O427 12357255 60159
ORIGEN against CELSUS: Translated from the ORIGINAL INTO ENGLISH.
Origen against Celsus: Translated from the ORIGINAL INTO ENGLISH. By James Bellamy, Gent. Nec Verbum Verbo curabis reddere, fidus Interpres. Horat. de Arte Poet, LONDON, Printed by B. Mills, and Sold by I. Robinson, at the Golden Lyon in St. Paul's Church-Yard.
The Translator's PREFACE TO THE READER. THAT Translations of Learned Authors in general, especially if they be carefully under∣tak'n, and prudently manag'd, are of great Use to the Publick, I think, after all that has been said against 'em, no Person can reasonably deny, or ev'n call into question. For as the same Reasons which may be assign'd, for the Commendation of a Fountain of Water, may as well be brought in Praise of the Streams, which pro∣ceed from it, so far as they are pro∣perly convey'd: So I think, the very same Arguments which are us'd in Favour of any Learned Original, will equally serve, to justifie, and recom∣mend a Translation of it, so far as it answers its principal End, in convey∣ing
to our Minds the true Sence of the Author. And tho' I think, I may say, with∣out the Suspicion of Vanity, that I have, in some measure employ'd my Time and Strength, in the Study of the Learned Languages, and that I highly value 'em, as the happy Ve∣hicles of solid and useful Learning; yet the bare Language in which a Book is writ (let it be never so much extoll'd, as being learned, and copious, or esteem'd for its Antiquity, native Majesty, and inimitable Sweet∣ness) is, I confess, one of the least Things, which will ever recommend it to my Esteem, and Perusal. For I humbly conceive, that in all our Studies we shou'd not so much nibble at Words, which are, as it were, but the Bark of the Tree of Know∣ledge, as aim at the Improvement of our Reason, which is a strong Re∣flection from the Deity, and affords abundant Matter of agreeable Enter∣tainment, to them, who are so happy, as to be distinguish'd from the Gene∣rality of Mankind, by a wonderful Pe∣netration of Soul. And if an Author, by his natural Capacity, and acquir'd Abilities, do's make a more than ord'nary Figure in the intellectual and learned World, is an Honour to the
Age in which he flourish'd, and per∣haps equally the Wonder and Envy of succeeding Ages, I think, the more Reasons may be assign'd, why he shou'd be cloath'd in the English Language, which is most familiar to us, and is allow'd by all capable Judges, to be very expressive, copious, and charming. For certainly 'tis Pity, that such im∣mense Treasures of Sence and Learn∣ing shou'd be confin'd, to those few Persons, in a comparative Sence, who happen to understand the Language in which he writes, and like the vast Mines in Peru and Mexico, serve chiefly for the Convenience, and Delight of those, who are Foreign to us, both by Blood, and by Religion. And I have often thought, and 'tis the Opinion of many Persons, who are far more capable of judging than my self, that 'twou'd conduce very much to the Honour of the BRITISH NATION, to have the Fathers of the Three First Centuries, those Heroes of Antiquity, and Pillars of the Christian Church, translated into the Language of our Country, and cloath'd in so Modern and so Charming a Dress, if it be possible, that many of both Sexes, whose Genius and Education do's not lead 'em, to the Study of Greek and Latin, may be induc'd to read 'em,
and to square their Lives by those ex∣cellent Rules of Vertue, and Piety, which they have laid down, for the Conduct of Others, and of which they were in their several Ages, and are still, in some Sence, living, and highly honou∣rable Examples. And since, by the Policy of a Neigh∣bouring Nation, the Language of Lewis the XIVth has already obtain'd that UNIVERSAL MONARCHY, to which he seems to aspire, and since, many excellent Translations, of which the French may justly boast, have in∣vited and almost constrain'd, many in∣genious and polite Persons, to learn and admire their Language, and so perhaps they have been unhappily and insensibly won over to their Cor∣rupt Religion and Slavish Principles of Government, I think, 'tis not a little strange, that we, who are so prone to a Phantastical Imitation of 'em, shou'd so much abound, in Ʋnnecessary and Trifling Originals, and give so little Encouragement, to the Translation of those Ancient Authors, whom, in Spite of all our Ignorance and Preju∣dice, we must acknowledge, to have been remarkable for their Learning, and whose Labours, since they were generally approv'd, and highly admir'd, in the Early and Pure Ages of the Church,
and since they strangely confounded the Whole Heathen World, one wou'd think, might very well serve for our Confirmation, and delightful Enter∣tainment. And tho' we deservedly pay a most profound Respect to the Greek and Hebrew Text of Scripture, as claim∣ing in a strict Sense the Venerable Title of the Word of GOD, and challenging in a special Manner the Time, and Strength of those, whom God and Men have thought fit to employ, in the Ex∣plication and Defence of the Sacred Oracles; yet 'tis an extraordinary Hap∣piness, which we in these Nations en∣joy, that we have such excellent Tran∣slations of the Bible, and ev'n the com∣mon People (who have precious and immortal Souls, as well as others, and want more Helps, for the regular and comfortable Discharge of their Duty) are so far from being commanded by their Ministers, to avoid 'em, as being dangerous in unskillful Hands, and an imperfect Rule, both of Faith, and Manners, that they are strictly en∣joyn'd, and with all imaginable Ten∣derness entreated, to read 'em, with the greatest Seriousness, Industry, and Pleasure. And if we have just Cause, to re∣turn God our most humble and hearty Thanks, for raising up, and inclining
some proper Persons, to undertake so im∣portant and so difficult a Work, for af∣fording such Measures of his gracious Assistance, as were necessary, to support, and encourage 'em in it, and to bring it at last to a most honourable and hap∣py Accomplishment, I think, the Tran∣slations of any pious, rational, and learn∣ed Authors, whose Labours have a ten∣dency, to lead us, into the true and deep Sence of the holy Scriptures, and to furnish us with proper Weapons, to en∣counter the inveterate and most formi∣dable Adversaries of the Christian Reli∣gion, must be very desireable, and at∣tended with no small Advantages. I confess, I am highly sensible, that Translations do frequently abound with Faults, and perhaps with sueh as are notorious, which should a Person under∣take to justifie, he wou'd expose himself, to the Scorn, or Pity of the learned World, and to the Censure ev'n of the injudicious, and illiterate. But this, if it be a solid Objection against bad Translations, (which I hardly believe it is, since they may have many great Defects, and yet the Translator shou'd be esteem'd, and re∣warded for his good Will to the Pub∣lick, and that Measure of Industry, and Skill in the learned Languages, which appears in his Work, tho' he
deserves far less Esteem, than one, who happily accomplishes some accurate Composition, or more compleat Tran∣slation,) I say this, if it be a solid Argu∣ment against bad Translations, wo'nt hold against such as are good, and so ap∣parently and so highly useful, that shou'd any one exclaim against 'em, he would but betray his Folly, and provoke the Laughter, or silent Scorn, of those, who are not as remarkable Triflers as him∣self. For if no Translator must appear in the World, who is not so industrious, and so correct, that he almost seems to be free, from those Faults, to which the Frailty of humane Nature renders Man∣kind unavoidably subject, if the Taste of Readers is so nice, as to disrellish the the most exact Translations, that are ex∣tant, by Reason of many great Defects, which insensibly creep, into the best hu∣mane Compositions, then the same Ar∣gument which is us'd against Transla∣tions, will equally overthrow the most learned and useful Originals that ever were, and ev'n the sacred Oracles of the supream and all-wise Being. For tho' I think 'tis ridiculously ob∣jected against us, by the Atheists, and Deists, that some Faults have been found, in the best Versions of the Holy Scrip∣tures, and that the sacred Original Text
it self thro' the long Tract of Time in which the Books of the Old and New Testament were committed to Writing, thro' the Ignorance, and Carelesness, and perhaps Design of some Transcribers, is liable to some few Exceptions; yet if we must reject and despise all Translations, because some are bad, and the best im∣perfect, I fear, we must immediately throw up our Bibles themselves, and grope after Truth, by no better Help, than that of the dim Light of Na∣ture. For all the Versions of the Holy Scrip∣tures are allow'd to be the Works of Men, who were not immediately inspir'd by the Spirit of GOD, tho' we have Reason to believe, he was pleas'd to af∣ford 'em more than ord'nary Direction, and Influence, in an Affair which had so great a Tendency, to the Welfare of the Christian Church, and ev'n to the happy and timely Conviction and Con∣version of the most hardn'd Infidels, in∣to whose Hands the Scriptures may fall, from Time to Time, and in which they made their serious, earnest, frequent, and more solemn Addresses, to Almighty God, for all that gracious Assistance, which he saw was necessary or conve∣nient for 'em. All the Versions, and the Septuagint it Self, (for correcting which, and com∣paring
it with the Alexandrian Manu∣script, the World is beholden to the In∣comparably Learned, Indefatigable, and Ju∣dicious Dr. Grabe) all the Versions, I say, were the Works of uninspir'd Persons, who were liable to many gross Defects. Nay, the Greek and Hebrew Text of Scripture, those sacred and refreshing Fountains of living Water, have been shamefully polluted, by humane Additions and cursed Innovations, tho' God in his wise and holy Providence has preserv'd 'em, in all the Ages of the Church, so far uncorrupted in Spite, of all the Wit, Malice, and unweary'd Industry, of Men, and Devils, that they carry the lively and honourable Stamp of a di∣vine Authority, and are still what they always were, a perfect Rule, both of Faith and Manners. If then, we pay a more than ord'nary Deference, to the sacred Originals of the Holy Scriptures, and if the small Errors, in a comparative Sence, which are found in all the Versions that were ever ex∣tant, ought by no means to shock our religious and firm Belief of the Divine Inspiration of those sacred, and most valuable Records, then I think, 'tis suf∣ficiently evident, that Translations, in general, are of excellent and continual Use, and the Badness of some, and the Imperfections, which unavoidably
attend 'em all, is no solid Argument a∣gainst those which are good, or even such as are bad, if the Original was an Author who deserv'd to be translated, and so far as the Translator discovers his Af∣fection, and does real Service to the Cause of Piety, Sence or Learning. Another Objection that may be brought against Translations is this, that the injudicious, and illiterate shou'd not dare to intrude into those venerable Misteries of the Empire of Reason, and Learning, which some are apt to ima∣gine, 'tis their Prerogative, to consult, and to understand, and the entire Reputati∣on and Advantage of which they think is a Debt, that ought only to be pay'd to Persons of their Character, and Distinction. But many, who assume to themselves, the Title of Persons, who are profound∣ly learned, especially such whose Ta∣lent lies chiefly in torturing such Words as very seldom occur in Authors, whose Heads are living Dictionaries, or rather Libraries, the faithful but trifling Re∣positories of senseless Criticisms, which how great Satisfaction soever they may perhaps afford, to these eager and eter∣nal Hunters of meer Words and Phrases, are of little use; I say, many such Per∣sons have a much smaller Share, of solid Reason, than they whom these Tyrants
in the Empire of Learning would have to lie prostrate at their Feet. Besides I can't for my Life conceive, why any Persons how learned so ever they may esteem themselves to be, how knowing soever they may be accounted by others, who have gon in the same te∣dious, if not unprofitable Track of Study, and what Skill soever they may really have, in reading uncommon and al∣most obliterated Characters, or com∣paring almost an infinite Number of Worm-eaten and voluminous Manu∣scripts, I say, I can't conceive, why such Persons shou'd desire, and endeavour to engross all the Learning in the World to themselves, make it serve like the Egyptian Hieroglyphicks, to amaze, but not instruct, or reform Mankind, and prevent the Generality of Men, from making Enquiries into Truth, which these fond Admirers of themselves represent, as a Thing that's vastly beyond their Reach, and the Honour of Knowing, which ought by no means to be prostituted to 'em. For my Part, I confess, I cou'd never justifie, nor easily extenuate the com∣mon Practice of the Popish Priests, who forbid the Laity, to read ev'n the Holy Scriptures, which (if they are not ren∣der'd a meer Nose of Wax, by their Hu∣mane Traditions, and wrong Interpreta∣tions,)
are able, under the Influence of the Holy Spirit, to make the injudicious and illiterate, so wise as to secure the Salvation of their Souls, (tho' not fit to dispute, or manage an Intriegue, with subtil and designing Jesuits) and can warm their Hearts, with a much deeper Impression of the near Relation in which they stand both to GOD, and and to their Neighbour, and of those pru∣dent Methods, which they ought to take, to perform their Duty, in the most pleasant and profitable Manner, than some, of the most learned Doctors of the Sorbon can modestly pretend to have. And whether such Persons of Intriegue don't discover as much Ignorance, as Antichristian Pride, in taking these irregular Measures, to gain the Esteem, and command the Purses of the People, to support the Interest and raise the Reputation of the Church of Rome, which stands in Need of many pious Cheats to keep up it's Aspiring (and yet perhaps sinking) Hierarchy, is a Matter, that deserves to be tak'n into our seri∣ous and most deliberate Thoughts. And tho' I firmly believe, that our Blessed Saviour has appointed an Order of Men, which shall continue, ev'n to the End of the World, to preach his Gospel, and administer his Holy Sacraments, and I earnestly desire, that my Tongue
may cleave to the Roof of my Mouth, if I don't prefer 'em before Multitudes of those, who, thro' the Influence of Satan, the cursed Policy of the Church of Rome, the Disorder of their Bodies, their wretched Ignorance of the happy Set∣tlement of the sacred Canon, or the Reputation they expect to gain, by af∣fecting to make high Pretences, to new Light, and immediate Inspiration; yet I am far from thinking, that the Christian Religion was design'd to feed the bound∣less Ambition, and in so extravagant a Manner to raise the Reputation, and support the External Grandeur of the Clergy. And if the Scriptures shou'd be fre∣quently and seriously consider'd by all, to whom its Precepts, Promises, and Threatnings are directed, if the design∣ing Priests of the Church of Rome are guilty of a notorious Crime, in pre∣tending, that the common People shou'd n't dare, to intrude into those Sacred Mysteries, that are contain'd in 'em, if they ought to lye always open for the Information and Conduct of those, who most need their Assi∣stance, then no pious, rational, and learned Authors shou'd be deny'd the Laity, but, like the Public Service, which they pay to Almighty God, shou'd be offer'd to their Consideration,
in that Language which is most fami∣liar to 'em. I don't affirm, that they who wou'd hinder Persons of mean Capacities, and inconsiderable, acquir'd Abilities, from enjoying the Satisfaction, and reap∣ing the Advantage of learned Au∣thors, are as guilty, as the Romish Priests, who deny the People, that Word which alone is able, by the Blessing of Almighty God, to make 'em holy in this World, and compleatly and eternally happy in the World to come; tho' I think, that they, who are eminent for Learning, may, with a much better Grace, affirm, that 'tis their Preroga∣tive, to consult learned Authors, than the Popish Clergy can pretend, that the common People must be blind Votaries to the Church of Rome, that they must not understand the Language, in which their Divine Service is perform'd, and their Religion, and by consequence their Everlasting Salvation, must depend on the Qualifications, and Intention of those, who officiate for 'em. But if 'tis the Duty of the common People to read the Word of God, and to perform all their Acts of Devotion, in the Language of their Native Coun∣try, if they, who are unable, to un∣derstand the Sacred and Original Text of Scripture, shou'd have the Bible
translated into a Language, that is fa∣miliar to 'em, this seems to me, to be a solid Argument, to prove, that any useful Original which they don't un∣derstand, in the Language in which the Author writ, shou'd be cloath'd in such a Dress, as may render it intelligible, and easie to 'em. For my part, I am far from being bigotted to any ancient Authors, tho' I hope, they will be ever valu'd, in Proportion to that Vein of Sence, Learn∣ing, or Piety, which often runs, as it were, thro' the whole Body of their Discourse. I am not such a Slave to Antiquity, as to judge it a Crime, to read the Writings of those Modern Authors, in which any Thing in its own Nature valuable, do's occur, and Sir William Temple, in his Essay upon Ancient and Modern Learning, as Ingenious and Po∣lite a Person as he was, and as much as I am charm'd with his Writings, do's pay, I think, too great a Defe∣rence to the Ancients, and give too mean a Character of the Modern Heroes. But whether Ancient or Late Authors do deserve the Preference, that the En∣couragement of Translations shou'd be any Hindrance to the Reputation, and successful Progress ev'n of Ancient Learning, is, what I confess, after ma∣ture
Deliberation, I am not able to conceive. For as for those, who are entirely, and perhaps culpably ignorant of the He∣roes of Antiquity, and have no Skill in any of the Learned Languages, 'tis im∣possible, that Translations shou'd lessen their Esteem for those Authors, who bear the awful Stamp of very distant Periods of Time. Nay, this is so far, from being the true State of the Case, that I do not see, 'tis possible for the common People, to have any high and well-grounded Respect, for the genuine Monuments of Antiquity, but by Means of those very Translations, which they, who make the Objection, do most severely condemn. 'Tis true, they may hear it reported, that the Fathers of the Primitive Church were very pious, rational, and learned Writers, but their Knowledge, or ra∣ther Opinion, is not the natural Re∣sult of their own Examination, and Judgement, and, by Consequence, the Esteem which they have, and express for 'em, must be highly irrational, or at best uncertain, and extreamly su∣perficial. But when any of the Ancient and Learned Authors are, as it were, rais'd from the dead, and cloath'd in a Lan∣guage,
which they perfectly under∣stand, and they have carefully perus'd a Translation of 'em, by one, who, as they have Reason to believe, did perfectly understand the Language, in which the Author writ, and was Master of the Subject, and whose Fidelity they have scarce a Tempta∣tion to suspect, they then begin, to entertain a very honourable Opinion of 'em, and thank the Translator, for saving 'em the Pains, of understand∣ing, and consulting the Original. And as for those, who have Skill, in the learned Languages, I don't see, that a Translation of any Ancient and Con∣siderable Authors can do 'em any real Prejudice. For certainly the Transla∣tor must be void ev'n of common Sence, and very illiterate himself, if he desires 'em to pay a greater Re∣gard to the Translation, than they ought to pay to the Original. This wou'd be, to prefer the Stream before the Fountain, from which it proceeds, which wou'd be monstrously absurd, and can't fairly be suppos'd, in so Judicious and Learned an Age as this. And one, who understands the Languages, is so far from being hinder'd hereby, from the Study of 'em, or discourag'd from paying 'em a due Respect, that a Translation, if
it be but tolerably perform'd, is a Help to him, in consulting the Ori∣nal, and tends, to cultivate his Skill, in the learned Language, in which the Author writ. Besides, we must consider, that no Translator, who has common Sence, will desire, that they, who are pro∣foundly learned, shou'd lay aside the Original, for the Sake of a Transla∣tion; but only allow some Time, and take Pains to compare 'em, and see whether he has hit on the true Sence of the Author, and if he has really done so, the Translation must be va∣lu'd of Course, unless the Original be esteem'd for nothing, but the Words; which I believe, no rational Person will ever be tempted to imagine. I shall say no more of the Benefit and Necessity of Translations in gene∣ral; but offer something concerning that Author, whom, I have, in Part, translated, with a due Regard, I hope, to the Glory of God, and the Publick Good, tho' whether I have perform'd well, or not, I must leave to the Judg∣ment of the Learned, at whose Bar I shall think it an Honour to be ar∣raign'd, if I have been guilty of any gross Defects, and whose Friendly Censures, I shall willingly, and ev'n thankfully undergo.
That ORIGEN flourish'd in the Third Century, and in the Infancy, if I may so say, of the Christian Church, is so generally known, that it seems almost needless, to mention it. And since we deservedly, and chear∣fully pay a Deference, to the living Monuments of Antiquity, and especi∣ally to those Pious and Learned Wri∣ters, who liv'd in the Early and Pure Ages of the Church, partly thro' a natural Curiosity, to know the Names, Characters, and Works of the most Eminent Persons, who flourish'd in such distant Periods of Time, partly thro' a Sense of those Miraculous Me∣thods, which the Great God was, as it were, oblig'd to take for the Sup∣port and Encouragement of the Church, during its Minority, and partly from a just and deep Conviction, of the Eminent Piety, Profound Judgment, and Universal Learning of many of the Primitive Fathers, I think, a more than ord'nary Veneration shou'd be paid, to the Memory of the Deceased ORIGEN, and especially to his Books against the Ingenious and Learned CELSƲS, which are a lively Picture of his Capacious and Exalted Genius. Need I say any Thing in Commen∣dation of his Piety, or rather, will not every Thing, that I can say, fall vastly
short of the Dignity of the Awful Subject? Will it not in some Sence, and in some Measure, lose its native and al∣most unsully'd Lustre, by the faint Encomiums of the most elevated Mor∣tals, who are inspir'd with a tremen∣dous Sense of his Majestick Simplicity, and irresistible, and almost inimitable Charms? A Piety, which was so sincere, and so impatient of Restraint, that 'tis re∣ported of him, that when his Honoured Father was suffering under the Empe∣ror DECIƲS, he wou'd, ev'n in his tender Years, have saluted the Flames of Martyrdom, with the great∣est Readiness, and ev'n Triumphant Joy, had not his Dear and Honour'd Mo∣ther, by her maternal Authority, Arts of Perswasion, and innocent Methods of Female Policy, clip'd the flutt'ring Wings of his humbly-aspiring Soul. A Piety, discover'd, by denying ev'n the lawful Appetite of his sordid Flesh, and looking with a generous Disdain on the outward Grandeur, and perish∣ing Vanities of this lower World. A Piety, which was seen, by his Leaving, or, in a comparative Sence, Despising the School of Plato, that Celebrated Heathen Philosopher, for the Sake of the meek and persecuted
JESƲS. In a Word, a Piety, which appear'd in the Tenor of his Life, and Conversation, the Strictness of his Moral Vertues, and Christian Graces, in the flaming but just Zeal he shew'd for the Cause of Christ, the exact Care, and extraordinary Vigour, which runs thro' the Body of his most Excellent Applogy, and the prudent Measures, which he took, to win others, to the sincere Belief and regular Practice of that Holy Religion, which was so con∣stantly, so chearfully, and so brightly exemplify'd in himself. Need I say any Thing of his Sence, who cou'd n't content himself, with∣out the severe Study of Philosophy, and the sublime Notions of the Divine Plato, in particular, and familiarly convers'd with the most judicious Philosophers among the Pagans, and greatly im∣prov'd the refin'd and useful Know∣ledge; which he eagerly imbib'd, from those Stars in the Firmament of Learning, by lighting his Torch, if I may so say, at the dazling Rays of the Sun of Righteousness. Need I say any Thing of his Learning, who, on that Account, was justly the Wonder, and has too often been the Envy of the Heathen and Christian World, who by reason of his solid Sence, and uncommon acquir'd Abili∣ties,
was inclin'd, and qualify'd, to take an unconfined Range, thro' the immense Spaces of the Intellectual Aether, who by the Number, and Choice of the Books he publish'd (of which Eusebius gives us an Account, in his Ecclesiastical History) discover'd at once the Regularity, and almost infinite Compass of his Studies, and by his Travels into Foreign Countries, was fully acquainted with the Posture of Affairs, both in the Christian Church, and in the Learned World? I can't but take Notice, by the Way, that if ORIGEN had been so mean a Man, or his Works so dangerous, as Cardinal Baronius, Cardinal Noris, Gretzerus the Jesuite, and some others represent him, I wonder, that Pope Anastasius, a whole Council, the fore∣mention'd Persons, and the whole Ju∣stinian Age, shou'd so violently oppose him. I confess, after all that I have said, which is little, if compar'd with what I cou'd easily offer, in the Praise of ORIGEN, I dare not say, that St. Hierom, that very Learned Father, and afterwards the Justinian Age, and many Others since, had no Colour of Reason, for what they alledg'd against him. Indeed, the Wisdom of God does very plainly appear, in so ord'ring
Matters, that ev'n some of the Sacred Penmen of Holy Scripture, and the Brightest Lights that ever shone in the Glorious Orb of the Church of God, had some Defects, to allay their intrinsick and apparent Worth, and prevent that Excessive Veneration, which wou'd otherwise have been paid 'em, by reason of their Natural and Acquir'd Accomplishments, the Honour they reflected on the Ages, in which they flourish'd, and the extraordinary Service, they did the Cause of Christ, and the Common Wealth of Learning. But as the Translators of the Bible wou'd have been unjustly treated, had they been reproach'd with ev'n seeming to countenance, the false No∣tions of Things, which the Generality of the Jewish, and many of the Leaders of the Christian Church, are known to have entertain'd, or had they been up∣braided, as if they approv'd of David's Murder and Adultery, and St. Peter's most shameful Denial of our Blessed Lord: So I may rationally expect, that the Reader will be so just and candid, as not to imagine (as great a Man as ORIGEN himself was, and as great a Heroe of Antiquity, and Christianity, as I know he was) that I'm so very ignorant, as to agree with him, in those Opinions, or Practices,
which are evidently, and greatly liable to censure. As for his Notion, that the Devils may be recover'd; I must confess, it seems to me to be both a false, and dange∣rous Position; false, because there's no Colour for it, that I can see, in the Word of God; and dangerous, because it has a Tendency to encourage Per∣sons to go on in Sin, in Hopes, that ev'n the Fire of Hell will be at last extinguish'd, and be but a Second Pur∣gatory. We know, that no less a Per∣son, than the Late Most Reverend Arch-Bishop of Canterbury has publick∣ly appear'd in its Defence, and has offer'd such plausible Arguments, that perhaps it may seem difficult to con∣fute His Grace. But as I have much more Reason to doubt, of my own Salvation, than of the Eternal Happiness of that singularly Pious, as well as incomparably Rational, and very Learned Prelate, so I am fully satisfy'd, that ORIGEN will be a Star of the First Magnitude, in the supe∣rior Orbs, and tho' his Notions might in some Respects be peculiar to him, and justly deserve our Censure; yet the chief Thing in us, which the Great God regards, and on which he will put distinguishing Marks of his Fa∣vour, thro' all the Revolutions of Eter∣nity,
is a regular and steddy Course of sincere and unaffected Virtue, and Piety. As for Off'ring Sacrifice to Idols, which Petavius the Jesuite, and other Learned Men, do seem inclin'd to charge on ORIGEN, and Epiphanius thought fit to relate, in his Book of Heresies, 'tis observ'd by the late Learn∣ed Fredericus Spanhemius, in his Eccle∣siastical History, that that Act was never charg'd upon him, ev'n by the Justi∣nian Age, in which he was more ge∣nerally, and more violently oppos'd than ever. But be that Matter as it will, St. Hierom himself, who strongly oppos'd his Errors, had no small Veneration for him, on the Account of his Piety, Sence, and Learning. And the Late Reverend Dr. Stilling-fleet in his Origines Sacrae, do's frequent∣ly quote, and honourably represent him to the World, as many of the greatest Lights of the Christian Church, and of the Learned World had done before him. But I'm sensible, 'twill be readily ob∣jected against this Translation, that we abound already with Defences of the Christian Religion, which are much more useful, than ORIGEN, who makes it his Business, to confute Celsus, who was a Heathen Philosopher.
'Tis true, we have Grotius de Veri∣tate Christianae Religionis, the Learned Apology of the late Reverend Bishop of Worcester, the most Admirable Ser∣mons of the Famous Dr. Bentley, preach'd at the Lecture of the Ho∣nourable Robert Boyl, Esq some in∣comparable Sermons publish'd by the Reverend Dr. Tillotson, Dr. Blackhall, Dr. Stanhope, and Mr. Clark, Chaplain to my Lord Bishop of Norwich, the Learned Dr. Owen's Comment on the Epistle to the Hebrews: And I cou'd hardly discharge my Conscience, shou'd I forbear to mention Mr. Baxter's Rea∣sons of the Christian Religion, in Honour to the Memory of so Great, and espe∣cially so Good a Man. We have the Rational, and Learned Dr. Parker's Demonstration of the Law of Nature, and Demonstration of the Divine Autho∣rity of the Scriptures; and many Excel∣lent Authors, who have united their Forces against the most Formidable Adversaries of our Common Faith. But certainly, 'tis impossible, to be too well furnish'd with Reasons of the Hope that is in us, and we ought to be so far from Slighting either the Ancient Apologies of Justin Martyr, Ter∣tullian, Tatian, Arnobius, Lactantius, and the like, or ev'n the Modern Dcfen∣ces of the Christian Religion, that I
think, we shou'd deeply lament that we have no more, and that those which we have, are no better understood, and it highly becomes us, to make a thankful and due Improvement, of those many Excellent Helps, which God, in his infinite Wisdom, and Goodness, sees fit to afford us. I can think but of one Objection more, and that is this, that by Pub∣lishing this Translation of ORIGEN, I do expose the corrupt Principles of Celsus to more publick View. 'Tis true, I do so. But certainly the Truth is so safely guarded, by its Native Purity, and so well recom∣mended by the Evidence that attends it, that 'tis so far from being afraid of the Light, that it desires nothing more, if I may so say, than to make its most open, and undisguis'd Ap∣pearance in the World; and if the Objection has any real Force, 'twill hold, as well, tho' not equally against Origen himself, for writing against Celsus, which plainly supposes, that all the Learning, Wit, and Malice of that Arch-Fiend of Hell must be diffected, as it were, and laid open to View, which tho' they are the rankest Poi∣son, will never be able to infect us, if we have but the Blessing of Almighty God, on so Excellent an Antidote at
hand, as the indefatigable, and almost inimitable Labours of that Pious, Ra∣tional, and Learned Father, who op∣pos'd him. I shall say no more in Defence of a Translation of ORIGEN, but humbly submit my mean Performance, to the Censures of this Judicious, and Learned Age, and publish it as a publick, tho' unworthy Tribute of Praise, to the great Author of my Being, and Fountain of all my Hap∣piness; and as some, tho' but a small Recompence, to my Dear and Ho∣nour'd Father, for the prudent Me∣thods he has tak'n, the Pains, and Charge he has been at, and the great Readiness and unusual Joy, which he has always express'd, in Procuring, and Continuing to me, so far as it lies in his Power, under God, the extraordi∣nary, but not duly improv'd Advan∣tage of a Liberal Education. I have frequently read the Eight Books of Origen against Celsus, as they offer'd themselves to my Consideration, in the Greek Original, the French Tran∣slation of the Learned Monsieur Bouhe∣reau, and the Latin Version, and am not conscious to my self, of any wil∣ful and gross Defect.
And after many Solemn Supplica∣tions for Divine Assistance, many te∣dious, and yet pleasant Hours, which I have employ'd about it, many kind Directions, and Encouragements, from Persons of no mean Rank for Piety, Sence, Learning, and Extraction, and many earnest Desires, that the Glory of God may be my principal Aim, and in a word, after having perform'd, what lies within the Compass of my small Ability, to cloath it, in such a Dress, as may recommend it to the World, I say, such as it is, I humbly expose it to all Learned, Judicious, and Candid Persons, and submit it to the Censure of the Criticks. And if this First Essay shall meet ev'n with a tolerable Acceptation from the World, I design, God willing, to take the first Opportunity, to translate the Two following Books. That the Advantage, which the Reader may reap from ORIGEN, may be equal, or superior, to the Painful Pleasure, which I took, in Translating him, that his Belief of the Christian Religion, may be daily con∣firm'd, and that he may at Length enjoy that inconceivable Happiness in the Future World, of which many of
the Primitive Fathers are now par∣taking, and of which, I firmly be∣lieve, that the Pious and Incompa∣rable ORIGEN has no small Share, is the Sincere Desire, of The Ʋnworthiest Servant of our Common Lord, James Bellamy.
Origen against Celsus: Translated from the ORIGINAL INTO ENGLISH. Book the First.
ORIGEN's Epistle Dedicatory TO Ambrosius. WHen false Witness was brought against our Blessed Saviour, he held his Peace, and when he was accus'd, return'd no Answer, being fully perswaded, that the Tenor of his Life and Conversation among the Jews, was the best Apology that cou'd possibly be made in his Behalf. But you, Virtu∣ous Ambrosius, were pleas'd to desire me, for Reasons best known to your self, to vindicate the Christians from those foul Aspersions, which Celsus has publickly
cast upon 'em, as if a Confutation of him were not legible in the Things themselves, and what he offers might not be deservedly rejected, as wanting ev'n the Appearance of Truth to recommend it to the World. To shew that our Saviour held his Peace when false Witness was brought against him, I need only at present, produce the Testimony of St. Matthew, which is con∣firm'd by what St. Mark the Evangelist relates. St. Matthew has these Words, Now the Chief Priests, and Elders, Mat. 26. v. 59. and all the Council sought false Wit∣ness against Jesus, to put him to Death, but found none. Yea, though many false Witnesses came; yet found they none. At last came two false Wit∣nesses, and said, this Fellow said, I am able to destroy the Temple of God, and to build it in three Days. And the High-Priest arose, and said to him, answerest thou nothing? What is it which these witness against thee? But Jesus held his Peace. We read in another Place of the same Evangelist, that our Saviour return'd no Answer to the Persons who accus'd him. And Je∣sus Mat. 27. v. 11. stood before the Governor, and the Governor ask'd him, saying, art thou the King of the Jews? And Je∣sus said unto him; thou say'st. And when he was accus'd of the Chief Priests and Elders, he answered no∣thing.
Then says Pilate unto him, hearest thou not how many Things these witness against thee? And he answer'd him never a Word, insomuch that the Governor marvell'd greatly. And indeed it cou'd n't but be admir'd by Persons who were least capable of Re∣flection, that when he had so fair an Op∣portunity to free himself from the heavy Charge that was brought against him, to enumerate, or at least, modestly insinuate his shining Characters, and to commend the higher Powers, as being ordam'd of God, and by these innocent and po∣litick Methods to procure the Judge's Favour, I say, that when he had so fair an Opportunity to do all this, he shou'd be so far from embracing it, as to look upon his most violent Accusers with a truly-generous Disdain. That the Judge seem'd willing to ac∣quit him, had he made his Apology, is plain from the following Words, Whom Mat. 27. v. 17. will ye that I release unto you? Barab∣bas, or Jesus who is call'd Christ? And those Words, He knew that for Envy Ibid. 18. he had deliver'd him. So that the holy and spotless Jesus was scarce ever free from unjust and severe Accusations, as long as the perverse Dispositions of Men, whose Minds were corrupt, and whose Lives were often stain'd with the most gross Enormities, did remain the same
as they have been in all the Ages of the World. And ev'n now he holds his Peace, and makes no verbal Answer, but the un∣blemish'd Lives of his sincere Followers are his most chearful and most success∣ful Advocates, and have so loud a Voice that they drown the Clamours of his most bigotted and most zealous Adversaries. I will, therefore, be so bold as to say, that by Publishing this Apology, I shall seem to lessen the Force of those powerful Ar∣guments in Defence of the Christian Re∣ligion, which are drawn from the holy Lives of its pious Votaries, and are plain Appeals ev'n to Sense and common Ob∣servation. But that I might not seem backward in obeying the Commands you have laid upon me, I have endeavour'd, according to my present Abilities, to give a full, or at least, a sufficient Answer to all the material Objections which Celsus has brought against us, which, in your Opinion, my Dear and Respected Ambro∣sius, do strike at the Fundamentals of the Christian Religion, but, I verily be∣lieve, will never shock the Faith of one, who by the Grace of God does live in the Profession of it with some measure of Sin∣cerity. And God forbid that any of us shou'd have so embrac'd the Gospel (which is so lively a Declaration of his Love to perishing Sinners thro' the Merits of our
Blessed and All-sufficient Redeemer) as to be in Danger of receiving any bad Impressions from Celsus's Discourse, or the Writings of any other Ingenious and Learned Person, who holds the same Wicked Principles. For St. Paul reckoning up those things, which are apt to separate Mankind from the Love of Christ (all which his Love to 'em did, and will at last effectually, and most gloriously overcome) don't say that erroneous Discourses shou'd be any, much less a principal Cause of this un∣happy Separation. Observe first he says, Who shall separate us from the Love Rom. 8. v. 25. of God? Shall Tribulation, or Distress, or Persecution, or Famine, or Naked∣ness, or Peril, or Sword? (As it is written, for thy sake we are kill'd all the Day long, we are accounted as Sheep for the Slaughter,) Nay, in all these Things we are more than Con∣querors thro' him that loved us. Then reckoning up another Set of Things, which usually shock Mens Faith and Virtue, he says, I am perswaded, that neither Ibid 38. Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Prin∣cipalities, nor Powers, nor Things pre∣sent, nor Things to come, nor Height, nor Depth, nor any other Creature shall be able to separate us from the Love of God, which is in Christ Je∣sus our Lord. And there is just Ground
ev'n for us, who fall vastly short of the extraordinary Attainments of that great Apostle of the Gentiles, to say, Who shall separate us from the Love of God? Shall Tribulation, or Distress, or Per∣secution, or Famine, or Nakedness, or Peril, or Sword? But the Apostle who thought this too mean a Boast, for those who had arriv'd to so remarkable a Pitch of Virtue, as that to which he had at∣tain'd, professes, That in all these Things he was more than a Conqueror; which Words have a peculiar Weight and Emphasis. And therefore, when he and the rest of his Noble Class come to make their Boast, they proceed to the second Set of Things, which are here enumerated, and can say with a holy Triumph, That neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor Things present, nor Things to come, nor Height, nor Depth, nor any other Creature, shall separate us from the Love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. So that I confess, I have no great Opi∣nion of that Man's Christianity, whose Faith is in the least liable to be shock'd, either by this Book of Celsus, or the Writings of any other Person of the same unhappy Stamp. For really I'm at a Loss to know in what Class of Christians I shou'd rank that Man, who is not
Proof against all the bitter but unjust Reproaches, with which Celsus has loaded the Followers of our Blessed Lord. But because the common Sort of People are in no small Danger (as you imagine, my Dear Ambrosius) of turning Apo∣states from the Faith, since perhaps they may be shock'd by what Celsus has of∣fer'd against the well-grounded Princi∣ples of our holy Religion; and I hope will be no less confirm'd in their Judg∣ments, by what I shall seasonably produce in its Defence, provided I am able to confute his Errors, I resolv'd to obey your most just Command, and to return an Answer to the Book you were pleas'd to send me, the very Title of which, viz. A True Relation, will hardly pass for such with them, who are no great Profi∣cients ev'n in the Philosophy of the Heathens. St. Paul knowing there were many Things in the Greek Philosophy that were not in themselves contemptible, but had by Accident a malignant Influence on the Minds of Common People, repre∣senting Error under the plausible Ap∣pearance of solid and most important Truth, has these very Words, Beware Colos. 2. v. 8. lest any Man spoil you through Philo∣sophy, and vain Deceit, after the Tra∣dition of Men, after the Rudiments of the World, and not after Christ. But
this is more than I think, any judicious Person will allow the Book which I am just going to answer. For the Apostle calls the fore-mentioned Things by the Name of Vain Deceit, perhaps in Contra-Distinction to a certain Kind of Deceit which is not vain, but innocent and useful, which the Prophet Jeremiah con∣sidering, made bold to apply the follow∣ing Words to the Great God himself; O Lord, thou hast deceived me, and Jer. 20. v. 7. I was deceiv'd; thou art stronger than I, and hast prevail'd. But, in my Opi∣nion, what Celsus publish'd do's want ev'n that plausible Appearance, to render it worthy to be call'd deceitful, which is to be found in the Writings of those eminently-learned Persons, who were the Heads of the various Sects of Philoso∣phers among the Pagans. And as in Geo∣metry, 'tisn't sufficient that what is of∣for'd for a Demonstration, be in it self false and dangerous, but it must have some Colour of Truth, or it can never deceive, and engage ev'n the most faint Endeavours of one, who wou'd improve in that entertaining and useful Science: So those Discourses, which deserve the Cha∣racter of Vain Deceit, must have some Affinity with those rational Arguments, that are frequently made Ʋse of by the Heads of the several Sects of Philoso∣phers.
When I had proceeded in my Answer to Celsus, as far as the Place where he per∣sonates the Jew discoursing with our Blessed Saviour, I thought, 'twou'd be proper to put this Preface before my Book, that so any One into whose Hands it may accidentally fall, may plainly see, that I didn't principally intend it for those Chri∣stians, who are fully satisfy'd in their Judgment, but either for them who are entire Strangers to the Excellency of the Christian Religion, or for them who are weak in the Faith, as the Apostle calls 'em. Him that is weak in the Faith Rom. 14. v. 1. receive. I must add one Thing here; and that is this, that I have a diff'rent Design in answering Celsus in the gross, from what I had in Answering the Beginning of his Book. For at first, I design'd no more than to mention some of the Principal Heads, and content my self with a meer Compendium, But after mature Deli∣beration, I thought, twou'd be much more proper, to gather my Discourse, as it were, into a perfect System or Body. Then I was satisfy'd from the reason of the Thing, that I shou'd be at a needless Expence both of Time and Pains, and contented my self with what I had writ, against the Beginning of the Book, which Celsus publish'd.
But in the remaining Part of my Apo∣logy, which (if I may modestly say it of my own Performance) is much more elaborate, I determin'd to bend all my Forces against him, and to return a full Answer to eve∣ry Thing that seem'd to be material, and ev'n to some of his most trifling Objections. I must, therefore, desire my Reader to discover a more than ord'nary Candor in passing his Judgment on what I have done, especially on that Part of my Apology, which immediately follows this Epistle. And if the other Parts shou'd have no better Effect upon him, I hope, he will there also be extreamly fa∣vourable in the Sentence, which he may pass upon me. And, if you, Virtuous Ambrosius, de∣sire a more compleat Answer to Celsus, than that which I shall give him at pre∣sent, I must refer you to them, who have a far greater Share of Judgment, than that to which I lay my most humble Claim, and are better qualify'd for the due and honourable Management of so difficult a Province. However that Per∣son seems to me, to be in a safer and much more desirable Condition, who having met with Celsus's Performance, and being furnish'd by his own Experience with a warm and effectual Apology for that excellent Religion which he professes, and endeavours to practice to the utmost
of his Power, is so well-guarded by the Spirit of God, who dwells in the Heart of every sincere Follower of the Blessed JESUS, that he can look with a holy Contempt on the false Representations, and most pusible Arguments of the most Celebrated Hereticks that did ever appear in the World.
Origen against Celsus: CHAP. I. THE first Charge which Celsus brings against the Christians, is, Their holding Cabals, contrary to the Law of the Land in which they liv'd, and to which, as he thinks, they ought to be entirely subject. He distin∣guishes Meetings into Publick and Private, the Publick Meetings which were establish'd by Law, and the Pri∣vate and Separate Meetings which were kept up by Schismaticks. And his De∣sign herein is to cast Reproach on the Love Feasts of the Christians (which were appointed to prevent a common and threatning Danger, and were far more binding, than the sacred Tye of
mutual Oaths can be suppos'd to be) I say, he reproaches 'em, as if they manifestly and grosly interfer'd with that due and indispensible Loyalty, which, as they were Subjects, they ow'd, and ought, as he imagines, to pay the National Establishment. Since, therefore, he makes his Boast that he has the Law on his Side, and wou'd intimate, that the separate Meetings of the Christians did coun∣tenance and promote Schism and Sedi∣tion; I answer, that as a Stranger, who has his Lot providentially cast among the Scythians, who are govern'd by most wicked Laws, and has not a fair Opportunity to make a safe Es∣cape, wou'd be esteem'd by that igno∣rant and unciviliz'd People, as an Ene∣my to their Constitution, and a Fa∣vourer of the Sectaries, if he didn't comply with the Canons of the Church, but might still urge weighty and un∣answerable Arguments to justify his Separation: So the Christians might lawfully dissent from the Establish'd Re∣ligion, which introduc'd Image-Wor∣ship, and a whole Rifraff of the Mock-Deities of the Heathens, and abounded with more horrid Impieties than were ever practic'd by the most barbarous Nations of the World.
For as the Inhabitants of a City may lawfully defend themselves against a Prince, who has made an unjust Descent upon their Native Country: So the Chri∣stians might warrantably violate the Laws of Satan, that great Usurper, to free themselves and Others from his worse than Scythian Tyranny. CHAP. II. THEN Celsus goes on, and asserts, That Judaism, with which the Christian Religion has a very close Con∣nection, has all along been a barbarous Sect, tho' he prudently forbears to reproach the Christian Religion as if it were of a mean and unpolish'd Original; since he had commended the Barbarians, as being the Inventers of several excellent and very important Maxims, and he adds, That those Things which were in∣deed invented by the Barbarians, have been improv'd, and more accomodated to Moral Virtue by the Greeks. Now I think, I may justly take this Advan∣tage in Defence of the Christian Religion from the very Concession which Celsus makes, to observe that one who leaves
the Opinions and the Learning of the Greeks, and embraces the Doctrine of our Blessed Saviour, don't only assent to those Truths and useful Rules, which it recommends to his Consideration and Choice, but the more he's vers'd in the fore-mention'd Sort of Learning, the more he's confirm'd in his Judgment, and borrows from the Christians where∣ever he perceives that the Greeks them∣selves are defective. To this I might add, that the Christian Religion may justly boast of a peculiar Demonstration, such a One as is truly Divine, and vastly exceeds all the Logick of the Greeks. The Apostle calls it A Demonstration of the Spirit and of Power. A Demon∣stration of the Spirit, in as much as the Spirit of God do's in a secret but power∣ful Way, convince the Reader of the Truth of the Scripture-Prophecies, efpe∣ally of those, which have an evident and near Relation to the expected Sa∣viour of the World. And of Power, in as much as Miracles have been wrought to attest the Truth of the Christian Religion, some remarkable Footsteps of which do remain at this very Day, among those, who do what lies in their Power, under the Guidance and Influence of the Spirit of God, to live up to its holy Precepts.
CHAP. III. THEN Celsus having spoke of the Private Meetings of the Christians, in which they exercis'd themselves and instructed one another in their parti∣cular Way, and having confess'd that one very politick Reason might be as∣sign'd for what they did, viz. The Preventing of that severe Penalty, to which their Practice render'd 'em ex∣treamly liable, compares the Danger that threatn'd them with the Diffi∣culties, and Calamities, to which So∣crates and Pythagoras, and other Hea∣then Philosophers expos'd themselves, by maintaining the Reputation, and promoting the Interest of that compa∣ratively-vain Philosophy, of which, they were the admir'd and truly-learned Professors. But to this I answer, That the Athe∣nians soon repented of what they had done to Socrates, nor did they long retain their Spite against Pythagoras. For the Pythagoreans had Schools for a considerable Time in that Part of Italy, which went by the Name of
Greece the Great. But the whole Ro∣man Senate, the Emperors during the several Persecutions, the Soldiers, the common People, and ev'n they, who were nearly related to the Christians wag'd open War, as it were, against the Religion which our Blessed Savi∣our introduc'd, and wou'd easily, and quite have stop'd its happy Progress, if a Divine and Miraculous Power had not seasonably interpos'd, and made it overcome the whole habitable World, who exerted all their Malice, and us'd their utmost Endeavours towards its sudden and entire Extirpation. CHAP. IV. NOW let us see how Celsus re∣proaches the practick Part of our Religion, as containing nothing, but what we have in common with the Heathens, nothing that is New, or Truly-great. To this I answer, That they who bring down the just Judgments of God upon their Heads by their notorious Crimes, wou'd never suffer by the Hand of Divine and Inflexible Justice,
if all Mankind had not some tolerable Notions of Moral Good and Evil. Therefore we needn't wonder, that God, who is the common Father of his Creatures, shou'd plant in the Minds of Men those natural Princi∣ples, which the Prophets, and especi∣ally our Blessed Saviour do's so fre∣quently impress upon the Minds of Men, that So every one might be left without Excuse at the Day of Judgment, having had the Sence and Substance of the Law engrav'd upon his Heart in very legible Characters. This was obscurely represented to us by the Scripture, which speaks of God's Writing the Two Tables of the Law, as it were, with his Finger, and his giving 'em to Moses, and acquaints us, that they were afterwards broke by the Wickedness of them, who made the Golden Calf (as if it had been said, that they were broke by the Sins of Men) and that when the Law was writ the second Time on Tables of Stone, he deliver'd 'em to Moses, to signifie, that the Law which was de∣fac'd by the Original Apostacy, shou'd be re impress'd on the Minds of Men by the Preaching of the Gospel.
CHAP. V. THEN Celsus speaking of Idola∣try, do's himself advance an Ar∣gument, that tends to justifie and com∣mend our Practice, when he says, That the Christians can't think those to be Gods, which are made by the Hands of Men, and very often of such as are wicked, and unjust, and wallow in all manner of Debauchery. Therefore, endeavouring to shew in the Sequel of his Discourse, that our Notion of Image-Worship was not a Discovery that was owing to the Scriptures; but that we have it in common with the Heathens, he quotes a Passage in Heraclitus to this Effect, That they who pay Divine Worship to inanimate Creatures, do just as if they shou'd address and in∣vocate the Walls. To this I answer, That since I have already granted that some common Notions of Moral Good and Evil are originally implanted in the Minds of Men, we needn't wonder that Hera∣clitus and Others, whether Greeks or Barbarians, have publickly acknow∣ledg'd
to the World, that they held the very same Notion which we main∣tain. And Celsus quotes a Passage in He∣rodotus, to shew, that the same No∣tion, which Heraclitus held, did ob∣tain among the Persians. And I cou'd quote a Passage in Zeno Citiensis, who in his Book call'd , says, That the Building of stately Temples is alto∣gether needless, and indeed ridicu∣lous, since no Piece of humane Ar∣chitecture, how pompous soever it may be, is truly sacred, and valua∣able in the Nature of the Thing it self. 'Tis plain, therefore, that this practical Notion is engrav'd in Divine and Legible Characters on the Minds of Men. CHAP. VI. THEN Celsus says, That all the Power which the Christians had, was owing to the Names of certain Dae∣mons, and their Invocation of 'em; tho' I can't well conceive, what shou'd in∣duce, or ev'n tempt him, to talk at so extravagant a Rate.
I suppose, he obscurely hints at the Account we have, of some who cast out Devils. But this is a most noto∣rious Calumny, for the Power which the Christians had, was not in the least owing to Enchantments; but to their Pronouncing the Name of JESƲS, and making Mention of some remar∣kable Occurrences of his Life. For by these, and no unlawful Means, have Daemons been frequently dispossess'd, especially when the Person who pronounc'd that sacred Name, did it with a becoming Disposition of Mind, and with a most lively Faith. Nay, the Name of JESƲS has had such Power over Daemons, that some∣times it has prov'd effectual, tho' pro∣nounc'd by very wicked Persons. To this our Saviour seems to have a Re∣ference, when he says, Many shall say to me in that Day, in thy Name we have Mat. vii. V. 22. cast out Devils, and in thy Name have done many wonderful Works. And I know not, whether Celsus did omit this Passage thro' Ignorance, or rather thro' a voluntary and malicious Oversight.
CHAP. VII. THEN he accuses our Saviour himself, as if he wrought Miracles by the Help of Magick, and foresaw, that many other Persons wou'd do the same Things, by their Skill in that Hellish Art, boasting that a Divine Power did attend 'em, and, for that very Reason, did exclude 'em from the Number of his Followers and Fa∣vourites. And he makes Use of this Argu∣ment against him, If, says he, there was just Ground for his rejecting the fore-mention'd Persons, then he was a wicked Man, being guilty of the same Fault, which he charg'd on them, and if he was not a wicked Man, then neither did they deserve a Mark of Infamy, who according to his own Confession, were to do the same Things that he did himself. But tho' we shou'd grant, that 'tis difficult for us to determine precisely, by what Power our Saviour wrought his Miracles; yet 'tis very plain, that the Christians made use of no Enchant∣ments,
unless the Name of JESƲS, and some Passages of the Holy Scrip∣tures were a kind of Sacred Spell. CHAP. VIII. THEN Celsus frequently and se∣verely reproaches the Christians, with keeping their Opinions secret. To this I answer, That they are more known, and more generally pub∣lish'd, than the admir'd Speculations of the Philosophers themselves, ev'n al∣most to the utmost Limits of the whole habitable World. For who, in a com∣parative Sence, is ignorant of our Sa∣viour's Nativity, and Resurrection, and the Day of Judgment, in which he will reward the Righteous, and punish the Wicked, according to their Works? And are not many thousands of the very worst of Infidels acquainted with the Doctrine of the Resurrection, who turn it all into Banter and Ridicule? So that the Charge was altogether un∣grounded, and by Consequence unjust. But if there be some Arcana Imperii in the Christian Religion, which are not fit to be communicated to the Vulgar,
it can't be deny'd, that there are the same in Philosphy. For ev'n the Phi∣losophers held some Opinions which they kept more secret. Some of Py∣thagoras's Pupils rely'd on his bare Authority, and were satisfy'd with an Ipse dixit; Others were more privately taught, and instructed in those Things, which ought not to be prostituted to vulgar and unsanctify'd Ears. And many Rites in the Reli∣gion both of the Greeks, and Barbarians, are conceal'd from the Notice of the Vulgar. CHAP. IX. BUT Celsus seems with Abun∣dance of Earnestness, to plead for them, who laid down their Lives in Confirmation of the Christian Faith, when he says, I wou'd not perswade any one to renounce his Religion, by reason of the Dangers to which it may expose him; nor wou'd I have him ev'n seem to leave it; where he tacitly condemns all them, who are Christians in their Hearts, and yet publickly disown their Religion.
Here I may take Occasion to charge him, with the gross Inconsistency of his Discourse; for in some Places of his Book, he talks like a zealous Fol∣lower of the admir'd Epicurus, but here, that his Accusation may carry the more plausible Appearance, he dissembles his Opinions, and seems to hold, that there is in Man, besides his Body, which is material and earthly, another and much nobler Substance, that has an Affinity with God himself, and says, That they, who have Souls duly dispos'd, do, as far as the Frailty of their Nature will admit, aspire to a Participation of the Nature of God, to which they are so nearly ally'd, and are never more highly pleas'd, than when they are seasonably and solidly entertain'd with Discourses concerning the Supream and Adorable Majesty both of Earth and Heav'n. Observe, a little before he said, He wou'dn't perswade any one to renounce his Religion, by reason of the Dangers, to which it may expose him, nor wou'd he have him ev'n seem to leave it; and yet he's grosly guilty of the same Fault himself, which he severely con∣demns in others. For he knew very well, that if he had openly profess'd he was an Epicurean Philosopher, his Accusation wou'd be little regarded by them, who live in the firm Belief
of an over-ruling Providence, tho' in∣deed they may differ from one ano∣ther in their Sence and Explications of the Principles, which they are known to hold. By the Way I'm inform'd, there have been two Persons, who went by the Name of Celsus, and both of 'em were Philosophers of the Epicurean Sect; One who liv'd in the Reign of the Em∣peror Nero, and another, who liv'd in the Reign of the Emperor Hadrian, and some Time after. The latter of these is the Person, with whom I am at present concern'd. CHAP. X. AND he continues his Discourse, and advises us to embrace no Opi∣nions, but under the Conduct of impartial Reason, on the Account of the many and gross Errors, to which the contrary Practice will shamefully, and unavoidably expose us. And he compares those Persons, who take up any Notions without due Exa∣mination, to the designing Priests of Mithras, Bacchus, Cybele, or Hecate, or any other Mock-Deity of the Heathens.
For as these Impostors having once got the Ascendant over the common People, who were grosly ignorant, cou'd turn and wind these harmless Cattle, as their Interest or Fancy might direct: So, he says, the very same Thing was known to be the common Practice of the Christians. Some of 'em, says he, neither exami∣ning what it was that they believ'd; nor caring to be examin'd, wou'd use this Ex∣pression, don't examine into Matters, but believe; and thy Faith will infallibly save thee, and wou'd frequently say with an Air of affected Gravity, that the Wisdom of this World is very dangerous, and mis∣chievous, but Folly is a most admirable and useful Thing. To this I answer, that if all Men cou'd conveniently leave the Concerns of Life, and had Leisure and Inclina∣tion to bend their Minds to the Study of Philosophy. I shou'd heartily wish, that this might become a Universal Practice, tho' (to speak modestly, and to keep within due Compass) I think, I may safely say, that the sublime Doctrines of the Christian Religion, the short Hints of the Jewish Prophets, our Saviour's Parables, and abundance of other Things that are Simbolically de∣liver'd, and propos'd with the Sanction of a Law, are not more involved, and
attended with greater Obscurity, than many of the Opinions which are ad∣vanc'd and maintain'd by the Philoso∣phers themselves. But if the Method which I have mention'd, and before recommended, be impracticable, partly by Reason of Men's natural Incapaci∣ties, who, for the most Part, are very unfit to apply their Minds to Learn∣ing, and partly by Reason of the ne∣cessary and unavoidable Cares which attend Humane Life, what better Way cou'd any one have contriv'd, and tak'n, more suited to the Genius, and out∣ward Circumstances of the common People, than that which our Blessed Sa∣viour took, for the Conversion of a degenerate World? And as for the vast Numbers of Persons, who have left those horrid Debaucheries, in which they formerly wallow'd, and have pro∣fess'd to embrace the Christian Religion, I ask, which of the two Methods con∣duces most to their Advantage, and has the most natural and remarkable Tendency to the general Benefit of the Humane Race, to reform their Man∣ners, from a Sense of those most grie∣vous Torments, which the just God will be, as it were, constrain'd to in∣flict upon the wicked, and of that bright and massy Crown, which waits for the Righteous, and which they
will receive, when this frail and short Life is ended, tho' they don't stand to examine the Grounds on which their Faith is built, according to the strict Rules of Art, or to defer their Con∣version, 'till they have a fair Oppor∣tunity, and Capacity, to apply them∣selves to rational, and learned Studies? For Experience may convince us, that very few, in a comparative Sence, will advance ev'n so far as this, and reap the Benefit of yielding a naked, but well-grounded Assent to the Truths of the Christian Religion; but instead of that, the greatest Part of Mankind are fully bent upon a vicious Course of Life. CHAP. XI. THE Love of God therefore, in sending his Son into the World, do's very plainly appear, in accom∣modating Matters to the Circum∣stances of Humane Life, that so the Gospel might be of more general Advantage to the World, and this is none of the least Powerful Arguments, to prove that our Blessed Saviour had
a Divine Commission: For, if a Man, who has any Manner of Religion, will readily acknowledge, that a Physitian, who recovers sick Persons, is sent from God, tho' the Cure do's extend no far∣ther than the Bodies of his Patients, much more must we ackowledge, that our Saviour was indeed sent by the Fa∣ther, who has recover'd so many Thou∣sands of Persons from spiritual, and more dangerous Distempers, has improv'd the Faculties of their Minds, and prevail'd with 'em, to depend upon the Will, and Providence of God, to refer all their Actions to the pleasing of him, and to use their utmost Care, lest they incur his just and severe Displeasure, by Thought, Word, or Deed; and since our Adversaries are continually making such a Stir, about our taking Things on Trust, I answer, that we who see plainly, and have found the vast Advantage, that the common Sort of People do manifestly, and fre∣quently reap thereby, who make up by far the greater Number, I say, We, who are so well advis'd of these Things, do professedly teach them to believe, without a severe Examination, who can't neglect their worldly Bu∣siness, and spare Time enough, to make long and exact Enquiries into the Grounds of our Holy Religion.
And our Enemies themselves, tho' they wo'n't confess it, do the very same Thing, by which we incur their Censure. For when any one of them, do's first devote his Time and Strength to the Study of Philosophy, and either by some unexpected Accident, or the Tutor, who is first recommended to his Choice, is determin'd to fall in with a particular Sect; don't he take it for granted, that he has pitch'd on the most happy Method? For he do'sn't stay 'till he has heard, and weigh'd the Arguments, that may be brought for one Sect, and against another, and so at last choose to be a Stoick, Pla∣tonick, Peripatetick, or Epicurean Philo∣sopher, or the like. For, 'tis by a cer∣tain Impulse, in which Reason is little or not at all concern'd, that the Pre∣ference is frequently given to the Stoick Philosophy, for Instance, and the Pla∣tonick is despis'd, as being less sublime than the rest; and the Peripatetick, as giving too great an Indulgence to hu∣mane Frailty, and representing, more than any other Sect, those Things to be truly good, which are generally, but very unjustly reputed to be so. And there are some, who being, as it were, thunder-struck, at the very mention of an over-ruling Providence, by reason of its unequal Distribution of
its Favours, as they imagine, do rashly deny that there is any such Thing, and fondly embrace the corrupt and wild Notions of Epicurus. If, there∣fore, according to the Dictates of Rea∣son, we must joyn our selves to some Sect of Philosophers or other, either among the Greeks or Barbarians, with∣out weighing all the Arguments which may be brought on either Side; how much more just and reasonable is it, that we shou'd believe him who is GOD over all, and our Blessed Saviour, who teaches, that this God alone is to be worshipp'd, and that we shou'd raise our Minds above those Things, which can hardly be said to have a true Existence, or at best are very im∣proper Objects of Divine Adoration? 'Tis true, that only one, who makes Use of Reason and severe Study in exa∣mining the Principles he holds, is ca∣pable of building his Faith on rational Demonstration. But since we are forc'd to take many Things on Trust, ev'n in the most common and necessary Affairs of Humane Life, is it not highly agree∣able to the Dictates of solid Reason, that we shou'd immediately and firmly believe in God, and in him alone? Who is there that goes by Sea, marries, performs the Conjugal Act, or sows
his Ground, that will not hope the best, tho' nothing is more common than to meet with frequent and great Disap∣pointments? And if in our ordinary and daily Concerns, we overlook the uncertain Events of Things, and are encourag'd by the pleasing Prospect which our Faith and Hope do already give us, how much more Reason is there for one, who puts his Trust in God, to ex∣pect the desir'd Success of any impor∣tant Action, than there is for one who goes by Sea, or is employ'd in any worldly Affair, I say, how much more Reason is there for such a One, to place his entire Confidence in God, the glorious Creator of the spacious Universe, and in our Blessed Saviour, who in his infinite Wisdom, thought it fit to recommend his excellent Do∣ctrine to the whole habitable World, by suffering for Mankind not only cruel Persecutions, but also a Death, which in some Sence, was highly ig∣nominious, and by his own most He∣roick Example, at once taught and encourag'd the first Publishers of the Gospel boldly to encounter the great∣est Difficulties, and the most apparent Dangers, if they might but be honou∣rably and happily instrumental to save precious and immortal Souls.
CHAP. XII. THEN Celsus says, If they will re∣turn a solid Answer to some perti∣nent Questions, which I shall fairly pro∣pose to 'em (not as if I were unac∣quainted with the Opinions, which they hold, but because I love to cherish the tender Concern, which I naturally have for the Good of Mankind in general) 'twill be very well. But if they refuse to comply with this most reasonable, and highly necessary Request which I make to 'em, and run into their Common Cant, and say, Don't examine into Matters, but believe; sure 'tis fit at least, that they shou'd be so civil, as to tell me what Notions they advance, and whence their Original was deriv'd. To which I answer, that those Words, Not as if I were unacquainted with the Opinions which they hold; do not a little savour of his usual Presumption. For if he had read the Prophets, which are full of very obscure Hints, mystical Representations, and Expres∣sions, that every One don't easily, or
perhaps tolerably understand, and if he had carefully, and candidly read the Parables, that are scattered up and down in the Gospels, and those Parts of Scripture, which contain the Jewish Law and History, and if hav∣ing read the Writings of the Apostles without a Tincture of Prejudice, he had put himself in a Capacity of un∣derstanding their genuine Meaning, and full Design, he wou'dn't, with such an Air of Confidence, have boasted, that he was perfectly ac∣quainted with all the Opinions which the Christians hold. For no Divine, ev'n among our selves, whose constant, laborious, and almost entire Employment it is, to be conversant with those sacred Writings, do's dare to talk with such an Air of Vanity. Nor do any of us pretend to a perfect Acquaintance with the Opi∣nions of Plato, Aristotle, Epicurus, or the Stoicks, when ev'n they, who have undertak'n to interpret the Writings of these famous Philosophers, are so un∣happy as to differ among themselves, and quarrel with each other. But perhaps Celsus might borrow this bold Expression from some ignorant People, who were not sensible, that in∣deed they knew nothing at all, and I'm apt to think, that these were the pro∣found
Doctors, if the Truth was known, to whom he's indebted for that compre∣hensive Knowledge, of which he makes his Boast. And to me, he seems to do just like one, who travelling into Egypt (where the learned Clergy talk very Philo∣sophically concerning their sacred Rites, but the common People are wonder∣fully pleas'd with hearing some dark Fables related to 'em, the rational Ac∣count of which they don't in the least understand) do's immediately hereupon imagine, that he's perfectly acquainted with the Learning and Religion of the Egyptians, tho' he never convers'd in a familiar manner, with any of their Priests, or with any Persons that, ex∣plain'd to him what is signify'd by their mysterious Hieroglyphicks. And what I have said of the Egyptians, may as well be said of the Persians, Sy∣rians, Indians, and all other Nations that veil their Religion, as it were, with significant, but very mysterious Ceremonies.
CHAP. XIII. BUT since Celsus has laid this down as one of the Maxims of the Christians, that the Wisdom of this World is very dangerous and mis∣chievous; but Folly is a most admi∣rable and useful Thing: I answer, he don't fairly represent the Words of the Apostle Paul, which run after the following Manner, If any Man among you seems to be wise in this World, let 1 Cor. iii. V. 8. him become a Fool that he may be wise, for the Wisdom of this World is Foolish∣ness with God. He don't simply say, that Wisdom is Foolishness with God, but prudently confines his Discourse to the Wisdom of this World, and don't simply say, If any Man among you seems to be wise, let him immediately become a Fool; but If any Man among you seems to be wise in this World, let him become a Fool, that he may be wise. By the Wisdom of this World, I un∣derstand that vain Philosophy, in a com∣parative Sence, which the Scripture
do's so justly, so frequently, and so se∣verely condemn. And so Folly is a most admirable and useful Thing, not strictly consider'd, but in this limited Sence, when a Person becomes a Fool in the Esteem of this vain and dege∣nerate World. 'Tis just the same Thing, as if any one shou'd say, that the Platonicks, who believe the Immortality of the Soul, and the Doctrine of its Transmigration, have embrac'd ridiculous Opinions; that is, they are such in the Judgment of the Stoicks, who endeavour to over∣throw it, and of the Peripateticks, who insult over Plato, as if he were a Mad∣man; and of the Epicureans, who re∣proach them that believe a God, and an over-ruling Providence, as being the unhappy Authors of all the wild Superstition, that was ever brought into the World. And if there were Occasion, I cou'd make it appear, that tho' 'tis much better for them, who have Opportu∣nity, and Capacity, to build their Faith on rational and convincing Arguments, than to take Things on Trust; yet our Blessed Saviour wou'd have Persons of mean Capacities, and under some peculiar Circumstances, to believe with∣out a severe Examination, since other∣wise we can't suppose, that the Gospel
wou'd be of any Advantage to 'em. So much is intimated by St. Paul in the following Words, After that in the 1 Cor. i. V. 21. Wisdom of God, the World by Wisdom knew not God, it pleas'd God by the Foolishness of Preaching to save them that believe. Hence it is plain, that in the Wisdom of God the World ought to have known him, and because they so grosly fail'd herein, it pleas'd God to save them who believe in the fore-mention'd Way, viz. By the Preaching of a Doctrine, which was Foolishness in the Judg∣ments of many thousands, ev'n of ju∣dicious and learned Persons. St. Paul himself was not ignorant of this, when he us'd these Words, We preach Christ 1 Cor. i. V. 25. crucify'd, to the Jews a Stumbling-Block, and to the Greeks Foolishness; but to them who believe, both Jews and Greeks, the Wisdom of God, and the Power of God.
CHAP. XIV. AND since Celsus has reckon'd up several Nations who agree in their Opinions, and (I know not for what Reason) leaves out the Jews, as if they held none, that did bear the least Resemblance with those which the rest of the World maintain'd, I wou'd ask him, why he believes the Accounts which are giv'n by the Histo∣rians, both among the Greeks and Bar∣barians, and disbelieves what is fre∣quently, and credibly related in the Jewish History. For if all other Historians have giv'n a faithful Account of the Antiquities of the several Nations from which they sprung, why shou'd the Jewish Writers be the only Persons in the World suspected of gross Deceit? And if Moses and the Prophets have said many Things in Favour of the Jews, may not the very same Thing be charg'd upon all, or far the greatest Part of prophane Hi∣storians. Must we give Credit to the Annals of the Egyptians, which repre∣sent
the Jews as a strange Sort of People, and believe, that all that the Jews say against the Egyptians, viz. That they treated 'em in a most barbarous Manner, and for that Reason were justly and severely punish'd by God, is a ridiculous Fable? I might say the same Thing of the Assyrians, who, if we may believe their own Historians, were anciently engag'd in long and bloody Wars with those of the Jewish Nation. And the Jewish Writers (for perhaps I shou'd be thought to speak from Prejudice, if I shou'd call 'em Prophets) make frequent Mention of their Wars with the Assyrians. See therefore, how Celsus is led aside by Prejudice which he's so ready to charge others with, when he readily believes some Nations to be extreamly wise, and highly esteems their Histo∣ries, as being entirely authentick, and condemns those of other Nations as being false, and void ev'n of common Sence.
CHAP. XV. Observe his Words, 'TIS an Opinion, says he, that is generally receiv'd by the Ancients, in which not only some few wise Men, but entire Nations, and those not a little remarkable for Sence and Learning, have readily and unanimously agreed. He took special Care not to reckon the Jews among the wise Nations of the World, as if they were vastly infe∣rior in respect of Wisdom to the Egyp∣tians, Assyrians, Indians, Persians, Odrysae, Samothracians, and the Eleusinii. But how much do's Numenius the Pythagorean deserve to be prefer'd be∣fore him, who has made his Name immortal by his uncommon Eloquence, has tak'n such Care in his impartial Enquiries into Truth, and heap'd up so many good Authorities to confirm his excellent and elaborate Notions? This learned Author in his Book  speaking of those Nations, that held God to be incorporeal, has rec∣kon'd the Jews among 'em. He also
makes mention of some Passages in the Writings of the Prophets, which he takes in an Allegorical Sence. 'Tis reported also, that Hermippus in his first Book  acquaints us, that Pythagoras borrow'd his Phi∣losophy from the Jews, and taught it to the Greeks, and there is extant Hecataeus's History of the Jews, wherein he do's so highly commend the Wisdom of that People, that Herennius Philo in a Book, that he has writ concerning 'em, seems inclin'd to think it spurious, and afterwards says, that if it be really genuine, tis probable, he was inwardly a Convert to the Religion which they profess. But I wonder in my Heart how it comes to pass, that Celsus shou'd reckon up the Odrysae, Samothracians, Eleusinii, and Hyperborei, as being famous at once for their Wisdom, and Antiquity, and make no mention of the Jews, for the Egyptians, Phoenicians, and Greeks, do by their own History, give sufficient and ample Testimony to the Antiquity of that People, which, I thought, 'twas needless for me to produce. For any one, that reads Josephus's two Books of the Jewish Antiquities, may see there a long Catalogue of Authors, who confirm the Truth of this Matter by their concurring Testimony. And Tatian,
who writ after him, has made a learned Discourse against the Gentiles, wherein he quotes abundance of Authors, who have writ concerning the Antiquity of the Jews, and of Moses in particular. So that Celsus seems to me to talk at this extravagant Rate, rather from implacable Malice, than out of Zeal for Truth, designing to reproach the Christian Religion (which has so close a Connection with that of the Jewish Nation) on the Account of its Ori∣ginal, which he supposes to be late and mean. And he says, that the Galactophagi of Homer, the Druids of the Gauls, and the Getae (who agreed with the Jews in some Opinions, but have no Writings extant, that I know of) are remarkable for their Wisdom and Antiquity. But he levels all his Malice at the Jews, and will neither allow 'em to be wise nor ancient. Then giving us a Catalogue of wise and ancient Persons, who were useful to their Contemporaries by their bright Example, and to Posterity by their ad∣mirable Writings, he has purposely left Moses out of the Number of Men remarkable for their Wisdom, tho' Linus, who is put at the Head of 'em, has left behind him no Laws, nor Books, for the Regulation of So∣cieties, or Reformation of Manners,
whereas Moses's Laws are diligently observ'd by an entire and populous Nation, by whose Means they have been diffus'd, almost thro' the whole habitable World. Take Notice therefore, of the unac∣countable Malice by which Celsus is acted, who says nothing of Moses, but mentions Linus, Musaeus, Orpheus, Phe∣recydes, Zoroaster the Persian, and Pytha∣goras, with abundance of Honour, as having giv'n wise and wholesom Pre∣cepts to Mankind, and tak'n prudent and due Care to transmit 'em to Poste∣rity by their Writings, which are ex∣tant at this very Day. And I suppose, he designedly omitted to speak of the ridiculous Fables (espe∣cially in the Writings of Orpheus) which attribute humane, and ev'n ex∣orbitant Passions to their pretended Deities.
CHAP. XVI. THEN he finds great Fault with the Mosaical History, and can't bear, by any Means, that it shou'd be tak'n in an Allegorical Sence. But one might ask this mighty Man (who calls his Book by the Name of A True Relation) how it comes to pass, that he's able to discover the most pro∣found Mysteries in the strange Acci∣dents, which according to his own admir'd Poets and Philosophers, have befall'n his Gods and Goddesses, which have been polluted with Incest, have contended with their Fathers and made 'em Eunuchs, and done many immo∣dest Actions of the like Nature (which might be mention'd, if Occasion of∣fer'd) but when Moses don't say any Thing that is comparable to this, of the great God whom he ador'd, or of the Angels, or of Men (for he don't represent ev'n them, as making such a bold Attempt as that of Saturn against his Father, or that of Jupiter against Saturn, or that of the Incest,
which the Father of the Gods and Men committed with his Daughter) Celsus treats ev'n the famous Lawgiver of the Jews, as a notorious and shameful Impostor, and takes the People, who are govern'd by his Laws to be weak, and extreamly credulous. Here he seems to me to act like Thrasymachus in Plato, who will not suffer Socrates to state his Notion of Justice, but says, Have a Care how you say, that Expediency, or Decency, or any such Thing is Justice. For reproaching, as he thinks, the Mosaick History, and blaming them severely, who take it in an Allegorical Sence, tho' he acknowledges, that of the two they are more pardonable, than they who literally interpret it; and having form'd his Accusation to his Mind, he wou'd deny us the just Liberty of making our own Apology. But we openly challenge any Person who may espouse his Cause, to set Author against Author, and may ad∣dress our selves to him after the fol∣lowing Manner, Pray Sir, be pleas'd to produce the Poems which were writ by Linus, Musaeus, and Orpheus, and the History which was publish'd by Pherecydes, and compare 'em with the Laws which Moses gave to the Jewish Nation; Examine which have the greatest, and most general Influence
on the Minds of Men, and impartially consider how few of the Writings of those celebrated Authors, which you have reckon'd up, had any tolerable Effect, especially on the common People, since, according to your own Confession, they were design'd for them, who were capable of understanding Allegories. Whereas Moses acted the Part of a Skillful and Divine Orator, who makes use of Expressions that admit of diffe∣rent Sences, neither giving the Laity among the Jews a Handle for the least Irregularity in their Morals, nor want∣ing Matter for the sublime Specula∣tions of those who are more judicious, learned, and inquisitive. And I don't see, I confess, that the Works of your Poets, with all their Wisdom, are preserv'd, what Service soever they might do the Publick. But the Books of Moses have prevail'd with them, whose Opinions and Customs, are vastly different from those which obtain among the Jewish Na∣tion, to believe, that according to the Account he gives, the Laws which are contain'd in 'em, were giv'n him by the great God himself, the glorious Creator of the spacious Universe. For 'twas agreeable to the Dictares of his infinite Wisdom, that since it was his Will to give Laws to the World, they
shou'd carry along with 'em that Force and Efficacy, without which 'twas im∣possible for 'em so readily, and so uni∣versally to obtain. This, I say, not examining at present, what has an immediate Relation to our Blessed Saviour; but contenting my self with what relates to Moses, who, tho' he came infinitely short of the Holy and Unspotted JESUS, did vastly excel your most Celebrated Heroes, whether Poets, Historians, or Philo∣sophers. CHAP. XVII. THEN Celsus being desirous, and ev'n eager, to cast an oblique Reflection upon the Account, which Moses gives of the Creation of the World, according to whom it wants a great Deal of the Duration of Ten thousand Years, discovers himself, tho' he do's what he can, at the same time, to conceal, or dissemble his Opinion, to be one of them, who hold the Eter∣nity of the Material World.
Any judicious Person may justly, and easily infer this from that Passage of his, There have been, says he, in all Ages of the World, many Conflagrations, and Inundations, the last of which was Deu∣calion's Flood, and that is of no early Date. Let him therefore, especially since he blames the Christians, for not build∣ing their Faith on rational and solid Grounds, acquaint me, what Demon∣strative Arguments do of Necessity in∣duce him to believe, that There have been several Conflagrations and Inundations, and that Deucalion's was the latest Flood, and Phaeton's Conflagration the latest that has ever happen'd. And if he refers me to Plato's Dialogues concern∣ing those Matters, I shall return him the following Answer, that we have Reason to believe, that the virtuous and refin'd Soul of Moses, which was rais'd above all sensible Objects, and all created Beings, and had its entire and firm Dependance upon God, was fill'd with the Holy Spirit, who enabl'd him to set Divine Truths in a much clearer Light than Plato, or any of the ancient Sages, whether Greeks or Barbarians. But perhaps he may demand of us, what rational Grounds we have for such a Belief as this. If so, let him first give us his Reasons for the Opi∣nion
which he holds and advances, ev'n without the Shadow of a De∣monstration, and then, I'll undertake, that he shall soon be acquainted with the Grounds, on which our Faith in this Affair is built, tho' I can't but take Notice, that sorely against his Will, he confess'd the World was of a modern Date, and not of the Dura∣tion of Ten thousand Years, when he said, That these remarkable Events were esteem'd ancient by the Greeks, because the Conflagrations and Inundations have been Means to bury in Oblivion, many considerable Events of much greater An∣tiquity. But let him, if he pleases, support his fabulous Account of Conflagrations and Inundations, by the Authority of the Egyptian Doctors, who, in his Opi∣nion, were the wisest Men that were ever born into the World, some Foot∣steps of whose profound Wisdom may be seen, in their paying Divine Wor∣ship to the Brute Beasts themselves, and in those very Arguments, which they bring to justify and recommend the Symbolical Rites, that are made use of in the RELIGION of their Country. The Egyptians forsooth, who endea∣vour to give some Colour of Reason for their mystical Ceremonies, by their
Theological Speculations, must pass for Men of most admirable Wisdom, but one, who in Observance of the Jewish Law, refers every Thing to the Blessed GOD, of whom, and thro' whom, and to whom are all Things, is more ignorant (if we may give any heed to Celsus, and Men of his unhappy Principles,) than they, who don't only dishonour the Deity, by paying divine Adoration to Creatures endu'd with Reason, but ev'n by paying it to those which are inanimate, under a Pretence of I know not what imaginary Trans∣migration of the Soul, which they make to descend from Heav'n, and pass into the Bruits, ev'n into those of 'em, which are of the most savage and cruel Disposition. And it seems the Egyptians, who hide their Religion under the sacred Veil of significant, but obscure Figures, do challenge from us the profoundest Re∣verence, but Moses forsooth, who has writ a faithful and useful History of the Jewish Nation, and left 'em whol∣some Laws for the Regulation of their Conduct, both in a private and pub∣lick Capacity, has only, in the Judg∣ment of Celsus, and the Epicureans, amus'd 'em with empty and ridiculous Fables, that will not admit, ev'n of an Allegorical Interpretation.
CHAP. XVIII. THEN he says, That Moses hav∣ing borrow'd his Opinions from this wise and eloquent People, meaning the Egyptians, got himself a prodigious and unaccountable Name. To which I an∣swer, that 'tis no Wonder at all, if Moses borrow'd some Notions from the Wise Men that liv'd in Egypt before him, and introduc'd 'em, with some little Difference, or great Improvement among his Country-men the Jews. And without all doubt he deserves to be blam'd severely, if he has ad∣vanc'd such Notions as bear neither the Characters of Truth, nor Wisdom, but if he has embrac'd and taught those Opinions, which, according to Celsus's own Confession, are both true, and wise; I can't conceive that he has done any Thing, whereby he might justly incur his Censure. I wish, with all my Heart, that Epi∣curus, and Aristotle, who do's not so directly, and so grosly deny an over-ruling Providence as the other do's, I say, I wish, with all my Heart, that
they and the Stoicks, who hold that God is corporeal, had been instructed in that Heav'nly Doctrine, that was deliver'd by Moses, that the World might not so much abound, as it do's, with Authors that absolutely deny a Providence, or confine it within very narrow Bounds, or introduce a corpo∣real and corruptible Principle, inso∣much that the Stoicks hold God him∣self to be nothing more than Matter, and are not asham'd to acknowledge that he undergoes the various Changes to which Bodies are subject, or that if he is so happy as to be incorruptible, 'tis for no other Reason, but because there's no Object from without, that has any Power to corrupt him. But the Jewish and Christian Doctrine, which preserve the pure Nature and Im∣mutability of God inviolable, is esteem'd impious by Celsus, because 'tis most di∣rectly repugnant to those extravagant Notions, which greatly derogate from the infinite Honour, that is due to the Supream and Adorable Majesty, and teaches us when we address the Throne of Grace, to say, Lord, thou Psal. cii. v. 27. art always the same, and represents God acquainting us, that he never Mal. iii. v. 6. changes.
Then Celsus, not condemning Cir∣cumcision, which is in use among the Jews, says, They borrow'd that Custom from the Egyptians, and gives greater Credit to the latter than he does to Moses, who assures us, that Abraham was the first Person, who brought Cir∣cumcision into Use. And Abraham's Name, and his great Familiarity with God, is not only mention'd by Moses in his Writings, but also by the Magi∣cians themselves, who in the Formu∣laries of their own horrid Devotion, have this Expression, The God of Abraham, signifying thereby the Intimacy, that there was between the great God him∣self, and this eminently-virtuous, and holy Man. For 'tis on this Account they per∣form their Magical Operations in the Name of The God of Abraham, tho' they are far from knowing who this Abraham was. The same may be said of Isaac, Jacob, or Israel, which, tho' they are Hebrew Names, are frequently made use of by the Egyptians themselves, who pretend they can do prodigious, and ev'n miraculous Things by the Help of Magick.
But 'tis not my Business at pre∣sent, to give any farther Account of Circumcision, which began at Abra∣ham, and was abolish'd by our Blessed Saviour. 'Twill be more to my Purpose, to answer the severe Accusations, which Celsus brings against the Jewish Reli∣gion in general, who thinks he gains his Point, and effectually overthrows Christianity, if he can but make a successful Attempt against the Jewish System, on which the Doctrine of our Saviour is acknowledg'd to be most evidently built. CHAP. XIX. THEN he says, That a Company of Men, that look'd after Sheep, and Goats, being left to the Conduct of Moses, were so grosly deceiv'd by him, that he made 'em believe, there was no other God but one. Let him show therefore, since he thinks they did, without just Cause, oppose the Worship of a Plurality of Gods, I say, let him show, whether,
on rational Grounds, he can establish the Polytheism both of the Greeks and Barbarians. Let him show the Sub∣stance and Essence of Mnemosyne, on whom Jupiter begat the Muses, or of Themis, on whom he begat the Hours, Let him show the Subsistence of the Graces, which are always represented Naked. But I'm confident, he'll never be able to prove from the Things themselves, that the Gods of the Greeks, which have Bodies attributed to 'em, do de∣serve the Name of Deitys. For what Reason can be given, why we shou'd believe, that the Fables of the Greeks concerning their pretended Deities, have any more Truth or Sence contain'd in 'em, than those of the Egyptians, For Instance, whose Language is un∣acquainted with Mnemosyne, the Mo∣ther of the Muses, or Themis, the Mo∣ther of the Hours, or Eurynome, the Mother of the Graces, and the like? What is there in all these empty Ficti∣ons, that deserves to be compar'd with the Evidence, and Weight, which that one Argument, drawn from the entire Harmony of the seemingly-clashing Parts of the spacious Universe, do's carry with it, to prove the perfect Ʋnity of God.
For 'tis impossible in the Nature of the Thing, that a Piece of such Divine Architecture, all the Parts of which (how numerous soever, and how distant, and different soever from each other they may be) have so ad∣mirable an Agreement, and so mani∣fest, direct, and constant a Subserviency to the Advantage and Ornament of the whole, shou'd be made by several Hands, as 'tis not rational to think, that the Motions of the Heavenly Bodies are caus'd by several Souls, since there's no Need of any more than one, which making the vast Ex∣pansam to move from East to West, con∣tains within it self all those lower Things, which, tho' they are not in themselves compleat, do nevertheless conduce to the wonderful Harmony, and by Consequence the surprizing Perfection of the Universe. For every Thing which is circumscrib'd by the World is a Part belonging to it, but God is not properly a Part of any whole, of what Kind soever it may be. For Absolute Perfection is insepar∣able from the Nature of God, whereas all the Parts of the Universe, how agreably soever they may strike upon our wondering Senses, and entertain ev'n our Nobler Powers, are naturally, evidently, and in a comparative Sense,
very grosly imperfect, and if we carry our Speculations a little farther, per∣haps we shall find, that as God is not a part of the Universe: so neither in Propriety, and Strictness of Speech, can he be call'd a whole, since we must unavoidably suppose a whole to be compos'd of Parts; and at least, 'tis most highly irrational to think, that the great God has Parts, any one of which has not an equal Virtue, and Dignity with the rest. CHAP. XX. THEN Celsus says, That these Men who look'd after Sheep, and Goats, were unhappily prevail'd with to believe there was no other God but one, whether they call'd him the Most High, or Adonai, or the Majesty of Heav'n, or Sabaoth, or whether they were pleas'd to give any other Name to the World, which was the Boundary of their real Knowledge. He adds, 'Tis no great Matter by what Name the great God be call'd; whether with the Greeks they call him Jupiter, or with the Indians, or Egyptians, call him by any other Name.
To which I answer, that this Dis∣course of his do's naturally, and un∣avoidably lead me to a difficult and important Question concerning the true Nature of Names, whether, as Aristotle thinks, they depend entirely on Institution, and Choice, or whe∣ther, according to the Opinion of the Stoicks, they have their Foundation originally laid in Nature, Words be∣ing first form'd on the Model of Things themselves, in Imitation of which, Names, and the Elements of Etymo∣logy were happily introduc'd into the World, or whether, as Epicurus thinks, who differs from the Stoicks, they have their Foundation partly laid in Nature, and are partly owing to Accident, and Contrivance, the first Men having un∣designedly affix'd such and such arti∣culate Sounds to such and such Objects, of which they had form'd, and wou'd convey an Idea. If therefore, I can make it appear, that some Names have a natural, and by consequence an inseparable Efficacy, (such as the Wise Men among the Per∣sians, or the Brachmans, or Samanaei of the Indians, or the Wise Men of any other Nations do constantly make use of) and if I can prove, that the Art which is commonly call'd by the Name of Magick is not absolutely incongruous
to Reason, as the Followers of Aristotle and Epicurus think it is, but has certain stated Rules, as they that are skill'd in it do know, and can easily demon∣strate, I say, if I can make this appear, I think, I may then safely affirm, that the Name Sabaoth, Adonai, and other Names, for which the Jews have so profound a Veneration, were not de∣sign'd to denominate any created Be∣ings, much less those of an inferiour Order, but do contain some sacred My∣stery, which has an immediate Refe∣rence to the great and adorable Crea∣tor of the Universe. These Names therefore, have an Efficacy, when they are duly pronounc'd by any Person whatsoever. There are other Names, which, being pronounc'd in the Egyptian Language, are prevalent with certain Daemons, whose Power is limited to such or such a Sphere, and others, which being pronounc'd in the Per∣sian Language, are prevalent with other Daemons. And I might instance in several Nations of the World, that use other Names, applying 'em in very different Sences, and so we shall find that the terrestrial Daemons, which have parti∣cular Places assign'd 'em, have Names giv'n 'em, according to the Language
which the People speak. Any Man of Sence therefore, one wou'd think, that bestows but the least Thought on this important Subject, will scruple to make use of Names foreign to the Things which they represent, least he shou'd unawares, be guilty of the same Fault with them, who use such im∣proper and harsh Expressions concern∣ing God himself, that they don't at all stick to give him the false, and vile Appellation of inanimate Matter, or run into the Error of those unhappy Persons, who greatly derogate from the infinite Honour which is due to the supream and original Cause, and disparage true Virtue, and Piety, by mis-applying the Sacred Name of Sum∣mum Bonum, to a little glittering, but perishing Dust, or a happy Constitution of Body, or that which is falsely, but too commonly call'd an Honourable Descent, Noble, Princely, or Royal Blood. And surely the Danger of mis-applying the Name of the Aweful Majesty of Heav'n, or the Chief Good, is at least equal to that of changing the stated Names, which are us'd in Magick and have a Mystical Sence, and giving the Names of Superiour Powers to infernal Spirits, and on the contrary, those of infernal Spirits to Superiour Powers.
I need not say, that at the very men∣tion of Jupiter is understood the Son of Saturn, and Rhea, the Husband of Juno, the Brother of Neptune, the Fa∣ther of Minerva, and Diana, and the Person that committed Incest with his Daughter, nor need I say, that at the mention of Apollo, is understood the Son of Jupiter, and Latona, the Brother of Diana, and Brother to Mer∣cury by the Fathers side, or need I speak of many other Things that were related by the Ancient Heroes (whom Celsus has, with so much Honour enume∣rated) or contain'd in the old, and admir'd Theology of the learned Greeks. Pray how comes it to pass, that Jupiter is call'd as he is, and that the Son of Saturn and Rhea is not the Name that's given him? The same Question may properly enough be ask'd, concerning the rest of the Riff∣raff of the Heathen Gods. This Consideration, I think, has a manifest Tendency to favour, and justi∣fy the Practice of those Persons, who have some mystical but solid Reason for using the Name Sabaoth, or A∣donai, and some other Names when they speak of GOD, since they who understand any Thing of the true Nature of Names, will easily find
that some sacred Mystery is veil'd un∣der the Names which are giv'n to the Angels, one of whom is call'd Mi∣chael, another Gabriel, and another Ra∣phael, each having a Name affix'd to him by the Father of Spirits, agree∣able to the Nature and Extent of that honourable Work, in which his great Creator has thought fit to employ him. And the Virtue which accompa∣nied the Pronunciation of our Saviour's Name, and by which cruel and obsti∣nate Daemons were frequently, and pub∣lickly dispossess'd both of the Minds and Bodies of Men, must, I think, be resolv'd, at least in some Measure, in∣to the natural Efficacy of Names. I might add one Thing here, and that is this, that they who are skill'd in Enchantments, tell us, that if they make use of such and such Words in the Ori∣ginal Language, the End propos'd will certainly be obtain'd, but if the very same Words be chang'd, and others be made use of, which convey the very same Idea, they will immediately, and strangely lose their extraordinary Virtue. So that the Power which they have, is not owing to the Things of which they are the external Signs, but to cer∣tain unknown Properties, that belong to the Names themselves.
CHAP. XXI. THIS may serve as an Apology for the Christians, who willingly, and ev'n triumphantly embrace Death it self in the most horrid Shapes, ra∣ther than call God by the Name of Jupiter, whatever Intention or Mental Reservation they might have, or give him those Names which are us'd in the Languages, and adapted to the Religions of other Countries. For ei∣ther they call him by the general Name of God, or they bestow such Epithets as these upon him, The Creator of the World, the Former of Heav'n and Earth, or might express themselves by the fol∣lowing Periphrasis, He who has sent some wise and virtuous Men into the World, whose Names being honourably blended with his own have a strange and ev'n miraculous Power. Here I might enter into a long Dis∣course, in Opposition to them, who ea∣gerly contend for the promiscuous Use of the most sacred Names.
For if Plato be so much, and not undeservedly commended, who brings in a Person upon Philebus's calling Pleasure a Goddess, making use of the following Expression, For my part, Protarchus, I have a profound Vene∣ration, ev'n for the Names of the Gods, which like themselves, I esteem, sacred and inviolable; how much more ought Christians to be commended, who make Conscience of applying those Names to God, which are unhappily, but too com∣monly, borrow'd from the empty and ridiculous Fables of the Poets? But so much of this Matter for the present. CHAP. XXII. LET us now see how Celsus loads the Jews with Reproaches, which don't well suit with his horrid Pre∣sumption, in professing that he was perfectly acquainted with the Opi∣nions of the Christians. They give themselves, says he, to the Worship of Angels, and to Magick, following
therein the Precepts of their celebrated Moses. Let him therefore, since he's so well acquainted with the Jewish and Chri∣stian Doctrine, shew where there's any Precept in all the Pentateuch, that can be brought in Favour of Angel-Wor∣ship, and acquaint us how 'tis possible, that Magick shou'd be in Vogue with a Nation that observes the Law of Moses, who has left the following Words upon Record, Regard not them Lev. xix V. 31 that have familiar Spirits, neither seek after Wizards to be defil'd by 'em. CHAP. XXIII. THEN Celsus undertakes to shew, That the Jews by reason of their monstrous Ignorance, tamely suffer'd them∣selves to be led aside into great, and very pernicious Errors. I confess this might with Justice have been alledg'd against the Jews, with respect to their denying our Bles∣sed Saviour to be the true Messiah, who had the plain Testimonials of a Divine Commission, and was so frequently,
and so evidently foretold by their own celebrated Prophets. But not being desirous to entertain the least Thought concerning that Mat∣ter, which he knew wou'dn't serve his Cause, he supposes the Jews to be most grosly deceiv'd, in a Case wherein the contrary is extreamly evident. CHAP. XXIV. LEaving then what immediately re∣lates to the Jews to another Op∣portunity, he enters into a Discourse concerning our Blessed Saviour, as being the Head of an Ʋpstart Sect, who from him are call'd by the Name of Christians. He says, That our Saviour appearing in the World, and introducing his Doctrine but a few Years ago, was (for what Rea∣sons he knows not) tak'n by the Chri∣stians for the Son of God, in a strict and proper Sence.
To which I answer, that when our Saviour did so lately introduce his Doctrine, it shou'd meet with such wonderful and happy Success, that al∣most in ev'ry Part of the whole habi∣table World a great Number both of Greeks and Barbarians, of learned and unlearned Persons, shou'd so rea∣dily, and ev'n triumphantly forsake the Religion in which they were born, and bred, and to which they were pre-engag'd by many other strong, and almost indissoluble Ties, and on a sudden discover so extraordinary a Zeal for a new Religion, as to be willing to sacrifice their Reputation, their For∣tunes, and ev'n their Lives for the Pro∣fession of it, (which can hardly be said of any other Doctrine, which has all external Advantages to recommend it.) I say, when the Posture of Affairs is such, we must be strangely blinded by the Force of Prejudice, it we don't ob∣serve a more than ordinary Appearance of the Providence of God, in so sudden, so remarkable, and so blessed a Change as this. I think, I may safely say (not to speak from Prejudice, but as one who desires and endeavours to make impartial En∣quiries into Truth) that a skillful Phy∣sician can't recover his Patients ev'n from their bodily Diseases without the
Blessing of Almighty God upon the pro∣per Methods he prescribes. And if any one can cure the more fatal Distempers of the Soul, can sud∣denly, and in a considerable measure, dispossess those rooted and dangerous Vices, that have for a long Tract of Time usurp'd and maintain'd a Domi∣nion there, can free it from its former, and in some Sence, Native Intempe∣rante, Injustice, Contempt, and Pro∣phanation of holy Things, and, as a Proof of his Skill, can instance in an hundred Persons, whose Manners he has been happily, and greatly instru∣mental to reform, I presume, you will not say, that this can be done without a seasonable, and more than common Interposition of the Providence of God. If then any Person, who weighs these Things in the Ballance of his serious and deliberate Thoughts, will of Ne∣cessity acknowledge, that much of the Natural, and all the Moral Good, of which the whole World can boast, is owing to some higher Cause, than a General Concourse of the Supream and and All-wise Being, how much more justly, and more eminently may this be said in Commendation of our Bles∣sed Saviour, if we compare the Course of Life which his Followers once ig∣norantly and unhappily led, with the
Tenor of their future Conversation, and consider how willingly, and ev'n greedily they devoted themselves to Debauchery, Fraud, and Avarice, be∣fore they made a Profession of that holy Religion, which the Blessed Jesus in∣troduc'd into the World, (which in the Judgment of the Epicureans was a Notorious Cheat, and the greatest Plague with which Mankind cou'd possibly have been infected) but in Process of Time were illustrious Exam∣ples of the contrary Virtues, insomuch that some of 'em from a sincere and vehement Desire of attaining to an ex∣traordinary Degree of Purity, and of Devoting themselves more entirely to the Service of God, did abstain from the lawful Delights of Sense, and those rational Entertainments which Marriage it self affords. And any one who examines into these Matters, with that Diligence and Exactness which is requisite, will easily perceive, that our Saviour, with a Greatness of Soul that was peculiar to him, attempted what was vastly be∣yond the Sphere of meer humane Na∣ture, and that the Event did most remarkably answer his Design. For when ev'ry Thing look'd with an unfavourable Aspect, on so great, and seemingly so bold an Undertaking,
and threaten'd, that the Gospel shou'd be confin'd to a very narrow Compass, when the Roman Emperors in their successive Reigns, the Governors of Provinces, and Generals of Armies, the Magistrates of particular Cities, the Soldiers, and the common People, in a Word, when all Persons that were in Places of Authority, or had any In∣terest, and Influence, declar'd open War against the Christian Religion, I say, ev'n then, under all those evident and great external Disadvantages, it bore the sacred and undeniable Marks of a Divine Original, approv'd it self to the Consciences of the most wicked Men, forc'd its Way, in Spite of the united Malice, and most vigorous Efforts both of Earth and Hell, gain'd ground by the most violent Opposition, and being superiour to all its Enemies, which were neither few, nor contemptible, and having a wonderful Power over the Minds of Men, all Greece, and a great Part of the most barbarous Nations, became Trophies of Honour to the Immortal Memory of its God-like Founder.
CHAP. XXV. AND since the greatest Part of the World are entirely ignorant of the Arts and Sciences, and have but a small Measure, and scarce any Glim∣merings of Reason, 'twas morally im∣possible, but that among such vast Numbers as embrac'd the Christian Religion, the Irrational and Illiterate shou'd greatly exceed those in Num∣ber, who had render'd themselves fa∣mous for their Sence and Learning. But Celsus, not being willing to con∣sider this as he ought, speaks with the highest Contempt of the Sun of Righte∣ousness himself, who condescends to shine promiscuously on the greatest, and the meanest, and to enlighten, and warm with his refreshing Rays, the most eminent Saint, and the vilest Sinner, and he looks on this extraordinary Condescension, as an Argument of prodigious Folly, and unman∣ly Self-Debasement, as if it were not one of the highest Flights of Majestick Sim∣plicity, that cou'd possibly be discover'd by an Incarnate God.
But Celsus himself can't say, with all his Prejudice, and Malice, that all who ever embrac'd the Doctrine of our Blessed Saviour, were dull and stupid to a Proverb, and the only Persons in the World who were so, since it seems he's so just, and so gracious as to ac∣knowledge, that some few may be found among 'em, who are very se∣vere in their Morals, and are capable of understanding Allegories. CHAP. XXVI. BUT because he personates a Jew (in Imitation of a Professor in the University, who makes his young Pupil declaim, that he may use him∣self to the Art of Rhetorick) I say, because he personates a Jew, enter∣taining our Saviour with Discourse that's very childish, and unbecoming the Gravity, as well as suppos'd Sence and Learning of an old Philosopher; Let me examine, according to my weak Ability, what 'tis that he supposes him to say, and make it appear, as I think I can easily do, that the Jew
don't strictly, or ev'n tolerably observe his Character. Celsus introduces him, making his Address to our blessed Saviour, and pretending to convince him of several Points, and the first Thing of which he endeavours to convince him, is, that the Account of his being born of a Virgin is an empty and ridiculous Fable. Then he reproaches him with being born at an obscure Village, and having a Woman to his Mother, that got her Live∣lyhood by going out to Service, who, he says, being convicted of Adultery, was di∣vorc'd from her Husband, who was a Car∣penter by Trade. Then he says, That after this Indig∣nity wand'ring from Place to Place, she was privately brought to Bed of our Sa∣viour, and that he being forc'd by reason of Want, to work in Egypt, and having learn'd there some of those Arts, for which the Inhabitants of that Country are so Famous, return'd into his Native Coun∣try, and swelling with a vain Conceit of the Miracles he shou'd do, gave out that he was God. But for my Part, I must confess, to me, who do with a silent but deep Re∣gret, pass by ev'n the weakest Argu∣ments that are offer'd by our Adver∣saries, and naturally affect to trace
Things, especially such as are of the last Consequence to the Souls of Men, 'till I come by slow Degrees, to their true Originals, I say, to me these Things are so far from giving an unhappy Shock, that they are no small Confir∣mation of that important Truth, that our Blessed Lord is the very Person, whom the Prophets foretold to be the Son of God, and the Saviour of the World. I can't deny, but that com∣monly a Man's Descent from rich and honourable Parents, and Enjoyment of the Advantage of a liberal Education, do's not a little conduce to blazon his Name, and command Reverence from Persons of an inferior Rank: But when one who labours, in the greatest De∣gree imaginable, under the contrary external Inconveniencies, can spread his Fame to the most distant Regions of the World, in Spite of his mean Ex∣traction, and the fond Opinions which are too often receiv'd by aspiring Mor∣tals, and climb the higher up the steep Ascent of Honour, by reason of the vio∣lent Opposition which is made against him, who, if he has any Spark of hu∣mane Nature left, can forbear to ad∣mire a Soul of the same Rank of Beings with himself, so strangely elevated be∣yond the common Pitch, and so nearly approaching to the Deity, so capable of
forming well-laid, deep, and truly ge∣nerous Designs, and of crowning all by a happy and answerable Execution? If we make a serious and narrow Enquiry into the Matter, shall we not be ready and ev'n constrain'd to think thus with our selves, was it possible, that one who was born of poor and ignoble Parents, and was not instructed in the Liberal Arts, and Sciences, whereby he might have been render'd capable of insinuating himself into the People, and of engaging their Affecti∣ons, and their Purses in his Service, shou'd so work upon the Passions of Men, by an invisible Power, and the naked Evidence of Truth, as almost universally to gain their Credit and Esteem, tho' the Doctrine which he introduc'd was in a great measure new, a Doctrine, which, without derogating in the least from any of the Jewish Pro∣phets, did abolish the Mosaick Dispen∣sation, and make void the Laws of the Greeks, especially those, which had an immediate Relation to Religious Wor∣ship, in which they were so grosly ig∣norant? Is it not strange, and ev'n prodigious to a Miracle, that one who ev'n accord∣ing to the Confession of his Enemies, was so meanly born, and bred, and by consequence was very unfit to ma∣nage
an Intriegue, which requires a Chain of Thought, and continu'd Thread of Artifice, shou'd so move the secret Springs of humane Souls, and so powerfully incline 'em against their strongest Inclinations, by encou∣raging the righteous with a pleasing Prospect of a glorious and eternal Re∣ward in the World of pure and perfect Spirits, and by representing to the wicked, as in a Glass, those dreadful Torments which they must expect to suffer, when they shall fall into the Hands of the living God, I say, is it not strange, and ev'n prodigious to a Miracle, that such a one, shou'd not only engage ignorant, and illiterate Per∣sons to embrace his Doctrine, but also a great Number of the rational and learned World, who, under the sacred Veil of naked Truths cou'd discern un∣fathomable Depths of supernatural Wis∣dom, display'd with all the Art that a God cou'd shew? I remember Plato relates a Story of one that was born at Seriphos, who upbraiding Themistocles, a Famous Ge∣neral, said, that the Reputation he had happily establish'd was not owing to his Merit, but his happ'ning to be born at a famous City of Greece, whereupon Themistocles, who was sensible, and gratefully acknowledg'd, that the Place
of his Nativity had no small Tendency to render his Name immortal, return'd him this judicious and diverting Answer, If I had been born (said he) at Seri∣phos, I shou'dn't have been so famous as I am, but if you had been born at Athens, you wou'd never have be∣come Themistocles. Now our Sa∣viour, who is upbraided with being born in a Village, and that not of Greece, or any celebrated Country, and having a poor Woman to his Mother, that got her Livelyhood by her Labour, and leaving his Country, by reason of Want, was forc'd to work in Egypt, I say, our Saviour, who, if I may ac∣comodate the foregoing Instance to our present Case, was of a meaner Extra∣ction than the fore-mention'd Person, that was born at Seriphos, did as it were, give a happy Shock to the whole habitable World, and made a greater Impression upon the savage Dispositions of Men, I scorn to say, than Themi∣stocles the Athenian; but a greater than ev'n Pythagoras, or Plato, or any of the Wise-men, Princes, or Emperors were ever known, or reported to have made. What Person then, unless he loves to dwell upon the Superficies of Things, will not stand astonish'd when he considers that our Blessed Saviour sur∣mounted all the Difficulties, which lay
in the Way to his growing Reputation, and seem'd to threaten that his Name shou'd, as it were, sleep in Everlasting Silence? CHAP. XXVII. IT seldom happens that any one Per∣son is famous for many Things at once, for One is famous for Wisdom, another for Military Discipline, and som of the Barbarians for their Skill in Magick, and several others for some few suppos'd Perfections, which per∣haps do scarce deserve our Notice. But our Saviour was very remar∣kable for the best Sort of Wisdom, for Authority, and for working Miracles, not to mention those other innumera∣ble Excellencies that adorn'd his Per∣son, and might sufficiently recommend him to the World. He did'n't act like a Tyrant, who, by the Help of a prevailing Party, takes Occasion to violate the known Laws of the Land in which he lives, nor like a Robber, who comes with Armed Men, against them who innocently pass
by the King's High-Way about their necessary Affairs, or like a Wealthy Man, who, by the Help of Bribes, induces Persons to come over to his Interest, whether by right or wrong, or like many others that might easily be men∣tion'd, whose Proceedings do mani∣festly deserve our Censure, but like one, who came to teach an ignorant and degenerate World, what Thoughts they shou'd entertain of God, and how they might so regulate their Morals, as to maintain an humble and familiar Correspondence with his Blessed Ma∣jesty. And as for Themistocles, and several other Persons, who gain'd a more than common Reputation, and did real and extraordinary Service to their Native Country, this must be said, to draw a Shade over their greatest Glory, that ev'ry Thing seem'd to smile on their just and honourable Attempts, and as it were, pave the Way for their glo∣rious Victories, and immortal Tri∣umphs. But as for our Blessed Savi∣our, besides what I have already said (which upon the first View, one wou'd think, was enough to have eternally conceal'd, or shamefully fully'd the Name of the greatest Heroe that the World cou'd ever boast of) the igno∣minious Death, which he suffer'd on
the Cross; if he had had the fairest Character, wou'd have giv'n his Fol∣lowers just Cause to suspect him of being a vile Impostor, if we may give any Credit to our Adversaries, or at least have drawn a most dismal Veil over the few bright, and entertaining Scenes of the most Aweful Tragedy, that was ever acted. CHAP. XXVIII. AND 'tis Matter of Wonder, that our Saviour's Disciples, who, in the Judgment of our Enemies, were not Eye-Witnesses of the Truth of his triumphant Resurrection, and saw no∣thing but what was common and ev'n contemptible in his Person, shou'dn't be afraid to imitate him in his Suf∣ferings, to encounter the most immi∣nent and threat'ning Dangers, and leave their Native Country, to publish the Doctrine which their crucify'd, but blessed Lord had taught 'em. For I believe that no Person, who, laying aside his Prejudice, examines these Matters duely, will say, that they
wou'd ever have undergone the Fa∣tigue of Ttinerant Preaching, if they had not been fully perswaded of the vast Obligations that lay upon 'em, both from Reason, and Gratitude, not only to conform their Manners to the holy Precepts of the Christian Re∣ligion, but also to do what lay in their Power, to bring many others under the same honourable, and happy Bonds, when, as Matters went at that Critical Juncture, they were sure to incur the Displeasure of the Heathen World, who were zealous for their ancient Laws and Customs, and cou'dn't en∣dure the least seeming Innovation, es∣pecially with respect to the pompous Ceremonies of their religious Worship. But all these Difficulties were light, and trivial, in the Esteem of those, who had Courage, not only to prove to the Jewish Nation, that our Blessed Sa∣viour was frequently, and expresly fore∣told by their own Prophetick Oracles, but also to make it appear to others, as Occasion offer'd, that this very Per∣son was the true Messiah, who was crucify'd but t'other Day, and willingly, and ev'n chearfully laid down his pre∣cious Life for the whole Race of Men, after the same manner, tho' with un∣speakable Advantage, in which some others have sacrific'd all that's near
and dear to 'em, for the good of their Native Country, to free it from a ra∣ging Pestilence, a threat'ning Famine, or some violent impending Tempest, that greatly endangers Ships, and puts a Stop ev'n to Navigation, which is so, convenient, and necessary, for promo∣ting an advantagious Trade into Fo∣reign, and very distant Parts. For there are some secret Reasons in Nature, which very few understand, why the Death of one virtuous Man, who readily suffers the greatest Evils that can possibly befall him, for the real and perhaps lasting Welfare of the Place of his Nativity, shou'd destroy, or at least severely check, the usurp'd Power of those infernal Daemons, who are the Cause of Plagues, Famines, Storms, and the like evident and great Disorders, which frequently happen in the World. And I wou'd fain know of them, who don't believe, that our Saviour dy'd for the general Benefit of the humane Race, whether they won't give easie Credit to many Hi∣stories that are extant, both of the Greeks and Barbarians, which furnish us with frequent, and remarkable In∣stances of Persons, who have freely laid down their Lives for the publick Good, and whose Death has been hap∣pily instrumental to purge away those
threat'ning, and grievous Calamities, that infected Cities, and perhaps whole Nations, or whether, on the Supposi∣tion that these are Matters of Fact, it be in the least improbable, that one, cloath'd with humane Nature, shou'd be nail'd to a Cross, to destroy the Works of the Devil, who before did often, and too successfully, exercise a Tyrannical Power over the Bodies, and Souls of Men. Our Saviour's Disciples observing these Things, and many Others of the like Nature, with which in all Proba∣bility, their prudent, and indulgent Master thought fit to acquaint 'em, and being fill'd with the Spirit of God (for they were not inspir'd with their unusual Courage, by the Virgin which the Poets speak of, but by the true Wisdom of God) they made haste Thro' the wide World their Fame to spread. Hom. Il. Lib. 5. v. 2
CHAP. XXIX. BUT 'tis Time to return to the Jew, whom Celsus personates, who says, That the Virgin Mary being big with Child, was divorc'd by her Husband the Carpenter, for committing Adultery with one Panthera, a Soldier, and being got with Child by that scandalous Wretch. Let us see therefore, whether the In∣ventors of this Story don't give a false, and obscure Account of the Matter, and whether by all that they have to say, they are able to overthrow the Doctrine of our Saviour's miraculous Conception by the over-shadowing of the Holy Ghost? For so surprizing a Passage as this is, might very easily be falsify'd, and 'twas possible, they might deny the Truth of it, tho' they were inwardly convinc'd, that our Saviour was not conceiv'd in the common Way of humane Generation. And methinks, it wou'dn't have been incongruous at all, that they who didn't believe, or rather wou'dn't acknowledge the Mi∣racle, shou'd invent a Fiction, to serve their malicious and base Design.
But to invent one, that was so far from having a plausible Appearance, that 'twas a great, and notorious Un∣truth, was to discover their Weakness to them, who are able to distinguish Truth from Falsehood. For do's it stand to Reason, that one, who was so useful to the World in general, and express'd a most ten∣der Concern, both for the Greeks, and Barbarians, that they might reform their Manners, from a Sense of a Fu∣ture, and Aweful Judgment, and do what lay in their Power, to gain the Favour of the Blessed God, the Crea∣tor, and Supream Disposer of the Uni∣verse, I say, do's it stand to Reason, that such a one, so serviceable to pro∣mote the Glory of God, and the Wel∣fare of precious and immortal Souls, shou'd be so far from being born in a miraculous Way, as to be of a base, and illegitimate Extraction? I ask the Greeks, and particularly Celsus, (who, whether he be a Platonist or no, thinks he has sufficient Authority for what he says, if he do's but quote a Passage out of the learned Plato,) whether it be not a Reflection upon one, who holds the Doctrine of the Transmigration of Souls, and by Con∣sequence, that every Body has a pro∣per Soul to act, and animate it, to de∣ny
that our Saviour was born in a lawful Manner, who engag'd in so difficult and important a Work, in∣structed so many ignorant and seduc'd Persons, and happily, and suddenly re∣cover'd 'em from that Deluge of Im∣morality, in which they had been so long, and so deeply plung'd. Is it not more rational to think, according to the Opinion of Pythagoras, Plato, and Empedocles, (on the Testimony of which learned Authors, Celsus himself do's very much rely) that there are some secret Reasons, why every Soul shou'd have a Body appropriated to it self, that is a fit Receptacle for it, and suited to the good, or bad Qualities, which it had in its State of Pre-exist∣ence? Is it not just, and reasonable, that a more than humane Soul, that do's more Service to the World, than many Thousands of others (to say no more, lest my Discourse shou'd be thought to savour of Prejudice) shou'd be united to a Portion of Organiz'd Matter, that is more excellent than the Generality of Bodies are? For if those Souls, which by the Virtue of some secret Causes, are of too noble a Nature, to be united to an inanimate Creature, and are not worthy to animate a Body, that is compleatly form'd, have one that is
adapted to 'em, the Head of which being disproportionable to the rest of its Members, do's in a great Measure hinder the free Exercise of Reason, and others, that are more perfect, act a Body that is more duly dispos'd, and so others, according to the several Degrees of their native, or acquir'd Excellencies, are sent into more or less perfect Bodies, why may not a par∣ticular Soul assume a Body in a mi∣raculous Way, a Body, that has some∣thing in common with the rest of Men, that may render it fit for hu∣mane Conversation, and something wherein it differs from 'em, that may in some Measure, secure it from the sad Contagion of a neighbouring, and di∣stemper'd Mind. In short, if we give any Credit to them, who are skill'd in Physiog∣nomy, such as Zopyrus, Loxus, Polemon, and others, who have directly handl'd that difficult Subject, and pretend to find out extraordinary Mysteries, by observing the Rules which that Sci∣ence proposes, what Absurdity is there in asserting, that all Bodies are suited to the Qualities of the Soul that acts 'em?
Is there then the least Probability, that a Soul, so excellent in it self, and form'd for such great, and truly-ge∣nerous Designs, as the Humane Soul of our Blessed Saviour, shou'd animate a Body, which, as Celsus represents the Matter, was begotten in Adul∣tery, by a wicked Souldier, on the Body of a lustful Female? One wou'd rather think, that a Mad-man, or a Person, who prov'd a constant Plague to the Age, and Place he liv'd in, or a Teacher of Intemperance, and Injustice, and an impudent Encourager of all Manner of Vice, shou'd owe his Birth to so impure a Copulation, and not a Teacher, much less an e∣minent Practicer, of Temperance, Justice, and all other Virtues.
CHAP. XXX. THIS was plainly foretold by the Prophet, and exactly agrees with the promis'd Sign, that we read of in the Prophecy of Isaiah, where 'tis said, That our Blessed Saviour wou'd, by the Course of his Actions, make good his Name, and prove himself to be Emmanuel, God with us. And I think it may not be impro∣per, to mention the Prediction of the fore-mention'd Prophet, that our Sa∣viour shou'd be born of a Virgin, which Celsus takes no Notice of, tho' he pretends to be perfectly acquainted with what the Christians hold, either not having read it, or cunningly con∣cealing his Knowledge, lest he shou'd unawares overthrow his own belov'd Opinions, and advance any Thing to the Prejudice of the Cause, which he espouses, and uses his utmost Endea∣vours to maintain. The Words of the Prophecy are these, Moreover the Lord spake again to Ahaz, Isaiah vii. V. 10. saying, ask thee a Sign of the Lord thy
God, ask it either in the Depth, or in the Height above. But Ahaz said, I will not ask, neither will I tempt the Lord, and he said, hear ye now, O House of David, is it a small thing to weary Men? But will ye weary my God also? Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a Sign, Behold a Virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son, and call his Name Emmanuel. That Celsus discover'd his Malice, in not mentioning the fore-going Pro∣phecy, I gather, from his passing over it in a profound Silence, when he quotes some Passages in St. Mathew's Gospel, and particularly makes mention of the Star, that appear'd at the Nativity of our Blessed Saviour. But if the Jew, whom Celsus perso∣nates, being us'd to make critical Re∣marks on Words, shou'd tell us that the Word, which is translated Virgin, shou'd be render'd Young Woman, I an∣swer, the Hebrew Word , which the Septuagint translate Virgin, tho' Others favour his Meaning of the Word, is understood of a Virgin in the Book of Deuteronomy. If a Damsel (that Deu. xxii V. 23. is a Virgin) be betroth'd to an Husband, and a Man find her in the City, and lye with her, then ye shall bring 'em both out to the Gate of the City, and ye shall stone 'em with Stones that they dye; the Dam∣sel because she cry'd not, being in the City,
and the Man, because he has humbl'd his Neighbour's Wife. So thou shalt put away evil from among you. But if a Man find a betroth'd Damsel in the Field, and the Man force her, and lye with her, then the Man only that lay with her shall dye. But to the Damsel thou shalt do nothing, there is in the Damsel no Sin worthy of Death. But not to dwell too long upon the Hebrew Word, which perhaps few Per∣sons understand, I shall endeavour to prove from the Context, that, accord∣ing to the Prophetick Oracle, Emma∣nuel was to be born of a Virgin. The Lord said to Ahaz, ask thee a Sign of the Lord thy God. either in the Depth, or in the Height above, Then 'tis said, that this Sign was to be giv'n, Behold a Virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son. But what Sign cou'd a young Wo∣man's Conceiving be, if it was not meant of a Virgin? And to which of the two, is it most proper to attribute the Conception of Emmanuel, that is, God with us, to a young Woman with Child, in an unlawful, and dishonou∣rable Way, or to one, who had not lost her Virginity? Certainly, 'tis most agreeable to the Dictates of Reason, to suppose, that so extraordinary a Person was conceiv'd by the latter, in a strange, and ev'n miraculous Way.
And if the Jew lays such a mighty Stress upon those Words, Ask thee a Sign of the Lord thy God; I shou'd be glad to know, what Person was born, in the Reign of Ahaz, of whom it might be said, This is Emmanuel; which being interpreted, is, God with us. And if no such Person can be found, I think, we may fairly understand this Text of our Blessed Saviour, who, as the Scriptures acquaint us, was to be born of the Seed of David, accord∣ing to the Flesh, and the following Words, In the Height above, or in the Depths below, have a manifest Agree∣ment with what is said of our Savi∣our, He that descended, is the same that Eph. iv. V. 10. ascended up far above all Heav'ns, that he might fill all Things.
CHAP. XXXI. THIS I say to a Jew, who, if he observes his Character, must give his ready, and firm Assent to the Truth of the Jewish Prophecies. And I ask Celsus, and those of his Party, did the Prophets foresee Things to come, or did they not? If they did not fore∣see 'em, what shou'd make 'em speak with such an Air of Assurance, and how comes it to pass, that the whole Jewish Nation has all along look'd upon their Prophecies, as divinely-in∣spir'd Oracles? And, since I am natu∣rally led, into a Discourse concerning the Jewish Prophets, I hope, that what I shall offer on this important Head, may not only, by the Blessing of Al∣mighty God, be of some Use to the Jews, who believe that they were divine∣ly-inspir'd, but also to as many of the Greeks themselves, as act upon ingenu∣ous Principles. For they must acknow∣ledge, that the Jews had true Prophets among 'em, unless we cou'd suppose 'em, to have a sufficient Warrant, for vio∣lating
their divinely-instituted Rites, and paying Divine Worship, as a just Tri∣bute to the Mock-Deities of Foreign Nations. I prove my Assertion thus, We read in the Jewish Law, That other Nations Deu. xviii. V. 10. hearken'd to Observers of Times, and to Diviners. But to the Jewish Nation 'tis said, As for thee, the Lord thy God has not suffer'd thee so to do. Then it follows, The Lord thy God will raise up to thee a Prophet of thy Brethren. If therefore, while other Nations had Men among 'em, who foretold future Events, whether by the flying or sing∣ing of Birds, or by a narrow Inspe∣ction into the Entrails of Beasts, or by the hollow Voices, that were form'd in the Bellies of certain Persons, or by the Childaean Horoscopes, the Jews, (who had, in common with others, a Cu∣riosity to know what shou'd come to pass) were forbid to take the fore-men∣tion'd Methods, and had no Prophets of their own, who were acquainted with Futurities, they wou'd immediate∣ly have entertain'd mean Thoughts of their own Religion, as bearing no un∣deniable Characters of its Divine Autho∣rity, and have rejected all their Prophets down from Moses himself, insomuch that we have Reason to believe, they wou'd never have committed any Thing that
was deliver'd by 'em to Writing, but either have had Recourse to the Heathen Oracles, or have practic'd something in Imitation of 'em, in their Native Country. And it was not in the least absurd, that the Prophets, for the Satisfaction of some Persons, who desir'd it, shou'd prophesy concerning Matters, that seem'd to be of mean Importance, as Samuel did, concerning some Asses that 1 Sam. ix. V. 20. were lost, and Ahijah, concerning the Death of Jeroboam's Son. 1 Kin xiv V. 12. And indeed, if they had no Prophets among 'em, how cou'd any, that were zealous for the Jewish Law, reprove them, who consulted the Heathen Ora∣cles? As we read, that Elijah reprov'd Ahaziah, saying, is it because there is not a God in Israel, that ye go to enquire of Baal-zebub the God of Ekron? I think then, that I have sufficiently prov'd, not only, that our Saviour was to be born of a Virgin, but also that there were divinely-inspir'd Prophets, to whom the Jewish Nation might have frequent, and satisfactory Recourse. These didn't only, in the general, foretel some Things, that wou'd come to pass, with reference to our Blessed Saviour, and the remarkable Revo∣lutions of Empires, and Change of the Face of Affairs in the Jewish Na∣tion,
and Conversion of the Gentiles; but, sometimes, did more particu∣larly foretel some Things, as that the Asses, which Kish had lost shou'd be found; and that Jeroboam's Son shou'd dye: And I might give many Parallel Instances, that we meet with in the Holy Scriptures. CHAP. XXXII. I Have this to say farther to the Greeks, who wo'n't believe, that our Saviour was born of a Virgin, that the Creator of the World, if he pleases, can make ev'ry Animal bring forth its young, in the same wonderful manner, that is observ'd of some inanimate Creatures, and nothing hinders, but he may cause, if he pleases, the like unusual Productions in the World of Men. For among Animals, there are some Females, that bring forth their young, without any previous Copulation with the Males, as, for Instance, the Vul∣tures, which propagate their Kind in this uncommon Way, as the best Wri∣ters
of Natural History do acquaint us. What Absurdity is there then, in supposing, that the All-wise God, de∣signing to bless Mankind, with an ex∣traordinary, and truly-divine Teacher, shou'd so order Matters, that our Bles∣sed Saviour shou'd not be born, in the ordinary Method of humane Genera∣tion? And the Greeks themselves do rea∣dily acknowledge, that some Men have come into the World, without the Con∣junction of Man and Woman. For if the World had a Beginning, as many of 'em grant it had, then the first Man was not produc'd in the common Way, but, according to them, by the Sperma∣tick Vertue of the Earth, which, to me seems much more strange, and unac∣countable, than our Saviour's Nati∣vity, if we do but follow the Dictates of impartial Reason, since the Way in which he was born, has some Resem∣blance with the usual Method of car∣nal Copulation. And, since I'm concern'd with the Learned Greeks, it may not be impro∣per, to make my Appeal, ev'n to their own Histories, that it may appear to the World, that Others, as well as the Christians, must, upon their own Prin∣ciples, acknowledge the Possibility of so extraordinary a Production, against
which they so loudly exclaim. Now some of their Modern Authors tell us, that Plato was born of Amphictione, without the Conjunction of Ariston, who was forbid to touch his Wife, 'till she shou'd be deliver'd of a Son, whom she shou'd conceive by Apollo. This is a meer Fable, I confess, in∣vented in Favour of a Person, whose uncommon Attainments made 'em in∣clin'd to think, that ev'n his Body was of a Divine Original, since they thought, 'twas fit, that the Bodies of those Per∣sons, who are not on a Level with the rest of Men, shou'd have some honou∣rable Mark, by which they may be distinguish'd from Vulgar Mortals. And because Celsus's Jew continues his Discourse with our Blessed Saviour, and ridicules the Fiction, as he is pleas'd to call it, of his being born of a Vir∣gin, and ranks it among the Fables of the Greeks, concerning Danae, Menalippe, Auge, and Antiope, I answer, that such pityful Drollery as this, wou'd look with an agreeable Air, in a Merry An∣drew, who gathers a Mob about him, and plays his Monkey-Tricks on a Stage, but don't at all become one, who wou'd treat of Matters of great Impor∣tance, with that Gravity, and Serious∣ness, which the Nature of the Things may justly challenge from us.
CHAP. XXXIII. THEN Celsus, making mention of some Things, relating to our Saviour's Going into Egypt, refuses to give Credit to those Parts of the Hi∣story, which contain any Thing, that is supernatural, as the Angel's warning Joseph, the reputed Father of our Lord, and don't examine whether his Leav∣ing Judaea, and Going into Egypt, will not admit of an Allegorical Sence; but invents an Occasion for his literal Go∣ing thither, and believing, and acknow∣ledging, in some measure, the Truth of our Saviour's Miracles, (which caus'd Abundance of People, to flock to him, esteeming him to be the true Messiah) but endeavouring to shew, that they were wrought by the Help of Magick, and were far from being Proofs of a Divine Commission, he says, That having been privately educa∣ted, he was forc'd to work in Egypt, and having learn'd those Arts, for which that Nation is so famous, he return'd in∣to his own Country, and gave out that
he was God. But for my Part, I can't conceive, that a Magician wou'd so in∣dustriously promote a Religion, which teaches us, to have a strict Eye to the Day of Judgment, especially when we take any serious Affair in Hand; nor, can we think, that he wou'd take such Care, to inculcate that aweful Solem∣nity, upon the Minds of his Apostles, whom he design'd to imploy, in the Promulgation of the Gospel, were he a Person of so infamous a Character. For either they wrought Miracles, or they did not. 'Tis absurd to suppose, they did no Miracles at all, but barely relying on the Authority of a Doctrine, which did not, like the Logick of the Schools, recommend it self to carnal Reason, had the Courage to promote a new discountenanc'd Religion. And if they wrought Miracles, do's it stand to Reason, that a Company of Magi∣cians shou'd agree, to expose themselves to imminent Danger, and the greatest Inconveniencies imaginable, to pro∣mote a Doctrine, that condemns the Use of the very Art they practic'd? But 'twou'd be Loss of Time, to confute this Discourse of Celsus, which has nothing, but perhaps a little witty Drollery, to recommend it to the Palate of the un∣wary, and less judicious Reader.
CHAP. XXXIV. HE goes on in the same Comical and Bantering Strain; If the Mother of Jesus, says he, was a Celebrated Beauty, and for that Reason, the Great God was pleas'd to admit her to his passionate Em∣braces, one wou'd think, that so excellent a Being is of too pure a Nature, to be captivated by the Charms of a frail, and humane Body, however he cou'dn't have made Choice of a more improper Person; viz. One, who had neither a Great For∣tune, nor Noble Birth, to recommend her; but led so obscure a Life, that she was scarce known by those, who were her nearest Neighbours.
CHAP. XXXV. HE continues his Raillery, and says, That when her Husband, the Carpenter, came to hate her, and sue for a Divorce, all that she had to plead in her own Behalf, was ineffectual, to redress her Grievances, nor did the Great God see fit (as much as you wou'd make us believe, he lov'd her) to engage his Power, to protect her from threat'ning Danger, ev'n in her Native Country. Therefore none of these Things, says he, have the least Reference to the Kingdom of the Blessed God. But this Language, is just like that, of a Company of Per∣sons, scolding in the open Streets, who vent their Passion, without the least Regard to the Rules of Justice, or Civility.
CHAP. XXXVI. THEN taking some Things out of St. Mathew's Gospel, or per∣haps out of some of the other Evange∣lists, concerning the Dove, that descend∣ed upon our Saviour, at his Baptism, he wou'd fain have the whole Account, to pass for a false, and trifling Story. And having said enough, as he imagines, to prove, that our Saviour wasn't born of a Virgin, he continues his Discourse, but don't treat of Things, in the Order of Time, in which they came to pass, (for inveterate Malice can never en∣dure, to be confin'd to a regular Method) and talks, like those shatter-brain'd Fel∣lows, whose Heat, and undue Passion, do's so transport 'em, beyond the Bounds of Reason, that they don't stick, to say whatever comes into their Minds, and so are hinder'd, from managing, in a becoming Way, the several Heads of severe, but unjust Accusation, which they bring against their Adversary, with an Air of Vanity, and Insolence. For had'n't he been greatly wanting,
in the pretended Method he observes; he wou'd have trac'd the History from its very Original, since his In∣tention was, to expose it to Contempt. But on the contrary, the Mighty Cel∣sus, who boasts so much of his com∣prehensive Knowledge, after he had finish'd his Discourse, concerning our Saviour's Birth, immediately passes on, to the Descent of the Holy Spirit, at his Baptism, in the Resemblance of a Dove. Then he finds Fault with the Prophecies concerning his Incarna∣tion. After that, he returns to what immediately follow'd his Nativity, viz. To give an Account of the Star, that appear'd, and the Wise Men, that came from the East, to worship him. But any diligent Reader, may save me the Labour, of showing, how con∣fus'd Celsus is, throughout the whole of his Book, and this one Thing is sufficient, to convince any Person, who loves Exactness of Method, that 'twas a Piece of Arrogance in him, to give his Book the Title of A True Relation, and was a Strain of Vanity, perhaps beyond most Philosophers, that ever went before him. Plato says, That it don't become the Character of a Man, famous for Wisdom, to be positive in Matters, which are involv'd in very great
Obscurity. And Chrysippus, after he has giv'n the Reasons, that induc'd him to be of this, or that Opinion, do's modestly refer us to those Persons, who are able to give a more clear, and exact Account. But this mighty Man, being much wiser, I suppose, than Plato, Chrysippus, and all the Greek Phi∣losophers, gives his Book the engaging Title of A True Relation, which suits well enough, I confess, with his Boast∣ing, that he didn't want to be inform'd of the Opinions, which the Christians held. But that it mayn't be thought, that I pass by what he says, for Want of being in a Capacity, to return him a proper, and sufficient Answer: I have resolv'd to examine every Material Ar∣ticle, tho' I cannot observe so strict a Method, as I wou'd, but am forc'd so far to comply, ev'n with the Folly of my Adversary, as to trace him thro' the Labyrinth of his confus'd Discourse. Let us see then, what he has to offer, against the Descent of the Holy Spirit, on our Blessed Saviour, in the Resem∣blance of a Dove.
CHAP. XXXVII. THE Jew, whom Celsus personates, directs his Discourse to our Sa∣viour, in the following Words; You pre∣tend, says he, that a Bird appear'd to you, at your Baptism; but can you produce any credible Person, that was present, to see it; Or, heard the Voice from Heav'n, (by which, you say, you were declar'd, to be the Son of God) besides your self; and (if we may take your Word) another Person of the same pityful Class? But before I return him a direct and full Answer, I must beg Leave, to make one Remark, that 'tis very difficult, and in some Cases, impossible, to give evident, and undeniable Proofs, of the Certainty of undoubted Matters of Fact. Suppose any One shou'd say, there never was such a Scene of Action, as the Trojan War, grounding his bold Affirmation, on the seeming Impossi∣bility, of some of the material Circum∣stances, which attended it; and not conceiving, how there shou'd be, In
rerum natura, such a Person, as Achilles is represented to us, the Son of Peleus, and Thetis, the Goddess of the Sea; or Sarpedon, the Son of Jupiter, or Ascalaphus, and Jalmenus, the Sons of Mars; or Aeneas, the Son of Venus; how cou'd we convince him of his gross Mistake, when so many Fables, be∣ing interwoven with the Body of the History, are so readily, and so univer∣sally believ'd? Or suppose, any Person shou'd call into Question, the Story of Oedipus, and Jocasta, and Eteocles, and Polynices, their Sons, by reason of what is confidently related, concerning the Sphinx, a certain Monster, that was half a Virgin, how cou'd we de∣monstrate, that the whole Account is true? I might say the same, concerning the second Theban War, which was con∣tinu'd, by the Posterity of them, who had lost their Lives in the first (tho' that be more free from the Appearance of Fiction, than the former Story) and concerning the Return of the Heraclidae to Peloponnesus; and I might instance in many other Things, of the like Nature, which are recorded in the Histories of the Greeks. But he who reads 'em, without a Tincture of Prejudice, and with a sincere Desire, that he may not be deceiv'd, will judge, how far he is
requir'd, to yield his ready, and firm Assent; what Passages he must take in an Allegorical Sence, and what he must reject, as being writ in Favour of some particular Persons, and will en∣deavour, to find out the true, and full Meaning of those, who were the Ori∣ginal Authors of these Stories, which the Greeks, who are a learned Nation, do so generally believe. I wou'd lay down this Praeliminary, with respect to the entire, and amazing History of our Saviour's Life, as 'tis impartially re∣lated in the Gospels, and I don't men∣tion this, as if I wou'd have the more intelligent; and learned Sort of People, to take Things on trust, but to shew, that the Reader has great Need of Candor, joyn'd with a severe Applica∣tion, and must penetrate, if I may so say, into the very Spirit of the Au∣thors, if he wou'd take their Writings in their true Sence, and utmost Lati∣tude. I answer then, in the first Place, that if the Person, who rejects the Account, that's giv'n, of the Spirit's appearing to our Saviour, in the Re∣semblance of a Dove, was a Follower of Epicurus, Democritus, or Aristotle, there wou'd be some plausible Ground for his Incredulity, because then, I con∣fess, he wou'd observe his Character.
CHAP. XXXVIII. BUT Celsus, with all his Wisdom, seems to me, to have quite for∣got, that all this while he was speak∣ing, in the Person of a Jew, whom we must suppose, to yield a firm Assent, to many Passages in the Prophets, that wou'd sooner be liable to shock our Reason, than any Thing related in the History, of which, I am now dis∣coursing. For one might ask this pre∣tended Jew, who wo'n't believe, that the Holy Spirit appear'd to our Bles∣sed Saviour, in the Resemblance of a Dove; Pray Sir, how will you be ever capable, of giving evident, and unde∣niable Proof, that God spoke to Adam, Eve, Cain, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, or Jacob, as your Scriptures do plainly assert he did? And, to set History against Hi∣story, I wou'd address this Jew after the following Manner; Dear Sir, you can't be ignorant, that Ezekiel, who is one of your own celebrated Pro∣phets, has these very Words, The Hea∣vens were open'd, and I saw Visions of Ezek. i. V. 1.
God; and he adds, This was the Appea∣rance, Ezek. i. V. 28 of the Likeness of the Glory of the Lord, and he said to me. Now if those Things, that are rela∣ted of our Saviour, must be acknow∣ledg'd to be false, because, as you think, they have not sufficient, extrinsick Evi∣dence, to recommend 'em to the World; since you affirm, They were seen, and heard, by no Person but himself, and ano∣ther, of the same pityful Class; Have we not more Reason to suspect, that Eze∣kiel impos'd upon us, when he said, that the Heav'ns were open'd to his View? And tho' the Prophet Isaiah says, I saw the Lord, sitting upon a Throne, high, and lifted up, above it stood Isa. vi. V. 1. the Seraphims, each one had six Wings; Pray Sir, what rational Assurance have you, that he really saw, this enter∣taining, and amazing Sight? You be∣lieve that these Things are true, and come from the Spirit of God, who nei∣ther can be deceiv'd, nor will deceive us, and are perswaded, not only, that the Prophet saw 'em, but also that he was Divinely-inspir'd, when he committed these Things to Writing. But I ask, which of these three, is it most fit we shou'd believe, Ezekiel; Isaiah, or our Blessed Saviour? The two former did nothing, that deserves to be compar'd, or ev'n mention'd, with
what the latter has done, whose Power was not only most gloriously display'd, when he appear'd, and dwelt on Earth; but shines with a happy, and remar∣kable Lustre, at this Distance of Time, in the Conversion, and exemplary Re∣formation of those, who believe in God thro' him. And that all those wonder∣ful Effects, which we frequently see, are owing to his infinite Power, I in∣fer from hence, that as he said, and, as constant Experience may convince us, the sincere Labourers are few, in a Mat. ix. V. 37. comparative Sence, and yet the Harvest of Souls is great; that is, vast Numbers ibid. V 38 are, every where, almost continually, brought into God's Threshing-Floor, if I may so say, I mean, the visible Church. This I say to a Jew, not as if I had the least Design, to derogate from the Honour, which I am sensible, is due to Ezekiel, and Isaiah, (for that wou'd be very inconsistent, with the Profession, which I make, of the Chri∣stian Religion, which is built on the Jewish Prophets, as well as on our Sa∣viour's Apostles, Jesus Christ himself be∣ing the chief Corner-stone) but I wou'd Eph. ii. V. 20. convince him, if it be possible, upon the Principles, in which we both agree, that we have far more Reason, to give Credit to the Report of our Blessed
Saviour, who is reported to have seen, and heard such Things, and, for ought we know, did acquaint his Disciples, with the Vision which he saw, and the Voice which he heard from Heav'n. Perhaps, it may be objected against us, That ev'n they, who have giv'n us an Account, of the Holy Spirit's Appearing in the Resemblance of a Dove, and of the Voice, that came from Heav'n; hadn't these Things, so much as from our Sa∣viour's Mouth, since, ev'n according to our own Notions, the same Spirit, which inspir'd Moses, to write a History of what pass'd for many Ages, before ever he was born, ev'n from the Creation of the World to the Time of Abraham, who, in some Sence, was the Father of the Jewish Race, might also immediately re∣veal the strange Passages, which happen'd at our Saviour's Baptism, to the four Evangelists. But to this I answer, that one, who is favour'd, with what the Scriptures call the Gift of Wisdom, can easily ac∣count for the Opening of Heav'n, and assign a Reason, why the Holy Spi∣rit appear'd, to our Blessed Saviour in the Resemblance of a Dove, rather than in the Shape of any other Animal. However, these are Niceties, that are foreign to our present Purpose.
All therefore, that I shall do at pre∣sent, shall be to shew, that Celsus did not only want the Innocence of the Dove, but ev'n the Subtilty of the Serpent, when he put such Discourse as this, into the Mouth of one, whom he calls a Jew, who, if he be not false to his Pretensions, must believe several Things, that are much more impro∣bable, than any Thing related in the History, of which, I am now dis∣coursing. CHAP. XXXIX. I Remember, in a Disputation, I had with some Celebrated Jewish Doctors, and before a great Deal of Learned Company, who were at once Witnesses, and Judges of what I said, I us'd this Argument against 'em; Pray Gentlemen, let me know, said I, since two Persons have appear'd, upon the Stage of the World, who are con∣fidently reported, to have done such Things, as were vastly beyond the Sphere of Nature; viz. Moses, the Lawgiver of the Jews, who has writ the History of what he did; and
JESUS, our Master, who has not left behind him, in Writing, an Ac∣count, of any of the Actions which he did; but has the concurring Testimony of the four Evangelists; I say, let me know, on what Grounds, you can justify the vast Difference, which you make between 'em, that we must be∣lieve, forsooth, that Moses deliver'd nothing, but what was true, tho' the Egyptians reproach him, as one that dealt with the Devil; but must look upon our Saviour, as a vile Impostour, on the Account of the severe Accusa∣tions, which you bring against him. We see, that both these Persons, have their Authority supported, by the Te∣stimony of a great Body of People, Moses has his supported by the ready, and joint Testimony of the Jewish Na∣tion, and our Saviour his by the General Suffrage of the Christians, who don't deny Moses, to be a Prophet sent from God; but confirm the History of our Saviour, ev'n by the Sacred, and Un∣disputed Authority of your celebrated Moses. If therefore, you desire us, to justify our Conduct, in paying so awful a Regard to our Blessed Saviour, do you first assign some Reasons, why you believe in Moses, who came into the World, many Ages before the incarnate Jesus, and then, it may be time to ac∣quaint
you, with the rational Grounds, on which our Faith is built. But if you refuse to give us any Reasons, why you believe in Moses, neither shall we think fit to acquaint you, with those we have, for believing in our Saviour, or if you are not able to offer any Demonstrative Arguments in favour of your justly celebrated Moses, be pleas'd to hear, what Arguments we can bring, ev'n from the Law, and the Prophets, to prove, that our Jesus is the true Messiah. And which is some∣thing strange, those very Arguments, which we bring from the Old Testament Writings, to prove, that our Saviour had a Divine Commission, do, at the same Time, prove, that Moses and the Prophets were Persons, who were im∣mediately inspir'd. But to return. The Law, and the Prophets, abound, with as strange Stories, as that of the Dove, that appear'd to our Saviour, at his Baptism; and the Voice, that came to him out of Heav'n; and that it was the Spirit of God, that appear'd to him, in the Resemblance of a Dove, do's, I think, at least seem highly probable, from the Consideration of the Miracles, which our Saviour wrought, which Cel∣sus says, he did, by the Help of Ma∣gick, which he had learn'd in Egypt.
Here I think, it may not be im∣proper, to mention, not only the Mi∣racles of our Saviour; but also those, which were wrought by the Apostles, who were, every Way, qualify'd, for that great Work, in which, their Master did engage 'em. For if their Ministry hadn't been accompany'd with Miracles, they wou'd never have been able, so happily to prevail with their Hearers, to renounce the Religion, in which they had been born, and bred, and to embrace a new, discountenanc'd Doctrine, the Profession of which, wou'd expose 'em to the greatest Dan∣gers, ev'n to an ignominious, and pain∣ful Death, and some remarkable Foot∣steps of that Holy Spirit, who ap∣pear'd to our Saviour, in the Resem∣blance of a Dove, do remain among Christians, to this very Day. They disposses Daemons, perform many won∣derful Cures, and sometimes, when God sees fit, they foresee, and foretel future, distant, and very contingent Events. And therefore, let Celsus, and his Jew, ridicule us, as much as ever they please, yet 'tis plain, and I think, undeniable, that many Persons have embrac'd the Christian Religion, in Spite of all the Force of Prejudice, the Spirit of God making so sudden, and so powerful an Impression on their Minds, whether in
a Dream, or Vision, or some other Way, that instead of being implacable Ene∣mies to Christianity, as once they were, they have chearfully, and ev'n trium∣phantly, laid down their Lives, for the Sake of their Profession, and seal'd the Truth with their warmest Blood. If I shou'd only relate those Things, that have fall'n, within the Compass, of my own personal Knowledge, and frequent Observation; I shou'd furnish Infidels, with abundant Matter of Laughter, who wou'd be ready to suspect us Christians, as we do them, of inventing Fictions, to support a bad, and sinking Cause, tho' the Searcher of Hearts can bear me Witness, that my Design, and Endeavour, is not to maintain our Religion, by fabulous, and ridiculous Narrations; but by a Variety of proper Evidence, to recom∣mend it to the World, as being de∣riv'd from no other, than a Divine Original. And since 'tis a pretended Jew, who calls in Question, the Descent of the Holy Spirit, upon our Saviour, in the Resemblance of a Dove, one might well demand, who is it, that says thus in Isaiah's Prophecy, Now the Lord God Isa. xlviii V. 16. has sent me, and his Holy Spirit; which Words are ambiguous, and may either signify, that the Father, and the Holy
Spirit, sent our Blessed Saviour, or, that the Son, and Spirit, were both sent by the Father, the latter of which two Interpretations, seems to me, I confess, to be true, and genuine, and because our Saviour was sent first, and then the Holy Spirit, that the Pro∣phecy might be fulfil'd, the Accom∣plishment of which, was reserv'd for Future Ages, for that Reason among others, I judge it is, that Things are related, as they are, by the Evangelists. CHAP. XL. AND since Celsus's Jew do's, in some sort, acknowledge, that our Saviour was baptiz'd by John the Bap∣tist, I wou'd produce the Testimony of a Famous Author, who liv'd quickly after, I mean Josephus, who in the 18th Book of his Jewish Antiquities, says, That John the Baptist was invested with Authority to baptize, and pro∣mis'd Remission of Sin to them, that came to his Baptism.
The same Author, tho' he don't be∣lieve, that our Saviour was the true Messiah, and when he enquires into the Cause of the Taking of Jerusalem, and the Destruction of the Temple, don't ascribe this grievous, and sur∣prizing Calamity, as he ought to have done, to the Crucifixion of our Blessed Saviour; yet is fore'd: to make some slender Approach to Truth, and to acknowledge, that 'twas a remarkable Judgment, which God sent upon the Jewish Nation, for killing James the just, (who was Brother to Jesus, who is call'd by the Name of Christ,) and was, without doubt, a very virtuous, and pious Man. This James was the same Person, St. Paul, that sincere Follower, and eminent Apostle of our Blessed Lord, tells us, that he went to visit, because he was the Brother of Christ, which Title was proper for him, not so much by Reason of their being, in a peculiar Sence, of the same Flesh, and Blood, as on the Account of the admirable, and manifest Agreement both of their Doctrine, and their Morals. If then the fore-mention'd Author says, That the Destruction of Jeru∣salem, was owing to the Barbarous Death of James the just; how much more Reason is there to believe, 'twas
really, and principally owing to the Crucifixion of our Blessed Saviour, whose Divinity, is so frequently at∣tested, by so many large, and united Bodies of Men, that consist of such Persons, as have left their vicious Pra∣ctices, devote themselves to the Ser∣vice of their great Creator, and liberal Benefactor, and in all their Actions, have a most serious Regard to his Honour, and Interest in the World. And tho' the pretended Jew shou'd make no Apology for the Prophet Eze∣kiel, and Isaiah, since we meet with Passages in their Writings, and in the rest of the Prophets, which are no less strange, I am sure, than those which are related in the Gospels, con∣cerning our Blessed Saviour; viz. That the Heavens were open'd, and that he heard a Voice from thence; I shall endeavour to shew, that all, who believe an over-ruling Providence, ac∣knowledge, there have been praeter∣natural Visions, and such wherein fu∣ture Events, relating to the Affairs of humane Life, have been more clearly, or more obscurely represented to the warm Imagination; I say, I shall en∣deavour to shew, that the Assertors of Providence acknowledge, that such Visions have been seen, by Persons in their Sleep; and that 'tis no difficult
Matter to conceive, upon this Hypo∣thesis, that the same Impressions may be made on the Imagination, when a Person is awake: Whether they be de∣sign'd by God, for the private Benefit of some particular Persons, or to pro∣mote the spiritual Advantage of Man∣kind in general, and as in our Sleep, tho' there be nothing to strike upon our Sense of Sight, or Hearing, yet we strongly imagine, that we see such Objects, and hear such articulate Sounds, when 'tis our rational Faculty, that's all this while at Work, and undergoes these various, and strange Sensations: So there's no Absurdity, in supposing, that the same Thing might happen to the Prophets, when we read, that the Heav'ns were open'd to 'em, that they saw strange Sights, and heard the Voice of the great God himself. For my Part, I don't suppose, that the visible Heavens were open'd, and, in a literal Sence, were cleav'd asun∣der, to give the Prophet Ezekiel an Occasion, for writing as he do's. And I am fully satisfy'd, that they who read the Gospels, with any Mea∣sure of Judgment, won't understand our Saviour's Vision, in the gross Sense of the Words of Scripture, tho' I am not a little sensible, that the ig∣norant Sort of People, who, at every
Turn, and to support an idle Whim∣sy of their own, will allow the Frame of Universal Nature, to be shak'd from off its Hinges; and imagine, that so vast, and compact a Body, as that of the Heavens, was rent in two; will be offended with any Discourse in Di∣vinity, that do's in the least, interfere with the literal, and most obvious Sence of Scripture. But one who dives to the Bottom of Things, will find, that, according to the Account, we have, in Holy Writ, there is a certain, Divine Know∣ledge, which none, but a few, happy Persons have, (as Solomon says, Thou shalt find the Knowledge of the Lord) Prov. ii. V 5. and that the several Branches of it, are such as follow; viz. A Sight, a∣dapted to the Contemplation of Ob∣jects, that are beyond the Sphere of unassisted Nature, such as Cherubims, and Seraphims; a Hearing, suited to the Per∣ception of Sounds, vastly different from those, which are form'd in the Air; a Tast, that can relish the living Bread, that came down from Heaven; a Smell, that can distinguish that Heavenly Perfume, of which, the Apostle speaks, when he says, We are unto God a sweet Savour of Christ; and a Touch, of which, 2 Cor. ii V. 15. St. John speaks, when he says, Our Hands have handl'd of the Word of i. John i V. I. Life.
The Blessed Prophets therefore, be∣ing Partakers of these Divine Sensati∣ons, and seeing, hearing, tasting, and smelling, in a Way that is perfectly supernatural, we must understand these Things, in the same Sence, in which we must take that Place in Ezekiel; where he's said, to have eat the Book that was deliver'd him. In this Sence it was that Isaac smelt the sweet Savour of the Divine Gar∣ments of his Son, and pronounc'd this Blessing upon him, See the Smell of my Son is as the Smell of a Field, which the Lord has bless'd. And after the same Manner, our Saviour touch'd the Le∣per, which I think, must be under∣stood of a Spiritual, rather than a Corpo∣real Touch, that he might not only cleanse him, as some think, from his bodily Distemper, but chiefly, that he might purge him from the viler, and more dangerous Leprosy of Sin. And after the same manner, John the Bap∣tist bears Witness in the following Words, I saw the Spirit descending from John i. V. 32. Heav'n, like a Dove, and it abode upon him, and I knew him not; but he that sent me to baptize with Water, the same said to me, upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending, and remaining, the same is he, who baptizes with the Holy Ghost; and I saw, and bare Record, that this is the Son
of God. And the Heav'ns were open'd to our blessed Saviour, when there was no Person present, as far as I can ga∣ther from the Account, which we have in Scripture, to be an Eye, and Ear. Witness of what happen'd to him, ex∣cept John the Baptist. But our Saviour foretold his Disci∣ples, that they also shou'd see the Heav'ns open'd, saying, Verily, Verily, John i. V. 51. I say unto you, that hereafter you shall see Heav'n open, and the Angels of God as∣cending, and descending upon the Son of Man. And, in the foregoing Sence, we must understand that Place of Scrip∣ture; where 'tis said, that St. Paul was carry'd up to the third, or highest Hea∣ven, which before was open'd to him, since we are well-assur'd, he was one of the sincere Followers, and most emi∣nent Apostles of our Blessed Lord. But as for those Words, Whether in the Body, 2 Cor. xii V. 3 or out of the Body, I can't tell, God knows; 'tis not my Business at present, to in∣sist upon 'em.
CHAP. XLI. GIVE me leave to add one Thing here, and that is this, that Celsus, without any Warrant from Scripture, or Reason, as far as I can see, imagines, that our Saviour did ac∣quaint his Disciples, with the strange Things that had happen'd to him, that the Heavens had been open'd, and that the Spirit of God, had descended upon him at the River Jordan. But this mighty Man, with all his Wis∣dom, seems not at all to have consider'd the Incongruity of such a Supposition, with the General Practice of our Saviour, who forbad his Disciples, to make mention of the Vision, which he saw upon the Mountain, 'till he shou'd rise from the Dead. And No∣thing was more common, as appears from the Gospels, than for our Blessed Saviour, to do what lay in his Power to avoid all Talk, that was in favour of himself. Therefore he says, If I bear John v. V. 31. Witness of my self, my Witness is not true. And because he industriously
avoided every Thing that savour'd of Self-Applause, and had rather that his Works shou'd praise him, and demon∣strate to the World, that he was the true Messiah, the Jews said to him, If thou be the Christ, do thou tell us plainly. And because the Jew, whom Celsus personates, speaking of the Appearance of the Holy Spirit, to our Saviour, in the Resemblance of a Dove, says, There's no Body, to attest the Truth, of what happen'd to you, besides your self, and another Person, of the same pityful Class, I think it will be seasonable, and highly necessary, to shew, that he talks in such a manner, as is very unsuit∣able to the Character he bears. And this is evident, from the different Re∣gard, which the Jews pay to Christ, and to John the Baptist, both with Re∣spect to their Persons, and their Suf∣ferings, which to me is a sufficient Argument, that, after all the Preten∣sions which he makes to Knowledge, he cou'dn't personate a Jew, discoursing consistently with our Blessed Sa∣viour.
CHAP. XLII. THEN Celsus, (I don't well know how, but I suppose, purposely) overlooks one of the most cogent Ar∣guments, that can be brought, in Fa∣vour of our Blessed Lord; viz. His being foretold by the Jewish Prophets, by Moses, and those who succeded him, and ev'n by some, who liv'd long before him. I presume, 'twas for this politick Reason, because he knew very well, that he cou'dn't return any tolerable Answer to a Proposition, to which both the Jews, and the greatest Hereticks did assent, who all agree, that many of the Prophecies of the Jewish Prophets were accomplish'd, in the Person of him, whom we believe to be the True Messiah. And perhaps, he had never read the Prophecies, but had heard a general, and loose Report concerning 'em. For if he had known, that there have been several Prophets, who have foretold our Saviour's Appearance in the World, certainly he wou'd never have put
these Words, into the Mouth of a Jew, (which I think, wou'd much better have become a Samaritan; or a Sad∣ducee,) viz. My Prophet said formerly in Jerusalem, that the Son of God wou'd come to reward the Righteous, and to punish the Wicked. For surely, there have been more than one Prophet, that have prophe∣cy'd of our Blessed Saviour, since ev'n the Sadduces, and the Samaritans; who own no more than the Pentateuch, can't but see, if they are not wilfully blind, that Moses himself has pro∣phesy'd concerning him, and 'tis im∣possible, the Prophecy shou'd be pub∣lish'd at Jerusalem, since the Name of no such Place was known, for many Ages after Moses. By the Way, I wish with all my Heart, that all our implacable Ad∣versaries; unless it shou'd please God to convert 'em, were as ignorant as Celsus, not only of the true, and full Sence of the Things, of which the Scripture treats; but also of the very Letter of it, that so their Discourses, not having that Colour of Reason, which sometimes they have, the com∣on People might not so much, as for a short Space of Time, yield, ev'n the weakest Assent to any Thing, they are able to produce against us.
Besides no Jew, but one, who is brought over to the Religion which we embrace, will acknowledge, that the Prophets foretold, that the Son of God was to come into the World. What the Jews say is this, that the Messiah is to come, and in their Dis∣putations with us, the first Question almost which they ask, is, Who is this Son of God, of whom you talk so much? intimating to us, that they don't be∣lieve, that any such Person was ever intended by the Prophets. For my Part, I firmly believe, that the Person, of whom there are so many Predictions, in the Writings of the Jewish Prophets, is the Son of God; but I can't, for my Life, conceive, how a Jew, who denies this plain As∣sertion, can consistently with his Cha∣racter, make use of the following Words, My Prophet said formerly in Jerusalem, that the Son of God was to come into the World. Then Celsus adds the following Words, To reward the righteous, and to punish the wicked. And, as if this was all that was fore-told, and there were no Predictions, concerning the Place of our Saviour's Nativity, or the unjust, and barbarous Treatment, which he met with, at the Hands of his own Country-men the Jews, or his Resur∣rection from the dead, or the Miracles
he perform'd; he says, Why shou'd this Prophecy be appropriated to you, when the same Thing may be said of many Persons, that liv'd before, and after you, with more reason, than you can say it of your self? and seeming to insinuate, that there were abundance of Persons, to whom this Prophecy might fitly be apply'd, as well in all respects, as to our Blessed Saviour; he says, Several Enthusiasts and Impostors have claim'd the venerable Title, of the Son of God, and have said, that they came down from Heav'n: tho' I know not, what Ground he cou'd have, for using this Expression, since the Jews do strongly deny, that our Saviour was the Son of God. To this I answer, that seve∣ral Prophets have prophecy'd in a dif∣ferent manner, concerning the Messiah, some by obscure, and almost unintelli∣gible Hints, others by Allegories, and some in the plainest, and most express Terms imaginable. And because Celsus discovers his Malice, and excessive Heat, in the Sequel of his Discourse, where the Jew, speaking to those of his own Nation, that were converted to the Christian Faith, has the Confi∣dence to say, That the Prophecies which are apply'd to our Saviour, may be other∣wise, and much better accommodated; I think, it may not be improper at pre∣sent,
to instance in some few of 'em, which are most considerable. And here let any Person employ his utmost Skill, I defy him to shock the Faith of any judicious, and establish'd Chri∣stians. As for the Place of our Saviour's Nativity, 'tis said, That a Ruler shall come forth from Bethlehem, in the fol∣lowing Words, But thou, Bethlehem Mica. v. V. 2. Ephratah, tho' thou be little among the Thousands of Judah; yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me, who is to be Ruler in Israel; whose Goings forth have been from of Old, from Everlasting. This Prophecy can't, with any Shew of Reason, be apply'd to those Enthu∣siasts and Impostors, as Celsus calls 'em, who say, they came down from Hea∣ven, unless it plainly appears, that they were born at Bethlehem, or as the Words may be render'd, came forth from Beth∣lehem, to be Rulers of the People. As for our Saviour's being born at Bethle∣hem, if any Person be dissatisfy'd with the Prophecy of Micah, and the Ac∣count which is giv'n by the Evange∣lists, let him only consider, that the Cave, in which he was born, and the Manger, in which he lay, are to be seen at the fore mention'd Place to this very Day. And this is a Truth so well known, and so credibly attested, that
ev'n they, who are Strangers to the Christian Religion, are frequently heard to say, Here is the Cave, in which, that JESUS, who is worship'd by the Christians was born. And 'tis my Opinion, that before our Saviour did make his Appearance in the World, the chief Priests, and the Teachers of the People, openly confess'd, and taught, that the Messiah was to be born at Bethlehem; and that ev'n the common People among the Jews were acquainted with this Pro∣phecy, which was deliver'd, in ex∣press, and very familiar Terms. Hence it came to pass, that Herod, enquiring of the chief Priests, and Scribes, where the Messiah shou'd be born, receiv'd this Answer, that he shou'd be born at Bethlehem, in the Land of Judaea, which was honour'd, by being the Place, from which no less a Person than King David himself did spring. Besides we read in St. John's Gospel, that the Jews said, that Christ was to be born at Bethlehem; which was in the Native Country of the fore-men∣tion'd King. But when our Saviour was come into the World, those Per∣sons, who left no Stone unturn'd, to oppose the Religion, which he intro∣duc'd, did no longer teach, that the Messiah was to be born at Bethlehem,
plainly shewing, they belong'd to the fame wretched Fraternity, with them, who prevail'd with the Souldiers, (who were appointed to guard the Sepulchre, and were Eye-Witnesses of his triumphant Resurrection) to say, His Disciples came by Night, and stole Mathew xv▪ i. V. 13. V. 14. him away, while we slept; and said to 'em, If this come to the Governor's Ears, we'll perswade him, and secure you. Such is the Power of Prejudice, and the Love of Opposition, that it often happens, that we can't discern the most apparent Truths, and are loth to en∣dure the Shame, which attends a Re∣cantation, of those false, and dange∣rous Principles, which we have once embrac'd, and I think, 'tis every jot as easy, to leave any bad Habit, that we have unhappily contracted, tho' it be, as it were, rooted in our very Nature, as to leave the Opinions, which we formerly held, and which were very dear, and extreamly familiar to us. 'Tis well known, we do, with a Kind of secret Reluctancy, forsake those Houses, Cities, and Villages, which by our long, and delightful Continuance in 'em, have render'd themselves familiar, and ev'n natural to us. And if it was not for unac∣countable
Prejudice, ev'n the common People among the Jews, wou'dn't shut their Eves, as they manifestly do, a∣gainst the glorious Light of Scripture-Prophecy, nor deny the extraordinary, and often miraculous Circumstances, which attended the Life, and Death of our Blessed Saviour. But that Pre∣judice is one of the greatest Infirmi∣ties, which our Minds can possibly la∣bour under, is plain to them, who con∣sider, that 'tis with no small Diffi∣culty, and Regret, that we leave the Opinions, which we receiv'd by Tra∣dition, from our Parents, tho' perhaps, they may be such, as on mature De∣liberation, do cover us with the deepest Shame, and fill us with Vexation, and Confusion. So talk to an Egyptian, 'till your Heart do ake, and your Breath fails you, yet he'll be so far from renoun∣cing his Religion, that he will persist in it, if it be possible, with greater Obstinacy than before, and rather dye, than be guilty of so horrid a Prophanation, as he accounts it, to eat, and pollute the sacred Flesh of Animals. I thought it necessary, to dwell the longer on this Subject, that so we may return a solid Answer, to them, who, perhaps may not stick to say,
If the Prophecies have so plain a reference, to your Saviour, as you say they have, how comes it to pass, that the Jews, whose Wisdom you so highly value, don't embrace the Christian Religion, as well, and as readily as you, and regulate their Practice, by those Precepts, which Christ, in some Sence, has left behind him? But let none reproach us, as if we were so wretchedly ignorant, as not to discern the Sophistry, of so weak an Argument, (since some, and I hope, many of us can make it appear upon Occasion, that Christianity is built on the most rational, and solid Grounds,) or reflect upon us, as if we were ac∣countable, for the monstrous Blind∣ness, and extravagant Practice of the Jews.
CHAP. XLIII. I Might, if 'twere necessary, instance in another Prophecy, that was writ, many Ages before the Incarnation of our Blessed Saviour, in which Jacob prophesies concerning all his Children, and speaking concerning Judah, has these remarkable Words, The Scepter Gen. xlix V. 10. shall not depart from Judah, nor a Law∣giver from between his Feet, 'till Shiloh come, and unto him shall the Gathering of the People be. Now any one, who reads this Prophecy, which is of greater Antiquity, than their celebrated Moses, (tho' perhaps some Infidels may suspect it) can't but wonder, how Jacob cou'd foretell, that the Rulers of the Jewish Nation, which consisted of no less than Twelve Tribes, shou'd come of the Tribe of Judah. This we see has been so evidently, and so remarkably verify'd, that the whole Body of the Jews, do take their Name from the fore-mention'd Tribe, which held the Reins of Government in their Hands, and manag'd 'em as
they pleas'd, and 'tis Matter of Won∣der to all, who are not biass'd by Pre∣judice, that the fore-mention'd Pa∣triarch, shou'd not only foretell, that the governing Power shou'd be lodg'd in the Tribe of Judah, but also, that it shou'd come to a Period, at a pre∣fixed Time, as the following Words import, The Scepter shall not depart from Gen. xlix V. 10. Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his Feet, 'till Shiloh come, &c. And he is come, for whom the Su∣pream Authority was reserv'd, I mean, the Messiah, by whom the True Glory of the Tribe of Judah, was advanc'd to its greatest Height, he, I say, who was the Prince, whom God had pro∣mis'd, who might have laid a fairer Claim to that Title, The Desire of Na∣tions, than any Person who ever went before, and I may safely say, than any who ever did, or will succeed him. For all Nations almost have believ'd in God thro' him, and have plac'd their Confidence in his Name, accord∣ing to that Prophecy in Isaiah, In his Name shall the Gentiles trust. This is he, who proclaim'd Liberty to them, who were held fast in the Bonds of Sin, and Satan, as all Men naturally are, and said to them, who were cover'd with spiritual Darkness, be ye Light in the Lord, according
to that Famous Prophecy, I will pre∣serve Isa. xlii. V. 6, 7. thee, and give thee for a Cove∣nant of the People, to establish the Earth, to cause to inherit the desolate Heri∣tages, that thou may'st say to the Prisoners go forth; to them that are in Darkness, shew your selves. And the vast Num∣ber of Persons, who flock'd from all Parts to our Blessed Saviour, did abun∣dantly make good the Words which follow, They shall feed in the Ways, and their Pastures shall be in all high Places. CHAP. XLIV. BUT because Celsus, who pretends, he don't want to be inform'd, of what the Christians hold, reproaches our Saviour, as if either he was not assisted by his Father, or was unable to help himself, when he came to suf∣fer; I must add one Thing here, and that is this, that the Prophets foretold his Sufferings, and the Reason why he underwent 'em, that they shou'd con∣duce to the Advantage of Mankind in general, that he shou'd ev'n sacri∣fice
his Life for 'em, and be treated for their Sakes, as a condemn'd, and most vile Malefactor. They also foretold; that the Gentiles; who had no true Prophets, shou'd acknowledge him, to be sent from God, and that he him∣self, with respect to his outward Ap∣pearance in the World, shou'd be a mean, and very contemptible Person. The Words of the Prophecy are these, Isa. lii. V. 13. 14 15. Behold my Servant shall deal prudently; he shall be exalted, extoll'd, and be very high. As many were astony'd at thee, (his Visage was so marr'd, more than any Man, and his Form more than the Sons of Men) so shall he sprinkle many Nations, the Kings shall shut their Mouths at him, for that which had not been told 'em, shall they see, and that which they had not heard, shall they consider. Who Isa. liii. V. 1. 2, has believ'd our Report? and to whom is the Arm of the Lord reveal'd? For he shall grow up before him, as a tender Plant, and as a Root out of a dry Ground; he has no Form, nor Comeliness; and when we shall see him, there is no Beauty that we shou'd desire him. He's despis'd, and rejected of Men, a Man of Sorrows, and acquainted with Grief: And we hid, as it were, our Faces from him, he was despis'd, and we esteem'd him not. Surely he has born our Griefs, and carry'd our Sorrows: Yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten
of God, and afflicted. But he was wound∣ed for our Transgressions, he was bruis'd for our Iniquities: The Chastisement of our Peace was upon him, and with his Stripes we are heal'd. All we like Sheep have gone astray; we have turn'd every one to his own Way, and the Lord has laid on him the Iniquity of us all. He was oppress'd, and he was afflicted, yet he open'd not his Mouth: He is brought as a Lamb to the Slaughter, and as a Sheep before her Shearers is dumb; so he opens not his Mouth. He was taken from Prison, and from Judgment, and who shall declare his Generation? For he was cut-off out of the Land of the living, for the Trangression of my People was he stricken. I remember, I made use of this Pro∣phecy, in a Disputation, which I for∣merly had, with some Jewish Doctors, and one of 'em return'd the following Answer, that we must understand it, as relating to the whole Body of their own Nation, whose Dispersion, and many other Calamities, were Means, to gain Proselites to their Religion. And he explain'd those Words, He has no Form, nor Comeliness; and those Words, That which had not been told 'em shall they see, and that which they had not heard, shall they consider; and those Words, He was wounded for our Transgressions,
he was bruis'd for our Iniquities; I say, he explain'd 'em all, in Favour of the Sence, which he had giv'n 'em. On the contrary, I offer'd several substan∣tial Arguments, to prove, that this Pro∣phecy must be understood of a single Person, and by Consequence is not to be refer'd to an entire Nation, or great Number of People. I ask'd of whom those Words were spoke, He has born our Griefs, and carry'd our Sorrows; and those Words, He was wounded for our Transgressions, he was bruis'd for our Iniquities; and those Words, By his Stripes we are heal'd. For they are plainly meant of those Persons, who, whether Jews or Gentiles, were cur'd of their spiritual Diseases, by the Suf∣ferings of our Blessed Saviour, to whom the Propher, inspir'd by the Spirit of God, accommodates these several, and extraordinary Characters. But that which most perplex'd 'em was that Expression, For the Transgres∣sion of my People was he stricken. For if this Prophecy has a Reference, to the whole Body of the Jews, 'tis diffi∣cult to make Sence of the foregoing Words. We must, therefore, under∣stand 'em, of some single Person, and not of the whole Jewish Nation, and who can that Person be, but our Bles∣sed Saviour, by whose bloody Stripes
all they, who believe in him, are imme∣diately, and will at length be com∣pleatly heal'd; I say, who, but our Blessed Saviour, who has spoil'd Princi∣palities, and Powers, that usurp, and too long maintain a Tyranny, over the Souls of Men, and has made a Shew of 'em openly, upon his HO∣NOƲRABLE CROSS. But the critcal, and full Examination of this Prophecy, I shall reserve to a more pro∣per Place, tho' I thought, 'twas neces∣sary for me, to dwell a little upon it, on the Account, of what Celsus's Jew thought fit, to object against us. CHAP. XLV. ONE remarkable Thing that has led Celsus, and other Infidels, into gross Mistakes, in this important Affair, is their not knowing, or, at least, their not considering, that the Prophets speak of a twofold Coming of the Messiah; his first Coming, at which he was to appear, cloath'd with all the innocent Infirmities of humane Nature, and strling with the pres∣sing
Inconveniencies of a mean, and despis'd Condition, that so, living a∣mong Men, he might the more feel∣ingly instruct 'em, in those Moral, and Divine Truths, which were important, and highly necessary, and inculcate upon 'em that aweful Account, which they must shortly give, when they shall be summon'd, to appear, before the Bar of God; and his second Coming, at which he will appear, free from the least Allay, ev'n of natural Imperfe∣ction, and shine with the united, and unfully'd Rays, of his Original, and in some Sence, naked Divinity. 'Twou'd be tedious, to relate all the Prophecies, that have an immediate, and mani∣fest Reference to our Blessed Saviour. I shall, therefore, at present confine my self, to that which we meet with, in the Forty fifth Psalm, which is en∣titul'd, A Song of Loves, and where our Saviour is expresly call'd by the Name of GOD. The Words are these, Grace is pour'd into thy Lips, therefore Psal, xlv, V. 2, 3. God has blest thee for ever. Gird thy Sword upon thy Thigh, O most Mighty, with thy Glory, and thy Majesty, and in thy Majesty ride prosperously, because of Truth, and Meekness, and Righteousness, and thy right Hand shall teach thee ver∣rible Things. Thine Arrows are sharp in the Heart of the King's Enemies, where∣by
the People fall under thee. Thy throne, O God, is for ever, and ever: The Scepter of thy Kingdom is a right Scepter. Thou lovest Righteousness, and hatest Wicked∣ness, therefore God, thy God, has anointed thee, with the Oil of Gladness, above thy Fellows. Where take Notice, that the Prophetical Psalmist, making his Ad∣dress to God, Whose Throne is for ever, and ever, and the Scepter of whose King∣dom is a right Scepter; says, that this Person was anointed by God, who was his God, and that he was anointed, above his Fellows, with the Oil of Gladness, be∣cause he lov'd Righteousness, and hated Wickedness. I remember, that once I horribly baffl'd a Jewish Doctor, with this very Prophecy, who being at a grievous Loss, to know what Answer he shou'd give me, had seasonable Recourse to a pityful Evasion, which was suitable enough, to the false Principles, he en∣deavour'd to maintain; viz. That those Words, Thy Throne, O God; is for ever, and ever, the Scepter of thy Kingdom is a right Scepter, were spoke of the Great God himself; and those Words, Thou lovest Righteousness, and hatest Wickedness, there∣fore God, ev'n thy God, has anointed thee with the Oil of Gladness, above thy Fellows; must be understood of the Messiah.
CHAP. XLVI. CELSƲS's Jew continues his Discourse, with our Blessed Sa∣viour, and says, If, as you your self ac∣knowledge, every Person, who comes into the World, by the general Concourse of Providence, is a Son of God; What special Prerogative is there, which you can justly claim? To which I answer, that they, who are no longer acted by a Spirit of Bondage, as St. Paul expresses it, but choose Virtue, for its intrinsick Worth, may, in a less noble Sence, be call'd, the Sons of God. But there's a vast Disproportion, between those, who are the Sons of God, as they are imperfectly endu'd, with Moral, and Christian Virtues, and our Blessed Saviour, who is the inexhaustible Foun∣tain, from which their borrow'd Good do's entirely, and will for ever flow. The Words of St. Paul, which I just now refer'd to, are these, Ye have not receiv'd the Spirit of Bondage, again Rom. viii. V. 15. to fear, but ye have receiv'd the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father.
The Jew continues his Discourse, in the following Words, Abundance of Persons will find Fault, with your pretend∣ed Saviour, for applying those Prophecies to himself, which, they think, may, at least as justly, be apply'd to them. To this I answer, that I am apt to think, that Celsus didn't know of any Persons, who rival'd our Saviour, in his Miracles, and justly claim'd the Title of Sons of God, or The Power of the Supream Majesty. But because the sincere, and strong Affection, which I have for Truth, won't suffer me, to pass by any Thing, that ev'n seems to oppose the Christian Cause, I readi∣ly acknowledge, that before our Sa∣viour's Incarnation, there was a cer∣tain Person, whose Name was Theudas, who appear'd among the Jews, pre∣tending to be a mighty Man, after whose Decease, his deluded Followers were soon dispers'd. Some Time after, in the Days of the Taxing, (during which, as far as I can gather from Scripture, our Blessed Saviour was born) one Judas of Galilee, drew after him, a considerable Number of weak, and credulous Jews, who, affecting No∣velties, cry'd him up, as a Man, en∣du'd with more than ordinary Wis∣dom, and was no sooner brought to condign Punishment, but his Doctrine
came immediately into Disrepute, or, at best, was only secretly maintain'd, by some few Persons, of mean Rank, and Figure. And after our Saviour appear'd, upon the Stage of the World, one Dositheus, a Samaritan, endea∣vour'd, to perswade his Country-men, that he was the very Person, to whom the Prophets had so plain a Reference, when they foretold the Coming of the Messiah, and some few Persons, I con∣fess, there were, who seem'd heartily to embrace his Doctrine. Here, I think, it will not be im∣proper, to mention that wise Expres∣sion of Gamaliel, which we meet with, in the Acts of the Apostles, to shew, beyond all Contradiction, that the fore-mention'd Persons, were not intend∣ed in the Promise, which God gave, of sending the Messiah, and that nei∣ther of 'em deserv'd the honourable Title, of The Son, or Power of God; but that of all the Men, who ever appear'd, and made a Figure in the World, our Blessed Saviour was the only Person, who cou'd justly claim it. If this Counsel, said he, or this Work be Acts. v. V. 38. of Men, 'twill come to nought; but if it be of God, ye can't overthrow it, lest haply ye be found, ev'n to fight against God. There was also one Simon, a Magi∣cian,
of Samaria, who endeavour'd by his Magick, to draw People after him, and for some Time he wasn't without his Followers, but I believe, there are now scarce thirty Simonians in the whole habitable World: Nay, perhaps I have exceeded the Number, since there are only a few near Palaestine, and that Doctrine, which they em∣brac'd, did never obtain, in any other Parts, tho' its Authour did fondly ima∣gine, that it wou'd soon, and easily reach, and happily engage, the most distant, and barbarous Nations in it's Favour. For they who know any Thing, of their celebrated Simon, owe their Knowledge, entirely to the Ac∣count, which we have of him, in the Acts of the Apostles. So that, were it not for the Christians, his very Name wou'd, before this Time, have been bury'd in oblivion, and 'twas suffici∣ently evident from Experience, that he bore none of the shining Charac∣ters, of one, who had a Divine Com∣mission.
CHAP. XLVII. THEN Celsus's Jew, not keeping to the sacred Text, says, That our Saviour boasted, that some wise Men of the Chaldaeans, being mov'd, by a secret Perswasion, that he was born, came to pay Divine Worship to him, in his In∣fancy, and that when they had acquainted Herod, the Tetrarch, with it, he order'd his Officers, to kill all the Infants, that were about that Age, imagining, that our Saviour wou'd inour the same Fate with them, and thereby be prevented, from ever coming to the Crown. Take Notice, how grosly the Jew is mista∣ken here, who confounds the wise Men, and the Chaldaeans, not discerning, that, for any Thing that appears to the contrary, they might be of Different Countrys, and Professions, and notori∣ously Falsifying the Account, which we have of this Matter, in the Gos∣pels. And I know not how it comes to pass, that he don't think fit, to ac∣quaint us, that the Star, which they aw in the East, was the Ground of
their secret Perswasion, that the Messiah was then born into the World. Let us see therefore, what matter of Dis∣course this Subject will afford us. I confess, 'tis my Opinion, that the Star, that appear'd, at our Saviour's Nativity, was entirely new, and vastly different, from those which are com∣monly seen, whether in the superiour, or inferiour Orbs, and I am enclin'd to think, it might be much of the same kind, with those Comets, that appear for a Time, and have different Names assign'd 'em, by the Greeks, accord∣ing to their different Figure. And I build my Opinion upon the following Grounds. It has been observ'd by Learned Authours, that when any considerable Alteration has happen'd, in the Face of Affairs, such Stars have expos'd themselves to View, as did presage some strange Revolutions of Empires, some dreadful Wars, or some such Accidents as these, which put the whole World into a terrible, and un∣usual Commotion. I have also read, in a Treatise concerning Comets, writ by Chaeremon the Stoick, that some∣times they have presag'd very happy Events, and he produces several In∣stances, from very credible Historians, to make good the Assertion, which he there lays down.
If then, at the Establishment of some new Monarchy, or before some remarkable Scene of publick Affairs do's begin to open, these Comets, or Stars of the like Nature, do appear; 'tis no Wonder at all, that a Star shou'd be seen, at the Nativity of our Sa∣viour, who was design'd by the All∣wise God, to make so sudden, so great, and so happy an Alteration in the World, to publish a new, unadorn'd, and discountenanc'd Doctrine, not on∣ly to the Jews, and Greeks, but also to a vast Number of the most distant, and barbarous Nations of the World. And this I may safely say, in Fa∣vour of the Christian Religion, that we don't meet with any, or at least with no Scripture-Prophecy, concerning the Appearance of such a Star, at such a Time, for Instance at the Establish∣ment of such a Rising Empire, but the Star, that grac'd our Saviour's Nativity, was foretold by Balaam, as Moses gives us an Account. There shall come, says Numbers xxiv. v. 17 he, a Star out of Jacob, and a Scepter shall rise out of Israel. But here I must argue with the Greeks, and Jews, and therefore shall be oblig'd, to dispute against each Sort of Persons, from very different Topicks. To the Greeks, I have this to offer, that the Magicians, who converse with Daemons, and do,
with a most Horrid Solemnity, invoke their seasonable Assistance, for the most part attain the End, which they pro∣pose to themselves, unless a Divine Power interfere, that is Superiour to the Daemons, or some Name be men∣tion'd, that has a greater Force, than those Names, which are appropriated by 'em to the Art they practice. But if that shou'd happen, then all their Magical Operations are unavoidably lost, and they are, as it were, dazzl'd, and confounded with the bright Rays, of the Sun of Righteousness. It seems to me, therefore, to be high∣ly probable, that when our Saviour was born, and a Multitude of the Heavenly Host (as St. Luke do's cre∣dibly relate the Passage) prais'd God, saying, Glory to God in the highest, Peace on Earth, and good Will towards Men; Luke ii. V. 14. the Daemons were shock'd, and all their Hellish Measures most strangely disconcerted, not only by good An∣gels, who came down from Heaven, to celebrate the Nativity of our Bles∣sed Saviour, but also by the Humane Soul of the Holy and Spotless Jesus, as being a happy Instrument of the Deity, which dwelt in so glorious, but inconceivable a Manner, ev'n in his Humane Nature. The Wise Men, therefore, being desirous, to perform
their usual Operations, and failing in what they endeavour'd to effect, we may naturally suppose, enquir'd into the Reason of their bad Success, and were sensible, that something ex∣traordinary must occur, to defeat their rais'd Expectations, and exceed the Power of the Daemons, and when they saw a Sign in the Heavens, they had a natural Curiosity, to know its Mean∣ing, and having perhaps consulted the Prophecies of Balaam, and this Prophecy of the Star, of which, Moses gives us an Account, and particularly those Words, I shall see him, but not now; I shall behold Numbers xxiv. V. 17 him, but not nigh; from hence they might frame this rational Conjecture, that the very Person, at whose Birth, 'twas prophesy'd, that a Star shou'd appear, was then actually born, and having a just Notion, that he was far Supe∣riour to all their Daemons, they came to pay him, the just Tribute of Di∣vine Adoration. They steer'd their Course, therefore, to Judaea, being perswaded, that some great Prince was born, but ignorant of the Nature of his Kingdom, and the Place of his Nativity, and when they were happily come, to the Place where the young Child was; they offer'd Presents to him, that were live∣ly Representations of his Divine, and
Humane Nature; viz. Gold, an Em∣blem of his Royal Power, Frankin∣cense, to note to us his Divinity, and Myrrh, to signify his bitter Passion. CHAP. XLVIII. SINCE therefore, 'twas the Sa∣viour of Mankind, that was come into the World, who was God, and by Consequence, above the Angels; (tho' they are frequently employ'd as ministring Spirits, in the Behalf of Men) the Worship which the Wise-Men paid him, was abundantly re∣compens'd, by the Warning, which the Angel gave 'em, that they shou'dn't return to Herod, but depart into their own Country another Way. And 'tis no Wonder at all, that Herod shou'd seek to destroy the Infant-Saviour, tho' Celsus's Jew seems to doubt very much, of the Truth, of what we think was plain Matter of Fact. For Malice is so foolish, and so daring a Thing, that 'twill contend for the Victory, with the Providence of God it self. This Passion had so far the Ascendant over Herod, that he was fully perswaded, that the King of the
Jews was born, and acted unaccoun∣tably, whether his Notion were true or false, and was so weak, that he didn't discern, that either our Saviour was the very Person, whom the Pro∣phets foretold, to be the true Messiah, and so wou'd infallibly possess the Throne; or, on the contrary, was a meer Impostor, and by Consequence, there was no Ground for him, to disturb the Peace of his Mind, by any jealous Surmises. He resolv'd to destroy him, being hurry'd by his unruly Passion into the grossest Inconsistencies, and stirr'd up without Doubt by the Devil, who, apprehending our Saviour to be an extraordinary Person, and a most formidable Enemy to his usurp'd Do∣minion, employ'd all his Wit, Malice, and Industry against him. But the Angel warn'd Joseph, to go with the young Child, and his Mother into Egypt. And how improbable soever, this may seem to be, on the first View; yet the due Series of Events, was very critically observ'd by Provi∣dence. In the mean Time, Herod issu'd out Orders, that all the Infants, that were in Bethlehem, from two Years old, and under, shou'd immediately be put to Death, expecting that he, who was born King of the Jews, wou'd share
in the same common, and approaching Calamity. For he didn't discern that invisible, and kind Hand of Providence, that takes Care of them, who are the proper Ob∣jects of its most watchful Protection, and upon whose Safety, the Good of Mankind does so evidently, and so greatly depend, and among which ho∣nourable Number, our Blessed Saviour deserves to be esteem'd the Chief, as being one, who vastly, and indeed, infi∣nitely surpass'd all other Men, in real, and intrinsick Dignity. For he was not sent into the World, to be an Earthly King, as Herod falsly imagin'd; but to enter on the Posses∣sion of such a Glorious Kingdom, as it became the Great God to bestow, on one, who was to procure a Happi∣ness for his Subjects, that consists not en∣tirely, or chiefly, in Things, which are in themselves indifferent, and frequent∣ly prove pernicious to the Owners, and was to govern 'em by such Laws, as are truly Divine, and so to take the most proper Methods, to render 'em com∣pleatly, and for ever happy. Therefore denying, that he was an Earthly King, and shewing, that his Kingdom was of a spiritual Nature, he says, If my Kingdom were of this Joh. xviii. V 36. World, then wou'd my Servants fight,
that I shou'dn't be deliver'd to the Jews; but now is my Kingdom not from hence. CHAP. XLIX. IF Celsus had been aware of this, he wou'd never have talk'd so weak∣ly, and so impertinently as he does. If, says he, Herod was afraid, that when you came to a fit Age to reign, you wou'd dispossess him of his Kingdom, why didn't you reign, when you were grown up to Years of Discretion, and Maturity? On the contrary, tho' you pretend to be the Son of God; yet you are forc'd to go a∣bout like a Slave, and a Vagabond, and to sneak like a Malefactor, not having a Place, whereon you may comfortably lay your Head. But 'tis far from being an Argu∣ment of a sordid Spirit, for a Person to use innocent, and common Pru∣dence, that he may happily avoid the Dangers, with which he is surrounded, not from a slavish Fear of Death, but a sincere, and vehement Desire, with Submission to the Will of God, to pro∣long
his Life, that he may be farther serviceable to the Publick, 'till a fair Opportunity, to lay down his Life, for the Promoting of the True, and Best Interest of Mankind, do's happily pre∣sent it self. That this was our Saviour's Case, is plain, to one, who is acquainted with the Design of our Blessed Lord, in those grievous Sufferings which he underwent, of which, according to my weak Ability, I have already, and I hope sufficiently, discours'd. CHAP. L. THEN that Celsus, with all his Knowledge, didn't so much as hit upon the exact Number of the Apo∣stles, may be gather'd from the follow∣ing Words, Being attended; says he, with Ten, or Eleven Wicked Publicans, and Mariners, he went up and down with 'em, begging his Bread, from Door to Door, like a base, and most miserable Crea∣ture.
Let me therefore examine, what he says, and return him such an Answer, as I judge convenient. 'Tis plain then to those, who read the Gospels, with any tolerable Care, (which I'm apt to think, my bold, but blundering Antagonist never did) that our Saviour chose twelve Apostles, and that there was but one Publican among 'em, I mean St. Mathew; and by Mariners, as he promiscuously calls 'em, I suppose, he may mean James and John, because they left their Father Zebedee, to fol∣low their Blessed Lord. For as for Peter and Andrew, that got their Livelyhood by their Nets, they were not so properly Mariners, as Fishermen, as the Scripture calls 'em. We'll also suppose, that Levi the Publican was another, to whom he might have a Reference, tho' accor∣ding to some Copies, that we have of St. Mark's Gospel, he was no Apostle. As for the rest of that honourable Fraternity, we know not what Em∣ployments they were, by which they got their Maintenance, before they espous'd the Interest of our Blessed Saviour.
CHAP. LI. SO that I may safely say, that 'tis plain to them, who examine into these Matters, with that Judgment, Care, and Impartiality, which is highly requisite, that the Apostles were acted by an extraordinary, and super-natural Power, when they publish'd the Chri∣stian Religion to the World, and made the carnal, and haughty Minds, of some of the worst of Men, submit to the commanding Authority of the Word of God. For this wonderful Effect was not owing to the Charms of humane Elo∣quence, the Exactness of their Method, or those other Artifices, with which the Logick, and Rhetorick of the Greeks, do frequently, and perhaps, more than suf∣ficiently, furnish too many subtil, and designing Persons. I am of the Opinion, I confess, that if we cou'd suppose our Saviour, to have made Choice of Persons, qualify'd with the brightest humane Accomplishments,
to preach the Gospel, such as had the general Character, and Reputation, of Men of profound Wisdom, and uni∣versal Learning, who, by the Help of sublime Speculations, polite Language, and a graceful Elocution, cou'd win upon the Audience, and make the several Passions of their Hearers, serve their sordid, and vain-glorious Purposes, I say, if our Saviour had tak'n this Me∣thod, he might justly have been blam'd, for using the same carnal Policy, that was too apparent, in the Heads of the several Sects of Philosophers, and his Doctrine wou'd have wanted those legible Characters of its Divinity, which were stamp'd upon it, had it been maintain'd by sprightly Fancy, proper, and elegant Language, and har∣monious Cadencies, and the Assent giv'n to it, wou'd too nearly have re∣sembl'd that, which is giv'n to the Opinions of the Philosophers among the Pagans, and wou'd manifestly have had its Foundation laid in the Wisdom of Men, rather than the irresistible Power of God. Now what Person, who looks on these Fisher-men and Publicans, who were not so much as taught, the very first Principles of Humane Literature, (as the Gospels acquaint us, and as Celsus is ready enough to believe) and
yet had such a Presence of Mind, that they were able, not only to discourse to their Country-men the Jews, con∣cerning Faith in Christ, but also to preach the same Doctrine to other Na∣tions, and were favour'd with most wonderful Success, I say, what Person who looks on these Fishermen and Pub∣licans, will not presently enquire, whence they deriv'd this uncommon Power of Perswasion, and acknowledge, that our Saviour's Promise in the fol∣lowing Words, Come after me, and I will make you Fishers of Men; was evi∣dently, Mat. iv. V. 19. and remarkably accomplish'd, in that Divine Power, which accom∣pany'd the Preaching of the Apostles? 'Twas this, to which, St. Paul has so plain a Reference, when he says, My Speech, aad my Preaching was not 1 Cor. ii. V. 4. with enticing Words of Man's Wisdom; but in Demonstration of the Spirit, and of Power, that your Faith shou'dn't stand in the Wisdom of Men, but in the Power of God. For as the Prophetical Psalmist speaks, who fore-told the Preaching of the Gos∣pel, The Lord gave the Word, great was the Company of those that publish'd it; Ps. lxviii. V. 11. and as it is fore-told in another Place, His Word runs very swiftly. Ps. cxlvii V. 15.
We see, that The Voice of the Apo∣stles was heard thro' all the Earth, and their Doctrine, and Fame too, was spread to the most distant Regions. They also, who hear this Doctrine, are fill'd with the Spirit of God, who accompanies the Preaching of it, as abundantly appears, by the Disposition of their Minds, the Tenor of their Con∣versations, and their vigorous Defence of the naked Truth, ev'n to the ap∣parent Hazard of their Fortunes, their Reputations, and their Lives, tho' it can't be deny'd, but ought to be deep∣ly lamented, that too many who have tak'n upon 'em the Ministerial Function, after all the Profession, which they make, of believing in God, thro' Christ, and after having seem'd to be wonder∣fully attracted by the bright, and al∣most irresistible Charms of Gospel-Grace, 'tis to be fear'd, did never feel the saving Impression of it on their Hearts, attended with a suitable Influ∣ence on their Lives, and Conversa∣tions. And tho' I have already mention'd that Expression in the Gospel, accord∣ing to St. Mathew, The Harvest is great, but the Labourers are few. Pray ye therefore the Lord of the Harvest, that he wou'd send forth more Labourers into Mat. ix. V. 37. the Harvest; I think it mayn't be im∣proper
to repeat it, to shew, that our Saviour's Foreknowledge of the Enter∣tainment, which his Doctrine wou'd meet with in the World, was a Divine Proof of its future, happy, and more than ordinary Effect upon the Minds of Men; a Doctrine, the good Success of which was far from depending on the Assistance of the most Learned Doctors, but was owing to that Divine, and Miraculous Power, that accompany'd the Apostles in their SACRED MINISTRATIONS. CHAP. LII. AND because Celsus represents 'em, not only as a Parcel of ig∣norant Fellows, but also as a Club of most scandalous Creatures, vile Publi∣cans, and Mariners; I answer, it seems he assents to some Passages in the Gos∣pels, whereby, he thinks, he can sup∣port his Cause, but rejects, when he thinks fit, the Authority of the Evan∣gelists themselves, that he may not be oblig'd to acknowledge, and reve∣rance thse Characters of Divinity,
which are so legible in their Wri∣tings. But when he sees, with what Faith∣fulness they relate, ev'n those Things, that seem to lessen their Esteem, and manifestly expos'd 'em to the greatest Dangers, he ought certainly to believe the rest, as being divinely inspir'd, and by consequence, infallibly true, and of the highest Importance to us. Barnabas, I confess, in his Catholick Epistle, (from whence 'tis probable, that Celsus has borrow'd his disadvan∣tageous Remarks upon the Apostles of our Blessed Saviour) says, That Jesus chose such Persons to the Apostolical Function, as were wicked to the last Degree. And in the Gospel according to St. Luke, St. Peter says to Jesus, Lord depart from me, for Luke v. V 8. I am a sinful Man. And St. Paul, in one of his Epistles to Timothy, says, This is a faithful Saying, and worthy of all Acceptation, that Christ Jesus came 1 Tim. 1. V. 15. into the World, to save Sinners, of whom I am chief; tho' at last he became a most Eminent Apostle. And I know not, whether Celsus's Memory, or his Judgment, is most de∣fective, when he makes no Mention of St. Paul, who, next to our Blessed Saviour, was the most remarkable Founder of the Christian Churches.
But 'tis probable, he thought it wou'd not serve his Cause, and that, if he had tak'n Notice of him, he had ob∣lig'd himself to have giv'n a rational, and distinct Account, how a Person, who once persecuted the Church of God, spit his Venom, and employ'd his most vigorous Endeavours, in Op∣position to the Christians, insomuch that he thirsted for their Blood, was so strangely alter'd on a sudden, that he spread the Gospel from Jerusalem to Illyricum, endeavouring to avoid building on the Foundation, which another had laid, and making it his Choice, and Business, to preach to them, who had never heard the glad Tydings of Salvation by a Crucify'd Redeemer.
CHAP. LIII. WHAT Absurdity is there then, in supposing, that our Saviour, being desirous to shew Mankind, what Sovereign Remedies he had, and was willing to apply to the distemper'd Souls of Men, shou'd make Choice of Per∣sons, that were notoriously wicked, and work such a sudden, and surprizing Change upon 'em, that by the Purity of their Lives, they became very ho∣nourable Examples to them, who were afterwards converted by their Mi∣nistry? If they, who have reform'd their Manners, must be upbraided with the Crimes, which they formerly com∣mitted, then we may as well bring in a most heavy Charge against Phaedon himself, ev'n after he had devoted his Time, and Strength, to the Study of Philosophy, because History acquaints us, that Socrates took him, from a Place, where Debauchery was pra∣ctic'd, without Fear, or Regret, and put him upon rational, and learned
Studies, in which, in Process of Time, he was far from being a mean Profi∣cient. We might also condemn Philosophy, it self, by Reason of the extravagant Courses, which Polemon the Successor of Zenocrates had formerly tak'n. But in Truth, this Consideration do's great∣ly brighten, and recommend their Cha∣racter, that by the Help of so Divine a Thing as Philosophy, they cou'd be brought to resolve on a virtuous, and severe Course of Life, in Spight of those bad Impressions, with which they were forc'd to struggle, and over which they did, with no small Diffi∣culty, obtain an honourable, and happy Conquest. And I scarce know, whether the Greeks can produce any Instances of this kind, in any other Persons, besides Phaedon and Polemon, or at best, they can name but very few Persons, who ever left their Intemperance and Debauchery to apply their Minds, to the entertain∣ing, and useful Study of Philosophy. But in the School of Christ, besides the twelve Apostles, who had the Honour to be contemporary with him, we see daily, a far greater Number of Persons, that become virtuous, and pious, and join in a Blessed Chorus, acknowledging, with the deepest shame, and Sorrow,
the many false, and almost fatal Steps, which formerly they took. We our selves (says the Apostle) were some∣times Tit. iii. V. 3, 4. foolish, and disobedient, deceiv'd, serving diverse Lusts and Pleasures, living in Malice, and Envy, hateful, and hating one another. But after that the Kind∣ness, and Love of God our Saviour, to∣ward Man appear'd, not by Works of Righ∣teousness which we have done, but accor∣ding to his Mercy he sav'd us, by the Washing of Regeneration, and the Re∣newing of the Holy Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly. For as the Pro∣phetical Psalmist speaks, He sent his Word, and heal'd 'em, and deliver'd 'em Psal. cvii. V. 20. from their Destructions. I might add, that Chrysippus, in a Book which he has writ, Entitul'd, The Art of Curing the Disorders of the Humane Passions, en∣deavours to lay down proper, and effectual Rules, for the Management of those, which disturb the Peace of the Mind, and to that end, he argues up∣on the Principles of several Sects of Philosophers, not examining, which of 'em are most agreeable to Truth, and has the following Words. If, says he, Pleasure be esteem'd the chief Good, the Passions may, and ought thus to be cur'd, and if there be three Kinds of Good, they are to be cur'd after this different Manner.
Now they, who find Fault with the Christian Religion, do wilfully Neglect, to consider, how many unruly Passions are successfully govern'd by it, what a Stop it puts to that rapid Torrent of Vice, and Immorality, which is too visible in the World, and what extra∣vagant, savage, and ev'n Diabolical Tempers it has frequently, happily, and very suddenly conquer'd. Cer∣tainly, it ought to raise their Admira∣tion, and constrain 'em, to make the most thankful Acknowledgements to Almighty God, to consider, what vast, and apparent Advantage the Publick reaps, from those proper, and most ex∣cellent Methods, which our Saviour took, for the Reformation of Manners, and one wou'd think, that if they won't allow Christianity to be the True Religion; yet they must confess, that it conduces very much to the true In∣terest of Manking, and which is more, has an Immediate, and Principal Re∣gard to their better, and immortal Part.
CHAP. LIV. AND our Saviour has so effectu∣ally consulted, ev'n the Tempo∣ral Advantage of his Followers, that he wou'dn't have 'em to be rash, and precipitate, but gives 'em this neces∣sary Lesson, When they persecute you in one City, flee unto another; and teaches 'em by his own Example, not to run into needless Dangers. Celsus takes Occasion, ev'n from hence, to form an Accusation against him, in the Person of a Jew, in the following Words, You run up and down, with your Disciples. But as for the Charge, which is here brought against our Blessed Saviour, we meet with a Parallel Case, ev'n in the Histories, which the Greeks have publish'd. For Aristotle, that Famous Philosopher, when he saw, he shou'd be condemn'd, as a wicked Person, by reason of some pecu∣liar, and in some Sence, dangerous No∣tions he advanc'd, which, as the Athe∣nians thought, did give too great En∣couragement to Licentiousness, took an
Opportunity to go from Athens, and remov'd his School to Chalcis, making the following Apology, to some of his Acquaintance, Let us leave Athens, (says he) that we mayn't suffer it, to be in the Power of the Athenians, to re-act that horrid Impiety, which they plainly discover'd, by their ill Treatment of so great a Genius, as the World knows Socrates to have been, and to commit, a most griev∣ous Offence against so sacred a Thing as Philosophy. CHAP. LV. CELSƲS adds, That our Saviour, running up and down with his Dis∣ciples, was forc'd to beg his Bread, like a sordid Wretch. But pray let him inform us, where he has rak'd up all these scurrilous Ex∣pressions. I confess, we read in the Gos∣pels, that certain Women, that were cur'd of their Infirmities, among which was Susannah, did readily distribute some Part of their Substance, to furnish the Disciples, with what was necessary for the Support of Life.
But pray, what Philosopher, who employs his Time, and Strength, with some Regard to the Benefit of his Relations, and Friends, and indeed of Mankind in general, wou'd refuse to have his Wants supply'd? Or, did it become the Philosophers, to accept the seasonable, and generous Assistance of their Friends, and others; but argue a base and sordid Spirit, in our Blessed Lord, or those who became his Fol∣lowers? CHAP. LVI. THEN the Jew, whom Celsus per∣sonates, continues his Discourse with our Saviour, in the following Words, What Necessity was there, that, when you were an Infant, you shou'd be carry'd into Egypt, to avoid being kill'd? For surely, it didn't become a God, to be afraid of Death. An Angel, it seems, was dispatch'd from Heav'n, to bid You, and some of your nearest Relations, be∣take your selves to Flight, lest you shou'd be found, and be put to Death. But cou'dn't Almighty God, who, as we are told,
did imploy his Angels for your Direction, and Assistance, preserve his Son, as easily in Judea, as in Egypt? Celsus thinks, that there was nothing extraordinary in the Humane Body, and Soul of our Blessed Saviour, and ridiculing his precious Blood, that was shed upon the Cross, he says, 'twas not Such Blood as from the Immortal Gods do's Hom Il. Lib. 5. V. 34. flow. But we, who give Credit to our Sa∣viour, when he gives a Testimony of his Divinity, in the following Words, I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life; John xiv. V. 6. and in other Parallel Places, and when he bears Witness to the Truth of his Humanity, in the following Expression, Now ye seek to kill me, a Man, who has told you the Truth: I say, we, who be∣lieve John viii. V. 40. our Saviour, when he speaks thus of himself, do assert, and maintain, that he had Two Natures, the one Divine, and the other Humane, and that since he came into the World, with an In∣tention to live, in some respects, like the rest of Men, 'twas highly incon∣gruous, that he shou'd run upon a Precipice, and be fond of Misery, and Death.
'Twas fit, he shou'd be directed, and govern'd by them, to whom the Care of his Education did belong, and that the Angel's Orders shou'd be strictly, and religiously observ'd, and the same Angel which said at first, Joseph, thou Son of David, fear not to Mat. i. V. 20. take unto thee, Mary thy Wife, for that which is conceiv'd in her, is of the Holy Ghost; said afterwards, Arise, and take the young Child, and his Mother, and flee into Egypt, and be thou there, until I bring thee Word, for Herod will seek the young Child, to destroy him. And I see nothing in this whole Ac∣count, that ev'n seems to shock our Reason, and destroy our Faith. For we read elsewhere, that Joseph was warn'd by God in a Dream, and that such Apparitions as these have been, is a Truth, in the firm Belief of which, Experience it self may, I think, suffici∣ently confirm us. What Absurdity is there then, upon the whole, in suppo∣sing, that our Blessed Saviour, who assum'd the Humane Nature, shou'd act with the Prudence of a Man, in endea∣vouring to keep out of the Way of impending Calamities, not as if he cou'dn't have avoided 'em by his In∣finite Power, without taking such Mea∣sures as he did; but because 'twas consistent with the Will of God, and
with the Nature of Things, that his Life shou'd be preserv'd, In the Ʋse of Means, and not by a Continu'd Course of Super-natural, and Miraculous Events. 'Twas more agreeable to the Dic∣tates of Infinite Wisdom, that our Sa∣viour shou'd be carry'd by his Pa∣rents into Egypt, and that he shou'd tarry there, 'till they heard of the Death of Herod, than that he shou'd stay in his Native Country, and yet be preserv'd, from the Evils to which he was expos'd, being better arm'd than with Pluto's Helmet, and secur'd from the Rage of his malicious Ene∣mies, by their being struck, like the Sodomites of old, with sudden Blind∣ness. For such a Series of miraculous Appearances, had been very unsuitable to his great Design, of acquainting the World, as a Man authoriz'd by the Testimony of God himself, that the TRƲE SON of GOD, the ETER∣NAL WORD, the WISDOM, and POWER of GOD, did gloriously, tho' wonderfully reside, in the Humane Na∣ture of the INCARNATE JESƲS. But 'tis not my Business at present, to speak fully of the Two Natures, that were united, in the Person of our Blessed Saviour, since there is a Par∣ticular, and if I may so say, a Do∣mestick
Dispute between us, con∣cerning that Difficult, and Important Point. CHAP. LVII. THEN Celsus's Jew, as if he had been educated in the Schools of the Greeks, and instructed in their Learning, says, That the Ancient Fables, that attribute a Divine Original to Per∣seus, Amphion, Aeacus, and Minos, tho' they be not in Strictness true; yet do display the Actions of these Persons, as being great, and wonderful, and above the Sphere of Humane Nature. But for your Part, what did you ever say, or do, that was worthy of Admiration, tho' you were openly challeng'd, to give convin∣cing Proofs, that you were the Son of God. In Answer to this, I need only ask the Greeks, whether they can shew, that any of the fore-mention'd Per∣sons, did any extraordinary Service to the World, or perform'd any great Exploit, to induce future Ages, to believe the Truth of those Fables,
which represent 'em to us, as being deriv'd from a Divine Original. But I defy 'em, to instance in any of the Actions of these Fabulous He∣roes, that deserv'd to be nam'd, much less compar'd, with what our Saviour did; unless they will refer us to their own Fables, and Histories, and have us to believe 'em, without any more adoe, and disbelieve our Histories, of the Truth, and Importance of which, we have all the Evidence, that we can reasonably desire. We say, and know, that the Di∣vine Power of our Blessed Saviour, has been sufficiently seen, and happily felt, thro' the whole habitable World, where any Churches are founded, that consist of Persons, reclaim'd from many exorbitant Vices. And the Name of JESƲS, at this very Day, composes the ruffl'd Minds of Men, dispossesses Daemons, cures Diseases, and works a meek, gentle, and amicable Temper, in all those Per∣sons, who make Profession of Christia∣nity, from an higher End, than their worldly Interest, and sincerely believe, what it teaches us, concerning God, and Christ, and a Future Judgment.
CHAP. LVIII. THEN Celsus, foreseeing, how many remarkable Actions, that were perform'd by our Saviour, might be mention'd by us, to his Honour, a few of which, I have related, makes as if he granted the Truth, of what is writ, concerning the Diseases, that were cur'd, the Dead that were rais'd to Life, and the few Loaves, with which a great Multitude was fed, and of which many Fragments did remain, and those strange Accounts we meet with in the Gospel-History, and im∣mediately adds the following Words, Well, let us suppose, that you really did these Things you talk of. But in the same Breath, he quite unravels what he had said before, and sets them on a Level, with the Operations, that are perform'd by Magicians, who pretend to do mighty Things, and having stu∣dy'd Magick in Egypt, get a little Mo∣ney out of People's Pockets, by pra∣ctising their Art in the open Forum, ispossessing Daemons, curing Distem∣pers,
calling back departed Souls, and representing to the deluded Sight, a Table spread with imaginary Dain∣ties, and Animals, that seem to move of their own Accord, but have no in∣ward Spring of Life, and Motion. His Words are these, Pray must we esteem the Persons, who perform these won∣derful Operations, to be the Sons of God, or must we not rather esteem 'em to be vile Wretches, that are well-vers'd, it seems, in a Diabolical Art? You see here, that he allows an ex∣traordinary Power in Magick, tho' by the Way, I'm much mistak'n, if he isn't the very Person, who writ se∣veral Books, in which, he directly maintains the contrary. And yet, because he thinks, it may serve his Cause, he compares the Acti∣ons of our Blessed Saviour, with the Operations of Magicians. Indeed, there had been some Ground, for making this invidious Comparison, if our Sa∣viour had made such a Vain Shew of Miracles, as the Magicians do. Their Design also, whatever Won∣ders they may effect, by the Assi∣stance of the Devil, is not to reform the Manners of Men; nor have such Vain Amusements the least Tendency, to beget in Persons a True Fear of God, and so to regulate their Actions, that
they may be honourably acquitted, when they shall be summon'd, to ap∣pear before his Awful Bar. The fore-mention'd Persons, don't so much as aim at any Thing of this Kind, and if they did, of all Persons in the World, they wou'd be most unfit for so great an Undertaking, since they themselves, are guilty of the mot notorious Crimes. Whereas our Blessed Saviour, who design'd by his Miracles, to reform the Manners of them, who were Eye—Witnesses of what he did, gave not only his Follow∣ers, but all Mankind, a Bright Ex∣ample of Ʋnaffected Virtue, and Piety, that they, who were to publish his Excellent Doctrine, might at once be directed, and encourag'd, to acquaint their Hearers with the Mind of God, and that the fore-mention'd Persons, being more convinc'd by the Native Beauty, of the Christian Religion, and the Holy Lives of their Teachers, than by the Miracles that were wrought, might in all their Actions, have a sincere, and sacred Regard to the Ho∣nour of God, and the Interest of their Dear, and Ever Blessed Redeemer. Now, if the whole Course of our Saviour's Life was such, as I have re∣presented it, without using any Arti∣ficil Colours, and Bold Figures to em∣blazon
it, as we know, is too frequently the Case of many, of the feign'd Heroes of Antiquity; how absurd a Thing is it to compare it with the cursed O∣perations of Magicians, and is it not highly agreeable to the Dictates of im∣partial Reason, to believe, that he was GOD, as he himself assures us, and condescended to assume the Hamane Nature, for our Common, and Everlast∣ing Benefit. CHAP. LIX. THEN Celsus, confounding Things at a most miserable Rate, and borrowing, what is peculiar to one Sect of Christians, that he may, the more successfully, reproach the whole Body of 'em, says, Certainly, a God wou'd never have such a Body as yours, that is so contemptible, as being liable to so many, and so considerable Imperfections. In Answer to this, we say, he as∣sum'd A Humane Body, (being con∣ceiv'd in the Womb of the Blessed Virgin,) which render'd him capable of Suffering, and Dying, in some Re∣spects
like the rest of Men. In this Sence, we may truly say, he was a miserable Person, Being tempted in all Heb. iv. V. 15. Things, as we are, yet without Sin. For with us, 'tis beyond all Doubt, that He committed no Sin, neither was Guile found in his Mouth, and that God did 1 Pet. ii. V 22. deliver him up as a Spotless Sacrifice, for the Sins of an Apostate World. Then Celsus says, the Body of a God, wou'd never have been form'd like your's. But he can't deny, that if our Saviour was born, as we say, he was, then ev'n his Body had, in some Sence, a Stamp of Divinity upon it, and might be call'd the Body of the Great God himself. On the contrary, he disbe∣lieves, and ridicules the Account, we have, of our Saviour's Conception by the Holy Ghost, and thinks he was begotten in Adultery, by one Panthe∣ra, a Souldier, on the Body of her, whom we call the Blessed Virgin, and that made him say, the Body of a God, wou'd never have been form'd like your's. But I think, I have said enough on that Head already, to satisfy any Impartial, and Candid Reader.
CHAP. LX. CELSƲS goes on, neither says he, Do's the Body of God stand in Need of such Food, for its Nourishment, and Support, as that with which yours is supply'd; as if he cou'd shew out of the Four Evangelists, not only that he ate, but also by what Food his frail Nature was maintain'd. But be it so, I grant he ate the Passover with his Disciples, and not only made Use of the following Words, With Desire, Luk. xxii V. 15. I have desir'd to eat this Passover with you; but did actually partake, of what was provided for him. I grant also, that being thirsty, he drank at Jacob's Well. But what is this to the Pur∣pose? 'Tis said expresly, he ate Fish, ev'n after he was risen from the dead. And this agrees very well with what we say, viz. That he assum'd a Real, and not a Phantastical Body, and was conceiv'd in the Womb of the Blessed Virgin. Then Celsus says, A God had no need of such a Voice, nor such Methods
of Perswasion. But this, I think, is one of the most frivolous Objections, that he cou'd possibly have rais'd a∣gainst us. For I might tell him, that Apollo, one of the Gods of the Greeks, who goes under the Name of Pythian, and Didymaen, made use of such a Voice, when the Oracle was giv'n by the Pythian Priestess, or the Priestess of Miletum. And yet the Greeks don't take Occasion from hence, to call in Question, much less to deny, the Divi∣nity of Apollo, or any other God, who gave out Oracles, at some convenient Place. Now how much more, did it con∣duce to the Spiritual Advantage of the World in General, that God shou'd re∣veal his Will in the Person of our Blessed Saviour, who spoke with such Authority, and Power, that he made a secret, but irresistible Impression upon the Minds of Men.
CHAP. LXI. THEN Celsus, whose wicked Opi∣nions, and Practices, render him hateful to that God, who is a Lover of right Reason, and unaffected Vir∣tue, reproaches our Saviour in the fol∣lowing Words, All his Miracles disco∣ver'd him to be a Person, hateful to God, and a notorious, and vile Impostor. But if we critically enquire into the Na∣ture of Things, and the Signification of the foregoing Words, we shall find, that in Propriety, and Strictness of Speech, no Person, how wicked soever he may be, can have this Character giv'n him, that he is hated of God. For the following Expression carries Abundance of Truth, as well as Weight in it; viz. Thou lovest all Things that Wis. xi. V. 24. are, and hatest nothing, which thou hast made; for never wou'dst thou have made any Thing, if thou hadst hated it. If we meet with any Expressions in the Writings of the Prophets, that seem to intimate, that God hates his Creatures, we must interpret 'em by
this general, and necessary Rule, that the Scripture, when it speaks of God, do's often cloath him, as it were, with those very Passions, which are fre∣quently working in Humane Breasts. But to what Purpose is it, to return an Answer, to a Person, who ev'n in a Discourse, Entitul'd, A True Re∣lation, takes the Liberty, to give Vent to his Passion, in most unjust, and severe Invectives, and to treat our Blessed Saviour, as if he were, like him, a Notorious, and Vile Im∣postor. For such Language, as he gives him, don't become a Man, who pre∣tends to Reason, and Demonstration, tho' he discovers at once, his Want both of Sence, and Breeding. On the contrary, he ought to have fairly sta∣ted the Controversy, which there is between us, to have examin'd Matters, with the greatest Impartiality, and Exactness, and shou'd have avoided, as much as might be, all needless, and ridiculous Digressions, and Tauto∣logies. But because Celsus's Jew, do's no longer continue his Discourse with our Blessed Saviour, I shall draw my first Book to a Conclusion, and if God will grant me the Knowledge of his Truth, which is able to overthrow,
tho' not wholly to extirpate Error, ac∣cording to that Expression, Destroy 'em by thy Truth, I shall return an Answer, to what Celsus offers, as personating a Jew, directing his Discourse to those of his Native Country, who are sup∣pos'd, to be unhappily, as he ima∣gines, brought off from Judaism, to an open Profession of the Religion, which we embrace.
Origen against Celsus: Translated from the ORIGINAL INTO ENGLISH. Book the Second.
Origen against Celsus: CHAP. I. MY First Book in Answer to Celsus's Discourse, Entitul'd, A True Relation, ending where he ceases to personate a Jew, discour∣sing with our Blessed Saviour, and be∣ing swol'n to a convenient Bulk, I re∣solv'd to compose a second, and therein, I shall endeavour to confute, what the same pretended Jew has to offer, to those of his own Country, who are inwardly perswaded of the Truth, and Excellency of the Christian Religion.
And I confess, I can't but wonder, that since Celsus was so fond of speak∣ing in the Person of a Jew, he didn't make him direct his Discourse to the Gentiles, rather than to his own Coun∣try-men. For 'twou'd have carry'd with it, a far more plausible Appea∣rance, if it had been directed by him, to those, who embrac'd the Religion which we profess, and were Gentiles, like our selves. But it seems, this mighty Man, with all his Knowledge, to which he makes such great Pre∣tences, did not know, or at least, do's seem to me, not duely to consider, the Nature of that Figure of Speech, which we make use of, when we speak in the Person of another. Let us see therefore, what he says, to those Jews, who embrac'd the Chri∣stian Religion. He says, That suff'ring themselves, to be most shamefully deluded by our Saviour, they left the Religion of their Ancestors, and alter'd both their Name, and their Course of Life. But he don't consider, that the Jews, who believ'd in our Blessed Saviour, did not totally renounce the Law of their justly-admir'd Progenitors, and Fore-Fathers; but liv'd in the Obser∣vance of it, deriving their Appellation, from a Word, that denotes the Poverty of the meer Letter of the Law.
For Ebion in the Hebrew Language, signifies Poor, and the converted Jews, were call'd by the Name of Ebionites. And St. Peter himself, for a considerabe Time, observ'd the Jew∣ish Rites, that are prescrib'd by the Law of Moses, as not having yet learn'd, ev'n from our Blessed Saviour, to ascend, as it were, from their lite∣ral to their spiritual Meaning, as we have the Matter related to us, in the Acts of the Apostles. On the Morrow, as they went on their Journey, and drew Acts 1. V. 9, &c. nigh unto the City, Peter went up upon the House-Top to pray, about the sixth Hour. And he became very hungry, and wou'd have eaten; but while they made ready, he fell into a Trance, and saw Hea∣ven open'd, and a certain Vessel descend∣ing unto him, as it had been a great Sheet, knit at the four Corners, and let down to the Earth; wherein were all Man∣ner of Four-footed Beasts of the Earth, and Wild Beasts, and Creeping Things, and Fowl of the Air. And there came a Voice to him, rise Peter, kill, and eat. But Peter said, not so Lord, for I have never eaten any Thing, that is common or unclean. And the Voice spake to him again the second Time, what God has cleans'd, that call thou not common.
You see here, that St. Peter him∣self, that Eminent Apostle, is repre∣sented to us, as retaining the Jewish Distinction, between Clean, and Ʋnclean Meats; and 'tis plain, from what fol∣lows in the History, that nothing less than a Vision cou'd engage him, to preach the Doctrine of Faith in Christ to Cornelius, who was not descended from the Israelites, and to his Friends that attended him. For he being a Jew, and observing the Traditions of the Jewish Church, had a contempti∣ble Notion of the Gentiles. And the Apostle Paul, in the Epistle to the Galatians, acquaints us, that St. Peter, for Fear of displeasing the Jews, refus'd to eat with the Gentiles. For before that certain came from James, he did eat with the Gentiles; but when they were come he withdrew, and separated him∣self, Gal. ii. V. 12. fearing them which were of the Cir∣cumcision. And the other Jews dissembl'd likewise with him, insomuch that Barnabas also was carry'd away with their Dissimu∣lation. And it was not, I think, wholly incongruous, that they shou'd comply in some measure, with the Jewish Rites, who were entrusted with the Apostle∣ship of the Circumcision: For they, who seem'd to be Pillars, gave Paul, and Barnabas, the right Hand of Fel∣lowship, the former Persons directing
their Course to the Circumcision. But need I say, that they who preach'd to the Jews withdrew, and separated themselves from the Gentiles, when the Apostle Paul himself became a Jew to the Jews, that he might win upon 'em. We read therefore, in the Acts of the Apostles, that he offer'd an Oblation upon the Altar, to shew that he hadn't altogether renounc'd the Jewish Law, in which he had been educated, and of which he was once so passionate an Admirer. Had Celsus known all this, he wou'd never have introduc'd a Jew, addres∣sing himself to those, who were con∣verted from Judaism to the Christian Faith, in the following Manner. What is the Matter, says he, my dearly beloved Country-men, that you have on a sudden renounc'd the Religion of your Fathers, and Ancestors, and suffer'd your selves to be so shamefully deluded by your pretended Saviour, as to be prevail'd with to alter your Name, and Course of Life.
CHAP. II. BUT because I have already men∣tion'd St. Peter, and the rest of those, who preach'd the Doctrine of Faith in Christ, to the Circumcision, I think, it may not be improper, to quote a Passage of our Saviour's in St. John's Gospel, and a little to explain it; I have says he, many Things, yet John xvi. V. 12, 13. to say unto you, but ye can't bear 'em now. But when he (the Spirit of Truth) is come, he will guide you into all Truth, for he shall not speak of himself, but what∣soever he shall hear, that shall he speak. Now I ask Celsus's Jew, what were these Things, that our Saviour had to say to his Disciples, which, under their present Circumstances, they were not in a Capacity to relish? Was not this his Desire, viz. to instruct 'em, since they were Jews, and by Consequence, acquainted with the Letter of the Mo∣saick Law, I say, to instruct 'em, in the true Sence of the Law, which the Types, and Ceremonies, under the Le∣gal Dispensation, did but imperfectly
represent, and to give 'em a new Light into those good Things to come, of which, the various Rites concerning pure, and impure Meats, and Drinks, con∣cerning Festivals, New-Moons, and Sab∣baths, were all but obscure, and in themselves, very mean, and contemp∣tible Shadows? These, without Doubt, were the Things, which their Blessed Lord, wou'd have communicated to 'em. But knowing very well, how difficult a Thing it is, to disengage the Mind, from those Notions, which I had al∣most said, were of as early a Date, as its own Original, and are daily more deeply rooted, in our very Nature, by the strong Prejudices of our Birth, and Education, and especially, when one looks upon 'em, as having the Awful Stamp of a Divine Authority, and by Consequence, as being too im∣portant, and too true, to be call'd in Question, or but slightly regarded; knowing, I say, and considering, how difficult a Thing it is, to convince Persons, under such unhappy Circum∣stances, and to perswade 'em, that the Ceremonial Law was Loss, and Dung, in Comparison of the True Religion, he prudently waited for a more convenient Time, and differ'd his Discourse, 'till after his Bloody
Death, and triumphant Resurrection. And indeed, if he had talk'd to them, of Things, that exceeded the Bounds, of their present, and narrow Capacity, he might have shock'd their Faith in him, as the SON of the LIVING GOD. And I leave any one to judge, whether this be not the most natural Sence of the following Words; I have yet many Things to say unto you, but ye John xvi. V. 12. can't bear 'em now. For there were several Explications to be giv'n of the Law, with Respect to its Spiritual Meaning, which ev'n our Saviour's Disciples at that Time were not duely dispos'd to hear, because they had been born, and bred among the Jews, and since their Religion, consisted very much of those Things, which were Types, and Shadows of the Gospel-Dis∣pensation, I'm inclin'd to think, that 'tis upon that Account, that our Sa∣viour makes Use of the following Words, When the Spirit of Truth is come, he will guide you into all Truth, as if he had V. 13. said, he shall lead you into the true, and full Sence of those Things, viz. Types, and Figures, which you were conversant with, and whereby you imagin'd, you paid God, the true Wor∣ship, which was due to him, and requir'd by him. And the fore-mention'd Promise,
which our Saviour made to his Dis∣ciples, was abundantly, fulfill'd to the Apostle Peter, when the Spirit of God shew'd him in a Vision, all Sorts of Animals, Birds, and Four-footed Beasts, and creeping Things, and said to him, Rise, Peter, kill, and eat. And indeed, at that Juncture of Time, he was so fond of his former Religion, that he return'd this Answer, ev'n to the Voice, which he heard from Heaven, Not so Lord, for I have never eaten any Thing, that is common, or unclean. But at length, his Understanding was enlighten'd, as appears from the following Words, What God has cleans'd call not thou com∣mon. And after that Instructive Vision, the Spirit of Truth, leading Peter in∣to all Truth, acquainted him with those Things, which he cou'dn't bear, while our Saviour was present with him in the Flesh. But I shall have Occasion hereafter, to speak of those, who adhere, to the litteral Sence of the Mosaick Law.
CHAP. III. MY Business at present is to shew, that Celsus betrays his wretched Ignorance, in representing a Jew, ad∣dressing himself to those of his Na∣tive Country, who were converted to the Christian Faith, in the following Words, What's the Matter, my dearly beloved Country-men, that you have re∣nounc'd the Law of your Fathers? For how can they be said to re∣nounce the Law of their Fathers, who severely blame Persons for not adhe∣ring to it. Tell me, says the Apostle, ye that desire to be under the Law, do ye Gal. iv. V. 21. not hear the Law? For 'tis written, that Abraham had two Sons, and so on to those Words, Which Things are an Al∣legory. And how can they be said, to re∣nounce the Law of their Fathers, who are continually making mention of it, as if they were proud, of shewing the honourable Regard, which they still pay to it, and argue after the follow∣ing Manner, Say I these Things as a Man, 1. Cor. ix. V. 8.
or says not the Law the same also? For 'tis written in the Law of Moses, thou shalt not muzzle the Mouth of the Ox, that treads out the Corn. Do's God take Care for Oxen? Or, says he it altogether for our sakes? For our sakes, no doubt, this is written. And how confus'd is Celsus's Dis∣course, and how do's it want, ev'n a plausible Appearance, to recommend it to the World, when he talks after the following Manner. Some of you, says he, have forsak'n our Excellent Religion, under a Pretence of giving Allegorical, and Mystical Explications of the Law. Others of you are great Admirers of a spiritual Sence, as you are pleas'd to term it, and yet are diligent Observers of those outward Ceremonies, which make so consi∣derable a Part of the Religion which we embrace. There remain some others, who adhere to the literal Sence of Scripture, thinking, that Abundance of spiritual Mat∣ter is wrapt up, in the very Letter of the Law, and profess, that Jesus of Naza∣reth was the Person, who was foretold by the Jewish Prophets, and at the same Time, observe the Precepts of Moses, and the Traditions of their Ancestors. But how cou'd it be expected, that Celsus's Jew, shou'd give us a true, and clear Account of Matters of this Nature, since in the Sequel of his Dis∣course,
he mentions several very great, and notorious Heresies. And there were some Jews, who turn'd their Backs, as he says, upon the Creator of the Uni∣verse, and didn't know, that the be∣lieving Israelites did live, in the strict Observance of the Law of their Fa∣thers. For his Design was not, to act the Part of an impartial Enquirer into Truth, who readily submits to the Evidence, which it carries with it, but to vent his Malice, and right, or wrong, to make a Vigorous Opposi∣tion to the Christian Religion, and as he vainly thought, to expose it to the highest Contempt imaginable. CHAP. IV. THE Jew continues his Discourse, 'Twas but t'other Day, says he, that we severely punish'd the Person, who led you aside, like a Company of silly Sheep, and by Consequence, 'twas very lately, and on a sudden, that you renounc'd the Law of your Fathers.
But to this I have already return'd a sufficient Answer. What he adds, I confess, carries with it a much greater Force, With what Face, says he, or Colour of Reason, can you despise those Sacred Rites, which not long agoe, you held in very great Esteem, and especially, when the Law of Moses, is the Foundation, on which, the Doctrine of your Jesus is built, as you your selves acknowledge? That the Christian Religion, is found∣ed on the Jewish Law, and Prophets, as well as upon Christ, and his Apostles, is, what, I readily confess. But we must also consider, that they naturally lead us to the Mistery, which was hid from Ages, but is now made manifest, Eph. iii. V. 9. by the Appearance of our Blessed Sa∣viour. And we don't despise the Law, be∣cause we have a clearer Revelation; but instead of that, have the greater Ve∣neration for it, and endeavour to shew, what Depths of Divine Wisdom there are, ev'n in the Legal Dispensation, which the Jews themselves know little, or nothing of. And why shou'd we think it strange, that the Gospel shou'd be founded on the Law of Moses, when our Saviour speaking to those, that re∣fus'd to believe in him, has the follow∣ing Words, Had ye believ'd Moses, ye John. v. V. 46.
wou'd have believ'd me, for he wrote of John. v. V. 46. me; but if ye believe not his Writings, how shall ye believe my Words? And the Evangelist St. Mark begins his Gos∣pel thus, The Beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, as 'tis writ∣ten Mark i. V. 1. in the Prophets, Behold, I send thy Messenger before thy Face, which shall pre∣pare thy Way before thee; intimating to us, that the Gospel is founded on the Scriptures of the Old Testament it self. I can't conceive therefore, what Celsus's Jew proposes to himself, when he says, If any Person has foretold, that the Son of God, was to come into the World, he was one of our own Prophets, and inspir'd by that God, in whom we believe. And I wou'd fain know, how it tends, in the least, to the Prejudice of the Christian Religion, that John the Baptist, who was the Fore-runner of our Saviour, was a Jew. For it don't follow, that because he was so, there∣fore all who embrace the Christian Re∣ligion, whether Jews, or Gentiles, must observe the Letter of the Jewish Law.
CHAP. V. THEN the pretended Jew tells us, That our Saviour was punish'd by his own Country-men, according to the De∣merit of his horrid Crimes. But I think, I have said enough already, in An∣swer to so pityful a Cavil, and therefore, sha'n't do him the Honour, to imi∣tate him, in his frequent, and needless Repetitions. Then he laughs at the Doctrine of the Resurrection, and of a Future Judgment, at which the Righteous will be rewarded, and the Wicked punish'd; I say, he laughs at it, as being, in his Opinion, most highly ridi∣culous. And he says, That the Christians say nothing, ev'n on these important Sub∣jects, as they are pleas'd to call 'em, but what was said long before; imagining, that this is an effectual Argument, to overthrow the whole Superstructure of Christianity.
To this I answer, that our Blessed Saviour, perceiving how little Confor∣mity there was, between the Lives of the Jews, and the Doctrines, ev'n of their own Celebrated Prophets, thought fit to teach 'em, by Parables, that the Kingdom of God shou'd be Mat. xxi. V. 41. tak'n from 'em, and giv'n to the Gentiles. And we see this Prophecy, most evidently, and remarkably fulfill'd, in the Age, in which we live. For the present Jews, not enjoying the Benefit, of that supernatural Light, which is highly necessary, to the right Under∣standing of the Scriptures, abound, to their great Shame, with extravagant, and innumerable Fancies: Whereas the Christians are happily led, into the Spiritual Knowledge of the Truth, which alone is able, at once, to en∣lighten, and elevate the Mind, and don't live after the Manner of the Jews, as Members, of an Earthly Re∣publick, but like worthy, and honou∣rable Citizens of that Heavenly Jeru∣salem, of which their Pompous Wor∣ship, and external Grandeur, is a very imperfect Emblem. This is evident, in as much as they penetrate, into the deep Mysteries of the Law, and are able, to give a ra∣tional, and intelligible Explication of 'em, to any Persons, who may modest∣ly desire it.
And suppose I shou'd grant, that our Saviour himself went so far, as to observe the various Ceremonies, relating to the Jewish Sacrifices, this I think, wou'd be no solid Argument, against our believing, that he was the SON of GOD. He is the SON of that ADO∣RABLE MAJESTY, who gave the Law, and from whom the Pro∣phets did receive their Commission, and we, who are Christians, and Mem∣bers of the True Catholick Church, don't wilfully transgress the Law, but re∣jecting the Fables of the Jews, employ our Time, and Strength, in searching into the Spiritual, and Mystical Sence, which we think, the Law, and the Prophets do admit of. For 'tis plain, that they themselves wou'dn't have us rest, in the litteral, and most ob∣vious Sence of the Words, that are made use of, in the important Mes∣sages, they deliver from Time to Time, since 'tis their common Prac∣tice, to usher in their Prophecies, with some such Introduction as this, I will open my Mouth in a Parable: I will utter dark Sayings of Old; and when they speak of the Commands of the Law, as being obscure, and impossible to be rightly understood, without Divine Assi∣stance; they put up this earnest Peti∣tion
to Almighty God, Open thou mine Eyes, that I may behold wondrous Things, out of thy Law. Ps. cxix. V. 18. CHAP. VI. AND by the Way, since I am speaking of the Manner of Ex∣pression, which the Prophets us'd, I may safely challenge any Person, to instance in any Words, of our Blessed Saviour, that were vain, or ev'n seem'd to have the least Tincture of Pride, and Ostentation. And how can he be accus'd of Haughtiness, and Arrogance, who had abundant Reason, to use the following Words, Learn of me, for I am meek, and lowly of Heart, and ye shall find Rest to your Souls? Mat. xi. V. 29. He, I say, who after he had supp'd with his Disciples, laid aside his Gar∣ments, and took a Towel, and girded himself, and pour'd Water into a Ba∣son, and wash'd their Feet, and re∣prov'd one of the Company, who wou'dn't suffer him to do it, and said, If I wash thee not, thou hast no Part with me. He who said to his Disci∣ples, John xiii. V. 8.
I am among you, as he that serves: Luk. xxii V. 27 To proceed, let any one shew, if he can, that our Saviour did ever ad∣vance any single Position, that was false, and let him explain the Nature of a great, or small Untruth, if his Inclination prompts him, to prove him a notorious Liar, tho' to speak proper∣ly, I think, there are no Degrees of False-hood, and on the contrary, any true Proposition is as much a Truth, as the most important Article of the Christian Faith. But why shou'd I talk as I do? Let any one, and par∣ticularly, the pretended Jew whom Celsus personates, make it appear to the World, by solid Reason, if he can, that our Blessed Saviour was ever guilty of the least Impiety. Was it a Crime, to abolish the Circumcision of the Flesh, the Cere∣monial Distinction of Meats, and the carnal Observance of Feasts, New-Moons, and Sabbaths, that his sincere Followers might have their Minds gradually rais'd, to the spiritual, and full Sence of the Law, which alone is worthy of the Infinite Purity, and great Design of the Supream Majesty, who gave it, tho' 'tisn't in the least incongruous, that a Minister, and ev'n an Apostle, shou'd still be a Jew to the Jews, that he might gain the Jews
being under the Law, as it were, to gain them who were under the Law? CHAP. VII. THE Jew adds, that Abundance of Persons, besides our Saviour, have led such aside, as tamely suffer themselves to be deceiv'd, and are ev'n fond of De∣lusion. I answer, let him instance in any one Person, if he can, who ever gave such useful Precepts to the World, as our Blessed Saviour has left upon Record, and taught 'em a Doctrine, which had as great a Virtue, to reform the Manners of Men, as that which accompany'd the successful Preaching of the Gospel. Then he says, the Christians find Fault with the Jews, for not believing, that Christ was God. But this I have already answer'd, and shew'd, in what Respects, we own our Saviour to be GOD, and in what Sence, we believe he was a Real Man.
CHAP. VIII. CELSƲS's Jew adds the following Words, How can any one imagine, that we, who all along declar'd to the World, that God wou'd send a Person, to punish the disobedient, and rebellious, shou'd treat him so basely, when he came, in Compliance with the Will of God, and to accomplish such great Designs. But 'tis hardly worth my while, to return an Answer, to so ridiculous a Question. For 'tis just as if a Person shou'd say, how is it possible, that I, who always preach'd up the Doctrine of Temperance, shou'd be guilty of De∣bauchery, or, that I, who in Dis∣course, did always vindicate the in∣jur'd Rights of Justice, shou'd ever be guilty, of violating its Sacred Rules? And as nothing is more common, than for Persons to talk, in the Praise of Virtue, and yet be openly guilty, of the most scandalous Vices: So the Jews, who make the Prophetick Oracles the Matter of their continual Boast, do yet shut their Eyes, against the
glorious Light, of those Scripture-Prophecies, which are evidently ac∣complish'd, in the Person of our Bles∣sed Saviour. And if I may ascribe their Blindness, to some other Cause, besides the wretched Degeneracy of Humane Nature, which they plainly discover'd, I may safely say, that 'twas directly foretold, by the very Prophets they so much admire. For Isaiah says expresly, Hear ye in∣deed but understand not, and see ye indeed, but perceive not, make the Heart of this People fat. Now let any Person ac∣quaint me, what it is, that the Pro∣phet intends, by these, and the like Expressions. 'Tis plain, they saw our Saviour, but wilfully shut their Eyes, against the piercing Rays of the SƲN of RIGHTEOƲSNESS, and heard him discourse to 'em, but cou'dn't com∣prehend, that his humane Nature was the living Temple of the Deity, which was going to forsake their Nation, and to engage all its infinite Per∣fections, in the behalf of the believing Gentiles. And 'tis Matter of Fact, and a Thing very Remarkable, that since the Incarnation of our Blessed Saviour, the Jews have been left by God, and that the Beauty, and Glory of their Re∣ligion, is, in a Manner, entirely de∣fac'd
and lost, insomuch that there is scarce one Sign of the Divine Pre∣sence among 'em, except the severe Judgments, which do so justly befall their Nation. They have neither Prophets, nor Mi∣racles, to attest the Truth of their Re∣ligion, whereas the Christians, ev'n at this Distance of Time, have a Power of working Miracles, conferr'd upon 'em, some of which are not infe∣riour to those, which were wrought, when our Saviour was on Earth. CHAP. IX. THEN Celsus's Jew breaks out into the following Expression, How can any one imagine, that we shou'd treat a Per∣son so ill, that was foretold by our own Prophets, unless we had a Mind to enhance our Crime, and so to aggravate our most deserved Punishment? To this, I answer, that at the final Judgment (which is one of the Ar∣ticles of the Christian Faith) the Jews will be punish'd, in a more dreadful Manner, than the rest of the World,
not only for rejecting the Messiah, which was a horrid Crime, but also for their barbarous, and almost un∣accountable Carriage, towards the Prince of Peace. Nay, ev'n at this Day, (so re∣markably do's the Vengeance of God pursue 'em!) they are the most mi∣serable People, upon the Face of the whole habitable World. For what Nation is there, besides that of the Jews, that is banish'd, from their Me∣tropolis, and deny'd the Liberty, of serving God, according to the Reli∣gion of their Fathers, and Ancestors, in their Native Soil? These are some of those grievous Calamities, to which, their own Crimes expos'd 'em (For no History can parallel their Villanies) and especially those horrid Barbarities, which they exercis'd, towards our Bles∣sed Saviour, who came into the World, to save 'em, from Sin, and Hell.
CHAP. X. THE Jew adds, How cou'd we look upon him as GOD, who on the one Hand, did none of those Mighty Things, which he pretended to effect, and on the o∣ther, was convicted, and condemn'd to a severe Punishment, was forc'd to abscond, that he might not be taken, running, like a Vagabond, from Place to Place, and yet was at last apprehended, and be∣tray'd, ev'n by one of his most eminent Followers, who of all Persons in the World, one wou'd think, might have had the Grace, to espouse his Master's Cause? Was it in the least suitable to the Majesty, and Wisdom of a GOD, to flee, like a guilty Wretch, and to suffer himself to be apprehended, and forsak'n by his intimate Friends, who esteem'd him their Lord, and Saviour, THE SON OF GOD, AND THE TRUE MESSIAH? To this I answer, that we are not so ignorant, as to call THE BODY of our Blessed Saviour, which was material, and sensible, by the VENERABLE NAME of GOD. Nay, we don't attri∣bute
so much as this, ev'n to the holy and spotless Soul of JESƲS, with respect to which, he uses the follow∣ing Words, My Soul is exceeding sorrow∣ful, ev'n unto Death. When we meet Mat. xxvi V. 38. with such Words as these, in the Wri∣tings of the Prophets, Behold I am the Lord, the God of all Flesh: Or, Those Jer. xxxii V. 27. Words, Before me there was no God Isa. xliii. V. 10. form'd, neither shall there be after me; the Jews acknowledge, that 'tis the great God himself that speaks, but he makes Use of the Prophets, as Instru∣ments, to communicate his Will to Men, and the Greeks confess, that 'tis a God, that speaks the following Words, by the Mouth of the Pythian Priestess, I can the numerous Sands with Ease recount, Herod. Clio. Fathom the Sea, and understand a Mute. After the same Manner, we say, that it was GOD, the ETERNAL WORD, the SON of the EVER-BLESSED GOD, that made Use of the humane Nature of the HOLY JESƲS, as a proper Instrument, when he spoke the following Words, I am the Way, the John xiv. V. 6. Truth, and the Life. I am the Door, I am the Living Bread, that came down John x. V. 7. from Heaven. And I might instance John vi. V. 15. in many other Expressions to the same Effect.
We blame the Jews therefore, and I think not unjustly, for not acknow∣ledging our Saviour to be God, of whom the Prophets do so frequently produce their concurring Testimony, that he is the POWER of the ETERNAL FATHER. 'Twas to him the Command of God was directed, which we read of, in the Account that Moses gives us, of the Crea¦tion of the World, Let there be Light, Gen. 1. V. 3. let there be a Firmament, and the like. 'Twas to him he said, Let us make bid. V. 6. Man, in our Image, after our Likeness. ibid. 26. And the ETERNAL WORD did every Thing, according to the Com∣mand of God. And this is not a Conjecture, form'd in our own Fancies, but we build our Faith, in this important Affair, on the concurring Testimony, of those very Prophets, who are readily own'd, and extreamly admir'd by the Jews them∣selves. For we are told expresly, He commanded, and they were created. Now, what created Being, how noble soever, cou'd execute the Command of the ETERNAL FATHER, with Respect to the Creation of the World, who, but he, who was the ETERNAL and LIVING WORD?
CHAP. XI. BESIDES 'tis plain, from several Pas∣sages in the Gospels, that he, who spoke those Words, by the Mouth of the Blessed Jesus, I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life; was not circum∣scrib'd, within the narrow Limits of his Humane Nature. John the Baptist foretelling, that in a short Time, the Son of GOD shou'd make his Appearance in the World, speaks of him, as a Person, that was Omnipresent. There stands one among John 1. V. 26. 27. you, says he, whom ye know not, he it is, who, coming after me, is before me. Now is it probable, or ev'n possible, he shou'd apply these Words, to our Saviour's Body, or his Humane Soul? And our Blessed Lord himself, raising the Minds of his Disciples, to more sublime Thoughts of the SON of GOD, makes use of the following Ex∣pression, Where two or three are ga∣ther'd Ma. xviii V. 20. together in my Name, there am I in the midst of 'em. There's another Promise, that is
much of the same Import, which he makes to his Disciples, Lo! I am with Mat. 28. V. 20. you always, ev'n to the End of the World. I hope the Reader will not misunder∣stand me, as if I said any Thing, that might in the least interfere, with that intimate, and glorious Union, that there is, between the Humanity of the incarnate Jesus, and the Miste∣rious Person of the ETERNAL WORD. For if St. Paul teaches us, that He that is joyn'd to the Lord is one Spirit, 1. Cor. 6. V. 17. certainly they that understand this Doctrine, will readily allow, that there is a closer, and more Divine Union, be∣tween the WORD, and its assum'd Hu∣manity. And our Blessed Saviour did a∣bundantly discover, that he was no less than the Power of God, by the fre∣quent, and uncontested Miracles, which he wrought, ev'n in the Presence of the Jews, tho' they profess'd, to enter∣tain a most unaccountable Notion, (I can't imagine, for my Part, that it shou'd ever enter into any Man's Mind) that he cast out Devils, by Beelzebub the Prince of the Devils, and Celsus, we know, ascribes 'em to the Power of Magick. But our Saviour abundantly con∣futed this Absurd Conceit, by shew∣ing, that the Kingdom of Satan was
going to suffer a most violent Shock, as evidently appears to them, who read the Gospels with any tolerable Share of Judgment. Let Celsus shew, if he can, wherein our Saviour fail'd in his great Design, to destroy the Works of the Devil, and bring convincing Proofs of the Truth, or ev'n Probability of what he offers. But this, I'm apt to think, is what he will scarce be able to perform, since the Objections, that he raises a∣gainst us, are founded, for the most Part, on some Matters of Fact, which are grosly misunderstood by him, or some Passages in the Gospels, which are shamefully misapply'd, or some fabulous Accounts, which are owing to the unhappy, but fruitful Inven∣tion of the Jews.
CHAP. XII. BUT because Celsus's Jew affirms, that he was convicted, and con∣demn'd, after a Legal Process, I de∣sire to know, how this can be prov'd to be true, when 'tis plain, beyond all Contradiction, that his Enemies were very zealous, in suborning false Wit∣nesses against him. Perhaps they wou'd fain make us believe, that our Saviour was convicted, because his Accusers took great Advantage against him, by that innocent, and just Expression of his, I am able to destroy the Temple of Mat. xxv V. 6. 1 God, and to build it in three Days. 'Tis true indeed, he spoke these Words, of the Temple of his Body, but they, not knowing his Design, imagin'd, that they had a Reference to their Material and Pompous Temple, for which they plainly discover'd a far greater Veneration, than for that Glorious, and Adorable Temple, wherein the ETER∣NAL WORD, the TRƲTH, and WISDOM of GOD did Personally, tho' Mysteriously reside.
But since Celsus's Jew insults over us, because our Saviour was taken, I grant he was, but this ought to be con∣sider'd, that it wasn't done, without his own Consent. For when his Time was come, he surrend'red himself, as an easie Prey, in∣to the Hands of his barbarous Enemies, and abundantly made good the Cha∣racter, which is giv'n him, in the Holy Scripture, and particularly in the fol∣lowing Words, Behold the Lamb of God, who takes away the Sins of the John i. V. 28. World. This is no more than what the Evangelist tells us, Jesus therefore knowing, says he, all Things, that should Joh. xviii V. 4, &c come upon him, went forth, and said unto 'em, whom seek ye? They answer'd him, Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus says unto 'em, I am he. And Judas also which betray'd him, stood with 'em. As soon then as he had said unto 'em, I am he, they went backward, and fell to the Ground. Then ask'd he them again, Whom seek ye? And they said Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus an∣swer'd, I have told you that I am he. If therefore ye seek me, let these go their Way. And when one of his Disciples stood by, and smote the Ear of the High-Priest's Servant, he said, Put up thy Sword into its place. For all they that take the Sword shall perish by the Sword. Thinkest thou, that I cannot now
pray unto my Father, and he shall presently give me more than twelve Legions of An∣gels. But how then shall the Scriptures be fulfill'd, that thus it must be? Now if any Person shou'd be so weak, as to imagine, that these are only Ficti∣ons of the Evangelists, have we not Reason, on the contrary, to think, our Adversaries have been grosly guilty of that Practice (with which they charge the Christians) that so they might vent their implacable Malice, against all those, who profess to be the Followers of the Blessed Jesus, and to believe, that those Things are most certainly true, which are related by Persons, whose Integrity do's abun∣dantly appear, from the Consideration of the dreadful Calamities, to which they knew their Religion did so ma∣nifestly expose 'em? For we can't conceive, that the Fol∣lowers of our Blessed Saviour shou'd embrace the most shameful, and pain∣ful Death, with undaunted Courage, and heroick Constancy, had they been the scandalous Inventers of the History, which they transmitted to Posterity, but on the contrary, we must esteem 'em to be Persons, who were fully per∣swaded, in their own Minds, of the Truth, and Importance, of what they publish'd to the World; since they
knew, by Observation, and Experience, that Scorn, and Infamy were the shocking Attendants, and Persecution, and Death almost the natural, and una∣voidable Consequence of the glorious Profession, which they made of the Name of Jesus. CHAP. XIII. WHAT the pretended Jew says farther, viz. That our Saviour was betray'd by his own Disciples, he might learn from the Evangelists, with this little Difference, that whereas they acquaint us, that he was betray'd by Judas, he chooses to speak in the Plural Number, that his Objection may seem to have the greater Force, but hasn't the Curiosity. I will not say the Conscience, to enquire narrow∣ly, into the Account, which we have of Judas, whose Heart was miserably divided, between his Master, and his Lust, and govern'd at once by extra∣vagant, and very different Passions. For that infamous Traitor gave a Sign to the Persons that came to appre∣hend
him, Whomsoever I shall kiss, that Mat xxvi V. 48. me is he, hold him fast. So that it seems, he retain'd something of the Respect, which formerly he paid his Master, since otherwise he wou'd have betray'd him openly, and without that flattering Ceremony, and most horrid Solemnity. We have Reason therefore to be∣lieve, that our Saviour's most excel∣lent, and awakening Discourses had made some faint Impression, ev'n up∣on the Mind of one, who was so un∣accountably sway'd by a covetous Dis∣position, that he had the Impudence to betray his Lord, and wou'd not stop, 'till he had shamefully compleated the most villanous Design, for the Accom∣plishment of which, all the Devils in Hell did ever lend their Assistance. Therefore the Evangelist tells us, that Judas when he saw he was condemn'd, Mat xxvi V. 3. repented himself, and brought again the thirty Pieces of Silver, to the Chief Priests and Elders, saying I have sinn'd, in that I have betray'd the innocent Blood. And they said, What's that to us? See thou to that, and he cast down the Pieces of Silver in the Temple, and departed, and went, and hang'd himself. Now if Judas, whose Custom we may suppose it was, to apply to his private Use, the Money that was col∣lected,
for the Relief of the Poor, was so far penitent at last, as to return the thirty Pieces of Silver, to the Chief Priests, and Elders; I think, we may rationally conclude, that the Instruc∣tions of our Blessed Saviour had wrought, in some Measure, on this most harden'd Wretch, that he cou'dn't erase 'em, out of his faithful Memory, and fail entirely in his Respect for the meek, and spotless Jesus. But those Words, I have sinn'd in that I have betray'd the innocent Blood, are a plain, and open Acknowledgment of his hor∣rid Crime, and you may partly judge, what a lively Sense he had, of the great Injustice, and Ingratitude, that appear'd in what he had so lately done, since Life it self was grown a Burthen to him, he felt an unusual Horror of Con∣science, and was forc'd to arraign, accuse, and condemn himself. We have here likewise a remarka∣ble, and standing Instance, of the happy Effect, which our Saviour's In∣structions had, upon the vilest Wretch, that ever breath'd in the common Air, that tho' he added the Worst of Treasons, to his Cheating the Poor; yet some Sparks of Ingenuity were remaining, in a Person, who was little better than a Devil in an Humane Form.
Indeed 'tis possible, after all I have said, that Celsus's Jew may give no Credit, to the Account, which we have in the Gospels, of the Treachery of Ju∣das, and will hearken to that Part alone, that acquaints us, that one of our Saviour's Disciples did betray him, and will take the Liberty, to say more than the Holy Scripture do's affirm, viz. That he committed that horrid Crime, with the full Bent of his Will, and without the least Re∣morse. But 'tis very unreasonable, that a Person shou'd believe, or disbelieve the Scripture-History, as he is led aside, by the unhappy Biass of his deprav'd Affections. And our Adversaries themselves, if they have any Shame in 'em, must, I think, in some Measure, be affected, if they will but read the Hundred and Ninth Psalm, which directly, and en∣tirely relates to Judas. It begins after the following Manner, Hold not thy Psal. cix. V. 1. Peace, O God of my Praise. For the Mouth of the Wicked, and the Mouth of the De∣ceitful are open'd against me. 'Tis prophesy'd there, that Judas shou'd be degraded from the Aposto∣lical Function, on the Account of the horrid Crime he shou'd commit, and that another shou'd supply his Place,
which is intimated to us in the fol∣lowing Words, Let another take his Psal. cix. V. 8. Office. And supposing our Saviour had been betray'd, by one his Disciples, who was, if it had been possible, more wickedly dispos'd than Judas, and his Master's most sweet, and heav'nly In∣structions hadn't made the least se∣cret Impression upon his harden'd Mind, how wou'd this in the least reflect on the Holy Religion, which the Blessed Jesus introduc'd into the World? What relates to his being appre∣hended by his Enemies, has been al∣ready consider'd, and I have shew'd, that he made a willing Surrender of himself, into the Hands of those Blood-thirsty Wretches, to set us a Bright Example of Submission to the Will of God, under the darkest Dispensations of his wise, and holy Providence. What the Jew adds, I confess, do's seem to me to be very childish, and ridiculous. A good General, says he, who commands a numerous, and well-dis∣ciplin'd Army, was never known to be betray'd by his Soldiers. Nay, the Ring-leader of a Company of High-way-Men, tho' the merest Rogue in Nature, and tho' his Followers be the most contempti∣ble, and cursed Crew that ever was in
the World; yet needn't fear being betray'd, since they esteem him the fittest Person for the Accomplishment of their base De∣signs. But as for your Pretended Sa∣viour, he was betray'd by his own Dis∣ciples, not having so great an Interest in 'em, as a good General in his Soldiers, or the Ring-Leader of a Company of High-way-Men in his vile Accomplices. On the contrary, many Instances might be produc'd from History, of Famous Generals, and Ring-Leaders of High-way-Men, betray'd by those, who were under their Command, ev'n after they had receiv'd from 'em, all the Assurances of their inviolable Fi∣delity, which they cou'd reasonably desire. But suppose 'twere otherwise, I ap∣peal to common Sence, whether it cou'd be fasten'd on our Blessed Savi∣our, as a just Reproach, that he was shamefully betray'd by one, who was engag'd, by all the Sacred Ties of Duty, and Gratitude, to be devoted to his Service, who certainly, if he hadn't been possess'd by the Devil, cou'd never have form'd so cursed a Design, much less have ever brought it to so dishonourable an Execu∣tion?
I ask Celsus, who pretends to no mean Skill in Philosophy, whether 'twas Plato's Fault, that Aristotle, af∣ter he had been his Pupil, for twenty Years, did publickly declare, that he rejected his Tutor's Notion, of the Immortality of the Soul, and esteem'd his Conceptions, as no better than Philosophical Chimera's, and vain Amusements. I ask him, whether Plato's Philo∣sophy lost any of its native Sublimity, and all his Notions were false, the very Moment his Pupil did oppose him; or rather, since Plato was plainly in the right, at least in the Opinion of a Platonist, whether Aristotle, as Learned as he was, didn't discover too much of Malice, and Ingratitude. Chrysippus also, in several Places in his Writings, do's condemn the Opi∣nions of Cleanthes, tho' 'twas owing to him, that in his younger Years, his Mind was season'd, with whol∣some, and excellent Instructions. Besides, Aristotle is suppos'd to have study'd Philosophy in the School of Plato, for twenty Years, and Chrysippus study'd the same excellent Science for many Years, in the School of Clean∣thes: Whereas Judas hadn't conti∣nu'd three Years with our Blessed Sa∣viour, when he so shamefully betray'd him.
And if we read the Lives of the Philosophers, we shall meet with fre∣quent Instances, that, in some Re∣spects, resemble the Horrid Treachery of Judas. We shall find, that the Pythagoreans built Tombs, for such Persons as left the Study of Philosophy, and betook themselves to a different, and less-useful Course of Life. But I suppose no Person, will be so weak, as to take Occasion from hence, to reflect on the Doctrine of Pytha∣goras, or the solid Arguments which his Followers us'd in its Defence. The Jew adds, that Having many Things to say, with respect to our Savi∣our, which are far from being fairly re∣presented by his Disciples, he chose to pass 'em over in a profound Silence. But I ask, what Truths are these, that are misinterpreted by the Evan∣gelists, and which he forbears to men∣tion? Must not this pass for a Rheto∣rical Flourish, to make us believe, he was furnish'd with a great Stock of Arguments, against our Blessed Saviour, when most, if not all, that he cou'd possibly say, if it was true, and mate∣rial, was borrow'd, from those very Gospels, which sometimes he so much despises.
CHAP. XIV. THEN Celsus finds Fault with our Saviour's Disciples, for say∣ing, That he foreknew, and foretold all the remarkable Things that ever happen'd to him. But we doubt not in the least, but we can easily prove, by an Enume∣ration of Particulars, (let Celsus say what he pleases to the contrary) that our Saviour foretold several Things, that shou'd befall his Disciples, some considerable Time before they came to pass. What a wonderful Instance of this, is that which St. Mathew gives, Ye Mat. x. V. 18. shall be brought before Governors, and Kings for my sake, for a Testimony a∣gainst them, and the Gentiles. I might quote many other Places, where our Saviour do's expresly foretell the grie∣vous Persecutions, that shou'd be the too common Lot of Christians. Now what Religion is there, in the whole habitable World, that wants the Advantage of a TOLERATION,
except that which our Saviour intro∣duc'd? So that there's no Ground, for that foolish Plea, which our Enemies make Use of, that he saw, what bad Entertainment, false, and corrupt No∣tions wou'd naturally meet with in the World; and therefore, to raise his Re∣putation, and promote his Interest, did only foretell those Things, which any Child might have known wou'd befall him. But if Persons wou'd unavoidably be brought before Governors, and Kings, for holding false, and wicked Notions, one wou'd think that the Epicureans, who disbelieve an over-ruling Povidence, shou'd be brought before 'em, as soon as any Persons in the World, or the Peripateticks, who think, that the Prayers, which are put up, and the Sacrifices, which are of∣fer'd to the Gods, are wholly insigni∣ficant, and little Arts unworthy to be practic'd by those, who pretend to the Sence, and Learning of Philosophers. But perhaps our Enemies may object, That the Samaritanes are persecuted on the Account of their Religion. To this I answer, that they are condemn'd to dye, for circumcising themselves, in direct Opposition to the Law, which permits none but Jews, to observe this celebrated, and
Ancient Rite. And we don't find, that the Judge leaves it to their Choice, whether they will obstinately persist, and dye, or renounce their Re∣ligion, and so be publickly acquitted, but if they are found to be circum∣cis'd, immediately they must suffer Death. The Christians are the only Persons in the World, who, tho' they are perse∣cuted, according to our Saviour's Predi∣ction, Ye shall be brought before Governors, and Kings for my sake, are entreated, to the last Breath they draw, to renounce the Christian Religion, and sacrifice to Idols, and so to put themselves directly into a safe, and happy Condition, with respect to their outward Circumstances. See therefore, with what Authority our Blessed Saviour spoke the follow∣ing Words, Whosoever shall confess me, Mat. x. V. 32, 33. before Men, him will I confess, before my Father, which is in Heav'n, but whoso∣ever shall deny me before Men, him will I also deny, before my Father, which is in Heav'n. Take Notice, that this was spoken by him, a considerable Time before the Thing, that he speaks of, was true in Fact. Perhaps such a Thought as this, may be ready to dart into your Mind, that he builds Castles in the Air, and what he prophesies don't look at all, as
if the Event wou'd be answerable. But if you can exercise a little Pati∣ence, you'll say thus to your selves, if our Blessed Saviour did readily fore∣tell, that Governours, and Kings, wou'd use their utmost Endeavours, to extir∣pate the Religion, he introduc'd into the World, and if the Event has fully an∣swer'd his Prediction, certainly we have all imaginable Reason to believe, that he receiv'd such a Power from God, as was necessary, to make his Doctrine obtain, so Universally as it did, and that he knew very well, that all the Difficulties, that lay in the Way to its Reception, shou'd be happily, and easily surmounted, by the help of Miracles. And who, without a Transport of Holy Admiration, can set our Sa∣viour before his Eyes, expresly foretel∣ling, That the Gospel of the Kingdom shou'd Mat. xxiv V. 14▪ be preach'd in all the World, for a Wit∣ness unto all Nations; and see the Pre∣diction in due Time fulfill'd, the Gos∣pel being preach'd to the Greeks; and Barbarians, to the Learned, and Un∣learned, and the whole habitable World being brought, as it were, un∣der its honourable, and happy Yoak? Besides let the Pretended Jew, who don't believe, that our Saviour fore∣told those Things, which, we see, did afterwards befall him, I say, let him
consider, that when the City of Jeru∣salem was in all its Glory, and the Pompous Ceremonies of the Jewish Reli∣gion were solemnly perform'd in it, he foretold, that it shou'd be invaded, and ruin'd by the Romans. I suppose, no One will take the Li∣berty to say, that they who were his Familiar Friends, and constant Hearers did satisfy themselves. with teaching (Viva Voce) those Things, which are the Subject-Matter of the Gospels, with∣out leaving behind 'em a History, of the most remarkable Transactions of our Blessed Saviour. St. Luke has the following Words, When ye shall see Jerusalem compass'd with Luke 21. V. 20. Armies, then know that the Desolation there∣of is nigh. Now at the Time when these Things were writ, there was no Sus∣picion of a Siege, or any grievous Ca∣lamity, that threaten'd the Jewish Church, and State. 'Twas in the Reign of the Emperor Nero, that the Romans made their first Attack, on this Once∣glorious City, and it was not tak'n, 'till the Reign of the Emperor Vespa∣sian, whose Son Titus Vespasian did ut∣terly destroy it. This was a just, and heavy Judg∣ment of God upon 'em, for killing James the just, as Josephus wou'd fain have us to believe, whereas in Truth
'twas owing to the horrid Crime they committed, in embruing their cursed Hands in the bloody Death of our Bles∣sed Lord. Celsus therefore, might every Jot as well have granted, that our Saviour knew what Accidents wou'd befall him, and yet have talk'd with the highest Contempt of his Divine Prae∣science, as grant, that he was capable of working such Miracles, as he wrought, and at the same Time af∣firm, that he was a Notorious and Vile Impostor. And he might with all his Learning have shown, that the Augurs and Auspices foretold Future Events, by the Flying of Birds, and by the Intrails of Beasts. But he was loth, it seems, to make this Concession, whereas he do's in some sort acknowledge, that our Saviour wrought many Miracles, and yet asserts, he did 'em by the Help of Magick. Phlegon was much more ingenuous, who in the 13th and 14th Book of his Chronicon, acknowledges, that our Saviour foretold Future Events, and says, they exactly answer'd his Pre∣diction, tho' I observe, that he seems sometimes to confound our Blessed Lord with the Apostle Peter.
And as it were, in Spite of Preju∣dice, he draws this natural Conclu∣sion, That since the Founder of our Holy Religion, and many of his Followers were able to foretell many future, and remarkable Events at so great a Distance of Time, which exactly answer'd their Pre∣dictions, we must suppose, that they were acted by a more than Ordinary Power. Then Celsus says, That our Saviour's Disciples not being able to conceal those Things, which were expos'd to Publick View, thought that the best Game they had to play, was to give out that their Master foresaw, a long Time before, all the Accidents that did afterwards befall him. But either he didn't know, or at least seems to be ignorant, that our Blessed Saviour us'd the following Words to his Disciples, All ye shall be offended because of me this Night; which Mat. 26. V. 31. we know happen'd accordingly, and was no false Prophet, when he said to Peter, Before the Cock crow thou shalt deny me thrice. Ibid. V. 34. Now if they hadn't been Men of undoubted Integrity, but had de∣sign'd to impose on our Credulity by false Narrations, they wou'd certain∣ly
have discover'd so much of Worldly Policy, as to have said nothing at all of Peter's Denying his Blessed Lord, whose Cause he had so resolutely pro∣mis'd to maintain, and never to have mention'd the Offence which ev'n some of the Disciples took, at the mean Condition in which our Saviour condescended, and thought fit to appear; and if these Things, which seem to represent the Followers of our Blessed Lord to a great Disadvan∣tage, were not related in the Gospels, how cou'd Celsus, or any other Per∣son, have tak'n Occasion from thence to cast a Reproach on our most Holy Religion? But they were not unwilling, that latest Posterity shou'd be acquainted with their Failings, since they were well assur'd, that this wou'dn't in the least hinder the happy Progress of the Everlasting Gospel, or give the Reader any just Occasion, to be guilty of the like Irregular Practices. What Celsus adds is ridiculous to the last Degree, The Disciples got this publish'd, says he, to secure the Reputa∣tion of their Master, and 'tis as if to prove that a Man is just, I shou'd in∣stance in several Acts of Injustice that he has done, or to prove that he's free
from Passion, I shou'd shew that he has been guilty of Murder; or, to prove that he's immortal, shou'd expose his dead Body to View, and after all, put People off with this frivolous Pretence, that he foresaw whatsoever shou'd befall him. But here 'tis apparent, that he grosly misapplies the Instances, which he's pleas'd to produce. For there's no Absurdity at all, in supposing that our Blessed Saviour shou'd propose himself to us, as a Bright Example of Moral Virtue, and yet teach us, to sacrifice our Lives, and all that's dear to us, for the Sake of the Religion we embrace. Consider also, that the Death which he suffer'd, is of General, and Univer∣sal Advantage, as I think, I have suf∣ficiently prov'd already. And tho' Celsus do's fondly imagine, that it makes very much for the Cause which he espouses, that we don't deny, that our Saviour suffer'd in the most notorious, and shameful Manner; yet this is for Want of knowing the SACRED MYSTERIES, that are con∣tain'd in the Passion of our BLESSED LORD, as St. Paul observes, and the several Predictions, which are left upon Record by the Inspired Prophets, con∣cerning this difficult, and important Affair.
Besides he seems not to know, that there was a Celebrated Heretick, who deny'd that the Sufferings of our Sa∣viour were real. This made him say, You don't pre∣tend, that his bitter Passion was only in Appearance, but, without mincing the Matter, you hold that he suffer'd, in a strict, and proper Sence. For our Parts, we think, 'tis a No∣torious Heresy, to maintain that our Saviour's Sufferings were only in Ap∣pearance, since we must then affirm, as the necessary Consequence of the fore-mention'd false, and dangerous Position, that his Resurrection, as glo∣rious as we suppose it to be, was a meer Deceptio Visus. For he that real∣ly dyes, if he rises again, must be really ris'n, and on the contrary, he that dy'd but in Appearance, can only seemingly rise. But because Infidels endeavour, to expose the Doctrine of the Resurre∣ction of our Saviour, to the last De∣gree of Prophane Contempt, I shall take Occasion to mention here, what Plato relates of Er, the Son of Arme∣nius, Plato's Common Wealth l. 10. who at the End of twelve Days rose out of his Tomb, and told seve∣ral remarkable Transactions, that to
his certain Knowledge had pass'd in the World of Spirits. And I might mention the Story, which Heraclitus tells, of a Woman, who continu'd a considerable Time without any Sign of Life, which I think, do's evidently, and not a little, serve my present Purpose, since 'tis with Infidels I'm now engag'd. And many pregnant Instances might easily be produc'd from History, of Per∣sons who have appear'd the Day after their Decease. Is it then any Wonder at all, that one, who in the whole Course of his Life did so many Actions, which no∣thing short of a Divine Power cou'd possibly enable him to perform, who wrought Miracles, to attest the Truth of his Doctrine, which were so sur∣prizing, and so open to the View of his most implacable Adversaries, that Celsus himself has not the Face to deny, that they were true in Fact, tho' indeed he ascribes 'em to the Power of Infernal Daemons, I say, is it any Wonder at all, that so Divine a Person as our Saviour was, shou'd have something that was remarkable in his Death, and that his Holy Soul, having freely, and ev'n chearfully left his Body for a Time, shou'd re∣turn to it, as soon as ever it had
perform'd the entire Duty of a Dis∣united Spirit? Our Saviour has the following Words, No Man takes it from me, speak∣ing of his Life, but I lay it down of John 10. V. 18. my self, I have Power to lay it down, and I have Power to take it up again. And perhaps the Reason why his Holy Soul made Haste, to leave his Body, might be this, that his Legs might not be broken, as those of the Thieves were, who were crucify'd by his Sides. Then came the Soldiers, and brake John 19. V. 32. the Legs of the first, and of the other, which was crucify'd with him. But when they came to Jesus, and saw that he was dead already, they broke not his Legs. So that I have answer'd that Ob∣jection of Celsus, how will you per∣swade us, that he cou'd foretell these Things? As for that other, How will you ever make us believe, that a Dead Person is immortal? We say 'twou'd seem no Wonder at all, if People wou'd but take us right, that he that dy'd was not strictly immortal, but he that rose from the Dead. Nay, we say, that our Saviour was not immortal, with respect to his Humane Nature, before his Body was separated from his Soul. For no Per∣son
who is to dye, can properly be said to be immortal, but then he's truly immortal, when he's for ever loos'd from the Bands of Death. Christ being rais'd from the dead, dies Rom. 6. V. 9. no more; Death has no more Dominion over him; whatever some Persons may affirm, who don't understand the Meaning of these mysterious Words. CHAP. XV. WHAT Celsus adds, is no less ill-grounded, than what goes before; What God, says he, or Daemon, nay, what Man of Common Sence, will not take the most proper Methods that he can, to avoid the Evils he foresees will befall him, and especially, when he knows he can easily prevent 'em, if he will? But Socrates was well-acquainted with the Nature of the Poyson, that was giv'n him, and if he had but follow'd the Advice of Crito, he had escap'd out of Prison, and secur'd his Person, from the great Inconvenien∣cies, to which he was expos'd, and
yet he chose rather to dye, than to act in the least unbecoming the Cha∣racter of so Celebrated a Philosopher. So Leonidas, the Lacaedemonian Ge∣neral knew very well, that he, and his Company shou'd dve at Thermo∣pylae, yet preferring his Honour to his frail, and mortal Life, he said, Come, let us dine like those, who are to eat their Supper with the Dead. They who will take the Pains, to consult Historians, may find abundance of such Instances as these. What Wonder is it then, that our Blessed Saviour didn't use all possible Endea∣vours, to avoid those Evils, which he knew wou'd befall him, when a far inferiour Person, I mean the Apostle Paul, foreseeing what Things he shou'd suffer at Jerusalem, encounter'd the greatest Dangers, and sharply reprov'd the Cruel Kindness of those, who with Tears in their Eyes, endeavour'd to prevent him, from the happy Execu∣tion of his great Designs. Nay, many at this very Day, who are not ignorant, to what dreadful Ca∣lamities the Profession of Christianity will expose 'em, and that if they wou'd openly renounce it, they shou'd be immediately discharg'd, and have their Goods restor'd; I say, many at this very Day, despise Life with all
its native, and gawdy Charms, and embrace Death it self, ev'n approach∣ing to 'em, in the most frightful Shapes. What Celsus adds, is as ridiculous as what went before, If, says he, Judas's Treason, and Peter's Denial of his Ma∣ster were foretold by Christ, one wou'd think, they shou'd for that Reason, have had an Aweful Sense of His Divinity, and thereby have been effectually secur'd from offering such base Affronts, to their suppos'd Rightful Sovereign, and most Liberal Benefactor. But here Celsus, with all his Wis∣dom, do's unawares most grosly con∣tradict himself, because if our Saviour was GOD as well as Man, then the Events of Things cou'dn't but exactly agree with what his Infinite Mind foresaw concerning 'em, and by con∣sequence, the one must Ʋnavoidably betray, and the other by a sad, but Fatal Necessity deny him. If Matters cou'd have happen'd otherwise, if Judas hadn't betray'd, nor Peter de∣ny'd him, being sufficiently fore∣warn'd of the Folly, and Danger of committing such horrid Crimes, his Veracity might easily have been call'd in Question. For if our Saviour fore∣saw, as we say he did, that Judas
shou'd betray him, he also foresaw that Corruption of his Nature, that that inclin'd him to his Treachery, and if he foresaw, that St Peter wou'd deny him, he also foresaw his Infir∣mity, that was the unhappy Cause of his committing so base a Crime, and this was consistent enough with his permitting him, to be surpriz'd into a gross Act of Sin. And what do's Celsus's Jew propose, I wonder, when he says, They betray'd, and deny'd him, throwing off all manner of Respect to him, whom they own'd to be their Lord, and Master? For I have already shown, that Judas him∣self, as vile a Wretch as he was, re∣tain'd some respect for our Blessed Saviour, ev'n in that horrid Instant, in which he inhumanely betray'd him. And the like may be said of St. Peter, who, after he had shamefully deny'd him, went out, and wept bitterly; as St. Mathew acquaints us. What the Jew adds is very ridicu∣lous, and childish, If a Person, says he, do's once discover the Snares, that are laid for him, and detect his Ad∣versaries, they commonly desist from their malicious Purpose. For the contrary is most evident, from the Experience of
all Ages of the World. Then as if he were drawing to a Conclusion, he says, We mustn't imagine, that these Things came e're the more to pass, be∣cause he foretold 'em, but rather infer from what I have said, that he never did foretell 'em. For 'tis absurd to suppose, that either Judas wou'd ever have be∣tray'd, or Peter have deny'd him, had they been forewarn'd, and appriz'd of his Prediction. But since I have already overthrown the Principles, on which his Discourse is founded, the Conclusion which he draws, viz. We mustn't imagine, that these Things came to pass, because he fore∣told 'em, must fall to the Ground of Course. We say the Events happen'd, as Things in their own Nature possible, and since they came to pass, we see the Predictions verify'd. For the Truth or Falshood of Prophecies is best known by the Event. Therefore what he says, viz. That they didn't come e're the more to pass, because he foretold 'em, but we must rather infer from what I have said, that he did ne∣ver foretell 'em. For 'tis absurd to sup∣pose, that either Judas wou'd ever have betray'd, or Peter have deny'd him, had they been forewarn'd, and appriz'd of his Prediction. This I say, is most ap∣parently
false, and his Inferences are not just. Then he says, that If our Saviour was GOD, and really foretold these Things, as You are apt to imagine, they must ne∣cessarily come to pass, so that a God is suppos'd to force his Disciples to be wicked, with whom he seemingly express'd so endear∣ing a Familiarity, when on the contrary, he of all Persons shou'd have been highly serviceable to all Mankind, and especially to his intimate Acquaintance, and might have had so much Policy, one wou'd think, as to affect those Persons, who es∣pous'd his Cause. Besides is it usual, for Men to betray their Friends, to whose Table they are welcome, and where they are civilly, and perhaps very plentifully en∣tertain'd? Yet here no less a Person than a GOD is suppos'd to be betray'd. Nay, a GOD (which greatly aggravates the Matter) is suppos'd most grosly to intrench on the sacred Laws of Civility, and com∣mon Friendship, and by his Divine Pre∣diction, to make his Disciples themselves turn Traitors, and Cowards. I shall return an Answer to this long Invective, rather in Compliance with the strict Injunctions, that are laid upon me, than for the sake of any Force, that I discern in the Obje∣ction.
Celsus entertains a fond Conceit, that whatever is foretold by a GOD, do's therefore come to pass, because it was foretold by him. But here I must beg Leave to differ from him, and am, I confess, of the Opinion, that he who foretells Future Events, isn't properly the Cause of their Coming to pass, at the predicted Time, but that on the contrary, he foresees, that Things will happen so or so, whether ever they be foretold or not. And I don't think that his Praescience, ev'n upon the Supposition that he's GOD, do's in the least in∣terfere with the Possibility of Future Events to happen, or not to happen, according to the natural, and regular Course of Things, as if barely on that Account, they must infallibly answer his Prediction.
CHAP. XVI. HERE I might produce Abun∣dance of pregnant Instances, from the Sacred Scriptures, and from the Histories of the Greeks themselves, to shew, that Future Events are not owing to Predictions, but fall out al∣ways in such a Way, as perfectly a∣grees with the Liberty of the Humane Will. And either my Notion of this Matter is just, or what the Greeks call , will be no Sophism at all, tho' the contrary be very appa∣rent, to any Learned, and Judicious Person. To render this Matter as intelligi∣ble as may be, I shall instance in the Prophecies concerning Judas, which the Sacred Scriptures do furnish us with, and shall produce one remar∣kable Instance of the Truth of my Assertion, from the History of the Greeks, viz. The Answer of the Hea∣then Oracle to Laius.
By the Way, I shall here take it for granted, that the Oracle was true, since I think, I may make the Sup∣position, without doing the least Pre∣judice to the Subject, which I have now in Hand. The Author of the Hundred and ninth Psalm, speaking in the Person of our Blessed Saviour, has the following Words, concern∣ing that Traitor Judas, Hold not Psal. cix. V. 1. thy Peace, O God of my Praise, for the Mouth of the Wicked, and the Mouth of the Deceitful are open'd against me. And if you take diligent Notice, you'l find, that throughout the Psalm, the Prediction must be understood, in a Sence consistent with the Crime of the Traitor, and his deserving all those heavy Curses, that are there mention'd by the Psalmist. Let 'em fall upon him, says he, by ibid. 16. a Spirit of Prophecy, because he re∣member'd not to shew Mercy, but perse∣cuted the poor and needy Man, that he might ev'n slay the broken in Heart. 'Tis plain, he might, if he wou'd, have remember'd to shew Mercy, and was not forc'd, to persecute the poor, and needy Man, tho' he misemploy'd that Power, which God Originally gave him, and actually betray'd his Master, and so render'd himself most justly obnoxious to those dreadful
Curses, which are mention'd in that famous Prophecy. And as for the Answer, that the Oracle return'd to Laius, which I mention in Favour of the Greeks, 'tis related by one of their Ancient Tra∣goedians to this Effect. Seek not vain Man in Spite of Destiny, Eurip. Phoenis. The blessed Fruit of Marriage to enjoy, Too soon alas! thou'lt find it prove thy Bane, For he who to thy native Heat his Life will owe, With Death it self shall ill-requite thy Pains, And dreadful Mischiefs on thy Houshould bring. Here 'tis plain, that Laius was un∣der no Necessity of begetting an un∣happy Son, but if due Care were wanting, a Tragical Scene wou'd present it self, and Oedipus, and Jocasta, and their two Sons, wou'd suffer all those grievous Calamities, which as the History acquaints us, did after∣wards befall 'em. The same Sophism is frequently made Use of as an Argument against taking Physick, for the Recovery of our Bodily Health, and Strength; If God has decreed, says one, that I shall be effectually cur'd of my Distemper, I shall certainly recover my former
State of Health, whether I use any Remedies or no; and if he has de∣creed, that I shall not be recover'd from it, whatever Medicines I may take, 'twill infallibly remain upon me, therefore whether he has decreed my Recovery or not, the Endeavours of the Physician are equally, that is to say, entirely useless. And the Sophism in the Case of Laius, is very Comical, and runs af∣ter the following Manner, If the Fates have decreed, that I shall have a Son, I shall certainly have him, whether I am ever concern'd with any Woman or no; and if they have decreed, that I shall never have a Son, I shall never have one, whe∣ther I live in the Use of Means or no; and therefore whether they have decreed, that I shall have a Son, or have determin'd the contrary, no car∣nal Copulation will ever have the desired Effect. But as 'tis highly absurd to refuse Physick, which is the usual, and pro∣per Method, for the Recovery of our Bodily Health: So 'tis no less ab∣surd, to abstain from Carnal Copu∣lation, if a Person be desirous of a Child, since 'tis the ordinary, and pro∣per Method of Humane Generation.
These Things I mention, because the profound Celsus has the following Words, If Christ was God, and did really foretell these Things you talk of, they must infallibly come to pass, at the predict∣ed Time. For I deny, that they must Necessarily come to pass, since 'twas possible for 'em to have had a quite contrary Event. But if he only means, that Divine Praescience do's, in some sence, necessitate the Event, I readily grant it, and this I think, I may vigo∣rously maintain, and at the same Time assert, that 'twas very possible, that Matters might have happen'd otherwise. But I think, he's far from proving what he boldly asserted, viz. That on the Sup∣position of the Divine Praescience of our Saviour, 'twill Naturally follow, that he made his Disciples turn Traitors, and Cowards, and so was justly chargeable with their aggravated Guilt. 'Tis true, that since the Heart of Judas was, as it were, Open, and Trans∣parent to his All-piercing Eyes, our Blessed Lord was fully appriz'd of the Hellish Design, which he had form'd, and plainly perceiv'd, that the Respect which he had for his Master, was not sufficient, to secure him, from the Fa∣tal impression of a covetous Disposi∣tion. This made him say those Words, with an Eye to Judas, he that dippeth
his Hands with me in the Dish, the same shall betray me. Take Notice farther of the Absur∣dity, and Falshood, of what Celsus says, 'Tis unusual, says he, for Per∣sons to betray their Friends, to whose Table they are welcome, yet here even a God is suppos'd to be betray'd. On the contrary, 'tis too well known, that Persons, who have been engag'd, by the most Sacred, and endearing Tyes, have often and most shamefully betray'd their intimate Friends, and liberal Benefactors. The Histories both of the Greeks, and Barbarians do furnish us with a∣bundant Instances of the fore-men∣tion'd Practice. This is what the famous Poet, who dwelt at Paros, and is so much ad∣mir'd for his Iambick verses, reproaches Lycambe with. For speaking of his in∣trenching on the Laws of civil con∣versation, he says, Thou hast dissolv'd the Sacred Band of Archi∣lochus. Friendship, and art Notoriously guilty of the basest Treachery. But for the fuller Confirmation of my Argument, I shall refer the Reader to them, who have apply'd their Minds, to the Study of History, both Sacred, and Prophane.
Then Celsus, as if he had undeni∣able Arguments, for what he offers, has the following Words, Nay a GOD (which highly aggravates the Matter) is suppos'd, to intrench upon the Rules of Civility, and common Friendship, and to make his Disciples turn Traitours, and Cowards. But this is more than he can ever prove, unless we must allow the Con∣sequence, which he draws, to be Na∣tural, and just, which I am sure is so very weak, that any Child almost wou'd see thro' it, and be ready to expose it. CHAP. XVII. THEN says Celsus, If your Savi∣our suffer'd freely, in Obedience to his Heavenly Father, 'tis plain, that since you say that he was GOD, and that his Sufferings were entirely voluntary, you must acknowledge, 'twas impossible, that in the midst of his suppos'd Agonies, he shou'd have had so quick a Sense of Pain.
But here, tho' he don't perceive it, his Words imply a plain, and very gross Contradiction. For he will not deny, that our Saviour suffer'd freely, in Obedience to his Father, and then certainly he must feel some Pain, which is inseparable from the Notion that we have of Suffering; since 'tis very ungrateful to Flesh and Blood, as he can't but know, and is not easily reconcil'd, ev'n to the calm Dictates of impartial Reason. And if he thinks that all Sence of Pain is immediately excluded, where there is a partial, or ev'n an entire Con∣sent of the Humane Will, why do's he acknowledge that our Saviour e∣ver suffer'd? In Truth he hadn't re∣sembl'd us in all Things, Sin only excepted, had he assum'd the Hu∣mane Nature, without those many Infirmities, and Miseries, which are its common, and almost inseparable Attendants. So that after his Voluntary Incar∣nation, he was under some Sort of Necessity to suffer, and in some Re∣spects, the Calamities to which he was expos'd, were occasion'd by the Malice, and unwearied Endeavours of his cruel Enemies.
And indeed, as I have already shown, if he hadn't giv'n his Con∣sent, it had been impossible, that One who was GOD as well as Man shou'd suffer, but he willingly, and ev'n chearfully embrac'd the most painful, and shameful Death, from a deep, and most affecting Sense of the vast Advantage, that wou'd redound from it, to a degenerate World. Then Celsus granting what he wou'd seem to deny, has the follow∣ing Words, Pray why do's he make such horrid Complaints, and so earnestly desire, that his Sufferings may be pre∣vented? For he says, Father, if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me. But here Celsus do's plainly, and not a little discover his impotent Malice, against the Blessed Founder of our most Holy Religion. For instead of admiring the remarkable Integrity, which appears in the Writings of the Evangelists, (who might, if they had pleas'd, have o∣mitted this Passage, which he thinks do's make so much for the Interest he espouses, but were induc'd by several very urgent Motives, to relate it) I say instead of admiring the Sence
the remarkable Integrity, which ap∣pears in the Writings of the Evan∣gelists, he takes their Words in a Sence, in which they never under∣stood 'em, and adds some Things, that are owing to his own Invention, and takes no Notice of what im∣mediately follows, from whence he might have learn'd, how submissive our Saviour was, to the All-dispo∣sing Will of his ETERNAL FA∣THER. Nevertheless, says he, not as I will, but as thou wilt. And Celsus seems to have never read those o∣ther Words, (which plainly shew, how submissive a Temper our Blessed Lord discover'd, under all the grie∣vous Calamities, which his Father was pleas'd to bring upon him,) I mean those Words of St. Mathew, Nevertheless if this Cup cannot pass Mat. 26, V. 42. from me, not my Will, but thine be done. Here Celsus acts the Part of those, who horribly pervert the Scriptures, and are not asham'd, to do it in the most open Manner. Our Adversaries frequently take Notice of those Words, I kill, and reproach us with 'em, but they will∣fully Deut. 32, V. 29. overlook the following Words, I make alive, which Passage of Scrip∣ture
plainly intimates to us, that tho' God do's destroy all them, who live in a Course of Rebellion against him, and are horrid Plagues to their Native Country; yet at length he will make 'em Partakers of a Spiritu∣al, and Glorious Life, such a one as will make 'em trample upon this lower, and perishing World, with the greatest Disdain imaginable. They take Notice of those Words, I will smite him, but the following Isa. 57, V. 17. Words, I will heal him, are wholly disregarded. Here God is represented to us, as acting the Part of a most Skilful Physician, who makes grievous, and often deep Incisions, into the Flesh of his Patients, not with a Design to do it any Prejudice, or put 'em to any needless Pain, but to remove the Cause of their Bodily Indispositi∣on, and that which keeps them in a low, and langushiing Condition. They take Notice of those Words, He makes sore, but those Words, and binds up, are not mention'd by 'em. So Celsus dwells on those Words of our Saviour, Father, If it be possible, let this Cup pass from me; But don't mention the least Syllable of the following Words, which plainly dis∣cover the entire Resignation of our
Blessed Lord to his Father's. Com∣manding, and all-disposing Will. Here a large Field of Discourse presents it self, which wou'd be of considerable Service, to those, whom St. Paul calls perfect, We preach Wis∣dom, says he, to them that are per∣fect. But this I shall reserve to a more convenient Season, and a more pro∣per Place, and only perhaps just touch upon it, as I pass along. I have already, and I think more than once observ'd, that sometimes our Saviour's Expressions must be understood of the Person of the , the first born of the Creati∣on, as for Instance, when he says, I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life, and sometimes must be re∣strain'd to his Humane Nature, as when he says, Ye seek to kill me, a Man that has told you the Truth, which I have heard of God. So in the Case which is now be∣fore us, we must understand him speaking as a Man, discovering at once the Weakness of the Flesh, and the Willingness of the Spirit, the former in those Words, Father if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me, and the latter in those Words, Ne∣vertheless
not my Will but thine be done. And 'tis observable, that he begins with those Words, which are a plain Indication of the Weakness of the Flesh, and concludes with those, which discover the Willingness of the Spirit, and the latter are oftnest repeated by him. Besides, 'tis worthy of our Notice, that he don't absolutely pray, Let this Cup pass from me, but expresses a most profound Submission to his Father's Will, in the following Words, If it be possible. I am not insensible, I confess, that some Interpret those Words after the following Manner, that our Sa∣viour foreseeing what Calamities wou'd befal the City of Jerusalem, and not only so but the whole Na∣tion of the Jews, on the Account of that unjust and barbarous Treatment he shou'd meet with at their Hands, had such a tender Compassion, for this sinful, and miserable People, that he desir'd to be excus'd from Suffer∣ing, that he might prevent 'em, from being forsak'n of God, and expos'd to those threatning Calamities, which he had in View. And then 'tis as if he had said, since the Jews, upon my Suffering, will be sadly left by that God, who
once took 'em into his special Pro∣tection, and put 'em under so happy a Government, as that of a Theocracy, I desire, if it be possible, that this Cup may escape me. Besides if our Saviour's Sufferings put him to no Pain at all, as Celsus wou'd fain have us to believe, it was impossible they shou'd, upon our own Hypothesis; I shou'd be glad to know, how he cou'd set his Followers a bright Ex∣ample, of Patience under the most grievous Sufferings, for the Sake of their most Holy Religion. CHAP. XVIII. THEN Celsus's Jew accuses our Saviour's Disciples of Imposture, You impose on us, says he, with a Company of Old Wives Fables, and han't the Sence, to give 'em the least Colour of Reason, to recommend 'em to the World. To this I answer, the Evangelists cou'd easily have omitted these Things, if they had pleas'd, and then there had
been no Room for this horrid Slander. For how cou'd our Enemies, unless they wou'd invent Fictions, out of their own fruitful Brain, reproach us, with such, and such Expressions of our Saviour, during his most bitter Passion, if the Evangelists had suffer'd 'em, as it were, to sleep in an eter∣nal Silence? And Celsus wasn't sensible, that 'twas morally impossible for 'em, to allow 'emselves to be tamely deluded, in the Affair of the History of our Blessed Saviour, so as to be prevail'd with, to look upon him to be no less than a God, and the very Per∣son that was so frequently, and so expresly Foretold by the Jewish Prophets, and at the same Time be convinc'd in their Consciences, that all that they writ concerning him (at least what seem'd to favour him) was made up of Fictions, that were entirely owing to their fruit∣ful, but unhappy Invention. But 'tis plain, that either they were Men of Integrity, and publish'd no∣thing, but what they firmly believ'd was true, or else their Gospels are fill'd with trifling Fictions of their own, and by Consequence, they cou'dn't possi∣bly be perswaded in their Minds, that our Saviour was a GOD.
Then Celsus's Jew asserts, That ev'n some of the Christians, (like Men that are intoxicated by the Fumes of Wine, and don't mind at all what they say, or do) have alter'd the Original Text of the Gospels, so that they may ad∣mit of various, and almost infinite Readings. And this, I suppose, they did out of Humane Policy, that when we press 'em home with an Argument, they might have the larger Scope, for their Pitiful Evasions. But for my Part, I confess, I know no Changes, that the Original Text of the Gospels has ever undergone, unless by Means of the Followers of Marcion, Valentinus and Lucian. Be∣sides 'tisn't fair at all, to charge such a Thing as this upon the Christian Religion, as a Crime, and unworthy of its pretended Purity, but those Persons who were concern'd in the Fact, ought by all the Laws of Ju∣stice to answer for it. And as 'tis no solid, tho' a plau∣sible, and popular Argument, against the Heathen Philosophy, that Sophists, Epicureans, and Peripateticks have us'd their utmost Endeavours, to delude the World, with their false, and dan∣gerous Opinions: So 'tis no convin∣cing
Argument against the Truth of the Christian Religion, that some Per∣sons have had the horrid Impudence to corrupt the Gospels themselves, and so have giv'n an unhappy Rise to numerous▪ and most impious He∣resies. CHAP. XIX. THEN Celsus's Jew finds Fault with the Christians again, for misapplying, as he fondly imagines, the Scripture-Prophecies to our Bles∣sed Saviour. But I think, I have spoke sufficiently to this Point already. Besides, if the Conviction of his Reader was the End which he pro∣pos'd to himself, he ought to have giv'n us a Key, for the right under∣standing of the Jewish Prophecies, and might have offer'd, one wou'd think, some solid Reasons, why they can by no Means be fairly accommodated to our Saviour, and really he needn't have been so sparing of his Time, and Strength, in examining a Matter of such vast Importance, and especially,
since he confidently affirms, that there are Abundance of Persons, to whom the Prophecies might more fitly be apply'd. But Celsus, it seems, isn't sensible at all, that tho' such extravagant Dis∣course as this might become one, who is an utter Stranger to the Prophetick Oracles; yet 'tis very improper, to come from the Mouth of any rational, and sober Jew. Indeed, a Person of the fore-men∣tion'd Character, will do what lyes in his Power, to evade the Interpre∣tations of Scripture, which we Chri∣stians give, but he'll never grant what Celsus says, viz. That there are Abundance of Persons, to whom the Pro∣phecies may more fitly be apply'd, than to our Blessed Saviour. I have already observ'd, that the Prophets speak of a twofold Coming of the Messiah, so that 'tis needless for me, to answer the pretended Jew, when he says, The Prophets represent the Messiah, as a mighty Prince, and Soveraign of the Ʋniverse.
CHAP. XX. WHAT he adds, that God never destgn'd to bring so great a Plague upon the World, as the Christian Reli∣gion, do's strongly savour of the Ma∣lice of an inveterate Jew, who supplies his Want of Reason, by a vast Stock of Impudence, that he has always by him. But I defy Celsus, and all the Men in the World, to prove, that a Doctrine, introduc'd by one, who re∣claim'd so many Persons, from the most scandalous Vices, and effectually engag'd 'em, to enter upon a virtuous Course of Life, did deserve so scorn∣ful a Title, as that which the Jew bestows upon our Holy Religion. Celsus adds with equal Inadverten∣cy, No one, says he, but a Mad Man, wou'd take your Saviour to be God, or the Son of God, who instead of carry∣ing the aweful Stamp of Divinity, bore all the Marks of Infamy and Disgrace, and especially since this Doctrine is en∣tirely
built on some forc'd, and ev'n ridi∣culous Interpretations of Scripture. But he ought to produce some In∣stances of these forc'd Interpretations, which he talks of, and these Marks of Infamy (as he thinks) which do so much disgust him, and let us see, what it is, that he has to offer against us, that so the Christians might return him a satisfactory, or at least a suf∣ficient Answer, if they thought the Matter did require it. He says, That as the Sun, enlight∣ning every Thing by its piercing Rays, do's immediately discover it self to us, by the glorious Light, which it transmits, over the whole Sphere by turns: So your pretended Saviour, had he been God, or the Son of God, wou'd have resembl'd that glorious Luminary. This we say, believe, know, and can prove, he did. For when he came into the World, or which is the same Thing, when the Sun of Righteous∣ness did but begin to shine, and its dazling Rays were intercepted, by a dark, and sullen Cloud, Justice seem'd to regain its native Seat, the Neigh∣ing of Horses, the Clangor of Trum∣pets, the Clashing of Arms, and the piercing
Groans of Sick, and Wounded Persons were heard no more; but a wonderful, and happy Calm succeeded the late dismal Con∣fusions. The All-wise GOD so or∣der'd Matters, that he prepar'd the Way, for the Success of the Gospel, by subjecting entire Nations to the Roman Empire, that so our Saviour's Apostles might not be hinder'd, as otherwise they might have been, in observing the Orders, which their Blessed Lord had giv'n 'em, to teach all Nations. For how wou'd this have been practicable, (I wo'n't say easy to be done) if People of diffe∣rent Countries had liv'd under Princes of their own, had wanted a mutual, and fair Correspondence, and had not liv'd under the Jurisdiction of the Roman Emperors. 'Tis very well known, that our Saviour was born, in the Reign of the Emperor Augustus, who brought the greatest Part of the World under the Roman Yoak, and made Man∣kind, almost, as it were, one Body Politick. This manifestly, and greatly con∣duc'd to the Spreading of the Gospel, not only, as it laid a Foundation for a Freedom of Commerce, but also as it happily prevented those dread∣ful
Wars, which, we have Reason to believe, wou'd unavoidably have hap∣pen'd, if all the Nations of the Earth hadn't been united, under one com∣mon Empire. For before the Reign of Augustus, the Athenians wag'd War with the Peloponnesians, and many Pa∣rallel Instances, if it were needful, might easily be produc'd from Histo∣ry. And the strict, and most peace∣ful Religion, which the Christians embrace, wou'd never; in all Proba∣bility, have been establish'd in the World, as, Blessed be God, it is, if our Saviour hadn't been seasonably born, in a Time of profound, and universal Tranquility. Then Celsus says, That the Christians are guilty of wretched Sophistry, when they have the Confidence to say, that he, whom they affirm, to be the Son of God, was the VERY ETERNAL WORD. And he thinks this is un∣answerable. Because (says he) instead of that Pure, and Holy Word, which we ex∣spected they wou'd give us an Account of, they only tell us of a miserable Man; and scandalous, Wretch, that ended his Days upon a Cross, which was certainly the most shameful, as well as painful
Death, that he cou'd possibly have suf∣r'd. But this Objection has been already answer'd, and I have plainly shew'd, that The First-born of every Creature was pleas'd to assume a Human Body, and Soul, that at the Creation of the World, God gave a positive, and strict Command, and the Person, who was concern'd in its honourable, and speedy Execution, was no other than the LIVING, and CO-ETERNAL WORD. And since my Business at present is to talk to a pretended Jew, I shall quote a Passage out of the Old Testa∣ment, viz. He sent HIS WORD, Psal. 107, V. 20. and heal'd 'em, and deliver'd 'em from their Destructions. What Celsus adds, in the Person of a Jew, That if this was the Word, that was the Son of God, we heartily agree with you, is more than I ever heard any Jew acknowledge▪ tho' I have fre∣quently convers'd, and disputed, with their most Celebrated Doctors. I have already prov'd, that our Blessed Saviour was no Magician, nor Vile Impostor, and I don't think fit, to imitate Celsus, in his frequent, and ridiculous Tautologies.
CHAP. XXI. LET us see now, what he has to say, against the Account we have, of the GENEALOGY of our SAVIOƲR. Here one wou'd think, he might seasonably have mention'd the Dis∣putes, that the Christians themselves have often had, by reason of the seeming Disagreement, that there is between the several Evangelists, in this important Affair. But with all his profound Knowledge of the My∣steries of our Holy Religion, he hadn'd so much Policy, it seems, as that wou'd amount to. He says, This Genealogy, which, it seems, is orderly trac'd up, to the re∣puted Parent of Mankind, and according to which your pretended Saviour was of the Honourable Line of the Jewish Kings, was a fine Invention, to procure him greater Kindness, and Respect, from those weak Persons, who wou'd be so credulous, as to take any Notice of him.
And (says he) 'tis a little odd in∣deed (but the Christians can swallow any Thing) that the Carpenter's Wife was descended, from so Noble a Race, and, which is more unaccountable, that she her self shou'd know nothing of the Matter. But pray what's this to the Affair in Hand? Suppose she was igno∣rant, that she came from a Noble Family, what I beseech you, can you infer from thence, to the Prejudice of Christianity? Might it not be true, that she was remotely descended, from the common Parents of Mankind, and more immediately from the Kings of Judah, whether she knew it, or no? And perhaps Celsus thinks, that all the Ancestors of a Person, who is oppress'd with Poverty, must of Course resemble him in Condition, and that all the Ancestors of a King did infallibly attain to Royal Dignity. But 'twou'd be Loss of Time, to re∣turn an Answer, to such ridiculous Discourse as this. For the Age in which our Lot is cast, will furnish us, with innumerable Instances of Persons, who came of a Rich, and Noble Family, and yet by some un∣happy Accident, or other, were soon
reduc'd to a much meaner Condition, than that of the Virgin Mary, the Mother of our BLESSED LORD, and on the contrary, they whose Outward Circumstances were former∣ly very inconsiderable, have been ad∣vanc'd, by some Sudden, and Re∣markable Turn of Providence, to the Highest Pitch of External Grandeur. CHAP. XXII. THEN he asks, in his Cavilling Way, Pray what did your Jesus ever do, that was truly Great, and any Way Worthy of a God? Did he baffle his Enemies, and disconcert their most Politick Measures? To this I answer, that we are told in the Gospels, that the Earth shook, the Rocks were rent, the Graves were open'd, the Vail of the Temple was rent in two, the Sun suffer'd an Eclipse, and the Earth was cover'd with thick Darkness, ev'n such as might be felt. These were some of
the Aweful Circumstances, that at∣tended the most bitter Passion of our Blessed Lord. And I think, Celsus wou'd have discover'd much more of an ingenuous Temper, if instead of relying on the Authority of the Evangelists, only when they offer any Thing, that makes, as he thinks, for the Cause, which he espouses, he had either wholly rejected the Gospels, or else wholly admitted 'em, and had but thankfully admit'd the Amazing Condescension of the ETERNAL WORD, who willingly became In∣carnate, with this great Design, to recover a Degenerate World, from the sad Ruines of their First Apo∣stacy. Another very considerable Circum∣stance, that makes for the Honour of our Blessed Saviour is this, viz. That ev'n at this Distance of Time, His NAME has such an Admirable Vir∣tue, that it infallibly, and easily cures the most dangerous Distempers, both of Body, and Mind. And as for the Sympathy, which the Sun, if I may so say, discover'd, when the Sun of Righteousness it self was suffering a more dreadful Eclipse, which hap∣pen'd in the Reign of the Emperor Tiberius; and as for the stupid Earth, which trembl'd, when the God of
Nature groan'd, and was ready to expire; We have the concurring Te∣stimony of Phlegon, if I mistake not, in the Thirteenth Book of his Chro∣nicon. Then the Jew, thinking to ridicule our Saviour, quotes those Words of Bacchus in Euripides. —when e'er I please Euripid. Bacc. Heaven for my Rescue daigns to interpose. But here in the first Place, I can't but make this obvious Remark, that the Jews, of all People in the World, are least fond of the Heathen Poets. However for once, we'll sup∣pose our Jew, to differ from all his Country-men, and to express a sin∣gular Affection, for the Learning of the Greeks. And I ask him, whe∣ther, according to the Rules of any Logick, that he ever read, it ev'n seems to follow, that, because our Saviour didn't avoid his Sufferings, he cou'dn't have freed himself from 'em, if he pleas'd. I think, he ought much rather to believe, what is related to us in the Acts of the Apostles, that an Angel shook off St. Peter's Chains, and deliver'd him from Prison, and that Paul and
Silas, who were put into the Stocks, at Philippi, a City of Macedonia, es∣cap'd out of Prison by a Miracle, and much more wou'd the Power of God have been engag'd, to preserve our Saviour, from the grievous Suf∣ferings, which he underwent, if the Decrees of Heav'n, and the Reason of Things hadn't conspir'd, if I may so say, to render 'em most highly ne∣cessary. For ought I know, Celsus wou'd be ready to ridicule those Stories, or perhaps might never take the Pains to read 'em, since in all Probability if he had ever minded 'em at all, he wou'd presently have resolv'd 'em, as he do's our Saviour's Miracles, in∣to the Power of Magick. Then Celsus has the following Words, The Person that condemn'd your Pretended Saviour, didn't en∣dure a Punishment, comparable to that of Pentheus, who was depriv'd of his Senses, and torn to Pieces. But he's so horribly ignorant, as not to know, that Pilate, consider'd in his Publick Capacity, was not so properly concern'd, in Condemning our Blessed Saviour, as the whole Body of the Jewish Nation, which,
we see, is for that Reason dispers'd, over the whole habitable World, and suffers a far worse Distraction, than ever Pentheus did. But why do's he make no Mention at all of the troublesome Dream, that the Wife of the Roman Governor had, insomuch that she said to her Hus∣band, Have thou nothing to do with Matxxvii V. 19. that just Man; for I have suffer'd many Things this Day in a Dream, because of him. Then he leaves out those Things, that are evident, and remarkable Proofs of the Divinity of our Savi∣our's Person, and Commission, and takes Abundance of Pains, to dress up the LORD of GLORY in a Fool's Goat, by the disadvantageous, and ludicrous Relation, which he gives, of the horrid Affronts, that were offer'd him, viz. The Scarlet Robe, that they put upon him, in a Way of Mockery; the Crown of Thorns, that they put upon his Head, and the Reed, that they put into his Hand. But it may not be amiss, to ask you the following Question, From whence cou'd you learn these Things, but from those very Gospels, which you take the Liberty to reject at Plea∣sure? And if this be the true State
of the Case, how comes it to pass, I be¦seech you, that such Persons as you are can take Occasion, to reflect upon our Saviour, from those very Passages of Scripture, which, as many others, with great Reason, judge, do leave an Eter∣nal Brand of Infamy on those, who had the horrid Impudence to insult him? I think, you shou'd rather admire the Remarkable Integrity, which appears, in the Writings of the Evangelists, and be fill'd with a Holy Awe, when you consider the Amazing Condescention of the Blessed Jesus, who seal'd his Doctrine, with his most precious Blood. For we have no Account, that, after the Sentence of Condemnation was pass'd upon him, he made the least Complaint, or ever utter'd a Word, that ev'n seem'd to be unworthy of the Greatest Hero, that the World cou'd ever boast of. Then Celsus says, One wou'd think, that now, if ever, he had a fair Oppor∣tunity, to give full Proof of his pretended Deity, and in the Face, if I may so say, of the whole habitable World, to be reveng'd of the Jews for the base Affronts, which you see were offer'd, both to him, and to his Dearly-belov'd, and Highly-honour'd Father.
But here I ask those of the Greeks, who believe an Over-ruling Provi∣dence, and grant that Miracles have been wrought, Pray, why don't the injur'd Deity take that Advantage (as on your Hypothesis he might easi∣ly do) which is plainly giv'n him, by those innumerable, and great Af∣fronts, which are daily offer'd him, by the bold Assertors of a Blind Fa∣tality. And when they return an Answer to this single Question, all the Argu∣ments, which they bring, may easily be retorted on themselves. CHAP. XXIII. THEN says the pretended Jew, What! Shall we say, that this vile Fellow that was crucify'd t'other Day had Such Blood, as from th' immortal God do's flow? Hom. Il. l. 5, v. 340
This we must suppose to be spoken by him, in his usual Way of Banter, which seems to me to be his peculiar Talent. But I shall show, that the Evange∣lists, who relate these Matters, with a becoming Gravity, and prudent Care, have left behind 'em a true, and sufficient Account, of the most considerable Passages, that occur'd, let Celsus say what he pleases, to the contrary. They acquaint us, that the Blood, which flow'd from our Saviour's Body, was not fabu∣lous, like that, which Homer speaks of, but that soon after he expir'd. One of the Souldiers with a Spear pierc'd his Side, and forthwith there came out John 19, V. 34, 35. Blood, and Water, and he that saw it bare Record, and his Record is true, and he knows that he says true. In Dead Bodies, 'tis common for the Blood to stagnate, and we don't use, to see Water trickle down from the Veins; but when our Sa∣viour was dead, Water, and Blood flow'd from his pierced Side, in a praeter-natural Way. And if instead of putting an improper, and forc'd Sence, upon some Passages in the Gospels, and thereby seeking all possible Oc∣casion, to reproach our Saviour, and his Followers, one wou'd but dili∣gently,
and impartially consider the strange Events, which are there rela∣ted, one might easily perceive, that the Centurion, and they who were set to watch the dead Body of our Saviour, (who had been Eye-Witnesses of the Earth-quake, and many other surprizing Accidents, that happen'd at that Time) were struck with an unusual Terror, and said, Truly this Mat. 27, V. 54. was the SON of GOD. Then our Bigotted Adversary, who only reads the Gospels, with a De∣sign to pick up some Scraps of 'em here and there, which, as he fondly imagines, do make for the Interest, which he espouses, ridicules our Savi∣our, on the Account of the Gall, and Vinegar, that was giv'n him to drink. He was so very thirsty, says he, that he greedily drank off the bitter Draught. In answer to this, I might easily show, that that Action of our Savi∣our will admit of an Allegorical Sence, and must by no Means be consin'd to the bare literal Interpretation of the Words. But I choose at present to return a more general Answer, to this vile, and notorious Calumny, viz. That this Relation of the Evangelists exactly agrees, with what was fore∣told,
under the Old-Testament-Dis∣pensation. For in the 69th Psalm, The Messiah is brought in speaking the following Words, They gave me also Gall for my Meat, and in my Thirst they gave me Vinegar to drink. Now let the Jews acquaint us, who it is that the Prophetical Psalmist speaks of, and name any other Per∣son, recorded in any History, whe∣ther Sacred, or Prophane, who had Gall, and Vinegar, giv'n him to drink; or, let 'em freely acknowledge, that what is here related was predicted, as what wou'd certainly befall that Person, whom we believe to be the TRƲE MESSIAH, and then we come upon 'em, and ask 'em this natural Question, how comes it to pass, Gentlemen, that you shou'd be so loth, to see YOƲR OWN PROPHECIES accomplish'd, for which you have deservedly so pro∣found a Veneration? And methinks, an impartial En∣quirer into Truth shou'd scarce need any other Argument, to convince him, that our Blessed Saviour was the Person, who was all along fore∣told, than this, that in him all the Jewish Prophecies concerning the Mes∣siah were so exactly fulfill'd.
CHAP. XXIV. THEN Celsus's Jew addresses himself to us, in the following Words, Do you really believe (ev'n you who are so apt to swallow any Thing, that is propos'd to you, by some People, how ridiculous soever it may be) I say, do you really believe, that we do ill, in not acknowledging your pretended SA∣VIOUR to be GOD, and not looking upon him, as one who sacrific'd his Life, for the General Advantage of the Humane Race, with this great De∣sign, among others, to set us a Bright Example of Patience, under the afflicting Hand of Almighty God. To this I answer, that we justly blame 'em, because tho' they were born, in a Land of Light, and edu∣cated in the Knowledge of the Law, and the Prophets, which shou'd have been School-Masters, to have brought 'em unto Christ, they can't answer
the solid Arguments, which we bring against 'em, and yet will obstinately persist in their wretched Ʋnbelief, if the Grace of God don't seasonably, and remarkably interpose in their Be∣half. Farther, we have great Cause to blame em', because they will not see that the numerous, and great Advan∣tages, which the Followers of our Bles∣sed Lord did most certainly reap, from the Heavenly Instructions which he gave 'em, were an undeniable Argument, that he assum'd Humane Nature, with a kind, and generous Intention, to pro∣mote our common Interest, and 'twas not his Design at his first Appearance in the World, immediately to distri∣bute compleat Rewards, and inflict the severest Punishments on Men, ac∣cording to their good or bad Beha∣viour, but to have his Doctrine pub∣lish'd to the most distant Parts, as the Prophets had most expresly fore∣told, and to that happy End to ac∣company the Preaching of the Apo∣stles with an irresistible Power. Farther, they justly incur our Cen∣sure, by refusing to believe his Miracles, which so evidently carry'd with 'em the Stamp of a Divine Authority, and saying, That he cast out Devils, by Bel∣zebub, the Prince of Devils.
Lastly, We think they render'd themselves highly obnoxious to the just Vengeance of Almighty God, by treating him as a Slave, and a Vagabond, which was an odd Re∣quital of the Kindness, which he show'd 'em, in causing the Gospel to be preach'd, to every City, and Village, throughout the Land of Ju∣daea. For there was nothing mean, or in any Respects unworthy of his Character, in all the sad Fatigues which he underwent, but on the contrary, 'twas a great, and highly Honourable Action, truly, and every Way worthy of an incarnate God, to give wholesome Precepts, with a li∣beral Hand, to such Persons, as were capable, of receiving Instructi∣on from him. What Celsus's Jew adds, is most notoriously false, Not being able, says he, during the whole Course of his Life, so much as to prevail with his own Disciples, to adhere to him, he was at last very severely punish'd, as I hope all the World is by this Time sufficiently inform'd. But pray what was it, that so greatly excited the Rage, and Envy
of the Chief Priests, Elders, and Scribes among the Jews, but the Consideration of the vast Numbers of People, that follow'd our Blessed Saviour, ev'n into Desarts, some of 'em being strangely charm'd, with the sweet, and Heavenly Expressions, that dropt from his sacred Lips, and others convinc'd by the Miracles, which he had wrought, which fill'd the Minds of his most inveterate Ene∣mies, with equal Malice, and Asto∣nishment? And how apparently false are those Words, which follow, That he cou'dn't prevail with his own Disci∣ples, to adhere to him, but they gave too evident Proofs, of the Frailty of their Nature, by their wretched Cowardize? For what Malignant Influence soever their irregular Fear might have up∣on their Minds, which were not yet duely fortify'd, against the vio∣lent Shocks, of outward, and ap∣proaching Calamities, they were ful∣ly satisfy'd in their own Minds, and were ready, for the most Part, to profess, that our Blessed Saviour was no other, than the TRUE MES∣SIAH. For St. Peter had no sooner deny'd his Lord, but struck with the Hor∣rour of his Crime, He went out, Mat. 26. V. 74. and wept bitterly, as St. Mathew tells
us, and those of his Disciples, that we read of, who retain'd a profound Respect for their Lord, and Master, but were a little amaz'd and for the present, shock'd, by considering the sad Calamities, which befel him, regain'd that Native Courage, when he appear'd to 'em, after his Trium∣phant Resurrection. Nay, they not only believ'd, he was the SON OF GOD, but were confirm'd in the Christian Faith, and became more Couragious, than ever, under the happy Conduct of the great Captain of their Salvation. Celsus thinks, as appears, by the Sequel of his Discourse, there was no real Excellency in our Saviour's Do∣ctrine, nor any Regularity, and Strict∣ness, observable in his Morals, suffi∣cient to advance him above other Men, but that, contrary to the Character, which he bore, he ought not to have dy'd at all, or at least there shou'd have been nothing in his Death, that might justly induce us, to lay down our Lives, when Occasion offers, for the Sake of our most Holy Religion. But to me, I confess, this seems to be a Notion, not a little unworthy of the Learning, and good Sence, ev'n of a Heathen Philosopher.
On the contrary, our Saviour, by dying for Mankind, has set us a Bright Example of Patience, under all the Sufferings, to which the Pro∣vidence of God may call us, for the Sake of the True Religion, in Op∣position to the ungrounded Prejudices, which the Generality of Men are too apt to labour under, who are Natu∣rally ready to pay Divine Adoration, to the most insignificant Trifle, ra∣ther then the Supreme, and Truly-Adorable Majesty, and viewing Per∣sons, and Things, in a false, or very imperfect Light, are wretchedly, and frequently mistaken in the Judgment, which they pass upon 'em. For the greatest Instance of the pretended Piety of these Bigots to Idolatry, is to level all their Wit, and Malice, at those Well-meaning, and Truly-religious Persons, who from a deep Sense of their indispensible Duty, have entirely devoted themselves a Holy, and Living Sacrifice, to the Great Creator, and Supream Gover∣nor of the Universe.
CHAP. XXV. THEN Celsus, in the Person of the pretended Jew, continues his Charge, against our Blessed Saviour, in the following Words, Your Jesus cou'dn't keep himself free from Evil. But I think he wou'd do very well, to instance in any MORAL EVIL, that might justly be charg'd upon him. If he means, that our Saviour was guilty of some Vice, or other, (which must be his Meaning, or else 'tis plain, that he talks very improperly) 'twill lye upon this vile Caviller, to name any one Vice. if he can, that ever stain'd the Life, and obscur'd the Bright Character of the HOLY JESƲS. But if his Meaning be no more than this, that our Blessed Lord him∣self was expos'd to many outward, and grievous CALAMITIES, such as Poverty, Persecution, the
Treachery of wicked Men, and espe∣cially the shameful, and painful Death, which he suffer'd on the Cross, then I think, we may, with equal Justice, bring in a severe Charge, against so great a Man as Socrates, who, with all his Philosophy, and Moral Vir∣tue, cou'dn't avoid falling into innu∣merable external Dangers. And how many of the Greek Philosophers cou'd I easily name, who were not only oppress'd with extream Poverty, but made it the Matter of their de. liberate Choice. For Proof of this, we may have Recourse, to their own Celebrated Authors. They tell us, that Democritus was so tak'n up, with Nobler Thoughts, that he had no Leisure—Hours, to bestow upon his Farms, that Crates gave away the Income of his whole Estate, with the greatest Freedom imaginable, that he might have the better Opportunity, for Philosophical Speculations, and that Diogenes, out of his strange Frugality, was con∣tented, to spend his Life in a Tub; and yet no Man, I think, of com∣mon Sence, will, for that Reason, entertain hard Thoughts, of so ex∣cellent a Person.
Then Celsus adds, That our Sa∣viour was far from being regular, and unblameable. But let him give an Instance, if he can, of any one, among the Numerous Followers of our Saviour, who ever observ'd him, to do an unworthy Action, or if he refuses to rely on their united Testimony, I think, 'tis fit, he shou'd acquaint us, with the Grounds, on which he builds his unjust, and heavy Charge. 'Tis very unlikely, (to say no more,) that our Saviour shou'd be guilty of the least Breach of any Promise, that he ever made, if we consider, how much, and how readily he consulted the true Interest of his Followers, I mean the Welfare of their Precious, and Immortal Souls. And when we see, that the re∣markable, and unlikely Events, which he foretold, at some Distance of Time from their Accomplishment, have exactly answer'd his Prediction, that his Doctrine is publish'd, to all the Nations of the World, and that they, who have embrac'd it, have, meerly on that Account, been brought before Governours, and Kings; we
can't but be fill'd with a Holy Ad∣miration, and encourag'd, to have our firm, and entire Dependance, upon his Infinite Wisdom, Irresi∣stible Power, and Universal Good∣ness. And sure I am; that Celsus him∣self can't reasonably desire, to have greater Evidence, of the Truth of any Doctrine, than that which our Saviour has giv'n us, of the Truth of the Gospel, unless he be so wretchedly ignorant of the Incarna∣tion of the ETERNAL WORD, as to exspect, that the HUMANE NATURE, which was assum'd by him, shou'd not be subject to the common Calamities, which attend Humane Life, and by Consequence, to imagine, that we shou'd want the Brightest Example, of Submission to the Will of God, that any Mor∣tal ever gave. The only Reason, if it may be call'd so, that can possibly be as∣sign'd, for such an extravagant Conceit, is this, that Celsus esteems PAIN the GREATEST E∣VIL, and PLEASURE the HIGHEST GOOD.
And here he goes a Strain, be∣yond most of the Philosophers them∣selves, I mean, of those that believ'd an Over-ruling Providence, and allow Courage, and Constancy, and the like Endowments, a Place among the MORAL VIRTUES, which are at once so Necessary, and so Or∣namental. And our Saviour was so far, from subverting the Foundation of our Faith, by the various, and grievous Calamities, to which he was expos'd, and which in the Event did befall him, that I think, he has tak'n the most effectual Method, to confirm it, if we can but divert our Thoughts, from the shocking Calamities, that at∣tend Humane Life, to the Bright Objects, and Glorious Entertainments of the Future State, in which we shall look, with an Holy Disdain, up∣on Sin, Satan, and this lower World.
CHAP. XXVI. THEN Celsus has the following Words, Surely you will not have the Confidence to say, that your JESUS, being unable to work upon the Minds of Men, in the wretched World, in which we live, went down to Hell it self, to see if he cou'dn't make Converts there. But our Saviour when he was here on Earth, had so many, and such zea∣lous Followers, that, for that Reason, he had abundance of Enemies, and when he was stript, as it were, of his Humane Body, did converse with Naked Spirits, in the Infernal Region, to make Converts of those, that were capable, of being duly wrought on, by his powerful Ministry, and there∣by of answering the DEEP DE∣SIGNS, of his ETERNAL, and ƲNIVERSAL LOVE. What Celsus's Jew adds is, I think, very ridiculous. If (says he) after
you have tamely suffer'd your selves, to be led aside, like a Company of prodi∣gious Fools, you think you need no other Apology, than a few Pityful Arguments, in your own Defence, Pray why mayn't all those Scoundrels, and Villains, (that like your JESUS have been publick∣ly executed, according to the just De∣merit of their Crimes) be accounted Persons, who had the Broad-Seal of Heav'n? But nothing, in my Mind, can be more clear, than the wide Difference, between the Exemplary Sufferings of our Blessed Saviour, and the just Exe∣cution of those, who have been con∣demn'd as Impostors, or punish'd for some scandalous Crime. And sure I am, that no Man can shew, with any Colour of Reason, that a Person can ever be reclaim'd, from the most no∣torious Crimes, or indeed from any Immorality, by the Help of Magick. Then the pretended Jew, compa∣ring our Saviour with a Company of High-way Men, says, That by a Parity of Reason a Person may have the Impudence, to say, that such a High-way Man, instead of being a Person of so infamous a Character, was no less than a GOD, because forsooth he acquainted his cursed Crew before-hand, that he
shou'd shortly suffer all those grievous Calamities, which in the Event did be∣fall him. To this I answer, in the first Place, that our Believing our Blessed Saviour to be the True Messiah is not meerly, or chiefly founded, on his Fore-telling the dreadful Sufferings, to which he was expos'd, and which for our sakes he readily underwent. In the second Place, I acknowledge, that the Holy Scriptures acquaint us, that tho' our Saviour was GOD as well as MAN; yet He was number'd with the Transgressors, that Barabbas, a Robber, was releas'd, and our Saviour crucify'd, and plac'd between two Condemn'd Malefactors. And I grant, that if our Saviour's Disciples bore any Resemblance to Thieves, and if 'twas known in the Memory of Man, that Persons of that infamous Cha∣racter did readily expose themselves to the greatest Contempt, and Scorn, and the worst Treatment, that Hu∣mane Wit, and Malice cou'd invent, and if they can rationally be suppos'd, to do all this, from a just Regard to the Glory of GOD, and the Holy Precepts of our BLESSED RE∣DEEMER; then I confess, Celsus wou'd have had some Ground, for
his bold, and most prophane Com∣parison. But our Saviour, who laid down his precious Life, as a Sacrifice for the Sins of Men, and his sincere Dis∣ciples, (who, by their unparallel'd Sufferings, bore an Honourable Testi∣mony, to the Truth of his most Ex∣cellent Doctrine, and were the only Persons, whose bare Religion ever brought 'em into Trouble) under∣went the most violent Persecutions, from their Enemies, without the least Colour of Reason, and contrary to the Known, and Fundamental Laws of Humanity. CHAP. XXVII. NOW observe, how Celsus renders himself ridiculous, by what he says, of the sincere Followers of our Blessed Lord, During the greatest Part of his Life, Says he, they convers'd with him, in a Femiliar Manner, and seem'd to listen to the Instructions, which he gave 'em, but withal, were so cunning,
that, when they saw he was condemn'd to dye, they wou'd neither dye with him, nor for him, and were so far, it seems, from putting in Practice that wholsom Doctrine, which their Master had taught 'em, viz. Chearfully to encounter the greatest Difficulties, and Dangers, and to be ready ev'n to dye, for the sake of their Religion, that they shamefully deny'd him, and didn't envy any Martyrs, the imaginary Honour of laying down their Lives, for the Cause of Christ. Here Celsus takes the Hint from the Gospels, and aggravates some Faults of the Disciples, with a Design, no doubt, to expose the Christian Religion to Contempt, not considering they were just enter'd, into the School of Christ, nor mentioning one Syllable of their Recovery, from their grievous Falls, which was so remarkable, that they preach'd the Gospel boldly, and suf∣fer'd abundance of Ill-treatment, at the Hands of the Jews, and had the Courage, to welcome, and ev'n defy Death, in its most horrid Shapes. I perceive, he didn't care at all, to take Notice of what our Saviour foretold to St. Peter, When thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy Hands. Nor of those John 21, V. 18 V. 19. Words, This spake he, signifying by what Death he shou'd glorify God.
He says not one Word of St. James, the Brother of St. John, nor of the latter, and seems to be ignorant, that Herod kill'd John the Baptist with the Sword, because he bore Testimony to the Truth of Christ. Nor do's he do St. Peter, and the rest of the Apostles so much Justice, as to mention their flaming Zeal, in spreading the Gospel of our Saviour, and to give us an Account, how They departed from the Acts 15, V. 41. Presence of the Council, rejoicing, that they were counted worthy to suffer Re∣proach for his Name; wherein they vastly exceeded all that is related, in the Histories of the Greeks, concern∣ing the Courage, and Constancy of their justly-admir'd Philosophers. So that we plainly see, that from the very Infancy of Christianity they who embrac'd it, were effectually taught by it, to despise the gaudy Vanities of the present Life, (which the greatest Part of Mankind imagine to be so charming, and agreeable) and to have the sincere Desires of their Souls most vehemently carry'd out, after another Life, which is far more excellent, and in a word, is every way worthy of a GOD.
I can't conceive, how Celsus can be freed from the Charge of willful Imposture, in the following VVords▪ All that your pretended SAVIOƲR cou'd do, says he, was only to get ten wicked Mariners, and Publicans, to publish his Doctrine to the World, and 'Iwas more than he cou'd do, after all his big Pretences, to convince ev'n those cre∣dulous Animals of its Truth. For 'tis plain, ev'n from the open Confession of the Jews, that not only ten Persons were overcome, by the Divine Efficacy of his Doctrine, nor a Hundred, nor a Thousand, but at one Time four Thousand, and at another Time a much greater Num∣ber, and that he wrought upon 'em; to so great a Degree, that they for∣low'd him into Desarts, which alone were capable of containing those vast Numbers of Persons, that thro' him did believe in GOD, and where they reap'd great Benefit, from his Exemplary Life, and Engaging Con∣versation. I confess, the frequent Repetitions, which Celsus makes, do almost force me, to be guilty of wretched Tauto∣logy, and make me as impertinent as himself.
For if I didn't, in some Measure, (tho' sorely against my Will) com∣ply with his way of Writing, per∣haps some weak Persons might suspect, that out of wicked Policy I passed by his Objections, being conscious to my self, that I was utterly incapable, of returning a satisfactory, or ev'n tole∣rable Answer. Then says he, Pray isn't it the most absurd Thing in the World, to suppose, that he, who when he was alive, and us'd all the little Arts he had, cou'd gain no Followers in comparison, or at least none of any Sense, or Rank, shou'd after his Death, by the Ministry of his Apostles, so strangely influence a conside∣rable Part of Mankind, as they are re∣presented by some to do. But according to the Rules of strict Reasoning, which he pretends to be so great a Master of, he shou'd have argu'd thus, if after his Death he furnish'd his Ambassadors, with all necessary Abilities, to work upon the Minds of Men, and did actually, and so wonderfully move all the secret Springs of the Humane Soul; then there's no Question to be made, but that when he was on Earth in Per∣son, he made deep Impressions on
the Minds, ev'n of the greatest Bar∣barians, partly by his powerful Preach∣ing, and partly by his uncontested Miracles. CHAP. XXVIII. BY and By he asks, Pray what Reason have you to believe, he was the Son of God? And persona∣ting one of us, returns this Answer, in his usual way of Banter, Because we know, says he, that he laid down his Life, to destroy the Works of the Devil. But the Faith of Christians, in an Affair of this Nature, and Impor∣tance, is built, I can assure him, on no single Argument, how perswasive soever it may be, but the concurring, and clear Evidence of several Mo∣tives, a few of which I have already mention'd.
And I shall have Occasion perhaps, to make Mention of some other Ar∣guments, on this Head, not only in my Answer to Celsus's Book, entitu∣led A TRUE RELATION, but also in some other Treatises, if GOD shall be pleas'd to afford me that Measure of the Assistance of his Spirit, that will be necessary, to accomplish my Design. Then, as if we were so weak, as to believe, that our Saviour's bare Suffering on the Cross, was suf∣ficient to prove, He was the Son of God, He says, What if he did re∣ally suffer, can't we instance in many others, that suffer'd as well, and as much as he? But Celsus, in this Matter, acts the Part of one of the most unfair Enemies, which the Christian Reli∣gion has, who, when they read the History, of the Crucifixion of our Saviour, immediately imagine, that we FONDLY CANONIZE all Persons, who were ever so un∣fortunate, as to hang upon a Cross. This, any one may see, is the common Practice of the Adversary, I have to do with, who, being ut∣terly unable, to resist the clear Evi∣dence,
which the Miracles of our Blessed Saviour, do carry in 'em, of the Truth of our Holy Religion, has the Face, to misrepresent 'em to the World, as done by meer Le∣gerdemain, or rather by the Assi∣stance of the Devil. But this Pityful, and Vile Cavil has been so frequently answer'd, ac∣cording to my slender Ability, that really it quite tires my Patience, to repeat Things so often, as I see I must. Then Celsus makes us say, That our Saviour was the SON OF GOD, because he cur'd the lame, and blind, and rais'd a few from the dead, as we Poor Creatures that we are! are ready to imagine. But that, in Spite of all that he can say, this Consideration of it self is a solid Argument, to prove, he was the SON OF GOD, is plain, from that Famous Prophecy in Isaiah, Then the Eyes of the Blind shall be open'd, and the Ears of the deaf shall Isa. 35, V. . be unstopp'd, Then shall the lame Man leap as an Hart. And 'tis highly improbable, to say no more, that the Evangelists shou'd forge the Account, they give
us, of some, rais'd from the dead, because had they been giv'n, to in∣venting Fictions, meerly to serve a Turn, they wou'd have giv'n us more frequent Instances of that Na∣ture than we meet with, and of the Resurrection of those, who had been longer dead, than those, of whom we read in the Gospels. But their giving so few Instances of Persons restor'd to Life, seems to me, to be as plain a Proof as can be, that the Evangelists, whatever Celsus may say, were Men of HONEST PRINCIPLES, and the farthest of all Men in the World, except our Blessed Saviour, from being Persons of INTRIEGƲE. They instance only in the Daughter of the Ruler of the Synagogue, (whose Case seems foreign to the Purpose, for our Saviour says of her, She is not dead, but sleeps) in the only Son of a Widow, whom our Saviour reco∣ver'd, out of tender Compassion to his disconsolate Mother, ordering the Coffin to be stop'd. And Lastly in Lazarus, who had continu'd some Days in the Grave, as the Evangelist ac∣quaints us; and I wou'd offer the following Consideration, to the most judicious of our Adversaries, and at this Time more immediately to the
Jew, whom Celsus personates, viz. That as in Elisha's Time, there were many Lepers, but none of 'em were cur'd, that we read of, except Naaman the Syrian; and many Widows in the Days of the Prophet Elijah, but he was only sent to the Widow of Sarepta, in the Country of Sidon, (for she alone was thought worthy of the Miracle he wrought:) so many Per∣sons dy'd, when our Saviour was on Earth, but he only rais'd those from the dead, who, in some Sence, had QƲALIFY'D THEMSELVES for so SPECIAL A FAVOƲR. And this I am apt to think he did, to typifie something future, and give Mankind convincing Proofs, of the Truth and Excellency of that Do∣ctrine, which he introduc'd into the World. And I may safely say, that accord∣ing to the Promise he had made, his Disciples did far stranger Things, than those, which he himself exhibited to the outward Senses of them, who were the happy Spectators of his Miracles. For the Eyes of the spiritually blind were frequently open'd by 'em, the Ears of those, who once were
deaf to all the awakening Precepts of Virtue, and Religion, were unstopp'd, that so they might receive the Word of God, and the Promise of Eternal Life, and many, who were spiritually lame, were cur'd by the Gospel; in∣somuch that they don't only leap, but ev'n leap as a Stag, which Ani∣mal, as Naturalists observe, is an Ene∣my to Serpents, and happily expels their Poison. They deriv'd such a healing Vir∣tue, from their Heav'nly Physician, that they cou'd immediately tread on those Serpents, and Scorpions, by which they were once most sadly crippl'd, without incurring the least seeming Danger. Nay, they were ef∣fectually steel'd, if I may so say, against the strong, and too often fatal Impressions, which Vice, and Immo∣rality are apt to make, upon the Minds of Men, and in a great Mea∣sure fortify'd, against the malicious, and vigorous Attempts of United Daemons.
CHAP. XXIX. WHEN our Saviour admonish'd his Disciples, to avoid those designing Wretches, who confidently affirm'd, they were the TRƲE MESSIAH, and endeavour'd by their cursed Enchantments, to draw Men after 'em, (for 'twas needless to admo∣nish 'em, to avoid every trisling, and conceited Impostor) he directed his Dis∣course to 'em after the following Man∣ner, If any Man, says he, shall say unto you, Lo! here is Christ, or there; believe it not. For there shall arise FALSE CHRISTS, and false Prophets, and they shall shew great Signs, and Wonders; Insomuch that (if it be possible) they shall deceive the very Elect. Behold I have told you before. Where∣fore if they shall say unto you, behold he's in the Desart, go not forth. Behold he's in the secret Chambers, believe it not. For as the Lightning comes out of the East, and shines ev'n unto the West;
so shall also the Coming of the Son of Man be. In another Place he has the fol∣lowing Words, Many will say unto me in that Day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophecy'd in thy Name? And in thy Name cast out Devils? and in thy Name done many wonderful Works? And then will I profess to 'em, I never knew you, depart from me, ye that work Iniquity. But Celsus, confounding the Mira∣cles of our Saviour, with the-Enchant∣ments of Men, breaks out into the following Exclamation, O the Force of Truth! He himself don't stick to ac∣quaint us, as ev'n your own Writings inform us, that many shall come, and do the same Miracles, that were wrought by him, and on that very score, O mon∣strous Impudence! He charges 'em with being wicked Men, and notorious, and vile Impostors; and says, That Satan will be the Original Author of their cursed Arts. So that he himself ac∣knowledges, that 'tis so far from bear∣ing the Stamp of a DIVINE AƲ∣THORITY, that 'tis owing to a Dishonourable, and Ʋnhappy Source, and not being able to resist the clear Evi∣dence of Truth, do's, in the very same Breath, condemn their Miracles, and his
own. Now isn't it a most intolerable Thing, that from the very same Actions, he, by all Means, must be denominated a GOD, and Others be branded with the Infamous Title of MAGICIANS? So that his own Mouth condemns him, and we ha'n't more Reason, to think, that they were Wicked Men, than that he himself was one of the Vilest Per∣sons upon Earth. For he has plainly told us, that Actions of that Nature, were certain Indications of the most No∣torious Deceit, and Impiety, and not of a Divine Power, accompanying the Persons, who perform'd 'em. But here 'tis obvious to observe Celsus's Malicious Mis-representation of Matters, since our Saviour's Lan∣guage is vastly different, from what the Pretended Jew wou'd fain have it to be. Perhaps he might have had some plausible Pretence, sor his Prophane Discourse, if our Saviour had admo∣nish'd his Disciples, to avoid all those, who shou'd make their Boast of Mi∣racles, and had infinuated nothing of the unjust Claim, they laid, to the Title of the TRƲE MES∣SIAH.
But since we are told, that they gave out, they were the CHRIST, (which I think, is a Profession, that Magicians don't commonly make) and since we are told, they shou'd be Persons, of very loose Morals, and shou'd work such Miracles, as were vastly different from those, which were wrought by our Blessed Saviour, the Conduct of the Holy JESƲS in this very Affair, is so far from carrying the Appearance of the least Imposture, that to me, 'tis a Convincing Argu∣ment, that both he, and his Disciples, wrought their Miracles, by the POWER of GOD, and that others, who were acted by Satan, did only counterfeit the Glorious Actions of CHRIST, and his Apostles, and so prevail'd with some deluded Persons, to be∣lieve, that their High Pretensions were most just, and reasonable. The Apostle Paul acquaints us, how The Man of Sin, and Son of Perdition, shou'd be revealed, and exalt himself a∣bove 2 Thes. 2. V. 3. all that is called GOD, or wor∣shipp'd, so that as GOD, he sits in the Temple of God, shewing himself, that he is GOD. And in another Place he says, Now ye know what with-holds, that he might ibid. V. 6 be reveal'd in his Time. For the My∣stery of Iniquity do's already work; only
he who now lets will let, until he be tak'n out of the Way. And then shall that wicked One be reveal'd, whom the Lord shall consume, with the Spirit of his Mouth, and shall destroy with the Brightness of his Coming; ev'n him, whose Coming is after the Working of Satan, with all Power, and Signs, and lying Wonders, and with all Deceivable∣ness of Ʋnrighteousness, in them that perish. And he gives the Reason, why God wou'd suffer him, to act his Hellish Part, upon the Stage of the World, viz. Because they receiv'd not the Love of the Truth, that they might be sav'd, that they all might be damn'd, who be∣liev'd not the Truth, but had Pleasure in Ʋnrighteousness. Now let any one shew, with any Colour of Reason, that the Miracles of our Saviour, and his Disciples, which are related in the Gospels, were done by such WICKED ARTIFICE, as the Apostle speaks of, and it may not be amiss, to read the Prophecy of Daniel concerning ANTICHRIST. But Celsus represents the Words of our Saviour to a Disadvantage, when he makes him say, That many shou'd come after him, who shou'd do the very same Miracles, with those which he wrought
himself, and yet be Wicked Persons, and Notorious Impostors. For as there was a VAST DIF∣FERENCE, between the DIA∣BOLICAL POWER, by which the Wise Men of the Egyptians were acted, and the DIVINE ASSIS∣TANCE, which Moses had, when he wrought his Miracles, the Event sufficiently proving, that what the for∣mer did, was merely owing to the Force of their Cursed Enehantmenss, and what was perform'd by the lat∣ter, was manifestly owing to the INFLƲENCE of the BLESSED SPIRIT: So there was the same be∣tween those of our SAVIOƲR, and those of ANTICHRIST, and his Con∣federates, who counterfeited the Mi∣racles of CHRIST, and his Apostles, and Followers, which had a most won∣derful, and happy Issue, Mankind be∣ing thereby induc'd, to embrace the BEST RELIGION, that was ever in∣troduc'd into the World. Celsus, I confess, discovers, that he isn't entirely ignorant of the Scrip∣tures, when he makes our Saviour say, That Satan wou'd be the Original Author, of that Cursed Art, by which false Prophets wou'd impose upon the World, but is a little too hasty in
drawing his pretended Consequence, viz. Our Saviour's Miracles, ev'n ac∣cording to his own free Confession, did bear no Stamp of a DIVINE AƲTHO∣RITY, but were such Works, as were to be perform'd, it seems, by some of the Vilest Persons, that ever breath'd on Earth. For he makes no Difference at all, between those Things that are Ho∣mogeneous, and those that are Hetero∣geneous, as Logicians Call 'em, between Things of the same, and Things of a very different Kind. Now as a Wolf, and a Dog, do widely differ, tho' there seems to be some considerable Resemblance be∣tween 'em, with respect to their Shape, and Tone of Voice, and the same may be said of a Stock-Dove, and a Pid∣geon: So what is done by the Help of Magick is not of the same kind, with what is perform'd by a Power, that is Truly-Supernatural and Di∣vine. And if such wonderful Things, ev'n in the Judgment of Celsus, are done, by the Assistance of Infernal Spirits, may we not rationally suppose, that Things, that are much more unaccoun∣table, may be easily done, by the im∣mediate Assistance of the Ever-Blessed God?
Shall every Thing that is evil, be found among Men, and every Thing that is truly-good, be banish'd from the World? I think, there's much more Reason, to lay down this, as a General, and most Excellent Maxim, that where-ever there is any real Evil, under the Disguise of some real Good, the opposite Good must, at least, be equal to it, with Respect to its De∣gree. And thus we may strongly argue, from Miracles wrought by the Help of Magick, to such as are perform'd, by the special Assistance of the Great GOD himself. We must either deny, that any Good or Evil, is to be found in the World, or, on the Supposition of the latter, must allow the former, and perhaps if we grant the former, we must affirm the latter; or at least on the Supposition of any real Evil, must allow an equal Proportion of that real Good, to which the real Evil is di∣rectly opposite. He that will assert the one, with∣out granting the other, seems to me, to talk at the same mad Rate, with one, who, confessing, that there are such Things as Sophisms, or false Shews of Reason, shou'd deny, that there's any such Thing, as true Logick in
the World, which is widely different from 'em. So that I say, if we grant, that there is such a Thing as Magick, which has so great an Influence upon wicked Daemons, as to engage 'em, to lend their ready, and joint Assistance, to those, who profess that Art, it na∣turally follows, that Almighty God is oblig'd, in some Sense, to exert his Power, in Performing such Miracles, as carry with 'em a convincing Evi∣dence of the Truth, they were de∣sign'd to attest. The next Thing, I take it, that we have to do, under this important Head, is to examine into the Life, and Con∣versation, of those, who pretend, they have a Power, to produce super-natural Effects, and to enquire, whe∣ther the wonderful Operations they perform, do any way tend, to the Temporal, and Eternal Advantage of the Souls of Men, and we must care∣fully distinguish between Magicians, who hold a Correspondence with the Devil, and those happy Persons, who are fill'd with the Holy Spirit of God, (whose Divine Impressions they ex∣perience both on their Souls, and Bo∣dies,) who consult the true, and best Interest of Mankind, and endeavour
to make Men Proselites to the most Excellent Religion, that was ever re∣veal'd by a God. Now if an Enquiry of this Kind be necessary, to distinguish true Mi∣racles from those which are false, to prevent us from making Miracles, where there are really none, and en∣gage our Assent, to the Truth of 'em, when the Finger of God may very plainly be discover'd, then we shall find, that the Miracles, which were wrought by Moses, and our Blessed Saviour, were owing to an Extraor∣dinary Appearance of the Power of God, since they were Solemn Seals, by which the Truth of the Jewish, and Christian Religion was confirm'd, each of which, we know, was embrac'd by a considerable Body, of very Wife, and Virtuous Men. Besides, how cou'd Moses's Law, which forbids the Jews to worship Images, and teaches 'em, to raise their Minds above all created Beings, and fix 'em, on the Eternal God, the Great Creator, and Sovereign Dispo∣ser of the Universe, I say, how cou'd such a Law derive its Original, from the Horrid Practice of Magicians.
And since 'tis a Jew, that Celsus personates, I wou'd humbly desire him, to resolve the following Que∣stion, How comes it to pass, that you (who firmly believe, that the Miracles, which Moses wrought, were perform'd, by the Extraordinary Assi∣stance of the Spirit of God, and en∣deavour to defend 'em against those, who say, that the Wife Men of Egypt did strange Things, by the Help of Magick) can't be prevail'd with, to acknowledge, that our Blessed Sa∣viour perform'd his Miracles, by an Immediate Assistance from Above, but are so strangely fond, of Imitating the Egyptians, whom you know, to be your sworn, and irreconcileable Enemies? For if we may be allow'd, to judge of Miracles, by the Event, and argue in Favour of YOUR JƲSTLY-CELEBRATED MOSES from his being rais'd up by Almighty God, to be the HONOURABLE FOUNDER of the Jewish Polity, I am sure, we may say far more, in Commendation of our BLESSED SAVIOƲR, since the imperfect Moses isn't worthy to be nam'd, with the HOLY, and SPOTLESS JESUS.
For, as for Moses, 'tis obvious to re∣mark, that he found, ready to his Hand, such Persons, among the Poste∣rity of Abraham, as liy'd in a Religi∣ous Observance of Circumcision, that initiating Rite, and many approved Customs, which were handed down, by Tradition, from Father to Son, and he knew very well, that they were, in a great Measure, dispos'd, to re∣ceive his useful Instructions, and prac∣tise his wholesome Precepts, when 'twas he, under God, who brought 'em out of Egypt, and the Laws he gave 'em, had the Stamp of a Di∣vine Authority, as You your self ac∣knowledge. But Our Saviour making, in some Sence, a much greater Attempt, intro∣duc'd a Religion, that was in a Man∣ner new, and caus'd it, to gain Ground continually, in Spite of all the rooted Prejudices of a different Education. And if 'twas highly necessary, that Moses shou'd convince, not only the Sanhedrim, but also the Common People among the Jews, of the Truth of his Doctrine, by confirming it, with those Miracles, which the Scrip∣tures gives us an Account of, there was at least equal Reason, why our Blessed Saviour shou'd take the same
Method, to prove the Divinity of his Mission, since the People did na∣turally, eagerly, and very justly ex∣pect Signs, and Wonders, in such extraordinary Cases. Nay, 'twas evidently necessary, he shou'd work far greater Miracles than Moses, to wean the bigotted Jews, from their Humane Traditions, and prove, by Dint of Argument, and plain Appeals to Sense, and com∣mon Observation, he was a Person, who was TRULY-DIVINE, and in a far more noble Sence, than any of their Ancient, and JUST∣LY—CELEBRATED Pro∣phets. And how was it possible, that he shou'd be otherwise, when the Ma∣nifest Design of the Glorious Pro∣phecies under the Old-Testament-Dispensation, was obscurely to reveal him, under the Character of the TRUE MESSIAH? And what Celsus's Jew objects, a∣gainst the Christians, may every Whit as well be urg'd by him, to the Prejudice of the Authority of Moses, Viz. That Our Blessed Saviour was guilty of the most Notorious, and Vile Imposture.
The Jew breaks out into the fol∣lowing Exclamation, O the Force of Truth! He himself acquaints us, as your own Writings inform us, that many shou'd come, who wou'd perform the same Mi∣racles, that he wrought himself, and on that very score, O horrid Impudence! he has the Face to charge 'em, with be∣ing wicked Men, and most notorious Impostors. And a Greek, or Egyptian, or any other Infidel, may say thus to a Jew, O the Force of Truth! Moses has told us plainly, as your own Wri∣tings inform us, that many shou'd come, who wou'd perform the same Miracles, which he did himself, and yet be very wicked, and designing Wretches. For 'tis writ in YOUR OWN LAW, If there arise among you a Prophet, or a Dreamer of Dreams, and Deut. 13, V. 1. he gives thee a Sign, or a Wonder, and the Sign, or the Wonder come to pass, whereof he spake unto thee, saying, let us go after other Gods, which thou hast not known, and let us serve 'em; Thou shalt not hearken to that Prophet, or Dreamer of Dreams.
The pretended Jew goes on, and makes our Saviour say, That Satan will be the Original Author of their Cursed Art, thinking thereby to ridi∣cule, and insult him. But the Chri∣stians, or any Infidels, may as well alledge, against his Celebrated Moses, that these Prophets, and Dreamers of Dreams wou'd counterfeit his Miracles. The Jew says farther, That our Saviour's Miracles, ev'n according to his own Confession, have no Stamp of a Divine Authority, but are such Works, as wou'd be done, by the Vilest Persons upon Earth. But an Infidel may turn the Argu∣ment upon Moses, and say, that his Miracles, ev'n according to his own Confession, have no Stamp of a Di∣vine Authority, but are such Works, as wou'd be done, by Persons of the most infamous Character. And the following Words, that our Saviour, not being able, to resist the Evi∣dence of Truth, do's, in the same Breath, condemn their Miracles, and his own, may every whit as well be retorted upon Moses.
And those Words of the Jew, Isn't it, I beseech you, a most intolerable Thing, that from the same Actions He by all Means, must be denominated A GOD, and Others be branded with the Infa∣mous Title of MAGICIANS? I say those Words of the Jew may be turn'd upon Moses thus, Isn't it, I beseech you, a most intolerable Thing, that from the same Actions He by all Means must be denomina∣ted a Faithful, and EMINENT SERVANT of the BLESSED GOD, and Others be branded with the odious Title of IMPOSTORS. And those Words of the Jew, Ev'n According to his own free Confession, we have no more Reason, to think, that they were wicked Men, than that he was a vile Wretch himself, may be turn'd upon Moses thus, what an Instance of Madness is it, to look upon Moses as a Servant of GOD, and more than ordinary Prophet, and at the same Time to deny these honourable Cha∣racters, to such Persons, as were to work Miracles, as well as he, ev'n according to his own Prediction? And those Words of the Jew (which he thinks do give more Force to the
Objection) viz. That our Saviour him∣self has told us, that such Actions were certain Indications of the most notorious Deceit, and Impiety, and not of a Di∣vine Power, accompanying the Persons who perform'd 'em, may easily be re∣torted upon Moses. CHAP. XXX. THEN Celsus's Jew, speaking to those of his Native Country, who had embrac'd Christianity, asks us the following Question (for 'tis plain, he had his Eye upon us all along, tho' for a blind, he directs his Discourse to them) What in God's Name cou'd induce you, to believe in your pretended Saviour? Was it his Foretelling, that he shou'd rise from the dead? But this may be turn'd upon Moses thus, What induc'd you to be∣lieve in your most Celebrated Pro∣phet? Was it his Foretelling the Circumstances of his Death, in the following Words, So Moses the Ser∣vant Deut. 35. V. 4. 5. of the Lord dy'd there, in the Land
of Moab, according to the Word of the Lord. And he bury'd him, in a Valley, in the Land of Moab, over against Beth-peor: But no Man knows of his Sepulchre, unto this Day. If the Jew ridicules our Saviour, because he fore-told, that he shou'd rise from the Dead, we may, by a Parity of Reason, expose Moses to Contempt, and say, that he was the Author of the Pentateuch, and inserted that Passage, No one knows his Sepul∣chre, unto this Day, with a politick Design, to render his Name Im∣mortal. Then the Jew continues his Dis∣course, to those of his own Country-Men, that were Christians, in the following Words, Well, we'll suppose, says he, for once, that your pretended Saviour foretold, that he shou'd rise from the dead. But pray, have not others made Ʋse of the same pityful Artifice, to take Advantage of the Weakness of some silly People? Zamolxis, Servant to Pythagoras, took this Method, to delude the Scy∣thians, and it seems, Pythagoras was so cunning, as to do the same. And Rampsinitus is reported to have done the like in Egypt, who, if any Credit
is to be giv'n to History, play'd at Dice with Ceres, in the Region of the dead, and forc'd her, to give him a Handkerchief, she had, that was curiously embroider'd. Orpheus did the same, among the People, who were call'd Odrysae, Protesilaus among the Thessalians, and Hercules, and Theseus among the In∣habitants of Toenarus. But here it de∣serves to be consider'd, whether any Per∣son, that was really dead, did ever rise with the same Numerical Body. Do you, who look on the Accounts, that are giv'n by others, as trifling Sto∣ries imagine, that the Catastrophe of your senceless Drama is ever the more just, or probable, because you endeavour to adorn it, with some fine Inventions, because your Crucify'd JESUS gave a dreadful Out-cry, when he lay at the very Point of Death, because there hap∣pen'd to be an Earth-quake, and a more than ordinary Darkness? You boldly affirm, that he rose from the dead, (tho' it seems, he was far from being able, to secure his Person, while he remain'd on Earth) and shew'd upon his Body all the Marks of his Cru∣cifixion, and the very Print of the Nails.
But you your selves acknowledge, that there was no Witness of the Truth of this Account, but one Fanatical Wo∣man, and perhaps some Body else, of the same wretched Caball, that was plain∣ly deluded, by her own idle Whimsies, or too easily believ'd, what she wou'd have to be true, as it frequently hap∣pens, or in the last Place (which seems to me more probable) had a Mind to amuse People, with this imaginary Miracle, and furnish such Cheats, as her Self, with a Pretence, for disturbing the World, with Notorious, and Vile Impostures. But since 'tis a pretended Jew, that says all this, I shall answer him accordingly, and turn the Edge of his own Weapon upon Moses, by desiring, that he wou'd resolve me the following Question, Pray how many gross Impostors have done Miracles, to take Advantage of the Weakness of some silly People, and yet you are forward to give Credit to Moses, on the Account of the Miracles, he wrought? Besides, methinks 'tis somewhat unsuitable to the Character of a Jew, to alledge the Instances of Za∣molxis, and Pythagoras, since the Jews,
'tis well known, are little conver∣sant with the Greek Historians. The Account which he gives us; of Rampsinitus, and Ceres, wou'd have come, with a much better Grace, from the Mouth of an Egyptian, who, to lessen the Authority of Moses, might say, that 'twas much more probable, that the fore-mention'd Per∣sons shou'd play at Dice together, in the Region of the Dead, and that he, as a Proof of his Descent thither, shou'd produce the embroider'd Hand∣kerchief, which he took from the Goddess, than that Moses went into the Darkness, which God himself did inhabit, and that he alone had the Honour, to come near him, as he himself gives us an Account. And we, who are the Followers of the Holy Jesus, may make the fol∣lowing Address, to the pretended Jew, when he talks at so extravagant a Rate, Pray how do you answer the Greeks, and Egyptians, who raise many of the same Objections against Moses, that you offer against our Bles∣sed Saviour? When you have heap'd up all the Arguments, you can think of, in Defence of Moses, (tho' we think, at the same time, that we can solidly, and clearly prove him to be a True, and very Eminent Prophet)
you'll be forc'd, unawares to acknow∣ledge. ev'n according to those Argu∣ments, which you your Selves make use of, that our Blessed Saviour did vastly, and indeed infinitely exceed him. But because Celsus's Jew makes meer Game of the Histories which give us an Account, of the Descent of some Heroes into the Region of the Dead, and their Return from thence, and thinks, that their pre∣tended DIVINE SORT OF AB∣SCONDING for a Time, and then coming back again, and ma∣king an Appearance upon the Stage of the World, was all Artifice, and Delusion (as he plainly intimates, when he speaks of the Opinion, that the Odrysians had of Orpheus, the Thessalians of Protesilaus, and the In∣habitants of Toenarus entertain'd of Hercules, and Theseus,) I shall make it appear, that there is no Manner of Comparison, between these Fables of the Greeks, and the Account that the Evangelists give us, of the Re∣surrection of Our Saviour. 'Tis obvious to remark, that these Fabulous Heroes cou'd descend into the Region of the Dead, whenever the Fancy took 'em, and return as soon
as they saw Cause to do so. But since our Saviour was crucify'd, in the open View of the Jews, and Ro∣mans, and after his Death, was tak'n down from the Cross, in the Sight of so many Witnesses, what Reason have we to imagine, that he feign'd his Descent, into the World of disem∣body'd Spirits, and his Return to our World again, as the Greeks have feign'd their Heroes, to have often done. Nay, I'm inclin'd to think, that from the Story of these Ancient He∣roes we may be furnish'd, with an Argument, that will take away, in a great Measure, the SƲPPOS'D INFAMY of the CROSS of CHRIST. Had our Saviour dy'd, in a com∣mon Way, and giv'n the Jews and Romans no convincing Proof, of the Reality of his Death, he had certainly been liable to Suspicion, as well as many of the Heroes of the Greeks, tho' he had really been loos'd from the strong Bonds of the Grave, in which he was some Time held. I humbly conceive, therefore, that one principal Reason, why he dy'd, in so publick a Manner, was this, that no Person might have the least Umbrage of Jealousy, that he crafily retir'd from the World, and feign'd
himself, to be gone down to the Re∣gion of the Dead, and took his own Time to appear again, making the World believe, that he was ris'n from the Dead, when in Truth, he was all this While as much alive as ever. But to remove any such foolish Suspicion, we need only consider, that his Disciples most willingly ex∣pos'd themselves to imminent Dan∣gers, in publishing his Doctrine to the World, tho' they were not ig∣norant, of the rooted Prejudices of Men, against it. This certainly, they wou'd never have been tempt∣ed to do, if their Lord's Resurrecti∣on had been no more than an em∣ty Fiction, especially if we consider, they not only perswaded others, to lay down their Lives, for the Cause of Christ, but with the greatest Readiness wou'd, if it were possible, have dy'd Ten Thousand Deaths, to promote it. Then Celsus's Jew as if 'twas impossi∣ble, that any one shou'd rise from the Dead, with the same Numerical Bo∣dy, makes Use of this rash Expression. We must, says he, consider, whether any Person that was really dead, did
ever rise, with the same Numerical and Proper Body. This, One wou'd think, shou'dn't come, from the Mouth of one, who bears the Character of a Jew, who is suppos'd to believe, what we find re∣corded, in the two Books of Kings, 1 Kin. 17. V. 22. concerning two Children, one of which was restor'd to Life by Elijah, 2 Kin. 4. V. 34. and the other by Elisha. And I be∣lieve, 'twas Matter of our Saviour's Choice, to be educated among the Jews, because they were accustom'd to Miracles, that so by comparing what he did, with what had been done, in the former Ages of the World, they might be forc'd to acknowledge, that his Miracles deserv'd the Prefe∣rence, by whom, and in whose Name, far greater Things were perform'd, than had been done, in the Memory of Man. Then the pretended Jew (having produc'd the Histories of the Greeks, to shew us the strange Artifices, which the Ancient Heroes us'd, that People might imagine, that they were ris'n from the dead) directs his Discourse, to those of his Native Country, that were converted to the Christian Faith, in the following Words.
Do you look upon the Accounts, that are giv'n by others, as trifling Stories, and imagine, that the Catastrophe of your Senseless Drama is ever the more just, or probable, because you endeavour, to a∣dorn it, with some Fine Inventions, be∣cause your Crucify'd Jesus gave a most dreadful Out-Cry, when he lay at the very Point of Death? To this I answer, we believe, that the Account, which you have giv'n, of the Ancient Heroes of the Greeks, is grosly Fabulous, but we are fully perswaded, and I think, on very ra∣tional Grounds, that the Account, which is giv'n us, of our Blessed Sa∣viour, in those Holy Scriptures, which are common to us both, and of which we make our Boast, as much as you your selves, is far from deserving that contemptible Character, which this Gentleman is pleas'd to give it. Therefore, we can never grant, that the Glorious Miracles, which were wrought, in raising some Persons from the dead, as we are credibly inform'd, were no better than empty Fictions, and vain Amusements. We believe, that our Saviour did really rise from the dead, as the Prophets, and he himself had foretold he shou'd; and one Thing, among others, that makes
his Resurrection the more remarkable, and in which it excell'd that of any other Person, is the following Consi∣deration, that he wa'n't rais'd from the dead, by a Prophet, such as Elijah, or Elisha was, but by the IMME∣DIATE INFLƲENCE of rhe GOD-HEAD. Hence it came to pass, that the happy Effects of his Resurrection were so Exrraordinary, and so Ge∣neral. Pray was the Resurrection of the two Children before-mention'd, a great and diffusive Blessing to Man∣kind, as we know the Resnrrection of our Saviour was, when the Power of God did so eminently accompany the Preaching of the Gospel, and caus'd it to make so deep, and lasting an Impression, upon the Minds, of so many of his Hearers, who at first were strangely prejudic'd against him?
CHAP. XXXI. THE pretended Jew goes on, and is ready to split his Sides with Laughing, at the Earth-quake, and ridicules the more than ordinary Darkness, that were the AWFƲL CONCOMITANTS of our Sa∣viour's Sufferings. But this I have already answer'd, according to my weak Ability, and produc'd the Testimony of Phlegon, who acknowledges, that these won∣derful Events did really happen, at the Time of our Saviour's Passion. Then the Jew has the following Words, You say, that he rose from the dead, (tho' he was far from being able, to secure his Person, while he remain'd on Earth) and shew'd upon his Body all the Marks of his Crucifixion, and the very Print of the Nails, with which his Hands, and Feet were pierc'd.
But what dos this Gentleman mean, by saying, He wa'n't able to secure his Person? If he means, that our Blessed Saviour wa'nt able to secure himself, from the common Contagion of Vice, and Immorality, what he says, is ab∣solutely, and manifestly false. For he never spoke a Word, or did an Action, that was in the least in∣decent, or unworthy of an INCAR∣NATE GOD. He was led, as a Sheep, to the Mat. 27 V. 2 Slaughter, and as a Laneb before her Shearers, was dumb; so he open'd not his Mouth. Viz. By way of Com∣plaint, or Uneasiness, as St. Mathew acquaints us. But if Celsus means, that he didn't exert his Power, to secure himself, from the outward Calamities, to which he was expos'd, which morally con∣sider'd, were neither Good, nor Evil; I have prov'd already, from the Gos∣pels, that he submitted to 'em with the greatest Readiness imaginable, and shew'd the Reasons, which justify'd his Conduct. Then the pretended Jew, having spoke of our Saviour's shewing all the Marks of his Crucifixion, and
the very Print of his Nails, says, There was no Witness, of the Truth of this strange Account, but one Fanatical Woman, designing to ridicule Mary Magdalen, who saw him, after he was ris'n from the dead, as we are told in the Gospels, and because we are inform'd, that he was seen by others, he thought fit to add the following Words, And perhaps some Body else, of the same wretched Cabal. Then he plainly discovers, that he is one of those, who admire the Epi∣curean Hypothesis, when he endeavours, to shew, how a lively Idea of a de∣ceas'd Person may be form'd, in the warm Imagination, in the following Words, Who was deluded by her own idle Whimsies, or too easily believ'd, what she wou'd have to be true, as we know it frequently happens. There's a great Deal of Force, if we must give any heed to his idle Whimsies, in this scurrilous Lan∣guage. But ev'n from hence we may be furnish'd, with an Argument, to prove the IMMORTAL SƲBSISTENCE of HƲMANE SOƲLS, when they are separated from their Bodies, and the
unavoidable Consequence of what he here asserts, amounts to this at least, that it survives the Body. For, if as Plato observes, in his Dia∣logues, about the HƲMANE SOƲL, there are certain Images of dead Per∣sons, that are seen near their Tombs, then they must be owing to some Cause or other. And no Cause can be so rationally assign'd, as the Soul of the deceas'd Person, that assumes a Body, which is adapted to it. But Celsus, who advances the fore-mention'd Notion, wou'd make People dream, while they are tho∣roughly awake, and have their Sen∣ces about 'em, and says, They too ea∣sily believe, what they wou'd have to be true. Such Dreams, indeed, as he talks of, are common, when the Bo∣dily Sences are lock'd up by Sleep, but I think, we can't easily account for 'em, when Persons are awake, unless they be troubl'd with Me∣lancholy, or fall'n into a Fit of the Frenzy.
Celsus, it seems, wa'n't ignorant of this, and that made him call Mary Magdalen, a Fanatick, tho' the Scrip∣ture-History says nothing like it, and our Saviour's Appearing, after he was ris'n from the dead, and showing all the Marks, that were made in his Crucify'd Body, must, according to Celsus, be solv'd by the Doctrine of the Images of deceas'd Persons, but, according to the Scripture-Ac∣count, (which he's so cunning as to use, when he thinks that it serves his purpose) the Matter of Fact stood thus. Our Saviour call'd one of his Disci∣ples to him, who cou'dn't for his Life believe, that he was ris'n from the dead, with the same Body, I say, with the same Body. For the Appearance of Hu∣mane Souls, after Death, don't seem to be the least Matter of his Doubt. Therefore, 'tis remarkable, that he dos'n't say, Except I see him, but Ex∣cept John 20. V. 25▪ I shall see in his Hands the Print of the Nails, and put my Finger into the Print of the Nails, and thrust my Hand, into his Sides, I will not be∣lieve. He didn't question, but that the Soul of a deceas'd Person might a∣nimate a Body, which wou'd be vi∣sible to the corporeal Eye, and, bear
a Resemblance to that, from which 'twas separated by Death, not only with respect to the Eyes, and Voice, and Mien, but also, Sometimes appear in a like Habit cloath'd. Hom. Il. Book 23, V. 67. Therefore our Saviour call'd Thomas to him, and said, Reach hither thy Finger, and behold my Hands, and reach John 20, V. 27. hither thy Hand, and thrust it into my Side, and be not faithless, but believ∣ing. And by the Way, 'twas agreable, to the many Prophecies, which we meet with concerning him, the many evident Miracles he wrought, and un∣usual Accidents, that befell him, that he shou'd rise from the Dead, and that this considerable Circumstance shou'd, as it were, crown, and com∣pleat the rest. The Prophetical Psalmist speaking in the Person of our Saviour, has this Prophecy, relating to him, My Flesh also shall rest in Hope, for thou wilt not leave my Soul in Hell, nor Psalm 16, V. 9. suffer thy Holy One to see Corruption. And the Body, with which our Saviour rose from the Dead, did nei∣ther consist, of such gross Matter, as
it consisted of before, nor of such subtil Matter, as that with which se∣parate Souls are cloath'd, when an Apparition appears. Therefore St. John has the follow∣ing Words, His Disciples were within, and Thomas with 'em. Then came Je∣sus, the Doors being shut, and stood in the Midst, and said, Peace be unto you. And he adds these Words, Then says he to Thomas, reach hither thy Finger. St. Luke tells us, that When Simon and Cleopas were talking of the Things Luke 24, V. 14. that had happen'd to him, Jesus himself drew near, and went with 'em. But their Eyes were holden, that they shou'd not know him. And he said to 'em, What Manner of Communications are these, that ye have with one another, as ye walk? And in the same Chap∣ter he has these Words, And their Eyes were open'd, and they knew him, and V. 35, he vanish'd out of their Sight. And tho' Celsus compares this Ac∣count, which the Gospels give us, of the Appearance, which our Savi∣our made, after he was ris'n from the Dead, to common Stories of wonderful Apparitions, and laughs at those, who were Eye-Witnesses of the Fact; yet they who impartially examine into Matters, and are fur∣nish'd with a Capacity, to make nice
Enquiries, will be forc'd to acknow∣ledge, there was something in the Case before us, that was very re∣markable, and surprizing. CHAP. XXXII. THEN Celsus offers an Obje∣ction, which do's a little de∣serve to be consider'd by us, If Christ had a Mind, says he, to exert the Di∣vine Power, which he pretended to have, certainly he ought to have appear'd to his Enemies, to the Judge, who pass'd the Sentence of Death upon him, and to the whole Body of the People, who rose up, as it were, in Arms against him. And indeed we don't go about to deny, that the Scripture plainly ac∣quaints us, that after he was ris'n from the dead, he refus'd to appear so publickly, and to all Persons pro∣miscuously, as he did before. He was seen of the Apostles forty Days, and spoke Acts 1, V. 3. of Things, pertaining to the Kingdom of God, as we learn from the Acts of the Apostles.
And we read in the Gospels, that he wa'n't continually with 'em, but sometimes after the Interval of eight Days, appear'd in the midst of 'em, when the Doors were shut, and at other Opportunities appear'd to 'em, in a very different Manner. And St. Paul, intimating to us, that he did't so frequently appear then, as he had done before, has the following Words, I deliver'd unto you first of all, that which I also receiv'd, how that 1 Cor. 15. V. 3, &c. Christ dy'd for our Sins, according to the Scriptures▪ And that he was bury'd, and that he rose again the third Day, according to the Scriptures: And that he was seen of Cephas, then of the Twelve. After that he was seen of above five hundred Brethren at once, of whom the greater Part remain, unto this pre∣sent, but some are fall'n asleep. After that he was seen of James, then of all the Apostles. And last of all he was seen of me also, as one born out of due Time. Here a very difficult Question do's occur, that requires the closest Ap∣plication, and that not of ordinary Christians, but of those, who have attain'd to the greatest Eminency, in the School of Christ, viz. Why our Saviour refus'd, to expose himself to
publick View, after his Resurrection, as he had done before. There's no need, I think, in a Book of this Nature, (the main Design of which is to defend the Christian Re∣ligion, against the bold Attempts of its malicious Adversaries) to give a full, or large Solution of so Critical a Point. But I shall offer a few Thoughts at present, which, I hope, will give the Reader some small Sa∣tisfaction, in this difficult Affair. Tho' our SAVIOƲR was but ONE, with respect to HIS PERSON; yet there were SEVERAL NOTIONS, under which Mankind did consider him, and different Persons saw him, in very different Sences. That there were several Capaci∣ties, in which Mankind did consider him, is plain from such Expressions as these, I am the Way, the Truth, and John 14, V. 6. the Life. I am the Bread, I am the Door; and many other Expressions, John 6, V. 35. that I cou'd easily name, if Occasion John 10, V. 9. offer'd. That different Persons saw him, in very different Sences, will readily be granted by those, who can assign the Reason, why he didn't take all the Disciples with him, into the Mount of Transfiguration, but only Peter, James, and John, viz, Because they
alone cou'd bear the Brightness of so glorious a Sight, behold the dazling Lustre of Moses, and Elias, and hear the Voice, that came from Heaven, and the Charming Conversation, which those two Celebrated Prophets had the Honour, and Happiness, to maintain, with the Blessed Jesus. I'm of the Opinion, I confess, that before he went up to the Mountain, Mat. 5, V 1. and instructed his Disciples, concern∣ing the Beatitudes, he didn't appear to those, who were brought to him in the Evening, at the Foot of the Mountain, and were cur'd of their Distempers, I say, he didn't appear to those, who were indispos'd, and stood in need of his healing Power, in the same Manner as he did to them, who enjoy'd a confirm'd State of Health, and were able to go up with him to the Mountain. And as he privately explain'd the Meaning of his Parables, to his Disciples, whose Sense of Hearing was much quicker, than that of the Common People, to whose Ears there was nothing convey'd too often, but an empty Sound: So I believe, there was some considerable Difference, in their spiri∣tual, and ev'n their corporeal Sight.
'Tis farther plain, that our Savi∣our wa'n't seen by all Persons, after the same manner, from the Instance of Judas, who being about to be∣tray him, said to his Accomplices; He whom I shall kiss is he, intimating Mat 26. V. 48. they didn't know him. And that Ex∣pression of our Saviour, I sat daily with you, teaching in the Temple, and ye laid no hold on me; do's manifestly favour the Opinion, which I have here laid down. Since therefore, we have such Ap∣prehensions of our Saviour, not only with respect to his Divinity, which was more latent, and undiscern'd by the Generality of Men, but also with respect to his Humane Body, the Form of which, I believe, he chang'd, when ever he thought fit to do it; We think, that before his Death (by which he spoil'd Principalities, and Powers) he was, in some Sense, discernable by all, but afterwards ev'n many of those, who had formerly seen him, had not Sences, that were adapted to the Sight of a ris'n Jesus.
'Twas therefore an Instance of his Condescension to the Weakness of Men's Capacities, that he didn't ex∣pose himself to Publick View, after he was ris'n from the dead, to Pub∣lick View, did I say, when 'twa'n't without frequent Intervals, that he appear'd ev'n to his Apostles, and Disciples? For after he had honourably, and happily accomplish'd the Work of our Redemption, we have Reason to be∣lieve, that his Divinity shone with much brighter Rays, thro' the Glass, if I may so say, of his Humane Na∣ture. Cephas, who was, as it were, the First-Fruits of the Apostles, was the first, that saw him, then the Twelve (Matthias being chosen, in the Room of Judas) then five Hundred Bre∣thren at once, then James, then perhaps all the Seventy Disciples, and at last the Apostle Paul, (as one born out of due Time) who knew very well, why he us'd the following Ex∣pression, in his Epistle to the Ephesians, Ʋnto me, who am less than the least of Eph. 3. V▪ 8, all Saints, is this Grace giv'n. And perhaps those Words, Less than the least of all Saints, and those Words, Born out of due Time, may have a greater Affinity, than some Persons
on the first View, may be ready to imagine. And as there's no Colour of Rea∣son, for any One to reflect upon our Blessed Saviour, for not taking all the Apostles with him, to the Mount of Transfiguration, but only three of 'em, when he was going to display the Glory of his Raiment, and the Heav'nly Lustre of Moses, and Elias, who were to discourse with him, in a familiar Manner: So neither is there just Cause, for any one to find Fault with the Account, which we meet with, in the Gospels; viz. That he didn't expose himself, after his Re∣surrection, to the View of all, but only of those, whose Eyes were strong enough, to bear the dazling Bright∣ness of so glorious an Object. And I think, that the following Expres∣sion, which is us'd by the Apostle Paul, To this End Christ both dy'd, Rom 14, V. 9. and rose, and reviv'd, that he might be Lord, both of the Dead, and of the Living, may have a Reference to the Subject, on which I am now dis∣coursing. The Dead, over whom he has a rightful Power, are they of whom the Apostle speaks, in his first Epi∣stle to the Corinthians, The Trumpet, 1 Cor. 1  V. 52.
says he, shall sound, and the dead shall be rais'd incorruptible. Under the Term Living, I conceive he comprehends, not only those, who shall be rais'd from the dead, to an Immortal Life, but those also, who may be consider'd by us, in a very different Capacity, I mean those, who will be alive, at the Coming of our Lord, and be chang'd. He says, We shall be chang'd, which Words are brought in by him, after he had said, That the Dead shall be rais'd incorruptible. And in his first Epistle to the Thessalonians, he describes the Difference, between the Dead, and the Living, in the following Words, I wou'dn't have you ignorant, Brethren, 1 Thes. 4. V. 13. concerning them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not, ev'n as others, who have no Hope, for if we believe, that Jesus dy'd, and rose again, ev'n them also, who sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him. For this we say unto you, by the Word of the Lord, that we, who are alive, and remain, to the Coming of the Lord, sha'n't prevent them, who are asleep. The Sence of which Verses I have giv'n, according to the best of my Judgment, in my Comment on the foregoing Epistle.
Now we needn't wonder, that our Saviour, after his Resurrection, wa'n't seen by all, that believ'd in him, since the Apostle, writing to the Corinthi∣ans, as Persons of mean Attainments, has the following Words, I deter∣mine, 1 Cor. 4. V. 4. to know nothing, among you, save Jesus Christ, and him crucify'd. And says in another Place, Hitherto ye 1 Cor. 3. V. 2. were not able to bear it, neither yet now are ye able, for ye are yet car∣nal. I confess, the Scriptures, in which the Characters of infinite Wisdom are so legible, do acquaint us, that our Saviour, before his Death, ex∣pos'd himself to Publick View (tho' ev'n here some Exceptions must be made) but after he was ris'n from the Dead, he was no longer pro∣miscuously seen by all, but accord∣ing to the Direction of Heaven, consulted the Capacities of those, to whom he thought fit to ap∣pear.
As we read in Scripture, that God appear'd to Abraham, and other Holy Men, tho' there were con∣siderable Intervals, and we know very well, that he didn't appear to all: So we may rationally suppose, that the SON OF GOD, when he made his Appearance to Persons, after he was ris'n from the dead, took a prudent Method, not unlike that, which God had before observ'd, in making Discoveries of himself, to the Ancient Fathers of the Jewish Church. So that I have return'd an Answer, (according to my weak Ability, and as far as I thought, consistent with the Design of the present Treatise) to the Objection which Celsus makes, in the following Words, If Christ says he, had a Mind, to exert his Di∣vine Power, he ought to have appear'd to his Enemies, to the Judge, who pass'd the Sentence of Death upon him, and to the whole Body of the People, who, as it were, took up Arms against him. Sure I am, that he acted wisely, in not appearing to his Enemies, or the Judge, who condemn'd him. For he happily prevented 'em from being struck blind, like the Sodomites of old, who lay in wait for the Angels,
who, as the Scripture acquaints us, were kindly entertain'd by Lot. Gen. 19, 9, 10. The Men, 'tis said, put forth their Hand, and pull'd Lot into the House to 'em, and shut the Door, and they sinote the Men, that were at the Door of the House, with Blindness, both small, and great, so that they weary'd themselves, to find the Door. The Design of our Saviour was to shew his DIVINE POWER, in a Way, suited to the Capacities of Men, and the TRUE REASON why he refus'd, to appear so publickly, after he was ris'n from the Dead, as be∣fore, was this, because he was then too bright an Object, to be beheld by COMMON EYES. Therefore Celsus, as if he had wrack'd his Brains, to the utmost, cou'd hardly have thought of any Thing, that had less Argument in it, than the following Words, What! was he afraid, that he shou'd be hung upon the Cross again, when if we may give any Heed to you, he was no less than A GOD? Besides I suppose, you'll hardly say, that he came into the World, on Purpose to ABSCOND. But 'tis evident, he came into the World, to be seen by few compari∣tively, and many of those, who saw
him were, in a great Measure, Stran∣gers to the Bright Rays of his Divi∣nity. Nay, he was altogether unknown to many, in as much as he came, to discover his Glory, to those who were Children of the Light, and so were freed from that worse than Egyp∣tian Darkness, which naturally. draws a Veil, over the Minds of Men. And he came, with this generous Design, to display the Riches of his Grace, to those, who were Ʋnrigh∣teous, and lay wallowing, in their Filth, and Gore, and to act the Part of the best Physician, that the World cou'd ever boast of, in curing those, whose Minds were attended, with in∣numerable, and great Disorders.
CHAP. XXXIII. LET us see, what Celsus adds, Had he had a Mind, says he, to have giv'n a Proof, of his pretended Divinity, one wou'd think, he shou'd have VA∣NISH'D, the very Moment, he was nail'd to the Cross. But this is just for all the World like the idle, and prophane Talk of those, who deny an Over-ruling Provi∣dence, and are erecting new Schemes, in their warm, and fruitful Imagina∣tion, for the more regular Govern∣ment of the World, and have the horrid Impudence to say, that had the Affairs of it been left entirely to their prudent Management, the Benefit of the Universe had been more effectu∣ally consulted, than now it is, tho' many Things in their Hypothesis are possible, but still they add to the seeming Irregu∣larities, that we allow to have hap∣pen'd, by their Fancyful Schemes, or
they suppose that to be done, which, in some Respects, might have a Na∣tural Tendency, to the Advantage of the Universe, but go, on so many, and such weak Hypotheses, as wou'd destroy the very Nature of Things, and on both Accounts, are perhaps equally guilty, of apparent, and gross Absurdities. But to return a more direct An∣swer to Celsus, I might acquaint him, that our Saviour, by Virtue of his Divine Nature, cou'd have disappear'd, if he pleas'd, as soon as ever he was nail'd, to the Accursed Tree. This is self-evident to those, who believe, and know that he was GOD. And 'tis plain to them, who con∣sult the Gospels, if they don't only rely on their Authority, so far as they imagine, that they serve their turn, and think that all is meer Fiction, and Jargon, that makes in the least against 'em. St. Luke tells us, that After his Resurrection he took Bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and gave to Simon, and Cleopas. And when they Luke 24, V. 31. had tak'n it, their Eyes were open'd, and they knew him, and he vanish'd out of their Sight. But I cou'd easily shew, that 'twas inconsistent with the Design, which he had, in Coming into the World,
to vanish, as soon as ever he was crucify'd. And when we read the History of our Saviour, we must not rest in the bare Literal Sence, as if that were all, that the Holy Ghost design'd. For every considerable Circumstance, that occur in it, contains, or naturally leads us, to some Mystery, or other, which a judicious Reader, with some Difficulty, may perceive. For Instance, the Crucifixion of our Saviour was a Representation, of what is meant by the following Expression of the Apostle, I am crucify'd with Gal. 2. V. 20. Christ; And by those other Words, God forbid, that I shou'd glory, save in Gal. 6. V. 14. the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the World is crucify'd unto me, and I unto the World. His Death was necessary, that we might say, with the Apostle, In that he dy'd, he dy'd unto Sin once, and that the righteous, Rom. 6. V. 10. being made conformable to his Death, might say, with the Apostle, If we 2 Tim. 2, V. 4. be dead with him, we shall also live with him. So his Burial was design'd, to re∣present our Conformity to his Death, and our Crucifixion with him, as St. Paul observes; We are bury'd with him, says he, by Baptism into Death.
But I shall give a fuller Acount of his Burial, of his Tomb, and of the Person, that buried him, in a distinct Treatise, on these important Subjects. At present, I shall only mention, the Linnen Cloaths, in which, Di∣vine Providence did wisely order, that the Body of the Spotless Jesus shou'd be wrap'd, and the New Sepulcher, that was hewn in Stone, or cut out of a Rock, by Joseph of Arimathea, wherein, as St. Luke, and St. John observe, no Man was ever laid before. It may not be amiss, to consider, whether the Account of the Sepul∣cher of our Blessed Lord, which has the Unanimous Consent of Three Evangelists, don't carry with it, some convincing Evidence of Truth, and whether they, who apply them∣selves, to the Allegorical Sence of Scripture, ought not to seek for some Mystical Reason, why our Saviour shou'd be laid, in a New Sepulchre, as St. Mathew, and St. John acquaints us, and why it shou'd be such a one, as St. Luke, and St. John men∣tion, wherein no Man had ever been Mat. 27. V. 60. laid before him. For 'twas highly requisite, that one, whose seemingly John 19. V. 41.
Tragical End was grac'd with so uncommon Circumstances, and such Marks of Honour, that our Saviour, who after he was dead, gave Signs of Life, I mean the Water, and Blood, that flow'd from his pierced Side, shou'd have something, that was very re∣markable, in his Burial, that as he was free from the least Stain of Moral Impurity, being born out of the ordinary Way, of Humane Ge∣neration: So his Burial might bear the Marks, of an untainted Purity, which is Mystically represented to us, by the New Sepulchre, in which he was laid, which was not compos'd, of many Stones, joyn'd together, ac∣cording to the Rules of Art, but was one entire Piece, cut out of the Rock, made hollow, and every Way ad∣apted for the Purpose. I might have made several other Remarks, and from these outward Signs have rais'd my Thoughts much higher, in Contemplation of those sublime Things, which they faintly represent. But they wou'd afford such vast Plenty, of most excellent Matter, as wou'd very well deserve a distinct Discourse, and a considerable Vo∣lume by it self.
At present I shall only say, 'twas fit, that he, who had design'd, to hang upon a Cross, and to dye, like a Man, shou'd be bury'd, in such a Manner, as was suitable to his Myste∣rious Death, and so answer his Cha∣racter to the last. But suppose, the Evangelists had acquainted us, that our Saviour va∣nish'd, as soon as ever he was nail'd to the Cross, then Celsus, and the Infi∣dels, so hard is it to please 'em! wou'd have come upon us, and have said, Good Sirs, What Crotchet came into his Head, that he shou'd stay, 'till he was nail'd to his Cross, before he thought fit to vanish, or how came he to forget, to take this Matter into his serious Thoughts, before he came to the Place, where he was shamefully executed? If therefore, they find Fault with the Evangelists, for not telling us, that our Saviour vanish'd, when he was going to be crucify'd, but giving us an impartial Account of Matters, we have more Reason to blame them severely, for not believing, that our Saviour rose from the dead, and af∣ter his Resurrection, appear'd to his Disciples, tho' The Doors were shut, John 20, V. 19.
and gave Bread to two of 'em, and vanish'd, as soon as he had done dis∣coursing with 'em. CHAP. XXXIV. BUT I can't conceive, why Celsus shou'd say, that our Blessed Sa∣viour did ABSCOND. What Am∣bassador, says he, did ever affect to conceal himself, when One wou'd think, 'tis plain enough, that his Business was to deliver his Embassy? But this is a meer Slander, as is suf∣ficiently evident, from the Words of our Saviour, to those, who endea∣vour'd to apprehend him, I sat daily, says he, with you in the Temple, and Mat. 26. V. 55, ye laid no hold on me. As for what Celsus needlesly repeats, I shall content my self with the An∣swer, which I have already giv'n. He goes on, and says, Did your pre∣tended Saviour in his Life-Time, teach his Doctrine, in a most Publick Man∣ner, and after his Resurrection, only
appear to one Fanatical Woman, or some others, who belong'd to the same wretched Cabal, because, when he was living, the World had more Sence, than to give Credit to him, but every one, forsooth, must believe the Doctrine of the Resur∣rection of Course? But that he appear'd only to one Woman, is most notoriously false. For St. Mathew has the following Words, In the End of the Sabbath, as it began to dawn, towards the first Mat. 28. V. 1. Day of the Week, came Mary Magda∣len, and the other Mary, to see the Se∣pulchre. And behold there was a great Earth-quake, for the Angel of the Lord descended from Heaven, and came, and roll'd back the Stone, from the Door, and sat upon it. A little after he has these Words, Behold Jesus met them, (i. e. the two Marys) saying, All hail. And ibid. 9. they came, and held him by the Feet, and worshipped him. And I have already answer'd what Celsus objects, in the following Words, When he was crucify'd, says he, there were Witnesses enough, but when he rose from the dead, at most he appear'd, only to a small Company of Scoundrels.
I have sufficiently shown, that our Saviour cou'dn't be seen by all, and I shall only add at present, that all Per∣sons were capable at Times, of see∣ing him, with respect to his Humane Nature, but to discern the Bright Rays, or ev'n the least Glimmerings of his DEITY, was what exceeded the Capacity of the Generality of Men. I speak now, of his Humane, and Divine Nature, in Contra-Distinction to each other, and not as having a mutual Reference, and close Con∣nexion. But pray observe, how weakly Celsus talks, having said, That our Saviour appear'd only to one Fanatical Woman, or perhaps a few Others of the same wretched Cabal; he adds the fol∣lowing Words, When he was crucify'd, says he, there were Witnesses enough, but when he rose from the dead, he ap∣pear'd but to a few, whereas had he had any Brains, he must have tak'n the quite contrary Course. But I wou'd fain know what he means by the latter Words? Accor∣ding to his weak Judgment, our Sa∣viour must have tak'n such Methods, as were plainly impracticable, and
grosly absurd, viz. He must be cru∣cify'd, forsooth, in the Sight but of a single Person, and have appear'd to all Men PROMISCUOUSLY, when he was ris'n from the dead, for those Words He shou'd have tak'n the quite contrary Course, will bear no other tolerable Sence, if I am ca∣pable of making a Judgment, upon any Thing. Our Saviour has acquainted us, with the Person, that sent him, in the following Words, No Man knows the Father, save the Son, and in these Words, No Man has seen God, at any Time; but the only Begotten Son, who is in the Bosom of the Father, he has declar'd him. He it is, who reveals the Things of God, to his true Disciples, and we endeavour to form our Scheme of Divinity, upon his most excellent Model, who sometimes tells us, that GOD is Light, and in him is no Dark∣ness 1 Jon 1. V. 5 at all, and at other Times, That God is a Spirit, and they that worship John 4. V. 24. him, must worship him in Spirit, and in Truth. And any one, that will, may learn, for what End, God sent his Son in∣to the World, if he will but consult the Prophecies, relating to our Savi∣our,
and the Writings of the Evan∣gelists, and Apostles, and especially the Epistles of St. Paul. He came, to instruct us, in the true, and most direct Way, to Peace here, and Compleat, and Eternal Happiness hereafter, and to take a most BLESSED ADVANTAGE, if I may so say, of the HORRID IMPIETY, and continual PROVO∣CATIONS of Impenitent, and da∣ring Sinners. Celsus being ignorant of this, has the following Words, He came, it seems, to instruct good Men, and to make free, and Monstrously-large Offers of his Grace, ev'n to the vilest Rebels. Then says he, If he had so Sin∣gular a Fancy to ABSCOND, what Need was there, I wonder, of a Voice from Heav'n, saying, that he was the SON of GOD. And if he hadn't a Mind to ABSCOND, then why did he suffer, and dye? He imagines, I perceive, that the Accounts, which we meet with in the Gospels, are inconsistent with themselves, not being able, with all his pretended Sagacity, to compre∣hend, or frame any just Idea, of the Design of our Blessed Saviour, which was
neither to lye hid altogether, and so be entirely useless, and a meer Cypher in his Own Creation, nor to have his Bright Side, if I may so say, I mean his DIVINE NATURE KNOWN, to many of those very Persons, who had the Honour, to see him, with their Bodily Eyes. The Voice, that came to him from Heav'n, saying, This is my Beloved Son, in whom I am well-pleas'd, isn't said to be heard by the Multitude, as Celsus's Jew imagines, and the o∣ther Voice, which is said to come from the Cloud, was only heard, by those, who went up, with our Saviour, to the Mountain. For such is the Nature of a Voice from Heav'n, that it can only be heard, by those, for whom God is pleas'd, for wise Rea∣sons, to design it. I don't speak here, of the meer Vi∣bration of the Particles of the Air, or any Philosophical Account, that may be giv'n of a Voice, but of a Spiri∣tual Senfation, whereby one, who has Spiritual Senses exercis'd, do's hear God speak, when one, who is deaf, to all the awakening Precepts, of Vir∣tue, and Piety, is entirely ignorant of what is said, I mean, as to any valua∣ble, and lasting Purpose, that it serves.
This I think, is a sufficient An∣swer, to those Words of Celsus, What Need was there, of a Voice from Hea∣ven, saying, that he was the SON OF GOD? And what I have already offer'd, concerning the Sufferings of our Sa∣viour, is a satisfactory Answer, I judge, to the following Words, If he hadn't a Mind to conceal his Power, and obscure his Glory, then sure he was born, under a very unhappy Pla∣net, or else he had never suffer'd, and dy'd. Then Celsus's Jew, is pleas'd to draw a Consequence, which is very unnatural, and unjust. For it do's by no Means follow, that because our Saviour, by his Sufferings, has taught us to bid Defiance to Death it self, therefore when he rose from the Dead, he shou'd have order'd the whole World, to make a General Rendezvouz, and have publickly ac∣quainted 'em, with the Reason, why he left the Realms of Light, and Glory, and thought it worth his While, to come down, into this miserable, and siful World.
For this he had already done, when he said, Come unto me, all ye that la∣bour, Mat. 11. V. 28. and are heavy-laden, and I will give you Rest. This he had also done, in the long Sermon, which he preach'd upon the Mount, concerning the Beati∣tudes, and his Discourses on several other Subjects, which are annex'd to it, and in his useful Parables, and fre∣quent Disputes, with the Scribes, and Pharisees. And St. John acquaints us, in his Gospel, with what a Majesty our Saviour spoke, which is not so much to be understood of the Arti∣ficial Colours of Humane Rhetorick, or a graceful Elocution, and happy Gesture, as of those Divine, Impor∣tant, and Plain, but Commanding Truths, that were the Subject-Matter of his frequent Discourses. And we learn, from the other Gospels, that our Saviour spoke, with such a modest Air of Assurance, and such an Ʋn∣common Authority, as always engag'd the Attention, and Affections, and rais'd the Admiration of the List'ning Audience, many of whom, did, as it were, hang upon his precious Lips, and cou'd gladly have imparted to him their very Souls, if it had been possible.
Then drawing to a Conclusion, he adds, All that I have said, has been bor∣row'd, from your own approv'd Authors, so that I needn't produce any other Testi∣monies, since the Edge of your own Wea∣pons, is sufficiently turn'd upon your selves. But I have already shown, that when he directs his Discourse to our Saviour, or to us, he is pleas'd, to interlard it, with Abundance of ridiculous Stories, that I'm confident, the Evangelists never thought of, and it remains, to be prov'd, that we are wounded by our own Weapons, un∣less his fond Imagination must always pass, for a clear, and sufficient Proof, of one of the greatest Untruths, that was ever broach'd in the World.
CHAP. XXXV. THEN Celsus breaks forth into the following Exclamation, Good God! Can we imagine, that a God shou'd come down, from Heav'n to Earth, and yet that Men shou'd refuse to embrace his Doctrine? But to this I answer, that Moses himself acquaints us, that God did evidently, gloriously, and frequently, appear to the Jews, when Miracles were wrought in Egypt, when they pass'd the Red Sea, and had the Pillar of Cloud, and of Fire, to conduct 'em, and when the Law was declar'd to 'em, in a very publick Manner, and with Circumstances of the most Awful Solemnity, and yet they, who were Eye-Witnesses, of these amazing Instances of an Over-ruling Providence, and of the special Care, which Heaven took of them, were guilty of the gros∣sest Infidelity. For had they really, and firmly believ'd what they had
seen, and heard, they had never been so infatuated, as to have made the Calf, to Have chang'd their Glory, into the Exod. 32. V. 4. Similitude of an Ox, that eats Grass; or to have said to one another, speak∣ing of the Calf, These be thy Gods, O Psal. 106. V. 20▪ Israel, which brought thee up, out of the Land of Egypt. And 'tis too plain, that the Car∣riage of the Jews, when God appear'd so often to 'em, and wrought so many Miracles for 'em, and especially when they were wand'ring, in the Wilder∣ness, as we learn, ev'n from their own Sacred Writings, and their proud Contempt of the Doctrine, which our Blessed Lord introduc'd, tho' he deli∣ver'd it, with the greatest Authority, and confirm'd it by Miracles, I say, 'tis too plain, that the Carriage of the Jews, upon these various, and astonish∣ing Scenes of Action, was owing to the same unhappy Cause, I mean, their wretched Unbelief. And 'tis no great Wonder, that they didn't believe in our Saviour, since they did but tread, in the Steps of their long-descended Ancestors, for whom they profess to have so pro∣found a Veneration.
Then Celsus asks, What God, I be∣seech you, did ever appear among Men, and wa'n't credited by 'em, especially if he was so Politick, as to send 'em Word of his Coming? And how cou'd the Jews themselves, as stupid as they always were, be ignorant of a Person, whom, 'tis well known, they had for many Ages ex∣pected? But I wou'd fain know of the Jews, which were the greater Miracles, those that were wrought in Egypt, and the Wilderness, or those that were perform'd by our Saviour, in the open View of his cruel, and malicious Ene∣mies. If they say, the former were the greater, then 'tis natural enough to suppose, that they, who have resisted the Evidence of those Miracles, which, in their Esteem, are the greater, shou'd much more despise those, which, they think, are far inferiour to 'em; I mean the Miracles, that were wrought by our Blessed Saviour. Or, if they say, that the Miracles of Moses, and those which our Saviour perform'd, are equal, we needn't wonder, that the Jewish Nation shou'd, at different Times, be guilty of giving Way, to the Workings
of their Horrid Unbelief, in Cases that on many Accounts, were Parallel. The Moral Law was first pub∣lish'd to the Jews by Moses, who ac∣quaints us, that in those early Times, their Fore-Fathers were chargeable with the fore-mention'd Sin, and many other notorious Crimes. And when the New Law, and Second Covenant was first publish'd by our Saviour, the Jews plainly show'd, by their wretched Un∣belief, that they were the genuine Off∣spring of those notorious Unbelievers, in the Wilderness, and we may just∣ly apply to 'em, those Words of our Saviour, Truly ye bear Witness, that ye Luke 11. V. 48. allow the Deeds of your Fathers. And those of the Prophet, Thy Life shall hang in doubt before thee, and thou shalt Deut. 28. V. 66. fear Day and Night, and shalt have no Assurance of thy Life. For they didn't believe in him, who came to give Life to a World, that was dead in Sin.
CHAP. XXXVI. WHAT Celsus objects farther, in the Person of a Jew, may easi∣ly be retorted upon Moses, and the Prophets. He finds Fault with our Saviour, for exceeding, as he thinks, the Bounds of Reason, and Modesty, when he threatens, and upbraids, and says, Wo be unto you, and I fore-tell you, which, he says, plainly intimates, that he wanted Power, to prevail with his Hearers, and is an Argument, that he was so far from being A God, that he hadn't the Common Prudence of a Man. But we may easily retort his own Argument upon him. For God himself uses many Ex∣pressions, in the Law, and the Pro∣phets, that sound every whit as harsh, as those Words, Woe be unto you, which our Saviour makes use of, in the Gospels. Woe unto them, says the Isaiah 5. V. 8.
Prophet Isaiah, that join House to House, Isaiah 5. V. 8. that lay Field to Field. And again, Wo unto them, that rise up early, that ibid. V. 11 they may follow strong Drink. And again, Wo unto them, that draw Ini∣quity with Cords of Vanity. And again, Wo unto them, that call Evil Good, V. 20. and Good Evil. And again, Wo unto them, who are mighty to drink Wine. And abundance of Instances of the V. 22. like Nature might easily be produc'd, if Occasion offer'd. What think you, of that Expres∣sion of the fore-mention'd Prophet? Ah sinful Nation, a People laden with Isaiah 1. V. 4. Iniquity, a Seed of evil Doers, Chil∣dren that are Corrupters! Don't we meet with as bitter Invectives, in that Chapter, as any that our Sa∣viour ever us'd? Your Country, says the Prophet, is desolate, your Cities are burnt with Fire: Your Land Strangers ibid. V. 7 devour it in your Presence, and 'tis de∣solate, as overthrown by Strangers. I might also instance in that Place, in Ezekiel, where God says to the Prophet, Thou dwellest among Scor∣pions. Ezek. 2. V. 6.
So that I can hardly think, that Celsus can be in Earnest, when he makes his Jew find Fault with our Saviour, as exceeding the Bounds of Reason, and Modesty, as often as he us'd such Expressions as these, WOE BE UNTO YOU, and I FORETELL YOU. For what the Jew says, may be retorted on himself, since the GREAT GOD do's often speak exactly after the same Manner, and thereby without Doubt, did sufficiently, and as it were, de Novo, authorize our Saviour, to use that Turn of Expression. And if there be any Force, in what he farther objects, viz. That our SA∣VIOUR wanted Power, to prevail with his Hearers; It makes as much against GOD Himself, who is frequently brought in by the Prophets, speak∣ing, with the same Air of Severity, and any one who thinks, that the Jew has Cause, to blame our Saviour, for using the fore-mention'd Expres∣sions, wou'd do well, I think, to con∣sider, that we meet with abundance of Very dreadful Exprobrations in Levi∣ticus, and Deuteronomy, and if the Jew, who is oblig'd, to defend the Wri∣tings, which Moses publish'd, can of∣fer any Thing, to justifie the Expres∣sions
I refer to. We may bring the same, or much stronger Arguments, in Defence of that seemingly-rigid Practice of our Saviour. Nay, we can offer more, in De∣fence of Moses, than the most bigot∣ted Jew, since our Saviour has ac∣quainted us, with its Spiritual, and Mystick Sence, tho' one, who has any tolerable Knowledge of the Prophets, may discern, that the GREAT GOD can't be said, to exceed the Bounds of Reason, when he uses such threat∣ning, and upbraiding Expressions as these, Wo unto you, or, I fore-tell you, and 'twou'd be horrid Blasphemy, to say, That the All-wise Being takes such improper Methods, for the Conversion of Sinners, as argue, that he wants the Common Prudence of a Man, as Celsus makes our Saviour to do. The Christians, who hold, that 'twas the same God, that spoke by the Prophets, and by our Blessed Sa∣viour, can give a rational Account, of those Threatnings, and direful Ex∣probrations, which we meet with in the Scripture. And because Celsus pre∣tends, to be so great a Philosopher, as well as so nicely vers'd in the Opi∣nions, which the Christians hold, I
shall just touch upon a few Things, that I think, very naturally occur. I wou'd ask him, whether Mercury in Homer don't take such Methods, as were proper, to bring Ʋlysses to a Sense of his Duty, when he says, Wretch that thou art! what makes thee Hom. Od. lib. 12. v. 281. rove alone? For 'tis the Part of Syrens, to fawn, and flatter, who, —sit and chaunt 'mong dead Mens Hom. Od. lib. 12. v. 145. Bones. And speak after the following soft, and soothing Manner, Ulysses, Glory of the Greeks, draw near. Hom. Od. lib. 12. v. 184. How then can he have the Face, to say, that when the Prophets, and our Saviour, say, Woe unto you, to wean the Minds of Men from their beloved Lusts, they hadn't a serious, and compassionate Regard, to their precious, and immortal Souls, which they wou'd fain rescue, if 'twere pos∣sible, with a Kind Cruelty, if I may so say, from the ever-burning, and intolerably-scorching Flames of the Infernal Lake.
But, perhaps, he dreams 'tis requi∣site, that the Great God, or any other Person, who bears the Characters of Divinity, shou'd merely consult the Dignity, of his own Excellent Na∣ture, and act in such a Way, as wou'd not be agreeable to the Capacities of Men, nor proper to perswade their Wills, and engage their best Affe∣ctions. And how ridiculous do's he render himself, when he says, that our Sa∣viour wanted Power to perswade? I cou'd produce many Parallel Instan∣ces, from the Writings of the Jewish Prophets, and of the Greeks themselves, and know very well, that some of the most Famous of 'em all, were unable to prevail with their Enemies, their Judges, and Accusers, to leave their Vices, and apply themselves to the Study of Philosophy, as a happy Intro∣duction to a regular Course of Virtue.
CHAP. XXXVII. THEN the Jew, in Conformity to the Principles of Judaism, says, We hope for the Resurrection of the Body, to Eternal Life, and shall be abundant∣ly convinc'd, of the Possibility of it, by the Resurrection of the Expected Mes∣siah, who will be the Glorious Pattern, according to which, we also, shall be rais'd from the Dead. But I'm apt to think, that the Jews will hardly grant, that their Messiah will be the Pattern of their Future Resurrection. However, if they really think so, and don't scruple to talk like Celsus's Jew, I shall ask one Question, that may serve for an Answer, since he undertakes, to confute us, by our own Authors, how comes it to pass, that he has read those Passages, which he thinks, make for him, but seems to have never read, any Thing of our Saviour's Resurrection, at least to be
ignorant of his being the First-Born from Colos. 1 V. 18 the Dead; or can there be nothing in the Scripture, but what he's willing shou'd be there? But since the Jew acknowledges the Resurrection of the Body, 'tis needless to bring Arguments, to prove it, (whether he do's in earnest believe it, and is able to defend it, or no and therefore, as to this Mat∣ter, I shall return him no farther An∣swer. CHAP. XXXVIII. THEN says Celsus's Jew, Where for God's sake, is this pretended Messiah, that you make such a Stir about; for we want sadly to see him, and are ready to embrace his Doctrine? But we may ask him every Whit as well, where is that Glorious Person, who spoke by the Prophets, and wrought so many Miracles, to con∣firm the Law of their Celebrated Moses? I say, where is he, that we may see him, and may believe, that
you are God's peculiar Heritage? You wo'n't say, I suppose, that Almighty God appear'd always to the Jews them∣selves. And why may not we be allow'd to take the same Method, in Defence of our Saviour, who once rose from the Dead, and did so power∣fully work upon the Minds of his Disciples, that their lively Hope of a Glorious Resurrection to an Immor∣tal Life of Inconceivable Happiness, and spotless Purity, did revive their fainting Spirits, and support, and com∣fort 'em, under the most grievous Tor∣ments. Then he says, Did this Pretender come down from Heav'n, on Purpose that we might reject him? As if he were fond of the Basest Affronts, that cou'd possibly be offer'd him. I answer, No; but he foresaw, what Treatment he shou'd have, and fore∣told the Unbelief of the Jews, and made use of it, as a Happy Occasion of the Calling of the Gentiles; Ʋn∣happy, Unhappy indeed for them, but very happy for us, who are not of the Posterity of Abraham. For their Fall, (as Divine Provi∣dence was pleas'd to order the Mat∣ter) was the Rising of the Gentiles,
as the Prophetical Psalmist speaks, A Psal. 18. V. 43 People, whom I have not known, shall serve serve me. As soon as they hear of me they shall obey me. And as the Pro∣phet Isaiah says, I was sought of them, Isa. 65. V. 1. that ask'd not for me: I am found of them, that sought me not. We know, what a Series of Tem∣poral, and Dreadful Calamities the Crucifixion of our Saviour has en∣tail'd, if I may so say, upon the Jew∣ish Nation. And their Mouths wou'd be for ever stop'd, shou'd we upbraid 'em (but God forbid, we shou'd ev'n seem to insult 'em) and shou'd we demand of 'em, as we very well may, whether the Dispensations of Divine Providence toward 'em, don't bear the Awful Marks of his Severe Displea∣sure, and whether Almighty God didn't take a most unaccountable Me∣thod, if his Design were, to show the World, that the Jews were still his peculiar People (tho' too far from being zealous of Good Works) when he suffer'd such grievous Calamities to befall 'em, when their Metropolis was tak'n, and they were at once de∣priv'd of their Magnificent Temple, and all their Pompous Worship, and what∣ever they cou'd offer, to allay the Native Darkness, of this MYSTE∣RIOƲS SCENE of PROVI∣DENCE,
it might be largely insisted on, and improv'd to very valuable Purposes, by the Christians, who ad∣mire the Wise, and Deep Design of GOD, to make Use of the Horrid Impiety of those very Persons, who were Once his PECƲLIAR PEOPLE, as a Blessed Occasion of calling them, who were Strangers to the Covenants, and had no Right to the Glorious Pro∣mises, relating to the Messiah's King∣dom. This was fore-told by the Pro∣phets, viz. That GOD wou'd take an Advantage by the Sins of the Jews, not merely to call any single Nation, but to select some Persons, from all Parts of the Earth, that hav∣ing Chosen the Foolish Things of the World, he might give an ignorant People very clear Discoveries of im∣portant Truths, taking his Kingdom from the Jews, to bestow it on the Despised Gentiles. And I shall quote one Prophecy, concerning this surprizing Turn of Providence, which is in Deuteronomy, where the Prophetical Historian in∣troduces GOD, speaking after the following Manner, They have mov'd Deut. 32. V. 21. me to Jealousy, with that which is not GOD, they have prvok'd me to An∣ger, with their Vanities▪ And I will
move them to Jealousy, with these, who are not a People, I will provoke 'em to Anger, with a foolish Nation. CHAP. XXXIX. THEN the Jew concludes with the following Words, We see, therefore, says he, that he was a Man, like one of us, as we had Reason to believe, both from Reason, and Expe∣rience. But I can't for my Life conceive, how our Saviour, if he was no more than a Man, cou'd ever be so weak, as to imagine, that his Doctrine wou'd obtain, and much less meet with the desir'd Success, that he shou'd ho∣nourably surmount all Difficulties, and Dangers, and prove in the Event superiour to the United Force of the People, Senate, and Emperors of Rome, and all Foreign Potentates. If we don't allow, that he had a DIVINE, as well as a HƲMANE NATƲRE, how can we account for his making
so many, and so remarkable Con∣verts, on a sudden, when the Disad∣vantages were so great, which he labour'd under? Had they all been Men of Reason, that he had to deal with, I confess, the Wonder wou'd sensibly abate. But the greatest Part by far were void of Reason, and little better than Brutes, in a Humane Shape, and which is worse, were Slaves to their unruly Passions, and on that Account 'twas far more dif∣ficult to reclaim 'em from their exor∣bitant Vices. So that we must resolve this Mat∣ter, into his being the Wisdom, and the Power of GOD, let the Unbe∣lieving Jews, and the Learned Greeks, gnash their Teeth, as much as they please, or produce what they can to the contrary. And I might say, that Instances of his Divine Power are not wholly wanting, ev'n at this Distance of Time▪ We shall therefore not only con∣tinue, by the Assistance of the Holy Spirit, to believe in God the Father, according to the Doctrine of his ETER∣NAL SON, but shall also be excited,
by a Holy Ambition, to endeavour to convert the ignorant Heathenss to the Christian Faith, while they by all Means will have it, that we truly are the Persons, whose Ignorance de∣serves highly to be pity'd, (tho' we know very well, that the Case they commiserate is in Truth their own) and they give it out, that we are guilty of Imposture, whereas they do but condemn their own frequent, and most apparent Practice. I am sure, if we lead Persons aside, 'tis a very Happy Seducement, since the Eternal Welfare of their Better Part is Honestly aim'd at, and Effectually consulted by us, who are honour'd sometimes with being Instruments, in the Hand of ALMIGHTY GOD to reclaim 'em. By the GRACE OF GOD, with which, our sincere, and earnest, tho' weak Endeavours, do concur, they are prevail'd with, to leave their former Intemperance, or at least make some slow, and imperfect Advances toward the contrary Virtue, they leave their unjust Dealing, or at least approach to the Confines of Justice, they renounce their Supersti∣tion, and Folly, or at least are con∣ducted
into the High-Way, if I may so say, that leads to the MOST SUBLIME, and MOST USEFUL WISDOM, They leave their Cow∣ardly, and Sordid Temper, and are inspir'd, with the NOBLEST KIND OF COURAGE, which appears, on all just Occasions, but especially when they are call'd, to lay down their Lives, and seal the Truth of their most Holy Religion, with their warmest Blood. To conclude, without Doubt, our SAVIOUR is already come, who was expresly foretold, ev'n by the Jewish Prophets. My Antagonist there∣fore did not a little discover his Igno¦rance, in making his Jew say, That A CERTAIN PROPHET foretold the Coming of the MESSIAH. But because Celsus, who brings in his Jew, speaking, as he imagines, agreably to the Principles of Judaism, thinks fit, that he shou'd break off here, (tho' indeed he adds a sew Things, that are not worthy to be mention'd) I shall here put a Pe∣riod to my SECOND BOOK.
And if I may but have seasonable, and suitable Assistance from above, I shall endeavour in my THIRD BOOK, to answer some remaining Arguments, if they may be so call'd against the CHRISTIAN RELIGI∣ON, which Celsus thought fit to use, and endeavours with all his Might to maintain. FINIS.
