19254.5 39960680 150519
The Married-womans Case: OR Good Counsell to Mayds, to be carefull of hastie Marriage, by the example of other Married-women. To the tune of The Married-mans Case. Maidens all, that are willing to wed, before you are we'l aduised, Make not too much haste to the mariage bed, est the sheetes be too dearely prized: urs to try before you doe trust, any loue not but only for lust; make their pore wiues to leape at a crust: us liues a woman that's marry'd, is marry'd, ues a poore woman that marry'd. liues single has little to care for, ent and et' provd; nceithen wher∣fore est to be brided▪ rest, be possest; udge at the best: marry'd, is marry'd, t's marry'd. rich man, ion, he can, and his shooes, flatly refuse; chuse: , is marry'd, y'd A woman that marries a quarelling Coxcombe, hath cause enough to stae her: For when fd the Alehouse be bringeth a Fox home, hee'l finde some occasion to base her: She seldome shall goe without her face blacke, She shall not want blowe, though ville she lacke, Although from a man hée'l perhaps turne his backe: And thus liues a woman that's marry'd, is marry'd, Thus liues a poore woman that's marry'd. Not only at home hée's giuen to quarrell, but also in other places: Where now and then, to his wonderfull peril, he méees with knocks and disgraces; And then his poore wife his Surgeon must bee, To cure his infirmities ready is shee; Yet for her endeauour ingratefull is hee: And thus liues a woman that's marry'd, is marry'd, Thus liues a poore woman that's marry'd. A woman that to a whore-monger is wed, is in a most desperate case: She scarce dares performe her duty in bed, with one of condition so base: For sometimes hee's bitten with Turnbull-stréet Fleas, The Pox, or some other infections disease; And yet, to her perill, his mind she must please: Oh, thus liues a woman that's marry'd, is marry'd, Thus liues a poore woman that's marr'yd.
The second part, To the same tune. A Woman that marries a drunken sot, must looke for no competent liuing; For he all the day will sit at the Pot, and neuer takes thought for thriuing: From Alehouse to Alehouse all day he will come, While she sits with bread and faire water at home; What-euer he gets, he giueth her none: And thus liues a woman that's marry'd, is marry'd, Thus liues a poore woman that's marry'd. And if she haue children, her griefe is the more, to heare them complaine for vittle, While their wretched father ith' Alehouse doth rore, and thinke of their want but little: Too many such husbands there be, the Lord knowes, That will haue good liquor, how ere the world goes: But she that has such a one, néeds no more woes: Yet thus liues a woman that's marry'd, is marry'd. Oh, thus liues a woman that's marry'd. A woman that is to a gamster espoused, her ease is to be lamented: For he from his gaming can hardly by rouzed, by any meanes can be inuented: Hée's either at ide thrifth, at Tables or Dice, Where while he sits wishing for Kator and Size, His money consumeth away with a thrice: And thus liues a woman that's marry'd, is marry'd. Oh, thus liues a women that's marry'd. As long as his purse with monies is lin'd, he neuer has power to giue ouer; And if he haue lost, tis still in his mind, that he shall his losses recouer: And thus night and day with vaine folly hées led And wasts what should maintain his houshold with bread, Who oft are constrain'd to goe fasting to bed. And thus liues a woman that's marry'd, &c. A woman who's ty'de to a iealous asse, is a slaue to his doubfull condition: She hardly dares looke any man in the face, but still it produceth suspition; He marketh her steps with so watchfull an eye: And though she all basenesse doth scorne and dresse, Yet he dreams of hornes, when he knowes no ca why▪ And thus liues a woman that's marry'd, &c. And thus it is difficult, doe what you can, a perfect good husband to light on: Then let do faire Maiden be in loue with a a that she hath but onely set sight on: For marriage must not be accounted a toy, One houre brings much sorrowes or ioy: Then do not (swéet Damsels) your fortunes By being too hasty of marriage, of marriage, Thinke first how to liue when y'are marry'd. And thus Ile conclude, as I began, with this friendly admonition: Let no woman heedlesly marry a man, before she has tri'de his condition: For time will bring euery action to view, And try whether Louers be faithlesse or true: And thus, gentle Maidens I bid you Adieu; Desiring you well to be marry'd, be marry'd, Or else may you neuer be marry'd. M.P. Finis. London Printed for H. G.
