22076 99900599 177959
ENGLANDS IOY, FOR SVPPRESSING the Papists, and banishing the Priests and Iesuites. 1 KING. 18.21. How long hault yee betweene two opinions? If the Lord be God, then follow him; if Ball, then follow him. 2 KING. 17.24, 25. And the King of Assyria brought men from Babylon, and sow Cuthah, and from Aua, and from Ha, and from Sepharuaim, and placed them in the Cities of Samaria, in stead of the children of Israel, and they possessed Samaria, and dwelt in the Cities thereof. And so it was at the beginning of their dwelling there, that they feared not the Lord: Therefore the Lord sent Lyons among them, which slew some of them. Printed M.DC.XXIV.
ENGLANDS IOY, FOR SVPPRESSING of Papistry, and banishing the Priests and Iesuites. I Confesse that prayer is so forcible, that it openeth the gates of heauen; and as you read, how the holy Ghost descended vpon the Apostles in the forme of fiery tongues, so through the enforcement of Prayer, all blessings spirituall and temporall are let downe amongst the children of God, like Peters sheete. Who would not then aske to obtaine? seeke to finde? knocke to haue it opened? and importune the father of mercy to haue no deni∣all? considering the Parable tells vs, That the wicked Iudge who neither feared God nor man, granted the widowes Petition to be deliuered from her clamors, and ouer troublesome attendancy? and thus are wee beholding to our God. But now, to make God beholding vnto vs, were a secret out of the Treasure-house of heauen indeed, wherein I will be bould to tell you how you may be proficient, and inuite you to wisdomes schoole to learne a cunning which the heart of the naturall man is vncapable of; and this is, to retribute thankes to
God, to giue his glorious name the praise, to bee gratefull vnto him, and to reioyce in hymnes and spirituall Songs when a benefit is imparted, and our soules are comforted. What a story is the story of the Iewes, being deli∣uered from Hamans cruelty and persecution, for the purpose in hand.Hester 9.17, 18 The Text saith; That they rested the same day, and made it a day of feasting and glad∣nesse, a good day, and sent portions and presents one to another: but wherefore was all this? For sauing their liues, and preuailing against their enemies. But, oh thou God of heauen! that ridest vpon the wings of the winde, and holdest the reynes of the kingdomes of the world in thy hand, to let loose or restraine at thy pleasure: Thou knowest that we haue more causes to reioyce and bee glad then the Iewes in their Parim. For, if wee may compare the lesse with the greater, they had but the preseruation of their bodies, and a slight tryumph against their cor∣porall enemies, we are in the way to saue our soules, and put our spirituall aduersaries to flight, the Flesh, the World, and the Diuell. What? Papistrie to be suppressed? The Priests and Iesuites to be banished? And the Gospell of Ie∣sus Christ to flourish?Psalme 45. My soule leapes for joy, and my heart is enditing a good matter. I speake of the things which I haue made touching the King, my tongue is the pen of a ready writer. Oh blessed be God for this alteration? Doth not Ieremy tell vs, that, In Ramah there was a voyce heard,Ieremy 31. Math. 2. lamentation, and weeping, and great mourning, Rachell weeping for her children, and would
not be comforted because they were not. Did not al Eng∣land wring their hands for sorrow, and begin to mourne and be affrighted, when they saw the Papists so arrogantly mischieuous, to insult in euery towne and shire, and mocke vs to our faces, as if Sandolet and Tobiah were to scoffe and deride the Iewes, when Nehemiah came to re-edifie the Temple. And hath not God put into the Kings heart to dam vp this in∣undation, and to keepe the raging Sea within limi∣tation, that it doe not ouerflow the lower and fruit∣full grounds. Marke but the progression of businesse, tell it to your Children, and write it in the Philacteries of your garments. Did not we determin to match with Spaine? And did not Spaine resolue to ouermatch vs in the contract? Did he not resemble an vnmanner∣ly and impudent Guest, who inuited to some neigh∣bourly meeting, would not onely come himselfe, but brought a whole rablement of Cormorants with him: so Spaine must not only condition for a daugh∣ter, but the Papists through the Kingdome haue li∣berty of Conscience, Masse in their houses, Priests within their doores, penalties remitted, and the Pur∣seuants and Officers restrained from their priuy searches, whereby the Spanish Ambassadour presu∣med on his meritorious seruice, and some Papists tri∣umphed, as if the wiser sort knew they were in the right. And was not this a fearefull beginning, and who knowes with what strength the strong man would haue encreased in keeping his possession. But was this all? No, no, the seuerall shiers of Eng∣land, worse then the Iewes that poysoned the springs
of sweet water, in these daies had malitious instru∣ments to corrupt the youth of the Countrey, and the Priests, Iesuites and Friers ranne from house to house, and made them all amazed with crying out; Great is Diana of the Ephesians. But now Papistry shall be suppressed, and the Priests and Iesuites banished. Oh blessed alteration: oh blessed King: oh blessed Parliament. The Am∣bassadors houses were so many hiues to which the drones resorted, who not onely fed vpon the hony of the Bees, but presumed to kill and beat them a∣way which preserued them: Thus these vnconstant people, not onely despised the Pastors of their own Congregations, and vnder protection of the Prero∣gatiue of Kings, rayled on the Lord and his annoin∣ted. The Streets swarmed with ruffianly appariti∣ons, Priests in disguised apparell, and Iesuites in Courtly vestments. And what did they? Not only watch the outward behauiour of men, and gouern∣ment of the City, but tooke aduantage of the weak carnall Gospeller, and set vpon them with the out∣ward glory of a vissible Church. The Cathedrall of Paules had her walkes min∣gled with a number of peremptory and audatious Romanists, who not onely brandeth vs for luke∣warmness and vniustifiable actions, but boasted both of and in their disputations, that they had put the true and learned seruants of God to silence, as if Zedchiah should strike Michaiah on the face, and peremptorily aske him, when the Spirit of God de∣parted from him, to bee infused into such an vn∣derling.
The Court hath not onely euery corner, but pub∣licke walkes filled with Papists, and Hispaniolized temporisers. And what did they? appeare in seuerall disguised formes, and their corrupt hearts taught their tongues to vent forth blasphemy, and notori-abuses: For as you read how Ieremy was taken by his enemies, and brought before the Princes and Priests for weakning the hands of the men of warre, and daunted their hearts that wished well to the peace of Zion: So played these imposturing spirits, charming all men with such subtilties. What? the house Austria to be checked, and the Emperour of Germany to be affronted with petty rebels? beleeue it not it is impossible, take heed, how you aduen∣ture in such a businesse; you see how hee preuailes, and no forces can resist him. What? the Arch-Dutches to be mated with such inferiors, traytors, rebells, and mechanicke vpstarts? Neuer speake it for shame: For at this instant they are no lesse then foure mighty armies, 60000 men ready to deuoure these one night Mushrumps, and setting vpon their terri∣tories in foure places at once, make a fatall ruine of all their fortunes and hopes in a moment. What? Spaine to be threatned with warre, and in∣trusions of hostillity? Who is able to couer the Viena, as Xerxes once did the Hellespont, with a numberlesse, and inuincible Armado, to set vpon the Iland of Brittany as a Conqueror: to trouble Ireland with an army of 20000: to infest Scotland, and ouer∣run it at pleasure, and to make England to tremble with the multitude of his forces, and yet dare you talke of warre and assisting the Low-Countries? But
now God be thanked, Papistry shall be suppressed, the Priests and Iesuits banished, and these mighty Buls of Bassan either haue their hornes sawed off, or their chaps mufled, and what an alteration is heere? Oh let vs then giue thankes vnto God, and con∣fesse his mercy is beyond our apprehension, and his benefits are an Ocean in comparison of our duty, standing poole of deseruing. And seeing the King is so gracious to looke vpon vs like a faire mouing Planet, in a conspicuous Orbe, from whose influ∣ence can proceede nothing but sweet presages: See∣ing our Parliament is so religiously Honorable, to sound the foord of Spaines proiects, and their fun∣tries hassard by collusion, and halting betweene two opinions: with the plummets of true Wisedome, and Zeale to the Gospell of Iesus Christ: Seeing our Clergy are so indulgent ouer Gods Church, that they will not suffer either the wild Bore of the For∣rest to trample downe the hedges, or little Foxes to destroy the Grapes, but are willing that Iehoydas filthy garments may be taken away, and a crowne of pure Gold set vpon his head, seeing the people are prepared to call and hasten one another to go vp to the Temple of the Lord; and rather then Ruben shall rayse a heape of stones like an Alter, to put the people in feare of Idolatry, they are ready to arme with their brethren, and examine how the matter stands, let euery man exhillerat himselfe, and cry out: Why art thou cast downe ô my soule, and why art thou disquieted within me? hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him, he is the health of my countenance, and
my God: So then if Papistry shall be suppressed, the Priests and Iesuites banished, and our enemies, both Forraine and Domesticke ouer-reached: let God haue the glory, the Prince the honor, the Parlia∣ment the commendation, the people the comfort, the Country the benefit, and euery true hearted Christian sing Iopaean, and Epithalamians to Iehouah. Marke the difference betweene flourishing King∣domes through the blessing of reformation, and aduise of good gouernours, and the fearefull distra∣ction of Common-wealths, where irreligion and in∣direct courses ouer-maister: While the ambition of Athalia was predominant ouer her affection, and driue her head-long to al voscenity and tyranny, she committed idolatry, she neglected the house of God, she defiled the Alter, she destroyed the seed-royal, she vsurped the Diadem, and disturbed the peace of Iuda and Israel: But when Iehoas was miraculously preserued and instructed by Iehoiada: Athalia is slaine: Iehoash doth that which is right in sight of God, the Priests repaire the Temple, the Alters are cleansed, the Common-wealth reformed, and the whole Country resetled in order; and was not this a great alteration? In the story of Manasses, and Ammon his sonne, you shall finde these imputations of wickednesse cast vpon them by the Holy Ghost: Hee did that which was euill in the sight of the Lord, hee liued after the abhominations of the Heathen, hee reared vp Alters for Baal, he offred incense to the Host of Heauen, he made his sonne passe through the fire, he vsed enchauntments, obserue times, and dealt with familiar spirits, and wrought much wickednes
before the Lord: But when Iosiah came to raine, and was instructed how? he feared God, and liued vprightly, he cleansed and repayred the Temple: he commanded the booke of God to be read, hee rent his cloathes as strucken with compunction of soule, he made a couenant with God to obserue his testimonies, hee put downe all the offices of Baal, and the groues dedicated vnto him: Hee slew his Priests, he solemnized the Passeouer, and he perfor∣med the words of the Law, which were written in the Booke; and was not this a great alteration? Thus is it betweene the gouernment of Spaine and England, especially the contrariety of Religion, and diuersity of seruing God, betweene Papists and Protestants: the Papists both in Spaine and in Eng∣land, commit blasphemous idolatry, are poluted with incests and fornication, derogate from the Honor of God, to attribute adoration to creatures, passifieth himself in the Laborynth of aequiuocation: Dissemble with God, their owne soules, and all that deale with them, care not by what meanes or treachery they compasse their owne ends, deny Christs presence in Heauen, a maine article of Faith, extenuate the power of the God-head, by allowing a dyety to Creatures, and an inuocation to Diuells. First, they haue made many Saints that are passed downe to Hell: Allow of murther and monstrous impiety, and in a word, are poysoned with the dregs of abhomination, wherewith the whore of Babi∣lon hath filled her cup. The true Protestant and zealous Christian allow∣eth God the preheminence of all adoration, will by o meanes blaspheme with idolatrous exorcismes,
detesteth whoredome, and all incestuous Leprosie, defieth the participation of Gods glory to murther, simply and plainly contriueth his affaires, and kee∣peth his word, though it be to his owne hinderance, intermeddles not with matters of state, except hee be called to place of eminency, is with Anna pray∣ing in the Temple, and continually reioyceth in the conuersation of Gods seruants, and maketh the Church the sanctuary of his soule, in a word, is ru∣led by the directory of Gods word, and neither dare abuse the Maiesty of Princes by inter-iecting a iea∣lousie and suspition betweene the Prince and the subiect, nor runne away with the deceit of his owne heart, in presuming to be more holy then his bre∣thren, or preiudging others either maliciously, or foolishly: And is not this a great alteration? And is not this cause enough to compell vs to thanke God, and acknowledge his mercy and kindnesse, that our King and Parliament would goe and buy eye-salue without money, perspicuously to looke in∣to the enormities of the Church and Common-wealth, and not onely with Nehemiah, abridged the extreamity of vsury: compelled a relaxation of debts and oppression, kept and sanctified the Sabba∣oth,Nehemiah 13. droue the Merchants and sellers of meate out of the City, and at last put away their idolatrous wiues: but also would not suffer the Ammonites and Moabites to come into Gods Temple, but enforced them to banishment out of Ierusalem. For as you read how Iacob after his returne from Laban cleansed his house of the idols: so did Nehe∣miah in despight of Eliashib the Priest, who had al∣lied himselfe to Tobiah a stranger and idolater, put
him from his lodging, and cast out all the stuffe out of his chamber, which in the text is likewise called cleansing, and thus thankes be to God, our great Ne∣hemiah dealt with the Papists, hee hath not onely thought them as prickes and thornes in the sides of good Christians: but now found them as noysome and infectious weedes in the Common-wealth, to choake and eate vp the sweeter Flowers, and spring∣ing grasse; and thus hath the Church of God ex∣ample enough in Scripture to be an enemy to Gods enemies, and fall to reformation with courage and magnamity. Shall such a man as I flye, (sayth Nehemiah) shall such a King as I, (sayth King Iames), that haue been trayned vp from my infancy to deny Popery, and for my Kingdome of Scotland, a very nursery of zealous professors, and mirrour of purity and piety, suffer England to be defiled and contaminated with the poyson of superstition; & now I haue recollected my selfe, shall I giue way to rotten and filthy policy, to eate vpon the heart of true Religion, or suffer pri∣uate ends to thicken themselues, like some obscure and dangerous cloud, to stand as an interposition betweene the Sunny splendor of Gods word, and the faire progresse of gouerment: No, No? I will now be my selfe, and therefore if either the Pope or Spaine deride me with Michol for dancing before the Arke, and bringing it in into Gods house: I will answere with Dauid, I will yet bee more vilde and zealous for the Lord; and as he told his wife, that therefore God had taken the Kingdome from her father, and inuested him with the Diadem, so may King Iames answere Spaine, that therefore God will
make him mighty in his Prouinces, in despight of malignant opposition, and England shall not be on∣ly able to stand firme, like an impregnable rocke in all honor, riches, and prosperity: but of sufficiency to protect distressed neighbours, and recouer vn∣fortunate and surrepted Prouinces: Therefore away yee Priests and Iesuites, packe hence for your liues; and let me not heare any further of your daring im∣postures, and you that will remaine Papists, and with the Adder stoppe your eares, that charme the Charmer neuer so cunningly, hee shall not preuaile ro remoue you, take heede and bee warned, that you liue modestly in your wilfulnesse, neither daring to breake our statutes against those Locusts of Rome, nor to insult your selues, or be offensiue to any ciuill conuersasion by the wrong defence and supportation of Romes corrupted Doctrine: For I protest vnto you by the faith of a Religious King, I take a pleasure in hearing, what God sayd to Abraham: For I know him, that he will command his children,Genesis 18.19 and his houshold after him, and they shall keepe the way of the Lord to doe iustice and iudgment, that the Lord may bring vpon Abraham that which hee hath spo∣ken vnto him: And therefore as I am Gods substitute in the supreame royalty, so will I be his instrument in the practise of this reformation, neither suffring any Papist whatsoeuer to haue the vse of Idolatrous masses, nor to bring vp their owne Children in the eimerian darknesse of ignorance, and diuelish deuo∣tion: For the Apostle tells vs plainely,Colos. 2. that the tormenting the body, worshipping of Angells, obseruing of Dayes, and many foolish humiliati∣ons, likewise denying of lawfull marriage, and
forbidding of meates, and cellebrating of supersti∣tious times, are all the doctrines of the Diuell: and is not this joy to England, and how are our hearts cheered, as you read of the Israelites, that in the time of Salomon reioyced with one another, and made merry eating and drinking vnder ther owne Vines. Thus shall wee see the backes of our aduersaries, and by Gods speciall fauour and grace the banish∣ment of Priests, and Iesuits: But yee Maiestrates of the Common-wealth? let them not immitate the Is∣raelites in this,Exod 40. to rob the Egyptians in their departure out of Egypt? Let them not exporte our treasures, nor enrich other Countries with our spoyles: Let not your Ladies bestow their iewels and ornaments vpon them: For though they could be contented to loue them with gratuities and presents, yet must the Common-wealth reserue some secrets of State, not to be impouerished by the lauish gifts of those, that vnderstand not the Mistery of carying wealth out of the Land, or consuming our siluer in trifles, let none of their houses bee furnished with those rem∣nants of gew-gawes, wherein the ancient idolaters excelled them in be decking their idols, I meane their meduies, crucifixes, relickes of saints, the wood of the Crosse, the milke of our Lady, and a thousand such like trumperies fit for nothing but toyes to play with all, as Apes do with Nut-shells: For as you read how the children of Israel were tainted with the grosse superstition of Egypt: so must needes the ten∣der hearts of your women be captiuated with the reseruation of these things: Let your Purseuants and Officers a Gods name be the researchers of suspected
places, that the very children, which as yet, know no harme, may be sent to the Schooles of the children of the Prophets, and by that meanes learne to liue in the feare of God, and dye in his fauour: Let the po∣tent men be disarmed a Gods name, not to giue them cause to thinke the better of themselues, as if they were to be feared, or reputed dangerous and polliticke: but as you take kniues and other hurtfull things from madde men to preuent mischiefe, that they neither endanger others, nor themselues: In a word, let all good orders be obserued, and a fashion∣able body of a religious Common-Wealth erected, that his Maiesties person may bee secured, the Prince and his Sister protected and pleased, the ho∣nest neighbours subtenated with care and dilligence, out owne Country flourishing with prosperity and confidence, the poore releeued, the trades restored, the City repayred, the Merchant countenanced, the souldiers esteemed, the Clergy-man beloued, the well deserued reuerenced, the weake supported, the obstinate sinner punished, the offender through frailty remitted, and all iustifiable actions practised to the glory of God, and comfort of our own soules. Then if there be cause of warre,Exodus 15.1. and so successe fallen, Moses and Israel shall sing a song of Tri∣umph to the Lord; and Miriam the Prophetesse shall take a Timbrell in her hand, and all the women goe after her with Timbrels and Dances: Then if there be the flourishes of peace, and that Salomon hath finished the Temple of God, and his owne house, he will present himselfe before the Lord,1 Kings 8.22.9 and kneele to his prayers, spredding foorth his hands toward Heauen: And then to conclude both in war
and peace shall England confesse to the Lord. What is man, that thou shouldest thinke vpon him, or the sonne of man, that thou wilt remember him? and so prayse the Lord in his Sanctuary, and in the fir∣mament of his power: prayse him in his mighty acts, and according to the excellency of his greatnesse, prayse him for thinking vpon vs, euen in this particu∣lar of suppressing Papistry, and banishing the Priests and Iesuites. I will meddle with no matter of State, nor ad∣uenture traducing for selfe loue, or aduising others more wiser then my selfe, but keepe close to the shore of this one speciall obseruation: Let the ad∣uersaries of religion say what they can to accuse a Protestant of one murther, whereas God and the World knowes, that not onely the turbulencies of Europe haue beene blowne vp with popish breath, and sufflation of Consistorian Cardinals: but the fearefull slaughters of Princes haue beene audaci∣ously prosecuted, eyther by Friers and Priests, or such instruments, whom the pestilent Iesuites haue sedu∣ced: what state then in the world (especially our re∣formed Churches, if there were no other cause then this affrighting, would endure then in the gouern∣ment, and therefore now this must needes be a hap∣pinesse to England, that at this instant such a mercy floweth toward vs, as a Proclamation against them. How Geneua hath continued, and groaned vn∣der the pressure of many difficulties, yea, endured diuers assaults of whole armies, and volleies of shot, from the mounted Cannons against her; and yet was neuer any attempt made vpon the Duke of Sauoy,
and her aduersaries by her procurement, or suggesti∣on, is well knowne to the world. In all those bloody massacres of France, and ter∣rors of the ciuell warre, what one mischiefe was euer conceiued against the persons of their Kings, and who durst lay hands on the Lords Annoynted? In that fiery triall in the dayes of Queene Mary, when the rages of Papists made them more furious, then a Beare robbed of her Whelpe: What one Protestant slipped out of the circle of obedience, to put her in suspition of her life, yea it is well knowne, that the Protestants of Suffolke aduanced her to the Crowne though they were the first that felt the effect of her ingratitude: In all the troubles of Germany, and ex∣actions vpon the free Cities, how securely did the Emperors goe on concerning their owne persons, and when did you read of a Pope slaine, but as they poysoned one another. I will name but one thing in the Low-Countries, and that is the pride and cruelty of the Duke of Alua; so that if euer an ex∣cuse might haue beene made for taking away a Ty∣rants life, it might here in some action or other haue receiued a iustifiable forme, and yet Alua liued with∣out touch, and practised all manner of wickednesse without controule: whereas on the contrary side in these Countries formerly mentioned, there hath bin a 1000 seuerall murthers committed vpon the bo∣dies of publicke and priuate persons, or at least pro∣secuted with resolution to be actuated vpon aduan∣tage by popish Priests, Iesuites, and their Officiall, and Ministers: Is it not high time then to banish them our Common-wealth, or doe as we haue done (and so it shall be no new matter or deuise of pu∣nishment)
euen hang them vp at Tyborne, or de∣trude them into the house of slaughter, where Iustice is predominant. Marke for Gods sake, marke the secrets of good husbandry, he that meanes to till and manure a wod∣dy ground, must leaue no stumps within touch, least he breake his plow in the labour, and see fresh scien∣ces and sprigs to sprout vp to choake the corne: the best way then is to stocke vp roote and tinde, and follow the picke-axe with a spade, that the ground may bee throughly searched indeede; and so must England doe with this brood of Vipers, eyther pull out their stings, or chap them in peeces: For so were the Priests of Baal serued at seuerall times, and in se∣uerall places by Gedeon, Iohn, Elias, Iosias, and o∣ther godly Priests and Princes: but seeing this good beginning of our gracious and iudicious King, in the quenching the smoake of these fire-brands, which in time would eyther haue blinded our eyes, or put them cleane out, hath cheered our hearts, and powred the balme of Gilead into our wounds, let him haue the glory of his owne handy-worke, and England the joy, and so both he, England, and euery true Christian retribute all possible thankes to the ancient of dayes, whose haires are as white as wooll, and eyes as a flame of fire; and to the voyce that commandeth vs out of Babylon, least we be destroy∣ed in her abhominations: For Babylon is fallen, is fallen, that great City; because she made all the nations drinke of the Wine of the wrath of her Fornication. FINIS.
