a924 99897954 136257
Algier Slaves Releasment: OR, The Ʋnchangeable Boat-Swain. No Prison like the Jayl of Love, nor no such torments found; To those that loyal mean to prove, whose loves are firm and sound; This loyal person ne'r would change, like a true Lover he; Indur'd his Fetters and his Chains, and Betty's Captive be. To the Tune of, Awake, Oh my Cloris. OF a Constant Young Seaman, a Story I'le tell: That I hope all true Lovers will please very well: All his cry was still, though I continue a Slave; Yet the want of my Dear. is far worse than a Grave, All the tedious song Night in close Prison I lye; But methinks I behold my dear love lying by: In the mid'sf of my pains, this doth still give me ease; That is pleasant to me, which some call a Disease. Sometimes to the Gallies I'm forced to go; Though amongst all my Fellows, like a Slave I do Row: And when I am spent with this Labour and Pain; The thoughts of my Love doth revive me again. ANd when with Strappa does sometimes I do meet: I find little Pain, if I think on my sweet: Thus 'twixt Pleasure and Pain, my time I do spend; Yet vow to be Constant unto my Lives end. No Torture nor Prison shall make me forsake, Nor flye from my Reason, for my Betty's sake: I do slight all the Torments bestow'd by the Turk; When I think on my Dear, and in Gallses do work. But a Renegado to make me they strive; I'le never consent to't, whilst I am alive: But will a Couragious true Protestant be: I'le be true to my faith, and be constant to thee. Ah Betty, when Billows do Rage and do Roar, For want of thy sight I am troubled sore: Whilst others are troubled with terror and fear; Yet I am chear'd up with the thoughts of my Dear. No Prison is like to the want of thy sight; Which Locks up my bliss, for thou art my Delight: Though distant I am, therefore only opprest: Yet still my dear Betty doth lodge in my breast. In the midst of my forrows, whilst others do mourn; 'Tis the want of my Love that doth make me forlorn: Yet would not enjoy thee in this cursed place; Though for want of thy Love, my tears trickle apace. But be of good cheer, for every one knows, 'Tis an ist Wind indeed that no comfort blows. And again I do hope thee in England to see: Then who'l be so happy as Betty and me. And now thorough Provsdence. I am return'd; By Shipwrack I scap'd, for our Ship it was burn'd: No torment like mine was, when I was a Slave: For the want of my Betty, was worse then a Grave. FINIS. Printed for J. Deacon, at the Rain-Bow near Davids-Inn, in Holborn.
