B2059aA R232527 99898009 171007
THE Best Way OF Using the True Salt POLYCHREST OF MESSIEƲRS SEIGNETTE OF ROCHEL. LONDON, Printed for the Author. MDCLXXXV.
The best Way of Using the true Salt Polychrest of Mes∣sieurs Seignette of Rochel. THis Remedy has got such a Repu∣tation abroad, that 'tis no Won∣der if some People have been and are still very eager to disco∣ver it. So natural it is for Mankind to inquire into all Things; and such is the Duty incumbent on those who take up∣on them the Cure of Diseases, as to omit nothing that may conduce to so great a Thing as Health is. But we have rea∣son to wonder both at the Ignorance and Baseness of those Men, who, abusing the Trust we had reposed in them for the Sale of this Polychrest, have coun∣terfeited it, and do still counterfeit it (as doth one Mr. Roussean in Paris)
with a Mixture of Sulphur and Saltpe∣ter burnt together. The Effects of which have been too fatal, and have sufficiently taught us how dangerous it was to be surprised by the Equivoque of a Name signifying so contrary Things. It was upon that ground that in the Year 1675 we published a Treatise of all the Imita∣tions of our Polychrest that were then made, wherein we made it appear how much they differed from ours. Of which Truth the Learned were so fully convin∣ced, upon a strict Inquiry made in that Juncture of Time in the most famous Universities of France, and by the Ex∣periments that were made of it in pri∣vate, that I need not inlarge upon it. The only Design of these Papers is, to shew how to use this Remedy more me∣thodically and to more Advantage than has been done hitherto; and to declare withall, that we have took away the Selling of it from Mr. Angibaud, a French Apothecary living in S. Martins Lane, who was intrusted with the Sale thereof. For, having made an ill Use of the Trust
we had put in him, and taking an Ad∣vantage of our dwelling out of this King∣dom, he has made bold to put off, un∣der our Name and Seal, a Powder of his own making. Which has proved so per∣nicious, and has so far indangered the Lives of some Persons of great Quality in this Kingdom, that the true Polychrest was brought into Suspicion. And in∣deed it was natural enough for Persons that could not, through such a cunning Disguise, and so deceitful an Outside, discen the true Remedy from the Coun∣terfeit, to exclaim against the true one, and charge it as a mischievous Thing, though never so beneficial to Mankind. This very Thing was fit to be took notice of, the rather for that our Repu∣tation and the Lives of such Persons are at stake, and because Mr. Angibaud (as we are informed) continues to sell his Polychrest, contrary to a Promise he hath given us under his own hand, that he would not meddle with it any more. 'Tis true he has dressed it up with new Covers, and that the Name and Town
printed thereon are sufficient Marks to distinguish it from ours. But, if on the one side he has stripped it of its former borrowed Out-side, he has inriched it on the other with the Spoils of a small Treatise published by us in French about fifteen Years since. Insomuch that he gives his Polychrest all the Virtues of ours, though he knows well enough, and has been told of it sufficiently, that there is a vast Difference. This second Shift is no less captious and cunning than the first. For he fore∣saw very well, that few Persons would give themselves the trouble of compa∣ring the Copy with the Original. And, if any were so far curious, he knew they could but commend him for his faithful Translation, for having followed his Text close, without adding or diminish∣ing, without changing the Words or the Sense, but rendering the Whole, word for word, out of French into English. The Gentleman was sensible, that in such a Case as this, if any, he must be strict and conscientious, and do things
bonâ fide. The Truth is, we cannot but commend his for it, and return him Thanks forsooth for the Respect he shewed to our Treatise, so far as to ima∣gine it should contain all the Virtues of his Powder, and that it was of it self sufficient to cry it up. One good Turn deserves another; and 'tis but fit we should express our Gratitude to him by these two good Offices. In the first place, I shall make his Apology against those that might find fault with him for having altered the Method of our Book which he was plea∣sed to transcribe. For, whereas we had spoke but towards the end of it of the Use which might be made of our Poly∣chrest with Mineral Waters, without opening at large the Advantages that might come by it, he began his Treatise by shewing how easily his Powder is dissolved in the said Waters, and how it brings them out of the Body, some∣times by Stools, and sometimes by Urine. Now this Transposition is certainly very judicious, and nothing could be better
contrived for his purpose, being it con∣tains all the Virtues one may most ratio∣nally attribute unto his Powder. Which, if capable of producing any good Effect, must needs do it on this Occasion. 'Tis well known, that most of the Salts used in Physick, being suspected in a small quantity of Water, may be drunk with∣out Fear, being well dissolved, and es∣pecially in that vast Quantity of Water which some People use to drink up. In the next place we shall do him the Kindness to shew him a more ready, and perhaps a cheaper, Way than he has to make his Powder. Let him but take what Quantity he pleases of Salt of Tar∣tar, or of any other Alkali, fixed and well-purified, and add to it a reasonable quantity of acid Spirit, and he shall see presently all his Salt purified and chry∣stallized. If he question this Experiment, he may inquire about it of the Physici∣ans, and other Virtuosi, in whose Pre∣sence I made it. They will assure him, that out of that Mixture of Acid and Al∣kali, there comes a Salt of the same Taste
and nature as his, that will stand any Proof. They will testify unto him, that, after it is dryed up and pulverized, if it be thrown into cold Water, it is present∣ly congealed, and turned into chrystal∣line lumps, instead of being dissolved; that those Chrystals are long, sharp∣pointed, and easily reduced into Pow∣der, their figure coming near those of Saltpeter; that being put upon glowing Coals, they melt away to Water, and that in the quenching of them they make them cake together by a kind of Vitri∣fication. They will further tell him, that the same Chrystals being exposed to a moderate Heat, or to an Air somewhat dry, lose presently their from, and are reduced into a Powder almost impalpa∣ble. By those Gentlemen he shall be in∣formed, that our Salt is (much like Cashoo) bitter-sweet, that it easily dis∣solves in the Water, that its Chrystals are hard, compacted, and of the figure of Lozenges, that they never dissolve in the Air nor yet in the Fire, that they nei∣ther quench burning Coals nor make
them Cake; but on the contrary grow red-hot like Iron, and lose only their Transparence, without receiving any o∣ther Alteration whatsoever. The aversion that People always had against Physical Remedy's, but chiefly against Purges, has given us occasion to go about to correct the same, and to take off from them that unpleasant Tast and dreadful Colour which daunts the spirits of the stoutest Men, and often deprives them from the benefit which might be got by those Remedy's. To compass our Design, that which seemed most proper for it is the Matter of Salts; which is not only of the greatest lati∣tude, but withall includes in it self all the Virtue inherent in the Mixts, and contains in a short compass what is dif∣fused in other Body's. Therefore we made choice of three sorts of Salt, the best known to us, to compose a Reme∣dy of many Uses in Physick, and such as could be taken without any great caution. Which Remdey we named
Polychrest, from a Greek Word that signify's a Thing of several Uses. And indeed in the first place it pur∣ges, without irritation and pain, the gross Excrements and the most viscous Hu∣mours, so that it may be safely admini∣stred to the weakest Persons, and to Women at any time of their Child∣bearing, even when they have upon them those griping Pains which are com∣monly the fore-runners of a Labour. And, as it is safe and proper to Women in that Condition before their Deli∣verance, so it is in their After-pains whilst they ly in Child-bed. Secondly, this Polychrest is excellent to remove Obstructions in any part of the Body whatever, and likewise to correct the putrify'd Mass of the Blood, and restore it to its natural state. Which two Property's are of that great conse∣quence, that they should make the Re∣ceipt so much the more valuable; but they are Things the least known, and therefore the least regarded. For many People are prepossessed, that a Physick
don't work, and no Good is to be ex∣pected from it, unless it works violently, and carry's off wth it a great deal of thick Matter; as if this were the only Way to ease Nature, and the Cure of all Di∣seases should depend upon those Eva∣cuations. These Things being premised, our De∣sign is now to propose a short and ea∣sie Method, that may serve on the one side as a Guide and Direction for the sick, and a Ground-plot on the other side for such as shall be appointed to ad∣minister this physical Remedy. Inso∣much that it will be an easy matter for these, according to their Insight and Experience in Physick, to stretch or va∣ry it, as Occasion shall serve, having still a regard to the differency of Distem∣pers, and the symptoms that may happen. I have frobore to descend to Particulars, and that for these three Reasons. First, because they may be easily discovered. Secondly, because otherwise they may be left to the care and fidelity of the Patients Physician. And thirdly, be∣cause
Mr. Angibaud has saved us the trouble of it by publishing our fore-men∣tioned Treatise, which I suppose has been read by several. Therefore it will be sufficient to ob∣serve three principal Ways, in the Use of our Polychrest, according to the three Intentions one ought to have in the Cure of Diseases. The first is in order to Purge the gross Excrements, and all the filth that remains in the Ventricle. The second is, to allay and dissolve the Hu∣mors that ly stagnant in the inward Parts, as the Liver, Spleen, Reins, Mesenterium, Pancreas, and the Womb. The third is, to make it circulate with the Blood, to correct and purify it when putrid, to sweeten it when it is come to be too sharp or acid, to make it fluid when too thick to dif∣fuse it self through all the Parts of the Body, or when it is so active and violent as to run without giving any nourishment of Spirits want still to be∣ing wasted of Spirits want still to be recruited. Now these are the Ways
called by the Physicians, Prima, Se∣cunda, & Tertia Via, this last being the remotest of all. The common Dose of this Remedy to Purge the first Way is six Drams, to be put in a Quart or three parts of a Quart of Water, or of any other Li∣quour. But one may take a lesser quan∣tity both of the Powder and Liquour, according to the Age and Strength of the Patient. As for a Child one or two years of age, the fourth part of the Doze will be enough, being taken in four or five ounces of blood-warm Milk, and that in the space of five or six hours, one hour before and after it has sucked. Half the Doze in a Pint of Water will be suf∣ficient for a Child five or six years old; which he may take at any time of the Day, provided it be some time before he eats, or after he has eaten. The two thirds of the Doze in three parts of a Quart of Water is proper for a Child ten or eleven years old. And lastly, the whole Doze in a Quart or three parts of a Quart of Water, for any Person
fifteen years of Age, and all above that Age. As for such Persons who, by rea∣son of the weakness of their Stomach, cannot bear with such a quantity of Wa∣ter, they may freely reduce it to a Pint, steeping some Licorish therein, to take off a bitterish kind of Taste which some Persons might be disgusted at. The most proper Time to purge with this Remedy is in the Morning, fasting. But, in case of Necessity, it may be ta∣ken at any time of the Day, except im∣mediately after Meals. Two or three Hours after one has drunk the last Glass of the Doze, he may take some Veal or Mutton-broth. In general 'tis to be observed, that in all Diseases contracted by an abundance of Humours, but especially by viscous and melancholy Humours, such as hinder the Digestion and interrupt the course of the animal Spirits (which is observable in a sick Body, by a low intermittent Pulse) the whole Doze must be put in∣to three parts of a Quart at the most, or a Pint of Spring-water warmed, or else
instead of common Water, in some De∣coctions of Roots, Barks, and Aromatical Herbs, the better to extenuate and di∣vide that gross and viscous Humour. And because it sometimes falls out in such Diseases, that the Patient brings up all the Doze, or some part of it, the Way to remedy that is to take again as much of the Dose as is come up, thereby to open the Passage to and precipitate the Humours. But, if the Patient continue to vomit (which happens but too often) then we make use of a purging Salt; and this we give either alone, or with the fourth part of the Doze of Polychrest, in two Glasses of warm Water, or else in some cooling Broth. Which Salt do's evacuate much more than the Polychrest, and is most proper in this Exigence. But in such Diseases as proceed from the overflowing of the Choler, which rarifying or mingling it self with the other Humours, causes Fermentations in the Blood, and provokes Keckings and Vomitings, it is more proper to put the Doze of Polychrest into a Quart or three
pints of Spring-water, and to drink it cold by degrees, one Glass full every Hour or Half-hour. But, if the Patient be under any great Pains, either of Cho∣lick or Diarrhaea, he may take the Re∣medy in the same quantity of Water ve∣ry hot, and as is before said. This Remedy does not only purge gently, but corrects also the Violence of all other Purges, if one put but one half or a fourth part of the Doze into their Infusion. It has also a singular Pro∣perty, viz. to stop and appease the Vo∣miting occasioned by the most powerful Emeticks; which do not only give ter∣rible Jerks to the Membranes of the Sto∣mach, but leave commonly a bad Impres∣sion, especially upon a weak Stomach. To prevent which, put a third part, or one half of our Doze, into one half pint of cold Water, and take it half an Hour before the Emetick. And, if the Opera∣tion of the Emetick be such as to cause too violent and constant a Vomiting, 'tis but taking the fourth part of the Doze into a great Glass of Water or warm De∣coction.
The Vomit having done work∣ing, there remains still commonly some Disposition to vomit, with a swimming of the Head; and the long stay either of Antimony, or of any other Emetick in the Stomack, is known to be of a dangerous Consequence. Which to avoid, do but take one half or a third part of the Doze of Polychrest in a great Glass of Water. The same will remove the pricking of the Sulphurs and the Salts of Antimony, and precipitate them with the Humours disgorged into the Stomack by the low∣er Parts, which is the most natural Way. The second Way is to remove the Ob∣structions which are bred in the Liver, Spleen, and Mesenterium, in the Pancre∣as, the Reins, the Bladder, and the Womb; from whence proceed a great number of long and stubborn Diseases, such as Rhumatisms, heaviness of the Head and Head-akes, Sleepiness, Apo∣plexy, Palsy, Cachexy, Jaundice, the Dropsy either of the Brain or Breast, of the low Belly or the Womb, the Asthma, or shortness of Breath, Ischuries or re∣tentions
of Urine, the Nephreticks, the Gout, and Sciatick. To which add di∣verse other Diseases, caused by those Ob∣structions; which do not only obstruct the Passage of the Blood, but make it besides too sharp and too brackish. And of this Number I reckon Restlesness, great Pains in the Head, Giddiness, Phrensy, the Contractions of the Nerves, Convul∣sions, Inflammations of the Breast, Hy∣sterical or Hypocondriacal Vapours, and the Scurvy. In all which Diseases, the chief end of this Remedy being to separate and ex∣tenuate the thick and stagnant Humours that lay in the narrowest Passages, and to give free passage to the Blood, and to the motion of the Spirits, this following Method is to be observed. First of all, the Patient is to be pre∣pared by a Purge with a Doze of the Polychrest, in a pint or a pint and a half of River or Spring Water, to carry off by this means the coursest Excrements, and to facilitate the distribution of the remedy through all the Parts of the
Body. After which, the very Night af∣ter the Purge, he may put a Doze in a quart or three pints of Water, and take a great Glass of it three hours after Sup∣per, and another the next day very ear∣ly, that he may sleep upon it, and the rest in the Day-time between Meals, con∣tinuing the use of it during five or six Days more or less, according to the Na∣ture of the Disease, and the Condition of the Diseased. Nay he may, if he plea∣ses (which is our usual Method) forbear drinking of it between Meals, so he takes a great Glass in the Night when he goes to Bed, and the rest in the Morning fast∣ing, in the compass of two or three Hours. But for a greater ease to the Patient, and to follow the Indications that offer themselves, it is proper enough to put the Remedy into different Liquours. So, when the Patient is of a bilious Temper, it may be put in Liquours made sowrish with the Juice of Lemons, Gooseberry's, or Barberry's, &c. if he be of a moist or pituitous Temper, let it be put in Ptisanes,
or Decoctions, made with Roots, Barks, Leaves, or aromatical Flowers. And, if one would have these Liquors work by Stools rather than Urine, they must be drunk very warm, walking abroad in the Air, or taking some other Exercise. But, if he had rather they should work by Urine than by Stools, he must take it cold, and that by Intervals, keeping his Bed or his Chamber, and adding to his Doze a little Spirit of Sulphur or Vitriol. Instead of Decoctions he may use River-water, which runs through the Body much quicker than Spring-water. The same will become mineral, and very strong, if one put the fourth or third part of the Doze upon two Quarts to be drunk in the Morning, fasting, within the compass of two or three Hours, du∣ring the first five or six Days, diminish∣ing afterwards the Doze of the Powder to the fourth part or something less up∣on the same Quantity of Water. The use whereof must be continued yet a while, according to the Patient's Distemper.
The Third and last Way of using this physical Remedy is in order to have it mingled with the Chylus and the Blood; that running by this means into the most secret Conduits, it may qualifie and re∣fresh the too sharp and inflamed Choler, correct and dulcifie the other Juices too acid or too corroding, and restore the whole Mass of Blood to its true Consi∣stence, and that balsamick Quality it must have to distribute to all Parts of the Body the Nourishment they want. To do this effectually, the two first Ways must be made use of, or else one must be at least sufficiently purged. This be∣ing done, put the third part of the Doze into a Quart of Water, or any other convenient Liquor, and take a Glass on't two hours after Suppper, and another in the Morning. Sleep upon it, if you can possibly, and drink the rest in the Day-time, an Hour before every Meal, and two or three Hours after. So the whole Doze will be taken in twenty four Hours, whereby the Patient shall be brought to a good Temper, and find a
great deal of ease; his Water will come more freely, and his Belly will be loose∣ned, without any other sensible Effect. If so be the Patient is of a lean and dry Constitution, or is wasted away by his long Distemper, 'tis fit in such a Case he should be bathed in a Room for several days together, or (if he be too weak) every other day. But the Water must only be lukewarm, whereby to provoke an insensible Transpiration, or at the most a little Moisture on the Skin. And, during the Bath, the Polychrest shall be used just as before, only the Patient shall drink a Glass on't at his entring into the Bath, and some Glasses while he is in. Which Method is to be observed in all Diseases proceeding from the Corruption of the Blood; such as consumptive, pu∣trid, and hectick Fevers, quotidian, ter∣tian, and double tertian Agues; also in all Venereal Diseases, and all such as pro∣ceed from an exceeding great Efferves∣cency or Irritation of Humours, as bloo∣dy Fluxes, whether they proceed from the Brain, or from the Breast, from the
Stomach, or the Reins, from the Hae∣morrhoids, or the Womb. But, if the Patient be fat, and of a moist Comple∣xion, 'tis fit he should take some Exer∣cise during this Use of the Remedy, and a convenient Sweating will be very pro∣per for him. Thus you have in general the Chara∣cter of this Remedy, and the Method to be used for the Cure of the fore-menti∣oned Diseases. Those that judge only of the Goodness of Physick by the great quantity of Drugs, and that are used to seek their Ease in great Compositions (though their Virtue does commonly fall short of their shew) will undoubted∣ly look upon the Virtues we attribute to our Salt, as a Piece of Exaggeration. But we are fully perswaded on the other side, that those who understand Physick, being conscious that the plainest Physicks are the best, will think well of our Re∣medy; especially if they do but examine the Nature of it, and consider the Vir∣tues of Salts and mineral Waters, the Ef∣fects whereof do oftentimes exceed the
Expectation both of those that take them, and of those that prescribe 'em. What remains, before we conclude, is to acquaint you, that our Reflections and long Experience have taught us, that Polychrest does not work upon all Occa∣sions alike, but that it operates best in case of a Cholick, a Diarrhea, and Gripings in the Guts, in an over-flowing of the Choler, in hysterical Suffocations and melancholy Vapours, and in the men∣strual Retentions. Upon these Occasi∣ons I may say that Polychrest has signa∣lized it self, and has often exceeded our Expectations. And therefore, though from the Ground-plot we have already laid, one may guess what course must be taken in those kind of Diseases, yet for the publick Good we shall inlarge a lit∣tle upon it. In case of a bilious Cholick (which is easily discerned by the Temper of the Person troubled therewith, by the Dis∣eases he is subject to, such as burning Fe∣vers and Light-headedness, by a bitter Taste in the Mouth, by a frequent dis∣position
to Vomiting, and by a yellow∣ish Complexion) let the whole Doze be put in a Quart of Spring-water, or thin Veal-broth, and let the Patient take it as hot as he can possibly, in the space of an hour and a half or two hours. But, if the Pains continue, and the Belly don't grow loose, let him take another Doze either immediately after the first Doze is drunk up, or else six or seven Hours after. And, during this Interval, let him take some good nourishing Broth. For a pituitous Cholick (which is dis∣cernable by the good Complexion of the Person which is troubled with it, by the frequent Waters that run out of his Nose and Mouth; and by the Rhumatisms he is often affected with) let the whole Doze be put only in a Quart of aroma∣tick Decoction, or (for want thereof) of plain Water, and let the Patient take it, in the space of an Hour or an Hour and a half at the most, as hot as he can drink it. And, if that be not sufficient, (as most times it is not) let him take ano∣ther Doze, Glass upon Glass, if he can
bear with it; or else an Interval may be allowed him, during which the Patient must take good nourishing Broth. As for a windy Cholick, common to pituitous and melancholy People, and easy to be discerned by the Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and Hypocondria, and by the Winds those Persons make both upwards and downwards, by a con∣siderable stretching of the Ventricle, by the grumbling noise and swelling of the Abdomen, by the bringing up of Nou∣rishments and Remedies, by being bound, and by a closing up of the Anus where∣by the Injection of Clisters is often hin∣dred; for this kind of Cholick, I say, let the whole Doze be put into a Quart of aromatick Decoction, adding to it some Flowers of Camomil and Claver, and let the Patient take it hot, one Glass full every quarter of an hour, or every half hour. At the same time let there be some Fomentations of Rue, Camomil, and Claver, be apply'd to the Part. And, whereas this is the most malignant and obstinate of all the Cholicks, two or
three Dozes will be requisite, to be ta∣ken quicker or sloower according to the Strength of the Patient. This withall take along with you, that whatever Cholick it is, assoon as the vi∣olent Pains are allay'd, it is absolutely necessary by emollient or wind-expelling Clisters to carry off the Humours that are got into the Bowels, and to purge the Patient assoon as he shall be in a con∣dition to endure new Evacuations, lest some leven should remain, which might disorder him again. For a simple Diarrhea, let the Pati∣ent take half the Doze in a Quart of Decoction, either of Barley or Bran. But, if there be any thing of Bloud, let there be added to the Decoction some handfuls of red Roses, and of grains of Wall-wort very ripe, to be infus'd or boyl'd therein. The Use of which must be continued for the space of two or three Days, till the Humour be a little sweetned. After which, the Patient must be purged with the whole Dose, in a Quart of Water, or of the same Deco∣ction.
In case of a Cholerd Morbus, where∣by the Patient lies under a great misery, first an attempt must be made to put a stop to his Vomiting by a Bo∣lus of Treacle and Myrrh, with a grain or two of Laudanum. Assoon as he has got some rest, and hath recover'd strength by some Yolks of Eggs, let him take by little and little, and from time to time, a Doze of the Powder in a Quart of Decoction, or warm Water. His Vomiting being stop'd, and the Cho∣ler having ceased its fermentation, let him be purged with the whole Doze in a Quart of Water, to be taken in the space of an hour. Which must be reite∣rated as often as occasion shall serve, that nothing may remain either in the Stomach or Bowels, that may in time a∣waken the Distemper. For hysterical Suffocations and melan∣choly Vapours, let half the Doze be put in a Quart of cold Water, to be taken in the space of two or three hours. But, if the Patient have lost his Senses, and be not in a condition to take it in that
manner, let some dry Powder be put into his Mouth, or let there be so much of it dissolv'd in some Water as he can take, which he shall take by spoonfuls, till he comes to himself again. Then let him take the half Doze as aforesaid, and the next day let him be sure to purge himself with a whole Doze in a Quart of cold Water. And, forasumuch as those suffocating Fumes are only caused by Obstructions and fuliginous Matters re∣maining in the small Vessels, where they ferment from time to time, and make Ex∣plosions as it were, it would not be im∣proper to cleanse the Conduits, by ta∣king it several Days together as an open∣ing Remedy. This were the way to pre∣vent their frequent returns, and to ex∣tirpate the Evil which oftentimes is but palliated. In case the menstrual Blood be stop't, which often breeds the Jaundice, and is the common cause of hysterical Vapours, the Polychrest ought to be used in the manner prescribed for all Obstructions in general. Only 'tis to be observed, that
the Patient must purge her self with it two or three days before the time her monthly flowers should come, that it may operate the better, and help Nature the more effectually in this kind of flow∣ing. But, if this Evacuation be suppres∣sed long since, and that several Ways have been try'd to rectify it, the Poly∣chrest must be used with the same assi∣duity, and as long as is usual with Mine∣ral Waters. I mean, that one half or a fourth part of the Doze be put in a Quart of River or Spring Water, and two or three Quarts of the same be drunk up every morning, for the space of four or five Weeks. Now this Remedy has in this Case many Advantages over the mineral Wa∣ters. As, amongst others, the Certainty of its Nature and Effects, which cannot be asserted of the Minerals which im∣pregnate the mineral Springs. For, be∣sides that those Minerals are not always certainly known, there happen sometimes considerable Changes from Year to Year, by the Mixture and Concourse of new
Matters, whereby their Property is much altered. Moreover 'tis a certain Truth, that there is no danger of keeping long in the Stomach this great quantity of Water that is drunk; neither is it a small Conveniency and Satisfaction for one, that he can take this mineral artificial Water at all Times, and in all Places, 'Tis doubtless a great Conveniency for such Persons as are confined to a Place, either by their Calling, or for want of competent Means to transport themselves to the Waters. ADVERTISEMENT. THE Polychrest of Messieurs Seignette is sold by Monsieur Barbeau, in Pall-mall, at the Sign of Bourdeaux Town. Every Doze is made up in a Paper, with a Swan printed upon it, and this Motto Cum Sole & Sale omnia fiunt. The Pa∣per is sealed up with a Seal, having the Name of Seignette in it.
