B4416 E455_6 99864459 162027
A BREVIATE OF THE WEAVERS BƲSINESS Before the Honourable Committee of the House of Commons in the Star-Chamber. July 28 1648 THat their Opponents in their Petitions referred to this honourable Committee. charge the said Go∣vernors to have committed many things contrary to the Statute-lawes and Ordinances of the said Company. And the said Governors have put in their An∣swer to each particular charge, in some things justifying their practices, either by prescription, by their Charter confirmed in Parliament, by the Statute-Laws, or by the allowed Ordinances of the said Company; And in other things by deniall of the charge, referr the same to the proof on both sides. Now forasmuch as there is no other rule of safety for the said Governors to act and regulate by, or their members to submit unto, then the Ordinances of their Company procured by common consent, and confirmed by the Judges, according to 19. H. 7. Cap. 7. (which they are respectively engaged by Oath to observe) untill the said Ordinances be by the same, or a higher Power repealed. And forasmuch as the said Opponents charge the said Governors with breach of the said Ordinances: The said Governors doe therefore humbly pray this ho∣nourable Committee, That in the drawing up of the Report to the honourable House of Commons touching the Pre∣mises;
you will be pleased to permit the Clerk of the said Company to attend your Honors with their Books of Ordi∣nances under Seal, together with the Statute-Book, and other matters of Record by them quoted; to the end their practises may be examined by them, and this honourable Committee may receive full satisfaction. That the Governors of the said Company have admitted Stran∣gers,contrary to Law, to the undoing of the Petitioners and their Families. That in 47. years there hath been admitted into this Company 317 Strangers, that fled into this Kingdom for Religion, and were allowed by the State to inhabite in this Realm, and to have Chur∣ches and Congregations not onely in London, but in Norwich, Yarmouth, Colchester, Canterbury, and other Cities and Maritine towns in this Kingdom where Strangers doe still live, and exercise Weaving without molestation. 2. These Statutes still in force, viz. 14. H. 8. Cap. 2.21. H. 8. Ca. 16. and 32. H. 8. Ca. 16. give liberty to Strangers born, Denizens, or not Denizens to take Apprentices and Journey-men, (provided they be born under the Kings obeysance) and appoint the Master and Wardens of Companies in London, to regulate all such Strangers or Denizens, and their Manufactures, as doe use their respective Arts within two miles of London; and to admini∣ster the Oath mentioned in the Star-Chamber Decree, made 20. H. 8. as by the same Statutes may appear. 3. These Ordinances confirmed by the Judges, viz. 31, 45, & 53. appoints the ordering and regulating of Strangers, Denizens, and Forainers. 4 By prescription by their Charter, confirmed in Parliament, And by the 15 and 17 Ordinances of this Company the said Go∣vernors have liberty to admit whom they conceive fit into their Corporation. 5. Whereas their Opponents in their Petitions, and before this honourable Committee have from time to time in a most lamen∣table manner alledged and affirmed, that they and their families (being many thousands) doe want emploiment, and are undone in their Trade by reason of the multitude of Strangers that are continually admitted into their Company. The said Governors doe upon their reputation affirm unto your Honours, That by the diligentest search and course they can
possibly take, they cannot discover that there is twenty Master-strangers admitted that weave any of those kindes of ware which these Opponents were bred up unto, or deale in, the Strangers being generally Weavers of broad Silks and Stuffs; and the said Opponents are Weavers of Ribbonds and Laces. Lastly, the said Governors doe manifest that they have really endevoured to procure a restriction of the comming over of stran∣gers Weavers in the future; as by their Bill twice read in the house of Commons at the beginning of this Parliament, which is now before this honourable Committee, may clearly appear. Which Bill, together with a new draught of a Bill since delivered to this honourable Committee, the Governors humbly desire may be ta∣ken into consideration. That the Governors have admitted many Natives that have not served seven years to the said Trade. This Charge the said Governors deny, affirming, That they never admit any native Weaver, untill they have good testimony either upon Oath or credible Certificate, that each partie to be admitted hath served seven years apprentice to the said Trade, this being the onely rule and practice in all the Companies in London. Moreover, if it be found that any persons have given false testi∣mony or counterfeited any Certificate, they are liable to punish∣ment; but the Governors are not therefore to be blamed. That the said Governors have exacted Fees of those they make Free, viz. a Silver spoon and ij. s. iiij d. 1. The 27 Ordinance of the said Company in express words appointeth them to take the said Spoon; yet they remit it to all that are not well able to give the same; and there is not one person of an hundred but gives it freely. 2. The spoones so received are not diverted to particular or private uses (as by some hath been suggested) but are duly accoun∣ted for every yeer; therefore if they should be inhibited to be taken in the future, the prejudice will bee to the stock not to the Gover∣nours. 3. As touching the ij s. iiij d. above mentioned it is not paid to the Governours, but to three Officers of their Company, it being the usuall constant fee which hath been paid and continued time out of mind, unto the said Officers and their predecessors for gi∣ving the oath, recording the testimony of each mans due service to the trade, and his admittance thereupon, and for posting them
into severall other books, and for other services and attendances in and touching the premises; The said Officers having but 4 l. a peece per annum for their service, besides such accidents as ma∣king free, binding Apprentices, &c. That the Commonalty are deprived of their right, in being de∣nied their voice in electing of the Bailiffs and Wardens of the said Company yeerly. Note, That in most Companies the Master and War∣dens are chosen by the Assi∣stants only, without the Livery.1. The Bailiffs of this Company,ever since they were a Corpo∣ration (which is about 500. years) have constantly been nomina∣ted and elected, by the old Bailiffs, Wardens, Assistants, and Li∣very of the said Company only, and that by scrutinie, without any interruption or intermixture of any other persons, under the degree of the Livery whatsoever. 2. This manner of electing the Officers of Corporations by a certaine select number of rank and degree (as is practised in Lon∣don and other popular Cities) hath long since been resolved in a case of Law by all the Judges, to be good and agreeable with the Law, for the avoiding of popular disorder and confusion, (not∣withstanding the word Commonalty specified in their Charter,) as may cleerly appear in the Lord Cookes fourth Report, fol. 77. and 78. touching Corporations. 3. When any Common-halls are called in London for the pub∣lick service of the State or City, as for the choosing of Magistrates, granting of Loan moneys, &c. none but the Liveries of the seve∣rall Companies are summoned or permitted to be there, and what∣soever they conclude upon, is binding to the severall members of each respective Company in London; otherwise instead of regular resolutions, nothing could be produced but terror and confusion. Lastly, the said Governors conceive, that their custome being of that antiquity, is amongst the rest of the customes of London con∣firmed by Magna Charta. That the Governours have received the treasure and stock of the said Company, and refuse to give any account thereof. 1. The Governours humbly conceive, that this Honourable Committee at the first general hearing were resolved to decline this particular charge, in regard it then appeared not only by their Councell, but also by an Order in Chancery, that the same busi∣nesse brought thither by their Adversaries was yet depending in that Honorable Court; yet neverthelesse their opponents have since procured the said accounts to be perused, and have taken upon
them to put in severall exceptions against the said accounts, which exceptions were received by this Honorable Committee 7. Julii instant, at which time it was thought fit and ordered, That the Governors should not put in any answer unto the said exceptions. Therefore the said Governours are inforced to remind your Ho∣nors of some heads of what they have formerly presented to this Honorable Committee touching their accounts, viz. 1. That the accounts of this Company have been yeerly exa∣mined, audited, and allowed by Auditors chosen and qualified ac∣cording to the fifth and fortieth Ordinances of the said company, confirmed by the Judges according to the Statute of 19. H. 7. Cap. 7. 2. That all moneys expended out of the common stock for the necessary and publick affaires of the Company are allowed by the said fortieth Ordinance, & therefore they ought not to be excep∣ted against by their Opponents (who being members of the said Company are sworne to the due observance of the said Ordinan∣ces aswell as their Governours) but to be concluded by the said Ordinances. 3. If the generality of this or any other Corporation, have a right to except against any part of the disbursments of their Masters and Wardens, then their power wil hold equall to except against all their accounts, which if graunted, it will unavoydably follow, that Governours cannot purchase, let or set, or take up mo∣nies at interest upon the Common-Seale of that Corporation, for the defraying of any publick service, without the consent of eve∣ry individuall member of the same Company, the dangerous con∣sequence whereof, the Governours humbly leave to your Honors most serious consideration, humbly praying that no such excepti∣ons may ly against their accounts, nor any such thing brought in president in the future against them, or any other in like case. That the stock of their Company is wasted, and that there is no provision made for their poore. 1. In defence to this Charge the said Governours answere,That they have land and arrears of Rent in Ireland, which if they did enjoy would amount unto a thousand pound, besides they have lent and paid for the use of the State, since 12. October 1640. above One thousand pounds more. 2. They affirme that they have 46. setled Pensioners of their Company, besides above 60. other poore, that they releive quar∣terly; and could they be freed from these expensive troubles, they
might soon by the blessing of God raise a good stock for their Company. 3. The said Governours humbly intreat your Honours to take speciall notice, that these Opponents who question and except against the accounts of the said Governours, which have beene duly audited and allowed according to the allowed Ordinances of the said Company, have themselves for many yeers together recei∣ved the Journeymens quarteridge, (which if duly collected, is equivalent to the Masters Quarteridge) and have shared it amongst themselves, refusing to give any account thereof unto their Governours, contrary to their severall Oathes; which said Quarteridge belongeth to the stock of the said Company, as by the 43. Ordinance of the said Company may clearly appear, and not to their private uses. That the said Governours have dismissed the Yeomandry con∣trary to an Order of the Court of Lord Major and Alder∣men. The said Governours affirme, that they have not dismissed them, but in regard they are the Governours substitutes, and for that by Law the said Governours are lyable to answer all misde∣meanours committed by them, And for that the said Opponents have practised to sow sedition betweene the Governours and their Members, &c. Therefore the Court of Assistants and Livery made an Order for the regulating them and their searchers, for the safety of the said Company in the future, according to the 5.26. and 43. Ordinances of the said Company. That the said Governours doe not put the Lawes of the Realm, the Ordinances of the said Company, and Orders of the Lord Major and Aldermen in execution against Offenders. 1. As by the Law the said Governours may not proceed a∣gainst their Members before their offence be proved, so when due proofe hath beene made of any offence, the said Governours have duely proceeded against Offenders, according to their re∣spective Oathes. 2. The Orders of the Court of Lord Major and Aldermen, produced by the Opponents for suing one Richard Fletcher, and o∣thers in those Orders specified, bears date in Anno 1627. and 1630. which was long before these Governours were in place; and therefore ought not to be charged therewith. That the said Governors purchased a Patent and Contract, very destructive to the Trade and Society.
This Contract the said Governours withstood 3. yeers together, and endeavoured their utmost to have avoyded the same, which said Contract was by the procurement of the said Governours, discharged in July, 1640. And as touching that which their Opponents terme, a Patent or Monopoly, the said Governours doe affirme, that the Commonwealth hath beene, and at present is very much prejudiced by adulterated, insufficient, and cheating Wares and Commodities, which are thereby inhibited, and which had long since beene prevented, (had not the said Charter beene under restraint by means of their Opponents) All which is more fully set forth in the Governours answer to this particular charge received by this Honorable Committee and reade, 22. June last, unto which together with their former Answer they referre. The cause why many Weavers, as well as other Tradesmen, want imployment, is the generall obstruction of Trade that hath been occasioned through the distraction of the times, for if there were a free open Trade again, albeit there were more Weavers then there are, yet they could not want imployment. Is the great prices that silke hath been at of late, inso much that the Weavers can hardly make one of one. Is the importation of Woven Laces, and Ribbonds from France, and other forain parts, which are inhibited by the Statute of 19 H. 7. Cap. 21. It, that as many Weavers Apprentices went out in the States Service since these troubles began, so their Masters tooke other Apprentices in their roomes, and now many of the first being returned againe hath encreased the number of Weavers ex∣ceedingly. This is the summary account of the Governours answers de∣livered at severall times unto this honorable Committee. And now the Governours humbly desire your Honors patience to peruse these ensuing particulars. 1. That in the progresse of this businesse their Opponents, from time to time, have enlarged their accusations farre beyond the bounds of their petitions referred to your Honors, or their proofs touching the premisses. 2. The said Governours have used their utmost endeavours by way of Treaty with their Opponents, to have composed their differences according to the advice of this Honorable Committee.
But because the said Governours could not condescend to some of their Opponents demands, (which tend to the totall subversion of the ancient established Government of the said Company) the said opponents brake off, & declared they would treat no further, with them; an account whereof the said Governours and Livery presented to this Honorable Committee, subscribed by them 12. April last, which they humbly desire may be by your Honors taken into consideration. Since which time the said Opponents, to raise up the difference between the members of the said Company and the said Governours, have printed and published a most notorious libell, wherein they cast many scandalls and reproaches upon the said Governors, & wherein they term the said Governors cheaters, affirming that within this few yeeres they have received 1200 l. in bribes, and shared it amongst themselves; which libell being full of other notorious scandals & calumnies (to the end it should be taken for truth) they entituled it, [The humble representation of the Commonalty of the Company of Weavers to the high Court of Parliament] but never durst deliver it to the Parliament to this day: Which Libell, together with severall other Libels by them printed and published; together with their other practises in going from house to house to incense the people against the said Gover∣nors; hath made them so odious, that now many of their Members in stead of paying their duties, and conforming to government, refuse to pay any more, and reproach and threaten the said Governors when they are in execution of their service for the Company, to their great discouragement and danger. And the Governors hope this Committee will call to mind the said Opponents uncivill and tumultuous carriage before this ho∣norable Committee, both against them, the Governors, and their Councell; to which the Governors might add their many other strange and feditious practises to enforce their clamorous and false aspersions cast upon the Governors; and that during the depen∣dency of the Cause upon their own complaint before the Parlia∣ment, and by way of reference before this honorable Committee; of which insolencies and bold miscarriages, as the Governors hope to finde a time to be heard upon their further Information, so they humbly expect and desire, That this honorable Committee, for so much as thereof hath already appeared before them (the matter, as the Governors conceive, concerning the Honor and Justice of Parliament) will he pleased to take the same into their due and se∣rious consideration. FINIS.
