C1368A 99899229 152610
A CATALOGUE of the BOWES, OF The Town, or the Hunters after Fortunes to be set by AUCTION. Catalogues will be distributed by the Sentries of the Park, &c. ADVERTISEMENT. ON Tuesday the 14 of this Instant July, will be expos'd to Sale in the Play∣House pitt, in Bridges-street, a Choice Collection of Bowes, who have a mind to dispose of themselves to the Ladies that bid most, their Estates as well reall as per∣sonal, being worth from 500 l. to 2000 l. a Year; They may be view'd by any Lady in S. James's or Hide-Park, between the hours of six and nine in the evening. All Ladies that will be accepted must subscribe to these Conditions, and give Bonds with Judgement for performance. First, That she be contented with the Peticoat, and not desire to wear the Britches. 2ly. That she never indict the Man in Venus's Court for Matrimonial omission, nor ever complain thereof to her Goshops, 3ly. That she never present him with the Horns. 4ly. That she never ingage him in a Tongue∣battle. If any Lady object that these Conditions are too Strict, and say, it is impossible to keep a Cat from playing with her Taile: To satisfy such, I will in the next procure a Catalogue, of some good natur'd Men, that will allow them liberty of Conscience. The CATALOGUE.     l. 1 ONe pretty handsome Man, his Head some what of the Emptiest;but his Pockets well fil'd, his yearly in come 900 2 One comely proper Man, in Suffolf-street, who has an Estate worthper Annum 800 3 A middle size Man, barbary shape, who is worth in Jewels, besides thosehe wears in his Garter and Shooe-buckles 5000 4 A superfine well trim'd Bow, not a hair of his Wig a rye, his Face somewhat Poxkified, but does not esteem it the worse, his annual rents 1000 5 A young brisk dapper Man, in Chacery-lane, whose title to his Estateis not very secure; but to make amends will promise to get himselfKnighted, that he and his Lady may take place over the inferiourRank, worth 500 6 A young Countrey-Squire, in Long-acre, who in time will be justice ofhis county, worth yearly 2000 7 A delicat, neat, well timberd Man, Baby-face, keeps his Coach, some¦what too frugal for his years 1700 8 A young puny Man, who lost the Generative faculty; but is so reason∣ableas to admit of a Coadjutor to perform marriage duty 1000 9 A thin lean Skeleton, in Lime-street, his Face fair enough, by useing aButter-milk wash, a litigious Person; but whose Quercks, and Quilletsin Law bring him in per Annum 500 10 An accomplish't young Gentlemen, in the Strand, Swears by Godgenteely, Mouths all manner of Oaths, with a bonne grace, neverbaulks his Glass, knows well how to pick up a Woman in Spring-Garden,or St. James's Park, worth a Year 600
