C2654 669.f.7[39] 99870641 161021
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms BY THE KING. ¶ A Proclamation forbidding all the Tenants or Debtors of such who are in actuall and open Rebellion, or who adhere to, or assist the Rebells, to pay any Rents or Debts to such Persons or any of them. WHEREAS We have, by Our severall Proclamations, bearing Date the Eight Day of March last and the Seventh Day of Aprill last, published Our Resolution to grant out Our Commissions for the seizing of the Goods, and Sequestring the Estates of all such Persons who are in Rebellion or do assist those who are, to the intent that such their Goods, and Rents, may be safely deposited untill such Time as the Offenders can be brought to a Legall Triall, which shall speedily proceed against them as soone as they can be apprehended, and delivered into the hands of Iustice. And We did therefore command all Persons who were any wayes indebted unto, and all the severall Tenants of all such Persons, to forbeare to pay any Rents, or Debts due to the said severall Person but to detaine the same in their hands towards the maintenance of the Peace of the severall Counties, and the Reparation of such men who have suffered by the violence of the Rebells. Since which time hath pleased God so farre, and so eminently to blesse Our Armies, that We have again reduced severall Counties to Our Obedience, which were for the greatest part, if not totally, possessed by the Rebells; And considering therefore that it very probable Our said Proclamations were kept from the knowledge of Our good Subjects of those Counties, We have once more thought fit to publish the same, and do hereby Declare to all Our loving Subjects whatsoever, that as We have already issued out such Our Commissions into severall Counties, in which We give Authority to the Persons truste by Us to distinguish between those who have been active and malitious Contrivers of this Rebellion, and those who have been through Weaknesse or Feare seduced by them; So We will dayly issue out other Commissions to the same Purpose. And We doe straitly charge and command all Our loving Subjects of what Condition soever, as they will answer their Disobedience at their utmost Perills, That they pay no Rents or Debts which now are, or hereafter shall grow due to any Persons who either are, or lately have been in Rebellion, (and have not since submitted themselvs to Us) or to any such who adhere to, or assist those who are in Rebellion, and that they presume not to receive any Good Money or Stock in trust for any such Persons, but that they faithfully accompt, and pay the same to such Persons as either are, or shall be intrusted by Us for that Purpose, and We shall proceed against all such Persons who shall wilfully, and peremptorily disobey Us herein, as against Persons notoriously disaffected to Us and Our Service. And Our Pleasure is That this Our Proclamation be read in all Churches and Chappells throughout this Our Kingdom. Given at Our Cou at Oxford, the Twenty fifth day of September, in the Nineteenth yeare of our Reigne. God save the King. Printed at Oxford, by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the Ʋniversity. 1643.
