C7477B 99895643 153162
A DIARY AND Relation of PASSAGES In, and about DVBLIN: From the First of August, 1647. to the Tenth of the same. Brought this day, being the eighteenth of August, 1647. by Lievtenant Colonell Arthur Culme, one in the present Expedition in IRELAND. By Him presented to the Parliament. LONDON, Printed for Godfrey Emerson, at the Swan in Little-Britaine, 1647.
A Diary and Relation of Passages in, and about Dublin; From the first of August, 1647. unto the Tenth of the same. FOR relieving of Trim (a considerable Garison of ours twenty miles distant from Dublin) besieged by Colonel Preston, the Rebels General of Lemster, with his whole strength, Colonell Michael Jones Com∣mander in chiefe of the Lemster Forces, marched from Dublin the first day of August, 1647 with about 3800 Foot, and two Regiments of Horse, two Demi-Culve∣rins, one Saker, and four Saker Cuts. That night the Army quartered at a Village called Swords, six miles from Dublin, being something out of the Road to Trim, but leading towards the Rendezvouz apppointed for meeting with the Drogheda and Dundalke Forces, joyned with a Party of Horse and Foot expected out of the North of Ireland. Munday the 2. they marched to Ballirothery, 6 miles from Swords. Tuesday the 3. they marched over the hills of Holliwood, a moun∣tainous Countrey, to a place called the Naall, and that night to Gariston, where Colonell Jones received intelligence of the advan∣cing of the expected Supplyes. Wednesday the 4. the Army marched to the hill of Skreene, where they met with Sir Henry Tichborne, with the Drogheda Forces, Colo∣nel Moore, with those of Dundalke Newry, and Carlingford, and Col. Conway with a party of the Northerne old British, all making up about 700 Horse, and 1200 Foot; and two peeces of Ordnance. Thither came from Trim Major Caduggen, and Capt. Arthur Gra∣hem, informing that the enemy had that morning burned his Camp about Trim, retyring to the old lurking-place, called, Port Leicester, a great and secure fastnesse, about five miles Westward from Trim. The same day our Army marched to the hill of Tarragh, where they were drawn up, and mustered 1500 Horse, and about 5000 Foot. That night they quartered at the foot of the hill of Tarragh, at
a place called Dodistowne; here Colonell Jones called a Councell of Warre. Thursday the 5. the Army marched to a place called Scurloikstown, within one mile of Trim, where that night they Quartered. Friday the 6. they marched through Trim to a place called Trim∣blestowne, a strong Castle belonging to the Lord of Trimblestowne, wherein the Enemy had a Garison. This place Colonell Jones surrounded in view of the Enemy then encamping at Port Leicester 2 miles off; thereby to draw him forth, if possible it might be, to ingage himself to fight. Saturday the 7. a party of 50 Horse of ours was commanded out for discovering of the Enemy, and observing his motion. About ten of the clock that day, the Enemy was observed to move, and rising from Port Leicester to crosse the Countrey, and march toward Maynouth, a place within 10 miles of Dublin: This confir∣med the intelligence formerly given us of the Rebells intending to come between us and home, and marching to Dublin for surprising that place, in absence of our Forces engaged at the siege of Trim∣blestowne. Whereupon Col. Jones resolved to rise with the Army, and to follow the Enemy, and had scarcely spoken the word for comman∣ding Drums to beat, but (by especial Providence) at the same instant, did the Castle beat a Parley, offering to surrender it, if permitted to march away with Bag and Baggage, and Colours flying; which, with advice of a Councell of War, was assented unto, we receiving the place, and placing therein a Garison. That night our Army marched back through Trim, and quartered at Scurloikestowne aforesaid, therein (in foure houres) marching as far as before they had done in one whole day. That night a Convoy with some provisions came from Drogheda to the Army. That night a Commanded party of 500 Horse was sent out from our Army, with Orders to follow the Enemy, and beat up his Quarters, if enquartered; otherwise to follow him to Dublin, if marching forward; the Body of our Army being to follow after with all possible expedition. This commanded Party found the Enemy quartered behinde a very great Bog, so as no approach could be made to him; whereof Col. Jones being certified, he the next morning advanced towards the enemy with the whole Army.
The Army marched through the strong Fastnesse of Deniga, be∣longing unto Westby, wherein was a Garison of the Enemy that hot at our men in their passing by, the Village we fired, but the Castle held out. That day about 10 of the clock our Army came to a place called Linchesknocke, within one mile whereof the Enemy was drawne up on Dungan hill, a place to him of all advantages, being a high ground, whereunto adjoyned a wood and a bog, (their usuall refuge in distresse.) The enemy also stood possest of great ditches, within which he was, as in so many strong Works intrenched; hereunto may be added the advantages of Wind and Sun. The Enemy had lately before mustered 7300 Foot, and 1047 Horse; which number of Horse appeareth by a Muster-Roll after found, in these words; Viz. Mustered the 5 of August, 1647. The Lord Gen. Troop, besides Officers 52 Col. Fitz Gerrald 49 The Major Generall 50 Lievt. Col. Finglas 45 Major Butler 50 Cap. Fitz Gerrald 42 Colonell Cullen 34 Sir James Dyllon 36 Captain Davies 47 Major Dungan 44 Capt. Iohn Fitz Patrick 35 Colonell Preston 35 Captaine Aylmer 26 Captaine Plunket 28 Captaine Harpoole 28 Earle of Fingall 41 Lord of Trimblestowne 36 Earle of Westmeath 41 Cap. James Barnwell 35 Capt. John Butler 39 Sir Walter Butler 40 Cap. Grace 47 Cap. Edward Butler 34 Cap. Wash 44 Cap. Bagnall 45 Cap. Nugent 44 This list of 26 Troopes, amounteth to 1047 Horse, whereunto is to bee added the Lord Viscount Costelaghs party of about 300 Horse, and two of the Nugents, with two Troopes more, which came to the Enemy the night before the Battail. Under the hill our Army was drawn up, the Enemies Cannon played hotly at us, but with little losse, other then 1 horse, and two Men. About 12. of the Clocke the Armies joyned the Battaile, continu∣ing about two houres, our two wings of Horse with some foot, ha∣ving broken both wings of the Enemy, our maine body advanced & broke their's, whereupon about 3000. of the Rebels betaking them∣selves to the Bog, they there drew up into a body. But Colonell Jones commanding the Bog to be surrounded with Horse and Foot, our Foot followed into the Bog, where they put to the Sword all not admitted to quarter; such of the Rebels as left the Bog feil into the power of our Horse.
Of the slaine there were upon the place reckoned 5470. besides those after gleaned up, which were very many of the enemies Foot, there could not escape above 500. being as they were invironed; among those slaine were 400. of Collogh Kittaghes men. There was also put to the Sword without mercy, all formerly of our party now found amongst the Rebels, and all English though never of our party. The number of Prisoners (as appeareth in the annexed Schedule) is of Colonells five, whereof  the Lieutenant Generall of Lemster and the Earle of Westmeath: foure Lievtenant Colonells, six Serjant Majors, 32. Captaines, 23. Lievtenants, 27. Ensignes, two Cornets, 22. Serjeants, two Quarter-masters, two Gunners, the Clerke of the store, 13. Troopes, and 228. Common Souldi∣ers: Preston their Generall hardly escaped with the Horse, hee lost his Carriages, and Cannon, being foure Demy-Culverings, each carrying 12. pound Bullet, and 64. faire Oxen attending the Traine, which are to us of very great use, wee being till now in that kind very short provided. There was also taken Prestons Cabbinet of Papers, much valued in the discoveries therein made; all their Co∣lours wee have, which Colonell Jones could not bee perswaded to bee brought into Dublin in Triumph, as savouring (said hee) of ostentation, and attributing unto men the glory of this great work, due to the Lord onely. Of ours were some wounded, but not 20. slaine; of note we lost onely two Cornets, and one Captaine Gibbes, who overheated in the service died in drinking ditch water. Herein to give every hand in this glorious action the honour due, were more then many more lines would suffice unto; In the gene∣rall never did men carry themselves with more resolution and gal∣lantry, then did ours, both officers and Souldiers, deserving much more encouragement then hitherto they have found, most of them having scarce meate to eate, or cloaths to put on. All done, Colonell Jones commanded throughout the Army thankesgiving to bee given to the Lord of Hosts, who did that day wonderfully for his people, appointing Tuesday the 17. of Aug. for a day of publick thanksgiving, in all the Churches of Dublin. On the place where the Battaile was fought did the Army that night Quarter. Munday, August the 9. Colonell Iones called a Councell of Warre, and Commanded Colonell Fnnick, Governour of Trim, to place Garrisons in Denigan, and Kilbrewe.
That day the Army marched to Maynouth, a strong Castle belong∣ing to the Earle of Kildare, which was summoned and surrendred by the Rebels, and by us Garrisoned. After this Victory the Enemy quit and burnt divers of their Gar∣risons, viz. the Naas, Siggnistowne, Harristowne, Collanstowne, Castle-Warning and Moyglare, and much more had been gained of them, had there been pay and provisions for our Army whereby the Victo∣ry might have been prosecuted, but in the want of both, they were enforced to take homewards unexpectedly. Tuesday the 10. Colonell Iones dismissed the Northerne Forces that had joyned with him, engaging himselfe for their satisfaction, as soone as Treasure should come over. Hee also dismissed to their severall Garrisons the Forces of Drog∣heda, Dundalke, Newry and Carlingford, commanding Sir Henry Tich∣burne in his returne to summon the Nobbyr and other places neere Drogheda possessed by the Rebels, promising if occasion required, and that provision could bee made for the Army, to advance with his strength to their assistance. That day the rest of the Army marched to Dublin, where wanting what might content our hungry and wearied Souldiers, by provi∣dence of God, as our Army was ready to enter the Citie, they were met with newes of 1500 .l. brought by Captaine Rich into the Harbour, borrowed by Alderman Walley, therein much meriting of the publique; this small summe, though otherwise very inconsi∣derable, was yet something in the present distresse, and is to bee valued as an earnest of the Lords care of his people, to whom hee will in his good time appeare in a full deliverance. There was little considerable pillage gained from the Enemy in this Victory, that of best value was the Artillery and Oxen, which last Colonell Iones purchased for the publique use, from those hands whereinto they fell, unto whom hee standeth ingaged for satisfaction: as for pillage of greater value, little was found, how∣soever some have beene pleased to speake of it largely, and ridicu∣lously, and if any thing had been in that kind gained more then or∣dinary, it could not be imagined it should be of publique advantage comming in, (and that of due) into private hands. This was the most signall Victory with greatest losse to the Re∣bells, that ever was gained in Ireland since the first conquest thereof by the English, for which the Lord make us truly thankfull.
A list of the Prisoners taken at the Battaile of Dungan-Hill, August 8. 1647. 5 Colonels. The Earle of Westmeth Lievtenant Generall Berne Colonel warren Colonel Browne Colonel Buttler 4 Lievtenant Colonels. Lievtenant Colonel Synnett Lievtenant Col. Fitz Gerrard Lievtenant Col. Cavanagh Lievtenant Col. Cuce 6 Serjant Majors. Major Tafe Major Lawlor Major Gusak Major Gaffegan Major Synnett Major Berne 32 Captaines Michael Berne Arthur Cavanagh Darby Toole Martin Wolverston Edward Terrel Christopher Nugent Edward Nugent Balthazer Nugent Iames Dempsye William Terrel Roger Darcye Iames Fitz Gerrard Thomas Goghegan Charles Conner Henry Warren Patrick Nettervile Teagh Connor Thomas Plunkett Lawrence Fitz Patrick Thomas Gawlie Richard Nash Dominick Shortayle Iohn Comerford William Furlong Arthur Dillon Lawrence Tute Robert Preston Capt. of Horse Randol M. der Captaine Goghegan Captaine M. Donnel Captaine Tafe Captaine Rochford 23 Leivtenants. Nicholas Terrel James Casye Garret Floid Edmund Bermingham Thomas Darcye Christopher Goghegan Walter Mooney Donnough Dempsye Leonard Shortayle Christopher Darcye Michael Gainer Rosse Goghegan Thomas Quiun Henry Dolton Henry Neale Bryan Cavanah Terlogh Toole Robert Berne Walter Fitz Harris John Roch Theobald Toole Rosse Dempsye James Barryals Fitz Gerrald 27 Ensignes. James Fitz Simons James Terrel Teah Kelly Francis Fox James M. O. Kyre Christopher Nugens Lawrence Dempsye Philip Cusack George Warren Andrew Goghegan Oliver Lynack James Warren John Butler James Fitz Harris Victor Whyle Jeffrey Fitz Simons Owen O Heveran Edward Fitz Gerrald Robert Fitz Gerrald Lawrence M. Donnel Phileme Nolan Patrick Kahor Authony O. Bryan Dannel Cowran Terlagh M. O. Nully Evis M. Alexander Nicholas Quaitrel 2 Cornets. Richard Talbott James Fitz Gerrald 2 Quarter Masters Iames Walsh Richard Iones 2 Gunners. Michael Walsh Philip Stafford Clerk of the Store Iohn Hadger 22 Serjants. Donnah Mynan Iohn O. Meighan Moyle Murry Kavanagh Peirce Synne Teagh Gaffney Iames Pursell Patrick Rowland Chire Kavanagh Morrough Kavanagh Garret Toole Neile O Roirk Neale O Dolan Iohn Darcye Patrick Farily Thomas Corlan Richard Murphey Gerrat Terrel Manus O Ledan William O Moran Owen M. Caffrey Iohn M. Scallin Dudly Berne 13 Troopers. 228 Common Souldiers. FINIS.
