D2001 99897640 133313
A Prayer or Petition FOR PEACE. November 22. 1644. Behold, your house is left unto you deso∣late; And verily ye shall not see me, till ye say, Blessed is he that cometh in the Name of the Lord. without whom yee can Doe Nothing. Printed in the Year, 1644.
A PRAYER & PETITION FOR PEACE. By the Lady Eleanor. O Lord, the great and dreadful God, as we have sinned deeply and offended, guilty of no less then open Rebellion, by excluding thee, fleeing from thy presence with one voyce (as it were) We will not have this man to reign over us (or) He defers his coming, as others; Even departed from thy Precepts and Iudgements set before us: so here prostrate before the foot-stool of thy Throne, implore ne∣vertheless pardon and forgiveness.
For this no stoln or secret transgres∣sion committed, but with a high hand; and so much the rather presuming on this access, because hitherto the vul∣gar (the burthen and heat of the day though theirs) those sheep yet not guilty or accessary to this trespass or capital Crime, or of thy return op∣posed, as manifest in hearkning not to the loud voyces of the Propets accom∣plished thy Messengers: But to our Kings, Princes, Heads and Rulers, which appertains, so straitly com∣manded, saying, What I say unto you, I say unto all, Watch; the Gentiles watch∣word also charged in readiness to be; and signs of the time they not them discerning, such and such express evi∣dent Signs and Tokens, haste, watch'd over them, as sinc ethis a Nation, or
under the whole Heaven. the like un∣known, witness, The Irish Massacres VVinter flight, and Sabbath journey, those bloody pestilent Vials, so vio∣lently poured out (without doubt) not since the Flood as in this present Century. Thus neither (awakened or) taking warning (by Forraign Nations) as Beacons lighted our neighbors houses set on fire first, like Jacob's setting in the front the handmaids and their chil∣dren: whichalarms so lightly weigh∣ed, til suddenly at last, like Sampsons se∣venfold new Cords and green withs, all pluckt asunder when linked so fast and knit, France with Great Britain, Spain with France, Germany with Spain; together with these late married Isles or united Kingdoms, now in wi∣dows
forlorn woful Estate, or worse, as divorced; sometime that as had it been a new world, with such Creations flourishing, & Titles all new Names, even walking like days of old, also be∣come as those, when God repented he made Man, brought to a like Ebbe or fall, as those insasciable Gyants, Great Britains Babel Towering thoughts confounded. And now behold, O Lord, through a high and heavy hand abased and so low brought, humbled to ashes and sackcloth, from the highest to the low∣est; then tread not on a worm, break not the bruised reed, the wounded smite them not; but hear us out of the deep, O thou our Anchor, hope and present help, ready to be consumed and swallowed up, if thou calm not
and asswage those working tempestu∣ous Seas, through unruly raging winds let loose, wrought and contri∣ved; And so with him praying in his posture, Elijah, when as without Rain so long, forty two Moneths (that pro∣phetical Number▪prest so much, of Three years and a half) he bowing himself double, or kneeling on his head; also behold such our Estate turned upside down, since the year 1642. defer us not these miserable Isles and Kingdoms of ours, whose Store∣houses exhausted, like those Rivers dryed up, and like the dead Trees, burnt up our Nation and Habitation, torn between two She-bears, like those Forty two ungratious Infants. To conclude (O forsake us not! thou of uspeakable Mercy) cause thy
face to shine upon us, for the Lords sake, our alone Saviour Iesus Christ, made of the womans seed according to the flesh: A woman making her first witness of the resurrection and  ful tidings to the : Let thy mighty voyce be heard, that speakest sometime to the Fish, the Fig-tree, the Deaf, the Dead, and very Devils subjects; And at whose motion the Sun and Moon moved not, stood still, heard him; and turnest the hard Rock into standing waters, &c. also the waters of this city, heal them; say the word and it is DONE, that henceforth let there be no more DEATH, no more Kil∣ling and Slaying, stay thy Hand She beseeches thee.
A Prayer or Letter for the Peoples Conversion and Deliverance from their Distraction, Iune 1649. ANd O Lord of Sabbaths, our King, the God of Hosts sitting between the winged Cherubims, en∣closing thy glorious Throne; That without delay vouchsafest to hear the humble address of thy Handmaid, and the waters according held of our Brittish Jericho, witness the very next moneth, Decemb. the 5th Anno 1644. a conjuring Letter from the otherside, as would answer at the day of Iudge∣ment the contrary, &c. to lay aside Arms, whereas about three moneths after, the Enemy waxt at thy con∣suming presence like melting wax, calling to Rocks and Hills, or fleeing to hide them were put to flight: He
vanished in that fashion disguised, a∣mazing those that knew him, signed with the years of thy right arm, 1645. owing since the horrible design Anno 1605. November the 5th which facti∣on (he the four and twentieth of those Alban Elders, prostrating his Crown so low) combined with. And the Sword of VVar sheath'd thus, as when Elias the Prophet his Supplication presented, just three years & six months after their depart∣ing the City, he in that maner led in a string, from 1641. January, until 1645. June, that blow before his downfal. Notwithstanding, Iustice her Sword dravvn since Kings, Princes, Head-Rulers, going to wrack, great Trees felled down, as well as those of lower growth amended; like that restless
mans Estate, taking unto him seven spi∣rits more unsufferable, after the House swept and adorned, the Epilogue or End worse then the beginning, point∣ing to the Spiritual Function; especi∣ally, seeking high places, earthly prefer∣ment, whereat all aym. Then here croaching at thy blessed feet, for a blessing on the Iubiles insu∣ing year: O heavenly bounty, royal mercy, greater then Solomons exceed∣ing fames report, suffices we have bin and are of thy Iustice, not wanting an open example, a hissiug to all Nations, guilty of no petty Treason, thine own Servants and Citizens, Shuting thee out, conspiring against thee; outed by disloyal Tenants: with those Hus∣bandman also saying, the Inheritance shall be ours, to us and our heirs; accom∣plished signs and tokens when, the
Creation groaning to be delivered, accompanied with the peoples voices or distempers restored to their old li∣berty: Kingdom against Kingdom, wit∣ness, brethren Nations strugling like Esau and Iacob, one house storming the other, the Devil the old Serpent, for his part storming too, his time because knows of no longer continuance; a day of publique Thanksgiving, deserving rather then sitting up their own horn, or to be admired of the world. How is it then that they do not under∣stand, blaspheme thy name so nigh: rave on the world; notwithstanding, What have we to do with thee, O Jesus, con∣jured before the time, to torment them not, both sex discovering, like the dog returnd to his excrement, and Sow to the mire, how cleansed from filth, or in grace growing up, how long the grace∣less
world in these budding times, also besotted, look back with Lots wife, to a sink of sin and corruption, with whose incesstious Daughters the Kings of the Earth matched, for the Mothers sake disinherited, they and their heirs referred to their salique slavish Law, wresting that, That the Lillies spin not, &c. as the pillar displays . VVith his Play-house for another whether not recorded in Ahabs reign by our Scotish Bethmite, also (as it were) execrable, Ierichos edifice Ere∣cted: The foundation laid in his eldest Son, and the gates in his yongest son, ex∣ecued at the gate; that after demolished those cages, or Monestaries of theirs, for an acknowledgment of the pow∣der plots escape, dedicated that Mon∣ster everlasting like Theator, to the Devil for his Sabbath-service, and o∣ther such like.
New Jerusalems precious founda∣tions and gates, ought rather much to have looked after, or to have consi∣dered the Arks building, which cen∣tury the seventeenth, we then were en∣tred; the Ark as in length Three hundred cubits measured out by the days of the year, so in breadth fifty, answerable to the weeks thereof; the hight of it thirty cubits, according to the days of the moneth, &c. So teach us to number ours, the sum of it. That merciful Lord, except infu∣sed special grace: Since so it is, as de∣rive their Name, from BRUTE, So are they, may as well speak to the Ass and Adar to hear, What the Spirit saith unto the churches, or to cause by means of a stick or rod, cast in an Ax to swim, grown (thou seest) so brutish and blockish, well shadowed out in
seeing men like Trees walking: with∣out which from above avails as much, as before the Scriptures speaking in the vulgar language: That blessing although not equivolent to the former; how hear we every man in his own lan∣guage, we born, &c. yet a door, not re∣mote therefrom. From whence emboldned do beg, give them leave like as when bitten by fiery Serpents, those vipers; by another beheld in the same likeness were healed; so by these leaves taken from a womans hand, by them  (as it were) live may for ever: They by reason of their knowledge puft up hitherto, even of times and seasons mistery to take their fill, not in season till the evening of time this last ages. And since to have knowledge of the disease, though the first step to reco∣very
suffices not: The Medicine if not attained, give them the Spirit of discerning, since come to maturity the Tree of Life, a qualification for of our first parents expedition, the tree reser∣ved, that casting an eye upon the Map of the world that then was, the Ark Baptisms figure, whereby to measure or parallel the Gospels pilgrimage and the Floods age together, lifting up the same voice, the swelling Seas sound∣ing their alarm, climbing over Rocks and Mountains, besides an universal flood a year or two ago, over the face of the earth, told then before, There shal be signs in tht Heavens, in the Sun and Moon, and in the Stars, the Sea roar∣ing, people at their wits end distract∣ed, &c. witness this sign, A new Star, as seen in the East, the one 74 years before Ierusalems destruction or judg∣ment,
so the other in Cassiopei its a∣spect or influence to the great Year 1644. extended Rev. 7, 14, 21. refer'd to it; VVhich Messenger Star likewise appeared seventy four years before our being entred into the very day of judg∣ment, with no ordinary apparitions in the Heavens, The powers of Heaven and Earth shaken both. So look upon us amended Lord,  bck-rd Spring vvith those ungrateful graceless Lepers (asked) Where the nine, &c. cursing hitherto, vvhere thou blessest, such returns. O send down upon the time to come, (though have sinned a great sin) a bles∣sed shower of commiseration for which so much. And for this stollen touch, as vertue when gone from thee, 1649. FINIS.
