d352 99895313 152649
An EXPLANATION OF THE ROMAN CATHOLICKS BELIEF, Concerning Their Church, VVorship, Iustification, and civil Govern∣ment and their other Tenets: As it was presented to some persons of Quality, for their particular satisfaction. Anno Dom. 1656.
An Explanation of the Roman Catholicks Belief, concerning Their Church, Worship, Iustification, civil Government, and their other Tenets: As it was presented to some Persons of Qua∣lity, for their particular satisfaction. WE believe the holy Scri∣ptures to be of Divine inspiration and infallible Authority; and whatso∣ever is therein contain∣ed we firmly assent unto, as the Word of God, the Authour of all Truth. But since in the holy Scriptures there are some things hard to be understood, which the ignorant and unstable wrest to their own destruction;2. Pet. 3.16. we therefore pro∣fesse (for the ending of controversies in our Religion, and setling of peace in our Consciences) to submit our private judg∣ments to the Judgement of the Church, represented in a free Generall Coun∣cell. 2. We humbly believe the sacred My∣sterie of the Blessed Trinity, one Eternall,
Almighty, and incomprehensible God whom onely we adore and worship, as a lone having Soveraigne Dominion over all things, to whom onely, we acknow∣ledge as due from men and Angels, all glory,1. Tim. 1.17. service, and obedience (abhor∣ring from our hearts, as a most detestable Sacriledge, to give our Greatours ho∣nour to any Creature whatsoever. And therefore we solemnly protest, that by the prayers we addresse to Angels and Saints, we intend no other than hum∣bly to sollicite their assistance before the Throne of God, as we desire the prayers of one another here upon earth, not that we hope any thing from them, as original Authours thereof, but from God the Fountain of all Goodnesse, through Ie∣sus Christ, our onely Mediatour and Re∣deemer. Neither do we believe any divinity or virtue to be in Images, for which they ought to be worship't, as the Gentiles did their Idols, but we retain them with due and decent respect in our Churches, as instruments, which we finde by expe∣rience, do often assist our memories, and excite our affections. 3. We firmly believe, that no force of
nature nor dignity of our best works can merit our Iustification, but we are ju∣stified freely by grace,Rom. 3.14. through the Re∣demption that is in Iesus Christ. And although we should by the grace of God persevere unto the end in a god∣ly life and holy obedience to the Com∣mandements; yet are our hopes of eternall glory still built upon the mercy of God, and the merits of Christ Iesus. All other merits (according to our sense of that word) signifie no more, than Actions done by the assistance, of Gods grace, to which it has pleased his good∣nesse to promise a reward; a Doctrine so farre from being unsuitable to the sense of the holy Scriptures, that it is their principall) design to invite and provoke us to a diligent observance of the Com∣mandements, by promising heaven as the reward of our obedience, 1 Tim. 4.8. Godlinesse is profitable to all things, ha∣ving the promise of this life, and of that which is to come, And Rom. 2.6. God will render to every man according to his deeds, to them, who by patient, confi∣dence in well-doing, seek for glory, and honour, and immortality, eternall life. And again, Rom. 8.3. If you live after the flesh you shall die, but is through
the spirit you mortifie the deeds of the bodie; you shall live, And Heb. 6.10. God is not unjust to forget your work and la∣bour of love, which you have shewed for his name, &c, Nothing being so frequent∣ly repeated in the Word of God, as his gracious promises to recompense with everlasting glory the faith and obedience of his servants;Luke 6.38. Nor is the bounty of God barely according to our works, but high and plentifull, even beyond our ca∣pacities, giving full measure, heaped up, pressed down, and running over into the bosomes of all that love him. Thus we believe the merit or reward∣ablenesse of holy living (both which si∣gnifie the same thing with us) arises not from the self-value even of our best acti∣ons, as they are ours, but from the Grace and Bounty of God;Luke 17.10. and for our selves, we sincerely professe, when we have done all those things, which are commanded us, we are unprofitable servants, having done nothing but that which was our du∣ty, so that our boasting is not in our selves, but all our glorying is in Christ. 4. In the holy Eucharist, or most vene∣rable Sacrament of the body and bloud of our Lord: We acknowledge that there
are, as in all other Sacraments, two things. The visible signe, which is the forms of bread and wine, to which noe Catholick may or doth direct his worship. There is also invisible Grace signified, the body of our blessed Lord, whom being pre∣sent we adore and worship with all possi∣ble reverence and thanksgiving from our hearts for so great a blessing, warranted herein by our blessed Lord himself in each of the Gospels. 5. We humbly confesse that from the be∣ginning of Christianity, the holy Com∣munion was administred frequently, in both, & sometimes in each kind, according to severall circumstances: and hence the holy Church following the piety of Chri∣stians, who insensibly became accustomed to receive it almost universally in one kinde, upon great motives did after∣wards ordain to have it in one, as now it is commonly administred, though the receiving of it so is not matter of faith. Neither do we believe that religious and devout communicants, are hereby be∣reaved of any benefit or comfort in o∣beying the Churches orders, since our holy belief instructs us,Trid ses. 21. a n. 3 that our blessed Lord the fountain of all grace is as e∣qually
present in one kinde as in both. 6. The holy Sacrifice indeed of the altar we clearly believe ought to be ce∣lebrated in both kinds, as now it is ac∣cording to the divine institution,Luk. 21.9. as be∣ing done in representation and comme∣moration of our Lords blessed passion on the crosse, wherein the body and bloud were separated: Whatsoever therefore propitiatory power our holy Religion attributes to this commemorative Sacri∣fice, it is by virtue of the Sacrifice of the crosse, as being by this applied to us. This is the substance of our faith ex∣pressed in the Councell of Trent,Ses. 22. c. 1. so that still we humbly acknowledge the ground of our salvatlon to be derived from our Lords blessed and bitter passion. 7. We freely acknowledge that is no way commanded by the Church, that the people should pray in a language which they understand not, nay, there is given them all possible incouragement to en∣crease their devotions, and with the A∣postle to allure all, if it may be, to conti∣nuall prayer, (which is the life of our souls) by ordaining and publishing most excellent prayers in vulgar languages for their use.
As to the lyturgies they of the Church properly belong to Church-men, and therefore were anciently styled the Priests books, lest the people should not receive full benefit by their publick use, there is an expresse command of our ho∣ly mother the Church in the Councell of Trent,Ses. 5. c. 8. that the Pastours and all who have charge of souls, in the very time of di∣vine service, should expound and make them plain to the peoples capacity, as in the old times of the Church we find it was also ordained and practised. Our faith teacheth us to exercise Chri∣stian Charity by humbling our selves be∣fore the divine throne of Gods mercy, to begg forgivenesse (as we do for one ano∣ther here upon earth) of the debts and trespasses of those middle sort of Chri∣stians, as S. Augustine and the Councel of Florence call them,In En∣chyridie ad Lau∣rentium & De Civ. l. 21. c. 24. who had not brought forth sufficient fruits of repentance, dy∣ing in communion of the faithfull; which indigent condition of theirs, relievable by the Churches, or the prayers of the faithfull surviving, speaks what the anci∣ent call Purgatory: warranted herein by the practise under the law recorded and recommended in the Maccabees, which
being in no ort reprehended by our Lord or his Apostles amongst the rest of the Jews unlawfull practises, was and is justly presumed to have been allowed by him, as many of the Fathers understood his sermon in the Mount,Mat. 5.29. 1 Cor. 15.29. 2 Cor. 3. and by them, as is hinted by S. Paul: whereupon it hath continued ever since in generall practise throughout all ages, as even gravestones and all other Christian monuments do witnesse especially all ancient Lyturgies of the Saints, and books of common prayers used in all Churches: neither can we decern how possibly this may be conceived offensive to God, whose justice herein we hope and do humbly endea∣vour to appease by our exercise of bro∣therly compassion. 9. We firmly believe, and highly re∣verence the Moral Law,Exod. 20. Mat. 19. Eccles. 12.13. being so solemn∣ly delivered to Moses upon the Mount, so expresly confirmed by our Saviour in the Gospel, and containing in it self so per∣fect an Abridgement of our whole duty both to God and man. Which Morall Law we believe obliges all men to proceed with faithfulnesse and sincerity in their mutuall contracts one towards another; and therefore our con∣stant
Profession is, that we are most strictly and absolutely bound to the ex∣act and entire performance of our pro∣mises, made to any person of what Reli∣gion soever; much more to the Magi∣strates and Civil Powers, under whose pro∣tection we live, whom we are taught by the Word of God to obey, not onely for fear, but conscience sake; and to whom we will most faithfully observe our pro∣mises of duty and obedience, notwith∣standing any dispensation; absolution, or other proceedings of any forraign Power or Authority whatsoever, Wherefore we utterly deny and re∣nounce that false and scandalous positi∣on, that Faith is not to be kept with Here∣ticks, as most uncharitably imputed to our practises, and most unjustly pinned upon our Religion. These we sincerely and solemnly professe, as in the sight of God, the searcher of all hearts, taking the words plainly and simply, in their usuall and familiar sense, without any Equivocation or Mentall Reservation whatsoever.
