e1916 E253_11 99868891 159153
AN ORDINANCE OF THE Lords and Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT, For re-imbursing of Captaine WILLIAM EDWARDS the moneys to him due for the service of the State, and for his better enabling to proceed on in the said service. Die Martis, 28 Mati. 1644. ORdered by the Lords in Parliament assembled, that this Ordinance shall be forthwith printed and published. Jo. Browne Cler. Parliamentorum. LONDON, Printed for J. Wright in the Old-baily. 1644.
Die Martis, 28 Maii. 1644. WHereas Captaine William Edwards, Alderman of Che∣ster, Captaine of a Troope of Horse under the com∣mand of Sir William Brere∣ton, hath done good service, and suffered much in his estate for his fidelity to the Parliament, as by sufficient testimony appeareth; The Lords and Commons thereof taking notice, and that there is an arreare to him, his Officers and Troopers; the summe of three thousand forty one pound foure shilling and six pence; and that unlesse the same be payd, or he some other way competently provided for, he can neither recrute or maintaine his Troope and charge, or proceed to doe more service, which he is willing to doe, doe thinke sit that some course should be held for his encouragement and further supply. And whereas some Citizens of London and others have debts owing unto them by delinquents within the County of Chester, and the County of
the City of Chester, and have also some debts owing unto them by well affected persons in the said County and City who were of sufficient abilities, but are of late plundered and destroyed in their estates by the Commissioners of Array in the said County and City for their adherence and good affection to the publique cause of the Parliament and Kingdom, some of them having suffered long imprisonment, and others fled for their safety with losse of their estates; Be it therefore on the said Captaines behalfe, and for and towards his better satisfaction ordered and ordained, in case any such creditors shall now ad∣vance by way of loan to the said Captaine Edwards, for and towards the said recruit and satisfaction of his said arreares the value of the fifth part of such debts as are to them owing, as aforesaid; The said Captaine Edwards shall have and hereby hath full power and authority to receive the same, and to take the subscriptions of such Citizens and others as will lend the said fifth part, and to give Notes or Acquittances for the same endorsed on this Ordinance, or upon such true Copy thereof as shall be published in print, and therein mentioning the summes due unto them, and the Debtors names and place of their dwelling. And in such cases it shall be lawfull for Sir William Brereton Baronet, or in his absence for the Committees of Sequestration, or any three or more of the Deputy-Lieutenants of the said County of Chester, or the County of the City of Chester, when the said City and places re∣spectively
spectively shall be reduced to obedience to the Par∣liament, to set and let by Lease or Leases unto the said Creditors so much of the Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments of Deliquents which shall be seized and sequestred in the said County, and Coun∣ty of the City of Chester respectively (to wit, such as are already by Ordinance of Parliament or∣dered and disposed of for maintenance of the For∣ces under the command of the Parliament, for re∣ducing of those parts to obedience, and to be put in execution by the said Sir William Brereton, whose expresse assent is hereunto) as may serve not onely to satisfie the said fifth part so contributed and lent with interest at eight pound per cent. for the same, but also the residue of such their just debts respective∣ly, whereof they shall make such contribution as aforesaid. And the said Captaine is to give accompt to the said Sir William Brereton, or in his absence to the Committees or Deputy Lieutenants of the sums, or what he shall receive by vertue of this Ordinance, so as the same may not exceed the proportions in∣tended and owing unto the said Captaine as afore∣said. And the said Sir William Brereton and the said Committees and Deputy-Lieutenants are hereof to take notice, and the said Captaine Edwards is also to be accomptable to the Lords and Commons, or such as they shall appoint, for what he shall exe∣cute, doe, or receive by vertue of the premisses. Jo. Browne Cler. Parliamentorum.
