e2157 e166_12 99860009 156988
The Petition and Articles or severall Charge exhibited in Parliament against Edward Finch Vicar of Christs Church in London, and brother to Sir Iohn Finch, late Lord Keeper, now a Fugitive for fear of this present Parliament, 1641. Therefore the sin of the young men was very great before the Lord, for men abhorred the offerings of the Lord. 1 Sam. 2.17. Thus saith the Lord, I come against the Shepheards, and will require my Sheep at their hands, and cause them to cease from feeding the Sheep; nei∣ther shall the Shepheards feed themselves any more, for I will deliver my Sheep from their mouthes, and they shall no more devour them. Ezek. 34.10. Ed: Finch his Perambulations away for hamersmith a priest, with open book in hand, walks after three men, who walk after a coach and horses. A crowd follow them and a man looks on from a inn window. LONDON, Sould by R. Harford at the Signe of the Bible in Queens-head Alley in Paternoster-row. 1641.
TO THE HONORABLE THE KNIGHTS, CITI∣ZENS AND BVRGESSES OF the Commons House of Parliament. The humble Petition of the Parishioners of the Parish of Christs Church, in London, Most humbly sheweth, THat Master Edward Finch, Vicar of the said Pa∣rish, having set up their Communion Table Al∣tar-wise, doth there administer the Sacrament, causing all the Communicants to come to the Railes or Formes, and useth frequent and unreasonable bowings before the said Table, in his approach unto it, and returne from it. That he is of evill and scandalous life and conversation, not regarding himselfe to instruct the Petitioners soules, and hindring them also of such helpes as therein they would otherwise have, and exacts of them unlawfull and unreasonable Fees and summes of money, as by the annex∣ed Articles may appear,
That the Petitioners are troubled in the said Church with singing, Organs, and other Instruments of Musicke, not understood by them, whereby they are greatly distract∣ed in the Service of God, the same being altogether unpro∣fitable, and no way tending to their spirituall edification. They most humbly pray that your Honours will be pleased to take the Premisses into your grave conside∣ration, and to grant unto them, such relief therein, as to your great wisdomes shall seem meet. And they shall dayly pray, &c. The Articles mentioned in the annexed Petition, against Master Edward Finch Vicar of Christs Church, in London. FIrst, that the said Master Finch is very officious and ob∣servant in worshipping the great Idoll, lately erected in the said Church, viz. the Altar. 2. That he exacteth sometimes twenty shillings a piece, and ma∣ny times more, for funerall Sermons, himselfe seldom preaching any of them, and affirmeth his Pulpit to be his Shop, and therefore must improve it to the utmost. 3. That he is very carelesse and negligent in executing his Pastorall duty, having appeared scarce twice in twelve moneths to officiate the same, nay not once in a year. 4. That he ordinarily preacheth in his Surplice. 5. That he also weareth his Surplice in going the perambula∣tion of the Parish. 6. That he hath not for many yeares been resident in the Pa∣rish, but lets to farme his Vicaridge-house.
7. That he maketh no conscience of Oathes, but is a frequent violater of Gods holy Name, by often swearing thereby, with fearfull and horrid Imprecations, and Execrations, as was most abundantly proved. 8. That he is a common haunter of Tavernes, and Ale-houses, and is often and openly drunke. 9. That he hath exacted excessive Fees, as ten shillings for a Christening. 10. That before he will performe his duty in Burials, and upon other occasions he will have his lawlesse and unconscionable demands satisfied, whereof some of the Petitioners have com∣plained to the Diocesan, but it seemes his correction was gentle, for no amendment hath followed. 11. That he hath demanded and taken for Burials of Pa∣rishioners, ten and twelve pounds a piece, and hath shut, or caused to be shut up the Church doores, and not suffered the ground to be broken for Parishioners, untill his undue exactions have been sa∣tisfied. 12. That he hath administred the Communion to a dying woman, when he was so drunke, that he forgot the Service, failed in rehearsing the Lords prayer, and at his departure was not able to returne to his place of abode without leading. 13. That at the same time he caused all present with the said woman to depart the room, and then enjoyned the sicke party to confesse unto him all her secret sinnes. 14. That being so alone with the said woman, he demeaned himselfe so uncivilly, and used such unseemly gestures towards her, that she was fain to cry out for her husband to come in. 15. That afterwards for performance of this good service about the said woman, he sent for a Fee of three shillings four pence.
16. That November 5. 1639. he would suffer no Sermon to be preached, unlesse out of the Collection for the Poor he might have a Fee of thirteen shillings and four pence, but finding the Collection to be small, he took ten shillings. 17. That this last November 5. 1640. he would neither preach himselfe, nor suffer any other to preach. 18. That he and his wife having for many yeares lived asun∣der with much obloquie, he keepeth company with divers women suspected of incontinency. 19. That he hath since his being Vicar of the said Parish much opposed the Lecture, which without intermission hath for many yeares been continued in the West end of the said Church, called the Old or Lower Church, (early in the morning on the Lords day) not suffering any one to preach the same, unlesse he the said Vicar might have extraordinary hire for permitting of it, viz. about fourty pounds at one time, and twenty pounds at another time, and divers other summes at other severall times, and at this present twenty pounds a year, and yet not contented therewith, he threatens to arrest the present Lecturer, unlesse he may have his unjust demands satisfied. 20. That he deteineth and keepeth away divers bookes be∣longing and appertaining to the said Church. 21. That many times in receiving his owne exacted Fees for Burials, he hath also received Duties due to the Church wardens for the use of the Poor of the said Parish, and deteined them to his owne use. The proofes of such of the foresaid Articles as were more fully and largely opened in Parliament by severall wit∣nesses, follow here.
TO the first Article concerning his frequent and most lowly bowing to his Idol-altar, (set up by himselfe and with his owne hands in a most proud and insolent man∣ner) both at his approaches to it, departure from it, and passing by it, there was proof much more than enough to to testifie and clear it. To the Articles of his exacting unjust and excessive Fees for Burials; it was proved, that he at one time exacted, would have, and had before hand five pounds for a Sermon, at the Funerall of one Master How, an ancient Parishio∣ner; but Master Finch hearing that there were gloves given to divers, sent presently for gloves for himselfe and his man, just about the time that the Corps was going to Church, but because there was none left, he was promised to have them the next morning, yet notwithstanding be∣cause he had them not at that present, he caused the Church doores to be shut up, made the Corps and people stand a great while in the street, at last letting them into the Church, yet disappointed them of their Sermon, and yet kept the five pounds to himselfe, without restitution of any part thereof.
It was further testified by another Parishioner who was made Executor to one Master Darneton, a young man in the Parish, who upon his Death-bed desired that Doctour Holdsworth should make his Funerall-Sermon, and to avoid all differences, the Deceased very frankly gave M. Finch a legacy of fourty shillings, and a mourning Gowne, con∣ditionally, that he would give way for Doctour Holdsworth to preach, but Master Finch not content with what the De∣ceased left him in his will, he afterward understanding that the Doctour had five pounds, and a mourning Gowne left him as a Legacy, and his Legacy was not so much; he again sends for the Executor, and demands of him, what he would give him to let Holdsworth preach, as for the fourty shillings legacy, that he should not hinder him of, but ow he came upon new tearmes, to know what he would give him, for he saw no reason but he should have as much to give way as the other had for preaching, for the Pulpit was his; so that he did enforce the Executor to keep the Corps from Monday till Saturday, before it could be buried, by reason of Master Finch his unreasonable demands, for he told this Executor, and others, that had the like occasions with Master Finch, as was then testified, That his Pulpit was his Shop, whereby he got his living, and that he must improve his Shop to the utmost advantage, as well as they did theirs: and further saying, That no Holdsworth should come into his Pulpit, to eat the bread out of his mouth, for what was Holds∣worth more than he? so that in conclusion, he did cause the said Executor to disburse, to give him satisfaction, to the value of thirteen pounds five shillings six pence, most of it in money, and the rest in linnen cloth, and notwith∣standing the said Master Finch performed no office at the funerall himselfe, but spent his time in the Taverne at the same time, when the funerall was performed: and this was proved to be his usuall manner, to get his first demands fully into his hands, and then by one tricke or another to come over them again for a new supply, or else there should be no ground broke nor Church-doores opened. These instances were thought sufficient for the proof of this Charge though the Parishioners had divers more notorious prankes of his of this kinde, and were then and there ready prepared with witnesses to have testified them all.
To the Articles concerning his superstitious affection to the Surplice and other Popish practises, it was testified (and further could have been proved than was desired or could by time be permitted) that he usually preached in his Surplice, wore it when he went about the Parish in the annuall perambulation, through the streets, and was so Popishly affect∣ed and addicted to it, that even since his lying under the just condemnation of these things, he refused, on last Ascension day, 1641. to accompany the Parishioners in their Perambulation, because they would not suffer him to wear the Surplice, and reade the Epistles and Gospels at the stinted places and corners of the streets, as formerly. And that he never read or pronoun∣ced the Name Iesus in either of the Sacraments, Epistles, or Go∣spels, or in Sermons or Prayers, (though then on his knees) but he most constantly ducked lowly at it; and in his Canonicall prayer, before his Homilies, (for all his preaching was conti∣nually a meer reading out of a written book) he familiarly used to praise God for the Saints departed, but especially for the Virgin Mary the Mother of God. As for the Article touching his drunkennesse, besides his ac∣customed practise of that beastly sin, at other ordinary times; it was testified by very good witnesse, that hath seen him drunke on the Lords day, and at another time, twice drunke in one and the same Lords day; first in the morning, and then laid to sleep, and drunke again before night. Also another Parishioner be∣ing employed to take order for the buriall of a friend of his in the said Parish, for which Master
Finch (as his custome was) would have his morey before hand, which he accordingly recei∣ved, being 3 pounds, 13. s. upon the payment whereof, the said Parishioner demanded on acquittance, but Master Finch and his man were so drunke that they could not write, so that the party was fain to call witnesse that it was paid, and very needfull too, for the next day Master Finch sent his man to demand the same money again, who answered, he had paid it already the day be∣fore, and would not pay it twice. Some few dayes after the Church-wardens came to the Parishioner for their Duties, which Master Finch had received in the former sum, but Master Finch would not pay them any. It was further also testified to full satisfaction of the Parlia∣ment, that he was so drunke when he was fetcht from a Ta∣verne to give the Sacrament to a dying woman, that he was fain to be led by the arme to the house, that there he was not able to pronounce the Lords Prayer, but was out twice or thrice in saying it, that he was not able to rise off from his knees without helpe, nor being up to sit downe; that he de∣livered the Elements without Consecration; And also desi∣ring the people to go forth of the room, he came to the dying woman, to whom using many unfit gestures, and stroaking her cheekes, he said, That if she would confesse to him all her se∣cret sinnes, then he would love her. The woman thereupon, cal∣ling out as loud as she could for some to come in, they found her much troubled in minde, and unsatisfied, by reason of Ma∣ster Finch his ill carriage and behaviour, and therefore desired that the Sacrament might be given her again by some other Mi∣nister, but she died before it was effected; and Master Finch was fain to be led to the next Alehouse (as he desired) where he lay all that night, and the next morning this wretched man was so shamelesse, as to send for a fee of three shillings four pence for that his most wicked and abominable service. As for his Sermons on November 5 the Popish
Powder-plot, it was testified also, that one year he would permit no Sermon at all. Another year he would permit none unlesse he might have a share of thirteen shillings four pence out of the Col∣lection for the Poor, which being but small, he took ten shil∣lings for his owne use. Another year he preacht himselfe, and in his Sermon (as it was fully proved) he said words to this effect, That the Plotters in that businesse were but a few male content persons, and that they desired at their death, that this Act might be forgot∣ten, and he thanked God it was so almost, and he hoped it would be quite forgotten. It was also testified that for the Sermons at seven of the clocke, on Sabbath day mornings in the Lower Church, he had of the Parish fourty pounds to let Master Davis come in, and about fifty five pounds when Master Brocket came in, be∣sides other summes at other times. To the Article touching his incontinency, it was testified by the Coachman that carried him and two others of his de∣boist Comrades of his owne Coat and condition, together with three women to Hamersmith, where being arrived in an house fit for their intentions, every one chose his woman, and Master Finch his mate (as the witnesse delivered it) being the fattest of the three, and this Coachman being called up into the room unto them, saw them all use these women, in his pre∣sence, with most vile and obscene gestures, upon beds, even to the utmost of what hands could do under their clothes, but far∣ther he could not testifie, for they had time enough in his ab∣sence; but bringing them backe again late into London, he set them downe at Newgate, where he left them altogether plot∣ting what excuse the women should use to their husbands, and it was resolved, that one must say, she had been at a womans la∣bour, another had been to see a friend that was sicke, &c. It was also testified, that he was a constant frequenter of the company of two mens wives, after a most familiar manner, both in City and Countrey journies, namely one Mistris Valentine at the Chequer at Dowgate, and one Mistris Stevenson at Christs Hospitall, and that he alone was seen at Barnet In their two com∣panies onely, comming out of an Inne in a Coach. Also that one night, Master Finch his wife (from whom he hath wilfully lived apart these seven yeares, whose company he could not abide) comming to the said Stevensons house in Christs Hospitall
a foresaid (where also was his frequent rendevous day and night) to aske her husband for some maintenance for her selfe and chil∣dren, he most furiously and desperately drew his knife at her, whereat she ran out of the house, and he after her with his knife in his hand, but she having recovered the Cloister, he, it seemes, beat her downe forward, threw his knife at her, and there she was found on the ground, crying out for helpe, her hat beaten off from her head, and her hair all about her eares; whereat, he running in again, she was forced thus to depart for the pre∣sent. It was also testified, that a Kinswoman of Mistris Valen∣tines comming to see her at the Chequer aforesaid, and M. Finch being there came to her, used many flattering words and com∣plements to her, and taking her at advantage, in a private room, perswaded her to lie with him, which she refusing, he still per∣sisted in this his wicked and lustfull desire, and at last shewed her what was most shamefull to be seen or spoken of, and would by violence have had the use of her body, which she still vehe∣mently refusing, and he perceiving that she would call out for helpe against him (as she told him she would, if he would not forbear) he opened the door and called for a Chamber-pot, by which meanes the door being opened, she ran out from him, and comming out of the room, he affirmed and swore to Mistris Valentine, That this Puritan slut he could not convert her. About two yeares after this also, the said party going again to see her kinswoman Mistris Valentine, there she met Master Finch a∣gain, who after many flattering complements, told her that if she would love him, he would make her a Lady; and Mistris Va∣lentine her good Cousin said thereupon to her, That he might well do it, for he was very likely to be made a Bishop: this was testified by the said Kinswoman her selfe publikely in the House of Commons, to the great admiration of all then present that heard it.
It was further testified against him, that being in company he should affirme and say, This point of Doctrine, I have preacht and will preach it, and that to all eterntty, that that man which hath a handsom woman to his wife, and he were jealous without a cause, that it was lawfull for her to make him a Cuckold, and rather than be should not be made one, he would ride an hundred miles to do it him selfe. It was also testified by another Parishioner that he frequent∣ed an house in Christs Church Parish, where two Sisters lived, married women, both very comely for person, but not without great cause strongly suspected of incontinency; who for their misbehaviours were forced to shift their dwelling from Parish to Parish. And one of these women dying a while after in an∣other Parish, she was so rotten with the foul disease, and loath∣som, that every one that knew thereof was afraid to come nigh her; and she her selfe was not ashamed to tell thereof. And (it is reported) that when she was coffened, her necke was so rotten and perished with the said disease, that her head fell off from her body. It was yet farther testified by the Porter of Christs Hospitall, that in the time of Master Finch his lying at Master Steven∣sons house, as aforesaid, the said Porter by his office attend∣ing the gates of the Hospitall, observed Master Finch most fre∣quently to go out and come in, at very unseasonable houres in the night with the said Master Stevensons wife, which the Porter had divers times told Master Stevenson himselfe of, fairly and privately, but no amendment following, and the Porter still being disquieted, to let in Master Finch, &c. to Master Steve∣sons house, one night after, or rather morning, about 2. or 3. of the clocke, he and Mistris
Stevenson comming in, and the Porter thereby much discontented to rise out of his bed at such houres, he began to wrangle and grumble, whereupon words passing be∣tween them, and Master Finch in his sweet-hearts company especially, impatient to bear them, fell very foul on the said Porter, abused him in tearmes, caught him by his beard (which he wore very broad and long, almost downe to his girdle) and by violence and rage pulled agreat piece off his beard from his chin, whereupon the Porter had him before Sir Martin Lumley, then one of the City Justices, to binde Master Finch to his good behaviour, which he was never able to do, nor any else, as yet. These and many mo such like foul and scandalous things have been most plenteously proved against the said Master Finch: and after all, it being demanded what answer he could make for all these things, he desired some time to make answer, and to plead by Counsell, but it was replied, These things were mat∣ters of fact, and not of Law; and therefore he knew at present whether they were true or no: but he being silent, command was to withdraw; some other witnesses were heard also, which spake to the same effect, which for brevity sake we omit, for if we should present you with all his extorted exactions for Buri∣als and Baptizings and other particular enormities of his life, it would fill a volume, for almost every one he had to deal with in these kindes, in the Parish, hath experience what an heavy burden he hath been to the Parish. The whole Grand Committee for Religion receiving abundant sat is faction in the truth hereof, and all the rest of the Articles forementioned, accordingly proceeded to an unanimous Vote of his gracelesse and palpable guilt in them all, and he now lies under the just censure of the House: yet (strange to be spoken) this most impious and impudent men, like a right athe∣isticall son of Belial, puts on a whores forehead to this day, carries himselfe most proudly and insolently (as ever before) amongst the Parishioners, officiates when he lists, in his owne shamelesse person, being still very vexatious to them; yea,
committing many of the foresaid condemned Superstitions, wicked and drunken practises afresh, without any blushing or the least signe of relenting: in this case much worse than wic∣ked Achab, who though he had sold himselfe to worke wicked∣nesse, as the Scripture sayes, yet when the hand of God was on him, and a judgement threatned against him, 'tis said, he hum∣bled himselfe before the Lord: but this most wicked and ungod∣ly man, quite void of grace, yea, of common civility, like his brazen-fac'd mother of Rome, (one of whose bold brats he in heart and practise also, in a great measure shewes himselfe) carries about with him an unblushing whores forehead, and jets up and downe with strange arrogancy. And indeed his most unbridled pride hath principally oc∣casioned the publication of these his so foul and enormous carriages, and if he be not quite past shame, it may serve a little to pull downe his plumes, and tame his insolencies. For as yet, like wicked, yet foolish Agag, he falsly perswades himfelfe, that the bitternesse of sorrow or smart is past and gone. But I trust the Lord will in mercy to his poor and too-too long abused Church, arise by our Honourable Worthies in Parliament, and have mercy on Sion, in the ruine of all her impious and implacable enemies, and all those rotten-hearted, scandalous Baals Priests, and pay them home the just wages of their insufferable iniquities and impieties, who have most mi∣serably overspread, and almost quite poysoned the whole King∣dom with their Popish and prophane abominations; of whom and their just reward the Lord himselfe complaines, and testi∣fies against them by the Prophet, Ier. 23.9. My heart breaketh within me, because of the Prophets all my bones shake, &c. Which may (by lamentable experience to this Kingdom) be properly applied to our wicked Prelates, and their scandalous and idola∣trous Priests; for when such men as these have been winkt at,
nay, countenanced; and on the other hand, such a number of able, heavenly, soul-directing Teachers, for a few indifferent Ceremonies (as the imposers themselves acknowledged they were) shall be suspended, censured, fined, imprisoned, banish∣ed, undone, &c. as if power were put into their hands, onely, to pull downe the Throne of Christ, and to advance the King∣dom of Satan. And who they are, that have been the great Engineers to hin∣der the flourishing of the Gospel in England, (whatsoever their flourishing pretences have been) or if ever it possibly can flou∣rish so long as such stand, let wisdom judge, Ierem. 23.10, 11. For the Land is full of Adulterers, and because of swearing the Land mournes, the pleasant places are dried up, and their course is evill, and their force is not right. For, both the Prophet and the Priest are prophane; yea, in mine house have I found their wicked∣nesse, saith the Lord. And again, verse 14, 15. I have seen also, in the Prophets of Icrusalem, an horrible thing; They commit Adulte∣ry, and walke in lies; They strengthen also the hands of evill doers, so that none can returne from his wickednesse: For from the Prophets of Ierusalem, is wickednesse gone forth into all the Land. They are all of them unto me as So dome and the inhabitants thereof as Gomorah. Therefore, thus saith the Lord of Hosts concerning the Prophets; Be∣hold, I will feed them with Wormewood, and make them drink the wa∣ter of gall &c. O Lord, to whom vengeance belongeth; O God to whom vengt∣ance belongeth; Lift up thy selfe, thou Iudge of the Earth, and render a reward to the proud. But do good, O Lord, in thy good pleasure unto Sion, and build thou again the wals of Iera∣salem. Amen, Amen. FINIS.
