E734A 99897819 170951
THE INGAGEMENT AND RESOLUTION OF THE Principall Gentlemen of the County of Salop, for the Raising and Maintayning of Forces at their own Charge, for the defence of His MAIESTIE, their Countrey, and more particularly the Fortunes, Persons, and Estates of the Subscribers under-named. VVE whose names are under-written, do hereby ingage our selves each to other, and promise upon the Faith and VVord of a Gen∣tleman, That we will do our uttermost endeavours, both by our selves and friends, to raise, aswell for defence of our King and Countrey, as our own particular Safeties, one entire Regiment of Dragoneers, and with our lives to defend those mens Fortunes and Families that shall be Contributers herein, to their abilities. And for the more speedy expedition of the said service, as also for prevention of being surprized and plundered by our Enemies, we have thought fit to intreat Sir Vincent Corbett formerly Captain of the Horse for this County, to be our Chief Commander over the aforesaid Regiment; And likewise we have appointed the day of our appearance for bringing in of every mans proportion of his Horse or Money, according to the subscription of his undertaking, to be the Twentieth day of December, all in Battlefield. Henry Bromley Esquire, Sheriffe: Robert Viscount Killmorrey. Robert Howard, Richard Leveson Knights of the Bath. Richard Herbert Esquire. Richard Lee Baronet. Paul Harris Thomas Wolrych. Vincent Corbett. Knights and Baronets. William Owen. Richard Prince. Robert Eyton. Iohn Weld Sen. Francis Ottley. Thomas Screven. Thomas Eyton. Thomas Lister. Knights. Iohn Corbett. Rowland Lacon. Roger Owen. Edward Kinaston. Francis Herbert. Robert Corbett, of Humfreston. Iohn Bromley. Thomas Corbett. Pelham Corbett. Roger Kinaston. Carew Stewry. William Fowler. Edward Acton. Walter Pigot. Thomas Ireland. William Cotton. Edward Cresset. William Barker. Francis Thornes. Arthur Sandford. Thomas Owen. Iohn Newton. Edward Baudewin Charles Baldwin. Thomas Edwards. Walter Waring. Esquires. Ralph Goodwin. Tho. Whitmore. William Blunden. Richard Okeley. Harbert Iencks. Francis Billingsley. Robert Matthews. Richard Church. Rees Tannat. Thomas Phillips. Iohn Leighton. Lawrence Bentall. George Ludlow. Iohn Dawes. Thomas Barkley. Edward Stanley. Henry Powell. Francis Burton. Fulk Crumpton. Iohn Pay. Pontesbury Owen. Esquires. Creswell Taylor. Thomas Holland. Andrew Charleton. Edward Owen. George Holland. Edmund Bullock. Iohn Huxley. Iohn Wilkocks. Thomas Lokier. Audley Bowdler. Edward Astley. Richard Hosier. Iohn Wibumbury. Francis Chambers. Francis Smith. Henry Heynes. Francis Morris. Gentlemen. These who have subscribed, are those which were at the first and second meeting. The rest of the Gentry which are far remote, and as well affected, we humbly desire may be added to this our Association. IOHN STVDLEY Esq Major of the Town of Shrewsbury, and the rest of the Inhabitants within the said Town and Liberties thereof, do, with a full and generall consent, engage themselves to finde and furnish one Troop of Dragoneers consist∣ing of sixtie, at the charge of the said Town and Liberties; as also two hundred foot Souldiers at their charges. Likewise under the command of Sir Francis Ottley Knight, Captain for the said Town, for the defence of the Kings Majesties Royall Person, The known Laws of the Land, The Liberty and Property of the Subjects, And the Safety of the said Town and Liberties. May it please Your Majestie, WE the Clergy of this County, are (with the Noble Gentry) sensible of Your Majesties Wrongs, and our Countries Danger; And therefore with them offer up our Abilities, (with all humilitie) an hundred Horse, to be under the Command of Sir Vincent Corbett, ac∣cording to Your Majesties Commission: That so Your Loyall Subjects may here live in Peace, and be serviceable to Your Majestie.
