G1205 E725_7 99862648 114814
ΣΥΓΚΡΕΤΙΣΜΌΣ. OR Dis-satisfaction Satisfied. In seventeen sober and serious QUERIES, Tending to allay the Discontents, and satisfie the Scruples, of persons Dis-satisfied about the late Revolution of Government in the Common-Wealth, and to guide every Mans feet into the way of his Duty, and the Publique Peace. Proposed by J. G. a Cordiall Friend, and Well-willer to the Interest of all men, consistent with the Publique Peace and Safety. For he supposed that his Brethren would have understood, how that God, by his hand, would deliver them: but they under∣stood it not. Act. 7. 25. This Moses whom they refused, saying, Who made thee a Ruler and a Judg, the same did God send to be a Ruler and De∣liverer, &c. Act. 7. 35. When the Righteous are in Authoritie, the People Rejoyce. Prov. 29. 2. LONDON, Printed by J. Macock, for H. Cripps, and L. Lloyd, and are to be sold their shop in Popes head Alley, neer Lombard street. 1654.
Dissatisfaction Satisfied. I. WHether doth not the Apostle expresly affirm (Rom. 13. 1.) That the Powers that be [i. whatsoever they be, and however, in respect of second means compassed, attained, or procured by men who stand possessed of them] are ordained by God [i. orderly, regu∣larly, wisely, & righteously in respect of his providen∣tial interposure about the vestment of them, disposed of, and lodged in the persons, whosoever they be, who are the present Ministers, or Administrators of them?] Or were not the highest Powers in the world, when the Apostle spake this, viz. That the Powers that be, are , ordained of God, vested in Nero, not only a Monster of men (as he is commonly termed) in respect of his bloody cruelty, unnaturall lusts, &c. but likewise advanced to the Empire, neither by the orderly way of the suffrage or election of the people, nor yet by the less disorderly way of the choyce of the Roman Senate, but partly by the wickedness of his mother Agrippina, who caused her husband Claudius
to dis-inherit his own son Britannicus, to make way for the Adoption of her son, (this Nero) partly by the over-ruling interposure of the Cohorts and rest of the Souldiery, The Senate (saith the Story) as men af∣frighted with amazement, not once contradicting the same? II. Whether is it any way necessary in point of reason, or conscience, that they, who quietly obey, and sub∣mit unto the present power, or the persons actually invested with Authority over them, should either ju∣stifie, approve, or own the termes, method, way, means, or manner, either of their attaining unto, or their investiture with, this Authority and power? Or did the Apostle Paul justifie, or approve of, the way or means by which Nero obtained the Imperiall Dig∣nity, in submiting and appealing unto him, or nnto his Authoritie, yea or in his injoyning all Christians Acts. 25. 10, 11. (as we heard) to be subject unto him, and this not only for wrath, but for conscience sake Rom. 13. 9.? Or do we ever read in the Scriptures, of any person either punished, threatned, or reproved by God, for doing things sim∣ply, and in themselves, lawful, at the command, or in obedience unto, any Magistrate or Person, seated, and setled in Authoritie, how unduly so ever advanced to his seate of power? III. Whether is it not the gracious Counsel and intent of God, in declaring, That whatsoever Powers be,
they are ordained by him (as we have heard) and again, that ALL that are in Authority, should be prayed and Interceded for, yea and thanks also given for them, &c. Whether (I say) is it not the gracious intent of God in these, and many other like Declarations made by him, to provide for the peace & quiet of States, Kingdoms, and Common-wealths, by cutting off al occasions and pretexts from the people, of quarrelsome disputes about the Rights and Titles of those, who are in pre∣sent possession of the Soveraign or ruling powers? And do not all they reject this gracious counsell of God against themselves, and against their Nation, and labour to defeat it, who set themselves with all their might (yea, with more might, it is to be feared, then their own) to raise a Spirit of disloyaltie and disobe∣dience in the people, unto the present Government and Governours, upon pretence, That those who are in power, did by undue and unworthy means possess and invest themselves with it? IV. Whether is, or ought, the letter of the Law, to be observed in all cases whatsoever? or is not ratio Le∣gis, anima Legis, i. e. the reason, or end of the Law, the soul of the Law, which is in all cases to be preferred before the letter, which is but as the body of it? Yea or hath any Law whatsoever any binding force, further then the execution of it, or sub∣jection unto it, are consistent with the publique safety and good Omnis lex ordinatur a communm hominum salu∣tem, & in tantum obtiet vim & rationem Lgu∣cundum vero quod ab hoc deficit, virtutem obligandi non habet. Ʋade Ju∣ris peritus dicit, Quod nul∣la ratio juris, aut quitatis benignit as patitur, ut quae salubriter pro salute homi∣num introducuntur, a nos duriori interpretatione con∣trae ipsorum commodum perducamus ad severita∣tem. Contingit autem mul∣toties, quod al quid obser∣vari communi saluti est u∣tile, ut in pluribus, quod tamen aliquibus easibus est maxime nocivum. Aqu. 12. q. 96. a. 6. Ʋnde si emergat casus, in quo observatio ta∣lis Legis sit damnosa com∣muni saluti, non est obser∣vanda. Ibid. Necessitas dispensationem habet an∣nexam; quia necessitas non subditur legi. Ibid.? Or are not such men Judges of evil thoughts
(as the Scripture speaketh James 2. 4) who con∣demn such persons, as violators or transgressors of the Law, who in order to the publique peace and safety, act besides, or contrary to, the letter of the Law, and in such cases only, wherein the observance of this letter visibly threateneth the said common peace and safety? Or whether are private men, who know little of, converse little with, State transactions and affairs, the more competent Judges, when, or in what cases, the observation of the letter of the Law is of a dangerous and threa∣tening import to the publique safety, or such persons, whose dayly residence is in the mount of State-negotiations, and who by the advantage of the ground, where they stand, may very reasonably be conceived to be in a full capacity per∣fectly to discover and understand on what hinge the publique Interest and Safety turneth, and what means and interposures are most promising of their procure∣ment, promotion, and establishment? V. Whether are such promises, engagements, or pro∣testations, binding upon the Consciences of those, who have made them, yea or lawful for them to ob∣serve or keep, which, by reason of an alteration and change of those circumstances and terms, under which, and in consideration of which, they were made,
cannot be observed or kept, without the imminent danger, or damage, of those, unto whom, and for whose sake, wealth, and safety, they were made Ad hoc quod teneatur bo∣mo facere, quod promisit, re∣quiritur quod omnia immu∣tata permaneant: alioquin, nec fuit mendax in promit∣tendo, quia promisit quod habebat in mente, subintel∣lectis debitis conditionibus. Nec etiam est infidelis non implendo, quod promisit, quia aedem conditiones non ex∣tant. Senecs. D. Benefic. l. 4. c. 34. Ad quintum decendum, quod ille qui aliquid pro∣mittit, si habeat animum faciendi quod promittit, non mentitur: quia non loqui∣tur contra id, quod gerit in mente. Si vero non faciat quod promisit, videtur infi∣deliter agere per hoc, quod animum mutat. Potest tae∣men excusari ex duobus. Ʋno modo, s promisit id, quod manifeste est illici∣tum, quia promittendo pec∣cavit, mutando autem pro∣positum, bene facit. Alio modo, si sint mutatae condi∣tiones personaram & nego∣tiorum—Ʋnde & Aposto∣lus non est mentitus, qui non ivit Corinthum, quo se iturum esse promiserat, ut dicitur, 2 Cor. 1. Aqu. 22. qu. 110. a. 3.? Or in case, a man having borrowed a sword of his Friend, and promised to deliver it back again into his own hand within a months time, this Friend of his in the interim falling into a delirium or phrene tique distemper, and so continu∣ing till the said month be expired, is this man bound in conscience to perform his promise notwithstāding, by deliver∣ing the sword into his friends hand at the time appointed? Or is not the sad providence befaln his friend in this case, to be interpreted by him, not only, or simply, as a discharge from God in re∣spect of the performance of his said promise, but as an Item, or engagement layd upon him by God, at no hand to perform it? Or hath there not within these few years past, been an alteration or change in the politique terms and circumstances of this State and Com∣monwealth, as considerably great, as well can be imagined? VI Whether was that supposition of Moses without
sufficient reason, or gronnd, when, upon his aveng∣ing one of his Brethren by smiting the Egyptian, who oppressed him, he SUPPOSED that his Brethren would have under stood how that God by his hand would deliver them? Or were not his Brethren dull and slow of heart in not taking the kindly impressions of such a providence, and nor understanding, that pregnant inti∣mation from God, that his Counsel and Will was, to appoint and make his Servant Moses a Prince or Ruler over them, and this in order to the vindication of their liberties, the freedom of their persons from oppression, and to their further benefit and good otherwise? or do not they shew themselves to be altogether unexperi∣enced in the speech and language of high Providen∣ces, or at least to be either but dull and drowsie, or else cross and froward, Interpreters of the most sig∣nal dispensations of God, who do not understand that his will and pleasure is, to appoint such a person toties quoties, by whose hand he vouchsafeth unto a People a long continued series of extraordinary de∣liverances, for a Prince and Ruler over them? Or do not that people reject the Counsel of God against themselves, who say unto a Person so commended unto them, and appointed over them by God, who made Thee a Ruler or a Judg? VII. Whether did not God send THAT Moses to be a Ru∣ler and a deliverer unto his People, who was refused by them, saying unto him, who made thee a Ruler and a Act. 7. 35. Judg? Or is it not a matter of frequent occurrency and observation in the Providential Administrations
of God, that such things are brought about and done by him, which, though as contrary to the minds and desires, as to the expectations of many good people, when they are new done, yet turn to an incomparable benefit and advantage unto them afterwards? Or was not the death of Christ, as a Sword passing through the soul of his Virgin Mother, yea and of many other holy Luk. 2 35. and gracious persons, both men and women, by which notwithstanding they were highly raised in peace and comfort afterwards, and shall be eternally saved? Or did not eleven of the twelve Tribes of Israel side with the house of Saul against Davids ad∣vancement 2 Sam. 2 10. over them, being for a time highly un∣willing and discontented that he should be their King, under whose Government notwithstanding they flourished like a green bay Tree, and saw many years of the greatest prosperity and peace? VIII. Whether are not children like to receive better quarter, and terms of love, care, provision in things necessary and convenient, &c. from their natural Parents, and such who begat them, then from strang∣ers, or persons not so neerly related to them? Or is any community of men or body of people, like to be so naturally regarded and cared for in the things of their comfort and peace, by any other kind of Ruler, or Governour whatsoever, as by those who, under God, have been the Preservers of their lives, liber∣ties, and estates, by exposing their own persons to all the difficulties, hardships, and hazards of war, and jeoparding their lives themselves in the high places
of the field, where death for the time had his throne? Or doth not the Preserving of a people upon such terms as these, as kindly, as naturally, as affectio∣nately, endear them to their Preserver, as the act of procreation commendeth children unto the love and tender affections of their Parents? Or is not the Act of Preserving of very neer a kin to the Act of Beget∣ing? If the premises will stand, who are more desire∣able by a people in the places of Rule and Authority, then those, who have been their great Preservers? IX. Whether are not they rather Back-biters of sin, then Reprovers, who importunely declaim and cry out against the Sins of those that are Absent? Or is not this a most unworthy practise of men, to insinu∣ate themselves into the hearts and affections of sim∣ple and inconsiderate people, by causing, or tempting them to think the better of themselves, whilest others are reproached and declaimed against in their hear∣ing, as persons more sinful and unworthy, then they? Or have not daring and bold speeches uttered against Superiors, and persons in Authority, tending to ble∣mish them, or to impair their honor & esteem, always been of an affectionate and captivating resentment with the more ignoble and lower-spirited sort of men, causing them to have the persons of those, who utter them, in admiration, as worthy Assertors of the Liberties of the People, and exposing their own li∣berties, yea and lives also, to make the purchase?
X. Whether is there any instance or example to be found in all the Scripture of any Prophet, or faithful Servant of God, who counted it a pleasure to declaim against their Rulers before the people; especially against any such Ruler, whom they acknowledged, or knew, to be a person fearing God, and withall, a man, the tenderness and goodness of whose Consci∣ence they could not lightly but know to be such, which made him utterly averse as to any penall vin∣dication of himself, (especially upon the persons of such men, whom he had the least cause of all to judg godly,) though highly injured and provoked by them? Or is it not a most unworthy strain of an un-Christian dis-ingenuitie, to tread and trample upon those with a foot of insolencie, whom we know (or at least have very good grounds whereon to be con∣fidently perswaded) that they are fast bound in their judgements, and consciences towards God, from ri∣sing up against us, to repair themselves, or to measure out unto us according to the just demerit of such our misdemeanors against them? XI. Whether doth not the Apostle, expresly charge and injoyn every Soul (without exception of any) to be subject to the higher powers, declaring, That whoso∣ever resisteth the Power, resisteth the Ordinance of God, (Rom. 13. 2.) If so, do not such persons sin against an express Commandment of God, and this with an
high hand, who, under what pretext soever, shall o∣penly teach disobedience unto the Powers over them, animating and encouraging, yea by all unchristian and indirect means, incensing and provoking the people against the Powers, which God, whether in judgment, or in mercy, hath most justly placed and appointed over them? Or can the sin of resisting the Powers, be more pregnantly, unquestionably, yea or more dangerously and mischievously perpetrated and committed, then when those, who ought to live in subjection under them, are day after day, openly solicited, tempted, urged, yea upon Religious pretences conjured, to deny or refuse this subjection unto them, and are passionately, and (as it were) out of an extasie of zeal, born in hand, that whilest they break so signal a Command of God, they do him worthy service? XII. Whether do not all Christians stand expresly char∣ged, to make supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks, as for all men, so more especially for Kings, and ALL that are in Authority, that they may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty? If thus, do not such Christians notoriously prevaricate with the scope and intent of their own supplications and prayers (at least if they supplicate and pray ac∣cording to the prescription of the Holy Ghost, now mentioned) who labour in the very fire without ceas∣ing to make profelytes unto Barabbas, in stead of Je∣sus Christ, striving might and main to season all they can, with principles of turbulency and sedition, and to mold their Christian Brethren into such counsels and
resolutions, which no man can reasonably imagine or expect, but that they should, or will, exasperate those in Authority into such ways, which must needs make their lives less quiet and peaceable? XIII. Whether are such men filled with the Spirit of God, or with a contrary spirit, who, in stead of giving thanks unto God for those in Authority (which is the express Command of the Apostle, as we heard—that giving of thanks be made for all men, For Kings, and for ALL that are in Authority, &c.) do little else upon all occasions but fill the ears of men with their discon∣tents, complaints and murmurings against those in Authority? And whether are not murmurers and complainers Jude v. 16., and so again, traytors, heady, high-mind∣ed 2 Tim 34., and again, men who despise Government [or Lordship, ] presumptuous, self-willed, NOT AFRAID to speak evil of dignities 2 Pet. 2. 10., ranged by the Ho∣ly Ghost himself amongst persons highly disappro∣ved by God? And whether is not that wisdom, which is from above, as well peaceable, as pure, gentle, and easie to be entreated Iam. 3. 17., as that which is found in persons, having bitter envying, and strife in their hearts, earthly, sensual, devillish Iam. 3. 14. 15? XIV. Whether did not Satan (the great Enemy of the peace and safety of mankind) desire to sift the Apo∣stles rather then any other sort of men, [i. e. to disturb and trouble their fancies, memories, understand∣ings,
&c. for a time, with an intent and hope by this means to draw out of them some soyl or dross, some unworthy carriages, or other, which coming from them, he knew must needs be more serviceable for his ends, then the same, or the like, coming from other men.] Or doth he not in these days labour in the ve∣ry fire to disturb the principles, distemper the ima∣ginatives, disorder and confound the reasons, appre∣hensions, and understandings of such men, whose disordered actings and miscarriages he supposeth will be of highest conducement to his ends, which are known to be, the trouble, misery, and destruction, of the poor creature called Man? Or are not such men, the men of this character, whose zeal hath so highly commended them to the opinions and thoughts of many devout and well-meaning men and women, that they judg their thresholds to be much nearer the threshold of God himself, then other mens? XV. Whether is there any kind of zeal more ecstatical and fierie, then that which is blind, and without knowledg? Or was it not such a zeal as this, which made the Apostle Paul himself, whilst yet a Pharisee, exceedingly mad against the Saints, in so much as to persecute them even unto strange Cities Act 26. 11.? Or were not the Jews, to whom notwithstanding Paul bears this witness, that they had a zeal of God, the fiercest ene∣mies of all others, to the most worthy and faithful Servants of God? Or was it not a spark of this un∣hallowed fire, that provoked the two Disciples, James and John, to demand of Christ, whether they should not command fire to come down from Hea∣ven
to consume the Samaritans, because they received them not? Or did not the Lord Christ upon their mo∣tion turn himself towards them, and rebuke them in these words; Ye know not what manner of Spirit ye are of Luk. 9. 53. 54 55.? Or do they understand and consider of what spirit, they either are, or ought to be, who (in effect) call for fire, not only from Heaven, but from Earth also (I mean, from the vulgar, and less considerate sort of people) to destroy, if not the per∣sons, yet the power and Authority (which must needs endanger the persons also) of such Rulers a∣mongst them, who do not receive their notions and Doctrines about Government, and submit to an in∣vestiture from them, and such as they please to joyn in the Act of this investiture with themselves? XVI. Whether is the assertive or high-bearing confi∣dence of men, any demonstrative, yea or compe∣tent, argument or ground of truth, in what they de∣liver and avouch upon such terms? Or did any man, or any sort of men, ever fly an higher pitch of confidence then the Jews when they notoriously belyed the Lord Jesus Christ, expressing themselves thus: Say we not WELL that thou art a Samaritan, and hast a Devil? Or did they not speak very ignorantly, wickedly, and falsly, when they pleased themselves with an high and confident conceit, that they spake WELL, and nothing but the truth? Or, are not the grounds of most mens confidence, rather ignorance, or want of consideration, of such things, which are strongly objectionable against their notions and apprehensi∣ons, in conjunction with a vain glorious humor of being thought Demi-prophets, and persons of a
more familiar converse with God, then other men, then any well-grounded knowledg or comprehensi∣on of the certain truth of those things, which they affirm? XVII. Whether is the Epocha, or time of the first entrance beginning, or setting up of the fift Monarchy in the World, fixed and determined by God in the Scriptures, so that no humane endeavors or contri∣butions towards such a thing, are any ways available to accelerate or hasten this period of time, nor (on the other hand) any humane opposition or obstructions or unworthy actings of men, any ways able to retard or set it back? If neither, why should any men trou∣ble the World round about them, and abuse the sim∣plicity of inconsiderate people, by an importune bear∣ing them in hand, that if they were but permitted to umpire the soveraign Affairs of their State and Nati∣on, they would out of hand bring the said blessedness of the fift Monarchy upon the head of the world, even before the day thereof? Or why should these men, or any others, clamor day after day in the ears of poor people, against such persons, who themselves ac∣knowledg to be truly Godly, as if they stood in Christs way, and would not suffer him to set up his Kingdom, or this fift Monarchy, in the world, only because they cannot be satisfi'd about the truth or soberness of their notions, and refuse to steer a course, threatening ruine and confusion to their Nation? Or is it not the sence and declared opinion of these men, that the day and hour, at least the year, wherein that Great Jubilee of the Monarchy they speak of, shall begin, is unchange∣ably, unalterably, unremoveably fixed by God?
Postscript. I. MAy it not be yet further queried, Whether such persons, whether Ministers of the Gospel, or others (but especially the former) who publiquely undertake or pretend to know, and predict unto the people, how long the present Government shall stand, and after how many months, or years, it shall present∣ly be dissolved and fall, do not impose a kind of wretched necessity upon themselves to turn every stone for the raising of Tumults and Insurrections in the Land, and to enrage the people against the pre∣sent Government and Governors, thus to make a covering for their own shame, and to prevent the dishonor and reproach of false Prophets from light∣ing upon their heads? Or did not the Wizard in France, having engaged the reputation of his Art in foretelling the death of Duke Beron by a Bungurdian on a certain day, and finding no likelyhood, the day now approaching, of the event otherwise, resolve to make himself a true Prophet by doing the execution himself, and accordingly murthered him? II. Again, Are not these passages ensuing (published in print and subscribed by Mr John Simpson, Mr Wil∣liam Greenhill, Mr Thomas Brooks, Mr Hanserd Knollys, Mr T. Harrison, Mr Christopher Feak, Mr Richard Wol∣laston, Mr Henry Jesse, with several others, about two
years since, viz. in November, 1651.) worthy to be engraven with the Point of a Diamond, and written in letters of Gold; If Cesar, and Pagan Rulers under him in Judea, and elsewhere, were to be honored and submitted unto, as both Christ taught, and his Apostles (Mat. 22. 21. Mark 12. 27.) (AND YET THEY CAME IN BY THE SWORD, AND KEPT GODS CHURCH IN BONDAGE,) how much more should our Governors be honored by all people in our Nation? The same Authors soon after express themselves thus: In our days, wherein persons truly fearing God are of divers forms, dissenting in Church Government, &c. some that are termed Presbyterians, some Independents, some Ana∣baptists, and some that are not so resolved with any of these; the power of chusing Rulers, or of being chosen, should not be limited to any one of these forms, or perswasions, to the excluding of others, [excepting such, WHO EITHER DENY PROPRIETY, or Magistra∣cy, or who assert carnal liberty, or Polygamy, whom we have witnessed against in our former declaration; or such, AS HAVE OPPOSED, Or DO NOT OWN, THIS PRESENT GOVERNMENT.] A little be∣fore (in the said printed paper) having solemnly pro∣fessed thus; With one consent we do thus declare, as in the presence of the Almighty, who is the searcher of all hearts, before whom the wicked and deceitful shall be confounded at the day of Judgment; they lay down this Proposition; That all people in every Nation, as well members of Churches, as others, ought FOR CON∣SCIENCE SAKE to honour such, as by the wise dis∣posing Providence of God, are their PRESENT RUL∣ERS; and are to submit to the civil commands, not on∣ly of such Rulers as are faithful, but even to Infidels,
(to omit several other things of like import in the said paper.) Are not the contents and substance of these sayings clearly and expresly founded upon the good Word of God, which (as the said Authors worthily, and most truly inform us) is the Rule and Standard for Faith and obedience? If so, must not all such men of necessity be false Prophets, casting snares upon the people, and leading them out of the ways of truth and peace, who are so far from HONOURING THEIR PRESENT GOVERNORS (though no Infidels, but partakers of like precious faith with the Saints themselves, though no keepers of Gods Church in bondage, but most zealous and faithful Assertors of the entire liberties thereof,) that with open mouth they pour contempt upon them day after day, con∣sulting with their spleens, or worse spirits, how to make their savour to stink in the eyes of the people, and so to arm them with discontents and indignation against them? Or is this in the dialect, or sence, of the Holy Ghost, to, HONOUR GOVERNOURS? III. Whether, a mans conscience bearing him witness in the Holy Ghost, that his heart is upright with God, and that he unfeignedly purposeth and desires to do all the good upon Earth, whilest he abideth amongst men, which God shall any ways enable him unto; ought not such a person, even in conscience towards God, and out of love and genuiness of affection to his generation, embrace and accept of all such opportu∣nities, and advantages of standing, for the promotion of his work, which God shall by any providence of his offer unto him? Or when God called Moses up to
the top of the Mount (Exod. 19. 20.) had it been meet for him to have answered, Nay; but I will serve thee faithfully beneath in the valley? Or is it not a grand detriment, or loss, unto the world, when Princes (as So∣lomon speaketh) walk as servants on the Earth; i. e. when men of noble Principles, of publique Spirits, whose hearts and souls are in travel with the wealth, peace, and prosperity of the world round about them, who are shap'd and form'd (as it were) on purpose by God himself for Rule and Government, shall want a stage whereon to act like Princes, or be perswaded to enjoy themselves in priva∣cy and retirement? Or in case the Sun should be over∣ruled to change place with the Moon, should not the world have cause in abundance to lament the change? Or had his tabernacle been pitch'd in any inferior Orb, beneath that, wherein it is now placed by God, could the Earth have rejoyced in his light at that rate, which now it doth? Or had He been in any capacity to inrich the inhabitants thereof with his treasures, as they are now inriched by him? Or if a candle should creep under a bushel, when there is a candlestick provided and set on the table for it, should not they in the house have much more reason to be offended at it, then well pleased? Or is it not a secret guilt or conscious∣ness in the generality of men of their own narrow∣chestedness, and self-ward propensions, which make them jealous that other men are, and will be found, in the same condemnation with them; and that no man coming where he may without much danger serve himself, will be much intent upon the service of other men further then his own secular interest shall super∣intend and advise him? FINIS.
