h1838 e2_10 99872075 124497
THE Glory and Beauty OF GODS PORTION: SET FORTH In a SERMON preached before the Honourable House of COMMONS at the Publique Fast, Iune 26. 1644. BY GASPAR HICKES, Pastour of Lanracke in Cornwall, a Member of the Assembly of DIVINES. LONDON, Printed by G. M. for Christopher Meredith at the Signe of the Crane in Pauls Church-yard. 1644.
Die Mercurii, 26o Iunii, 1644. IT is this day ordered by the Commons assem∣bled in Parliament, That Master Rous, Master Salwey and Master Nicoll, doe from this House give thanks unto Master Hardwick and Master Hickes for the great paines they tooke in the Sermons they preached this day, at the intreatie of this House, at St Margarets Westminster, it being the day of publike Humiliation, and to desire them to print their Ser∣mons. And it is ordered that none shall presume to print their Sermons, but whom they shall licence under their hands writing. H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com. I appoint Christopher Meredith to print my Sermon, Gasp. Hickes.
TO THE HONOVRABLE HOVSE OF COMMONS now assembled in Parliament. IT is the commendation and glory of great works to be carried through difficulties, to be borne up and brought to passe in despight of oppositions. The street & wall of Ierusalem were built in troublous times. The Church comonly passeth thorough fire and water to her highest advancements & inlargements. So it comes to passe, partly thorough the malice of adversaries, who straine their rage higher according to the Churches risings; if we could empty hell and the world of enmity, we might perhaps) steale quietly to Heaven, and injoy spirituall priviledges with out∣ward ease; principally, thorough the wisdome of God in the dispensation of mercies; he raises the value of them by put∣ting them off upon hard termes. We should be apt to surfet of priviledges, to kick against him that feeds us, and light∣ly to esteeme the rock of our Salvation, if the Lord did not diet and physick us, if he did not acute our appetites by some sharp mixtures, some bitter ingredients in our sweetest and fullest cup; if he did not keep our souls in a longing temper by holding forth blessings to us, after which we must reach and straine, and presse even thorow a piece of hell, through a world of dangers and hardships before we attain them. And
if good things dearly come by are to be highly prized, I do not see how we can over-rate those we are now pursuing. All our gold in full weight cannot satisfie our enemies, their sword is cast into the ballance, they hunt after our pretious souls. Yea, the Lord cals upon us to expend not only teares and cries, but bloud and life and all: Rich mercies they are which he holds at such a rate, indeed more worth then our all. The insuing dis∣course shewes forth a little glimpse of their excellency, which in all humility I present to your view. It is your high pre∣ferment in Gods favour (Honourable Patriots) that he conveyes our blessings to us through your hands that you are made the chieftaines, the leaders among and above your bre∣thren. And although the heat, the brunt lie mainly upon you, yet are your protections strong, your reward sure. I need not tell you that the eyes of men and Angels are upon you; that the Christian world is at agaze, filled with expectation of the glorious results of your high and difficult indeavours. We all rise or fall, in all probability) as you stand faithfull & uni∣ted in the work you have in hand. Your imployments are emi∣nent, your interesses deep; the concernment is publike, reach∣ing all that have a share in Zions prosperity. The Lord fa∣sten you as nailes in a sure place, that we may be an ha∣bitation of justice, and a mountain of holinesse, and the blessings of the Lord may be upon us. So prayeth Your humble Servant in Soul-affaires GASPAR HICKES.
THE Glory and Beauty OF GODS PORTION. ISAI. 28.5, 6. In that day shall the Lord of hosts be for a crowne of glory, and for a diademe of beauty unto the residue of his people: And for a spirit of judgement to him that sitteth in judgement, and for strength to them that turne the battell in the gate. THere is an evill among all things that are done under the Sunne (saith Salomon) that in respect of outward occurrences,Eccles. 9.2, 3. there is one event to all, to the righteous, and to the wicked; to the cleane, and to the uncleane; to the pious, and to the prophane; whence the hearts of the sonnes of
men are filled with evill, and madnesse possesses their mindes till it bring them to destruction. That which makes desperate ones runne mad in sinning is their pre∣sumption of Gods connivence at their courses, their damned inference of his approbation of their evils from their present impunity and prospering in them; because they have no changes,Psal. 55.19. therefore they feare not God. And that which drives the sager and better tempered sort of Naturalists out of their wits is their conceit of careles∣nesse or confusion in the dispensations of providence, or of unequall compensations of meedes or punishments to men according to deservings. Hence Brutus that wonder of magnanimity and constancie, that stour stickler for the libertie of his countrey, a great admirer and practitio∣ner of vertue, and an able assertour of the divine provi∣dence, such as he knew; when he was finally vanquished by Antonius, and saw such bad successe in his cause which he tooke to be so good; he disclaimes all his vertues as trifles, and derides endeavours to live well as vain and bootlesse. But though reason be puzled, yea confoun∣ded at that which is above its reach, yet faith can fathome these depths, and so farre satisfie its selfe in them, as to see the Lords hand, and to justifie his proceedings. And that which beares up the beleeving heart from faintings or fluctuations amidst the various and strange vicissitudes of things below, is the consideration and assurance of an over-ruling and unerring concurrence, discerning, dire∣cting, disposing all, in a most free, wise, and equall course, even in those passages and exigents which seeme to be most disordered or uncertaine. Then when bad men are crown'd with pride, fatted with luxury, mounted on horse backe in unworthy advancements, whence they
over-look with disdaine, and trample upon with insolen∣cie Gods humble, holy, innocent ones: or then when the Lord ariseth to shake the earth terribly, and to worke dreadfull desolations in the middest thereof, he hath al∣wayes a selected parcell, which is his deare charge, to whose safety and honour he beares tender and unalterable respects in the most doubtfull or dangerous times. In that day] whether it be the short day of the wickeds prosperitie, or the determined day of vengeance upon them, shall the Lord of hosts be for a crowne of glory, and for a diademe of beauty, for truest advancement and orna∣ment, to the residue of his people, to that pretious portion which is his owne according to the election of grace; He shall be for a spirit of judgement to him that sits in judgement: He will raise up instruments, and fit them with faithfulnesse and activitie for the administration of Justice: He shall be for strength to them that turne the battell in the gate: He will infuse courage, and adde wonderfull successe to their attempts that fight his bat∣tels, and jeopard their lives for his cause. The words read unto you are a propheticall Promise, let it not seeme unsutable to the day for me to handle a Promise. It is our worke to day to humble our soules and poure them out in prayer; and what so proper and pre∣vailing to melt a gracious soule as the goodnesse of a Promise? and where but in the Promises shall we look for grounds and matter of our requests? and what one single Promise in Scripture can more directly and fully answer our desires than this? we groane after Reforma∣tion, this Promise holds it forth to us in the honourable and amiable notions, of glory and beauty: Our supreme Councell, our Kingdomes Worthies are this day on their
knees before the Lord, and what blessing would they beg of God, or we for them rather then the spirit of judgement here promised? Our Armies are in the field, and if we were put to the option to find out and beseech an advan∣tage to them, we cannot bethinke a better than is here ex∣pressed, that the Lord would be their strength. If I had a spirit and a tongue to set forth, and you hearts rightly di∣sposed to aske what is here contained, I might impart, and you obtaine the fulnesse of the blessing of God. That we all may doe our duties the better, I beseech you looke over the Promise againe, wherein you may finde remarkable: 1. The seasonablenesse of it, intimated in the circum∣stance of time when it shall be accomplished, In that day. 2. The pretiousnesse, expressed in the substance of good things assured, the Lord himselfe undertakes to be for a crown of glory and for a diademe of beauty, rich, and sure, and honourable advantages these. 3. The peculiaritie of the Priviledges, appropriated they are to Gods residue or remnant, the persons with whom alone he stipulates. 4. The specification of two choice excellencies where∣with he honours and beautifies his covenant people: 1. The spirit of judgement, for Civill Government. 2. Holy valour and strength for military exploits. In that day, &c. The parts I shall handle in the same order as they lie disposed in the Text, beginning with the seasonable ac∣complishment of this pretious Promise set downe in the circumstance of time, of which a word only, because I may not spend much of the little time allotted me about a circumstance.
In that day] If you considerately calculate the time here noted by a view of the context, you will find it to be a time of foule degeneration, when the greatest part was swollen in pride, slimed with sensualitie, growne to an height of insolency and universality in sinning, and there∣fore ripe for a judgement, yea indeed it was the very day of wrath, when destruction like a violent storme, a deluge of mighty waters did dash and overwhelme the flower of their beauty, when like a greedy devourer it consumed most of their visible strength and excellencie: In such a day tis much if the Lord affords shelter to his deare ones, an hiding place till the indignation be over∣past: yet more it is which he here undertakes for them, even then to keepe them up in their honour, to raise them higher in happinesse, when his severity is most sharpe, and his judgements are most heavie round about them. 'Tis a cleare truth,  That in the worst and most dangerous times the Lord doth certainly provide for the glory and the beauty, the advancement and the ornament of his chosen people. If you looke for the literall or historicall accomplish∣ment of this truth, you will find it in the blessed reignes of Hezekiah and Iosiah,2 Chron. 29. & 34. wherein after the Lord had re∣moved the ten tribes out of his sight, and cut short Judah for their high provocations, yet some glorious respites he affords to his remnant, wherein Religion and Justice re∣covered their flourish, and the ruined honour of that Church and state revived and got strength. But if you consider the Promise in its generall drift, in its extent or amplitude, as it reaches and belongs to all the faithfull, then might I by a plaine and plentifull induction shew how from time to time it hath beene performed: but I shall not multiply instances, rather I shall single out some
few that are most eminent and remarkable. And where should I begin but at the most glorious advantage that ever befell the Church, the summe of saving Priviledges so much desired, so long looked for, to which its proba∣ble this Promise mainly points? I meane, the exhibition of Christ in the flesh: upon what times fell that? even upon the most degenerate and deplorable that might be: when the glory of the Scepter was departed, and the beauty of truth and worship fouly blemished and razed, when the Church was even at the lowest ebbe. After∣wards, when Christ had gathered a people for himselfe, and suffered Sathan to vent his malice against them in bloudy opposition, when the rage of persecutours was at the achme,Euseb Ecles Histor. 1 8 c. 4. at the height. When Dioclesian and Maxi∣mianus had vowed the extirpation of the Christian Name, when their savage crueltie had more exhausted the world, then ever any warres had done (as the Historian ob∣serves) even then on the sudden doth the Lord chaine up the grand enemie,Supius. checke and over-turne his fell agents in their fiercest careere, and introduce glorious liberty, a flourishing calme on his heritage. In succee∣ding ages, when the weedes of heresie sprang apace in the fat and well manured soile of the Church, and at last grew together into popery as into one stemme, all errours and villanies falling into that as into a common conflu∣ence or sinke, when that man of sinne was swollen up to such monstrous insolencie,Melchior Adam. in vitâ Lutheri. that he set his feet upon the neck of all authority, when he was waxen impudent in blasphemies, insomuch that Tecelius the foule-mouthed publisher of his indulgences blushed not to affirme that by the Popes power (interventu pecuniae, mony he must have too) he could pardon him that had defiled the blessed Vir∣gin
the mother of Christ; even then did the glorious Sun of truth breake forth in the preaching of the Go∣spel, many Nations threw off the yoke of Antichrist, and subjected themselves to a beautifull Reformation. But whether doe we wander from our selves? what neede we looke for forreigne or farre fetcht instances? never was this truth more evidently exemplified in any Nation or Church under Heaven then in ours. When did the Lord advance us to the dignity of his people, and establish his truth and worship amongst us in a peaceable and beautifull manner? even immediately after that cloud of bloud which fell in our Marian dayes had besmeared our land, when whosoever would keep conscience, and get Hea∣ven at last, must looke to be transported thither in a fiery convoy. Why then run thorough all ages, inquire of the former and latter dayes, and you will find that in the sad∣dest and most sinfull times the Lord provides, most cer∣tainly and gloriously for the security and honour of his people. And indeed what fitter opportunities can be found out,  or thought upon, wherein the Lord should magnifie him∣selfe in doing great things for his servants? For when is his hand so visible and his helpe so glorious as in extre∣mities? It is time for thee Lord to work (saith David) for they have made voide thy law, Psal. 119.126. when men have violated all bonds both sacred and civill, cut in two the sinewes of the lawes authoritie, and let themselves loose to all exorbitancies; high time then for the Lord to take the matter into his owne hand, to stirre up himselfe for the vindication of his honour. A remedie applyed rebus confuses & perditis,Calvin in loc. when things seeme desperate and past cure, how wonderfull and welcome must it needs
be? Then doth the glory of a deliverance appeare, when the Almighty hand hath broken those knots and difficul∣ties, laid open those streights which otherwise were alto∣gether inextricable; and then doth the beauty of a Church shine most conspicuously, when she hath recovered her purity, and escaped pestilentiall contagion in bad times, when she is quitted from those blemishes that threat∣ned to over-spread her by a seasonable and thorough Re∣formation. But I have promised brevity in this point. Let us see a little only how the truth will sute with our times. That perillous dayes were upon us before the flames of publique wrath and misery brake forth, none will deny, except such as are stupid under any mischiefes, or are actours or abettours of ours. I will not so much as mention in what case our Lawes and Liberties, Lives and Liberties stood. I desire to limit my selfe within mine own verge, and I beleeve men are sensible and querulous enough of the evils that touch their skins,James 2.19. Devils tremble at the sense of misery, Christians should search out the cause, and take that to heart. And if the sins of men cor∣rupt the times and make them dangerous and trouble∣some, think sadly then upon what a generation we are fallen (oh that I might say) what dismall dayes we have escaped. For Religion (which is the main) how hath the power of it been denied and cryed down in a despight∣full and furious way of opposition, the purity sophistica∣ted and defaced by base mixtures, rotten formalities? Oh 'twas enough to cause any tender and truly affected soul to feel pangs of spirit, to hold his loynes, to fall into tra∣vell, and bring forth an Ichabod, an issue of consternation, or doubtfull astonishment, to see those uncircumcised Philistines, Popery and prophaneness, irreligion and will∣worship
seizing on the Arke, and driving away the glory of the Lord. For truth how hath it been silenced, perver∣ted, mangled? the day would faile me almost to reckon up the exploded, monstrous, licentious errours that have been raked up out of hell published and patronized among us. For manners, I thinke the Sunne never looked upon a people nor measured an age more conspurcate or corrupt then ours, 'twere easier and fitter to bewaile with teares, then expresse in words the excessive height of our pride and oppression, injustice and bloud, luxury and sensuality. And as sinne hold possession, so did judgement lie at the doore, which hath since fallen upon us as a devouring beast: how could it be but that so much filth must send up vapours to darken the face of Heaven with indignation against us? Oh the dreadfull cloud that still hangs over us, showring downe an horrible tempest of wrath! a viall is poured out that turnes all into bloud. Now if at this point the Lord be pleased to turne againe the captivitie of our Zion, to cleare up all, and shine upon us with favour, what will this be lesse then a Resurrection from death? how will our glory and beauty (as that rare bird) revive from the very ashes of a ruinous decay? But if as yet we are not brought low enough for such an exaltation, if the times are not yet at the worst, if sharper seasons must be expe∣cted, if our present hopes should be strangled in the birth, or nipped in the bud, which the Lord avert; here's the comfort, that in such a day when the wickednesse of the enemies is fully ripe, and Christs Spouse hath sate long enough in the dust, when things are brought to such a passe that the Lord may be most magnified in the confusi∣on of insolent adversaries, and the advancement of his dejected depressed people, even then will he certainly be
for a crown of glory and for a diademe of beauty unto them, which is the second particular, the high and honourable advantages here promised to the Church. Glory is the lustre or splendour that results from dignity, and a crown is the highest ensigne of honour, the principall token of Majesty. Beauty is the impression of sweetnesse or lovelinesse, and a diademe is the most stately ornament to set forth beauty, and make it more amiable. And a composure of glory and beauty makes up a piece of most absolute and exact symmetry, consisting of all the parts and lineaments of perfection. To such compleat excel∣lencie doth the Lord raise his covenant people. In the verses preceding my Text we find mention of a crown, but 'tis the crowne of pride, of glorious beauty, but 'tis fa∣ding like a flower: by which the Prophet expresses the usurped domineering of the wicked, which shall be troden in the dirt, or (as some think) he alludes to their festivall garlands, the impudent badges of luxurie and lascivious∣nesse; to which he threatens a terrible blast, a shamefull withering. And continuing the Allegorie, by the same termes used in a different sense, he sets forth the true ho∣nour and excellencie of the Godly. The Lord of hosts him∣selfe undertakes to be their glory, by interessing them in all sublime and saving Priviledges, He is their beauty by im∣pressing on them the sweet and comely Properties of grace; and in both crownes and diadems are gifts well be∣fitting the bounty of the highest Majestie to his beloved Ones: Indeed The presence or the favour of God is the only glorious ad∣vancement and ornament of a people or person. What is it else that makes the Church an eternall ex∣cellencie,Isai. 60.15-19. a joy of generations? Isai. 60.15. then doth she sucke
the milke of nations, and the brests of Kings, when found and eminent members are added to her; her brasse becomes gold, her iron silver, when she is stored with pretious gra∣ces, edified with pure ordinances; her wals are salvation, and her gates praise, when she is guarded externally by good Government; internally by the everlasting armes, the watchfull eye of Heaven: her brightnesse surpasses sunne and moone, when the direct and unclouded beames of divine favours shine upon her, when her God is her glory, vers. 19. This is the truth, the top of excellencie, if we consider: 1. Who it is that dignifies and adornes: even the Lord of hots the King of glory, able to bring low and to lift up, who ownes the pillars of the earth, and hath set the world upon them, who in the most glorious exercise of his Sove∣raignty raises his poore ones out of the dust, and sets them among Princes, I Sam. 2.7, 8. 2. How: he puts some of his owne honour upon them, imparts his owne nature to them, beautifies them with his owne comelinesse, Ezek. 16.14. for what is true grace but particula Di, something of God, a piece of Heaven? 3. What manner of glory and beauty is thus impressed, viz. that which is spirituall and internall, which though it be invisible and inconspicuous to carnall view, which can see nothing in the Saints, but their burdensome taske, their heavie pressures, their bitter incounters, their sad dejections; yet this sets majestie and sweetnesse on the inner man, so that under a clouded and calamitous out∣side that is full of serenity, in a meane and despised condi∣tion that is truly heroique and magnanimous, that wants no worth nor lovelinesse, though naked of all externall dresses and contributions.
4. To what purpose this is conferred: to wit, that the great God may take up his residence, and fasten his dearest delights on his poore creatures; hereby he workes them to sutablenesse, and so to communion with himselfe, who is all glory and beauty; he makes his sanctuary glorious, because tis the place of his feet, Isai. 60.13, where he walkes, and converses, and discovers himselfe graciously: he clothes the Kings daughter in wrought gold, that he may desire her beauty, Psal. 45.11. that he may impart his heart love, his bosome counsels, his blessed imbraces to her as to his Spouse. Thinke seriously what a prefer∣ment it is to be a Favourite of Heaven, in Covenant and Communion with God. Suffer me here a little more distinctly to shew how and in what respects especially the Lord doth advance and adorne a Church or people. 1. This is effected when the ignominious naeves or staines of abuses are wiped off by Reformation: this is the repairing of the breaches of Gods house, the purging the body from peccant humours; this is sweeping the floore, wee∣ding the garden, fining the silver from its drosse. And that is glorious and beautifull Reformation 1. Which is hearty; when a people upon deep convicti∣on of their decayes and degenerations set themselves in earnest to recover their spirituall losses: Turne ye even un∣to me with all your hearts (saith the Lord, Ioel 2.12.) with fasting weeping, and mourning, an overly paint of emen∣dation, a necessitated laying downe of some grosser evils will be to no purpose. There is nothing that so much dis∣solves communion with God as the estranging of the af∣fections, and they will be most forward and forcible in reclosing with him, when we get up to a good pitch
of honour and happinesse in his favour. 2. Reformation must be intire of thorough. 'Twill admit no sutes for a little Zoar, nor spare a delicate Agag nor keep alive cursed fatlings under pretext of sacrificing, nor leave the high places standing, because they are faire structures; but it strikes at every evill little and great, plausible and profitable, that is destined and devoted to destruction.Ex pessimo ge∣nere ne catulus quidem haben∣dus. When the souldiers slew Maximinus the ty∣rant and his sonne, they cryed out, Keepe not one whelp alive of so bad a litter. 'Tis in vaine to lop off the mon∣sters head except it be feared; mischiefes attempted and not extirpated will certainly repullulate or multiply;Quicaquid non est peractum, pro non inchoao∣est. Plin. here that saying holds true, Better never to begin then not to ac∣complish: To irritate ill humours and not expell them will increase distempers in the body, whereas a thorough cure frames it to a more firme habitude of health then ever. 3. Reformation should be generall and thorough, as in respect of parts, so of persons also: all of all sorts should come under it. Materials must be prepared before the building can go up; there must be hewing and squaring, and apting of each part and parcell before the whole can be set together in a comely composure. We put our re∣formers upon an unreasonable an impossible taske, when we expect and cry upon them for accomplishment of the worke, and we retard and dash their endeavours by our unsutablenesse. Many would have all well in the lumpe, and every thing bettered but themselves; but how can a handsome structure be made up of rough stones and un∣wrought timber? how can a pure Church be  of impure members? assure we our selves the totall summe of Reformation wil amount no higher th we find it im∣proved
upon particular accounts, and the onely way to have good times is for every one of us to amend our selves. 2. The Lord dignifies and beautifies a people as by removing corruptions and blemishes, so also by erecting and establishing among them the choice Priviledges and Ornaments of his truth, his Worship, his Ordinances. The Jewes gloried of their three crownes, one of the King∣dome, another of the Priesthood, a third of the Law; that of the Law they preferred, because it regulates and flourishes the rest; and then is that crown truly glorious 1. When it retaines and exercises its soveraignty or pow∣er, when 'tis glorified and prevailes in mens consciences. I plead here for Christs spirituall regiment in the heart by the Scepter of his Word, not for the Pope-like and undue Prelation of persons, which is not the honour, but the greatest scandall and mischiefe of a Church: 'Tis a blessed and an eternall truth, The Kingdome of God is not in word but in power, 1 Cor. 4.20. The majesty of Christs gracious presence is not personated by externall pompe, but declared and magnified by spirituall energy. Vaine therefore are their feares, and frivolous their objections, who suggest that a Church looses all her glory when her Ministers are limited in the excessive additionals of earthly honour and aboundance; and I am ashamed to think that so sordid an argument should be urged by Scholars, whose ingenuity (that I name not conscience) should exceed all others: Oh noble and liberall learning, that ever thou shouldst be prostituted to such base uses and re∣spects as now thou art! Bernard in his dark times com∣plaines of this vile humour in Church-men:Serm. 10. super Cantic. In the of∣fices and dignities of the Church (saith he) men seeke the ad∣vancememt
of their estates, and not the Salvation of soules; 'Tis for Bishoprickes, Archdeaconries, Abbacies, &c. that they beat their breasts in devotion, and their braines in study; The mockings, scourgings, spittings, yea the crosse of Christ, are cast off as disgracefull burdens, and new fashioned orna∣ments forged and worne with much bravery; high titles, rich revenues, popular adoration: after these they gape greedily, stretch largely, climbe ambitiously; let soules sinke or swimme they care not, so they may lift up their heads, and build their nests on high: and he concludes that herein the spirit of Antichrist was discovered even as a noon-day-devill.Serm. 33. For those amongst us that will not follow the sonne of lesse except they may be sure of Vineyards and olive-yards, and may be made captaines of thousands, and captaines of hundreds; that can shape their designes to no lower a pitch then a lordly dignity, or a fat plurality; that mind the University and the Ministery onely as a stirrop to ambition or a stale to covetousnesse; 'twere well if their aimes were frustrated by plucking the prey out of their teeth, that they were discouraged, yea rated off from the holy function, wherein there is no hope they should de∣meane themselves conscionably, seeing they enter upon it with such impure intentions. And doubt not but when these offae Cerberi these bewitching baites be removed, the Lord will stirre up and qualifie better spirits for his owne worke. See this in one instance only: Those bles∣sed Reformers of Germany did not only drive the Popes do∣ctrine out of their countrey, but his tyrannicall Prelacie, his whole rabble of full bellied Clergy, whose large in∣comes were all put into the hands of Princes and States: whom I cannot commend for dispensing them to right uses, perhaps their unfaithfulnesse therein hath been
one provocation to plucke downe the judgements which have since ruined them; yet then were their Schooles and Academies most frequent and flourishing; and I dare challenge any age within the like compasse of time and ground (reserving alwayes due honour to Christs Worthies that have since abounded) to paralell that in number and eminency of learned men, who did not only vindicate the truth from Antichristianisme, but all hu∣mane literature from blind barbarisme, wherein it had long lien buried. Let me not be mistaken here, as if I thought there were too much dignity and maintenance for Ministers amongst us, if it were duly conferred and distributed. We need not imploy our own help so to betray our honour; there are two sorts of engineeres that are now plotting against us: Some in a prophane policy would keep us in a slavish inferiority to themselves, and therefore they like Ierobo∣ams way best, they would choose Priests of the lowest of the people, or make them so; these hold a base con∣dition, a poore pittance fittest for us. Others againe are for an eleemsunary salary, that Ministers being ingaged to their benevolence, they may by the same bond be tied to their conceits and errours. But I speake to wise Physiti∣ans, who know how to purge peccant-luxuriant humours, without impairing those that are vitall and benigne. And I beseech you, (the searcher of hearts knowes, I plead not for my owne belly, but for your honour, yea the honour of Christ whose work you have in hand) I beseech you let it appeare by some speedy and cleare course that you intend not the diminution or unsettlement of the double honour of Christs servants, but the establishment and enlargement thereof.Isai. 46.6. Idolaters lavish gold out of
the bag; superstition casts excesse upon its instruments; let not Religion starve nor pinch them that wait upon her, let exor∣bitancies be pared away, but let Christs due be preserved, and then I will not doubt to resume what I had in hand, that his royalty is not advanced by the worldly height and state of his nearest attendants, his throne is not supported by such painted props, his Kingdome is spirituall, and his Government most full of glory,2 Cor. 10.4, 5. when thoughts are captivated and consciences awed by the mighty weapons of his own Ordinances and Discipline, when they have free course,2 Thes. 3.1. due honour and kindly workings in the hearts of men. 2. Truth, Worship, Ordinances are glorious and beautifull when they hold their simplicity and purity: Mixtures to these are not only superfluous but poysonous; histrionicall and gau∣dy dresses of mens putting on are to these as a whorish paint to a good complexion, or like that unnaturall burden of haire, worne in pretence of ornament, wheras there is nothing to so∣ber judgements that can render men more uncomely or ugly. Yet how doe men dote upon mixtures? how have we seene the pure streames of truth mudded with humane placites and traditions?Mat. 15.9. Gal. 1.8. the Commandements of men cryed up and obtruded upon the conscience for doctrines? another Gospel preached and entertained, though vented by persons of lesse credit be∣yond comparison, then an Apostle or an Angel from Heaven▪ accursed persons for their labour. Wanton wits have been la∣vish in broaching, and silly soules have been greedy in snatch∣ing up any errours. Well the words of the Lord are pure words, as silver tried in the furnace, purified seven times, Psal. 12.6. as tis hellish chymestry for sublimated wits to extractor cast out the least scruple hereof as refuse, so 'tis damnable imposture for any cheating compounders to put tinne among this silver, drosse among this pure mettall. The compleat body of faith was once delivered to the Saints,  simul & semel,Jude 3. fully and
wholly intrusted with them: they that wilfully or remissely loose the least minute thereof hazzard thereby the eternall losse of their pretious foules; and they that make or admit the least addition to it, shall have added to them all the plagues written in Gods Book, Rev. 22.18, 19. no lesse dangerous are mixtures in point of worship, yet doe multitudes run a mad∣ding after them. That good old fashion of worship in Spirit and in truth is censured and hissed at as a jejune raw humour, or as a fanaticall rash undertaking; nothing pleaseth without a pompous outside, a visible bravery, though never so fond and new-fangled. Yea, have we not some who think them∣selves as much injured by paring their nailes and polling their haire, as if their hands and heads were cut off? that hold themselves spoiled of the very heart and braine of Religion, if any of their burdensome and excrementitious superfluities, (the blemish and bane of Religion,) be purged out, or lopped off? And no wonder that men are in love with such trifles; they affect a way of worship which pleases the eye, fils the belly, arrides the sensuality. Those Adiaphorists or middle∣men of Germany appointed by Charles the fifth to compose the Interim, that monstrous miscellany wherewith he thought to please all parties, did together with some shreds of truth, some patches of Reformation mingle almost the whole lum∣ber or garbage of popish rites and superstitions: amongst the rest they would retaine extreme Vnction; and it was wittily objected to them that they did it, that they might sleeke their owne skinne,Ʋt ipsi procede∣rnt un∣ctiores. and provide for their owne panch. Questionlesse such a worship as breakes no bones, extracts no sweat from the people, that costs little paines, and brings in much profit and secular advancement to the chiefe actours and upholders of it, shall have stiffe fautours and abettours every where. But heare what the Lord saith of such mixtures to the Prophet, Ezek. 43.7, 8, 9. Son of man, the place of my throne, and the place of,
the soles of my feet, where I will dwell in the midst of my people, shall not be defiled by their whoredomes, and their carcasses, in their setting their threshold by my threshold, and their posts by my posts, and the wall between me and them: 'Tis as the filthinesse of whoredome, as the stink of a carcasse to the Lord to have hu∣mane inventions erected or interposed as parts or props of his worship. Pompey once in an audacious humour would would needs enter into the most holy place, and seeing nothing but a cloud there, in derision he termed the Jewes Nubicolas, cloud-worship∣pers: before the Romans thought that Apis, or Iupiter Hamon, or some such soule idoll had been inclosed there; how doe men seek after and rest upon the garnished outside, the speci∣ous paint of worship, without which they contemne its spiri∣tuall simplicitie as a vaporous or crude conceit? whereas the excellencie, the vigour, the soule of it lies in its internall truth, its primitive and native purity. 3. The Lord puts glory and beauty upon a people by setting up godlinesse and godly men amongst them; by increasing the number, inlarging the graces, advancing the persons of his Saints and Servants. When the vilest men are exalted the wic∣ked ruffle and riot at pleasure, all things are tumultuous and squalid, Psal. 12.8. but when the righteous are up, there's change of cheere, things are in a joyous and faire state, Prov. 29.2. Godly men are the choisest things upon earth,. Clē. Alex. the ho∣nour, the beauty, the blessing of the places that hold them: such ornaments, yea and more glorious are they to the earth, then the Luminaries are to the Heavens: and when they are fitly placed in the Horoscope of a Church or State, in Houses of Dominion, oh what an happy aspect, what a flourishing influ∣ence doe they afford. Why then should men of parts and place, perhaps well affected to the publike good, stand, aloofe from Religion for feare of contracting disgrace from it?Euseb. Ec∣cles. Hist. li. 6. c. 18. Per∣haps the devill tels them as Perphcy did Origen, that it will
turne their learning into barbarisme, their acutenesse into sottish∣nesse, that it will spoile all their gifts and sufficiencies. Or else he frights them as Cajetan did the Electour of Saxony, wishing him to beware that he did not blemish his noble house by giving credit and countenance to Luther.Caveret ne∣maculam illusis.  aspergat. Mlen. Adam in vitâ Lu∣ther. Profectò indeta venit prae∣propere af∣ectatur, periculosè captatur. Bza. 2 Chro. 9.21. Satan buzzes it into their eares, that if they favour those frantique fellowes, adhere to those strict truths and wayes, they will staine their bloud, emascu∣late their spirits, and lose the garbe and repute of gallants. But harken rather to the Counsels of God, to the Words of truth and sobernesse. To you great ones I speake: Think sadly how poore, vain, false the glory is, that is without God and godli∣nesse: truly if you have it tis more then is doe to you, you seek it sin∣fully, and buy it dearely. Summe up all your sumptuous store, your birth, breeding, bravery, possessions, titles, and best tis but like Salomons freight; gold, and silver, and Ivory, and apes, and peacocks, strong mixtures of pride and vanity, enough to poyson your excellencies, to sinke your ship, to damne your souls. Whereas if you sincerely affect and honour Religion, it will honour you, yea it will make you the glory of your God, the dignity and beauty of your country, otherwise the greater you are the more unworthy burdens and blemishes you prove to the earth that bears you. To bring that which hath been said home to our selves,  I will lay before you only two things by way of information: 1. The necessitie: 2. The blessing of a present Reformation: The necessitie grounded on the dishonourable and odious dege∣nerations whereinto we were fallen; the blessing commended and amplified from the glorious and beautifull excellencies to which it would advance us. 1. The former, the foulnesse of our decayes and distempers I have already touched: and so generall they were that they might take up an age of complaining, yea and so apparant that you that have your senses about you cannot but see and feele
them, though I should say nothing of them: Methinks we were even come to that passe wherein the ten Tribes lay after their defection: For a long season they were without the true God, without teaching Priests, and without Law, 2 Chro. 15.3. Popery, atheisme, prophanenesse were shouldering out our God, our faithfull teachers were crushed, silenced or discouraged, and Idoll sheepheards promoted that starved soules, or edified them to damnation; the justice and power of our Lawes nullified, force and will carrying all before them. We may gather what should generally have been done, by considering what is done where the mischiefe prevailes. Many dark places of the Land are still the habitations of such cruelties. I speake it in the griefe of my soule, the parts to which I stand most neere∣ly related are overwhelmed with all the branches and extre∣mities of the misery: and I mention it not to informe you of what you know not, but now in the day of your humiliation (seeing the Lord hath made me your remembrancer) to in∣kindle pitty in you and move you to speedy and thorough helpefullnesse to them. If any misinformed, or partiall, or an∣gry fellowes aske us what ailes us, when we lift up our eyes, and put forth our endeavours for remedy? Let's answer them thus, they would take away our God, and what have we more? they would bereave us of our teaching Ministers, and it would be worse to want them then to feede upon the bread of adversitie and the water of affliction, Isa. 30.20. they would spoile us of our Lawes, divine and civill, and twere better the Sun should droppe out of Heaven,Act. 11.28. that our hearts should be torne out of our bodies, then we loose them. Honourable and beloved, The Iewes when they conceived their Law, and place and Temple, indangered by Pauls preaching, with a joynt and vehement vociferation they cryed out, Men of Israel helpe. Let me with a better spirit and upon better grounds bespeake you in the name of the Lord, Men of Israel, ye that are Israel,
Israelites indeed, helpe, helpe every one of you, you by your ad∣vise and authority; you that can doe nothing else, by your supplications, humiliations, reformations; we by our instru∣ctions, intercessions, actions, passions; others by their estates and lives; every one in Gods way, every one in his own way, help to gaine, to hold these things, so absolutely necessary: In the day that we let go our holdfast, we loose our God and our good, our safety, and our subsistence, our glory and our beauty. 2. Take a view of the blessing of Gods returne to a Church or people; This my Text expresses in fullest termes, 'tis glo∣ry heightened to a crowne, beauty decked with a diadem. We have heard loud bragges of a glorious state, a flouri∣shing Church in our Land, and that from the mouthes of them who did what they could to ruine both. Indeed we have had multitudes of eminent Saints brought forth, nourished, per∣fected amongst us, but no thankes to them, who would not willingly have afforded them a being on the face of the earth, these blessed Palmes sprang and spread in despight of their pressures. Of late God hath offered in a gracious way to wipe away the staines from our glory, the blemishes from our beauty, which were many and foule. But how is this mer∣cy entertained? doe men looke upon the wellcome, and ad∣mire Reformation as the rising sun, dispelling our hellish darknesse? rather they startle and storme at it as a formi∣dable thing, one solicitous for his ill gotten goods, another for ill administred office, a third for his undue promotion, some for their selfe opinions, which they will hold to the hazzard of all; most for their beloved lusts, which they pre∣ferre to the glory of God, the safety of the State, yea and their own soules to: most would withdraw their shoulder and stiffen their necks against Christ yoke as intollerably rigo∣rous; nothing so much frights them as the erection and ex∣ercise of an exact discipline. Doe men thirst after the pure
fountaine of truth, the cleere and spirituall wayes of worship? or rather content themselves with the broken cisternes of hu∣mane inventions, and delight to wallow in the puddles of profanenesse and formality? Is it the joy of mens hearts that the righteous are in authority? Whence then that grating of spirit, that gnashing of teeth at their advancement and good successe in Gods worke? Men of honour are so tender of their reputation, that they will not beare a word of dis∣grace without a quarrell, a revenge; and how wary of their beauty are the fondlings of our age? or if they want that which is genuine and proper, they adde paints and spots and attires, too often such as are monstrous and meretricious: yet how wilfully doe men degrade themselves of the glory to which God would exalt them? how madly doe they teare off the ornaments which he would put upon them? Well though base spirited, narrow hearted creatures are un∣suteable and uncapeable of honour, though sordid clownes neglect and besmeare their comelinesse they care not how; yet let us whose hearts the Lord hath touched, whose eyes he hath opened, prize and pursue these blessings according to their worth: And if we were but provident, wise for our selves, we should not account them dearely gained at any rate, no thought it were an age of fasting and prayer, an eter∣nity of angelicall obedience, the expence of our largest liveli∣hoods, our heart blood. Ob. But alas (say many) when shall we see the accom∣plishment of this promise, such glory and beauty should be more conspicuous. Sol. 1. And doe you not see the every dayes wonders the Lord is working: 'tis for want of illightned eyes and thank∣full hearts then: could we rightly cast up our receipts, we might find glorious advantages already upon accompt. 2. Are you offended at the seeming slownesse and diffi∣culty
of the progresse? 'tis because you mistake the nature of the worke. One way whereby the Lord commends the worth of his best blessing to us, is sometimes our hard com∣ming by them; The Iewes have a tradition, that God sucked Moses soule out of his mouth with a kisse, that so his dissolu∣tion might be without all paine: such an easie, lazie, good∣cheape way of reformation doe most men affect: they would have all the fatnesse and sweetnesse of Heaven droppe into their mouthes sleeping; on take heed, wake not the men, fright them not with difficulties, for then they will fling off in discontent, or give up all as lost. 'Tis remarkeable what Luther writes to Spalatinus touching Melancthon;In Epist. d Spalat. Melancthon was a man of excellent parts, very serviceable for Christs cause; but of a timorous disposition, apt to be overmuch de∣jected in difficulties: and at that time extremely pensive he was for feare of some sad issues of the great meeting at Aus∣purge: Whereupon Luther wishes his friend to exhort and charge him in his name. Ne fiat Deus, that he make not himselfe a god, he might seeme to be farre enough from aspiring to be a god, who was cast downe below the common pitch of a man. But here was his fault, his projects must be like the counsells of God, unerringly and unchangeably stand and be effected both in respect of time and manner, or the cause (he thinks) was lost, and his spirit utterly sunke. So it is with many amongst us, they must have their own mind and their own will in all things (which is Gods peculiar) or they are undone: If they have not all that they have promised or fancied to themselves, they have nothing at all: If the simple gourde of their projects of conceits be smitten and wither, they think they doe well to be angry, to be disconsolate even to the death. But 'tis no disparagement nor diminution to the worth or comfort of faithfull and blessed instruments that the Lord over works them, brings to passe something, yea the maine
in the most glorious undertakings by himselfe. Have we not seene rich blessings, eminent atchievements effected by the bare and immediate hand of God, when councels have beene crossed, endeavours tired, yea hope it selfe worne out and rea∣dy to give up the ghost? can we but acknowledge it to be the Lords doing, to bring downe insolent adversaries to truth and peace and holinesse, when they have been trapped and confounded by snares of their own setting, mischiefes of their own hatching, who were impregnable by all humane at∣tempts? like to the Nemean Lion, which when Hercules had slaine, he knew not how to get off his skinne, that was so hard that nothing could pierce it, neither wood, nor stone, nor steele; only the Lions own nailes where sharpe enough to doe it. So hath the Lord turned the pride and madnesse of wic∣ked men upon their own heads to their ruine, that otherwise were too tough or strong to be dealt with. In great works God will be eminently seene and acknowledged, yea, and he carries them thorough insuperable difficulties and impossibi∣lities to us, that we may set him up and trust in him only. 3. Why will you dislike the work for its hardship, or tho instruments for their slacknesse; and not consider rather and stand amazed at the opposition that is made against them? I think the devill never played the devill more outragiously and apparently then now: all his sleights and all his furies, and all his confederacies are now on foot: Hell and earth, and Rome openly combined, strongly armed, professedly fighting against the honour and happinesse of our Kingdomes: and shall we not have something to doe to fetch our priviledges out of the fire? to winne them at the sharpes? 4. Be not too bitter in quarrelling or casting blame upon opposites; but reflect and looke into your own indisposition to the glorious and beautifull work now in hand. Is it a mat∣ter of nothing think you to resuscitate and animate dry bones,Ezek. 37.3
to put flesh, and finewes, and skinne, and beauty upon them, to in∣fuse spirit and vigour into them? Indeed the Lord is able to doe it with a breath, with the turne of an hand; yet he uses to proceed in a wise method by little and little, striving as it were with the aversenesse of the object. And we shall al∣wayes find degenerated creatures wofully averse to Gods rectifying and reforming work. Iehoshaphat stretched his si∣newes, and put forth all his endeavours about the businesse of reformation, but he could not bring to passe all he intended, because the people had not prepared their hearts unto the God of their fathers, 2 Chron. 20.33. Such crooked pieces, such un∣tameable monsters doe our reformers find the multitude of men amongst us. Hezekiah made a faire progresse in that blessed way, and when he had brought things almost to the upshot, the Priests were too few, they that should have been most forward were unsanctified and unhearty in their duties. Oh the miserable scarcity, the cursed untowardlinesse we are like to find in our Sanctuarie men for the worke of God! 2 Chron. 29.34. Iosiah began betimes, and went farre in the best paths of his fathers, yet all could not prevent the over∣throwing vengeance to which the guilt and bloud of Manasses provocations had made the whole obnoxious, 2 King. 23.26. now if we lay all these and more obstacles and blocks in the way, 'tis no wonder if the motions of our reformers be slow; nay, 'tis well if ever we gaine any sound recovery, 'tis well if the definitive irreversible doome be not past upon us, and we be not left to confusion as an incurable people. I speake not this as if I were ignorant or inobservant of the cursed art of some, whose drift it is to weare out and bring to nothing the blessed work begun by delayes, which they dare not oppose by open force, nor yet in favour of their backwardnesse and benummednesse, by whose slacknesse it is kept so long be∣tween the knees, and is in danger of strangling: but only to
still and check their impatiencie, who by their precipitous ha∣stinesse and fleshly discontent, manifest little skill in discerning Gods method and manner of working, and lesse faith in wai∣ting upon his wise and gracious dispensations under clouds of difficulties and seeming protractions, He that beleeveth maketh not haste. Isai. 28.16. Obj. 'Tis farther objected that we seeme to be farre enough from recoveing glory and beauty, seeing the dishonourable blemishes of errours break out so much upon us. Sol. To this I answer, 1. 'Tis not to be denied nor dissem∣bled, that errours have seemed to grow upon us whiles we have been contending for the truth. And we shall find more then once that upon the most eminent changes in the Church for the better, Satans malice and mens corruptions have cast in such mischiefes. Constantine the great was the Angel that bound Satan, the heathen power;Rev. 12.5. he was that man-child at whose birth and by whose victorie, the dragon, the persecuting Emperours were cast down and vanquished; yet in his dayes Arrius hatched and vented his venome which infected the world. In Germany upon the very dawning of reformation the hellish fogs of Anabaptisme rose up and flew abroad like clouds spread upon the mountaines. 'Tis no new thing we see for errour to confront the truth most petulantly and peremptorily when it is springing up to greatest purity and lustre. 2. This fals not out without some advantage to the truth, There must be heresies (saith the Apostle) that they that are ap∣proved may be made manifest, 1 Cor. 11.19. Many Champions for Christ shew their valour by incountring and quelling such monsters;Eph. 4.14. much chaffe is whiffled away by the blasts of false doctrine, and the sleights of men, which before lay heaped up with the graine; and many truths are rendred more cleare and glorious, by ventilations and debates with errour. 3. Do any impute the cause and charge the blame of this
evill upon Reformation? why doe they not as well quarrell the Sunne for discovering bogs and precipices in their way; or fall out with their Physitians for making them the more sick for the present, when they attempt a cure upon their foule bodies? When I would have healed Israel (saith the Lord) then the iniquitie of Ephraim was discovered, and the sin of Samaria, Hos. 7.1. Many latent maladies that have both root and stuffe in the body shew not their apparent symptomes till remedies be applyed. Ile be bold to affirme that the serpentine brood of errours which now crawle abroad were spawned in the mud∣dy times that of late passed over us; and how grievous and odious they are to our reformers, Pulpits and Presses have in part declared and will doe more by a just & full Confutation of them: and I doubt not but authoritie will provide that that shall not impudently and impunely exspatiate, but will use its power in a timely and thorough crushing of them. If there be any yet unsatisfied, either the timerous that star∣tle at difficulties, or the contentious that cavill at some partiall and yet remaining blemishes; I must plainly tell you, I dare not promise you nor my selfe such golden dayes wherein no wind shall blow, no cloud shall rise: I cannot fancy such an Idea, such an exact constitution of a Church, wherein there shall be no naeve or wrinkle, no discrasy or distemper. Can the creature here be capable of glory that hath no defect or stain? of beauty; to which there is nothing wanting or redundant? Well whosoever you are that thorough feare, impatiencie, or unreasonable dislike of these invaluable blessings now ten∣dered to us, judge your selves unworthy of them, and thrust them from you; let me tell you that you have neither part nor lot in this matter.Act. 8.21. & 13.46. I must turne my selfe to them to whom it be∣longs, for to them is this Salvation sent, and they will heare it; and they are Gods residue. The Lord of hosts well be, &c. to the residue of his people. The third particular, the persons to whom these advantages are appropriated.
All glorious priviledges,  all beautifull ornaments belong to Gods selected portion, and to that only. Even to that chosen generation,1 Pet. 2.9. that holy nation, that pe∣culiar people, which the Lord singles out for himselfe in his free and eternall purpose,Mal. 3.17. makes up for his jewels by actuall and effectuall calling; hypocrites and formalists may partake of generall and externall priviledges, the men of the world have large shares of common mercies,Psa. 17.14. even their bellies full of Gods hid treasures; but all saving favours, yea all favours in a saving manner are conferred only on the remnant. A man may be hospitable and beneficent to his eighbours, gentle to his servants, mercifull to his enemies; but his affection and usage of another straine which he beares and expresses to his towardly children, his faithfull spouse, 'tis not for a stranger to intermeddle here. Let gracelesse men prattle of I know not what figment of universall grace; let the bond-slaves of Satan pride themselves in the imaginary faculty of their free∣will. Our God is infinitely bountifull, but not so lavish as some would make him, to cast away his high honours, his deare delights promiscuously, these are the propriety of the elect, the portion of sons and daughters; these are peculiari∣zed to Gods residue. Quest. But who are this residue? Resp. I cannot stay upon a discovery of them. Briefly take notice of them thus, 1. Negative, by their distinction. They are not men of the multitude nor of the world, nor of the times; they dare not sinne of the fashion, not goe to hell for company; their care is to be at a reall and wide difference from all ungodly and unsound ones; to be saved from the untoward generation.Act. 2.0. 2. Positive, by their qualification.Jer. 2.3. They are holinesse to the Lord, the first fruits of his increase, prime parcels intirely dedi∣cated and vowed to his service, consecrated vessels of the best
mettall and making, new framed by Gods blessed workman∣ship in the most delicate artifice of grace,Eph. 2.10. created in Christ Io∣sus, cast into his mould, and so prepared for honourable de∣signes,2 Tim. 2.1. made meet for the masters use. Their holinesse is hearty, their maine drift the honour and service of their God. 3. Collectivè, by their consociation. They all live by the same Spirit, walk by the same rule, mind the same Heaven, and therefore they are of one heart, and of one soule.Act. 4.32. Pearles are ac∣counted more pretious and fitter for ornament, when they are of equall bignesse or sorted into Vnions: Plato Gold and Diamonds (said the Naturalist) are nothing in price or luster to the consent of good minds. And although there may be some petty diffe∣rence between them in judgement, some small and tempora∣ry distance or interruption in affection; yet they accord in the maine, they are shaken together in times of triall and separati∣on; and as Christs cause and their owne greatest good re∣quires, they strengthen their union by all warrantable and worthy wayes of mutuall ingagement and helpfulnesse. Vse 1. This may shew us then that when the Lord doth great works and conferreth great blessings he distinguisheth and selecteth both instruments and objects. Times of the Churches exaltation are times of widest and most thorough distinction. Multitudes would presse in for a share of her pri∣viledges, when she is rising, that must be shaken off as burdens and blemishes before she can recover her honour. When fa∣vourable edicts were published for the Jewes, their adversa∣ries claime acquaintance with them and offer them assistance, they would needs have a finger in the temple-work: but their help is refused, and their officiousnesse suspected as more dan∣gerous then their professed opposition, Ezra 4.1, 2, 3. If there be a Iudas among the twelve he must be uncased before Christ have finished his work▪ and what have devils to doe to fit in the assembly of the Gods? devils in treachery, in ma∣lice,
in impuritie: The mixed multitude, the mungrell crew that came up with the Israelites out of Egypt, were touched with a stupid admiration of the wonders which God wrought for his people, and promised themselves much hap∣pinesse in their company; but when they met with streights and wants, and found not things answerable to their sensuall humour, then they fell a murmuring and a lusting; and the Lord swept them away in his displeasure, so that none of them reached Canaan, Numb. 11.4. One great cause of the streights and miseries that have befallen us in our passage from Egypt to Canaan hath been the discovery and distincti∣on of those loose rotten adherents to Gods cause and people. And oh that they were all shaken off, while they are unsound at heart, we may take more comfort in their falling away then in their accesse. If yet a sword pierce deeper into Christs soule, if heavier things befall his members, it is that the thoughts of many more hearts may be revealed,Luk. 2.35. that a clearer and more thorough difference may be put betweene the pretious and the vile. 2. Hath the Lord a speciall pretious portion (such as we have heard decyphered) upon which he heapes such honour, fastens such favour, impresses such beauty? Fearfull it is then, that it should be the butt of mens opposition,Act. 28.22 the sect-every where spoken against, in common account the vile refuse rather then the glorious residue.Histor. of France. The Marshall Biron of France was a man impudently and insatiably ambitious, yet above all his titles of honour he affected to be stiled the scourge of the Huguenots. And how have men of power and policy thought no founda∣tion sure enough for their security, their glory, their content∣ment, but that which is laid on the ruines of the estates or con∣sciences of Gods pretious ones? Oh the deepe and cursed ma∣chinations or contrivances that have been plotted and urged to cast them downe from their excellency,Psal. 62.4. to root them out from
having a name under Heaven, to embitter their beings to them, to make them crouch under unreasonable and impious burdens. When the Arrian Bishops swayed in the Church under Valens an Emperour of their heresie; Liberty was given to Iewes, heathens, hereticall Christians of all sorts to exercise their Idolatry, false worship, mad festivals, what not? only the Orthodox were expelled their Churches: and in one place being assembled for holy performances at the foot of a mountaine, under the injury of all weathers, they were thence driven by force of souldiers, Theod. lib. 4. ca. 24. Is it not lamen∣table that in the repute of many amongst us, Papists, Atheists, Monopolists, sensualists, drunkards, any the basest society or sort of men should be held more tolerable then the holy bro∣therhood, the members of Christ, the Saints of the most High, who alone are deare to God, and linked together in the only gracious and blessed Communion? How many for con∣science and quietnesse sake in the raigne of our Prelates did leave their deare countrey, their rightfull possessions? yet there are not wanting some that maligne a wildernesse to them. 'Tis a common wish, Oh that we were ridde of them all! and why are you greedy of your own ruine? Should not the Lord of hosts leave his remnant among you, ye would soone be turned into a Sodome, Isai. 1.9. Their presence and prayers are the pillars of a Kingdomes safety, the procurers of its hap∣pinesse. And if malice hath not utterly blinded men, let them rub their eyes and see two choice excellencies amongst many here annexed to them and those most profitable for humane societie; even the spirit of judgement, for Civill Administra∣tion; and holy valour and strength for militarie exploits: for so it followes, The Lord will be for a spirit of judgement to him that, &c. First of the first, the spirit of judgement, which is the gift of governing well, faithfulness & ability in executing justice.
The Lord doth highly dignifie and blesse a people by setting over them religious and righteous Magistrates and Rulers. 'Tis a good argument of Gods favour to Israel which Hu∣ram deduces from the choice and qualification of Solomon: be∣cause the Lord loved his people, he hath placed such a King over them, 2 Chron. 2.11. And when the Lord undertakes the glo∣rious and happy reparation of that state after an wofull decay, he promiseth to restore their Iudges as at the first, and their Coun∣sellours as at the beginning, to reduce them to primitive purity and integrity, Isai. 1.26. This blessing will shine the more by setting against it the misery and mischiefe of its opposite in∣justice. As a roaring lion and a ranging beare, such an one is a wicked ruler over a poore people, Prov. 28.15.Cedren. In the dayes of Phocas that bloudy usurper, (he was the first sworn slave to Antichrist that wore a crown) a holy Monk was so bold as to expostulate or enter dispute with God: he asked him why he had set such an impious wretch over Christians; and he was answered by a voice from Heaven (if you will beleeve the story, 'tis related by Cedrenus) because a worse could not be found, and the sins of men deserved such a mischiefe. Ma∣gistrates are either the common good, or the common evill of them to whom they have relation.In Epist. ad Spalat. That passage of Luther is memorable: he was in great danger of death, and he wishes that the Pope and his crew might be the only instruments of it, he would not have Caesar involved in the cause, he would not have his royall hands stained with his bloud: for (saith he) I know how it fared with Sigismund after the burning of Huss, nothing prospered with him, besides his domestique infa∣mies and calamities, the weale-publique suffered exceedingly with him and under him. The most exemplary judgements are upon the most eminent persons, yea; and they fall not alone, the poore sheep smart for their dotages and delinquen∣cies: whereas the Magistrates vertues are the peoples bles∣sings,
Eccles. 10.17. and their vertues are comprized under this expression, The spirit of judgement. Quest. But what is this spirit of judgement? Resp. 1. It is a renewed sanctified faculty, saith David with some of his last words that savour most strongly of Heaven: He that ruleth ever men, must be just, ruling in the feare of God, 2. Sam. 23.3. 'Tis true there are functionall abilities inlarged to men, which are profitable to others though not saving to themselves. You may be deep Statists, learned Lawyers, exact in the disquisition of truth, the deciding causes, &c. yet all this doth not amount to the blessed property in my Text. In∣dustry, experience, ingenuity, morall honesty, noblenesse of mind may make men dexterous in the art of judging, the Lord infuses the spirit, and that seasons all with supernaturall ex∣cellency. Plainly he is a good Ruler indeed that is a gracious Christian to. 2. The spirit of judgement is regular; as it is framed by Gods finger, so tis guided by Gods rule. We explode the Popes Ca∣non law,Luther. Ridiculum planè est Constanti∣um. Impe∣ratorem aeternum nominare, &c. Som. Eccles Hi∣stor. lib. 4. cap. 16. Vs Itali vultis ha here Deum in ane,  non creditu esse Deum in calis. and that justly, the summe whereof is this. The Pope is god on earth, above all things heavenly, earthly, spirituall, secular, he hath the propriety of all things, and no man must dare to say to him, what dost thou? This we dislike not only because 'tis the Popes, but because 'tis most lavishly irregular, making up a modell of government fitter for old Persians, or moderne Iurks then for Christs freed men. Strange then it is that men of lear∣ning, that would be called Divines, should so much cry up the Law of the will. Athanasius held it absurd and ridiculous in the Arrians at the Councell of Ariwinum to prefixe this title to their forme of Faith. Praesente Constantio crno, magno &c. to give the stile of eternall to the Emperour, and yet to deny the eternity of the Son of God. And very acute is that of Melancton disputing about the Eucharist: You Italians will needs have God to be in the bread, when you doe not, beleeve that there is a God
in Heaven. And are not they worthier of derision then confu∣tation, who make men omnipotent and absolute, and yet spoil God of his freedome in decreeing and working, raze or abro∣gate his perpetuall commands, yea and live as if there were no God in Heaven? Let mortals tremble to imitate the thunder of the Almightie by the stormes of their exorbitant lusts and passions; to take absolutenesse upon them, which is the in∣communicable prerogative of him whose throne is in the Heavens. 3. The spirit of judgement is active. The spirit we know is the vigorous principle of motion and action; contrary here∣unto is that distemper mentioned, Hab. 1.4. The Law is slacked, defluit lex, 'tis fallen into a swoune: The Metaphor is taken from the slow, yea, imperceptible motion of the pulse in the failing of spirits. And alas for us for want of activity! we have expected, desired, magnified, blessed, fasted and prayed for a Parliament; and we know how much time, substance, parts, spirits, bloud our Worthies have expended for the pub∣like good: what dangers and difficulties they have incountred: heretofore and now they have framed for us the best Lawes humane under Heaven. Would it not be a sad thing if this wonderfull power when it comes to execution should be put into paralyticall hands, either quite benummed, or so shaking, that they can doe nothing evenly or steddily? that it should be like a gunne in the keeping of an Indian, a rare and forcible Engine in its selfe, but made uselesse for want of good mana∣ging? Oh that ever there should be any advanced to place and armed with authority, who thorough the vile timorous∣nesse of his own spirit, or the treacherous compliancy of his owne evill heart with sin or the times, should not dare to act that good for which he is sure to have assistance and accepta∣tion with the most High, without the conscionable perfor∣mance whereof he can never stand acquitted before the su∣preme
Tribunall! Upon whomsoever the spirit of judgement which is the Spirit of the Lord hath fallen, let them goe in this their might, let them put forth their strength, and exercise their facultie, the Lord cals and sends them, and will do great things by them. 4. The spirit of judgement is impartiall. As the soule in the body it diffuses it self in a just proportion thorough the whole into each part according to its severall need and capability. Who so small or inconsiderable, who so high or uncontrole∣able as to be without it influence or reach? by it rulers must governe, by it the governed must be ruled. The Lord gives a charge and prescribes a method to the executioners of his ju∣stice, Ezek. 9.5, 6. he commands them to strike home, and to spare none that bore not his owne caracter or marke, and to begin at his Sanctuary at the ancient men before the house. Twas the Popes old trick to exempt his Clergy from the Civill, which detra∣ctingly he cals the Secular power: but the Popes patronage now I hope will nothing help our bad Ministers. Oh that they might feele the most speedy and heavy hand of justice, as they have had the deepest hand in occasioning our decay and misery. Charles the fifth was wont to say wittily, If the shavelings had been good,Si Sacrifi∣culi frugi essent, non indigeent Luthere. there had been no need of Luther. Let the guilty hang the head, they that are faithfull and conscionable need not feare nor decline the decisions of a Parliament; the censures of righteous Magistrates. If any say that I seek the ruine and publish the shame of men of mine own calling: I an∣swer no: they are the proud, the persecuting, the prophane, the popish, the temporizing, the insufficient, the lazy, the drun∣ken, the scandalous Prelates and Ministers that disgrace the holy function, and make us asham'd of them, as Gentlemen are of their beggarly kinred, or rather as an honest man is to see his brother goe to the gallowes. And as they have troubled our Israel, so let the Lord trouble them: Let their owne dung be
spread upon their own faces, but let Gods Sanctuary be purged of them. Moreover, why should the spirit of judgement shrinke or be abashed at the stout looks of any overgrowne great one,Criminosi∣or cupa est, ubi honestior status. Sal∣vian, li. q. de. Guber. Dei any blustring Belialist? let such feele the force, the omnipo∣tency of justice. 'Tis a true saying, The higher the condition of the sinner, the baser alwayes is the sin. What! will men steale, mur∣ther, oppresse, commit adultery sweare falsely or blasphemously, drinke drunke, live dissolutely and debauchedly, and thinke they are delivered to doe these abominations,Jer. 7.9, 10. because they are great in the world? Methinks noble spirits should hold it more base to deserve then to suffer sharpe and shamefull pe∣nalties of just lawes which they breake. If you improve your greatnesse to quit your selves from them; your priviledge is no other then theirs, who run mad unchained, and post to per∣dition without controll. 5. The spirit of judgement is uniforme. It casts mens minds, and aimes, and actions into one mould or fashion.Jam. 4.5. The spirit that is in the world lusteth to envie, a distorting, distracting evil. Corrupt men differ as much in minds as faces, or if they ac∣cord they meet only in evill. Great spirits are lyable to great impulsions, violent concussions; when they are whirled by excentrique passions, or wheeled by byassed and selfe respects, their motions must needs be disordered and turbulent. But when this blessed principle in my text is the Primum mobile the first mover, then all the spheares, whether superior or infe∣rior in place, swifter or slower in motion, hold on their owne course evenly and constantly, and accord with others in an exact correspondence; and the harmony is really by farre more sweet, then the imaginary musique of the heavens was fained to be. There are diversities of gifts,1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 7. and differences of administrations, but one and the same spirit, and the manifestati∣on of that spirit is given to every man to profit withall: all tends to mutuall helpfulnesse, to the common good of all, and eve∣ry
one that partake of that Spirit: hence all gifts become ser∣viceable and contributary each to other: and 'tis a most bles∣sed and beneficiall intercourse or trade that passes betweene sanctified abilities. It hath ever been a rich blessing to good Magistrates to be instructed and abetted in their most glorious acts by faithfull Ministers. David had his Seers, so had Salo∣mon, Asa his Azariah,2 Chr 15.1. & 19.2. 2 Ki. 19.2. & 2.14. Iehoshaphat his Iehu, besides a number of teaching Priests and Levites, whose Catalogue we find re∣gistred, 2 Chron. 17.7, 8. Hezekiah had his Isaiah, Iosiah his Huldah, Zorobabel his Ioshua, the Elders of the Jewes brought out of captivitie to reedifie the City and Temple, built and prospered thorough the prophecying of Haggai and Zachariah the sonne of Iddo. Temple-work, Church-work never goes up with∣out such hands. I should be sorry that any here present should judge the Prophets uselesse, or burdensome, or intermedling without their verge in weighty holy affaires. A Reformati∣on pretended without the Councell and Consociation of men of God would be like Adonijahs feast,1 King. 1. , , 9, 10. to which Abiathar the temporizing Priest, and bloudy Ioab, and other such like were called, Courtiers (perhaps) and Souldiers, and Politicians enough, but faithfull Zadok and Nathan the Prophet, and Sa∣lomon the Kings son, and true-hearted Benaiah being left out, the meeting proved both sinfull and sad, it began in conspira∣cie, and ended-in confusion. But oh happy meetings-where all sorts of gifts are met together and joyntly improved to mutuall and publique good! 'Tis the good Spirit of God that joynes and keeps men unanimous in and for that with good: and whatsoever tends to the setting of good men or good gifts at oddes, though it be never so covertly or speci∣ously carried, suspect it as proceeding from the envious one, the evill spirit of confusion. I need not adde any thing for application of this point. 'Tis the spirit of judgement (which hath been described) that fits
every man for the weighty affaires of Civill Administration, that is intrusted and imployed in the same. You see hence (Noble Patriots) what it is that you should mainly strive for and cherish in your selves; and we find what we should most importunately beg for you of Heaven. The work before you is glorious, the power in your hands ordinate, the way of di∣spensing it the best in the world, most sutable to equity and to our spirits; wherein as just Soveraignty is not bounded un∣worthily, so community hath some stroke according to its ranke in matters of highest publique concernment. Oh then let this spirit of judgement animate and sway all your consulta∣tions and proceedings; let it season them with sanctitie, order them with regularity, manage them with activity, carry them thorough with impartiality, corroborate and crowne them with unanimity; and the issue will be (if it be not cut off by sinfulnesse and ingratitude) a heape of blessings upon us, and upon many generations. So much of the spirit of judgement, the first excellency here specified. The second followes, which is strength to order the battell in the gate, valour and abilities for the warre. This is a choice gift or blessing of God,  the honour and ornament of a State or people. A usefull seasonable subject had I time to prosecute it. I shall now handle it very briefly. The Lord is a man of war. Exod. 15.3. and he makes some of his servants brave warriours; he girds them with strength, teacheth them the use of their armes, covers them with the shield of Salvation, gives them undauntednesse to encounter, and swiftnesse to pursuit their enemies, Psal. 18.32-40. till they have their necks under their feet. Such were the Israelites under Ioshua's command, nothing could stand before them. Such were the Judges, men won∣derfully
inspired and inabled to rescue Gods people from op∣pression;2 Sam. 23.8. such Worthies had David, who was called and qua∣lified to cut short the enemies of God, and to erect his Wor∣ship in purity and peaceablenesse; and with this blessing hath the Lord honoured pious Princes and States, whom he hath set up and established in all ages. This holy valour will appeare a choice honourable blessing if we consider it, 1. In the habite.  There is naturall hardinesse in bruits, for which we admire them; morall fortitude in meere men, which renders them both dreaded and renowned; but this is a san∣ctified sublime gift of the Spirit, an admirable adorning grace. 2. In the exercise. Fit it is to be imployed in great matters, high exploits, the maintenance of Gods cause and truth, the vindication of his honour, the reliefe of his Saints, It ingages strength and life, and all upon such noble designes and servi∣ces. Unholy courage makes men more able to do hurt, it de∣generates into rage, becomes lusts champion, and breakes out into injuriousnesse, revenge, murther, &c. 3. In the Usefulnesse of it. Mans sin filled the world with Antipathies, and enmities, and God hath armed many of the irrationall creatures to make defence and opposition against their Antipathists. And who have so many implacable fierce enemies as the Saints? as they have need of patience to beare their injuries, so valour is very usefull and advantageous to repell them, when they find a warrant or call? Vse 1. Miserable then and ruinating to a state is the want of this gift, this blessing. And would you know what it is that melts the spirits, dissolves the nerves, enfeebles the man∣hood and magnanimity of a nation? let me present it to your view in a home president, even of the generations that have passed over us, the people that have formerly possessed our places. The Brittaines the ancient inhabitants of this land
were a warlike nation, the made stout resistance against the Romans, bore their yoke with much reluctancie, and threw it off upon all occasions:English Chronic. yet when their Nobles degenerated into lust, luxury, and cruelty; when falshood and faithlesnesse both to∣wards God and man abounded in all sorts, when plenty brought forth the cursed fruits of loose and wanton living: when they were gene∣rally addicted to hate of truth and love of lying, insomuch that if any were gentler and more given to truth then other, the rest would worke him all the hurt and spight they could; and this did not only the seculars, but also the Clergie, and the heads thereof, giving themselves over to drunkennesse, pride, contention, envie, &c. ca∣sting from them the yoke of Christ (they are the very words of our story) then they became a spectacle of reproach and mi∣sery, a prey to barbarous nations.Gens Saxonum sera. Sal∣vian. The Saxons that succee∣ded them were the Imps of Mars, a terrour to this part of the world, they lived by their sword and were victorious almost whithersoever they went: yet when they grew cold and heart∣lesse in the Religion which they had zealously professed,English Chronic. when trea∣chery, injustice, shedding innocent bloud, impiety, sensuality did overspread them, they were wofully wasted by intestine broiles and forreigne incursions, and at last swallowed up by the Norman Conquest. The application of these histories be to the enemies of God, and of his people. Sins, such sins as these wea∣ken mens sinewes, emasculate their spirits, devoure their ex∣cellencie, and cause the hearts of the valiant utterly to melt. Cowardice and basenesse are the proper and certaine effects of sin. And although wicked men may be stout and sturdy, and mighty to do mischiefe, either for the scourging of Gods people, or the breaking each other in pieces; yet is this in them but bestiall hellish fury, no true valour; and the more directly and impetuously it is set against God and goodnesse, the sooner and more fatally shall it bring themselves to ruine. 2. This gives us great occasion to magnifie the Lord for
this choice honourable blessing conferred upon us. Our bow hath of late recovered its strength: God hath stirred up and fit∣ted courageous spirits, excellent instruments for military af∣faires. And although the nature of the warre amongst us be calamitous, and many events of it very sad; yet the maine comfort is, the quarrell is apparently betwixt Christ and Anti∣christ, he that sees not so much now is wilfully maliciously blind. Now the prophecies in the Revelation seeme to fore∣shew that the ruine of Antichrist shall in a good part be brought to passe by the sword:Rev 16 6. & 1.14, 15, 16,17. They that gave their king∣domes to the beast shall recover them by force, they shall hate the whore, make her desolate and naked, eate her flesh, and burne her with fire. They that make warre with the Lambe, shed the bloud of Saints and Prophets, they shall have bloud given them to drinke, as they are worthy: Methinks the Lord is breeding and apting a generation of men amongst us that shall make the throne of the beast shake. If any censure me for cherishing and blowing up the sparkes of valour in mens spirits,1 Cor. 4.3. With me it is a very small thing to be judged of them, or of mans judgement. LUTHER was called a Trumpet of sedition;Tua Se∣ditionis. they said of BEZA when he accompanied the Protestant forces in France fighting for their Religion,Evangeli∣um flam∣meun &  that he preached a Gospel composed of fire and brimstone. But we that are Ministers need not feare nor shame to carry the Trumpets of the Sanctuary before the Lords armies. All yee whose hearts the Lord hath touched Goe on in this your might,Judg. 6.14 Josh. 1.7. Isai. 26.4 be strong and of a good courage, be not afraid nor dismayed, for the Lord your God is with you whithersoever ye goe in his way, Iehovah who is everlasting strength, is strength in an eminent glorious manner to them that turne the battell in the gate. Let me close your thoughts with one briefe consideration from the whole. In all that hath been said you see verified that great Position of the Apostle (indeed a Paradox to the world) That Godlinesse is profitable for all things.1 Tim. 4.8 Perhaps you
have accounted it needfull and helpfull for the worship of God, the ordering of the conversation, Peace of Conscience, &c. Yet further take notice here how it conduces to the flou∣rishing and good government of a state, to the managing and blessing of all affaires, not Religion only, but civill and milita∣ry to. 'Tis the feare, the favour, the gracious presence of God that crown a people with most glorious advantages, that adorne them with most precious priviledges, that prosper them both in peace and warre. As therefore we tender and desire the safety and honour of our state, the publike and mutuall welfare of Rulers and Sub∣jects, the good and glorious successe of our greatest designes; let all of us together, and every one of us in our stations, with our heartiest intentions and indeavours doe what we may to get and keep the Lord amongst us in the power and purity of Religion. Let this be practised, promoted, prayed for above all by all. So will it dignifie and beautifie us with all honoura∣ble and amiable excellencies; it will burnish the crown and sta∣blish the throne; it will enoble our spirits and deck our heads; it will strengthen our lawes with authority and justice, and sharpen our swords against the faces of our enemies; it will make us a blessing and a praise above all the nations under Heaven. FINIS.
