L1808 E436_12 99864109 161612
THE DECLARATION AND PROPOSITIONS OF His Excellency the Lord Generall LEVEN, and divers other eminent Commanders of the standing Army in the Kingdom of Scotland; to the Parliament assembled at Edinburgh, concerning the dis-ingaging of a war with England; as also, touching the Parliament, and Army. Likewise, the progresse of the Scots Army under the com∣mand of the Earl of Calender, with their approach neer the Confines of England. And the gallant preparations of Sir Arthur Haslerig, Go∣vernour of Newcastle. Also, a Declaration of the Parliaments Army in the King∣dome of Ireland, under the command or Colonell Iones, concerning the Lord Inchiquin's dissert∣ing the Parliament of England, and de∣claring for the KING. April 20. 1648. Imprimatur Gilb. Mabbott. LONDON, Printed for R. W. MDCXLVIII.
Letters from IRELAND Scotland, and the North, relating the true Affaires from all the said places. SIR, I Suppose you are not ignorant of the sad condition we are in, by meanes of the Traitrous procee∣dings of the Lord Inchiquin a∣gainst the Parliament, and King∣dome, in that he hath betraied the trust reposed in him, and declared, that he will not acknowledge the Parliament of Eng∣land to be a Parliament, neither will he submit to any Order or Ordinances of Parliament; but on the con∣trary, if occasion serve, oppose them: he hath also by his Agents, endeavoured to perswade the Prote∣stant forces in other parts of this Kingdome, to desert the Parliaments and Protestants cause, and joyn with him, under a pretence of no body knowes what, but himselfe: it is greatly feared he will joyn with the Re∣bels, but as yet he keeps those forces which adhere un∣to him, in a body by themselves, without admitting a∣ny
Irish to march under his command, yet there is a Cessation of War concluded between them and the Lord Inchiquin; and by the correspondency which is held between them, wee may assuredly gather, that when need requires, they will use their endeavours to assist each other; Inchiquin hath gathered his forces into a body, and is marching into a body, and is mar∣ching towards Dublin, as it is thought, with an intent to besiege the City, and if it be possible, by force or policy to get it into his possession, and this supposition is not without some ground, for those of Inchiquins party give out, that all those that wil not joyne with him, were best to pack away for England, and if any oppose him, they shal receive such a reward as shall prove a terrour to others, if hee should ever have a strength to set down before the City, it is much dou∣bted that some of the souldiers wil be too forward to run unto him; but for the generality, they declare themselves very averse to his proceedings, and do de∣clare that with the utmost ability, & expence of their bloud and lives, they wil use their endeavours to op∣pose him, and bring him to his deserved punnishment and if they know any of their fellow Souldiers or of∣ficers that shall adhere unto him or but seeme to favour or give any liking to his undertakings, they will upon the first knowledge thereof lay hands on them and bring them forth unto exclaima∣tion or commit them to custody where they may re∣main, untill such time as they may have convenient triall concerning the Premises; such a hatred have the well affected to the cause against his proceedings.
This is the condition that at the present this City is in, you see we are in a very sad condition, and likely to bee made a prey, unto those more then barbarous bloud-thirsty inhumane Rebels, who have, as it were with devouring jaws, long gaped to devour us, and which by meanes of our own divisions and distractions, they wil undoubtedly bring to passe, if the English parliament do not take us into their serious considerations, and speedily contrive some way to relieve us, and prevent the inevitable ruine which now thre∣tens us, and wil speedily take us, if not prevented by their wisdomes, whom next under God, have preserved us hither∣to, and for whom we are ever bound to pray. Dublin12. April 1648. Declaratory Letters from the Kingdom of Scotland. SIR, IT is concluded in Scotland that an army shal be sent in∣to England, and although many wil not be perswaded to believe it, yet it may be easily gathered, that such a thing is intended, and wil speedily be effected, if not prevented; for the Scots army draws Southward, and many of them are ordered to be quartered neer the Borders, the Lord Belca∣rouse Troop have taken up their quarters within five miles of Berwick, having order so to doe. Many other Troopes have quarters assigned them in the South of Scotland, and especialy in the Townes and Villages nrer adjoyning to England; also from other parts of Scotland we perceive the Scots Forces to creep Southward, but they are wary, and do it by little and little, the better to avoid suspition, but if their intents are, as is suspected, England may chance to frustrate their designs, and the Scots after all their jugling be decei∣ved of their expectations.
Sir, Arthur Haslorig, keepes a vigilant eye over the Malignants of Newcastle, and is very carefull as be∣comes a Governour of a place of that strength to see and provide all things fit for the safety and fortifica∣tion and defence of the Town, and Castle, and will quickly be able to defend it against any force or com∣bination whatsoever, yet in these parts the Malignants that a long time have been glad to keep silence begin to talk high againe as if they were possest with some great hope, and had great expectations of a third to accomplish their design, and some ill affected Stew∣ards have been so bold as in open court, publickly to declare & charge their Iuries, to present all such persons in their Jurisdictions as have taken up Armes against the King, and to fine and punish them, and Sir Richaad Graham at Cumberland, at a Court gave charge to all his Tenants, that they should be ready when he should have occation to call them, and the Cava∣liers are fobold as to incourage the peopl saying, fight for King Charles, and if you will you shall speedily be imployed. The Parliament of Scotland have given answer to the English Commissioners papers, but it is said to be ve∣ry unsatisfactory. and that they refer the substance of all to their own Commissioners who are comming into England, of whom the Lord Lee is one to treat with the Parliament, and have Propositions and instructions given them, to treat about setling Religion according to the Covenant for the King his removall to one of his house, and a personall treaty with him as also for disbanding the Army and other Propositions that I have not as yet; the certainty of the difference between the Clergy and state is as great as ever, they will by no meanes consent to the raising of men, listing in di∣vers
parts of this Kingdome; 'tis supposed 'twill be spee∣dily effected; and because many of the Commanders of the standing Forces of this Kingdome do not concur with them in this design, those Forces are to be disbanded, and the Earl of Calender is to be General of their new Modell; insomuch, that the Cavees and English Fugitives grow very high, trea∣ting ruine and destruction to the Parliament and their Ad∣herents. But indeed, some dayes there are great hopes of an agreement, and other days the distance is so farre, as scarce any man shal know how neer they are to have an Army: ma∣ny English men are at Edenburgh, and they doe dayly in∣crease. Another great ship came to Leeth Rode on Fryday night last; what she is, is not yet known, but a flying Report of the Prince being in her, but no certainty. Some Irish Re∣bels are come into some of the Scots Islands, and the Maro. of Argyles Regiment are directed, with some others, to march towards them. This is all, I earnestly request a correspon∣dency weekly, and where I shal direct my Leer unto you, that I may take the occasion to subscribe my self. Your oblieged servant, R. S: Barwick12 April, 1648. Postscript. Since the writing hereof we hear that the Parliament of Scotland have given an answer to our Commissioners pa∣pers, but it is said to be very unsatisfactory, and that they re∣fer the substance of all to their own Commissioners which are comming into England to treat with the Parliament.
SIR, IN the Marq. of Argyles Countrey, there is risen up in Arms one commonly called Kolkittoh, which hath cau∣sed some of the Forces that lay in the South of Scotland to march Northward for the suppression of them, all the Of∣ficers in the standing Army or Scotland except Lieutenant General Middleton) have petitioned to the Parliament, and presented these Proposals, viz. 1. That they will be pleased to consult with the Ministers of the Kirk, in relation to their proceedings touching the Kingdome of England. 2. That they will be pleased not to ingage in a War against their Brethren of England, unlesse the Kirk of Scotland doe concur therein. His Excellency Gen. Leven, and the rest of the Officers of the Standing army, have declared their unwillingnesse to in∣gage in a war against the Kingdome of England, Parliament, and army. Sir, I am Your assured loving friend, R. G. Barwick12 April, 1648. FINIS.
