l2200 e640_26 99865800 165934
TVVO LETTERS FROM Col. ROBERT LILBƲRNE. The one to the Honourable William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the Parliament. The other To his Excellency the Lord Generall. CONTAINING The particulars of the totall Rout and over∣throw of the Earl of DERBY, and the Forces under his Command in Lancashire on the 25 of August 1651. By the Parliament forces under the said Colonel Robert Lilburne. Imprimatur Hen. Scobel Cleric. Parliamenti. LONDON, Printed for Robert Ibbitson dwelling in Smithfield neere Hosier Lane end. 1651.
Mr. Speaker: MY Lord Generall being pleased to command me to stay here to assist the well-affected against the Lord Derby, who was then at Warrington in this County with some considerable Force both from the Isle of Man, and which he had from the Scots Army, where-with he did not only much encourage the Enemies, but also discourage all the well-affect∣ed in these Counties of Lancashire and Cheshire, and whereof he thought himselfe wholly Master; as indeed he was, and none in those Counties were able, or durst appeare against him, and began to beate Drums, and raise men in all places where he came, and would have been very strong in a short time, not only through the accesse of many Malignants, Pa∣pists, and dis-affected Persons, but that assistance the Mini∣sters, and those who are called Presbyterians afforded, and would have more abundantly appeared, for they are the men who are growne here more bitter & envious against you then others of the old Cavaliers stamp, the power of the Almigh∣ty was very much seene in the totall over-throw (I hope) of that wicked designe which was laid, and hatched not only here, but through the whole North of England, who was get∣ting into the like Posture, as you may further understand by those papers I have here sent you, but that God who hath all along appeared with us, and for us, hath shewed himselfe very good, and powerfull in the discipating of this Enemy, who was about fourteen or fifteen hundred strong; I had on∣ly three Companies of Foot, abou fifty or sixty Dragoons, and about thirty Horse from Liver-poole, with my owne wea∣ried, and some what scittered Regiment, through our tedious march from Scotland, and hard duty we had here.
Yesterday morning about 11 or 12 a clock in the night the enemy marched from Preston, we lying within two or three miles of them, where we expected those supplyes of Forces which came not: some of our intelligence informing us, the Enemy more running away towards their Army with what they had gotten; we pursued them hither with some confidence that that Intelligence was true, and the rather we beleeved it, because of some discouragement we put upon them the day before; but upon our approach hither we found it otherwise, for they were bending their course towards Manchester, where they had not only very great hopes of sur∣prizing my Lord Generalls Regiment of Foot, but also great assurance of the assistance of five hundred men in and about that Towne, but upon the sight of our neare appoach they unexpectedly put themselves into a posture of fighting with us, which then we endeavoured to decline, in regard of the great advantage they had by their many Foote, and Hedges, and the danger we apprehended my Lord Generalls Regiment of Foot at Manchester to be in, we were drawing off, thinking to have marched in the left flanke of them thither, to have gained a conjunction with our Friends, who had order to march to me that day towards Preston, we had thought to have met them in the way, having sent severall Messengers to let them know both the Enemies and our motion, but the Enemy perceiving us to draw off, quickly advanced upon us with their Horse, and Foot, which we perceiving, and that we could not goe off safely enough, we fell to dispute with them, which lasted almost one houre, our Horse being not a∣ble to doe any service but in Lanes, and they over-powering us so much in Foot made the businesse very difficult, that we hardly knew whose the day would be for so long; but there∣in was the Salvation of God the more seen, and the greater opportunity we had to destroy them. I desire that he may have the praise and glory of that happy successe he was plea∣sed to give unto us, his poore Creatures; having given you this Narrative in general, which I thought it my duty to doe, this inclosed List will informe you further of the particulars; I desire the Lord would teach us to walke in some way answe∣rable
to those manifold and gracious Dispensations he daily gives us experience of, and manifests his love unto us in that his Name may be magnified in all we doe, in our severall pla∣ces and stations; this great mercy to us here I hope is the ear∣nest of his further tendernesse, to the great concernments of all good people in this Nation, which is the hearty desire of Wiggon the 25. of August, 1651. Your faithfull and most humble Servant to my power Rob. Lilburne. This Bearer was all the while in the Engagement, and is able to give you a further Relation. I have not lost an Officer in this Engagement but one Corporall; and not above ten Souldiers slaine, but very many wounded. Present these: To the Right Honourable William Lenthall Esq Speaker of the Parliament of the Common-wealth of England, haste. A List of the Prisoners taken at Wiggon, Aug. 25. 1651. COl, Fhrogmorton. Col, Rich. Legg. Col. John Robbinson. Col. Baynes. Col. Ratcliffe Gerret. Adjutant Generall. Lieut. Col. Creson Rigby. Lieut. Col. Francis Baynes. Lieut. Col. Galliard. Lieut. Col. Constable. Major Gower. 4. Captains, 2 Lieutenants, one Quartermaster. 20. Gentlemen and Refor∣madoes. 400. Private Prisoners, All their Baggage, & Sump∣tures, Armes, and Am∣munition, the L. Derbies three Cloaks with Stars, his George, Garter, and other Robes. Slaine and dead since they were taken. The L. Witherington. Major Gen. Sir Tho. Tilsley. Col. Matth. Boynton. Major Chester. Major Trollop, and divers o∣thers of quality, whose names are not yet brought in, besides sixty private men.
May it please your Excellency, UPon the receipt of your Orders to stay here with my Re∣giment, I marched that day from Stopport to this Town; which was 22 miles before I rested, hearing the Enemy was here, and thinking I might have a little surprized them, but they were gone to Chorley; the next day I marched after them towards Preston, and lay within two miles of them onely with my own Regiment, and about 60 Horse and Dragoones which is all the Country could assist me with, all this while, (saving onely one Company from Manchester of Foot and two from Chestr which have beene with me two dayes,) That night I sent 40 Horse to alarum them (who then wounded Col. Vere) hearing they were to have had a Randezvous at Preston the next day: I did that to give notice to the Town and Country I was there to oppose the Earle, and to stay the people from rising with him, who reported it, that none of our Forces was in that Country, and made the Country beleeve all was their owne, which the people generally tooke for granted, and was comming in a pace, as by these inclosed you may perceive. The next day in the afternoone, I having not Foot with me, a party of the Enemies Horse fell smartly amongst us where our Horses were grasing, and For some space put us pretty hard to it, but at last it pleased the Lord to strengthen us so, as that we put them to the flight, and pursued them to Ribble-bridge, this was something like our businesse at Mussle-burgh, & kild & took about 30 prisoners, most Officers and Gentlemen, with the losse of two men that dyed next morning, but severall wounded and divers of our good Horses killed. That night came the three Companies of Foot, and the next morning hear∣ing of your Excellencies Regiment comming towards Man∣chster, I only removed two miles to a more convenient ground, thinking to have staied there till your Regiment could come, which I expected this day, but their wearinesse frustrated that
expectation, and this morning I had intelligence that the E∣nemy was upon their march, which I thought was a running away from us, being they began at 11 in the night, and march∣ed so fast and privately; but their confidence was much other∣wise raised, having increased their number at Freston and that ingagement of the Priests and Manchesterians (who are very Malignant) to assist them with 500 Men and Armes, and the hopes that they had of surprizing your Excellencies Regiment put them into great heart, that when we appeared here (think∣ing we had been (as it were) pursuing a flying Enemy) they shewed a great deale of courage by a mighty shout they gave beyond the Towne in sight of us, in the way towards Man∣chester, which we observing, together with the advantage they had of us in these grounds, and hearing their number of Foot was much increased, and the danger your Regiment was in, put us upon new thoughts when they were at one end of the town and we at the other, and resolved rather to decline engaging with them here, then hazard the losse of your Regiment, and put our selves upon an Ingagement upon too much disadvant∣age, they exceeding us much in Foot, and we having no grounds to fight our Horse upon, were were drawing off, thinking to have marched in the Flanke of them towards Manchester to have gained a Conjunction with our friends there) but they seeing it, presently drew through the Towne to fall upon us, which we observing and being so neere to them, resolved to trust God with the issue, and he was graciously pleased to give us a comfortable successe to the praise of his great name, in a totall rout of our Enemies, who were increased to about 14 or 1500. and I had onely my owne Regiment and those three Companies of Foot & the sixty Horse & Dragoones; The dis∣pute lasted almost an houre, and very difficult to us, they over∣laying us so with Foot (having not ground for our Horse but the laine to fight in) the same place where my Regiment beat up Hambletons Reare, but at last God gave us the day, and I de∣sire that he alone may have the praise for that great salvation he shewed to us a Company of poore Creatures. As for the particulars I cannot yet give a very exact account to your Excellency, but onely that the Lord Derby is sore hurt,
but escaped though narrowly, the Lord Widdrington and Col. Sir Will: Throgmorton dying, and Tildesly and Boynton slain and severall other very considerable persons of great quality, and about sixty Souldiers, and we have taken most of their Colours and about 400 prisoners. I thank God I lost not one Officer, nor above ten Souldiers that I can hear of, but many Horses kild and spoiled with their pikes, which I hope your Excellency will be pleased to consi∣der and repaire. The Country now begins to bring in prison∣ers and to shew themselves to mee, but before but a few ap∣peared: The Enemies word was Jesu & their signall a White about their Arme, our word was Providence and signal Greens; I am (my Lord) Your Excellencies most humble Servant ROB: LILBURNE. Wiggon 25. August 1651. late in the evening. 30 August 1651. Imprimatur Hen. Scobel Cleric. Parliamenti. FINIS.
