l2627a 45097827 171409
A SATYR, OCCASIONED BY THE AUTHOR'S SURVEY OF a Scandalous Pamphlet Intituled, The King's Cabanet Opened. OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University, 1645.
A SATYR. WHen Lawes and Princes are despis'd, and cheap, When High-pitcht Mischeifs all are in the heap; Returnes must still be had; Guilt must strive more, Though not to' Enoble, yet to' Enlarge her store. Poore Cheap Designes! the Rebell now must flie To Packet-Warre, to Paper-Treacherie. The Basiliskes are turn'd to Closset-Spies, And to their Pois'nous adde Enquiring Eyes. As Snakes and Serpents should they cast their sting, Still the same Hate, though not same Poyson fling; And their Vaine teeth to the same point addresse, With the like Rancor, though unlike Successe: So those that into undiscerning veines, Have throwne their Venome deepe, and their dark staines, By fraile Advantages, still find it good, To keep th' Infection high i'th' Peoples Blood. For Active Treason must be Doing still: Lest she Vnlearne her Art of Doing Ill. Who now have waded through all Publike awe, Will break through Secrets, & prophane Their Law.
Know you that would Their Act and Statute see, Nature kept Court, and made it her Decree. When Angels talke, all their Conceipts are brought From Mind to Mind, and they discourse by Thought. A Close Idaea moves, and Silence flies To post the Message, and dispatch Replies. And though Ten Legions, in the Round are bent, They only heare, to whom the Talke was meant. Now, though in Men a diff'rent Law controules, And Soules are not Embassadours to Soules: Nature gave Reason pow'r to find a way, Which none but these durst venture to betray. "Two close safe Path's she did bequeath to men, "In Presence, Whisper; and at Distance, Penne. Publike Decrees and Thoughts were else the same, Nor were it to Converse, but to Proclaime. Conceipts were else Records, but by this care, Our Thoughts no Commons, but Inclosures are: What bold Intruders then are who assaile, To cut their Princes Hedge, and break His Pale! That so Vnmanly gaze, and dare be seene Ev'n then, when He converses with His Queene? Yet, as who breaks the Tall Banks Rising Side, And all the Shore doth levie with the Tyde, Doth not confine the Waves to any Bound, But the whole Streame may gaine upon the Ground; So these, streight Prospect scorn, and Private View, "The Crime is small that doth engage a Few. These Print their shame, they must Compleat their Sin: Not take some Waves, and shutt the Sluce agen. But, to the Rageing of their Sea, they doe Let in the Madnesse of the People too.
But, 'cause the Crime must weare a Maske and Vaile, And faine the Serpent would conceale his Taile. No sooner comes the Libell to our view, But see a stay'd, demure, grave Preface too: Which seems to shew they would not thus intrude, Nor presse so farre but for the Publike Good. But as some London Beggers use to stand, In Graecians Coates with Papers in their hand, Who are (as them in diff'rent parts we meet) English at Home, but solemne Greeks ith' street. Of whom uncloth'd, and when the truth is heard, Constantinople only knowes the Beard. So this sly Masker, lay it's Tinsell by, Is only Painted Zeale, and Pageantry. We need not let our Satyr here compute, How it prophanes God in his Attribute. See the Preface.But, for it's Light it need no Bushell call, A Semestresse Thimble would Ecclipse it all. O! in what weaknesse it pretends to creepe, How well the Tyger personates the Sheepe. It not Returnes ill Language to the King, Though the next Lines the Psalmes against Him bring. Then it to th' Businesse comes, and lets us know, Who reads it either is it's Friend, or Foe. If Friend, the Scandals all must true appeare: If Foe (alack the man is nere the neere.) Foe no light moves, no Miracles like these, Heel' say they're not the Kings too if he please, And tell us pray, why may'nt your last words stand, You counterfeit His Seale, why not His Hand? But to admit. We now deduce and bring, What after Notes clearely imply oth' King.
First, They His Consort from His Secrets wrest: See the first Annotati∣on.They doe allow the King, but not the Breast. The Sacred Knott must have a Tye and Force, To joyne their Hands, but yet their Thoughts Divorce. And, as the Ivy wedds her Consort-Tree, Though joyn'd and close their chast Embraces be, Yet in those Twynes and Circuits we can find, No Traffick, no Commerce of Mind with Mind: So must the Sacred Lawes of Marriage peirce, Here she may Sprout, and Grow, but not Converse. And like a Plant remov'd by 'Grafters toyle, She finds, not Nuptials, but a change of Soyle. England to th' Queene Transplanted thus must prove, No Forraigne Kingdom, but a Forraigne Grove. But, lest this groundlesse seeme, they Reasons vexe, And tell the World she's of the Weaker Sexe. In what wilde Braines this Madnesse first began! They're wondrous angry, 'cause the Queenes no Man. Fond Sirs forbeare, doe not the world perplex: Reason and Judgment are not things of Sexe. Soules and their Faculties were never heard, To be confin'd to th' Dublet, and the Beard. Consult one Age from this, and you shall find A Queene the Glory of your Annalls shin'd. But who to farre and distant Objects flyes, Must say the Sunne wants Lustre or He Eyes. Our Present Injur'd Queene returnes that store, And doth again, what could be done before: By the Kings Judgment, showes Her owne is Right, And still she meets His Ray with her owne Light. Thus the Wise King to Sheba's Queene was knowne, Who knew Him Wise, by Wisedome of her Owne.
But as all Publike knowledge barr'd must be, See on in the first An¦notation.So Houshold-Acts must have their Mysterie: No circumstance can passe, no Servant made, But must be wrapt in silence and close shade. One place in Court a Riddle must afford, Worthy a secret Sybills darke Record. See the 2. AnnotatAs the Kings acts must all Their limits prove, So their Restraint and Raines must check his Love. Esteems of's Consort by their pitch must flie, Nor must He Rate His Deere Queens Health too high. He must affect thus farre, and then no more; His Tydes must be proportion'd to their shore; His Tendernesse their Weights and Ballance weare, By Granes and Scruples they confine His Care, But (Savage) know, there can no Ransome be See the 3. Annotat.Poys'd with the Health of such a Queene as she. She that at once such weightie Acts can doe, That can be Queene, and yet Negotiate too. Send, and be sent, and without more demurre, Be both the Queene, and Her Embassadour. That gives dispatch for Ships, and when she please, Divides the Empire with the Queene oth' Seas. Who dares the Threats of any danger stand, The stubborne Rock, or the Devouring Sand. And though the Sea swell like Her fate, and Grave, Looke at her Consort, and despise the Wave. The Captiue Queene did (thus) the Tyrant tell, I am no Captive so my King be well. Q. curtius lib. 3.By these, her worth and Rate is faintly knowne, Past stories blush when she erects Her owne. Search old Gray Annalls, you may find at length, Some Queene in Vigour, and her mid day strength.
Who in her Injur'd Consort's cause, referres To Copies glancing at these Acts of Hers; But if Infirme and Sickly Queenes we scanne, No story patterns Her, None ever can. Shew us a Queene fraught with such wide Affaires, Here private Weaknesse, there a Kingdoms Cares, Perplext and tortur'd from her Rest and ease, By a Rebellion here, there a Disease: Advice, and Medcines at one time we view, A Councell-Bord, Bord of Physitians too: Yet her Capacious Soule both these defeats, While this Hand holds Instructions, that Receipts. These are our fam'd Queens Crimes, but yet one more See the 3. Annotat.Must be the maine Ingredient of the Store. Which seems to presse so deepe, there's nought so bright, But this may sully all it's Lustre quite. 'Tis Her Religion's Care: She tryes Her Powr's, To keep that still. Doe not we so for Ours? Why to one Face so diff'rent shapes have bin? What Virtue is in Vs, in Her, is Sin. Our diff'rent Faith's did long together grow, And neither suffer'd, neither losse did know: And like a stream, which 'twixt two feilds doth flow, Which as it Moistens, so Divides them too: So did the Kingdoms Law throw Dew and growth, In weight and just proportion unto both, And like a parting Current slide along, To keep them wide, that neither neither Wrong. Our Faith's were then but Two, but since a sp'rit So many Mushrome-Sects rais'd in a Night: The Protestant (as she could Parties gaine Who unconcern'd were in the Dreggs and staine,)
Did recommend her Votaries, and bring Her Faith to it's Defendour, our Just King. Who with such Zeale hath kept her Rites entire, As well from Languishing, as from strange Fire: That still the Censer savours it's true Sent, Without Accession; yet no Perfume spent. The happy Martyrs find their Faith hath stood In Him, as when they bath'd it in their blood. They joy to see, that He his God adores Nor at High-Places, nor at Threshing-Floores. But 'spight of Scandals, pay's his homage still In the Iust Beauty of the Sion-Hill. To Other Sects; though as in Common-Feilds Which Swine, and Horses, Mules, and Oxen yeilds, Who though at Distance feed, Approaching, clash, And Disproportion'd shapes together dash So they, though one Rebellion them sustaine Themselves Accuse, and are Accus'd againe. Could they comply, then possibly might dwell Some faint Agreement, though no Peace in Hell. See the 4. Annotati∣on.Now, these nice Tasts no Forraigne aids indure, (Their Rebell Scots, are English Rebels sure.) No, nor the Papists: much it with them sticks, Lest these Mens Punniards, should be Hereticks: Their soules would be Prophan'd, and clean vndun, Should they be slaine by an Idolatrous Gun. Goe lay your Vizar by, your Masking stuffe, The Devill is tyr'd, and Hell hath laugh'd enough: The world discries the Cheat; 'tis quickly knowne They no Faith hate, who have Resolv'd on None. These may not fight: that is, the King you'd haue Tamely forsake his Crowne, and be your Slave,
His Easier Subjects long agoe you gart, All who approv'd your Baite, and swallow that. Indeed, Discerning soules the snare forsooke, And through the Wave did still discrie the Hooke; But yet so close designes were cast about, Your Race was halfe runne ere the King set out. Yet you complaine, and guilty feares doe gnaw, Lest you should scanted be for Space and Law: Conscious, though you your cause did forward meet. It's Guilt and Sin hangs Plummets at it's feet. Are not the Jewes, Walloones, the Turks, and all Whom from as Diff'rent Gods as Lands you call, An Armie strong to keep the cause in heart, But that the King must with His Subjects part? Can no Accession so much safety send, But you will dread Him still before you end? Some times at Ebbes his God doth let Him stand, See on in the 4. An∣notation.That so the Rescue may declare His hand. But, what (you hope) may make the King's side pause, Is what He writes about the Penall Lawes. Poore, shallow soules! I deeme it one from hence To forfeit Loyalty, and forfeit Sense. Shall such as wast their Blood be quite debarr'd, And kept without the Pale from all Reward? Shall fame Report, shall after Ages tell, So Just King regards not who doe well? But you pretend, this was a State-Decree, Not without Pow'r which made may cancell'd be. The King nev'r saies it shall: but cannot doubt That when His God hath brought His work about, And shifted Iarres and Tumults into Ease, And seat him 'midest his Councell in High Peace:
Their joynt vnited suffrage will think fit, To give this Act; or something Great as it. See on in the 4. An∣notation.But see, His Pardon then to Ireland came, (Wild Rebels) offers He not you the same? He holds still out the same fresh cheerfull Ray, You shutt your Windowes and exclude the Day. Embrace the shine, or else expect the stroake: The Flint the Sunne ne're melts, at last is brooke, But now the Flood-Gates op',See on. and a free Sluce, Let's in all Senselesse Doctrines, and wild Vse. And by Comparing what's said long agoe, Finds Disproportion in the King's Acts now. His past Resolves it up to Present brings, His Vowes to Vowes, and Things to combat Things. A Diff'rent face throughout, and a fresh Scene Succeeds: and all his Acts seeme shifted cleane. Weak men! who are depriv'd by Guilt or chance, Of all the lights of Common Circumstance; That have unlearn't that Actions shift their Face, And date their worth from Persons, Time, and Place, And sundry such, from whose Neglects appeare Acts as Sinnes there, which are Try'd Virtues here. For instance then: oft as the King reflects His Oath's injoyne; His People He protects. Which Oathes extent, and Circuit we may view Spread ore th' Five Execrable Members too. Yet (farre as't them concernes) that Chaine is broke, That Oath left Him, because they left His Yoake. Now of this Pitch, and Size, doe still appeare, All Aerie Scruples which are starred there. The King Declared, He thought you meant no Ill. Say, would you the King Declareso still?
Allow but diff'rent Circumstance, and we Find, all your Scandals will His Gloryes be. Now, as the worst things have some things of stead, And some Toades treasure Jewels in their Head. So doth this Libels Wombe girt, and containe What though it compasse Round it cannot staine. Lines of so cleare, yet so Majestick strame, A most Transparent, yet a close-wove Veine. Which when we reach its Sense, we may discrie We see more by its Light, then our owne Eye. So Phoebus (when the Clowd and Night is done) Lends us his Light to know he is the Sunne. Yet this expressive Clearenesse is but barke, An Out-side▪ Sunne which guards us from the darke. Here, the Bright Language shuts in Brighter sense, Rich Diamonds sleep within a Chrystall Fence. Gemmes of that rate, to Tully they'd appeare Fitt Purchase for his Critick Senates Eare. And their whole Shine in a full Lustre tends To God, His Conscience, Consort, and His Friends. THE CLOSE. No winding Characters, no secret Maze Could so perplex, but they have found their wayes: They thred the Labyrinth: and what to doe? Where tends the Guide? what purchase in this Clew? Q. Curtius lib. 3.Rash Alexander forc't King Gordius Knott, And so in hand found he a Rope had gott. FINIS.
