M2581 E618_10 99865514 117759
Wonderfull News from the North. OR, A TRUE RELATION OF THE SAD AND GRIEVOVS TORMENTS, Inflicted upon the Bodies of three Children of Mr. George Muschamp, late of the County of Northumberland, by Witch-craft: AND HOW MIRACULOUSLY IT pleased God to strengthen them, and to deliver them: As also the prosecution of the sayd Witches, as by Oaths, and their own Confessions will appear, and by the Indictment found by the Jury against one of them, at the Sessions of the Peace held at Alnwick, the 24. day of April, 1650. Novemb. 25. 1650. Imprimatur, JOHN DOVVNAME. LONDON, Printed by T. H. and are to be sold by Richard Har∣per, at his shop in Smithfield, 1650.
A Preface to the Reader. Courteous Reader: WIth a sad heart I present unto thee the ensu∣ing Discourse, not out of malice to the per∣son of any, but to shew the great mercy of Almighty God, and to magnifie his glori∣ous Name for preservation of Me and my Children, and for delivering us from those extreame torments and miseries where∣with by Diabolicall meanes we have beene afflicted. In prosecution of which sad Story, I have delivered nothing but Truth, as is testified by very many people of great Ranke and Quality, as also by Divines, Phisitians, and numbers of other people, who have beene sad Spectators of our Miseries. Beseeching the Almighty God to deliver thee and all good Christi∣an People from the like Miseries, and Torments, which have happe∣ned unto Me, and my poore innocent Children. Thine, Mary Moore.
A briefe Description of Mr. GEORGE MUSCHAMPS Childrens unnaturall Tryalls, from the Yeare of our Lord, 1645. Ʋntill Candlemas, 1647. The time of their Releasement. FIrst in Harvest, some two Moneths before MI∣CHAELMAS, about four or five of the Clock in the afternoone, Mistris MARGARET MUSCHAMP suddainely fell into a great Trance, her Mother being frighted, called Company, and with much adoe recovered her; as soone as the childe looked up, cryed out, deare Mother, weepe not for me; for I have seene a happy Sight, and heard a blessed sound; for the Lord hath loved my poore soule, that he hath caused his blessed Trumpet to sound in my eares, and hath sent two blessed Angels to re∣ceive my sinfull soule. O weepe not for me, but rejoyce, that the Lord should have such respect to so sinfull a wretch as I am, as to send his heavenly Angels to receive my sinfull soule, with many other divine expressions: Calling good Mother send for my deare Brother, and ho∣nest Mr. HUET, perhaps the Lord will give me leave to see them; that faithfull man may helpe my soule forward in praying with me, and for me; for we know the prayers of the faithfull are very powerfull with the Lord. They bg three miles off, in the Holy Island, were sent
for, and with what speed might be, came; she all this while in her Heavenly Rapture, uttering such words as were admirable to the be∣holders, her Brother and the Minister came to her, which heard her ex∣presse much joy. The Minister exhorting her, to whom she gave such satisfaction, that he blesled God in shewing such mercy to a childe of eleaven yeares old. All that night she continued, apprehending these Heavenly Visions, the Minister praying with her, and for her, as she desired him. After she fell into a little rest, and when she awaked, re∣membred not any thing she had sayd or done. Witnesses to this first, Mr. HUET, Minister. Mrs. KENADY, her two Brothers, and two Sisters, with her Mother. GEORGE ROBINSON, and his Wife. KATHERINE GRAME. ODNEL SELBY, and his Wife. MARGARET DIKSON, with divers others in the house then present. After this she continued well till Candlemas. ON Candlemas Eve, betwixt the houres of one and two in the af∣ternoone, being the Sabboth, her mother with most of her ser∣vants being at Church, onely her two Brothers, and two Sisters with her, she was suddainely striken with a great deale of torment, called for a little beere, but ere they could come with it, the use of her tongue was gone, with all her limbs, pressing to vomit, and such torments, that no eyes could looke on her without compassion: Her mother comming home with a sad heart, beheld her childe, using what meanes could be, but no ease, till eleaven or twelve a Clock at night she fell in∣to a slumber and slept till six in the morning; as soon as Berwick gates were opened her mother sent for Phisitions, both of soule and body, with the Lady SELBY, Colonell FENVVICKS Widow, with other friends, who forth with came to behold this sad fight, with many o∣thers that came to the childe waking out of her slepe, which was without present torment, but had lost the use of both limbs, tongue, stomacke, onely smiled on them, and signed, that we could understand she had all her other senses very perfect, but would let nothing come
within her mouth of any nourishment, for her Jawes were almost closed: Physitians gave their advice, with other friends; and what could be had, was gotten for her: but her signes from the beginning were, away with these Doctors Drugs, God had layd it on her, and God would take it off her. She beg'd that Mr. BALSOM, Mr. STROTHER, and Mr. HUET, wou'd be her Doctors in their earnest prayers to the Lord for her; for she was confident there was no helpe for her, but from Heaven: yet her mother to her great expences neglected no lawfull meanes that could be used. About 12. a clock she had a tormenting fit before all the com∣pany; but it was not above an houre: but from that time till Whit∣son Eve, being 16. weekes, she slept as well in the nights, as any one, but as soone as she awaked in the morning begun her torment: First three or foure houres every day, encreasing till it came to eight houres, every houre a severall torment, such strong cruell ones that cannot be exprest, as many with weping eyes beheld it, that Ministers would pray by her till the sad object would make them leave her to the Lord, expecting nothing but death. Sir WILLIAM SELBY his Lady, the Countesse LENDRIK, the Lady HAGGARSTON, with many others, would look, till sorrow would mak them forbeare: Yet as soone as these torments were over, the child would instantly smile, and make signes she felt no paine at all: solying quietly till the next morning, onely we wet her lips with a little milke and water; for nothing she would let come within her jawes; but would smile and shew her Armes and breast, and say God fed her with Angels food: for truely all the 16. weekes fast, did not appeare to diminish her fatnesse or fa∣vour any thing at all. On Whitson Eve in the morning she had eight hours bitter torment, in the afternoone her mother being abroad, left her Husbands Brothers Daughter Mrs ELIZABETH MUSCHAMP with her, who made signes to her to carry her into the Garden, in her mothers absence; her Cozen casting a mintle about her, gave her her desire, and sate in the Garden with her on her knee, who in the bringing downe had so little strength in her neck, that her head hung wagging downe; but was not set a quarter of an houre, till shewing some signes to her Co∣zen, bolted off her knce, ran thrice about the Garden, expressing a shrill voyce, but did not speake presently: she that was brought down
in this sad condition came up staires on her owne legs, in her Cozens hands: Captaine FALSET, his Wife and his Daughter being then in the house, did behold this miraculous mercy of the Lord done to this child: her mother being at Berwick, three miles off, was sent for, and imparted her joyfulnesse unto the Lady SELBY, and good Mr. BAL∣SOME, whose prayers with the rest (as the child sayd) had prevailed with God for mercy. When her mother came home, her Daughter which she left in so bad a condition, came with her cloathes on, down to the gate, calling Mother, Mother welcome home. Now the Mo∣thers joy may be imagined, but not expressed; desiring her mother pre∣sently to send many thanks to Mr. BALSOME, and Mr. STROTHER for that the Lord had answered their prayers for her. The next day be∣ing the Sabbath, she beg'd on her mother to returne thanks to the glo∣rious God, who never failed any that trusted in him, and her self would ride into the Holy Iland and joyne in thanks and prayers to the Lord, with Mr. HUET, Sir THOMAS TEMPEST, Captaine SHAFT, with the rest of the parish that feared God; She by Gods power did it the next Thursday, being a Lecture in Berwick, her selfe, and with Mr. BALSOME and Mr. STROTHER gave glory to the Lord for his never forgotten mercy to her; though her flesh did not diminish, yet her strength was but weake, and her stomack by degrees came to her again, and for seven or eight weeks was very well: then her mother removed to Berwick, where the Garison being kept, the discharge of a Musket would cause her to fall into very great extasies, being there severall times for 24 hours space, she would be suddenly taken with her for∣mer torments. For three weeks space she lost her stomack, and all her limbs, and of a sudden recoverd all again, not remembring what she had either done or suffered. To avoyd this inconvenience, her mother removed from Berwick, and carried her in one of these sad conditions one mile off Berwick, where she continued seven weekes more in these afflictions. Her eldest Brother upon S. Johns day at night in the Christmas fol∣lowing betwixt the houres of 1. and 2. was taken exceedingly ill, that it was thought he would not live: the next morning he was a little eased of his extremity and pain, but both his stomack and the use of his legs taken from him, so that he was forced to have help to put on his cloathes, was lifted into a chaire where he sat all day long, but could
neither eate nor drinke any thing, but a little milke or water, or sowre milke. He consumed away to nothing, yet not heart-sicke; but would reason, talke and laugh with any friend as if nothing ayled him. His mother now being prest downe with sorrow, sent to the Doctors both at Newcastle. Durham, and Edenborough, not doubting or suspecting any unnaturall Disease; the Physitians all agreed by the course of nature he could not live a month to an end, which was sad newes to his sor∣rowfull Mother, God knowes. After two or three weekes she had another fit of her former tor∣ments▪ after she had lyen three or foure weekes in her extremity, be∣gun, and cryed the Rogue, never till then, offering a word in her tor∣ments, but as if some were striking at her; she seemed to save her selfe with hands and bedcloaths from blowes, deciphering a wretched creature as we all after knew by her description: Sometimes he would fight with her in the shape of a Dragon, of a Bear, a Horse, or Cow: Many fancies she did expresse; and good things, she sayd, fought for her, and still got the better of him: The enemies Weapons were a Club, a Staffe, a Sword, and Dagger; her good things got them all, as she thought, and after the wretch, she thought, got the Dagger againe. Now when she fixt her eyes upon her objects, no action you could use would move either eyes or gesture, till she came out of her fits, then did not remember any thing she either did or sayd: After a while she would make her hand goe on her brest, as if she would write, with her eyes fixt on her object; they layd paper on her brest, and put a pn with inke in her hand, and she not moving her eyes, writ, Jo Hu. Do. Swo. have beene the death of one deare friend, consume another, and torment mee; whilst she was writing these words, she was blowne up ready to burst, shrinking with her head, as if she feared blowes: then would she be drawne, as in convulsion fits, till she got that wri∣ting from them that had it, and either burne it in the fire, or chew it in her mouth, till it could not be discerned. Let any one snatch the paper from her and hide it as private as he could, she would have gone to the party and place, still in torment till she got it, and either burne it or chewed it, that none could discerne one word she had wrote, then im∣mediately she would have ease: Thus for a moneth or six weekes, eve∣ry other day, with severall torments, and such like expressions conti∣nued; her good things, as she called them came still and saved her from her enemies.
These words written, and her other expressions, caused her sad m¦ther to have very contradictive thoughts: So that one day her Neece MUSCHAMP that had been her Companion in most of these sad con∣ditions, being troubled to thinke what this childs writing should mean; sayd to her Aunt, there is one that I have ever feared since my cousin MARGARET was first afflicted; but I dare not name her whom I have suspected: Her Aunt answers, and onely one I suspect: And these Letters make me tremble to thinke on it; but the Lord pardon our thoughts, if we thinke amisse: So revealing our thoughts one to ano∣ther, and pitcht both on DOROTHY SVVINOVV. Her Neece saith, Mrs. SVVINOVV came to see the childe when you were away, and spake harshly of you, and besides the childes looking on her, which she never did on any else, makes me feare her: Her Aunt answered, if she could doe me hurt, and not her owne soule, I feare her more then a∣ny else, but that cannot bee; so Lord pardon us, if we thinke amisse, and let us not speake any further of her. This childes mothers occasions called her to Newcastle, which jour∣ney was not pleasant, leaving so sad a house at home, and her childes writing, and her Neeces thoughts, and her owne, made her very sad, that her servant wondering to see such a change, presumed to aske the cause of it she knowing her servant to be trusty, revealed the suspected party to him, no living soule being by; her occasions being dispatched returned home. But in her absence her Daughter had beene quite distracted, run up and downe with a staffe in her hand, saying she would kill the Rogue: in this rage she apprehended her good things (for so she called them) in the likenesse of a Dove, and a Partridge, and begun and sung, Judgo and revenge my cause O Lord: Next, How long wilt thou forget me Lord; shall I never be remembred? And concluded, Behold and have regard, ye servants of the Lord; and so came out of her fit, not remem∣bring any thing, either done or syd; she never having any of these Psalmes by heart, or any booke by her, nor as yet any voice to sing them to this day. By her at that time was my Neece MUSCHAMP, Mr. MOORES six sonnes, and his Daughter, with my owne children and servants, and divers neighbours. After my comming home, she fell into another of these strange fits; the Minister of Tweedmouth being by, seeing and
hearing many strange passages, which cannot halfe be remembred: But part of her discourse was; that if she had two drops of his blood or hers, within ten dayes, it would save her life; if not death long com∣ming, but torment perpetually. Divers of these fits she had, in every one expressing their bloud would save her life; from ten dayes to six, from six to three, which was on a Saturday, being heavily tormented, her tongue taken from her, with her eyes fixt on her objects, wrote thus againe, JO. HU. DO. SVVI. hath been the death of one deare friend, consumes mother deare friend, and torments me; for three dayes they have no power, but the fourth they will torment me: two drops of his or her bloud would save my life, if I have it not I am undone, for seven yeares to be tormented before death come. Whilest she was writing the teares comming downe her face, still saving her selfe in this bitter agony, as it were, from her enemies blows. As soone as her mother came from Newcastle, she sent (that ser∣vant she revealed her minde to at Newcastle) to one JOHN HUTTON, he was one it was suspected that could do more then God allowed of; bidding him confesse who had wrong'd her child, or she would appre∣hend him: her child in her extremity writing the two first Letters of his name, with anothers. So when this servant told him his message another being by to wit∣nesse his answer, which was thus: WILLIAM HALL, your Mrs. knowes as well who hath wrong'd he child as I: for the party that with a troubled minde your Mrs. had concealed all this time, and at Newcastle in her chamber all alone told you is she that hath done her all this wrong. The servant answered, God blesse me, could he tell what his Mistresse said to him, no living soule else prese it, bidding him re∣veale the party? the Rogue sayd, a great stone is not easily lifted, and he had one foot in the grave already: repeating many old sayings: but sayd, DOROTHY SVVINOVV wife then to Colonell SVVINOVV, was the party that had done all the mischiefe to her child, and was the cause of all her further crosses. This answer being brought, and her childs last writing, three dayes they had no power, the fourth to torment; and the Sabbath being one of the three, the monday following, her mother, her Neece MUS∣CHAMP, her son in Law EDVVARD MOORE, GEORGE ARMO∣RER,
WILLIAM HALL, and WILLIAM BARD, rid to Etherston thinking Mr. WALTŌN to have beene a Justice of the Peace; but was not: then she with her company went directly to Sunderland, where Jo. HUTTON dwelt, and sent for him, who forthwith came, and though they had never seen him, but by the childes description, nor he them; he knew them all naming their names; and fell downe on his knees for to pray for the child; but her mother bidding him rise, she desired none of his prayers, but tell her how he came to know what she spake to her servant all alone, so far off, he repeated before all the company what he had formerly spoken. She sayd her eldest son was very ill too, the Lord blesse him, not thinking that he was wronged; but the Rogue answered, one was the cause of both: she in a maze sayd, I had a sister that dyed in a restlesse sicknesse, God grant she was not wronged too: the Rogue sayd, Mi∣stresse, Mistresse, one is the cause of all, envy nothing will satisfie, but death. Said she is this possible? Mistresse sayd he my life is in your hand, but I'le maintaine DOROTHY SVVINOVV was the death of the Lady MARGERY HAMBLETON, the consuming of your son, and the tormentor of your daughter, and the cause of all your evill; and if you would have my hearts bloud take it, for my life is in your power, none speaking of bloud to him. She told him the child had wrote two drops of his or her bloud would save her life; and if the Devill had left so much in him, she would (if it pleased the Lord) have it ere they par∣ted. The wretch using still Godly words and his prayers, desired to take his bloud privately, that none should see; so the child nickt him halfe a dozen times in the forehead, but no bloud appeared; then he put forth his right arme and that was not till her mother threatned his heart bloud should goe before she wanted it; then he layd his thumb on his arme, and two drops appeared, which she wip'd off with a pa∣per, the which she had writ the words in, and bid him farewell: he bid them ride softly, they had both tide and time enough, it being a fine quiet day; of a sudden as soon as they were on horse back it grew very boystrous, that they had much adoe to sit on their horses; riding fast, at Sunderland Towns end, came two white Lambs to them, and kept close with their horses till they came to Bambrough, being two long miles, neither sheep nor lambs neere them; the water was very deep, yet being venterous they rid it over.
On Munday night she fell into a heavenly Rapture, rejoycing that ever she was borne, for these two drops of blood had saved her life, o∣therwise she had beene seaven yeares in torment without any ease, or death had come: behold her two Angels (which she was bold to call them) on her right hand, and her Tormenters on her left, setting her selfe with a majestick carriage, her words so punctuall and discreet, that it was admirable to the beholders. Saying her Angels bid her now be bold to speake out, looking on her left hand, saying, thy name is JOHN HUTTON, and hers is DOROTHY SVVINOVV, she hath beene the death of my Aunt HAMBLETON, the consumer of my Brother, and the tormenter of me; she knowing my Aunts estate was but for life, and her onely sonne had marryed FAUSETS daughter, who to enjoy the estate, he having but one sonne, was the cause of yong JAMES FAUSETS unnaturall fits: But think∣ing Mr. FAUSET would follow her more strictly there, then we could doe here, let him alone, to be the more vehement with us, every fit pro∣mising me case, if I would consent to lay it on my mother; but I will never consent, but if it were possible indure more torment; fince she is all that the Lord of his goodnesse hath left to take care of us five fa∣therlesse children; except our Father in Heaven, which protects her for our sakes. Thus for two houres together she continued in a very heavenly re∣ligious Discourse with these Angels, rejoycing that she had got two drops of blood; saying, if her Brother had as much, it would save his life also; witnesse to these words were Mr. MOORE of Spittle, his six Sonnes and a Daughter, Mr. ELIZABETH MUSCHAMP, Mrs. MARGARET SELBY, ANNE SELBY, and GEORGE LEE, who was almost cast away comming into Barwick Harbour in a Ship by that fearfull tempest which HUTTON raised. GEORGE ARMORER, WILLIAM HALL, WILLIAM BEARD, HENRY ORDE, with divers Neighbours, all admiring the Lords great power expressed in that afflicted childe. Her mother being destrous to have some small quantity of HUTTONS blood, rode the next day to him with two ser∣vants, who brought him to her sonne, he not being able to goe to him. He acknowledged still his life was in her hands, and came riding be∣hinde one of her servants home to the Spittle where she dwelt, and be∣ing brought before Mr. MOORE, confirmed all that he had formerly
confessed, and withall sayd, Mrs. SVVINOVV had two bad women a∣bout her, the Millers and the Websters Wives, who had beene the death of Jo. CUSTERD and his Wife, with many other things of their wic∣kednesse: That night he desired to goe to rest, and when he pleased to call him, he would confesse further to him alone; the next day came Mr. WILLIAM ORDE, Mr. BROAD Minister, with Mr. HEBERIN, and EDVVARD SAUFIELD, who heard all this confirmed, and so the mother tooke her sonne in her armes to the place where the wretch was, and got his blood. He stayed there seven or eight dayes, and yet Mr. MOORE had never power to examine him any more, the wretch still desiring to be gone, the mother in the presence of MARGARET SELBY, MARGARET ORDE, and WILLIAM BEARD, charged him, that although he had beene long the Devills servant, at last to be but a bridge for Gods crea∣tures to goe over, in confessing the truth; who answered, Mistris, Mi∣stris. If I were a yong man, able to endure all the torments that should be layed on me, I would take my death that Mrs. DOROTHY SVVI∣NOVV was the death of the Lady HAMBLETON, the confumer of your sonne, and the Tormentor of your Daughter, and the cause of all your other troubles. Now whilest he was there the Girle was never troubled, but he was not past the Townes end, till she fell into a terrible fit; saying, DOROTHT SVVINOVV with two Witches more were come to tor∣ment her worse then ever HUTTON did, and the one was a yong wo∣man, and the other an old: So that till they had Justice of DOROTHY SVVINOVV, her mother and they should never be at peace: Upon this her mother rid to Justice FOSTER of Nuham, and upon Oath gave Information against both HUTTON and Mrs. SVVINOVV, to appre∣hend them, who after delayes apprehended him, and sent him to New∣castle Goale, but not her, though it will appeare she was three several times in his company after he had the Information upon Oath, whereof he gave her a Coppy, with the Coppy of HUTTONS Examination, but would never let Mrs. MUSCHAMP see it; seeing that delay, she spoke with a Durham Justice at Bellford, which not being in the County, and in haste he could not grant her a Warrant to apprehend the sayd Mrs. SVVINOVV; but bid Mr. FOSTER doe Justice, which is not yet done.
The Girle having many tormenting fits, in the midst of which her Angels alwayes appearing to her, banishing the Witches, which she ap∣prehended; the Girle would cry out and relate to her Angels how she by the two Witches had been tormented, forcing her to get the information, whereof her mother kept a Coppy; so that let her mo∣ther give the paper to whom she would, or laye it any where, the child would goe to either place or party most strangely. As soone as her Angels departed. her torments leaving her, she told them that her enemies would have killed her: but justly might she sing the 35. Ps Plead thou my cause O Lord, &c. Repeating the first part thereof so sensibly and distinctly, that the Ministers there present admired to heare it. As likewise her declaring the death of the Rogue HUTTON in prison before it was knowne there, saying if he had been urged he would have dis∣covered the other 2. Witches; foretelling many strange truths, appoin∣ting divers meetings with her Angels, such a day and such an houre, to consult with them what should become of her brother, and what punishment her enemies should have, bidding every one they should not so much as looke after her, for if they did it would anger her Angels, and undoe her, for there were some strange Angels besides her owne to meet her; this being the fourth meeting with them, and it would de∣clare all, saying she must have all cleane cloathes about her; for this day or to morrow she must meet them under such a tree in the Garden: After comming out of her fit, she remembred not any thing what was done or sayd. Her mother observing her words, which hitherto had beene so re∣markable, clothed her childe all in white, and freely commended her to the Lord, watching his glorious time in the afternoone, being in a walk under a tree with her Brothers and sisters; suddenly she gave a great shrike, and skipt over a double ditch and another, and run to the Gar∣den doore. Her eldest sister came to her mother saying, MARGRET is gone to her Angels meeting, who with hast ran with the key of the Garden doore, where her childe was standing, beating at it, saying, I come, I come: she opened the doore and left her to her protector, and hastily went to the other side of the house to secure that part of the Garden: but (alas) ere she came, a wicked creature set on by the e∣nemies instigation, had been looking after her, and her childe wrin∣ging her hands, weeping bitterly, as if she could have torne her flesh
from the bones, or haire off her head, saying who was here? what wicked creature had stayd her blessed Angels from her; and for three houres together tooke on grievously, her mother weeping with her, begging of the Lord not to punish the innocent for the wickeds fault. After some time the child went into the Garden againe, where finding one of her Angels, she sayd, Lord, it was not my fault: but well is me that you will come unto me! but (alas) where are the rest? Her mo∣ther being within, hearing these words. A quarter of a yeare (a long time to be without comfort) still weeping: Then she had this Answer from her Angels, that for twelve weeks they would not visibly appeare to her. This she remembred for three dayes, and related to her brothers and sisters and the rest of the houshold the shape of those Angels: which were bodyed like Birds, as big as Turkies, and faces like Chri∣stians, but the sweetest creatures that ever eyes beheld: one of the strange ones came flying over the trees with a sweet voyce, and gave her notice the rest were come; which she found most true. Two or three lighted upon the ground, and the rest with the heavenliest voy∣ces that ever were heard, with a resolution to declare the truth of all. And if the Justices, and Judges at the Assizes would not doe justice, her owne two Angels (who were alwayes to her like a Dove and a Partridge) would visibly, to the admiration of all the beholders, ap∣pear like a man and a woman, and justifie the truth, if the wicked wretch had not scared them away. But now the one of her Angels bid her have a care she were neither frighted nor angred for twelve weeks, in which time they would not come to her; but in the meane time her enemy would make every third fit a terrible one, which was most true. In the meane time Colonel SVVINOVV dyed, and she comes into the Countrey, and because FOSTER would doe no justice, I got her apprehended in Berwick; she made such friends that it was a greater freedome to her then she had formerly from all other Lawes, and went at pleasure. The Girle with her mother being one Sabbath day at Ber∣wick Church, comming along the Bridge with her Husbands son, and daughter; DOROTRY SVVINOVV being at the farther end thereof, the Girle never seeing her but in her fits, knew her and was ready to fall downe in her mothers hand, crying yonder is the wofull thiefe; her mother knowing it true, sayd now to the Girle it is not she, who
answered, I have seen her a hundred times to my smart, it is she: her mother troubled much at the sight too, would have had the Girle back, but her desire was to be at home, who was no sooner come in, but she fell inro a terrible fit, for two houres long; sometimes her tongue drawne in within her throat, other whiles hanging over her chin on her breast. Sad and heavy sights were seen in her afflictions, still bidding all that were by her see the wicked Wretch DOROTHY SVVINOVV with the two Witches at her back, saying she would not let her goe back to Berwick, lest the Justices should have been witnesses them∣selves; but let her come home, where she knew all their hearts were hardened: for alas, she sayd I have two weeks and two dayes yet be∣fore my Comforters come, which made her enemies thus cruell, that if it were in her power to take their lives she would but the Lords pre∣serving power would never leave them who suffered these torments for his owne glory and their soules health saying, ours were but the cor∣rections of a loving Father to shew his great power in his weakest children, rejoycing exceedingly that he thought her (a sinfull creature) worthy so much happinesse, accounting it more joy to see her blessed Angels then all the world could afford, thanking God especially for making her a watch over her mother, brothers, and sisters, and would foretell strange things before they happened. When her 12. weekes were past, the very day and houre came di∣vers to see the Event, and waited with patience her appoynted time, which was the very minute of the houre of the day 12. weekes, they were scared from her, Mr. BROAD, Minister, Mr. STEVENS, Physi∣tian, Mrs. MUSCHAMP, and Mrs. HAGARSTON, besides their owne Neighbours were Witnesses, hearing her expresse much joy to meete with those long absent deare friends, relating the intention some had to looke after them againe; so apprehending them in the Chamber, where the Spectators heard her for two houres, most divinely and heavenly discourse with them, answering and replying to that religious discourse, praying for her enemy DOROTHY SVVINOVV, with the teares run∣ning downe her face, that if the Lord had mercy in store to grant her it, lamenting the sad condition she had run her soule into, for satisfy∣ing her malice to lessen her hope of eternity, making such a description betweene hell torments and heavenly joyes, as that no Divine on earth could have gone beyond her: Crying out for Justice, saying, if she
were in hold as a Fellon ought to be, her power would be gone, and their torments eased; but now with much joy she blest God her An∣gels would never leave her againe, whilst they were in affliction; say∣ing, she would go to the Judges (and desired to carry her brother there to) and begge for Justice; if she got it, her brother should come home as well as ever he was, she no more tormented, and there should be no more hard heartednesse against her mother, which the Lord knowes was such without any just cause, that her passion is by Gods power beyond imagination: Every fit she spake to this effect, till the Sizes came: in her fit her brother asked her if it were possible that he could ride that could neither go or stand; she answered that the Lord would inable him, therefore he should goe, and her Angels would goe along with them, and bring them safe back againe. So their Mother not daring to disobey such divine commands, whose confidence doth wholly depend upon Gods providence from Heaven, rid behinde her sonne, and came to the Judge, relating her sad conditi∣on; he heard her, but being falsely informed, did not resent it: she went to the Justices to remove DOROTHY SVVINOVVS body to the County where the act was committed: they pretended ignorance, the childrens mother went with them to a Counsellour to instruct them, whose answer was he would not meddle in it: Yet these dejectments did not drive her from an undoubted confidence in an all sufficient God; the next day betweene one and two of the Clock in the afternoone the Girle suddainely had a fit and after her torments her Angels appeared unto her, to them she complaines, saying, no Justice abroad, no Peace at home, what should become of her mother? for that Godlesse thiefe DOROTHY SVVINOVV, by the instigation of the Divell, had hardned the heart of both Judges and Justices against her, and now at this instant (sayd she) is using meanes to harden her husbands heart a∣gainst her too (which she knowes will be cruellest to her of all) and withall begun to consume her eldest sister, and that she would this night, or to morrow morning go to the Judge, begge once more for Justice; if she got it, her Brother with the rest should be well, if not, worse then ever; saying, if the Judge denyed her it, it would not be well with him; this was part of her two houres discourse.
Witnesses the Chamber full, amongst which was, Colonel SIPTHORP, and his Wife. Colonel RODDAM. Captain TOMPSON, his Brother and two Sisters. Mr ANDIRSON, and Mr. SVVAD∣VVELL. Mrs. CLETHER. Mrs. ALLGOOD. Dr. GENISON. BEfore she was out of her fit came Dr. GENISON, who invited the mother with her children to his house, being the next house to the Judges Chamber, in regard the Girles first appoyntment was al∣wayes kept; so after her supper sent to see if it were more convenient to waite upon the Judge that night, or the next morning: the answer was returned that night was fittest: So Dr. CLETHER and his wife, with Dr. GENISON and his, went along with the mother and their children thither, there was a great many spectators to see the Event. Thus being set downe in the chamber, her mother began her former suit, in begging Justice: his answer was, that that which belonged un∣to the County Palatine of Durham, belonged not unto him: So she re∣quested him in his returne back, either to doe it, or else give order to the Justices in the County to apprehend her; of a suddaine the Girle fell into a fit, relating before them all DOROTHY SVVINOVVS ma∣lice from the beginning, the cause of the troubles that broke Sir Ro. HAMBLETONS heart, the death of his Lady, and how she sought still by evill meanes to take away her mothers life, when the Lord would not permit that, got leave first to torment her, then to consume her bro∣ther, and now hath begun to consume her eldest sister, and harden her Father in Lawes heart, to make her mothers life more sorrowfull, with her hands up, and eyes fixed upon her objects, begged Justice for the Lords sake, for Jesus Christs sake; saying I ought to command Justice by the Lawes of the Realme, in the name of our Soveraigne Lord the King, but I beg not in the name of any mortal man, but in the name of the King of Kings, Justice for Christs sake, Justice for his mercies sake, it we have but ordinary Justice, which ought not to be denyed to the poorest creature who demands it, my brother that sits there shall goe home as well as ever he did, I no more tormented, my mother no
more afflicted, and my sisters torments at an end: if we have no justice my torments shall be doubled, my brother worse then ever he was, and my sister (which she hath this day begun to torment) worse then any of us, and my mothers afflictions, by the hardning of folks hearts against her will be unsufferable; but the Lords preserving mercy will never leave them who depend upon his providence; but it will be worse for them who deny us justice then for us. These words with many more significant expressions, that the Judge thought she feigned: but as soon as she was out of her fit, did not know what was past, as all the be∣holders did see, onely an innocent bashfull Girle, without any confi∣dence at all when she was out of her fits. So her mother returned home with them, where she found her other Girle began to con∣sume. That night she came home the Girle fell into a fit, pressing to vomit, but nothing came up but a piece of Fir-stick full of crooked pinnes: after her Angels came, she cryed out of the Judges injustice, saying, now the enemy when she sees she can have no justice, strived to choake her with these things, being stones, coles, brick, Lead, straw, quills full of pins, with straw full of pins, tow, and Virginall wire, all full of pins; one great stone for three weekes together came alwayes to her throat and went back again, till at the last the Lord brought it up. She bid watch with her brother three weeks; for they would if they could either cut his throat in the night, or else burne him with fire; therefore let the Watchers be very wakefull, and carefull, so blessed be God they were, and did heare as it were knives sharpning on the staires, and 3 severall times fire was found in the roome one night, like to have burnt them, but by Gods mercyes were saved. She sayd now DOROTHY SVVIHOVV was seeking a new way to take away her mothers life; for she was consuming the child within her, and withall bad them watch with her brother and sister that night twelve month they began to tor∣ment him (which was Saint Johns day at night) betwixt the houres of 1. and 2. in the morning, and that very moment of the houre they would seek to take his life and the use of his sisters legs, if Christians prayers and diligent watching did not prevent them; so it pleased the Lord to move the hearts of good friends to watch with them till the houre came. The Girle then had her fit, and cryed out, the Grand Witch Meg
is come to the doore with a lighted Candle in each hand, pray on one halfe houre longer, and their power will be gone, who observed her request, there was a suddaine smell of brimstone, but nothing seene by any; but here are some of their names that were witnesses to most of her tryalls, and first them that prayed by her. Mr. BROAD. Mr. EDVVARD ORDE. Mr. GEORGE ATHERLONY. Mr. EDVVARD MOORES six Sonnes, and one Daughter. With divers others, which were too tedious to relate. AFter this her Brother and Sister continued still consuming, and she every other day falling into her fits, and after torment her An∣gels alwayes appearing unto her, she still declares that DOROTHY SVVINOVV hardened the hearts of all that her mother had to deale with, sayd, it should be worse and worse, till of an instant the Lord should make her greatest enemies her greatest friends; declaring how that if she were in hold her paine were gone, as well as HUTTONS was for telling her owne releasement a quarter of a yeare before it came; saying, it was neither for her owne desires or her owne ease, that the Lord released her, but to helpe her mother when she could not helpe her selfe, which was most true to her great griefe and sorrow, but much joy to thinke that the Lord should not onely foretell it, but inable her own to helpe her: She still expecting justice, sent these strange things the Girle cast off her stomack to Durham, which could scarce be believed; yet by chance one being by at the casting of them, which was there present, got a Warrant to apprehend DOROTHY SVVINOVV, and served it her owne hands, with many contradictions ere it was done: Where DOROTHY SVVINOVV came into a chamber in the Consta∣bles house, which afterwards she confessed was for feare of taking her blood, which was never in the others thoughts: Yet obeyed not that Warrant, till a second, then went but onely and put in bayle, as though it had beene for an ordinary fault, which the Girle in her fits cryed out of, saying, that still gave her further power to worke her wickednesse. Still all this quarter the Girl in her fits desired them to watch with her, on Candlemas Eve, and they should not thinke their labour lost, and
betwixt the houres of one and two the next day the glory of God should appeare, her mother being confident of the Lords mercy, gave notice to all that came nigh her; so some that feared God came to see the Event, which releasement being writ from her owne mouth will confirme these warnings of her former trialls, which have all with much patience beene gone thorow, that the preserving mercies of the most glorious God, who never failes those that depend upon his most firme promises was never more declared on earth then in the weakest of his creatures, preserved by a gratious God, to whom let all that read and heare these unexpressible mercies, give all Glory, Honour, Laud, and Praises. The Expressions of MARGARET MUSCHAMP when she was in her last extreame fit, upon the second day of. FEBRUARY, 1647. THey thought because their time was but short, to have tormented me worse then ever, but I defie them. I have reason to blesse God more for his mercies to me, then I thinke ever sinfull creature had. Both my torments are at an end, and those fearefull sights I doe not now see, though it hath pleased God to suffer and let them have power to torment me, yet I was never without comfort. My time was sad when I had no comfort, but I thanke God who hath given me patience. I blesse God who never suffered the Devill to have so much power, as to cause me blaspheme his name, or to speake words to offend him. It is a great mercy that he granted me patience to endure my payne; if it had pleased God I should have beene content as well with tor∣ment as releasement. To her Angels. Because I shall have no more torment, shall not I see your faces a∣gaine? That's sad to me, that's more griefe to me, I had rather endure my paine; that's more griefe ten thousand times, but sinee it's Gods will, I am as well content with the one as the other, I still trust in God
he will send you to protect and watch over us. I have endured my paines a great while, it is two yeares agoe yester∣day; yet I blesse God for it, alwayes with much patience, my paine hath beene very vehement for the time, yet I blesse God I did never speake wordes to offend him: I confesse I doe not deserve it, I deserve no such thing, rather Judgement, not such Godly Chasticement: since he granted them power, he never left me to my selfe. Is this the last farewell? If it had been Gods will, I had rather in∣dured all the to ments could be put to a creature. But since it hath pleased God it should be so, I am content, the thing that's his will, the Lord grant that it never be sorrowfull to me, but make his will my will, that we may never repine. He knowes the secrets of all hearts. As for that wicked woman, if she had had any fear of God, she would have thought that though she had done it never so secretly, yet God would finde it out: She should have thought no such thing; but where the Divell gets entrance, his temptations are very strong. These torments are more welcome to me, then if I had been in my perfect health; if I had not knowne what torments had been, what pain had been, I should never have seen such joyfull sights: these are more joyfull to me then all the paine. Our paine, what's all our pain? what's all the pain on earth? Gods mercy is above the Divels power. Their time is limited. They sought my mothers life, but could not get it. Oh! to think of Hells torments which she hath run her soule into, that's more torment then all ours. It's comfort for me, joy for me, that God hath showne his power, that God hath given the Divell po∣wer to torment, I care not what thc Divell can doe; I defie all the Divels in Hell, for where the Divell hath any power, he triumphs as much as he can, though he triumph and we are weake, God is strong, his power is not lessened. That wicked woman DOROTHY SVVINOVV was the cause of the death of my Aunt MARGERY HAMBLETON, she was the cause of those troubles, which she thought should have broke my Aunts heart, but they broke Sir ROBERTS, that the estate might fall to her sonne: She was the cause of JAMES FAUCETS unnaturall fits, but
she let him alone, because she knew that if he came to London he would follow her more strictly then we can here. She set two Witches more to torment us: Jo. HUTTON, that dyed in prison was my great tormenter, these Witches have begun my sisters torment, though our torments have been more long, yet her time hath been most sad, because she wanted comfort: though I have had my paines, I never wanted comfort. She hath entred into the Divels service, ought she not to think of the torment of her soule? If it had not been thus with us, we should have despised the mercyes of God, our comfort is for joy in heaven, thats more comfort for us, thats more happinesse to thinke of, then all our paines and torments; if our bodyes were torne at horse heeles, and dragged with wild Beares, yet all were nothing to heavens joyes. Our souls are a precious jewell, we ought all to looke after them; our bodies are but dust and ashes: if our bodies were tortured with all torments, one blinke of heavens joyes will sweeten all. Now my torments are at an end, I care not though they were longer: the torment of my body is nothing, but to thinke of the torment she hath hazarded her soule into, is the torment of Hell fire. Wee confesse wee all deserve that, but not by that meanes she hath. None will believe it, she sets such a faire face upon it: where the Di∣vell tempts, delusions are strong. The Divell hath gotten power to harden all hearts. Those that are to do us justice, will not: though they deny us justice, yet God can and will in his due time, grant us justice over them all. Though God hath suffered the Divell to have power to torment us; they now have their times: certainly our times are in a better life; we have no pleasure here, all our pleasure is in the world to come. I have cause to blesse God, who doth send these blessed Angels to watch over me: my paynes were always with joy, never sorrowfull, and when I had no comfort, yet I had hopes that God who layed them on me, would take them off me in his due time. Have not I reason to blesse God? none hath reason more: the Lord
grant I never forget his mercies: he hath been very mercifull to us, in granting us patience to endure more then wee could expect at his hands. What is this they have run their soules into? the Lord grant them hearts to repent them of their sinns; the Lord grant us penitent hearts to repent us of our sinnes: we have all done as much as deserves hell, where is gnashing of teeth, paines, fire and brimstone for ever. We have cause to blesse God that hath not suffered us to go neither to Witches, nor any of the divels servants, but to looke to God. No creature thought we could have indured, what can we indure of our selves? No, without God we can doe nothing, what cannot God inable us to indure? There is nothing that can be done, but we can do it by Gods assistance, we cannot say we can doe any thing of our selves, no not the least thing in the World, seeing our helpe is in an able God, we can do any thing. I know the Lord will never suffer the divell to have any further pow∣er over our bodies; though they hurt our bodies, they shall not hurt our soules, they shall not come neare our soules. Our soules are all the comfort we can expect, what are our bodies? Our bodies are nothing; I blesse God that would have his glory tryed on our weake bodies, which no creature thought could have indured such torment. We have reason my brother, sister, and all of us to blesse God; yea, all creatures that behold it have reason to blesse God, and to thinke that he is a mercifull God to us, it is his mercy we know, it is his promise that all those that repent with penitent hearts, he is still ready to forgive them, we acknowledge it is Gods mercy, not our deserts. They have tormented my brother a yeare a gone St. IOHNS day at night, and they have tormented me two yeares agone yeasterday, my sister is pined away, they began with her since Lammas, she hath lesse comfort then we have had. She from the beginning hath had great paine without comfort, and though my paine have beene sorest, yet I have had great comfort. Since God hath granted this day to be my releasement, have I not reason to blesse this God? My brother and sister are still under their burthen: Let them not thinke it a burthen, but rather beg patience to indure it.
If ever God give them health, we have all reason to have thoughts of eternity, and never to forget the word of God. My sister is worse then my brother, or then ever I was, my torments were vehement, sometimes a day, sometimes eight houres, sometimes shorter, sometimes longer; and though my time was sore and vehe∣ment, yet still I had ease after it, but my sister hath no ease. Now when I am released, what shall become of my brother and sister, if it please God to give them so much power as to torment them? If that God make me a watch over them, that I may declare their grief, it is a great mercy. They thought to have choaked me, once they made me cast up pins, and stones, and things that creatures would not thinke possible should have come out of my mouth, yet God inabled me to indure that not a∣ny creature thought I could. They thought to have done the like to my Brother, but God did not suffer the Divell to have so much power, but they have striven so to do. For my Brother GEORGE he had neede to have a care of himselfe, he by the sight of me I saw consumed; we have reason to blesse God he is away. If you love my sister BETTYES life bring her not home, you may as well take a knife and cut her throat, as be the cause of her torments. If they love my sister and brothers life, bring them not in sight one minute, by looking on them doth them more hurt then we thinke of. If my sister had gone away to and not looked so much on my Bro∣ther as she hath done it had beene better for her. She hath done her selfe more wrong then us, in setting these two more against us, though it hath pleased God to let them have so much power over our bodies, yet they never had power over our soules. They are trying all ways in the world to have power to torment my Mother, they are seeking to torment her by an unnaturall way, if we have not a care of our selves, and one of another by Gods mercies. Shall they never have more power to torment me? They thought this last night to have made me more passionate then ever I was; I blesse God though they made me somewhat passionate, yet stil God inabled me with patience not to be much extravagant much after their desires, those Justices all of them have denyed us Justice: Let them take heede of themselves: Let them take heede of a heavy
burthen that may fall upon themselves: Though our Mother be lo∣ving unto us; yet let them take heede of a heavy burthen may fall on them: I wish to God it be not so, that the innocent doe not suffer, the Lord grant they may have a sensiblenesse of the wrong they have done us, and suffer not the innocent to indure for them. Now after this, when they cannot get power to torment me, will they ever be more vehement with my brothers and sisters? Whensoever she is put in hold till she come to her tryall she should not have her liberty; for if she come abroad amongst her company, she will be as cruel as ever. If these two Witches were catcht and in hold, she would goe to death to the utmost to make them more vehement then ever: though they torment the rest, yet they shall never have power to torment me. It is sayd in the word of God, you shall not suffer a Witch to live; yet she consults with Witches, and consults with their wayes, which by the Lawe of God deserves death. Shall I never behold your faces againe? If it were so it would be more sad to me then all my paine: Though you be not in my sight, yet I trust in Gods mercy so much, as that you will still watch over us, and protect us. God grant we never forget Gods mercies, to be impatient, seeing we have rest in torment. What mercies can be showne unto a creature, but it hath pleased God to shew it to me? that it hath pleased him to grant mee so much patience, though of my selfe I was not sensible of my torments, that was a mercy and much comfort to my soule, that though they tor∣mented my body, they never had power to cause me speake unbefitting words to hazzard my soule. But had it not pleased God to have sent you to me that time, what have would become of me? I had beene distracted and like a mad body. When the Divell was strong and had most power, God still crossed him of his opportunity. Those that are so malicious, seldome any thing satisfies their mindes, save this extravagant way, that is a fore thing: many times malice is never satisfied without life: shall I never see you with my eyes here? yet ye will reveale this, either by me, or by some other means It shall be more strange before it be all declared. Now after this
time shall I never have more torment by any Witch, nor none I hope. Shall I meet you in such a place, at such a time? I will. Seeing you have set mee that time of appoyntment, I hope you will put me in minde of it: I will, if it be Gods will to make me do it. Mr. FRANCIS BROAD, and Mr. GEORGE ATHERLONY two Ministers, with Doctor STEPHENS a Physitian, were with her in di∣vers of her last tormenting fits. These words were spoken in the hearing of two Ministers, and at least a hundred others. And taken by Mr. Edward Ord. MARGARET WHITE of CHATTON, her owne Confession of her selfe. COnfesseth and saith, That she hath beene the Divels servant these five yeares last past, and that the Divell came to her in the likenes of a man in blew cloaths, in her owne house, and griped her fast by the hand, and told her she should never want, and gave her a nip on the shoulder, and another on her back; And confesseth her Familiar came to her in the likenesse of a black Grey-hound, and that the Divell had carnall knowledge of her in her owne house two severall times. Likewise the sayd MARGARET WHITES Confession up∣on Oath of others, as followeth, viz. Mrs. DOROTHY SVVI∣NOVV of CHATTON, and JANE MARTIN of the same, and sister to the sayd MARGARET, WHITE of CHATTON, aforesayd, Confesseth upon Oath that Mrs. SVVINOVV, and her sister JANE, and her selfe were in the Divels company in her sister JANES house, where they did eate and drinke together (as by her conceived) and made merry.
And Mrs. SVVINOVV, and her the sayd MARGARETS sister with her selfe, came purposely to the house of Mr. EDVVARD MOORE of Spittle, to take away the life of MARGARET MUS∣CHAMP and MARY, and they were the cause of the Childrens tor∣menting, and that they were three severall times to have taken away their lives, and especially upon St. Johns day at night gone twelve moneths; And sayth that God was above the Divell, for they could not get their desires perfected; and saith, that Mrs. SVVINOVV would have consumed the childe that Mrs. Moore had last in her wombe, but the Lord would not permit her; and that after the childe was borne Mrs. Swinow was the occasion of its death, and Mrs. Swinow came riding on a little black Nag to the Spittle with a riding coat, and that she and her sister were also the occasion, and had a hand in the death of the sayd child: And further confesseth that she and her sayd sister were the death of Thomas Yong of Chatton (by reason) a kill full of Oates wat∣ched against her sisters minde; And further saith, that the Divell called her sister Jane (Besse:) She confesseth, that her sister Jane had much trou∣bled Richard Stanley of Chatton, and that she was the occasion of his sore leg. This is acknowledged and confessed to be true, before John Sleigh Justice of Peace, and Robert Scot Towne Clarke of Barwick. MARGARET WHITE, I her Marke This was confirmed after, in the presence of Mr. Ogle of Eglingame, Mr. Walton of Etherstone, Mr. Foster of Newham, Justices of the Peace, being present a multitude of people at Kimestone: This same was afterward taken upon Oath at Morpeth, in the presence of Mr. Delavall, High Sherriffe of Northumberland, Mr. Ogle, Mr. Fenwick, Mr. Dela∣vall, Mr. Shafto, Mr. Kilinworth, Mr. Hall, six Justices of the Peace. Warrants issued out after her Inditement was found, for the apprehen∣ding of her, but as yet not taken.
Northumber. Ad Generalem Sessionem Pacis tent. apud Aln∣wick pro Com. pred. die Mercurii viz. 24. die Aprilis, 1650. Coram Gulielmo Selby Mil. Georgio Fenwick Ar. Henrico Ogle Ar. & al. Justic. ad Pacem in Com. pred. con∣servand. assignat. &c. Necnon, &c. Nomina Jurator. ad Inquirend. &c. Johannes Ilderton. Ar. Will. Armorer, Gen. Nich. Forster, Gen. Ephr. Armorer, Gen. Franc. Alder. Gen. Richard. Widhouse, Gen. Georgius Lisle, Gen. Alex. Armorer, Gen. Christoph. Ogle, Gen. Edvardus Bell, Gen. Radulphus Watson, Gen. Hugh Arrowsmith, Gen. Jo. Creswel. Gen. Joh. Ord, Gen. Georgius Craw, Gen. Franc. Forster, Gen. Henricus Johnson, Gen. Qui quidem Jurator, putant ut sequitur. IUr. pro Custod. libert. Angl. Authoritat. Parliamenti super sacram suam presentant. quod Dorotheo Swinow nuper de Chatton in Com. Northumber. Vid. 24 die Martii Anno Dom. millesimo, sexcentesimo, quadragesimo, octavo, ac divers. al. dict. & vicibus tam antea quam postea Deum pre oculis non hab. sed instigatione Diabolicaseduct. quosd. malas & Diabolicas Artes Angl. vocat Witchcrafts, Inchantments, Charmes, and Sorceries, nequit Diabolic. ac Felonice apud Spittle in Com. Palatin. Dunelm. die & Anno supradict. usa fuit & exercit. ra∣tione quarundum malarum & Diabolicarum Artium quidem Sibilla Moore de Spittle pred. in Com. Palatin. Dunelm. pred. infans existen. & ad tunc in Pace Dom. R. ad tunc existen. a
pred. vicesimo quarto die Martii supradict. us{que} primam diem Aprilis Anno supradict. languebat. & pred. Sibilla apud In∣sulam Sacram in Com. Palatin. pred. ad mortem suam devenit & vitam suam dimisit & sic Jur. pred. super sacr. suum pred. di∣cunt quod Vid. Dorothea pred. Sibilla ratione practitionibus & exerit. Diabol. Artiū pred. apud Insul. sacr. pred. in Com. Palatin. Dunelm. pred. modo & forma pred. Felonice & Diabolice interfe∣cit Contr. Pacem Publicam nunc. Copia. Ex. per Crow. Cl. Pa. Northumber. Ad Generalem Sessionem Pacis tent. apud Aln∣wick pro Com. pred. die Mercurii, viz. vicesi∣mo quarto die Aprilis 1650. Coram Gulielmo Selby mil. Georgio Fenwick Ar. & Hen∣rico Ogle Ar. & al. Justic. ad Pacem in Com. pred. concernant. assignant. &c. Necnon &c. VVHereas Dorothy Swinow of Chatton Widdow, doth stand indicted at this Sessions of divers Witchcrafts, Inchantments, Charmes, and Sorceries, and especially for use∣ing and practising the sayd Diabolicall Arts upon Sibilla Moore an Infant and Child of Mrs. Mary Moore Widdow: It is therefore Ordered by the Court, and the High Sheriffe of the sayd County, his Bayliffes and Officers, and all others whom it may concern, are hereby required forthwith to ap∣prehend the body of the sayd Dorothy Swinow, & her to carry & convey unto the Goal of the said County, there to remain untill she shall be thence delivered by due course of Law. To the High Sheriffe of the sayd County, and to all Constables and Officers, whom it may concerne. Crow, Cl. Pac.
Northumber. Ralph Delaval Esquire, High Sheriffe of the sayd County, to all Bayliffes of Liberties, She∣riffes, Bayliffes, Constables, and whomsoever else it may concerne, greeting; By vertue of an Order from the Sessions of the Peace to me di∣rected, these are to charge and command you, and every of you, that immediately upon sight hereof, you attach and apprehend the body of Dorothy Swinow of Chatton Widdow, and her safely convey to the Common Goale at Morpeth, there to remaine untill she shall be from thence deli∣vered by due course of Law; hereof faile not, as you will answer the contrary at your utmost pe∣rills. Given under the Seale of my Office this 26. day of April, Anno Domini, 1650. Per eundem Vic. FINIS.
