m836 e50_10 99871939 155148
A RELATION OF THE GREAT Victories and Successes of the Garrison of Plymouth, since the last Account, given you in the Continuation of the true Narration, May 10. Truly Expressed from thence in two severall Letters, the one from Leivetenant Collonell Martin, Commander in Cheife there, to a Friend of his in LONDON. fleur-de-lis The other by a Captaine there, to a worthy Minister of this CITIE. LONDON, Printed by T. P. and are to be sold at the Marigold in Pauls Church-yard. June 4th. 1644.
A Letter written from Plymouth, by Leivetenant Collonell Martin, Com∣mander in chiefe there, to a Friend of his in LONDON: Wherein is Expressed severall Victories late∣ly obtained in those Parts, by the the PARLIAMENTS forces. SIR; AMong all my friends in London, I cannot at present only salute you as well to minde you of your minding us, whom and whose condition I presume you connot forget; As likewise to informe you of what great things the God of power and mercy hath lately done for us of this place, even since the time you left us. I beleeve you have heard though not from me, of our beating the Enemy at St. Budiex, since which time in divers small skirmishes betwixt our Horse and theirs, we have put them to the worst, and taken prisoners. On Saturday last in the morning, I drew forth 1000. Foote, and about 100. Horse; with these we marched to∣wards Trenmans Jumpe, but in regard the maine strength of the Enemy lay at Plympton, least they might fall on our reare, I commanded 400. Musketeeres with 25. Horse to make good the severall wayes about Compton with the rest of Horse and Foote we drew up at Hoptons worke, from whence the parties were issued forth; First 145. Musketteeres, under the command of Captaine Hals, who with the helpe of the Horse fell upon and carried the Ene∣mies Guard at the Jumpe, before any of the rest which I
commanded to second them; where come up they tooke the whole Guard not one man escaped, which were Threescore and twelve men, and about Fiftie Horse, Dra∣goones and Troopers; with these they retreated, and a little above Knockins Hole were charged in the Reare by two Troopes of the Enemies Horse, which advanced from Warlie Huse, but were by the speedy and resolute facing of our men quickly broken, routed, and pursued above a mile. Here were added to our prisonees 17. and as many Horse. There were taken about 100. Armes, Comman∣ders and Officers, none save two Lievetenants one Cornet, and one Corporall of Horse. With these we returned, ha∣ving lost only one man killed by his owne Musket some others hurt. Yesterday I sent Captaine Hayne with 300. Musketeeres over the water to Mount Edgcombe, the par∣ticulars of the service will be too tedious. They landed un∣der the Warren, upon which the Enemy left all their Ord∣nance, which were but two Sacats, and one Demycullve∣ring: When the passage was open, I went over my selfe, with 20. Horse, set a Gaurd upon Mount Edgcombe, and by this time Captain Duttue who was commanded to march to Maker Church who had beaten the Enemy there, who indevored to possesse the place before him, from thence he followed the Enemy to Milbrooke, which was present∣ly yeelded before my selfe was able to come up, the Ene∣my pretended a parley whilst their Souldiers got cleare of the Towne, yet wee recovered two Collours and three hundred Armes, three Barrells of Powder, there was only one peece of Ordnance which hee brought not off, beeing possest of the Towne, I sent Captaine Chafin to view a great worke which they had upon Jusworth point, but be∣fore his comming the enemy had left it with sixe peeces of Ordance, there I set a strong Guard till the water should come in, whereby wee might carry away the Gunnes with the Cattell which the Souldiers had taken: From thence I marched to Cawson, having appointed Captaine Hayne to attempt the Enemies worke there, the strength of which I then knew not, when I came I found him par∣lying with the worke, which was forthwith delivered up,
in it were but three peeces of Ordnance but an impregna∣ble peece we had not tane then to bring away there Guns▪ some of them I caused to bee dismounted, there being two others in another little worke; but by this time I thought fit to returne to the Guard at Mount Edgcombe and sent the dispersed Souldiers there being now with mee not above forty foote and ten Horse, after this by the Im∣portunity of some I consented to make triall of the strength of the House, which wee did, and fired the Ban∣quetting House, but could not enter, whilst wee were thus imployed, on the other side the enemy drawes up neere a thousand Horse and foote against our workes, but were beaten back, meane while a strong party of Horse were sent about by Salt Ash, from whence they tooke the Ga∣rison Souldiers, and with great hast came towards Mil∣brooke and fell into the worke at Jusworth when our Boates which had taken in the Ordnance, Men, and plunder were not halfe muket short off the shore, I was informed of their comming, and considering the strength of the House and the fewnesse and wearinesse of my men and Horses, I commanded their retreate which wee made in very good order, when the enemy had got the top of the Hills. I be∣leeve wee brought over fifty good horses, I could not yet take an exact accompt of them, neere 200. sheepe, with a 100. Oxen, Kine and young Cattell, prisoners we tooke not above ten, besides some Country men which I have since freed, nine peeces of Ordnance, di∣vers of our owne men which were kept prisoners in Milbrooke were now delivered, wee lost at the House one Lieutenant, three common Soul∣diers, all which were such as had no calling there. Thus have I given you account of the goodnesse of the Almighty towards us, I hope these are but beginning of greater mercies: Men from all parts come in to us daily, had we but money to pay them; you can hardly immagine the greatnesse of our streights for want of it, pray Sir as you tender the wel∣fare of this place, solieite earnestly for a supply for us, wee should not want men could we but afford them ordinary incouragement. Sir I am your ready friend. ROBERT MARTIN. Plymouth May 16. 1644.
A TRVE COPY OF A Letter written from Plymouth, May, 16. by a Captain there, to a wor∣thy Minister of this Citie SIR, SINCE my last unto You, it hath plea∣sed God to blesse our endeavours, and to give us some victories over our E∣nemies; which I shall here give you a certain Relation of. On the 11th, of this instant May, we sallied out into the Enemies Quar∣ters at the Jumpe, where they had a guard of Horse and fooe, they being neere 80. All which were killed and ta∣ken by our men, with the loosse of one man only on our side. We killed an Irish Commander that would take no quarter after we had gotten the worke, and the rest we brought away prisoners with their armes: The Enemie then having his alarum in other quarters, gathered toge∣ther, and followed our men as they retreated: but our men were armed with such resolution, as that they
thought it dishonorable for them to come off without op∣posing them also, which they did with good successe. We killed 6. or 7. of them, and tooke 17. prisoners: In all that day we tooke 88. prisoners, besides those that were slaine, were 60. Horse and about 100. mens armes. On the 15th. of this instant, we steered our course ano∣ther way, and fell over on th Cornish-side, where it pleased God to give us wonderfull successe: We landed our men not farre from Mount Edgcombe, where they kept their guards, but upon our first onsett they forsooke their guards, and left their guns, and betooke themselves to the House, we leaving a party to keepe play with the House, drew away a good party further into the Country. We first marched to a place called Maker, where in the Church we had a barrell of Gunpowder, and tooke some few men, but the rest fled away, some to Milbrooke, and some to Causan-fort; We leaving another party to make good the Church to secure our retreate, matched forward to Milbrooke, where they had a Garrison of about 250. all which fled, and so without opposition of any but the Towne, which for feare of plundring yeelded upon quar∣ter, we tooke in it 7. great Guns, and many Armes, 3 bar∣rells of powder, many great shot, which we haveing sent away marched to Causan and summoned their Fort, which yeelded also upon composition, where we had five peices of Ordnance, and one barrell and halfe of powder, and some great shot. We could not bring off our Gus from Causan, for feare of the Enemie, being on our backs. Then leaving Causan we returned to Mount Edgcombe, and summoned the House, but they would not yeeld, whereupon we stormed it, tooke the Out-houses, and burnt them and the banqueting-house, but the Main-hous being built in such a forme and with stone, was not fie∣red. The night drawing on, and the Enemy being on our backs we retreated, bringing over with us 50. Horse, 100 heade of Cattle, and neere 200. Sheepe, and 3. peices of Ordnance from under Mount Edgcombe, that played upon
the Boats which passed up to Sone-house, we tooke 12. in all and brought them away. We tooke this day about 200. mens armes. Lievetenant Colonel Martin hath for the present the sole command of the Garrison and carrieth things very sweet∣ly, to the content of all honest men. I am perswaded had he not beene here, we had beene in a very sad condition. We are extreamly necessitated for want of Money, pray doe your utmost to procure some for us. Postscrip. We Issued out of the Towne one Wedensday the 22. of May, toward Warly House 4. mile out of the Towne, where we tooke 50. Horse and retreated with the losse of 6. men, and upon our retreate their Horse pursued us. Which being discovered a party of our Horse faced about to encounter with them, and fell in pell-mell amongst them, and tooke 6. Horse and men with their compleat Armes, the Enemy then perceiving our men to be no way daunted, but rather joyfull; and to persist, with courage, they returned againe to their Quarters, that we could not see one in 4. miles about, but at Plympton, where we hope ere long to find them.—Added by one who was an eye witnesse of it, being now in London. FINIS.
