N1331 E460_25 99864566 162146
THE DEMANDS AND PROPOSALS OF The Earle of Norwich, and Sr. Charles Lucas, (in the name of themselves, and the rest of his Majesties Officers and Souldiers in the City of Colchester) to Generall Fairfax, concerning the surrendering of the said City, and their resolution thereupon. With the Answer of the Lord Generall to the said DE∣MANDS and PROPOSALS ALSO. the Proceedings of the Scots Royalists neare the Parli∣ament doores, and their animating on the people to Cudgell the PARLIAMENT. Likewise, the Dscovery of a great Designe in the City of London, to have murthered most of the Parliament men, and the ap∣prehending of the Princes Agent at the Royall Exchange, and taking of divers Commissions from his High∣nes to the Citizens, for the raising of an Army for his Royall father the King. Signed, CHARLES. P. LONDON, Printed ANNO DOM. 1648.
The discovery of a great Plot in the City of London to Massacre the Parliament men, and other Jnhabitants with in the City, and the Apprehending of the Princes Agent neere the Royal Exchange. THe Treaty is carried on violently, & many jealousies possess the honest party, who are as active as scrutinous, knowing a personall Treaty was never yet desired with out some designe to cut their throats; divine providence, with Gods wonted goodnesse to his people discovers a hellish Plot in the City, to Massacre all honest Members in Parliament, and Inhabitants in City and Suburbs, for which Com∣missions were granted from his Sacred Highnesse the Prince of Wales, to Citizens and others, who in the pro∣secution of the Covenant with their deare Brethren of Scotland, and their zeale to the Royall Cause of his Gra∣cious Majesty, make large subcriptions for buying Armes,
and maintaining the forces listed for this great designe) no marvell now▪ that the Prince, and the City, with the Reformadoes should so much presse for a Personall treaty in London, that their brethren of Scotland may be pro∣vided for, and a Cessation and Free trade insisted on, that the City should raise forces by act of Common Coun∣cel, and the Royal party so much domineere.) A Committee was this day appointed to joyne with the Miltia in examining and discovering this designe, with power to send for parties, witnesses, &c. seize horses armes, and Ammunition, and secure such persons as they shall think fit. They consider of their Lordships Votes upon the businesse of the Treaty, and make some additi∣ons and alterations therein: Agree to the repealing of foure Votes for no further application to the King. To the Vote for persons to attend him during the Treaty, the Commons add a provision, That they be not persons ac∣cepted against under restraint, or in actuall Warr by Sea or Land, nor so many as may cause suspition: To that, for his Majesty to be in the same freedom as at Hampton Court, Concurred. To that for Domestick servants to attend him, agreed to, so that they be not in any of the former limitations. His Highness the Prince of Wales, hath sent for a Dr. and Apothecary from London to wait spedily upon him: They acquaint the Speaker with the Princes Command, the occasion thereof, and their desires to the House in re∣lation thereuto. The House Ordered, that the said Dr. and Chirurgion go aboard the Prince, and return: Its conceived the message was mistaken, and an Oculist intended, Ah poor Prince this is worse then blasting his land Army, for now his Amorous features will no more
tempt the French Ladies, and besides, his Highnesse may come to an incapacity of—if his sight be not re∣covered. Some of the Scots Commanders insolencies was this day taken notice of in Westminster Hall, in stirring up the discontented people at the House rising, to fall on the Parliament men, crying, Cudgell them, Cudgell them. The Princes Agent was seen this day in the Exchange, London, and being friendly invited to a Glasse of Wine, a squadron of Major Gen. Skippons horse in the interim secured him, upon search finde the Clavis of the Princes Characters, Commissions from the Prince to Citizens, and severall particulars of Armes in relation to the grand Designe of the City: The prisoner and two Troopers are Coched, a squadron of horse-guard them down to Derby hous who dispose of the Agent into safe Custody, & return thanks to the Troopers, who rest not here, but scout round, and thorow the City this night, and Sunday like∣wise, their activiandy gallantry makes them terrible, and more dispicable, the Enemy calling them Fairfax Bastards. Make these 300 horse 60. and give them power, they will secure both Parliament and City. The Bunch of Cavaliers and Citizens were hapily discovered at a Tavern in London, but more unhappily prevented. SIR, WE have little News here, God is acting for us, though we do little for ourselves, and the lesse we se our selvs do, the more we shall do: Our great work now, is the carrying on of the approaches, which are so
neare, that our souldiers and theirs lay down their Arms and instead of shooting cast stones one at another; our line between Botolph gate and East-gate, is almost brought to their wall. The enemy in town are very full of distra∣ctions, and the inhabitants of straits and disturbance, as you will perceive by the enclosed petitions, which were this day sent unto his Excellency in a letter from the L. Norwich, and the rest, expressing, That they had at the desire of the inhabitants, thought fit to restrain them and that they should be constrained for the better accommo∣dation of the souldiery, to turn out the Towns-people whereby their houses and goods would be left liable to spoile and ruine; for the prevention whereof, they had thought fit to treate with his Lordship for the surrender of the town, if he pleased, to which purpose they would send six Officers, if his Lordship would appoint the like number to meet them on his behalf. With this letter came another, offering the exchange of Capt. Gray for Mr, Weston, and Mr. Rawlens: His Ex∣celencies answer was, that as to the exchange he accepted of, but as to the matter of treaty, he would send answer by a messenger of his own. As yet no inclination to grant their requests, the Officers are to advise about it to mor∣row, delay being now the best part of our game. This evening his Excelency going into one of the forts near East gate, the enemy discharged a Drake with Case shot, which scattered durt upon him and his attendants, but did none of them any harme. Our men kil'd one of theirs looking over the Wall. The other day Sr. Richard Hastings boy being exchan∣ged for one Gooday a Townsman, whom the enemy had apprehended as a spie, having heard some discourse a∣mong
the souldiers, and told it among the rest, that our soldiers bid him comend them to Goring, & tell him they would bore a hole through his nose, and draw him with a rope through Cheapside, crying here is the great Bull of Colchester, which made his Lordship merry. To the Right honorable the Earle of Nor∣wich, the Lord Capell, and Sir Charles Lucas. The humble Petition of the Inhabitants of Colchester. SHEWETH, THat your Petitioners having lately received your Commands to prepare our selves generally to depart the town, for the better supplying of the souldiers we have been bold humbly to Petition the L. Fairfax for liberty to passe into the Country, least being forced we go vo∣luntarily without his Lordships licence, we might expose our lives to eminent danger. We therefore humbly pray your honors to be pleased to give way that our Petition may be sent to his Lord∣ship, and that till we have received answer of it, we may not be enforced from our habitations. Au. 16. 1648. Subscribed by us the Mayor & Aldermen in the name of all the Petitioners. W. Cooke Mayor, R. Buxton, Io. Furley T. Laurence, and Io. Sharp Aldermen. To the Right honorable Thomas Lord Fairfax his Excelency. The humble Petition of the inhabitants of Colchester. Sheweth, THat divers of your Petitioners of every parish, having been summoned this present morning to attend the
Commanders in chief here, have received this Message from them, strict charge to communicate it to all the in∣habitants in generall, namely, that we must with all expe∣dition provide to depart the town, or otherwise we shll by power be forced therunto, for that what ever becom∣eth of us; the souldiery, who maintain the Kings cause must and shall be provided for. Now my Lord, your Petitioners being driven to this exigency, they have no other means but to fly to your Christian clemency, and humbly pray, that you will give them leave to passe into the Country for the preservation of their lives. And your Petitioners shall pray, &c. Aug. 19. 1648 Subscribed by the Mayor and Aldermen in the name of all the Petitioners. Wil. Cook Mayor, Rob. Buxton, Io. Furley, Tho Laurence, and Io. Saw. Aldermen. Colchester. Leaguer Aug. 20. My Lords, I am willing to be∣leive that the necessities of the inhabitants of the towne of Colchester have wrung from them the Petition in your letter inclosed, I shall not only clear my self to all the world from the occasion of their sufferings but so far contribute to their releif, as to allow all the inhabitants of that town to enjoy the liberty in their Petition desired, provided the Committee of the County of Essex, now prisoners with you, be sent out with the first, only I shall not permit the wives and children of any townsmen, or others who shall abide with you in arms to have the be∣nifit above mentioned. And to the other part of your Lordships letter that concerne the rendition of the town, I make this offer, that all such Officers and Souldiers under the degree of a Capt, (excepting all such of my Army, who have since the 10 of May deserted their colours shall have passes without injury offered them to return to their homes, engaging themselves never hereafter to bear Arms against the Parl. and all other Superiour Officers, with Lords and Gentlemen, to submit to mercy. Your Lordships servant, T. FxIRFAX. For the Earl of Norwich, Lord Capel, and Sr. Charls Lucas. FINIS.
