N1240A 45097874 171453
CHRIST'S Commission-Officer: OR, The Preachers Patent CLEARED: AND, THE Peoples plea considered. In a Sermon preached before (and now presented to) the ASSOCIATED Ministers of Christ, in the County of Sommerset, at a late solemn Ordination at Sommerton in the said County, June, 9. 1658. By John Norman, Minster of the Gospel at Bridgwater. Rom. 10.14, 15. How then shall they call on him, in whom they have not believed? and how shal they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear with∣out a preacher? And how shal they preach except they be sent? as it is written how beautiful are the feet of them that preach the Gospel of peace, & bring glad tidings of good things? 1 Tim. 1.12. I thank Christ Jesus our Lord who hath enabled me: for that he counted me faithfull, putting me into the Ministery London, Printed for Edward Brewster, at the Crane in Paul's Church-yard, 1658.
Epistola Dedicatoria. Dilectissimis, & in Christoper∣qùam reverendis Ministris Evangelii, apud Somerse∣tenses ASSOCIATIS, ar∣ctissimó{que} & pacis & pie∣tatis vinculo conjunctis, Gratiam misericordiam & pacem in Domino. Patres fratrés{que} in Christo colendissimi,
ANte oculos ponit conciuncula haec (qualis qualis est) omnia illa, quibus nuperrimè praebuistis erectas aures. Quam acriùs eflagitâ∣runt non pauci, ut in apricum feram, hanc omnibus & singu∣lis vestrum perquàm humilli∣mè offero. Non est quòdlautâ apologiâ ceulongis ambagibus vosfuti∣lè & nullo cum ructu morer. Post iteratas à me denuò mul∣túmque inficias, vicerunt candem eorum, quibus fami∣liarissimè utor, rationes, quae desiderio Christi, coeli, evan∣gelii, ejusdémque Ministerii exardere mihi videbantur. Pompaticam eloquentiam (ut Hieronymi  utar) non ambiit concionator vester, nec pruritum aurium,
2 Tim. 4.2.  Chryst. in Tit. sed pro∣desse animis: 1 Cor. 10 33. , ut cum Apostolo loquar, ne inanis reddatur crux Christi. 1 Cor. 1.17. . Chrys. in 2 Cor. 11. Oratione itaque pressâ usus sum, non praecultâ Quemad∣modum sa∣pienti viro incessus mo∣destior con∣venit; ita oratio pres∣sa non audax, Seneca. Ep. 40. in fine. popu∣lari, non politâ. Cujuscunque orati∣onem vides politam, & sllcitam; scito ammum in pusiäis oc∣cupatum in scriptis niil solidum, Id. Epist. 21. Nec minùs de rebus Theologicis dicen∣dum semper duxi, quàm de Philosophicis Cicero: Istius∣modi res dicere ornatè pueri∣le est, planè autem & per∣spicuè expedire posse, docti & intelligentis viri. Cicero L. 3. de finibus, bon. & mal.
Rerum Theologicarum con∣culcatores, potiùs, quam con∣cionatores sunt, qui (secun∣dum Hieronymum) exceptis verbis tinnulis atque emendi∣catis, nihil aliud loquuntur. Hier. Ep. amil. 56. Liceat itaque ut cum Apo∣stolo palàm & ingenuè profi∣tear, non statuisse me quic∣quam scire, nisi Jesum Chri∣stum, eúmque crucifixum: 1 Cor. 2.2. & quicquid sine hoc nomine fuerit, quam∣vis literatum, & ex∣politum, & veridi∣cum, non me totum rapuisse, sicut Augu∣stinus. Con∣fes. L. 3. ca. 4. Valeant, per me licet, oratorum lenocinia, Platonico∣rum &
Erubiscat ergò su∣perbus & infoelix pecca∣tor, & limeat elatione coecatus, irâ inflamma∣tus, impatieniae vitio faedatus, sientiainflatus; cui plus placet ars Ari∣stotelis quam scientia de Apostolis, plus codex Flatonis cuam liber di∣vinus: quem nulla lectio laetificat, nulla sapie ntia aedisicat; nullus sermo sapit, nisi suerit Gram matieè conceptus, Dia∣lecticè imaginatus, Rhetoricè purpura∣tus, Aug. li. specul. peccat. e. 6. Peripateti∣corum sophismata: Arma enim militiae nostrae non carnalia sunt, sed divinitùs valida, ad destructio∣nem munitionum: 2 Cor. 10.4. Vivus est Dei sermo & efficax▪ Heb. 4.12. Tota scriptura divinitùs est inspirata, eadem{que} utilis ad doctrinam, ad redargutionem, ad correctionem, ad dis∣ciplinam in justitiâ: Nec solummodo po∣test hominem sapien∣tem reddere ad sa∣lutem, verùm etiam hominem Dei cùm  tùm ; Seu à Paulo scriptum sit, ut plerique le∣gunt, , ut Complutensis edi∣tio, vim vocabuli in se inclu∣sam habet. Proinde ab Oecumenio ex∣ponitur , q. d. integrè, plenè consummatè: à Chrysostomo au∣tem
, i. e. accurate & exactè instructus, Jo. Rainold. Thes. 1. de S. scriptura, p. 64. & perfectum, & ad omne opus bonum perfectè instru∣ctum. 2 Tim. 3.15, 16, 17. vide Andr. Rivet. Isa∣gogen. ca. 5. In evangelio; en! omnis veritas est, & omnis manife∣statio veritatis, ficut Origenes. Homil. 9. in Ex∣od. En! . Uti Basilius Contra Eunomi∣um. L. 1. Ad eun∣dem modum & Chrysostomus scripturam dicit Homil. 13. in 2. ad Corinth. Imò, vel Bellarmino ipso fatente, En! sacra scriptura regula certis∣sima, tutissimáque est De Verbo Dei. I. 1. c. 2. Ad scripturas itaque audi∣tores ubique provoco, qua∣rum adoranda est plenitudo.
Adorò scripturae plentudinē Terr. ad∣ve s. Her∣mog. Ad legem & contestatio∣nem, cum Isaiâ clamito, Isa. 8.20. Illud ipsum, quod antehàc Constantinus, in Synodo Ni∣caenâ, omnibus à me dissen∣tientibus suadeo: untinam, & addi liceat persuadeo! viz. ut hostilem omnem expel∣lentes contentionem, ex ver∣bis divinitus inspiratis, solu∣tionem quaestionū capiamus. . Theodor. Histor. Ecles. l. 1. ca. 7. Audiamus, quid dicit Dominus; non quid dicit Donatus,
glorificaum est nomen meū in gen∣tibus, dicit Dominus: Audi: dicit Dominus, non di∣ct Donat us, aut Rogatus, aut Vincentius, aut Am∣brosius, aut Augustinus. Ang. Epist. 48. circa med ū. &c. vel hic, vel ille, licèt apprimè eruditus, amicus aut pius. Nec audiamus, ut inquit idem Augustinus; Contr. Petilianū de unit. Ecl. ca. 3. Haec dico, haec dicis; sed audiamus, haec dicit Dominus. Liceat ejuf∣dem verbis, & fratres alloqui me, aliter hoc in argumento, quod in manibus est, sentien∣tes Sunt certè libri Dominici, quorum authoritati utrique consentimus, utrique credi∣mus, utrique servimus, ibi quaeramus ecclesiam, ibi dis∣cutiamus causam nostram. Nolo equidem, (ut subjungit ille) humanis documentis, sed divinisoraculis, ecclesiam, addo & ministerium, demon∣stri. Idem, ibi∣dem.
Illud tamen non diffiteor, sed planè, ut res est, haud invitus éxpono; hoc aliquan∣tò majorem mihi injecisse scrupulum, utrùm libertas ista prophetandi, quam adop∣târunt fratres, S. scripturae accommodata fuerit? an po∣tius abaliena? sc. quod, non modò in Socinianorum
Docet Paulus rectè id fieriposse, unum∣quémque munus docendi aggredi, modò ad id aptus sit, quod aggredi cogitat, vel cupit Theoph. Nicholaid. in refut. tract. de miss. ministrorum. In eandem sententiam pedbus eunt. Catechesis Racco∣viensis. c. 2. Raddecius in not, in librum Smigelecti. Socinus in Tractatude Ecclesiâ. Ejus defensionem ha∣betis, per Theoph. Nicholaidem. castris, usitatissime eam pro∣pugnatam habemus, qui scrip∣turis parum tribuunt, verum etiam, in Enthusiastarum col∣luvie (& ejusdem farraginis homuncionum) Est igi∣ur dog∣ma sedi∣tiosum & Diaboli∣cū, dogma Anabaptisticū; de homimbus sine discrimine permittendis, functionem ecclesiastic am suscipere, & ecclesiam docere. Hieron. Zanchi. in quartum prae∣ceptum. qui scrip∣turas apertè rejiciunt At sen∣tentiae huic uni suffragantur omnes, in hoc unum lubentis∣fimè coeuntes. Testem Deum invoco in animam meam;
2 Cor. 1.23. me nullis vel iracundiae, vel invidiae igni∣culis exardescere, ob an∣nunciatum Christum, ceu anhelantessacrorum desiderio Christianos. Hoc mihi intimè in votis est, Dominúmque messis animitùs & obnixè rogo, ut operarios in messem suam , mittat, Secundū vulgatam interpreta∣tioem emittat, secūdùm Bez & Ar. Montan. extrudat, secundum E asmi & Syriac. ver∣sionem per Jun. Tre∣mel. ceu eijciat, sic Hilar. pud Leig. Crica Sa∣cr. & sic ad verbum sonat, inquit Beza. Nam messis quidem multa, operarii autem auci. Mat. 9.37, 38. vid. Polycarp. Lyserum ad L. Illud unioè memorae infixum ve∣lim, quòd Domini sit extru∣dere operarios ideoque dolo∣si potius quàm docti est, e∣ipsum intrudere, ceu injicere. Huc ut animum advertatis, in eoque cogitationes altiùs defigere ut placeat, suadet haec, quam audivistis, con∣cio.
Rerum summas tantùm persequebar: utpote, qui compendia longis anfracti∣bus anteponenda semper sen∣si. Praesertim verò, quia sic postulabant angustiae tempo∣ris, nec aliud, utplurimum auditorum genii: ut multa in pauca conferam, & omnia (quoad possem) quae argu∣mentum hoc spectant, ut uno quasi fasce complectar: Nonnulla insuper adscripsi: at non sine desiderio vo∣strûm alicujus, multis mihi nominibus pariter & vobis observandi, & multimodae literaturae celebritate de∣corati. Haec ad initium cujusvis lineae sic (') insig∣nita dedi.
Me ex aliorum fontibus hortulos hosce nostros ir∣rigâsse, haud inficias eo: Est e∣nim ut arbitror benig∣num, & plenum ingenui pudoris, fateri per quos profeceris. Plini. se∣cund, ad Vespasian praefat. nat. histor. Nec solùm ab alienigenis Joh Gerhard. Loc. Com. Tom. Sext. de Mi∣nist Eccles. ca. 3. sect. 1. n. 54. &c. r. 64. &c. Fred. Baldvin. Cas. consc. l. 4. ca. 4. casu 1. Josh. Stegman. Photinianism. Disp. 53. qu. 1 & 2. Hier. Zanchius in quart. paecept. Chemnit. Loc. Com. de ecclesiâ. Bucanut Loc. Com. 42. qu. 29. ad qu. 45. Profess. Leyd. cens confes. ca. 2. sect. 2.3. Synopsis pur. Theolog. Disput. 46. c. 5. Apollonii Consideraio quart. controvers. &c. ca. 5. qu. 3. sed à nostratibus Lazar. Seaman . Gillespy Miscell. quest. Rutherford peac. plea. ch. 16. qu. 16. & due right of Presbyt. ch. 5. sect. 1, 2. Collins vindiciae min. Evangel. & vindiciae revindicatae. Hall. Pulpit guarded. Ferreby Lawf. preach Tho. Bali. London Minist. Ju divinum Ministerii E∣vangelii. Liber vix. satis laudatus, & qui de ecclesiâ Anglican â optimè meritus est. hoc a gu∣mentum teri, eruditioni ve∣strae satis compertum est.
Vestrûm erit, reverendi fratres, aequâ lance trutinare, quid sit veri, & quid à vero alieni: qui (musarum dicam? an) scripturarum sacris ver∣satissimi estis, & politiori li∣teraturâ instructissimi. Quic∣quid boni occurrit, aut veri, illud Dei esse, palam profite∣or: sin aliquid mali, vel falsi, (quod me prorsus latet) hoc planè nostrî est. Omnia bona mea, nec sunt purè bona, nec purèmea; omnia mala mea, & sunt purè mala, & purè mea. Hugo. Hîc, primùm operam de∣di, ut quantum omnino potui, cum scripturis loquar,
Sic instruit Zep∣perus, de arte ha∣bendi & audiendi conciones Sacr. l. 3. c. 3. & nec fallar in eis, nec fallam ex eis Sic adprecatur Augustinus. Sint castae deliciae meae scripturae tuae: nec fallar in eis, nec fallam ex eis, Con∣fes. Lib. 11. c. 2. Penes vos sit judicium, his de rebus: quibuscum, tan∣quàm grati in vos animi, & permagni affectus (licèt per∣exiguum) testimo∣nium, libellus hic deponitur.
Gratâ memoriâ amores, mores, res vestras omnes prosequor. Grata mihi sem∣per in mentem occurrit con∣cordia vestra, grata comitas, grati conventus, grataconsue∣tudo & colloquia. Eruditam, quam apud vos frequentissi∣mus observavi pietatem, ex∣ardescentes preces, efferves∣centem zelum, exoptatam submissionem, exantlatos la∣bores, & emeritas  laudes nulla unquam apud me deleat (nec delebit) oblivio. At temperabit ser∣mo, quamvis nunquam tacebunt affectus. Ipse me citiùs quàm vos obliviscar: etsi unquam sermo tacebit, lo∣quetur affectus. Ambros. de Gratiano & Valen∣tiniano.
Pernavigate, charissimi fratres, & verbi & vitae velis expansis, secundiori spiritus afflatu fruituri, potiaminíque votis, amico sidere, amicis sanctis, ad Dei gloriam, Dia∣bolorum gravamen, ecclesiae pacem, & ecclesiasticorum prospera, frementibus licèt & frendentibus Satanâ, ejus∣que sectatoribus. Non est, quòd nostrûm quivis, Jonae instar, Jon. 1.5, 6. in tot tantís{que} ecclesiarum procel∣lis, ignorationis, ignaviae, intemperantiae, aut ingenii vafri somno sit consopitus. Officio honestati sumus. Hoc unicum, 2 Tim. 4.1. ad 6. Episcopus est nomen quod plus oneris, quàm honoris signi∣ficat. Polyd. Vir∣gil. quas scintillas admoveret? quos stimulos adji∣ceret? ut Christi propugnatores, & carnis expugnatores nosmet comprobe∣mus. Optimè cedet laboranti.
Quot labores ve∣ritati nunc exhibes, tot etiamremunera∣tions pignora, intra spei tuae cubiculum clausum tenes. Gre∣gor. Moral. Nec ob∣est quo minùs in lautiora provehantur dona, ipsissimo usu, & docendo promoveamur doctrinâ. Quò in plures diffunditur, eò redundantior manat, & in suum fontem recurrit. In se enim refluit ubertas prudentiae, & quò pluribus fluxerit, eò exercitius fit omne, quod remanet. Ambros. Offic. Quod ad me spectat, cum praefecto Pharaoni à poculis, peccata mea recordaturus sum hodie; Gen. 41.9. ingenuéque cum Ambrosiorecog∣nosco:
Offic. c. 1. Lice∣at & cum eodem insuper adscribere —& quantumlibet quis{que} profecerit, nemo est: qui doceri non egeat, dum vi∣vat. Ibid. quòd pri∣ùs docere inciperem; quàm discere: Dis∣cendum igitur mihi simul & docendum est. Nec profiteri piget, Augustini verbis Ego ex eorum numero me esse profiteor; qui scri∣bunt profictendo, & scribendo proficiunt Epist. 7. pa∣rùmmutatis, exeorumnumero meesse, qui docētproficiendo, & docendo proficiunt Mutuò ista fiunt ut homines dum do∣ceant, discant. Se∣neca Epist. 7. & in hoc gaudeo (uti Seneca) ali∣quid discere, ut doce∣am: nec me ulla res delectabit, licet ex∣imia sit & salutaris, quam mihi uni sci∣turus sum. Idem, Epist. 6. Veneror equidem inventa sapientiae:
Senec. Epist. 65. & facilè eorum sententiae accedo, qui judicâ∣runt, neminē unquā habuisse doctrinam inmicum, nisi ig∣norantem. Ideoque de indu∣striâ, hâc in re, aliquantisper versata suit haecconcio, nequis auditorum à veritatis trami∣te, hâc ex parte, deflectat. Illud verò planè meminisse, & penitâ mente reconditum vel∣lem; aliud esse erudiri de ve∣ritatibus Jesu Christi, aliud edoceri de eo, ficut veritas est in Jesu Ehpes. 4.20, 21. Nunquid Domine Deus veritatis, quisquis novit ista, ipse placet tibi? In∣faelix enim homo, qui scit omnia illa, te autem nescit: Beatus autem qui scit, etiam si illa nesciat. Quiverò & te & illa novit, non propter illa beatior sed propter teso∣lùm beatus est. &c. Aug. Cōs. L. 5. c. 4. Potest quis peritus esse, imò praedicator, 1 Cor. 9.27 tamen periturus Quid prodest peruum esse, & periturum! Aug. Confes. L. 11. C. 2.. Nec sic immorandum esse scientiis judico, ut post habitae sin scripturae Quid prodest in muda∣nis profi∣cere doctrinis & marces∣cere in di∣vinis? Caduca sequi fig∣menta, & coelestia fastidire mysteria? Isidor. de li∣bris Gentil.; nec ipsissimis scripturis, post-habito spiri∣tu
—O Domine perfice me, & revela mihi eas. Aug. Confs. L. 11. ca. 2 — Agnos∣camus gratiam, quae facit prodesse doctrinam, quae gratia si desit, videmus etiam obsse doctrinam. Idem Epist. 107.. Animalis enim homo non percipit, quae sunt spiri∣tus Dei, in scripturis nisi, po∣tenti ejusdem spiritus adju∣mento 1 Cor. 2.14. Psal. 119.18., cujus inspiratione, exaratae sunt scripturae 2 Tim. 3 16..
Sed manum de tabulâ. Ut veritati & vobis prosperè suc∣cedant omnia, obnixè peto. Adunitis vestris consiliis, conatibus, & caeptis omnibus, fausta laetáque omnia pecor. Ut vivat Christus; valeat causa ejus, vigeat concordia, nec diutius vacillent Christi∣ani: ut revalescat, quae est secundùm pacem, disciplina, & radices altiores agat, quae est secundùm pietatem, do∣ctrina; iterum atque iterum, instat oratio Devinctissimi vobis fratris ac in Domino conservi JOH. NORMAN.
To the plain, especially the pious READERS.
NExt to the glory of God my Saviour, the good of your souls, was it that subdued me; (who had els been still deaf to all intreaties of friends and fellow-labourers) to let you see this from the Press, which others (& probably, som of you) heard from the Pulpit. The same God, who perfects strength in weakness, that so far prospered it when it was deli∣vered to the ear, make it now likewise powerfull upon the heart, when it is delivered to the eye. If either sin shal be restrain∣ed by it, or the saints refreshed, or the sauciness of seducers re∣buked, or the service of our Saviour regularly advanced, the speaker hath his end, the sermon its errand. Some things are now set before you, more than were then spoken: Some things which I did not then de∣sign, especially for further cleer∣ing up of objections; others, which I could not then deliver, for the fuller carrying on of the application. Both are common∣ly thus marked (') at the be∣ginning of each line. The rest you have welnigh in the same words which you then heard, as near as my notes and memory could
suggest it, onely some things now and then may be herein de∣livered less contractly: especial∣ly in the uses. Before you peruse, pray. Man may open the Scrip∣tures to your understandings, but God alone can open your under∣standings to the Scriptures
Luk. 24.45. Ps. 119.18.. As you peruse, pause a while, and consider; conferring the seve∣rall texts and truths, and com∣paring spirituall things with spiritual. If you wil notmeditate upon, & search God's Word, I shall never marvail, if you mistake or slight mens writings. Having perused, put things to an issue; as in the presence of God, judging your selves that you be not judged. Do you con∣clude upon the whole, that such as undertake to be teachers ordi∣narily in the Church without ordination, are but toyling them∣selves in their own corruption? Oh! let conscience be put off by you, while it is ready to put to you such questions as these. Is it a sin for this man to preach, and can it bee safe for thee to hear him? Canthy attendance be wel, & his act so ill? Shal his guilt increase by it, and wil thine de∣crease? Doth heviolate an Ordi∣nance of God, and invade an of∣fice so sacred in the Gospel? And durst thou beside thy conni∣vence at this attempt, bring it all the countenanee, whereto thy cō∣pany will amount? Could the prde o his heart make him a preacher, unless thy presence with others, (probably the more for thee) did maintain him hear∣ers? O my soul! Shall I that hope fr heaven, harden him in that sin, for which he must with∣out repentance, howl in hell for ever? Is this to reprove? or doth it not approve this work of darkness, to give it the respect of my observance in the open light? Shall I not knowingly hereby communicate in his sin? and how can I have comfort thence for my own soul? Hath God prohibited him to preach? and how can I have a precept to hear? or hope to profit by hearing him? Where have I promise that I shall, or how ca I pray in faith, that I may reap any soul-advantage by him? e∣specially, while I run my self upon such a tentation, instead of reclaiming him from his trās∣gression? Nay, hear the Word of the Lord: I sent them not, nor commanded them: therefore they shal not profit this people at all, saith the Lord, Jer. 23.32. Hearken not to the words of such Prophets; for I have not sent them, saith the Lord, Jer. 27.14.15. & 23.16. with
21. Reader had'st thou seen the pub∣lick tears, that were bled forth at the eyes; or heard the passionate throws, that were breathed orth from the hears by one of those vnts of Christ that were now solemnly set apart [That ever he should preach so many sermons without a solemn sending forth! and to which he could see no promise of successe! &c.] It could not but have made some impression upon thy heart, as it did upon mine and many o∣thers. I shall detain thee no lon∣ger, but to deliver my own soul, in the words of Zealous, and Studious Baxter First sheet for the Mini∣stry, p. 14.. Christian Reader, as ever thou wouldst be sanctified, confirm∣ed, and saved, hold fast to Christ, Scripture, Ministry, and Spirit; and that in the Church & Communion of Saints; and abhor the thoughts of separating each from other. And to declare my sense of the same truth, in the same terms, with holy and humble Dr. Sibbs
Epistle to the Reader be∣fore P. Bayns on he Ephe∣fianst,, now in heaven. I speak not as if way were to be given to Vo∣stian, lawless, licentious, liberty prophesying; that every one, as soon  he is big of some new conceit, shon bring forth his abortive monster: F thus the pillars of Christian fai would soon be shaken, & the Church God, which is an house of order, wou become a Babel, an house of confusio The doleful issues of which pretende liberty we see in Polonia, Transylva∣nia, and in Countries neerer hand Reader, the doleful issues which we se in England, let us sigh over, & sprea before the Lord, in whom Irest. Thy soul-friend, JOHN NORMAN
CHRIST'S Commission-Officer: OR, AN Ordination-Sermon. 2 Timothie 2.2. And the things that thou hast heard of me, among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithfull men, who shall be able to teach others also. THese two Epistles of Timo∣thy, and the next to
Titus; what are they, but Paul's Directory for the regu∣lar continuance, and re∣verend carriage of the Gospel-Ministry? Two things he infi∣sleh upon principally: The investitue of some with the Office of Ministers, the imployment of such in this Office. How and on whom Timothy and Titus shall confer it, and how themselves and those should carry themselves in it: what was their part for delegating men to the Ministry, and what must be their own and others part and demeanour in the Ministry. These things are very accu∣rately and abundantly interspersed. Lo, it is not enough (without further preface) that Timothy in these, and Titus in the next Epistle look how they do comport themselvs, but they must com∣mit this sacred trust to others; the ne∣cessity of the Ministry is so eminent: and this with the best-sighted caution, and most studious circumspection, the nature of the Ministry is likewise so excellent. This, this beloved & much reverenced; which is the end of your present conven∣tion, is Paul's charge, and must be Timo∣thie's care in this verse. The things that thou hast heard of me among many witnesses, the same commit thou, &c.
Four things wust be here briefly enqui∣red into. 1. The matters or things which are to bee committed. 2. The manner how? 3. The man by whom. 4. The men to whom these things are to bee committed. First, what are the things which Timothy must commit? Paul tells him, The things that thou hast heard of me, the same com∣mit thou. But whether those which hee had heard from Paul publickly and o∣penly in his preaching, or more particu∣larly those at his own ordination, when hee was put into the Ministry by Paul, 2 Tim. 1.6. together with the Presbytery, 1 Tim. 4.14. be the chief or only things in our Apostles eye, it is not expressed: The ensuing words bespeak the last (at least partly, if not) principally intended.
Ti∣mothy it is plain, is not only charged in these Epistles with teaching others, but with or∣daining teachers: And no doubt, but with committing unto others the Office to teach, he is to commit such Gospel-truths by teaching, as shall be of best, and most inser∣viency, to their holy and happy conduct, throughout the difficulties, and discharge of their office of Teachers. A point of easie observation, and eminent use, which could not probably be omitted at the Apostles Or∣dination of Timothy, that hath obtained
well-nigh an universall concurrence, at eve∣ry Ordination since. Secondly, but how must Timothy com∣mit these things? . It would be little other than a wast of precious time, and of your patience, to produce the se∣verall Scriptures in which, or purposes to which, this word is used. There are but two senses (I humbly conceive) that can with any probability bee tendered here: viz. Either that Timothy commit these things to others in way of doctrine only, by teaching and opening these things to them; or in way of delegation also; and speciall trust, as the word is often used; 1 Tim. 1 18. cum 2 Tim. 1.14. Lu. 12 48. . The ophyla∣ctus hoc discrimen constituit in verbis . Illud accipit de miraculorū doni, boc verò de Mi∣nillerio. vi deplura a∣pud Bezam ad loc. & Leigh. Crit. sac. ad ver∣bum. trusting these things with them as Officers, who are to teach others, and must therefore be a deposito∣ry and treasure-house of divine truths for others. This latter sense, which emi∣nently taketh in the committing of the Of∣fice to teach, is that which to me seems, most especially in our Apostles design and purpose, for these two reasons. Be∣cause, 1. This most openly corresponds, not only to the subject in hand, but to the scope of the whole: both Epistles being to direct Timothy, especially about
publick Ordinances and Officers: how he shall Ordain Officers, and how these and himself shall order the affairs of their Office. 2. This hath the most ob∣vious, if not the only countenance from the Characters given us, of the men to whom Timothy is to commit these things which are immediately subjoined. For if Timothy were to commit these things to them only, in way of doctrinal teach∣ing; what need or use was there, of so severe a restriction, or of such speciall qualifications, as we read added? faith∣full men, able to teach others also: which Gillespy in his Miscellany Questions, Col∣lins in his Vindiciae, and the London Mi∣nisters in their Jus Divinum Ministerii Evangelici, do very well observe. No doubt, but as to the doctrinall teaching of these things, Timothy was no less a debtor, than was Paul to the Barbarian, as well as Greek; to the unlearned, as well as learned; both to the wise, and to the unwise, Rom. 1.14. So that Timo∣thy is to cōmit
these things, more than in way, of doctrine only: He is to com∣mit them in way of delegation also, un∣to such faithfull men, as shall be able to teach others: which cannot rationally be understood, of other than publick and authoritative teaching; if either 1. the quality of the men, or 2. the contents and aim of these Epistles, which concern publick tranfactions in the Church, especially publick teachers: or if 3. the command it self be duly weighed: fo such as are to teach but privately, an from grounds of charity only, need n such commitment of these things t them; nor needs it that there be such choyce of men: this being every ma and womans duty, Heb 5.12. Nor ca any thing be justly impleaded, from the Apo∣stles use of the future tense, [who shall b able to teach others also] for though tha they shal be able to teachothers, be necessari antecedent to the commitment of the Office sensu physico, i. e. that they shal have abi lities to teach: yet it followeth, the commit∣ment of the Office, sensu morali, i. e. tha they shall use such abilities ordinarily, or b able to teach others, acceptably, and lawful∣ly: remembring still that old, honest, an veceived principle. Illud tantum possumu quod jure possumus. We are able to do n more, than we are able in Law, or may
lawfully. And thus our text aptly corre∣sponds to that of the same Apostle, Rom. 10. vers. 15. How shall they preach except they be sent? i. e. how shall they preach warrantably? Abilities they must have before sending, but sending vests them with authority. So that the words speak as much in effect as this; Doth Timothy know such as are faithfull and fit, or a∣ble to teach others; he must commit these things to them, as Trustees for others. Doth he find any so qualified for the Of∣fice to teach, hee must leave them Com∣missioned to this Office: Are they quali∣fied with fidelity and ability, Timothy must commit to them a furniture of au∣thoriy. Thirdly, but how must Timothy com∣mit these things, this Office to them? What! he only? he, and none but hee? No, we never find the Ministry commit∣ted to any, by a single person; but still it is done by severall in society. We al∣ways read of more than one concurring to it, and never remember less than two: And those are no less than were Paul & Barna∣bas, Act. 14.23. The Twelve are associates in it, Acts 6.2, 3, 6. and it is the joint act
of how many teachers and Prophets? Act. 13.1, 2, 3. The seat and subject of this power, is not a Presbyter; but the Presbytery, 1 Tim. 4.14. Can we ratio∣nally think, that Paul doth require Ti∣mothy to commit the Ministry to others, so as recedes from, and hath no consi∣stency with the practice of Paul in the same case, upon Timothy himself? Well, and who of us doth not remember, that Timothy received his Commission, no ton∣ly by the laying on of Paul's hands, but of the Presbytery likewise? 2 Tim. 1, 6. and 1 Tim. 4.14. True 'tis, that Titus is to Ordain Elders, , City by City, where the Churches were planted, and their condition called for it; but with this proviso, as Paul had appointed him. Tit. 1.5. And who can think, that Paul's appointments, and Paul's actions should so little accord, or so much inter∣fere? that Paul should order either Titus there, or Timothy here, to do that singly by himself, which Paul an Apostle never did (if I may not say, never durst) but in society? It is granted, that this com∣mand did concern
Timothy eminently, and signally above others; but not ex∣clusively, so as to shut out all others. It must be done by others likewise, though it be directed to, and is to be directed by him especially, as one that had an emi∣nent and speciall trust, about the orde∣ring of this and all other Church affairs being by office an Evangelist. 2 Tim. 4.5. Fourthly. Yet once more; to whom must Timothy commit this trust, these things in way of office? What? to all the Congregation? No: There must be some to be taught, as well as others sent forth to teach. What then? to any of whatever qualification? Nor this. They must be at least men of a good life, faith∣full men; yea, and men of good learning too, that shall be able to teach others also. The text thus opened, the truth is ob∣vious, which I shall at this time take up, or observe from it. Observ. Those that are authorita∣tively from Christ, in his Church, to teach others, must have that Office com∣mitted to them, as well as bee qualified for that Office. How orient (me thinks) is this obser∣vation in all its truths from the text! Lo, 1. Some there must be in the Church,
who are authoritatively from Christ to teach others. But then 2. That there may be such in the Church who are from Christ to teach authoritatively, they must have the Office committed to them by some Timothy. Yet 3. Timothy may not give Commission to this Office, un∣lesse he find qualifications for this Office. Timothy may not dare to confer authori∣ty on any, without due cognizance first had, both of their fidelity and ability. Well, 4. Hath God qualified any with fidelity and ability; yet though they are able to teach others, they may not acceptably teach others in the sense mentioned, (unlesse for proof of those abilities) untill Timothy hath from God committed to them authority likewise. But to lead you further abroad. Give me leave to open and offer to you, these five things, and thereto lend me I beseech you, your most strict and serious atten∣tion. 1. There must bee some in the Church who are by Office from Christ authoritatively to teach others. 2. They must be qualified for this Office. 3. They must have this Office cōmitted to them.
4. How it must be cōmitted. And 5. Why it must be committed to them. First, there are to be some in the Church, who are by Office authoritative∣ly from Christ to teach others. I say by Office; but this not civil, but spiritual. Officers wee are, not in the Common∣wealth, but in the Church, to which Christ hath promised. I will also make thy Officers peace, Isa. 60.17. Thus bre∣thren and beloved, we may with Paul magnifie our Office. Rom. 11.13. An Office the Mi∣nistry is, 1 Tim. 3.1. Yea, such is the Deaconship, ver. 10.13. and therefore this much more, which as to your want, and its worth doth so much transcend that, as the Apostles intimate Act. 6.2. What lesse than this? [that it is an Of∣fice] doth Paul assert of his own Mini∣stry? Rom. 11.13. or assure the Saints of ours? when he tells them, Rom. 12.4. That as we have many members in one body naturall, and all members have not the same Office; so 'tis in the body mysti∣call too, ver. 5.6. wherein Deacons, Pa∣stors, Teachers, and Rulers be in distinct Office, as the 7. and 8. verses import. So that Preachers are by Office distinct from and dignified above the people. Are
all Teachers saith the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12.29. It is no more possible that all be Mi∣nisters or Teachers in the body spiritual, than that all be Magistrates in the body civill; or that all be Officers in the body military; or that all the members be eye or tongue, in the body naturall: If all may be Teachers, where are the others to be taught? of whom this Text tells us. Need I mention the practice under the Law, the Prophecies then touching the Gospel, or the precedents left us in the times of the Gospel? He that runs may read, a constant discretion between the Priests and people then, between Pastor and people now, between the members of the Church, and the Ministers of the Church in both. To the Law and to the Testimony. And here how eminent a difference hath the Holy Ghost made! Ministers of the Church are to be overseers, members of the Church to be overseen, Acts 20.28. These are set under, those said to be over them in the Lord, 1 Thes. 5.12. These are to submit, those to preside and rule, Heb. 13.7, 17. Briefly, these to bee taught, the other to teach, Galat. 6. ver. 6.
Yea, teach we must not only with assi∣duity, but with authority. With authority I say, not magisterial indeed, as if we were Lords over the Church; 1 Pet. 5.3. That is interdicted: Mar. 10.42. but Mini∣stertall, as over the Church in the Lord; 1 Thes. 5.12. this is incouraged. Heb. 13.17. Far! far be it, that we should preach up such an authority, as if we had dominion over your faith! 2 Cor. 1.24. No, all the authority which we plead for, is the dispensation (not domination) committed to us, for the good of the faith∣full. 1 Cor. 9.17. The authority which the Lord hath given us, is for your edifi∣cation, and not for your destruction, 2 Cor. 10.8. And with this restriction, and un∣der this respect, let me tell you; that we are to teach, and exhort, and rebuke, not only with authority, but with all authority, Tit. 2.15. and there is not that holy Minister, but may speak wih holy Mi∣cah, according to his measure: Truly I am full of power by the spirit of the Lord, & of judgment, and of might to declare un∣to Jacob his transgression, & unto Israel his sin Mic. 3.8. True it is, that all Church∣members ought to be teachers of others.
Heb. 5.12. But this private and chari∣tative: Christ hath therefore over and above, appointed in his Church such tea∣ing likewise, as may be publick and autho∣ritative. i.e. that there be such teachers, who are by power and authority derived from him to them, publickly to open and apply the Scriptures, for the conversion and edificati∣on of souls; as in his stead, and not only in private, 'Where yet, such in teaching are properly enough said to preach, though it be in a private house. Act. 5.42. or but to one particular person; Act. 8.35. it being not simply an act of 'charity in them, but an act of authori∣ty, which it cannot be said to be in o∣thers. Charitative teaching which should be every mans work, too soon be∣cometh no mans work. And therefore, Christ hath ordained, that there be pe∣culiar officers for authoritative teaching, who are to give themselvs wholly to it, 1 Tim. 4.15. and must not only be able to teach, as the Text speaks; but must be apt to teach, 2 Tim. 2.24. and abide in teaching. 1 Tim. 4.16. And unto these teachers, all people are bound to attend, as those that teach not only by a∣bility,
but by authority derived from Jesus Christ. Luke 12.16. Indeed, how shall they hear without a preacher sent? Rō. 10.14, 15 Think you, that such teachers are now ceased; and that this office was of no longer continuance, than the first age or century of the Church? Oh! Where are your considerations of the everlasting Kingdome of Christ? Is. 9.6.7. Lu. 1.33. of the Chur∣ches perpetual existencies? Mat. 16.18. Heb. 12.27, 28. and of her continued pressing exigencies? Rom. 10.14. Eph. 4.12.13, 14. or of our dearest Christs ends by, and enga∣gements to the Ministry?
Mat. 28.19, 20. Lu. 24.46, 47. Did a Kingdom ever stand without Officers? Did the Church ever subsist without a Ministry and Ordinances? Or hath Christ said that she ever should, on this side glo∣ry? Nay hath he not rather told us, that the word of the Lord endureth for ever? and that this is the word, which by the Gospell is preached to you? 1 Pet. 1.24.25. Beloved, did not Christ assure his Christian Churches by prophecy un∣der the Old Testament, of giving them teachers by office, without limiting it to this, or that Century or age? Jer. 3.15 Nay rather, letting us understand, that he will have such continued, even after the Jews are called, if you compare that vers with the 14, 16, 17. ver. Or Jer. 23.3.4. &c. or Isa. 66.20, 21. Besides, When Christ had actually sent forth first the Twelve, Mat. 10.1. and after that the Seventy, Luk. 10.1. and again enlarged their Commission, Mat. 28.19. doth not he ascertain his presence with them, e're he parted from the earth, alway, to the end of the world, ver. 20. which could not intend themselves onely, but must in∣clude their successors, Quamvis quoad mo∣dum & gradum ex∣traordinarii Ministri nullos habent succes∣sores, quoad ipsam ta∣men essentiam admi∣nistrationis, eodem of∣ficio funguntur Mini∣stri Ordinarii versus Ecclesiam, quo extra∣ordinarii olim funge∣bantur Ames. Medu. Theol. lib. 1. ca. 35. n. 4. who-e∣ver are, according to his ordi∣nance, bid go teach and bap∣tize: For the Disciples, where are they and the Apostles? do they live for ever? Again, be∣ing ascended up on high, did not our Lord Christ give gifts unto men? and thus, not only some Apostles, and some Pro∣phets, and some Evangelists; but som Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edi∣fying of the Body of Christ: ends of con∣tinued and constant observation, need, and use. But till when, shall these Pastors
and teachers endure? and how long shal the Church enjoy them? Till wee are all come in, or into quod scitè expo∣suit Syrus interpres, quasi Scrip∣tum sit, Bz An∣not. maj. ad. Loc. the unity of the faith, and of the knowledg of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the mea∣sure of the stature of the fulness of Christ, Eph. 4 8, 11, 12, 13. Shall I add to all this? how Christ hath particularly di∣rected, for the investiture of fit and faith∣full men with this Office, in his severall Churches, in these two Epistles to Timo∣thy, and in the next to Titus; and how hee will have these Commandments, inviolably and impartially kept until his appearing, 1 Tim. 5.21, 22. chap 6.14. Readers, if you can believe, that there is no more need of labourers for husbandry, [1 Cor. 3.9.] or of seedsmen, or reapers for harvest, [2 Cor. 9.11. Luk. 10.2.] or of builders for houses, [1 Cor. 3.9, 10.]
"or of some to plant and water for gar∣dens and orchards; [1 Cor. 3.6.] then, and not till then, may you be∣lieve that the Church shall have no more need of Ministers by office: for thus the Scriptures mentioned, express our necessities of them to us. Sure I am, if Church-members may be still called the Sons and Daughters of God, 2 Cor. 6.16. Such Ministers may be likewise called the Spirituall Fathers, that be∣get them, 1 Cor. 4.15. the spirituall nurses that feed and nourish them, 1 Thes. 2.7. 1 Cor. 3.2. and are the stewards, that when grown up, are to give them their portion of meat in due season, Luk. 12.42. In a word, if men had need still to be believers, they have still need of Ministers, by whom ye be∣lieved, 1 Cor. 3 6. and if ye are still Pil∣grims and strangers, 1 Pet 2.11. how ye can want such Officers as are called guides, Heb. 13.7. and the light of the Word, Mat 5.14. I must profess, I see not; farewell the Office-Ministers of Christ in England, and farewell the chariots and horsmen of England, 2 Kings 2.12. Secondly, those that are by Office au∣thoritatively from Christ to teach o∣thers, must be qualified for this Office, before they have it committed to them. This is a true saying indeed, if a man de∣sire the Office of a Bishop; (which term in Scripture phrase, bespeaketh no more then a Presbyter or Minister
Tit. 1.5. with 7. Phil. 1.1. Act. 20.17. with 28.  a word e∣very where else rēder∣ed Bishop by our translators. many of our English Bishops i. e. Prelates them∣selves being judges A.B. Whitgift against Cartwright, p. 383. An∣selm in 1 Tim. 3. B. Bridges of the Princes Supremacy p. 255. B. Bilson against Semi∣naries lib. 1. p. 318. see B. Jewel against Har∣ding Def of the Apo∣log. par. 2. ch. 3. divis. & chap 9. divis. 1. & B. Morton Cathol A∣pol. par. 1. ch. 33. he de∣sireth a good work, 1 Tim. 3. ver. 1. But must not this bee acknowledged a true saying likewise, that who and what the man is that desireth it; [how able? how apt &c?] should be first considered, be∣fore he be Commissioned, or set apart unto it? Else what mean those numerous chara∣cters, which Timothy hath given him in charge, that are continued to the eight verse, and whereof Titus is re-minded likewise, by the same Apostle, when he appoints him to ordain Elders in every City, at least of Creet, Tit. 1.5. ad 13. Or what means else that notable and no less dreadfull charge? 1 Tim. 5.
ver. 21.22. I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Elect Angels, that thou observe these things, without preferring one before another, doing nothing by partiality. Lay hands suddenly on no man, neither be partaker of other mens sins, keep thy self pure. Ah my brethren! Church-work is chary work. Lay we on hands suddenly, and we lay them on sinfully. And to be sure, we shall partake of other mens sins, if we shall so little prize their, our own, & other mens souls, which any thing below the blood of him that was God, Act. 20.28 1 Pet. 1.18.19. is too smal to pur∣chase? Come sirs, who is the faithful and wise steward? him shall the Lord make ruler over his houshold, Luk. 12.42. And shall we, who are the Lords by Office, and must account to the Lord for our Office; shall we make them rulers, who will manifestly ruine more than rule the houshold of Faith? Can wee keep our selves
pure, and yet be careless of confer∣ring such a power, such an honour, as the Ministry is? it hath a power to bind to, & loos from hell; A power to open and shut heaven, Mat. 16.19. and an honour abstractly so called, Heb. 5.4. that doth not onely speak us to be Embassadours for Christ, 2 Cor. 5.20. but Angels rather than men, Rev. 1. C. 2. O beloved! who is sufficient for these things? Surely none are in regard of adequation, and alas! how few in regard of acceptation? But what though we can∣not find men equall to the Office, shal we forget, that men should bee able for the Office? See more use 2 sect 1 Surely, the bold precipitancies of men uncalled upon this Office, and the bloo∣dy preceleratings of men unqualified into this Office, are abominations never enough to be bewailed before the Lord. Thirdly, Those that are authorita∣tively from Christ to teach others in his Church, must not only be quallified for this Office, but must have the Office com∣mitted to them. Hear the Apostle; How shall they preach except they be sent? Rom. 10.15. How shall they saith he? Nay they do; and this how often! how open! and God sent them not, say the godly: Yea I have not sent these Prophets, yet they ran; I have not spoken to them, yet they prophesi∣ed, saith God himself. Jer. 23.21. True, they do it wickedly; but how shall they do it warrantably? How shal they preach except they be sent? i.e. with the appro∣bation of God's Law; they may easily ad∣venture upon it from their own lust, How shall they preach either with success and countenance from him? or without sin∣full and sawcy presumption in them? How dareth he perform the Heralds Of∣fice, to proclaim war and peace in the conscience, who was never put into the
Office, nor can produce an Herald's pa∣tent? This is the Metaphor,  How shall they preach as God's Herald's? Lo Christians! beside meetness for the Office, an Herald of God, a Minister, must have mission: suitableness to the Office is not enough without sending. Nay, are you not told, in the same strains of reason and Rhetorick; that there is as great a necessity of sending, that we bee preach∣ers, as was and is of preachers, that you be hearers? or of hearing, that you bee believers? or of believing, if you expect an answer to, and the acceptation of your prayers? So high our Apostle car∣rieth it, if you look back upon the 13, and 14. verses. Such an holy concatena∣tion maketh he of all these. 'So that you cannot bear us in hand, with the blas∣phemous Socinian, that there remains no more a necessity of such sending, since the Apostles ceased: for that (say they) Ostorod in Instit. c. 42. Th. Nicholaid. in desens. Tract. so cui de Eccl. c. 1. Schmaltz. in resert. Thes. D Frantz. per. 2.
dis∣put. 4. these were to preach a new doctrine, which we now are not. For with what faithfulness can this be said, in regard ei∣ther of hearers, the interrogations all running in so clear and constant a stream? 'Tis as much said, How shall  they hear without a Preacher? and how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? &c as how shal they preach except they be sent? Or in regard of the holy Apostles? who assure us, that they preached no other things, thā those which Moses and the Prophets did say should come. Act. 26.22. Chap. 24.14. Chap. 28.23. And not only, as they passed to and fro, did they ordain Elders in every Church, Act. 14.23. but pre∣scribed a constant course for Ordinati∣on likewise, as the Epistles to Timothy, and Titus witnesse. Nor can you say, that they are sent of God, who are on∣ly gifted. For as it is not said; how shall they preach except they be gifted? but, except they be sent; and that as watch∣men and messengers, as the next words import out of the Prophet Isaiah 52.7.8. So, the Scripture never saith that gif∣ting is sending, but supposeth that or∣dinarily before this; & distinctly speaks of  and  i. e. of the abilities to preach or prophecy, and authority to preach or prophecy,of mens
suita∣ble qualifications for it, and sending forth with commissions for it. Witness Ezek. 2.2, 3. Isai. 6.7.8, 9. Jer. 1.7, 9. Joh. 20.21, 22. And what though it be true; that sending imports many times, Gods commmanding men to go forth to the work of the Ministry? yet, as no gif∣ted brother can shew us any such com∣mand from God, so it's observable; that the Scripture never mentions any as sent forth to preach or prophesie, but the same persons were always, either mediately or immediately, appointed of God unto the Office. Witnesse Isai. 1 8, 9. Jer. 1.5, 7. Ezek. 2.4. Mat. 10, 1, 5, 16. Mar. 3, 14. Joh. 1.6 Mat. 11.10, &c. An immediate missiō & appoint∣ment to this Office there are no pious men will boast they have; or if they did, there are no prudent men will be∣lieve they have, till, they see it attested with a power of miracles; Nor is there any promise whereupon any should hope for it. So that I cannot but con∣clude upon the whole: That no man can now preach Ordinarily and orderly, without Ordination, or being sent forth of God me∣diately. He sins in preaching that is not thus sent forth with power. But to draw the proof of this propo∣sition out into more paticulars. Bee
pleased to observe the expresse precepts, eminent precedents, and evident pre∣scriptions, wherewith God hath counte∣nanced it, and the elegant properties & titles wherewith Ministers are clothed, which bespeak it. Sect. 1. See the expresse precepts of God for it (to wave the implicit only. 1 Tim. 5.22. Rom. 10.15. Heb. 5.4.) Behold as they ministred to the Lord; and fasted, Act. 13.2. the holy Ghost said Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them. And accordingly, the Prophets and teachers, mentioned ver. 1. When they had fasted and prayed, and laid their hands onthem, they sent them away, ver. 3. Observe, Christians. God had suited them to the work. God had supplied them with fit∣nesse, yet these must separate them to the work, and send them forth. And why this separating, think we, of such extra∣ordinary officers; if not to sanctifie, as it were, and seall an Imprimatur upon the ordinary rule? It is granted, that
Pauls Apostleship was not of men, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father who raised him from the dead, Gal. 1.1. That he was first immediately de∣signed hereunto by Jesus Christ, as it was declared to Ananias, Act. 9.15. B if the holy Ghost will have one so mira∣culously & immediately called, to pass thi common road, before the ordinary exe∣cution of his office among the Gentiles; who of us then, may plead immunity from it, or proudly take another by∣path? Though God had every way quali∣fied Paul and Barnabas for the ministery, though God had eminently called them to the ministry, yet that these Prophets and Teachers do externally commission, or se∣parate them to the Ministry likewise, i evidently the command of the Holy Ghost▪ Let me present you next with that pre∣cept of God by Paul to Titus, Ch. 1.5.—And ordain Elders in every City, as I had appointed thee. What Elders meaneth he? By age? No, time, as one saith, Collins vindic. Minist, Evang. qu. 2. &c. not Titus must make these. What Elders then? Flders by
Office, as the words ensuing clear it; and those, not in the state, but among and over the Saints: Bishops, or overseeers, who are to hold fast the faithfull word, verse 7, 9. Now thus, there is somewhat supposed in these words, that there should be Elders in eve∣ry City, where the Churches were established; and somwhat proposed how the Churches must be supplyed with El∣ders. How so? Titus must ordain them, Ordain Elders in every City. They are not Elders by Office then, till Ordination. But what is this? must Titus qualifie them for this Office? and is this all, which is intended by it? No; this was God's part, and is to be presupposed on their part, e're Titus may put forth any such act to∣wards them, as Ordination is; if you consult the following verses 6. ad 10. Titus may discuss and ventilate their gifts and qualifications, but God onely can derive and furnish. Is. 1.17. 1 Cor. 12.6 That which Titus hath in charge is to Ordain, to confer the Office of Elders, : and in that notion is the word used, not only by profane Authors frequently,
Sic apud Demosthe∣nē, Xenoph. & Herodiā occurrunt,  & similiter but by the Apostles, Act. 6.3. , &c. whom we may appoint over this business, as our translators render it: This how did they? but by prayer, and laying their hands on them, ver. 6. and so putting them into the Office of Dea∣cons? besides if gifts, if qualifications could have made them Elders, of what need or use was there of such an order from Paul? or of Ordination by Titu for thus they had been Elders already before and without either; if but charactered, as the next verses do de∣scribe. And if so, how is Titus require to Ordain such? and why restrained to Ordain such onely? So obvious is i that beside a competency of ability of their part, there must be , an ap∣pointment or Ordination on Titus's par likewise; or they are not to be acknow∣ledged Elders. So express are the precepts of God for it. Sect. 4. And what eminent precedents find we among the godly for it? Surely no man taketh this honour to himself, but he that is called of God, Heb 5.4. True, many a man doth de facto, but not any man doth (i. e. ought) de jure. Not Aaron un∣der the Law, nor any of the Priests after his order: 'They were separated from among the children of Israel to their Office; Nū. 8.14 & 2.6. & 1 50. Exo. 28.1. 2 Chro. 29.11. which was not only to offer sa∣crifice unto God, but to open the statutes of God, & teach in Israel, Deut. 33 10 Levit. 10.11. 2 Chr.
17.18.9. the work now of every Gospel Minister. So, nor did the Apostle and high-Priest of our pro∣fession Christ Jesus; He also glorified not himself to be made an high-Priest; but he that said unto him, Thou art my son, to day have I begotten thee, Heb. 5.5. What, did he glorifie himself to be made a Pro∣phet then? Neither. The Spirit of the Lord God (saith he) is upon mee, and hath anointed mee to preach good tidings, &c. Isa. 61.1. i.e. anointed me not on∣ly with abilities, but with authority. Hee was a Prophet of the Lord's raising up, Act. 3.22. If I honour my self (saith hee in his Ministry) my honour is nothing; it is my Father that honoureth me, Joh. 8.54. It was the Father sanctified and sent him into the world, about his Ministeriall concernments, Joh. 10.36. and sealed him his Commission, Joh. 6.27. And be∣hold, as my Father sent me, even so send I you; saith he to his Disciples, Joh. 20.21. Ah beloved! Self-Ministers then are none of our Saviours Ministers. His Mini∣sters can say; he made us, and not wee our selves. And with Paul, 1 Tim. 1.12. I thank Christ Jesus our Lord, who hath ena∣bled me, for that he counted mee faithfull, putting me into the Ministry. Observe, He doth not thank him onely for his ena∣blings for the Ministry, but for his
inve∣stiture with the Ministry; not onely his promptness for it, but for putting him i it. So distinct a notion did the holy A∣postles and Prophets keep, of their qua fications for the Ministry, which made the apt to teach; and of their commission t be Ministers which gave them authority teach. Lo, as they were allowed of God  be put in trust with the Gospel, (so they te us) they spake 1 Thes. 2.4. and accor∣ding as the glorious Gospel of God wa committed to them, 1 Tim. 1.11. Did these holy men of God think it enough, tha they were able to preach? Nay, but this was it they chose rather to insist upon, that they were (as Paul saith of himself) appointed preachers, 2 Tim. 1.11. True it is, they durst not but manifest his word through preaching, but then it was committed to them according to the commandment of God our Saviour, Tit. 1.3. And therefore how often have wee them, both in the Prophesies of the Old Testament, Jer. 1.5, 7, 17. Ezek. 1.3. & 2.3, 7, 8. Hos. 1.1, 2, &c. and in the Prefaces to most of the Epistles Rom. 1.1. 1 Cor. 1.1. Jam. 1.1. 1 Pet.
1.1. &c. in the New Testament, insisting upon, and justifying of their callings to bee Prophets and Apostles? Beloved, hear you any of them pleading, that qualifications are a sufficient Com∣mission? or for a freedome of Pro∣phesying by un-officed Prophets? (pardon the in congruence of the ex∣pression) or, because God hath fitted a man with parts and abilities, that hee needs no other furniture of power or authority, to exercise and exert them? Rather; do you not hear and read them, distinctly propounding, and directly proving their Commission, over and above their qualifications? Assu∣ring you, that God did not onely bring them gifts, but bid them go, Isai. Chap. 6. verse. 9. Amos Chap. 7. verse 15. Jeremiah Chap. 1. verse 7. Ezekiel Chap. 3. verse 1, 4, 11. That God sanctified them for, that GOD sent them forth to, and God set them in their Ministeriall work and Office, Jeremiah Chap. 1. verse
5.7.10. Ezek. Chap. 2. verse 3.4. &c. Not onely had they dispositions and gifts for com∣municating the Gospel, but a dispen∣sation of the Gospel was committed to them, 1 Corinth. Chap. 9. ver. 17. Gal. 2.7. O my brethren! are we compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses, an shall wee yet think the commitment  the Ministry needlesse or uselesse? ' can wee suffer our selves to bee put o with so poor a pretext as this? That a these instances from the Apostles an Prophets do not arise to the Ordnati∣on now practised, by the interventio of men, and imposition of the hands o the Presbytery. For who seeth not, tha they fully reach to evince the necessity  a commissioning to the Office, beside quali∣fications for the Office of Ministers; which is the point now before us? And it be∣ing more then manifest, that the imme∣diate ways of committing men to the Mi∣nistry are now ceased, and a mediate way from God instead thereof, commanded which is written as with a Sun beam, in the Epistles to Timothy and Titus: unless you will break with God, and these pre∣cedents among the godly, by putting your selves into the Ministry, whereas they were put into it of God, 1 Tim. 1.12. These in∣stances will in effect and virtue bind you to the Ordination now practised; if it be the only way now prescribed, and lest us of Jesus Christ: Of which hereafter.
Sect. 3. Thirdly, see yet further the e∣vident prescriptions, which are given forth for putting men into Ministry, by our Lord Jesus? and these how numerous; that they fill up a good part of three E∣pistles. Beloved, consider I beseech you. Why should the conferring of the Ministry be so pressingly directed to Timothy and Ti∣tus? why should the call of men to, and their qualifications for the Ministry be so plainly differenced? Why should the committers, and they committed to it, be so particularly distinguished? If gifts, with a desire to ex∣ercise them, were sufficient? or the so∣lemn committing of this Office, were but super-erogatory and superfluous? Would the blessed Spirit of wisedom have spentit self in superfluites, think we? Is there no more set before us, but who are to be Ministers? and how they are to act
in their Ministry? Hath not the same spirit set before us, their appointment and putting into the Ministry likewise? Ay; and this how articulately! By what men? in what manner? after what matters previous? and by what means present? Who are to be Ordainers? who, and how they are to be Ordained? what is pre re∣quired to it? what to be performed in it? and what the product and issue of it? Read else but 1 Tim. 3. Chap and 1 Chap. of Titus. Sirs, why this wast, i more were no other ordination to the Office of Mi∣nisters, but what gis, and our own, or others desires to ue them make? O you▪ that stand in the way and see, and ask for the old paths, where is the good way that we may walk therein, must you not say of this? This is it, wherein God hath been alway wont to meet, and give mis∣sion to his servants: either immediately by investiture of them with the Office from himself, as our Lord was pleased to send forth first the Twelve, Luk. 9.1. and af∣ter the seventy, Luk 10 1. Or else mediately, by the interposition of his own Officers, as Tmothy is directed to do in this verse. We: doth Matthias Apostolize? not till Christ appoints him, Act. 1. Do Paul and Barnabas? not ll our Saviour authorize them, Act. 9.17. Chap. 13.2. Hath every Church its Elders, that la∣bour in the word and doctrine? Bu Paul and Barnabas first Ordain them, Act. 14.23. Is it the order of Christ that there be Elders in every City? but withall
that Titus Ordain them, Tit. 1.5. Hath Timothy the gift or Office of an Evange∣list? but not without the laying on of Pauls hands, and of the Presbytery like∣wise? 2 Tim. 1.6. 1 Tim. 4.4. There must be such who are by calling to teach others? but Timothy must commit this trust to them for others, as in the Text. Belo∣ved, why are these things written? and for whom think we? Are they not for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come? Doubtlesse, whatsoever things were written aforetime, were writtē for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope, Rom. 15.4. Ah Sirs! may we dare to reject this word of Christ? or re∣move to another way of our own or o∣thers contriving? either frame new ways of committing the Ministry (I mean)? or else frowardly deny the continuance of the Ministry, as too many do? Nay can you so forget the Commandment of Christ, and his Covenant with his Ministers, which hee calls upon us so affectionately to re∣member, as a thing of most happy re∣marke, Mat.
28.19.20 Go teach, &c. Lo, I am with you alway,  all days,  to the end of the world. Which cannot bee restrained to the end of that age; as the pregnancy and propriety of this phrase, See it learnedly Vindicated & opened Jus divin. Mini. Evā. par. 1. c. 2. p. 27. ad 31 and the parallel usage of it by this same Evangelist, Mat. 13.40. (m) Chap. 24.3. (n) (besides the precedent passage which is not all your days, but all days) do plentifully evince. Or have you so for∣gotten that command by Paul to Timo∣thy? I give thee charge in the sight of God, who quickneth all things, and be∣fore Christ Jesus, who before Pontius Pi∣late witnessed a good confession: That thou keep this commandment without spot, unrebukeable, untill the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. What commandment intends he? I humbly conceive, with Beza and others Chrysost. Homil 18. Ambr. Lyra Gorrā. Cor∣nel à Lavi∣de. Diodat. & Engl. Annotat. ad ver. 1. this complex command∣ment contained in, and carried along thorow the whole Epistle; unto which the Apo∣stle quickens him with six arguments. Dickson ad loc. And thus it eminently taketh in that (well-nigh) paralell charge, Chap.
5. ver. 21.22. which includeth the confer∣ring of the Ministeriall Office, as doth the third Chapter. And what though this Commandment could not bee fulfilled till the coming of Christ by Timothy himself? yet might it bee by Timothie's successors: 'Who are clearly concerned to attend this charge of the Apostle, as addressed to them in Timothy; the im∣port and intent of the Scriptures being not only for the present men and times, but for all that succeed or follow Rō 15. Psa. 119.152. Lu. 16.16, 17. Rev. 22.19 And verily, 1. if there shall still be till his coming, both sinners to be begotten un∣to Christ; and to be brought into his Church; and if there be Saints to bee brought forward, and to bee built up in communion with Christ and his Church; and if there be souls to bee sanctified and saved, until the time of his appearance. (which who doubts that believes any thing?) And 2. if our Lord Christ hath onely ordinarily annexed and ap∣pointed, to bestow these great blessings by a Ministery sent, as it is cleer he hath, Rom. Chap. 10. verse,
14, 15. Ephesians Chapt. 4. verse 11, 12, 13. Having by this onely (usually) brought about the addition of sinners to his Church and to himself, Acts the second Chapter, and the 41. and 47. verses, and Chap. 11. vers. 24. the conversion of souls to, and their confirmation in and with himself, Acts Chap. 26.18.15.32. The remissi∣on of sins, and regeneration of sinners, Acts 26. Chapter 18. ver. and 1 Corin. Chap. 4. vers. 15. The new birth of souls, and to believe in himself, James Chap. 1. verse 18. and 1 Corinth. Chap. 3 vers. 5. The subduing of sin and Satan, and the salvation of Saints, 2 Corinth. Chap. 10. verse 4.5. and 1 Corinth. Chap. 1. verse 21. And 3. If our Lord Christ doth not now extra∣ordinarily send forth any, as it's plain hee doth not: neither immediately design∣ing out any persons, nor delivering to any a power of miracles. I say, if so; then of necessity, the ordinary way of com∣mitting this Office, and of sending out such Officers, which was given in charge to Timothy and Titus, are of a continuing obligation, and of consant observation in the Chur∣ches of Jesus Christ.
Sect. 4. Let me put you in mind but of one thing more, and this is, the Elegant titles that are given to Ministers, which do all bespeak a necessity, not onely of being quaified for this Office, but of having the Office committed to them. Are not Ministers clled the Angels of the Churches, Revelations Chap. 1. verse 20. the overseers of the Church? Acts Chap. 20. ver. 28. the rulers of the Church? Hebrews Chap. 13. ver. 7. Yea, and such rulers they are in, and so over the Church, as are to be counted worthy of double honour, 1 Timothy Chap. 5. ver. 17. and 1 Thes. Chap. 5. vers. 12.13. Are they not the Stewards of Christ? 1 Corinht 4.1. The Heralds of Christ, ? Romans 10. vers. 14. Yea, and the mbssadours of Christ, 2 Cor. 5. ver. 20. Are they not termed watchmen? Heb. 13.17. builders? 1 Cor. 3.10. and souldiers? 2 Tim. 2.3, &c. Now what lesse do any of these apart, or can all these together intimate? than that Mi∣nisters should be furnished with authori∣ty, as well as fitted with ability? and must bee able to shew a commission, as well as speak of qualifications? In a word, that they must have a deligation from our Saviour to this employment, as wel as a disposition in their spirits to this employ∣ment.
Sect. 4. Fourthly, how is this Office of being Teachers in the Church to bee committed unto such, as are duly qua∣lified? You will easily observe, that we are not enquiring about committing the Office to extraordinary teachers; such as are by immediate deligation from Christ immediate I mean, not only ratione vir∣tutis, sed suppositi in regard of power, but of person. This case falls not within our compasse; when such immediate furni∣tures (as were herewith given) for the Ministry, and therefore such immediate ve∣stitures with the Ministery, have no place. But our enquiry is about the commit∣ting of this office to Ordinary teachers, by mediate deligation from Christ i. e. by his Officers, who in his name, and accor∣ding to his Ordinance, are to separate them to this service of his, in his Church. Hujus, Ministerij jus per ho∣mines Com∣municare solt, at{que} iâ ratione vocatio ordinarii Ministri est media∣ta. Hoc au∣tem sic est intellgen∣dum, ut authoritas administrandi res divinas à Deo immediatè communicetur ministris omnibus legitimis, & designatio perso∣narum in quas confertur fiat per Ecclesiam. Ames. Medul. The∣ol. l. 1. c. 35. n. 5. & 6. And thus briefly, this Office is to bee committed to men duly qualified, 1 by the Presbytery. 2 after proof. 3 with prayer and fasting. 4. and with putting on of their hands.
Sect. 1. By the Prebytery i. e. by presbyters in Office; whose part it was in the Ordination of Timothy. 1 Tim. 4.14. Their common care and charge it was, and not Pauls only. 2 Tim. 1.6. We never read Paul to have practiced in, or to have pretended to a sole power of Or∣dination; or to so much as a negative voice in that particular, though (no doubt) he had a greater latitude of authority, than any can now lay claim to, as be∣ing an Apostle, not of, or by man, but by Jesus Christ: Yet Paul was neither ordained nor did Ordain, without the concurrence of some other Act. 13.1, 2, 3. ch. 14.23. 'If any will yet implead ordination by a presbytery, because without a Prelate; 1 he ought to produce the divine instituti∣on of a Prelate distinct from a dignified be∣yond a Presbyter or Minister. Certain we are, the Apostles have left no such one, up∣on their list of Church Officers; Eph. 4 11. Rom. 12.6, 7, 8. 1 Cor. 12.28. and clear it is, that a Bishop and Presbyter are all one in the language of the Scripture, See sect. 2. Tit. 1.10. vid. Hieronym. ad Loc. Idem est ergo Pres∣byter, qui Episcopus &c. 1 Tim. 3.1, 2.
Post Episcopum Diaconi ordinationem subjicit. Quare? ist quia Episcopi & Presbyteri una ordinatio est? uter{que} exim sa∣eerdos est. Ambros. ad Loc. &c. having the same office, the same ordination, the same characters given to, and qualitier 'required in them, and the same work being committed to them. And as clear 'tis that a Presbyter or ordinary Minister is vested with a power of government or rule. 1 Tim. 5.17. Heb. 13.7, 17. 1 Thes. 5.12. Act. 20.17, 28. 2. Hee ought to prove the divine investiture of pre∣lates with Ordination ard imposition of hands different from presbyters, whereof 'we read not one word in all the Scriptures, but of the laying on of the hands of the pres∣bytery in fair and open characters, 1 Tim. 4.14. True 'tis that we read of Ordination by Timothy and Titus 'Evan∣gelists, by Paul and Barnabas Apostles, but this neither directly serveth the cause of the Prelates, they being nei∣ther Apostles nor Evangelists, nor in∣directly, unlesse they can prove them∣selves to be a distinct order or dignity of Ministers, by the divine appointment of Jesus Christ, & in that sence can put in a plea of being their successors which a Presbyter in a fair construction may, 1
Pet. 5.1, 2. Though a Prelate without a forced construction cannot. Where doth 'the Scripture prescribe that there should be any ordination of Prelates different from, or over and above their former ordination as Presbyters? Or that there should be any Ordination by prelates as distinct from Presbyters? When it is a ruled case, that a Bishop or Prelate or∣dained per saltum (i. e. who never had the Ordination of a Presbyter himself, but only of a Bishop) can neither con∣secrate and administer the Sacrament of the Lords body, nor ordain a Pres∣byter: of the Church. l. 3. ch. 39. by which it appeareth, that a Bishop doth not excell a Presbyter by a di∣stinct and higher order or power of order; 'for which Doctor Field hath produced the acknowledgment of the most lear∣ned among the Papists. Aquin. Bonavent. Dominic, à Soto. Ar∣macanus. Camerar. & Contare∣nus. (e) The in∣stance of Timothy and Titus, as if Bi∣shops of Ephesus and Crete, will be a covering too narrow. For as we never read the Spirit of God calling them Bishops in Scripture, (the Post-script to those Epistles being disowned from being any part of the Canon by many Papists, even by Baronius and the Rhe∣mists; and are so disproved by severall Protestants, vide Be∣za Anot. maj. ad 1 Tim.
6.22. ad 2 Tim. 4.23. ad Tit. 3.14. So, Timothy is expresly enough called an Evangelist. 2 Tim. 4.5. 'Nor could their frequent removes, see them described Jus Divin. Min. Evan. par. 2. p. 69. Smectimnu∣us sect. 13. after the mention of their being at E∣phesus and Crete, have any consistence 'with the charge or Office of a Bishop, which obligeth to a fixed residence a∣mong his flock? (to passe other rea∣sons see Jus Di vin. Minist. Evang. par. 2. c. 5. throughout against their diocesan Episcopacy) 'Their frequent diversions and journeys, and various dispatches to and fro, at the desire of the Apostles, and as might best subserve the design and welfare of the generall visible Church, do loudly e∣nough proclaim them to be Evangelists I know there are on the other hand that vest the people with this power and pri∣viledge of Ordination, beyond what was ever possessed by the
Prelates. But with no countenance that I know from Christ, yea, or conveniency to Christians; while it is little other than a seed-plot of dis∣sentions among them, and of divisions into parties; and while beside their di∣stance from the power of ruling, whose place it is to be ruled; such are their dis∣abilities & disproportion to make proof of mens ready instruction to the kingdom of God, either in cleering the difficulties of the Gospel, or in evicing gainsayers. 'Tis true; We read (whatsome ingenious∣ly observe before us London Ministe in their Jns div. min. evan. par. 3. c. 13. of Ordaining El∣ders in every Church, but we never read of Ordaining Elders by any Church. They Ordained them Elders in every Church, Act. 14.23. Who Ordained them? Paul and Barnabas for the people, not the people for themselves. That every Church should Ordain them Elders in every Church, grates too much upon common sense and truth. Nor will the word  help it out, for what ever bee the import of i.e. To stretch out the hand; which is still done in Or∣dination, with imposition of hands. Nor can there much more be evinced by the usage of this word in this place, if there be any worth in that obser∣vation of learned Stepha∣nus, that it signifieth not to give suffrage, but to create, ordain, &c. when it governs an accusarive case, as here it doth.  Steph. Thesaur Ling. graec. ad verbum
. manifest enough it is, both from what is antece∣dent to this expression, and what is after it, that Paul and Barnabas were the , to whom [they] must necessarily bee under∣stood to relate nine times be∣sides, in the narrative or re∣lation which is herewith made, ver. 21. ad finem. Far be it from mee, to divest the Churches of Jesus from any part of those priviledges, which are given them by his charter? Let it be granted them for me, that the people may choose; and look out men, and set them before the Presbytery, as they did for Deacons be∣fore the Apostles, still observing their li∣mies, Act. 6.3, 5, 6. But the Presbytery 'tis, that commit the Ministry, appoint and send forth the men, as then did the Apostles, ver. 3.6. Peruse I beseech you the primitive practise, the records of all those Ordinations, which you finde in the Acts of the Apostles, 1.6.13.14. Chapt. & what prints read you, or the ob∣scurest trace of the peoples putting men into the Office of Ministers? Peruse to these, the Epistles that most particularly treat of, and purposely take up this sub∣ject or argument, those to Timothy and Titus: and yet tell us where may wee finde the smallest track or footstep? 'Las! if the peoples suffrage had been enough to set men in Office, what need such pressing arguments from Paul to Timothy and Titus? and such particular instru∣ments of them with this business, that they Ordain Elders in
Crete and Ephesus? Doth he write at this rate, in any one of all the Epistles he sendeth to the Chur∣ches? or in either of these Epistles sent to these Officers, that the Churches see to the Ordaining of Elders, &c. Again, if so; what need or right had Paul to in∣teress himself or Barnabas so far, as to Ordain Elders in every Church, at Ly∣stra, Icontum, and Antioch, &c. Act. 14.19.23 Would they have so abused their own power, or the peoples priviledges, as by this to have been arraigned for bu∣sie-bodies in other mens matters? which they might have been, had Ordination been in the power and right of the Churches. 'Tis true, we may be proper∣ly enough called the Ministers and Mes∣sengers of the Churches, so far as I know. But how? Not as if they were the originall, but are the object of our authoritative mission and messages; not as if we were sent from, and by them into this Office, but as sent to and for them for their obedience and joy of faith: unless men may be said to send messengers to themselves,
Sect. 2 The Ministry is not to bee committed till after probation or triall made. Oh that dreadfull charge! I charge thee before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Elect Angels—lay hands sudden∣ly on no man, 1 Tim. 5.21.22. Timothy must not, for so much as the Office of a Deacon, therefore surely not for the Office of a Bishop or Minister. Let these also first bee proved; then let them use the Office of a Deacon, 1 Tim. 3.10. 'Tis an abuse then to put men into the Office of the Ministry, before or without proof made. Nor may this proof bee slight and overly, but must bee diligent and distinctive. est propè explorare qualis in se res sit, & a diversis aut contrariis discernere inquit Pa∣reus. Nec solummodo probare, sed approbare signisicat, ut po perspectum, sic apud Luc. 14.19. & 1 Pet. 1.7. & Phil. 1.10. & 1 Thes. 2.4 & apud Plutarc. de Instit. liber. . Proved they should bee, in their spirituall and inward call to the Ministry, and in their suitable qualifications for the Ministry. What they are for life? what for learning▪ and what they are like to be for labour? What are their purposes by it? what i their proportion to it? and what will bee their perseverance in it? In a word; what of God and grace is to be found in them? and what of forwardness and zeal there is and will be for God?
Thirdly, With prayer and fasting. Such was the primitive practise, Acts 6.6. & 13.3. & 14.23. and stands upon record as our pattern. Whether these enter the essence of Ordination, I say not: but sure I am, that they are of eminent and excellent observation and use. Is our Lord himself therefore about to choose, and authoritatively to send abroad Apo∣stles? He continueth all night before it in prayer to God, and when it was day he called unto him his Disciples, and of them hee chose Twelve whom also he named Apostles, Luk. 6.12, 13. Ah sirs! pray, pray, you that want and would have Pastors. Fa∣sting prayers, will make fervent preachers. We beseech you brethren, for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the love of the Spirit, that yee will strive together with us in your prayers to God, Rom. 15.30. this day. Oh the weaknesses of our persons▪ the work we are to perform! the worth and weight of God's presence! and our want of your prayers, which if earnest, will be sure to be effectuall prayers ā. 5.16.! Pray ye there∣fore, the Lord of the Harvest, that he wil send forth these expectants, Labourers into his Harvest Mat. 9.38..
Sect. 4. With imposition of hands. Thus Timothy was Ordained, 1 Tim. 4.14. and was to Ordain, 1 Tim 5.22. What though Papists have placed it among the Sacraments? must wee therefore pluck it from among the Saints? although Paul preserveth it among the principles of the do∣ctrine of Christ, Heb. 6 1, 2. (under what notion, or to what purpose, I shall not dispute) Surely their dotage on it, will be a poor Apologie for our deniall or de∣spising of it, upon whom the true light hath shined: especially when the whole solemnity of Ordination is once and again set forth by this one Ceremony; 1 Tim. 4.14. and 5.22. 2 Tim. 1.6. and you hear none of us pleading for it as a Sacrament; though we would not be put by from any solemn right; especially if an inseparable adjunct to an Ordinance of Christ. Is Timothy enjoyned to lay hands suddenly on no man? 1 Tim. 5.22. what less can be implyed, than that he lay hands so∣lemnly upon some, at least after mature scrutiny? I shall not expatiate, but if (beside the concurrent profession and practice of the reformed Churches
See a brief view of thei cō∣currence herein of∣fered you by Dr. Seaman in his , at the beginning Pro∣pfion 3. if Paul, so pretious a Saint, and so profound a Scholar, did thus accept it in his own Ordination to the Ministry, as hee did, Act. 13.3. and did thus act and assist in the Ordination of others, as hee did, 2 Tim. 1.6. God forbid! that I, or any other should so much listen to pride, pre∣judice, or what ever else it bee, as to he∣sitate it causlesly! or to harden my self a∣gainst it contem trously. 'Paul's prescri∣ption and precedent me thinks will be enough to acquit and answer for us, though we had nothing else to render in account, why we retain this ancient rite: by which, yet publick offices have been wont to be conveighed, Numb. 27.18, 23. and 8.10. Act. 6.6. and this partacularly, 1
Tim. 4.14. 'Tis true, when Paul enjoins Titus to Ordain El∣ders in every City, Titus 1.5. hee doth not prescribe expresly, imposition of hands. Nor doth he prohibit it; but ra∣ther points it out, not obscurely, by two things (though the common practice thereof in those times might have been intimation enough to him, and a justi∣fication for it, against this exception.) 1. By leading him back to former in∣structions [as I had appointed thee] wherein if wee may make judgment, from what Paul practised, Act. 14.23 2 Tim. 1.6. to what Paul prescribed, this could not but make one particular, especially, if the affir∣maive included in that precept to Ti∣mothy, 1 Chap. 5.22. bee put with it in∣to the same scale. 2. By the light of the Word (rendered here by ordin and in Acts 6.3. by appoint) which the Apostles practice had alrea∣dy interpreted, to import the laying on of hands, Acts 6.6. as one particular requisite to that publick and solemn work. I know it is pretended that the Holy Ghost was miraculously given by imposition of hands in Ordination, and thence it is pleaded, that the mira∣cle now ceasing, so doth the mystery too. But how is the former proved and justified? And if; yet how the latter is therefrom
pleaded or inferred I see not; unless we shall upon the same ground now relinquish prayer, because it's no more effectuall to heal the sick, or raie the dead, as it was formerly. Act. 9.37, 40, 41. Jam. 5.14, 15. We hear the Apo∣stles requiring them to look out seven men full of the Holy Ghost, that they may lay hands upon them, Acts 6.3. cum 6. but never hear them relating so much as one that had received the Holy Ghost, be∣cause they had layd their hands upon him, in his Ordination. I say in his Ordination: for it is granted that the Holy Ghost was given, by the laying on of hands, in the other cases, Act. 8.17.18. and 19.6. Why must Timothy and Titus (think we) receive satisfaction touch∣ing mens gifts before Ordination? 1 Tim. 3. and Tit. 1. And why must they till then retard and stave off their Ordination, 1 Tim. 5.22. If laying on of hands would have conferred that spirit upon men, from whom all gifts come? 1 Cor. 12.8. ad 12. True it is, we read of Timothie's gift by the laying on of Paul's hands, and of the Presbyte∣ry; 2 Tim. 1.6. 1 Tim. 4.14. But not of the Holy Ghosts being given him hereby. It is rather the gift of the Mini∣stry that is intended in these Scriptures, than gifts for the Ministry, and perhaps, may bee therefore mentioned in both places not plurally, but singularly [the gift.] That offices are called
gifts, and particularly the Ministry, compare Ep. 4 8, 11. between which the 9 and 10 verles, fall as within a Paren∣thesis: the 11 vers. giving us the expli∣cation in particulars of what had been expressed at the 8 ver. ingeneral: Isti duo versus (sc. 9.10) per parea∣thsin lguntur, nam mox vesu 11. rdit ad supeiora, hoc est, ad explicanda dona ali∣quo de qu bs dixerat in genere, dedit dona hominibus Zanch. ad Ephes. 4.10 And so is an appofite answer to every one that asks this question; what are those gifts, when Christ ascended up on high, which he received for Psal. 68.18. and give unto men? He gave som Apo∣stles, and som Prophets, and som Evang∣lists, and som Pastors and Teachers. Fithly one thing is yet behind. Why must those that are authoritatively from Christ to teach others in the Church, have the Office committed to them, as well as be qualified for that office? Why? It is for the honour of Christ, for the happinesse of the Church, and for the hope and heartning of such teachers themselves. Sect. 1. It is for the honour of Christ. Which is the great design, that grace hath to carry on, by all the various me∣thods
and ministrations of it, by all Of∣ficers, and by all Ordinances. Had he thrown the reyns of his Church, King∣dom and cause loose, to the liberty, or rather lusts of men, take hee that will: teach he that will: who could have then read such his accurate prudence? such his absolute power? and such his affluence of perfections, as are now made legible in treating his own affairs; by those only that are of his own appointment, and can shew his royall patent? Alas! what conveniency would this at all bear to his transcendant dignity, and most ta∣king glory, whereof the greatest royalties are but poor resemblances? Wil men call him the wonderfull Counsellor, the Prince of peace, Is. 9.6.7 the King of kings, and Lord of Lords?
Rev. 19.16. that either hath never a Secre∣tary, Herald, Embassadour, or so much as a Steward by office, by whom the grand importances of his Court and Crown may be transacted on the one hand? or is so little tender of these great trusts, and his own transactions on the other; that whosoever hath but will and skill, fore∣head and fitness enough, may without further leave from him or his, lay hold upon these offices, and leap into the highest honour? Need I remind you, that such are the offices, such is the ho∣nour to be a Minister of Jesus? Is it spi∣ritually? Well; the more spirituall the office and honour is, the more need in a just sense, of his putting them into a security, from the fleshly presumptions and forward pretensions of vain men, who are but too desirous of being teach∣ers of others, even before they under∣stand what they say, or whereof they affirm themselves, 1 Tim. 1.7. or at least of heaping unto themselves teach∣ers, having itching ears, 2 Tim. 4.3. It is true, I acknowledge, that pious Ministers are so far from being accounted ordina∣rily to the honour of Christ; that wee are made rather with Paul, the filth of the world, and the off-scouring of all things, 1 Cor. 4.13. But what saith Paul? God, who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, hath shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ, 2
Cor. 4.6. and if our brethren be enquired of (saith he) they are the glory of Christ, 2 Cor. 8. ver. 23. And no marvail, for besides the expressions to his glory by them, such are the ampressions of his glory upon them, not onely in their Ministeriall gifts and graces, which bespeak them qualified for this Office by Christ, but in the Ministe∣riall authority and administrations, which bespeak them Commissioned to this Of∣fice from Christ. And indeed, what other are his Ministers, Pastors, and Teachers among us; but the speaking gifts, and standing pledges of Christ's glorious ascen∣sion for us? and of his gracious and great affections to us, Ephes. 4.8, 11. compa∣red. Sect. 2. It is for the happiness of the Church likewise, which is next to his Fa∣thers honour, in the aym and heart of Christ. It is for her enlargement, edifica∣tion, and establishment, as the Apostle at large instanceth and illustrateth in the same, Ephes. 4.12, 13, 14, 15.
verses. For the perfecting of the Saints, &c. Throw open but this door once, that gifts, and a desire to exercise them make a Minister, and you may (too late) per∣ceive well-nigh, all that is dear to the Church going out, and whatsoever is divi∣ding and destructive coming in, by the same door, both speedily and irremediably. What Corah and his complices will not tell Aaron and Moses too? Ye take too much upon you; seeing all the Congregation are holy, every one of them, and the Lord is a∣mong them: wherefore then lift you up your selves above the Congregation of the Lord, Numb. 163 Nor could I ever yet hear of any thing more eminent among them, than is error and confusion, who have taken qualifications to give Commission. Alas! this must needs break the unity, and blast the purity of the Churches quickly. N, 1. It must needs break the unity of the Chuches, (a blessing how desirable in it self? and how dear to our Saviour) if nothing but fitness and forwardness bee requisite to make an Officer or Minister. Wo to the Common-wealth of this Israel! If every one that had ability, had therefore authority too; If every one that probably is, or presumeth himself to be fit for such or such an Office, were thereby put into it, and must be so obey∣ed; or if every one, who is qualified for, must bee therefore counted a Judge, Ju∣stice, yea, or but a Constable.
Hath God provided against such intrusions upon civill Offices? and will he permit it in sacred? Taken such care in order to the accord and quiet of the Common wealth? and hath he thrown it by with respect to his Church, which is so much dearer to him than are all the Societies in the world beside? Who would be ruled, if but to presume our selvs qualified, would make us rulers, ei∣ther in Church or State? Surely this would make the militant Church, like that military body, where qualifications to command were a commission for a Company: The Church should have all Officers and no Souldiers quickly; and if it did not run with such an army into blood and confusion, yet would soon and surely run with it into bitternesse and contentions. 'He that can secure me the peace and unity of that Kingdome, where every one that is fit, may be there∣by supreme; or of that County, whe every one that is fit, may be thereby Sheriffe; or but of that Corporation, where every one that is fit, may be thereby Major, shall be (with me) a none-such among men, and may per∣swade, if any, that the beauty and har∣mony
of the Churches of Jesus may be preserved too, wherein every one that judgeth himself fit, is thereby made a Minister and Officer. Let me add his, if Ministers are not Officers,* the Church hath none: For who else can shew me so clear evidences? And if men may bee bold with this Office in the Church, to invest themselves with it, and to execute at pleasure, why they should be back∣ward to, or baulk any other Office, I know not: For
this of all others is most sacred and most circumscribed. And if all Offices lye in common where shall we look for the Churches Concord? Ah Sirs! have wee read the 12 to the Romans from the the 3 to the 9, or the 1 Cor. 12? And can we think our blessed head and Master, in whom are hid all the trea∣sures of wisdome and kindnesse, so remisse about conferring Offices? and so regardlesse of the Churches concord as this amounts to? What! are there so many unities? and all with respect had to the Church? One body, and one spirit, even as they are called in one hope of their calling; one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in them all? Eph. 4.5, 6. Lo, therefore Christ hath given Pastours and Teachers (names of Office) verse 8, 11. that they may keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. verse 3. and that till we all come in the unity of the faith &c. ver. 13. N. 2. This will blast the purity of the Churches too, and let in (what not?) that is destructive to verity, and the power of Godlinesse. If our stiring times have not given sufficient testi∣monie to this sad truth, I know not what times ever did or shall. What through uncalled Preachers, and uncate∣chised hearers, Oh! the havock and convulsions that are made in the Churches of Jesus! And inded, who can expect; but that those, who will vainly or violently enter upon the Ministery without Ordi∣nation, shall likewise venturously em∣ploy themselves in it, without obser∣vation? Witnesse those false teachers whereof Peter
tells vs. 2 Peter, Chap∣ter 2. and Jude, from the fourth to the twentieth verse. Who may, or how can wee expect other, than unsetlednesse in the love of the Gospell? and unsoundnesse in the life of godlinesse from that man, or men, who shake off the order of the Gospell? Surely, they that heap to themselvs teachers, walk but after their own lusts therein, and have it ch∣ing ears, turned from the truth, and unto fa∣bles. 2 Tim. 4.3, 4. And therefore whe∣ther they that make themselvs teachers are like to walk in the law of God, and to lead you in the ways of that truth which is according to godlinesse, judg ye? What lesse can be said than this? That measuring themselvs by themselves, and comparing themselvs among themselvs, they are not wise: and if the premisses be considered, how wicked!
Sect. 3. It's for the beartning and comfort of such teachers, that beside qua∣lifications, they shall have the Office committed to them: their comfortable incouragement much conducing to the credit and interesse of that King Jesus, whose Embassadours they are. Sirs! the duties, difficulties, and discourage∣ments of Ministers, how various are they? how involved! And alas! what sorry things are our best qualifications to support us, without the strong aid of that grace, which sets before us the bene∣fit of our Commission, to stay and cheer our hearts. Who of us, my brethren, but must confess with Paul, that wee are not sufficient of our selvs, so much as to think any thing as of our selvs? Where then is our sufficiencie? and what is our support? Our sufficiency is of God, who also hath made us able Ministers of the New Testa∣ment, 2 Cor, 3.5, 6. That God, who hath made us Ministors, is the spring head of our sufficiencies in the discharge and exer∣cise of our Ministry; and that God hath made us Ministers, is the stay and basis of our hopes in all the difficult emergencies of our Ministry.
See 2 Tim. 1.11, 12. That our God hath sent us, is the stablishing consideration, a∣gainst all despondencies and discourage∣ments, that he will supply, strengthen, secure, and work all our works in us and for us. And Lo, by this it is, that God would have us to chide down our fears, and to keep up our faith. I sanctified thee, saith he to Jeremie, and I ordained thee a Prophet unto the Nations. Doth Jeremie say? A Lord God! I am a child, behold I cannot speak. Ay, but hear what the Lord saith unto Jeremy: say not  am a child, for thou shalt go to all that I shall send thee, and whatsoever I com∣mand thee thou shalt speak: Be not af∣fraid of their faces; for I am with thee to deliver thee saith the Lord; Behold, I have made thee a defenced City, &c. Jer. 1.5, 6, 7, 8, 18, 19. An beloved, God doth therefore Commission us, to corroborate and comfort our hearts, and to confirm us you see against hardships. 'Oh the tears and tentations, that every man of God is subject to! without are fightings, within are fears: And in the midd'st of so many inward distractions, and out∣ward distresses; while such is the diffi∣culty of our province, such the dbiity of our persons, such the deceitfulness of sin, such the deiusions of Satan, such the desperate stubborness of the world, such the depths and heights of the Word, and such the danger and worth of immortall souls, for which we must give an account; In the midd'st of all this, how would our hearts gather asto∣nishment! and our hopes go down into de∣spair, did not the sense of this truth, and the sweet fruits that grow upon it so∣lace
our souls: If God hath sent. God will second me; if God hath put me into the Ministry, he will prosper me in the Ministry; if he hath given me a Com∣mission, he will not deny me his conour∣rence; he that appointed me to this Office, will accomplish his ends by and upon me in this Office: These, these are the comforts of a Commissioned, if conscienti∣ous Minister. Be the success what it wil, if he be sincere and sent, he is to God a sweet savour, though in them that pe∣rish 2 Cor. 2.15, 16. and God is his strength and reward; though he hath spent his own strength to no purpose, Isa. 49.4, 5. A stranger, an unofficed preacher hath not to intermeddle with this joy. But Oh the sweet Cordiall! and comorta∣ble savour, of our investitue with the Office both unto us and you! when both you and we shall call to mind; that we are not barely the servants, but the stewards of Christ; or onely the subjects, but the Embassadours of Christ, and so whatsoever we bind or loose, beseech or charge, rebuke or comfort,
it's as if God did it; as though God did beseech you by us; we pray you in Christ's stead, 2 Cor. 5.20. Christ hath bid us go teach, bap∣tize, &c. Lo, I am with you, Mat. 28.19, 20. But the unofficed preacher hath neither part nor lot in this promise; for be it supposed, that Christ hath given him feet, bestowed abilities; yet hath he not bid him go, granted him authori∣ty: and who can hope, that Christ will go with him, that goeth before Christ, or rather steals away before he sent him? Will hee be with the Prophets that run, and he not sent them? Nay, I am against these Pro∣phets, saith the Lord, Jeremi. 23.21.30.31, 32. ƲSE. Having thus explained and evinced the assertion or observation; give mee leave now to exercise my self and you, a while, in the application. I shall not be ve∣ry long; neither the straights of time, There being 13. afterward to be or∣dained. nor indeed my strength, permitting it. I shal therefore lay but three Uses of this point before you. The first for humilia∣tion and consternation, the second for holy caution, the third in way of hearty counsell.
Ʋse 1. Of humbling consternation. Is it so, that such as are to teach authorita∣tively in the Church, or Ministers of Christ, must be both men qualified for the Office, and have the Office commit∣ted to them? Oh! what matter of hum∣bling consternation and holy confusion before the Lord doth this call for from us this day? Oh that mine head were waters, & mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for the slain (shall I say, or for the souls?) of the daughter of my people, Jer. 9.1. Partly through unqualified Ministers of the one side, and partly through uncom∣missioned Ministers on the other side. Oh the ravine and ruine, that is made of multitudes of souls! one whereof is more worth than all England, all the Indies, yea, than all the world. Ah firs! how have holy things been profaned? how have heavenly things been pollu∣ted? and how much, how long have wholesome truths been perverted, what between this and that extream? Who of us is such a stranger in England but un∣less deafe doth hear? that unless blind doth see? and unless sensuall or stupid, but must sigh, and smite upon our thighs, in the sad remembrances of there things! Oh! how hath God been and is yet dis∣honoured by it? How hath the Gospel bee, and is yet despised by it? and how hath godliness ben, and is yet derided for it, to this day? Ay, and for this, not∣withstanding all our engagements and endeavours for a Reformation, the land moun and lyeth unreformed, even to this hou. And now, Oh that we could (ure I am that we should) mourn be∣fore the Lord for these things. Sect. 1. Let us mourn for unqualified Ministers. O believed! how many have walked (and Oh that I should mention it without weeping!) walked under the calling of Minister, that have not been wor∣thy to be caded men? but have been ra∣ther like the Mule for ignorance the, Goat for lust and the Swine for drunk∣ennesse, than like the Ministers of Jesus; such whose God hath been their belly, whose Gospel hath been their barn, whose glory hath been their shame. Non Pastores, sed praedatores; non prae∣cones, sed praedones, as Bernard Ad Clerū Sermo in Cencilio
hemens. ele∣gantly declaimeth the prophane Priests, especially the Prelates of his time: Soul-thieves and murderers, rather than true Ministers.
Ministers shall I call them in Divinity? monsters they are in Morality. Beasts in mens shapes, rather than Ministers, which ought to bee the best of men. Oh the build∣ing up of sin! the betraying of our Saviour's interesse! and the blood of immortall souls, that will bee requi∣red at your hands! I say at your hands, if any such are here. What I thou that teachest another, teachest thou not thy self? Art a light to them that sit in darkness, and yet the light that is in thee is but dark∣nesse? Tell'st others of a narrow way to heaven, and yet art treading thy self the broad way to hell? Press∣est humility, holinesse, and heaven∣ly-mindednesse in the Pulpit, and there is nought but pride, profane∣nesse, coveteousnesse, or contention in thy practice? Warn'st others a∣gainst all sinne, and against all ap∣pearance of sinne, and to adorn the doctrine of God our Saviour in all things, as ever they would enjoy him or heaven; and yet walkest thy self, as if there were neither sin, nor suffering, God or Gospell, hell or hea∣ven, to be shut into, or shut out from? And art thou a Minister (thinkest thou) that Christ wil, & Christians must own? Oh! how will Christ shake off such prophesiers in his name, in the open view and prospect both of men and Angels at the last day? and professe unto them, I never knew you, i. e. I ne∣ver owned you, Depart from mee yee that work iniquity. Ah wretches! take yee my Covenant into your mouths, and take up my Commission as Ministers, and yet live like miscreants? Verily if there be a furnace of divine vengeance heated one seven times more, then usuall, these shall fill it: if there be an hotter place in hell than others, these shall have and howl in it. If you will not receive it from mee, read I pray, Rom. 2.17. to the end, Mat. 7, 22.23. Psalm 50.15. Hos 4.6.
Rev. 19.20, 21. O Christians, have you no tears left for these men? no bowels of pity and compassion? especially when the Church of Christ i so concerned in them? Alas! without eminent repentance, there remains no∣thing but wo, wo, wo, for them. For wrath and astonishment, for horrour and a∣mazement, for blacknesse and chains under darkness are such reserved, for ever and ever. Such Angels, whosoever scape, shall be sure to be tormented among the damned Devills. Sect. 2. Let us mourn for uncommissio∣ned Ministers. Ministers! do I mean such? nay rather they are busie-bodies in other mens matters. Ministers by intrusion they are, and equivocally; but not by investiture not properly; if in title, yet not in truth. Their judgement pro∣ceeds of themselves, and usually are in judgement and for destruction to the sheep; not for the preservation, but for the perdition of the souls that are led by, and listen to them; witnesse those Jeremiah 14.14, 15, 16. and Chap. 27.25.
2 Pet. 2.1. &c. So usuall hath it been, for self-Ministers, to be soul mur∣derers, Nor do the Prophets onely de∣claim such for false Prophets, who run, and God ne're sent them with that message; but such likewise who run and God never sent the men: or if you will, such who prophesied & God never sent them, Jer. 23.21. and 14.14.15. aswel as those who prophesied what God never spoke to them. It is true that ordinarily both these met in one and the same per∣sons. And is it not as true as familiar and frequent in our times? It never was (I am apt to think) more usuall in Israel, than now it is in England, that such who prophesie without designation or warrant from God, prophesie the deceit of their own hearts, instead of the Word of God. Ezek. 13.1, 2, 3, 17. Jer. 14.1. & 23.16, 26. And are not such, think we, for a lamentation? yea, and let them be for a lamentation. Oh friends! these, these are they, that have been so much com∣plained of by God, Jeremiah 23.21, 32. so much cautioned to the godly, Jer. 29. ver 8, 9. So much the curse of that Prince, who hath given them counte∣nance, 1 Kings 22. verse 1. ad 37. and have so miserably cheated, and per∣niciously corrupted the people that have reposed confidence, or taken com∣placenie in them, Ezekiel 13. verse 4. ad 17. Oh Christians! as there were false Prophes also among the people, hath not Christ foretold
Mat. 7.15. & 24.23, 24, 25, 26. 2 Pet. 2.1. &c. 1 Joh. 4.1. that there shall bee false teachers among you? and have not our eyes seen them? men of the same cha∣racter, and of the same cariage, which he foretold? and have not the same sad consequences been found among us, who have read their description delusions, and dreadfull issues in the 2 Pet. 2. and in the Epistle of Jude? Sirs, that our souls could weep in secret for them! and for the Church, Cause and Covenant of our God, that suffer through and by them! And as for you the Prophets and Ministers of God, let me say to every one of you from the Lord, what was sometime said unto Ezekiel. Son of man, prophesie against the Prophets of Israel (Saith he, of England say I, to you) that prophesie, & say unto them that prophesie out of their own hearts: Hear ye the word of the Lord Thus saith the Lord God Wo unto the foolish Prophets, that follow their own spirit, and have seen nothing &c. Ezek. 13.1, 2, &c.
Use 2. Of holy caution, Is it so that such who are to teach authoritatively in the Church must be both qualified for the Office, and have the Office commit∣ted to them? I have this to beseech and beg, to command and charge you, from and by the Lord. Take heed, Oh! take heed, of adventuring upon publick au∣thoritative teaching in his Church, till you have both of these; parts and pow∣er, qualifications and commission gi∣ven you of Jesus Christ. Sect. 1. Do not adventure upon this Of∣fice without qualfications. This is such an Office, that (what head is so able! What heart is so accurate and honest!) who is equall to it? If the Apostle cry∣eth out ; who is equall or suf∣ficient? 2 Cor. 2.16. What must we do who are not more short of his Apostle∣ship, than we are of his abilities? Sure∣ly no life can be too good, no learning can be too great for the Ministry, nay or good or great enough. A Pastor among his peo∣ple, like Saul among his subjects, should be higher at least by head and shouldiers both for fidelity and for ability, for soundnesse of apprehensions, for simpli∣city of affections and for sincerity and unbiastnesse in all his actions. Like Ez∣ra, one that hath prepared his heart to seek the law of the Lord, and to do it, and to teach in Israel statutes and judgments, Ezra 7.10. Who-ever may be blame-wor∣thy
a bishop must be blamelesse as the Stew∣ard of God. 1 Tim 3.2. as the Apostle inculcateth twice together. Tit. 1.6, 7. Nor is it enough that he be good really but he must have a good report; and this not only of them that are within, but of them likewise, which are without. 1 Tim. 3.7. But because 'tis not life, so much as learning, which is now adays made the matter of question, if not of contumely and contention: Let mee have the liberty to leave my sense in this likewise. And I beseech you, let not pride, let not prejudice, let not precipi∣tancy, or what-ever else, shut up your ears, or stop your hearts against it. Oh! never think that you are apt to be teachers of others, unlesse you are able to teach others also. Know that such a one had need be full of goodnesse, and filled with all knowledg, who is fit (especially of Of∣fice) to admonish others Rom. 15.14. Full of judgment and of might, Mic. 3.8 He had need with Ezra, be a ready scribe in the Law of God, Ezra
7.6. a scribe instructed to the Kingdom of God Ma. 13.52. one of pickt and choice abilities and experience, worth and wisdome; a messenger, and interpreter one among a thousand, Job 33.23. an able Ministe of the New Testament, 2 Cor 3.6. 'Well may such be reckoned by ou Apostle among the Impostors of the las times, who understand not, 2 Pet. 2. 1. cum 12. but ar willingly ignorant 2 Pet. 3.8. of which sort are they that creep into houses, and lead captive silly women laden with sins, led away of divers lusts, ever learning, and never able to come to the know∣ledg of the truth 2 Tim. 3.6.7. But never were, or shall they be reputed a∣mong the Pastors of the last times; for these are to hold fast the faithful word as they have been taught, and are able by sound doctrine both to exhort and con∣vince the gain-sayers Tit.
1.9. These cast not off, but continue in the thing which they have learned and been as∣sured of. 2 Tim. 3.14. A good Minister of Christ is one nourished up in the words of faith, and of good doctrine whereunto hee hath attained. 1 Tim. 4.6 True it is, that wee are fallen among men and times, that discourage, dissuade and disgrace learning: but let not that de∣ter us, who are not (through mercy) ut such, that on the other hand, quic∣n, cherish, countenance it, and speak mfortably unto all the Levites that teach he good knowledg of the Lord. Chro. 30. 22. It's true, some would have us Preachers like Je∣boams Priests, only of the lowest of the eople. 1 King. 12.31. at least, for lite∣ature (not to mention livelyhood.) And well may such indeed passe for the Priests of Jeroboam, for (with me 'tis eyond doubt) they are not the Prea∣hers of Jesus, i.e. by his allowance and ppointment. No; Christians, his are pproved workmen, that need not be asha∣ed, rightly dividing the word of truth, Tim 2.15. The Pastors after his heart e such, as shall (and therefore can) feed is People with knowledg and understan∣ding. Jer. 3.15. not blind seers, igno∣ant watch-men, or Shepherds that can ot understand. Isai. Chap. 56. verse 10, 11. I do not say, but you may be good men, and have but little or no learning; but I dare not say, you will make good Ministers with∣out learning; for how should you? I pray consider.
N. 1. Will not your relations to God ca upon you for learning? He imploys none but the wise and faithfull to be his Stew∣ards. Mat. 13.52. How can you bee his mouth? Jer. 15.19. his messengers? Isa. 42.19. or the men of God 1 Tim. 6.11. else, who are to make known the mysteries of his Gos∣pell? If you are the mouth of God, let us hear you speak as the Oracles of God. 1 Pet. Chapter 4. verse 11. Who do expect a proof of Christ speaking in and by you 2 Cor. 13.3. if you are the Mes∣sengers of the Lord of Hosts, Let us see that your lips do preserve knowledg, that men may find the law at your mouth Malac. Chapter 2. verse 7. And if you are men of God, make us at least some way sensible, that you are furnished with instructions to every good work. 2 Tim. Chap. 3 verse 17. N. 2. Mat. 5.14. Will not your relations to the people call upon you for learning? These you ought to warn and teach in all wisedom, Isa. 9.16 Col. 1.28.
Mat 13.52. How shall you be their lights? their leaders, and instructors else unto the Kingdom of God? If you are blind lea∣ders of the blind, both shall fall into the ditch, Mat. 15.14. And a dreadfull thing it will b for you, if God's people are destroyed for lack of knowledge in you, Hos 4.6. Your lips should preserve know∣ledge for the people, as a publick store∣house; and they must seek the law at your mouth, Mal. 2.7. If there arise matters too hard for them, they must arise and ask you, Deut. 17.8. ad 12. Ezek. 44.24. And how shall you teach them, if ye are yet to learn the Oracles of God your selves? Heb. 5.12. Thou that teachest another, teachest thou not thy self, saith the Apostle? Rom. 2.12. N. 3. Will not the requisites and duties of your office call upon you for learning? Surely the Law should not perish from the Priest, nor counsel from the wise, nor the Word from the Prophet, Jer. 18.18. Men may declaim humane or School-learn∣ing very confidently; but whereunto will a Minister's duty arise, unless he be furnished with some competency there∣of? How shall hee convince gain sayers without it,
. shutting them up in their argumnts and answers? or stop the mouths of the learned adversaries, who fly either to the originall texts, or to those orderly contextures of truth, which have received the allowance and con∣sent both of teachers and Christians, to stand as maximes of unquestionable truths? Besides how shall he rightly di∣vide the word of truth else, 2 Tim. 2.15. or reconcile the Scriptures which seem∣ingly differ, if he hath no acquaintance with Logick, Rhetorick, or Grammar? Again, how shall he reveal the sense of Scriptures entirely, and cause the people to understand the reading? Nehemi. 8. ver. 7, 8. Especially, since there are so many riddles Ezek. 17 2. and dark sayings
Ps. 78.2. in them, and all expositions of, and ob∣servations from them, are to bear such exact accord to, and to be examined by the originall, which the Holy Ghost in∣spired. Nay, or how shall he so much as read the Scriptures intelligently without some humane teachings and learning? Deliver this Bible to one that is not at all learned, saying, read this I pray you, and must he not say I cannot, for I am not learned! Isa. 29.12, Had wee to do with no more then Paul's Epistles; how many things must be acknowledged in them, both hard to be understood, and hard to be utterred? Heb. 5.11. But what do the unlearned and unstable? Let Peter tell you: They wrest them, as they do also the other Scriptures, unto their own destru∣ction, 2 Pet. 3.16. 'Tis in vain to tell me that Jesus Christ was not learned. For doth not he himself assure me otherwise? The Lord God hath given me the tongue of the learned, and opened mine ear to hear as the learned, Isa. 50.4. And do not his auditors assure me the same too? Mat. 13.54, 55. Joh. 7.15. Say you the Apo∣stles were not learned? and as for the Prophets how illitterate were they! But sirs, do the Scriptures say the same like∣wise? Indeed, was Moses such an one, who was learned in all the wisedom of the Egyptians? Act. 7.22. or was Daniel, to whom God had given skill in all learn∣ning and wisedom? Dan. 1.17. or was Paul that was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, Act. 23.5. and was so emi∣nently versed both in humane learning Tit. 1.22 Act. 17.28 and divine, that Festus thinks much learning had made him even mad? Act. 26.24. Again, were Samuel, Elijah, or Elisha so unlearned, who had so many pupills, and bred up so many scholars, which
were called sons of the Prophets, at Nai∣oth, Bethel, Jericho, and Gilgall, which were in this respect little other than Universities and Schools of learning? 2 Sam. 19.19, 20. 2 Kings 2.2 3, 5, 12. and 4.38. as we read of a Colledge at Jerusalem likewise, 2 Chron. 34.22. and 2 Kings 22.14. True it is, that grace cal∣led many such to be Prophets and Apo∣stles, who were unlearned: but then the same grace which called, did by and by qualify thē with learning, that they were, as Micah saith of himself, full of power by the Spirit of the Lord, and of judgment, and of might, Micah 3.8. If they had not learning by outward education, they had learning by inward inspiration, and spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.21. If they had not acquired learning, i. e. by their own stu∣des, they had (which is better) infused learning by the Spirit of grace. The Spirit did still make an extraordinary supply of learning from himself, unto such as were allowed of him in the Mini∣sty, that were without an ordinary sup∣ply thereof by Schools of learning. To one was given saith
Paul, by the Spirit the word of wisedom, to another the word of knowledg by the same Spirit, to another prophe∣sie, to another discerning of spirits, to another diverse kinds of tongues, to another the inter∣pretation of tongues; all which were wrought by the self-same Spirit, 1 Cor. 128, 10.11.
2. Sect. Do not adventure upon publick authoritative teaching in the Church with∣out a commission. If you expect the assi∣stance, acceptance, allowance, and ap∣probation of Christ; Oh! do not ad∣venture upon it, without authority first given you of Christ. If affectation, if a∣varice, if ambition, or whatever else it be, shall be putting you on; let the aw of this truth of God, & your accounta∣bleness to the God of truth prepōderate & stay you back; as ever you would answer it to Christ, to his Church, or to your own Consciences another day Sirs, the time is coming, when al Vzards shall bee pluck'd off, and what were your aims by, what your abilities for, and why you declined authorzing to the Ministry shall bee produced in open Court, and conscience shall bee put to it (will you nill you) to an∣swer such interrogatories as these are: Who made you a teacher in Israel? who required this at your hands? who gave you this authority?
&c. And sirs, will not this bee a sad indictment from the Lord in that day? I did not send these Prophets, these preachers, yet they ran; I have not spoken to them yet they prophesied. Well; is it so, that such teachers must have a commission as well as qualifications from our Lord Jesus Christ? Oh! that such among us, who exercise the Ministry, enjoy the maintenance, and expect the reverence of Ministers, yet never entred by the door of Ordination upon the discharge of this Office, but have climbed up some other way, would seriously lay it to heart! What? is the Ministry an Office? and the external committing of the Ministry unto men God's Ordinance? how is it then, that such do (that I say not that such dae) ordinarily exercise the Mini∣stry, as to the preaching part, who never were, and perhaps never will be, who ne∣ver did design, nor do now desire to be solemnly set apart to the Ministry? Consider I pray you these two things. 1. That to do the proper work of a Minister or Officer of God cannot bee safe. 2. To do the preaching work of a Minister cannot but be sinfull. N. 1. To do the proper work of a Minister or Officer of God cannot bee safe, without his ordination or appoint∣ment thereunto. Men may passe it by, it is true, but God will not put it up un∣punished. The holiest pretexts of Korah and his complices will not help them, if they seek the Priesthood. Numb. 16.3.10, 31.32, 33. God is so far from bear∣ing withit in common men, that he would at no hand take it from the chiefest ma∣gistrate: witnesse Sauls losse of the Kingdome for it, though burdened then with so great straits 1 Sam. 13 8 to 15 & Ʋzziahs leaprosie to the day of his death for it, though (before this) hee had been blessed with so great successe. 2 Chron. 26.16 to 22. And now beloved, is not ordinary authoritative teaching in the Church the proper work of a Mi∣nister of Christ? Yea; what is, if this benot? Wherefore or whereunto is a Minister or∣dained else, if not to be a Preacher and Teacher of the Church in faith and ve∣rity? 1
Tim. 2.7. wherefore worthy of double honour else, if not for labouring in the word & doctrine, which eminently bespeaketh preaching? 1 Tim. 5.17. Wherefore is the Gospell and this Office committed to him else, if not for mani∣festing the word through preaching? Tit. 1.3. yea indeed, not so much to baptize as to preach. 1 Cor. 1.17. Beloved, there∣fore 'tis we are allowed of God to be put in trust with the Gospel, 1 Thes. 2, 4. ther∣fore are we appointed of God to this trust in the Gospel, 2 Tim. 1.11. there∣fore and thereunto it is that we are so adjured and called upon God in the Gospell. I charge thee before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judg the quick and the dead at his appearing, and his Kingdom; preach the word, be instant inseasō, out of seasō, &c 2 Tim. 4.1, 2. 'Sirs, is there any proper act of a Gospel-Mi∣nister? If there be not, why do you not plainly tell us, there is no such Officer left us? If there be, may not preaching put in as fair and full, yea a fairer and fuller claim than any? Say you, the administration of the Sacraments is al proper act of this Officer? Be it so but consider I beseech you, whether preaching may not put in for the pre∣cedence
thereunto? Are Gospell-Mi∣nisters more eminently, or more expres∣ly said, either to be commissioned to be Ministers, for that act then for this? 1 Cor. 1.17. 1 Tim. 2.7. or more commen∣ded in their ministry by that act, than by this? 2 Tim. 2.15. or more to bee counted of with respect to their mini∣stry, for that act, than for this? 1 Tim. 5.17. 1 Thes. 5.12, 13. or are we more often, or more openly circum-scribed, or described, as the Ministers of the Lord by that, than by this? ibid & Heb. 13.7. Or are wee more concerned, and commanded, and charged to at∣tend upon that act of our Ministery, than this? Rom. 12.7, 8. 1 Tim. 4.13, 14, 15, 16. Sure I am, though I ex∣clude not the administration of the Sacraments from being a proper act of an Office-Minister, and one of those purposes and ayms, why God will have men put into the Ministry; yet prea∣ching the Gospell is with more abun∣dant frequency expressed among the acts of Ministers, and with more abun∣dant fulness evinced to be the aym of God by the Ministry. If you have but o∣verly read the Scriptures, yet you cannot
but observe this. With what conso∣nancy therefore to sound reason or Scripture-revelation the administrati∣on of Sacraments shall be received to bee the Proper act of a Minister of Christ: and authoritative teaching re∣rejected mean-while, judge ye? And if it be (as it is proved to be) the pro∣per act of a Minister thus to preach au∣thoritatively; what an adventure you run, what an attempt you rush upon, Oh that you may attend in time, who Or∣dinarily discharg this part of our Office without Ordination thereunto.
N. 2. Todo the preaching work of a Mi∣nister ordinarily, without Ordination can∣not but be sinfull. What though we yeeld that there may be an essay without it for tryal of qualifications? wil it there∣fore be an excuse for such who make it a trade or course? or because the sons of the Prophets may be called thereunto occasionally? will it therefore be a co∣vert for him who is exercised therein or∣dinarily? Can you so forget the prohibi∣tions, precepts, precedents and pregnant characters & titles of preachers mentioned formerly. *Is it not sinful for an unofficed person to baptize? Consult else the di∣sputes between Papists and Protestants about midwives baptisme. And can that be sinfull for you, yet preaching sinlesse? When both these are prescribed in the same commission, and preaching hath the precedence; not onely in the order of words there, Mat. 28.19. but in re∣gard o worth and eminency else-where, as the more notable end, and nobler er∣rand why we were sent forth not to bap∣tize, as our Apostle saith, but to preach the Gospel, 1 Cor. 1.17. i.e. not so much to that as to this. But more particular∣ly see I beseech you, whether this sin tends to these three things at least. 1. To the vacating of this Gospel-Officer, as to this act at least, of preaching. For if this bee a common operation, what needs a peculiar officer for it? If it may bee, nay must bee (for so far some carry it) the work of every other man, to la∣bour for abilities to preach, and to lay them out in preaching; what need we as to this purpose of an office-Minister? Is there a speciall officer for the common work of every particular member in the body civil, military, or naturall? If not
there, why here I pray you? Well: must we have none to teach authoritatively and by office in the Churches? you can∣not I suppose shut out the light of so many Scriptures, as you have seen and heard to speak the contrary. Must we? how then (beloved) can authoritative teaching be every ones imployment? We have no speciall organ in the body for feeling, that is the common work of e∣very member, but we have for fight, for smell, taste, and hearing, 'What it is with others I know not, but a thing of sad remark and resentment it is with me; that so many of those, who at first have contended for no more than that unofficed men may preach, have at length cast off the office of preachers, and therewith cast out all the Ordi∣nances and Churches of our dearest Jesus. 2. To the violating of Gospel-order. For what is more openly delivered here, than that every one do his own business, stu∣dying to bee quiet, 1 Thes. 4.11. That as the Lord hath called every one, so hee walk and abide in the same calling wherein he was called,
1 Cor. 7.17, 20. That no one think more highly of himself than he ought to think, but soberly, according as God hath dealt to every man the measure of faith, Rom. 12.3. And that every member keep to his own place in the bo∣dy; God having set the members in the bo∣dy, every one of them, as it hath pleased him, 1 Cor. 12, 18, &c. 3. To usurpation upon the Gospel-Chur∣ches. For who reads not, that they have rule over you, and must bee so remem∣bred, who have spoken to you the Word of the Lord? Heb. 13.7. That such as are to admonish you from the Lord, have authority, and are over you in the Lord? 1 Thes. 5.12. and must be esteemed very highly in love by you for their work sake, ver. 13. If gifted brethren are to labour in the Word and doctrine, to preach or teach authoritatively in the Churches; the Churches must then per∣form them reverence. 1 Tim. 5.17. yea, & pay them maintenance: for what hath God more cleerly ordained, than that they who preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.14. and that he that is taught in the Word communicate to him that teacheth in all good things? Gal. 6, 6.
'But I for∣bear any longer to rub upon this soar; trusting thorow grace, that the Liber∣tinism produced by this liberty of pro∣phesying (as it is misnamed) will at length awaken all the people of God and preachers of the Gospell to a just averiaion from, & abhorrence of it. And I no way doubt but such Prophts at length, as run to & fro, preaching the dreams & delusions of their own hearts, shall be ashamed every one of his vision which he hath propesied, neither shal they wear any longr a rough garment to de∣ceive. i.e. coun∣terfeit the true Pro∣phets, who commonly wore such garments. 2 King. 1.8 Isai. 20.2. Mat. 3.4. se Hut∣chenson up∣on the place But he shall say, I am no Prophet, I am an husband man: for man taught me to keep cattell from my youth Zech. 13.4, 5 As for you brethren and beloved who take your selvs to be apt and able, inwardly called and competently qua∣lified to tach others in the Church, why should not this Office be committed to you, that you may with peace to you, with profit to others, and without pro∣vocation to God authoritatively teach others? Yea, and let me intreat and in∣gage you by our Lord Jesus; as ever you would have his presence with you, his protection and gracious providence
over you, his power aiding, and his grace prospering you; do not exercise the Mi∣nistry ordinarily, without or before en∣trance thereinto by Ordination. Oh! be not so averse to Christs honour, the Churches happinesse, & your own com∣fort I but if you are indeed qualified for the Ministry, see that you have the Mi∣nistry committed to you. Sirs, wy should your proving for the Ministery seem so dreadfull? or putting into the Ministery seem no more defirable to you who professe, that this one act of the Ministry is so delicious and dear unto you? If your aims are right and abili∣ties reall, why there should be such an a∣versation from tryal, I know not. Sure I am, you should be first proved, and then, and not till then use the Office of a Bi∣shop, being found blamelesse 1 Tim. 3.10. cum ver. 1, &c. If you are not averse from, nor affraid of triall, ac∣quit your selvs, and acquaint us where your exceptionlye, and put not such a stumbling block in your brethrens way. Why there should be so much loath∣nesse or aversnesse to Ordination, if there be so much love of, and abili∣ty for the office, as is pretended, I must profess I see not.
Object. Do you tell mee, the Apostle saith, ye may all prophesie one by one? 1 Cor. 14.31. Answ. True; all ye that are Prophets, of whom he is now speak∣ing, 29, 32, verses. He saith not all ye people. 'One whole sex are prohibited, 34, 35, verses, and for the other, what less than this speaks he? Are all Pro∣phets? 1 Cor. 12.29. i. e. all are not, Where doth the Scripture tell you of unofficed Prophets? men that never were, nor never will be put into office, yet ordinarily did and might perform this act of office? See you not how di∣stinct the mention is of the Prophet and righteous man? Mat. 10.42. and how frequently the Prophet is delivered in upon the Catalogue of Church-Offi∣cers, even in this same Epistle? 1 Cor. 12.28. Eph. 4.11, &c. Object Eldad and Medad (say you) do prophesie in the Camp. Numb. 11.27. Answ. True; and who would not have wished with Moses in the same case? would God all the Lord's people were Prophets! But, Lo, when was it? not til the Lord took off the Spirit that was upon Moses, and it rested upon them, ver.
26. 'And who were they? Of them that were written, but went not out un∣to the Tabernacle, ver. 26. i. e. of the Seventy Elders (officers of Israel) whom God commands Moses to bring thither, and covenants to put upon them of his Spirit, ver. 16, 17, 18 Object. But we are all Priests unto God, Rev. 1.6. Answ. True; but not all Prophets, 1 Cor. 12.29. The same Christ who hath made us Priests hath made us Kings too, a royall Priest-hood, 1 Pet. 2.9. We are neither properly, but in a figurative sense onely. 'Will not this vest us with a civill authority to mulct and punish? how will that then, to Minister publickly or preach? Object. But we all ought to be teach∣ers of others?
Heb. 5.12. Answ. True, even women are not exempted, but en∣joyn'd Titus 2.3, 4. Yet not in the Churches, how eminently soever gifted, 1 Cor. 14.34, 35. Privately and charita∣tively all may, all must, as I have said; Oh let your families, friends, and with whom ye walk in fellowship witnesse it, and let the Word of God dwell richly in you to this purpose, Col. 3.16. But ought therefore all to teach publickly and authoritatively likewise? Nay, here our Apostle: Are all teachers, 1 Cor. 12. ver. 29. i. e. all are not, all ought not, 1 Cor. 12.29. 'Shew us I pray you, where any gifted brother may assume autho∣rity to himself? or where he is allow∣ed of our Saviour, as in his name and stead, to teach publickly in the assem∣blies of his servants? and where atten∣tion is due to him in so doing by com∣mandment from the Lord? Hath Christ ever said to such as he hath to his office-Ministers? He that heareth you heareth me, and he that despiseth you, despiseth me, &c. Luk. 10.16. Object. But we must speak often one to another, rebuke, consider, comfort, edifie, and exhort one another; not on∣ly our families, but especially those with whom wee walk in fellowship. Answ. True; do it and spare not. No good man or Minister durst disswade or dis∣courage it. Nay, this wee do command and charge you by the Lord.
Mal. 3.16 Levit. 19.17. Heb. 10.24 25. 1 Thes. 5.11. Heb. 3.13. But what is this to warrant your publick preach∣ing in the Churches of Christ? Is there no difference between that and private Christian-converse & conferences, which grow out of charity and the communion of Saints? 'Do you, will you say, but that women among you as wel as men are intended by the Apostle in those Scriptures, whereto you allude? yet who seeth not that women must keep silence in the Churches? 1 Cor. 14.34. Pray shew us from Scripture, where men out of office are enjoined to such publick teaching, or so to teach, from which women are precluded? Object. Say you as every man hath received the gift, even so should wee mi∣nister the same one to another, as good stewards of the manifold grace of God? Answ. True; 'But your selves wil not say (I think) that women are excluded from what this text enjoyneth. Accept this command then in it's greatest lati∣tude, it can import no more than this, if you allow (what I am sure you must, and believe you do) in it's full accord with other Scriptures, that wee mini∣ster the gift we have received one to an o∣ther, every one in his own orb, in his order; Publick Ministers of the Church, (in which he instanceth ver 11.) in a
publick and authoriative way, private members of the Church in a private and charitative way, as did Aquila and Pris∣cilla, Act. 18.26.
'And beyond doubt, those women that laboured with Paul in the Gospel, Phil. 4.3. for he suffered not a woman to teach in the Church, 1 Tim. 2.12. And truly otherwise, up∣on the same ground that you infer from this text, that every one who hath gifts for publick preaching must minister the same publickly? upon the same ground with equal right and reason may ano∣ther inter, that this gifted person must preach publickly, whether the Church approves him gifted, and indulgeth him this liberty or not: (and indeed where that call and comprbation of the Church hath any foot-steps in Scrip∣ture, which some speak of, e're such shall exercise his gifts, I see not) and again, that every man who hath recei∣ved gifts or abilities to administer the Sacraments, or to absolv from censures, may and must minister the same to o∣thers, which you do not, dare not grant, nor indeed may without destroy∣ing the order of the Churches, despising the Ordinances of Christ, and denying the necessity of Ministers by office. And I pray consider, whether more eminent abilities be needfull for the ordinary ministration of Sacraments, than for preaching? and whether you are more evidently excluded by this text, or by any other from ordinary ministration of Sacraments than of sermons? But if you limit this command, according to the liberty which the words afford you, it speaks for us, and against you. For what are stewards, but men in of∣fice? and in what other notion, is it ever used in Scripture, or where? And thus it wil be no more, than this, in the sense of it: That as every man hath received the office (which is by gift frequently understood in Scripture, Rom. 12.6, 7. Eph. 4.8.
cum 11.) so he minister, viz. according to his trust and office; which is illustrated particular∣ly, v. 11. wherein he distinguisheth these officers or stewards, into two species or ranks, viz. such as are to speak from Christ, and such as are to serve in his Church: such as are to be the mouth of God, authoritatively to guide them; and such as are to minister, as of the a∣bility which God hath given, i. e. Bi∣shops or Presbyters, and Deacons as he frequently elsewhere maketh the distri∣bution, Phil. 1. 1 Tim. 1.3. &c. These he describeth by the most eminent acts of their office, and directeth how they shall discharge them. Object. Why? they that were scat∣tered abroad went every where preach∣ing the Word? Acts 8.4. True, but who were they? If you say men out of of∣fice, let us hear your proof, the onely particular man therewith mentioned is Philip, ver. 5. who was e're this ordain∣ed, Chap. 6.5, 6. and was an Evangelist Chap. 21.8 Again, when did they it? when the Church was all scattered a∣broad, which was at Jerusalem, verse 1. And is there no difference between prea∣ching under the scattering of the Chur∣ches, and during their settlement? 'Though I think that the universal term [all] ver. 1. doth rather intend all the Ministers of that Church, except the A∣postles, than all the members. For why, or where should the Apostles have stay∣ed, if all these had been scattered
abroad? Or how could Saul have been stil making havock of the Churchthere, haling men and women to prisons, v. 3. which is another probability that they were onely men in office, who went thus preaching to and fro, to which you may add the pregnancy of the expression, which Luk, maketh use of verse 4 , which this Evangelist hath so often and onely used of preachers by office, Act. 5.4. and 8.12. and 10.36. Luk. 8.1. and 9.6. and 20.1. as the late learned laborious and pious Assemblie do animadvert.see their answer to the Reas. of the diss. brethren, p 30, 31, 32. Object. 'But we find Apollos teaching the way of the Lord diligently, even in the Synagogue? Act. 18.25. True, but who was Apollos? not onely an ele∣quent man, & mighty in the Scriptures, verse 24. but is expresly mentioned to be one of the Ministers by whom the Co∣rinthians believed, 1 Cor. 3.5, 6. and in that regard he is owned by Paul, as his brother Apollos 1 Cor. 16.12. and ranked with him & Pet, 1 Cor. 1.12. Say you he was not put into office when he preach∣ed at
Ephesus, Act. 18. but how prove you it? Surely the mention of his knowledg only of John's baptism, i. e. his doctrine and Ministry, ver. 25, will be too slender a proof thereof; especially if you consi∣der the other characters therewith given him, and the contracted knowledge of the Disciples of Jesus, some time after their first sending forth, and that John had his Disciples, as well as had Jesus his. But further suppose we it: yet what can be more inferred, than we readily grant? viz. that that one who purposeth the Ministry, and is preparatorily quali∣fied for it, may give proof of his qualifi∣cations by preaching some sermons e're his putting into office; into which it is manifest that Apollos was, if not already put, yet not long after this at Corinth, to which he passed from Ephesus ver. cum Ch. 19.1. 26. Object. 'Doth not Jehosophat send his princes toteach in the Cities of Judah? 2 Chron. 17, 7. and with them the Priests and Levites v. 8, and they taught in
Ju∣dah, v. 9. True; So that there is never an unsent teacher. Amemorable and imita∣ble precedē (no doubt) for supreme go∣vernours: that the teachings of the Law of the Land and of the Law of the Lord do go together, the Magistrates teach∣ing that, and taking care for, and giving countenance to the Ministers teaching this. But behold, it is so done, as the mat∣ters of the Lord and the matters of the Kin, are distinctly ordered by distinct officers, as the same Jehosophat appoints Chap 19.11. So that it no where appear∣eth that the secular Lords and Princes did teach the same matters, and in the same māner, as did the Priests & Levites.
'Object. Say any yet amongst us? Sir, we have been proved and approved by the Ministers of Jesus. Som of us former∣ly, under the power of the Committees; some now before the present Cōmission∣ers which are intrusted with the inductiō of Ministers. Why should you press us to ordination, who can already offer so fair and full a plea for the office? Ans. Be it so, as you have said in the former part; (though how many have crept in at another door without either proba∣tion or approbatiō. I am loth to speak) Surely, as I cannot but cōmend so much care on the part of the civil Magistrate, e're he invests men with the civil right of enjoying the maintenance, or inducteth them to the exercise of the Ministry in such a particular parish; yet this co∣vering I must tell you, will be too nar∣row for you, who expect the doubleho∣nour and execute the office of the Mini∣sters of Christ. How strictly you were proved, your selves best know; but that you were not solemnly approved, with prayer, fasting, and imposition of hands, who knoweth not? If your selves will but ask your approvers now, or hereto∣fore, you will easily receive this ready answer: That they did not put you in∣to the office of Ministers; (such kind of ordinations having no patrons (that I know) among men, nor pretexts for it from God, nor scarce any consistence with any principles amongst us what∣soever.) But what they did was to per∣mit and approve you, so far as concern∣ed them, as delegated from the civill Magistrate, to the exercise and enjoy∣ments of the Ministry in such a place. Formerly none might be approved, but such as were already office-Ministers; at present none but such as are (if not actually made Ministers, yet) apt and able for the Ministry; the actuall investiture of men with which Office is not their present buisnesse. And though whether this investiture be in the power of the Presbytery, or of the people, may not be so well accor∣ded: Yet that there is something else, than the present approbation, for ma∣king one an Office-Minister, is on all hands between those of the presbyteri∣an and Congregational perswasions assented to.' Sirs, may any or all this weigh with you? Or will you yet retain your pre∣judices? Let me onely mind you of that of the Apostle: That no man think of himself, more highly then he ought to think; Rom. 12, 3. and renew my for∣mer motion once more to you, and I passe to the next use. Sirs, are you gifted in earnest for the Ministry? and have you not gilded over your prea∣ching out of Office, with pretexts only? Oh! com, come, try your qualificati∣ons, and take up a commission, and see whether wee'l not give you the right hand of fellowship. Ʋse 3. Of hearty Counsell, wherein I must and shall be very contract, being sensible both of your work, and my own
weakness. It shall be 1. To you unto whom this office is or shall be this day committed. 2. To you over whom God hath or shall commit such offi∣cers. Sect. 1. To you unto whom this Of∣fice already is, or shall be this day com∣mitted. Is it so &c. This calleth upon you to do the whole Offic that is com∣mitted to you of God, and o to demean your selves as those that have this holy Office commttd to you of God. 1. 'To d the whole Office that is committed to you. Make full proof of your Mini∣stry. 2 Tim 4.5 'Tis (let me tell you) of a vast cmpass; doctrinall, disci∣plinary, publick, private, in season and out of season, &c. and of a vast conse∣quence: ele it hd never ben so affe∣ctionately perswaded by Christ, and so awfully pressed by his Apostle, or so frequently by both. Joh. 21.15, 16, 17. 1
Tim. 5.21 ch 6.13.14. 2 Tim. 4.1. ad 6. As ever we would have peace in our own bosomes, or be pure from others blood, let us with-hold nothing from our people, that is profitable for them to know, and proper for us to com∣municate. This will be their crown, and our comfort. Acts 20.20, 27, 28. If we would not be counted men but of half-hearts, or would not be conten∣ted with an half-holinesse in our peo∣ple, or with an half-heaven for our own persons, let us do, I pray you, our whole work. It cannot be concealed that wee have in these times a great many half-Christians, Act. 26.18. halfe profes∣sors; and it must be confessed, that we have but too many half-ministers, or half-pastours, as to the execution of their Office. And surely, to me it seems not much an inferiour solecism accor∣ding to Scripture, to hear of an half-Minister, as to hear of an half-Chri∣stian in grace, or an half-man in na∣ture. 2. This calleth upon you so to de∣mean your selves in the work of the Mi∣nistry, as those that have the Office com∣mitted unto you of God.
'The man of God, especially in the matters of God, must not be or behave himself, only after the rate of other men. 2 Tim. 2.24. 1 Tim. 6 11. The ordinary works we perform, should leave a relish & sa∣vour of that sacred word we preach, & of this spiritual Office we are put into. An Sirs! what examples, should wee Pastours be to our people in (well∣nigh) every particular! in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity, 1 Iim. 4.12. Tit. 2, 7. 1 Pet. 5 3. He that hath my word, lt him speak my word faithfully, what is the chaffe to the wheat saith the Lord, Jer. 23.28. And oh that we may shew our selves approved unto God, and workmen that need not to bee ashamed before men! 2 Tim. 2.15. Say you how should we? 1 Let us do our work con∣vincingly; convincingly both in regard of others consciences, Joh. 8.9. and of our own Commission.
2 Cor. 6.1. Let us do it with au∣thority, like our Saviour, and not as the Scribes, Mat. 7.29. as those that are ful of power, and of judgment, and of might, by the Spirit of the Lord, Mic. 3.8. That when we preach, or pray, or censure, or comfort, &c. & there cometh in one that believeth not, he may be so convinced of us, and judged of us, and the secrets of his heart made manifest: As that fal∣ling down on his face, he may worship God, and report that God is in us of a truth, 1 Cor. 14.24, 25. 2. Let us do our work conscientiously and sincerely; without partiality as to man, and with purposes for God. 'For why else is our Commission? 1 Tim. 1.11, 12 what else is God's Command? 2 Tim. 2.15. or what lesse will be our comfort? 2 Cor. 1.12. and must be our character, 2 Cor. 2.17. 1 Be not partial towards men, how shall we then prove our selves the Ministers and Stewards of Christ? 2 Cor. 4 1, 2. who must give every one their portion of meat in due season, Luk. 12.42. Let us remember God's Covenant with Levi, Deut. 33 8, 9. and the com∣mand he hath left with us, 1 Tim. 5.21. And truly it is worth our most serious reflections upon our selvs, whether, what the Lord somtime in way of reproof told the Priests, doth not now as particular∣ly reach us, in the midd'st of so many reproches!
viz. Therefore have I also made you contemptible and base before all the people, according as ye have not kept my ways, but have been partil in my law, Mal. 2.9. Again, 2. Let all our purposes center in God. Wee are un∣worthy to bee called his Officers, who are carelesse of his honour, and unworthy that hee should have a care of ours, 1 Sam. 2.30. Sirs, let us not preach our selves, but Jesus the Lord, 2 Cor. 4.5. As of sincerity, as of God, in the sight of God, so let us speak in Christ, 2 Cor. 2.17. What I would we please men? how are we then the servants of Christ? Col 1.10. As we are allowed of God, to be put in trust with the Gospel, even so let us speak not as pleasing men, but God, who trieth our hearts, 1 Thes. 2.4. 3. Let us do our work couragiously & strenuously, with∣out despondency or shrinking, without dejection or sinking. If God's Commis∣sion and concurrence will not bear up our hearts, and bear us up thorow hard∣ships, I know not what will. A prisoner with these at the bar is able to face and fright a Judge upon the bench, Act. 24.25. 'Were we Embassadours in bonds, yet we ought to speak boldly, Ephe. 6. vers. 20. Such is the person we sustain, and the place we stand in. What should baulk or brow-beat us, who have such an authority to warrant us, and such almightinesse with us, to work all our works in us and for us? 2
Tim. 1.11, 12. Were wee private men, or went wee  but upon a private message, well might our hearts mditate terrors. But being Officers of Christ, and such as hee will own to the worlds end, nor bonds, nor blood, or death should move us, Act 20.23, 24, and 21.13 A few bg looks, or bitter words, or biting scoffs are sorry bug-bears to daunt a Commission-offi∣cer of Jesus; to whom is given all pow∣er both in heaven and earth, a he lls us for our encouragement, Mat 28.18, 19, 20. How would we have born to have stood at the bar? Act. 25.6, 7 or have sate in the stocks? c. 16.23, 24, 25. or have been scourged at the Whipping-poast 2 Cor. 11.24. with our predecessors? yet were they bold in our God, to speak the Gospell of God, wih much contention 1 Ihes. 2.4. and waxed the bolder, by their own and others bounds,
Phil. 1.14. Act. 4.29. 4 Let us do our Ministeriall work carefully and diligently: neither list∣ning to our own idlenesse, nor led away of other intanglements. Oh the weight of that one Scripture! worthy to be in∣graven in letters of gold, upon all our Study-doors, and to be continually re∣corded in our hearts. Give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine: Neglect not the gift that is in thee which was given thee by prophesie, with the laying on of the hands of the Presbyte∣ry. Meditate on these things, give thy self wholly to them, that thy pro∣fitting may appear , to all men, in all things, by all means. Take heed un∣to thy self & unto your doctrine, continue in them: for in doing this, thou shalt both save thy self & them that hear thee. 1 Tim. 4.13, 14, 15, 16. 'Are we Officers? we must wait on our Office: he that tea∣cheth on teaching, and he that exhor∣teth on exhortation. Rom. 12.7.8. Whosoever have time to spare for the toys and vanities of the world, we have none, whose time is Christs and his Churches, and who are to give our selvs wholly to the word. 1 Tim.
4.15. Oh how puzng and perplexing would such questions as these be, if Christ should put them unto us. Why stand ye here (perhaps) all the day idle? We cannot say, No man hath hired us. Mat. 20.6, 7. Or what dost thou here Elijah? 1 King. 19.9, 13. be we either in the Cave, or in the croud; either weary of our callings, or wasting our time to and fro about lower concern∣ments? Sirs, are not we the souldiers of Christ? No man that warreth in∣tangleth himself with the affairs of this life, that he may please him who hath chosen him to be a souldier, 2 Tim. 2.4. Wee have Sanctuary work to attend. 'Twas death for the Priests, if they did not abide in the Sanctuary, according to their severall charges, because the a∣nointing oyl of the Lord was upon hem: because they were solemnly ap∣pointed to this work and office, Levit. 10.7. and 21.11, 12. and 8.35. It is not reason that we shal leave the Word of the Lord, say the Apostle, and serve tables,
Act. 6.2 this was in ministring to the bodily necessities of the poor. And shall we leave the Word of the Lord, and serve the times? or be secu∣ring trifles in comparison of eternity, with the miscarriage of our peoples souls? Oh! let us stir up the gift of God that is in us! Had wee nothing to reflect upon, but the laying on of o∣thers hands upon us, this might bee e∣nough to cause us to return upon our own hearts often, and to revive and blow up whatsoever is of love or zeal in us, to a vigorous execution of our of∣fice, 2 Tim. 1.6. Are wee Officers of Christ, and in his Church? Surely wee had need ply our businesse hard. Nor can we (likely) be too busie in our office, who have (I am sure) the highest charge, 2 Tim. 4.1, 2. the heaviest account, Heb. 13.17. the hardest work, 2 Tim. 4.2, 5. Jer. 1.18, 19 and the hottest warfare, (i) 2 Tim. 2.3, 4.
Sect. 2. This truth calleth upon you over whom God hath set or committed, or shall this day commit such officers. This counselleth you how to esteem of, and entertain them in exercise of their trust, and execution of their Ministry. Say you how? As those that are officers of the Lord, and as over you in the Lord, 1 Thes. 5.12. As those that are appoint∣ed of God to watch for your souls, and must give an account, Heb. 13.17. And therefore how should you submit your selves? and obey them, so far as they rule over you in the Lord? that they may give up their account with joy, and not with grief; for that is unprofitable for you, as the Apostle adds. What though such have been, or now shall be outward∣ly appointed by men, yet are they allow∣ed of God to be put in trust with the Gos∣pel, 1 Thes. 2.4. with Act. 13.2, 3. Beloved, those who are ordained of men accor∣ding to God's Ordinance, are yet God's Officers, God's Ministers. What else doth Paul assure us of the Elders, or ordina∣ry Pastors and Teachers of the Church of Ephesus? (which because ordinary, could not be immediately put into of∣fice:) The Holy Ghost made them over∣seers, Act. 20.28. Or what else doth he affirm of those of the Church at Colosse? In his mention of Epaphras; 'tis, our dear fellow-servant, who is for you a faithful Minister of Christ, Col. 1.7. When hee minds them their duty touching Archip∣pus, (who was it seems none of the most circumspect or constant Minister) 'tis thus; Say to Archippus, take heed to the Ministry which thou hast received in the Lord, that thou fulfill it, Col. 4.17. And what other language hear we con∣cerning
Tychicus? Col. 4.7. Tychicus a beloved brother and a faithful Minister, and a fellow-servant in the Lord. So far was it from truth, in the purest primi∣tive times; that they were onely to bee accounted the officers and Ministers of the Lord, who were immediately put in∣to the office by the Lord. Well then; let a man so account of us as of the Mi∣nisters of Christ, and stewards of the my∣steries of God, 1 Cor. 4.1. I say as Mini∣sters of Christ, not of the Common∣wealth, not of Antichrist. I know there is a common reproach rolled upon the Ministry in England, as if we were no o∣ther than Priests of Baal, limbs of Anti∣christ, Antichristian Priests &c. So much unbridled are the spirits and speech of many, that would seem to bee religious, and thereby speak their religion vain.
Isa. 1.26. But beloved call you those, or can they be Antichristian, who have been so evi∣dently opposed by Antichrist, and so emi∣nently owned by Christ; as have been the zealous and strict Ministery in England, and still are to this day? Oh! how can you more honour, more help up Anti∣christ? or hurl more dirt and disgrace in the face of Jesus Christ? than by cal∣ling those Ministers Antichristian, who have been and are so powerfully able, and so prosperously useful to break the league of so many thousands of souls with sin and death, and to bring them over to the reall and ready imbracements, of the service of God and life eternall? 'Chri∣stians, have not your eyes seen, and ears eard of multitudes both of men and women, that have been, and still are be∣gotten by them, unto Christ through the Gospel? and that are built up in communion with him through their Ministry in the Gospel? Built up, not in aëry speculations and dotage, about questions and strifes of words; whereof cometh envy, strife, railings, &c. This is easily done indeed (and among us how eminently) by the subtilty and zeal of seducers, and such as consent not to wholesome words, 1 Tim.
6.3, 4, 5. But lo, multitudes built up, through the good hand of God upon the gracious Ministry in England, in the reall abhorrency of sin, the rich a∣nointings of the Spirit, in the life of faith, the labour of love, in the power of sancti∣fication, poverty of spirit, in heavenliness of their minds within, and holiness of manners without: In a word, to be do∣ers of righteousness, & in the doctrine which is according to godliness. Need I cal for Testimony to a truth so establish∣ed, in the mouth of more then two or three thousand witnesses?
2 Cor. 13.1. Need we, as some others, may the pious prea∣chers to the pious people of England, from it's first reformation say; Need we, as some others, Epistles of com∣mendation to you? or letters of cōmen∣dation from you? Yee are our Epistle writen in our hearts, known and read of all men. Forasmuch as ye are ma∣nifestly declared to be the Epistle of Christ, ministred by us; written not with ink, but with the spirit of the li∣ving God; not in tables of stone, but in fleshly tables of the heart 2 Cor. 3.1, 2.3. What is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoycing? are not even ye, in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ, at his comming? 1 Thes. 2.19. And will you also, being led away with the er∣rour of the wicked, fall from your own steadfastnesse? 2 Pet. 3.17. you of whom we have been so affectionately desirous, as we were willing to have imparted to you, not the Gospel of God only, but also our own souls, because ye were dear to us? 1 Thes. 2.8. And will you also listen to their scurrulous imputations, who compasse us about with words of hatred, and say: Come, and let us smite them with the tongue (who cannot now smite them with the sword) and let us not give heed to any of their words. Jer. 18.18. Why? Sirs, ye are our work in the Lord. If we are not the Ministers of Christ to others, yet doubtlesse we are unto you, for the seal of our ministry are ye in the Lord 1 Cor.
9.1, 2. Say you, ay, but we are antichristian? however we cloak it over, or cover it up? But sirs, upon what reason? whence riseth it? Are we put into the Ministry by antichrist? No, But by instruments that are his pro∣fessed and open adversaries. Do we pro∣mote antichrist by our Ministry? Nei∣ther: This is to pluck him up root and branch, & to prefer Jesus Christ in all his Offices. Are we protected in our ministry by antichrist? Nor this, unlesse the croa∣kings of those froggs which come out of his mouth, the contradictions, calum∣nies and comminations of his Priests & Jesuites (which have immixed them∣selves with separatists of all sorts) be our shield and protection. Have we not been persecuted in our ministry by Anti∣christ? Surely yes; what else doth the Book of Matyrs attest? and the bonds, blood and ashes of Holy Bradford, San∣ders, Rogers, and the rest in Q. M. daies? On the other hand. Have not the purpo∣ses of the zealous Ministers in England been eminently for Christ? To exalt his salvation, and with the ejection and downfall of that man of fin? Witnesse else both presses and Pulpits. Hath not the presence of Christ been eminently with the zealous ministry of England? to blast the policies, and break the power of Antichrist, prospering them in his own work & against the wiles & wrath of that wicked one? Speak malice it self & spare not. Hath not the power of Christ
en eminently active by, and apparent in the zealous Ministry of England? Ark others else? If I may not appeal to your own consciencies: whether their sermons have not fallen like thunder and lightning upon them? and the weapons of their warfare have not been mighty, through God, to the pulling down of strong holds? and pierced even to the dividing asunder of soul & spirit? Nay once more, have there not been, and yet are the prints & characters of the Mi∣nisters of Christ eminently found upon the zealous Ministers of England? com∣pare them else, with these Epistles to Ti∣mothy and Titus. Sirs, what else have been and are their dispositions and qua∣lifications fo the Ministry, but such as Christ hath propounded? What else their deligation to the ministry, for the substance of it, but such as Christ hath prescribed? What else the discharge of their Minstry, for the scope and main of it, but such as Christ hath pressed? Al∣lowing in all this for humane infirmi∣ties; for you may not think we cease to be men, when we come to be Mini∣sters. Lastly what else the doctrine which they did and do still minister, but such as Christ and his Apostles preached? 'And are we yet Antichristian? Whence, or why is it? Do you tel us we were ordai∣ned by Bishops (at least severall of us) and these are antichristian? But Sirs,
if you can content your selves with so littlecharity, I must, and do count it my duty to labour for more honesty, than to brand those holy and learned men with being Antichristian, who first brought us from under the yoak of Antichrist, and burn'd in flames of Martydom, by his cruelty, for the caus of Christ. Thus did these zealous Bi∣shops: Cranmer, Farrer, Latimer, Hooper, Ridley. And I doubt not but many others since would have sealed the same cause, upon the same call, with their choicest blood, whose works and writings for piety and against Popery, wil speak for them among the living, when you are sleeping among the dead. Can Satan thus cast out Satan?
Mar. 3.23. or would Anti∣christ so consume and cast out Anti∣christ? Well: but should your preju∣dice passe; and we suppose with you, our English Bishops to have been all Antichirstian, yet will you be to seek for proof of your sequele: that all those are Antichristian too, who were ordai∣ned by Bishops: unlesse you will hap∣pily call your lease or land Antichri∣stian, because this was derived from, or that drawn up by a Popish Land-lord. Ordination of Presbyters was not an∣nexed to a bishop as such only, for he could not ordain a Presbyter, unlesse himself had been ordained a Presbyter. Nor did he ordain any Presbyters sing∣ly by himself, but stil with the concur∣rence of other Presbyters. The premis∣ses do plainly enough evince, That one Presbyter may assist in the Ordination of other Presbyters: That ordination by Presbyters is Gods Ordinance: That Ministers so ordained must be acknow∣ledged Gods Officers. If therefore this Bishop, together with other Pres∣byters, may warrantably ordain in the capacity of a Presbyter, and one so or∣dained by him must be reputed the Of∣ficer of Christ; with what right, or by what rule shall the same man ordain∣ed by this Bishop be rejected for an Of∣ficer of Antichrist? If this Bishop loveth to have the preheminence, over the other Presbyters in Ordination, & layeth hold upon it by a divine right, (generally they have claimed by an hu∣mane only) it is his sin, but doth no way annul or alter the substance of this
man's ordination: no more than doth the same Bishops administration of the Lord's Supper, upon the same aims and affectation, adnull this Supper to any pious soul. We wel know, he may law∣fully do this (as likewise that) in the ca∣pacity of a Presbyter. Say you yet that our Ministry in England is Antichristi∣an, because our ordmation came from Rome, from Antichrist? If so, you may not be offended if I tell you, that this charge is either utterly fall, or very fal∣lacious. Would you attempt the proof of England's conversion and Ministry to have come originally from Rome? you may indeed gratifie the Jesuites who have been long striving in this subject, but with no success: But you should do wel first to consult our English Chroni∣clers upon this subject, see Fox's Acts and Monumets book 2 be∣ginning, or Speeds Hi∣story, or Fullers Ecl. History. and the just conquest, which some have already got see hites way to the Church, sect. 49. upon this point: and by that time you will easily resolve, that these were not from Rome, and if you please to read on, may soon inform your self what stout champiōs against
Rome's apostacy, have been usually found among our English Ministry. We do and must tell you, that our ordination came from Christ, not from Rome, not from Antichrist, though it is true it hath miserably been conta∣minated by Antichrist, as what office or ordinance in the Church hath not? Now that we must part with an ordi∣nance of Christ, becaus it hth somtime been possessed by, and passed to us tho∣row the hands of such, as have served and set up Antichrist, pray shew us, who are wholly to seek of such a Scripture. Must the Jews cast away the golden ves∣sels of Sion, becaus they had been quafft in, in the literal [the figure of this my∣sticall] Babylon? or must they not ra∣ther carry them back, ino the Temple in Jerusalem,
Ezra 5.14, 15. which was a type of Jesus. Or did they cease to be the vessels of the Temple (I know they ceased to be ves∣sels in the Temple) while they were carried to Babylon, or were kept there? Farewell all Churches, constitutions, and ordinances of Christ; if their com∣ing to us thorow the bold intrusions and invasions of Antichrist, may divest us. yea, and farewell the offices of Christ too, for upon which of these hath he not been and stil is an usurper? But blessed be God, all the cunning and commixtures of Antichrist are not able to vacate one constitution of Jesus Christ. Baptism and the Lord's Supper, notwithstanding all his usurpations and additions, have been, and still are, the blessed Ordinances of our Lord & Saviour, and shal be till the worlds end, Mat. 28.19. cum 20. 1 Cor. 11.26. we have his security therefore; and may thence easily assume the continuance of an office-Ministry, for dispensing these Ordinances, and consequently of Ordi∣nation likewise; see these things pro∣ved before the Scripture prescri∣bing this as the onely course of putting men into office, Tit. 1.5. &c. and never promising such office-Ministers since the Apostles days, as shal be with∣out ordination to the Ministry. Come then beloved, suffer not your selves to be detained with such prejudices, or be drawn aside with such pretexts from the ordained and office-Ministers of Je∣sus. But receiv such in the Lord with all gladness, and hold them in reputation, Phil. 2.29. neither making nor taking up false reports against them, neither re∣fusing to hear, nor to honour them; e∣specially
remembring what Christ hath told you. Hear them, and you hear him; receive them, & you receive him; dispise them, and you despise him; and if you de∣spise him, you despise him that sent him, Luk 10.16. Mat. 10.40. 'Tis true, there is little other due to us, than what scur∣rilous tongues and pens take liberty to load us with, if we be look'd upon as we are in our selves; sinfull men, that may be in this respect the least of Saints, Eph. 3.8. and chiefest of sinners, 1 Tim. 1 15. as Paul saith of himself. But there is a double honour which is due unto us, if we be look'd upon as labourers in the Word and Do∣ctrine, as the messengers and Ministers of Jesus, 1 Tim. 5.17. Sirs, as little respect as you will for man's, for our own sake; yet much is due, for the message sake, for the Ministeries sake, for our Masters sake. In this regard, Paul tells Philemon that he oweth him his very self, Phil. 19. If you enquire of the best of Ministers as men, Elias, one of the loftiest Prophets is a man of like passions, Jam. 5.17. Alas! wee have the same Devill to assault us, the same deceitfull world to allure us, and the same desparately wicked heart
to assist to them, and betray us. But if you enquire of us as Ministers, wee are fellow-helpers concerning you, 2 Cor. 8.23. overseers of you, Act. 20.28. that are to rule over you, Heb. 13.7, 17. and are over you in the Lord, 1 Thes 5.12. We are fellow-workers unto the kingdom of God, workers together with God, 1 Cor. 6.1. Embassadours for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, 2 Cor. 5.20. Let me therefore Christians say this unto you, especially of the Congregations concerned in those, which are solemnly to be set apart to the office and work of the Ministry this day, as Paul said of Ti∣motheus unto the Corinthians, with a very little change, 1 Cor. 16.10, 11. If Timo∣theus, if these come to you, see that they may be with you without fear, for they work the work of the Lord, as we also do. Let no man therefore despise them, but conduct them in and out, in the work of the Lord with peace. Soli Deo sit gloria, Amen. FINIS.
