P1873 E1164_2 99867636 119955
THE TRIUMPHS Of LOVE: CHASTITIE: DEATH: TRANSLATED OUT OF PETRARCH BY Mris ANNA HUME. EDINBƲRGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majestie. 1644.
To the most excellent Princesse, her Highnesse, the Princesse ELISABETH, Eldest daughter to the King of BOHEMIA. THat my rude lines durst meet the dazeling rayes Of Majesty, which from your Princely eyes Would beat the owner back, blame them not, they Want sense, nor had they wit to bid me say Thus much in their behalfe: else having heard Y' are mercifull, they could not be affeard: Or doubting some arrest of sudden death Made haste to be reprived by your breath! True glory of your sex, whose single name Protecteth vertue, and commandeth fame.
Now you have sav'd them with a looke, the rest Assume like boldnesse, and desire to taste Like honour, since they justly think their claim Better, by vertue of great Petrarchs name: Whom if they lamely follow tis more grace, Then t' have outgone a meaner Poets pace. Your milder judgement must the sentence give, For which they humbly wait to make them live. The humblest of your Highnesse servants ANNA HUME.
ANOTHER TO HER HIGHNESSE. I Doe not dedicate these to delight Or profit you, both are the Authors right: Nor is it that your Highnesse may protect My part, it merits not so much respect; Nor that you may examine and compare, It lesse deserves such serious Princely care: Nor is it gratitude, because y' have been Pleas'd to approve some others you have seen: Since retribution so farre below Proportion, would be worse then still to owe: Nor vanity, that thus I may have leave To tell the world the honour I receive, In that my name hath reacht your sacred eare: I hate that emptie vice; yet need not feare
The censure, were it just since 't would make proud The staidest thoughts to be by you allow'd. If any aske me, What is then my end? 'Tis to approve my selfe a reall friend To chaste Lauretta, whom since I have tane From the dark Cloyster, where she did remain Unmarkt, because unknown, my aime is now To make her happy, by attending you: Where she may see her truest worth outgone, And learn more vertue then she yet hath known The humblest of your Highnesse servants ANNA HUME.
To the Reader. REader, I have oft been told, Verse that speake not Love, are cold. I would gladly please thine eare, But am loth to buy 't too deare. And 'tis easier farre to borrow Lovers tears, then feel their sorrow. Therefore he hath furnish't me, Who had enough to serve all three.
The Triumph of LOVE, Translated out of Petrarch. CHAP. I. The Argument. A vision shews the captived By mighty Love in triumph led. IT was the time, when I doe sadly pay My sighs, in tribute to that sweet-sowre-day, Which first gave being to my tedious woes: The Sunne, now o're the Bulls horns proudly goes, And Phaëton had renew'd his wonted race: When Love, the Season, and my owne ill case, Drew me that solitary place to finde, In which I oft unload my charged minde: There tir'd with raving thoughts and helplesse moan▪ Sleep seal'd my eyes up, and my senses gone,
My waking fancie spied a shining light, In which appear'd long pain, and short delight. A mighty Generall, I then did see, Like one, who (for some glorious victory) Should to the Capitol in triumph go: I (who had not been us'd to such a show In this soft age, where we no valour have But pride) admir'd his habit, strange and brave, And having rais'd mine eyes, which wearied were, To understand this sight was all my care. Foure snowie steeds a fiery Chariot drew; There sat the cruel boy; a threatning ewe His right hand bore, his Quiver arrowes held, Against whose force, no helme or shield prevail'd. Two party-coloured wings his shoulders ware; All naked else; and round about his chaire Were thousand mortals: some in battell tain, Many were hurt with darts, and many slain. Glad to learn newes I rose, and forward prest So farre, that I was one amongst the rest; As if I had been kill'd with loving pain Before my time; and looking through the train Of this teare-thirsty King, I would have spi'd Some of my old acquaintance, but descri'd
No face I knew: If any such there were, They were transform'd with prison, death and care. At last one Ghost, lesse sad than th' others, came, Who neare approaching, call'd me by my name, And said: This comes of Love: What may you be, (I answer'd, wondring much) that thus know me? For I remember not t' have seen your face. He thus reply'd: It is the duskie place That dull's thy sight, and this hard yoake I beare: Else I a Thuscan am; thy friend, and deare To thy remembrance: his wonted phrase And voyce did then discover what he was. So we retir'd aside, and left the throng, When thus he spake; I have expected long To see you here with us; your face did seem To threaten you no lesse. I doe esteem Your prophesies; but I have seen what care Attends a Lovers life; and must beware. Yet have I oft been beaten in the field, And sometimes hurt, said I, but scorn'd to yeeld. He smil'd and said: Alas! thou dost not see, (My sonne) how great a flame's prepar'd for thee. I knew not then what by his words he meant; But since I finde it by the dire event:
And in my memory 'tis fixt so fast, That marble gravings cannot firmer last. Mean while my forward youth did thus enquire: What may these people be? I much desire To know their names, pray, give me leave to aske. I thinke ere long, 'twill be a needlesse taske (Replied my friend) thou shalt be of the train, And know them all; this captivating chain Thy neck must beare, (though thou dost little feare) And sooner change thy comely forme and haire, Then be unfettered from the cruell tie, How ere thou struggle for thy liberty; Yet to fulfill thy wish, I wil relate What I have learn'd. The first that keeps such state, By whom, our lives and freedomes we forgoe, The world hath call'd him Love; and he (you know But shal know better when he comes to be A Lord to you, as now he is to me) Is in his child-hood milde, fierce in his age; 'Tis best beleev'd of those that feel his rage. The truth of this thou in thy selfe shalt finde, I warn thee now, pray keep it in thy mind. Of idle loosenesse, he is oft the childe; With pleasant fancies nourisht, and is stil'd
Or made a God by vain and foolish men: And for a recompense, some meet their bane: Others, a harder slavery must endure, Than many thousand chains and bolts procure. That other gallant Lord, is conquerour Of conquering Rome, led captive by the faire Egyptian Queen, with her perswasive Art, Who in his honours claimes the greatest part: For binding the worlds victor with her charmes, His Trophees are all hers by right of armes. The next is his adoptive sonne, whose love May seem more just, but doth no better prove: For though he did his loved Livia wed, She was seduced from her husbands bed. Nero is third, disdainfull, wicked, fierce▪ And yet a woman found a way to pierce His angry soul. Behold Marcus the grave Wise Emperour is faire Faustina's slave: These two are tyrants: Dionysius, And Alexander, both suspicious, And yet both loved: the last a just reward Found of his causelesse feare. I know y' have heard Of him, who for Creusa on the rock Antandrus mourn'd so long; whose-warlike stroke
At once, reveng'd his friend, and wonne his love: And of the youth whom Phedra could not move T' abuse his fathers bed; he left the place, And by his vertue lost his life (for base Unworthy loves to rage doe quickly change) It kill'd her too; perhaps in just revenge Of wronged Theseus, slain Hyppolito, And poore forsaken Ariadne: so It often proves that they who falsely blame Another, in one breath themselves condemne: And who have guilty been of treachery, Need not complain, if they deceived be. Behold the brave Heros a captive made With all his fame, and twixt these sisters led: Who, as he joy'd the death of th' one to see, His death did ease the others misery. The next that followeth, though the world admire His strength, love bound him. Th' other full of ire Is great Achilles, he whose pittied fate Was caus'd by love, Demophoon did not hate Impatient Phyllis, yet procur'd her death. This Jason is, he whom Medea hath Oblig'd by mischief; she to her father prov'd False, to her brother cruel; t' him she lov'd
Grew furious, by her merit over-priz'd. Hypsiphile comes next, mournfull, despis'd, Wounded to see a strangers love prevail More then her owne a Greek. Here is the frail Fair Helena, with her the Shepherd boy, Whose gazing looks hurt Greece, and ruin'd Troy. 'Mongst other weeping souls, you heare the moan Enone makes, her Paris being gone. And Menelaus, for the woe he had To lose his wife. Hermione is sad, And cals her deare Orestes to her aid. And Laodamia, that haplesse maide Bewails Protesilaus. Argia prov'd To Polinice more faithfull then the lov'd (But false and covetous) Amphiaraos wife. The groanes, and sighes of those that lose their life By this kind Lord, in unrelenting flames You heare: I cannot tell you halfe their names, For they appeare not onely men that love, The gods themselves, doe fill this mirtle grove: You see faire Venus catch't by Vulcan's Art With angry Mars: Proserpina apart From Pluto, jealous Juno, yellow hair'd Apollo, vvho the young god's courage dar'd;
And of his trophees proud, laught at the bovv, Which in Thessalia gave him such a blovv. What shal I say? here, in a vvord, are all The gods that Varro mentions, great and small; Each vvith innumerable bonds detain'd, And Jupiter before the chariot chain'd. The end of the first Chapter.
ANNOTATIONS UPON THE FIRST CHAPTER. COnquerour, 87. line.] Julius Caesar. Egyptian Queen, 89. line.] Cleopatra. Adoptive Sonne, 93. line.] Augustus. A woman, 98. line.] Sabina Pompcia, whom she loved with much violence, yet killed her in his anger; Italian Commentar. Marcus the grave, 99. line.] Marcus Au∣relius, who so doted on his wife Faustina, that though hee had often notice shee abused his bed, yet he would not divorce from her. Italian Commentar. Dionysius, 101. line.] Tyrant of Syracuse, Italian Commentar. Alexander, 102. line.] Tyrant of Thessaly, he was above measure fearefull, and yet was kil∣led by a wench whom he kept. The Story is not worth relating, Italian Commentar. Creusa, 105. line.] Creusa was wife to Aene∣as before he see Dido, if ever he did see her. Ita∣lian Commentar. Antandrus, 106. line.] Antandrus is a
rock seated on the Aegean sea, where he used sports many dayes together in honour of her fu∣neralls. Italian Commentar. And wonne his Love, 107. line.] Aeneas kil∣led Turnus in a combat, and so revenged the death of his friend Pallas, whom Turnus had killed before: and wonne his mistresse Lavinia, in whom Turnus clamed interest, Virgil. Phedra could not move, 108. line.] Hypo∣lito was sonne to Theseus by Hypolita the Ama∣zon, Phedra wife to Theseus was in love with her sonne in law Hypolito, and being justly re∣jected by him, accused him to his father, as ha∣ving tempted her; on which he fled, and drow∣ning in his flight, she killed her selfe for grief of his losse. Italian Commentar. Forsaken Ariadne, 114. line.] Ariadne was left asleep in an Iland by Theseus: who loved this Phedra better then her, though shee had brought him out of the labyrinth, and left her father to goe with him: (a knowne History.) Treachery, 117. line.] He had dealt treache∣rously with Ariadne, for the love of her sister Phedra, and she required him with loving, and falsely accusing his son Hypolito. Brave Heros, 119. line.] Theseus led be∣twixt Phedra and Ariadne. Death, 121. line.] He rejoyced, as Petrarch alledges, to see Phedra kill her selfe, because she had been false to him.
Misery, 122. line.] Ariadne might rejoyce both to see Phedra (for whom he had been false to her) abuse him, and to see his death before her owne, Italian Commentar. The next, 124. line.] Hercules. Was caused by love, 126. line.] He was killed by Paris in a treatie of marriage with his sister Polixena, whom Achilles loved. Impatient Phillis, 127. line.] Demophon ha∣ving occasion to goe to Athens, set a time for his returne, but staying a little beyond his day, by the crossenesse of his affairs, and the winds, Phil∣lis jealous that he had forsaken her, very wisely, hanged her selfe, Ovid. Cruell, 130. line.] When Medea fled from her father with Jason, shee tooke her brother with her, and cut him in pieces, which she scattered, that the pursuers might be stayed by gathering up his limbes, Ovid. Grew furious, 131. line] Shee was revenged on his inconstancy and ingratitude after, by send∣ing his new choice, Chreons daughter, a golden vestment, which was so inchanted or anoint∣ed, that it stuck fast to her, till it burnt her up. Hypsiphile, 132. line.] She entertaind Jason with too much kindnesse, as he passed by to Colchas. Strangers love, 133. line.] Medea, whom Jason brought back with him being no Grecian, and therefore her disgrace was the greater, by
the low esteeme her rivall was in. Shepherd boy, 135. line.] Paris who was bred a shepherd by his mother, to avoid a prophesie, that hee would bee the cause Troy should bee burned. Enone, 138. line.] A Nymph in Ida, whom Paris loved, when hee kept sheepe on that mountain. His wife, 140. line.] Helene, whom Paris car∣ried to Troy. Hermione, 140. line.] Shee was daughter to Menelaus, and Helene being contracted to Ore∣stes first, she was taken from him, and married against her will to Pirhus. Orestes, 141. line.] He was sonne to Aga∣memnon, beloved of Hermione. Laodamia, 142. line.] She died for griefe on the corps of Protesilaus, when it came back from Troy. Italian Commentar. Argia, 143. line.] Wife to Polenice a The∣ban, she was killed by Creon, for going to mourn over her husbands grave. Amphyaraos wife, 145. line.] Eryphile, who betrayed her husbands counsells, and was cause, that against his will, hee tooke that journey, in the which hee perished, Italian Commen∣tary. Proserpina apart, 152. line.] To expresse her anger, for Pluto had ravished her.
Young gods courage, 154. line.] Cupid. His Trophies, 155. line.] The skinne of Py∣thon a Monster, which hee had newly kil∣led. A blow, 156. line.] Strooke him in love with Daphne, to try whose arrowes were sharp∣est, and teach him to brag.
CHAP. II. The Argument. Brave Massinissa doth relate His Love: Seleucus his hard fate. WEari'd, not satisfi'd, with much delight, Now here, now there I turn'd my greedy sight, And many things I view'd: to write were long, The time is short, great store of passions throng Within my brest: when loe, a lovely paire, Joyn'd hand in hand, who kindly talking were, Drew my attention that way: their attire And forrain language quickned my desire Of further knowledge, which I soon might gain; My kinde Interpreter did all explain. When both I knew, I boldly then drew neare; He lov'd our countrey, though she made it feare. O! Massinissa; I adjure thee by Great Scipio, and her who from thine eye
Drew manly tears (said I) let it not be A trouble, what I must demand of thee. He lookt, and said: I first desire to know Your name and qualitie; for well you show Y' have heard the combate in my wounded soul, When Love did Friendship, Friendship Love controul. I am not worth your knowledge, my poore flame Gives little light (said I:) your royall fame, Sets hearts on fire, that never see your face But (pray you) say; are you two led in peace By him? (I shew'd their guide) your History Deserves record: it seemeth strange to me, That faith and cruelty should come so neare. He said; Thine owne expressions witnesse beare. Thou knowst enough, yet I will all relate To thee, 't will somewhat ease my heavie state. On that brave man my heart was fixt so much, That Lelius love to him could be but such; Where ere his colours marched, I was nigh, And Fortune did attend with victory: Yet still his merit call'd for more then she Could give; or any else deserve but he. When to the West the Romane Eagles came My self was also there; and catcht a flame,
A purer never burnt in Lovers brest: But such a joy could not be long possest! Our nuptiall knot (alas!) he soone untide, Who had more power then all the world beside! He car'd not for our sighes; and though 't be true That he divided us, his worth I knew: He must be blinde that cannot see the Sunne, But by strict justice Love is quite undone: Counsel from such a friend gave such a stroke To Love, it almost split, as on a rock: For as my father I his wrath did feare, And as a sonne he in my love was deare; Brothers in age we were, him I obey'd, But with a troubled soul and look dismaid: Thus my dear halfe had an untimely death, She priz'd her freedome far above her breath; And I th' unhappy instrument was made; Such force th' intreaty and intreater had! I rather chose my self then him t' offend, And sent the poyson brought her to her end: With what sad thoughts I know, and shee'l confesse, And you, if you have sense of Love, may guesse; No heire she left me, but my tedious moan; And though in her my hopes, and joyes were gone,
She was of lower value then my faith! But now farewell, and trie if this troup hath Another wonder; for the time is lesse Then is the taske: I pittied their distresse, Whose short joy ended in so sharp a woe: My soft heart melted: As they onward goe, This youth for his part, I perhaps could love (She said) but nothing can my minde remove From hatred of the Nation; He replide, Good Sophonisba you may leave this pride, Your City hath by us been three times beat, The last of which (you know) we laid it flat. Pray use these words t' another, not to me (Said she) if Africk mourned, Italy Needs not rejoyce; search your records, and there See what you gained by the Punick warre, He that was friend to both, without reply A little smiling, vanisht from mine eye Amongst the croud: As one in doubtfull way At every step looks round, and fears to stray, (Care stops his journey) so the varied store Of Lovers staid me, to examine more, And trie what kinde of fire burnt every brest: When on my left hand strayed from the rest
Was one, whose looke exprest a ready minde In seeking what he joy'd, (yet sham'd to finde;) He freely gave away his dearest wife, (A new found way to save a Lovers life) She, though she joy'd, yet blushed at the change▪ As they recounted their affections strange, And for their Syria mourn'd; I tooke the way Of these three Ghosts, who seem'd their course to stay, And take another path: The first I held And bid him turne; he started, and beheld Me with a troubled look, hearing my tongue Was Romane, such a pause he made, as sprung From some deep thought; then spake as if inspir'd, For to my wish, he told what I desir'd To know: Seleucus is (said he) my name, This is Antiochus my sonne, whose fame Hath reacht your eare; he warred much with Rome, But Reason oft by Power is overcome. This woman, once my Wife, doth now belong To him; I gave her, and it was no wrong In our Religion; it staid his death, Threatned by Love; Stratonica she hath To name: so now we may enjoy one state, And our fast friendship shal out-last all date.
She from her height was willing to descend; I quit my joy; he rather chose his end Then our offence; and in his prime had dide, Had not the wise Physician been our guide: Silence in Love orecame his vitall part; His Love was force, his Silence vertuous Art. A fathers tender care made me agree To this strange change. This said, he turn'd from me, As changing his designe, with such a pace, Ere I could take my leave, h' had quit the place. After the Ghost was carried from mine eye Amazedly I walkt; nor could untie My minde from his sad story; till my friend Admonisht me, and said: You must not lend Attention thus to every thing you meet; You know the number's great, and time is fleet. More naked prisoners this triumph had Then Xerxes souldiers in his army led: And stretched further then my sight could reach▪ Of severall Countreyes, and of differing speech. One of a thousand were not knowne to me, Yet might those few make a large History. Perseus was one; and well you know the way How he was catched by Andromida:
She was a lovely brownet, black her haire And eyes. Narcissus too, the foolish faire, Who for his owne love did himselfe destroy; He had so much, he nothing could enjoy. And she, who for his losse, deep sorrow's slave, Chang'd to a voyce, dwells in a hollow cave. Iphis was there, who hasted his owne fate, He lov'd another, but himselfe did hate; And many moe condemn'd like woes to prove, Whose life was made a curse by haplesse love. Some modern Lovers in my minde remain, But those to reckon here were needlesse pain. The two, whose constant loves for ever last, On whom the winds wait while they build their nest▪ For Halcion dayes poore labouring saylers please, And in rough winter calme the boystrous seas. Far off the thoughtfull Aesacus, in quest Of his Epiria, findes a rocky rest, Then diveth in the floods, then mounts i'th' aire. And she who stole old Nisus purple haire His cruel daughter, I observ'd to fly. Swift Atalanta ran for victory, But three gold apples, and a lovely face, Slackt her quick paces, till she lost the race:
She brought Hippomanes along, and joy'd That he, as others, had not been destroy'd, But of the victory could singly boast. I saw amidst the vain, and fabulous hoast, Faire Galatea lean'd on Atis brest; Rude Polyphemus noise disturbs their rest. Glaucus alone swims through the dangerous seas, And missing her who should his phansie please, Curseth the cruels Love transform'd her shape. Canens laments that Picus could not scape The dire enchantresse; he in Italy Was once a King, now a pie'd Bird; for she Who made him such, chang'd not his clothes nor name, His Princely habit still appears the same. Egeria, while she wept, became a Well: Scylla (a horrid rock by Circes spell) Hath made infamous the Sicilian strand. Next, she who holdeth in her trembling hand A guilty knife, her right hand writ her name. Pygmalion next, with his live mistresse came. Sweet Aganippe, and Castalia have A thousand more; all there sung by the brave And deathlesse Poets, on their faire banks plac'd▪ Cydippe by an apple fool'd at last.
ANNOTATIONS UPON THE SECOND CHAPTER. A Lovely pair, 5. line.] Massinissa and So∣phonisba: The story runs thus, Massinis∣sa King of a part of Numidia an associate of the Romanes, loving and much beloved of Sci∣pio: Sophonisba was daughter to Asdrubale, son of Gisco, a Principal man in the Citie of Car∣thage: her father married her to Syphax, a more considerable King of the same Countrey, then Massinissa, and an associate also of the Ro∣manes, with intention to debauch him from the Romane friendship, which it did accordingly. It came to passe in the progresse of the warre, that Massinissa tooke Syphax prisoner, and entered Cirrha his principall City victor: Sophonisba presented her selfe before him at the gate of the Castle, and being beautifull and eloquent, to both which her affliction added lustre, she besought him to take her for his prisoner, and either pre∣serve her from being led in triumph to Rome, or kill her. Massinissa was soon taken, and as sud∣denly
promised to performe her desire, which that hee might the more easily doe, hee married her presently. When he came to Scipio (after much commendation and honourable intertain∣ment bestowed upon him in publick) hee drew him aside, and reproved him sharply for this rash act (being afraid that Sophonisba would make him for her Countrey, as she had done her other husband.) Massinissa retired to his Tent, and after a long inward debate, and many tears, at last he composed a cup full of poyson, and writes to her with it, That since he could not performe the first part of his promise, to make her free, (as by marrying her hee hoped to have done) hee would yet keep the last; desires her to remember whose daughter she was, and that she had been wife to two Kings. When shee read the letter, she said no more, but, If this be the best token my Husband hath to send me, I accept it willingly; but tell him, It would have grieved me lesse, if my marriage bed had not been so near my grave: and with such resolution as these times thought vertuous, shee drank up the poyson chearfully. Titus Livius. That Lelius Love, 32. line.] Lelius was bo∣some friend to Scipio, yet Massinissas Love equal∣led that of Lelius. The Romane Eagles, 37. line.] The Romane Ensinges, meaning Scipio, with the Romane ar∣my,
for they carried an Eagle in their colours. Seleucus, 101. line.] The story is cleare e∣nough here, That Seleucus King of Syria, ha∣ving married Stratonica, a young and beautifull Ladie, Antiochus his sonne by a former wife, became desperately in love with her, and concealing it out of shame, or feare, or both, hee fell sick almost to death, which the Physician finding by his Art, told the father there was no safetie for his son, but by bestowing his mother in law on him: to which the father joyfully yeilded With Rome, 103. line.] It was not this An∣tiochus that had warre with the Romanes, but another long after him, which Petrarch knew well enough, but useth a figure of purpose to mention Antiochus the great. In his army, 128. line.] Being as they say, 700000. men. Perseus was one, 133. line] He was sonne of Jupiter and Danaë. By Andromida, 134 line] Andromida was an Ethiopian. The history is known, he saw her tied naked to a rock, when he went to kill the sea Monster that should have devoured her. Iphis was there, 141. line.] Iphis hanged himselfe because his mistris despised him. Constant Loves, 147. line] Halcion, sonne of Aeolus, and Ceica daughter of Lucifer: He was drowned in his return from consulting with the
Oracle, she having had an ominous dream, went to the shore, where shee found his dead body newly cast up, and as shee was about to cast her selfe into the Sea, they were both turned into lit∣tle birds of his name, Halcion, it is the bird cal∣led the Kings-fisher; they build on the shore, and the weather is calme all the while they are hatching their young. Aesacus, 151. line.] Aesacus was sonne to Priamus. Epiria whom hee loved, flying from his pursuit, was bit with a Serpent and died of the wound, for griefe of which misfortune, hee went to the top of a Rock, & leapt into the Sea, where Thetis in compassion, transformed him into a bird, called a Dydaper or Diver. His cruell daughter, 155. line.] Scilla, daugh∣ter to Nisus King of Megara; when Minos war∣red against her father, and could not overcome him, by reason of his purple hair in his head; she stole the haire and gave it to him, in hope to gain his affection: By this means Minos became victor, but in detestation of her unnaturall fact rejected her, who being banished and desolate, wandered till she became a Larke: Her father was turned into a Merling, and pursues her e∣ver since. Swift Atalanta, 156. line.] A knowne Hi∣story, all her suiters must out-run her, or bee kil∣led; and she being too swift to be matched with
speed, Hyppomanes tooke three golden apples, and cast first one a good way off: then as shee ran aside to catch it, hee got ground of her, and when shee approched hee threw another, and a third, till he obtained the victory, by this cun∣ning (not without her consent.) Faire Galatea, 163. line.] Galatea was daughter to Neptune: her lover Atis and shee being together, his Giant rivall Poliphemus came thither, and killed him with a great stone as he fled. Glaucus alone, 165. line.] Glaucus was a fisher, and seeing that the new haild fish by ta∣sting a kinde of herb upon the banke, revived, and leapt againe into the Sea; He tried the con∣clusion himselfe, and followed them, by which means he became a Sea-god: Hee loved Scilla, but Circe loving him, and seeing her selfe de∣spised by him for the love he bare to Galatea; Circe transformed her rivall into a Rocke: so as Glaucus swims along without his Mistresse, and curseth the loving Witch that caused it. Canens laments, 168 line.] Canens was wife to Picus, a King in Italy of old: Cir∣ce transformed him also to a Magpie, because she could not obtain his love. Aegeria while she wept, 173. line.] Aegeria was a Nymph, or Goddesse that converst with Numa Pompilius in his solitary retirements,
whilest he composed the Romane lawes, being the first King of Rome after Romulus, So sayes Plutatch, and Titus Livius: yet Livius saith also she was his wife, by which it should seeme, that being as wise as her husband, she had a good hand in the businesse. The Poets fained her to weep her self into a Well after his death, because there was a Well in the middle of that Grove which he made for their consultations. Scilla a horrid Rock, 174. line.] See above in the Annotations, 165. Infamous the Cicilian strand, 175. line.] That is, hath made it dangerous for passengers. Her trembling hand, 176. line.] Cannace, daughter to Eolus, having had a childe by her brother, her father caused cut the childe in pie∣ces, and commanded her to kill her selfe, which she being compelled to resolve on, writ first to her brother, with the pen in the one hand, and a knife in the other, to give him notice of her end, that he might burie her childe and her. His live Mistris, 178. line.] Pigmalions mistresse was a statue of his owne cutting, on which he grew enamoured, and prayed till it be∣came a live woman. Aganippe, and Castalia, 179. line.] Aga∣nippe and Castalia are two Fountains in Par∣nassus, sacred to the Muses. Faire banks placed, 181.] Because the Poets
doe all drinke of these two Wells: Petrarch will have the bankes to bee their ordinary resi∣dence, alive and dead. Cydippe by an apple foold, 182. line.] Her Lover writ an oath, That shee should marry him upon an apple, and dropt it in Apollos Tem∣ple, which she finding and reading, he made her beleeve shee had sworne to make him her Hus∣band.
CHAP. III. The Argument. Love woundeth Petrarchs wary heart, Who well describes that dying smart. MY heart was fill'd with wonder and amaze, As one struck dumb, in silence stands at gaze Expecting Counsel, when my friend drew neare, And said: What doe you looke? why stay you here? What mean you? know you not that I am one Of these? and must attend? pray, let's be gone Deare friend (said I) consider what desire To learn the rest hath set my heart on fire; My owne haste stops me. I beleeve't (said he) And I will help; 'tis not forbidden me. This Noble man, on whom the others wait, (You see) is Pompey, justly call'd, The great:
Cornelia followeth, weeping his hard fate, And Ptolomies unworthy causelesse hate. You see farre off the Grecian General; His base wife, with Aegisthus wrought his fal: Behold them there, and judge if Love be blinde. But here are Lovers of another kinde, And other faith they kept, Lyncus was sav'd By Hypermnestra: Pyramus bereav'd Himselfe of life, thinking his mistresse slain: Thisbes like end, shortned her mourning pain. Leander swimming often, drown'd at last; Hero her faire selfe from her window cast. Courteous Ʋlisses his long stay doth mourn; His chaste wife prayeth for his safe return, While Circes amarous charmes her prayers controule, And rather vexe then please his vertuous soule. Amilcars sonne, who made great Rome afraid, By a mean wench of Spain is captive led. This Hipsicrates is, the vertuous faire, Who for her husbands deare Love cut her haire And serv'd in all his warres: This is the wife Of Brutus; Portia, constant in her life And death: This Julia is, who seems to mone, That Pompey loved best, when she was gone.
Looke here and see the Patriarch much abus'd Who twice seven years for his fair Rachel choos'd To serve: O! powerfull love increast by woe! His father this: Now see his Grandsire goe With Sarah from his home. This cruel Love O'recame good David; so it had power to move His righteous heart to that abhorrid crime, For which he sorrowed all his following time. Just such like errour soil'd his wise sonnes fame, For whose idolatry Gods anger came; Here's he who in one houre could love and hate: Here Tamar full of anguish wailes her state; Her brother Absolon attempts t' appease Her grieved soul. Sampson takes care to please His fancy; and appeares more strong then wise, Who in a traitresse bosome sleeping lies. Amongst those pikes and speares which guard the place, Love, wine, and sleep, a beauteous widdowes face And pleasing Art hath Holopherues taine; She backe again retires, who hath him slain, With her one maide, bearing the horrid head In haste, and thanks God that so wel she sped. The next is Sichem, he who found his death, In circumcision, his father hath
Like mischiefe felt; the City all did prove The same effect of his rash violent Love. You see Ahashuerus how well he bears His losse; a new love soon expels his cares: This cure in this disease doth seldome fail, One naile best driveth out another nail. If you would see Love mingled oft with hate, Bitter with sweet; behold fierce Herods state, Beset with Love and crueltie at once: Enraged first, then late his fault bemoans, And Mariamne cals; those three faire Dames (Who in the list of Captives write their names) Pocris, Deidamia, Artimesia were All good, the other three as wicked are: Semiramis, Biblis, and Myrrha nam'd, Who of their crooked wayes are now asham'd: Here be the erring Knights in ancient scroules, Lancelot, Tristram, and the vulgar soules That wait on these; Jiniver, and the faire Isond, with other Lovers: and the pair Who, as they walke together, seeme to plain Their just, but cruel fate, by one hand slaine; Thus he discours'd: and as a man that feares Approching harme, when he a trumpet heares,
Starts at the blow ere touch't, my frighted blood Retir'd; as one rais'd from his Tombe I stood: When by my side I spi'd a lovely maide, (No Turtle ever purer whitenesse had) And straight was caught (who lately swore I would Defend me from a man at Armes) nor could Resist the wounds of words with motion grac't; The image yet is in my phansie plac't. My friend was willing to increase my woe, And smiling whisperd; You alone may goe Conferre with whom you please, for now we are All stained with one crime: My sullen care Was like to theirs, who are more griev'd to know Anothers happinesse then their owne woe: For seeing her, who had enthral'd my minde, Live free in peace, and no disturbance finde: And seeing that I knew my hurt too late, And that her beauty was my dying fate: Love, jealousie, and envie held my sight So fixt on that faire face, no other light I could behold; like one who in the rage Of sicknesse greedily his thirst would swage With hurtfull drinke, which doth his palat please, Thus (blinde and deaf t'all other joyes are ease)
So many doubtful wayes I followed her The memory still shakes my soul with feare. Since when mine eyes are moist, and view the ground; My heart is heavie, and my steps have found A solitary dwelling 'mongst the woods, I stray ore rocks, and fountains, hils and floods: Since when such store my scattered papers hold Of thoughts, of tears, of inke; which oft I fold, Unfold, and teare: Since when I know the scope Of Love, and what they feare, and what they hope; And how they live that in his Cloyster dwell, The skilfull in their face may reade it well. Mean while I see, how fierce and gallant she Cares not for me, nor for my misery, Proud of her vertue, and my overthrow: And on the other side (if ought I know) This Lord, who hath the world in triumph led, She keeps in feare; thus all my hopes are dead, No strength nor courage left, nor can I be Reveng'd, as I expected once; for he, Who tortures me and others, is abused By her; she'le not be caught, and long hath used (Rebellious as she is!) to shun his vvarres, And is a Sunne amidst the lesser starres.
Her grace, smiles, slights, her words in order set; Her haire disperst, or in a golden net; Her eyes enflaming with a light divine So burn my heart, I dare no more repine. Ah, who is able fully to expresse Her pleasing wayes, her merit? no excesse▪ No bold Hyperboles I need to feare, My humble stile cannot enough come neare The truth; my words are like a little stream Compar'd with th' Ocean, so large a theame Is that high prayse; new worth, not seen before, Is seen in her, and can be seen no more▪ Therefore all tongues are silenced; and I, Her prisoner now, see her at liberty: And night and day implore (O unjust fate!) She neither heares, nor pitties my estate▪ Hard sawes of Love! But though a partiall lot I plainly see in this, yet must I not Refuse to serve: the gods, as well as men, With like reward of old have felt like pain. Now knovv I hovv the minde it selfe doth part, (Novv making peace, novv vvarre, novv truce) vvhat art Poore Lovers use to hide their stinging vvoe: And hovv their bloud novv comes, and novv doth goe
Betwixt their heart and cheeks, by shame or feare: How they be eloquent, yet speechlesse are: And how they both wayes leane, they watch and sleep, Languish to death, yet life and vigor keep: I trode the pathes made happy by her feet, And search the foe, I am afraid to meet. I know how Lovers metamorphos'd are To that they love: I know what tedious care I feele; how vain my joy, how oft I change Designe, and countenance; and (which is strange) I live without a soul: I know the way To cheat my selfe a thousand times a day: I know to follow whiles I flee my fire: I freeze when present; absent, my desire Is hot: I know what cruel rigour Love Practiseth on the minde, and doth remove All reason thence; and how he racks the heart; And how a soul, hath neither strength nor Art Without a helper to resist his blowes; And how he flees, and how his darts he throwes: And how his threats the feareful Lover feels; And hovv he robs by force, and hovv he steales: Hovv oft his vvheels turne round (novv high, novv lovv) With hovv uncertain hope, hovv certain vvo:
Hovv all his promises be voyd of faith, And hovv a fire hid in our bones he hath; Hovv in our vains he makes a secret vvound, Whence open flames and death doe soone abound. In summe, I knovv hovv giddy and hovv vain Be Lovers lives; vvhat feare and boldnesse raigne In all their vvayes; hovv every svveet is paide, And vvith a double vveight of sovvre allaide: I also knovv their customes, sighs, and songs; Their sudden mutenesse, and their stammering tongues, Hovv short their joy, hovv long their pain doth last, Hovv Wormvvood spoyleth all their hunni's taste. The end of the third Chapter.
ANNOTATIONS UPON THE THIRD CHAPTER. COrnelia followeth, 13. line] Cornelia was last wife to Pompey the great, and wept for the losse of his honour, being over∣come at Pharsalia by Julius Caesar, and for his death, being killed in her armes by Ptolo∣lomies command, without other cause, but to gaine favour of Caesar, who had got the better: therefore it is justly called by Petrarch, Ptolo∣mies. unworthy causelesse hate in the next line. Grecian Generall, 15. line.] Agamemnon Generall of the Grecians that went against Troy: He was in love with Cassandra, daugh∣ter to Priamus, whom hee carried home cap∣tive with him. Aegisthus, 16. line.] In his absence Clitem∣nestra his wife entertained another, with whom she conspired his death at his returne,
in this sort; she gave him a shirt close at top, and as hee was searching for a place to put forth his head Aegisthus killed him. Lyncus was saved, 19. line.] Lyncus was one of the sonnes of Danoe. The History runs thus, Aegisthus and Danoe being two brothers, Aegisthus had 50. daughters, and Danoe had 50. sonnes; Danoe offered his sonnes in mar∣riage to Aegisthus his daughters, which Aegist∣hus would by no means consent to, till the other compelled him by force of armes: Then hee gave a secret command to his daughters, every one to kill her husband in the night: They all obeyed, except Hypermnestra, who spared her husband Lyncus and did not kill him: A poore courtesie, but that the wicked∣nesse of the rest made it seeme a great fa∣vour. Pyramus bereaved, 20. line.] It is a known Story, that Pyramus and Thisbe having made an appointment in a wood, she came thither first, where seeing a Lion approch, she let fall her mantle, and hid herselfe among the bush∣es: Her Lover came within a little while af∣ter, and see her mantle torne or trampled by the Lion; This made him imagine shee had beene devoured: so he killed himselfe on the place. Thisbies like end, 22. line.] When shee
came out of the bushes and found him dead, shee killed her selfe too with the same wea∣pon. Leander swimming often, 23. line.] The sto∣ry is cleare of it selfe, that Leander having used to swimme the Hellespont, was drowned one time in a storme, which when Hero see, in a window, where she stood expecting his arrivall, for he perished neare the shoare, shee cast her selfe down from thence into the sea. Courteous Ʋlysses, 25. line.] Hee stayed ten yeares from his wife at the siege of Troy, and tenne yeares more were spent in his journey home. His chaste wife, 26. line.] Of all the Grecian wives, she was most faithfull, though most so∣licited, Homer. Circes amarous charmes, 27. line.] Circe was a famous witch, that kept him with her inchantments against his will. Amilcars sonne, 29. line.] Hanniball, the great Carthagenian Generall: hee doted ex∣treamely upon a poore mean wench in Puglia, Italian Commentar. Hipsicrates, 31. line.] She was wife to Mi∣thridates King of Pontus. Portia, 34. line.] Portia was daughter to Cato, and wife to that Brutus who killed Ju∣lius Caesar: a woman of a great and constant
spirit, adorned with wisedome, temper, and love to her husband, of whose death being ad∣vertised, shee put hot embers or coales in her mouth, and so died. Julia, 35. line.] Julia was daughter to Juli∣us Caesar, and wife to Pompey the great, whom she loved so extremely: that one day his Robes being stained with blood at a sacrifice, and sent home; shee tooke a sudden fright at the sight of the blood, fell in labour, and died: Yet as it of∣ten happens, he loved her not so well, as he did his next wife Cornelia. Fierce Herods state, line. 68.] Herod loved his wife Mariamne furiously, yet put her to death on a fals accusation, that she had conspired his end. Hee had the miserable and just punish∣ment to believe her innocent, and love her bet∣ter after her death, Josephus. Three faire Dames, 71. line.] Pochris, Dei∣damea, Artimesia; Pochris was wife to one Cefalous: who went every day abroad to hunt. One day her jealousie made her follow him, and hearing him call for the fresh arie, she rose from the place where she was concealed, to see what Nymph it was: He thinking it had beene some wilde beast, shot an arrow, and wound∣ed her. When hee knew what shee was, hee was much afflicted, but shee being past reco∣covery, desired of him, as her last suite, that the
Nymph Aire might not succeed her in his love, by which hee found her mistake, and cleared it: So shee died very well plea∣sed. Deidamia bore Pirhus to Achilles, and would never marry another whilest hee was at Troy, nor after his death. Artimesia was wife to Maussalus, King of Caria, after his death, shee dried his heart, beate it to powder, and mingled it with her drinke, saying, There was no o∣ther Urne worthy to hold such precious ashes. Biblis, Semiramis, and Mirrha, 75. line.] Biblis loved her brother: Semiramis loved her sonne, yet some Authours thinke it a calumnie: Mirrha loved her fa∣ther. Lancelot, Tristram, 78. line.] Knights of the Round table. Jiniver, 79. line.] Jiniver or Guiniver, was wife to King Arthur, and Mistris to Lance∣lot. Isond, 80. line.] Belle Isond, wife to Marke, King of Cornewell, and Mistris to Tristram. By one hand slaine, 82. line.] The wife of
one Lancelot, killed by her husband; toge∣ther with his owne brother, whom shee used too familiarly, Italian Commentary.
CHAP. IV. The Argument. Himselfe with other slaves of Love Are all shut up in Venus grove. WHen once my will was captive by my fate, And I had lost the liberty, which late Made my life happy; I, who us'd before To flee from Love (as fearefull Deere abhorre The following huntsman) suddenly became (Like all my fellow-servants) calme and tame: And viewd the travels, wrestlings, and the smart, The crooked by-pathes, and the cosening Art That guides the amarous flock: then whil'st mine eye I cast on every corner, to espie Some Ancient or Modern who had prov'd Famous: I saw him, who had onely lov'd
Euridice, and found out Hel, to call Her deare Ghost back; he nam'd her in his fall For whom he died. Alceus there was knowne Skilfull in Love and verse: Anacreon Whose Muse sung nought but Love: Pindarus, he Was also there: there I might Virgil see: Many brave wits I found, some looser rimes, By others Writ hath pleas'd the ancient times: Ovid was one: After Catullus came; Propertius next, his Elegies the name Of Cynthia beare: Tibullus, and the young Greeke Poetesse, who is receiv'd among The noble Troup for her rare Saphick Muse. Thus looking here and there (as oft I use) I spi'd much people on a flowry plaine, Amongst themselves disputes of Love maintaine. Behold Beatrix with Dant; Selvagia, she Brought her Pistoyon Cin; Guiton may be Offended that he is the later nam'd: Behold both Guidoes for their learning fam'd: Th' honest Bullonian: The Scicilians first Wrote Love in rimes, but wrote their rimes the worst. Francischin and Senuchio, (who all know) Were worthy and humane: after did go
A squadron of another garbe and phrase, Of whom Arnaldo Daniel hath most praise, Great master in Loves Art, his stile as new As sweet, honours his Countrey: next, a few Whom Love did lightly wound; both Peters made Two; one, the lesse Arnaldo: some have had A harder warre; both the Rimbaldoes, th' one Sung Beatrix, though her quality was known Too much above his reach in Mont-ferrat. Alvernia's, old Piero, and Girault: Flocchetto, who from Genua was estrang'd And call'd Marsilian, he wisely chang'd His name, his state, and countrey, and did gain In all: Jeffray made haste to catch his bane With sails and oares: Guilliam too sweetly sung That pleasing Art, was cause he di'd so young. Amareg, Bernard, Hugo, and Anselme Were there, with thousands more, whose tongues were helme, Shield, sword and speare, all their offensive armes, And their defensive to prevent their harmes. From those I turn'd, comparing my owne woe, To view my countrey-folks; and there might know The good Thomasso, who did once adorne Boloigna, now Messina holds his urne.
Ah vanisht joyes! Ah life too full of bane! How wert thou from mine eyes so quickly tane? Since without thee nothing is in my power To doe; Where art thou from me at this houre? What is our life? If ought it bring of ease, A sick mans dreame, a fable, told to please. Some few there from the common road did stray, Lelius and Socrates, with whom I may A longer progresse take: O! what a paire Of deare esteemed friends to me they were! 'Tis not my verse, nor prose, may reach their praise; Neither of these can naked Vertue raise Above her owne true place: with them I have Reach't many heights; one yoke of learning gave Lawes to our steps, to them my festered wound I oft have shew'd; no time or place I found To part from them; and hope, and wish we may Be undivided till my breath decay: With them I us'd (too early) to adorne My head with th' honoured branches, onely worne For her deare sake I did so deeply love, Who fill'd my thoughts (but ah!) I dayly prove, No fruit nor leaves from thence can gathered be; The root hath sharp and bitter been to me.
For this I was accustom'd much to vexe, But I have seen that which my anger checks: (A Theame for buskins, not a Comick stage) She tooke the God, adored by the rage Of such dul fooles, as he hath captive led: But first, Ile tel you what of us he made; Then from her hand what was his owne sad fate: Which Orpheus or Homer might relate. His winged coursers ore the ditches leapt, And we their way as desperately kept, Till he had reached where his mother raignes, Nor would he ever pul or turne the reignes; But scour'd ore woods and mountains, none did care Nor could discerne in what strange world they were. Beyond the place, where old Aegeus mournes, An Iland lies, Phoebus none sweeter burnes, Nor Neptune ever bath'd a better shore: About the midst a beauteous hill, with store Of shades and pleasing smels, so fresh a spring As drownes all manly thoughts: this place doth bring Venus much joy; 't was given her Deity, Ere blinde man knew a truer god then she: Of which original it yet retaines Too much, so little goodnesse there remains,
That it the vicious doth onely please, Is by the vertuous shun'd as a disease. Here this fine Lord insulteth o're us all Tied in a chaine, from Thule to Ganges fall. Griefes in our breasts, vanity in our armes; Fleeting delights are there, and weighty harmes: Repentance swiftly following to annoy: (Such Tarquine found it, and the bane of Troy) All that whole valley with the Ecchoes rung Of running brookes, and birds that gently sung: The banks were cloath'd in yellow, purple, green, Scarlet and white, their pleasing springs were seen; And gliding streames amongst the tender grasse, Thickets and soft winds to refresh the place. After when Winter maketh sharp the Aire, Warme leaves, and leasure, sports, and gallant cheare Enthrall low minds. Now th' equinox hath made The day t' equal the night; and Progne had With her sweet sister, each their old taske taine: (Ah! how the faith in Fortune plac't is vain!) Just in the time, and place, and in the houre When humble tears should earthly joyes devoure, It pleased him, whom th' vulgar honour so, To triumph over me; and now I knovv
What miserable servitude they prove, What ruine, and what death, that fall in Love. Errours, dreams, palenesse waiteth on his chair, False fancies o're the doore, and on the stair Are slipry hopes, unprofitable gain, And gainfull losse; such steps it doth contain, As who descend, may boast their fortune best: Who most ascend, most fall: a wearied rest, And resting trouble, glorious disgrace; A duskish and obscure illustriousnesse; Unfaithful loyalty, and cozening faith, That nimble fury, lazy reason hath: A prison, whose wide wayes doe all receive, Whose narrow paths a hard retiring leave: A steep descent, by which we slide with ease, But finde no hold our crawling steps to raise: Within confusion, turbulence, annoy Are mixt; undoubted woe, and doubtful joy: Vulcano, where the sooty Cyclops dwel; Lyparis, Strombolli, nor Mongibel, Nor Ischia have more horrid noise and smoke: He hates himselfe that stoops to such a yoke. Thus were we all throng'd in so strait a cage, I chang'd my looks and hair, before my age,
Dreaming on liberty (by strong desire My soul made apt to hope) and did admire Those gallant mindes, enslav'd to such a woe, (My heart within my brest dissolv'd like snow Before the Sunne) as one would side-wayes cast His eye on pictures, which his feet hath past. The end of the fourth Chapter.
ANNOTATIONS UPON THE FOURTH CHAPTER. EƲridice, 13. line.] Euridice was wife to Orpheus a famous Greeke Poet, who made a journey to Hell for her after her death, and having recovered her from Pluto, on con∣dition hee should not looke backe, lost her by breaking his promise. Hee hated marriage ever after, for which, or for his unnaturall Love to boyes, hee was killed by women at a sacrifice, and they say, named his wife after his head was off. Alceus, 15. line.] An excellent, but lascivi∣ous Greeke Poet, Italian Commentar. Anacreon, 16. line.] Another Greeke Poet. Italian Commentar. Pindarus, 17. line.] An excellent Greeke Poet, Italian Commentar. Virgil, 18. line.] The Prince of Latine Po∣ets, who knowes him not? It seemes hee was also in Love, Italian Commentar.
Ovid, Catullus, Propertius and Tibullus, 21. 22. and 23. lines.] All Latine Poets, and all Lovers. Italian Commentar. Greeke Poetesse, 24. line.] Sapho, she first in∣vented those verses called Saphicks after her: a better Poetesse then a woman, Italian Com∣mentar. Dant, 29. line.] An Italian Poet, whose Mi∣stresse name was Beatrix. Italian Commen∣tary. Pistoyan Cin, 30. line.] Cin of Pistoia, ano∣ther Italian Poet, whose Mistresse was named Selvagia. Guiton may, 30. line.] Guiton was the best Italian Poet of his time: and therefore Petrarch thinkes hee should have had the first place here. Italian Commentar. Guidoes, 32. line.] They were two Italian Po∣ets of one name. Italian Commentar. Sicilians, 33. line.] They were the first in∣venters of rimes, and those very rude ones. Ita∣lian Commentar. Francischin and Senvchio, 35. line.] Two Italian Poets, friends to Petrarch. Italian Com∣mentar. A squadron, 37. line.] Here followes a troup of obscure provinciall Poets. Italian Com∣mentar. Peters, 41. line.] Two unconstant riming
Lovers, of whom there cannot bee much said to much purpose, onely they with Arnaldo Daniel, and the lesser Arnaldo were provinci∣all, Italian Commentary. Rimbaldoes, 43. line.] There were two Poets of that name: The first loved two or three Mistresses, and made verses, &c. The o∣ther loved but one, named Beatrix, Coun∣tesse of Mont-ferrat, Italian Commen∣tary. Alvernia's, old Piero, 46. line.] A good Poet that lived long: so there hath beene three Peters in all. Girault, 46. line.] Another Provinciall Poet, but I know not why hee should bee here, since I cannot learne that hee had ei∣ther Wife or Mistresse, Italian Commen∣tarie. Flocchetto, 47. line.] Hee was a Merch∣ants sonne in Genua, but being of a good spi∣rit, hee travelled, and changed his Countrey; from whence hee was called Marsilian: hee turned religious at last, for discontent in love: hee was also a Poet, Italian Com∣mentarie. Jeffray, 50. line] Jeffray Ruder, hee fell in love with the Countesse of Tripola, by re∣port, and making a sea-voyage to see her, fell sicke by the way: after hee was landed, the
Ladie came to visite him, hee not being a∣ble to visite her, by which good fortune, well satisfied, he died presently after, Italian Com∣mentary. Guilliam, line, 51.] Guilliam Gabesten of Rosiglion, loving, and too much loved of a Ladie, named Sorismonda, wife to Raimond, Lord of a principall place in that Countrey: his fine verses discovered their Love to her Husband, who killing him, caused dresse his heart, and made her eat it, then told her what it was: shee gave him a bitter answer; with which, enraged, hee drew his sword upon her, who leaping over a Balcone to shunne his fury, died of the fall, Italian Commen∣tarie. Amareg, 53. line.] There were two Po∣eticall Lovers of that name. Bernard, 53. line.] An amarous Poet, who turned religious at last, Italian Com∣mentarie. Hugo, 53. line.] A pleasing Poet▪ much respected for his Art, but an ill Me∣nager and died poore, Italian Commenta∣rie. Anselme, 53. line.] A worse Poet, and worse Menager then the other, Italian Com∣mentary.
Thomasso, 59 line.] A Poet, and friend to Petrarch, who studied with him in Bolognia: it seems he died, and was buried in Messiana, Ita∣lian Commentar. Lelius and Socrates, 63. line.] They were two friends to Petrarch. Italian Commen∣tary. Many heights, 74. line.] That is, they found out many mysteries of Learning, in their com∣mon studies, Italian Commentar. My head with th' honoured branches, 80. line.] His Mistresse, her name being Lauretta, hee wore Lawrell Garlands (as Emblems of her) sooner then he thought, his Poesie deserved that honour. For buskins, 87. line.] Because of the subject: Laurettas warre with Cupid, being both Tra∣gicall, for she made him prisoner, and mage∣sticke, in regard of the dignitie of the Victresse, and powerfulnesse of the enemy: the Tragedi∣ans, understood here by buskins (a kinde of feet, or legge-ornament which they wore) using a more grave and weighty stile then the Comick, Italian Commentar, Orpheus or Homer, 92. line.] Two of the best Greeke Poets. Aegeus mourns, 99. line.] The Aegean Sea, called so from Aegeus father to Theseus, and King of Athens, who drowned himselfe there,
thinking his sonne was dead. Tarquin, 116. line.] Tarquin ravished Lucrece, which was the ruine of his fathers house, and made the Government bee changed: a knowne History. Bane of Troy, 116. line] Paris, who caused the destruction of Troy, by carrying away Hel∣len wife to Menelaus. Progne, 126. line.] The Swallow, her taske is to build in the spring. Her sweet sister, 127. line.] Philomel, or the Nightingale: her case is to sing, or mourne if you will. Time and place, 129. line.] Good-friday in the Church, and at Masse as it should seem; but the Italian Commentary in the life of Petrarch, contests much to prove that it was in the fields, that he see her by hazard, as hee and shee were both going to visit the Church of Saint Varan, it was Good-friday however. Vulcanus, 151. line.] Vulcanus or Vulcano, Lyparis, Strombolli, Mongibell, and Ischia, all burning Islands and Mountains in the Medi∣terran Sea. Side-wayes cast, 161. line.] The place seem∣eth imperfect, but is not, for hee compareth himselfe in his last contemplation of the mise∣rie of Lovers after his experience, (which hee had not much heeded before) to a man, who
neglecteth a piece of rare work or picture, by haste or other thoughts; and when hee is past, considers it more seriously, either standing still▪ or going on with his eye fixed on it. The End of the Triumph of Love.
THE TRIUMPH OF CHASTITIE: Written by PETRARCH, AND TRANSLATED Out of Italian, BY Mris ANNA HUME. EDINBƲRGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Ma∣jestie, 1644.
THE TRIUMPH OF CHASTITIE. CHAP. I. The Argument. Chastitie binds the winged god, And makes him subject to her rod. WHen to one yoke at once I saw the height Of Gods and men subdu'd by Cupids might; I tooke example from their cruel fate, And by their sufferings eas'd my owne hard state: Since Phoebus and Leander felt like paine, The one a God, the other but humane.
One fnare catcht June, and the Carthage Dame, (Her Husbands death prepar'd her funerall flame, 'Twas not a cause that Virgil maketh one) I need not grieve, that unprepar'd, alone, Unarm'd, and young, I did receive a wound, Or that my enemy no hurt hath found By Love; or that she cloath'd him in my sight, And tooke his wings, and marr'd his winding flight: No angry Lions send more hideous noyse From their beat breasts, nor clashing thunders voyce Rends Heav'n, frights Earth, and roareth through the aire With greater force, then Love had rais'd, to dare Encounter her, of whom I write; and she As quicke and ready to assaile, as he: Enceladus when Aetna most he shakes, Nor angry Scylla, nor Charibdis makes So great and frightfull noyse, as did the shock Of this (first doubtfull) battel, none could mock Such earnest warre; all drew them to the height To see what maz'd their hearts, and dimn'd their sight. Victorious Love a threatning dart did show His right hand held; the other bore a bow, The string of which he drew just by his eare; No Leopard could chase a frighted Deere
(Free, or broke loose) with quicker speed, then he Made haste to wound; fire sparkled from his eye: I burn'd, and had a combat in my brest, Glad t' have her company, yet 'twas not best (Me thought) to see her lost, but 'tis in vain T' abandon goodnesse, and of fate complaine: Vertue her servants never will forsake, As now 'twas seen, she could resistance make: No Fencer ever better warded blow, Nor Pilot did to shore more wisely row To shun a shelfe, then with undaunted power She wav'd the stroke of this sharp Conquerour. Mine eyes and heart were watchfull to attend, In hope the victory would that way bend It ever did; and that I might no more Be barr'd from her; as one, whose thoughts, before His tongue hath utter'd them, you well may see Writ in his looks; O! if you victour be Great Sir, (said I) let her and me be bound Both with one yoke; I may be worthy found, And will not set her free, doubt not my faith: When I beheld her with disdain and wrath So fill'd, that to relate it, would demand A better Muse then mine: Her vertuous hand
Had quickly quench't those guilded fiery darts, Which dipt in beauties pleasure, poyson hearts. Neither Camilla, nor the warre-like hoast, That cut their brests, could so much valour boast; Nor Caesar in Pharsalia fought so well, As she 'gainst him, who pierceth coats of mail; All her brave vertues arm'd, attended there, (A glorious troup!) and marched paire by paire: Honour and blushes first in ranke; the two Religious vertues make the second row; (By those she other women doth excell) Prudence, and Modesty, the twins that dwell Together, both were lodged in her brest; Glory and Perseverance ever blest: Fair Entertainment, Providence without, Sweet courtesie and purenesse round about▪ Respect of credit, feare of infamy; Grave thoughts in youth, and what not oft agree, True Chastitie, and rarest beauty; these All came 'gainst Love, and this the heav'ns did please And every generous soule in that full height, He had no power left to beare the weight! A thousand famous prizes hardly gain'd She tooke; and thousand lorious palms obtain'd,
Shooke from his hands; the fall was not more strange Of Hannibal, when Fortune pleas'd to change Her minde, and on the Romane youth bestow The favours he enjoy'd; nor was he so Amaz'd, who frighted th' Isralitish hoast Struck by the Hebrew boy, that quit his boast▪ Nor Cirus more astonisht at the fall The Jewish widow gave his Generall: As one that sickens suddenly, and feares His life, or as a man tane unawares In some base act, and doth the finder hate; Just so was he, or in a worse estate: Feare, griefe and shame, and anger in his face Were seen, no troubled Seas more rage, the place Where huge Typheus grones; nor Etna when Her Giant sighs, were mov'd as he was then. I passe by many noble things I see; (To write them, were too hard a taske for me) To her and those that did attend, I go; Her armour was a robe more white then snow; And in her hand a shield like his she bare Who slew Medusa, a faire pillar there Of Jasp was fixt, and with a chain (first wet In Lethe floud) of Jewels fitly set,
Diamonds mixt with Topasses (of old 'Twas worne by Ladies, now 'tis not) first hold She catch't, then bound him fast, then such revenge She tooke, as might suffice▪ my thoughts did change; And I who wisht him victory before, Was satisfi'd, he now could hurt no more. I cannot in my rimes the names contain Of blessed Maids that did make up her train▪ Calliope nor Clio could suffice, Nor all the other seven for th' enterprise▪ Yet some I will insert may justly claime Precedency of others. Lucrece came On her right hand: Penelope was by, Those broke his bow, and made his arrowes ly Split on the ground, and pull'd his plumes away From off his wings: after Virginia Nere her vext father, arm'd with wrath and hate, Fury, and ir'n and Love, he freed the state And her from slavery, with a manly blow: Next were those barbarous women, who could show They judg'd it better die, then suffer wrong To their rude Chastitie: the wise and strong The chaste Hebraean Judith, followeth these; The Greeke that sav'd her honour in the Seas.
With these and other famous soules I see Her Triumph over him, who us'd to be Master of all the world: Amongst the rest The vestall Nunne I spide, who was so blest As by a wonder to preserve her fame. Next came Hersilia the Romane Dame (Or Sabine rather) with her valarous train, Who prove all flanders on that sexe are vain. Then 'mongft the forraign Ladies, she whose faith T' her husband (not Aeneas) caus'd her death; The vulgar ignorant may hold their peace, Her safety to her Chastitie gave place; Dido I mean, whom no vain passion led, (As fame belies her) last, the vertuous Maide Retir'd to Aruns, who no rest could finde, Her friends constraining power forc't her minde; The Triumph thither went, where salt waves wet The Bayan shore, eastward; her foot she set There on firme land, and did Avernus leave On the one hand, on th' other Sybils Cave, So to Lencernus marcht, the Village where The noble Africane lies buried; there The great newes of her Triumph did appeare As glorious to the eye, as to the eare,
The fame had been; and the most chaste did show Most beautifull; it griev'd Love much to go Anothers prisoner, expos'd to scorne, Who to command whole Empires seemed borne. Thus to the chiefest City all were led, Entring the Temple which Sulpitia made Sacred; it drives all madnesse from the minde; And chastities pure Temple next we finde, Which in brave soules doth modest thoughts beget, Not by Plebeians entred, but the great Patrician Dames; there were the spoyles displaid Of the faire victresse; there her palmes she laid, And did commit them to the Thuscan youth, Whose marring scarres beare witnesse of his truth: With others more, whose names I fully knew, (My guide instructed me) that overthrew The power of Love: 'mongst whom of all the rest, Hyppolito and Joseph were the best. The end of this Chapter.
ANNOTATIONS Upon the Triumph of CHASTITIE. PHoebus and Leander, 5. line.] Phoebus lo∣ved Daphne, and Leander Hero. Juno, 7. line.] Juno loved Jupiter so much, that shee was troublesomly jealous, if shee can be called jealous, that had so much wrong. Carthage dame, 7. line.] Dido, shee burned her selfe in her husbands funerall pile, lest she should bee compelled to marry an importunate suiter, or bring warre on her Countrey. Camilla, 57. line.] She was Queene of the Amazons: it is said, they cut off their right brests, that they might shoot with the more ease. Caesar in Pharsalia, 59. line.] That famous battell, in which he overcame Pompey the great and made way to the Empire. Religious vertues, 64. line.] Faith and Hope, Italian Commentarie.
The twinnes, 69. line.] Justice and Fortitude, Italian Commentarie. The Romane youth, 81. line.] Scipio, who o∣vercame Hannibal. Typheus groans, 95. line.] Typheus was one of the Giants that warred with heaven: there was a mountaine throwne upon him, under which when hee groanes, it sends forth smoke, fire, and stones▪ with great noise. Nor Aetna, 95. line.] Another mountaine, which was cast upon Enceladus another Giant: the smoke and fire of all these burning moun∣tains, proceeds from the Giants that lie oppres∣sed under them. Slew Medusa, 100. line.] The shield of Perseus▪ which turned all that beheld it, to stones. Jasp. 101. line.] Jasp hath a qualitie to make one chaste. Lethe flood, 103. line] Forgetfulnesse, an ex∣cellent cure for Love, and the tooth-ake. Diamonds, &c. 104. line.] Diamonds is thought maketh the wearers constant: Topasses make chaste, for which two causes they were worn by Ladies of old; but I hope they are not needfull now. Calliope, &c. 112. 113. line.] the nine Muses. Lucrece, 114. line.] A knowne Story, shee
killed her selfe after Tarquin had ravished her. Penellope, 115. line] The chaste wife of Ʋlisses. Virginia, 118. line.] Virginia being a beau∣tifull young Maid▪ was adjudged a bondwoman by Appius Claudius, that hee might obtain his owne base ends: her father seeing no other way to preserve her liberty and chastity, killed her, which occasioned the alteration of that govern∣ment, by which Appius had his power, and gave liberty to the people. Judged it better die, 123. line.] Their hus∣bands, fathers▪ brothers, &c. being killed and chased by Marius, they hanged themselves, I∣talian Commentarie. The Greeke, &c. 126. line.] Hippo a Greci∣an maide▪ who being embarked against her will by one who intended to dishonour her, leapt in to the Sea, and drowned her self, Italian Com∣mentarie. The vestall Nunne, 130 line.] Called Tucia, who cleared her selfe from a false accusation, by carrying water in a sive. Hirsilia, 132. line.] Wife to Romulus, shee with the other Romane wives, all Sabine wo∣men, who had been stollen from their kindred, seeing their husbands ready to fight with their fathers, brothers, cousins, &c. ranne in betwixt them, and opposing themselves to the naked
swords, staid the fury of the fight, brought them to a parley, and so to an agreement. Dido I mean, 139. line.] Petrarch it seems was much troubled at the wrong done to Dido, by Virgil; who to honour his Aeneas, will needs have it, that she forfeit her honour to him, when in true History, it is knowne hee never see her: this he glanceth at in her defence three severall times, for which I thanke him. Retired to Arnus, 141. line.] One Piccarda, who rendered her selfe a Nunne, but was taken out by her friends, and compelled to marry, Ita∣lian Commentar. Baian shore, 144. line.] Baiae, is a Citie in Campania, called so from the hot bathes that are in it: it lieth alongst the Coast of the Mediter∣ran sea, south-east from the mouth of Tiber, and giveth name to the Bay neare it, where Lauret∣ta landed. Avernus, 145. line.] A great Lake nere Baiae. Sybils cave, 146. line.] A cave not farre from Avernus, where Sybilla called Cumea, was wonted to give her answers. Linternum, 147. line.] A little Village in Campania, honoured by the death and buriall of the elder Scipio. By Sulpitia, 156. line.] Sulpitia was a ver∣tuous and learned Lady of Rome, who lived
and wrote in the time of Domitian: it seemeth she hath beene chosen to dedicate that Temple or Altar to Venus▪ which hath power to curbe unreasonable passions, for the chastest women did worship Venus for that end, belike as the In∣dians worship the Devil. Thuscan youth, 163. line.] A beautifull yong man▪ who pittying the miseries of those wo∣men that doted on him, and wearied with their importunities, marred his owne face. My guide, 164. line.] His old Thuscan friend, who described The Triumph of Love to him ere he was one of the traine▪ doth now de∣scribe The Triumph of Chastitie. Hippolito and Joseph, 169. line.] Hippolito rejected the unlawfull Love of his stepmother, and Joseph the solicitation of his masters wife.
THE TRIUMPH OF DEATH: Written by PETRARCH, AND TRANSLATED Out of Italian, BY Mris ANNA HUME. EDINBƲRGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Ma∣jestie, 1644.
THE TRIUMPH OF DEATH. CHAP. I. The Argument. Lauretta meeting cruell Death, Mildely resignes her noble Breath. THe glorious Maid, whose soule to Heaven is gone And left the rest cold earth, she who was growne A pillar of true vallour, and had gain'd Much honour by her victory, and chain'd That God which doth the world with terrour binde, Using no armour but her owne chaste minde:
A faire aspect, coy thoughts, and words well weigh'd, Sweet modestie to these gave friendly aid. It was a miracle on earth to see The bow and arrowes of the Deitie, And all his armour broke, who erst had slain Such numbers, and so many captive tain: The faire Dame from the noble fight withdrew With her choise company, they were but few, And made a little troup, true vertu's rare, Yet each of them did by her selfe appeare A theame for Poems, and might well incite The best Historian: they bore a white Unspotted Ermine, in a field of green, About whose neck a Topas chain was seen Set in pure gold; their heavenly words and gate Exprest them blest were borne for such a fate. Bright stars they seem'd, she did a Sun appeare, Who darkned not the rest, but made more cleare Their splendour; honour in brave minds is found: This troup with Violets and Roses crown'd, Chearfully marcht, when lo, I might espie Another ensigne dreadfull to mine eye, A Ladie cloth'd in blacke, whose sterne looks were With horrour fill'd, and did like hell appeare,
Advanc't, and said, You who are proud to be So fair and young, yet have no eyes to see Hovv neare you are your end, behold, I am She, vvhom they, fierce, and blinde, and cruell name, Who meet untimely deaths; 'tvvas I did make Greece subject, and the Romane Empire shake▪ My piercing svvord sack't Troy, hovv many rude And barbarous people are by me subdu'd? Many ambitious, vaine, and amarous thought My unvvisht presence hath to nothing brought▪ Novv am I come to you, vvhiles yet your state Is happy, ere you feel a harder fate. On these you have no povver, she then replide, Who had more vvorth then all the vvorld beside, And little over me; but there is one Who vvill be deeply griev'd vvhen I am gone, His happinesse doth on my life depend, I shall finde freedome in a peacefull end. As one vvho glancing vvith a sudden eye Some unexpected object doth espie; Then lookes again, and doth his ovvne haste blame: So in a doubting pause, this cruell dame A little staid, and said, The rest I call To minde, and knovv I have o'recome them all:
Then with lesse fierce aspect, she said, Thou guide Of this faire crew, hast not my strength assaid, Let her advise, who may command, prevent Decrepit age, 'tis but a punishment; From me this honour thou alone shalt have, Without or feare or paine, to finde thy grave, As he shall please, who dwelleth in the Heaven And rules on earth, such portion must be given To me, as others from thy hand receive: She answered then; a farre we might perceave Millions of dead heapt on th' adjacent plain, No verse nor prose may comprehend the slain Did on deaths Triumph wait, from India, From Spain, and from Morocco, from Cathai, And all the skirts of th' earth they gathred were, Who had most happy liv'd, attended there; Popes, Emperours, nor Kings, no ensignes wore Of their past height, but naked shew'd and poore. Where be their riches, where their precious jems, Their Miters, Scepters, Roabs and Diadems? O miserable men, whose hopes arise From worldly joyes, yet be there few so wise As in those trifling follies not to trust; And if they be deceiv'd in end 'tis just:
Ah, more then blinde, what gain you by your toyle You must returne once to your mothers soyle, And after times your names shall hardly know, Nor any profit from your labour grow; All those strange countreyes by your warlick stroke Submitted to a tributary yoke; The fuell erst of your ambitious fire, What helpe they now? the vast and bad desire Of wealth and power at a bloody rate Is wicked, better bread and water eat With peace; a woodden dish doth seldome hold A poysoned draught, glasse is more safe then gold; But for this Theame a larger time will aske, I must betake me to my former taske. The fatall houre of her short life drew neare, That doubtfull passage which the world doth feare; Another company, who had not beene Freed from their earthy burden there were seene, To try if prayers could appease the wrath, Or stay th' inexorable hand of death. That beauteous croude conveen'd to see the end Which all must taste; each neighbour, every friend Stood by, when grim death with her hand tooke hold, And pull'd away one onely haire of gold.
Thus from the world this fairest flower is tane To make her shine more bright, not out of spleen: How many moaning plaints, what store of cries Were uttered there, when fate shut those faire eyes For which so oft I sung; whose beautie burn'd My tortur'd heart so long; whiles others mourn'd She pleas'd, and quiet did the fruit enjoy Of her blest life; farewell, without annoy, True Saint on earth, said they; so might she be Esteem'd, but nothing bates deaths crueltie. What shall become of others, since so pure A body did such heats and colds endure, And chang'd so often in so little space? Ah worldly hopes, how blinde you be, how base? If since I bathe the ground with flowing teares For that milde soule, who sees it witnesse bears; And thou who read'st maist judge she fetter'd me. The sixt of April, and did set me free On the same day and moneth: O! how the way Of fortune is unsure, none hates the day Of slavery, or of death, so much as I Abhorre the time which wrought my liberty, And my too-lasting life; it had been just My greater age had first been turn'd to dust,
And paid to time, and to the world the debt I ow'd, then earth had kept her glorious state: Now at what rate I should the sorrow prise I know not, nor have Art that can suffise The sad affliction▪ to relate in verse Of these faire Dames, that wept about her herse▪ Courtesie, Vertue, Beautie, all are lost, What shall become of us? none else can boast Such high perfection, no more we shall Heare her wise words, nor the Angelicall Sweet musick of her voyce; whiles thus they cride The parting spirit doth it selfe divide With every vertue from the noble brest, As some grave Hermite, seeks a lonely rest: The Heav'ns were cleare, and all the ambient Aire Without a threatning Cloud, no adversaire Durst once appeare, or her calme minde affright; Death singly did her selfe conclude the fight; After, when feare, and the extreamest plaint Were ceast, th' attentive eyes of all were bent, On that faire face, and by despaire became Secure; she who was spent, not like a flame By force extinguisht, but as lights decay, And undiscerned waste themselves away:
Thus went the soule in peace, so lamps are spent, As the oyle fails which gave them nourishment; In summe, her countenance you still might know The same it was, not pale, but white as snow, Which on the tops of hills in gentle fleakes Fals in a calme, or as a man that takes Desired rest, as if her lovely sight Were clos'd with sweetest sleep, after the spright Was gone. If this be that fooles call to die, Death seem'd in her exceeding faire to be. The end of the first Chapter.
ANNOTATIONS UPON THE TRIUMPH OF DEATH. NOble fight, line, 13.] Her fight with Cupid: See above in the Triumph of Cha∣stitie. Choice Company, 14. line.] The Ladies that had been vertuous before her time, and now waited on her Triumph, Lucrece, Penelo∣pe, &c. They bore a white, 18. line.] Their ensigne, a white Ermine in a greene field, with a chaine of Topasses set in pure gold: the white Ermine was an Embleme of innocencie: The Topasses of Chastity: and the pure gold of tride Vertue. On these 43. line.] Meaning the other La∣dies that waited on her, because they were all dead long before.
There is one, 45. line.] Petrarch, whom she thought would be more hurt by her death then her selfe, in regard of his extreme affection. Another Company, 95. line.] The former Company who were dead, could not bee sory for her death, because she would be nearer them, but another company of Ladies, her friends and neighbours, came to pray that death would let her stay longer amongst them. One onely haire, 102. line.] Alluding to the purple haire on the head of Nisus, which his daughter stole, because he could not die whiles he wore it, as if Lauretta had had such another: or as if every body had one: See above in the Triumph of Love, 2. Chap. 155. line. No adversary, 142. line.] No wicked spirit, meaning, that she was troubled with no appari∣tions at her death.
CHAP. II. The Argument. The happy spirit doth descend To comfort her afflicted friend. THat night which followed the too-sad decay Of my best Sunne, whiles it was yet full day: (Whence I remain as blinde) the Summer dew Slides through the Aire, and faire Titonia now Bestowes true dreames, (when like the growing yeare) A Ladie (crown'd with orient jemmes) drew nere: (With whom a thousand other Crownes did move) And stretching forth that object of my love, Her hand; she spoke, from whose sweet words did flow Joy to my soule, and said, Doe you not know
Her, who hath rais'd your thoughts above the strain Of the low vulgar, as her love did gain Place in your heart, then vvith a sober looke She set her selfe and me, close by a brooke O're shadowed vvith a lavvrell and a beach: Like one vvhose vveeping interrupts his speech: Must I not knovv the soul maintains my breath; But doe you live, or are tane hence by death? I answer'd, Pray instruct; I live said she, And you are dead, till you be joyn'd with me: But time is short, though vve desire it long, Take my advice, and curb your flovving tongue: The day approacheth fast, my sad reply Was this: Ah say, is it much pain to die? You lately tri'd and knevv, you'l ne'r obtain True happinesse, she said, if you remaine In this so blinde and common errour; knovv, Death is the end of prison and darke vvoe To vvell-bred soules, doth onely terrour prove To those that place on earthy drosse their love; And even my death vvhich doth my soul annoy, Could you conceive the least part of my joy, Would make you happy (having fixt her eye, Whiles thus she spake, devoutly on the skie)
Then clos'd her rosie lips, and silent staid▪ Sicknesse and Tyrants crueltie have made Death bitter, I reply'd; 'Tis true, said she, The pains we feel before death bitter be, And hellish torments worse; but he whose minde Is staid by heavenly hopes, shall truely finde, Though weake and wearied, this last step a short Sigh, and no more; as I drew neare the Port, My body weake, my soul did much rejoyce; Yet heard the whispering of mourning voyce; Alas, for him who reckons every day A thousand yeares, and stil in vain doth stay On earth, and never more must see her face On Sea or Land, and filleth every place With that one Theame, and findeth no delight Of ought but her, to thinke, or speake, or write. My sight I that way turn'd, from whence mine eare Receiv'd the sound, and saw 'twas she whose care Us'd to incite my Love, and temper thine: Her face and speech I knew, oft her divine Wise councels, healing cordials were to me, With honest mirth and chearful gravitie; When I with most felicitie was blest In my first prime, and when thou lov'dst me best:
When thy praise fam'd me most, even then my life Was little better then a bitter strife, Compar'd with that sweet death, which few obtain; No banisht man call'd to his home again Is more joy'd, then this passage pleased me: But for the pitty that I had of thee I do adjure thee, by that faithfull Love Thou knewst on earth, but better know'st above; Did ever Love, said I, beget in thee One thought to pitty my long misery, Not wronging thy great minde; the sweet disdain, Sweet mildnesse of your looks in doubtfull pain, Hath held my wishes long; ere I had said The words, a lightning smile, such as oft paid And eas'd the sadnesse of my wounded heart I saw: Then she replide; Nothing could part My soule from thine, nor shal; but 'tdid behove With outward coldnesse to restrain thy love, No other way would have preserv'd our fame; A rod destroyes not a kinde mothers name: I studied to conceale my Love, such care And providence dwell not with hope and feare; My countenance you saw, but not my heart, I turn'd and staid thy course with heedfull Art▪
As one would tame a horse: my cheeks have been Oft dy'd with fain'd wrath, when my heart within Was a whole fire of Love; yet reason still Kept her owne place, and did command my will: But when I found thee overcharg'd with woe, I us'd my milder lookes, preventing so Thy death, and my reproach; when I observ'd Thy passion grow too strong, I then reserv'd My selfe, as if with griefe or feare opprest: These were my ensignes, and I found it best To mixe disdains with favours, this your songs Have made already passe through many tongues; When I beheld the teares swimme in thine eye, I said, Without my help, I feare he'll dye: Then gave some modest aid; when you were bold, I said, he must be curb'd: now pale and cold, Now warme and fresh, now sad, now full of joy, I kept thee safe, not without much annoy; Glad t' have thus finisht, 'twere enough reward Could I believ't; thus trembling, as affeard, Not with dry eyes, I said, she made reply, Doe you distrust, for what end should I ly; A little blushing, then went on, If to My partiall eye, the world esteemed you:
I held me quiet, being throughly blest In that true-love knot lockt within my brest: The faire report (if it be truth) I heare Thy praises have acquir'd me farre and neare, I much esteem, and never more did crave But moderation in thy love to have; That onely wanted; whiles with signes of woe You would perswade what I did throughly know, To open view you did your heart expose: My coldnesse hence, hence your distemper rose: In other things we did like friends agree, Joyn'd by a Love, from all base passions free; My heart was burnt with almost equal fire, At least, when once I knew thy strong desire▪ But mine I hid, whiles yours was open laid: When you were hoarce, with having often praid, For pittie, I was silent, shame and feare Were cause my great Love did but smal appeare: Griefe is of no lesse weight, because conceal'd, Nor more when by impatience 'tis reveal'd; Deceit doth not increase, nor yet impaire A truth; But say, Was not my Love then cleare When I receiv'd the lines you sent before Your face and song? My Love dares say no more.
My heart was stil with thee, though I restrain'd My lookes; and you, as having vvrong, complain'd, Because I gave the most part, and vvithdrevv The least, yet was not that vvith-held from you; A thousand and a thousand times mine eye Was turn'd with pittie on thy misery; And ever had continued stil the same, But that I fear'd a danger in thy flame: And not to leave you in suspence, Ile shovv What I beleeve you vvil be glad to know; In all the rest I found a pleasing fate, Onely for one cause I dislik'd my state▪ My place of birth did to my thoughts appeare Too meane, and I stil grieve 'tvvas not more neare Thy flovvry seat, yet doe I vvel approve Of any Countrey where I had thy Love; Besides, the heart in vvhich I place most trust, If me thou hadst not known, 'tis like it must Have elsewhere lov'd, so had I got lesse fame; You do mistake, my Love had been the same Where ever you had liv'd, my Starres did raise Me to so high a flame, I said: much praise And honour have attended me, she said, How e're it be, but I too long have staid:
Thy joy makes thee forget the wings of time, Aurora now brings day, the Sun doth climbe Above the Ocean, from her golden bed; At last, about to part and leave me sad, She said, If you have ought besides make haste And end your speach before the time be past; All my past suff'rings your kinde words make light, I answered, But I grieve without your sight, And wish to know, if I am like to be Long here, or if I soon may follow thee: She going thus replide; I do beleeve, That without me on earth you long must live. The End of the Triumph of Death.
ANNOTATIONS UPON THE SECOND CHAPTER OF THE TRIUMPH OF DEATH. BEst sunne, 2. line.] Meaning Lauretta, who dyed in the middest of her age, being but 33. yeares old. Titania, 4. line.] Aurora the morning, cal∣led Titania from Titan, the Sunne, who lodgeth with her. True dreames, 5. line.] The morning
dreames are held true, because the fancie is then most free from vapours. A Ladie, 6. line.] Lauretta crowned, be∣cause she was now a Saint. Other crownes did move, 7. line.] Other crowned Saints that came along with her, be∣like hee thought they must dote on her, as hee did. Doe you live, &c. 18. line.] The Italian Commentary makes a long and needlesse dis∣course to defend the congruitie of this place, as if all did not know that those who dreame they see a dead person appeare, as if alive, doe ordinarily make such a doubt in their sleepe. When I receiv'd, 129. line.] Hee had one time, as hee used, sent her some of his verses, and coming himselfe just as they were presented to her, shee received them in his presence, Italian Commentary. My Love dares say no more, 130. line.] She sung a song, beginning thus, for an undirect ex∣cuse of her reservation. Flowrie seat, 145. line.] Florence. Of any countrey, &c. 146. line.] The sense here seemed cleare to mee, that Lauretta being
well descended, but borne in Cabriers, an ob∣scure village, shee was onely displeased with that particular; yet the honour of his love was recompence enough for that misfortune, and any place good enough where shee had that ho∣nour: and if shee had beene borne neare Flo∣rence, where hee had his birth, shee might have beene unknowne to him who had left it, his parents being chased from thence by a con∣trary faction; and if hee had not seen her, it is like hee might have loved another, so should shee have missed that honour, to which Petrarch answers, That where ever she had beene borne, hee must needs have loved her, by the influence of his Starres: but when I looke on the Italian Commentary, I finde hee takes the meaning quite other wayes, which I have expressed as neare his sence as I can, thus: Thy flowry seat, for though I well approve Of that faire countrey where I had thy love: Yet might that heart, in which I trusted, stray To other beauties, and be turned away By this defect, so had I got lesse fame, &c. As if shee had said her greatest misfortune
was feare or jealousie, that hee disliking the place in which shee lived (though she thought it sweete enough) might change his affection, and bee drawne to love some other▪ Let him that reads or compares, take the sence hee ap∣proveth most. FINIS.
Advertisement to the Reader. THe first title page should have told thee that all the three Triumphes were translated out of the Italian, a circumstance I considered not then, since it is thought necessary to say so much, I wil now say more: I never saw them, nor any part of them, in any other language but Ita∣lian, except the poore words
in which I have cloathed them. If they afford thee either profit or delight, I shall the more willingly bestow some of my few leasure hours on turning the other three Triumphs, of Fame, Time, and Divinitie or Heaven. Farewell.
Errata. Page 19. line 13. reade amasedly. p. 22. r. Massinissa was. p. 3. l. 8. r. mixed, for mingled. p. 33. r. blowes for wounds. p. 35. l. 15. del. now. p. 54. l. 5 r. provincial Poets. p. 65. l. 22. r. Linternum. p. 70. is figured false, in the 17. l. of it, read know for knew, and in the 22. l. r. thy foul for my soul.
WHen first my light did shine, you lik'd me well. Now that is gone; you hate my loathsome smell; You with prolongers made me live, and art Preserv'd my light; but now Time acts his part, Triumphant Time, shews now my glasse is run And all must end, that ever was begun: Envy hath playd its part, and I do go To Coffin: as I do, all must do so. Time breaths a shrewd and life-bereaving blast, Yet upward flyes my light, where it shall last. I'me glad to part from body, which I lov'd So deer, that many wayes and arts I prov'd This mudwall to maintain, and body save, But yet in spight of me 'twill go to grave. This is my comfort, Body, that thy tombe Which is thy grave, shall be thy mothers womb To bring thee once again unto the light, And life, which death shall never know, or night: Then be content, though you and I depart: Yet Soul and Body still shall have one heart. And upward flyes my soul, where it shall dwell, Beyond the reach of Envy, Death, or Hell.
