P3483 E573_21 R206264 99865436 165402
PRINCE CHARLES PROCLAIMED KING, AND Landed in Jersey with the Duke of YORK, and a list of the Lords, Knights and Gentlemen of quallity arrived there with his Highnes, and his design touching the West of ENGLAND. ALSO His entertainment by the Lord JERMANE who is made Governour of the Island, with the Lord Hopton and 300. other persons of note, that were convoyed by 2. States∣men of Warre WITH The Duke of Yorks Declaration touching his brother the Decla∣red King. And his Highnesses Message to the King of France, and a present of one hundred thousand Crownes sent him by the Cardinall London Printed for J. J. and are to be sold at Temple-Barre. 1649.
The landing of PRINCE CHARLES, And the Duke of YORKE IN The Isle of Jersey, with the Lord Hop∣ton, and 300. other Lords, Knights and Gentlemen, convoyd by 2, States-men of WARRE. THe Prince of Wales since his long and tedious journey from his Native Country, hath with his Councell at St. Germans in France (ouching the next place of his arri∣vall) had severall consultations, (having staid there lon∣ger then welcome) after which consultations he with his bro∣the Duke of York, the Lord Hopton, and 300 other Gentlemen of quallity betook themselves to hover for a time at Sea, intending for Jersey, where they are (as the newes is come) for certaine landed, being convoyed thither by two Statesmen of War, of 35 peeces of Ordnance. Its conceived their intention and Reso∣lution
is to be speedily in Ireland, and farther after they shall see cause. From Dublin. Letters say that the Lord Lieutennant is marched with his whole Army toward Trehah, it being first to be attached, the Governour thereof being Sir Arthur Ashton, formerly Governour of Reading, an old Souldier, & one famous for making good towns and did one once against the King of Sweden to his ad∣miration, this town is fortified as well as his, and as all the Ingineers Ormond had could do it. The cheef Governour must besiege it on both sides the water, whether he storm it as was his usuall way in England, or make a fotmal siege by itrenching and ap∣proaches time will shew, its mineaqle in most places, the sudden and easie carrying this place wil faciliate the whole worke, if this prove hard, the rest it like to come of so, If any ask why North not South first, its anfwe∣red, that there is good reason for it, for the better acco∣modation by Sea, who will keepe out any thing from the besieged, and furnish the besiegers with food, as to serve them with Biske, Beer; &c. Sir, Our Armies being at present not enged as we can hear I can inform you but little more for matter of News, only, we have for certaine, that since the advance of the Lord Leiutenant Crumwell, divers come from Inchiqueene, and that Col. Went∣worth is come with 50 horse and men, and there hath benn the like attempt at Drorhedah, but not so good successe some being taken and executed. A Letter from Chester Sept. 9. Sir, In my last I gave you the glad tydings of the Lord Governours landing in Ireland, since which we have not been acqinted with much action in those parts; but the best news at present as we hear is the return of some ships from Dublin since the landing of the Lord Leiutenant
who specify, that the Lord Governour marched on Satturday last from Dublin, its generally beleeved he is marched towards Tredah, and the Letters say, They hope it is taken by this time, and that they question not but that before this comes, to hand their will be some action, and further say that they do not beleive the enemies strength so great as they bragg off. We also hear that divers of Prince Ruperts men do often desert him so that he hath not Seamen with him, to man above 3 of his best ships, But there are not yet come any letters from our Navy before Kingsale. since the late great winds By Letters from Scotland, it was this day certified, That some Dans ships passed by the Islands of Orkney, towards Ireland, and Isle of Pha∣roe, one of the ships belonging to the Parl. of England chased them, & some of them ran on the Coasts of Scotland. That on those Coasts in Scotland, ly 2 Armies, one for the Kirk, and one for the State, who look for the landing of Forces from Montrosse, whom they heare is gathe∣ring of Forces in Denmark and Sweaden, by himself and his Agents to come against them, yet some of the Scots Souldiers were very abusive. From Yarmouth came thus, that Captaine Coppin with the Greyhound set at liberty a vessel that had been taken by 4 Dunkerk men of Warre, who after turning out all het men, puting only 5 into her, were sending her to Ostend, he also chased an Irish Frigot a long time, but the wind being extream high, and the storme increasing he was forced so let fall all his sales, or he had been over set, but he see her hover on the sands, and its thought she got not off againe. This day we had Intelligence that the Garrison of Oxford was in some distemper being seduced, partly by the discontented people of the Levelling faction, and partly by the Cavaliers who drive on their interest by complying and fomenting their discon∣tents. The Souldiers there have drawn up certaine Proposals, The sub∣stance is, for a new Representative, &c. These men are now quell'd, and the house having notice thereof, and that certain Agents from London are apprehended, who had blown up the mins of these poore souls in∣to thoughts of being restorers of their Country, who know how to settle the Nation better then ever it was, these are to be called to account, and proceeded against, and a Declaration speedily to goe forth for to un∣deceive.
The Souldiers a Oxford (as we are informed by letters from thence have drawn up eight Proposals to this effesh viz. for the chusing of a new Representative and disolving this, and for electing Agitators. They keep Guards and stop passenger, some talk of parties in other places rea∣dy to back them, and their is o Letter intercepted going tom a prisone- in the Fleete to the Lorn Cottingtor, wherein he relates that all the hoper of that party depends upon the seeming complyance of his Majesty seems ing complyance with the Levelling party, without whom it is impossi∣ble for any of his party here to prove serviceable, unlesse upon their prin∣ciples, he writes, That the Kings friends increase dayly, but have no possibility of acting unlesse the Levellers lead the way. This afternoone Col. Tomblinsou and Col. Euglisby were dispatched towards Oxford. From high Wickam we understand, that some turbulent spirits affron∣ted the Mayor who imprisoning some of them, with other of their con∣fede ates broke the prison, and after came dairing the mayor to his face, Sunday Sept 9. The book of Common Prayer was read at Petert Pauls Whar by one Williams, who not long since was required to for∣bear by the Lord Mayor, yet still persisted in that course, for which he was carried away by a Troop of horse, without doing any injury to his person, though some others were hurt in the action. Derby Sept. 9. 1649. THe Miners of this County seeme much discontented at some procee∣dings of Parl. and especilly in their own busines, they have had this weeke severall meetings, and we are informed to draw up a Declaration against the present Authority, upon publication whereof they intend to be ready to maintain with their lives and fortunes, and likewise the A∣greement of the people. And if this fire should unhappyly break out, I fear it would not be easily quenched, but prove to the ruin of the whole Na∣tion, which the Lord prevent, and incline the hearts of all to justice, love and peace. Windsor Sept. 10. The Major of Wickam complained lately to the Go∣vernour of this Castle against some of the Souldiers, that offered many incivillities, and high affronts to him; some whereof he had but the day before committed, and the prison door broke open by the Levellers com∣ing that way, The Governour resolved, and hath promised him all the assistance he can against them if they come the next Market day; and then it is possible they will be snapt.
FRom Oxford came thus; Sir, The Levelling party doth much resort o these quarters, since this Garrison hath revolted from the Parliament, Horse and foot come in night and day in great numbers, but we hear that will be soone prevented by some of the Asmies horse, that are appointed to straighten their quarters. Their Councell consisted most of private souldiers at first, but since some head-peeces are come from London to joyn with them, They talk of other Garrisons that will joyn with them, and that they doubt not but to have an offensive Field Army before six weeks be ended, we heare they are framing a Remonstrance for the recove∣ry of Englands lost freedoms, and for ease of the people from Burthens and oppressions, for obtaining whereof (they say) they are resolved, to hazard their lives and Fortunes. There came further this day that the Souldiery have seized on the 4. Gentlemen sent down to appease them, and that Col. Inglesby himself is secured by his own Souldiers in Oxon, but of this little certainy. From Scotland we here little of News, only the Committee of Estates are still at St. Johnstons, The King and they can make nothing yet upon their Treaty, the one working upon the others late defeat and the other thinking him stronger and more populously affected then ever, and upon the least turning any of the three Nations shall have as little need of their assistance as they of his affections. A Letter from Chester SIR, ƲPon the sight of your last, daed the 28. of the forgoing month, wherein I received so many extraordinary engagements, and courtisies from you I thought good to answer your desires (therein mentioned) with the best nwes for present, which is thus, viz. That from Dublin we hear that since the ad∣vance of the Lord Lieut. they heare that Inchiqueen is not wh O mnd but only the Lord Ad and Ormond are together much fearing Owen Re should fall in their reae, And further are informed that there hath been some actio¦on between a party of the Lord Leiut. and Ormonds near Dghda, th man∣ner thus, a squadron of our horse bing sent ut to discover the enemy met (in a narrow passage with a party of the en my, who though more i number then themselves, yet they resolved to charge them, and at the fist the enemy came on with such fury as they were confident of a victory, yet our men wh ng a∣bout cme on with such resolution that forced them to retreat, that thi ea∣gernes provd their desteny, in which dispute 6 of their men were kild onely 3. of ours received some small hrt, and as we heare, brought of some of thei s prisoners, by my next I am co fid nt I shall give you a better accoun of te proceedings of our Amy, and of their succ sse at Doghedah.
The Committee of Estates are not yet come from St. Iohn∣stones, and so the Letter not yet sent to our declared King, we shall not be to hasty in sending, because we exspect a speedy an∣swer, and a good: The banished out of the North of Ireland, (whom my Lord of Ards &c. would give mony and more to have againe) come hither, are to be reduced into six companies, who also will be disposed for defence, and its but need, in re∣gard of the alterations in Ireland. We shall passe the Winter merrily, and quietly, merrily in regard we shall have French Wines at as cheap price as Scotch Ale to you; quietly, because we have no enemy within: We have nothing to bewaile, but the generall violation of most of the Commandements of the second table, notwithstanding our Ministers preaching, our publicke shames imposed upon offendors by the Church, and severe lawes that should, and generally are put in execution by the Magistrates. It is Ceported that at the landing of the Prince tnd Duke with the rest they were entertained with many expressions of joy [(from the Lord Iermaine)] for his safe arrivill, which questionlesse they will suddenly they will soone be weary of. We here further that their design is to Proclaim Prince Charls King and to Crown him in Jersey and after to reduce Dakmouth or some such place in the West, in expectation of a generall rysing. From France we hear the Duke of York came hither on Thursday last and the nexh day was revisited by our King, and the Cardinall, whom he most humbly desired to have compassion on his brother the King, and to give all the aide h could for regaining his Kingdoms, whereto the Cardinall made answer it could not be now, but when they were in ca∣pacity they would spare neither purse nor power, but desired him to ac- of a small present of 10000 Crowns in the mean timr. FINIS.
