P4267 E105_3 99859961 112065
THE FIRST SPEECH OF Master Pym, The last Parliament. Concerning Liberty of Parliament. Generals concerning Religion. Generals concerning Civill go∣vernment. IN DOMINO CONFIDO printer's deivce June ye 5th 1643 London Printed, 1643.
A SPEECH DELIVERED IN Parliament by M. Pym, in the House of COMMONS, April, 1640. HEE that takes away weights from the motions, doth as good service as hee that addes wings unto it. These weights are old grievances, whereof there are three heads. 1. First, liberty of Parliament. 2. Generals concerning Religion. 3. Generals concerning civill government. I shall prove that these grievances are more grievous to the King, then they are to the Sub∣ject. I shall propose some waies of remedy, just and easie.
That Kings can doe no wrong, is their just prerogative; The distemper of the world is not caused by the celestiall bodies, but by the inferiour: In like manner of a Kingdome. Generall grievances concerning Religion, which we possesse by the Lawes of God, and of the Land. Encouragements given to the Popish Reli∣gion, I desire no new Lawes to be made against them, not a rigid execution of those that are already enacted. But this we are sure of, that if they once get the superiority, their Religion is destructive of all others. We must looke upon a Papist as he is in himselfe, but not as he is in the Church. The Planets have a quiet motion of their owne, but they are interrupted by another. The particular encouragements. First, Cessation of all Law, that were not made to raise a Revenue to the King, but to suppresse Idolatry, and to restrain Errors. A free communication of Councels through the Kingdome. Papists, being admitted to places of trust, and power in the Common-wealth. There is a Congregation at Rome, who plot how England may be reduced, and here in Eng∣land we have a Nuncio, to put in execution what they resolve of there.
Innovations to prepare us to Poperie. 1. FIrst, divers Bookes printed, Questions published and maintained in the Uni∣versitie. 2. Secondly, Popish Ceremonies introdu∣ced: when the drie bones were to be made a man, they were joyned first in the sinewes, and then they were to be animated. 3. Thirdly, Discouragements upon the pro∣fessors of Protestant Religion, things of indif∣ferency urged, to make the difference wider amongst as many questions, where there is no ground in Law, upon the Bishops authority, not upon the Kings authority, under the great Seale or Proclamation. 4. Fourthly, Encouragements of authority to Ecclesiasticall Courts. 1. First, To fine and imprison in some cases illegally. 2. Secondly, To affirme their jurisdiction to be derived from the Crowne, and say it is Iure divino, and therefore we are bound to maintain the prerogative of the Crowne. 3. Thirdly, Many ordinances set out, new Articles to examine Church-wardens. In the Common-law there is a title of ex∣travagants, and so are these.
4. Fourthly, Generals against civill Go∣vernment. 1. First, taking of tunnage and poundage, and all other impositions. 2. Secondly, Knighthood. 3. Thirdly, inundation of Monopolies, and commodities not only exported, but con∣sumed at home, as Sope, Drink, Salt, and that which is very comprehensive, the Shipmoney. 4. Fourthly, There is a countenance of judgement for it against all other judgements, and book Cases. 5. Fifthly, That which somewhat stickes by me, that is, the Forrest, and I might easily looke my selfe in it. 6. Sixthly, The sale and farming of Nu∣sances, being compounded for the assesse to be Nusances, and are licensed, as buildings, depo∣pulations, &c. 7. Seventhly, military charges, and com∣positions raised upon the Subject without ground of Law, conduct-monies, pressing Cart-horses, &c. 8. Eighthly, Extrajudiciall proceedings, a teeming grievance, the Judges will presume to anticipate their judgements. 9. Ninthly, the authorities of Courts of Justice have countenanced these Monopolies, as the Star-Chamber hath done against the Sheriffes, for not collecting Ship-money. 10. Tenthly, The Lords of the privy Coun∣cell have assisted them.
11. Eleventhly, the prerogative hath been vouched for the maintainance of them. 12. Twelvethly, The Conscience hath been pressed in this point, betwixt the prerogative, and liberty broken. Manwarring for his offence in this kinde, was as neere the ground as ever I saw any, and I did not thinke he should have leapt into a Bi∣shops Chaire. Intermissions of Parliament, the King summons them, but we humbly desire the benefit of the Law in that point. AS these grievances are to the Subject prejudiciall, so are they to the King much more. 1. First, this not liberty of the Parliament cuts off the sweete communion that ought to be betwixt the head and the members. 2. Secondly, it deprives the King of the present supply, and benefit the King hath by Subsidie. 3. Thirdly, it lesseneth his reputation abroad. 4. Fourthly, by the breaches in, and upon Religion he hath lost a great part of his Alli∣ance with Protestant States abroad, lost a great many Subsidies at home, because of the pres∣sing of indifferent things. 5. Fifthly, who will be industrious where he hath no propriety?
6. Sixthly, It breeds many jealousies, wee can remember when it hath bred distemper and one Summers distemper will consume more wealth then ever this Monopoly brought in. 7. Seaventhly, The Princes that have main∣tained their Subjects liberty, have been most glorious therein. What he omitted in each due place, is here inserted. THat not only composition was laid on goods imported and exported out of this Kingdome, but also on goods that were carried from one forraigne Countrey to another, as from Spaine to France, & vice versa. Another way is that for want of a legall way of accounting a great deale of the profit stickes by the way, and comes not to the Kings purse. The King hath farmed the Wines for thirty thousand pounds, the Farmors make forty thousand pounds, at the sale by retaile, it a∣mounts to two hundred thirty and two thou∣sand pounds. Remedies. First, present it to the higher house, they joyning to goe to the King, as in the land of Aegypt whilest the darkness was amongst them the Sun did give light, and the people had their visionable faculty, which was only hin∣dred by the interposition of the darknesse. FINIS.
