P594 R43888 42476212 151264
A Particular NARRATIVE Of a Great Engagement Between the GARISON of TANGIER, And the MOORS: And of the Signal Victory which His MAJESTIES Forces obtained against them on the 27th. of October last. Publish by Authority. Reprinted Anno Dom 1680.
A Particular Narrative of a Great Engagement Between the Garison of Tangier and the Moors. Tangier, Octob. 29. 1680. NOt to trouble you with an account of every days proceeding since the last that was made publick, though it would afford so many more instances of the great Care, Vigilance and Conduct of ourlate Governor Sir Palmes Fairborne, as well as of the Enemies Resolution to press this Place, we will begin this Relation from the day on which Sir Palmes received his Mortal Wound. The 24th Instant in the morning our Governour was from a Line of the Enemies unfortunately shot in the Body, as he was giving Directi∣ons for breaking of Ground upon a little Eminence to the left of the Spur under Peter borough Tower, by which Work he designed to amose the Enemy: who thereupon taking encouragement from the fll of Sir Palmes, or contemning the small Guard that was drawn out, made a very bold Sally out of their old Trenhes with which they had en∣vironed Charles-Fort, which the Spanish Officer at th head of 50 Horse (the 200 Spanish Horse being arrived some days before) ob∣serving, very bravely charged them, and forced them back into their Trenches▪ pursuing them to their very Line; from whence in his retreat they much galled him, killing him both Man and Horses, and mak∣ing a second Sally with a greater number, (some of their Horse be∣ing likewise come up to assst them) Which so little discourged the Spaniards that they renewed the Charge, and forced the Moors a se∣cond time into their Trenches, and then retired, and drew up upon the Ground where they were first posted, by which time they were re-inforced by our English Horse and more Foot, which the Enemy perceiving thought not fit to attempt any thing further. In this Action was killed and Wounded dight or ten Spaniards, and as many Morses, a Captain in the Scotch Regiment mortally Wounded, with seven or eight private Soldiers. The 25th, we perceived the Enemy had brought a Trench so very near our Stockade at Roe▪ Foxt, on that side that looks towards Ann Fort, that they had taken encouragement from thence to begin a Gal∣lery
in order to a Mine, the Ground being very commodious for it, and had likewise brought their Cannon to our old Place of Arms, which is but a Pistol-shot from the Fort, which progress and bold Proceedings of theirs, put Colonel Sackville (who succeeded Sir Palmes Faireborne in his Command) upon calling a Council of War, to con∣sult what was fit to be done, for that it appeared without some extraordinary Action our new Work would be quickly in some distress; and in pursuance to the Resolutions that were then taken. On Wednesday the 27, by three of the Clock in the morning, the Garison was in Arms, and such care was taken, that as well taken in drawing together our Men, as in their march out of the Town, so great a silence was observed, that although the Enemy had had Per∣dues on our very Walls, they cou'd not have take the least Alarm; our Foot was disposed into six Battalions, one of which was composed of Seamen, under the Command of Vice-Admiral Herbert, and com∣manded under him by Major Banlay, the other Battalions being com∣manded by Major Hacket, Major Boynton, Captain Giles, Captain Bow∣en, and Captain Spot, the whole Party of Foot consisting of about 1500 Men; The Horse being seven Troops, amounting to 300, were commanded, the English by Captain Neatby, Captain Cay, and Cap∣tain Langston; the Spanish by Don Salvador de Montfarte Don Marique de Moronia (who commands two Troops) and Don Fernando Penatelo To amuse and divert the Enemy, the Horse belonging to the Mole, amounting to about 50 were ordered with Riders and a Trumpet at the head of them to March to the Spur at Peterborough-Tower, where we pitched several Colours, and had Drums appointed to beat a strong Alarm, Captain Makenny with the Town-Horse marching at the head of them. On the other side in the Bay where the Enemy had a Battery of 8 or 9 Guns, Admiral Herbert had appointed all the Boats of the Fleet with Waste-cloaths and Colours, to make shew as if they intended to attempt their Cannon; both which designs, especially the latter took very good effect, drawing a good number of the Ene∣my from their Trenches, which appeared by their pitching their Colours all a long the Coasts, and firing at the Boats. A particular Attack was likewise ordered to be made out of Pole-Fort by 150 Men under the command of Captain Lundy and Captain Hume, upon the
Trench, where the Moors had begun a Gallery, in order to the Mineing the Fort, in which Sally Mr. Sheres, His Majesties Sur∣veyor General, to whose Valour and Advice much of our good suc∣cess is to be attributed, was present. The Horse marched first out of Catherin Port, and drew up in the Stockade just before it, then the Foot, and drew up according to the direction of Colonel Sackville, which was performed with so great silence that the whole party was almost drawn up, before the Moors took the Alarm. The disposition of the several Divisions, Advanced-Parties, and Reserves both of Horse and Foot was ordered in the most proper and Soldier-like manner the ground would permit, and the Posts that were to be attacked required. When the Party was ready to advanc, Colonel Sackville gave the Signal to the Fort, from whence the Attack beforementioned upon the Enemies Gallery was to be first made; Major Beckman the Ingineer Marched out with them to give directions about demolishing the Enemies Worke, and stopping their Mine; The Attack proved a hot and very bloody piece of service, by reason of the Enemies having a greater Guard there than ordinary; the two Captains that commanded were im∣mediately carried off dangerously wounded, as were most of the o∣ther Officers, among which was Lieutenant Robinson, and had not the Reserve come timely to their relief, that Party had run great hazard of being cut off. By this time the whole Body was engaged, the Enemy very stubbornly disputing every Line and Trench where∣in we attacked them, coming to Push of Pike, and handy-blows in several places; The particularities of every Action is hard to set down; but after we had beaten them from their new Trenches, we advanc∣ed to the old Line, where our Forts formerly stood, which was per∣formed with great loss on our side (there being not above 50 Men left in one of the Battalions of my Lord Inchiquin's Regiment) and at length by levelling the Trenches made a passage for the Horse, through which Captain Neatby with his Troop advanced upon the nemy, as did likewise Don Salvador de Monforte, and Don Manri∣que de Moronia, with theirs, who found a passage a little more to the Right; upon which the Moors turned their Backs, and betook themselves to flight from all quarters, being pursued by our Horse
& Foot, who made very great slaughter among them; Many of their Horse performed very daringly for the rescue of their Foot, among which several of their principa Men fell. We pursued them scattered ike Sheep at least a Mile into the Country, kiing several of them in the very Campamong their Tents. We took two pieces of Cannon, five Colours, several Prisoners, and had taken many more had they not refused quarter, and killed by computation about 500. After our Horse and Foot were retreated within our old Lines, which we pos∣sessed from James to Monmonth Fort, we fell to filling and leveling their Trenches, wherein we buried many of their Dead, who very bravely lost their lives in the defence of them; we also took in an ad∣ventageous spot of ground to our new Fortifications, which we forti∣fied with a good Stockade, from whence we discover the Bottom, where the Enemy before lay in Covert from the Fort, and where they had begun their▪ Gallery in order to their Mine, which about three of the Clock was finished, and then we retreated and marched into the Town in very good order, the Enemy contrary to their custom permitting us to retire without the least disturbance. Some hours after died S Palmes Fairborne our Governour, having first had the satisfaction to hear of our success, whose loss is very much lamented by the whole Garison. In the mean time such of the Enemies dead that remained unburied, being laid together near Catherine Port, Colonel Sackville our pre∣sent Commander, writ to the Alcayde, offering him leave to bury them: He, or some body for him (for it is uncertain yet whether he be living or dead) returned a very civil Answer, and accordingly the Moors fetcht off the Bodies, (and brought three of ours that re∣mained in the Field) in a very melancholy manner, examining seve∣ral Heads with great care, many whereof they wrapt up in clean Linnen; by which we discovered they were Men of Note among them. One of them that fell we conclude to be the Alcayde's Brother by several Papers that were found about him. This is the fullest Account we can as yet give you of so glorious an action, wich, though much is due to the Conduct and Bravery of Colonel Sackville, Vice Admiral Herbert, and all the Officers, as well as to the undaunted Courage of the Soldiers, and among
them the Spanis Hrse who all in their several Post behaved them∣selves with as much Gallantry, as could possibly be shown by Men, yet must wholly be ascribed to the Divine Assistance and Protection without which it would have been impossible for such a handful of men to have perform'd what they did, having attacked and de∣feated so numerous and daring Enemies, pursued them a mile toge∣ther, level'ed and filled up their Lines and Trenches, Demolished all their other Woks, and taken Cannon, Colours and Prisoners, the marks of an Entire Victory; Of which Lieutenant-Colonel Talmash, who was a sharer in the danger and honor of it, is gone for England to give his Majestie a particular Relation. LIST of the Killed and Wounded. In the Battallion of Guards. LIeutenant Robinson shot through the Arm & Body, and 51 private Soldiers wounded, and seven killd. In the Earl of Dumbarton's Regiment. Captain Forbus killed three days before this Action. Captain Julius Lockart Wounded. Captain Robert Lundy Wounded. Captain George Hume Wounded. Captain Ro: Douglas Captain Hen. Porey Leiutenant Scot killed Lieutenant William Gascocke Lieutenant Geo. Murray Lieutenant Alex. Ennis Lieutenant Charles Corson Lieutenant Geo. Bainesmain wounded Lieutenant James Mac Roen Lieutenant Jam. Stuart Lieutenant John Ankmooty Lieutenant Gilbert Butler Ensign Dan. Farrel killed. Ensign Archibald Murray killed. Ensign John Mowast wounded.
Lieutenant Alexander St. Leger Reformed Officers killed. Ensign John Bell Reformed Officers killed. Ensign Hen. Rue Reformed Officers killed. Six Sergeants killed and mortally wounded. Private Soldiers 30 killed 100 wounded. In Earl Inchiquin's Regiment. Captain Philpott dangerously shoot in the Knee. wounded. Lieutenant Guy wounded. Lieutenant Tate wounded. Ensign Roberts dangerously wounded in the Thigh wounded. Ensign Thomas wounded. Ensign Fitzpatrick wounded. Ensign Webster wounded. Ensign Norwood wounded. Ensign Beckford wounded. Ensign Eliot wounded. Ensign Watson killed. Ensign Trant killed. Private Soldiers 34 killed, 124 wounded. Of Vice-Admiral Herbert's Battallion. Captain Dungon killed. Lieutenant White killed. Ten private Soldiers killed, two Serjeants, and 22 private Soldiers wounded. Of the Spanish Horse In the Troop of Don Salvador de Monforte, his Cornet and two others killed; Three Reformed Officers, and 17 private Soldiers wounded; Twelve Horses killed, and as many wounded.
In Don Antonio Penatelo's Troop. Two private Soldiers killed, and three wounded; Three Horses killed, and three wounded. In the two Troops of Don Manrique de Moronia. The Lieutenant, Cornet, and a reformed Officer, with ten private Soldiers wounded, and nine killed; eight Horses killed, and eight wounded. English Hose. In Captain Neatby's Troops Lieutenant Capel; wounded in the Right Arm; Cornet Windham shot in the Right Arm, which is cut off; Five private Soldiers wounded; 9 Horses, wounded, and five killed. In all, seven Commission Officers, killed. Wounded, whereof many Mortally, 24. Non-Commission Officers, and private Souldier, 90 killed. Wounded, whereof a third part Mortally, 348 Horses killed 41 Wounded 54. FINIS.
