R1124 99834105 152708
THE RE-RESURRECTION Of the RUMP: Or, Rebellion and Tyranny revived. The third Edition. To the Tune of the Blacksmith. IF none be offended with the Sent, Though I foul my Mouth, Ile be content, To sing of the Rump of a Parliament, Which no body can deny. I have sometimes fed on a Rump in Sowse, And a man may imagine the Rump of a Lowse; But till now was ne're heard of the Rump of a House, Which no body can deny. There's a Rump of Beefe, and the Rump of a Goose, And a Rump whose Neck was hang'd in a Noose; But ours is a Rump can play fast and loose, Which no body can deny. A Rump had Jane Shore, and a Rump Messaleen, And a Rump had Antonyes resolute Queen; But such a Rump as ours is, never was seen, Which no body can deny. Two short years together we English have scarce Been rid of thy rampant Nose (Old Mars) But now thou hast got a prodigious Arse, Which no body can deny. When the parts of the Body did all fall out, Some votes it is like did pass for the Snout; But that the Rump should be King was never a doubt, Which no body can deny. A Cat has a Rump, and a Cat has nine Lives, Yet when her heads off, her Rump never strives; But our Rump from the grave hath made two Retrives, Which no body can deny. That the Rump may all their Enemies quail, They'l borrow the Devils Coat of Mayl, And all to defend their Estate in Tayl, VVhich no body can deny. But though their Scale now seem to be the Upper, There's no need of the charge of a Thanksgiving supper, For if they be the Rump, the Army's their Crupper, VVhich no body can deny. There is a saying belongs to the Rump, Which is good, although it be worn to the Stump, That on the Buttocks Ile give thee a Thump VVhich no body can deny. There's a Proverb in which the Rump claims a part, Which hath in it more of Sence than of Art, That for all you can do, I care not a Fart, VVhich no body can deny. There's another Proverb gives the Rump for his Crest, But Alderman Atkins made it a Jest, That of all kind of Lucks, shitten Luck is the best, VVhich no body can deny. There is another Proverb that never will fail, That the good the Rump will do when they prevail, Is to give us a Flop with a Fox-tail, Which no body can deny. There is a Saying which is made by no Fools; I never can hear on't but my Heart it cools, That the Rump will spend all we have in Close Stools Which no body can deny. There's an Observation wise and deep, Which without an Onion will make me to weep; That Flyes will blow Maggots in the Rump of a Sheep, Which no body can deny. And some that can see the Wood from the Trees, Say this Sanctify'd Rump in time we may leese; For the Cooks do challenge the Rumps for their Fees. Which no body can deny. When the Rump do sit we will make it our Moane, That a reason be 'nacted if there be not one, Why a Fart hath a Tongue, and a Fyest hath none? Which no body can deny. And whil'st within the Walls they Lurk, To satisfy us, will be a good work; Who hath most Religion, the Rump, or the Turk, Which no body can deny. A Rump's a Fag-end, like the Baulk of a Furrow, And is to the whole like the Jayl to the Burrough; T'is the Bran that is left, when the Meal is run thorough Which no body can deny. Consider the World, the Heav'n is the head on't, The Earth is the middle, and we men are fed on't; But Hell is the Rump, and no more can be sed on't. VVhich no body can deny. Flectere si nequeunt superos Achaeronta movebunt. FINIS, In English, The RVMP.
