R2073 669.f.10[97] 99869421 162630
An Elegie upon the death of the right Honourable & most renowned, ROBERT DEVEREƲX, Earle of ESSEX and Ewe, Viscount Hereford, Lord Ferrers of Chartley, Bourchier and Lovaine, late GENERALL of the Forces of the PARLIAMENT of England, who deceased the 14. of September, 1646. CAn Englands noble Champion [ESSEX] die? That kept us safe from hostile Tyrannie) Can he (I say) from us to's dust depart, (Ne're to returne) and we not lay't to heart? Can we (whose Shield he was) not sensibly Bewaile our losse of him with weeping eye? O Heavens forbid! unworthy Nation we, Should we of his great worth unmindfull be. Though he's extinct, yet let Posterity Keep up his name, that did (our Liberty Safely for us and them to keep) expose Himselfe, unsafely, to the rage of Foes. He prick'd the timpany of their great pride, Teaching refluxes to the flowing-tide Of those that fought so for Prerogative; Therefore, (though He be dead) His Name will live. He first did lay our present Strengths foundation, (Which prospers well) t' unslave our British Nation, And oft did hazard's life in bloody fight, Yet knew no quarrell but the publike right, For which he forc't Foes fortitude to flight: Therefore we grieve his Obsequie to write. He that the Victor was, is now the Prize: For he which gat us many Victories, Is vanquished himselfe, and forc't to lye At feet of death, who hath the victory. "See then that Prowesse, though it purchase praise, "Purchase it cannot health, or length of daies. "Both great, and good, yea valiant men must die, "When death (impartiall) strikes them, they must lie "In dust: the passing bell will tole for them, "That rang, erewhile, the Beggars Requiem. "The way he's gone, is not a way untrod, "But is decreed by the eternall God, "To be the way, that ev'ry man must go: "Aswell a Friend, as he that is a Foe. "Death takes excize of all, and his is paid, "His soul's at's place, his bodie's to be laid "Where they in their best judgments do think fit, "Who with what else he left, have right to it. But is there not more in good ESSEX'S death Then yet I've said? let's feare he's gone from th'earth As one we were unworthy of: because Our sinnes against Gods sin-forbidding Lawes Have th' Almighty incens'd and made him frown, And in his wrath against us, to cast down This so great Pillar, that he might be set In better place, and there more glory get, For sins (we know) bring sorrowes back with fears. And we may now lye pickl'd up in tears, For that our Patriots so fast do dye Before our peace be made up perfectly. "Great God! let thy offended wrath surcease, "Behold thy people, send thy people peace: "Turn not so fast our Nobles into dust: "Be mercifull (dear God) as well as just. "If thou proceed to do as thou'st begun, "We shall be drosse when all the gold is gone. "'Tis thou, 'tis thou alone, didst send this Griefe, "'Tis thou, 'tis thou alone must send reliese. "O then recruit our losse, increase our friends; "And so for what thou'st done make us amends. "To thee alone our Sorrowes do appeale, "Earth hath no wound too hard for Heaven to heale. William Rowland. AN EPITAPH FOR HIS TOMBE. ALL you who passe here by draw neere; And with your tears bedew what's here. For they've as marble eyes as hearts, That cannot weep a tear in parts, But, like dull Stoicks, quite forbeare, When they do see, and read, or heare, Who lies herein: that ESSEX is The man, an Earle renown'd by his Most noble birth: whose father Queene Eliza had in great esteeme. And he himselfe, by Parliament, To b'Englands Generall had consent, And fought our Battells. Now he's dead, Do not you rudely o're Him tread, Who hath So stout a Champion prov'd, And was therefore So greatly lov'd, That Fame hath his victorious browes Oft duly crown'd with Lawrell boughs. Who then to grieve will spare the cost, That England such a Peere hath lost? And that no more of that same Blood Is left, to do England more good. William Rowland. AEtatis Suae 56 A MOVRNEFVLL CLOVD Ouer vaylinge the face of England for the sorrowfull death of his Exelence Robert Deuourux Earle of Essex and Ewe Vicout Herryford Lord Ferreres of Chartley Boucher and Louaine Lord General of all the Parlaments forces, & and dyed ye 24 of September 1646. BASIS VIRTVTVM CONSTANTIA depiction of tomb Hîc jacet in tumulo, praeclaro Sanguine natus; ROBERTUS DAVEREUX, Miles fortissimus Armis. W. R. EPITAPHIUM in obitum ROBERTI DEVEREUX, Nobilissimi & Illustrissimi ESSEXIAE COMITIS. ESSEX Castellum Patriae, fortissimus HECTOR, Belligerans validè, generoso Stemmate natus, CIVIBƲS & murus, necnon tutela COLONIS, Bellonae Conjux armatos duxit apertè, Et Patriae fixus, Regi{que} fidelis in ARMIS, Candida Magnificis floruerunt cuncta potenti, INVICTƲS, stabilis, necnon quo justior ALTER Haud Pietate fuit, nec Bello Major & Armis. Vota, proces, lachrymas, jam desine (Candide Lector,) Invito scelere, ac fortuna reposuit Altis: Parce tuis lachrymis, donârunt Numina CAELOS: Flebilis in tumulo, multi doluere Colores. Epilogus. Coeli animam, terrae Corpus, fortes{que} dolorem, Et Mundus Nomen, clara{que} facta ferunt. XIV. Calend. Novemb. M.DC.IVL. Tho. Thorne Londinensis. Published according to Order. London, Printed by R. Austin. 1646.
