R2324 E445_37 99863368 115564
A LETTER SENT To the Honorable William Lenthal Esq Speaker of the Honorable House of COMMONS, OF The Fight between His Excellency's The Lord Fairfax Forces AT MAIDSTONE, And the KENTISH Forces, JUNE 1. 1648. PRinted by the Command of William Lenthal Esq Speaker of the Honorable House of Commons. London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons. June 3. 1648.
TO The Honorable William Lenthal Esq Speaker of the Honorable House of COMMONS. SIR, THe particulars are too many to be related at this time concern∣ing this last nights Ingagement with the Enemy at Maidstone, which in brief was such as never was since these VVars began; This Army strugled with so much difficulty to overcome a stubborn and resolute Enemy: The Fight begun about Seven of the clock at night, about a mile from Maid∣stone, and before we could beat them from hedge to hedge, and get in at the Barracado's, it was past Nine; and af∣ter
we had entred the Town, we di∣sputed every street and turning; they having Eight pieces of Canon, which they discharged above Twenty times upon our men in the streets, and by Gods mighty help and assistance we overcame them between twelve and one of the clock at night, being every minute in all that time firing upon their horse and foot, and they upon us, it being extreme wet weather du∣ring all this time of Ingagement; we took about Four hundred prisoners, and near as many Horse, our Forlorn-hope of horse gave the red Standard of horse as gallant a charge as ever was seen, which is said to be General Hales his Troop. The reason why the Ingagement began so soon, the Train and the Rear of the Army be∣ing
three miles off (and not come up) was, that the Forlorn of horse and foot being ingaged in viewing the Town before it was dark, came off safe: The Enemy being with their whole body of horse and foot within two miles on the top of the Hill to∣wards Rochester all day long in view of our Army, about Eight thousand men, who, as they perceived that we did not dispute the pass at Alsford, which was very difficult for us to have done; they sent in a supply of Twelve hundred horse and foot to those before in the town of Maid∣stone, who came in just as we inga∣ged, being Seamen, Apprentices, and most part Commanders and Cava∣liers that have formerly been in arms
against the Parliament. There were in all, as we guess, Two hundred then slain in and about the town, and Ca∣ptain Price a very honest and stout Gentleman, Col: Hewsons Captain Lieutenant, was also slain, and about thirty more of our men, most falling at the mouth of the Canon with Cae shot; we took Eight pieces, six Iron, and two Brass, abundance of Arms, having been up all night, and want of time cannot send more particulars at present: Onely I desire God to let you see how the old quarrel is revi∣ved by the same party, with greater violence then at first. You will short∣ly understand what Earls, Lords, and other persons of quality appeared in this business. His Excellency from
the first minute of Ingagement to the last, could not be drawn off from a personal and hazzardous attendance on the service, and is much impaired in his health. John Rushworth. Maidstone, June 2. 1648. 6 in the morning. FINIS.
