S3235 R184083 43077619 151710
THE Sheriffs of London For the time being, are the proper MANAGERS and Legal JUDGES OF THE Election of Sheriffs For the year ensuing. THE Right of Electing Sheriffs being already demonstrated to belong by Law, Charter, and Custom, to the Free-men or Barons of London; and this being acknowledged by my Lord Mayor and the Court of Aldermen on Saturday last, in their granting and allowing to the Common▪ Hall the Nomination of both the Sheriffs: All that comes under debate at present, is concerning the nature of the Court that is held for the Election of these Officers, and who are the Proper Managers, and as it were Judges thereof. It is certain, That before the Statute of Lincoln, all the Sheriffs of the Kingdom were chosen in their several and respective County-Courts, where the Sheriffs for the time being, did, by putting the Questions, collecting the Suffrages, and declaring upon whom the choice, through the Majority of Votes, had fallen, constantly precide and govern the Elections. And as to this day▪ the Election of Coroners remains vested in the County-Courts, where the several Sui∣ters in the respective Courts have the Right and Priviledg of Chusing those Officers; so the managing the said Elections is by all men confessed to ap∣pertain to the Sheriffs then and there in Office, when and where such Electi∣ons are to be transacted. Now, forasmuch as the Statute of Lincoln doth no ways extend to the City of London, and County of Middlesex, because they hold, claim, and enjoy the Election of annual Sheriffs of the said City by Charter, &c. and the Election of the yearly Sheriffs of Middlesex by the Charters, Patents, and Grants of the Kings of England at the Fee-Farm Rent of Three Hundred Pound per annum; it undeniably follows, That the Court wherein the Choice of the said Officers is transacted and mana∣ged by the Barons and Free-men, is in the Nature of a County-Court; and that the Sheriffs for the time being, are to conduct, rule, and declare the Election. And seeing the Common-Hall's for the choice of Parliament-men for the City of London, and I may add, for the Election of Mayors, are of the same nature with these which are held for the Election of Sheriffs; it na∣turally and demonstratively ensues, that the Sheriffs being granted to be the proper Officers for the putting the Questions, taking the Suffrages, and declaring upon whom the Majority of Hands or Votes have fallen in the Election of Members for Parliament, and in the choice of Mayors, so it likewise appertains and belongs to them to guide and manage the Election of the Offi∣cers now under debate, and to publish and proclaim upon whom the Citizens do devolve that trust.
And forasmuch as the City of London is by ancient Prescription, a Coun∣ty, there do thereupon, and by virtue thereof belong unto it, not only Sheriffs, but a County-Court, as an incident and adjunct inseperable from a County; and whatsoever hath at any time heretofore been the Prerogative and Right of the Sheriffs in the County Courts of England, doth entirely remain to the Sheriffs of London, there being no Act of Parliament or Char∣ter, by which they are stript or devested of them. It is matter of astonishment, how the present Lord Mayor comes to pre∣tend to any such Right, Priviledg or Power, seeing all his Predecessors have constantly left the management of this Matter and Affair to the Sheriffs, for the time being, as the Officers to whom it did properly belong. Tho there have been some in the Chair heretofore, who understood the Prero∣gatives of their Place, and who had as much zeal for the maintaining the Rights of the Chair, as any can be supposed to do, or have. And should the present Sheriffs suffer themselves to be deprived of this Right and Appurtenance of their Office, they would not only betray the Trust reposed in them, but become liable to all such Actions as may or shall be brought against them by those Citizens who conceive and e∣steem themselves injur'd. And if upon Tryal of such Actions, it do ap∣pear, That my Lord Mayor hath no Right to govern the Poll, they will not only entail a perpetual infamy upon their Name, but be con∣demned to such Fines and Costs as will infallibly ruin and impoverish them. And for any to alledg, That my Lord Mayor may dissolve the Court, if things do not go according to his inclination and mind, is both to put upon him that which he hath no Right, either by Law, Charter, or Act of Common-Council to do, being there only in the Quality of a Concivis, or Fellow-Citizen; and to cloath him with a Capacity, and Power of depriving the City of such Officers, and exposing both the City and himself to such Consequences, as I tremble to mention. And for any to insist upon the Confirmation of the Gentleman that my Lord Mayor hath drunk to, meerly upon that score and motive, is both plainly to destroy the Plea which the City have put in to the Quo Warran∣to against their Charter, and to make themselves obnoxious to Indictments, Plaints and Actions, as Betrayers and Subverters of the Rights and Priviledges of the Corporation. For as all the Charters are for the Citizens Election of Two Sheriffs from a∣mong themselves; so the Council for the City-Charter, are unanimous, that this is their legal and undisputable Right. And as to what refers to the present Choice, it was after a fair and peace∣able management (notwithstanding many provocations to have begottn Di∣sturbances, and created Riots), declared to have fallen upon Mr. Papillon, and Mr. Duboise, two as worthy Gentlemen as ever were called to that Office in the City of London. Yea, when the Poll was demanded, contrary to all sense, and meerly to give the Electors Trouble, it was not only readily granted by the present Sheriffs, but all things in the conduct of it▪ carried with the greatest impartiality, condescention, and forbearance imaginable. For tho the present Sheriffs, as well as the Freemen, are resolved to adhere to their Rights, yet they are not to be provok'd upon by the heats and passi∣ons of others, to do any thing which may either be an offence against the Government, or endanger the quiet and peace of the City. And we are all assured, that his Majesty will neither encourage the infring∣ment of the Laws of the Land, or countenance the overthrowing the Prviled∣ges and Jurisdictions of his Regal Chamber. LONDON: Printed for R. Dew. 1682.
