T1089 E831_16 R207471 99866520 118796
Three Great and BLOODY FIGHTS BETWEEN The ENGLISH and the FRENCH: THE FIRST, By Gen. Pen, and Gen. Venables, against Monsieur de Poince, Governor of St. Chri∣stophers for the King of France: With the particu∣lars theref, the taking of the Isle De la Martinic∣que, and the Resolution of the said Gover∣nor to fight it out to the last man, rather then to betray his Trust and Loyalty to the KING. THE SECOND, Neer St. Mallovvs, continuing for the space of 8 hours: with the number of Ships, sunk, ired, and taken. THE THIRD, Neer the Isle of Majorca, by Gen. Blake, and the valiant Chevaliers, continuing for the space of 24 hours: With a true Narrative thereof, and the total routing and sinking of both the two Generals, the Lord Valbelle, and the L. de Lan∣des, who had taken above 150 men of war besides gallant Merchants. London, Printed for Geoage Horton, 1655.
Two great and bloody Fights between the English and the French: the first, by Gen. Blake, and the French Cheva∣liers, near the Isles of Majorca, which continued for the space of 24 houres: the second, at the Isle of St. Christo∣phers, by Gen. Pen, and Mounsieur de Poince; with the subduing of all the French in De la Martinicque, &c. THe French having for some yeares last past made an incursion into the Isles of St. Christophers, and de la Martinic∣que, at which time they became Ma∣sters thereof, and subdued the English, keeping them as Vassals and slaves, and exposing them to
most inhumane cruelties and tortures; so that many honest men were deprived of all Earthly Comforts and Enjoyments, till it pleased God to use a means for their deliverance; by whose Series of Providence, great things have been ma∣nifested and done for the English Nation at home, and now more especially for his people abroad; as appeares by these ensuing Demon∣strations, viz. General Pen, and General Venables having steered their Coast for the Western Islands, at last bare up towards St. Christophers, and wheel∣ing off to the South-west Point, tacked about for the Isle De la Martinicque, where Major Gene∣ral Haines 'tis said landed with so considerable a party, that in seven hours time he became wholly Master of all that was held by the French, pos∣sessed their Plantations, and seized their Goods, secured the prisoners, which are said to be 735, and placed his Garisons: Since which time, we hear, that they have summoned Monsieur de Poince (Governour for the King of France in St. Christophers Island) who is resolved, if they as∣sail him, to sell their lives at a dear rate, and that no conditions shal be acceptable, though never
so equal, for that he wil rather chuse to die, then falsifie his Loyalty. The English Generals are now upon that coast and intend (by Gods permission) suddenly to make an Attempt: VVhich the Governour un∣derstanding, hath caused to be raised great Bul∣works and Fortifications, and thereupon planted many gallant pieces of Ordnance; so that the work to some may seem to be difficult, but feasi∣ble enough to such heroical Spirits, who are brass within, and steel without; the English being thus characterized by the French prisoners. And thus it appears they are; for from St. Ma∣los they write, That divers of the French Mer∣chant men returning from Provence, ladn with Commodities, and convoyed by five men of war, hapned to meet with an English frigat, who after 8 hours fight, sunk 3 of them; but being so lamen¦tably rent and torn, and exceedingly over-powr∣ed, she at last gave them another broad side, and by sinking of one down by her side, she charged through and so escaped; in which Dispute, the enemy were so extreamly battered and shattered, that not one of them durst attempt a pursuit, this frigat had not sailed many Leagues, but she met
with an Ostender, who perceiving her to be very much impaired, bare up close to her, presenting her with three broad sides, one after another: the English frigat an∣swered them again, and plyed them so close with great and smal shot, that after four or five hours fight, the enemy decli∣ned Engagement, and ran aground, where the men all perished, excepting four, who narrowly escaping shipwrack, at last got to St. Malows. To these great Atchievments, may be added the renowned Victory of General Blake, which according to the most true inteligence is thus represented, viz. That the said General having sent forth a squa∣dron of ships towards the Islands of Ma∣jorca and Minorca, after some Leagues past, they espyed some ships under sayl, who making towards them, the other tac∣ked
about, opened their Ports, put forth their Guns, manned their Decks, and pre∣pared to fight them: so that bearing up to each other, the Chevalier de Valie Commander of the French Van, dischar∣ged two broad sides, and was answered a∣gain: He bare up the second time, but came off with abundance of losse; for he was so gored by the Unicorn, that his ship sprung a Leak, having at least five foot Water in the Hold; besides his main Mast, Boltsprit and Misne, vvere cut off, by Iron bars, and Chain shot, so that he caused his ship to run aground, by vvhich meanes, he saved himself, his treasure, and seven more in a Long boat, the rest peri∣shed, and about 150 vvere slain and taken prisoners.
During which time of Action, the Chevalier de la Landes, who commantled the rest of the French ships, were not in the least declining, but after 24 hours bloody Conflict, was boarded and taken, and not a ship that belonged to him esca∣ped. These two Commanders were accounted the chief Hectors in those parts, and scornd but to bid defiance to the proudest Foe that ever sayled upon the sea, having vanquished in their time a∣bove 150 sayl of men of war; and yet at the last subdued with nine English Frigats, and the loss of 37 men; as the best Intelligence, of these Times affirmeth. FINIS.
