T1387 669.f.26[3] 99869522 163885
To the Alderman, Deputy and Common—councel-men of the Ward of FOR the better and more speedy execution of the Act of Parliament lately made, Intituled, An Act for the speedy provision of money for disbanding and paying of the Forces of this Kingdome both by Land and Sea: We the Commissioners, whose names are subscribed, thereby authorized (amongst others) for the better Assessing, Ordering and Levying of the sums of money by the said Act to be raised within the City of London and Liberties thereof, Do in his Majesties Name hereby will and require you forthwith upon Receipt hereof (calling to your assistance the Churchwardens, Constables and Overseers of the poor of the several Parishes in your said Ward, who are hereby also required and charged to observe and follow your direction, and appointment herein) well and diligent∣ly to inform your selves and without delay to make true, distinct and fair Certificate unto us in writing under your hands of the several particulars following, that is to say. 1. Of the Names and Surnames of every Person within your Ward who either is Alderman or Sheriffe of this City or hath fined for Alderman and Sheriffe of the said City. 2. Of the Names and Surnames of every Person who hath been or now is Deputy to any Alder∣man of the said Ward. 3. Of the Names and Surnames of all the Common-councel-men of the same Ward. 4. Of the Names and Surnames of all Persons of the degree of a Barronet, and Knight of the Bath now inhabiting or residing within the same Ward. 5. Of the Names and Surnames of all Persons of the degree of a Knight Batchelour now inhabi∣ting or residing within the same Ward. 6. Of all Persons of the degree of an Esquire or so reputed inhabiting or residing within the said Ward, and above the age of 21 years. 7. The Names and Surnames of every Parson or Vicar within your Ward being possessed of a Parsonage or Vicarage or other estate of the cleer yearly value of 100 li. 8. Of the Names and Surnames of every Doctor of the Civil or Cannon Laws, and every Ad∣vocate residing within your Ward. 9. Of the Names and Surnames of every Judge or Commissioner in the Court of Admiralty or of the Probate of Wills residing within your Ward. 10. Of the Names and Surnames of every Person who hath practised as a Proctor in either of the said Courts residing within your Ward. 11. Of the Names and Surnames of every Doctor of Physick residing within your said Ward. 12. Of the Names and Surnames of all English Merchants within your Ward not free of this City. 13. Of the Names and Surnames of all English Factors residing within your Ward. 14. Of the Names and Surnames of all Merchants strangers of the degree of a Knight residing within your Ward. 15. Of the Names and Surnames of all Merchant strangers below that degree, trading to Sea, re∣siding within your Ward. 16. Of the Names and Surnames of all Merchant strangers trading within the Land, that reside within your Ward. 17. Of the Names and Surnames of all Persons being Aliens born, and using or exercising any trade, mystery or manuall occupation, being a house-keeper within your said Ward. 18. Of the Names and Surnames of all Attorneys at Law of any the Courts at Westminster, resi∣ding within your Ward. 19. Of the Names and Surnames of all Widows residing within your said Ward, and of what (highest) degree the husbands of such Widows were in their life times. 20. Of the Names and Surnames of all Persons keeping one or more Hackney Coach or Coaches within your Ward, and how many Coaches and pair of Horses he or she so keepeth. 21. The Names and Surnames of all free-men of this City being of none of the degrees before mentioned, dwelling or residing within your Ward, who can dispend in Lands, Leases, Money, Stock or otherwise of their own proper estate the sum of 5 li. per annum or above, and how much yearly every of them can dispend as aforesaid (so neerly as you can deem them) and of what Company every of them is free, and in what Parish he is resident. 22. Of the Names and Surnames of all other Persons within your Ward that can dispend in Lands, Leases, Money, Stock or otherwise of their own proper estate the sum of 5 li. per annum and above, and how much yearly every of them can dispend as aforesaid, (so neer as you can deem them.) 23. That you also insert in your said Certificate the number of all single Persons in every family above the age of 16 years. 24. As also of all other Persons of what estate or degree he or she be, not before mentioned or here∣in comprised nor receiving Almes and being above the Age of 16 years. And that you distinguish all of every degree, rank and quality aforesaid by themselves in order. And in the true and exact performance of all and every the particulars above mentioned; We require you and the said Church-wardens, Constables and Collectors for the poor, not to fail upon the Pe∣nalties in the said Act conteined. Dated at the Guild-hall London the 4 day of September, 1660.
