T1589 669.f.17[38] 99870365 163287
TO THE PARLIAMENT OF THE COMMON-VVEALTH OF ENGLAND, The humble Petition of diuers wel-affected, and constant adherers to the inte∣rest of Parliaments, and their own natiue fundamental rights and Freedomes therein concerned, Youngmen and Apprentices of the Cities of London and Westminster, Borough of Southwark, and parts adiacent. SHEWETH, THAT it is extremely to our griefe and astonishment, that M. Lilburn a Free-man of England, and Free Citizen of London, should be suffered by you to be so violently pursued for his life upon an Act of the late Parliament, which not one of you but knows in your own consciences to be most unjust, bloody, and tyrannical, and against the very end and tenour of the Trusts of Parliaments, and in destruction and subversion of our fundamentall and indubitable native Rights and Freedoms: It being hardly credible, but that we know it, that you have not been prevailed withall to declare the same null and void in Law, by the many just, rational, earnest, and legal Petitions hither to presented unto you. You no sooner sate, but you voted your selves the Parliament of the Common wealth of England; notwithstanding you all know you wanted the legal, formal election from the people, due to that Trust. What was it then, that induced you so to Vote, and afterwards to declare your selves so to be? Certainly, if any thing justly moved you thereunto, it was your reall purpose, that the Justice, life, and power of a Parliament of the Common-wealth of Englaand should be visible amongst you, and acted by you; and that you intended to do the proper works of a true Parliament, which without doubt, are to deliver the Captive, and set the Oppressed free; and being so, what greater proof can you give, either more agreeable to the known Lw of the Land, or more acceptable to all true Lovers of the ancient Liberties of the Nation, then to deliver M. Lilburn out of this snare causlessly laid, purposely to intrap his life? You see by those many Addresses of the people to you on his behalf, that they are sensible, as we are, that what is done unto him, may be done (at the lusts, wis, and pleasures of men in power) unto every man, and that the common liberry hath been, and is highly violated in this uniust and most unparallel'd cruelty towards him. You see also, that waving the manner of your Election to the Parliamentary Authority, that they nevertheless owned you, in hopes to find the life and power of a true Parliament amongst you, a condescention in them very much deserving your highest re∣gard, and most zealous resolutions to answer their iust and sober expectations, and to grant their iust desires concerning Mr. Lil∣burns safety, which every one discerneth to be iust; and wonder▪ exceedingly at your deferring there of, Principally, if not onely by your iust and righteous works, you can be known to be a Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, part of whose works you do, in repeoling that bloody and insnaring, and not in the least to be spoken or pleaded for unjust Act; and in restoring him to his estate and freedom, &c. When upon any respects you decline such works, you decline your owne being: and when you cease from doing of them, do you not cease also from being a Parliament. Consider we beseech you, Is it not a rule that can∣not deceive, His you are, whose works you do; the cruelty you suffer to be done unto him, being in your power, and duty to pre∣vent, in the sight of God and Man you do it, and are gilty of it. O therefore fear the Almighty God before the mightiest of men, and couragiously do this and the Nations work, deliver this captive, and set this oppressed man M. Lilburn free from all his trouble and causless hazards of death. And should such a Jury be found (more like Devils then Christians) that should find him guilty of Felony upon so vile a By-Law▪ (without any the least act of Felony at the Common-Law laid to his charge) a thing so contrary to the true Law of England; how know you, but your power of pardon may be restrained by his potent adversaries, and his death hastned before you can redeem it, as it hath already been threatned? the court and place of his trial having been terrified and frightned already with a party of Horse. No, we beseech you to be perswaded, though by us the youngest and weakest of men, who yet may live, and prove to be, as we heartily desire, a Seed-plot and Nursery of preservers to you and yours, and our native and just fundamen∣tal rights, not to defer to grant these our humble and but just desires so much as one moment, but vouchsafe us the favour as to be the immediate messengers to him of your just respects, and his deliverance from his most unjust captivity. And we shall ever pray, &c.
