T1689 669.f.5[4] 99869253 160717
TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE LORDS AND COMMONS NOW IN PARLIAMENT ASSEMBLED. The humble Petition of the Knights, Gentry, Ministers, and Freeholders, of the County of Yorke, now met at the Assizes there holden. Sheweth; THat our oppressed hearts, in the middest of feares, sends up daily prayers to Heaven, for your unwearyed cares and endeavours for the publicke safe∣ty, & in our saddest apprehensions, we first offer our hearty prayers for you, it being most just to preferre those to our selves, who for our sakes neglect themselvs, & all particular interests, and therby raise in us a firme confidence (by Gods blessing) to receive from you a continuall streame of prospe∣rous Counsels and resolutions, for the benefit of this State and Kingdome, which being apparently sicke of generall distraction, we humbly submit to your wisedomes and directions, whether there be any cure or remedy under heaven, so proper and naturall, as concurrence and unity, which wee have still observed to be the ayme and scope of all your proceedings, and therefore in pursuance thereof, lately petitioned his Majestie to de∣clare such fit meanes and expedients, as may take away all distances and misunderstandings (the coppy whereof, together with his Majesties answer, we send hereunto annexed) which having not produced any new overtures or expedients not formerly declared, (as was hoped) wee likewise addresse our selves to your wisedomes, (that as your determinations doe alwayes tend to the generall happinesse,) So you would please to declare such fit meanes as may take away all distances and misunderstandings, in such manner as conduceth to that end, and consists with the honour of his Majestie, and the assured safety of the true Protestant Religion, and his Maje∣sties Dominions wherein we are most confident that your wisdomes will equally provide, that neither his Majesties just prerogative, nor the declared liberties of the subject, of which the pri∣viledge of Parliament is the most eminent) shall in the least measure suffer diminution; All which particulars, by the Protestation generally taken in this County, wee are bound to main∣taine: And your Petitioners (who acknowledge and give hearty thanks for the excellent Lawes and freedome which we have received and enjoyed since the beginning of your Assembly,) shall daily pray that the progresse of your endeavours may give perfection to your great worke and pious intentions; And that the Almighty would crowne you and them with all blessings and continued protections. Martis 12 Aprilis 1642. Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, That this Petition be forthwith Printed and pu∣blished. Jo. BROWNE Cler. Parliamentor. Printed at London by E. P. for Iohn Wright, dwelling in the Old-baily. 1642.
