T1848 R185373 45789432 172742
INNOVATIONS OF POPERY IN THE CHURCH of ROME, CALLING For Repentance and Reformation; being as a Wall of Separation between Christians and Christians. Wherein is shewed, That the Mystery of Iniquity, Sodom and Egypt Spiritual, Babylon the Great, and the Mother of Harlots and Great Whore, are all founded in Innovations. Given forth partly to stir up our Thank∣fulness to God for his former Mercies to this Nation in delivering it from the Horrid Popish Thraldom and Ignorance; and for his preserving it at this time from the impending Storm that threatned us: partly also to help to establish those that are wavering in their minds towards it: and to encourage those that are un∣der it, who truly fear God, in expecta∣tion of deliverance from under it. By one that Loves all that fear the Lord, and love Truth and Righteousness in their Hearts, wheresoever they are found. W. T. LONDON: Printed for Thomas Northcott in George-Yard in Lumbard-Street, 1689.
INNOVATIONS OF Popery IN THE CHURCH OF ROME, CALLING For Repentance and Reforma∣tion, &c. HHving some things lying fair before me concerning the Church of Rome and Popery; and having a desire to express the same with as much
clearness and plainness as I can; it will be needful for me, in the first place to distinguish both be∣tween Persons and Persons; and also between Things and Things; being prompted thereunto by the manner of our Lord and Masters writing to the several Churches in Asia, Rev. 2. & 3. He owns the Good, and disowns the Evil, in the same Church, and in the same Persons. He doth not own all for good, because some things were good: Nor doth he disown and reject all as evil, because some things were evil. His example I desire to follow. Now therefore concerning Per∣sons, they are thus distinguished. The Church of Rome, taken in a general sense, consists of these three Parts. 1. The Hierarchy, or Ruling Priesthood, who are as the Lead∣ers and Teachers, and Rulers of
the People, from the Pope down∣wards, in Subordination to him. 2. Inhabitants of the Earth; that is, such as have their minds and hearts on the Earth, and have no power of Truth in them: but all their Religion stands only in their outward Form: whose life is in that, and Zeal for that on∣ly. 3. Such as in sincerity of Heart seek after the Lord, and pursue (according to their understanding) things that are spiritual or hea∣venly: who Hunger and Thirst after Righteousness; whose hearts are drawn after the Lord, and who love Truth in the inward parts, and hate Lying, and De∣ceit. These, altho they may be under many mistakes in judgment or knowledge, by reason of edu∣cation or outward teaching yet I look upon them as people;
whom God will own; saying to them, Come out of her my people. And concerning things, I di∣stinguish between those ancient Truths, which the Church of Rome had, and lived in at first, and still retain; and those Inno∣vations brought in among them afterwards. And therefore I call nothing Popery but Innovations introduced, or upheld by some Pope or Popes, wherewith the Church of Rome is infested. I do not comprehend those ancient Truths, which they lived in at first in the Apostles days, and which they still retain, under the name of Popery: but as I said, only their Innovations; such as these which follow, and which I shall endeavour to detect by evidence of Scripture, and to manifest the Truth obscured by them, as there is need. 1. The Popes Exaltation, or
his being made Universal Bishop. This is an Innovation directly re∣pugnant to the Doctrine of Christ, and of his Holy Apostles; and practice of the primitive times. Its contrary to the Doctrine of Christ, plainly exprest in the Con∣curring Testimony, both of Mat∣thew, Mark and Luke. Read Matth. 20.25, 26. Mar. 10.42, 43. Luk. 22.25, 26, 27. Its in all these places flatly forbidden the Servants of Christ, to exercise Dominion or Authority over their Fellow Disciples: and they are commanded, not to be like the Princes of the Nations, or Gen∣tiles herein. The words in Mat∣thew are these, Ye know that the Princes of the Gentiles (or Nati∣ons) exercise Dominion over them, and they that are great, exercise Authority upon them: But it shall not be so among you. What can be spake more plainly and fully than
this? But it shall not be so among you. The words in Mark, and in Luke are to the same purpose, pro∣hibiting this Exaltation and Do∣minion. And the Apostles of Christ they kept to this Doctrine: Paul denyed such Dominion, 2 Cor. 1.24. Not that we have Dominion over your Faith, but are helpers of your joy. And Peter excludes this Lordship likewise, 1 Pet. 5.3. Neither as being Lords over Gods Heritage, but being ensamples to the Flock. Again, if we look at the pra∣ctical State of the Churches; and take notice of the several Epistles of Christ to the Seven Churches of Asia, we see no Superiority gi∣ven therein to one Angel of the Churches above onother. But they are distinctly writ unto, as having no precedency one above another, but every one standing distinct in his own Sphere or
Charge. So that this Exaltation of the Popes is dissonant to the pu∣rity of the Gospel, and crept in through impurity and corrupti∣on in after Ages, as by and by I shall make appear. Only first take notice, that this Exaltation of the Popes is an Inno∣vation very fitly suiting or agree∣ing with the Mystery of Iniquity. For Paul speaks plainly of such an exalted one in the Mystery of Ini∣quity, Who opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is called God, or that is Worshipped (that is, above all Magistrates and Rulers who are called Gods. Psal. 82.1, 6.) Who hath his Seat in the Temple of God, 2 Thess. 2. So the Pope he hath his Exaltation in the Church or Temple of God. Now let us take notice how this Innovation of the Popes great Ex∣altation over all his Fellow Bi∣shops came in. It had its rise from
Pride and Ambition: and from the Gift of a wicked Man. Pride and Ambition working in him that was Bishop of Rome, and seek∣ing to have the preheminence, he obtained of Phocas, then Emperor, that the Church of Rome should be, and should be called, Caput omnium Ecclesiarum, The Head of all the Churches. And so con∣sequently, that he should be the Head of all the Bishops. This was the rise of the Transcendent Exaltation of the Popes, or Bishops of Rome. It was the Gift of wick∣ed Phocas; a Man of whom it is recorded, That he was (Tyrannus, patriaque calamitas, sub quo omnis generis mala exundaverunt) a Ty∣rant, the Calamity of his Coun∣try, under whom all manner of wickedness abounded. Thus you see what manner of Original this Innovation had: and what the Foundation of it was. And the
Popes came not to this height till about six Hundred Years or more after the Birth of Christ, as Hi∣story informs. Bucholcer pun∣ctually sets down the Year 607. when Boniface 3. obtained this of Phocas. But tho the Pope was thus ex∣alted among men: yet hereby he received the greater fall in the Kingdom of Christ, where he that humbleth himself as a little Child is greatest: But he that exalts himself shall be abased, Matth. 18.4. & Ch. 23.12. So that his Exal∣tation is his fall, his earthly Ex∣altation was his fall in heavenly things: here he fell from the hum∣ble and heavenly Station, in which Christ stated his Church. And therefore its not unworthy the Consideration; whether that ex∣altation of his was not that falling of a Star from Heaven to the Earth spoken of, Rev. 9. Especially if
we consider the Concomitants or Consequences of the fall. The Pope now having none to con∣trol him, but being thus exalted above all, he had power to bring in what innovations he would. As the Star fallen from Heaven to the Earth had power given him to open the bottomless Pit; which comes all to one. For what is that Pit? We cannot imagine it to be a Pit in the Earth, that had a Lock and Key upon it: but mans Heart is as a deep Pit, without a Bot∣tom or Foundation: and the ima∣ginations thereof is as a Smoke issuing out of that Pit. Innova∣tions are the imaginations of mans Heart; and like Smoke they darken the Sunshine of the Gospel, and fill the Air (that spiritual Air that mens Spirits should breath in) with darkness, and unwholesome Mists. And this the Pope had power to do when he was exalted;
and the Star had power to do when he was fallen. And there∣fore this his Exaltation was his fall. And if he was a Star as the Angels of the Churches were cal∣led; this his exaltation seems plainly to be the falling of that Star. Now therefore, if the Church of Rome would reform it self from its Innovations, it must begin here, and bring down its Bishop to his first Station; and divest him of that power to bring in or uphold any Innovations contrary to the primitive simplicity of the Gospel. For while he stands in this exal∣tation, they can never reform themselves farther than he pleases: And especially while they look upon him as Infallible. For who can pretend to rectify any thing that proceeds from Infallibility. 2. Therefore another Innova∣tion is, The Popes Infallibility.
This is a device which backs and supports his Exaltation, and sub∣jects the Thoughts and Spirits of men under him without contra∣diction. For who dare mutter against an infallible Judge? But it might suffice one would think, to overturn the Infallibility of Popes, to see one Pope Excommunica∣ting another; as Alexander Tertius and Victor Quartus did; who were both chosen Popes by the Cardi∣nals at the same time: and had both the same Authority given them. This was in the Year of our Lord, 1159. saith Buchol: And again in the Year 1439. Pope Eugenius was deposed by the Coun∣cil of Basil, and Amadeus created Pope in his stead; and hence great Seditions arose. Now if you will have the Council here to be Infallible, then the Pope was Fal∣lible: Or if you will have the Pope to be infallible, then the
Council was Fallible: So chuse here whose Infallibility you will subvert, whether the Popes or the Councils. Take notice also of the acts of one Pope more, for I would not ennumerate many) Pope Alexander VI. for the en∣riching of his Son Borgias, prepared a splendid Banquet, to which he invited certain principal great men; of which number Cardinal Adrian his familiar Friend was one. He ordered his Servants to set before them Wine that was poisoned; and to set before him and his Son pure Wine. But Pro∣vidence so ordered it, that the Wine that was poisoned was set before himself and his Son; so they drank the poisoned Wine, and the Guests drank pure Wine, Here was a great want of the A∣postolick priviledge whom no deadly drink should hurt: and so also of the Spirit of Infallibility,
as to the preservation of himself, and his Son. But that's not all I aim at. This wicked Murtherer had a little afore that poisoned another, a Cardinal of Rome John Michael. Now shall we say, that so wicked a wretch was endowed with the Spirit of God, which on∣ly is the Spirit of Infallibility? Doth that teach such Treachery and Wickedness? Surely every sober man will abhor to think so. But I need not stand upon such particular instances to shew the Fallibility of Popes: this will more generally appear as we go along discovering other Innova∣tions. For their Innovations con∣tradicting and clashing against the Doctrine of Christ and his Holy Apostles plainly manifest the fal∣libility and erring Spirit of the Popes. 3. Another Innovation is the Selling of Pardons and Indulgen∣ces.
And this is another device helping to support the Popes in their greatness, for it brings in much treasure into the Popes Cof∣fers. And here I shall take notice of these three things. 1. That Pardons are Sold. 2. That they are a great support to the Popes Exaltation. 3. That this Innova∣tion absolutely destroys the Popes Infallibility, and transplants him out of Peter into Simon Magus. 1. I shall prove that Pardons and Indulgences are Sold by the Popes: for some will deny any thing, though never so manifestly known; although the modester sort of men under the Popes will not deny it. I shall pass by their annual and more frequent selling of Pardons; and manifest their greater Fairs for the sale of them. For they have invented certain great Fairs or Marts when men are to flock to Rome, to buy them.
And these Fairs they call their Jubilees. They put the name Ju∣bilee upon them, but they are plainly Faits for Pardons and In∣dulgences. In the Jubilees Men went out free without Money: but here they are to pay their Money; therefore it is a Fair not a Jubilee. The first that invent∣ed these was Boniface VIII. in the year of our Lord 1300. And he ordained this great Fair (or mer∣cenary Jubilee) to be kept every hundred year. After him (but not next) Clemens VI. impatient of so long a stay for a Fair (be∣cause his Life was not likely to reach to it) he reduced this their pecuniary Jubilee to every fiftieth year: So in the year 1350. he kept his great Fair. Then in the year 1400. Boniface IX. kept his great Fair. Another was kept in the year 1450. But now they began to think fifty years was too
long between Fair and Fair, so Xystus contracted them to twenty five years distance: and he kept his great Fair, Anno 1475. Chro∣nologers have punctually expres∣sed the years; which puts the sale of Pardons out of doubt, if any should question it. 2. Take notice that these are a great support to the Popes Exalta∣tion: such multitudes of men flocking from all parts to Rome, to buy their Pardons, that they could scarce walk one for another in that great City. In one of their Jubilees about two hundred men, its said, were kill'd by the great Croud at the Bridge Sancti Ange∣li, as they hasted for Pardons; some trod under foot, and some pressed to death by the croud, and others thrust into the River. And yet such great Fairs or Marts would not satisfy the avarice of some of the Popes: but they sent
afterwards their pardons to re∣mote places to be sold. Alexan∣der VI. the year after his Jubilee, sent his Indulgences far off to be sold. In Germaniam (saith my Author) atque alias longinquas Provincias Diplomata cum amplissi∣mis Jubilei Indulgentiis misit, passim∣que vendidit, propter eos qui Romam venire neglexerunt, vel venire non potuerunt. This was pretended to be for the sakes of those that ne∣glected, or could not come to Rome at the Jubilee: By his Le∣gates he sold them Pardons eve∣ry where, passim vendidit Buchol. a Volater, anno 1500. This Simony hath greatly helped to enrich the Popes, and to bear them up in their high Exaltation in the World. Are these likely to be Successors of the Apostles? and to sit in the Apostolick Seat? Who said, Love not the World, neither the things that are in the World.
If any Man love the World, the love of the Father is not in him. 1 John 2.15. 3. This Innovation or inventi∣tion of Selling Pardons of Sins ab∣solutely destroys the Popes infal∣libility, transplanting him out of Peter into Simon Magus: that is, out of that Spirit that was in Peter, into that Spirit that was in Simon Magus. So that although the Pope pretend to be Peters Succes∣sor: Yet he is fallen from Peter to Simon Magus. The Spirit that was in Peter abhorred the very thought of Selling the Spiritual gifts of God for Money. But the Spirit that Simon Magus was of, and so the Popes are of, hath thought that the Spiritual gifts of God may be purchased with Mo∣ny. This is a great fall, to fall from one to whom the Key of the Kingdom of Heaven was commit∣ted, to one whom he Excluded
out of the Kingdom, and turned the Key against him: Saying. Thou hast neither part nor lot in this matter: Thou art in the gall of bit∣terness, and bond of Iniquity. And what was the ground of all this great Severity? only this; Be∣cause (saith Peter) thou hast thought, that the gift of God may be purchased with mony. Act. 8.18. to 24. And is not this very thought the Popes thought? Now I entreat you, weigh these things. Is not the pardon of Sins one of the greatest gifts of God? And does not the Pope think that it may be purchased with Money, seeing he sells it? Is not here the same thought that was in Simon Magus, for which he was so se∣verely sentenced by Peter, and Excluded by him from all right in dispensing the Spiritual Gifts of God? Will you say that Peter con∣demned this thought in Simon Ma∣gus
but is of another mind now, and approves of it in the Pope? If so, then you will condemn Peter as one faln from his own Sted∣fastness, and not the Pope. If you say, the Pope doth not think as Simon did; he doth not think that the Spiritual Gift of God may be purchased with Money; then I say, He is still the worse, to sell that Spiritual Gift, the Pardon of Sins for Money, which he thinks cannot be purchased for Money, For in so doing, he both robs them of their Money; and deceives their Souls, making them believe a Lie. And if the Case be so with the Pope, as it was with Simon Magus, who thought that the Gift of God might be purcha∣sed with Money, where is his In∣fallibility? yea, where is his power to pardon Sin? Do you think that Simon Magus had power to pardon Sin? Or that one in his Sin hath
power so to do? Seeing he that was guilty of that Sinful, Carnal Thought, is excluded with him from having any part or lot in dis∣pensing the Spiritual Gifts of God, except you will make Peter partial, in excluding one and not another, who is in the same fault. Again, doth not this also help to confirm that the Pope, being faln from Peter to Simon Magus, is that faln Star mentioned before? 4. Another Innovation was that called Annatae. An Invention very near of Kin to the selling of Pardons: for this is a kind of sel∣ling of Benefices. For they were not to enjoy Benefices, but under this Condition, that they should pay half of the yearly profit into the Popes Treasury. This, and the selling of Pardons hugely in∣creased the Popes Treasure. Quae res Blondo & Platina testibus, Pon∣tifices Romanos Bonifacii Successo∣res,
non minus Christiani Orbis quam Ʋrbis Dominos reddidit. These things made him Lord, as well of the whole Christian World, as of the City. You may see more of this in the Year 1400 from the Nativity of Christ, quoted by Bucholcer. Where he saith, This Custom all submitted to, except in England, where the same was yielded to concerning the Bishops, but not in other Benefices. Now if we may not call this Symony, what other name shall we give it? Seeing it is a kind of selling and buying of Spiritual Benefices, as they are called. And judge Ye whether Peter, or Paul, or any other of the Apostles made filthy Lucre the Door, by which they let men into the Ministry, as the Popes do. And yet the Pope call'd this Treasury, into which this is paid, The Apostolick Treasu∣ry: As if the Apostles had set up,
or used such an Earthly Treasury. I mention this invention, because it was one thing that greatly strengthened the Popes in their high Exaltation: And also because it impairs the Popes Infallibility, to see them act so contrary to the Spirit of the Holy Apostles of Christ; and yet giving it some Title to the Apostles, by calling this the Apostolick Treasury. 5. Another Innovation, is the Popes Usurpation of a Power over Emperors, Kings, Princes and People, in their Temporal con∣cerns: So as, with a Word he can dethrone one, and have another set up, at his pleasure, under his Dominion. Was there any thing that tended to this in any of the Apostles Practises, or Doctrine? Or for many Ages and Genera∣tions after them? Were not the Bishops in Subjection, as to tem∣poral affairs, under the Princes of
the World? And not one of them authoritatively above ano∣ther, until wicked Phocas gave the Precedency to ambitious Bo∣niface 3. And yet then, he did not give him power over himself, or over any secular Princes. So that this was an Usurpation and Innovation of the Popes after∣wards: and was practised by some of them; and they got it decreed in some of their Councils. And Boniface 8. (who first instituted the Mercenary Jubilees, the same Year that he celebrated the first Jubilee,) Writ, That he was Lord in Temporals and Spirituals, in the whole World. Of whom it is re∣corded by Platina thus: Qui Im∣poratoribus, Regibus, Principibus, Nationibus, populis terrorem potius quàm Religionem injicere conabatur: quique dare regna & auferre, pel∣lere homines ac reducere pro arbi∣trio animi conabatur, &c. His en∣deavour
was to be a Terror to Emperors and Kings, Princes and People: To give Kingdoms, and take them away at his plea∣sure. Now here take notice, that as the Popes Exaltation of himself was foreshewed, 2 Thess. 3, 4. So this Power and Dominion of the Popedom over Kings and Princes was foreshewed, Rev. 17. ult. un∣der the representation of a Wo∣man, there expounded to be a great City reigning over the Kings of the Earth. And the Woman which thou sawest, is that great Ci∣ty, which reigneth over the Kings of the Earth. Or nearer the Greek thus, Which hath a King∣dom above the Kings of the Earth. Which Kingdom, if it be not the Popedom reigning over the Kings of the Earth, deposing them at pleasure, and Surrogating others in their stead, then I confess I
know not what it is. But if other Circumstances in that Chapter be considered with this, I think it will put this out of doubt: which here I cannot stand upon, with∣out too great a diversion and in∣terruption; but in its proper place, following where the Hierarchy of Rome comes to be spoken of, by Gods assistance, I shall demon∣strate. Another innovation is, The Ex∣ercising Dominion over mens Faith. It may be something of this kind might begin before the Popes were so named: But however its upheld and practised by the Popes; and was not owned by the Apostles Doctrine; but is an Innovation contrary to the sim∣plicity and purity of the Gospel, wheresoever it is found. That it is a piece of Popery, and up∣held by them, is manifest by their punishing and cruel handling of
those that in Conscience towards God, and faithfulness to his Truth, cannot submit to those their hu∣mane Innovations, which they see to be so. But the Popes who have arrogated to themselves Po∣wer and Dominion over the Per∣sons and Thrones of Kings and Princes, are not satisfied without the like dominion also over the Throne of God, the Conscience; and except they model mens Faith, and cast them all into one Mould: which thing the Apo∣stles durst not do. The Apostle Paul disclaims this Dominion over mens Faith, 2 Cor. 1.24. And he durst not judge the Faith or Conscience of the different be∣lieving Romans, when some of them kept a Day, and others kept it not; and when some of them did Eat Herbs, and others did Eat Flesh; and both to the Lord as he judged: and therefore he de∣fends
them both, one against the other; and judged nothing but their judging of one another in so doing, Rom. 14.4, 5, 6. And then he puts them in mind of Christ's Prerogative in this case, ver. 10. Saying, But why dost thou judge thy Brother? Or why dost thou set at nought thy Bro∣ther? We shall all stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ. But the Popes are not of Pauls mind; they will have men believe as they believe, or else Burn them alive. if this be not to exercise Domini∣on over mens Faith, and Consci∣ence, what is; And if this be not an innovation contrary to the simplicity, purity, mercy and meekness of the Gospel, nothing is; which saith In meekness instru∣cting those that oppose themselves, 2 Tim. 2.25. not burning them, as is done under the Tyrannical Popedom.
7. But to back this their cruel Dominion over the Faith and Consciences of men, and to palli∣ate it, and make it take place, and go down with their people, they put the Name Heretick upon those who cannot conform to their Innovations; that they may incense people against them. And this is another Innovation. And so they heap Innovation upon In∣novation. Whereas indeed and in truth, nothing is Heresie but that which opposes the Truth of the Gospel, delivered by Christ and his Holy Apostles. To op∣pose false Doctrine, and innova∣tions of men is no Heresie: But to bring in Innovations contrary to the Truth of the Gospel, and to require subjection thereto, this is certainly Heresie. Therefore let them that call, or count men Hereticks look to it, that they be not found the greatest Hereticks,
devouring innocent Lambs of Christ under that false notion. And indeed here is a notable Stra∣tagem of Satan, whereby to make them that fear God, and abhor mens inventions, as Sheep fit for the Slaughter, even to fix oppro∣btious Terms upon them. For this begets an Odium in the minds of Blindfolded people a∣gainst them: and makes them through hatred ready for Butchers, and to execute Massacres and all manner of mischief against the Faithful Servants of Christ, under that notion of being Hereticks. It must be under some such dis∣guise, that the Great Whore makes her self drunk with the Blood of Saints, and with the Blood of the Martyrs of Jesus; such as bear witness to him and his Truth against the Innovations of men. 8. And so that's another Inno∣vation,
namely, To rid men out of the Earth whom they call He∣reticks. It's no sin to destroy them, say they: Yea further, they have made it a Law, to Burn them. And this hath not been a dead Law: or like a Sword kept in a Scabbard; but hath been cruelly executed where the power of the Popedom hath prevailed. I am sure this cruelty is an Inno∣vation: for there is no such Do∣ctrin from Christ, or any of his Apostles; but positive Doctrin a∣gainst it. Therefore that Law and such other destructive Laws, and the execution of them, must needs be Innovations of men. Christ Jesus our Lord said, He came not to destroy mens lives, but to save them, Luke 9.54, 55, 56. But this Spirit that hath got into the Popedom comes to destroy mens lives, therefore is a Spirit contra∣ry to the Spirit of Christ. It's a∣nother Spirit crept in under the
profession of the Gospel, not his. Christ Jesus our Lord said also concerning the Tares which his Servants would have been pluck∣ing up, Let them alone. How long were they to let them alone? Even till the end of the World. And then the Angels must do that work, Mat. 13.29, 39. Men are not infallible, they may mistake; Therefore the Lord said to his own Servants, Let them alone, lest ye pluck up Wheat with Tares: He will not have them do that rooting Work; but he will set those to do that work that can more certainly distinguish between Tares and Wheat, even the An∣gels; & they shall not do it neither, till his appointed time, even the end of the World. This therefore must needs be an Innovation con∣trary to the command and will of Christ, to be doing this work, un∣der any pretence, namely, to be rooting out Tares (if they really
be so) out of the Field of the World, before Christ's appointed time. Again, it's against that Golden Rule of Christ, As ye would that men should do to you, so do ye to them, Mat. 7.12. Now would any man have others to burn him because he cannot be∣lieve as they believe? Would those burning Popes have any of the Re∣formed Churches to burn them, or their People, because they believe not as those Reformed Churches believe? I think not. And yet it were but Lex talionis, like for like, if they did so. But I never heard of any call'd a Re∣formed Church, that ever did so: nor I hope ever will: altho they may have retained too much Po∣pish Cruelty still unreformed of. 9. Another Innovation is, The Forbidding Marriage to their Gler∣gy (so called.) This is an Inno∣vation also wherein they exercise Dominion over the Faith and
Consciences of others; and is di∣rectly contrary to the Scriptures. Have we not power, saith the Apo∣stle, to lead about a Sister, a Wife, as well as other Apostles, and as the Brethren of the Lord and Cephas, 1 Cor. 9.5. And again, 1 Tim. 3.2. A Bishop must be blameless, the Husband of one Wife, &c. And vers. 11. The Deacons Wives must be grave, &c. And vers. 12. Let the Deacons be the Husbands of one Wife. Hence you see its clear that they that are in the Ministry have power to Marry. But the Spirit of God dictating this liber∣ty to Paul, immediately in the beginning of the next Chapter (which was a continuation of his discourse about Marriage) he shews him an Innovation that should arise contrary to this liberty, and he saith thus: Now the Spirit spea∣keth expresly, that in the latter times some shall depart from the Faith, giving heed to seducing Spi∣rits,
and Doctrines of Devils; speaking lies in Hypocrisie, having their Consciences seared with an hot Iron; forbidding to Marry, and commanding to abstain from Meats, &c. Here the Spirit of God seems to point at this very thing, even at the Popes prohibition of Marriage to Bishops and Deacons, and such as were to be admitted into the Ministry; because it fol∣lows so quickly after that liberty of Bishops and Deacons to be Marryed. And the words that accompany this prohibition of Marriage are worthy to be taken notice on. It shall be by persons that are fallen, or departed from the pure Faith of the Gospel (who shall have power over Bishops, and are fallen) giving heed to seducing Spirits and Doctrines of Devils; Speaking lies in Hypocrisie, having their Consciences seared with an hot Iron (as hardned in their Consci∣ences as a thing seared with an hot
Iron.) Then as a visible Chara∣cter of such persons he gives these two open Marks, that every one that runs may read them. They shall forbid Marriage, that's one: And command to abstain from Meats, that's another: both which are found in the Popedom. They have power over Bishops, to for∣bid their Marriage: and they are fallen very low from the purity of the Faith or Gospel, as hath been shewed before: And these also impose it upon their People as a matter of Conscience, to ab∣stain from Meats. And the words Forbid and Command, shew that these things came in by force and power; not by a voluntary taking up. The Prohibition of Marri∣age was very stiffly withstood by the Clergy: but the power of the Pope prevailed against them. The Contest about this Innovation Bu∣cholcer expresses very plainly, in
the words of Schaffnaburgensis, shewing it to be an imposition of Hiltebrand call'd Gregory 7. Anno Christi 1074. The Popes had need to keep the Scriptures from their People: for otherwise which of them could read this first Epi∣stle of Paul to Timothy, and not see the Error of the Popes in this matter, expressed so plainly, chap. 3.2, 4, 11, 12. and chap. 4.1, 2, 3. 10. Their setting up Images and Pictures, and bowing to them, or before them in reverence to them, is another Innovation. And this is imputed to them for Idola∣try. For what is Idolatry, but bowing with reverence to an Idol? or worshipping an Idol? And this is flatly contrary to the Second Commandment, the words where∣of are thus, Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven Image, or any likeness of any thing that is in Hea∣ven
above, or in the Earth beneath, or in the Water under the Earth. Thou shalt not bow down thy self to them, nor serve them: for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, vi∣siting the iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children, unto the third and fourth Generation of them that hate me: and shewing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my Commandments. What man reading this Commandment, and seeing or beholding their Images, and their bowing to∣wards them, could think other∣wise, but that they worshipped them? Or who could think, but that this practise is a breach of this Commandment? Yea, they them∣selves that have patronized this Idolatry, have been so sensible of their contradiction of this Com∣mandment hereby, that they durst not let it stand: but have turned it out: because it looks their
Image-worship so full in the face: and is so plain that it would set the heart of every single-hearted man against it. And this turning of the Second Commandment out of doors, is a plain demonstration a∣gainst them of their consciousness that they are guilty of the breach of it. For if they did not know that it were against their Idolatry, what need they turn it out of doors? And to deceive the Sim∣ple, they have made up the num∣ber of ten, by dividing the last into two. Thus they dare tam∣per with the Commands of God! Durst any man whose Conscience is not seared, expunge a Com∣mand of God, which was writ with his own finger, and given with so great solemnity, as this was as well as the rest, at Mount Sinai? I know the Sophistry of those that would palliate this their Idolatry by frivolous distinctions
of Worship. But the Lord hath exprest himself so fully against all appearance of Worship in this point, that he hath laid all their vain distinctions of Worship void. For whereas he hath in this Com∣mandment declared himself to be a jealous God; doth not this warn every man to flee from eve∣ry appearance of the breach of it, lest he by tampering with Images provoke the eyes of his Jealousie? And doubtless this was spoken not only in respect of his own Jealou∣sie, who sees the purposes and in∣tents of every heart; but also of the jealousie of his faithful People, who would be offended thereby: and in offending them thereby, he is offended. Now let any judge; Is not here an appearance of Worship done to Images, when they bow before them, and to∣wards them with reverence? If a jealous man should see so much re∣spect
and reverence between his. Wife and another Man, and see her so Idolize him, as they do their Images, would it not beget Jealusie in him? Appearances of great respect beget Jealousie. Now I say, why hath the Lord decla∣red himself to be a Jealous God in this Commanment, but to ad∣monish us thereby to shun all ap∣pearance of the Breach of it? according to the Exhortation of Paul, 1 Thess. 5.22. Abstain from all appearance of Evil. For the Breach of this Com∣mandment, the Jews severely smarted many times: and shall not such as are called Christians take warning thereby? Nothing provoked the Lord so much a∣gainst his people Israel, as Idola∣try, and shedding innocent Blood: and shall we think that such things do not provoke his holy Spirit now? And a pretence of honour∣ing
God thereby will not excuse men to him. The Jews when they had made a Calf in the Wil∣derness, and Sacrificed to it, and Feasted with those Sacrifices, this was done in pretence to the Lord, who had brought them out of E∣gypt. Therefore when Aaron pro∣claimed a Day to do Sacrifice to the Calf, he proclaimed it thus, To morrow is a Feast to the Lord, Exod. 32.5. You see this was pretended to be done to the Lord, & the people came upon that Proclamation, as keeping a Feast to the Lord, and did Eat and Drink, and make merry; and in their Sacrifice c∣lebrated their deliverance out of Egypt. But they would have that Calf to represent their Deliverer, and therefore attributed that Title to the thing repesenting; which was due only to the Lord, whom they would represent. For we cannot imagine that they, who
so lately had seen the wonders of the Lord, in bringing them out with a high hand, and went be∣fore them in a Pillar of a Cloud and Fire, could believe that Calf to be their Deliverer; both because it was made after they were deli∣vered; and also because it was made of their own Ear-Rings, and Gold which they gave to Aaron to make it of: but they put Sig∣num pro re significata; the sign for the thing signified; which the Lord will not approve of in such case. And therefore in this place and to this Innovation I may here add their Idolatry used in their Sacrifice of the Mass, worshipping the Sign for the thing signified. Namely, their worshipping of that which their own hands have made; which was always counted Idolatry in Scripture. Their Land (saith the Prophet Isaiah) is full of Idols: they worship the Work of their
own hands, that which their own Fingers have made. And the mean Man boweth down, and the Great Man humbleth himself; therefore for∣give them not, Isa. 2.8, 9. And again in the New Testament its said, The rest of men which were not killed with these Plagues, yet repented not of the Works of their Hands, that they should not worship Devils and Idols of Gold, and Silver, and Brass, and Stone, and Wood, which nei∣ther can see, nor hear, nor walk, Rev. 9.20. Now consider, is not this the Work of their own hands, that which their own Fingers have made? Is it not a God of their own making? Do they not first make the Bread or Wasers, and then make it a God by speaking a few words? And is it not such a God as can neither see, nor hear, nor walk, nor speak? By which Characters Idols are frequently described: and will you have Christ Jesus to come
under the description of Idols, and make him like them? The Idols of the Heathen have Mouths, but they speak not, Eyes but they see not, Ears but they hear not. They are known to be Idols, because they can neither speak, nor see, nor hear: and will you make him like one of them? Read and consider, Psal. 135.15, 16. and Psal. 115.3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Where you may plain∣ly see, not to hear, not to speak, not to see, not to smell, not to han∣dle, not to walk are made notes of an Idol to know them by. And will you now make our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the World was made, like a Dumb Idol? Will you make that to be he, which was only left for a Memorial of him? Do this as often as ye do it in remembrance of me, saith he. He makes it but a Sign, for a Me∣morial of him. I do believe that many may be verily perswaded, that the Bread
and Wine are really the Body and Blood of Christ: and so use it with great reverence, as if it were he; and that they think they do honour him thereby. But it is great dishonour done to him, if you well consider the thing. For first it brings him under the Circumstances of the Idols of the Heathen, as hath been shewed. 2. To offer him up again, invali∣dates that one Sacrifice of himself upon the Cross, once for all, by which he hath for ever perfected them that are sanctified. But I know you stand upon the literal words of Christ, This is my Body. And therein I can bear with you a little, because many may think, that they verily obey Christ therein. But if you well weigh it, you will find that those words are not to be taken literally, but figuratively, as many other of his expressions were: as for in∣stance,
I am the Door, I am the true Vine, my Father is the Hus∣bandman: Take one more, which comes near to that saying, This is my Body, namely this, Except ye Eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and Drink his Blood, ye have no life in you, John 6.53. Some took that in a literal sense, as you do those words, This is my Body. But let us mind his own exposition of them; for that comes near to the Case in hand. The words that I speak unto you; they are Spirit, and they are Life. (What do you talk of the Flesh) The Flesh profit∣eth nothing: Its the Spirit that quickeneth, John 6.63. Whereby he shews plainly, that this Eating of his Flesh he spake of, was the receiving and nourishing of his Spirit in our Hearts, which gives us life; a Spiritual Life in him. A like expression to this he used to the Woman of Samaria, John
4.14. where he compares the re∣ceiving and embracing of his Spi∣rit to drinking of Water: the words are these, But whosoever drinketh of the Water that I shall give him, shall never Thirst: but the Water that I shall give him, shall be in him a Well of Water, springing up into everlasting. Life. You see by Water, he understood Spirit, and by Flesh and Blood he understood Spirit: which were Metaphorical expressions. And so here in these words, This is my Body, he spake after the same manner: For when as he saith, The Flesh profiteth nothing, to what end should we imagine, that he left his Flesh to be eaten. But then as for the Offering of him up by a Priest. This is an in∣trusion into the Mediatorship of Christ, who only could offer up himself to God: He being both the Sacrifice, and the Priest set
apart by God for that work, whom all the Priests under the Law ty∣pifyed. And he did this himself, Once for all. And there remains no more Sacrifice for Sin. For by one Offering he hath perfected for ever them that are Sanctified. You may read that word Once expres∣sed many times in the 9th. and 10th. Chapters of the Epistle to the Hebrews, whereby is shewed the Difference between the Sacri∣fices of the Law, which were types, and that one Sacrifice of Christ, which was the substance: How they were offered often, because they could not make the Comers thereunto perfect as pertaining to the Conscience: but this Sacrifice of Christ was offered but Once, because it is of Efficacy at once offering, to make the comers to it perfect, as pertaining to the Conscience, that is, to clear their conscience, that they may draw
near to God, in full assurance of Faith, having their Hearts sprink∣led from an evil Conscience, Heb. 10.22. Many things might fur∣ther be spoken upon this point; but it being much controverted by others, I hasten to other things. Only give me leave to commend one thing worthy to be read by all that are in doubt upon this Sub∣ject. And that is the Epistle of the Prophet Jeremy sent to the Captives in Babylon. You may find it in the Apocripha; its the last Chapter of Baruch, the whole Chapter. Where, setting aside the Matter that their Idols were made of, their description by their impotency to do any thing, or help themselves, beside many o∣ther circumstances, may as well be applyed to that which is called the Host, as it was to them; whereby they are known to be no Gods. They cannot speak,
they cannot feel if they be gnawed upon by Worms, they cannot save themselves from Thieves or Robbers, but stand in need to be kept with Locks and Bars from Robbers, if you set many Candles before them, they cannot see one, there is no Breath in them, they are born by men, having no feet to go with, whereby they declare unto men, that they are nothing worth, if they fall to the Ground at any time, they cannot rise up again of themselves: nor can they move themselves. By these things ye may know that they are no Gods. Many things of like sort you may read of them in that Chapter, whereby, saith the Pro∣phet Jeremy, you may know that they are no Gods; therefore fear them not. ver. 16. Now I pray you consider what dishonour you do to our Lord Jesus Christ, to exhibit him to the world in such a
Dress; so fully agreeing with the description of the Heathen Idols. May not the Heathen say, What is your God better than our God? Miserable are they, saith Solomon, And in dead things is there hope, who called them Gods which are the Works of mens Hands. Wisdom of Solomon, Chap. 13.10. 11. Another dismal Innovation is depriving people of the free use of the Holy Scriptures in their pu∣rity. In the first place, this shews the Popedom to be a Dominion, point blank opposite to the King∣dom of our Lord Jesus Christ. For his Kingdom is a Kingdom of light: but the Popedom is a King∣dom of darkness. Christ was gi∣ven for a light to us: but the Pope brings darkness. I will give thee for a Light to the Gentiles, that thou maist be my Salvation unto the end of the Earth, Isa. 49.6. The Light
is in order to Salvation not dark∣ness. And the same Prophet Isaiah personates Christ speaking thus, Chap. 51.4. Hearken unto me my peo∣ple, and give Ear unto me O my Nation: for a Law shall proceed from me, and I will make my judg∣ment to rest for a Light of the Peo∣ple. But the Popedome will not let his Law and his Judgment to rest for a Light of the People, but hides it from them; and as Thieves and Robbers they rob them of that which is for Salvation unto the end of the Earth. Therefore the true Apostles were sent forth to turn men from darkness to the Light; and by that means, from the Power of Satan (which is in the Darkness) unto God; that so they might receive forgiveness of Sins, and an inheritance (in that Light) among them that are San∣ctified by Faith in Christ, Acts 26.18. And therefore the happy State
of Believers is called an inheritance in the Light, Col. 1.12. Eph. 5.8. But Popery gives an inheri∣tance in the Darkness. It matters not how dark people be kept, if they have but Mony enough, they may obtain an inheritance in the Darkness therewith, such as it is. Is it not manifest to all, that here is a Kingdom of darkness set up under the Popedom, working quite contrary to the Kingdom of Christ, which stands in the Light? And as by this Innovation, they most clearly shew their King∣dom to be contrary to the King∣dom of Christ: So also hereby they manifest themselves to be Evil Workers, departed from the Truth of the Gospel. For why do they deprive people of the free use of the Scripture, but because it discovers their evil Deeds; their
deeds of darkness? And therefore lest people should see their works of darkness which it discovers, they put out that Candle: or hide the light of it from them, by clothing the Scriptures with the Hairy Sack-cloth of their own Comments, for the saving of their innovations from the sharp Edge thereof. Christ Jesus our Lord, the Truth and the Life, hath told us plainly, That he that doth Truth cometh to the Light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God. But (on the other hand) every one that doth evil hat∣eth the Light, neither cometh to the Light, lest his deeds should be re∣proved, John 3.20, 21. Its a plain demonstration of an evil doer, to hate the Light. I know some are so seared, that they have confidence (I may say impudence) to defend this restraint of the Scriptures from the people:
because say they, The liberty of having and reading the Scriptures is a means to beget and foment Errors and Heresies in the Church. To this I answer, First, This judgment is directly contrary to the Judgment of Christ: there∣fore its a false and forged Opinion. For Christ saith, Ye err not know∣ing the Scriptures: but Popery saith, Ye will Err if ye know the Scriptures, therefore ye shall be debar'd of them. Thus directly opposite to Christ, is that work, and he that defends it, Mat. 22.29. Secondly, I give this answer, The cause of this false assertion or shift, in saying, That the Scritures are a means or cause of Errors among the people, is this. They that are trained up under the Po∣pish innovations, take those inno∣vations for Truth, and the Truth it self for Error. So they call that Error and Heresie, which is con∣trary
to those innovations. And herein they fall under the Prophet Isaiah's Woe, Isa. 5.20. Woe to them that call evil good, and good evil: that put darkness for light, and light for darkness. And now to go on with this In∣novated Darkness. They hereby not only shew their opposition to Christ and his Kingdom; and make themselves known to be evil Doers: but also herein they shew themselves most cruel Tyrants against their own people, keeping them, as it were in a Dungeon and Chains of Darkness, where they must not make use of their own Eyes, nor have the Benefit of the comfortable light of the Sun: but they must see only with others Eyes; and by the light of those dim Candle-lights, which burn blew through the Damp of their Pit, which they hand to them in dark Lanthrons. To
speak plainly, they must have little or no light, but such as is obfus∣cated and dimmed with their poy∣sonous innovations; and that must be held forth to them by persons sufficiently leavened with their cor∣rupt inventions. They must not make use of their own Eyes, to see with their own Eyes and un∣derstandings, the comfortable Sunshine of those pure Truths which shine forth in the plain and uncorrupted words of the Gospel, left upon record. This is Tyranny upon the Souls of people; to which the Bondage of Egypt, and Cap∣tivity of Old Babylon was but a small matter; seeing that chiefly was upon the Body, but this is upon the Soul. So that their en∣thralled people cannot say, Their Soul is their own. But they are the Slaves and Souls of men, ful∣filling that very expression of them, Rev. 18.3. For how can a
Man say, that his Soul is his own, when he cannot make use of the Faculties of it? But must be whol∣ly in things Spiritual restrained to the Sense and Will of ano∣ther. This is an Innovation of great consequence: for it is as a Lock and Key upon all their other In∣novations, to keep them safe from being assaulted. So that hereby they Establish themselves in their Kingdom of Darkness? even as Satan holds his Kingdom in men, as long as he can keep them in darkness: but where light comes, Satan falls like Lightning: and even so where the free use of the Scriptures comes in their pu∣rity, their Innovations must needs fall. But what wickedness is this, that for the upholding an earthly Kingdom, they care not what be∣comes of Millions of Souls, but let them perish in the darkness by
their will. For Children of dark∣ness they must be kept; and not be suffered to become Children of the Light, if they can help it. The Holy Apostles of Christ gave this Testimony of the Scriptures, That they are able to make one wise unto Salvation, through Faith in Christ Jesus; and that they are given forth by inspiration of God; and are profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instru∣ction in Righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, thorow∣ly furnished unto all good Works, 2 Tim. 3.15, 16, 17. What's the reason then that men should be envied, the comfortable use and benefit of them? Is there any true reason can be given for the re∣straint of them, but this? That men would by them be instructed and furnished against the Innovations of the Popedom; and so run into that which they call Heresie? But
what desperate wickedness, and scared Consciences hath God gi∣ven people up unto, that dare thus in opposition to the inspira∣tions of the Spirit of God, and be∣nefit of the Souls of People, de∣prive them of so great helps, and furtherance of their Salvation! This is a Robbery far greater than any earthly Robbery. And yet they must be called Holy Fathers, who have been the greatest Rob∣bers in the World. May we not here greatly sus∣pect, that the Mystery of Iniquity doth here lurk, where such care is taken to keep out the light of the Scriptures from men, lest thereby they should discover it? Yea, may we not rather detect that Mystery of Iniquity to be here, where so many Innovati∣ons contrary to the Holy Scriptures are found? and such innovations as turn the profession of Christia∣nity
into a Stream quite contrary to its own nature? To work wickedly and contrary to the Spi∣rit of God, and yet pretend there∣in holiness and serving of God: What's this but Iniquity under a Mystery; wickedness vailed with pious pretences? And what is the Mystery of Iniquity, but Iniquity in a Mystery? Iniquity under pi∣ous pretences, which makes it a Mystery? But those pretences can∣not alter the nature of Wicked∣ness; but only put a fair Gloss upon it: for wickedness is wick∣edness wheresoever it is found; and the fair pretences put upon it cannot change its nature, but on∣ly dazle the Eyes, and Minds of men, and make it mysterious to them. The shedding of so much innocent Blood, as hath been shed in Massacres, and Fires, and by other ways, doth not change the nature of that wickedness, by put∣ting
the name of Hereticks upon those who were so destroyed: only that ignominious Title may cover it to the ignorant, and make that cruelty seem to them, a pious thing; and so make that Iniquity a Mystery. And in like manner Idolatry or bowing to Images may be made a Mystery, by pretending it to be a reverenc∣ing God, and thanking him for such or such a Saint, or such like considerations: when as the acti∣on it self is directly opposite to his command, and bears no other ap∣pearance, but of an idolatrous worship, contrary to the second Commandment; which they dare not let stand in the common sight of their people, for fear of its discovering their Idolatry. Now (not to name the rest of these their innovations here) what greater wickedness is there, then these three, namely, shedding innocent
Blood; worshipping Images, or Gods of their own making; and robbing people of so great a Be∣nefit to their Souls, as the Holy Scriptures in their purity might be? And all the pretences they can put upon these Evils, can but dis∣guise them, and make them a Mystery, but they cannot change the nature of them. 12. Another Innovation is that invention of putting their people upon the pattering over so many Pater Nosters, and Ave Maries, that they need a String of Beads to number them by. And here we may stand still and wonder that men that pretend themselves so profound Doctors and Fathers in the Church of Christ, should shew themselves to be so blind or wicked. So blind, as to think that God is well pleased with Lip-labour; or so wicked as to make people believe that he is so. Surely
they know that Christ Jesus our great Doctor or Teacher hath said, When ye pray use not vain Repetitions, as the Heathen do: for they think that they shall be heard for their much speaking. Be not ye therefore like unto them, Mat. 6.7, 8. But these Doctors make their people like the Hea∣then herein. The Lord requires such worship as is done in Spirit and in Truth, John 4.23.24. Its not vain Lip-labour that's accep∣table to him: but my Son, give me thy Heart, saith he. He hates drawing near him with the Lips, and the Heart far from him. Its pray∣ing with the Spirit, and with the understanding also that he re∣quires. If these great Doctors know not these things, they are not fit to be Teachers or Guides in the Church of Christ: and if they do know them, the greater is their wickedness to teach people
to do things that are so contrary to the Doctrine of Christ, and thereby to make them like the Heathen, thinking to be heard for much babling. But to what end should they repeat so many Ave Maries, with their Pater Nosters every day? Is Mary at hand every Hour to be saluted by them? Is she present continually all over the large Do∣minion of the Popedom, to be saluted by them all, that patter that Salutation so often over? Or do they hereby worship her as a God, thinking her to be Omni∣present? Its hard to know for what good end this Custom was invented. For my part I can see no other end in it but this; name∣ly, to keep People busie; and so to divert them from more serious thoughts, lest their Consciences should be set at work to ponder the Path of Life; and whether
they were in it or no: and so should enter into more serious and deep consideration of their Spi∣ritual condition. Or is it because they have led them out of the Road of peace by their superstiti∣ous innovations, and must give them some thing to do to pacify the requirings of their Conscience? For there is even in the Heathens a Conscience that must be satisfied, or diverted by some manner of worship or other: and therefore they satisfy their conscience as well as they can, by worshipping something, what they think to be a God. And is this the Case here? How like then do they make their people to the Heathen. But I consider there may be another end in it to keep people thus busie, and that is, lest they should grow too wise for their Teachers, by im∣proving their spare time, in search∣ing into Truth; and acquainting
themselves with the Ground of those things they practice, and walk in: and so should come to see the rotten Foundation, upon which all their superstitious and idle inventions are grounded. Filling their Hands full is a way to divert them from such scrutiny or search; that so they them∣selves may sit at rest and ease in their dominion of innovations o∣ver the People. For find them work enough, and that will keep them busie, and divert them from prying into the Mysteries of their Innovations, and so keep them off from turning against them for imposing such groundless imagi∣nations upon them. For the Minds of Man must have some∣thing to busie it self withal, being of a restless inquiring prying tem∣per. 13. Another Innovation is that of Cardinals: of which there is
no mention at all in Scripture: not one word of such a Conclave or Combination. These are as it were the very Hinges upon which the Popedom doth hang, and turn it self; and therefore are they rightly called Cardinals, as much as to say Hinges from Cardo a Door-hinge. These being Popes Creatures bear up the Pope after they have set him up. And one with another as one Head, they cherish and enforce the Popish In∣novations, wherein his Kingdom stands: and they therein as the chief Princes of that Kingdom. These having no Foundation in Scripture must needs be an Inno∣vation: And when the overflow∣ing Scourge comes to sweep away all refuges of Lyes; these, being one chief false refuge of the Pope∣dom, and main Pillars thereof, must tumble with it. The Pope, he is the Door through which the
Popedom of Innovations hath come in: And the Cardinals, they are the Hinges upon which he turns, bearing up him, and his Kingdom of Innovations: and together they will fall, when the Mystery of Iniquity shall be dis∣solved. These are of the number of those Merchants of the Earth, which shall lament the fall of the Babylon of Innovations, when mens Eyes shall be opened, and no man shall buy their Mer∣chandize any more, understand∣ing them to be but the vain In∣ventions of men which profit them not. For so hath our Lord Jesus Christ taught us, saying, In vain do ye worship me, teaching for Doctrines the Precepts of men. These are some of those Inno∣vations, which are introduced and upheld by Popes, besides many others, which it would be too te∣dious here to recite. It may be
the Lord may stir up the Spirits of some others to pursue them further. But these here mention∣ed, are sufficient to let any under∣stand what it is I call Popery, namely, these and such other In∣novations upheld under the Pope∣dom. For I would not have any to think (as I have signified be∣fore) that I do by Popery under∣stand whatsoever is found among the Papists: for I do not by Pope∣ry comprehend those ancient and good Truths, which the Church of Rome was at first established in; and many of which they may yet retain: as namely, all those wholesome and sound Doctrines that are agreeable to the uncor∣rupted Scriptures; and which nourish a pious and good Life; and which teach to walk humbly with God, and faithfulness to his precepts; and equity and just deal∣ing among men, to do to others as
we would have them to do to us; and which teach charity and mer∣cy and good works; and which lead to an inward walking with God: and to an innocent life a∣mong men; and such like. I call nothing of this kind, popery: but only, as I say, Innovations con∣trary to the precious Truths of the Gospel. I own that there are precious Truths among them, but much entangled and clouded with abundance of innovations mixed therewith. Therefore it was need∣ful for me, for Peoples better un∣derstanding, thus to distinguish, between the one and other: be∣tween the good and primitive Truths; and the inventions of men crept in afterwards. That in the inventions of men or Innovations, we may find the Apostacy of the Romish Church: which comprehends these things, viz.
In their Innovations we shall find, 1. The Mystery of Iniquity. 2. Sodom and Egypt Spiritual. 3. Babylon the Great. 4. The great Whore, that sitteth upon many Waters, which is the Mother of Harlots. Which things call for Repen∣tance. First, I say, in their Innovati∣ons we shall find the Mystery of Iniquity. And that may easily be found out by the plain and full description of him that is head in it, 2 Thess. 2.3, 4. First, take no∣tice that there must be a falling a∣way from the purity of the Go∣spel; which implys that the My∣stery of inquity was to arise where the purity and truth of the Go∣spel had been professed, and lived in, but was fallen from, and in the same place the Mystery of in∣iquity should arise, in which My∣stery
there should be one thus de∣scribed. (1.) He should be a Son of Perdition: or a Son of Destru∣ction, a destroyer, and so to be destroyed. And so the Angel of the bottomless Pit, which is a faln Star, hath the same name, both in the Hebrew and Greek Tongue, Rev. 9.11. being called Abaddon, and Apollyon, which signify a De∣stroyer. For they belong both to one and the same destroying My∣stery, as head therein, and so have the same name. (2.) He should be one that opposeth, and exalteth himself above all that is called God, or that is Worshipped. (3.) He sits in the Temple of GOD, (the Church) Shewing himself that he is God. Now who is there that Answers this Description so much as he that is head in the Popedom? Whether it be a par∣ticular man, or a conjoyned po∣wer, or combination of more to∣gether.
First, he or they that sit in that power, are fallen from the purity, simplicity, and innocen∣cy of the Gospel of Christ into the destructive inventions and inno∣vations of men: by reason of which Millions of Men and Wo∣men professing Christ, have been destroyed by Massacres and other∣ways: therefore Secondly, the Title of the Son of Perdition: a Destroyer, Abaddon, and Apollyon, doth aptly fit that Power or them in it. Thirdly, he is an Opposer, exalting himself above all that's called God. What is called God in Scripture? First, God Almigh∣ty himself, He opposes him, and exalts himself above him, in over∣ruling and controuling his com∣mand, leaving out what he pleases, or finds to be against his earthly Kingdom: one thing is the Se∣cond Commandment, which is so strongly enforced with argu∣ments,
even by God himself, to be inviolabsy observed, without any shew of the breach thereof, for fear of exasperating his jealousie, & in∣curring of punishment upon their posterity, that he that controuls it, must needs be an opposer of God. Secondly, He opposes Christ, and his Kingdom; bringing in an earthly Kingdom of darkness, in opposition to Christ's Spiritual Kingdom of Light. Thirdly, He opposes and exalts himself above all Magistrates (called Gods in Scripture, Psal. 82.1, 6. John 10.34, 35.) putting down and setting up as he pleases. He hath a King∣dom above them all. The Pope∣dom is a Kingdom above Kings of the Earth. Therefore he and they that bear the Power in that Kingdom, are this exalted one. Fourthly, He hath his Seat in the Temple of God the Church. The Church is called the Temple of
God in the New Testament, 2 Cor. 6.16. What agreement hath the Temple of God with Idols? For Ye are the Temple of the living God. Here this man of Sin, this Son of Perdition hath his Seat, He sitteth in the Temple of God, which clear∣ly distinguishes him from all o∣ther Potentates, which have their Seed in the Civil Government. Read 2 Thess. 2. Where, under this exalted one you will find, The Mystery of Iniquity subjoyned and entailed, as patronized by him. So finding out that exalted Op∣poser, finds out the Mystery of iniquity; which consists in Innova∣tions and Inventions of men, con∣trary to the Doctrine of Christ Jesus, and his Holy Apostles. I know some good people take this Mystery of Iniquity to be that natural sinful State, wherein ge∣nerally all men live. But for the better information
of their understandings, I desire those that think so, to take no∣tice, That this Mystery of Iniqui∣ty here spoken of, is a Circumscri∣bed Mystery, which had its rise since the publication of the Gospel; and shall have its period again in due time before inqiuity have an end. It began indeed to work in some mens Spirits in the Apostles days; but was letted that it could not break forth, and come to its heigth. It doth already work, saith the Apostle, Only he who now let∣teth will let until he be taken out of the way, 2 Thess. 2.7. An Ene∣my letted it until he was taken out of the way. The persecuting Emperors while they stood, they kept down the profession of Chri∣stianity very much, by frequent persecutions, so that there was more power of Christianity pre∣served, while Persecution lasted. But when Constantine the Great
got the Dominion, and gave full Scope to the profession of Christi∣anity, and drew in Nations into an outward conformity thereto, by his noble and courteous usage of those he conquered; then that which letted was taken out of the way: and then by degrees sprang up the magnifying of the outward form, and imagined pious addi∣tions were made thereto, un∣der which by little and little the Mystery crept up, till it came to its height, For it rose un∣der pious pretences; and that was it that blinded people so, that they could not perceive it. But as the Mystery of Iniquity had a Beginning and growth in this wise, since the Apostles times, so it shall have a period. The Lord will bring no nought this Mystery again, and consume it with the Spirit of his mouth, and destroy it with the brightness of his coming. It
shall fall with the desolation of the great Whore, upon whose Fore-head it is writ, being upheld by her: and she shall fall before Iniquity have an end, as will ap∣pear afterwards. And therefore I say, this Mystery of Iniquity, is not the common sinful state of wickedness, that men have lived in, in all Ages of the World, which have born the open Face of wickedness; but it is a circum∣scribed and vailed Mystery; ha∣ving a beginning and an ending in this latter age of the World, since Christ. It is a Mystery of wickedness wrapped up in an out∣ward Mantle of pretended Chri∣stianity. And when the Lord o∣pens the Eyes of Princes, that have given their power to it, to see it; they shall hate the Whore, and Eat her Flesh, and burn her with Fire, Rev. 17.16. And this they shall do before the common State
of wickedness have an end. Secondly, as the Mystery of ini∣quity is couched under the Inno∣vations of men: So in them we shall find that which is called So∣dom and Egypt Spiritually. Sodom literal was a place of great Violence and Uncleanness: How violently did they beset Lots House, only for the fulfilling of their Brutal uncleanness? And hath not as great violence been used upon the ac∣count of Innovations, for the ful∣filling of their spiritual unclean∣ness in going a Whoring after the inventions or innovations of men? Are not the Streets or ways of these innovations as full of danger and violence, where all are root∣ed out that stand against them; or at least violently handled? What hath been the Ground of all that violence of late done in France, but innovations of men, to turn them to embrace mens inventions?
That great word (if I may not say Boast) of converting about two Millions of people into the Bosom of the Church of Rome (for which might be expected a grateful acknowledgment from the Pope) what is it more then a converting of them to their Inno∣vations by their violence? For they were Christians before: they did not convert them to Christi∣anity, but only to the Popish In∣novations. I name this because it is so fresh in every ones mind: But violence hath all along atten∣ded the Innovations of the Popes. And beside the spiritual unclean∣ness of going a Whoring after mens inventions; How great a Provocation to brutal uncleanness is made, by that one Innovation of prohibiting Marriage to their Clergy; and otherwise by Licenc∣ing Stewes, and making people believe they have pardon for their
Sins, for a little mony, especially if they be Venial, as they count some. None I think are accoun∣ted so Mortal, as opposing their Innovations. That's made He∣resie with them, and worthy of death, and damnable. Again, in these Innovations, Egypt spiritually so called is found. Egypt was a House of Bondage to the natural Israelite: So these In∣novations are a House of Bondage to the Spiritual Israelite. The true Seed that desires to follow Christ fully, finds Bondage in all Innovations or Inventions of men. And they that impose humane Traditions and Inventions upon peoples Consciences, are like the Task-masters of Egypt, to the tru∣ly spiritual Seed. For the true Seed, the Chaste Virgin, hates subjection of Spirit to any other in things Spiritual, save to her own Lord Christ Jesus. His Wis∣dom
and Council she delights to lye under. But the hard task of the imposition of mans wisdom upon her Spirit is grievous Bon∣dage to her, and causes her Spirit to groan for deliverance. And in time the Lord will work deli∣verance for the spiritual Israelite; as he did for the literal. Thirdly, In Innovations we find Babylon the Great. Many words used in former times both before and under the Law, are transfer∣red, or brought over, and put upon things under the Gospel, or New Covenant: either because they are under the like Circum∣stances, or were prefigured by things aforegoing. As to give one Example or two; the Tabernacle and Temple which were made by men, and made of Wood, and Stone, and Gold, and Silver, and Brass, and Iron, These were pla∣ces for the presence of God to ap∣pear
in, and to dwell in. But in the fulness of time those were laid aside again, and yet the names of them retained and put upon other things, where the presence of God was to reside. As namely, Christs Body, Destroy this Temple, saith he, and in three daies I will raise it up again. This spake he of his Body, putting the name Temple upon it. Again the same word Temple is put upon his Church, 2 Cor. 6.16. Rev. 2.1. And al∣so upon the Bodies of his Disci∣ples, 1 Cor. 6.19. What, know ye not that your Body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost which is in you. And again saith the Apostle, If any man defile the Temple of God, him shall God destroy: for the Temple of God is holy, which Temple ye are, 1 Cor. 3.17. So Tabernacle is used in like manner, 2 Pet. 1.14. Short∣ly I must put off this my Tabernacle. I might instance in many things,
but I would not digress too much from my present scope and busi∣ness, which is to shew that the name Babylon is also put upon something under the Gospel, which Babylon of old resembled, or did prefigure. And that is, that Dominion that stands in In∣novations or Inventions of men. This is called, Babylon the Great, Rev. 17.5. Now why the name Babylon should be put upon that Power and Dominion that stands in Innovati∣ons under the Gospel times, con∣sider the like circumstances of both Old Babylon and New, and the like expressions given forth of both, and I think you may easily be perswaded thereof. Old Babylon was called, The glo∣ry of Kingdoms, Isa. 13.19. and the Lady of Kingdoms, Isa. 47.5, 7. And Babylon the Great is counted no less, seeing she reigneth over
Kings of the Earth, Rev. 17.18. There was the same exalted se∣curity of heart in both: for Old Babylon, said in her heart, I am, and none else besides me, I shall not sit as a Widdow, neither shall I see the loss of Children, Isa. 47.8. Ba∣bylon the Great, saith in her heart, I sit a Queen and am no Widdow, and shall see no sorrow, Rev. 18.7. Old Babylon was a place of Cap∣tivity to the Israelites: and New Babylon, or Babylon the Great, hath been a place of far greater Capti∣vity to the true spiritual Israelite. That was but for a few years, on∣ly for Seventy. But this hath lasted long, even many Genera∣tions, namely ever since Innova∣tions got head. That was a Cap∣tivity far less cruel than this latter Captivity hath been. They both of them have exercised force upon the Consciences of People.
As the People of God were bid to flee out of Babylon of old, And deliver every man his own Soul, Jer. 51.6. So in like manner concerning the Great Babylon, it's said, Come out of her my People, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her Plagues, Rev. 18.4. The words of the Prophets both Isaiah and Jeremiah concerning Babylon of Old, seem to reach even to this Babylon the Great: So that the Old Babylon seems to typisie this very much: as they that read Isa. 47. and Jer. 50, and 51 Chap∣ters, may perceive. And also that they both have a like destruction, Jer. 51.63, 64. compared with Rev. 18.21. Both are to sink and not rise again. This shall be the fall of Innovations, and of that power and Dominion that stands in them, in the Lord's time. They shall sink in the Waters: in the
minds of People, as things born down with great weight. Oh then rejoycing! Joy and gladness attends the fall of this Great Baby∣lon. Rejoyce over her thou Heaven and the holy Apostles, and Prophets for God hath avenged you on her, Rev. 18.20. What is it that hath done so much mischief to Apostles and Prophets, and Saints that God will avenge them thereof, as In∣ventions and Innovations of men? and therefore they are bid to re∣joyce when these are thrown down like a great Milstone into the bottom of the deep. That Babylon the Great stand∣eth in the Inventions and Innova∣tions of men is manifest; because it cannot stand in any pure Dis∣pensation of God: for then it could not be called Babylon nor Confusion. Therefore it must needs stand in the Inventions and Innovations of men, deviating
from the pure Dispensation of God, or purity of his Truth: and in them Babylon the Great will be found. And this will more appear by that which follows. For where the Great Whore is found, there Babylon the Great must be found; it being the In∣scription upon her Forehead, Rev. 17.5. Ʋpon her Forehead was a name written, Mystery, Babylon the Great, &c. Therefore now I come to that thing expressed a little afore, namely, That here (viz. in In∣novations) we shall find the Great Whore also. What was that, that was so much charged upon Israel of Old by the Prophets for Whoredom; but that they being a People stand∣ing related to God under the first Covenant (or Law) went a whoring after their own Inventi∣ons? Psal. 106.39. They did not
keep to the Institutions and Coun∣sels of God, but did like the Hea∣then, or other Nations: they worshipped Idols, set up Groves and Altars of their own Inventi∣on, and such like: and this was called Whoredom: because it was a breach of their Faithfulness, and Loyalty, and Chastity to God who had married them to him∣self under a Covenant, Jer. 3.14. Psal. 106.35, 39. Levit. 17.7. Ezek. 23.30, 37. So likewise under the Second or New Covenant, if we profess our selves married to God in Christ Jesus, to walk with him (whom we are commanded to hear and obey) according to his Counsels and Doctrin; and then follow in∣ventions of our own, and bring in Innovations contrary to the Doctrine of Christ and his holy Apostles, this is Spiritual Whore∣dom against Christ. As the In∣ventions
of the Israelites was whoredom against the Marriage Covenant of God given by Moses: So Innovations of Christians is Whoredom against the New Covenant given by Christ: the Mediator thereof. These two things must concur to the making up of the great Whoredom. 1. A Profession of a Marriage Cove∣nant to Christ: take him to be our Head, our Guide, and Coun∣sellor, and Ruler. And then, 2. Great disloyalty to him here∣in; in rejecting his Counsels, and Spirit; and entertaining and em∣bracing a Stranger, viz. A Spirit quite contrary to him, and an Enemy to his Counsels; altho professing him, yet introducing and setting up Innovations of its own. And whosoever do out∣strip or excel others therein, they are the Great Whore. And the Spirit of Whoredom will mani∣fest
it self most among them, by abusing the Chast and Faithful Servants of Christ, who love his Precepts, and dare not subject them∣selves to the Innovations of men. For the Whorish Spirit is a cruel Spirit, hating Chastity: because Chastity is a check to its Whore∣dom. I speak of Spiritual Cha∣stity and Whoredom. Thus you may see what is couched under the Innovations of men. viz. The Mystery of Iniqui∣ty, Sodom and Egypt Spiritual, Babylon the Great, and the Great Whore. Which Innovations most abound in the Church of Rome, tho others as yet may not be alto∣gether clear of some of them. But now that I may speak clear∣ly, and be rightly understood con∣cerning persons, I must resume my former distinction of persons: for I now come to speak of per∣sons chiefly. But as I could not
well speak of things in an abstra∣cted sense without relation to persons: so now I cannot speak of Persons without relation to things. I look upon the Church of Rome consisting of these three Parts. 1. The Hierarchy, or Ruling Chergy, so called. 2. The Inhabitants of the Earth. 3. Such as in sincerity of heart seek after the Lord. The First of these, viz. the Hierarchy as they stand in Inno∣vations in the Popedom, or usur∣ped Dominion and Exaltation, I take to be the Great Whore: And I shall give my reasons for it, which are these two follow∣ing. First, Because the Description of the great Whore, given by the Angel to John, doth so aptly fit this part of Rome. Those Cha∣racters
that are given of her, whereby to know her, are found on them. Secondly, Mystery standing up∣on the great Whores forehead, relates her to the Mystery of In∣iquity, Thes. 2. And that hath such an exalted one in it as we find only in Rome, and no where else. Concerning the first of these two Reasons, that the Great Whores Description and Cha∣racters are found in Rome, that is, in the Hierarchy thereof the very reading of Revel. 17. may give light to any unbyassed and indifferent Capacity. I shall point out several of those Characters. First, Come hither (saith the Angel to John) I will shew thee the Judgment of the Great Whore that sitteth upon many Waters, Revel. 17.1. Here we have one Character of the Great Whore,
and that is She sitteth upon many Waters. What those Waters are, the Angel expounds to John ver. 15. The Waters which thou sawest, where the Whore sitteth, are Peo∣ples and Multitudes, and Nations, and Tongues. She hath a large Dominion, over Peoples, Multi∣tudes, Nations and Tongues: a kind of Universality; which U∣niversality they of Rome boast of, and glory in the Title of Catho∣lic, which signifies Universal; But they are no further Univer∣sal than to fulfill this Prophecy. Therefore they glory in that which helps to discover their shame, giving them one Character of the Great Whore. The next ver. 2. gives us two more Characters of her. One is, That the Kings of the Earth have committed fornication with her. They have been drawn in by her, to go a whoring with her after
her Innovations or Inventions. The other is this: And the Inha∣biters of the Earth have been made Drunk with the Wine of her fornication. So that here you see, there is some distinction made between the Great Whore, and those that commit Fornication with her, or are made drunk by her wine. Which helps to clear my attribu∣ting of the Title of the Great Whore, only to their Ruling Hi∣erarchy. For its they that draw others into the Fornication of their Innovations: others are deluded by them, and made drunk by them. Here be two or three work stand need of being opened  1. Who are those Inha∣bites of the Earth. To that   ey are not the Saints  ersation is in Heaven,  expression is Phil  are such as have  the Earth: The
Inventions and Innovations of men, are not Heavenly things, but Earthly, springing from the carnal and earthly Wisdom of mans heart: now these having the chief Foundation of their Re∣ligion standing in the Innovations of men which are earthly, they are the Inhabiters of the Earth. They dwell in the earthly things of mans Wisdom, not in the hea∣venly things of Gods Wisdom, grounded in him, and his truth. And therefore, 2ly. These are fit Subjects to be made Drunk with those Innovations, that is, to be inflamed in their Spirits with a fu∣rious zeal for them: for their Re∣ligion stands in them: And there∣fore no marvel if they be violent like Drunken men, against all that speak against those Innovati∣ons: Yea a  ready with gree∣diness to destroy those that will not embrace them. And that es∣pecially
because, 3ly. Those In∣novations are made like wine to them, and therefore called the Wine of her Fornication. They so agree with the carnal heart of man, that they are as Wine to them: for they nurse them up in a good conceit of their Condition, indulging their carnal hearts with outward observations, and giving them rest therein, while they are Strangers to God, and to the ope∣rations of his Spirit. This repose in outward things, giving ease to, and lulling asleep their Conscience is sweet as Wine to them; and the more, being sweetned with the words of heavenly things put upon them. By the Artifices used about their Innovations, they are so taken, that they become ra∣ging Drunk, or mad upon them: not more humble, more meek and gentle, and tender-hearted, as the mystery of Godliness makes
men: But these become cruelly Drunk, first with the Wine of the Fornication of the Great Whore, and then together with her, drunk with blood, being made hands fit for her to destroy with. Which shews what Spirit is at work un∣der these Innovations. But before I proceed any fur∣ther, I would here advertise the Reader, that I do not look upon all that are counted of their Hier∣archy to be equally concerned, or have an equal share in this great Whoredom; tho I cannot excuse them. For some may be more passive, and carryed along with the stream and strength of the ac∣tive part, who are fierce and vio∣lent, and are the chief enforcers of their Innovations. As when the Prohibition of Marriage was imposed upon their Clergy, ma∣ny of them did greatly withstand it to their power; but were for∣ced
to it by the greater power of the over-ruling part, and made to submit to it against their minds. Such I look upon rather as Cap∣tives than otherwise. And so the case may be with many in other Innovations. But to proceed in the Descrip∣tion and Characters of the great Whore: the Angel took John in∣to the Wilderness, in the Spirit, that there he might see her more fully. Not that the great Whore is in the Wilderness, who sits up∣on many Waters, Peoples mul∣titudes Tongues: but that inti∣mates that such as are led out from her by the Spirit into a solitary Wilderness condition, shall best see her. And indeed they shall best see the Innovations of lesser Whores, who are not in the Whoredom, or involved in the Innovations.
Now what did John see? I saw (saith he) a Woman sit upon a scarlet coloured Beast, full of Names of Blasphemy, having seven heads and ten Horns. Here she is descri∣bed by that which supports her, and over which she ruleth, as one rules over the Beast they sit upon. The Great Whore is a pompous Whore, and sits upon a pompous Beast, a scarlet coloured Beast: that is, an earthly pompous Power; not upon the power of the Spirit, by which the Apostles of Christ were supported, but upon an earth∣ly power, full of blasphemous names against the true power, and the faithful servants of Christ, who abhor the Innovations of men. This is a Beast sutable to the great Whore, and of one Spirit with her; and fortified to uphold her in her large Dominion over Peoples, Multitudes, Nations and Tongues: having seven Heads,
and ten Horns, and what those are the Angel unfolds afterwards. To go on with the Characters of the Woman, vers. 4. And the Woman was arrayed in Purple, and scarlet colour, and decked with Gold, and precious Stones, and Pearls; having a Golded Cup in her hand, full of abominations and filthiness of her Fornication. Here she is described by her Ornaments, and by her Cup which contains her Fornication. Her Ornaments are such as are used by Kings and Potentates of the World, Purple and Scarlet, and Gold, and pre∣cious Stones, not such Ornaments as the Apostles were adorned with, and approved of in the Saints; such as Humility, Meekness, Quiet∣ness, Sincerity, Truth, and such as the Gospel approves of: but such Ornaments as might make her of equal Splendour with the Princes of the World, if not
above them. Doth not the Hie∣rarchy of Rome answer this mag∣nificence? And then she is described by her Cup in her hand which con∣tains the filthiness of her Fornicati∣on. This demonstrates that her Fornication is Spiritual: being con∣tained in a Cup carried in the hand: and that is, the model of her Worship, or composure of her Service, which contains her spiritual Fornication: and going a whoring after her own inventi∣ons. This Cup is a very remarka∣ble Character. 1. It's call'd a Cup, because it contains her Fornicati∣on: and also because out of it she pours forth the Wine of her For∣nication to the inhabiters of the Earth, wherewith she makes them drunk: It contains their Inventi∣ons after which they go a whoring. 2. This Cup is a Golden Cup. It's golden to outward appearance.
Their Outward appearances of Worship are not only glorious to the outward eye, being perform∣ed with great Ceremony, cost and splendour: but also the minds and ears of carnal earthly spirits are dazed with the seraphical expres∣sions, and golden words used therein. 3. This Cup is in her hand. In whose hand? In the great Whores hand: This shews that they that hand this Cup to the People, they are the great Whore. It's in the Womans hand, the great Whores hand. It's framed alrea∣dy, and beautified with all the art they can, and carried in the hand. It's already formed, to be put into the hand of every Servi∣tor that is devoted to their Inno∣vations. Their Worship is not carried in the heart, and spring∣ing from the Spirit of God, ad∣ministred from his Gift, to the comfort and edification of people,
as their Worship did in the Apo∣stles daies: but this is in the hand, and any wicked person can admi∣nister it, or hand it forth. 4 It's full of abominations and filthiness of her Fornication. It's full of Innovations and Inventions of men: which are an abomination to God. And to go after them, is to go a whoring from the Spi∣rit of God, as the Israelites did. They went a Whoring after their own Inventions, Psal. 106.39. Next, we come to the Inscrip∣tion upon the Forehead of the great Whore, vers. 5. which Couples all these together, viz. The great Whore, The Mystery of Iniquity, and Babylon the Great. So that, find one, and you find them all. The Inscription is this, Mystery, Babylon the Great, the Mother of Harlots, and abominations of the Earth. This being writ upon the forehead of the great Whore,
shews that she is all this, in her all this is found: this being as her Crime writ upon her Forehead: or a proper name extant to know her by. Now if you can find out the Mystery of Iniquity by him that Heads it, that sits in the Temple of God (the Church) exalted above all Magistrates; then you have the great Whore also. Or if you can find the great Whore by the Characters given of her, then you have the My∣stery of Iniquity, and Babylon the Great: for they are all co-inci∣dent, being concatinated in one Chain, as the inscription on the great Whores Forehead shews plainly. As for the Words Mystery, and Babylon the Great; seeing I have spoken of them before, I refer to that; and so pass on to the next Character of the great Whore, vers. 6. And I saw the Woman drun∣ken
with the blood of Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus: and when I saw her, I won∣dred with great admiration. Here's a mark of a bloody die, which the great Whore can never wipe off. But the more she en∣deavours to blot it out, by destroy∣ing those that see her guiltiness, the deeper she sets it, and the larger she makes it. Here every one may see, that the great Whore is a bloody Whore. She's drunken with Blood: which significantly expresses her great thirst after the blood of those she kills: so that she swallows down their blood greedily, without remorse, and without all reason, saving that they withstand her Innovations. Where shall we find this bloody drunkenness, so much, as in the bloody raging Massacres, Burn∣ings, and Cruelties which have been acted under the dominion
and power of Rome; and of those who have been infected with her innovations? None like those. And that which heightens this wickedness, is, that she is drunk with the Blood of Saints , that is of holy men, innocent per∣sons, who are of a Righteous life, and good conversation, and truly fear the Lord. Who are also cal∣led Martyrs or witnesses of Jesus , that is, such as bear wit∣ness to Jesus, acknowledging and owning him and his Doctrine, and willing to lose their lives; rather than to deny the truth delivered to us by him, and his Servants. Such as these she kills, because they see her innovations, and cannot stoop to them. That's greatly remarkable also, that her bloody drunkenness is such, as put John to admiration. John lived in times of Persecution, and saw cruelty enough no doubt, being
banished into the Isle of Patmos at that time: But that was not it that put John to an astonishment (as some would have it.) But it was something that was to come to pass afterwards, as the Angel said, Rev. 4.2. I will shew the things which must be hereafter. To shew John a Church (under the simi∣litude of a Woman) so far to go a Whoring from Christ after her own inventions, that she did not spare his most precious Servants, nor any that adhered to them? but shed their Blood in abundance for the sake of her inventions, and innovations, and yet professed her self to be the Spouse, yea, the only Spouse and Church of Christ: I say, to see one so highly pro∣fessing Christ, and yet acting so highly contrary to hisnature, and destroying his Servants, this might indeed make John greatly to wonder with great admiration.
But the tyranny of those present times that John lived in, under the persecuting heathen Emperors, could be no such admiration to him. For its no great admiration to see a known Enemy shed the blood of those he is against. But to profess the highest Loyalty to Christ, and commit the greatest Cruelty against his Children and People, this might put one to a∣stonishment. O Rome! Rome! O backsliding Rome! Who could make John astonished but thee! Who once was a pure Church: but to see thee profess the same Je∣sus or Saviour as formerly, and be so cruelly hard-hearted as to devour the tender Lambs of Jesus, who will rather dye than betray his Doctrine; and also to devour them so abundantly; who would not be astonished at such a dege∣neracy! O repent, repent, be∣fore misery come upon thee.
Another Character of the great Whore followeth Rev. 17.7. and 18. verses. And the Angel said unto me, wherefore didst thou mar∣vel? I will tell the Mystery of the Woman, and of the beast that car∣rieth her, ver. 18. The Woman which thou sawest is that great City which Reigneth over the Kings of the Earth. Or nearer the Greek words thus, which hath a Kingdom above the Kings of the Earth: for the words of the Greek are these,  These words being the interpreta∣tion of the Mystery of the Wo∣man; make it plain, that by Wo∣man is understood, That great Ci∣ty which hath a Kingdom above the Kings of the Earth. Now where shall we find such a City besides Rome, that hath in it such a Domi∣nion, in which all these Chara∣cters of the great Whore are found?
Rome hath a Kingdom above the Kings of the Earth. And the My∣stery of iniquity may say the same? she hath one in it, exalted above all, called God, above all Magi∣strates. So that you may clearly see That this great Whore, and the Mystery of iniquity fall in one with the other: find the one, and you may find the other. This great Whore, this Wo∣man, this great City, is terrible to the Kings of the Earth, hav∣ing a Kingdom above them. For She can strike them with her thun∣der bolts at her pleasure, and un∣throne them, by moving the Waves of the Sea against them, against which there is no with∣standing. To speak plainer, She can make them an execration with her Anathema; and then raise the Waves of the people against them which they cannot with∣stand: and then Surrogate others
to take their Throne. Is not this to have a Kingdom above them? Yea so great a Dominion she hath over them, that she can make them buckle to her pleasure, and wait at her gates, to humble them∣selves at her Feet, as not worthy to kiss her hands. This is to bring them lower, then a King brings his Subjects. For he ad∣mits his Subjects to kiss his hand: But the distance between this great Whore and Emperors is so great, that its enough for them to kiss her Feet. Such power hath this great Whore had as to cause the Son to rise against his Father, to turn him out of his Throne. Henry the fifth, the Son of Henry the fourth, when his Father was struck with the Thunderbolt of Excommuni∣cation by Pope Paschalis 2. and ejected from being Emperor; he rose up against his Father, and
put him in Prison, where with grief of mind he died. And this Henry the fifth his Son declared, that he did not thus persecute his Father out of a desire to Reign; but (Studio obedientia erga sedem Apostolicam) out of a zealous o∣bedience to the Apostolick Seat, (for such titles the great Whore hath arrogated to her self.) This was done about the beginning of the 12th. Century. And in the 13th. Century Pope Innocent the third. Othonem Anathemate ferit, Imperium ei abrogat, omnesque ab ejus obedientia & fide absolvit. He Anathematized Otho, deprived him of the Empire, and absolved all persons from their obedience and fidelity to him. And in Cen∣tury 14. History tells us of Boni∣face 8. that he writ, se effe Domi∣num in temporalibus & Spirituali∣bus in univer so mundo, that is, that he was Lord both in Temporals
and Spirituals in the whole World. And after his Death it was said of him, Hoc modo (sc. moe rore animi) mortuus est Bonifacius ille qui Impe∣ratoribus, Regibus, Principibus, Nationibus, Populis terrorem potius quam religionem injicere conabatur: quique dare regna & auferre, pelle∣re homines ac reducere pro arbitrio animi conabatur. Platin. Thus (that is, with grief of mind) dy∣ed that Boniface who made it his business to imprint terror upon the hearts of Emperors and Kings, &c. Rather than Religion: and who endeavoured to give and take away Kingdoms, to banish and call home, at his pleasure. But the height and Dominion of this great Whore or Popedom is so notori∣ous, that I need not insist further upon it. Thus you see what a one the great Whore is: and how like to her the Popedom is, sitting upon
many Waters, i.e. Peoples, Mul∣titudes, Tongues, Nations; draw∣ing Kings of the Earth to commit Fornication with her, prostrating themselves to her Innovations, or Whoredoms; making also the Inhabiters of the earth Drunk with the pleasantness of her Inven∣tions or Innovations; born up with great power; living in great pomp; carrying the filthiness of her Fornication in her hand, in a golden Cup, very taking to the carnal mind; and bearing upon her Forehead Mystery, thats her name in part, shewing her affini∣ty with the Mystery of Iniquity; one also that makes her self drunk with the plenty of blood of inno∣cent people; and one that hath a Kingdom above the Kings of the Earth. These are enough to know her by. But the Angel still goes further, to make her more fully known
by other things appertaining to the Beast that carries her, which is described by his seven Heads, and ten Horns. His Heads were seven Hills, and also seven Kings or Governments. His Horns were ten Kings. I shall only take notice of that here which is easie for any ordi∣nary Capacity to understand; and add that to the foregoing marks of the great Whore. And by this we may understand the very place where she is chiefly to be found. The seven Heads (said the An∣gel) are seven Mountains on which the Woman sitteth: This is one in∣terpretation of the seven Heads, She sits upon seven Hills. Now it's well known that Rome is scitu∣ated on seven Hills or Mountains. And therefore was known by the name Ʋrbs septicollis, and Septi∣ceps, and , which words
signifi seven Hills, or seven Heads. That's one Interpretati∣on or unfolding of the seven Heads of the Beast that carries the great Whore. The Angel also gives another interpretation of those seven Heads: that both meeting together, they might make the more certain discovery of her. That second interpretati∣on was not then at that time whol∣ly fulfilled, when the Angel gave it: And that still adds more clear∣ness and certainty to the applying of it to Rome. The interpretat∣on is this, And there are seven Kings, five are fallen, and one is, and the other is not yet come  and when he cometh he must continue a while. These seven Kings are: rightly taken by prudent under∣standing men, to be the seven Go∣vernments that Rome hath had, viz. First, Kings, secondly, Con∣suls; thirdly, Dictators; fourth∣ly,
Decemviri; fifthly, Tribunes Which five were fallen in John's time: then One is, said the Angel to John, and that was the Empe∣rors, which made the Sixth, and was standing in John's time. But the other, the Seventh, which was the Popes, is not yet come said he. And when he is come, he must continue a while. How aptly do these things fit Rome, even as a garment fitted to ones back. So that finding all these Characters of the great Whore so apparently in Rome, how can she clear her self from be∣ing that very great Whore? Only this I would have the Reader to mind, that by Rome here I do not understand every individual person in her; but the Ruling Hierarchical power of Rome, which makes the carnal and earthly people drunk with the Wine of her Fornication, and
holds the People of God in Capti∣vity under her. As Jerusalem and Israel was charged with Whoredom in like case of follow∣ing their own inventions, when∣as all in it were not guilty: but God had a precious people in it, who were grieved therewith. So it may be with Rome. And so by Pope, I do not so much un∣derstand every individual Pope, as the Mystery and the power of the Popedom in which they stand. I now pass on from the Hierar∣chy of Rome to the Inhabiters of the Earth, who are a People set on mischief by the Whoredomes o the great Whore. These are a People so intoxicated with the Wine of her Fornication (that is with the Innovations of the great Whore) that like drunken men they are full of quarrel, heady bold out-facers of Truth, haters of
all that stands in the way of their Innovations, and ready with ea∣ger minds to embrew their hands in the blood of righteous people, if their Masters do but call them Hereticks, and set them on; al∣tho they have no other provoca∣tion, or reason to do it, but only because they are against their In∣novations. These are very nu∣merous, so that the great Whore wants not hands to execute her fury upon the innocent Servants of Christ, when she sees a fit time to employ them: And this they are ready to do in loyalty to her Usurped Authority. And there∣fore altho they are not guiltless, yet she is chiefly charged with be∣ing drunk with the blood of the Servants of Jesus. As David was charged with the blood of Ʋriah, because it proceeded from him: So the great Whore standsguilty of all the blood shed in obedi∣ence
and loyalty to her Innovati∣ons. But in a dangerous thing to be  in the hand of there that sight against God, and against'd  simplicity and pu∣sity of his wares, and innocency and fidelity of his Servants. It may go easier with those that are drunk with the Wine of the great. Whores Fornication, than which her that is drunk with blood but I think none that understands the danger, would be in Sodoms use, because it shall be more tole∣table for them, than for some other Cities at the day of Judg∣ment. There is a third sort of People under the Dominion of the great. Whore, whom my Soul longs after; whose Spirits are drawn after the Lord, and who truly fear him; altho their understandings may be captivated under many of her Innovations. These when
they come to see their liberty in the Lord, may say with the Isra∣elites, O Lord our God, other Lords besides thee have had dominion, over us: but by thee only will we made men∣tion of thy name, Isa. 26,  Other Lord have had dominion over ye, to cause  to make mention of thy Name in their superstations waies: but by thee only, even by thy self, and thy direction and assistance will we now henceforth make mention of thy Name. They that have been in bondage under enforced Wor∣ship, when they are made right∣ly sensible of it, will see the do∣minion that other Lords have had over them, will not satisfie; but there will be a cry in their hearts, that he Lord alone may rule over their Conscience and that all their profession of him, or making mention of his name, may proceed from himself: and so shall they worship him in Spirit
and in truth. These may say al∣so with Israel of old, By the Ri∣vers of Babylon there we sat down, yea we wept when we remembred Zion, Psal. 137.1. I know whose case that hath been under lesser Innovations. The heart that tru∣ly fears the Lord, and pants after him, longs after the purity of his ways: and when it gets a glimpse thereof, sits down weeping under all other bondages of humane tra∣ditions and Innovations, finding it self as it were in a Captivity, or banishment from its own Land, which it longs to be at; and that is the enjoyment of the prefence of the Lord, in the purity and simplicity of his ways. Now my Soul and Spirit sim∣pathizes with such as these, breath∣ing to the Lord for their delive∣rance, wheresoever they are, ha∣ving had a fellow-feeling of their Bondage; and I hope deliverance
draws nigh to many. For what is their Captivity, but their Thral∣dom and Bondage under the In∣novations of men? And what shall be their deliverance, but the falling of those Innovations which hold them Captive, and their be∣ing set in the liberty of the Spirit. Though men have built a Tower of their own Inventions, whose top may reach to Heaven, and upon the top of which they pre∣tend to set men into Heaven; yet down again this must tumble. This Babel, this Great Whore, this Mystery of Iniquity, this Mother of Harlots must have a fall: and then that Voice will call to them from Heaven. Come out of her my People that ye be not per∣takers of her Sins, and that ye re∣ceive not of her Plagues, Rev. 18.4. Now what shall be this great fall of Babylon? I answer, if we consider what was the fall of the
Jews, we may partly understand thereby what shall be the fall of Babylon. The Jews fall was their continuing in that which God by Christ Jesus came to put an end to. They fell short of the Grace and Glory that was revealed and came by Jesus Christ, altho they continue a People still. So Baby∣lon the House of Captivity shall fall: Innovations or Inventions of men after which they have gone a Whoring, and under which the Seed of God hath been held in great bondage, these shall have thei  the hearts of men; they shall understandingly see them  hated of the Lord, and to  to the Spirit of God,  the Truth revealed by , and witnessed by  Astles and Pro∣phe  so they shall  in the  being seen and fallen , they shall
strongly be called out of them them by the Spirit of God. For observe, after it is said Babylon the Great is fallen, is fallen, that Voice is uttered, Come out of her my Peo∣ple. For after the great fall of Babylon, there shall yet be a Con∣tinuing in or upholding of her Innovations by some. But Gods people are called out: they that fear God and love his truth shall be called out; and so the rest that remain in them, shall be captiva∣ed themselves thereby, as a Bird in a Cage. For those Inventions and Innovations of men shall be∣come a Habitation of Devils, and a hold of every foul Spirit, and a Cage of every unclean and hatefull d, and that after Babylons great  Rev. 18.2. This fall of Baylon the Great that is, the fall of mens Innovati∣ons shall be no small matter: for it will carry along with it Plagues
and Death, and Famine, and Mourning. The Scarlet coloured Whore, that hath been decked with Gold, and precious Stones, and Pearls, anp lived deliciously, and Reigned in great Pomp, by by the Merchandize of her Inno∣vations, she shall have torment and sorrow, and be pinched of her Deliciousness, when men be∣gin to see the cheat of her Mer∣chandize, and will buy it no more, when they begin to see the Vanity and wickedness of her Innovati∣ons, and will no more buy any of them; then comes her Plagues and Torment, and Sorrow, and Famine, and Mourning. For what is it that hath upheld the Great Whore, but the Merchan∣dize of her Innovations? And these things men shall come to see, and Kings shall see. And when they see it, they shall hate the Whore, and make her Deso∣late and Naked, and shall Eat her
Flesh, and burn her with Fire. Her Innovations are as her very Flesh and Blood, which give her Comeliness and Vigour: if you consume them you put her to tor∣ment, and even eat her Flesh, as it were, and burn her with Fire: and this even those Kings shall do who have given their power un∣to the Beast that carries her, and whom she hath drawn in to com∣mit Fornication with her, Rev. 17.16, 17. And blessed be God who hath put it into the hearts of some Ru∣lers of the Earth, to make void one great Innovation of the Mys∣tery of Iniquity, for the delive∣rance of Gods people, that is, to oppose that persecuting of one a∣nother for Conscience sake, or worshipping God according to their Conscience. This is a great step of Reformation; and the King of Kings make them success∣full therein, and bless their good
Endeavours: and open their eyes yet further, and the eyes of all that are honest hearted, to see still further and further into the Mysteries of his Kingdom, and to embrace them; and also into the Mysteries of Iniquity, to turn from them. Oh! What rejoycing will there be in the Earth, among all that fear God and love his truth, when the Inventions and Innovations of men are cast out, and the sim∣plicity of the Gospel shall be free for all men to walk in! When those Innovations of men that have caused so much bloodshed, shall come to an end, and like a great Milstone shall be cast into the Sea, and be found no more, then will follow the Marriage of the Bride, the Lambs Wife; and Al∣elu. For the Lord God om∣nipotent signeth, Rev. 19.6, 7.
A POST-SCRIPT, to those that are Members or Ʋpholders of the Great Whore. THE Lord seeks not the De∣struction of people, but that they shou'd repent of the evil of their ways and be preserved: and that's the desire of him who hath writ these things. Therefore his advice to them that find them∣selves included in humane Inno∣vations is this, to humble them∣selves under the mighty hand of God, and lay down what they find to be contrary to his Coun∣sels; left they suffer in upholding
that which God will consume and destroy. For tho single persons cannot reform the degenerated State of things, yet they may re∣form themselves. The Pope may reform himself; a Cardinal may reform himself, by withdrawing himself from that he sees evil, and in humility of Spirit submitting himself to the Counsels of God, and simplicity of the Gospel, lay∣ing aside the Innovations of men. The Lords pleasure is, that man should rather be preserved than destroyed. I wrold have healed Babylon, (saith he:) Then if she be not healed, where lies the fault? Is not her Destruction of her self? Oh! that you could see the evils that are introduced into the profession of Christianity by the Wisdom of men, and de∣spise the World and the Glory thereof, and exaltation in the Earth, in comparison of an im∣mortal
Crown of Glory which fadeth not as Earthly glory doth! How much better a purchase would you obtain, than the earth∣ly fading transitory momentany glory of this world! And no man hath run himself so far from the Lord, but that there may be a returning, except he deny the Lord that bought him. They that were the greatest Transgres∣sors in the Churches of Asia were advised to repent; and threatned if they did not: which implies that the mercies of God were rea∣dy to receive them, if they did repent. O return, return to the purity and simplicity of the Gos∣pel, as it was in the Primitive times of the Apostles: and lay aside all these separating Inventi∣ons and Innovations of men, which divide between Christians and Christians; that we may come into Unity as at the first. What!
is Christ divided? No certainly, he is One, and his Doctrine is One. Its the Device and Do∣ctrines of men that divie. O what Acclamatis of Jw will there be among all that love the Lord Jesus Christ in truth, when the separating Inventions and tra∣ditions of man are cast forth! This is the great fall of Babylon over which the Saints and Servants of God shall sing Alelujah. But the Spirit of God seems to speak pro∣phetically of Babylon, that she will not be healed, saying of Ba∣bylon of old, we would have hea∣led Babylon, but she is not healed. And I think there is little ground to expect that so great a Society of men, so strongly conjoyned in a Mystery of Innovations, can make a publique Reformation of them∣selves together; because its most likely that the greater number of them will be for maintaining their
earthly Interest, and worldly Glory, that they have in their Kingdom of Innovations: there∣fore the Lord calls to particular persons to withdraw, saying, Come out of her my People, that ye be not partakers of her Sins, and that ye receive not of her Plagues, Rev. 18.4. For let her be as strong as she can, yet she hath to deal with one that is stronger. Strong is the Lord God who judgeth her; so that she cannot avoid his Stroke. Therefore let all that fear the Lord come out of her; come out of the Inventions, Innovations, or Tra∣ditions of men, into the simpli∣city and sincerity of truth, where you shall find the Comfortable presence and power of the Lord going before you, and as a Lamp enlightning your paths, that you may follow him in safety, and sa∣tisfaction to your Souls, as he leads and goes before you. . FINIS,
Books Printed and Sold by Thomas Northcott, in George-Yard, in Lumbard-street. Folio. ISaac Penington's works, price 12. s. Samuel Fisher's Works, price 12 s. Francis Howgil's Works, price 10 s. Quarto. Robert Barclay's Apology for the true Christian Divinity, as the same is held forth and Preach∣ed by the People called in scorn Quakers, price 4 s. George Foxe's New-England Fire∣brand quenched, price 4 s.
Hugh Cloaks Call from Sin to ∣liness of Life, pric.  d. An Account of the Suffrings of Thomas Briggs. 4 d. ½. George oex's Testimony to Ma∣stere of Ships and Seamen, 1 d. ½. Thomas Laythes Excreise of the Spi∣it in Spiritual things, James Parke's Epi to Friends, 1 d. . Robert Sandand's pistles of Love, 2 d. . A Journal of the Travels of Wil∣liam Caton, 6 d. Octavo. William Pen's no Cross no Crown, 2 s. George Keith's Immediate Reve∣lation, 2 s. 8 d. —His Divine immediate Reve∣lation, 1 s. 2. d. —His way to the City of God described, 1 s.
—His Fundamental Truths of Christianity, 8 d. —His Trow Christ owned, 4 d. —His Rector Corrected, 8 d. —His Truths Defence, 10 d. E. Bathurst's Vindication of Truth, 8 d. William Shewen's True Christians Faith and Experience, 1 s. Steghen Crisp's Epistle to Friends concerning presentand succeed∣ing Times, 2 d. Robert Barclay's Epistle of Love, 2 d. —His Possibility and necessity of inward and immediate Re∣valation, 3 d. —His Carechism and Conseffi∣on of Faith, 9 d.
John Field's, and Richard Scoar∣ver's Friendly Advice in the Spi∣rit of Love, &c. 1 d. Twelves. George Foxe's Instructions for Reading, Writing of true Eng∣lish 6 d. Gramatista, or the young Grama∣rian, being a very useful Spel∣ling Book for Children, to which is added the form of Bills, Bonds and Indentures, 6 d. Also Bibles of several sorts, and Testaments, and many other sorts of Books.
