T1784 E110_5 99873157 125616
Tom NASH his Ghost. To the three scurvy Fellowes of the upstart Family of the Snufflers, Rufflers and Shufflers; the thrice Treble-troublesome Scufflers in the Church and State, the onely Lay Ecclesi-Ass, I call GENERALLISSIMO'S. Being like Jobs 3. Comforters, or the Churches 3. Anti-Disciples, the Clergies 3. Persecuters, the States 3. Hors-leeches, the Divels 3. Chaplaines; namely, the Anabaptist, the Li∣bertine, and the Brownist. Written by Thomas Nash his Ghost, with Pap with a Hatchet, a little revived since the 30. Yeare of the late Qu. Elizabeths Reigne, when Martin Mar-Prelate was as mad as any of his Tub-men are now. Printed first at Yorke, and since re-printed at London. 1642.
Tom NASH his Ghost. I Am a Ghost, and Ghosts doe feare no Lawes; I Nor doe they care for popular Applause: I liv'd a Poet poore, long time agoe; And (living a poore Poet) I dy'd so. The thirtieth yeare of blest Eliza's Reigne I had a yerking, sirking, jerking veine; In those dayes, we had desperate madmen heere, Who did the Queene, State, Church and Kingdome jeere▪ And now a Crew are up as wise as those Who doe all Rule and Goverment oppose. In those dayes I did bring those men in frame; And now my Ghost is come to doe the same. Their Leaders were cal'd Martins; but I call These fellowes Swallowes, they would swallow all. I then did gall their Galls, and spight their spight, I made the Nests of Martins take their flight; But first they had disperst their fond opinions, In sundry places of the Queenes Dominions, Which (like Impostumes) not well cur'd at first, Corrupted ever since, doth now out-burst. Wherfore my ayery Ghost shall undertake Once more to try a perfect Cure to make; For (being now iuvisible, a Spirit) I cut through th' Ayre, and in the Earth can ferrit, And in an Augure hole my selfe can hide, And heare their knaveries and spie unspide. My Lines are sharp, but charitie's my ground, My ayme is to conforme not to confound, But if my labour prove to be in vaine, My Ghost shall (whence it came) returne againe.
TOM NASH HIS GHOST. APPEARING To the Anabaptist, the Libertin, and the BROWNIST. IT were a troublesome and tedious Busines for a generall Counsell (with the help of all the Vniversities) to give these whom I write to, corresponden Epithetes, Names, Titles, and Tittle-tattles that may be su∣table to their Educations and continuall practise; for as when Monopolies and Pro∣jects did oppresse and molest this Kingdome like swarmes of Caterpillers; in which uniust designes too many crafty com∣panions did abuse the Kings name, in playing the Knaves, to the mighty and intollerable generall iniury of his Majestie, and all his Subiects: so these Locusts are crawl'd out of the bottomlesse Pit, an under the blessed name of God they doe play the Divels incarnate.
It is to be wondred at, what wondrous paines they take to doe wickedly; how their unholy and crooked imaginations have pumped into their impious fancies the false conceptions of some vertuous matter; then are they in extreame paine and travell till they are delivered from the abortive Issue of their addle Brains: for which (although they have no accep∣tance from God, nor thanks from good men (but rather ha∣tred from all) yet out their stinking stuffe must, or the musty Verse must breake or crack all the hoopes, or the Divell per∣haps may want his due if authority be not reviled against, and a long scismaticall Oration hyppocratically stretcht out to the Rabble of their disobedient and unlick'd Auditors, who out of their deepe ignorance, doe extoll the vapourous mat∣ter, with a wine-drawne speech and lowting courtesie, blesse them for that dayes exercise, in inveighing so vehemently and bitterly against all Rule and Government, in Church and State; when indeed his admired mouth better deserved the help of Doctor Executioner, that hee might wipe it with a hempen wispe. Their Tongues have been the Wedges their Heads the Bee∣tles, and their Pens the Axes that have split, rent and cloven all our blessed peace, content and happinesse which we lately inioyed: their Books have beene shot (like Bolts) whereby this Kingdomes disgrace is not only overspread over it selfe; but also our dishonour is scattered over the face of all Chri∣stendome; and though they be so ignorant that they cannot dispute with a Sexton; yet they will take upon them to dis∣place Bishops and learned Divines, and place in their roomes Weavers and Wyer-drawers. But the wisedomes of these Martinists, will answer, that Bishops have beene erronious, negligent proud, contentious, covetous, uncharitable, ambitious, &c. all which is granted,
but it is not granted that all Bishops have been so (nor at least) so bad as these fellowes would make them) as men are men, so men are subiect to error and failings: if some great men in high and eminent places have done amisse, doth it stand with your witlesse reasons quite to overthrow and cast downe their high Callings, Functions and necessary Offices: some Iudges perhaps have done corruptly; ergo, wee will have no more Iudges: you may better argue, that many Separatists are malicious or ignorant Knaves, and therefore wee would have no more Separatists. This were to be as wise, as he that pul'd downe his house, because there was one old rotten post in it, or that all your Tribe should have no easier cure for the Tooth-ach, but by knocking out your braines: No, no, my friends (a farre off) there is no doubt but if the State were settled, (which by your Sectaries have too much disturb'd) there are (under God) Parliamentall Chyrurgions and Phy∣sitians that with his Royall Maiesties most humble, hearty, loyall and all desired assistance and protection, would soone recover this almost gangrean'd Church and Common-weale to its former health, and most renowned reputation and dig∣nitie. I would wish these shuttle-heads that desire to rake in the embers of Rebellion, to give over blowing the Coales too much, lest the sparkes flee in their faces, or the ashes choake them: some of them have made such hot worke already with tutoring their Tutors; that their owne lips are burnt: It is well known that their magnified Teachers have three severall times in the presence of God taken their Oaths, wherein they have vowed all Canonicall obedience, and they ought to ob∣serve the said oathes, till such time as the wisedome of that power and authority which ordained these oathes doe alter or brogate the same as occasions may requie. But though they
seemed constantly to sweare obedience to those venerable E∣dicts of the Church; yet it is found that their humble sub∣mission was but dissembling intrusion; and now they are possest of their Pulpits, they take great care that no learned conformable Preacher shall come there at any time, for feare that if truth come once to light, then their Cake will bee dough, and they being once discovered to their Auditors (es∣pecially their good Dames) may happen to want their pud∣ding, Bacon, with other good cheere, besides some other cour∣tesies at Conveticles, Thus, when these extraordinary qualified Theologues are mounted in their Thrones, a Popish Priest can hardly out∣doe him in strange postures, as in lifting up the purenesse of the whitest whitenesse of his eyes; then marke how hee dis∣playes his armes as if he were swimming; also the terrible as∣sault and battery that the poore cushion endures, the haukings, hemmings, hummings, coughings, spittings (with other Paren∣thesis while there is more matter a pumping) besides the ter∣ble thundring voyce against our Church-Lyturgie, although they doe know that they lye, and that that Booke was appro∣ved of by the learned Calvin and all the reverend Fathers of the blessed Reformation in King Edwards Reigne. That five martyr'd Bishops, (namely, Arch-bishop Cranmer, Bishop Ridley, Bishop Latimer, Bishop Hooper, Bishop Farrar, with many more godly men and glorious Martyrs, (whom the Pa∣pists most cruelly burnt and persecuted; yet they all at their very deaths did acknowledge our Church-Liturgie, or Com∣mon-prayer Booke, and sealed their faiths with their bloods, by the Papist Tyranny; and is it possible that any should be so shamelesse as to say that Booke is Popish now The said Booke was supprest in Q. Maries Reigne because it was not Popish: The said Booke was not Popish in all the
happy Reigne of Q. Elizabeth, nor was it esteemed either Popish or Romish in all the Reigne of King Iames: in both the times of these three mighty Princes (of ever-blessed me∣mory) and till within these three or foure yeares, there hath scarcey beene heard of any learned or Religious minded Pro∣testant that did ever hold that Booke to be stuft with Romish Raggs of Popery, although some things in it may be amended, and somethings quite omitted. But you have such nice stomacks that nothing will downe with you except it be sawc'd with disobedience and conten∣tion; you being such odd sellowes whom Learning, Witt, sence or Reason can by no meanes satisfie. Whips are for slaves and not swords, and it is fit that such as wisedome can∣not satisfie, should have their mouths bung'd up with ieeres, will nothing agree with your appetites, or relish well in your pallates, but the bald-rib of a Bishop, or the iole of a Iudge? truely I hold it better that some of you were taken away with Gregories Voyder; the Reason is, there are Caps with foure corners, and those you distast; there are creatures to bee met in one corner, hold there; and there is a Tree neere Padding∣ton with three corners; but no more of that (I pray) though it is necessary that some of you should escape no worse. I am so cleare-sighted that I can see through the very veines and sinnewes of your Consciences; for your Religions you may (many of you) cast Crosse and Pile, and for your iust dealing you may play at my Sow ha's Pigg'd. Therefore it is wholsome for the times that such Cocks as you should be let blood in the Combe. It is a marvell that most of your perverse Sects have not wry mouthes, for very few of you do speak right at any time; but out of the concupiscence of your Consciences, and the Learning you are indued withall in Crooked-Lane Lattin,
hath got you with child with Rebellion; and being with child you long to swallow Churches, and devoure Authority, but you will be told one time or other that there is some odds be∣twixt Learning and Libelling. I know some that will doe their ill-good will to outlaw my Soule for writing this, and they wil serve an execution of dam∣nation upon me, but if I be aware of their comming I will meete them with such a powder that shall make their bones to rattle in their Skins like 3. blew beanes in a blew bladder rattle bladder rattle. And for a conclusion, It is as lawfull, for honnest men by either speaking or writing to make the malicious Facts and Acts of Knaves knowne, as it is for Knaves to slaunder and abuse honest men; and most certaine it is that the Leaders of these Factions doe know they are out of the way, and would be glad to returne againe (were it not for some worldly re∣spect) for which causes they must impudently goe on, accor∣ding to the old Proverb, over-shooes, over Bootes. FINIS.
