T3135 E136_7 R8756 99873386 156466
The Truest, most happy, and joyfull NEWES THAT EVER CAME FROM IRELAND: BEING SENT OVER IN A LETTER, and read in the Honourable House of Com∣mon, Februarie 29. 1641. Relating the renowned Victory of the Protestant Party, in Repelling the Rebels from Dublin, under the Commands of the Earl of Ormond, Sir Charles Coot, and Sir Simon Harcourt. With the Noble Service of Captain Thomas Stenvile, near to the Town of Trohedagh. As also, the Apprehension of MacBrian, Con Ma∣genis at Care, Rory Magwire at the Town of Clogham, and others who are principall Conspirators and Actors in the Rebellion. The three Commanders afore-mentioned having (according to the late Proclamation set forth by the Lord Justices of Dublin) six hundred pounds a man for the Apprehension of those three Rebels. Mar. 3. London. Printed for William Reynor. 1641.
THE TRUEST, MOST Happie, and Jovfull Newes, that ever came from IRELAND. LOng have tyrannicall insolencie of the Rebels in Ireland exalted over the liberties, lives, and Con∣sciences of the Protestants: and hath hitherto continued so cruell, bloudy, and inhumane, that it supifies almost amaze ment it self: and withall, hath endan∣gered the hazard of the Kingdome, But although they have triumphed thus in the continuation of their barbarous in∣humanity. Yet the All-seeing eye of the Almighty, whose impartiall Justice will not permit nefarious deeds to sleep in impunity, the omnipotency (I say) of the same eye hath frowned upon the Rebellious proceedings of those savage
miscreants, which causeth no onely a∣lacrity in the hearts of all, but also to heaven, for so just an overthrow. Their repulse was thus, as shall be subsequent∣ly declared. The Citie of Dublin was supposed to have bin in great perill, being dange∣rously invironed, and begirt with the enemy both by Sea, and Land: Yea, more∣over there were divers Letters sent from Westchester, directed to the House of Commons, and read; whose meaning did strengthen the former suspitiou: for they did intimate that Dublin was so circumvolved with the enemy, that it was almost thought to be destitute ef Re∣lief: Then it was forthwith Ordered by the House, that present Aid should be immediately raised, and sent thither with great expedition, for fear if they should procrastinate the businesse, any danger might ensue, Hereupon the Commission to presse (both for Land and Sea-men) did issue
forthwith to His Majesties Officers. But in the mean time the Protestants ga∣thered a head together, and unanimous∣ly consulted to have a skirmish with the Rebels, and so to relieve the City of Dublin. The Earl of Ormond, Sir Charles Coot, and Sir Simon Harcourt mustred up their forces, and marched couragiously against them: whereupon at their first first Onset, there was a hot fray on both sides, till at length Captain Tho∣mas Stanvile came with three hundred men afresh, and then they slew many of the Rebels, and made them recant, some fled, others hid themselves: but still they followed them, slaying a great number, rooting them from one Town to another: and so they rook Mac Brian Prisoner, and driving them still forward, they took Con Magenis at Care, and at the Town of Clogham they took Kory Magwire all Prisoners, and committed them to the Castle in Dub∣lin.
And there was (according to the  Proclamation set forth by the Lord Ju∣stices of Dublin gven to all ingenerall both English and Irish) given to those Commanders that apprehended those three six hundred pounds a man. So that hereby Dublin is made free at this pre∣sent from any enemy, to the great com∣fort and consolation of those worthy Members that are now Fathers of our Country. We hope likewise, that by the auxili∣ary assistance of Almighty God, that when our King and Parliament shall be graciously pleased to send more aid thither, that we shall subdue the barba∣rous rage of those Rebels with facility. In the mean time, we have just cause to pray for the propitious successe of those, who are there already arrived: that God would so animate them with valour and courage, that they may un∣dantedly stand for the defence of his holy Gospell, and propagation of his divine Name: That they be so strong∣ly
armed with the true faith of Christ, that withall they should become more propense, and ready to oppose all those enemies, that shall dare r presume to derogate the least title therefrom. God grant that all our battles may prove as fortunate, and successive as this hath, and then we doubt not but we shall become tr ly victorious: That the Pro∣testant Religion do not thus initiate, and be first ascribed with the Chara∣cters of blood: That the prosperous securitie of the British Nation, be not overwhelmed with the turbulent bar∣barism of those Wolvish Rebels. That the heart of our gracious Soveraign may be consolated with more active alacritie: That the heaven-guided Par∣liament may be likewise comforted and not to receive such strange obstacles, and dangerous obstructions to their quotidian proceedings: That lastly, the honour of God may be advanced to the great security of the Realm. FINIS.
