T996 E160_29 99859794 156930
Regulated ZEAL. OR, An earnest request to all Zea∣lously affected Christians, to seeke the desired Reformation in a peaceable way. Shewing further, in severall particulars, wherein they are offensive who disturb the PEACE of the CHVRCH. If it bee possible, as much as lyeth in you, live peaceably with all men. ROM. 12.18. BY W. T.homason LONDON, Printed for Samuel Rand. 1641.
Regulated Zeale. ZEALE for Gods glorie, and love of the Truth, are two such transcendent excellencies, that whosoever will not for the advancement there∣of, (being lawfully called thereto) most wil∣lingly ingage both his life and fortunes, deserves not the name of Man: but yet it necessarily concernes (as the times now stand) every good Christian to know, that good acti∣ons may be ill done; as chyse meats may be slovenly hand∣led, and so mard in the dressing: in a word, things are ne∣ver well done, that are not orderly done, Order being their beautie. The businesse I drive at is this: The generall crie (at this day) of the Kingdome is Reformation: and in truth this is now a verie seasonable and blessed desire; and what heart is not full of it? But I wish from my soule, we were as right in the way to that long'd-for redresse, as we are desirous of that end But I feare there are too many, who whilst in their over-vchement, and unwarrantable pro∣ceedings, they seeke to quicken this Reformation, they lay stumbling-blocks in the way, and involve it with more dif∣ficulties. Zeale, where its well ordered, is a precious Diamond: there is no service pleasing to God without it; but yet, where it is not qualified with knowledge on the one side, and a cal∣ling on the other, too much zeale may prove dangerous, I
wish we could not experimentally say, scandalous, both to Church and Common-wealth. It is an undenyable truth, that every man in his place should endeavour a Reformati∣on, every man should pray for it, everie man should per∣swade to it: but no private man may breake the peace of God and the King for it, no man may swagger for it, or cause tumultuous and seditious meetings for it; much lesse overthrow the frame of all Government and Order in the Church for it: For private men to labour the redresse of publick grievances in a peaceable way, as by their humble Petitions to the seat of Justice, I say, happy are those men that doe it: but for such to forget their stations, to in∣volve themselves into the mysteries of Government, and to make themselves Reformers, where their place is to in∣forme; I thinke the Lawes neither of God nor man will warrant it. It would make a mans heart to bleed to see what divisions we have in our Church, what differences, even to separations, what distractions, what disgracefull handling one of another, to the shame and reproach of our Church, and derision of our adversaries, and all this for poynts not fundamentall; yea, for Circumstances and Ceremonies, which are not parts, but appurtenances to Gods worship. What comfort can such men reap of their zeale, who living in a Church, which doth heartily desire a Reformation of her blemishes, and at this very present is seriously imploy∣ed in the pursuit thereof, yet will not tarrie the leisure of their Governours, but will snatch the sword out of the hand of Justice, and have a Reformation of their owne devising; certainly such men pull downe more by their impatience, than they build by their zeale. Is it now a time to be divided amongst our selves, when all our forces united are little enough to withstand the com∣mon adversarie? Alas those seditious oppugners of the
publick weale little know, and lesse consider, how grievous∣ly they wound the cause of Religion, and how many they wrong at once: They are offensive to God in the contempt of his ordinance, who commands every soule to be subject to the higher powers: they are injurious to the State they live in, whose power they despise, and Government they trample under foot: they bring a blot upon the Ministerie, who suffer through their sides, and are perhaps by some malevolent spirits (though unjustly) censured as the sedi∣tious projectors of their unwarrantable insolences. And lastly, that which is seriously to be considered on, and I would to God they would take it more to heart, they ren∣der us a gazing stock to all Christian Churches, and make us the derision of all that are round about us. I would counsell these unquiet spirits, but to walke by the same light which themselves set up for others: let them regulate themselves by the rule of the Scriptures: What one thing is there that the holy Scripture doth more aboundantly insist upon than this, That we should keep the unitie of the Spirit in the bond of peace? with what vehemency of Spirit doth St. Paul urge it? If there be any consolation in Christ, (saith he) if any com∣fort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any compassion and mercie, fulfill my joy, that you be like minded, having the same love, being of one accord, and of one judgement, that no∣thing be done through contention or vaine glorie. Phil. 2.1. And againe, let us follow those things which concerne peace, and wherewith one may edifie another. Rom. 14.19. And the Apostle doth urge the same so farre, that hee exhorts all good Christians, to presse on uncessantly towards this mark, even untill they find an utter impossibility of ob∣taining the same: If it be possible (saith he) and as much as in you lyes, live peaceable with all men: Nay our Saviour himselfe, when he departed the world, left as a Legacie
to his Disciples this blessing of peace; My peace I leave with you, My peace J give unto you: And excellent to this purpose is that of St. Cyprian, Qui pacem Christi rumpit, adversus Christum facit: That man which breaks the ligaments of Christian peace, fights against Christ himselfe. Cypr. de unit. Eccles. Runne over the whole volume of the Word of God, and and you shall not finde any grace or vertue whereunto God hath vouchsafed greater honor, than to this of peace: God Himselfe is stiled, the God of peace; Christ, the Prince of peace; the Word, the Gospell of peace; his Angels, the messen∣gers of peace; his Ministers, the reconcilers to peace. So ex∣ceedingly God delights in it, so strongly he pleads for it; yea, and blesseth them that make it: Blessed, saith our Savi∣our, are the peace-makers; and he promiseth them a sweet blessing indeed, for they shall be called the Sons of God. Alas then, by what name shall I terme those, who for things of smaller moment, for Ceremonies, will rend the Church, shake off the yoak of obedience, and as farre as their indea∣vours will extend, reduce all Government into a confused Chaos? Oh that such minded Christians would sit downe a while and commune with their owne hearts; Am I now in Gods way? where is my warrant? what ground have I? where is my Commission? is the cause I now undertake, of that weight and consequence that it will beare me out, be∣ing a private man, in these boysterous proceedings? We all agree that the Scriptures are the perfect rule of our faith, wee all accord in the fundamentall grounds of Religion; may I then for things that are meerely appurtenances, and no parts of Gods Worship, make a tumult in the Church of God, and trouble the peace thereof? God is the God of Order, and shall I be the Author of Confusion? God would not come to Eliah in a Whirle-wind, but in a quiet and
still voyce; and shall I breake out in thunder? But some per∣chance may object, the cause we stand for is Gods, we strive to vindicate Gods service from the defilements of Poperie, the Ceremonies of our Church are the rags of Antichrist. I answer, who hath given you a calling to this imployment? I am sure the Apostle gives private men a better direction; namely, to study to be quiet, and meddle with their owne bu∣nesse, and to see that all things be done in love. It is true that libertie is given to everie Church to use what Ceremonies they please, that agree to the generall rule, and tend to edificati n and decencie: but libertie is not left to everie one in the Church, that he may set up, and pull stowne, what he will. This must bee left to the wise∣dome of the Governours onely, who (if they finde the Ce∣remonies of the Church not conduceable to that end for which they did intend them) may, and ought also to bee as ready to give them a dismission, as they were willing to receive them. If everie one in the Church of Creet might set up what his list, to what purpose did St. Paul leave Ti∣tus there, to set in order the things that were wanting. Tit. 1.5. Order is the usher of peace, and if every one should rule, it would be no vertue to obey. It is a happy conjunction be∣tweene Prince and people, where Unitie and Order knits their severall hearts into one. The Apostle St. Paul puts us in minde of one body, one Spirit, one Lord, one faith, one Baptisme, one God, one Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in us all. Ephes. 4.3,-6. De∣claring to us, by this multiplication of Vnities (as a most reverend Father of our Church observes upon this place) that the knots whereby we are tyed together, are both in number more, and of far greater moment, then that mat∣ters of smaller consequence should dissever us. And there∣fore leaving Church government to those it doth concerne,
our dutie is (I speake of private persons) to stand fast in one spirit, with one minde, striving together for the faith of the Gospell. Philip. 1.27. and if we passe these limits wee disturbe the state, and in it our selves, since in the quiet and prosperitie of our Church, consists both our weale and safe∣tie. But what need we many perswasions to peace & love one with another, when we have Gods owne example for our rule? For did wee with a serious eye look upon the face of these times, and well consider our strange irregularities, and sinfull provocations both in Church and State on the one side, and Gods mercifull dealing towards us, even to ad∣miration and astonishment on the other, wee could not but acknowledge, that we have infinite cause to spend the whole stock of our time (yea though it could be doubled) in breathing out praises and thanksgiving to God, rather than to squander it away in matters of strife. How strange a deliverance did God, not long since, vouchsafe us, when the Sword, accompanyed with blood and death, was en∣tred into our Coasts, which had not Gods over-ruling hand seasonably prevented, had undoubtedly devoured us? What matchlesse Conspiracies hath hee revealed unto us, which it was thought were laid so deep, that they could never have seen the light, but that it appeared, hee that was higher than highest regarded it, and there be higher than they? Now what shall we say to these things? what shall we repay God for these blessings? we see with our eyes, and our hearts may rejoyce in it, the Lord hath had thoughts of peace towards us, and shall wee now have thoughts of contention one against another? God hath wrought won∣derfully for our safetie; and shall we in the want of a com∣mon enemie divide our selves into parties? God forbid. The Prophet David saith, (and our experience hath found it true) that God hath pleasure in his people: why then should not his people delight in him againe; and in him, and
for his sake delight in one another. Its strange to read in some places of Scripture what emphaticall expressions God hath given us of his love: how hee doth beseech us to be reconciled. 1 Cor. 5. how he even waits to have mer∣cie on us Esay. 30.18. yea, and wonders at our back wardnes. Esay 59 16. And how sweetly doth the Lord reveale himself to his people the Jewes. I will rejoyce over them (saith hee) to do them good and wil plant them in this land assuredly with my whole heart, and with all my soule. Jer. 32.41. O how con∣vincing and prevalent should this compassion of God bee with us, even to enforce us to love and compassionate one a∣nother? Happy were it, if they would advisedly consider of this Gods gracious indulgence to his people, who for Cir∣cumstantiall matters, which God hath neither commanded nor forbid, are ready to contend, even to bloud. But let me not be mistaken, it is not my intent here to patronize & de∣fend the Ceremoniall Ordinances of our Church, but wish rather, since they are of that nature, that they may be safely abrogated without any offence to God, but cannot (as the times now manifest) be so safely retained, without breach of peace) that for the quiet, and peace sake of our Church, they were returned into the bosome of that Church from whence we had them: that so we might all as one man, serve the Lord in the purity of his Ordinances, with a cheerefull & peaceable minde. But yet so long as they stand established by the hand of Authoritie, its every private mans portion to obey: Onely thus far extends the duty of us all; if private men, to pray zealously; if Ministers, to preach zealously; if Magistrates, to endeavour zealously, that we may with one heart and soule keep the unitie of the Spirit in the bond of peace. And when all this is done, if those whom the care & charge of Reformation shall concerne neglect their duties, the sin will be their owne, and private men are free. FINIS.
