V120 E698_7 99866089 166541
A TRUE BREVIATE OF THE Great Oppressions and Injuries done to EVAN VAUGHAN Post-Master of IRELAND; By EDMOND PRIDEAUX, Esq Attorney Generall, And Post-Master of ENGLAND, since March, 1648. I. THe said Evan Vaughan having been for fif∣teen years last past Post-Master of Dublin, by the appointment of Mr. Witherings, for∣merly Post-Master-General of England, af∣terwards by Mr. Burlamachi; which place in the year 1642. was confirmed to him, by the said Mr. Prideaux upon certaine Ar∣ticles. In the year 1646. the aforesaid Vaughan was for∣ced to come for England, having lost all his meanes in Ireland, for subsisting; but in May 1647. Colonel Michael
Jones, and the rest of the Commissioners for Ireland went over, with whom the said Vaughan went from London, upon the former Articles with Master Prideaux, as Post-Master of Dublin, and continued so till April, 1649. At which time, the said Mr. Prideaux unjustly discharged him of his said Imployment, because he would not abate him Twenty shillings a week of his Sallary, formerly allowed him by Mr. Witherings, and Mr. Burlamachi, and granted him upon the said Articles by the said Mr. Prideaux; which is ready to be produced under his Hand and Seal. II. The said Mr. Prideaux in pursuance of his covetous ends which the said Vaughan would not submit unto, did out of Spleen to the said Vaughan, maliciously suggest to his Ex∣cellency the Lord Generall, then Lord Lieutenant of Ire∣land, many false things to the said Vaughans disadvantage; endeavoring to destroy him in his good name, and thereby to deprive him not only of his then place and livelihood, but also of his Excellencies favor, to obtaine any other way to live; knowing that being done, hee could ruine him at his pleasure: And in order thereunto, did contra∣ry to his owne knowledge, and the Certificates of Col. Jones, and divers other Officers of the Army in Ireland, and Marchants of Dublin, on the said Vaughans behalfe, charge the said Vaughan with unfaithfulness in the man∣agement of his trust, making use of that pretence to out the said Vaughan, in regard he would not yeeld to his covetous desire, to abate the said Twenty shillings a week of his Sallary; Notwithstanding, the said Mr. Prideaux comings-in then, was above Four thousand pounds a year raised for him, by the industry and labour of the said Evan Vaughan, and the rest of the Post-Masters of England, whom hee also assured by his promise, That every man should
reap the benefit of his own labour, and to bee their pro∣tector against all wrongfull opposers on that behalfe. III. The said Evan Vaughan having, though to his great expences in many journeys, cleared himself of those scan∣dals, and confirmed his Excellencies favor toward him, by evidencing the Equity of his Complaint, and making ap∣pear his Innocency, as to those things laid to his charge: His Excellency therupon promised to procure him his place again, with all profits thereto belonging. Whereupon the said Evan Vaughan came to London again, in order to obtain Mr. Prideaux good will therein, that he might be free from further vexations, and presented him with an account of 36 pounds and 18 shillings, or-thereabouts, due to him for service upon account, according to the a∣foresaid Articles, which he denied to accept of; and told him, if he would give him such an account, as he would approve of, he would accept of it, and would let the said Vaughan enjoy his place again, according to the former Articles, saying, I see you have the Lord Lieutenants good will: Upon which account, to buy Mr. Prideaux favor, the said Vaughan was forced to make himself debtor to him Forty pound and nine shillings; so he gave him near Eighty pound to keep himself out of his place, as it did after∣wards appear: For when he came to Dublin, another had a Commission from Mr. Prideaux for executing his Office or place in Dublin aforesaid. IV. Afterward the said Vaughan, by Petition made his case known to the Lord General, then at Cork, whereupon His Excellency granted him a Commission to be Post-Master General of Ireland; being fully satisfied of his Fidelity
and Abillity to discharge that place, and wrote a Letter to that purpose, in his behalf, to the Councel of State, who did also approve of, and confirmed his said Commis∣sion. V. The said Master Prideaux upon an Order from the Councell of State, did Article with the said Vaughan for maintaining two Post Barques to be imployed between Milford-Haven and Ireland; and then declared before the Committee, that he would defray and pay the charge of the Post Barques, so long as he should continue Post-Master, and promised to advance the said Vaughan a Hun∣dred pound: But afterwards, Mr. Prideaux being confirm∣ed by the Councel in his place, would not let the said Vaughan have a peny, unless he would give him a Bond and Security; who being ready to leave the Towne, and wanting money, he was forced to do; but after the Bond was sealed, he gave him onely a Note to receive Nine and fifty pound eleven shillings, and stopt the Forty pound and nine shillings, which he pretended he owed him; notwith∣standing, he had kept the said Vaughan most injuriously out of his place, and put him to the expence of many jour∣neys, to the hazard of his life, both by Sea and Land, and to the impoverishing of Himself, Wife, and Fa∣mily. VI. Having been forced to yeeld to his Oppression, in that particular, the said Vaughan nevertheless went chearfully a∣bout the States business, & setled the two Post Barques at Milford, and returned Certificates of the same to the Com∣mittee of Scotch & Irish Affairs; which service was well ap∣proved of by them; & when he arrived in Ireland, did settle
what stages he could in Munster: And afterwards got leave to go from the Head quarters to Dublin, purposely to settle that place in order to the Lord Deputy Iretons command; but when he came thither, the said Mr. Prideaux, contrary to his word and assurance given him, had Articled with Major Swift for his place there; so that he was forced to return as he came to the Head-quarters. And Four moneths after, the said Vaughan being commanded by the Lord Deputy to settle Stages between Dublin and London-Derry, he did the same upon his own charges; as also went into Scotland with a Pacquet to the Lord General; and there presented his Excellency with a Petition, setting forth the Wrongs and Injuries done to him, by the said Mr. Prideaux: Whereupon his Excellency granted him another Commission, expressing, That none should be im∣ployed in Dublin as Post Master, but the said Vaughan, or his Deputy. VII. The said Vaughan having by Vertue of the last reci∣ted Commission, setled a Deputy at Dublin, and being commanded with a Pacquet from the Commissioners of Parliament for England, he came again to London, and then desired Mr. Prideaux to pay what was due for the Post-Barques service, but he refused to pay their wages; by which means he was forced to Petition the Councel of State for their pay; and Master Prideaux after Three moneths attendance was ordered to pay him the same, being Two hundred pounds, after abating of near Fifty pound in the account: Which Order being issued to him, he refused to observe, but lent onely Seventy pound to the said Vaughan, and then desired him to settle Stages in South-Wales, which he did: Notwithstanding all these discouragements, hoping, That his observance of Master
Prideaux will, would in some measure diminish his cruelty, and rigour, and incite him to do him right. Whereupon the said Mr. Prideaux wrote a Letter to his Agent at Dublin to discharge him, well approving of the said Vaughans Commissions, and promised to give him satisfaction for his journey, when he should come back from South-Wales, and endeavor payment of the money the Councel of State had ordered him; but upon the said Vaughans coming to London, he was forced to Petition again; and though he obtained the second Order, the said Mr. Prideaux delayed the payment thereof so long, that during his attendance on him, he was Arrested for money that he had taken up to performe the States service; which, the said Two hundred pound the Councel had ordered him, was to dis∣charge; and then Mr. Prideaux hearing of his troubles, would not pay him a peny: But thinking that he could never come out of prison, most unjustly did write a second Letter to his Agent at Dublin, letting him understand, That if he was in the imployment, he might continue in it still; for he thought Mr. Vaughan would not trouble him any more. A lively expression of his cruelty, and desire of revenge. VIII. After the said Vaughan had made means to come out of prison, he went to Mr. Prideaux, and desired the rest of his money that was behinde, which the Councel had ordered him to pay, & what was then due for the Post Barques hire; for Mr. Prideaux had paid some out of the money, which the Councel had ordered him, upon the said Vaughans Bills to Mr. Peters, and to one Cap. Thomas, about One hundred and fifteen pound: But Master Prideaux would neither pay him any money, nor deliver his Bond for the Seventy pound, nor give him any satisfaction for his journey, but
very scornfully bid him take his course; knowing very well he might by his power and interest over-sway, and perswade many persons then in power against him; as the said Vaughan had found it, by Mr. Bond, to whom Mr. Pri∣deaux had promised to speak in his behalf; but on the con∣trary, told him many things against him, which were made appear to be false, before Master Prideaux at the Commit∣tee, when the said Two hundred pound was ordered him. IX. The aforesaid Vaughan did then againe Petition the Councel of State, which Petition was referred to the Committee for Irish Affairs, who was to hear his further agrievances, and Master Prideaux defence, and to report back the same to the Councel: To which end, a day be∣ing appointed, and Master Prideaux desired to be there; the first day he sent word, that he could not attend; and the second sitting he came, and through his subtilty, and other advantages, perswaded the Committee not to do any thing in the business. X. The aforesaid Vaughan finding that hee could have no Justice against him, in relation to his own Complaints, appeared in the behalf of one he had engaged in the States service; to wit, Master White of Milford, and de∣sired, That the said Mr. White might have satisfaction from Mr. Prideaux, out of the moneys which he could make appear to be due unto him from Mr. Prideaux; but he could have no redress therein; notwithstanding, many Noble Persons did endeavor it on his behalf, by which means, he was left in a sad condition, and not able to pay Mr. White, who is not yet satisfied.
This is but a short Recapitulation of the most obvious Injuries, which the said Vaughan hath suffered by the in∣justice and oppression of the said Master Prideaux, which if it be looked upon with an Impartial eye, will sufficient∣ly plead for the said Vaughan, and from the hands of Justice require a Compensation answerable to his great loss and dammages, amounting to above two thousand pounds, sustained since Master Prideaux had any thing to do with the Post Office. All these being but one Instance of the said Master Prideaux Spleen, Covetousness, and desire of Revenge, to all which he prostituted his power, as many others besides the said Vaughan, have been dearly sensible of, and now hopes for and expects satisfaction. All which, and much more will be justified upon Oath. Evan Vaughan. FINIS.
