C4084C 52528769 178734
ARTICLES OF VISITATION and ENQUIRY Concerning Matters Ecclesiastical: EXHIBITED To the Ministers, Church-Wardens, and Side-Men of every PARISH within the DIOCESS of SARƲM. IN THE Primary Episcopal Visitation OF THE Right Reverend Father in GOD GILBERT By Divine Permission, Lord Bishop of SARƲM. LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Church-Yard. MDCLXXXIX.
The Tenor of the Oath to be Administred to the Church∣wardens and Side-men of every Parish. YOU shall Swear, That you will well and truly execute the Office of Church-wardens and Sides-men, in your several Parishes, by Pre∣senting such Things and Persons as you shall find or know to be Presentable by the Laws of this Realm. So help you God.
ARTICLES OF VISITATION and ENQUIRY Within the DIOCESS of SARƲM. TIT. I. Concerning Churches and Chappels, with the Ornaments, and Furniture thereunto belonging. I. IS your Parish-Church or Chappel kept in good and and sufficient repair; and all things so decently ordered as becometh the House of God? II. Is there a Font of Stone for the Administra∣tion of Baptism? And is there in your Chancel a decent Communion Table for the Administration of the Lords Sup∣per, with a Carpet of Silk, Stuff, or Cloth, and ano∣ther covering of Linnen to spread thereon? And have you a Communion-Cup or Chalice, with a Cover of Sil∣ver, and one or more Flagons of Silver or Pewter there∣unto belonging? III. Have you in your said Church or Chappel a conve∣nient Seat or Pew for your Minister to read Divine Ser∣vice in? A Pulpit, with a comely Cloth or Cushion for the same? A Bible of the last Translation in a large Volume, and the Book of Common-Prayer, (established by the late Act of Parliament) both well and substantially bound?
Have you likewise the Book of Homilies set forth by Au∣thority, a Book of Canons, and a printed Table of the Degrees wherein Marriage is prohibited? IV. Have you a Surplice for the Minister to wear at all times of his publick Ministration in the Church, provided, and to be duly washed at the charge of your Parish? V. Have you a Register-book of Parchment, wherein to register the Names and Sirnames of all such persons as are married, christned, or buried within your Parish, to∣gether with the Names and Sirnames of both the Parents of the Children so christned, expressing the Day, Month, and Year of all such Christnings, Marriages and Burials? And is the Transcript thereof yearly within one Month next after the 25 of March, brought into the Bishops Re∣gistry? VI. Have you likewise another Book of Paper, where∣in to record the Names and Licenses of all such Strangers as are admitted at any time to preach in your Church or Chappel? As also a Book wherein to write down the Churchwardens Account, together with a strong Chest with Locks and Keys wherein to keep the aforesaid Book, and all the forementioned Furniture in safe custody? And lastly, have you a Bier, with a black Hearse-Cloth, for the Bu∣rial of the Dead? TIT. II. Concerning the Church yard, the Houses, Glebes, and Tithes belonging to the Church. I. IS your Church-yard sufficiently fenced with Walls, Rails, or Pales, and decently kept from all an∣noyance, or encroachments? Have any Trees there grow∣ing been cut down, how long since, by whom, and to whose use and benefit?
II. Is the house of your Parson, Vicar, or Curate,25 Ed. 1 with all the Out-houses thereunto belonging, kept in good and sufficient repair? Or have any of the said Hou∣ses, or Out-houses been defaced or pulled down without license from the Ordinary, and by whom? Hath any per∣son encroached upon any Garden, Yard, or Close belong∣ing to your Parsonage or Vicarage-house, or cut up any Treees growing thereon, or changed, or removed the ancient Marks and Bounds of the same? III. Have you a true and perfect Terrier of all the Glebe-lands, Gardens, Orchyards, Tenements, or Cot∣tages belonging to your Parsonage, or Vicarage; as al∣so a Note of such Pensions, Rate-Tithes, and portions of Tithes, or other yearly Profits (either within or without your Parish) as belong thereunto? Have any of the same been with-held from your Minister? and by whom, as you know, or have heard? IV. Have any of the ancient Glebe-lands belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage been taken away, or exchang∣ed for other, without the free consent of the Incumbent, and license from the Ordinary? by whom hath the same been made, and how many years since? and how much is your Parsonage or Vicarage damnified thereby in the yearly value thereof, as you know, believe, or have heard? TIT. III. Concerning Ministers. I. IS your Minister defamed, or suspected to have ob∣tained either his Benefice or Orders by any Simonia∣cal Compact? II. Hath he been legally inducted into his Benefice?
III. Did he within two months after this Induction, pub∣lickly in the Church upon some Sunday or Holiday, in the time of Divine Service read the 39 Articles of the Church of England established by Authority, and there publickly de∣clare his assent thereunto? IV. Hath he any other Ecclesiastical Benefice? Is he con∣stantly resident upon his Benefice among you? How many weeks in any one year hath he been absent from it? V. Hath your Minister a Curate to assist him? who is that Curate? is he conformable to the Laws and Orders of the Church of England, and doth he serve in any other Church beside? and what yearly stipend doth your Minister allow him? VI. Doth your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, in reading the daily Morning and Evening Service, Administration of the holy Sacraments, celebration of Marriage, Church∣ing of Women after Child-birth; Visitation of the sick, Bu∣rial of the Dead, and pronouncing Gods Commination a∣gainst impenitent Sinners, use the form and words pre∣scribed in the Book of Common-Prayer, without any ad∣dition, omission, or alteration of the same? And doth he use all such Rites and Ceremonies in all parts of Divine Ser∣vice, as are appointed in the said Book, so far as you have observed? VII. Doth your Minister at the reading or celebrating the Divine Offices in your Church or Chappel, wear the Surplice? VIII. Doth he observe the Holidays and Fasting-days, as also the Ember-weeks, and the yearly perambulation in Rogation-week, as in the Common-Prayer Book is ap∣pointed, giving notice to the Parishioners of every of the same in the Church, in the time of Divine Service, up∣on the Sunday next before?
IX. Hath your Minister or Curate been licensed to Preach by the Bishop? If so, doth he then constantly (unless in case of Sickness, necessary absence, or other reasonable Impediment) himself Preach in your Church or Chappel one Sermon every Sunday? Or if he be not a licensed Preacher, or being so licensed be hindred by Sick∣ness or otherwise, as aforesaid, doth he procure a Sermon to be so preached by some other Minister, and licensed Preacher? or one of the Homilies set forth by Authority to be there read by a Priest or Deacon? X. Doth your Minister diligently instruct the Youth of your Parish in the Church-Catechism? and doth he pre∣pare, and present them, being so instructed, to be confirmed by the Bishop? and doth he endeavour to reclaim all Po∣pish Recusants, (if any such be inhabiting within your Parish) to the true Religion established in the Church of England? XI. Doth he neglect or refuse to visit the Sick, or delay the Baptism of any Infant that is in danger of Death? is there any Child past Infancy, or other Person of more Years, through your Ministers default, yet remaining un∣baptized in your Parish? Doth he use to baptize any without Godfathers and Godmothers? XII. Hath he at any time (as you know, or have heard) preached any False, Heretical, Seditious, or Schismatical Doctrine, thereby to seduce the People into Parties and Factions, to the disturbance of the publick Peace and Vnity either of Church or State? XIII. Hath he presumed to marry any Persons in private Houses, or such as being under Age, have not the consent of their Parents, or without the Banns first published on three Sundays or Holidays in the Church, or at any other hours than between eight and twelve in the Morning, im∣less he had a License or Dispensation so to do?
XIV. Doth any Person preach in your Parish as a Lecturer? hath he allowance from the Bishop for so doing? Doth he before his Lecture read Divine Service according to the Book of Common-Prayer, and is he in all respects conformable to the Laws and Orders of the Church of England? XV. Is your Parson, Vicar, Curate, or Lecturer, a Man of a sober, unblamable, and exemplary Life? Doth he fa∣miliarly converse with ungodly, vicious, and excommuni∣cate Persons? Is he a frequenter of Taverns or Ale∣houses, a common Gamester, a Swearer, Railer, or Quar∣reller? Doth he set Neighbours at variance one with another, or encourage them to Suits and Contentions? Is he noted to be an intemperate Drinker, or vehemently suspected of Adultery or other sort of Incontinency with any Person, either within your Parish, or without? Is his Apparel grave and decent, as the Canons of the Church require? Or is his Carriage and Conversation in any kind whatsoever disorderly or scandalous, and unbeseeming a Minister of Iesus Christ? TIT. IV. Concerning the Parishioners. I. IS there in your Parish any Person that is a known or a reputed Atheist, or Blasphemer and mocker of Religion, or any Papist, or any professing any other form of Religion different from the Church of England, who hath not rendred himself capable of the benefit of the late Act for Liberty to Men of tender Consciences in the way pre∣scribed by the said Act? II. Is there any Person in your Parish that lieth under a common fame of vehement suspicion of Adultery, For∣nication
or Incest? Are there any common Drunkards within your Parish, or common Swearers, or Blasphe∣mers of God's Name, or any that are noted to be Railers, unclean or filthy talkers or sowers of Sedition, Faction, and Discord among their Neighbours? III. Do any of your Parish upon Sundays or Holidays follow their bodily or ordinary Labour, or permit their Servants so to do? Are any Shops kept open, or Wares sold, or do any Vintners, Inn-keepers, or other Victuallers and Sellers of Beer and Ale, suffer any Persons to tipple or game in their Houses upon those days? IV. Do the Inhabitants and Sojourners within your Parish duly resort unto your Church or Chappel upon Sun∣days and Holidays appointed for Divine Service? Do they then and there abide quietly, with Reverence, Order and Decency, during all the whole time of Common-Prayer, Preaching, or other Service of God there used? V. Doth every Person reverently uncover his Head, and so continue all the time of Divine Service in the Church? Do they all reverently kneel at the Prayers, and stand up when the Creed and Gospel are read? VI. Are there any in your Parish that refuse to send their Infant-Children to be baptized publickly in the Church, unless in case of urgent necessity? Are all sur∣viving Children who were privately baptized brought after Baptism into the publick Congregation, and is the Congregation certified of the true Form of their Bap∣tism according to the Rubrick of the Book of Common-Prayer? VII. Doth every Housholder in your Parish cause their Children and Servants to come to Church to learn their Catechism, and to give an account thereof unto your Minister, as he shall require it of them openly in the Church upon Sundays and Holidays, as in the Book of Common-Prayer is appointed, that when they are
well instructed in the same they may be confirmed by the Bishop? VIII. Do the Inhabitants of your Parish above sixteen Years of Age receive the Sacrament of the Lord's Sup∣per at least three times in the Year, of which Easter is always to be one? Doth any in your Parish refuse to re∣ceive the same kneeling, or from the hands of your own Minister, repairing for it to other Parishes and Mini∣sters abroad? Or are there any Strangers not of your Parish that forsake their own Churches, and usually re∣pair to yours for it? IX. Have you any among you that be denounced and declared excommunicate for any Crime committed? how long have they been so excommunicated? and do any of your Parish keep Society with them before they be recon∣ciled to the Church, and absolved? X. Are there any living in your Parish as Man and Wife who are within the degrees prohibited? Or any that being lawfully divorced, have married again? Or any that being lawfully married, and not separated or divorced by course of Law, do not cohabit together? XI. Are there any Wills or Testaments of Persons in your Parish, that be yet unproved, or any Goods ad∣ministred without a due Grant from the Ordinary? Did any dying in your Parish or elsewhere, leave any Legacy to your Church or Chappel? what were those Legacies, and how have they been bestowed? XII. Is there any Strife and Contention among any of your Parish for their Pews or Seats in your Church? Have any new Pews been erected in your Chancel, or in the Body of your Church or Chappel, without leave from the Ordinary?
TIT. V. Concerning Parish-Clerks and Sextons. I. HAve you belonging to your Church or Chappelry a Parish-Clerk, aged 21 Years at the least? Is he of honest Life and Conversation, and sufficient or able to perform his Duty in reading, writing, and singing? Is he chosen by your Minister, or according to the Right or Custom of your Parish? and doth he duly attend him in all Divine Services of the Church? Are his Wages duly paid unto him, or who withholdeth the same from him? II. Doth he, or your Sexton (if there be any such appointed in your Parish) diligently look to the Doors of your Church, that they be locked and opened at due time? And doth he keep your Church or Chappel clean from Dust, Cobwebs, or other Annoyance? Doth he toll or ring the Bells at the due accustomed hours be∣fore the beginning of Divine Service Morning and Evening, that the People may be warned to come unto the Church? And when any Person is passing out of this Life, doth he (upon notice given him thereof) toll a Bell, as hath been accustomed, that the Neigh∣bours may thereby be warned to meditate upon their own Death, and to recommend the dying Person to the Grace and Favour of God?
TIT. VI. Concerning Hospitals, Schools, School-Masters, Phy∣sicians, Chirurgeons, and Midwives. I. IS there in your Parish any Hospital, Alms-house, or Free-School, not of the King's Foundation or Patronage? Who was the Founder, or is now the Patron thereof? And what is the yearly Revenue or Stipend, belonging to the Governours or Masters of the same? Is the same ordered and governed in every re∣spect as it ought to be? And are the Revenues thereof rightly employed, according to the intention of the Founder, and of such Grants and Ordinances as have been made concerning the same? II. Doth any Man keep a publick School in your Parish, who is not allowed thereunto by the Ordi∣nary? Doth your School-Master teach his Scholars the Catechism of Religion set forth by Authority? Doth he cause them upon Sundays and Holidays order∣ly to repair to your Church or Chappel? and see that they behave themselves there quietly and reverently, du∣ring the time of Divine Service and Sermon? III. Doth any Man in your Parish practise Physick, or Chirurgery, or any Woman take upon her to exercise the Office of a Midwife, without approbation and licence from the Ordinary?
TIT. VII. Querie to put to the Minister, concerning the Church-Wardens and Sidesmen, and Ecclesiastical Officers. I. ARE the Church-Wardens of your Parish year∣ly and duly chosen by the joynt consent of the Minister and Parishioners; or one of them by the Minister, and the other by the Parishioners? II. Have the former and last Church-Wardens given up their due Accompts to the Parish, and delivered up to the succeeding Church-Wardens the Monies remaining in their Hands, together with all other things belonging to your Church or Chappel? III. Do they suffer no Misbehaviour or Disorder to be done by Men, Women, or Servants, or Children in your Church or Chappel? or upon the Communion-Table? IV. Do they against every Communion appointed in your Church or Chappel, provide a sufficient quantity of fine white Bread, and of good Wine, according to the number of the Communicants? V. Are there any Ecclesiastical Officers that exercise Ecclesiastical Iurisdiction within this Diocess, that take and receive any extraordinary Fees for any Thing or Cause? Have Abuses or Offences been presented by Church-Wardens and Sidesmen, and are such Offences, being presented, supprest, or left unpunished? VI. Have any Apparitors taken any Reward for the concealing of any Offence, or the avoiding of the Punish∣ment of the Offenders? And do they summon any with∣out a Citation first had?
If you know of any other Default or Crime of Ec∣clesiastical Cognizance, you are to present the same. THe Ministers of every Parish may joyn in Present∣ments with the Church-Wardens and Sidesmen; and if they will not present, then the Ministers them∣selves (being the Persons that have the chief care of the suppressing of Sin and Impiety in their Parishes) may present the Crimes aforesaid, and all such things as shall want a Reformation. Gilbert Sarum. THE Ministers of every Parish are desired to give in the Names of such of the younger sort in their several Parishes, as they judg fit to receive Confirmati∣on from the Bishop. FINIS.
