M1649A 53981683 180286
A GODLY DREAM, COMPYLED BY ELIZABETH MELVIL, LADY CULROSSE younger. At the Request of a FRIEND. Introito per angustam portam, nam lata est via quae ducit ad interitum. Printed in the Year 1686.
A GODLY DREAM. UPon a day as I did mournful sore, For sundry things wherewith my soul w gri My grid increased and grew more and ma I comfort fled and could not be reliev'd. With heavinesse my heart was sore mischiev'd, I loath'd my life, I could not eat nor drink, I might not speak, nor look to none that lived But musde alone and diverse things did think. 2 This wretched world did so molest my mind I thought upon this false and iron age: And how our hearts are so to vice inclin'd, That Satan seem'd most fearfully to rage: Nothing on earth my sorrow could asswage, I felt my sin so strongly to increase: I griev'd the Sprit was wont to be my pledge; My soul was plung'd into most deep distresse, 3 All merrinesse did aggravate my pain, And earthly joyes did still increase my wo: In company I could no wayes remain, But fled resort, and so alone did go; My silly soul was tossed to and fro. With sundry thoughts which troubled me full sore I preas'd to pray, but sighs oreset me so, I could do nought, but groan, and say no more. 4 The trickling tears abundantly ran down, My heart was eas'd when I had mournd my fill. Then I began my lamentation, And said, O Lord, how long is it thy will, That thy poor saints shall be afflicted still Alas how long shal subtile Sathan rage, Make haste O Lord thy promise to fulfil, Make haste to end our painful pilgrimage, 5 The silly Saints are tossed to and fro, Awake, O Lord, why sleepest thou so long We have no strength against our cruel foe, In sighs and sobs now changed is our song:
e world prevails our enemies are strong e wicked rage, but we are poor and weak; hen thy self with speed; revenge thy wrong, ke short these dayes, even for thy chosens sake; 6 Lord Jesus come and save thine own Elect, r Satan seeks our sillie souls to slay: he wicked world doth strongly us insect; ost wondrous sins increase do day by day, ur love growes cold, our zeal is worne away; ur faith is faild, and we are like to fall: e Lyon roars, to catch us as a prey ke haste, O Lord, before we perish all 7 These are the dayes which thou so long foretold uld come before this wretched world should end. w vice abounds and charity growes cold, d even thine own most strangely do oflend. e Devil prevails, his forces he doth bend, could be, to wrack thy children dear: we are thine, therefore some succour send, lieve our souls, we weary wandring here. 8 What can we do? we clogged are with sin, filthy vice our sensleffe souls are drownd, ough we resolve we never can begin, amend our lives, but sin doth stil abound, en wilt thou come? when shal thy trumpet sound? hen shal we see that great and glorious day? ave us Lord out of that pit profound reave us from that loathsome lump of clay. hou knowes our hearts, thou sees our whole desire secret thoughts they are not hid from thee: ugh we offend, thou knowes we strangely tyre, bear this weight, our sprit would fain be free, O Lord, what pleasure can it be, ive in sin, that sore doth preffe us down. give us wings, that we aloft my flee end the fight that we may wear the crown. Before the Lord when I had thus complained
My mind grew calm, my heart was then at rest, Though I was faint, from food I yet refraind, And went to bed, because I thought it best. With heavinesse my sprite was sore opprest, I fel on sleep, and so again me thought, I made my moan, and so my grief increast, And from the Lord with tears I succour sought. 11 Lord Jesus come, said I and end my grief, My sprite is vext, the captive would be free: All vice abounds, now send us some relief, I loath to live, I wish dissolv'd to be. My sprite doth long and thristeth after thee, As thirstie ground requires a showre of rain, My heart is dry, as fruitlesse barren tree, I feel my self, how can I here remain. 12 With sighs and sobs, as I did so lament, Into my dream, me thought there did appear, A sight most sweet which did me wel content: An Angel bright, with visage shining clear. With loving looks, and with a smiling chear, He asked me, why are thou thus so sad? Why groans thou so? what dost thou dwining here With careful cryes in this thy bailful bed. 13 I hear thy sighs, I see thy trickling tears, Thou seems to be in some perplexity: What mean thy moans, what is the thing thou fear Whom would thou have? in what place would thou Faint not so fast in thy adversity. Mourn not so fore, sith mourning may not mend, Life up thy heart, declare thy grief to me, Perchance thy pain brings pleasure in the end. 14 I, sigh'd again, and said alas for wo, My grief is great, I cannot it declare: Into this earth I wander to and fro, A pilgrim poor, consum'd with sighing sore, My sins place, increase do more and more, I loath my life, I weary wandring here:
ong for heaven, my heritage is there, ong to live with my Redeemer dear. 15 Is this the cause, said he: life up anone, nd follow me; and I shal be thy guide: e strain thy sighs, leave off thy heavy moan, efrain from tears, and cast thy care aside. rust in my strength, and in my word confide, nd thou shalt have thine heavy hearts desire. se up with speed, I may not long abide, eat diligence this matter doth require. 16 My soul rejoye'd to hear his words so sweet, ooked up and saw his face so fair, is countenance reviv'd my weary sprite, continent I cast aside my care, ith humble heart I prayed him to declare, hat was his Name: he answer'd me again am thy God for whom thou sighs so sore, now am come, thy tears are not in vain. 17 I am the Way, I am the Truth and Life, am thy Spouse, that brings thee store of grace: am thy Lord that soon will end thy strife, am thy Love whom thou would fain imbrace. am thy Joy, I am thy rest and peace, ile up anone and sollow after me: shall thee lead into that dwelling place, the land of rest thou longs so sore to see. 18 With joyfull heart I thanked him again, eady am I, said I, and well content wordo follow thee, for here I live in pain, wretch unworth, my days untimely spent; ot one is just, but all are fiercely bent o run to vice, I have no force to stand: y sins increase, which make me sore lament ke haste, O Lord, I long to see that land, 19 Thy haste is great, he answer'd me again, ou thinst thee there, thou art transported so; pleasant place must purchas'd be with pain.
The way is strait, and thou hast far to go. Art thou content to wander to and fro, Through great desarts, through water and through Through thorns and briers, and many dangers mo What sayest thou, thy feeble flesh will tyre. 20 Alace said I, although my flesh be weak, My Sprite is strong, and willing for to flee: O leave me not, but for thy mercies sake Perform thy word, or else for dool I die. I feel no pain since I should follow thee, The way is long, yet bring me through at last: Thou answeredst well, I am content said he, To be thy guide, but see thou grip me fast. 21 Then up I rose and made no more delay, My feeble arms about his neck I cast: He went before, and still did guide the way, Though I was weak, my Sprite did follow fast, Through mosse & myre, through ditches deep we Through pricking thorns, through water & throgh Through dreadful dens, he made my heart agast, He bare me up when I began to tyre. 22 Sometimes we clamb on caigie mountain And sometimes stay'd on ugly brayes of sand: They were so stay that wonder was to see, But when I fear'd, he held me by the hand. Throgh thick & thin, through sea & eke through Through great desarts we wandred on our way, When I was weak and had no strength to stand, Yet with a look he did refresh me ay. 23 Through waters great we were compel'd to Which was so steep that I was like to drown, Sometimes I sank, but yet my gracious guide, Did draw me up half dead, and in a swown. In woods most wilde, and far from any town, We thrusted through, the briers together sta I was so weak, their strength did beat me That I was forc'd for fear to flee aback.
24 Courage said he, thou art mid-way and more, Thou must not tyre, nor turn aback again: Hold fast thy grip, on me cast all thy care, Affay thy strength, thou shalt nor fight in vain; I told thee first that thou shalt suffer pain, The nearer heaven the harder is the way: Lift up thy heart, and let thy hope remain, Since I am guide, thou shalt not go astray. 25 Forward we past on narrow bridge of tree, Ov'r waters great, which hideously did roar: There lay below, that fearfull was to see, Most ugly beasts that gaped to devour. My head grew light, and troubled very sore, My heart did fear, my feet began to slide: But when I cry'd he heard me evermore, And helpt me up, O blessed be my guide. 26 Weary I was, and thought to sit at rest, But he said nay: thou mayst not sit nor stand, Hold on thy course, and thou shal find it best, It thou desires to see that pleasant land. Though I was weak I rose at his commands And held him fast, at length he let me see That pleasant place that seem'd to be at hand. Take courage now, for thou art near said he. 27 I looked up into that Castle fair, Glistring with gold and shining silver bright The stately tower did mount above the air, They blinded me, they cast so great a sight. My heart was glad to see that joyfull fight, My voyage then I thought it not in vain: him besought to guide me there aright, With many vows never to tyre again. 28 Though thou be near the way is very hard, aid he again, therefore thou must be stout: aint not for fear, for towards are debar'd hat have no heart to go their voyage out. luck up thine heart, and grip me fast about,
Out through this trance together we must go: The way is strait, remember for to lout, If this were past we have not many moe. 29 I held him fast as he did give command, And through the trance together then we went: Where in the mids great pricks of iron did stand, Where with my feet were all betorn and rent. Take courage now, said he, and be content, To suffer this, the pleasure comes at last. I answered not, but ran incontinent Out through the fire, and then the pain was past. 30 When this was done my heart did daunce for I was so near, I thought my voyage ended: I ran before, and sought not his convoy, Nor askt the way, because I thought I knew it, On stately steps most stoutly I ascended; Without his help I thought to enter there: He followed fast and was right sore offended, And hastily did draw me down the stair. 31 What haste said he, why ran thou so before, Without mine help thinkst thou to climb too hie, Come down again, thou yet must suffer more, If thou desires that dwelling place to see. This stately stair it was not made for thee, Holdst thou the course, thou shalt be thrust aback Alace said I, long wandring wearied me, Which made me run, the nearest way to take. 32 Then he began to comfort me again, And said, my friend thou most not enter there: Lift up thy heart thou yet must suffer pain, The last assault of needs it must be sore. This goodly way although it seem so fair, It is too high, thou cannot climb to stay; But look below beneath a little stair, And thou shalt see another kind of way. 33 I looked down, and saw a pit most black, Most full of smoak, and flamming fire most fell;
That ugly sight made me to Hee aback, I fear'd to hear so many shout and yell. I him besought that he the truth would tell, Is this said I the Papists purging place, Where they affirm that silly souls do dwell, To purge their sins, before they rest in peace. 34 The brain of man must warely did invent That purging place, he answer'd me again: For greedinesse together they consent; To say that souls in torment must remain, While gold and goods relieve them of their pain. O spitefull Sprits that do the same begin: O blinded beasts, your thoughts are all in vain, By blood alone our souls are cleans'd from sin. 35 This pit is bell, where through thou now must go; There is the way that leads to the land: Then play the man, thou needs not tremble so, For I shal hold and help thee by the hand. Alace, said I, I have no force to stand, fear I faint to see that ugly fight: How can I come amongst that bailful band, Oh help me now. I have no force to fight. 36 Of have I heard, that they that enter here, n this great gull shall never come again; Courage said he, have I not bought thee dear, My precious bloud it was not shed in vain, saw this place, my soul did taste this pain, Ere ere I went into my Fathers glore; Through must thou go, but thou shalt not remain; Thou needs not fear, for I shall go before. 37 I am content to do thy whole command, id I again, and did him fast embrace: hen loving lie he held me by the hand; nd in I went into that fearful place. old fast thy grip, said he in anie case, et me not slip what ever thou shall see: read not the death, but stoutlie forward prease,
For death nor hell shall never vanquish thee. 38 His words so sweet did chear my heavy heart Incontinent I cast my care aside. Courage said he, play not a cowards part, Though thou be weak, yet in my strength confide I thought me blest to have so good a guide, Though I was weak, I knew that he was strong Under his wings I thought me for to hide; If any there should prease to do me wrong. 39 Into that pit when I did enter in, I saw a sight which made me sore agast. Poor damned souls, tormented sore for sin, In flaming fire were frying very fast. And ugly Sprits. And as I had them past, My heart grew faint, and I began to tyre: Ere I was ware, one gripped me full fast, And held me high above a flaming fire. 40 The fire was great, the heat did pierce me so My faith grew weak, my grip was very small. I trembled fast, my fear grew more and more, My hands did shake that I held him withall. At length they loosed, then I began to fall, And cry'd aloud, and caugh him fast again: Lord Jesus come and rid me out of thrall, Courage said he, now art thou past the pain. 41 With this great fear, I started and awoke, Crying aloud, Lord Jesus come again: But after that no kind of rest I took, I preased to sleep, but it was all in vain. I would have dream'd of pleasure after pain, Because I knew I should it find at last, God grant my guide may still with me remain, It is to come that I believ'd was past. 42 This is a dream, and yet I thought it best, To write the same, and keep it still in mind: Because I knew there was no earthly rest Prepard for us that have our hearts inclin'd
To seek the Lord: we must be purg'd and sin'd, Our drosse is great, the fire must try us sore: And yet our God is merciful and kind, He shal remain and help us evermore. 43 The way to heaven I see is very hard, My dream declares that we have far to go, We must be stout for cowards are debar'd, Our flesh of force must suffer pain and wo, These driery ways and dangers many mo, Await for us, we cannot live in rest: But let us learn since we are warned so To cleave to Christ, for he can help us best. 44 O silly souls with care so sore opprest; That love the Lord, and long for heaven so hie, Change not your minds, for ye have chose the best, Prepare your selves for troubled must ye be Faint not for fear in your adversity, It is the way that leads you unto life; Suffer a while and you shal shortlie see The land of life, when ended is your strife. 45 In wildernesse ye must be try'd a while: Ye forward prease, and never flee aback: Like Pilgrims poor, and strangers in exile: Through fair and foul, your journey you must take: The devil, the world and all that they can make Will send their force to stop you in the way: Your flesh will faint, and sometimes will grow slack: Yet come to Christ and he shal help you ay. 46 The thorny cares of this deceitful life, Will rent you hearts, and make your souls to bleed: Your flesh and sprite will be at deadly strife; Your cruel foe will hold you still in dread, And throw you down: yet rise again with speed, And though you fall, yet ly not loytring still: But call on Christ to help you in your need, Who will not fail his promise to fulfill. 47 In floods of wo, when ye are like to drown,
For climb to Christ, and grip him very fast: d though ye sink, and in the deep fall down, yet cry aloud, and he will hear at last. Dread not the death, nor be not sore agast, Though all the earth against you shall conspie, Christ is your guide, and when your pain is past, You shall have joy above your hearts desire. 48 Though in this earth you shall exalted be, Fear shal be left to humble you withall: For if you climb on tops of mountains hie, The higher up the nearer is your fall. Your honey sweet shall mixed be with gall, Your short delite shall end with pain and grief, Yet trust in God, for his assistance call, And he shall help and send you soon relief. 49 Though waters great do campasse you about, Though tyrants threat, though Lions rage and roar Defy them all, and fear not to win out, Your guide is near to help you evermore. Though pricks of iron do prick you very sore, A noysome lusts that seek your soul to slay: Yet cry on Christ, and he shall go before, The nearer heaven the harder is the way. 50 Run out your race, you must not faint nor ty Nor sit, nor stand, nor turn aback again: If ye intend to have your hearts desire, Prease forward still, although it were with pain, No rest for you so long as you remain As pilgrims poor into this loathsome life: Fight on your fight; it shal not be in vain; Your rich reward is worth a greater strife. 51 If after tears, I live a while in joy, And get a raste of that eternal glore: Be not secure: nor slip not your convoy, For if ye do, ye shall repent it sore. He knows the way, and he shall go before; Climb ye alone: ye shal not misse a fall:
our filthie flesh it must be troubled more, ye forget upon your God to call. 52 If Christ be gone, although you seem to flee, With golden wings above the firmament: Some down again, ye shal not better be, That pride of yours ye shall right fore repent. Then hold him fast with humble heart and bent, To follow him although through hell and death: He went before, his soul was torn and rent. For your deserts he felt his fathers wrath. 53 Though in the end ye suffer torments fell, Cleave fast to him that felt the same before: The way to heaven must be through death and hell, The last assault must trouble you full fore. The Lion then most cruellie will roar, His time is short, his forces he will bend, The greater strife, the greater is your glore, Your pain is short, your joy will never end. 54 Rejoice in God, let not your courage fail, Ye chosen Saints that are afflicted here, Though Sathan rage, he never shal prevail, Fight in the end, and stoutly persevere: Your God is true, your blood to him is dear, ear not the way, since Christ is your convoy, When clouds are past, the weather will grow clear, Ye sow in tears, but ye shal reap in joy. 55 But death and hell have lost their cruel sting, Your Captain Christ hath made them all to yeeld: Lift up your hearts and praises to him sing; Triumph for joy, your enemies are kil'd. The Lord of Host, he is your strength and shield, The Serpents head hath stoutlie troden down: Trust in his strength, passe forward in the field: v'rcome in fight, and ye shal wear the crown, 56 The King of kings if he be on our side, e need not fear who dare against us stand: o the field may we not boldlie bide,
Forcline ma help us with his mightie hand. no sits above and rules both Sea and Land, Who with his breath doth make the bills to shake, The host, of heaven are arm'd at his command To fight the field when we appear most weak. 57 Pluck up your hearts ye are not left alone, The Lamb of God shall lead you in the way, The Lord of Hosts that reigns in royal throne, Against your foes his banner will display. The Angels bright shal stand in good aray To hold you up, you need not fear to fall, Your enemies shal flee and be your prey, Ye shal triumph, and they shal perish all. 58 The joyes of heaven are worth a moments pa Take courage then, lift up your heart on hie: To judge the earth when he shal come again, Above the clouds ye shal exalted be. A crown of joy and true felicitie Awaits for you, when finisht is your fight: Suffer a while and you shall shortlie see, A glore most great and infinite of weight. 59 Prepare your selves, the valiant men of war, And thrust with force out through the narrow way, Hold on your course, and shrink not back for fear, Christ is your guide you shal not go astray, The time is near, be sober, watch and pray, He sees our tears, and he hath laid in store A rich reward, which in that joyful day Ye shal receive, and reign for evermore. 60 Now to the King that creat all of nought, The Lord of lords, that rules both land and sea: That sav'd our souls, and with his blood us bought And vanquisht death triumphing on a tree. Unto the great and glorious Trinitie, That saves the poor, and doth his own defend, Be laud and glore, honour and Majestie, and praise: Amen, World without end.
A GODLY BALLAD. COme sweet Love, let sorrow cease, come Jesus Christ, come comfort me, me give me thy sprite of grace, in all my troubles to support me. For I have lived most foolishlie, rough kind-repinde, my mind-inclin'd to everie sin and vanitie. m leud by nature born, a sinfull wretch by death appointed: d my fathers me beforn, and dead in sin, yet thine Anointed Thou hast sent down of thy free grace, me to die that he might be The Mediator of my peace. th came by the first ADAM, for sin where through his God he grieved: hrist our second Adam came, and he brought life and him relieved From death and everlasting pain. at same ADAM that Lamb that came, his death hath given me life again. d for ADAM did prepare a Garden for his habitation: rist was in a Garden fair, roubled in mind for my salvation. The cruel death him sore affears that combate, he grat and swat in the Garden bloodie tears. am in the Garden dwelt, and in the Garden disobeyed, rist into a Garden felt he wrath of God, and was betrayed. The Jews by night with Judas came, ar of wear, with spear in gear, take that most innocent Lamb. m in the Garden fled,
and hid him when he had offended, Christ in a Garden bade, and in the Garden apprehended. Before the Priest brought and exem'd Accus'd, misus'd, refus'd, they chus'd Barrabas, and Christ condemn'd. Adam sinn'd because because that he, eat of the fruit that was forbidden: Christ the fruit was of the tree, whereon he died, the God head hidden: Was crucified between two theeves, Wherethrow Jesu sav'd you, that trow, and firmlie in his bloud believes. Adam banisht from the Lord, and for fault for his foul offences: Our Adam hath us restor'd, for our faults made recompences. And satisfied his Fathers wrath, For all that fall, that call and shall repent, and seek to him by faith. It was onlie Jesus Christ, that suffered for thy sins and smarted: Neither Pope nor Popish Priest, the Virgin nor the Saints departed. But onlie Christ that holie one, Nought than in man, that wan or can save our souls but Christ alone. I conclude, and ends here than, its onlie Christ our souls hath sav't, Fie on merits and works of man, give Christ the praise, for he should have it. All Praise to God our King therefore: Which King us bring, to reign and sing, with him in his eternal glore. FINIS.
