w1914 52529096 179244
THE CHRISTIANITY OF THE PEOPLE Commmonly called QUAKERS, ASSERTED Against the Unjust Charge of their being no CHRISTIANS, Upon several Questions relating to those Matters, wherein their Chri∣stian Belief is Questioned. Printed in the Year, 1693.
The Christianity of the People com∣monly called QUAKERS, Asserted against the Unjust Charge of their being no CHRISTIANS, &c. Question, WHat's your Belief con∣cerning the Blessed Trinity, as our Term is? Answer. Our Belief is, that in the Unity of the God-head there is Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, being those Three Divine Witnesses that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Spirit; and that these Three are One, according to Holy Scripture Te∣stimony. Quest. Do you Believe the Divinity and Humanity of Jesus Christ the Eternal Son of God, or that Jesus Christ is truly God and Man?
Answ. Yes, we verily believe that Jesus Christ is truly God and Man, ac∣cording as Holy Scripture Testifies of Him, God over all blessed for ever, the true God and Eternal Life, the One Mediator between God and Men, even the Man Christ Jesus. Quest. Do you believe and expect Sal∣vation, and Justification, by the Righte∣ousness and Merits of Jesus Christ, or by your own Righteousness or Works? Answ. By Jesus Christ his Righteous∣ness, Merits and Works, and not by our own, God is not indebted to us for our deservings, but we to Him for his free Grace in Christ Jesus, whereby we are saved through Faith in Him (not of our selves) and by his Grace inabled truly and acceptably to serve and follow Him as He requires! He is our All in All, who worketh all in us that is well pleas∣ing to God. Quest. Do you believe Remission of Sin, and Redemption through the Sufferings, Death and Blood of Christ? Answ. Yes, through Faith in Him as
he Suffered and Died for all Men, gave himself a Ransom for all, and His Blood being shed for the Remission of Sins; so all they who sincerely believe and obey Him, receive the Benefits and blessed Effects of his suffering and dying for them, they by Faith in his Name, re∣ceive and partake of that Eternal Re∣demption which he hath obtained for us, who gave Himself for Ʋs that he might Redeem us from all iniquity; he died for our Sins, and rose again for our Ju∣stification; and if we walk in the Light, as he is in the Light, we have fellow∣ship one with another; and the Blood of Jesus Christ His Son cleanseth us from all sin, 1 John 1.7. Quest. Do you believe and own the Di∣vine Offices of Jesus Christ in His Church? Answ. Yes, verily we sincerely be∣lieve and own Christ, not only as He is the Light of the World, enlightning e∣very Man coming into it; but also that he is given for a Leader, and for a Com∣mander. And that he is both King, Priest, and Prophet to and over his Church and
People. He is the Minister of the San∣ctuary which the Lord pitched, and not Man, and we are to hear him in all things. Quest. Do you believe or own Baptism as Essential to Christianity, or necessary to Salvation, and for the Ingrafting us into Christ and His Church? Answ. We believe and are fully per∣swaded, That Baptism which is Essential to Christianity, and the saving Baptism, or the Cause without which none can be true Christians, or saved, is the inward or spiritual washing of Regeneration by the Word of Life, This is the saving Baptism into Christ and his Church, which produceth the Answer of a Good Conscience towards God, of which the outward was a Figure, 1 Pet. 3.21. This is that One Baptism of Christ by one Spi∣rit into that one Body, whereof Christ is Head. As to Dipping or Sprinkling Infants, or Young Children we find no Precept or President in Holy Scripture for the practice thereof, and therefore we can∣not
think out not believing it Essential (or necessary) to Salvation, or making Christians a sufficient Argument to prove us no Christians (unless it can be proved that none are saved without it, and that all are saved that have it.) Considering also what's Positively affirmed in the 39 Articles; as in the 6th Article, That whatsoever is not Read in the Holy Scrip∣tures, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be required of any Man, That it should be believed as an Article of the Faith, or be thought requisite or necessary to Salva∣tion. And in the 20th Article, That the Church ought not to Decree or Enforce any thing against or besides Holy Writ, to be believed for necessity of Salvation. And in Article 21. That things ordain'd by General Councils as necessary to Salvation, have neither strength nor authority, unless that they be taken out of Holy Scripture. Quest. Do you believe or own the Lords Supper, either as a sign of the Love that Christians ought to have among themselves, or as a Seal of the Saints Communion and Commemoration of Christs Death for us, or
as Figurative of Christs Body and Blood spiritually received by Faith. Answ The Supper of the Lord we own, and renderly consider in a twofold sense, 1. In the Figure, 2. In the Sub∣stance. 1st. That our Lord Jesus Christ, at His Supper with His Disciples, did eat the Passeover (which was for the fulfil∣ling and consummation of the Feasts un∣der the Law;) see Luke 22. And at this Supper He did take and Minister Bread and the Cup to his Disciples (for there was no Transubstantiation) saying. This do in remembrance of me; and said the A∣postle, As often as ye shall eat this Bread and drink this Cup, ye shew the Lords Death till he come. 1 Cor. 11. After this they did more clearly know His coming, and Christ after the Spirit; Jesus Christ in them, 2 Cor, 13.5. and 5.16. 2d And Christ said to his Disci∣ples, I will not drink henceforth of this Fruit of the Vine until that day I drink it new with you in my Fathers Kingdom, Mat. 26.29. And likewise of the Bread, I will not any more eat thereof, until it be
fulfilled in the Kingdom of God, Luke 22.16. And he further said, I appoint un∣to you a Kingdom as my Father hath ap∣pointed to me, that ye may Eat and Drink at my Table in my Kingdom, &c. Luke 22.29, 30. In these things we believe he spoke mysteriously, and that every Member of his Spiritual Church, doth daily spiritually partake of his Body and Blood by Faith, as the Cup of Blessing which we Bless, is it not the Communi∣on of the Blood of Christ? And the Bread which we break, is it not the Com∣munion of the Body of Christ? for we being many are One Bread, and One Bo∣dy, for we are all partakers of that ONE Bread, 1 Cor. 10.15, 16, 17. The Son of God saith, Behold I stand at the Door and knock, if any man hear my Voice, and open the Door, I will come into him, and will SUP with him, and he with me, Rev. 3.20. And Wisdom calleth to the sim∣ple, Come Eat of my Bread, and Drink of my Wine, Prov. 9.4, 5. And saith Christ, The Bread of God is he that cometh down from Heaven, and giveth Life unto the
World. I am that Bread of Life; my Flesh is Meat indeed, and my Blood is Drink indeed. He that Eateth my Flesh, and Drinketh my Blood, dwelleth in me, and I in him, John 6. We believe that all who thus do truly partake of Christ by Faith, are in true Communion and Love among themselves, which they do want who are only in the outward Ob∣servation of Sign and Shadows. Quest. Do you own the Seals of the New Covenant? Answ. Yes, as the New Covenant i Spiritual, so are the Seals thereof (a they may be termed) proper to it, and therefore we believe they stand not in a∣ny external Shadow, Sign or Figure, bu in spirit and substance, the Seals of the New Covenant (which is inward and spiritual) must needs be the Evidence▪ Testimony, and work of the Holy Spirit giving us assurance through Faith of our share and interest in that Covenant. Se what the Holy Scripture saith in this case; see 2 Cor. 1.22. Who hath also seal¦ed us, and hath given us the earnest of th
spirit in our Hearts. Ephes. 1.13. After hat ye believed ye were sealed with the oly spirit of Promise. And Ephes. 4.30. And grieve not the holy spirit of God where∣y ye are sealed unto the day of Redemp∣ion. Our Christian sense and belief in these Matters may be briefly summ'd up in hat follows, viz. 1. We believe, That the spiritual ap∣earance, and living enjoyment of Christ  spirit, is above all outward signs, sha∣ows, or figures, or a Remembrance on∣y of him thereby. And that Christ more learly discovers himself by his Spirit in he New Covenant, than by any outward Representations in the Old, or thereunto ppertaining. 2. That the One Baptism of the Spirit s a Seal or Confirmation of the New Co∣venant to true Believers, and of them n it; and so is their spiritual Eating and Drinking with Him in his Kingdom a
certain Assurance, Seal or Evidence o their Spiritual Communion with him, and in him. 3. As all outward shadows and figure were of a decreasing nature, so there  the substance thereof, which they poin¦ed at, and wherein they ended, thoug the names given to the shadows wer carried along to the substance also, tha it might the more plainly appear in Scri∣pture how the shadows were fulfilled i the substance Christ; as in the Old Co∣venant there was outward Circumcision of the Flesh; in the New, there is th inward Circumcision of the Spirit. I the Old, there was divers Washings o Baptisms, Heb. 9.10. In the New. the One Baptism of Christ; in the Old, the Feast of the outward Passeover kept with Unleavened Bread, and other Feasts observed, &c. in the New Covenant, Je∣sus Christ is our Passeover, and the Feast is to be kept with Unleavened Bread of Sincerity and Truth; and here the One
Bread of Life is known and received. 4. We do not read nor find in Scrip∣ure, that One outward Type or Sha∣ow, was a Type of another Type out∣ward, but always of the thing Typified r Shadowed forth, which was the sub∣tance and end of that Shadow or Type, s may be shown at large, if any under∣ake to shew us any shadow or thing that s figurative in its own nature (mention∣d in Scripture) which they suppose we annot shew the substance of, under the ame Name or Title. Quest. Do you believe and own the Ho∣ Scriptures, contained in the Books of the Old and New Testament, to be given by Divine Inspiration, and to contain all Mat∣ers of Doctrine and Testimony, &c. neces∣sary to be believed and practiced in order o Salvation, and Peace with God? Answ. Yes, we do, and by the assis∣ance of the Grace and good Spirit of
God, which gives the true understan¦ing of the mind of God, and meaning Holy Scripture, we alwaies desire to li in the Faith, Knowledge and Practice them in all things appertaining to Li and Godliness, Holy Scripture being gi¦en by Divine Inspiration, is profitable  Doctrin, Correction, and Instruction, th the Man of God may be perfect, th¦rowly furnished unto every good Wo able to make the Man of God wise u¦ salvation, through Faith in Christ Jes Writ in behalf of the People of God c¦led QUAKERS, by some of them.
