18507.338 [ocm]68222498 183770
Century 3. Numb. 27. Nevves of this present weeke from Germany, Italy, and Spaine, the greatest that came these many yeers, in one weeke. The generall heads are as follow: A great overthrow given by Generall Stalhanse, to the Count of Mansfield in Silesia. A greater blow given to Piccolomini, by Generall Bannier in Saxonie, neere Erfurd. Two great victories obtained by the French in Italy, with the taking Prisoner of Prince Thomas of Savoy, as the Letters report. The generall discontent of the Subjects of the King of Spain in Catalona, a Kingdome bordering upon France. With other very remarkable passages. LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Butter. Iune 6. 1640. With Privilege.
Norimberg. Millaine, 6. 16. May. THE French Generall Count of Harcourt hath caused to bee pillaged and burned downe in his return from Cazall towards Thurino many places in Piemont and Montferat, which heertofore denied him provision for his Armie, he hath likewise fired the faire place of Firenzo, where he caused the inhabitants to bee chased into the fire, and three of the chiefest to be nailed to the gate, where they hung so long till they were starved; afterwards he pitched his campe within an howres going from Thurino, and thought to master the said Citie with the helpe of some traitors, and a mine, which from the Castle went very farre into the Citie, but being it was discovered to Prince Thomas, hee turned all the French Merchants out of the Citie, and did cast into prison ma∣ny chiefe Citizens, as also the Count of Harcourts Secretarie, who got secretly into the Citie, and caused some of the ringlea∣ders to be hanged: wherefore the said Count of Harcourt assal∣ted one passage which was but one quarter of howres going from the Citie, and though he was beaten off three or fowre times with some losse by the Marquis Serra, yet at last he maste∣red the same, and put all to the sword in it: afterwards hee ma∣stered also the bridge over the River of Poe, the Suburbs of Thurino, as also Settio and other places, that no reliefe and pro∣ision can be brought into the Citie; wherfore our Governour Marquis de Leganes rose from Verzelly and marched thither∣wards with the Armie consisting of eighteene thousand men oth horse and foot, to succour and relieve the said Citie, with he helpe of Prince Thomas: at Finate are likewise arrived 14.
Galleies with three thousand foot, as also foure hundred chests with Reals, and 200. thousand crownes in gold for this Citie, those three thousand souldiers are marching already towards the Armie. The Duke of Parma is now at Venice, it is thought that he will likewise come into the League, and the French King is likewise desired by the Pope to come into it. The Spaniards had an enterprise in hand against the Citie of Leucata, wherefore the French fortifie the same place more and more, and draw together all the forces in Languedock. Marshal de Shomberg is carried prisoner into the Castle at Mompelier, what the reason of it is, is not knowne. Basel, 8. 18. May. The French King hath sent 900000. Francks to the Wey∣marish Armie, Lievetenant Generall Tupadel, Fieldmarshall Shmitborger, Shavelitzky, Zillhart, and other Colonels are yet at Strasburg, they have no great mind to go to the Armie, because Baron de Oissenville, unto whom are sent yet from Paris 300000. francks is to command as the French Kings Lievetenant in Bris∣sack next after Generall Major Erlack, but Colonel Hatzstein will not condiscend unto it, except he sees first order from the Directors of the Weymarish Armie. The Imperialists straggle continually with strong parties into Alsatia, and at Shoenaw in the Plackwood five houres going from hence some hundreds are enqurtered. Collen 10. 20. May. The Count of Guyche fortifies his camp before Charlemont still more and more, the losse before Cazall causeth great alte∣ration, Monsieur de Bordeaux is to lead ten thousand men more into Italy, and Villeroy fixe thousand, and Monsieur Hallier is to
lead six thousand men to the Duke of Longuevile his Armie. Strasburg May 21. 21. On Saturday last the Imperiall Colonell Bamberger with 1000. men both horse and foote had an enterprise in hand a∣gainst the City of Hagenaw, but his plot was discovered by an untimely shot, and was forced to retire. Eysfield May 15. 25. The Imperiall and Swedish Armie ly on the River of Saala neare Salfield within a musquet shot one from the other, they play uncessantly both day and night with their Canons one a∣gainst another, especially the other day Generall Bannier plaid most fiercely against the Bavarians, with 3000. horse strong came into the Campe; the rest of the Bavarian troops ly likewise not farre from the Imperiall campe, and expect within few daies the rest of their troopes, which are drawne together from all places, insomuch that without all question we shall shortly heare of great blowes, to which end hot skirmishes passe alrea∣dy betwixt them every day, and the Imperalists have taken pri∣soners diverse of the Luneburgish troopes. The Imperiall com∣missarie Fuse, who went to Erfurd to Generall Bannier, is come back agine to Cronach, where he was put into prison, it is thought, that he will loose his life. Collen May 27. 37. The Imperiall Colonell Meuter hath by a stratgeme the strong Castle of Sicherg, which was guarded by the Duke of New∣burg his forces, the letters from Paris of the 9.19. of this moneth certifie: that the French King is gone towards Rein to bee the nearer to the siege before Charlemont, and at Paris
was sung Te Deum laud amus for the victory, which the French had before Cazall. Hamberugh May 9. 19. The King of Denmark continues still to leave strong forces both for sea and land, insomuch that by all appearance it will prove a warre betwixt him and the Hollanders. The 5. of this moneth Otto Brukman, who was sent Embassador by the Duke of Holstein to the king of Persia, was beheaded at Gotterp. Erfurd May 17. 27. After that Generall Bannier was gone with his Armie towards the river of Saala, the Imperalists put themselves into battle betwixt the river of Saala and Salfield, but being the Swedes plaid so fiercely against them with their Canons, the y were forced to forsake that ground, and on the other side of the Ci∣ty of Salfield in a valley they put themselves into battle think∣ing to keepe back there the Swedish Army but some of the Swe∣dish Regiments got immediatly with 40. peeces of ordinance over the River of Saala, took by force the Redout which the Im∣peralists had made upon the Hill, in which action Colonel Slang lost his right arme, which was shot off by a peece of ord∣nance, whereupon the Swedes planted immediatly their Ca∣nons upon the hill, wherewith they plaid most fiercely into the Imperiall Campe, and kild a great many of the Imperalists, insomuch that they were forced to forsake the same valley and they lie now in a valley betwixt two hils, wherefore Colonell Coning smark is commanded with many troopes to cut off from them below the forrage and provision, that for want of them they may likewise be forced to rise from thence, to which end the Swedes have taken already the Magazins, which the Impe∣riallists had at Hahla, Newstat and Besniek, wherein they
found a great store of provision, and obtained a great number of wagons loaden with provision, which intended to goe to the Imperiall Campe, both parties shoote yet with their Canons uncessanly one against another, in so much that on both fides above foure thousand men are slaine already, the Swedes strive above all to take the baggage from the Imperiallists, for with∣in five or six daies both parties will bee forced to looke out o∣ther quarters: at this instant we heare that the Imperiall Armie is retiring towards Frangonia, the Barbarian forces lie for the present yet about Hilpershausen six leagues from Piolomines Armie. From Vienna and Prague we have no other newes, but 11.21. of this moneth, the Emperour is risen from thence and gone towards Regenspurg, the report goes, that a generall Dyet shall be kept there. From Frankford. Lyon May 2. 12. THe Burgundians with some few troopes are come unawares before Poligny and fling many fire bals and hand Grana∣dons into it; wherefore the Marquis of Villaroy, who with his Armie lies at Borde three leagues from Chalon hath comman∣ded thitherwards with all speede five hundred foote and foure 100. horse to succour the said place. This weeke many troopes both horse and foote are passed hereby and gone towards Pie∣mont to joyne with the Count of Harcourt. Being the Spanyards in Catalogina have some enterprise in hand against the City of Lemata, wherefore the French Go∣vernour there Monsieur Despinan causeth the said City to bee more fortified, and in Languedok they draw all the French roopes together.
Greiffenberg in Silesia May 4. 14. The ninth of this moneth the Saxon and Brandenburgish Regiments of horse arived about Sittaw, from thence they thought to goe towards Hirshberg to joyne theirs with the Im∣periall Armie under the command of the Count of Mansfield, to which end they had come as farre already as Lawben, where they received intelligence, that Generall Major Stolhans with eight Regiments of horse was come already as farre as Hirshberg, wherefore the Saxon and Branderburgish Regi∣ments were forced to retire, because the tenth of this moneth the said Generall Mjor Stolhans had charged already the Impe∣riall troopes about Shoene betwixt Hirshberg and Goldenberg namely seven Regiments of horse, which together with two peeces of Ordnance thought to goe towards Hirshberg to begin the same, and the foot forces together with the rest of the Artil∣erie should have followed from Striega, but the said Generall Major Stolhans in his fuery fell upon three Imperiall Regiments of horse, and dispersed the same and obtained the two pieces of Ordnance together with all the baggage, the other foure Imperiall Regiments of horse were chased as farre as Smicberg Landshut and Striega, which action both Colonels Palefsky & Limpo were taken prisones. The 8. Swedish Regiments lie yet about Hirshberg: this day the aforesaid Generall Major Stolhans is to have his Head quarter at Lemberg 2. leagues from hence. Basel May 8. 18. The Imperiall Captaine Bssinger hath stragled againe as far as Benfield, intercepted some of these French and Wemarish souldiers and returned with a good booty to Phillipsberg.
Dresden the 8. 18. of May. After that the Castle of Tershen was surrendred unto the Imperialists and Saxons, the Saxon Generall Sergeant Major Delau came yesterday hither againe with the Artillerie; And at this instant we receive likewise avisoes, that the Castle of Toylitz was yesterday likewise surrendred by composition. Generall Major Stollhans hath chased the Saxon horsemen be∣yond Sittaw, and the Brandenburgish horsemen are gone again towards Berlin. Duringen the 11. 21. of May. Generall Piccolomini lyes in his entrenched campe betwixt Iehna and Salfeld on th' other side of the River of Saala, and the Swedish Army about Rudelstatt on this side, where they one against another out of ye Canons play vncessantly. The Im∣perialists expect every day the Bavarian Army, assoone as they have joyned together we shall heare of great newes, because for want of forrage they will not be able to lye long there, but must fight a pitch'd battaile: Generall Banniers Ladie and some Officers, which were left at Erfurd, are gone this day with a Convoy vnder the command of Colonell Heigings towards the Army, insomuch that it is believed, that Generall Bannier will march towards Gera and Zwickaw. The Imperiall Co∣lonell Gill de Haes hath close besieged againe the Castle of Mas∣feld, and straggle as farre as Eysenach. Antwerp the 12. 22. of May. From Artois is written, that the French intend to march likewise towards Flanders, and to joyne with the Hollanders, wherefore the Imperiall Generall Major Lamboy is to joyne with the Prince Cardinall Infanta, insomuch that it will prove a bloody summer. Vienna the 13. 23. of May. The Emperour hath bestowed vpon the Ambassadour of Turkie a stately golden chaine, and the peace with the Empe∣rour of Turky Sultan Ibraim is confirmed, whereupon the 11.21. of this moneth his Majestie went from hence towards Re∣genspurg, where a generall Dyete shall be kept.
Bonn the 15. 25 of May. Yesterday morning 400 Imperiall soldiers under the com∣mand of Colonell Meuter, which came from Mulheim, have taken the strong castle of Sieburg being guarded by the Duke of Newburg his forces, which made a shew as if they would carry Hay and straw into the said Castle, fell presently vpon the watch and thus tooke the City and Castle by force. Duringen the 16. 26. of May. Generall Bannier lyes with his army yet about Rudelstatt, and the Imperiall Generall Piccolomini at Salfeld, the Bavari∣an succour consisting of 17. Regiments hath now joyned with the said Piccolomini. Before the Bavarian troopes arrived, Generall Bannier gave an assault vpon the Roten-Hill neare Salfeld, to see whether he could play from thence into Picco∣lominies Campe, which at last he mastered, in which action Generall Major Pful was slaine, Colonell Slanghs right arme shot off, and Colonell Bawer dangerously shot, besides many other Officers, insomuch that on both sides above 4000 men are already slaine, the Swedes have taken from the Imperialists 2. Sconces. yet they could not get Piccolomini out of Salfeld, both Armies lye now so close together, that they could not lye closer, insomuch that without a pitch'd battaile, they can not part one from the other. Coburg the 14. 24. of May. This morning we received avisoes, that 6000 Swedish horse∣men have surprized an Imperiall quarter betwixt Rudelstatt and Mulberg, slaine some 100 of them, tooke many prisoners and obtained 9 standards. Both parties have order to fight. Paris the 18. 28. of May. The 9. of this moneth 150 horsemen and 70. foote of the garrisons of Chastelet. Peronne and St. Quentin went towards the Fort of Agincourt, which lyes betwixt Baupalme and Cambray, and after that they had surprized and pilladged the same they discry'd some Spanish forces both horse and foote, which were gone into France, whom they followed, they came into the Village of Ronsoy where they perceived an A∣larum
in the Vlage of Agincourt neere Chastilet, where the enemy hath takn many Prisoners and obtained many horses and a rich booty, whereupon our souldiers marched against them and found them strong 3 Companies of horse divided into 3 Squadrons, and seconded by 30 foote with fire-locks, and being come in sight of the enemy our Horsemen divided themselves into 5 Squadrons, which gave so fierce fire against the enemy, that with the first charge they kill'd a Marshall and 11. horsemen and pursued after the rest to the first Fort of their Country, where some few saved themselves, but 60: were taken prisoners, all the goods, which they had taken were restored againe to the Peasants. Erfurd the 14. 24 of May. At this instant wee receive avisoes, that Generall Bannier hath totally routed and defeated the Crabats that very few of them escaped alive. A List of the overthrow of the Spanish Army before Cazall the 20. 30 of Aprill. In the River of Poe are drowned above a 1000 souldiers, and in the field were found dead 2300 men. Wounded 1400. Prisoners 2000. Wagons loaden with Baggage were taken 1500. 2000 Barrels of Gun-powder, 1000 weight of Mat∣ches, 2000 Fire-balls, 4000 weight of Musquet bullets, 30 Coaches, 4000 Carts and Wagons, 9 great Pieces of Ord∣nance, and 36 others; 2 Morter pieces, 52 Ensignes, 32 Stan∣dards. Of the Prisoners that were taken, the chiefest are Vas∣quiet Lieutenant Generall of the Artillery, Don Carlo Hatta, Count Biglia, Marquis Bellaviano, Don Alphonso and others; Of those that were then slaine, the chiefest are Don Alardy, Marquis Carisana Generall of the Horse, the Baron of Osuman Lieutenant Generall of the horse, Field-marshall Mora, Mar∣quis de Sancto, besides many Captaines and other Officers. An Extract of a Letter from Franckford the 24of May, the 3 of Iune. As for newes I cannot but certifie you, that we have rceived
certaine avisoes, that 4000 Imperiall Curassiers and 3000 light horsemen are totally routed and defeated by the Swedes, and that an Austrian Earle is brought prisoner into Erfurd, yea they say, that the whole Imperiall Army is overthrowne and Piccolomini mortally wounded, (some have letters, that 28000 of the Imperialists are slaine and taken prisoners, the certain∣ty whereof we shall heare by the next.) It is likewise certaine, that the Swedish Generall Major Stollhans with his Army hath likewise defeated the Imperiall Army in Silesia, and that he is gone already into Bohemia and come as farre as Leutmaritz, so that the Imperialists have their enemy before and behind them. The last letters from France bring certaine newes, that the French vnder the command of the Count of Harcourt hath taken by assault the City of Thurino, and Prince Thomas pri∣soner, and they write also, that the said Count of Harcourt hath given againe an vtter overthrow to the Spanish Army, which was comming to relieve the said City of Thurino. They write also from Paris that the whole Kingdome of Catalonia is in vproare and that they have kill'd already many 1000 Castil∣lions. From Holland. Erford the 8. 18. of May. THe other day about 11. of the clocke the Luneburgish, Hessish, and Weymarish forces arrived safely here, and be∣fore this City in the open field they keepe a generall mustering the Generalls of the said forces were received by Generall Ban∣nier with great reverence, all the Canons discharged and a val∣ley of shot made with musquets. Yesterday rose from hence the whole Army & marched against Gen: Piccolomini, who lyes on the River of Saala, Fieldmarshall Hatzfeld hath already for∣saken his quarter, and is retired over the River of Saala, throw¦ing off all bridges over the said River: The Army of General Bannier consisted of 22000. horse and foote, the Weymarish consisted of 10000. men: the Hessish and Luneburgish Army o 12000. men, all stout and lusty souldiers. The Imperialists
likewise very strong, they speake of 60000. men. The Castle of Tetshen in Bohemia is surrendred upon discretion to the Saxon and Imperiall troopes, after that they had taken by as∣sault the out-workes, and were ready to doe the like to the Castle. The Swedish Gen: Major Stollhans hath defeated in Silesia neare Hirshberg and Goldberg the Imperiall Army un∣der the command of the Count of Mansfield, ruinated 3 Regi∣ments and obtained all the baggage, and taken prisoners both Colonels Palofsky and Limpo together with others. Paris the 9. 19. of May. This day was sung heere Te Deum laudamus for the Victory, which the Count of Harcourt had in Italy. The French King hath sent faire presents to the Count of Harcourt, and hath made the Governour in Cazall an Earle, and to all the Officers which had performed good service in the fight, presents were given. Vpon this Victory the said Count of Harcourt hath be∣sieged the City of Thurino, and hath reinforced his army with 4000. men, and 6000. more, which are already in the way, are likewise to joyne with him. The Baron of Arnault hath be∣fieged the Castle of Poligny in the French County, but was beaten away againe by Marquis Villeroy, who obtained all his Canons and Baggage: Duke Charles of Lorraine hath like∣wise had some losse. Wee have newes here, that the Count of Harcourt hath ta∣ken the bridge over the River of Poe, the Capuryner Sconce before Thurino and all the outworkes, insomuch that the City will likewise not be able to hold out long. Yesterday wee re∣ceived avisoes, that the City is taken already by assault, and that all the Spanyards are put to the sword, and Prince Tho∣mas taken prisoner. The French King is gone to Reims to keepe his Court there to be the nearer to the fiege of Charlemont. Liege the 16. 26. of May. Charlemont is now close besieged and Monsieur de Mil∣leray is likewise to come with his army before it. The French King is at Soy sons. At Hesdin and Dourans are erected great Magazins. The Spanish Army under the com∣mand
of the Marquis of Leden hath order to march towards Mabeuse to succour and relieve Charlemont. The report goes that 40 barrels of Gun-powder in the camp before Charlemont, some speak of more, are blown up, wch hath done great harme both to the men and to the Artillery. The French have plun∣dered and afterwards sired Orimont, Guay, and Chimay. Hamberough the 16. 26. of May. Generall Piccolomini hath mustered his Campe, and is passed thereupon the River of Saala taking his Head-quarter betwixt Witsensea & Longen Salzato expect their the Swedish Army: In the meane time the said Piccolomini caused the little City of Ilmen to be surprised, wherein he ruinated betweene 2 and 300. Swedish souldiers: Generall Bannier is risen from Ersurd with a strong Army, if Piccolomini doth stand to it, it will prove a most bloody battaile. Sluys the 17. 27. of May. The Prince of Orange lyes with his army yet at Maldegem, where hee doth entrench himselfe; In the encounter neare the new Ferry, wherof mention was made heretofore, we have lost 38 men and 40 were wounded, since that time nothing is passed. Count William of Nassaw Field marshall could not hitherto do much good upon the Fort of St. Donaes, though he lyes very nigh to it, and they can fling into hand granadoes, he playes continually with his Canons upon it, and makes the same like a heape of earth: He labours likewise very hard to get over the River of Soete, over the Zoute he hath a bridge and two Batteries standing upon the Ditch. The Spanyards have cut through the Zoute with a trench to maintaine the better the River of Soere, if we doe maister the same then the said Sconce is lost, because all succour and provision is then cut off from them. Flussingen the 17. 27. of May. Here are arrived 3 ships, which came from Bordeaux, they have beene fighting for 6 houres long against 2 Dunkerck Fre∣gats, one whereof carryed 18 and th'other 26 peeces of Ord∣nance: The 13.23. of this moneth went through Gent towards Bruges, the Count of Fountaine with many forces: Generall
Major Lamboy is going with his Army towards Mamur, Marquis de Leden, who lay the 13.23. of this moneth about Bael os to joyne with him. From the Imperiall Campe at Salfeld the 12. 22. of May. The 8.18. of this moneth about 10. of the clocke in the forenoone Gen: Bannier came with his whole army in a great fury before our Campe and finding us in a good posture after some hot skirmishes marched the same night towards Rudel∣stat, and the 9.19. of this moneth presented himselfe againe in battaile array; We remained in our trenches, and the charges dured all the day long, assoone as the Bavarian forces have joyned with us, we shall resolve another thing, in the meane time Gen: Bannier descryes all the passages hereabouts, and we feare, that he will besiege us and march against Leipzigh, ye∣sternight Generall Bannier came to Rudelstat, and being he is better furnished with provision, it is likely he will stay herea∣bouts a good while. Last night hee had his quarter in both Valleys Blanckenberg and Rudelstat, and neare the Cloyster of Munchenberg he planted the Canons, and advanced within 2 or 3 musquet shorts of our trenches, and being we can get no provision from Altenburg and Swartzenburg, we shall shortly resolve one way or other. Franckford the 18. 28. of May. From Prague and Leipzigh is written that the Swedish Ge∣nerall Major Stollbans hath defeated about Hirishberg in Silesia 9 Imperiall Regiments, taken a great number prisoners, a∣mongst which are Colonell Palofsky and Limpo, obtained all their Canons and baggage, and upon this victory he advanced within 8 leagues of Leutmaritz. From Franconia of the 15.25. of this moneth is written, that Generall Bannier hath burn'd downe the Suburbes at Kala, found a great store of provision in the City and maistered a passage over the River of Saala, from thence he marched to∣wards Katzestein, not farre from Salfeld. The Crabats which were commanded against him are totally routed and defea∣ted.
Flussingen the 19. 29. of May. St. Donaes remaines yet close besieged, Count Willi hath put foure Companies behind the Sconce together with morter peece to send from thence continually fire-balls int the said Fort. The Spanyards come yet in and out the For along the river of Soete, and within the Sconce they have made divers deepe holes into the wall to shelter themselves a∣gainst the Granadoes, and the women and children are for th most part departed out of the Sconce; In the meane time th besieged shoot very little with their Canons, and the othe Sconces as namely St. Frederick & the Star-sconce shoot lesse onely those of St. Iob thunder continually with thheir canons. The ships wch transported our horsmen lie before Ramekins Vpon the Ditch of the Soete and Zoute they shoot fiercely one upon another: Flushingen the 21. 31. of May. The Prince of Orange lyes with his Army yet at Maldeg there is as yet but little hope of the getting of St. Dona long as wee cannot get over the river of Soete. Amsterdam the 23 of May, the 2 of Iune. The 16.26 of this moneth, Marquis de Leden marched with 8000 men both horse and foote over the bridge at Antmery The gates at Hulst have been kept shut above three dayes long▪ and suffered no man to come in or out. The report goes, that the French King and Marshall de Ch¦stillien are comming with a strong army towards Flanders, it is thought that they will joyne with the Prince of Orange. All the bands of Ordonnancie are now in the field, out o every Company 20 men are taken and put under the weal Spanish companies. Our Admirall Martin Harpers Tromp, wee heare is to go within few dayes to Sea. The French continue still the fiege before Charlemont, an fortifie themselves before it exceedingly. Imprimatur Philip. Minutelius. LONDON, Printed for NATH: BUTTER.
