4617 S118627 99853834 177553
FOVRE GODLIE and profitable Sermons prea∣ched by Maister THOMAS CAREVV, The first against popery or false religion. Mathew. 16. 18. 2 The second against Atheisme the enimy to reli∣gion. Psalm. 53. 1 3 The third against Hypocrisie, the counterfeit of religion. Mathew. 7. 5. 4 The fourth against apostacie, the falling from re∣ligion. Mathew 12. 31. AT LONDON Imprinted by G. S. For George Pot and are to be sould at his shop in  Paules Church-yard at the signe of the Byble, 16.
TO THE RIGHT Honorable Sir George Carew, Baron of Clapton, Lord president of Monster, vice chamber∣laine and receiuer generall to the QVEENES Maiestie and liefetenant of the Ordinance. BEing moued (right honorable) by some learned and godly brethren, to publish this little booke, and order requi∣ring that I should doe it vnder some mans name, that might, if need weare, giue countenance thereunto, and wisdome perswading me to make choise of your Honor before any o∣ther, both in respect of your mynde; so well fauoring the truth of the
doctrine therein conteyned, and of your place so fytt to further the same; the former experience of your hono∣rable disposition promising me wil∣ling acceptation, I haue bene bould to present this small treatise to your Honors reading and good lyking, ho¦ping for this fruit thereof at the least that it may open vnto me a dore of further opportunity to performe the dutie of seruice which by and from my birth I haue owed you, and of thankfulnes which your late and honourable fauourhath more bound me vnto, wishing (if I may be bould to aduise one that is counseller to a Princes.) that your great and weigh∣tie affaires notwithstanding, your Honor may haue (I say not a mynd which I know you haue allready) but some time to be imployed in theise thinges that are of a heauenly qua∣lity, seing the fruit thereof is great not onely in thincrease of earthly
honour and prefeēr in this world, according to the will and promise of God made to godsse, but especial∣ly in the heauēly glorie of the world to come, when a full reward shall be bestowed vpon those who haue trewly and faithfullie indeauored to set forth his honor and glorie by furthering his religion, and vertue. Your Honors in all kinde of affection and humble dutie, to comaund alwaies in Christ Iesus Thomas Carew.
The Epistle to the Reader. CHRISTIAN reader, hauing: for the benefit o natural frende another book, writ∣ten of the mistery of frue religion, I haue beene mooued for the same reason, to write these foure Sermons. The first against false religion. The second against A∣theisme the enemy to religion, the third against hipocrisie the counter∣feyt of religion, and the fourth against Apostacy, the falling from religion, praying god we may haue grace to se and flie that which is false, with detestation; to se and follow that which is trew with acceptation, and be vpright and contynew in it vnto saluation.
Foure godly and profita∣table Sermons. Mathew. 16. 18. And I say also to thee that thou art Peter: and vpon this rocke I will build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not euercome it. 19 And I will giue vnto thee the keyes of the kingdome of heauen, and whatso∣euer thou shalt binde vpon earth shal∣be bound in heauen, and whatsoeuer thou shalt loose on earth shalbe losed in heauen. OVR sauiour Christ hath in the 15. verse asked this question of his disciples, whom they did say he was, which que∣stion Peter answered, as it is in the 16. verse, saying, thou art the Christ
the sonn of the lyuing God. Whereto our Sauiour Christ hath begun to reply in the 17. verse telling Peter he was the sonne of Iona, not the na∣turall sonne of the liuing GOD, as Christ was, but the sonne of Iona a mortall man: yet that he was the a∣dopted sonne of god, for that he had not this knowledge of Christ from man but from God, not from his na∣turall birth but from his spirituall birth. Now these wordes are a contynu∣ance of our sauiour Christes speech to Peter. From hence the papists, would proue that Peter was Prince of tha∣postles, that he was head of the Church, that he had absolute auc∣thority giuen him to remit and re∣taine synnes & that the rest of tha∣postles had this authoritie but by Peters graunt and appointmnt: all which they would deriue to the Pope
of Rome by successiō, for they say he is vniuersall and chiefe Bishop, he is head of the catholicke Church, h hath the keyes to binde and loose & those only that he will appoint, they say the Pope hath the holy ghost and cannot err, & consequently may doe what he list in the Church. Vpon this place they ound al the building of Poperie, therefore if this scripture be takē from them, all their religion falles to the ground. For if Peter were not prince or chiefe of thapostles, the Pope who they say is his successor cannot be vniuersall Bishop; if Peter were not head of the Church, the Pope that claimes from him cannot be head of the Catholick Church; if peter had not absolute aucthority to remit & retaine synnes, the Pope cannot haue it, and then it will follow that the pope professeth himselfe to be that he is not, and to be able to doe that he cannot and so that
scar the Pope is Antichrist, and that pealet colored beast which saint Iohn fullkes of in the Reuelation, that is  of names of blasphemy. First the Papists say Peter was cheefe of the Apostles but why doe they say so? he was not the first that was called to be an apostle: Andrew was he. Peter was not the best belo∣ued disciple. Iohn was he. Peter was not the learnedest nor most labori∣ous disciple, Paull was he, as the Iesu∣ites them selues confesse that paull brought moe into the Church, then Peter did, but the papists draw two reasons from the former wordes to proue Peter cheife of the Apostles. 1 Their first reason is, because the other disciples gaue place to Peter to speake first in answering our Sa∣viour Christes question which is a slender reason, for it followes not, be∣cause he spake first, that they gaue place to him to speake first, but rather
that he put forth himselfe to speake first, by a kinde of audacity and bould∣nes of speech & dexterity of wit that was in him, which yet was as often vsed to euill as to good. 2 There second reason is, because they say, Peter was the first that con∣fessedIohn. 1. Christ to be the sonne of God, but that is not so: for it appeares in Iohn. 1. that Iohn Baptist, and Natha∣niell and in Mathew. 14. 33. that ma¦ny other had made the same confessi∣on of Christ, before this time, and it appeareth in Iohn. 6. 69. that the rest of the Apostles themselues had also made this confession of Christ before this time, & the confession that Peter made, was not his confession only but of the rest of the Apostles also, who spake by his mouth for the avoyding of confusion, as among twelue Iurors one foreman speakes for them all, for order sake. Now as their reasons are feble &
false, so is the thing that they would proue by those reasons▪ for though all thapostles are cheife among other ministers, yet there was no cheife a∣mong them as appeares in Marke the 9. 34. where they dreaming of an earthly Kingdome of Christ, did dis∣puteMark. 9. 4. among themselues who should be cheife, which our Sauiour Christ reproues in them as the text shewes and that Peter was not cheife of tha∣postles, appeares by this that thapo∣stlesActs. 8. 14. sent him on their message to Sa∣maria: if he had bin cheife he should rather haue sent some of them. Also that Peter was not cheife, appeares by this that he gaue to Paul theGal. 2. 9. 1, Pet. 5. 4. right hād of fellowship: neither doth Peter call himselfe the cheife shep∣heard but calls Christ so in his first epistle and last chapter. But that we may the better vndermine & throw downe the cheife ground and foun∣dation of the popish religion let vs
5 come to the wordes that I haue red. Verse. 16. thou art Peter. &c. OVr Sauiour Christes purpose is in theis wordes to teach that though the church were now small and there were but few did make a right confession of fayth: yet their should be a great many gathered in∣to the church, and brought to the same profession of Christ that Peter had made by the preaching of the Gospell, which was committed to him and the rest of the apostles, as the keyes to open the kingdome of heauē. Yet the papist gather frō these words because our Sauiour Christe spake so particulerly to Peter, ther∣fore Peter was the head and foun∣dation of the Church; but the scrip∣ture saith Christ himselfe is the head of the church who doth geue life & mouing to it being his body, whichCol. 1. 18 no other man can doe: and is alwaies present with the same and euery mē∣ber
thereof which no other man can be; and therefore Peter or any other man can no more be head of the Church then a mans head can be cut from his shoulders, and set on another bodie. Paull would not giue that honor to the angells to be head of the church, much lesse to a mortal man, as ye may se in his letter, to the. collo. 18. Colossians. But the cause of the pa¦pists error in this point is for that they do not mark the reasō of our sauiour christ his speaking thus to Peter: he had mooued this question to all his disciples, whoe doe you say that I am? Peter in the name of the rest answe∣redverse. 15. the question, therefore as he had spoken to our sauiour Christ he speakes to him againe. Peter had said to him. Thou art christ the sonne of the liuing God, and christ saith to him thou art peter if any of the rest of the Apostles had answered the que∣stion,
our sauiour would haue replied to them, and said Thou art Iames, or thou art Iohn, as he doth to Peter. But here is the force of the point, and speech that our sauiour christ saith. Vpon this rocke I will build my church.Io. 1. . Peter is called a stone, or as the papists will haue it, a rock which we will not much striue with them a∣bout, for as a rocke is a great stone so a stone may be said to be a little rocke, but as Peter is called a stone,Esai. 8. 4. 1. Cor. 1▪ 4. so our sauiour christ is called a stone, and as the papists will haue it, as Pe∣ter is called a rock, so our Sauiour christ is called a rock, now the que∣stion is vpon which of these two christ said he woud build his church for they were both spoken of in this conference, for Peter had said of him, Thou art christ the sonn of the liuing God and christ had said of him; thou art Peter, and the sonne of Ionas.
The papists refer these wordes to Pe∣ter, and say Christ built his church vpon Peter, but if christ built his church vpon Peter, then he must ey∣ther build it vpon the person of Peter or vpon his particuler fayth. And if Christ built his church vpon peters person, he built it vpon a man, yea vpon a weake man, as he present∣ly shewed himselfe verse. 22. and if the church were built vpon Peter, It was built on a mortall man, and therefore while he liued, he was not able to vphould the church, that could not vphould himselfe, & then whē he died, the church should haue fallen with him. And if the church were built vpon Peters particuler faith, it should be built vpon a weake faith, as our Sa∣uiour christ saith to him, o thou of lit¦tle faith. And his faith being a proper adiunct to his person, when he died, his faith ceased, and so the ChurchMat. 24. 31 . Cor. 13. 13 should haue fallen to the ground,
therefore these wordes, vpon this rocke will I build my church, must be vnderstood of that rock, which Pe∣ter had confessed, that is vpon Christ himselfe, who is not only man, but God: who is not weake but strong, who is not mortall but immortall: for though he died, yet he had not a mortall body; but dyed willingly for our sinns, and rose againe the third day for our iustification, it being im∣possible,Acts. 13. that death should hold him as it did Peter. Therefore Christ was the foundation of the church, as be∣fore his coming in the flesh being e∣ternall God, so at this time also; and the church was in no daunger of fal∣ling, when he dyed according to flesh, because then he liued in his de∣vine nature, and now he liues in both his natures, & is able to support the church and all the members of his mysticall body and stones of this spi∣rituall building who are ioyned vnto him by that faith that Peter had made
profession of: as appeareth both by the text where Christ saith on this rocke I will build my church, notEphes. 4. 12. thy church, and also by the words of the Apostle Paule, who saith the church must be edified and built on Christ, and also that this building is by faith, and therefore it cannot be vpon Peter in whom we must not be∣leeue, but on christ in whom all the church professeth, to beleeue in the articles of the creede. But why should the papists thinke Christ built his church vpon Peter? Was the church built vpon any one of the patriarchs or prophets before Christes comming in the flesh? whie then should it be built vpon any one of the Apostles after? Was not Christ aswel able to sus∣staine his church himselfe afterward as he had done before? and were any of the Apostles any more able to doe it, towards the end of the world, whē the church was greater, then the pa∣triarchs,
and prophets were in the beginning whē it was lesser? The pa∣pistes inforce the wordes of the text, and affirme boldly Christ saith so. To which I answere no, he doth not say so: he saith vpon this rocke I will build my church, but is not Christ himselfe, whō Peter confessed, a rock aswell as Peter? is not Christ another manner of rock then Peter? they are much like those that heard Christ say,Iohn. 2. destroy this temple & in three dayes I wil build it againe: they vnderstood it of the temple of Ierusalem, but Christ ment it of the temple of his body. Therefore as one saith when▪ Christ said to Peter: vpon this rock I▪ will build my church; he ment I wil build thee vpon me, and not me vpon thee. Indeed some auncyent deuines haue said the church was built vpon Peter, and in their sence they say trew, that is, as it was built vpon the rest of the Apostles: saint Iohn saith the walles of the Cittie new Ierusalē
that is the trew church had 12. Foun∣dations, which were the names of the lambes 12. Apostles: and in that senceEphes. 2. 20. the church was not built vpon the Apostles only but vpon the prophets also: as Paul speakes to the Ephesians and all Christians: ye are saith he built vpon the foundation of the prophets and Apostles Iesus Christ himselfe being the chiefe corner stone: Therefore the church was not built vpon their persons, but vpon their doctrine that setteth forth christ Iesus to the world to be beleeued on, as Peter himselfe saith of Christ; to whom ye come as vnto a liuing stone or rocke, and ye as liuely stones be made a spirituall house. The papists obiect that our sauiour Christ called. 2. 3. Peter a stone, which he did not any of the rest of the Apostles: so he called Iames and Iohn Bonarges, and none but they; yet it follows not that only they two were the sonnes of thunder, but that other of the Apostles did
preach zealously aswell as they; as Peter himselfe did thūder against Si∣monActs. 8. Magus & others. So though Christ called Peter a stone it folowes not that he was so alone, for Peter himselfe calls all the true members of the church liuing stones. And were1 Peter. 2. 3. not diuers other of the Apostles as stable and vnmoueable as Peter? nay was not he more weake & wauering then many of the rest? therefore it1. cor. 3. 11. followes that not Peter no more then any of the rest of the Apostles, but Christ is the rock whereō the church is builded: as Paul saith, other foun∣dation can no man lay thē that which is laid which is Iesus Christ: and all1. cor. 1. 12. that build must build on this founda∣tion: and all that are built must be built on him. This Peter knew well and therefore he did not baptise into his owne name, but into the name ofActs. 2. Christ: he did not preach himselfe but christ. Therefore Paul reproues the Corinthians, because some did hould
of Paul, and some of Cephas, & some of Christ: why saith he is Christ deui∣ded? shewing that he is the only foun∣dacion and head of his church, vnto whom all the members must cleaue in one body. Therefore the church is not called by Peters name, but byIo. 21. Christes name, that is Chrystians: & Christ doth not say to Peter, feed thy sheepe, but feed my sheepe. Therefore as other comparisons and similitudes of the Scripture, doephes. 5. Col. 1 10. 15. set forth the communion, betweene Christ and his church, as he is called the husband, and the church his spouse: he is called the head, and the church his members: he is called the vine, and the church his braunches: because of the mysticall vnion, and neerenesse that is betweene them, & spirituall vertue, that he conveyes vnto them, and they receiue from him. So by this that he is called the rocke or foundation, and the church the building: and it may as truly be
said that Peter was the spouse, to whome the Church is to be maried, that Peter was the vine, into whome the church is to be ingrafted: as it can be said, he is the rock whereon the church is builded. Therefore when it is said, on this rocke I will build my church: our sa∣uiour meanes as I said before, on that rocke that Peter had confessed, he would build the rest of his church,Acts. 13. that was to be gathered by the prea∣ching of the Gospel, that was comm∣itted to Peter, and the rest of the A∣postles, as the keyes of the kingdome of heauen. And the gates of hell shall not ouercome it. our Sauiour saith, the gates of hell shall not preuaile against or ouer∣come the church that is built vpon this rocke: he vses this similitude be∣cause in those times before gunnes were inuented the strength of cities was in their gates, & because they v∣sed to exercise their gouermēt, in the
gates: so that he meanes the power and aucthority of hell, shall not pre∣uaile against those that are built on this rocke, that is those that professe and beleeue in Christ, so that this must be vnderstood of the inuisible church, and such as be true members of Christ, & not of the visible church, or those that be members in shew only, for the deuill hath preuailed a∣gainst diuers visible churches: as the 7. churches of Asia, that are now I∣dolaters vnder the Turke, and against diuers perticular persons, that were members of the church in shew one∣ly as Iudas, Magus and others▪ but the inuisible and true members of the church, that beleeue in Christ, shall not be ouercome, but shall o∣uercome. This is the victorie saith1. Iohn. 5. saint Iohn whereby we ouercome the world, euen our faith. The deuill by temptations and his instruments by persecutions, will seeke to ouercome them, but our sauiour hath said, none
shal be able to take them out of hisIohn. 10 exod. 2. handes. The deuill and his instrumēts did seek to destroy the Iewes in Egypt, & Babylon: but they could not as for o∣ther causes, so because Christ was in their loines: so now he seeks to destroy the people of God, but he cannot be cause they are in Christs loyns, that is v∣nitedRo. 8 vnto him by faith, & made mēbers of his body. Therfore Paul meaning to cōfort the Christians against all tryalls both inward & outward, saith who shal seperate vs from the loue of God in Christ Iesus our lord? shall persecuti∣on? anguish? height? deepth? &c. & at egth cōcludes, nothing shalbe able to seperate vs, as our sauiour Christ saith here, the gates of hell shall not pre∣uaile against the church: which doth seeme to put that out of questiō that some haue made questionable, that the children of God cannot fall from grace, for those that are regenerate in Christ Iesus are borne1. Peter. 1.
not of mortall seede that may dy, but of mortall that cannot dy, those that haue obteyned the sanctifying giftesIohn. 7. of God, the spirit is in them a well of water springing vp vnto eternall life. For although the first Adam might and did lose his original good∣nes, both to himselfe and his poste∣ritie; yet the second Adam cannot nether to him nor to his. Therfore as our Sauiour Christ, whē he was in the flesh did ouercome the deuill & the power of hell, in his owne persō: so he doth continually ouercome in his members, and his members do ouercome in and by him: therefore Paul saith, we are more then conque∣rers in Christ Iesus, & if the gates of hell should preuaile against the church, Christ should be a head without a body; and if it should pre∣uaile against any true member of the church, Christ should haue a maymed body which cannot be: therefore as Christ the rocke it
selfe is firme and stable, so is euery stone and true christian that is built thereupon. But seeing we se, that by the church here against whom the gates of hell shall not preuaile, is meant not the visible but the inuisible church, andVerse. 19▪. the papists say, Peters successor is head of the visible Church, this place serues nothing for them and I will giue thee the keyes of &c. Now our sauiour shewes by what meanes the church should be built vpon that rocke that Peter had confessed, namely by the ministery of the Gospel whereby the elect peo∣ple1. Peter. 2. 4 of God who are called lyuing stones, should be gathered and ioy∣ned to Christ the corner stone, that they might be made one spirituall house as Peter speakes. The church was built vpp∣on the rocke Christ Iesus from
the beginning: but Christ speakes of thincrease of the church, among the gentiles, who should be called and gathered by the word, that he com∣mitted to Peter, and the rest of the Apostles, as the keyes of the King∣dome of heauen. Here the ministers are compared to porters, the preaching of the worde to keyes, the kingdome of hea¦uen to a house, wherinto men are let in, and shut out. Keeping the keyes we know doth signifie aucthoritie: therefore in this speech our sauiour Christ giues Peter aucthoritie to receiue in, and shut out of the church, which is often called the kingdome of heauen. By the keyes we must vnderst and the worde and mynisterie thereof, as it is said the Pharisees kept backe the key of knowledg from the people▪ now because by the ministery of theMathew. 3. worde they were to pronounce aswel gods mercie to some, called loosing, &
to open the dore of the church, as also to pronounce gods Iudgmēts called binding, & to shut the dore to others: herfore our sauiour speaks in the plur∣al nūber. In the 20 chapter of the Gos∣pellIohn. 20. 23 of Saint Iohn, our sauiour Christ expoundes this, whē he saith to al the Apostles; whose sinnes ye remit they are remitted; and whose sinnes ye re∣taine they are retayned. Because all are sinners they were by the preach∣ing of the Gospel to call all men to repent of their sins, and to beleue in Christ the sauiour of the world; and those that dd so they had aucthority to loose them; that is to pronounce pardon to thē▪ & freedome & deliue∣rance from death and damnation by Christ Iesus, and to open vnto them the dore of the church, & baptise thē & to opē thedore of heauē to thē by seting before thē the promise of eter∣nall life. And on the contrary, those that should continue in their sinnes, and would not repent & beleeue in
Christ▪ they were to binde them, that is to pronounce that they bee the bondslaues of satan, and to shutLuk. 3. the dore of the church vnto them, and refuse to baptise them, as Iohn Baptist did to the Pharisees: and to shut the dore of heauen against thē, that is to pronounce that they haue noe parte in the kingdome of hea∣uen and saluation, but doe belonge to death and damnation: yea to binde them more strongly then theMathew. 11 men of Sodome who had not so ma∣ny meanes to bring them to repen∣tance; but marke, this opening and shutting, binding and loosing, re∣mitting and reteyning sinnes must be by the word. For noe prophet Apostle or minister euer had, hath, or shall haue power and aucthority to o∣pen heauen to him, against whom the Lord will shutt it: nor to shut heauen against him to whome the
Lord will open it. Christ himselfe onely hath the keyes of Dauid, he openeth & noeReue. 3  shutteth, he shutteth and noe man openeth; and hath tould vs in his word to whome he will haue the kingdome of heauen opened or shut. Noe man can open the kingdome of heauen to Caine, to Iudas, to IulianLuke. 13. thapostata, or to any other impeni∣tent person: because Christ hath shut it against them, as it is said, except ye repent and beleeue yee shall all perish. Nor noe man could or can shut the kingdome of heauen against Zacchaeus, Marie Magdalen, or any other that doth trulie repent and beleeue: for the Lorde hath said, at what time soeuer a sinner doth repente him of his sinnes fromEzek. 18: Mark▪ 16. the bottome of his heart. I will put all his wickednesse out of
my remembrance. It is said he that beleeueth shalbe saued; those that in the law were clensed from their leprosie must shew themse to the priest, now the priest must not pronounce him cleane that was a leper; nor pronounce him a leper that was cleane: so the Apostles and ministers of the Gospell, might not nor may not pronounce them, cursed that were penitent; nor them happie that were impenitēt. He that turnes the key the wrong way, we know cannot open the dore, as ye se in the exāple of the pharises who excom∣municated the blinde man: yet our Sauiour Christ for all that did not re¦iect him but receiue him. The papistes would tye these keyes to Peters girdle, because our SauiourIohn. 9. Christ said to Peter; to thee I giue the keyes of the kingdome of heauen: they confesse the rest of the Apostles had also aucthoritie to bind & loose, but they say it was by Peters graunt.
But our Sauiour Christ himselfe in the xx. chapter of Iohn, gaue the sameIohn. 20. 23 power and aucthority to the rest of the Apostles that he gaue here to Pe∣ter, yea as the prophets had the same power of binding and loosing before Christes cōming: as apeares by theIer. 1. speeches that are vsed to them of planting and rooting vp, of building and pulling downe. So Christ or∣deyned not onely Apostles and E∣uangelistes but pastors and teachers for the worke of the ministery, ther∣fore to them also that the preaching of the gospell is committed vnto, power and aucthority is cōmitted to binde and to loose, to remit and retaine synnes, aswell as to Peter. Paul saith the same of himselfe and Apollo, we are, that is our ministery is the sweete sauour of God both to them that are saued and to them that perish: to the one we are the sauour of life vnto life, and to the other we are the sauour of death vn∣to
death. Therefore our Sauiour Christ speakes here, to Peter in the name of all the rest, because he tooke vpon him to answere this questio for all the rest of the apostles. All this power and aucthority, not onely that was indeede giuen to Pe∣ter, but that the papists doe Imagine was giuen to Peter, they would de∣riue to the Pope of Rome: they say the Pope is vniuersall Bishop, they say he is head of the church, and that to him belongeth the keyes of the kingdome of heauen: they say the Pope hath power to binde and loose, to remit and retaine sinnes, to excō∣municate & absolue whome it plea∣ses him, and those onely to whome hee will giue this power, and they say he cannot erre &c. But if all that were trew which the papists affirme of peter, as we haue seene it is not, let vs see by what right they can conuey it to the Pope they say the Pope is
Peters successor at Rome, they say Pe∣ter conueyed his aucthority to his successor Lynus, and Lynus to Ana∣cletus, and Anacletus to t, & so from one to another▪ But there is no testimony nor pro∣bability of scripture, that Peter euer was at Rome, but diuers probabili∣ties to the contrary. When our Sauiour Christ was risen and ascen∣ded, Peter was at Ierusalem with the rest of the disciples, as it is re∣portedActs. 1. in the first of the Acts, and their tarried: sometime he conuer∣ted three Thousand at one sermon as it is in the second of the Acts: he was brought before the Gouer∣ners there and imprisoned & threat∣ned for preaching Christ as it is in 4. of the acts. He detected Ananias and Sapphi∣raActs. 5 of hipocrisie, as it is in the fi of the Acts. He was by the rest of the A∣Postles sent to Samaria, to assist
assist Philip, their he discouered the iniquity of Simon Magus as it is in the 8. of the acts: he was at Lydda &Acts. 9. 33. their he healed Aneas of the palsie as it is in the 9. of the Actes. He was at Ioppa and their raised Ta∣bitha or Dorcas from the dead, as it is in the same chapter, from thence heActs. 9. 4. went to Caesara, and there he con∣uerted Cornelius a captaine, as it is inActs. 10 the tenth of the acts: from thence he went to Ierusalem againe, when the Iewes contended with him for going in to Cornelius being a gen∣tile, as it is in the 11. of the acts: whēActs. 11. Iames was slaine by Herod, Peter was put in prison there, and was deliue-by an angell, and came to the house of Mary, where they were praying,▪ as it is in the 12. of Acts.Acts. 12. He was at Ierusalem at the coun∣sell that was houlden their about the question of indifferent things, as it is in the 15. of the acts, Three yeares at least, after Paules
conuersion, Peter was at Ierusalem, whether Paul went to visit him, and abode with him 3. dayes as it is inGal. 1. 8. the. 1. to the Galatheans: fourteene yeares after that, Paul went againe to Ierusalem, where Peter gaue him the right hand of fellowship, as it is in the. 2. of the Galathians. PeterGal. 2. was after this at Antiochia, as it is in the. 2. to the Galathians, & theirGal. 2. 1 Paul withstood him to his face. He was also at Babilon when he wrote his first epistle, which is a great way1 Peter.  13. from Rome; still bending his course to those places, where the Iewes that were the circumcision, might be his auditorie. When then shoule Peter be at Rome? when Paul writes his epistleRom. 16 to the Romans, it is probable he was not there: for if so sufficient a teacher had beene their what needed Paul haue written to them? and yet this makes it more probable that then he was not their; for in the last chap∣ter
of that epistle Paul salutes a▪ great many other; and makes noe mention of Peter. In the latter parte of Paules life, when he had trauailed so many coun∣tries▪ planted so many churches, wrought so many miracles and suffe∣redcts. 2 so many afflictions▪ being infor∣ced by the iniury of the Iewes, he ap∣pealed to Caesar, & was brought to Rome, and was there prisoner full 2▪ yeares, in a house by himselfe, as it is in the 8. of the Acts. All whichPhi. . 20 time Peter was not at Rome, for in Paules epistle to the Philippians, which he writes from Rome, as the conclusion thereof doth shew, in the secōd chapter he speakes of Timothie, & saith I haue non like minded who wil faithfully care for your matters▪ if Peter had beene there he would not haue preferred Timothie before him. In Paules epistle to the Colosi∣ans, which also was written from Rome, he saith of Tithcus, Onesemus,
Marcus, Aristarcus, and Iustus, that they onely were his workefellowes vnto the kingdome of God: which2. Tim. 4. 16 could not haue beene said, if Peter had beene there. In Pauls second E∣pistle that he writes to Timothy from Rome, he saith at my first answering all men forsooke me: if Peter hadPhilem 9. beene there would he not haue assist∣ed Paul but forsaken him? You se i all the story of the scrip∣ture vnto this time of Paules death, who in his epistle to Philemō written also from Rome saith, he was Paul aged: there is noe proofe nor proba∣bilitie but great vnlikelyhood that Peter was at Rome. Now seeing all the religion of popery hanges vpon Peters being at Rome, this at least had neede bee cleerely and euidently proued by the Scripture, or else he is a foole that wil be a papist. But if Peter had beene t Rome, what is that to the Pope?
he was at many places. The papists say the Pope is Peters successor at Rome; but the Apostles had noe successors, but Iudas onely, who fell before he entred into the full possession of that office, for be∣traying his Maister, in whose roome Mathias was chosen, as Dauid had pro¦phesied: let another take his charge. But after Christes resurrection, when. 2. they were fuly inuested in their ofice whē Iames was slaine with the word, there was non chosē to sucede him. But the papists doe not say the Pope succeedes Peter in his aposto∣licall office (but by the way) why then doe they call Rome the sea A∣postolike? & whie doth the Pope chal¦lenge a general authority ouer the whole church? frō Peter he had no ge∣neral authority ouer the whol church but as he was Apostle: but the papists say that Peter was Bishop of Rome 25. years & the Pope succeeds him in his Bishoprick: but first mark the folly of
this saying, and then the vntruth of it; for the folly of it, ye haue hearde before the papistes say, Peter was prince of the Apostles, now if he should become a Bishop, he should make himselfe inferior to all the A∣postles, and so leaue the greater off∣ice and take the lesse, which were to be exalted out of the hall into the kitchin, as we say. Now see the vntruth of it, if he had beene Bishop of Rome, he shoulde haue left the calling of an Apostle that Christ apointed him vnto; and taken to him selfe a calling, that heGal. 2. was not apointed vnto. Againe if he had beene Bishop of Rome, he should haue left the circumcision▪ which Paul said was committed to Peter, and chosen to himselfe the Gentiles2. Pet. 1. who were specially comitted to Paul. Now when they say Peter was Bi∣shop of Rome fiue and twenty yeares, it must needs be vntrew, as apeares by these two reasons, drawne from
the age of his life. When he wrot his second epistle, he saith in the first chapter, the time is at hand when I must lay▪ downe this my tabernacle: if they say he might write that epist∣le when he was Bishop of Rome, I an∣swere, in that epistle e cals himselfe an apostle, and not Bishop of Rome which he would haue done, if hee had taken vpon him an office of such high excellencie and great conse∣quence, as the papist speake of. The . reason to proue Peter could not be Bishop of Rome▪ fiue and twen∣ty yeares, as the papists say, is for that the former▪ times and circumstances considered▪ he must haue liued ra∣ther the length o two mens liues then one: whereas he liued not the time that nature affords to one man, for he died not a naturall death, but a violent death by persecution, as the papistes themselues confesse. And if they would deny it, yet the Scripture confirmes it, our Sauiour
Christ saith to him when thou werteIohn. 21. younge thou▪ girdedst thy selfe, and went whether thou wouldest, but when thou art old another shall gde the and lead thee whether thou wouldest this he spake signi∣fg by h death he should glori∣y But  Peter had beene Bishop of Rome, what makes that for the pa∣pists that clame so great thinges from thence▪ They say the Pope is Peters success∣or, & doth succeede him not onely in pace but in dignity, to be vniuersall Bishop and head of the Church: & in aucthority to binde & loose, and in vertue not to ere &c. But Peter nor the rest of the apostles could not cōuey the prerogatiues they had be∣stowed vpō the, to others; much lesse those that they had not. Peter & the Apostles had power & aucthority
to binde & loose thorough all the world: as their office extended gene∣rally to all nations, which other haue not but in their owne dioces, & charge only. And if the Pope had the keyes of the word of God (which yet he castes from him) & did vse thē a∣right; yet he could binde and loose but in the cittie and sea of Rome only: but in taking vpon him to sēd out his bulls, curses, pardons, and indulgēces to all countries, as (they write) in the name and behalfe of God and by the aucthority of saint Peter: he chal∣lenges that kindnes from Peter, that he neither did not could afforde him. Yea he challenges from Peter that which Peter himselfe neuer had; power to forgeue sinnes of his owne absolute aucthority, to canonize & make saintes, and set their names in red letters, which power none euer had or hath but God: as the grosseMathew. 9. Iewes could say who can forgeue sinnes but god onely?
Peter also & the rest of the Apostles, could not erre in preaching & wri∣ting the scripture; because the holy ghost was promised them, to bring all thinges to their remembrance: & was geuen vnto them in clouen tongues, and by our sauiour Christesacts. 1. Iohn. 20. breathing vpon them: but this prero∣gatiue and impossibility of erring, they could not conuey to any other, for all other since their time do build1. Cor. 3 some hay, and stubble, with gold & precious stones. Yet the papists or popistes are bould to say the pope cannot erre. Why they confesse he may sinne, for as Paul saith he is the man of sinne: if they should deny2. Th. that, Pope Ione would confute them who plaid the whore and trauailed with childe when she went a pro∣cession. They confesse also that the pope may be damned, for if say they hee should leade thousandes to ell it were not lawfull for men to say why
doth he so? &c▪ It is true he may be damned, & as some thinke must be, for the A∣postle2. thess. 2, Paul calles him the childe of perdition. Why then he may erre; if they had said, the Pope cannot but erre, they should haue said trew: for the2. thess. 2 Apostle saith, he shall deceiue the people with strong delusions, and cause them to beleeue lies. As for the title and dignity of v∣niuersall Bishop, Peter had no graūt of it from Christ, nor made any graunt of it to any other: he had in∣deede aucthority to ordaine Bish∣ops,1 Tim. 3. as the rest of the Apostles had: but to ordaine an vniuersall Bishop was not in his power. Neither did Lynus, Anacletus, Clement, nor the antientest Bishop of Rome, that the papists speake of, receiue this title from Peter: but Boneface the eight a late Bishop of Rome, in comparison, receiued it
from Phocas the Emperour of Rome, who slew his Maister Mauritius. Then began the vsurped supremasie of the Pope, not onely ouer the whole clergie, but ouer Kinges and Emperours themselues; which swel∣ling title of vniuersall B. other bish∣ops condemned as Antichristian. But if Peter could, and would cō∣uey his preuiledges to his successors; why should the Bishop of Rome haue them more then the Bishop of Ie∣rusalem, Antioch? &c. where it is more certaine Peter was thē at Rome. The papists say, because Peter was martired at Rome; that is a straunge parado that the sheading of innocent bloud, that pollutes o∣ther places, should sanctify Rome: that Ierusalem, for sheading the bloud of the prophets, should be destroyed, and Rome for sheading the bloude of the Apostles should be exalted. God respects noe persōs, and will he respect places?
Therfore to conclude, the Pope is not the head of the church; he is not Christs vicar, Peters successor, nor vniuersall Bishop: but he is An∣tichrist, that beast, that S. Iohn speaks of, that is full of names of blasphe∣my.
The second Sermon. Psalm. 53. 1. The Fle hath said in his heart there it ne God, they haue corrupted and done abhominable wickednes, there is none that doth good. IN this psalme the prophet Dauid com∣plains of the corrupt estate of the people at that time, wherin some were growne to such an height of wickednesse, that they were come to an vtter contēpt and deniall of God in minde and mā∣ners. The prophets purpose is to speake against atheisme, a sinne in the high∣est degree forbidden in the first table and first commaundement of the lawe: and against atheists the greatest sinners, whome first he deteseth in the first parte of the verse, saying, the foole hath said in his harte there is
noe god: & then discribeth in the wordes followinge, they haue cor∣rupted & done abhomynable wic∣kednes. &c. As he that is a good subiect doth de∣test treason, & those that be traytors against the prince: soe Dauid being a good man doth abhor atheistes that be traitors against god, & discribes their myndes & maners in writinge, that others may detest them also. The foole sayth Dauid, hath said in his hart ther is no god: or he is a foole that saith thus, for no wise man would say so. But some may aske how DauidMat. 5. doth call any man foole, seing our sauiour Christ sayth; he that calls his brother foole, is in danger of Hell fire: the answere is easy, our sauiour Christ speakes of cal∣ling our brother foole; but atheis∣tes are no brethren. Againe our sa∣uiour Christ speakes of him that in his owne quarrelles and iuries
and to vtter his corrupt affections of anger and choler, shall doe it: but he that shall in zeale of god and good∣nesse, and detestation of wickednes call a man foole; especially if he haue a calling to reproue sinne and wic∣kednes, it is not vnlawfull; when it is done in iust reprehencion. For ourMat. 23 auiour Christ himselfe, called the pharises fooles and blind; and the apostle Paul called the Galathians foolish Galathians: a maiestrate may vse the ciuill sworde in iust execution when a priuate man may not doe it, in froward disposicion: so the spiri∣tual sword may be vsed in iust repre∣hēciō, but not in vniust exclamation. Dauid sayth the foole, speaking in the singular number, not as if there were thē or now but one atheist; for in the next words whē he cōes to the descriptiō of atheistes, he speakes in the plural nūber: they are corrupt and become abhomynable, but hee speakes so, as if he should point out
euery such atheist with his finger, whatsoeuer his name be▪ whatsoeuer his calling be, whatsoeuer his bring∣ing vp hath beene, whatsoeuer con∣ceit he hath of himselfe, yet he is a foole that saith in his hart there is noe God. By a foole he doth not meane a naturall foole, but an artifi∣ciall foole, one that the diuell hath made a foole by his craft. There be twoe kindes of fooles, one that wantes naturall witt, ano∣ther that wantes true wisdome, that haue naturall witt and abuse it: of the first sorte Dauid doth not speake here, for such as want naturall witt, whome we call Idiots are not to be detested, but to be pitied. And Mache∣uell the arch foole & atheist of these last times, whome I name in my Ser∣mon, as Pilate is named in the creede, had much naturall witt, and was one of the greatest politicians in the world▪ therefore it seemes not to be the want, but the abundance of natu∣rall
witt that makes an atheist: for the presumption of his owne witt, makes him reiect all that he cannot com∣prehend within the reach of reason. But Dauid here speakes of the se∣cond sorte of fooles who want trew wisedome, and not onely of an or∣dinary foole or wicked man, but Dauid speakes of an extraordinary foole, that is growne to the highest degree of wickednesse and folly to say, their is no God: & therefore sets him forth as a foole inprimis. We account them fooles that deny prin∣ciples, and the more manifest that a∣ny thing is, the more foolish we rec∣kon him that impugnes it. The Lord saith by the prophet Ieremie, the peo∣ple were foolish because they hadIer▪ 4. 42. not knowne him; then they must needes be fooles that deny him: the Apostle Paul speakes of some whoe did forsake the creator, & saith whenRomans▪ 1 they professed them selues wise they became fooles: of such witty fooles
Dauid speakes here who say in their hartes there is no god. It may be asked how there should be some who say there is no god, se∣ing the apostle Paul sayth it is ingra∣uen in the nature of all men that their is a god? I answere these two may▪ both be found in the same man, t thinke there is a god, & to thinke the is no god: for by the light of nature al men know there is a god, and by the corruption of nature, wherby they seke to put out that light some men thinke there is none. As the apostle Peter speakes of such men who say where is the promise of his com∣ing? this sayth thapostle they wil∣lingly know not and they know it and will not know it. And marke hat these atheists do not deny any of the person of the god∣head onely as heretiks doe, as the Arrians denied the godhead of the sonne: the Macedoneans denied
the godhead of the holy ghost but these Atheists deny the nature ofRom. 1 God, and they doe not change the nature of god, like Idolaters as the apostle sayth. The Gentels trned the glorie of the incorruptible god, in∣to a corruptible man and beast, and that is, did make choise of a false god in stead of the trew god: but these deny the godhead it selfe, and say there is no god at all, no creator no gouernor of the world, no rewarder no punisher of men▪ Therefore though heretickes, that thorow pride deny any one of the persons of the godhead be fooles: though Ido∣laters that thorow ignorance doe forsake the trew god, and worship a false god be fooles: yet atheists that vtterly deny god & say there is no deuine power be fooles of all fooles. Now although Dauids detestation might be a suffici∣ent confutation of Atheists yet
not to the end to reclaime a setled atheist, who is such a foole as Solo∣mon saith, though he be brayed in a morter will not be made wise: yet to preserue other from the extreamity of that folly, I will set downe cer∣taine reasons to proue thereis a God, not as if there were any doubt of it; but because the corupt nature of mā doth raise vp doubts where none are. 1 The first reason is drawne from the creation of the whole and great world, the heauens, who hath drawne them out as curtens, the starres whoe hath placed them therein as cādels to giue sight to the world, the sun among the rest who hath put v∣pon it such glory as doth dasle the eyes of men: is it not God whoe is in∣finit in greatnes and glorie? Come we a little lower, to the elements of fire and water, whoe hath set betweene them the ayre to deuide and keepe them a sunder, being two fierce crea∣tures by nature and ready to deuoure
one another, that when they meete together the conflict is so great, that thereof arises the thunder; is it not God? Come we downe to the earth, whoe hath hanged it in the middest betweene the firmament as it were by a threed, that it mooues not any way though it be great, massy, and pressed with innumerable creatures beside; Is it not God, whose power supportes all thinges? who hath boū∣ded the sea that is many miles high∣er then the land, and lifteth vp his waues, and threteneth the earth but ouerflowes it not: is it not God, as he saith by the prophet Esai, all theseEsai. 40. thinges haue my hand made? These fooles doe fancy that the world is eternall, but the iudgment of the philosophers and all wise men doth confute that folly: if the world were eternall it must be God, for e∣ternity & deuinity dwells together. But we come to the second reason to proue there is a God which is the
creation of man whom the philoso∣phers call a litle world, he must be e∣ternall if the world be eternall: for who will Imagin that so goodly a house was at anie time without a dweler? But man was not eternall: for seing he is mortall and hath an end, he must nedes haue a beginning; who then made him? the rest of the 5 creatures could not doe it, for all the creatures in the world are inferi∣or to man, and therefore none of thē could make him that is superior & more excellent then they. And man did not make himselfe; for then he did and could also make other thinges in¦ferior to him selfe: but as our sauiour Christ saith he cannot make a haire white nor black. And if man did make himselfe thē we can do it still, why then haue not men childrē whē they would? and why haue they children when they would not; and why haue they daughters when they would haue sonnes? and why haue
some sonnes when they would haue daughters, therfore it was God? in whom we liue, moue, and haue ouracts. 17. Gen 4 being that made man as Moses saith of the dust of the earth But leaue we mans earthie and dusty body and come to the spirituall soule, that by the consideration of this reasonable creature we may amplify this se∣cond reason to proue the deity. And not to stand vpon the faculties of vnderstanding and memorie, wher∣by man thinkes of thinges past, considers things present and fore∣sees things to come, (which yet doth effectually perswade, that it must be one of incomprehensible wisdome and vnderstanding that did put these properties into him) but onely to speake of the con∣science of man which since the fall may be called the remayn∣der of natures light, which with∣out any other teather doth in∣struct a man.
what is good, and what is euill, and perswades a man to that which is good, and disswades him from that which is euill, examines that which is done, and if it be good approues it & rewardeth it with ioy and gladnes, & if it be euill, accuseth it, condemneth it, and rewardeth it with sorrow and terror. Who hath set vp this court in a mans harte, is it not God the iudge of all? and whence comes this terror after euil cōmitted, from the feare of mans law? noe it was in Caine, in Bal∣tazer, Caligula and others, who stoode in awe of noe earthly power: & those that doe stand in awe of men, giue them security from them, & yet they tremble: from whēce comes this but from this knowledge that there is a God, who will iudge and punish euill men and euill thinges? And therefore as one saith, it is much more easie to pull mens hartes out of there bellies, then to pull God out of their harte. 3. But come we to the third reason
which is taken frō the opinion, pract∣ise, and consent of all nations, not on∣ly christian but heathen: noe nation is so sauage, or people so barbarous, but haue alwaies acknowledged there is a god. Obserue this thorow all the histories of the Bible, what people shall you read of, that did not professe some religiō? Those that haue traue∣led the new found landes, India, China, Cataya and the rest, doe confirme the truth of this point: that though there be some of them that haue noe hou∣ses to dwell in, & some of them that goe naked, yet there be none but doe confesse some god, shewing it is not so naturall to cloath or harbour thē∣selues, as it is to acknowledge God. Protagoras the Athenian who yet did not in flatt termes deny the god head, but by consequence: notwithstā¦ding the Athenians had such a detest∣atiō of him, that they burnt his books and banished him the Cittie. In con∣sideration whereof some haue affir∣med
that it is not so much reason as religion that puts the specyall difference betweene a man and a beast. 4 Let the fourth and last reason be taken from atheists themselues who oftentimes in their life doe acknowledge their is a God, by swearing by him and saying Lord haue mercy vpon me; and some of them at their death, as Maister Greenham makes report of a man who from other extremities fell to be an atheist, and being in want did steale and was condemned to be hanged and at the place of exe∣cution did professe atheisme, and when he was ready to be turned of the ladder, said for Christs sake stay: and pause being made he said whatsoeuer I haue said, and what∣soeuer others haue said that there is no god, yet I know there is a god that will iudge and punish euil men; and reward good men, and now said
he turne me of the ladder. Then must not he nedes be a foole that against the testimony of heauen, of earth, of all nations, and his owne consci∣ence shall say there is no God? But be these all the reasons that might be brought to proue there is a god? no not by a thousand, for as god is infinite so there be infinite rea∣sons to proue the godhead. Dauid saith the heauens declare the glory of God: Iob saith aske the beastes & they will tell thee, the foules & they will declare him vnto thee, yea the least flower is a sufficient preacher of God vnto vs. What Arris or Ta∣pistry may be compared to some of them? what is so red as the rose? what is so white as the lillie? doth not the violet exceede all colours that are dyed in grain He that doubteth, saith a philosopher whe∣ther the fire be hot, let him put in his finger and feele: so he that doubteth
whether there be a God, let him opē his eyes and see; for the whole world is nothing else but as a booke, and all the creatures in the world as great & small leters, wherein a man may read and as it were spell god. Whoe that feeles the earth quake, will not say oh god? whoe that heares the Thūder and great windes will not say oh mighty god? who that lookes vpon the lightning, and bewtie and bright∣nesse of the firmament, especially at some time, will not say oh glorious god? who that sees the rough seas, & foaming waters when they are trou∣bled with the windes, will not say oh mightie god? who that considers the multitude, variety, qualities, and vses of the creatures, will not say oh wise and bountefull god? Therefore it is needles to stand any longer to proue that which is the plainest thing in the world; especially seeing Dauid doth not seeke to satisfie with reason, but to shame with detestation the
foole that sayth in his hart, that there is no God. There be two sortes of these fooles or Atheists, one sort that deny God directly, the other sorte that deny him indirectly: the first de∣ny the essence of God, the second de∣nie his essentiall properties, without the which he cannot be God, & say there is no regarding or rewarding God. Of the first sorte there were neuer many; histories do make report of E∣picurus & of Diagoras, who said ther was no God: and of Protagoras, who yet was either lesse wicked or more wilie: who said I say not that there is a God, nor I say not that there is no God: match Macheuel with which of these monsters ye thinke beste▪ But of the second sorte of Atheistes that deny Godes essenciall proper∣ties, namely his knowledge, his truth his Iustice, his prouidence, there al∣wayes haue bene and are manie in the world: these are Athists as well as
the other as those are traytors that deny the, royall prerogatiues of the prince, as well as they that deny the prince. As for example, take away vn∣derstanding memory, conscience, and will from the soule; and ye destroy the soule: so take away the essentiall properties of god and ye leaue him a name without a nature▪ therefore al∣though the Ephesiās professed Diana to be a goddes; yet because she had not the properties of the diuinity, butphi. 2. was an Idol of their owne Imagina∣tion, Paul faith they were without god in the world. Now that there be some fooles that do denie the diuine properties of god, it is evident by the scripture; Da∣uid speakes of some that deny his knowledge; they thinke he sees not their hartes, and their actions their whordomes, drunkennesse, robberiesPsa. 73. & they say how doth God see, is their knowledge in the almighty? as Cain thought, god did not see what he had
done with his brother Abell. Iob spea∣kesGen. 4. of some that said the clouds did hide him that he could not see; theyIob. 22. 13. thought of god as of a mā, that distāce of place and interposition of thinges could hinder his sight: but the pro∣phet Dauid derides that folly saying, he that made the eye shall not he see? for as one sayth, he is within al things without all things he is included in nothing nor excluded frō any thingPsal 94. therfore he sayth to the Church of Ephesus & the rest of the Churches,Reu. 2▪ I know thy workes. As such atheistes make god blind that he cānot see their workes, so they make him deafe that he cānot heare their wordes, their railing swearingPsa. 12, filthie talking &c. Therfore as it is in the psalme, they boast their tounges are their owne, they ought to speake what Lord shalPsa. 94 controll them? but as Dauid saith he that made the eare shall not he heare? he that gaue the lāguages doth vnder¦stand
all tounges as well Iudea as English; therfore our sauiour saith men shall giue account of their idleMat. 11 wordes at the day of Iudgment. And as these fooles make god blind & deafe, that he cannot see nor hear so they make him lame that he can doe nothing. zeph. . 12. the prophet speakes of some that say the Lord wil neither do good nor evill. They deny gods prouidence, although they will cōfesse he doth some thing in heauē, yet they shut him out of the world especially out of their owne cham∣bers and studies: Aristotle thought gods pouidence reached no lower then the moone, but the prophet Da∣uid that was wiser, saith whatsoeuer pleased the Lord that did he in hea∣uen, in earth in the sea, and in al deepe places. The Epicure philosopher at∣tributes all to fortune and chance, wordes inuented of thos that were ignorant of the causes of things▪ and retained of those that are ignorant of
god the cause of causes. The wordes indede are sometime vsed in the scrip¦ture, it fortuned and it chāced accor∣ding to the comon phrases that were in vse among the people: but yet the most chanceable thinges are gouer∣ned by the prouidence of God, and ascribed therevnto. When IonasIon. 1 was cast out of the ship into the sea a whale came instantly and receiued him: the text saith God, prouided a great fish to swallow vp Ionas. Whē Abraham was readie to sacrifice hisGen. 22. sonne, he lift vp his eyes and sawe a Ram yed in a bush: was it fortune? no he said to his sonne; god would pro∣uide. The stoicke philosophers ascribe all thinges that fall out in the world to fate and destinie; and will haue thinges not to depend vpon the pro∣uidence of god, but vpon a certen cō∣iunction of causes: but if that were so the effect must alwaies necessarily fol∣low the cause, but it hath diuers times bene otherwise. Fire hath this
propertie to burne fitt matter that is put vnto it: but the three chil∣dren mentioned in Daniell wereDa. 3 put into the exceeding hot fur∣nace, and yet burned not. If that were so, Sara, Elizabeth and others that where old, must haue died barren: but the promisse and proui∣dence of god made them fruitfull. And not onely the greatest thinges are ruled by gods prouidence, but the least thinges; as our sauiourMa. 1 Christ sayth, a sparrow salles not to the ground without our fa∣thers prouidence: now because some men will not acknowledge gods prouidence in his ordynarie workes as in the succeeding of somer water, cold, heate, rayne drought &c.en. 7 Gen. 19 Therfore god hath somtime shewed the same in his extraordinary workes, as in drowning the whole world with water; burning the citty of So∣dome with fire; causing the sunne to
stād still, yea to goe backward. Now se∣ing that god doth al thinges great & and small, ordinary and extraordi∣anry, is he not a foole that saith he doth nothing? As such atheists deny his prouidence, so they de∣ny his truth, some deny the authority of the scripture generally & care forExod, 14 Exod, 17 no other testamēt but Macheueis poli¦cyes: some deny the promises of the scripture perticularly & say wher is the promise of his cōming? they deny the threatninges of the scripture and put far of the evill day. Some deny miracles of the scripture and say the passing of the children of Israell throw the red sea was when the tyde was gone: they say Moses his geuing them water out of the rocke was by ob¦seruing the wild asses going thither to drinke: they say the speach of the floud was but some fleg∣matick or watrish conceit: and the fire that Peter speakes of where
with the world shalbe consumed, is but a fancy of some colericke braine: as what falsehood will not the fa∣ther of lies teach men to affirme? but for all that God is the God of truth and cannot lye, yea it is vnpossible that he should lye, and therfore Da∣uiditu. 1 sa. 19. h.  saith his truth endures for euer. Finally these fooles deny the Iustice of god, they say as zephanie declareth the Lord will neither doe good nor evil, that he will neither reward nor punish. And this is on chiefe reasonZph. 1 wherby the diuell confirmes them in their atheisme, because good men are not rewarded, and euil men are not punished: for they reason thus, if there be a deuine prouidence, it must be for the good of the good▪ and for the evill of the bad: but say▪ they it is cleane contrary in the world, good men are set in the stockes and evill men constables, But one cause why euil men are not punished, is be∣cause many maiestrates doe not exe¦cute
gods Iustic vpon murder∣ers, theeues, adulterers, drunkards as god hath cōmanded. If they aske whyGen. 4. then god doth not execute Iustice himselfe? I answere was not Caine a2. King. 9. vacabond for killing his brother A∣bell? were not Ahab and Iesabell for murdering of Naboth deuoured andAct. 12 their bloud licked with dogs? Was not Herode for priding himselfe in his oration eaten with wormes? was not Lcyan the atheist who said he got nothing by his christendome but a sillable to his name deuoured of his owne dogges? did not Macheuell also rott to death in Florence prisō? But god doth not punish all sinners in this world, for then men would think there were no other pūnishment be∣sides that which is temporal, and sōe that he doth punish he doth it not by and by, but let them contynue long in their synnes that he might shew the pacience of his owne nature, which is long suffering, and that his boun∣tifulnesse
migh drawe such men to repentance as the Apostle sayth; and as god hath somtime respect to them so somtime he hath respect to pos∣terity. For if king Ahab who was a wicked man had bene taken away to soone: we had lost good King He∣zechias if Solomon and Paul had bene taken away in their euill times, we had lost their good bookes. But those wicked men that are spared, if they doe not repent, they shalbe punished soone enough and too soone for them; and when their pu∣nishment beginnes there wilbe no end, we must remember the last day is the day of Iudgmēt & let vs neuer think wicked men shall escape as long as that day is to come: as Solomon faith though a sinner doe euill a hun∣dred times and God prolong his dayes, yet I know it shall goe well with those that feare the Lord; but it shall not goe well Ecl.  with the wicked man. Forbearance
is no quittance, in the meane sea∣son are they altogether free, from punishnent? no they are trou∣bled with feares, terrors, tormen∣tes, and passions which the poets call furies, as one that is con∣demned to dye, though he pla∣yes at cardes and dyce in the prison, till the time of execu∣tion: yet the thought and re¦membrance of his punishment doth feare and astonish him. But is it not strange that any should deny the power of god after he hath created and againe drow∣ned the whole world? that any should deny the truth of God, af∣ter he had brought the children of Israell out of Egipt and placed thē in Canaan, according to his pro∣mis made to Abrahā? that any should deny the prouidēce of god after he had fed the Isralites forty yeares in the wildernes with māna frō heauē & cau¦sed rehter armēts & shoes not to wax
old, that any should deny the Iustice of God after he had caste Adam out of paradice for his disobediēce, and cast of his owne people Israell for their vnbelefe and wickednes. But is it not more strange that any liuing in the Church, should deny God, who heard his oracles, sawe his mira¦cles, had such experimēts of his good¦nes? a man may better deny any thing yea all thinges to be, then God, who is before all thinges, who is better then all thinges, who is greater then all thinges, and in whō as the apostle saith all thinges doe consist: therfore let euery one that hath any witt sub∣scribe to this saying of Dauid, that he is a foole that saith in his heart there is no god. In his heart. But marke that he saith so in his harte, Dauid speakes of subtile fooles who will not alwayes vtter that which is in them: for they knew the lawe, that to deny God in wordes was blalphemy: and that blasphemie
should be put to death, therfore they would not expresse their foolish thoughtes. They are like an adulterous person that dares not father his owne child, but God that heares mentall as well as vocall speeches, turns his inside outward, that all men may se what he2 tim. 3 psa  s, though perhappes he will speake o∣therwise, and say there is a God, and that god is almighty true Iust &c. As Paul speakes of some that professe they know god, but by workes they deny him; and Dauid speakes of some that flattered god with their mouth, and dissembled with him with their double harte. So that an atheist may be also an hipocrite an atheist within and an Ipocrite without, an atheist indede, & an Ipocrite in shew. But Da∣uid saith he is a foole, that saith in his heart there is no god, that admitts such foolish thoughts in his minde,psa. 21 though he vtters them not with his mouth: but as Dauid saith let thy hād find out thy enemies o God & thy
right hand finde them that hate thee that they may know there is a god that rules in Iacob, and to the endes of the world Corupt are they. He further describes an atheist by his workes; one saith there be three signes of an atheist, euryous ques∣tioning, prophane scoffing, and wicked liuing; Dauid here standes vpon the latter. But marke that he speakes now in the plurall number, for there were then, as there be now, many a∣theistes. Macheuells opinions are grounded in the nature, and shewed in the practices of many that ne∣uer red his bookes. And as before Dauid attributeth a voyce to the heart, which onely God heareth: so here to the works which men see: as we vse to say, such a thing speaks hardly against such a man, the evill thoughts drop out at their fingers endes. When such men haue disgested
these vild thoughtes, that there is no god to see them; they dare do any thing, and that their is no god to heare them; they dare say any thing, and that there is no God to punish them, they will refraine nothing: when they haue cast a way the reuerence of the word of God that putteth a difference betwene good and euill, they doe that which is good in their owne eyes, that which they naturally like and lust af∣ter. Dauids meaning is not onely to teach, that those which be Atheistes doe corrupt them∣selues with wickednes, but also those that doe so shew themselues to be atheistes; as our sauiour Christ sayth the tree is knowne by the fruite: he that will lye forsweare, commit adultery, steal &c tell me hath he a right consideration of God?
no eyther he hath vtterly denied him or else he hath wrong and vild thoughts of him for if he did rightly consider of his presence, power, and Iustice: he durst not in such sorte pro∣voke the eyes of his glorie. Those whō we call vngodly men, may we not turne it godles men, that is atheistes that haue no reuerence to god nor to his commandementes? therfore he saith of such men, they are corrupt & become abhominable, that is they so corrupte their wayes, that for the same they are to be abhorred. The maiestrate should punish them, the mynister should reproue & satire thē, and all good men should detest thē. And indede if we did see and here the nūber of vild thoughtes words & actions of an atheist, an honest man would blush and spitt at them, there is none that doth good. That is atheists of that sorte doe not only wic∣ked thinges hauing no feare of gods lustice, but they neglect good things
hauing no hope of his mercy. Paul to Titus speakes of some that are repro∣bate to euery good worke; if they do any thing that is good, it is not in re∣gard of God, but for some other res∣pect, as Naball did feast many, yet he was a foole: To conclude let vs make vse of all that hath bene spoken; let vs know as there were many atheistes then, so there be now; therfore let vs take heede we be none of them; take heed we giue no place to vild affection & thoughtes of god, & that we doe not speake such wicked wordes and doe such wicked workes, as foolish men vse to doe: but that we doe thinke such thoughtes, speake such wordes; and doe such workes, as, wife and good men haue done. FINIS
The third Sermon Hypocrite, first cast out the beame out of thine owne eye, and then shalt thou see clearely to cast out the mote out of thy brothers eye. Hauing in the for∣mer sermon spokē of atheisme, which is the enemy to re∣ligion, my promise bindes me in the second place, to speake of Hypo∣crisie, which is the counterfet of reli∣giō: a vice much inveied against in the scripture not only for the cōmonnesse of it, but for the odiousnes of it, being not only a sinne, but a sinne of sinnes that turnes all the best thinges that a man doth, into synne. Now, al∣though both the prophetes, and A∣postles do speak of it in many places, yet I chose rather ye should heare our sauiour Christ himselfe speake
of it; who could best discerne and discouer an hipocrite; and therfore I haue chosen this scripture to intreat of, wherein we are to obserue these three thinges. First, the description of an hipocrite. Secondly, the repre¦hencion of an hypocrite. Thirdly, the reformation of an hypocrite. The description, is to be obserued generally in the word hypocrite, and more perticularly in the rest of the wordes of the texte, com∣pared with those that are gone be∣fore, and other places of scripture. An hypocrite, is as much to say, as a counterfet or dissembler; the word is borrowed from stage players, who put on them the persons & apparrell of other mē, as some put on the roabs, & play the part of Kinges; & so liers, being no such, but in coūterset shew: so hypocrites put on them the roabs, & counterset the persons of good Christimen, when they be no such, but bad ones. We doe abhorr coun∣terfetting
in all men, and in all mat∣ters; when a man will pretend he is a gentlman, being base borne; when a man will make shew, he is rich being a banckrupt; when a man will pretend to pay currant mony, when he payes counterfet brasse, or lead couered with siluer, or gold; then we must nedes mislike hipocrites, who dissemble more grosly then any o∣ther. Now, although all Hipocrisy be dissimulation, and coūtertfeting; yet all dissimulation is not Hipocrisy; at the least, that which the scripture speakes of: for, there hath bene, and is, dissimulation in those thar are out of the Church; as the Gebionites, be∣ing he athens, dissembled with Iosua and the Israelites, pretending they were far borne, when they were inha∣bitantes of that country. Hipocrisy therfore, to speake proper∣ly, and whereof I am to intreat▪ as  doth respect god▪ so it is in thse that doe professe religion.
There be two sortes of Ipocrites; the one, are such as counterfet the profes¦sion of religion; the other, such as counterfet the practice of it; of the first sort, there neuer haue bene but few in cōmparison. We read in the booke of Hester, when the King had crossed the edict, that haman had procured, for the destruction of the Iewes, and made proclamation that the Iewes should stand for their liuesoster. .  it is said, many of the people of the land became Iewes, for the feae of the Iewes fell vpon them that is, they did play the Ipocrites, and counter∣fet the religion of the Iewes: so now, among vs, there be some that we call Church papistes, that professe our re∣ligion, and come to Church, and yet wish in their heartes, that popery might come againe. But of the second sort of Ipocrites, that make a counterfet practice of religion, there alwayes haue bene, & are a great many. Of such, the apostle
speakes to Titus, saying. They profes they know god, but by workes they deny him, and of such our sauiour ChristTitus. 1 speakes here. Of these kind of hypocrites, their be also two sortes. One sorte, that are grosse Hypocrites; who know they doe dissemble, that is to say, though they will speake of religion, yet doe neyther refraine euill, nor doe good; for respect of religion, or conscience to god: but if they do eyther; it is for some other carnall or corrupt respect of men. Such a grosse hypocrite was Iudas, who, though he pretended the poore, in saying, the oyntment which the woman powred on our sauiour Christ might haue bene fold for soM. 14. much, yet he intended himselfe, and meant to play the thiefe, because he caryed the bag: and also he plaid the grosse hypocrite, when he saluted his maister with a kisse, and courte∣ous wordes and therin went about to betray him. I read of the grosse hypo∣crisy
of an vsurer, who did great∣ly cōmend & speake frindly to a prea∣cher, for speaking against vsury; as if he mēt to forsake his vnlawfull trade: but he shewed his reasō was, because the more vsury was spoken against, the fewer would vse it, & the fewer did vse it, the more he should gain by it The other sorte, are simple hypocri∣tes, who are vnsound in religion, and know it not, but thinke they are chris∣tians good enough, whē they are not; & think they do wel whē they do not: such a one was Iehu, who said to Iona¦dab, the sonne of Rechab; come & see the zeale that I haue for the Lord. Whē he ment to destroy the temple, & priestes of Baal; he thoght himself a very religious man, but he was an hypocrite: for it is said in the one and thirty verse, he regarded not to walke in the law of the Lord, with all his hearte: and though, he destroyed the temple of Baal, he destroyed not the golden calues, that were at Dan
and Bethell, but still contynued in the synne of Ieroboam, the sonne of Nebat, that caused Israell to sinne. Of such simple Ipocrites, our sauiourIohn. 16 Christ speakes to his disciples, when he sayth; the day shall come, when those that kill you, will thinke they▪ doe God seruice, when they serue the diuell. The former sort of Ipo∣crites, fayle in their affection, & these fayle in their Iudgment; the former deceiue other, and these deceiue thē∣selues. The former, which I call grosse Ipo∣crites, take on thē the professiō of re∣ligion, for their credit sake: or where religion is professed, they see they can be of no estimation, without making the same profession. As what credyt haue atheistes, or papistes, among Christians? or else for their profit, that they might haue the more custo¦mers, if they be chapmen; the moe clientes, if they be lawyers; and the moe patientes; if they be phisitions, &
not for any loue to religion, whereof they make profession. The second sort, which I call simple Ipocrites, take on them, the professiō of religion, with a desire to be saued, for they heare of the saluation spo∣ken of in the gospell, and conceiue it to be an excellēt thing, & they hear that turkes, Papistes, and those that be out of the Church cannot be sa∣ued: therfore they will profes religiō, that they may perswade themselues they shal be saued: but Ipocrites haue but a humane perswasion, that hath no other ground but their owne fan∣cy, and not a deuine perswasion, wrought by the spirit of god, and groūded vpon good reasons, drawne out of the word of god, as trew Chri∣tians haue. Of those, that be grosse Ipocrites, that of purpose, make religion and their whole profession, a cloake for their sinnes, though there haue alwayes bene some who may be called, hipo∣criticall
atheistes; yet there were ne∣uer many in comparison. But of the other, that be simple hy∣pocrites, who deceiue themselues in their Imaginatiō, there alwayes haue bene and are a great number. As Sa∣than transformes himselfe into an▪ angell of light, as the apostle saith, so Cor, 11. his mynisters transforme themselues into the ministers of Christ, and his members into the mēbers of, Christ. They call god father, as our sauiour Christ saith, but they are of their fa∣ther the diuell; they call the true chil∣dren of god bretheren, as in this place Christ bringes in an hypocrite spea∣king as to his brother; but hypocri∣tes2. Cor, 11. are false brethren as paul sayth, he was often among false breth∣ren, they are bastard Christians, not begotten of immortall seede. As2, Pet. 1▪ there is no hypocrite, that is re∣generated, and all that profes reli∣gion, and be not regenerate are hypocrites, as a wooden leg or siluer
nose, in the naturall body, supplies onely a place of a liuely member, so are Hypocrites in the Church. But yet, marke that hypocrites haue something in them, wherwith they doe deceaue themselues and others with a wrong perswation, they haue the outward badges of Christianity, which makes them so much the more odyous to god, that they will serue the deuill in his liuery: they haue bene baptised with water (as Simon magus that Hypocrite was) but not with the holy ghost: they receiue the other sacrament of the Lordes sup∣per,Mat. 26 as Iudas that hypocrite did, but, as one saith, they receiue the bread of the Lord, but not the bread and the Lord: they wil pray as the hypocriti∣call pharisie did, but at all times, not,Luk 18 Iob, 27. Mat▪  sa. 58▪ as Iob sayth, wil the hypocrite cal vpō God at all times: they wil fast & looke sower as our sauiour saith, & as Ahab that hypocrite did not but such a fast as the lord require, by the prophet Isa.
They will heare the word of God, as Alexander that Ipocrite did, but, as the word of man, they doe not heare1 Thss.  it, as it is indeede, the word of god which worketh in thē, as in those that beleue. In respect whereof they are compa∣red to ostreches, that haue great fea∣thers,Mat. 22. but are of small flight, and our sauiour Christ settes them forth by a figtree, that hath great leaues, (and therfore Adam and Eue made choise of them to make them breaches) but no fruite. But it may be asked, if Ipocrite haue no fruit at all, yes else how should they haue so much as a flat∣ring perswasion, that they be vnlike to the atheists of the world; therfore they haue some counterfet proper∣ties of christians, which in their own sence, and carnall construction▪ are as good as the best, at least good e∣nough, they will forsake some sinnes which the word of god forbids▪ for
although as, Dauid saith of Ipocrites; they hate to be reformed, that is, to be throwly reformed: yet they will reforme many thinges, after their fa∣shion;Mar. 6 as it is said of Herod: but those synnes that they doe forsake, they do it not for the feare of god, for the cō∣science of his cōmandement, or for the hatred of sinne; but eyther be∣cause of mans law, or of mans praise, or his owne false perswasion, that those shalbe a dispensation to him2, Tim, 3 for other sins, that he meanes to kepe still. But do Hipocrites onely leaue some euill thinges, doe they nothing that is good? yes, else how should they haue so much as a flattering per¦swasion, that they be like the childrē of god? Paul sayth, they haue a shew of godlines, they, by hearing the word, attaine to some knowledge,Psa. 50 but a confused knowledg, & hauing some knowledge, they will talke of pointes, and matters of religion, as the Lord speakes to them in the
psalme; that they will take his law in their mouth, they will aske questiōs somtime, not with a desire to learne but to pose men, and to shew their owne skill, as the scribe did, who as∣ked our sauiour Christ, which was the greatest commandement of the law. But if you marke it, the commu∣nication of an hypocrite, about reli∣gion,M. 13 is always vnsound, or vnsauery. Hypocrites also attaine to fayth, as it is said in the parable of stone pro∣fessors; but it is not a iustifying faith such as true christyans haue: but an historicall fayth, such as the deuils haue. Hypocrits wil somtime bring forth this fruit of frindship; but it is rotten of one side, they wil be frind∣ly in bad matters, as well as in goodIam. 2 matters, and to bad persons, as well as to good men, as it is said of them: they are partakers with the adulterers, they will giue al andPsa, 50 doe soe other duties, not constrai∣ned by the loue of Christ & the
of vertue, as the Apostle sayth, but to be seene & praised of men, which you shall marke, is the chiefe thing that hypocrites respect, in all the things they do: as our sauiour Christ sayth of them, they loue the praise of men, more then the prayse of god.Cor, 1 Mat. 6. Luk. There be some great persons, that looke in a glasse to se the wrinkles of their faces, but take flatterers repore that say they are white when they are blacke, and young when they are old. But because it were need∣les to goe about perfectly to desci∣pher an hypocrite, in whome there is nothing but imperfection, therfore I will draw to an end of this first point, onely let vs marke, that as an Hypo∣crite is but the counterfet of a Chri∣stian, so his vertues, are but the coū∣terfet of christian vertues▪ he labours not to forsake all sinne and to do all his duties, as christyans do, but only some, & not other; and those that he doth, proceede frō wrong affectiō &
carnall suggestions, and not from spirituall, and religious considerati∣ons. One cōpares Ipocrirs, to good∣ly flowers, that haue braue shewes, but bad smelles; and not vnfitly, for as the Camelion hath all ours, saue white, so they haue ates; saue sincerity, as we shall more plain¦ly and perticularly see, in the vnfold∣ing of the wordes of the text▪ Hipocrit That which we are to consider in the second place, is the reprehension of an Ipocrite, as four sauiour Christ should say thou dissembler, thou coū¦terfet; for so much doth this word I∣pocrite importe, and he speakes with detestation; for as one sayth fayned holines is double vngodlines: there∣fore, although our sauiour doth re∣proue many others synnes, yet none so sharply as Ipocrisy, in one chap∣ter he pronounces woe against theMa▪ 23. scribes and pharise eight times, for their Ipocrisy. Which practic of our sauiour
Christ shewes, there is a good vse of sharpe reproofe, against such, though not to reclayme them, who as our sauiour saith, are further from the kingdome of god then publicanes and harlots: for Solomon saith; bray a foole in a morter, and denounce a∣gainst him the iudgmentes of god, that are the pestle of that morter, yet they will not be made wise: but there is good vse of such reproofe, that o∣thers may take heede of hypocrisy. Therfore, our sauiour Christ seing men make a counterfet shew of holi∣nes, when it was not in them, sayth,Mat. 1. hypocrite, some men will play the hy∣pocrites, that cannot abyde to be called so, as some do hate the name of couetous man, but not couetousnes; so some do hate the name of an hypo∣crite but not hypocrisy. First pull out &c. Our sauiour Christ neuer calles any hypocrite, but he shewes cause why, which controulles them that will call a man hyporite, and
cannot proue it; if ye will call a man whoremaister, shew what woman he hath defiled, if ye will call him theefe, shew what persō he hath rob∣bed▪ so if ye will call a man hypo∣crite, ye must not only at least shew wherein he hath counterfeited and dissembled and shewed some point of hypocrisie, but that ther is in him no sincerity: for he that calles a man hy¦pocrite, doth challēg his whole estate & make euery thing naught that doth We must labour, to discerne hypo∣crites, from trew christiās, & not be like children, that if they see a face in the glasse: thinke it a man indeede, we cānot discerne all, for some will deceiue the wisest men, as Simon ma∣gus deceiued Philip himselfe; yet by wise obseruation, we may discerne many: though men profes & make a fayre shew of religion, yet if we find them counterfet, & vnconscionable in the practice of it; if we find them sicle, false, & decitfull in their wordes
& workes; if they tye not themselues cōscionably to the rules of truth, but wil lye for advantage, as Ananias did toActs.  2 Kings 10 Mat 26 the rules of holines, but wil worship Idols as Iehu did to the rules of Iustice but will deceiue vpō occasion as Iudas did, they are not worthie the name of christiās. Plain dealing is cald a Iewel of beggers but it is a Iewel for the bestPsal 32 christiās, as Dauid sayth; blessed is the mā in whose spirit there is no guile our sauior here settes down one note, how to discerne an hypocrite▪ & vnder this one, as it depēdeth vpon the former word is contayned diuers other: he hath said in the 3 v. why seest thou a mote in thy brothers eye and percei∣uest not a beame in thy owne eye? & in the 4. verse how sayest thou to thy brother suffer me to cast out the mote that is in thine eye, & behold a beam in thine owne eye? the first note ther∣fore that this texte affordeth to dis∣cerne an hipocrite is, he seeth a fault in another & not in himself: the secōd is
he will seke to reforme another, and not himselfe; the third is he standes vpon the reformation of little things and neglects great thinges. As touch∣ing the first, ye are to marke that hy∣pocrisy is blind; therfore our sauiour Christ calles the pharises that were hypocrites blind pharises: not that they haue no sight at all, for they haue some sight to discerne betwene good and euill, and more then Infidels haue (by the remaynder of natures) light) because they liue in the church but yet the sight that hypocrites haue: is but a glimering sight in compari∣son of trew Christians. For all sinne doth blind men, but especially the sinne of hypocrisy that drawes their eyes to their vertues (or rather shadow of vertues) that are in them and not to their vices. They turne as the prouerbe is, that ende of the wal∣let behinde them, and that makes them proud, as our sauiour calles the pharises proud pharises: & frō thence
comes boasting of thēselues, as saint Luke reports of the pharesy that said he did fast twice in the weeke, paidLuk 18 tithes &c. and was not as other men: and as an hypocrite sees not his faults so ye cannot make him see them. Our sauiour often told the pharises their faultes, but they would not se them, but fell out with him. Their is certain fish when ye goe about to take it, cas∣teth out black matter or slime, to trouble and thicke the water, that ye should not see how to take him: so hypocrites when ye goe about to shew them their faultes, and bring them to repentance, they cast out some filthie matter and seeke to wind frō you, by denying, excusing or shif∣ting; and if they cannot escape that way, then fall to scoffing, rayling, vp∣brayding &c. that ye cannot tell how to take them. Touching the se∣cond note of an hypocrite, in this place, which is to seeke to reforme others and not himselfe; let vs marke
as I haue said, an hypocrite is the coū¦terfet of a christian, and he will coun∣terfet not only the exercise, but the practises & duties of Christyanity and among other, this dutie of admonition although he hath Iayesteyes to be∣hold his owne saultes, yet he hath EA∣gles eyes to behold the faultes of o∣ther; An hypocrite will make shew of great hatred of sin, & loue of his bro∣ther & be very forward in reprehēsi∣on, but wheras a true Christian is first & specially careful to reform himself and then to reform others an hypo∣crite spends the most time, & is most busy where he hath least to do. In the three & twenty chapter, our sauiour saith, the pharises wil cōpas sea & lād, to make one proselit, that is to bring a man from gentility to Iudaisme: but when they haue done, they make him two fold more the child of hel by nus∣ling him in the opinion of Iustifica∣tiō & other corrupt doctrines which are if not more daingerous herises
yet harder to be remoued in the pro∣fession of religion, then any they held before, when they were without reli∣gion, as our sauiour sayth; publicansMat. 21 and harlots shall enter into the king∣dome of god before them. An hypo∣crite will reproue another man for co¦uetousnes and sees not that the world cleaues as neere to him as the coate to his backe: those that be the grea∣test censurers (except they hauean of∣fice therunto) cōmōly be not the best men, not as if we should thinke he that reproues another is an hypocrit, except we see he hath no care to re∣forme himselfe for that must be ioy∣ned to make it the note of an hypo∣crite: for admonition in an hypocrite is the counterfet of the vertue, that is in a trew christiā his owne fault is the vice that he seekes to couer therwith al as with a fig leafe First pull out the beā out of thine owne eye & thē shalt thou se clearely to pull the more &c. now let vs obserue the third property
of an hypocrite, which is to find fault with small things, and passe by great thinges; yet we must not thinke hy∣pocrites will not find fault with great sinnes also: but let vs marke the opposition that is here made be∣twene his brother and himselfe; he countes these great faultes that are in another, and those small that are in himselfe; so that it is not so much re∣spect of offences, as respect of per∣sons that leades him Our fauiour sayth of the scribes and pharises, they did strayne a gnat, and swallow a ca∣mell; they will charge other men with couetousnes, because they aske their owne: but see not their owne co∣uetousnes,am. 2. 1 in taking or keping that is none of their owne: they will cen∣sure those that steale for necessity and place them in the stockes, but those that steale for villany haue placeMat. 23 in their howses, thorow respect of per¦sons-Yea in those they like not, they will condemne those for faultes that
are none; as the pharises reproued the disciples for eating meat with vn∣washt handes, and for plucking and rubbing, to eate eares of corne on the saboth day: they will reproue the vse of indifferent recreacions, and them∣selues follow sinfull pleasures: they will stand much vpon ceremonies, and let goe matters of substance: as if a man should cry out against wea∣ring a surplis, pretending it was the ornamēt of an Idoll, & set vp the Idoll of the world in their hearts, and how∣ses, and worship it; or not haue their wiues churched pretending it is a popish custome: and yet beat and put away their wiues, which is a hellish custom: and sure it is, some men sinne more in iudging and censuring such thinges then some other doe, in vsing them. An hypocrite wil salute a man with wordes of courtesie, and deny him his chiefe dutie as Iudas did his mais∣ter.
Yea hypocrites, when they can haue nothing else to finde fault with in o∣thers, they will turne their good thin∣gos into euill; as the pharises found fault with our sauiour Christ for keep∣ing cōpany with publicanes & sin∣ners to convert thē, whē thēselues ept company with good men, to peruert them: they accused him for healing those that were sick & lame on the sa¦both day; when themselues neglected the duties of iudgment & mercy eue¦ry day. Phisicions do say of the phren¦sie, whē a mā beginnes to picke straws his brayne is distempered, & he be∣ginns to goe a madding: so whē a man busies himselfe about trifles, especial∣ly in this kind of cōparison it is a signe there be crotchets in his head, and vagaries from substantiall duties as the prouerb is some men are penny wise and pound foolish. An hypocrite will giue ames but not according to his ability as our sauiour sayth, he that hath much let him
giue plentifullye an hypocrite will kepe his promis, when there is no withdrawing occasiō but not to his own hinderāce as Dauid sayth vpright men doe. First put out the beame out of thine owne eye. This direction of our sauiour Christ shewes that trew chris∣tians must doe cleane contrary to hy∣pocrites, that is to say looke to great things, before small things; as in our first birth, the principall partes are first fashyoned so it is in our new birth A good christian doeth first serue god then men; first serue their prince and parents, then others and first seke to doe good to mens soules, then to their bodies: and as it is in doing of their duties so it is in reforming of offen∣ces. They spend their first and chiefest care, and zeale, in reforming of great thinges, and then those that are of smaller importance: by a beame heare our sauiour Christ meanes a great sinne, and by a mote he meaneth a little sinne.
and this shewes there be degrees of sinnes, for although all sinnes be great if they be considered in them∣selues, yet by comparison, some sinnes may be called litle: and that there be degrees of sinnes, apeares by the or∣der of placing the commandements and by the degrees of punishments, that god appointed for sinnes in the Iudicial law. The papistes because we refuse their distinction of mortall and veniall sinnes, say we make all sinnes alike, they say there are but seauen deadly sinnes viz pride couetous∣nes, lechery, gluttony, enuy, wrath, sloath, all the rest they call veniall sinnes. They take this distinction from the practice of the former churches; such they call veniall sinnes, as were not wont to be punished by the Churches censure; & they call those deadly sinnes, which the censure of the Church, did controll: we refuse this distinction, because the same is not warranted by the scripture,
neyther by expres words, nor by true collection: for the wordes of the scrip¦ture, it sayth of sinne generally, the reward therof is death: neither haue they it from any trew collection, for the scripture speakes more haynously of Idolatry, blasphemy, murder, sor∣cery &c. then of any of their 7. which yet they place among veniall sinnes & as they abuse the scripture, so they abuse the churches also; for although peraduenture those 7. sinnes were most commonly censured especially when they came to some high degree, as pride when it did shew it selfe in some extream vanity of speach, Iesture apparell &c. and couetousnes when it did shew it selfe in miserlynes and deceaueablenes &c. And wrath when it did breake out into rayling, barra∣ting; sloath when it did shew it selfe, in inordinate walking &c. And per∣aduenture the church did not so com¦monly censure Idolatry, blasphemy, murder &c. both because such prodi∣digious
offēces, were not so common as the other, and because they being cōmitted were punished with death by the ciuill maiestrate, yet it follows not, that the church did not censure these and other offences out of their nūber of 7. deadly sinnes, when and where they were commited, & by the ciuill maistrate neglected. But if we shall allow a distinction of deadly and veniall sinnes, it must not be in respect of the sinnes; for all sinnes of themselues are mortall, & no sinne i venial: but it must be in respect of the persons that commit thē To the elect to the faythfull and penitent, all their sinns euen the greatest are uenial, be∣cause they are discharged in the death of Christ: but to the reprobate, vn∣faythfull and impenitēt, all their sins euen the least is mortall, and they must die themselues. And as there be degrees of sinnes, so we gather from these wordes of our sauiour Christ, that hypocrites are to
be reckoned among the greatest sin∣ners: for their sinnes are called beames & others motes. If hypocrites shall haue the greatest punishment, then they are the greatest sinners; but they shall haue the greatest punishmēt, as appeares by our sauiours wordes; it shalbe easier for thē of Sodome in the day of iudgmēt, then for Capernaum that heard much, & made professiō of good thinges, and did that which was euill, ergo: and hypocrites are greater sinners then others, because cōmonly they sinne of knowledge, when in∣fidels sinne of Ignorāce; yea the sinne of hypocrisy it selfe makes thē grea∣ter sinners, because it turnes all the good thinges they do into sinne: for as sinceritie cōmends a mans acti∣ons, be they neuer so small; so hypo∣crisie condemnes a mans actions, be they neuer so great. Pluck out the beame &c. Now we come to the last point which is the reformation:
of an hypocrite, our sauiour sayth, pluck out the beame out of thine owne eye, and then thou shalt see plainly, to pluck out the mote that is in thy brothers eye; this shewes that hypocrisie is a sinne that may be repē¦ted of. The prophet hauing set downe the hypocrisy of the people, perswa¦des them to repent; so doth Iohn bap∣tist speaking to the Pharise that were hypocrites, bring forth fruits wor∣thie amendment of life: the apostle sayth to such, clense your handes ye dnaers, purge your hearts ye wauer∣ing minded▪ In the primatiue Church they appointed penance to sinners; and assigned the first place to hypo∣crites, in the beginning of lent; so ourk. 3 sauiour Christ in this place perswa∣des such an hypocrite, as he hath spoken of, to repent when he sayth plucke first the beame out of thineIam. 4 owne eye; for he that is an hypocrite may by the grace of God repent and afterward become a good Christyan.
For when it is said, first pluck the beame out of thine owne eye, wee must not thinke this is the noate of an hipocrite, but the duty of an hi∣pocrite: the noate of an hipocrite, as we harde, is to se a moate in his bro∣thers eye, and not a beame in his owne; and to seeke to reforme ano∣ther and not himselfe: neither must we thinke it the noate of an hipo∣crite to seeke to plucke a moate ou of our brothers eye, for the scripture wills vs to exhort and admonish one another; but a man must first and principallie seeke to reforme him∣selfe, or else he is wise abroade, and foolish at home, and as the prouerb is when thrift is in the towne he is in the field. But if an hipocrite will not reforme himselfe, then when his sinnes shalbe knowne, others must seeke to reforme him: and if he re∣fuse such ordinary meanes of pro∣ceeding, as our sauiour hath sett downe in the eighteenth chapter, the
church must excomunicate him for hipocrites are but as the parings of the nailes, & haires of the head, which are but excrements of a naturall bodie, which may be cut of with out any paine, blemish, or preiudice to the body. In the meane season, we must not condemne the church for some euill ones; the Manichees con∣demned christianity, because there were euill christians, but Augustine answeres them thus, your malicious eye (saith he) lookes onely to our chaffe, you should also behould our wheat: neither must we condemne the ministers and gouernours of the church, because they doe not by and by censure such it may be they know them not as we doe, or it may be tho∣row contrary information they think not of them as we doe, or it may be thorow some differēce that may fall out among themselues, they cannot doe at last presētly as we thinke they might doe. But to conclude, hipocri∣sy can serue our turne but among mē,
it shall helpe nothing but hurt much when we come before god, who shall iudge things that are hid in darknes,1 Cor. 4. 5. & make the secrets & intents of the harte manifest. Mathew. 12. 31. Wherefore I say  you euerie sinn & blasphemie &c. 22. And whosoeuer shal speak a word &c We haue heard in the first sermō of Atheisme the enemie to religion in the secōd of hipocrisy the coūterfeit of religiō; now in this third & last, we shal here of apostacy, which is a fal∣ling from religion. It is said in the 22. verse going before, that our Sauiour Christ cast out adiuel out of one that was possessed, insomuch that the peo¦ple were amased & said, is not this the sonn of Dauid, or messias? but whē the Pharises hard that, they enuying & ha¦ting him said, this man casteth diuels no otherwise out, but by Belsebub the chiefe of diuels: according to the prouerbe euill wil neuer speakes well, as if yebelieue malicyus mē they wil
perswade you, the seruants of God be the worst men in the country, & when they haue no euill things to defame them withall, they will depraue their vertues, as these Pharises did this ex∣cellent miracle saying, it was done by coniuratiō: but our sauiour Christ hath confuted their error, and con∣uinced them of slaunder, by diuers reasons and demonstrations in the former verses, his first reason is in the 25 verse; if I, saith he, cast out di∣uels by Belsebub, then Satans king∣dome must be deuided in it selfe, and so cannot continue; but his kingdom is not deuided; but continues still; ergo their accusation was vntrew: his second reason is in 27 verse if I by Belsebub cast out diuels, thē your children do so toe, but your selues will say they doe it by a miraculous gift from God, ergo your challing is false his third and last reason is in the 30 verse, if I cast out diuells by Belsebub, then doth Satan gather
with me and not scatter from me, but Satan seeketh to scatter from me & gathereth not with me ergo your de¦famation is slanderous. Now hauing thus conuinced them, he proceedeth in these wordes to shew them the nature and qualitie of their offence, as if he should say, ye charge me to cast out diuells by Belsebub, will ye know what ye haue done in saying so? ye haue sinned ye haue greatly sinned, ye haue blasphe∣med and that in the highest degree, ye haue not onely blasphemed me, but the holie Ghost and made your selues in the worst case of all men; for I say to you that euerie sinne and blasphemie shalbe forgiuen to men, but the blasphemie against the holy ghost shall not be forgiuen. Vpon this occasion, as we see, our sauiour Christ shewes a trew diffe∣rence of sinnes that men cōmit; some are pardonable and some are vnpar∣donable: now seeing as the prophet
Dauid saith, it is the blessednes of a man to haue his sinnes forgiuen; and the greatest miserie that can be, to haue his sinnes imputed. Let vs dili∣gently harken to this weightie questi¦on, what sinnes shalbe forgiuen to men, and which not: when our saui∣our speakes of the sinnes that be par∣donable, he speaks of no particuler sinne, but generallie of all sinnes, one excepted; as saint Mark makes it more plaine, who saith all sinne and blas∣phemies shalbe forgiuen to men, on∣ly this excepted which saint Mathew excepts: not onely originall sinne but actual sinn, not onely in thought but in word & deede, not only sins of omissiō but of transgression, not only secret sins but opē sines shalbe forgi∣uen to mē; & not only the sins that be of an inferior quality, but blasphemy. If any be so ignorāt not to know what sinn is, it is a transgressiō of the law; if any know not what blasphemy is, it is a great transgression of the law viz. it
is a cursed and cōtumelious speaking against God, either against his nature or against his properties; as Rabsache did when he denied the power of God and compared him to idols, and that is not onely blasphemy to spea directly against the diuinity, but to speak opprobrously against the huma¦nity of Christ, which was and is ioy∣ned to the diuinity; as the Pharises blasphemed when they said Christ was a sinner, and in this was chiefly Pauls blasphemie before his conuer∣sion, in speaking against the Messias, yet this great sinne is pardonable, as appears by this descriptiō of the larg and infinite mercie of God, which our sauiour christ sets downe here: as a prince hauing assembled a parlia∣ment & made streight lawes, he pro∣clames a general pardon for offēders excepting some o the greatest; so god the father, son, & holy ghost haue hol∣den a parliamēt frō al eternity, & pur∣posed & promised a general pardō of
all sinnes and blasphemies except that against the holie ghost, & herein doth this pardon excell the pardons of princes, for that they haue many exceptions; and gods pardon hath but one this pardō is sealed not with red wax but with the red bloud of Christ, who by his death hath satis∣fied the iustice of God for all other sinnes, except the sinne against the holie ghost: therfore what other sinn or sinnes soeuer any manhath com∣mittedlet him not dispaire, for he is within the compas of the pardon, as the Lord saith by the prophet Esai,Esai▪ 1. though your sin were as red as scarlet I will make them as white as snow. But though it be said, all sinnes shalbe forgiuen to men, it is not said to all men but he to whome any one sinne shalbe forgiuen all shalbe forgiuen, as in the 36 verse of this chapter it is said▪ of euerie idle word that a mā speaks he shall giue accoūt at the day of iudgment, that is to say
except his accoūt be made in Christ if he giues account for any thing he shall giue account for euerie thing, But we must marke to what men all sinnes and blasphemies shalbe forgi∣uen, namely those that repent, which is the condition of pardon set downe in the word of God, as our sauiour Christ the best interpreter of his owne wordes saith by saint Luke, ex∣cept ye repent ye shall all perish; butLuk. 13. the Lord saith by the prophet at what tim soeuer a sinner doth re∣pentEzek 18. him of his sinne from the bot∣tome of his harte, I will put all his wickednes out of my remembrance: Noah was dronken, Dauid committed adultery, Solomon committed idola∣trie, Peter committed periurie, Paul committed blasphemy, yet they re∣penting were forgiuen; yea there is no sinne except the sinne against the holie ghost, but some men haue com¦mitted and vpon repentance beene pardoned; nay if it were possible that
one man could be guiltie of all other sinnes, except this against the holie ghost; it were possible he might repēt & be forgiuē: yet our sauiour Christ makes not this large promise that a∣ny man should take incouragement to sinne, for a prince doth not graunt pardon to a traitor that he should a∣againe commit treason, but that he should afterward be a good subiect. The law doth allow some men the be¦nefit of their clergy for their escape, but if before they haue bene bur∣ned in the hand, & will seeme to make an occupation of stealing, it is other∣wise; which I speake not, as if a man that hath twice offēded in one thing, should dispaire of pardon: (although such a man had need haue double re¦pentance) but to shew that men must not continew in sinne, for there is no looking for pardon without repen∣tance, which is included in these words of our sauiour Christ, though it be not expressed, when he saith e∣very
sinn & blasphemie shalbe forgi∣uen to men; the reason is because mē may repent of them, & apprehēd the promise of pardon: but the blasphe∣my against the holie ghost shall not be forgiuen to men, because as th A¦postle saith to the Hebrews, it is im∣possible he should be renued by re∣pentance, but of that we shall heare more anon. First let vs consider who may commit this dangerous sinn, & who cannot, secondly what this vn∣pardonable sinn is, thirdly what be the causes of it, fourthly what be the steps and occasions of it, fiftly what be the companions of it, & sixtly & lastly what be the effects of it, that we may take heede of it: for if we fall into it there is no comming out a∣gaine. This sin, as our sauiour Christ describs it in this place, is blasphemy, so that as it sems it is none of the sins against the 2. table, as was the sinn of Noah, Lot, Dauid &c. It is a sin against the 1. table, & yet it is no witchcraft,
idolatrie, prophaning the saboth &c. But blasphemie, and yet it is not the blasphemie against the first person, nor against the second person, but it is the blasphemie against the third person: if any man obiect that the blasphemy of the pharises which our sauiour Christ reprooues in the pha∣rises here, was against the second per¦son, in saying he cast out diuells by Belsebub, I answere it is true; but it was also against the third person. If any inquire, if that made their sinne vnpardonable because it was double blasphemy, I answere no, but this mad it vnpardonable that it was against the holie ghost: what then? is the third person greater or more excellent thē the first or second? noe, but as Athana¦sius saith in his creede, they are all coequall and coeternall; but we must marke that in the scripture the holy ghost doth somtime signifie the per¦son of the holie ghost, and sometime the grace of the holie ghost, as wee
read in the sixt to the hebrews, where the Apostle speaking of this sinne saith, he that is once inlightned, and hath tasted of the good word of god, and power of the world to come, and is made pertaker of the holie ghost, that is of the grace and gifts of the holie ghost, if he fall away, it is vnpos¦sible he should be renue by repen∣tance; in this sence our sauiour christ speakes here of the holie Ghost, so that to sinne against the holie ghost is not to sinne against him as he is god; for so a mā should sinne against the whole godhead, nor to sinne a∣gainst him as he is the third person, for that were noe greater offēce the to sinne against the person of the fa∣ther or the sonne, but it is to sinne a∣gainst the grace of the holie ghost, that is wrought not in other, but in himselfe: the Macedonians that de∣nyed the person of the holie ghost to be god committed not this sinne, be∣cause they had not the grace of the holy
ghost. Therefore let vs consider who may commit this sinn and who can∣not, and then we shall the better de∣fine what this sinne is. The scripture deuides men into two sorts, elect & reprobate; the elect cannot commit this sinn, for the Apostle saith, the foūdation of God, meaning his elect∣tion remains sure, the elect may cō∣mitt any other sinne, and some of them haue committed euery other sinne either before or after their cal∣ling, and obtained mercy: but none of the elect euer committed this sinne, it falls into none but reprobates. But because the booke of election & re∣probation is not in our hands to read, we haue need of a more euident dis∣tinction. The Apostle Paul deuides all men into two sorts, naturall men and spirituall men, the naturall man saith he, perceiues not the things of God, but the spirituall man discrns all things: a naturall man we may say is he that hath onely the giftes of na¦ture,
as reason, vnderstanding, wit, memorie &c. And noe inlightning by religion and grace of the spirit; as the Philosophers who had asmuch vnderstanding as the light of nature could afforde them, they did know there is a God, because the creatures could not make themselues, nor be e¦ternall; therefore there must be one beginner which was God, who also they knew must be almightie and glorious, and therefore to be wor∣shipped: yet they could goe no fur¦ther, but for want of religion and the giftes of the spirit, they were ignorant how he was to be wor∣shiped. So that though these men did blas¦pheme, yet they did not commit this sinne: Rabsache and Goliah who did blaspheme GOD, yet blasphemed not the holy Ghost, because they spake they could not tell what; & all other who are not of the church that haue no other knowledg of God
then nature doth afforde them, can∣not commit this sinn, also those that be in the church who profes religion because the prince doth so, because other do so, because the time & place where they liue require they should doe so, who haue no more in them then natural mē, cannot commit this sinne against the holie ghost, because they are not partakers of the holie ghost: the other sorte of men are spi∣rituall men that are in the church, & they are of two sorte one sorte that may commit this sinne and the other that cannot. Those that can commit this sinn are hipocrites in the church that haue beene instructed in the catechisme, the pointes whereof the Apostle setteth downe to be repen∣tance frō dead workes, faith towards god, the doctrine of the sacraments, and of the resurrectiō both of Christ and other men, and of the last iudg∣ment: now the Apostle addeth in the fourth verse, it is vnpossible that those
that haue beene once inlightned with the knowledge of the trueth, & tasted of the good word of God, and power of the world to come, and beene made partakers of the holy ghost; if they fall away, that they should be renued by repentance. Let vs marke, those that may cōmit this sinn must be inlightned with the knowledge of the trueth, that is of the maine points of religion: a pre¦cious stone may in the darke be tro∣den vnder foot vnawares; but in the light the beautie thereof doth shine so, that none but mad men wil trāple vpon it: so many great sinnes may be committed of ignorant men, which none that haue knowledge will doe: except those that be desperate. And that we may the better find out this sinne, marke that the Apo∣stle saith in the same chapter: not onely that those that commit this sinn, must be inlightned with the knowledge of the trueth, but taste of
the good worde of God, or of the word of god that is good: that is, find some relish & sweetnes in religion; as a man may finde the sweetnes of a thing only by a taste: and this we see in the parable of the sower in those that are called the stony groūd, they receiue the word with ioy: and further marke that in the same chap∣ter to the Hebrues: that those that commit this sin may taste of the pow¦er of the world to come (that is) haue power to leaue some sins, & do some dueties that religiō requires. The A∣postle Peter speaking of those that Pt. 2. commit this sin, seemes to expound this point, saying, those that haue e∣scaped the filthines of the world tho rough the knowledge of the trueth, if they be afterward intangled there∣in and ouercome, their end is worse then the beginning; and marke that he saith they haue escaped not by faith and sanctification, but by know ledge: & last of all he saith they that
cōmit this sin are made partakers of the holy ghost, so that those that sin against the holy ghost must be par∣takers of the gifts of the holy ghost: e∣specyally the gift of knowledge, he that cōmits this sin must haue know¦ledge, & not a historical knowledge or knowledge that he may haue by report, which is vncertaine, but he must sin against the certaine know∣ledge, hat the holie ghost hath wrought in him: and he that cōmits this sin must be such a one as leaues some sin, not for feare of law, & that doth some duty not for praise or car∣nall profit, but he must haue a cer∣taine spirituall power so to do. But notwithstanding this, because the ho¦ly ghost doth not worke in thē faith, whereby they are ingraffed into Christ, and other▪ gifts of regenera∣tion wereby they might become new creatures, they may fal away. And in this descriptiō that thapostle hath set downe, we se those may commit this sin against the holy ghost, that haue no other
grosse sins in them: but lead a ciuill life in the church, and make shew as they were truly mortified & sancti∣fied, as these Pharises that our saui∣our Christ reproueth in this place were such. Now the other sorte of spirituall▪ men are such as haue not onely at∣tayned to those giftes of the holy ghost that we heard of before, that is a taste of religion, but haue disgested it, that haue escaped the filthines of the world not onely by knowledge but by faith and repentance; & ther∣fore cannot commit this sinne, as our sauiour Christ saith he that belee∣ueth hath passed from death to life; & as Paul saith there is no condemna∣tion to them that are in Christ Iesus,Ihn. 5 that walke not after the flesh but af∣ter the spirit; so that those that can∣notRm. . 1. cōmit this sinne are trew christi∣ans. But now we haue seene who can commit this sinne, that is to say ge∣nerally reprobates, and more parti∣culerly
hipocrites: and who cannot, generally the elect, and more parti∣culerly trew christians; let vs come more nerely to consider what this sinne is. We heard, he that commits this sinn against the holie ghost, must sin against the light that the holy ghost hath wrought in his heart, that is a∣gainst his iudgment and conscience; yet by the way we must not thinke that euerie sin of knowledge is this sinne (though sinnes of knowledge be greater then sinns of ignorance) yet euerie witting sin, is not this sin, for there were sacrifices in the law appointed for willing sinnes, to shew that if they did repent they might be∣lieue the pardon of them in Christ Iesus which was to come: therefore besides knowledge there must be some thing in the affection of those that shal commit this sin against the oly ghost, as appeares in the fiue & wentie verse going before, where
it is said, Christ did infer these words vpō the knowledge of their thoghts, their words were very wicked when they said he cast out diuels by Belse∣bub, but yet he saw something in their thoghts that made their words much more abhominable; those that commit this sin doe it of a malicious minde: which the Apostle in the tēth to the Hebrues calls a despiting of the spirit of grace; this malicious af∣fectiō, was in these pharises towards our sauiour Christ, as appeares by their suttle and cruell practises, and conspiracies against him, which did at this time preuaile against their iudgment, and carie them to slaun∣der and blaspheme him of a vilde minde: the like sinne it seemes Da∣uid speaks of in the psalme, when he saith be not mercifull to them that sin of malicious wickednes. Now therfore the sin against the ho∣ly ghost may be thus defyned, to be a wilfull and malicious offending a∣gainst
the truth certainly knowne, if any man thinke that blasphemy should be not included, but express∣ed as a necessarie braunch of the de∣finition, I will not striue with him; but although blasphemy be the high est degre in this sin, yet it seemes, asHeb, 10▪ there be other degrees of this sin a∣gainst the holy ghost, so a man may commit it without blasphemy: the A¦postle to the Hebrues saith, if we sin willingly after we haue receiued the knowledge of the truth, there re∣maines no more sacrifice for sinne, he doth not say if we blaspheme willingly. Did not the Pharises & the priests sin against the holy ghost at other times, hauing the sāe iudgmēt & the same affectiō in that they did, which they had in this blasphemy? as when they gaue Iudas mony to betray Christ, whē they called so egerly vpō Pilate to crucify him, & whē they off∣ered the soldiers larg sūms of money to say, his
disciples stole him away, that the glo∣ry of his resurrection should not shine abroade. Let it be considered whether men may not commit this sinne in workes, when they sinne a∣gainst the spirituall light of know∣ledge that is in them, of malice a∣gainst God or his trueth and people, though blasphemous wordes be not vttered: if Caine sinned against the holie ghost as some thinke, when he did of enuy kill his brother, because God did accept his sacrifice, and not his owne: if he did also hate God, & malicyously seek to deface his Imagehn. 3. in his brother, because Abels since∣rity and goodnes did deface his hi∣pocrisy and naughtines, was it not the sinne against the holy ghost? and yet Moses in Genises makes mention of no wordes of blasphemy: If Ana∣nias and Saphira committed this sinn, when they kept back parte ofAct. 5. the price of their land, and made a lie not to Peter only, but to the holy
ghost (as some thinke) and the extra∣ordinarie iudgment that fell out vp∣on thē seemeth to perswade, yet there were no wordes of blasphemy; yea if Iudas did commit this sinn when he betrayed his maister with a kisse, (as most think) there being no words of blasphemy vttered; then this sinne may be committed in workes, aswell as in blasphemous words. But these two things that we haue spoken of before, must needs concur in this sinne, it must proceede from knowledge; for no sine of ignorance (thogh it be blasphemy) is it, for Paul saith, he was a blasphemer and perse∣cuter,1. Tim. 10 yet he obtained mercy because he did it ignorantly: and the Apostle 1 Peter houlds those within the com∣pasActs. 2 of pardon that crucified Christ, because they did it of ignorāce. And secondly it must proceede from ma∣lice, without the which though sins of kowledge be great sinns, yet not this sinne; Peter sinned of knowledge
when he denied his maister with an oath, yet he committed not this sin because he did it not of malice but loued his maister still: therefore al∣though some man should blaspheme in sicknes or in persecution (as it is said of Paul before his cōuersion hect. 9 compelled some to blaspheme) yet it should not be this sin which is a wil∣full & malicious sinning against the knowne truth: but these pharises that knew Christ was the sonne of God, and that his miracles were done by the power of God, yet through enuy & hatred they said, he cast out diuels by Belsebub, they sinned against the holie ghost: so Iulian that had beene a professor of religiō, & yet of a wick∣ed minde did mocke Christ by his country, calling him a Galilean, & by his parents calling him the carpent∣ers sonne, cōmitted this horrible sin. I graunt this sin cannot easily be dis∣cerned, for though a man shall sinn greuously, yet wheth he were in∣lightned
by the holy ghost or no, it is hard to say: and although it may be discerned, he sinned of knowledg, yet whether he did it of a malicious and wicked affection or no, it is hardActs.  to say. When Simon Magus offered the Apostle money to giue him the gifts of the holy ghost to dispose at his pleasure, Peter doth not altogi∣ther deny him hope of pardon, but bids him pray to God, if it were possi¦ble the thought of his heart might be forgiuen: if Peter himselfe were somewhat doutfull of the nature of1 Iohn 5 that offence, whether it were this sin or noe; then it must needs be at least often times doutfull to vs. Yet it seemes that this sinne may be discerned, the Apostle Iohn saith there is a sinne to death for which I say not ye shoule pray, & the church did determine of Iulians sinne that we spoke of before, and forbade that he should be pray∣ed for.
The papists say there are. 7. dead∣ly sinnes, if they doe meane by deadly sinnes such as cannot be pardoned, then there is but this one; but if theyRom, 6. mean which deserue death, there are not only 7▪ but seauen score, for Paul saith the rewarde of sinne is death. But the apostle Iohn calls this a sinn to death in another sence then other sinns, for as by other sinns we deserue to dy, so Christs death hath discharg∣ed those that repent of them, and de∣serued that they should liue notwith¦standing: but this is a sin to death in∣deede, he that commits it must die himselfe and there is no hope of life for him, therefore pray not for him, so admonish him not, vse no meanes in vaine. The causes of this great sinn be 2 first the corruption of mās nature, se∣cōdly the tēptation of the diuel; that the corruption of mans nature is a cause of this sinne none can doubt, the Apostle saith sinn tooke occasion
by the commaundement, & wrought in him all manner of concupisence. That might be foūd in him who was an elect vessell, so it takes occasion to worke this sinn in some that be repro¦bates; and as this sinn is caused by o∣ther sins, so especially by hypocrisie, for it neuer falls into any but into hy∣pocrites; for although hypocrisie be not this sinn (for a man may repent of hypocrisie, as appears by the ex∣hortation that Iohn Baptist gaue to the Pharises that were hipocrites) yet a man may goe so far in hypocrisy, that he may be past recouery. The second cause of this sinne is the diuells temptation, who not only stirrs vp but inforceth mans corrupti¦on, and so often as he can causeth it to breake forth in al excesse: in Mat∣thew the twelfth, our Sauiour saith when the euill spirit is gone out of a man, that is in such sorte as he may be cast out of reprobates (when a man hath left some sinnes by know∣ledge
and done some dueties by a taste of religion as before) he walks through dry places, & finding noe rest, he saith he will returne againe to the place from whence he came, and if he finds it garnished for him, that is emptie of those gifts of re∣generation and sanctification, and that his heart be hipocriticall and false, he takes 7 other spirits worse then himselfe, that is he caries him to farr greater sinnes then before, & the end of that man is worse then the beginning. Now let vs consider of the steps whereby men clyme to this sinne, I say not all those that do commit his sinne, for some do runne more hastely to hell then o¦ther doe, but many fall not into this sinne at once but by degrees: there is a conception and a birth of euery sinne, so of this as Iames saith; we must not thinke that malicious sin∣ing is in the beginning of it, but in the perfection of it: the stepes to
this sinne are other sinnes: some if they commit not this sinne care not if they commit a hundred, but a man may die with a prick in his finger but he must die with a prick in his heart; there is no sinn but some haue dyed of it, where one dieth of this sinne a hundred dies of other sinns; though this be oftener committed then we think, seing it is spoken of in so manie places of scriptures, yet not so often as other sinns The first step to this sinne is negligence in hearing the word of God, and that it is so, appeares in the Hebrues where thapostle saith, you that for your time ought to haue beene teachers haue neede to learn the first principles of the word of God. The second step to it, is the con∣tēpt of the word, for he that is negli∣ligent in reading, hearing, praying & other exercises of religion, at lēgth they grow loathsome to him & so h comes to
contemne them; that this is a step to this sinn, appeares in the tenth to the Hebrues; if they be punished thatHeb. 10 dispise him that spake on earth, much more him that speaks from heauen. The third step is forsaking the fellowship of the brethren who call for christian exercises, and diligence and reuerence in them, as appeares in the Hebrews where the Apostle saith let vs not fortake our fellowship as the manner of some is.b. 10 4 Fourthly when they see their for∣mer necligence & contempt growes a discredit to them, and they become a byword; then they defēd there owne doeings, and speake against religion, and those that be forward in it, and so at length come to blaspheme the truth maliciously and desperately. Now let vs come to the occasions of this sin, for as there is somewhat that moues a man to euery thing, so to euery sinne: especially▪ to euery willing sinn, there are many occasi∣ons
of this sin▪ especially two▪ one g¦nerall the other particuler. The general occasiō is the hardnes and narrownes of the way that leads to life, for he that knowes the trth & asteth of the goodnes of it, would gladly haue hi part in it and such men do labour in some measure for it, as Christ saith manie shall striue to enter into life and shall not be a∣ble▪ they taste of the power of the world to come o leaue some sinne and do some uties▪ as Herod refor∣many things▪ but because the way is narrow and teaches men to deny thē slues and to serue▪ God in truth▪ in one thing aswel as in another (which such an hypocrite hath no will nor power to doe) he com at last to dis∣pite that good thing which he can∣not attaine, as a man that chaseth a thing that he would faine et, when he seeth he cannot ouertae it, he doth dispitefully curse it & let it go. The particulr occasion of this sinn
is when he is reproued of other sins▪ as we may see in the scripture, that this sin doth commonly fall out in controuersies, when mens worst af∣fections are stirred. Cain when he was controled for his hypocrisie, then he was angry & killed his bro∣ther: the Pharises being crossed by our sauiour Christs doctrine, disgra∣ced by his miracles, and reproued for their offences, being wrath against him: did malicyously blaspheme him, so whē Iudas spake against  good worke of the woman, like, an hipocrite pretending the poore▪ when he intended his owne commo¦ditie, because our sauiour Christ re∣proued him he was malecontent &▪ went out and consulted with the high priests & elders to betray him. And men are alwaies in most dan∣ger of this sin in a controuersy, there¦fore take heed of hipocrisie, take heede of committing & dwelling in any sin that is worthy of sharpe re∣proofe
take hed of caeling against the trueth, take heede of stiing af∣fections against them that reproue yea take heed that elsebub be not toe often in your mouths &c, Hauing seene the steps and occa∣sions to this sin, let vs se the compa∣nions of it, that is the things that doe alwaies accompany it, and they are specially three, The cōpanion of this sin in respect of the men themselues that cōmit it, is impenitencie, they cānot repent. The companiō of this sin in respect of God, against whom it, cōmited is vnpardonablenes, it shall neuer be forgiuen. The companion of this sin in respect of the church, is such de∣testation, they will not, nor may not vouchsafe to pray for it. Now he that hath commited this sin cānot repēt as appeares in the He¦brues where it is said, it is vnpossible he should be renued by repentance: repentance is a
of the minde and manners, but he that committeth this sin shal neuer be better: Paul speaks of some that haue hearts so hard that they cannot repent, these mens hartes are hardest of all, and why canne he not repent that hath▪ committed this sin? because he is fallen from grace, no man can repent by his owne power, it is the gift of the spirit of God; now he that hath committed this sinne hath lesse power to repent then he that is a meere naturall man▪ because the diuill hath taken a stronger pos∣session of him then of other men, and the holy ghost wil not rescue him, be∣cause he hath malicyously disped him: such a man shall haue sight en∣ough to se the fault as Iudas had, and shall sorrow for the punishmēt of it as Iudas did, but not returne: as those woundes are most dangerous that bleede not, so those sinns for which me weep not, as one calls teares the bloud of the soule▪ The papists say
they▪ that sin against the holy ghost▪ may repent, but very rarely & sedoe haue grace so to do, but they speake directly cōtrary to the Apostle▪ who saith not only they cānot repēt, but that it i vnpossible they should. The second companion of this sin in respect of God that I spake of is, it shall neuer be forgiuen: Obiect. why shall this sin neuer be forgiuen? Ans. because God in his eternal coū¦sell neuer purposed to shew mercie to it, and because Christ by his suffe∣rings did neuer satisfie for it at least efficienter, and because as it is said before, such a mā cānot repēt of it: the prophet Ieremie speaks of some men whose sin is written with a pēn of Iron, and the point of a diamond: all sin is dangerous, but this is most dangerous, for it is not onely vnpar∣donable of it selfe, but being once committed, it makes all the rest of his sin vnpardonable. The Iesuites in the Rhemish testament say the sinn
against the holy ghost may be forgi∣uen, but very hardly, but mark, in say¦ing it may be forgiuen▪ they speake blasphemy affirming a flat contrari∣ety to our sauiour Christ, and giuing him the ly: but their drift is to per∣swade mē that the Pope can forgiue this sin, as if the Pope could do that which God will not, and where they say very hardly it is forgiuen, they meane without performing the hard things of penance, or without pay∣ing a great deale of money, but wee must rest in these words of our saui∣our Christ, he that sins against the holy ghost shall neuer be forgiuen: therefore it is a vaine thing for the papists to giue men hope where the is no hope. The Papists say there are 6 sins against the holy ghost viz. de∣speration, presumption, obstincie, denying the truth, enuying the bre∣thren, and finall impenitencie, and they say only the last of these is vn∣pardonable, but if ye marke the for∣mer
dscription of this sin ye, shall finde that none of all these 6. is the sin against the holy ghost: desperati∣on, presumption, obstinacy, & enuy may be in those that neuer knew the truth, denying the truth of infirmity hath beene pardoned, finall impeni∣tencie is no sin at all, but rather a feareful effect of other sins, but they meane by finall impenitency dying in contempt of the sacrament of pe∣nance▪ and refusing the priests ab∣solution: but as their sacrament of penance is a counterfeit sacrament, so a man may performe true repen∣tance without it; and those that repēt in that sorte and no otherwise, shall neuer be forgiuen indeede, & there∣fore those that refuse such penance and absolution are like first to ob∣taine pardon. Our sauiour Christ here speaks not of a sinne the Phari∣se should commit, but of a sinne they had committed, as Marke plainely shewes when he
saith▪ this Christ spake because the Pharises said he had an vncleane spi∣rit, where our sauiour Christ saith it shall not be forgiuen, neither in this world nor in the world to come, the Papists would proue from thence that some sins may be forgiuen in the world to come, that they might vphold their fayned purgatory: but seing there were no sacrifices for the dead in the old testament, nor pray∣ers for the dead in the new testamēt, and seeing the scripture saith those that dy in the Lord est from their la¦bours; we cōclude ther is no purgato¦rie, but it is a ained inuentiō of their owne to maintaine the Popes kitch∣en. Saint Mark expoūds these words and saith, this sinne against the holy Ghost shal neuer be forgiuen, al sins that shalbe forgiuen are forgiuen in this life either in youth, in age, or at the point of death, as Ezechiel aith, at what time soeuer a sinner repen∣teth he shalbe forgiu; after death e∣uerie
one shall receiue according to that he hath done in this body, a Paul saith, he meaning therefore of these wordes of our sauiour Christ is, he shall haue no comfort of the forgiuenesse of his sinnes in this world; nor haue them itted at the day of iudgment. The third companion of this sin is in respect of the church, they de∣test not onely the sin but the person, for this sinne they will not pray for him; Paul would not pray for Alex∣ander, the church would not pray for Iulian, so we must not pray for those that commit this sinn; for we must not be more mercifull then God is, we pray Gods will may be done in generall, therefore we must not pray against Gods will in this particuler. Last of all we come to the effect of this sinne, the first is apostacy as it is said in the Hebrues they fall away, not stumble but fall flat downe, not into some particuler sinne as Dauid,
but generally from goodnes, not tha they will alwaies forsake the place where religiō is, but they forsake the loue and obedience of it; as Peter saith they doe with the dog retur∣ning to their vomit, & with the sow to their wallowing in the mire. Iudas when he had committed this sinne, went and hāged himselfe; Paul saith of Alexāder he hath done me much harme, not a little. Iulian when he had committed this sin scoffed a Christ himselfe, when he spoyled the churches he said of the vessells, be these fitt for a carpenters sonne The second effect of this sinne as is said in the Hebrues, is a fearefull looking for of vengence, as our Sa∣uiour said they are culpable of eter∣nall damnation, so they looke for it with trembling as the diuells doe, the bookes of election and reproba∣tion are not in our hands, but there is a copy of them in mens hearts, which is the booke of a mans own
conscience. I read of one who for some great sinne, whether this or no god knoweth, fell into desperation, & when a good minister sought to com¦fort him, he answered him my dam∣nation is as certainly sealed vp to me, as your saluation is to you. Now because there be some are ready to feare this sinn when they are far from it, for the satisfiing of such tender consciences, and answe∣ring of doubtfull motions, let vs re∣member as hath beene said before, those that commit this sin must sinn of knowledge therfore if a man can say he hath sinned of ignorance it is not it, also we heard before he that committeth this sinne must sinn of malice, therefore if he can say he sin¦ed of infirmitie & not with a malici∣ous mind it is not it, likewise we haue seen those that cōmit this sin cānot re¦pent, therefore if a man can say in trueth he is sory that he hath offend∣ed God, it is not it: in like manners it
is noted before, that the church will not pray for him that hath commit∣ed this sin; therefore if the brethren who know a mans offence and the circumstances of it wil pray for him, let him think it is not it, Furthermore we heard those that commit this sin do fallaway and become Apostates, therefore if a man be afraide to com¦mit other sins, & doth not without conscience fall from euil to worse, it is not it: last of all, though a man be so farr caried by temptation as to commit diuers sins, yet if he doth not hate the truth, neither in words nor deeds persecute the church, but doth loue and reuerence the trueth, and those that preach & professe it, be hath not cōmitted this vnreco¦uerable sin, nor neuer shal by the grace of GOD. FINIS.
