18507.25 S119536 99854743 177385
CORANTE, OR, NEVVES FROM Italy, Germany, Hungaria, Bohemia, Spaine and Dutchland. 1621. From Rome the 2 of Iuly 1621. FRom Naples they write, that the Italian Gallies were gone to Liuerno againe, and haue take three Turkish Ships in the Leuant Seas, there are Souldiers daily taken vp for Millane. This weeke by the Popes Commission, there are 20000. crownes made ouer into Germany, towards the paying of 30000. Footmen, which are taken vp there for the Apostolicall Sea. From Venice the 6. of Iuly 1621. Letters from Millane certifie, that the 4. Com∣panies of Horsemen, which conuayed the money that was to pay the Souldiers in Tirol, stayd in Valtolina, to fortifie the same: it is sayd that those of Valtolina haue sent vnto the Emperor, and to the Archbishop Leopoldus, to yeeld themselues vnder their Protection, that so they may be freed from the Spanish warre. From Constantinople it is written, that the great Turke is gone feom Adranapolie, and marcheth for∣ward towards Poland. On Sunday at night, certaine men with Shippes well appointed, set vpon the Ship called the Toro Negro, that lay richly laden to sayle to Constanti∣nople, and hauing slaine the Massaro, and cast him ouer boord, and taken certaine Balles laden with cloath of gold, silke, and some Chests of Rials of Plate, they set fire on the Ship, whereby the great Gally called Balby, that lay not farre from it, was also fired, and much spoyled: there are fiue men ta∣ken that were Actors therein. From Vianna the 10. of Iuly 1621. The Emperor hath put off his iourney to Prague, because other matters are falne out here. The Earle Palatine in Hungaria is dead, which will be an occa∣sion of much alteration. Bethlem Gabor lyes with his Forces by Fileck, and there hath by a wile, vpon security gotten Colonell Basinacke to come foorth, to treate with him, who being come, 400. Turkes that were with Bethlem, enclosed him round about, and slew 300. of his men; besides Stephen Palsy that is sore wounded, and got hardly away, and Bethlem begins now againe to present all those that hold with the Emperor. Newheusel is now strongly battered, Bucquoy hath made many Sconses about it, and cast vp two Mounts, and they within set open the Grammer∣gate, and thereat issue out & in, and doe much hurt to the Emperors Souldiers: This day there is more preparation for Sconses sent thether from hence. From Zurich the 12. of Iuly 1621. In Bundten there is no peace to be hoped for, by reason that the Spanish forces daily waxe stronger, and the Archduke Leopoldus still takes vp more men, whereupon the Lords of three Bundten quarters haue written to Zurich, Bern, and Saint Galen, for 4000. men, to defend their frontiers, and their dan∣gerous wayes, being resolued with 16000. men to match towards their Enemies, and to set on them. From Breslaw the 6. of Iuly 1621. The Marquis of Iagersdorp hath ouercome the whole Bishopricke of Newzs, and other places, Townes, and Castles also, and hath disarmed all the Inhabitants of the Townes, without any exception of Religion, and hath arrested the Bishops of News Colonell, his principall Counsell and spirituall ad∣ministrators and other persons, and committed them prisoners, and taketh oath of fidelity in the King of Bohemiaes name, and calls himselfe the said Kings Generall in Silesia, he strengthens his Armie daily, and with 12000. of his best Souldiers, runneth into Glats in Bohemia, and hath taken some Bohemian Catholike Lords, and brought them prisoners into Glats, which it is thought shall be dealt with all, as they were in Prague, for that many Lords in Silesia are much grieued thereat. The young Earle of Thurn hath taken some pla∣ces in the principality of Tessen, and wholy ransackt them, and is ioyned againe with the Marquis, to whom also 1500. Morauian Horsemen are ioyned. It is said that the Princes & States haue taken vp 9000. men, all poore Pesants, and haue made a Ca∣tholike Lord of Brinten, their Generall. From Vianna the 14 of Iuly 1621. From Newheusell it is certified, that the Empe∣rours Armie is besieged by the Hungarians, in such manner, that they cannot goe halfe a mile out of it, and the Lord Carel van Harruch came hether yester∣day, with a conuoy of 2000. Horsemen sent from Bucquoy, he is to goe backe againe this night, with the Lord Gundacker of Lichtenstein. It is certaine that Bethlem is 50000. strong, as it is thought to go into Morauia, and 20000. are to goe to New∣heusell. Bethlems Souldiers haue taken Beszniaki & Balsy by Fellecke, and slaine 900. of the Emperours Soul∣diers, and it is here very dangerous for the Townes vpon the hills. Also (for that they dealt so cruelly with the Budianers) 1200 of Bethlems forces haue set vpon the Earle of Colaldo, and haue giuen him an ouerthrow, wherein the Duke of Saxon and 80. of his Horsemen are slaine, and haue taken all the booty that they got from the Budianers from them againe. The Emperour is somewhat sickly, and yesterday he sent the Letters of assignation of the Marquisate of Lonsuits, with his confirmation thereunto, to the Duke Eelector of Saxon: This day an English Am∣bassadour arriued here. From Lints the 16 of Iuly 1621. Yesterday there came a Post hether from Vianna, and stayed not aboue an houre, hee carried Letters also to the Duke of Bauaria, to send some ayde, for that Bucquoy perceiuing himselfe to be to weake before Newheusell, he is gone with his Armie back againe to Brugh, and that the Hungarians haue a great enterprise in hand. The 13. of this moneth, the Lords that are arre∣sted were examined one after the other, and it is said that more shall be committed, and we are sworne to be obedient to the Duke of Bauaria. From Bergstrate the 18. of Iuly. 1621. On Thursday Colonell Ouertrout with his horse∣men in Aldenwaldt, shall be quartered in Mercke∣bach Fehret, and other places. This day, the Bishop of Wuttenberch sent to the Prince to Darmestradt, by his owne Post, to let him know within 8. dayes whether hee intended to ayde the Palatinate and the Bohemians, and also that hee would send for his Regiment out of the Bauarian Armie, and if not, that the Earle of Mansfield would enter into the field, and put all that Country to fire and sword. The morrowe the Marquis of Darmestadt will march forward, his carriage is all gone. From Bamberch the 13. of Iuly 1621.
The 7. of this moneth, there came a Trumpeter hether with Letters to the Prince, and to Don Cap∣pitel, to certifie him, that if the Prince doth not pre∣sently recall his Souldiers out of the Bohemian Ter∣ritories, that then hee will persecute and inuade our Country with fire and sword, whereupon Don Des∣cant presently rode to the Prince to Wurtzburch, to shew him the Letter, and on Sunday last came he∣ther againe, and the same day dispatched the Trum∣peter away, with what resolution, it is not yet knowne, onely that all the horsemen are sent for to come hether, as also that the rest of the forces are all in a readinesse, and stayd for further Commission. This Country is in a great feare, and they haue sent 6. Gentlemen to the Earle of Mansfield in the Pala∣tinate, to know his meaning, there is also Post sent to Vianna and Monchem. The Copie of the Earle of Mansfields Letter sent to Don Descant to Bamberch. OVr salutation, honourable, valiant, and wor∣thy good friends. How the Bishopricke of Wurzburch forces, and those of Bauaria haue he∣therto behaued themselues in Bohemia, is sufficient∣ly knowne, and therfore I neede not to speake more thereof, as also that we hither to haue done nothing, as likewise that you haue not in any sort medled with the Bohemian matters, but rather (as it is fit) haue stayed from proceeding therein. But for that the said Wurtenberch Souldiers, haue beene found to doe the contrary, and will by power to vs giuen from the King of Bohemia, our most gracious Lord, haue had sufficient cause to be reuenged on his Ma∣iesties enemies, as also on their ayders and abetters, and to giue the same measure vnto them, that they haue giuen vnto others. We thought it conuenient to send this Trumpeter vnto you, hereby to certifie and desire you that you would willingly send for your Regiment of Souldiers out of Bohemia, and withdraw them from thence, as also to refraine from that strange and cruell proceedings (whereunto you are only incited by the Emperor) and wholy to leaue them, which if you doe, as wee doubt not but you will, you shall finde vs to be your good friend, and if not you shall finde the contrary, for that as I am a true Knight, we will not refraine from persecuting all yours, and the whole Chapters subiects, & lands, with fire and sword. Which we desire you to thinke vpon, and to take good order therein, and to send vs your resolute answere touching our Letter by this bearer. Giuen in Weittenhousen the 14. of Iuly 1621. Stilo nouo, our desire is, that you would im∣part this also to the Chapter in Wurtenburch, that we in that case may be held excuscable. If any thing happen otherwise: Your honours good friend Ernst Earle of Mansfield. From Ausburgh the 19 of Iuly 1621. In Bauaria they take vp the sixt man throughout all the Country, and there are 26000, men to come to Straubing, where the Duke will make a generall Muster, the Ordinance and Amunition is sent the∣ther from Munchem, and the Bakers and Brewers must send Beere and Bread after the Armie, for that because the Earle of Mansfield hath sent a threat∣ning Letter by a Trumpeter to Bamberch; The Bi∣shop thereof hath sent it to the Duke of Bauaria, and thereupon hee is gone with all his Court and forces from Mouchem, and the Prince also is to send all his forces in the said Bishoprick and the rest, from Bam∣bergh on this side the Palatinate, and the Emperors Armies vnder the conduct of Monseur de Tilly, lye on the Bohemian frontiers about 2. Dutch miles from the Earle of Mansfield, who is very strong, wee shall shortly he are some newes. For that the Turke is entred with so strong an Army into the field, the King of Poland also assem∣bleth all his Forces, and the Soldiers march already from Meluingh, that haue at least 160. Dutch miles to goe before they come to the place of mustering. The King of Poland is very couragious and resolute to goe against the Turke. The warre now begins on all sides to haue some apparance on the King of Spain, and the Archdukes Gouernor of Brabanter side against those of the V∣nited Prouinces, for out of all the frontier Townes they go abroad to seek aduentures. They of Herto∣ghen bush with certaine Horsmen, made toward the Towne of Graue, where they tooke two Burgers, which they of the Graue vnderstanding, presently sent forth certaine Horsemen, who followed hem so fast, that before they got into Hertogen bush they did trouble them, & setting vpon them, tooke both the Burgers from them, and brought sixe of their Horsemen prisoner, with them to the Graue. There are 4 Ships of warre in Ostend that are pre∣pared to put to Sea, to take Marchants ships if they can, but Captaine Moy Lambert with eleuen Ships of the Vnited Prouinces men of warre, lye to watch their comming forth. The Archduke Albertus dead body lyeth openly to be seene, and many men are gone thito see it. Two Ships richly laden with Indian wares came hither into the vnited Prouinces vpon the 18th. of Iuly, wherof the Mauence hath in her, 9369. Picols and 55. cases of priemsche Ppper, 176073. pounds of Clones, 271 sackes of Mace, 11398 cses of Si∣namon, 704.¼ caracts of Diamonds. And the armes of Horne had in her, 3064. Picols, and 81. & ½. cases of Pepper, 10000. pounds of Clones, 150 cases of Beniamin of the best sort, 320 packes of Indigo, 183. packes of China linnen, 9. great cases of white China silke, 1. case of Taffaties, 463. ½. caracts of Di∣amonds. The West Indian affaires goe brauely forward, and they onely attend Saylors to put into them, that they may put to Sea, to reuenge the blood of their friends which hath beene spilt so tyranously by the Spaniards, that were so cruelly brought vnto their ends by them, and those that they threw ouer-bord, thinking to drowne them, who notwithstanding were so strong by Gods helpe, that being in the Sea they vnbound one the others hands, and swam on shore, but being taken there by the Spaniards, they were presently hanged. Imprinted by Broyer Iohnson Corantere to his Excellency, the 2. of August. 1621.
