19768 S101488 99837302 177492
Letters conteyning sun∣dry deuises, touching the state of Flaunders and Portin∣gall: Written by Card. Granuelle and others, and lately inter∣cepted and publi∣shed. Imprinted at London at the three Cranes in the Vinetree by Thomas Daw∣son, for Thomas Charde. 1582.
Letters of the Cardinall of Granuelle. SIr prouost my Lorde the Pre∣late of Sainte Vastz brought me your letters of the 14.To the pro∣uost Morillō April. 1582. of Fe∣bruarie, wherin you yeelde mee sufficient testi∣monie of the saide Prelates sufficiencie and good qualities, the which for the time that I haue had heere to deale with him, I finde to bee correspondent to your words. I haue vsed him friendly, and haue endeuored to make him good cheare. I haue also writtē to the court, there to pro∣cure him some good entertainmēt. I am sory yt here we be somewhat dry, howbeit we do (according as we ought) ēdeuor our selues to winne credite with straungers, at the least I will do the best I may, to let them vnderstand of it. I haue also very
earnestly preferred the sute of his brother and of Secretary Vasseur and his father, and that is all I can doe, beeing so farre off. The matter is the lesse, seeng the countie Egmond, and the L. of Cham∣pagney be yet in Gaūt, notwithstanding they be kept very straitly: for if they had bin transported into Zealand, I feare we should neuer haue had any good reconing of thē. If this wretched Orenge had died of the blowe, there had been better hope of their recouery. I remayne still in the same feare as before: that is, that so long as the saide Orenge may and shall beare any sway, we shall hardly obtayne the de∣liuerie of the sayde Lo. of Champagny. His Maiestie hath written very ear∣nestly to my L. the prince of Parma: but it was needelesse, considering howe fa∣uourably of his grace he assisteth vs. God send vs shortly good newes, & graunt you (my L. Prouost) the accomplishment of your desires: commending me hartily to your good remembraunce. From Madrill, this 19. of Aprill. 1582. Your good brother and assured friend.
Ant. cardinall of Granuelle. The superscription was. To my Lord the pouost of Ayre. Sir Maximilian Morillon, great Arch deacon of Malines, my good bro∣ther and friend. SIr prouost, To the same man. April. 25. with his owne hand. I haue no letter of your vnanswered. As they write out of France the prince of Orange is yet a foote, notwithstanding his hurt re∣ceiued by a young Biskain, who lost his life in this worlde in the enterprise. God peraduenture keepeth him for an other purpose. Alancon triumpheth, but it will be without an Iron corselet. Non durabit as I hope: the moneth of May is not yet past. I doe to my power sollicite the sending of souldiers into the Lowe Countreys, and especiall god prouision of siluer. I assure you there is no want in thee, as not respecting how small thanke I haue of those of Hazienda: so that may be done which belongeth to the seruice of God, & the master, & the benefit of ye poore countreys. There is on al sides great pre¦paration, as wel by sea as by land, against
those that would hurt vs, and I hope that the French can not procure ye ariuall of ye turkish armie this yere, howe arnestly so euer they labor, as wel by ye ordinary em∣bassador that is at Constantinople as by an expresse messenger, whom the Queen mother hath sent by Marseyles: bcause that by letters, euen lately receiued out of the east, wee are assured that the Per∣sians haue of late giuen the Turkes a shrewde blowe, whiche muche trou∣bleth the Constantinopolitaynes: be∣sides that the Turke laboureth all hee may about sending away 4000. Ianissa∣ries, and 3000 Spachies: and hath com∣māded two Sangiaques to be in redines, and hasted the feast of the circumcision of the sonne, to the ende, the better to entend to the saide resistaunce, for that all hope of agreement is past, also in the Arsenall they worke more slowly about the furni∣ture of the nauie. I hope my Lorde the Prince, hath already deliuered you the nomination of Turney, and the deane of Saint Gaule that of Malines, and I haue written to Rome, by the former or∣dinarie there to preuent, and there with
my Auditor M. Leander Lana, and Bli∣oul, hee shall finde all good addresse. I haue also sent my procuration to resigne, & by this ordinarie do hope to send the co∣pie. Wee haue had a shrewde turne a∣bout the Pensions leuied vpon Turney, but wee must for the time haue patience, and looke for remedie hereafter. I lod∣ged here my Lorde of S. Vastz, making him the best cheere I coulde, he is going towardes Portingall, whether I haue written (as I am bounde) in his behalfe, as also in the behalfe of Secretarie Vas∣seur, his father the Lord of Valhuon, and the little enfant: At the least I omitte no∣thing for my part that I am able to doe. My niece the La. of Ashey writeth vnto me, that Vateuille hath exhibited a petiti∣on to those of the Chamber of accompts of Dole, and sent another to the Exche∣quer in the lowe Countreys, pretending a title to Verseiles, as the recompence of the late Lorde of Peleux the father (being one of the Emperors chamber) for al his seruice together with the losse of his goods in France for the Imperial maie∣sties sake, as also for hauing his two
sonnes slayne, together with the death of my saide Nieces seconde father, who pe∣rished in ye battaile of Graueling, besides suche consideration as is to be had of the seruice of ye late L. of Ashey my nephew, together with his expēces in his masters affayres This request hathe shee sent vn∣to you with the perticulers thereto ad∣ioyned: heretofore you preuented my L. the prince, sticke now therefore to it, that at this time Verseil may be hers, notwith∣standing, presently you can not obtayne the rest of that whereto her demaund pre∣tēdeth. Desiring you to help her in what you well may. I haue heretofore giuen you to vnder∣stande, yt the king hath giuen Don Fran∣cis ye entry of Aspargosse de Lara whiche nowe is worth 3500. crownes, and will hereafter be better. He hath had woorde therof sent into Burgondy, but I know not whether they found him there. For some doe write that hee had altered his mind for comming hither, and that he was determined to goe to Fraunkfort to buy Horses, and so to serue in the warres in those partes, but I wotte not whether
this may cause him to take some other ad∣uice. I had here this Easter his brother and his people with me: I like him well, and hee profiteth in studie, I haue concei∣ued a good hope of him, and he liketh his master, and his master him. A Burgo∣gnion gentleman, named Monsieur of Thon goeth that way, and shall take ac∣quaintāce of you: his purpose as I heare is to take charge of my sayde nephew in stead of the L. of Vauldrey. If you please I pray you write vnto mee your opinion, whether you thinke it conuenient. The King is gone to meete with his sister the Empresse at Almerin, and from thence are to goe to Lisbon, wee shall see what will come of this enteruiewe. Thus heartily commending mee to your good grace, I beseech the creator to graunt you the accomplishment of your desires. From Madrill this 25. of April. 1582. Your good brother and assured friend, Ant. Cardinall of Granuelle.
The superscription was. To my L. the prouost Morillon, great Archdeacon of Malines, my fellow brother and friende. SIr counsellor, To the coū∣sellor of As∣sonuill. The 25. of April. 1582.I haue receiued your letter of the 25. of Februarie, & haue very willingly giuen audience vnto my Lord, the prelate of S. Vastz. Hauing of∣ten conferred together, he is departed in post towarde the king into Portingall. His Maiestie liketh verye well of the resolution of the reconciled estates, and in mine opinion they haue laide a good foundation of change, in saying that their earnest request to bee rid of straungers was onely vpon suche hope as the others ministred of framing thē selues to obedi∣ence, if they were gone, seeing that the re∣solution taken, and the sworn treaty, was the onely ground of discharging them, as also that ye others had shewed great hope of accommodating them selues to them, and returning to obedience after the said straungers departure, which neuerthe∣lesse
they haue not done, but do stil persist in their obstinacie. The Prince of Orenges death will alter many of their minds: And the duke of Alenson hauing none of his own peo∣ple about him, may perhappes repence that he euer came so far. The right way were, if the inhabitants of Antwerpe for making their owne peace (considering that my Lorde the Prince doeth yet offer them all fauour, if they would but return and acknowledge them selues) woulde deteyne him prisoner, and deliuer him in∣to his Maiesties handes, to the ende hee might reward him as he deserueth. I soli∣cite so much as possibly I may the speedy sending of men & money, whiche I hope will bee done: the men do already march, and dealing for money goeth forwarde: I hope God will assist vs notwithstan∣ding, whatsoeuer hindrāces they procure vs. He is aboue all, and the redier he will be to helpe vs, if we helpe our sel∣ues, as surely for the finall wading tho∣rowe so many miseries, we must. Con∣cerning your perticular parson, Secre∣tarie Lalloo may very well testifie, that
I haue done so much as you can require. Also by Spanishe letters which I haue written to his Maiestie with my owne hande. God graunt you may as I desire reape some fruite. And this I assure you: My Lorde the Prince hath as ear∣nestly commended you as is possible. Thus hartily commending me to your good remembraunce, I beseech the crea∣tor (sir Counsaylor) to graunt you your desires. From Madrill this 15. of Aprill. 1582. Your good Gossip and friende Ant. Cardinall of Granuelle. The superscription was. To my L. of Assonuille counsellour, and one of his Maiesties priuie counsell in the Lowe countreys. MAdam, To the Dut∣ches of Par∣ma the 27. of April. 1582. with his owne hande. I haue answered al your highnes letters that came to my hande, and doe very desirously attende newes from thence of your highnesse perfect recouerie, to the ende, to be eased of my care in yt by the last I hearde that the goute had not yet per∣fectly left you. God for his mercie sende
me shortly good tydinges. The letters which lately we haue had out of England putteth vs in hope that wee be deliuered of the Prince of Orenge, sith the 14. day after his hurt (as they write thence) there was no more hope of his life, and the Q. of Englande was duely aduertized from time to time of the state of his hurt. They say moreouer, that he hath been grieuous∣ly tormented as well with the payne of his wound, as also, with the payne that he hath bin put to, partly by such incitions, as the surgions haue made to come to the bottom of the hurt, & partly by cauteries of towe for stopping of the blood: which yet they could not atteyne. It is pitie hee died not long since, together with a great number of his faction, namely. S. Alde∣gonde. His death wil bread great altera∣tions as is most like, & we loke for news of what haue since happened, and what course matters haue taken. We heare that the duke of Anieow hath sent the P. Daulphin to the king of France for suc∣cour, we shall see what will come of it. I wot not what breach of war we look for, th the D. of Anicow doth al by ye know∣ledge,
consent and assistance of his said brother, as also he helpeth the Queen his mother, who openly ioyneth with Don Antonie to make warre against vs. It is euident they woulde doe more if they could. But we can haue no helpe of our power, ney∣ther knowe it, or consider in what state those bee that doe on all sides disquiet vs, yea so farre as by procuring the discente of the Turkes armie, who I suppose ve∣rily woulde come, in cace the Persian warre, which yet continueth, did not let him, as hauing lately on that side had an ouerthrow of his people, wherevpon, ac∣cording to the last newes, Constantino∣ple was much troubled, and the sayde Turke hath sent into his frontiers newe reliefe of two Sangiaques, with 4000. Ianissaries, and 3000 Spachies, notwith∣standing they giue out that they doe at∣tende an embassadour out of Persia, who shoulde bring the conditions of peace, whiche I hope is but a voice to deceiue them, and that he hath to doe with a peo∣ple that doe fight in running away. My Lord of S. Vastz went this way, and by poste continueth his iourney to∣warde
the king, who is nowe at Almerin whether he went to meete the Empresse, and my Lorde the Archduke Cardinall is gone to receiue her vpon the confines of the kingdome. The saide Abbot of S. Vastz seemeth a wary man, and suche a one as can yeelde good accompte of the state of the Lowe Countreys. I enter∣tayned him very well, and haue commen∣ded him in the court, to the ende they may so vse him, that hee may returne well sa∣tisfied. I am well assured that for his part he wil sollicite the sending of souldi∣ers and money for the pay: whereabout I haue laboured these two monethes, cal∣ling vpon it so much as I might. And alreadie we haue worde from Sicill and Naples, that the power that should come thence, will marche very shortly, so to ioyne with Don Ferdinand of Tolete, who is yet in the Neapolitayn gallies at Calibry, while Don Ihon of Cardoa, at∣tendeth conuenient tyme to passe the gulfe: and in troth, he is very slacke. So as the Countie Oliuares, who is in the same gallies, is not yet gotten to Rome, to the great preiudice of the affayres: not∣withstanding
his Holinesse hath already graunted the subsidy, which he hath stai∣ed these three yeeres full vnder colour of the abstinence of warre, which Iohn of Marliano had cōcluded with the Turke. I doe within these two dayes looke for the Prince Iohn Andrew Dorye, who returneth toward Italy with his Gal∣leyes, and the Duke of Ossuna goeth with him, who, as your highnesse maye haue heard, goeth as Viceroy to Naples. His Maiestie and all his blood thanked be God, are in good health, and we waite what resolution they wil take after their Maiesties haue beene together, who are to returne from Almarin to Lisbon, where (if I be not deceiued) the Kinge hath yet enough to do: for concerning iu∣stice, gouernment, treasurie, and suche like concerning surety, I see nothing yet done to my lyking: besides that, I wote not how his Maiestie can without daun∣ger leaue the Realme of Portingale. Our Nauy is prouiding, but slowly ac∣cording to custome, so as if wāt of monie had not hindred Don Anthony & the Q. Mother of Frāce, they had by this pre∣uēted
vs. The feare of the Turkes army hath caused the leuie of 6000. Almaines in Tirol, who are to take shipping at Spe∣tie: but if the Turks armie commeth not, yet shall we not want place where to vse them, if I may be beleeued. It is doubted whether the enterprise of Tercera shalbe executed this yeere, or whether they take any other order. God put into his Maie∣sties hart, that that may be for the best. It is still said, that the Imperiall diet shalbe holdē at Auspburg, but I cānot thinke it, it began vpon Sunday last, notwithstan∣ding the purport of ye letters of conuoca∣tion. I suppose my L. the prince hath sent out of the lowe Countreys some one to supplie the place for the circuite of Bur∣gondie: at the least, I gaue knowledge of it at the Court a good while since, to the ende therevpon to write to him what was beste, together with my opinion. Your highnesse may haue heard howe it hath pleased his Maiestie to nominate to the Bishoppricke of Turney Moril∣lon, Prouost of Ayre. Also that I haue graunted to discharge my selfe of the
Archbishopricke of Malines, as that I can not be there resident, nominating thereto M. Iohn of Auchin, deane of S. Gaule my officiall, who vnder the saide prouost of Morillon hath gouerned the sayd Archbishopricke many yeeres. The fauour which it pleased your highnes to extend toward the said Morillon in testi∣fiyng so wel of him to his Maiestie, for ye which I most humbly and hartily thanke you, together with the commendation of my sayde Lorde Prince haue bin a good helpe to him herein, and certaynely I hope that of ye choyse which his Maiestie haue made of these two persons, hee shall be well serued, and that when your high∣nesse shall knowe the saide deane, your selfe will bee of the same opinion. It is aboue fifteene yeeres since I first sued to his Maiestie to discharge mee of the said Church of Mallines, which as your high∣nesse knoweth I accepted full euill a∣gainst my will. For I sufficiently did foresee what woulde ensue, as that by my absence his Maiestie coulde not reape the fruites whereto he pretended by vniting the Abbaies vnto the Byshoprickes, whi∣che
he did, to the end, the Bishops might haue some ouersight in dealing with the states of Brabant, for withstanding the prince of Orenge, and other of his facti∣on, that troubled the affayres: and the bet∣ter to trayne the Abbots, who beeing a∣bused by the saide Prince of Orenge, haue giuen him opportunitie to hurt both them selues and the rest. As for Iohn of Sermillan, in whose behalfe your high∣nesse haue written, concerning the Abey of Dane in your letter, dated the 17. of Februarie, I haue alreadie written to Prouost Foncq, who hath returned me an answere that it is alreadie besto∣wed, I wote not on whom, without ma∣king his Maiestie priuie thereto, whiche he imputeth to the Counsaylor of Asson∣uille, so that if it be bestowed, ther is no more to say. I see no other matter at this time woorth the troubling of your highnesse, then you vnderstande by my former. Finally, most humbly and heartilye commending me to your highnesse good grace, I beseech the creator, to sende you a good, and long life.
From Madrill, this 27. of Aprill. 1582. Your highnesse moste humble and bounden seruant. Ant. Cardinall of Granuelle. The superscription was. To my Lady, to her highnesse owne handes. Most noble and most excellent Lorde, right honourable. To ye prince of Parma.I Haue answered all your excellencies letters, and since the blowe giuen to the Prince of Orenge here haue commen none of your newes. By Englande wee haue perticularly hearde the whole suc∣cesse of his hurt, in that this Queenes a∣gences remaining in Antwerpe, haue bin diligent in giuing daily notice of all that haue been incident to his hurt: and (as we haue there learned) he liued for the space of 14. dayes after the blowe in vehement torments, by reason as well of the griefe of his wounde, as also by the Anatomie
which the Surgeons made by incisions, as if it had been in dead flesh, for the sear∣ching thereof, and seeking to helpe it: al∣so by molesting him with fierye Caute∣ries, endeuoring to stop the vaine, which they coulde not bring to passe: farther, that the 14. day he was in such case, as euen his owne familiars were past hope of life. There is no speech in what state the affaires of Antwerpe remayned all the while, sauing that Alencon oft visited him, and that he made a short will. It can not possibly be, but that this happe will breede great alterations. God graunt it be to our benefite. His Maiestie trusteth, that your excel∣lencie will withou fayle helpe by all means possible to procure some good ef∣fect, by vsing such meanes (as you were determined) with the inhabitants of Ant∣werpe and other townes, offering vnto them (notwithstanding whatsoeuer their former committed offences) all pardon and curtesie, in case they will reclayme themselues: as also that you will not omitte what so euer occasion, to bee
dooyng somewhat with suche small force as you haue, if opportunitie may serue. All sending of speedy succour is dayly called vpon, and alreadie out of Naples, Sicilie, and Millan. We heare that men bee prouiding, farther, that the Horsemen that were at Naples shoulde presently march to Millan. The regi∣ment of don Ferdinando of Tolete (whi∣che as I write vnto you shall not go with the other troupe, but rather Peter of Paz) was yet at Colibre the 20. of this moneth, through the vnreasonable flack∣nesse of Don Iohn of Cardoua, who see∣keth to sayle so sure. The prouision of 40000. crowns appointed for victualing in Sauoy, are alreadie in the handes of Sanctius of Padilia. Also for feare of the turkish armie, there are 6000. Almaines leuied, and shall take shipping at Spetie: which (this feare past) may serue some o∣ther where, to whiche ende, there are 76000. crownes already sent. I doe by al meanes possible, call vpon the prouisi∣on of coyne, as I haue already written, which as I hope will be with profite. Don Antony, being openly assisted
by the Q. mother, threatneth to departe towarde the coast of Portingall, and thēce to the Ile of Terecra, and the Indi∣es, in the beginning of May. Our armie is prouiding more slowly then I coulde wishe. I haue alreadie twise written to his Maiestie. And I assure my selfe, your excel∣lencie shall shortely haue aunswere.Al this writ∣ten in Cy∣phres. Cyphres. I woulde it were alreadie done, and might no longer hange in suspence, and haue besought his Maiestie. The embassadour Iohn Babtista, af∣firmeth that Orendge remayned the 14. day past hope of life. Others that come by sea, thinke him alreadie dead. The aide Iohn Babtista, saith moreouer, that he prince Daulphine was gone to the French Court, there to sollicite the bro∣her to sende ayde: yea and that with hi peeches I wot not wherefore: for I am f that opinion, that Alenson doeth no∣ing but what the mother and brother ill. I beseech your excellencie, for a∣yding the spoyle of the Countrey of
Burgondy, to cause the Infanterie and Horsemen that are leuied in these Coun∣treys, to march with all speede that may be towards Flanders, otherwise they wil spoyle all. Besides, if the French shoulde come, they will serue as souldiers vse to doe in their owne houses, and therefore I am still of that minde, that for the safe∣tie of that countrey, 2000. Switzers were very requisite, who beeing retey∣ned, vntill the power that is to passe ou of Italy be come, might then be friendly dismissed with full payment, to the ende, still to haue them readye as neede might require. And therefore considering the harme that those of the countrey do com∣mit, this way woulde be the cheaper. The Prince Iohn Andrew Dory is not yet arriued here, but I looke for him within three or foure dayes at the far∣thest. The Duke of Ossuna, is yet a Pegnafiel: It is enough that we may say that hee is onwarde of his way: fo certaynely hee will make hasts: for i hee tarrie long, I am perswaded tha
the Prince Dorie will not stay for him, whereby hee maye remayne in Bar∣celone longer then willinglye hee woulde. His Maiestie is at Almerine, where the moste Noble Empresse is to arriue the firste day of May, or peraduenture sooner. Wee shall see what greate matters will ensue after this enteruiewe of the brother and sister. Farther, if I bee not deceyued, there is yet enough to doe in Portingalle before his Maiestie can departe, in cace he will leaue all things in safetie: for that in trothe, there is muche lesse done then I coulde well wishe, as well concerning Iustice, and Pllicie, as any other taking of or∣der in the affayres. His holynes hath graunted the sub∣sidie towarde the mainteynaunce of the Gallies. Also there is newes freshely come from Constantinople, importing that the Turke hath lately receyued some newe soyle aboute the borders of Persia, wherevpon Constantinople was
in some care or heauinesse. They hasten the feast of the circum∣cision of the sonne, to the ende, to gather some coin which wanted. And the Turke hath sent a supply of 4000. Ianissares, and 3000. Spachles: besides that he hath made two of his Sangiaques to marche with their power. For that many feared least the speeche raysed, that the Persian sought for peace or truce, is but dissimu∣lacion. So as wee hope, that notwith∣standing the French soliclting, the Tur∣kish armie yet it wil not come otherwise that it well be very small: but thereof we haue as yet no certaintie. Your excellencie may haue heard of the peace concluded betweene the Pola∣que and the Muscouite for 10. yeeres. Also from Armue, we haue by land heard good newes, that the Portingales haue there ouerthrowen many people of those quarters which purposed to haue hurt them, and that they remayned in his Ma∣iesties obedience. The Abbot of S. Vastz hath been heere: I haue procured him good enter∣tainement:
hee proceedeth on his iourney in post, and seemeth to bee a meete and seruiceable person. I haue prouided him of what so euer I haue thought might turne to his good entertaynement and cherishing, & haue not omitted to breake my mind to him concerning my opinion in matters, to the ende he might the bet∣ter deale. I thinke certainely, that be∣sides the letters which your excellencie haue receyued of Don Guillen of Saint Clement, you haue also had letters out of Portingall, touching ye affaires of the Imperiall diet, wherein I referre my selfe, as hauing afore written my opinion at large. God keepe and preserue your excel∣lencie, graunting you good successe in all your endeuors and enterprises. From Madrill this 26. of Apryll. 1582. Vnderneath was written. Of your excellencie. The most affectionate seruant. Ant.
Cardinall of Granuelle. The superscription was. To the most noble and excellent Lord my right honourable L. the Prince of Parma, gouernour and captaine generall for his Maiestie in the lowe Coūtreys, of Flaūders & Burgundy. To the Mar∣quise of Rou¦baisthe 16. of April. 1582.MY L. the Prelate of S. Vastz, who arriued here this day, deliuered me your letter of the 19. of February. I haue already by sundry my L. the P. writings to his Maiestie, heard of the holy resolu∣tion taken by ye estates. Also that at your solliciting & by ye whiche so fitly you pro∣pounded, together with your endeuors so wel accōmodated, what you by my L. and my L. president, wt others of your setting on worke, haue bin done. The inhabitāts of Artoise haue trode the path to the rest, wherof may redounde great benefite to al the countrey, for ye relleuing thē at length out of so many miseries. & you shal before these letters come to your hāds, haue no∣tice of his maiesties liking of ye said reso∣lution, together wt those yt haue traueyled therin: assuring you yt I haue not, nor doe not omit any meanes in hastening your
succour & furniture of coyne. And besides the 400000 crownes mentioned in your letter, there is meanes made for 300000 more. I haue done my endeuour to pro∣cure the setting downe of an assured mo∣nethly summe, whiche shoulde not bee slacked: but there is more to do in finding the meanes, then in wishing the doing of it. It is stil in hand, but I dare not put you in any assured hope before I see the de∣uise in a better forwardnesse: at the least, I assure you, there is no want in mee, and well I may say, that I do all that I may. As for such souldiers as appeare at the moustre, & ordinarily in following their bāners, or whē they come to hādy blows, are absent▪ that is an ordinarie disease, especially among suche souldiers, as are in their owne countreys. I dare say the faule is not in you, and what soeuer com∣meth to your notice, you would willing∣ly redresse: for besides the respect yt ought to be had to the masters seruice, by suche meanes you venture your owne parson, together with other captaines in great daunger. For weening to haue your nū∣ber of enrouled souldiers, for want there∣of
you are the weaker before your enimie, which may procure such daunger as you may easily comprehende. I neuer sawe the saide Prouost of S. Vastz before: but hauing conferred with him, besides the testimonie wt his works already doe giue, he seemeth in my opini∣on, a very seruiceable person. He shal pro∣céede on his iourney to his Maiestie, where hee shall finde part of that he hath in charge in a good forwardnesse, by meanes of such diligence as haue been v∣sed. I am to thanke you for such curteous offers, as it pleaseth you by your letter to make vnto mee: and for my part, for re∣quitall thereof, you shall alwayes finde mee ready, and willing to do for you (as occasion shall serue) whatsoeuer I may. Finally, most hartily commending mee to your good grace, I beseeche the Creator, my L. to graunt you the accom∣plishment of your desires. From Madrill this 16. of Aprill. 1582. Wholy ready to do you seruice.
Ant. cardinall of Granuelle. The superscription was. To my L. my L. Marquise of Roubais, Gouernour of Artoys and Hesdin. MY Lorde the Prelate of Saint Vastz hath deliuered your letter of the last saue one of February.To the L. of Montigny. In troth such are your desertes, in that you haue so nobly imployed your selfe in his Ma∣iesties seruice, that your selfe neede not to speake thereof, as being a thing mani∣fest, whereof his Maiestie is sufficiently enfourmed, assuring you that notwith∣standing it was needlesse: yet I failed not to put him in minde vpon euery occasion. And I perceiue he liketh you well, and esteemeth of your valiancie, and of that you haue vppon euery opportunitie that haue been offered, so nobly and so often employed your owne person with suche manhood and honour: whereby I hope that his saide Maiestie will omitte no oc∣casion, to let you vnderstande what ac∣coumpt hee maketh of you: also what cur¦tesie
you are to hope for of his greatnesse and liberalty. As for the charges of Flan∣ders, I perceiue not that his Maiestie doeth yet goe about to take any resolu∣tion: besides you know (sir) in what state Flanders matters doe yet stande, howe∣beit I hope that if you haue not yet heard of it, you shall shortly by my Lorde the prince vnderstande, that he is carefull in employing you honourably. And I can assure you, that the good will whiche I haue perceiued in his Maiestie towarde you is such, that in my opinion, you can not wishe it better. I am heere as you knowe farre from him, at the least twelue dayes iourneys off, and therefore can doe nothing but by letters, which can not al∣wayes watch their times so as those that are present had neede to renewe the con∣tents of the letters, and I hope that my Lorde president Foncq, who nowe is there, through whose handes also the af∣fayres of the lowe Countreys doe passe, & who in my opinion liketh you wel, wil not faile to do whatsoeuer to your behoof hee may possible, as also I assure you, that for my part what so euer in me lieth,
you shalbe remembred with all good and assured affection. Wherevpon for an end hereof. I commende mee to your good grace, beseeching the Creator, to graunt you the accomplishment of your desires. From Madrill this 16. of April. 1582. Your perfect friend to do you seruice. Ant. Cardinall of Granuelle. The superscription was. To my Lord the Lorde of Monti∣gnye. SIr, To the L. of Capres. the Lord of S. Vastz arriuinge heere in good helth this present daye, gaue me cause of great contentation, in that by him I vnderstood perticularlye, besides what before I knewe, the ende∣uors which your self together with other Lordes haue vsed for the common wealth of the countrey, vpholding the religion, and his Maiesties seruice, wherein in troth, your desert is great: and I doe e∣specially wishe that his Maiestie may ef∣fectually
(as occasion may serue) declare how well he liketh thereof. For my part, I will not fayle, but willingly testifie vn∣to his Maiestie, and so farre rehearse the same alwayes as time may serue, to the ende my endeuors may one day yeelde such fruits as may turne to your full con∣tentation, wherein you shall alwayes find me readie, as also in whatso euer els I may, to doe you pleasure and seruice. Finally, most heartily commending my selfe vnto your good grace, I beseech the creator, graunt to you the accōplishment of your desires. From Madrill this 16. of Aprill, 1582. Your good friende to vse. Ant. Cardinall of Granuelle. The superscription was. To my L. my Lorde the Earle of Hen∣ninlietart, L. of Capres.
MY Lorde of Gongnies, To the L. of Gongnies. the Prelate of Saint Vastz hath deliuered mee your letter, dated the 22. of Februarie. The goodwill and loue which heretofore I haue offered vnto you, is not onely not diminished: but rather dayly encrseth, vnderstanding the duty, wt in what you may, you do vse toward ye vpholding of religion, & his Maiesties seruice: as also by reason of such good will, as you haue borne towarde me, and doe nowe againe offer. Neyther haue I omitted often to testifie your desertes, and still will be rea∣die vpon all occasions to renew the same, and will sende vnto my Lord the prouost Foncq your request, to the ende he may make report thereof to his Maiestie, into whose handes, the same which you procu∣red to bee exhibited, whereof this yt nowe you sende mee, is the copie, may by this time be deliuered: desiring him to put his Maiestie in minde of my former suite which willingly I will renewe, earnest∣ly wishing him to take such order therin, as may be to your full contentation. Thus most hartily commending my self to your good remēbrāce, I besech the Creator,
to graunt you your desires. From Madrill this 16. of Aprill, 1582. Your good friende, Ant. Cardinall of Granuelle. The superscription was. To my L. the L. of Gongnies. MY L. tresorer generall, To Tresorer Stercke. ye prelate of S. Vastz, ariuing here this day, haue among others deliuered me your letters, bearing date the 15. of Februarie: by the contents whereof I gladly vnderstoode that his Maiesties grant, signed with his owne hande for confirming you in your estate, was made to your liking. The te∣stimonie of your loyall seruice is due vn∣to your woorkes, in that continually you haue so well employed your selfe: & I am very glad that your age and disposition can beare it, so well to tende dayly to the masters affaires, which (considering in what state they nowe remayne) doe neede some great assistance. I heartily thanke you for your offer, which at the request of my L. the prouost of Ayre you made to assist my pretence, for the payment of my wages and pentions, that haue so many
yeeres bin due: and I perceiue you know that I haue great reason, and that I haue borne my selfe modestly in vsing no im∣portunacie: notwithstanding, I haue so long stayed. But the losses which on all sides I haue susteined, together with my expences in my iourneys for our masters seruice, as also my seruing purely, and wt out interest, do nowe force mee to be ear∣nest. By the said prouost of Ayres letters I vnderstand, that by your good furthe∣raunce the matter draweth to some ende, that at the leaste I may bee relieued with some good portion, eyther in Burgondy or els where, for the wc I heartily thanke you: as also of the assuraunce that you make mee of your good will, toge∣ther with my Lords your felow brethren in my behalf, wherby I am greatly boūd to employ my selfe for the whole compa¦ny, especially for you in whatsoeuer oc∣casion may graunt me opportunitie. The resolution of the estates hath bin great, and of great importaunce: as that whereof the whole countrey I hope shal reap cōmoditie, his Maiestie being resol∣ued to accept of this good wil, & to sende aide
for the assuraunce of the said Countreys against the French, so to procure the rest and quiet which after so many mischiefes were thereto, more then necessarie. Thus most heartily cōmending my self to your good remembraunce, I beseeche the Creator, my L. Tresorer to graunt you your desires. From Madrill this 16. of Apryll. 1582. Your assured and olde friende. Ant. Cardinall of Granuelle. The superscription was. To my L. Stercke, high Tresorer of his Maiesties recepts in the Low coun∣treys. MY Lord, To the L. of Billy. I haue receiued your let∣ters of the last of Februarie, whi∣che my L. of S. Vastz deliuered mee at his comming hether, from whence hee is nowe departed vpon his iourney. I was glad to see him, and wee haue often con∣ferred together. The resolution that hee
bringeth from the estates, deserueth that he bee very welcome, especially, for that hee hath so honourablie behaued himselfe therein, as also in reconciling the estates of the Wallon Prouinces. In truth he is a meete man, and I am glad that I haue founde him affectionate towarde you. Of your good will towarde mee, I assure my selfe by reason of such offers as both by mouth and letters you haue often made mee. And your selfe may be sure to finde me alwayes correspondent in like desire, to employ my selfe in what soeuer concerneth you, which certaynely, both willingly and fauourablie I do per∣fourme in what I may. Wherefore heartily commending me to your good grace, I beseeche the Crea∣tor to graunt you your desires. From Madrill this 15. of Aprill. 1582. Your perfect good friende. Ant. Cardinall of Granuelle. The superscription was.
To my L. the L. of Billy. &c. Letters of A. Dennetiers. MY Lorde, To the L. of Rassenghiē. I lately receiued the let∣ters whiche it pleased your Lorde∣ship to write vnto mee by the L. of Saint Vastz, who was most honourably recei∣ued and feasted by the most noble, my L. of Granuelle, and as I vnderstand, shal so bee also by my L. Foncq at Lisborne, where he is already arriued, and was like speedily to be dispatched, hauing such an host, had not his dispatch by reason of the enteruiewe betweene the K. and the Em∣presse, (who was gone to see her at Alme∣rin whether shee came to meete him) bin stayed. I haue and still will willingly do my L. of Vendegies all pleasure I may, for besides his deserts, and vertuous qua∣lities, there is in vs a certaine kinde of conformitie, which maketh mee to loue, reuerence, and honor him, reioycing and congratulating with your Lordeship, for such a Lorde and friend, & such a nephew, of whō I hope of much in time to come, concerning the administration of ye com∣mon wealth & benefite of our countrey. I woulde to God we had many such. We can come to no ende with the wi∣dowe,
who is a foolish woman, and hath euill counseile, I hope neuerthelesse that time and friendes may mollifie her, and teach her to knowe her wrong. In the meane time my Lord of Secry waxeth so liuely and practise in the language and knowledge of spanish affaires, that his emprisonment will not onely bee not vn∣profitable to him, but also most profitable. As likewise to the aforesaid L. of Vende∣gies, who hath dayly dealings with proc∣tors and atturneys, learning the phrase & maner to proceede. Of this mishappe wil redounde this benefite, that they shall haue learned the speeche and customes of the kingdome. It is supposed, that his Maiesties soiour∣ning at Lisbone is very fit for ye reducing of the Hollenders & Zealāders, who haue learned & vnderstood what ye K. our M. is. Also that herewithal the P. of Orēges death, wt is thought certayne, may breede great alteratiō: God graunt we may wel vse this opportunitie. I suppose that will be when the French is better known: also that vntil then we shal haue enough to do and more then euer. For a good & firme
peace, a strong war is necessarie. The v∣niforme resolution of ye Wallon prouin∣ces was hard very acceptablie, god graūt it may be well vsed, otherwise I am in ye same feare with your Lordship. Where∣vpon I dare say his Maiestie will vse both wisedome and discretion. Your L. doeth greatly binde mee in shewing so great fauour towarde me, my kinsmen and friendes. I hope God will giue me grace to deserue it toward your Lordshippe and yours, according to my small habilitie, in whatsoeuer I may vn∣derstande requisite to your honor, welth, and seruice. A suppose that some of my yeeres pentions, in title of a Lorde of the priuie counsell, are yet behinde. I am to craue your Lordships fauour in the pay∣ment thereof, towarde the reliefe of my mother, and other our wantes which are great, by reason of the great losses whi∣che in our goods wee haue susteyned du∣ring these warres. If your Lordeship woulde do mee this fauour, to wishe mee some meanes how to be recompensed, I thinke his Maiestie woulde haue some regarde of my seruices and losses. The Admiralles sonne of Castile, was lately
by Alcaldes and Aguacilles ledde priso∣ner to the Castle of Alameda, as guiltie of the death of a gentleman, named Gut∣tieres, who was slayne by three or foure vnknowne Rebocados, of whome there haue been some Gentlemen and others founde in Arragon, and brought hither, who being here racked, the said Admiral and other great persons haue founde them selues grieued, alleadging that it is against their priuiledges, and as I vnder∣stande, there haue bin a plaintiue request exhibited to his Maiestie: wherevpon is great discoursing. I am glad to heare of the recouerie of Lens out of ye Frenches handes: for if his leasure had serued, that he might haue fortified it, it might haue done muche mischiefe all ouer the flatte Countreye, and bred great harme before it had been recouered. Thus my L. most humbly commen∣ding me to your L. good grace, I beseech the Creator to grant you the accomplish∣ment of your most noble and vertuous desires. From Madrill this 19. of Apryll. 1582.
Of your said Lordship, the most hum∣ble and affectionate seruaunt. A. Dennetieres. The superscription was. To my L. my L. the Baron of Rasseng∣hien, of the counsell of Estate, and chiefe of the Catholik K. of Spaines recepts in his lowe Countreys. Letters of the Abbot of Saint Vastz. MY Lorde, To counsel∣ler Richar∣dot. I suppose you haue recei∣ued the letters I writte vnto you by the way: Nowe that I am at my Lo. the Cardinalles, who hath lodged me at his house, and doeth mee all honor possible, granting me priuate audience so oftē as I desire it, I haue not forgottē to report your vertues and deserts. Wherein I as∣sure you, he hath taken such a liking, that shortly you shall see the effectes, and that cum faenore that shal be restored you, whi∣che by others enuie hath bin taken away. The rest is not to be referred to paper: only I pray you think that your affaires are at a good stay, whereunto I will bee
still assistant, & will not cease nisire plane confecta. We depart to morrowe toward Lisbone, from whence you shall heare of our newes. My Lo. of Morillon is nomi∣nated to the Bishopricke of Turney, and the Deane of S. Gudule to the Archbi∣shopricke of Malines, as one in whose be∣halfe my L. hath resigned. One of Mor∣becques childrē is here in prison, for kill¦ling his hoste peeuishly. The L. of Go∣micourt returneth with one habite, a∣thousand crowns and counsell for ye war. No more, but I pray you haue a care of our houshoulde affayres, and so besee∣ching God to continue you his fauour. I do wt al my heart cōmend me to yours. From Madrill this 26. of Apryll. 1582. Your perpetuall obedient friend. Iohn Abbot of Saint Vastz. The superscription was. To my L. my L. of Richardot, president of Artoys, and of his Maiesties pri∣uie counsell. Arras Letters of Peter Aldobrandine. My most noble Lady,
To the Dut∣chesse of Parma.THe 2. of this present, I wrot to your highnesse of my occurrences, and I receiued yours of the 22. of Februarie, foure dayes since, which as your self may imagine, bred my great contentation, as thereby vnderstanding howe after your great trouble with goutes and feuers, you nowe finde your selfe so eased, as we shortly hope that the Lorde God hath re∣stored you to your former health, whiche I haue, and dayly doe beseeche his diuine Maiestie to graunt you. I doe likewise vnderstande of your highnesse determi∣nation, wholy to obey his Maiestie, con∣cerning your aboode for a time in these quarters: which vndoubtedly both is and will be greatly to his Maiesties liking: as presupposing that your highnes persō and shadow in these Countreys, may yet bring foorth and woorke verye great and good effectes, for that he woulde that on the one side my Lorde the prince shoulde forceably compell suche as remayne ob∣stinate: and on the other side, yt your high∣nesse shoulde stand with your armes open and as it were an vmpire, to ende all controuersies towardes such as woulde
haue recourse to the gate of mercy: as al∣so to those that cannot be perswaded and beleeue that the way of great and migh∣tie force, is the same wherewith these countreys shoulde be reduced to due obe∣dience. Yesterday I had great talke with the Lorde Don Iohn Idiaqz, and than∣ked him for such paynes, as I knowe hee had taken, to the ende, your highnesse might at his Maiesties hande, obtayne such satisfaction, as the zeale wherewith you haue, and still doe serue him doth de∣serue, and besought him to persist, especi∣ally to procure ye reuoking of your high∣nesse, out of this exile with his fauour and good liking. Wherevpon I digressed in opening sundrye purposes concerning your highnesse entent. Hereunto he made me answere, that his Maiestie was suf∣ficiently perswaded, how greatly he was bounde vnto you. Also that he neuer dou∣ted of your readinesse to fulfill willingly whatsoeuer his Maiesties pleasure, who also will not omitte all due considerati∣ons of your highnesse seruice and quali∣tie. Farther, that it is necessarie you should attend the successe of this springe,
that afterward he may the better resolue himselfe: he promised me also yt he would not omit any conuenient time or place, so earnestly to deale wt his Maiestie, as your highnes may trust vnto him. For my part I will slacke no time or opportunitie, to the ende, to keepe the said L. well dispo∣sed & affected: who besids his great good will to your highnes, is also in great cre∣dite & authoritie with his Maiestie, & is glad to see me, & doeth by all meanes fa∣uour me: neither would he suffer mee as yet to moue his Maiestie, as I haue been about to doe: but willed mee to conforme my selfe to that your highnesse writ vnto him, for that he saith his Maiestie coulde not yet peruse your letters, so that it were good he should first see them, & then when time serued to speake, he would giue me warning. So as I wil wholy fulfil what so euer the said L. shall commaunde mee, who also hath promised to procure often letters to your highnes. To be briefe, to graunt you such amends as your deuotiō to his Maiesties seruice doth deserue. I haue assisted Nicelly in whatsoeuer I thought conuenient for the seruice of the
house: and if he had not bin here, he might haue bin in the bryers, and therefore may certifie you in what credit euē your high∣nes shadow is here. But perticularly cō∣cerning the Castle, I haue not spokē one worde, but am ready to perfourme what∣soeuer you shal appoint & command me. The knight Blondo writeth to me that concerning the kings reuenew, he ende∣uoreth not yet to vse any farther diligēce vntil the L. Duke, nameth the persons yt shall bye the landes, & then all necessary conueiances shalbe dispatched, when we also must take heed ye you be assured con∣cerning the title to Nouara. Because that at Madrill, there haue bin perticular dea∣ling touching the enhauncing and aug∣mentation of your highnes priuiledges, & that there it is to be dispatched: Sama∣niego hath perticular care of ye busines, & I haue here procured a consultation to be sent to Madrill, which is in the handes of his Maiestie, Bourbon, & La Posta, and as Matthewe Vasques promiseth me shalbe sent to morrow: and withall, this busines may be finished & ended, which is not of such importaunce as to put it in accompt
of rewarde, howebeit, I will bee still so aduised, that if I heare anything, I may knowe howe to answere. Earle Claudes sonnes haue presen∣ted a remembraunce to the counsayle of I∣taly, demaunding the same that their fa∣ther required, touching the goods confis∣cate by the death of Captayne Camillus, and I suppose they shall haue the same answere their father had, namely, to goe to the Duke. And as occasion fall out, I will not omitte anie endeuours. Cardi∣nall Farncsius corriuales doe all they may: and I thinke his Maiestie, Granuel, and Don Iohn Idiaqz sufficiently aun∣swered, who toulde me that they goe a∣bout to remedie it. Farther, yesterday the saide Don Iohn willed mee to bee of good cheere: for his Maiestie had his no∣ble Lordshippe in such reputation, as the seruice which this hole familie had, and still doeth vnto his Maiestie did deserue, but all valiant parsons haue Corriuales. So long as I remayne heere, I will ne∣uer desist as well in this, as in all other matters, but conforme my self wholly to your highnesse will, neyther will I omit
any diligence or endeuour, to the ende you may haue such satisfaction, as by rea∣son you are to hope for of the goodnesse of this great king, who God be praysed is in better health then euer he was: and in his determinations, vseth such secrecy and aduice, as no man can well enter to knowe any thing, before it please him to publishe it. The common opinion is, that in a∣nye wise hee will in September returne to Madrill, as being both in Castile and Arragon greatly desired. And yesterday the saide Lorde Don Iohn toulde mee, that the most noble Empresse did verye well like the Monasterie des Dechau∣ses at Madrill, and that her Maiestie doth yet minde to come thither, howebeit, that such is the loue and respecte shee beareth to her saide brother, that it is thought that at his being heere, shee will fulfill his Maiesties will, who wisheth to leaue her the gouernment of the kingdome, toge∣ther with the same. I will aduertise your highnesse of what so euer shall dayly hap∣pen. The French doe threaten to enter this kingdome with Don Anthony, who
truly is here as it were adored of the base cōmunaltie, & it is sayd that in Brittaine, there is a great army ready. Also in as much as they cānot beate any places but what lyeth between Duore & Mignio, his Maiestie sendeth towarde the Citie of Porto the Prior Don Hernando with 10000. footmen and 800. horse, with whom he shall keepe that Countrie. In this Citie there is a sufficient garrison. Also at Settubar a regiment of Almains; and ye rest of the fortresses hereabout are sufficiētly prouided. His Maiesties shoul∣ders are charged with greate expenses. Also it may be the shadow is bigger thē the daunger, which is encreased by him that endeuoured to hinder the sending of any power of importāce into those parts, as being but a small friend to our Prin∣ces glory, and an vtter enemy to the pro∣uiding of ye remedy for ye affaires of those parts which haue by him beene lost and subuerted: so as without farther speeche your highnes doe well vnderstande mee. Howebeit as Don Iohn toulde mee, although his Maiestie be to prouide for
diuers Countries: yet is he resolued to take order for greate prouision of coyne for the affaires of those Countries, ney∣ther will hee that the sayde assignation be imployed any other where. I am not sure of the iust summe, but I vnderstande it will bee at the least 2. millions of gold yeerely. The most part of the saide coine the Fouquers shall prouide monethly at Collen. In Italy there is order taken for 4. or 5000. Italians, a fewe horsemen, and 2. Regiments of Spaniardes, who all shall marche thitherwardes. And in as much as I perceiued all this prouision to proceede but slowely, and especiall that of coyne, (that is the principall) by the counsayle of Don Iohn, I determined to exhibite a briefe to his Maiestie, the tenor of the copie whereof is here inclosed, the which together with other diligence vsed coulde not but bring forth good effectes. I haue sent a copie thereof to Cardi∣nall Granuelle, who liketh it very well, and sendeth mee woorde that for his part hee hath and still doeth all that hee may, in what so euer is needefull to be
broght to passe: & I haue put him in mind that if that which was begunne to be pro∣pounded, be put in execution, all will goe well forwarde, and that there is no other sure way to reuoke your highnesse out of this exile. I will procure earnest warre in those partes: for in so doing, wee shall soone see those peoples minde: likewise to what purpose your highnesse staye in those countreys, may serue. I haue and will vse for County Mansselt vpon all occasions as well with his M. as wt his seruauntes, all meanes possible: and the Lorde Don Iohn sheweth mee that his Maiestie doth oftē write yt he shal be con∣tinewed. Also to seeke some meanes to content and satisfie the saide Lorde, as well because he deserueth it, as also for easing your highnesse minde: which is all that at this time I can say, most hum∣bly kissing your highnesse moste noble handes. And I pray God graunt you all supreme felicitie. From Lisbone, this 8. of Aprill. 1582.
Your highnes most humble seruant Peter Aldobrandine. The superscription was. To the most noble Lady, my Lady. &c. Letters of Peter Isunca. Most noble sir. BEseeching God this present may come to your Lo. and finde you in such health as I beseech & wish you.To Iasper of Annastro. By the last ordinarie I writ to your Lordeshippe of my occurrences. In these I will rehearse the substaunce thereof, so farre as I can remember (for I keepe no copies of my writings) as also what else shall come in my minde. For not being as then assured of the princes death, I nowe speake otherwise, then then I did, and although at that time I was earnest with you to come speedily hither, so to get you from among those beastes feete. Also that thervpon I writ you a perticu∣lar, which in case of necessity you shoulde
shewe to the prince, yet nowe I say, that by a letter which my father writt me the 23. of this moneth, his minde is, that your Lordeship come not presently, vntill that the heate of Orenges death bee cooled, for that hee doubteth least they haue layd your way, and so you should haue greater labour & payne to passe them, then to re∣mayne vnder the princes protection. Al∣so in respecte of so small assuraunce, I thinke it meet (for preuenting what may happen) that you sende me a proxie to re∣couer of his Maiestie that which he hath promised you for this seruice, with a se∣uerall note vnder your hande, in what maner you will that this quantitie bee employed and diuided: prescribing there∣in howe muche you alowe mee for my paynes. For although my father as∣sured mee of more then the thirde part, and that I was then content therewith: yet nowe I say, in consideration of suche great depts as the Marchaunts doe pub∣lishe, that your Lordship oweth, I will bee content with the fourth part: but if you be otherwise minded, you know that my father is a partie, which notwithstan∣ding
I will procure him to be content wt what I thinke good, & therfore I beseech you set it so down in your perticular note & instruction, to the ende wee may con∣clude vppon that whiche concerneth this matter. For that is the way to deale for satisfiyng my father, besides that, so your selfe may be pleased, and he wil not faile in whatsoeuer occurrēce may happē about his Maiestie. In the meane time, I pray God preserue you in such health as I do desire. I likewise put your Lordship in minde in the said instruction, to make perticular mention, that you would haue before the high alter in the Church of the town or village, of whēce he was, a tombe built of stone, in suche forme & maner, as you or I shold appoint for ye slaier of him. It were also good in my opiniō, to build a perpetuall chantry of 2. chapleyns. Al∣so to buy for the yong mans father & mo∣ther, or his nerest kinsman 3. or 400. duc∣kets of rent for them ioyntly to enioy: & that they and their successors might bee Lordes of the sayde chantrie and tombe, &c.
Now I say the Chamber hath procured to learne of my Father who the yong man was, and of whence, therefore if they shoulde also require to see the demonstra∣tion, that your Lordeship maketh of your affayres, it were meete you declared at large, and discretely whatsoeuer concer∣neth the same. I said also that (if you coulde) you shoulde procure the perfecte picture of the saide young man to be sent hither, which your Lordeship may easely doe considering the good nature where∣with it hath pleased God to endue you: and so you shoulde satisfie manie that are desirous to knowe him. My cousin Peter gaue mee warning that your Lordships creditors determined to molest my Lady your mother, purposing to take away her goods for your debt. Also yt he had writ∣ten vnto her, to sende some docket where∣by to auoide this trouble, and so inconti∣nently I gaue my father notice, wishing him with all speede to get forth two sce∣dules, which for this purpose, as also for preferring you before all the creditors of Peter Martinez of Arbalu, he had craued of his Maiestie in your name: and that
wee will procure to bee done, notwith∣standing the king seeketh to delay for a fewe dayes the ouerplus of suche gratifi∣cation as he oweth you. Whereupon, as also concerning other articles, presēt∣ly vppon tydinges of Orenges death I wrote a letter, the copie whereof I sente to your Lordshippe, and doe hope that you haue receaued it. For default wher∣of I wil sēd another, to ye end you may see wt what goodwil and seruice I haue & do employ my selfe in your seruice: not that I deale any whitt of my owne interest, but only of your Lordshippe and of your house, vntill I haue by Gods helpe brought and set thē cleare. I writ like∣wise in my last, that because it had been capitulated, I say, by woordes concluded with the  that the billes of 80000. shoulde bee dispatched in my name, it were good for the accomplish∣ing thereof, that the sayde Instruction which I require were sent me, to ye end I might worde by worde, accomplish it ac∣cording as your lordship should appoint. And I saide vnto  that it was requisite to haue  the
order that  had obserued,This writtē in Cyphers. and hee  in the same, vntill wee vnderstoode howe they had taken  in the estates  and other parties: and I immediatly aduer∣tized my father that it could not be, as ha∣uing shewed  the letter which  writte to him and to sundry other, the diuers copies disagreeing, together with that which  writ to Peter Lopes, are dispersed in this court, but all might be excused if there were any order taken. Howebeit presuppose the aforesaide so to bee, yet I writte to my father that if it pleased  to publishe mee to haue been the partie that had giuen the  I woulde with all my heart to do him seruice do it: but I knowe not what resolution they will take. This I thought good to imparte vnto you, that you might vnderstande it, There is a naughtie man in this Towne, who with excessiue libertie in my absence, hath medled in your Lord∣ships affaires. Especially one day a∣mong the rest, in the presence of Ladye
Frauncis of Aratia who is heere, who also (as shee is not troubled with the pippe) paide him home agayne presently: in suche wise, as they had gone together by the eares, had not one of the Kinges Secretaries wiues, in whose presence this argument begunne, stepped betweene them. All was about Orenges death, &c. And the same ho∣nest man toulde a verye friende of myne but yesterday, that hee knewe by some of credite, that  was in the disgrace of  for certaine causes whiche there were not to bee spo∣ken of, of him and his affayres: whiche when hee coulde not beare: he sayde, By the habitte of Saint Peter and S. Paule, if I coulde catche him, hee shoulde pay mee. This likewise I thought good to cer∣tifie your Lo. to the ende, If this bee a∣misse, wee might deale warily with this man. But if it bee otherwise, and wee may knowe that this wretche hath inuen∣ted it, as he hath done other things, also that you be sure, that neither by word nor
writing you haue not saide any thing a∣gaynst the  then that you consider whether it were good that you writ one letter vnto him, also that ye prince writ him another, to certifie him ye you are his faithfull seruaunt: and there∣in your Lo. may say, that this hath bin published and giuen out, by reason of some displeasure conceaued against  natiue of  for that is the cause why I tell you this wretches name, and no other: for now it is no time to make enemies, especially if heerein this man hath reported the trueth. Sende me woorde whether you made any Bargaine with the Mansleyer: For this wretch here saith, that he was a cut∣lers sonne of Bilbao, and that hee will cause his father to repayre to the king, for the rewarde which his Maiestie by his last edict offered to him that shoulde stay Orenge. In case he should haue au∣dience, they might bring our pretence in question. This is the cause why I speak: but if your Lo. woulde presently let me vnderstand, who or of whence this young man was, wee woulde enter acquain∣taunce
with his father and mother, or his nighest kindred, and so compounde with them that they shoulde not disturbe or hinder your Lo. rewarde. And ad∣mitte they can not haue it, yet will they still trouble vs. For although the king woulde not doe as I say, yet might hee commaunde your Lordshippe to giue the youngmans father, or neerest kinsman, part of that belongeth to you. Your Lord∣shippe must therefore well consider here∣of: and sende me worde of your minde, to the ende, by good counsayle, we may or∣der this matter, which is of so great im∣portance. By reason of the pleasure that the reue∣rent father Peter of Olaue hath done in helping me in so fitte a time vnto 200. crownes, I trust God willing, this day seuennight to depart homeward toward my house, where your worshippe may write to mee and commaunde mee. Also, if your habilitie coulde beare it, to helpe mee as I haue requested, with 500. Duc∣kets, toward ye reparations of my house, your worshippe might greatly binde me to your seruice: but if you doe it not, I
will impute it to your want. Thus commending my selfe to Sir Olaue, I wil ad no more, but that I send this by meanes of the Lorde embassador Iohn Babtista Tassus, whom I beseeche carefully to send it to Sir Olaue. I al∣so pray your worship, to let me vnderstād of your receipt hereof, whose noble par∣son and estate, our Lorde God keepe and preserue as I desire. From Madrill this last of Apryll. 1582. The superscription was. To the noble L. Iasper of Annastro, my L. &c. at Turney. NOble Lorde, To the gene¦rall payma∣ster of the P. of Parma his armie. I haue receiued your letter, dated the 18. of Februarie. which notwithstanding, it lay aboue two moneths by the way, yet came in so good time, that together with ye supply of 200. crownes wc you sent me there wt, I hope godwilling wtin these 8. daies to go home to my house, where God willing you shal alwayes finde mee readye at your com∣maunde,
as also hereafter where euer I bee, euen to the death. And because you haue, and still do deale so earnestly in my affaires, notwithstāding, you haue assig∣ned these 200. crownes, together with the other 300. vppon Hierome of Sala∣manca, I will deliuer them to whomsoe∣uer you shall appoint as speedily and di∣ligently as reason requireth, for I will slacke no longer then vntill the first op∣portunitie. Concerning the estate of Arcauty his businesse. I assure you (as peraduenture you haue hearde) although he lay at Paris vnder the name of his Maiesties factor, yet had his highnesse taken expresse order that no money should come to his hands: but be altogether deliuered to Isuard Ca∣pello, and after to Elias and Simon Cal∣uia, which was presently perfourmed in such wise as Arcauty was not bounde to any accompt of mony by him receiued. But he tooke order in his great discompt of 36300. crownes. whereof he had gi∣uē bils of exchange vnto such marchants as he had dealt wt, notwithstanding, there came neuer a peny into his handes, as I
said, but to Capello & Caluia, wt neuerthe∣les was very indiscretly done of his high∣nesse in respect of Arcauty: for it was a very absurde matter, to deliuer letters of exchange for that money that neuer came to his handes, although it fell out well. And if after giuing vp of that accompt, hee had gone home to his owne house, as he purposed when he came hither, he had not bin at that point that nowe he is at. But he stayed in this Court almost 2. yeeres, onely to cleare him selfe of the theft of 28000. crownes, which he saieth Alphonse Curiel hath committed, from his Maiestie, arising of two Commis∣sions of 55000. crownes: for when hee had here receiued them out of the Cheft with thre keys, he disboursed not there a∣boue 22000. So that when the factor, who is Curiels kinsman, or at the leaste his very friende, came to be chiefe of the Counsell of acompts in Flaunders, he did so informe him, as well by worde of mouth, as also by certayne the writinges of Isuarde Capell, Arcautyes enemie, that he made him beleeue, that Arcauty ought the saide 28000 crownes, so that
thus wtout farther a do, they haue brought him to that estate he is now in. But the receauer is scaped out of theyr hands, as he who gat the licenciat chumacero his maiesties counsayler, who is the visiter of the counsell of Demaynes & other the Kinge his officers to be the iudge of his cause: but when the factor and his com∣missioners perceiued that all they went about, was smally to the purpose, they woulde not directly charge the sayd Ar∣cauty, but did, and still do greatly molest him. Howebeit, it is sayde that Chuma∣cero will soone ende this matter, and that the affection of these Iudges will soone be spied. Of whom the one is Al∣fons Carner, who hath playde him the worst tricke of frindshippe that any man coulde: as if him selfe had liued sine cri∣mine. In this estate doe the receiuers affayres now stande. Where you desire to knowe whether bringing instructions from the generall receiuers, hee might bouldly come to giue vp his accomptes: I say he may, so that the saide instructions bee effectuall: also that there bee set downe both the re∣cepts
and disboursings of the mony. By this meanes, together with bringing mo∣ney for your expences, you may easely stoppe that gappe: for the King alloweth neyther wages nor any other thing vnto the Lo. of Vnceta, who stayeth here about giuing vppe of Lexaldi the receiuers ac∣compts and his owne, yea it is saide he will not giue him so much as a loafe of breade. I am therefore of opinion, that if you coulde get your accompt to be pas∣sed there, you should saue much, both mo∣ney and labour: but if not, bee of good cheare, for by the meanes aforesayde you shall giue the phisition a figge. Father, so soone as God will giue mee leaue to gette to Victoria, I will immediatly sende you your predecessors relation, as curious and braue as you coulde wishe, for vntill then I can not for the causes that aforetime I haue shewed you. I am very glad of that you write concerning Bernarde of Isunca, as also the La. Ma∣ry his sister will be, to whom I haue sent the copie of your letter: for shee loueth him deerely. God giue him that I wishe him.
At his comming, I pray you salute him from me, and will him to doe that he toulde me. Also that Lady Mary and her sonne were in good health the 20. of this present. I heare so much of the child, that notwithstanding euery man affirmeth it, yet I can not beleeue it. God preserue him to his seruice. Amen. The proui¦der the 23. of this moneth, was in suche health as my selfe stande in neede of, and laboureth still to resigne his office vnto me: but he cānot compasse it. He wil god∣willing, tarry still at home: some say his Maiestie will sende him into the Lowe Countreys with the souldiers that shall goe thither, to be their generall commis∣sarie: but I knowe he will not take it vp∣on him, vnlesse he helpe me to the other: also that in case I haue it, hee will not re∣fuse any thing. But make not me author hereof. In the sayde letters of the 23. it is sayde, that his Maiestie departed the 19. out of Lisbone, to meete his sister the Empresse. Also that hee returneth the tenth of May, wholy to receiue her. Also that the great Prior is in the fielde,
with whome there shall ioyne 8000. Ca∣stilian souldiers, 4000. Almaynes, and 800. Horses of the garde of Castile, and that with that campe hee shall goe to vi∣site all the houldes and countreys bee∣tweene Oporto and Bayon in Callice. The cause is sayde to bee for that Don Anthony is in Fraunce, furnishing him selfe to come vpon vs, but I can not thinke that. But his Maiestie will stoppe him, and so hee may make a fayre hande with these people. If hee were heere, though it seeme vnpossible, yet manye woulde be very glad. From Guipuscoa there came to him 18. shippes gallantly furnished with aboue 1500. Marriners, I wot not what to say of it: and althogh here were a voice of late that when the Empresse was comen into Portingale his maiesty would goe to Castile, yee now is there no more speache: where∣upon wee may gather that vntil he seeth the end of this frenche dealing, hee will not out of this realme. It is said that within these few dayes the great Chap∣leyne of Portingall was in hande with him in the behalfe of the Realme. And
hat although his Maiestie did them great honor in bringing his sister to go∣uerne them, yet should they greatly com∣playne of his departure, sithe nowe he knewe both the estate, qualitie and go∣uernours of the kingdome. But the K. vnderstanding whereat the Chapleyne leueled, made him this answere. My sister knowing mee to haue heere so great af∣fayres, woulde not but come to see mee. Thus the Chapleyn could not vnder∣stande his purpose: so great is his Ma∣iesties discretion. A while since, one Antony Guttierez, heyre to 6000. crownes rente in this towne, was slayne by night, and there∣fore a neere kinsman of the Admirall of Leon, was caryed to prison. They fet him out of the Church, and the prouostes of the court (comming hither) apprehended him, whether by right or wrong, and tor∣mented him brauely, euen to the vnknit∣ting of his ioyntes: which the Admirall is grieued at, and complayneth of the of∣ficers of Iustice, in that the Gentleman being his kinsman and of suche calling, they had racked him, and therefore vsed
great woordes agaynst the president of Castille: wherevpon his Maiestie com∣maunded to take him prisoner, so as he is prisoner in his owne house, and his eldest sonne, the Earle of Melgar is caried to prison to Alameda, in the countie of Va∣raias, because (as the speech goeth) hee is thought author of this murder. The Marquize of Pennafiell, heire to the Duke of Ossuna Viceroy of Naples, comming hither a while since with a wo∣man, who was saide to be his louer, they haue taken away the woman, & commit∣ted him as prisoner to his owne house. Thus these three Lords remayne in the state of meane Gentlemen. Also by reasō of some folly committed in the Monaste∣rie of the Dechausses, whiche is in this towne, about the holy weeke shall bee a twelue moneth. The Earle of Castanne∣da, Don Lewes of Cordoua, who ought to be the Duke of  and Marquize of Comarez: Don Anthony Manricqz sonne of Don Iohn Manricqz: Don Pe∣ter Vanegas and others, are banished the court. Don Henry Mendoza, brother to the Duke of Infantado is likewise bani∣shed
for another trifle: besides for the for∣mer matter of the Dechausses, the prince of Ascoli was almost a whole yere in ex∣ile. Thus may you see what K. Philip can do, euen in his absence. God preserue him. I haue no satisfaction in that which perticularly toucheth Annastro for his assuraunce, only that you keepe him there with you. Which God graunt it be so. Who preserue you in such state as I doe desire. From Madrill this last of Apryl. 1582. Noble Lo. B. L. M. A. V. M. Your seruaunt. Isunca. The superscription was. To the noble L. Peter of Olaue, my ve∣ry good L. High tresorer of the hap∣pie armie, which the Catholike Ma∣iestie maintayneth in his estate of Flaunders. &c. At Turnay.
¶ Letters of Frauncis Guillam. MOst noble L. sith the copie of my former writing vnto you is here∣vnto adioyned,To ye prince of Parma. I will certifie you onely of what haue since happened me. The Abbot of Saint Vastz arriuing here the 16. of this present, did deliuer mee that which your highnesse writte mee the 27. of Februarie. Also whiles very earnestly wee wayted for newes from your high∣nesse, there arriued yesterday a post here, by whom I receiued the letters which it pleased you to sende the 16. of this mo∣neth, whereunto I will make a short an∣swere, because the poste of Italy by whom I alwayes write, is this day to be dispat∣ched. Cardinall Granuelle entertay∣ned the sayde Abbot at his house: where∣in I assisted him vntill hee departed to∣warde his Maiestie, whiche was the 20. of this moneth. I shewed him what your highnesse writte vnto mee: also howe he shoulde behaue him selfe: wherein I will not there fayle him. I desired him to let me vnderstand if there were any thing
wherein I might do him any pleasure. I writ also to D. Iohn of Idiaxz how eare∣nestly he had trauayled to bring ye estates to this resolutiō yt they haue taken. Also that it were good yt his maiestie lett him vnderstand that your highnes informed him of the whole, with what so euer els I thought meete. Concerning the re∣turne of the souldiers that are departed out of these estates, also of the Italians that are to goe with them, I can say no∣thing: onely I was glad to vnderstand that his Maiestie hath nominated suche Captaynes ouer them to guide them, as your highnesse doeth so well like of, and as is meete for his Royall seruice, and I assure my selfe, hee will so deale in your highnesse behalfe, by reason of the great loue he beareth you. That which now me seemeth the best, is the furniture of coyne, and surely if I coulde doe anye more then put him in minde thereof, your highnesse should not desire it more. But I haue done that, and doe it still, yea and dayly will vpon euery opportunitie, considering howe euident it is, that your highnesse can doe nothing
without that substaunce. Vpon which occasion, together with that I sayde be∣fore, Maldonado shall come and serue your highnesse. Don Iohn of Idiacq hath answered my letters, the copy wher∣of I haue sent herevnto adioyned. I haue put both of them in minde, and will ad∣uertise your highnes of their resolution. The Cardinall shewed mee howe desi∣rous hee was of this resolution: Also howe often hee had propounded it, wil∣ling mee to doe the like. I suppose that the ordinarie prouision that is to bee made, dependeth vndoubtedly vpon the president of the Tresurie: for I haue tal∣ked with him, and he maketh mee no an∣swere to the purpose. But sith this is ordered by the way of estate, it is no mar∣uell. Of Madams health and recouerie, all wee your highnes seruauntes are ve∣rye glad, and reason. The contrarye whereof we doe feele, in that the French haue opportunitie to try that they do, and to bring all into triall, but I hope in God that in the ende, by meanes of such order and forecast as your highnesse will in all
places vse, they shall reape no fruite of their purposes. We haue of late dayes greatly wish∣ed for letters from your highnesse, to re∣solue the doubt conceiued of the death of Orenge, the newes being here so diuers, as well from Paris as Antwerpe. All wise men thinke him dead, and so we are to beleeue, although it be strange, yt your highnesse cannot fully verifie it. There came newes from Lisbone that hee was in extremities, and here it was sayde that he was dead: But his fautors had concea∣led it a fewe dayes, whyle they tooke or∣der in their owne affayres. I will write vnto Velasques of Mina∣ya, who is of his Maiesties chamber, con∣cerning the good you haue done him, and doe still wishe to doe, neyther can it bee but many will like well of it, that your highnes are so willing to fauour & plea∣sure his Maiesties seruauntes, especially such as are so neere his royall person. I doe infinitely thanke your highnes for the pleasure it pleased your highnesse to shewe mee, in thanking his Maiestie, and honouring his seruantes. The great
good will you beare mee, together with whatsoeuer I am or may bee, I will con∣fesse to depende of hour highnes, and will wholy employ my self, euen to the death, in your seruice. I hope by your fauou∣rable assistaunce at all times, I shall bee able to doe it, and I pray God I may re∣quite it. The liberty and commoditie that your highnesse haue giuen mee to distribute a∣mong sundry persons, to the yeerely va∣lue of two or three hundred crownes, as my selfe shall thinke good, was verye comformable to your highnesse mo noble seruice. I thanke you for this fa∣uour, and will beware of exceeding far∣ther then neede shall require: and all that I may reserue in this expence I wil, as one that herein doe not pretende to a∣ny other then your highnesse seruice. Certaynely it shall bee to make demon∣stratiō of that which your highnes meant to haue done with Foncq, Lallo, and Se∣bastian of Santoyo. In Francis of Humaras behalfe I wil vse all diligēce, as your highnes haue commaunded, towarde those officers that
receiue letters in his commendation. Truely hee deserueth all the fauour that you shewe him, and it were meet his Ma∣iestie should resolue vpon that he preten∣deth. Hee is heere, and hauing shewed him your highnes desire to do him good, also that you wished his seruice, to the rude, in the campe as also in all other oc∣casions, to haue the better opportunitie to gratifie him, hee is fully resolued to come and serue your highnesse, for he ta∣keth him selfe as earnest a seruaunte to your highnes as any other, and not re∣specting any pretences or benefites that heere hee might reape, and assuring him self of such fauour, as your highnes haue and will shewe him: hee mindeth to take order to depart with the first Gallies. He had neede leaue some prouision of money with his mother, but for that, and any o∣ther thing needefull for his iourney, hee will seeke the best remedy hee may. It may please your highnes to write to don Sanctius of Padilla, so to accomodate him thitherward, that he may passe with those that shall set first forwarde: also to whom∣soeuer shall haue charge of him, to vse
him as your highnesse seruaunt, and ac∣cording to his profession: for his good∣will to serue your highnesse doeth de∣serue it. I heare that Don Bernardino of Mendoza who is in England, hath writ∣ten to his Maiestie, and complaineth that your highnesse doe keepe no correspon∣dence with him, as that since August last, when you writ of the successe of Turnay, he hath not had any letters frō you, not∣withstanding hee hath sente you sundrye postes. I graunt many are lost, neuer∣thelesse among so many some shoulde come safe. I thought good to certifie your highnes hereof, because many think it strange there should bee so small fami∣liaritie. Our Lord preserue your high∣nesse noble person, with the encrease of long life, and such honor as all your ser∣uaunts do desire and stand in neede of. From Madrill this 30. of Apryll. 1582. Most noble Lorde, your hignesse
humble seruaunte who saluteth you. Frauncis Guillamas. The superscription was. To the most noble Lorde, the prince of Parma. &c. my verye good Lorde. These two letters ensuing, which were sent from the Ile of Tercera, being come to our handes, wee woulde not defraude the reader thereof. The copie of the letters which the K. of Castile writ vnto Ciprian of Figuei∣redo Vasconcellos, by Iasper Ho∣mem, who came to the towne of Praya the 7. of March. 1582. D. Cyprian of Figueiredo, I the K. doe salute you, stedfastly beleeuing that you will perfourme what euer you are bounde vnto for my seruice, and the
benefite of this Ile, as also of any thing perticularly touching your selfe, I thought good to commende vnto you that trust which I repose in you, also to write vnto you, that behauing your selfe, (as I will beleeue you will) I will not onely forgiue all former offences, but al∣so shall be glad to recompence the seruice that herein I hope for of you, to the ende, the great domage of this Ile, and the in∣habitauntes thereof, proceeding of suche preparatiues of souldiers, shippes, and munition as I haue commaunded to prouide, as the bringer of this my letter may more at large declare vnto you, may be stayed and excused. Written at Lisbone the 14. of De∣cember. 1582. The King. The superscription was. By the king. To D. Cyprian of Fignei∣redo.
THis letter together with another from Don Chistopher of Moura, and two from Ambrose of Aguiar, go∣uernour of the Ile of S. Michel for Ca∣stille, and one from Don Peter, Bishop of Castille, the saide Cyprian of Figueiredo woulde not open, but sent them from the Towne of Praya with others to Don Michel de Silua, Earle of Torres Vedras to the Citie of Angera, who like∣wise woulde not open them: and there∣vpon the sayde Cyprian of Figueiredo, referred them to the earle, who at his in∣staunce, they both being together, did finally breake them vp: and then hee desi∣red him, to send them to the kings Maie∣stie. Don Antonio. The answere to the former letter which Ciprian of Figueiredo Vasconcellos, gouernor of the Iles to the vse of K. Don Anthony sent, to the K. of Ca∣stille, which the Earle of Torres Ve∣dras sealed, when he had perused thē and so sent them by the way of Saint Michels Ile.
I Haue perused your Maiesties letter which you sent mee by Iasper Homē: wherein you say you cannot but think that I will fulfill what euer I am bound vnto for your seruice, the benefite of this Ile, and perticularly for mine owne per∣son: woulde to God your maiestie knew howe greatly your selfe are bound to the most noble Infant Don Lewes, who with his subiectes, alwaies assisted your father the Emperoure in his warres, thē would you not attempte any thing agaynst the Crowne of Portingall, to the preiudice of his sonne king Anthony, & so grieuously offende our L. God, in the destruction of our honor, life, & goodes, which you haue procured: neyther woulde I, or any the rest of the Portingales, his true subiects, refuse to serue you as a Christian King, and such a one as the Portingales nation haue euer borne great goodwil vnto. For as well in respect of the sayde duetie, as also by reason of your kindred with the K. of Portingall, it becommeth not you to desire that I should serue you as your vassall, neyther will my duety beare that I shoulde serue you as your subiect.
This Ile together with the inhabi∣tauntes thereof belong to king Antho∣ny, to whome they are sworne as to their king and naturall Lord, and that as well in his right of succession, and free election of the people of this kngdome, as also for that the citie & chamber of Lisbone writt downe certayne reasons, together with his right thereto, which I cannot thinke but your Maiestie haue notice of. Farther, although there were no other cause but ye only electiō of ye people of this Realme, who for default of kings, are by their decrees and ordinances to chuse o∣thers: yet was it inough, that your Maie∣stie entred the lande with an armie, the controuersie not being decided: for had your title bin neuer so good, yet had you thereby vtterly lost it. But I trust in god the whole will returne to such passe, as your Maiestie for the enioying thereof, will not damne your own soule, but that it will in the ende fall agayne into the right Lords dominion, notwithstanding, he be now dispossessed thereof. Your Ma∣iestie must not think me past shame, but a man damnified. And I would to GOD
that all kings had in their counsels free men, deuoyde of ambition, so shoulde not our R. Don Anthony, haue fallen into that estate, whereto great treasons haue cast him headlong, neither your Maiestie into the great danger of the losse of your selfe, and subuersion of all Christiandom: besides, if you be at the day of iudgement to giue accompt of the honors, deathes, & pillages of so many men, and of their li∣bertie, you can not sufficiently repent & make amendes for that is already passed. If your maiestie woulde but thinke vpon ye houre of your death, together with the euils that then will offer them selues to your view, and remember that you are e∣uerlastingly to suffer the paynes whiche you haue inflicted vpon the Portingalls perceiuing then howe neere the losse of all is vnto you; Oh! howe woulde you turne aside from all that is past: for at yt time it will bee before your eyes. Howe much better had it bin for you, quietly to haue remained in your own realme, to see your vassals in peace, your selfe beloued of all Christians, and obeyed of all your subiectes! for in respect of that you haue
done in Portingall, not onely all Christi∣an kings and princes, but also the very barbarous nations do mortally hate you. Consider howe many Innocents you haue wt your weapons murdered: thinke vpō the rauishments of so many widows and maydes, bournings and lamentati∣ons, as do cry to God for vengeaunce aginst you. Remember how many wiues ar e separated from ther husbands through forced adulteries: how many Churches are profaned, and religion dis∣honored: also into what slauerie you haue reduced the inhabitants of Portingal, for that of all this, and of more which you haue caused, you shall giue accompt be∣fore God, who will call you thereto with rigorous iustice, as that the whole hath been perpetrated in a realme which God hath loued aboue all others in the world. That which the inhabitāts of this afflic∣ted realme doe endure, is sufficient to let you know, that they which are out of this bondage and heauie yoke, do couet rather freely to dye in the warres, then to fall in∣to such slauery: neither will I otherwise counsell the inhabitants of this Ile, least
I shoulde both damne my soule, and my honor should fall into lesse reputation thē nowe it is in. For thereof I make suche accoumpt, as I had rather lose all liues that it were possible to enioy, then not to continue loyall to any king to whome I am sworne. For to die well is perpetuall honor, for the preseruation wherof, I had rather perseuer in loyalty, then feare the preparatiues of people, shippes, and mu∣nition, wherewith your Maiestie doeth threaten me: for I haue such a confidence in God, that hee will fight for vs & our ships. The sea & hauens of this Ilande, together with the foretresses, walles, and trenches are ready for the munition: yea, and many pittes opened, whereinto to cast those people yt shall come to seeke vs, who are not to haue any pardon, by rea∣son of such mischiefe as proceedeth of for∣giuing them. Your Maiestie are not to blame me: for I haue sworne to R. Anto∣ny to defende this crowne for my K. and L. And the like I woulde haue done for for you, in case I had been sworne there∣to, though not with so good a will. For it is enough that he is king of Portingall.
But if I shoulde through mishappe fal aliue into your bondage, & for doing my duty, you should put me to death, neither the remembrance of my loyalty, neither the fame of your crueltie and vniustice would euer perish. I serue not Don An∣thony for any benefite, notwithstanding, I may obtayne more of him then of any other K. But my loyalty consisteth in ful∣filling my duety, which causeth that such rewardes as by other then the K. of Por∣tingall are promised, can no whit mooue mee. For beyond my duety, there is no∣thing that can change my honor and loy∣tie, which I do more esteeme then all the kingdomes in the worlde, whiche is the same that enuegleth manie Gentlemen. Our Lorde God guide your Maiestie to your kingdome, and restore Portin∣gall to her right king and lord Don An∣thony, as all true and loyall Portingals doe wishe. From this noble Citie of Angera, in Iesus Christes. Ile of Tercera. The superscription was. To the K. of Castille from the gouer∣nour of the Assorian Iles.
Imprinted at London at the three Cranes in the Vintree, by Thomas Daw∣son, for Thomas Charde.
