A4065A [ocm]10826508 204792
A Serious PROPOSAL TO THE LADIES, PART II: Wherein a Method is offer'd for the Improvement of their Minds. LONDON: Printed for Richard Wilkin at the King's Head in St. Paul's Church-yard, 1697.
To her Royal Highness THE Princess ANN of Denmark. MADAM, VVHat was at first ad∣dress'd to the La∣dies in General, as seeming not considerable enough to appear in your Royal Highnesses Presence, not being ill receiv'd by them, and having got the Addition of a Second Part, now presumes on a more Particular Application to Her who is the Principal of them,
and whose Countenance and Exam∣ple may reduce to Practice, what it can only Advise and Wish. And when I consider you Madam as a Princess who is sensible that the Chief Prerogative of the Great is the Power they have of doing more Good than those in an Inferior Station can, I see no cause to fear that your Royal Highness will deny Encouragement to that which has no other Design than the Bettering of the World, especially the most neg∣lected part of it as to all Real Im∣provement, the Ladies. It is by the Exercise of this Power that Princes become truly Godlike, they are never so Illustrious as when they shine as Lights in the World by an Eminent and Heroic Vertue.
A Vertue as much above Commen∣dation as it is above Detraction, which sits equally Silent and Com∣pos'd when Opprest with Praises or Pursu'd with Calumnys, is nei∣ther hurt by these nor better'd by the other; for the Service of GOD, and the Resembling Him, being its only Aim, His Approbation in a soft and inward Whisper, is more than the loud Huzza's and Plau∣dits of ten thousand Worlds. I shall not therefore offend your Royal Ear with the nauseous strain of Dedications; for what can one say, when by how much the more any Person deserves Panegyric, by so much the less they endure it? That your Royal Highness may be All that is truly Great and Good,
and have a Confluence of Tempo∣ral, Sanctify'd and Crown'd with Spiritual and Eternal Blessings, is the unfeigned and constant de∣sire of MADAM, Your Royal Highnesses Most Humble and most Obedient Servant.
THE Introduction, Containing a farther PERSWASIVE TO THE LADIES To endeavour the Improvement of their Minds. DID the Author of the for∣mer Essay towards th' Improvement of the La∣dies consult her own Re∣putation only, she wou'd not ha∣zard it once more, by treating on so nice a Subject in a Curi∣ous
and Censorious Age, but con∣tent her self with the favourable reception which the good natur'd part of the World were pleased to afford to her first Essay. It is not unusual she knows for Writers to mind no more than their own Cre∣dit, to be pleas'd if they can make a handsom florish, get a Name a∣mongst the Authors, come off with but a little Censure and some Com∣mendations. Or if there are a few generous Souls who are got above the Hope or Fear of vulgar breath, who don't much regard that Ap∣plause which is dispenc'd more com∣monly by Fancy or Passion than by Judgment; they rest satisfied how∣ever in a good Intention, and com∣fort themselves that they've endea∣vour'd the Reformation of the Age, let those look to't who will not fol∣low their Advices. But give her leave to profess, that as she is very indifferent what the Critics say, if
the Ladies receive any Advantage by her attempts to serve them, so it will give her the greatest uneasi∣ness if having prov'd that they are capable of the best things, she can't perswade to a pursuit of them. It were more to her Satisfaction to find her Project condemn'd as foolish and impertinent, than to find it re∣ceiv'd with some Approbation, and yet no body endeavouring to put it in Practice. Since the former wou'd only reproach her own Un∣derstanding, but the latter is a shame to Mankind, as being a plain sign that tho they discern and com∣mend what is Good, they have not the Vertue and Courage to Act ac∣cordingly. And can you Ladies deny her so cheap a Reward for all the Good will she bears you, as the Pleasure of seeing you Wise and Happy? Can you envy her the Joy of assist∣ing at Your Triumphs? for if ever
she contend for Laurels it shall be only to lay them at the Ladies feet. Why won't you begin to think, and no longer dream away your Time in a wretched incogitancy? Why does not a generous Emulation fire your hearts and inspire you with Noble and Becoming Resentments? The Men of Equity are so just as to confess the errors which the Proud and Inconsiderate had imbib'd to your prejudice, and that if you al∣low them the preference in Ingenui∣ty, it is not because you must, but because you will. Can you be in Love with servitude and folly? Can you dote on a mean, ignorant and ignoble Life? An Ingenious Wo∣man is no Prodigy to be star'd on, for you have it in your power to inform the World, that you can every one of you be so, if you please your selves. It is not enough to wish and to would it, or t'afford a faint Encomium upon what you pre∣tend
is beyond your Power; Imita∣tion is the heartiest Praise you can give, and is a Debt which Justice requires to be paid to every worthy Action. What Sentiments were fit to be rais'd in you to day ought to remain to morrow, and the best Commendation you can bestow on a Book is immediately to put it in Practice; otherwise you become self-condemn'd, your Judgment re∣proaches your Actions, and you live a contradiction to your selves. If you approve, Why don't you fol∣low? And if you Wish, Why shou'd you not Endeavour? especially since that wou'd reduce your Wishes to Act, and make you of Well-wishers to Vertue and Good sense, become glorious Examples of them. And pray what is't that hinders you? The singularity of the Mat∣ter? Are you afraid of being out of the ordinary way and therefore admir'd and gaz'd at? Admiration does not use to be uneasy to our
Sex, a great many Vanities might be spar'd if we consulted only our own conveniency and not other peoples Eyes and Sentiments: And why shou'd that which usually re∣commends a trifling Dress, deter us from a real Ornament? Is't not as fine to be first in this as well as any other Fashion? Singularity is in∣deed to be avoided except in matters of importance, in such a case Why shou'd not we assert our Liberty, and not suffer every Trifler to impose a Yoke of Impertinent Customs on us? She who forsakes the Path to which Reason directs is much to blame, but she shall never do any thing Praise-worthy and excellent who is not got above unjust Cen∣sures, and too steady and well re∣solv'd to be sham'd from her Duty by the empty Laughter of such as have nothing but airy Noise and Confidence to recommend them. Firmness and strength of Mind will carry us thro all these little persecu∣tions,
which may create us some un∣easiness for a while, but will after∣wards end in our Glory and Tri∣umph. Is it the difficulty of attaining the Bravery of the Mind, the Labour and Cost that keeps you from making a purchase of it? Certainly they who spare neither Money nor Pains t'ob∣tain a gay outside and make a splen∣did appearance, who can get over so many difficulties, rack their brains, lay out their time and thoughts in contriving, stretch their Relations Purses in procuring, nay and rob the very Poor, to whom the Overplus of a full Estate, after the owners Ne∣cessaries and decent Conveniencies according to her Quality are sup∣plied, is certainly due, they who can surmount so many difficulties, cannot have the face to pretend any here. Labour is sweet when there's hope of success, and the thing la∣bour'd after is Beautiful and Desire∣able: And if Wisdom be not so I
know not what is; if it is not worth while to procure such a tem∣per of mind as will make us happy in all Conditions, there's nothing worth our Thoughts and Care, 'tis best to fold our hands with Solomon's Slug∣gard and sleep away the remainder of a useless and wretched Life. And that success will not be want∣ing to our Endeavours if we heartily use them, was design'd to be evinc'd in the former Essay, and I hope I have not lost my Point, but that the Theory is sufficiently establish'd; and were there but a General Attempt, the Practice wou'd be so visible that I suppose there wou'd remain no more place to dispute it. But this is your Province Ladies: For tho I de∣sire your improvement never so pas∣sionately, tho I shou'd have prov'd it feasible with the clearest Demon∣stration, and most proper for you to set about; yet if you will believe it impossible, and upon that or any o∣ther prejudice forbear t'attempt it,
I'me like to go without my Wishes; my Arguments what ever they may be in themselves, are weak and im∣pertinent to you, because you make them useless and defeat them of the End they aim at. But I hope better things of you; I dare say you un∣derstand your own interest too well to neglect it so grosly and have a greater share of sense, whatever some Men affirm, than to be con∣tent to be kept any longer under their Tyranny in Ignorance and Folly, since it is in your Power to regain your Freedom, if you please but t'endeavour it. I'me unwilling to believe there are any among you who are obstinately bent against what is praise-worthy in themselves, and Envy or Detract from it in o∣thers; who won't allow any of their Sex a capacity to write Sense, be∣cause they want it, or exert their Spleen where they ought to shew their Kindness or Generous Emula∣tion; who sicken at their Neigbours
Vertues, or think anothers Praises a lessening of their Character; or meanly satisfie ill-nature by a dull Malicious Jest at what deserves to be approv'd and imitated. No La∣dies, Your Souls are certainly of a better Make and Nobler temper, your Industry is never exerted to pull down others but to rise above them, the only Resentment that a∣rises at your Neighbours Commen∣dations is a harmless blush for your own Idleness in letting them so far outstrip you, and a generous Reso∣lution to repair your former neg∣lects by future disigence; One need not fear offending you by commend∣ing an other Lady in your Presence, or that it shou'd be thought an af∣front or defect in good breeding to give them their lawful Eulogies: You have too just a Sentiment of your own Merit to envy or detract from others, for no Body's addicted to these little Vices but they who are diffident of their own worth;
You know very well 'tis infinitely better to be good than to seem so, and that true Vertue has Beauty enough in her self t'attract our hearts and engage us in her service, tho she were neglected and despis'd by all the World. 'Tis this therefore you endeavour after, 'tis the approbation of GOD and your own Consci∣ences you mainly esteem, which you find most ascertain'd by an humble Charity, and that you never merit Praise so much, because you never make so great a progress in what is truly praise-worthy, as when your own defects are often in your eyes t'excite you to watch against and a∣mend them, and other peoples Vertues continually represented before you in their brightest lustre, to the end you may aspire to equal or surpass them. I suppose then that you're fill'd with a laudable Ambition to brigh∣ten and enlarge your Souls, that the Beauty of your Bodies is but a secon∣dary care, your Dress grows uncon∣cerning,
and your Glass is ne're con∣sulted but in such little intervals of time as hang loose between those hours that are destin'd to nobler Em∣ployments; you now begin to throw off your old Prejudices and smile on 'em as antiquated Garbs; false Reasoning won't down with you, and glittering Non-sense tho ad∣dress'd to your selves in the speci∣ous appearance of Respect and Kind∣ness, has lost its haut goust; Wisdom is thought a better recommendation than Wit, and Piety than a Bon-mien; you esteem a Man only as he is an admirer of Vertue, and not barely for that he is yours; Books are now become the finest Ornaments of your Closets, and Contemplation the most agreeable Entertainment of your lei∣sure hours; your Friendships are not cemented by Intrigues nor spent in vain Diversions, but in the search of Knowledge, and acquisition of Ver∣tuous Habits, a mutual Love to which was the Origin of 'em; nor
are any Friends so acceptable as those who tell you faithfully of your faults and take the properest method to a∣mend 'em. How much better are you entertain'd now your Conver∣sations are pertinent and ingenious, and that Wisdom never fails to make one in your Visits? Solitude is no more insupportable; you've conque∣red that silly dread of being afraid to be alone, since Innocence is the safest Guard, and no Company can be so desirable as GOD's and his holy Angels conversing with an up∣right mind; your Devotion is a Ra∣tional service, not the repetition of a Set of good words at a certain sea∣son; you read and you delight in it, because it informs your Judgments, and furnishes Materials for your thoughts to work on; and you love your Religion and make it your Choice because you understand it; the only Conquest you now design and lay out your care to obtain is o∣ver Vice and Prophaness; you study
to engage men in the love of true Pi∣ety and Goodness, and no farther to be Lovers of your selves than as you are the most amiable and illustrious examples of 'em; you find your Wit has lost nothing of its salt and agree∣ableness by being employ'd about its proper business, the exposing Folly; your Raillery is not a whit less plea∣sant for being more Charitable, and you can render Vice as ridiculous as you please, without exposing those unhappy Persons who're guilty of it; your Humour abates not of its inno∣cent gaity now that it is more upon the Guard, for you know very well that true Joy is a sedate and folid thing, a tranquility of mind, not a boisterous and empty flash; Instead of Creditors your doors are fill'd with indigent Petitioners who don't so of∣ten go without your Bounty as the other us'd to do without their just demands; nor are you unjust to some under colour of being Charitable to others, and when you give Liberal∣ly,
give no more than what is law∣fully your own. You disdain the base ungenerous Practice of pretend∣ing Kindness where you really mean none; and of making a poor Coun∣try Lady less instructed in the forma∣lities of the Town than your selves, pay sufficiently for your seeming Ci∣vility and kind Entertainment by be∣coming the Subject of your mirth and diversion as soon as she is gone; but one may now pretty securely re∣lie on your Sincerity, for when this lower sort of Treachery is abhorr'd, there can certainly be no place for that more abominable one of betray∣ing and seducing unwary Innocence. I do not question Ladies but that this is the Practice of the greatest number of you, and would be of all the rest were it not for some little discourag∣ments they meet with, which really are not so great as their own mode∣sty and diffidence of themselves re∣present 'em. They think they've been bred up in Idleness and Imper∣tinence,
and study will be irksome to them, who have never employ'd their mind to any good purpose, and now when they wou'd they want the method of doing it; they know not how to look into their Souls, or if they do, they find so many disorders to be rectified, so many wants to be supplied, that frighted with the dif∣ficulty of the work they lay aside the thoughts of undertaking it. They have been barbarously us'd, their E∣ducation and greatest Concerns neg∣lected, whilst their imprudent Pa∣rents and Guardians were busied in managing their Fortunes and regula∣ting their Mien; who so their Purse was full and their outside plausible, matter'd not much the poverty and narrowness of their minds, have taught them perhaps to repeat their Catechism and a few good Sentences, to read a Chapter and say their Pray∣ers, tho perhaps with as little Un∣derstanding as a Parrot, and fancied that this was Charm enough to se∣cure
them against the temptations of the present world and to waft them to a better; and so thro want of use and by misapplying their Thoughts to trifles and impertinencies, they've perhaps almost lost those excellent Capacities which probably were af∣forded them by nature for the high∣est things. For such as these I've a a world of Kindness and Compassion, I regret their misfortune as much as they can themselves, and suppose they're willing to repair it and very desirous to inform themselves were't not for the shame of confessing their Ignorance. But let me intreat them to consider that there's no Ignorance so shameful, no Folly so absurd as that which refuses Instru∣ction, be it upon what account it may. All good Persons will pity not upbraid their former unhappiness, as not being their own but other Peo∣ples fault; whereas they themselves are responsible if they continue it, since that's an Evidence that they
are silly and despicable, not because they cou'd not, but because they wou'd not be better Informed. But where is the shame of being taught? for who is there that does not need it? Alas, Human Knowledge is at best defe∣ctive, and always progressive, so that she who knows the most has on∣ly this advantage, that she has made a little more speed than her Neigh∣bours. And what's the Natural In∣ference from hence? Not to give out, but to double our diligence; per∣haps we may out-strip 'em, as the Penitent often does him who needs no Repentance. The worst that can be is the perishing in a glorious at∣tempt, and tho we shou'd happen to prove succesless, 'tis yet worth our while to've had such a noble design. But there's no fear of ill success if we are not wanting to our selves, an ho∣nest and laborious mind may perform all things. Indeed an affected Igno∣rance, a humorous delicacy and nice∣ness which will not speculate a noti∣on
for fear of spoiling a look, nor think a serious thought lest she shou'd damp the gaity of her humour; she who is so top full of her outward ex∣cellencies, so careful that every look, every motion, every thing about her shou'd appear in Form, as she em∣ploys her Thoughts to a very piti∣ful use, so is she almost past hopes of recovery, at least so long as she con∣tinues this humour, and does not grow a little less concern'd for her Body that she may attend her Mind. Our directions are thrown away up∣on such a temper, 'tis to no purpose to harp to an Ass, or to chant forth our Charms in the Ears of a deaf Ad∣der; but I hope there are none so utterly lost in folly and imperti∣nence: If there are, we can only af∣ford them our Pity for our Advice will do no good. As for those who are desirous to improve and only want to be assisted and put into the best method of do∣ing it, somewhat was attempted in
order to do them that service in the former Essay, in which they may please to remember that having re∣mov'd that groundless prejudice a∣gainst an ingenious Education of the Women, which is founded upon sup∣position of the impossibility or use∣lessness of it, and having assign'd the reasons why they are so little im∣prov'd, since they are so capable of improvement, and since tis so neces∣sary that others as well as themselves shou'd endeavour it; which reasons are chiefly Ill-nurture, Custom, loss of Time, the want of Retirement, or of knowing how to use it, so that by the disuse of our Faculties we seem to have lost them if we ever had any; are sunk into an Animal life wholly taken up with sensible objects; either have no Ideas of the most necessary things or very false ones; and run into all those mischiefs which are the natural Consequences of such mis∣management; we then proceeded to propose a Remedy for these Evils,
which we affirm'd cou'd hardly be rectified but by erecting a Seminary where Ladies might be duly Educa∣ted, and we hope our Proposition was such that all impartial Readers are convinc'd it wou'd answer the De∣sign, that is, tend very much to the real advantage and improve∣ment of the Ladies. In order to which it was in general propos'd to acquaint them with Judicious Au∣thors, give them opportunity of Retirement and Recollection and put them in a way of Ingenious Conversation, whereby they might enlarge their prospect, rectify their false Ideas, form in their Minds ad∣equate conceptions of the End and Dignity of their Natures, not only have the Name and common Princi∣ples of Religion floating in their Heads and sometimes running out at their Mouths, but understand the design and meaning of it, and have a just apprehension, a lively senti∣ment of its Beauties and Excellen∣cies;
know wherein the Nature of a true Christian consists; and not only feel Passions, but be able to di∣rect and regulate their Motions; have a true Notion of the Nothing∣ness of Material things and of the reality and substantialness of imma∣terial, and consequently contemn this present World as it deserves, fix∣ing all their Hopes upon and exert∣ing all their Endeavours to obtain the Glories of the next. But because this was only propos'd in general, and the particular method of effect∣ing it left to the Discretion of those who shou'd Govern and Manage the Seminary, without which we are still of Opinion that the Interest of the Ladies can't be duly serv'd, yet in the mean time till that can be ere∣cted and that nothing in our power may be wanting to do them service, we shall attempt to lay down in this second part some more minute Dire∣ctions, and such as we hope if atten∣ded to may be of use to them.
THE Second Part OF THE PROPOSAL TO THE LADIES. CHAP. I. Of the Mutual Relation between Ig∣norance and Vice, and Know∣ledge and Purity. WHAT are Ignorance and Vice but Diseases of the Mind contracted in its two principal Faculties the Un∣derstanding
and Will? And such too as like many Bodily distempers do mutually foment each other. Ig∣norance disposes to Vice, and Wick∣edness reciprocally keeps us Igno∣rant, so that we cannot be free from the one unless we cure the other; the former part of this Proposition has been already shewn, Part I. page 22, &c. and the latter may easily be made apparent; for as every Plant does Naturally draw such juices towards it as serve for its Nutrition, as every Creature has an aptness to take such courses as tend to its preservation; so Vice that spawn of the Devil, that Ignis fatu∣us which can't subsist but in the dark night of Ignorance, casts forth Vapours and Mists to darken the Soul and eclipse the clear light of Knowledge from her View. And tho a Wicked Man may pretend to Wit, tho he have never so much Acumen and Facetiousness of Hu∣mour, yet his Impiety proclaims his
Folly; he may have a lively Fancy, an Intriguing Cunning and Con∣trivance, and so may an Ape or a Fox, who probably if they had but Speech, tho destitute of Reason, wou'd outdo him in his own way; but he wants the Ingenuity of a Man, he's a Fool to all Rational Intents and Purposes. She then who desires a clear Head must have a pure Heart; and she who has the first in any Measure will never al∣low her self to be deficient in the other. But you will say what de∣grees of Purity are requisite in order to Knowledge, and how much must we Know to the end we may hear∣tily endeavour to Purify? Now in Order to satisfie this de∣mand I consider, That there are cer∣tain Notices which we may call the Rudiments of Knowledge, which none who are Rational are without however they came by them. It may happen indeed that a habit of Vice or a long disuse has so obscur'd them
that they seem to be extinguish'd, but it does only seem so, for were they really extinguish'd the person wou'd be no longer Rational, and no bet∣ter than the Shade and Picture of a Man. Because as Irrational Crea∣tures act only by the Will of him who made them, and according to the Power of that Mechanisme by which they are form'd, so every one who pretends to Reason, who is a Voluntary Agent and therefore Worthy of Praise or Blame, Reward or Punishment, must Chuse his Acti∣ons and determine his Will to that Choice by some Reasonings or Prin∣ciples either true or false, and in proportion to his Principles and the Consequences he deduces from them he is to be accounted, if they are Right and Conclusive a Wise Man, if Evil, Rash and Injudicious a Fool. If then it be the property of Ratio∣nal Creatures, and Essential to their very Natures to Chuse their Actions, and to determine their Wills to that
Choice by such Principles and Rea∣sonings as their Understandings are furnish'd with, they who are desi∣rous to be rank'd in that Order of Beings must conduct their Lives by these Measures, begin with their Intellectuals, inform themselves what are the plain and first Princi∣ples of Action and Act according∣ly. By which it appears that there are some degrees of Knowledge ne∣cessary before there can be any Hu∣man Acts, for till we are capable of Chusing our own Actions and direct∣ing them by some Principle, tho we Move and Speak and do many such like things, we live not the Life of a Rational Creature but only of an Animal. If it be farther demanded what these Principles are? Not to dispute the Number of 'em here, no body I suppose will deny us one, which is, That we ought as much as we can to endeavour the Perfecting of our Beings, and that we be as happy
as possibly we may. For this we see is Natural to every Creature of what sort soever, which endeavours to be in as good Condition as its Nature and Circumstances will per∣mit. And now we have got a Prin∣ciple which one would think were sufficient for the Conduct of our Actions thro the whole Course of our Lives; and so indeed it were, cou'd we as easily discern wherein our Happiness consists as 'tis natu∣ral to wish and desire it. But herein lies our great mistake and misfor∣tune; for altho we all pursue the same end, yet the means we take to ob∣tain it are Indefinite: There needs no other Proof of this than the look∣ing abroad into the World, which will convince us of the Truth and raise our Wonder at the absurdity, that Creatures of the same Make shou'd take not only so many dif∣ferent, but even contrary Ways to accomplish the same End! We all agree that its fit to be as Happy as
we can, and we need no Instructor to teach us this Knowledge, 'tis born with us, and is inseparable from our Being, but we very much need to be Inform'd what is the true Way to Happiness. When the Will comes to ask the Understanding this Question, What must I do to fill up my Vacuities, to accomplish my Na∣ture? Our Reason is at first too weak, and afterwards too often too much sophisticated to return a proper Answer, tho it be the most impor∣tant concern of our Lives, for accord∣ing as the Understanding replies to it so is the Moral Conduct of the Will, pure and right if the first be well Inform'd, irregular and vitious if the other be weak and deluded. In∣deed our power of Willing exerts it self much sooner than that Ratio∣nal Faculty which is to Govern it, and therefore 'twill either be left to its own range, or to the Reason of another to direct it; whence it
comes that we generally take that Course in our search after Happi∣ness, which Education, Example or Custom puts us in, and, tho not always, yet most commonly, we rast of our first seasoning; which shou'd teach us to take all the care we can that it be Good, and like∣wise that how Good soever it ap∣pear, we be not too much Wedded to and biass'd by it. Well then, the first light of our Understanding must be borrow'd, we must take it on trust till we're furnish'd with a Stock of our own, which we cannot long be without if we do but employ what was lent us in the purifying of our Will, for as this grows more regular the other will enlarge, if it clear up, that will brighten and shine forth with diffusive Rays. Indeed if we search to the bottom I believe we shall find, that the Cor∣ruption of the Heart contributes more to the Cloudiness of the Head,
than the Clearness of our Light does to the regularity of our Affections, and 'tis oftner seen that our vitious Inclinations keep us Ignorant, than that our Knowlege makes us Good. For it must be confess'd that Purity is not always the product of Know∣lege; tho the Understanding be ap∣pointed by the Author of Nature to direct and Govern the Will, yet ma∣ny times it's head-strong and Rebel∣lious Subject rushes on precipitate∣ly, not only without, but against its directions. When a Truth comes thwart our Passions, when it dares contradict our mistaken Pleasures and supposed Interests, let the Light shine never so clear we shut our Eyes against it, will not be convinc'd, not because there's any want of Evidence, but because we're unwilling to Obey. This is the Rise of all that Infidelity that appears in the World; it is not the Head but the Heart that is the Seat of Atheism. No Man
without a brow of Brass, and an Impudence as strong as his Argu∣ments are weak, cou'd demur to the convincing Proofs of Christianity, had not he contracted such diseases in his Passions as make him believe 'tis his Interest to oppose those that he may gratify these. Yet this is no Objection against what we have been proving, it rather confirms what was said concerning the mutual Relation between the Understand∣ing and the Will, and shews how necessary it is to take care of both, if we wou'd improve and advance either. The result of all then, Where we must begin. and what gives a satisfactory Ans∣wer to the Question where we must begin is this; that some Clearness of Head, some lower degrees of Know∣ledge, so much at least as will put us on endeavouring after more, is
necessary to th'obtaining Purity of Heart. For tho some Persons whom we vulgarly call Ignorant may be ho∣nest and Vertuous, yet they are not so in these particulars in which they are Ignorant, but their Integrity in Practising what they know, tho it be but little, causes us to overlook that wherein they Ignorantly transgress. But then any eminent degree of Knowlege, especially of Moral and Divine. Knowledge, which is most ex∣cellent because most necessary and useful, can never be obtain'd without considerable degrees of Purity: And afterwards when we have procur'd a competent measure of both, they mutually assist each other; the more Pure we are the clearer will our Knowledge be, and the more we Know the more we shall Purify. Accordingly therefore we shall first apply our selves to the Understand∣ing, endeavouring to inform and put it right, and in the next place
address to the Will, when we have touch'd upon a few Preliminaries, and endeavour'd to remove some Obstructions that are prejudicial to both.
CHAP. II. Containing some Preliminaries. As I. The removing of Sloth and stupid Indifferency. II. Pre∣judices arising. (1.) From Au∣thority, Education and Custom. (2.) From Irregular Self-Love, and Pride. How to cure our Prejudices. Some Remarks up∣on Change of Opinions, Novelty and the Authority of the Church. III. To arm our selves with Courage and Patient Perseve∣rance against (1.) The Cen∣sures of ill People, and (2.) our own Indocility. IV. To pro∣pose a Right End. §. I. THE first thing I shall ad∣vise against is Sloth, and
what may be joyn'd with it a stupid Indifference to any thing that is ex∣cellent; shall I call it Contentedness with our Condition how low and imperfect soever it be? I will not a∣buse the Word so much, 'tis rather an ungenerous inglorious Laziness, we doze on in a Circle with our Neighbours, and so we get but Company and Idleness enough, we consider not for what we were made, and what the Condition of our pre∣sent State requires. And we think our selves good humble Creatures for this, who busy not our Heads with what's out of our Sphere and was never design'd for us, but ac∣quiesce honestly and contentedly in such Employments as the generality of Women have in all Ages been en∣gaged in; for why shou'd we think so well of our selves as to fancy we can be wiser and better than those who have gone before? They went to Heav'n no doubt, and we hope that by treading in their steps we
likewise in due time may come there, And why should we give our selves any farther trouble? The lowest degree of Bliss in that happy place is more than we de∣serve, and truly we have too much Humility and Modesty to be Ambi∣tious of a higher. Thus we hide our faults under the borrowed name of Vertue; an old device taught us by the Enemy of our Souls, and by which he has oft∣en deceiv'd us. But 'tis all mistake and nonsense to hope to get to Hea∣ven, if we stint our Endeavours and care for no more but just to get there. For what's at the bottom of this pretended humble temper? No real Love to GOD and long∣ing to enjoy him, no appetite for Heaven, but since we must go thi∣ther or to Hell when we quit this dear beloved World, a taking up with that as the more tolerable place. Had we indeed any true Idea of the Life to come, did we
but fix our Eyes and Thoughts in the Contemplation of that uncon∣ceivable Blessedness, 'twou'd be impossible not to desire it with the warmest vigor, not to be Ambitious of all we are able to attain. For pray wherein do the Joys of Hea∣ven consist, but in the Fruition of GOD the Only and All-satisfying Good? and how can we Enjoy Him but by Loving him? And is it not the property of that Passion to think it can never Enjoy enough but still to thirst for more? How then can we Love GOD if we do not Long and Labour for the fullest Enjoy∣ment of him? And if we do not Love Him how are we like to En∣joy Him in any the least Degree? He needs neither our Services nor our Company, He loses nothing of His Happiness, tho we will not fit our selves to receive those Commu∣nications of it He is desirous t'impart to us; and therefore we've no rea∣son to think He will force His Bliss
upon us, render those Faculties He has given us needless, and make us Happy how unfit soever we are for Beatitude. What did we come into the World for? To Eat and to Drink and to pursue the little Im∣pertinencies of this Life? Surely no, our Wise Creator has Nobler Ends whatever we have; He sent us hi∣ther to pass our Probation, to Pre∣pare our selves and be Candidates for Eternal Happiness in a better. And how shall this be done but by Labour and Industry? A Labour in∣deed, but such as carries its Reward with it, besides what it is entituled to hereafter. The Truth is, that the Condition of our Present State is such, that we can't do any thing, much less what's Great and Excellent without some Pain and Weariness of the Flesh; even our very Pleasures are accompanied with Pain, nor wou'd they relish without it, this is the Sauce that recommends them. And
why then shall we be averse to the taking a little Pains in that Case only in which 'twill be worth our while? A Title, an Estate, or Place, can neither be got nor kept without some difficulty and trouble; an Amour, nay even a paltry Dress can't be manag'd without some Thought and Concern, and are our Minds the only thing that do not need, or not deserve them? Has our Bountiful Lord set no limits to our Happiness but the Capacity of our Nature, and shall we set less, and not strive to extend our Capa∣cities to their utmost reach? Has the obliging Son of GOD thought no difficulties too mighty, no Pain too great to undergo for the Love of us, and shall we be so disingenuous and ungrateful as to think a few hours Solitude, a little Meditation and Watchfulness too much to re∣turn to his Love? No certainly, we cannot have such narrow grovel∣ing hearts; no we are all on Fire,
and only want to know wherein to employ our Activity, and how to manage it to the best advantage, which if we wou'd do we must in the next place, §. II. Disengage our selves from all our former Prejudices, from our Opinion of Names, Authorities, Customs and the like, not give cre∣dit to any thing any longer because we have once believ'd it, but be∣cause it carries clear and uncontested Evidence along with it. I shou'd think there needed no more to per∣suade us to this, than a considera∣tion of the mischiefs these Prejudi∣ces do us. These are the grand hin∣drance in our search after Truth; these dispose us for the reception of Error, and when we have imbib'd confirm us in it; Contract our Souls and shorten our views, hinder the free range of our Thoughts and con∣fine them only to that particular track which these have taken; and
in a word, erect a Tyranny over our free born Souls, whilst they suffer nothing to pass for True that has not been stampt at their own Mint. But this is not all their mis∣chief, they are really the root of Scepticism; for when we have ta∣ken up an Opinion on weak Grounds and stifly adher'd to it, coming af∣terwards by some chance or other to be convinc'd of its falseness, the same disposition which induc'd us to receive the Premises without Rea∣son, now inclines us to draw as false a Conclusion from them; and because we seem'd once well assur'd of what now appears to have no∣thing in't to make us so, therefore we fancy there's nothing certain, that all our Notions are but Proba∣bilities, which stand or fall accord∣ing to the Ingenuity of their Ma∣nagers, and so from an unreasonable Obstinacy we pass on to as unrea∣sonable a Levity; so smooth is the transition from believing too easily
and too much, to the belief of just nothing at all. But pray where's the force of this Argument, This is true because such a Person or such a Number of Men have said it. Or, which commonly weighs more, because I my self, the dear Idol of my own Heart have sometimes em∣brac'd and perhaps very zealously maintain'd it? Were we to Poll for Truth, or were our own parti∣cular Opinions th'Infallible Standard of it, there were reason to subscribe to the Sentiments of the Many, or to be tenacious of our Own. But since Truth tho she is bright and ready to reveal her self to all sin∣cere Inquirers, is not often found by the generality of those who pre∣tend to seek after her, Interest, Ap∣plause, or some other little sordid Passion, being really the Mistress they court, whilst she (like Religi∣on in another Case) is made use of for a Stale to carry on the Design
the better; since we're commonly too much under the power of Inordi∣nate Affections to have our Under∣standings always clear and our Judg∣ments certain, are too rash, too pre∣cipitate not to need the assistance of a calmer thought, a more serious review; Reason wills that we shou'd think again, and not form our Conclusions or fix our foot till we can honestly say, that we have with∣out Prejudice or Prepossession view'd the matter in Debate on all sides, seen it in every light, have no bias to encline us either way, but are only determin'd by Truth it self, shining brightly in our eyes, and not permitting us to resist the force and Evidence it carries. This I'me sure is what Rational Creatures ought to do, what's then the Reason that they do't not? Laziness and Idleness in the first place; Thinking is a pain to those who have disus'd it, they will not be at the trouble of carrying
on a thought, of pursuing a Medi∣tation till it leads them into the con∣fines of Truth, much less till it puts 'em in possession of her. 'Tis an easier way to follow on in a beaten road, than to launch out into the main Ocean, tho it be in order to the making of new Discoveries; they therefore who would be thought knowing without taking too much pains to be so, suppose 'tis enough to go on in their Fore-fathers steps, to say as they say, and hope they shall get as much Reputation by it as those who have gone before. Again Self-love, an excellent Principle when true, but the worst and most mischievous when mi∣staken, disposes us to be reten∣tive of our Prejudices and Errors, especially when it is joyn'd as most commonly it is with Pride and Con∣ceitedness. The Condition of our present State (as was said before) in which we feel the force of our Passions e're we discern the strength
of our Reason, necessitates us to take up with such Principles and Reasonings to direct and determin these Passions as we happen to meet with, tho probably they are far from being just ones, and are such as Edu∣cation or Accident not right Reason disposes us to; and being inur'd and habituated to these, we at last take them for our own, for parts of our dear beloved selves, and are as un∣willing to be divorced from them as we wou'd be to part with a Hand or an Eye or any the most useful Member. Whoever talks contrary to these receiv'd Notions seems to banter us, to persuade us out of our very Senses, and does that which our Pride cannot bear, he supposes we've been all along deceiv'd and must begin anew: We therefore instead of depositing our old Errors, fish about for Arguments to defend 'em, and do not raise Hypotheses on the Discoveries we have made of Truth, but search for Probabili∣ties
to maintain our Hypotheses. And what's the result of all this? Having set out in a wrong way we're resolv'd to persist in it, we grope in the dark and quarrel with those who wou'd lead us out of it! But is there no Remedy for this disorder, since we hope that All are not irrecoverably lost, tho too many are so invellop'd in Prejudice that there's little probability of disenga∣ging them? Why really the best that I can think of at present is, to Resolve to be Industrious, and to think no Pains too much to purchase Truth; to consider that our Fore∣fathers were Men of like Passions with us, and are therefore not to be Credited on the score of Authority but of Reason; to remember like∣wise our own Infirmity, the short∣ness of our Views, and the bias which our Passions and secular Interests give us; generously to disengage our selves from the deceptions of
sense, from all sinister and little De∣signs, and honestly to search after Truth for no other End but the Glory of GOD, by the accomplish∣ing of our Own and our Neighbours Minds, and when we have humbly implor'd, as now we may very well hope for the Divine Assistance, that the Father of Lights will shine up∣on us, and that He who is the Way, the Truth and the Life will lead us in∣to all Truth; why then we shou'd do well to take notice, That it is of no great consequence to us what our old Opinions are any farther than as we persist in 'em; that there's no ne∣cessity that they shou'd be true, but 'tis highly necessary we shou'd fix on what is so; therefore these also must be made to pass the Scrutiny, and be cashier'd if they stand not the Test of a severe Examination and sound Reason. 'Tis a great mistake to fancy it a reproach to change our Sen∣timents, the infamy lies on their
side who wilfully and unreasonably adhere to 'em. Not but that it is mean and shameful to be ever on the tip-toe, and indeed to change in any Case where pure and disinteress'd Reason does not oblige us to it. To be once willing to alter our senti∣ments if there be just occasion for't, wou'd for ever after secure us from Changing, to which the Precipitate and Obstinate are most liable; where∣as such as suspend their Judgments till after a sufficient Examination and Weighing of all things they see cause to fix them, do seldom Change, be∣cause they can hardly meet with any Reason to do so; and indeed whatever may be the Character of a Wit, Stay'dness and Deliberation is that of a Wise Person. But as there is an extream on one hand in being too resolutely bent on our Old Opinions, so is there on the other in inordinately thirsting after Novelty. An Opinion is neither better nor worse for being Old or
New, the Truth of it is the only thing considerable; tho properly speaking all Truth is Antient, as be∣ing from Eternity in the Divine Ide∣as, 'tis only New in respect of our Discoveries. If we go about to as∣sign a Reason for this insatiable desire of Novelty, I know not how to find a better than our Credulity and easy assent to things inevident. Truth being the proper Object of the Understanding it does naturally search after it, and tho this search will never wholly cease, because our Understandings are more capa∣cious than our Discoveries, and the view of one Truth is but a Prepa∣rative to look farther; yet had we clear and certain Evidence for our Conclusions, tho that wou'd not end our Inquiries, it wou'd however sa∣tisfie us, so far at least as they had gone. Whereas on the contrary your hunters after Novelty are commonly never satisfied, they pull down to day what they had built up yester∣day,
and Why? But because they concluded too soon? and their Novel Hypothesis is founded on Fancy or Passion, or any thing rather than Right Reason. But when I speak of the little de∣ference that is to be given to Names, Authorities, and receiv'd Opinions, I extend it no farther than to mat∣ters purely Philosophical to mere Humane Truths, and do not design any Prejudice to the Authority of the Church which is of different consideration. For tho it be neces∣sary even in this Case, to deposite whatever may look like a Prejudice, arising from that particular way of Worship, whereby that Communi∣on in which we've been Educated is distinguish'd from all other Christi∣ans, yet as to the Substantials of Faith and Practice, tho every one be al∣low'd to Examine, for they will bear the Test, yet it is not fit that he shou'd draw Conclusions, contrary to what has been already determin'd
by the Catholick Church, or even by that particular Church of which he is a Member, unless where it does plainly and evidently contradict that sense of Holy Scripture which has been receiv'd by the Church Uni∣versal. Nor is this a giving up our selves to Authority barely as such, 'tis only a modest deference to Truth. Philosophical Truths are not open to every Inquirer, an elevated Genius and great application of Mind is re∣quir'd to find them out, nor are they of that importance but that Men may give Scope to their Thoughts, and very often think, tho indeed un∣reasonably, that they're oblig'd in point of Honour to defend their own Hypotheses. But the Articles of our Faith and the great Principles of Christian Morality are of another Nature, GOD wou'd have all Men to be sav'd and to come to the Know∣lege of these Truths, tho he did not design 'em all for Philosophers, and therefore they carry a Proof and Evi∣dence
suited to the very Vulgar, which he who runs may read, which every one ought to acquiesce in, tho accord∣ing to their leisure and capacity 'tis fit they inquire why. And being a matter of the highest concern such as our Eternal Happiness or Misery depends on, it may reasonably be supposs'd (tho to the shame of our Folly we sometimes find the contra∣ry) that Men won't play fast and loose in a Business of so vast impor∣tance, but that all Christians have as they are oblig'd seriously and ful∣ly consider'd it, and especially those who are more peculiarly set apart by the Divine Appointment for the study of Sacred Truths. So that to acquiesce in the Authority of the Church, so far as it is here plead∣ed for is no more than this, The call∣ing in to our assistance the Judg∣ment and Advice of those whom GOD hath set over us, and conse∣quently whom he assists in a more especial manner, to discharge that
Function to which he has call'd them; and, in such disputable points as we're not able to determine for our selves, a quiet submission to the Voice of our Guides, whom Mo∣desty will incline us to think have greater Abilities and Assistances, as well as more Time and Opportunity to find out the Truth than we. As Prejudice fetters the Under∣standing so does Custom manacle the Will, which scarce knows how to divert from a Track which the generality around it take, and to which it has it self been habituated. It wou'd be too large a digression, to examin throughly a Subject so fit to be consider'd, being it is the root of very much Evil, the last refuge of Vice where it fortifies it self when driven from all other retreats. We shall therefore forbear to enquire from what mistakes it draws its force, what Considerations are pro∣per to disarm it of its power, and what else might be of use to
deliver us from its Slavery, and on∣ly remark; That tho great defe∣rence is to be paid to the Ways and Usages of the Wise and Good, yet considering that these are the least number of Mankind, 'tis the Croud who will make the Mode, and con∣sequently it will be as absurd as they are: Therefore Custom can∣not Authorise a Practice if Rea∣son Condemns it, the following a Multitude is no excuse for the doing of Evil. None but the Weak and Inconsiderable swim down with the Torrent, brave Spirits delight to stem the Tide, they know no Con∣quest so Glorious, because none so difficult, as that which is obtain'd over foolish and ill-grounded Max∣ims and sinful Customs; What wou'd they not do to restore Man∣kind to their Lawful Liberty, and to pull down this worst of Tyran∣nies, because it enslaves the very Souls of Men?
§. III. But a Generous Resoluti∣on and Courageous Industry are not only necessary to enable us to throw off Sloth and to Conquer the Pre∣judices of Education, Authority and Custom, the same Resolution and Courage which help'd us to this Victory, must secure and continue to us the Fruits of it. We shall have need of Patience and constant Perse∣verance thro the whole course of our Lives if we mean to prosecute the noble Design we have begun; we must not think the Business is over when we have smooth'd the entrance; there will still be Difficulties, tho no insuperable ones, but such as will wear off by degrees, the greatest uneasiness being in the first effort. And tho our Progress shou'd not happen to be answerable to our De∣sires, there's no reason to be discou∣rag'd, we shou'd rather be animated by such noble Desires to greater In∣dustry. Where's the Glory of an
easy Victory? 'Tis Labour and Cost that inhanses the value of every thing. And to the end we may not be discourag'd, 'tis fit that we arm our selves against all Accidents by considering them before hand. We have the Malice and Industry of ma∣ny Cunning and Powerful Adversa∣ries, as well as our own indocility to contend with. The grand Ene∣my of Mankind is very unwilling that they shou'd arrive at that State of Innocence and Perfection from which he fell, and of all the Artifi∣ces he makes use of to hinder it, scarce any's more effectual than the mischief he excites us to do one ano∣ther. What are they employ'd in but his Service who will neither do any thing that's excellent themselves, nor if they could hinder, suffer it to be done by others? Who employ all their little Wit and Pains in Scoffing at such who they say in derision wou'd be wiser then their Neighbours? We must be content to suffer a scornful
fleer, a parcel of hard Names and a little ridiculing, if we're Resolv'd to do such things as do not deserve 'em. Dogs will bark at the Moon, and perhaps for no other reason but be∣cause she is out of their reach, eleva∣ted above them. But the Author of our Nature to whom all the Incon∣veniencies we are liable to in this Earthly Pilgrimage are fully known, has endow'd us with Principles suf∣ficient to carry us safely thro them all, if we will but observe and make use of 'em. One of these is Genero∣sity, which (so long as we keep it from degenerating into Pride) is of admirable advantage to us in this matter. It was not fit that Crea∣tures capable of and made for Socie∣ty, shou'd be wholly Independent, or Indifferent to each others Esteem and Commendation; nor was it con∣venient considering how seldom these are justly distributed, that they shou'd too much regard and depend on them. It was requisite therefore
that a desire of our Neighbours Good Opinion shou'd be implanted in our Natures to the end we might be ex∣cited to do such things as deserve it, and yet withall a Generous neglect of it, if they unjustly withheld it where it was due. There's so little reason that we shou'd be discourag'd from what is truly excellent and be∣coming on account of being Scoft and Laugh'd at for it, that on the contrary this is a new accession to our Glory, we never shine so Illustri∣ously as when we break thro these little Clouds and Oppositions which impotently attempted to obscure our Rays. To be Reproach'd for Wel∣doing is a higher Encomium, than the loftiest Praises when we do not deserve them: So that let the World think as it list, whilst we are in the pursuit of true Wisdom, our Reputa∣tion is secur'd, our Crown is furbish∣ing, and tho it do not shine out in this Envious and Ill-natur'd World, it will however, which is infinitely
more desirable appear in all its Lustre and Splendor in a better. And as we disregard the Censures of ill People, so are we patiently to bear with our own backwardness and indocility. There goes a good deal of Time and Pains, of Thought and Watchfulness to the rooting out of Ill-habits, to the fortifying our Minds against foolish Customs, and to the making that easie and pleasant which us'd to be irksom to us. But we ought not to be disheartn'd, since 'tis necessary to be done, and we cannot reasonably say 'tis Impossi∣ble, till we've attempted and fail'd in't. But then let's attempt it in the most prudent Method, use the properest Means, allow sufficient Time for their Operation and to make the essay: Let's not set about it by fits, or in one or two good Moods, nor expect it will be done on a sudden, but by degrees and in a proper season, making it our main Design and Business, and then I dare
confidently affirm the success will answer the Pains we have spent a∣bout it. §. IV. But one thing more, and then I shall go on as well as I can, to lay down what seems to me the best Method for Improvement. Whoever wou'd Act to purpose must propose some End to them∣selves, and keep it still in their Eye thro'out their whole progress. Life without this is a disproportionate un∣seemly thing, a confused huddle of broken, contradictory Actions, such as afford us nothing but the being a∣sham'd of 'em. But do we need to be taught our End? One wou'd rather think there were no occasion to mention it, did not Experience daily convince us how many there are who neglect it. What End can Creatures have but their Creators Glory? And did they truly under∣stand their own Happiness 'tis cer∣tain they wou'd have no other, since
this is the only way of procuring their own Felicity. But it is not enough to have barely an implicit and languid desire of it, 'twere much better to hold it ever in view, and that all our Actions had in their pro∣portion a warm and immediate ten∣dency thither. This wou'd stamp the impression of Holiness upon the most indifferent Action, and without this what is Materially and to all out∣ward appearance very good, is real∣ly and truly no better than a speci∣ous folly. We are not made for our selves, nor was it ever design'd we shou'd be ador'd and idoliz'd by one another. Our Faculties were given us for Use not Ostentation, not to make a noise in the World, but to be serviceable in it, to declare the Wisdom, Power and Goodness, of that All-Perfect Being from whom we derive All our Excellencies, and in whose Service they ought Wholly to be employ'd. Did our Knowledge serve no other purpose
than the exalting us in our own Opi∣nion, or in that of our Fellow Crea∣tures, the furnishing us with Mate∣rials for a quaint Discourse, an agree∣able Conversation, 'twere scarce worth while to be at the trouble of attaining it. But when it enlarges the Capacity of our Minds, gives us nobler Ideas of the Majesty, the Grandeur and Glorious Attributes of our adorable Creator, Regulates our Wills and makes us more capa∣ble of Imitating and Enjoying him, 'tis then a truly sublime thing, a worthy Object of our Industry: And she who does not make this the End of her Study, spends her Time and Pains to no purpose or to an ill one. We have no better way of finding out the true End of any thing, than by observing to what Use it is most adapted. Now the Art of Well-Liv∣ing, the Study of the Divine Will and Law, that so we may be Conforma∣ble to it in all things, is what we're
peculiarly fitted for and destin'd to, what ever has not such a Tendency, either Directly or at least Remotely, is besides the purpose. Rational Stu∣dies therefore next to GOD's Word bid fairest for our Choice, because they best answer the Design above mention'd. Truths merely Specula∣tive and which have no influence up∣on Practice, which neither contri∣bute to the good of Soul or Body, are but idle Amufements, an im∣pertinent and criminal wast of Time. To be able to speak many Languages, to give an Historical Account of all Ages Opinions and Authors, to make a florid Harangue, or defend right or wrong the Argu∣ment I've undertaken, may give me higher thoughts of my Self but not of GOD, this is the Knowlege that puf∣eth up, in the Words of the Apostle, and seldom leads us to that Charity which Edifieth. And as the Understanding so the Will must be duly directed to its End
and Object. Morality is so conso∣nant to the Nature of Man, so a∣dapted to his Happiness, that had not his Understanding been darkn'd by the Fall, and his whole Frame dis∣order'd and weakned, he wou'd Na∣turally have practis'd it. And ac∣cording as he recovers himself, and casts off those Clouds which Eclipse his Reason, so proportionably are his Actions more agreeable to Mo∣ral Precepts, and tho we suppose him ignorant of any higher end, he will however do such things as they en∣joyn him, toth' intent he may be easy, obtain a good Reputation, and en∣joy himself and this World the bet∣ter. Now were we sure that Rea∣son wou'd always maintain its ground against Passion and Appetite, such an one might be allow'd to be a good Neighbour, a Just Ruler, a plausible Friend or the like, and wou'd well enough discharge the Relative Du∣ties of Society, and do nothing mis∣becoming the dignity of Human
Nature. But considering how weak our Reason is, how unable to main∣tain its Authority and oppose the in∣cursions of sense, without the assist∣ance of an inward and Spiritual Sensa∣tion to strengthen it, 'tis highly neces∣sary that we use due endeavours to procure a lively relish of our true Good, a Sentiment that will not on∣ly Ballance, but if attended to and improv'd, very much out-weigh the Pleasures of our Animal Nature. Now this is no otherwise to be ob∣tain'd than by directing the Will in an elicit Act to GOD as its only Good, so that the sole End of all its movements, may be to draw near, to acquiesce in and be united to him. For as all Natural Motions are easie and pleasant, so this being the only Natural Motion of the Will must needs be unspeakably delightful to it. Besides that peculiar delectation, which this Fountain of Joy bestows as a Donative, on all who thus sin∣cerly address themselves to him. So
that it is not enough to be Morally Good because 'tis most Reputable and Easie, and most for our Pleasure and Interest in the present World, as this will never secure our Duty, so is it too low an End for a Creature capable of Immortality to propose, nothing less than an intire devoting of our selves to the End for which we were made, the Service and En∣joyment of the most amiable and on∣ly Good, can keep us Constantly and Uniformly in our Duty, or is a De∣sign that's worthy of us.
CHAP. III. Concerning the Improvement of the Understanding. I. Of the Ca∣pacity of the Humane Mind in General. II. Of Particular Ca∣pacities. III. The most common Infirmities incident to the Under∣standing and their Cure. IV. A Natural Logic, And V. Rhe∣toric propos'd. VI. The Applica∣tion and Use of our Knowlege. THE persection of the Under∣standing consisting in the Clearness and Largness of its view, it improves proportionably as its Ideas become Clearer and more Extensive. But this is not so to be understood as if all sorts of Notices contributed to our Improvement, there are some things which make
us no wiser when we know 'em, others which 'tis best to be ignorant of. But that Understanding seems to me the most exalted, which has the Clearest and most Extensive view of such Truths as are suitable to its Capacity, and Necessary or Convenient to be Known in this Present State. For being that we are but Creatures, our Understand∣ing in its greatest Perfection has on∣ly a limited excellency. It has in∣deed a vast extent, and it were not amiss if we tarried a little in the Contemplation of its Powers and Capacities, provided that the Pros∣pect did not make us giddy, that we remember from whom we have receiv'd them, and ballance those lofty Thoughts which a view of our Intellectuals may occasion, with the depressing ones which the irre∣gularity of our Morals will suggest, and that we learn from this inspecti∣on, how indecorous it is to busy this bright side of us in mean things,
seeing it is capable of such noble ones. Human Nature is indeed a won∣derful Composure admirable in its outward structure, but much more excellent in the Beauties of its In∣ward, and she who considers in whose Image her Soul was Created, and whose Blood was shed to Re∣deem it, cannot prize it too much, nor forget to pay it her utmost re∣gard. There's nothing in this Ma∣terial World to be compar'd to't, all the gay things we dote on, and for which we many times expose our Souls to ruin, are of no considerati∣on in respect of it. They are not the good of the Soul, it's happiness depends not on 'em, but they often deceive and withdraw it from its true Good. It was made for the Contemplation and Enjoyment of its GOD, and all Souls are capa∣ble of this tho in a different degree and by measures somewhat different, as we hope will appear from that which follows.
§. I. Truth in general is the Ob∣ject of the Understanding, but all Truths are not equally Evident, be∣cause of the Limitation of the Hu∣mane Mind, which tho' it can gra∣dually take in many Truths, yet cannot any more than our sight at∣tend to many things at once: And likewise, because GOD has not thought fit to communicate such Ideas to us, as are necessary to the dis∣quisition of some particular Truths. For knowing nothing without us but by the Idea we have of it, and Judging only according to the Rela∣tion we find between two or more Ideas, when we cannot discover the Truth we search after by Intuition or the immediate comparison of two Ideas, 'tis necessary that we shou'd have a third by which to compare them. But if this middle Idea be wanting, though we have sufficient Evidence of those two which we wou'd compare, because we have a
Clear and Distinct Conception of them, yet we are Ignorant of those Truths which wou'd arise from their Comparison, because we want a third by which to compare them. To give an instance of this in a point of great consequence, and of late very much controverted tho to little purpose, because we take a wrong method, and wou'd make that the Object of Science which is properly the Object of Faith, the Doctrin of the Trinity. Revelation which is but an exaltation and im∣provement of Reason has told us, That the Father is GOD, the Son is GOD, and the Holy Ghost is GOD, and our Idea of the God∣head of any one of these Persons, is as clear as our Idea of any of the other. Both Reason and Revelation assure us that GOD is One Simple Essence, Undivided, and Infinite in all Perfection, this is the Natural Idea which we have of GOD. How then can the Father be GOD, the
Son GOD, and the Holy Ghost GOD, when yet there is but One GOD? That these two Propositi∣ons are true we are certain, both be∣cause GOD who cannot lie has Re∣veal'd 'em, and because we have as clear an Idea of 'em as it is possible a Finite Mind shou'd have of an Infi∣nite Nature. But we cannot find out how this should be, by the bare Comparison of these two Ideas with∣out the help of a third by which to compare them. This GOD has not thought fit to impart to us, the Pros∣pect it wou'd have given us wou'd have been too dazling, too bright for Mortality to bear, and we ought to acquiesce in the Divine Will. So then, we are well assur'd that these two Propositions are true, There is but one GOD; And, There are three Persons in the Godhead: but we know not the Manner how these things are. Nor can our acquiescence be thought Unreasonable, nor the Doctrin we subscribe to be run down as absurd
and contradictory by every little warm Disputer and Pretender to Reason, whose Life is perhaps a con∣tinual contradiction to it, and he knows little of it besides the Name. For we ought not to think it strange that GOD has solded up his own Nature, not in Darkness, but in an adorable and inaccessible Light, since his Wisdom sees it fit to keep us ig∣norant of our own. We know and feel the Union between our Soul and Body, but who amongst us sees so clearly, as to find out with Certitude and Exactness, the secret ties which unite two such different Substances, or how they are able to act upon each other? We are conscious of our own Liberty, who ever denies it de∣nies that he is capable of Rewards and Punishments, degrades his Na∣ture and makes himself but a more curious piece of Mechanism; and none but Atheists will call in questi∣on the Providence of GOD, or de∣ny that he Governs All, even the
most Free of all his Creatures. But who can reconcile me these? Or ad∣just the limits between GOD's Pre∣science and Mans Free-will? Our Understandings are sufficiently illu∣minated to lead us to the Fountain of Life and Light, we do or may know enough to fill our Souls with the no∣blest Conceptions, the humblest Ado∣ration, and the intirest Love of the Author of our Being, and what can we desire farther? If we make so ill a Use of that Knowledge which we have, as to be so far puffed up with it, as to turn it against him who gave it, how dangerous would it be for us to have more Knowledge, in a State in which we have so little Humility! But if vain Man will pretend to Wisdom, let him first learn to know the length of his own line. Tho the Human Intellect has a large extent, yet being limited as we have already said, this Limitation is the Cause of those different Modes of
Thinking, which for distinction sake we call Faith, Science and O∣pinion. For in this present and im∣perfect State in which we know not any thing by Intuition, or immedi-View, except a few first Principles which we call Self-evident, the most of our Knowledge is acquir'd by Rea∣soning and Deduction: And these three Modes of Understanding, Faith, Science and Opinion are no other∣wise distinguish'd, than by the dif∣ferent degrees of Clearness and Evi∣dence in the Premises from whence the Conclusion is drawn. Knowlege in a proper and re∣stricted Sense and as appropriated to Science, signifies that clear Percep∣tion which is follow'd by a firm as∣sent to Conclusions rightly drawn from Premises of which we have clear and distinct Ideas. Which Pre∣mises or Principles must be so clear and Evident, that supposing us rea∣sonable Creatures, and free from Prejudices and Passions, (which for
the time they predominate as good as deprive us of our Reason) we cannot withhold our assent from them without manifest violence to our Reason. But if the Nature of the thing be such as that it admits of no undoubt∣ed Premises to argue from, or at least we don't at present know of any, or that the Conclusion does not so ne∣cessarily follow as to give a perfect satisfaction to the Mind and to free it from all hesitation, that which we think of it is then call'd Opinion. Again, If the Medium we make use of to prove the Proposition be Authority, the Conclusion which we draw from it is said to be Be∣liev'd; This is what we call Faith, and when the Authority is GOD's a Divine Faith. Moral Certainty is a Species of Knowlege whose Proofs are of a compounded Nature, in part resemb∣ling those which belong to Science, and partly those of Faith. We do not make
the whole Process our selves, but de∣pend on another for the immediate Proof, but we our selves deduce the Mediate from Circumstances and Prin∣ciples as Certain and almost as Evi∣dent as those of Science, and which lead us to the immediate Proofs and make it unreasonable to doubt of 'em. Indeed we not seldom deceive our selves in this matter, by inclining al∣ternately to both extremes. Some∣times we reject Truths which are Mo∣rally Certain as Conjectural and Pro∣bable only, because they have not a Physical and Mathematical Cer∣tainty, which they are incapable of. At another time we embrace the slightest Conjectures and any thing that looks with Probability, as mo∣ral Certainties and real Verities, if Fancy, Passion or Interest recom∣mend them; so ready are we to be determin'd by these rather than by solid Reason. In this enumeration of the several ways of Knowing. I have not reck∣on'd
the Senses, in regard that we're more properly said to be Conscious of than to Know such things as we per∣ceive by Sensation. And also be∣cause that Light which we suppose to be let into our Ideas by our Sen∣ses is indeed very dim and fallacious, and not to be relied on till it has past the Test of Reason; neither do I think there's any Mode of Know∣lege which mayn't be reduc'd to those already mentioned. Now tho there's a great difference between Opinion and Science, true Science being immutable but Opini∣on variable and uncertain, yet there is not such a difference between Faith and Science as is usually suppos'd. The difference consists not in the Certainty but in the way of Proof; the Objects of Faith are as Rationally and as Firmly Prov'd as the Objects of Science, tho by another way. As Science Demonstrates things that are Seen, so Faith is the Evidence of such as are Not Seen. And he who rejects
the Evidence of Faith in such things as belong to its Cognizance, is as un∣reasonable as he who denies Propo∣sitions in Geometry that are prov'd with Mathematical exactness. There's nothing true which is not in it self demonstrable, or which we should not pronounce to be true had we a Clear and Intuitive View of it. But as was said above we see very few things by Intuition, nei∣ther are we furnish'd with Mediums to make the Process our selves in De∣monstrating all Truths, and there∣fore there are some Truths which we must either be totally ignorant of, or else receive them on the Testi∣mony of another Person, to whose Understanding they are clear and manifest tho not to ours. And if this Person be one who can neither be Deceiv'd nor Deceive, we're as cer∣tain of those Conclusions which we prove by his Authority, as we're of those we demonstrate by our own Reason; nay more Certain, by how
much his Reason is more Compre∣hensive and Infallible than our own. Science is the following the Process our Selves upon Clear and Evident Principles; Faith is a Dependance on the Credit of another, in such matters as are out of our View. And when we have very good Reason to submit to the Testimony of the Per∣son we Believe, Faith is as Firm, and those Truths it discovers to us as tru∣ly Intelligible, and as strongly Prov'd in their kind as Science. In a word, as every Sense so every Capacity of the Understanding has its proper Object. The Objects of Science are things within our View, of which we may have Clear and Distinct Ideas, and nothing shou'd be determin'd here without Clearness and Evidence. To be a∣ble to repeat any Persons Dogma without forming a Distinct Idea of it our selves, is not to Know but to Remember; and to have a Confuse
Indeterminate Idea is to Conjecture not to Understand. The Objects of Faith are as Cer∣tain and as truly Intelligible in them∣selves as those of Science, as has been said already, only we become persua∣ded of the Truth of them by another Method, we do not See them so clearly and distinctly as to be una∣able to disbelieve them. Faith has a mixture of the Will that it may be rewardable, for who will thank us for giving our Assent where it was impossible to withold it? Faith then may be said to be a sort of Know∣lege capable of Reward, and Men are Infidels not for want of Con∣viction, but thro an Ʋnwillingness to Believe. But as it is a fault to Believe in matters of Science, where we may expect Demonstration and Evidence, so it is a reproach to our Under∣standing and a proof of our Disinge∣nuity, to require that sort of Pro∣cess peculiar to Science, for the Con∣firmation
of such Truths as are not the proper Objects of it. It is as ridi∣culous as to reject Musick, because we cannot Tast or Smell it, or to deny there is such a thing as Beauty be∣cause we do not hear it. He who wou'd See with his Ears and Hear with his Eyes may indeed set up in Bedlam for a Man of an extraordina∣ry reach, a Sagacious Person who won't be impos'd on, one who must have more Authentick proofs than his dull Fore-fathers were content with. But Men of dry Reason and a moderate Genius, I suppose will think Nature has done very well in allotting to each Sense its proper em∣ployment, and such as these will as readily acknowlege that it is as Ho∣nourable for the Soul to Believe what is truly the Object of Faith, as it is for her to Know what is really the Object of her Knowlege. And were we not strangely perverse we shou'd not scruple Divine Authority when we daily submit to Human. Who∣ever
has not seen Paris has nothing but Human Authority to assure him there is such a place, and yet he wou'd be laugh'd at as ridiculous who shou'd call it in question, tho he may as well in this as in another Case pre∣tend that his Informers have designs to serve, intend to impose on him and mock his Credulity. Nay how many of us daily make that a mat∣ter of Faith which indeed belongs to Science, by adhering blindly to the Dictates of some famous Philo∣sopher in Physical Truths, the Prin∣ciples of which we have as much right to examine, and to make de∣ductions from 'em as he had? To sum up all: We may know enough for all the purposes of Life, enough to busie this active Faculty of Thinking, to employ and enter∣tain the spare Intervals of Time and to keep us from Rust and Idleness, but we must not pretend to fathom all Depths with our short Line, we shou'd be Wise unto Sobriety, and
reckon that we know very little if we go about to make our Own Rea∣son the Standard of all Truth. It is very certain that nothing is True but what is conformable to Reason, that is to the Divine Reason of which ours is but a short faint Ray, and it is as certain that there are many Truths which Human Reason can∣not Comprehend. Therefore to be throughly sensible of the Capacity of the Mind, to discern precisely its Bounds and Limits and to direct our Studies and Inquiries accordingly, to Know what is to be Known, and to Believe what is to be Believ'd is the property of a Wise Person. To be content with too little Knowlege, or to aspire to over-much is equal∣ly a fault, to make that use of our Understandings which GOD has Fitted and Design'd them for is the Medium which we ought to take. For the difference between a Plow-man and a Doctor does not seem to me to consist in this, That
the Business of the one is to search after Knowlege, and that the other has nothing to do with it. No, who∣ever has a Rational Soul ought sure∣ly to employ it about some Truth or other, to procure for it right Ideas, that its Judgments may be true tho its Knowlege be not very extensive. But herein lies the difference, that tho Truth is the Object of every In∣dividual Understanding, yet all are not equally enlarg'd nor able to comprehend so much; and they whose Capacities and Circumstances of Living do not fit 'em for it; lie not under that obligation of extend∣ing their view which Persons of a larger reach and greater leisure do. There is indeed often times a mis∣take in this matter, People who are not fit will be puzling their heads to little purpose, and those who are prove Slothful and decline the trou∣ble; and thus it will be if we do not throughly understand our selves, but suffer Pride or Ease to make the esti∣mate.
§. II. It is therefore very fit that after we have consider'd the Capa∣city of the Understanding in gene∣ral, we shou'd descend to the view of our own particular, observing the bent and turn of our own Minds, which way our Genius lies and to what it is most inclin'd. I see no rea∣son why there may not be as great a variety in Minds as there is in Fa∣ces, that the Soul as well as the Bo∣may not have something in it to di∣stinguish it, not only from all other Intelligent Natures but even from those of its own kind. There are different proportions in Faces which recommend them to some Eyes soon∣er than to others, and tho All Truth is amiable to a Reasonable Mind, and proper to employ it, yet why may there not be some particular Truths, more agreeable to each in∣dividual Understanding than others are? Variety gives Beauty to the Material World and why not to the
Intellectual? We can discern the different Abilities which the Wise Author of all things has endow'd us with, the different Circumstances in which he has plac'd us in refer∣ence to this World and the Concerns of an Animal Life, that so we may be mutually useful, and that since each single Person is too limited and confin'd to attend to many, much less to all things, we may receive from each other a reciprocal advan∣tage, and why may we not think he has done the like in respect of Truth? that since it is too much for one, our united Strength shou'd be employ'd in the search of her. Especially since the Divine Being who contains in himself all Reality and Truth is In∣finite in Perfection, and therefore shou'd be Infinitely Ador'd and Lov'd; and If Creatures are by their being so uncapable of rendering to their Incomprehensible Creator an Adoration and Love that's worthy of him, it is but decorous that they
shou'd however do as much as they can. All that variety of sublime Truths of Beautiful and Wondrous Objects which surround us, are no∣thing else but a various display of his unbounded Excellencies, and why shou'd any of 'em pass unob∣serv'd? Why shou'd not every indi∣vidual Understanding be in a more especial manner fitted for and em∣ploy'd in the disquisition of some particular Truth and Beauty? 'Tis true after all our researches we can no more sufficiently Know GOD than we can worthily Love him, and are as much unable to find out all his Works as we are his Na∣ture, yet this shou'd only prompt us to exert All our Powers and to do our best, since even that were too little cou'd we possibly do more. We can never offer to him so much Praise as he deserves, and therefore it is but fit that he shou'd have All that Mankind can possibly render him. He is indeed immutable in his
own Nature, but those discoveries we daily make of his Operations will always afford us somewhat New and Surprizing, for this All∣glorious Sun the Author of Life and Light is as inexhaustible a Source of Truth as he is of Joy and Happi∣ness. If then we are convinc'd that there's some peculiar Task allotted us, our next business will be to en∣quire what it is. To know our own Strength and neither to over nor underrate our selves is one of the most material points of Wisdom, and which indeed we are most com∣monly ignorant of, else we shou'd not reach at all, how unable soever we are to attain it, nor make so ma∣ny successless attempts and be forc'd to come off with that pitiful Apology, I was mistaken, I did not think it. But we can scarce duly estimate our Un∣derstandings till we have regulated our Wills, reform'd Self-love and a train of immortified Passions, which
it is not our Business to speak of here, we shall have occasion to do't hereafter. Let it suffice that we re∣mark a frequent Error which these engage us in, that is, an aptness to lessen the Human Mind, to detract from its Grandeur and abridg its Powers when we consider it in Ge∣neral, and as great a forwardness when we look on our selves to ex∣tend our Abilities beyond their bounds. Are we conscious of a Defect? the shallowness of Human Reason at large must bear the blame, we Harangue very excellently on the Ignorance and Vanity of Man∣kind, and it were well if we rested there, and wou'd forbear to murmur even at our Creator himself for al∣lowing us so scanty a Portion. But if Reason has shon out, dispelling those Clouds which Eclips'd the bright face of Truth, we arrogate all to our selves. My Discovery, My Hypothesis, the Strength and Clearness of My Reasonings, rather
than the Truth are what we wou'd expose to view; 'tis that we Idolize our selves and wou'd have every one Admire and Celebrate. And yet all this is no more perhaps than another has done before us, or at least might have done with our Opportu∣nities and Advantages. The reverse of this procedure wou'd become us better, and it were more Glorious as well as more Just to ascribe the Excellencies of the Mind to Human Nature in the Lump and to take the Weaknesses to our selves. By this we shou'd both avoid Sloth, (the best use we can make of our Igno∣rance and Infirmity being first to be humbled for, and then sedulously to endeavour their Amendment) and likewise secure our Industry from the Mixtures of Pride and Envy. By looking on our own Acquisitions as a general Treasure, in which the Whole have a Right, we shou'd pretend to no more than a share; and considering our selves as Parts
of the same Whole, we should ex∣pect to find our own account in th' Improvement of every part of it, which wou'd restrain us from being puft up with the Contemplation of our Own, and from repining at our Neighbours Excellencies. For let Reason shine forth where it may, as we can't engross, so neither can we be excluded from sharing in the Be∣nefit, unless we wilfully exclude our selves; every one being the better for True Worth and Good Sense, except the little Soul'd Enviers of 'em. To help us to the Knowledge of our own Capacities the Informati∣ons of our Friends, nay even of our Enemies may be useful. The for∣mer if Wise and True will direct us to the same Course to which our Genius Points, and the latter will industriously endeavour to divert us from it, and we can't be too care∣ful that these don't disguise them∣selves under the specious appearance
of the former, to do us an ill-turn the more effectually. For it is not seldom seen that such as pretend great Concern for us, will press us on to such Studies or Ways of Liv∣ing as inwardly they know we are unfit for, thereby to gratify their Secret Envy, by diverting us from that to which our Genius disposes, and in which therefore they have reason to suppose we wou'd be Ex∣cellent. But tho we may make use of the Opinions of both, yet if we will be Sincere and Ingenuous we cannot have a more faithful Director than our own heart. He who gave us these Dispositions will excite us to the Use and Improvement of em; and unless we drive him from us by our Impurity, or thro negligence and want of Attention let slip his secret Whispers, this Master within us will lay most in our view such Les∣sons as he wou'd have us take. Our care then must be to open our Eyes to that Beam of Light which does
in a more especial manner break in upon us, to fix them steadily, and to examine accurately those notices which are most vividly represented to us, and to lay out our Thoughts and Time in the Cultivation of 'em. It may be our Humor won't be gra∣tified, nor our Interest serv'd by such a Method. Other Business or A∣musements put on a finer Garb, and come attended with more Charms and Grandeur, these recommend us to the World make us Belov'd and Illustrious in it: Whilst the follow∣ers of Truth are despis'd and look'd askew on, as fantastick Speculatists, unsociable Thinkers, who pretend to see farther than their Neighbours, to rectifie what Custom has esta∣blish'd, and are so Unmannerly as to Think and Talk out of the Com∣mon way. He who speaks Truth makes a Satyr on the greatest part of Mankind, and they are not over apt to forgive him, he contradicts the vogue of the Times, is so hardy as
to lay open Mens darling Errors, to draw a lively Picture of their most secret Corruptions, a Representati∣on which they cannot bear. Their Gall is touch'd proportionably as their Wounds are more deeply search'd into, altho it be only in or∣der to a Cure. They therefore who Love Truth shall be Hated by the Most, who tho they openly pretend to Honour, yet secretly Malign her, because she reproaches them. And as a plausible Life is not often a very Religious one, which made the best Judge pronounce a Wo on those whom all Men shall speak well of, so neither is the most Just and Illu∣minated Understanding the most ad∣mir'd and trusted to, but a plausible Speaker, as well as a plausible Liv∣er, commonly bears away the Bell. If then we consult our Passions and Vanity we shall go near to deter∣mine amiss, and make that use of our Intellectuals which Fancy or In∣terest pushes us on to, not which
Nature has fitted us for. Hence it is that those who might have done very well in some Studies and Em∣ployments, make but bungling work when they apply themselves to o∣thers. We go on apace when the Wind and Tide are on our side, but it costs us much Labour, and we make little speed, when we Row a∣gainst both. And as a due Consideration of our Particular Capacity wou'd put us right in our own Studies, so wou'd it keep us from clashing with our Neighbours, whom we many times Contend with not so much out of a Love to Truth, as thro a humor of Contradiction, or because we think this the best way to shew our Parts, and by this tryal of Skill to exalt our selves above them. But is there no better way to discover our Penetra∣tion, and to try our Strength, than by a Malicious and Litigious Oppo∣sition? The field of Truth is large, and after all the Discoveries that
have been made by those who have gone before, there will still be un∣troden Paths, which they who have the Courage and Skill may beat out and beautify. If then instead of Jostling and Disputing with our Fel∣low Travellers, of bending all the force of our Wit to Contradict and Oppose those advances which they make, we wou'd well understand, duly Employ and kindly Communi∣cate our Peculiar Talent, how much more Service might we do our Lord, how much more useful might we be to one another? What vast Discove∣ries wou'd be made in the wide Oce∣an of Truth? How many Moral Irre∣gularities wou'd be observ'd and recti∣sy'd? We shou'd be restrain'd from aspiring to things above our reach, move regularly in our own Sphere, not abuse those good Parts which were given us for Common Benefit, to the Destruction of our selves and others, be in a fair way to discern the Defects of our Mind and to pro∣ceed to the Cure of 'em.
§. III. We have already exprest our thoughts concerning the Capa∣city and Perfection of the Under∣standing, and what has been said if duly consider'd, is sufficient to bring every particular Person acquainted with their own defects. But because they who need Amendment most, are commonly least dispos'd to make such reflections as are necessary to procure it, we will spend a few Pa∣ges in considering for them, and in observing the most usual defects of the Thinking Faculty. If we are of their Opinion who say that the Understanding is only Passive, and that Judgment belongs to the Will, I see not any Defect the former can have, besides Narrow∣ness and a disability to extend it self to many things, which is indeed incident to all Creatures, the bright∣est Intelligence in the highest Order of Angels is thus defective, as well as the meanest Mortal, tho in a less
degree. Nor ought it to be com∣plain'd of, since 'tis Natural and Ne∣cessary, we may as well desire to be Gods as desire to Know all things. Some sort of Ignorance therefore, or Non perception we cannot help; a Finite Mind, suppose it as large as you please, can never extend it self to Infinite Truths. But no doubt it is in our Power to remedy a great deal more than we do, and proba∣bly a larger Range is allowed us than the most Active and Enlightned Un∣derstanding has hitherto reach'd. Ig∣norance then can't be avoided but Error may, we cannot Judge of things of which we have no Idea, but we can suspend our Judgment about those of which we have, till clearness and evidence oblige us to pass it. Indeed in strictness of Speech the Will and not the Under∣standing is blameable when we Think amiss, since the latter opposes not the Ends for which GOD made it, but readily extends it self as far as
it can, receiving such Impressions as are made on it; 'tis the former that directs it to such Objects, that fills up its Capacity with such Ideas as are foreign to its Business and of no use to it, or which does not at least oppose the incursions of Material things, and deface as much as it is able those impressions which Sensible Objects leave in the Imagination. But since it is not material to the pre∣sent Design, whether Judgment be∣longs to the Understanding or Will, we shall not nicely distinguish how each of 'em is employ'd in acquir∣ing Knowledge, but treat of 'em both together in this Chapter, allotted to the Service of the Studious, who when they are put in the way may by their own Meditations and Expe∣rience, rectifie the mistakes and sup∣ply the Omissions we happen to be guilty of. They who apply themselves to the Contemplation of Truth, will perhaps at first find a Contraction or Emp∣tiness
of Thought, and that their Mind offers nothing on the Subject they wou'd consider, is not ready at unfolding, nor in representing cor∣respondent Ideas to be compar'd with it, is as it were asleep or in a Dream, and tho' not empty of all Thought, yet Thinks nothing clearly or to the purpose. The Primary Cause of this is that Limitation which all Created Minds are Subject to, which Limi∣tation appears more visible in some than in others, either because some Minds are endow'd by their Creator with a larger Capacity than the rest, or if you are not inclin'd to think so, then by reason of the Indisposition of the Bodily Organs, which cramps and contracts the Operations of the Mind. And that Person whose Ca∣pacity of receiving Ideas is very little, whose Ideas are disorder'd, and not capable of being so dispos'd as that they may be compar'd in order to the forming of a Judgment, is a Fool or little better. If we find this to be
our Case, and that after frequent tryals there appears no hopes of A∣mendment, 'tis best to desist, we shall but lose our Labour, we may do some Good in an Active Life and Employments that depend on the Bo∣dy, but we're altogether unfit for Contemplation and the Exercises of the Mind. Yet e'er we give out let's see if it be thus with us in all Cases: Can we Think and Argue Rationally about a Dress, an Intrea∣gue, an Estate? Why then not up∣on better Subjects? The way of Considering and Meditating justly is the same on all Occasions. 'Tis true, there will fewest Ideas arise when we wou'd Meditate on such Subjects as we've been least conversant about; but this is a fault which it is in our power to remedy, first by Reading or Discoursing, and then by frequent and serious Meditation, of which hereafter. As those we have been speaking of are hindred in their search after
Truth, thro a want of Ideas out of which to deduce it, so there are ano∣ther sort who are not happy in their Enquiries, on account of the mul∣titude and Impetuosity of theirs. Volatileness of Thought, very per∣nicious to true Science, is a fault which People of warm Imaginati∣ons and Active Spirits are apt to fall into. Such a Temper is readily dis∣pos'd to receive Errors and very well qualified to propagate them, especi∣ally if a volubility of Speech be join'd to it. These thro an immoderate nimbleness of Thinking skip from one Idea to another, without obser∣ving due Order and Connexion, they content themselves with a superficial view, a random glance, and depend∣ing on the vigor of their Imagina∣tion, are took with Appearances, never tarrying to penetrate the Sub∣ject, or to find out Truth if she float not upon the Surface. A multitude of Ideas not relating to the matter they design to think of rush in upon
them, and their easie Mind enter∣tains all comers how impertinent so∣ever; instead of examining the Que∣stion in debate they are got into the Clouds, numbring the Cities in the Moon and building Airy Castles there. Nor is it easie to cure this Defect, since it deceives others as well as those who have it with a shew of very great Ingenuity. The vivacity of such Persons makes their Conversation plausible, and taking with those who consider not much, tho not with the Judicious; it pro∣cures for them the Character of Wit, but hinders them from being Wise. For truth is not often found by such as won't take Time to examine her Counterfeits, to distinguish between Evidence and Probability, Realities and Appearances, but who thro a conceit of their own sharp-sighted∣ness think they can pierce to the bot∣tom with the first glance. To cure this Distemper perfectly perhaps it will be necessary to apply
to the Body as well as to the Mind: The Animal Spirits must be lessen'd, or rendred more Calm and Manage∣able; at least they must not be unna∣turally and violently mov'd, by such a Diet, or such Passions, Designs and Divertisments as are likely to put 'em in a ferment. Contemplation re∣quires a Governable Body, a sedate and steady Mind, and the Body and the Mind do so reciprocally influence each other, that we can scarce keep the one in tune if the other be out of it. We can neither Observe the Er∣rors of our Intellect, nor the Irregu∣larity of our Morals whilst we are darkned by Fumes, agitated with unruly Passions, or carried away with eager Desires after Sensible things and vanities. We must there∣fore withdraw our Minds from the World, from adhering to the Senses, from the Love of Material Beings, of Pomps and Gaieties; for 'tis these that usually Steal away the Heart, that seduce the Mind to such
unaccountable Wandrings, and so fill up its Capacity that they leave no room for Truth, so distract its Attention that it cannot enquire af∣ter her. For tho' the Body does partly occasion this fault, yet the Will no doubt may in good measure Remedy it, by using its Authority to fix the Understanding on such Ob∣jects as it wou'd have Contemplated; it has a Rein which will certainly curb this wandring, if it can but be persuaded to make use of it. Indeed Attention and deep Meditation is not so agreeable to our Animal Nature, does not flatter our Pride so well as this agreeable Reverie, which gives us a pretence to Knowledge without taking much Pains to acquire it, and does not choak us with the humbling thoughts of our own Ignorance, with which we must make such a∣do e're it can be enlightened. Yet without Attention and strict Exami∣nation we are liable to false Judg∣ments on every occasion, to Vanity
and Arrogance, to Impertinent Pra∣ting of things we don't understand, are kept from making a Progress, be∣cause we fancy our selves to be at the top already, and can never attain to true Wisdom. If then we wou'd hereafter think to purpose, we must suffer our selves to be convinc'd how oft we have already thought to none, suspect our Quickness, and not give our desultory Imagination leave to ramble. And in order to the restraining it we may consider, what a loss of Time and Study such irregular and useless Thoughts occasion, what a Reproach they are to our Reason, how they cheat us with a shew of Knowledge, which so long as we are under the power of this giddy Temper will in∣evitably escape us And if to this we add a serious perusal of such Books as are not loosly writ, but require an Attent and Awakened Mind to ap∣prehend, and to take in the whole force of 'em, obliging our selves to
Understand them throughly, so as to be able to give a just account of them to our Selves, or rather to some o∣ther Person intelligent enough to take it and to correct our mistakes, it is to be hop'd we shall obtain a due poise of Mind, and be able to direct our Thoughts the thorow discussion of such Subjects as we wou'd Exa∣mine. Such Books I mean as are ful∣ler of Matter than Words, which dif∣fuse a light through every part of their Subject, do not Skim, but Pe∣netrate it to the bottom, yet so as to leave somewhat to be wrought out by the Reader's own Meditation; such as are writ with Order and Con∣nexion, the Strength of whose Ar∣guments can't be sufficiently felt un∣less we remember and compare the whole System. 'Tis impossible to prescribe absolutely, and every one may easily find what Authors are most apt to stay their Attention, and shou'd apply to them. But when∣ever they Meditate, be it on what
Object it may, let 'em fix their Minds stedily on it, not removing till it be throughly Examin'd, at least not until they have feen all that's necessa∣ry to their present purpose. Doing so we shall prevent Rash∣ness and Precipitation in our Judg∣ments, which is occasion'd by that Volatileness we have been speaking of, together with an over-weaning opinion of our Selves. All the irre∣gularities of our Will proceed from those false Judgments we make, thro∣want of Consideration, or a partial Examination when we do consider. For did we Consider with any man∣ner of Attention, we cou'd not be so absurd as to call Evil, Good, and Chuse it as such, or prefer a less Good before a greater, a poor Mo∣mentary Trifle, before the Purity and Perfection of our Mind, before an Eternal and Immutable Crown of Glory! But we seek no farther than the first Appearances of Truth and Good, here we Stop, allowing nei∣ther
Time nor Thought to search to the bottom, and to pull off those Dis∣guises which impose on us. This Precipitation is that which gives birth to all our Errors, which are no∣thing else but a hasty and injudicious Sentence, a mistaking one thing for another, supposing an Agreement or Disparity amongst Ideas and their Relations where in reality there is none, occasion'd by an imperfect and cursory view of 'em. And tho' there are other things which may be said to lead us into Error, yet they do it only as they seduce us into Rash and Precipitate Judgments. We love Grandeur and every thing that feeds our good Opinion of our Selves, and therefore wou'd Judge off hand, supposing it a disparagement to our Understandings to be long in Exa∣mining, so that we greedily embrace whatever seems to carry Evidence enough for a speedy Determination, how slight and superficial soever it be. Whereas did we calmly and delibe∣rately
Examine our Evidence, and how far those Motives we are acted by ought to Influence, we shou'd not be liable to this Seduction. For here∣by the Impetuosity of a warm Ima∣gination wou'd be cool'd, and the ex∣travagancies of a Disorderly one Regulated; we shou'd not be De∣ceiv'd by the Report of our Senses; the Prejudices of Education; our own Private Interest, and readiness to receive the Opinions whether True or False of those we Love, or wou'd appear to Love because we think they will serve us in that Inte∣rest; our inordinate thirst after a great Reputation, or the Power and Riches, the Grandeurs and Pleasures of this World, these wou'd no lon∣ger dissipate our Thoughts and di∣stract our Attention, for then we shou'd be sensible how little Concern is due to them. We shou'd neither mistake in the End and Object by not employing our Understandings at All about such things as they were
chiefly made for, or not Enough, or by busying them with such as are out of their reach, or beneath their Application; nor shou'd we be out in the Method of our Meditation, by going a wrong or a round about way. For the GOD of Truth is ready to lead us into all Truth, if we Honestly and Attentively apply our selves to him. In sum, whatever false Principle we embrace, whatever wrong Con∣clusion we draw from true ones, is a disparagement to our Thinking Power, a Weakness of Judgment proceeding from a Confuse and Im∣perfect view of things, as that does from want of attention, and a hasty and partial Examination. It were endless to reckon up all the false Maxims and Reasonings we fall into, nor is it possible to give a List of them, for there are innumerable Er∣rors opposite to one single Truth. The General Causes have been al∣ready mention'd, the Particulars are
as many as those several Compositions which arise from the various mix∣tures of the Passions, Interests, Edu∣cation, Conversation and Read∣ing, &c. of particular Persons. And the best way that I can think of to Improve the Understanding, and to guard it against all Errors proceed they from what Cause they may, is to regulate the Will, whose Of∣fice it is to determine the Under∣standing to such and such Ideas, and to stay it in the Consideration of them so long as is necessary to the Discovery of Truth; for if the Will be right the Understanding can't be guilty of any Culpable Error. Not to Judge of any thing which we don't Apprehend, to suspend our Assent till we see just Cause to give it, and to determine nothing till the Strength and Clearness of the Evi∣dence oblige us to it. To withdraw our selves as much as may be from Corporeal things, that pure Reason may be heard the better; to make
that use of our Senses for which they are design'd and fitted, the preserva∣tion of the Body, but not to depend on their Testimony in our Enquiries after Truth. Particularly to divest our selves of mistaken Self-love, lit∣tle Ends and mean Designs, and to keep our Inclinations and Passions under Government. Not to engage our selves so far in any Party or O∣pinion as to make it in a manner ne∣cessary that that shou'd be Right, lest from wishing it were, we come at last to persuade our selves it is so. But to be passionately in Love with Truth, as being throughly sensible of her Excellency and Beauty. To embrace her how opposite soever she may sometimes be to our Hu∣mours and Designs, to bring these over to her, and never attempt to make her truckle to them. To be so far from disliking a Truth because it touches us home, and lances our tenderest and dearest Corruption, as on the contrary to prize it the more,
by how much the more plainly it shews us our Errors and Miscarri∣ages. For indeed it concerns us most to know such Truths as these, it is not material to us what other Peoples Opinions are, any farther than as the Knowlege of their Sen∣timents may correct Our Mistakes. And the higher our Station is in the World, so much the greater need have we to be curious in this parti∣cular. The mean and inconsiderable of∣ten stumble on Truth when they seek not after her, but she is commonly kept out of the way, and industri∣ously conceal'd from the Great and mighty; either out of Design or En∣vy, for whoever wou'd make a Pro∣perty of another must by all means conceal the Truth from him; and they who Envy their Neighbours Preeminence in other things, are willing themselves to excel in exact∣ness of Judgment, which they think and very truly, to be the greatest
Excellency. And to help forward this deception, the Great instead of being Industrious in finding out the Truth, are generally very impatient when they meet with her. She does not treat them so tenderly and fawn∣ingly, with so much Ceremony and Complaisance as their Flatterers do. There's in her that which us'd to be the Character of our Nation, an ho∣nest Plainness and Sincerity, Open∣ness and blunt Familiarity: She can∣not mould her self into all Shapes to be rendred agreeable, but standing on her Native Worth is regardless of Out-side and Varnish. But to return from this Digression. Above all things we must be throughly convinc'd of our entire Dependance on GOD, for what we Know as well as for what we Are, and be warmly affected with the Sense of it, which will both Excite us to Practise, and Enable us to Perform the rest. Tho' we are Naturally Dark and Ignorant, yet in his Light
we may hope to see Light, if with the Son of Syrac we Petition for Wisdom that sits by his Throne to labour with us, and Sigh with David after his Light and Truth. For then he who is The Light that Lightneth every one who comes in∣to the World, the Immutable Truth, and Uncreated Wisdom of His Fa∣ther, will Teach us in the way of Wis∣dom and lead us in right Paths, he will instruct us infinitely better by the right use of our own Faculties than the brightest Human Reason can. For in him are all the Treasures of Wis∣dom and Knowlege which he Libe∣rally dispences to all who Humbly, Honestly and Heartily ask 'em of him. To close this Head: What∣ever the Notion That we see all things in GOD, may be as to the Truth of it, 'tis certainly very com∣mendable for its Piety, in that it most effectually humbles the most dangerous sort of Pride, the being Proud of our Knowlege, and yet does not slacken our Endeavours
after Knowlege but rather Excites them. § IV. As to the Method of Think∣ing, if it be proper for me to say any thing of that, after those better Pens which have treated of it already, it falls in with the Subject I'me now come to, which is, that Natural Lo∣gic I wou'd propose. I call it natu∣ral because I shall not send you fur∣ther than your Own Minds to learn it, you may if you please take in the assistance of some well chosen Book, but a good Natural Reason after all, is the best Director, without this you will scarce Argue well, tho you had the Choicest Books and Tutors to In∣struct you, but with it you may, tho' you happen to be destitute of the other. For as a very Judicious Writer on this Subject (to whose Ingenious Remarks and Rules I am much obli∣ged) well observes, Art of Thinking. These Ope∣rations [of the Mind] proceed
meerly from Nature, and that sometimes more perfectly from those who are altogether ignorant of Logic, than from others who have learn'd it. That which we propose in all our Meditations and Reasonings is, ei∣ther to deduce some Truth we are in search of, from such Principles as we're already acquainted with; or else, to dispose our Thoughts and Reasonings in such a manner, as to be able to Convince others of those Truths which we our selves are Con∣vinc'd of. Other Designs indeed Men may have, such as the Main∣tenance of their Own Opinions, A∣ctions and Parties without regard to the Truth and Justice of 'em, or the Seduction of their unwary Neigh∣bours, but these are Mean and Base ones, beneath a Man, much more a Christian, who is or Ought to be endow'd with greater Integrity and Ingenuity.
Now Reasoning being nothing else but a Comparison of Ideas, and a deducing of Conclusions from Clear and Evident Principles, it is in the first place requisite that our Ideas be Clear and Just, and our Principles True, else all our Discourse will be Nonsense and Absurdity, Falshood and Error. And that our Idea may be Right, we have no more to do but to look attentively into our own Minds, having as was said a∣bove, laid aside all Prejudices and whatever may give a false tincture to our Light, there we shall find a Clear and Lively Representation of what we seek for, unsophisticated with the Dross of false Definitions and unintelligible Expressions. But we must not imagine that a transi∣ent view will serve the turn, or that our Eye will be Enlightened if it be not fix'd. For tho' Truth be ex∣ceeding bright, yet since our Preju∣dices and Passions have darkned our Eye-sight, it requires no little Pains
and Application of Mind to find her out, the neglect of which Applica∣tion is the Reason that we have so little Truth, and that the little we have is almost lost in that Rubbish of Error which is mingled with it. And since Truth is so near at hand, since we are not oblig'd to tumble over many Authors, to hunt after e∣very celebrated Genius, but may have it for enquiring after in our own Breasts, are we not inexcusable if we don't obtain it? Are we not unworthy of Compassion if we suffer our Understandings to be over-run with Error? Indeed it seems to me most Reasonable and most agreea∣ble to the Wisdom and Equity of the Divine Operations, that every one shou'd have a Teacher in their own Bosoms, who will if they seriously apply themselves to him, immedi∣ately Enlighten them so far as that is necessary, and direct them to such Means as are sufficient for their In∣struction both in Humane and Di∣vine
Truths; for as to the latter, Reason if it be Right and Solid, will not pretend to be our sole Instructor, but will send us to Divine Revelati∣on when it may be had. GOD does nothing in vain, he gives no Power or Faculty which he has not allotted to some proportio∣nate use, if therefore he has given to Mankind a Rational Mind, every individual Understanding ought to be employ'd in somewhat worthy of it. The Meanest Person shou'd Think as Justly, tho' not as Capaci∣ously, as the greatest Philosopher. And if the Understanding be made for the Contemplation of Truth, and I know not what else it can be made for, either there are many Understandings who are never able to attain what they were design'd and fitted for, which is contrary to the Supposition that GOD made no∣thing in Vain, or else the very mean∣est must be put in a way of attaining it: Now how can this be if all that
which goes to the composition of a Knowing Man in th' account of the World, be necessary to make one so? All have not leisure to Learn Langua∣ges and pore on Books, nor Oppor∣tunity to Converse with the Learn∣ed; but all may Think, may use their own Faculties rightly, and consult the Master who is within them. By Ideas we sometimes under∣stand in general all that which is the immediate Object of the Mind, whatever it Perceives; and in this large Sense it may take in all Thought, all that we are any ways capable of Discerning: So when we say we have no Idea of a thing, 'tis as much as to say we know nothing of the matter. Again, it is more strictly taken for that which repre∣sents to the Mind some Object di∣stinct from it, whether Clearly or Confusedly; when this is its import, our Knowledge is said to be as Clear as our Ideas are. For that Idea
which represents a thing so Clearly, that by an Attent and Simple View we may discern its Properties and Modifications, at least so far as they can be Known, is never false; all our Certainty and Evidence depends on it, if we Know not Truly what is thus represented to our Minds we know nothing. Thus the Idea of Equality between 2 and 2 is so evi∣dent that it is impossible to doubt of it, no Arguments could convince us of the Contrary, nor be able to per∣suade us that the same may be found between 2 and 3. And as such an Idea as this is ne∣ver False, so neither can any Idea be said to be so, if by False we mean that which has no Existence; our Idea certainly Exists, tho' there be not any thing in Nature Correspon∣dent to it. For tho' there be no such thing as a Golden Mountain, yet when I think of one, 'tis certain I have an Idea of it.
But our Ideas are then said to be False, or rather Wrong, when they have no Conformity to the Real Na∣ture of the Thing whose Name they bear. So that properly Speaking it is not the Idea but the Judgment that is False; we err in supposing that our Idea is answerable to something without us when it is not. In sim∣ple Perceptions we are not often de∣ceiv'd, but we frequently mistake in Compounding them, by Uniting se∣veral things which have no Agree∣ment, and Separating others which are Essentially United. Indeed it may happen that our Perceptions are faulty sometimes, thro the Indispo∣sition of the Organs or Faculties, thus a Man who has the Jaundice sees every thing ting'd with Yellow, yet even here the Error is not in the Simple Idea but in the Compos'd one, for we do not mistake when we say the Object appears Yellow to our Sight, tho' we do, when we af∣firm that it does, or ought to do so
to others. So again, when the Mind does not sufficiently Attend to her Ideas nor Examine them on all sides, 'tis very likely she will Think amiss, but this also is a false Judg∣ment, that which is amiss in the Perception being rather the Inade∣quateness than the Falshood. Thus in many Cases we enquire no far∣ther than whether an Action be not Directly Forbidden, and if we do not find it Absolutely Unlawful, we think that sufficient to Authorize the Practise of it, not considering it as we ought to do, Cloathed with the Circumstances of Scandal, Temp∣tation, &c. which place it in the same Classes with things unlawful, at least make it so to us. Rational Creatures shou'd endea∣vour to have right Ideas of every thing that comes under their Cogni∣zance, but yet our Ideas of Mora∣lity, our thoughts about Religion are those which we shou'd with
greatest speed and diligence rectifie, because they are of most importance, the Life to come, as well as all the Occurences of This, depending on them. We shou'd search for Truth in our most abstracted Speculations, but it concerns us nearly to follow her close in what relates to the Con∣duct of our Lives. For the main thing we are to drive at in all our Studies, and that which is the great∣est Improvement of our Understand∣ings is the Art of Prudence, the be∣ing all of a Piece, managing all our Words and Actions as it becomes Wise Persons and Good Christians. Yet in this we are commonly most faulty; for besides the deceits of our Passions, our Ideas of Particular Ver∣tues and Vices, Goods and Evils, being an assemblage of divers sim∣ple Perceptions, and including several Judgments are therefore li∣able to mistake, and much more so considering how we commonly come by them. We hear the Word
that Stands for such a Thing, suppose Honor; and then instead of enquiring what it is at the Fountain head the Oracles of GOD, and our own, or the Impartial Reason of the Wisest and the Best, Custom and the Ob∣servations we make on the Practice of such as Pretend to it forms our Idea, which is seldom a Right one, the Opinions and Practices of the World being very fallacious, and ma∣ny times quite opposite to the Di∣ctates of Reason wou'd we but give ear to them. For what a strange distorted Idea of Honor must they needs have, who can think it Ho∣nourable to break a Vow that ought to be Kept, and Dishonourable to get loose from an Engagement that ought to be Broken? Who cannot endure to be tax'd with a Lye, and yet never think fit to keep their Word? What do they think of Greatness who support their Pomp at the Expence of the Groans and Tears of many Injur'd Families?
What is their Idea of Heaven, who profess to Believe such a thing, and yet never endeavour to Qualifie themselves for the Enjoyment of it? Have they any Idea at all of these things when they speak of 'em? Or, if they have, is it not a very false one? Now that we may avoid mistake the better, and because we usually join Words to our Ideas even when we only Meditate, we shou'd free them from all Equivocation, not make use of any Word, which has not a Distinct Idea annex'd to it, and where Custom has join'd many I∣deas to one Word, carefully separate and distinguish them. For if our Words are Equivocal, how can we by Pronouncing such and such, ex∣cite the same Idea in another that is in our own Mind, which is the End of Speech, and consequently how can we be Understood? And if sometimes we annex one Idea to a Word, and sometimes another, we
may for ever wrangle with those who perhaps wou'd be found to a∣gree with us if we Understood each other, but can neither Convince them, nor clear up the Matter to our own Mind. For Instance: Shou'd I dispute Whether Evil were to be Chosen? Without defining what I mean by Evil, which is a Word customarily apply'd to things of different Natures, and shou'd con∣clude in the Affirmative, meaning at the same time the Evil of Pain, or any Corporal Loss or Punishment, I were not mistaken, tho' another Person who annexes no other Idea but that of Sin to the word Evil, might Justly contradict me and say that I was. Or if in the Process of my Discourse, I shou'd without giv∣ing notice of it, substitute the Idea of Sin instead of that of Pain, when I mention Evil, I shou'd argue falsly. For it is a Maxim that we may Chuse a less Evil to avoid a greater, if both
of them be Corperal Evils, or if one of them be so, and we chuse it to avoid a Sin, between which and the Evil of Pain there is no Compa∣rison: But if the two Evils pro∣pos'd to our Choice be both of them Sinful, that Principle will not hold, we must Chuse neither, whatever comes on't, Sin being Eligible no manner of way. Thus many times our Ideas are thought to be false when the fault is really in our Language, we make use of Words without joyning any, or only loose and indeterminate Ideas to them, Prating like Parrots who can Modify Sounds, and Pronounce Syllables, and sometimes martial them as a Man wou'd, tho without the use of Reason or understanding any thing by them. So that after a long Discourse and many fine Words, our Hearer may justly ask us what we have been saying? And what it is we wou'd be at? And so a great part, of the Good Breeding
of the World, many Elegant Com∣plements pass for nothing, they have no meaning, or if they have, 'tis quite contrary to what the Words in other Cases signifie. From the Comparison of two or more Ideas clearly Conceived arises a Judgment, which we may lay down for a Principle, and as we have occasion Argue from. Always observing that those Judgments which we take for Axioms or Prin∣ciples, be such as carry the highest Evidence and Conviction, such as every one who will but in the least Attend may Clearly see, and be ful∣ly convinced of, and which need not another Idea for their Demon∣stration. Thus from the Agreement which we plainly perceive between the Ideas of GOD and of Goodness singly consider'd, we discern that they may be joyn'd together so as to form this Proposition, That GOD is Good: And from the evident disparity that is between GOD
and Injustice, we learn to affirm this other, That he is not Ʋnjust. And so long as we Judge of Nothing but what we see Clearly, we can't be mistaken in our Judgments, we may indeed in those Reasonings and Deductions we draw from them, if we are Ignorant of the Laws of Ar∣gumentation, or Negligent in the Observation of them. The First and Principal thing therefore to be observed in all the Operations of the Mind is, That we determine nothing about those things of which we have not a Clear Idea, and as Distinct as the Nature of the Subject will permit, for we cannot properly be said to Know a∣ny thing which does not Clearly and Evidently appear to us. Whatever we see Distinctly we likewise see Clearly, Distinction always includ∣ing Clearness, tho this does not ne∣cessarily include that, there being many Objects Clear to the view of the Mind, which yet can't be said to be Distinct.
That (to use the Words of a Ce∣lebrated Author) may be said to be Clear which is Present and Manifest to an at∣tentive Mind; Les Princip. de la Philos. de M. Des Gar∣tes. Pt. I. 45. so as we say we see Objects Clearly, when being present to our Eyes they sufficiently Act on 'em, and our Eyes are dispos'd to regard 'em. And that Distinct, which is so Clear, Particular, and Different from all other things, that it contains not any thing in it self which appears not mani∣festly to him who considers it as he ought. Thus we may have a Clear, but not a Distinct and Per∣fect Idea of GOD and of our own Souls; their Existence and some of their Properties and Attributes may be Certainly and Indubitably Known, but we can't Know the Nature of our Souls Distinctly, for Reasons too long to be mentioned here, and less that of GOD, because he is Infinite. Now where our
Knowlege is Distinct, we may boldly deny of a subject, all that which after a careful Examination we find not in it: But where our Knowlege is only Clear, and not Distinct, tho' we may safely Affirm what we see, yet we can't without a hardy Presumption Deny of it what we see not. And were it not very common to find People both Talking and Writing of things of which they have no Notion, no Clear Idea; nay and determining Dogmatically concerning the intire Nature of those of which they can∣not possibly have an Adequate and Distinct one, it might seem Imper∣tinent to desire them to speak no farther than they Apprehend. They will tell you Peremptorily of Con∣tradictions and Absurdities in such matters as they themselves must al∣low they cannot Comprehend, tho others as Sharp sighted as them∣selves can see no such thing as they complain of.
As Judgments are form'd by the Comparing of Ideas, so Reason∣ing or Discourse arises from the Comparison or Combination of se∣veral Judgments. Nature teaches us when we can't find out what Re∣lation one Idea bears to another by a Simple view or bare Comparison, to seek for a Common Measure or third Idea, which Relating to the other two, we may by Comparing it with each of 'em, discern wherein they agree or differ. Our Inventi∣on discovers it self in proposing readily apt Ideas for this Middle Term, our Judgment in making Choice of such as are Clearest and most to our purpose, and the excel∣lency of our Reasoning consists in our Skill and Dexterity in Applying them. Invention indeed is the hardest part, when Proofs are found it is not very difficult to manage them. And to know precisely wherein their Nature consists, may help us some∣what
in our enquiries after 'em. An Intermediate Idea then which can make out an Agreement between o∣ther Ideas, must be Equivalent to, and yet Distinct from those we com∣pare by it. Where Ideas agree it will not be hard to find such an Equiva∣lent, and if after diligent search we cannot meet with any, 'tis a pretty sure Sign that they do not agree. It is not necessary indeed that our Middle Idea be Equivalent in all re∣spects, 'tis enough if it be in such as make the Comparison: And when it is so to one of the Compar'd Ideas but not to the other, that's a Proof that they do not agree amongst themselves. All the Commerce and Inter∣course of the World is manag'd by Equivalents, Conversation as well as Traffick. Why do we Trust our Friends but because their Truth and Honesty appears to us Equivalent to the Confidence we repose in 'em? Why do we perform Good Offices
to others, but because there's a pro∣portion between them and the Me∣rit of the Person, or our own Cir∣cumstances? And as the way to know the Worth of things is to Compare them one with another, so in like manner we come to the Knowlege of the Truth of 'em by an Equal Ballancing. But you will say, Tho I may learn the value of a Spanish Coin by Weighing, or Com∣paring it with some other Money whose Standard I know, and so dis∣cern what proportion it bears to those Goods I wou'd exchange; yet what Scales shall I find to weigh I∣deas? What Hand so even as to poize them Justly? Or if that might be done, yet where shall I meet with an Equivalent Idea when I have occasion to use one? In answer to this Demand I con∣sider, that as Light is always visible to us if we have an Organ to receive it, if we turn our Eyes towards it, and that nothing interpose between
it and us; so is Truth, we are sur∣rounded with it, and GOD has gi∣ven us Faculties to receive it. If it be ask'd, Why then do we so sel∣dom find it? The Reason is, be∣cause instead of making right use of our Faculties we employ them in keeping it out; we either shut our Eyes, or if we vouchsafe to open them, we are sure to view it thro such unsuitable Mediums as fail not to misrepresent it to us. As for those few Noble Spirits, who open the Windows of their Souls to let in Truth, and take the Films of Inte∣rest, Passion and Prejudice from be∣fore their Eyes, they will certainly be Enlighten'd, and cannot miss of obtaining as much Truth as they are capable of Receiving. For, to go on with the Comparison, as we can See no farther than our own Horizon, tho the Light shine never so bright around us; and as we cannot dis∣cern every Object even within that Compass Clearly, nor Any Distinct∣ly
but what we particularly apply our selves to; So neither are our Capacities large enough to take in All Truth, as has been often said, nor are we capable of attaining Any, without Attention and diligent Ex∣amination. But if we carefully Con∣sider those Ideas we already have and Attend to those Truths we are acquainted with, we cannot want Mediums to discover more, if our Enquiries be after that which is within our Reach. He who is the Fountain of Truth is also a GOD of Order, and has so regularly connex'd one Truth with another, that the discovery of one is a step towards a further Progress; so that if we dili∣gently Examine those Truths which, we Know, they will clear the way to what we search after: For it sel∣dom happens but that the Question it self directs us to some Idea that will serve for the Explanation or Proof of it.
There is no Object, no Accident of Life but affords us matter of Instru∣ction. GOD has so dispos'd all the Works of his Hands, all the Actings of his Providence, that every one of 'em ministers to our Improvement, if we will but Observe and Apply them. Indeed this Living Ex Tem∣pore which most of us are guilty of, our making no Reflections, our Gay and Volatile Humour which trans∣ports us in an Instant from one thing to another, e're we have with the Industrious Bee suck'd those Sweets it wou'd afford us, frequently ren∣ders his gracious Bounty ineffectual. For as the Diligent-hand maketh Rich, whil'st the Slothful and Pro∣digal come to nothing, so the Use of our Powers improves and En∣creases them, and the most Observ∣ing and Confiderate is the Wisest Person: For she lays up in her Mind as in a Store-house, ready to produce on all Occasions, a Clear and Simple Idea of every Object
that has at any time presented it self. And perhaps the difference be∣tween one Womans Reason and anothers may consist only in this, that the one has amass'd a greater number of such Ideas than the o∣ther, and dispos'd them more Or∣derly in her Understanding, so that they are at hand, ready to be ap∣ply'd to those Complex Ideas whose Agreement or Disagreement can∣not be found out but by the means of some of 'em. But because Examples are more familiar than Precepts, as conde∣scending to shew us the very manner of Practising them, I shall endeavour to make the matter in Hand as plain as I can by subjoining Instances to the following Rules, which Rules as I have not taken wholly on Trust from others, so neither do I pretend to be the Inventer of 'em. We have heard already that a Medium is necessary when we can't discern the Relation that is between
two or more Ideas by Intuition or a simple View. Could this alone pro∣cure us what we seek after, the addi∣tion of other Ideas wou'd be needless, since to make a shew of Wit by tedi∣ous Arguings and unnecessary Flou∣rishes, does only Perplex and Incum∣ber the Matter, Intuition being the Simplest, and on that account the best way of Knowing. Rule I. And therefore we shou'd in the first place, Acquaint our selves throughly with the State of the Question, have a Distinct Notion of our Subject whatever it be, and of the Terms we make use of, knowing precisely what it is we drive at: that so we may in the second Rule II. Cut off all needless Ideas and whatever has not a necessary Connexi∣on to the matter under Consideration, which serve only to fill up the Capa∣city of the Mind, and to Divide and Distract the Attention. From the neg∣lect
of this comes those causless Di∣gressions, tedious Parentheses and Im∣pertinent Remarques which we meet with in some Authors. For, as when our Sight is diffus'd and extended to many Objects at once we see none of them Distinctly; so when the Mind grasps at every Idea that pre∣sents it self, or rambles after such as relate not to its Present Business, it loses its hold and retains a very fee∣ble Apprehension of that which it shou'd Attend. Some have added another Rule (viz.) That we Reason only on those things of which we have Clear Ideas; but I take it to be a Con∣sequence of the first, and therefore do not make it a distinct one: For we can by no means Understand our Subject, or be well acquainted with the State of the Question, unless we have a Clear Idea of all its Terms. Rule III. Our Business being sta∣ted, the next Rule is To conduct our Thoughts by Order, beginning with the
most Simple and Easie Objects, and ascending as by Degrees to the Know∣lege of the more Compos'd. I need not tell you, that Order makes every thing, Easie, Strong and Beautiful, and that the Superstructure is nei∣ther like to Last or Please unless the Foundation be duly laid, for this is obvious to the most Superficial Rea∣der. Nor are they likely to solve the Difficult, who have neglected or slightly pass'd over the Easie Questions. Our Knowledg is gra∣dual, and by passing Regularly thro Plain things, we arrive in due time at the more Abstruse. Rule IV. In this Method we are to practise the Fourth Rule which is, Not to leave any part of our Subject unexamin'd, it being as ne∣cessary to Consider All that can let in Light, as to shut out what's Foreign to it. We may stop short of Truth as well as over-run it; and tho we look never so attentively on
our proper Object, if we view but half of it, we may be as much mis∣taken, as if we extended our Sight beyond it. Some Objects agree ve∣ry well when observ'd on one side, which upon turning the other shew a great disparity. Thus the Right Angle of a Triangle may be like to one part of a Square, but compare the Whole, and you'l find 'em very different Figures. And a Moral Action may in some Circumstance be not only Fit but Necessary, which in others, where Time, Place, and the like have made an alteration, wou'd be most Improper; so that if we venture to Act on the former Judgment, we may easily do amiss, if we wou'd Act as we ought, we must view its New Face, and see with what Aspect that looks on us. To this Rule belongs that of Di∣viding the Subject of our Meditations into as many Parts, as we can, and as shall be requisite to Ʋnderstand it per∣fectly.
This is indeed most necessary in difficult Questions, which will scarce be unravell'd but in this man∣ner by Pieces: Ever taking care to make Exact Reviews, and to Sum up our Evidence justly e're we pass Sen∣tence and fix our Judgment. Rule V. To which purpose we must Always keep our Subject Directly in our Eye, and Closely pursue it thro all our Progress; there being no better Sign of a good Understanding than Thinking Closely and Pertinently, and Reasoning dependently, so as to make the former part of our Dis∣course a support to the Latter, and This an Illustration of That, carry∣ing Light and Evidence in ev'ry step we take. The neglect of this Rule is the Cause why our Discove∣ries of Truth are seldom Exact, that so much is often said to so lit∣tle purpose; and many Intelligent and Industrious Readers when they have Read over a Book are very lit∣tle
wiser than when they began it. And that the two last Rules may be the better observ'd, 'twill be fit very often to look over our Process so far as we have gone, that so by ren∣dring our Subject Familiar, we may the sooner arrive to an Exact Know∣lege of it. Rule VI. All which being done we are in a fair way towards keep∣ing the last Rule, which is, To judge no further than we Perceive, and not to take any thing for Truth which we do not evidently Know to be so. In∣deed in some Cases we are forc'd to content our selves with Probability, but 'twere well if we did so only where 'tis plainly Necessary. That is, when the Subject of our Medita∣tion is such as we cannot possibly have a Certain Knowlege of, because we are not furnish'd with Proofs which have a Constant and Immu∣table Connexion with the Ideas we apply them to, or because we can't
perceive it, which is our Case in such Exigencies as oblige us to Act presently, on a cursory view of the Arguments propos'd to us, when we want time to trace them to the bot∣tom, and to make use of such means as wou'd discover Truth. I cannot think we are often driv∣en to such straits in any considera∣ble Affair, tho I believe that very many Subjects may be propos'd to us, concerning which we cannot rea∣dily pass our Judgment, either be∣cause we never consider'd them be∣fore, or because we are wanting in some Means that lead to the Know∣lege of 'em. In which Case Reason wills that we suspend our Judgment till we can be better Inform'd; nor wou'd it have us remit our Search af∣ter Certainty, even in those very Cases in which we may sometimes be forc'd to Act only on Probable Grounds. For Reason can't rest sa∣tisfy'd with Probabilities where Evidence is possible, our Passions and
Interest may, but That does not in∣cline us to leave off Enquiring lest we happen to meet somewhat con∣trary to our Desires. No, Reason requires us to continue our Enqui∣ries with all the Industry we can, till they've put us in Possession of Truth, and when we have found, enjoyns us to follow her, how opposite so∣ever she may cause our Latter Acti∣ons to be to our Former. But by this we may learn (and so we may by every thing that such weak and fallible Creatures as we are, perform) to think Candidly of those whose Opinions and Actions differ from our own. Because we do not know the necessity of their Affairs, nor in what ill Circumstances they are plac'd in respect of Truth. And now to Apply what has been said; The State of the Question be∣ing Distinctly known, and certain Ideas fixt to the Terms we make use of, we shall find sometimes that the Difference which was suppos'd
to be between the Things them∣selves, is only in words, in the di∣vers ways we make use of to ex∣press the same Idea. For if upon looking into our selves we discern, that these differ∣ent Terms have but one and the same Idea, when we have corrected our Expressions the Controversie is at an End, and we need enquire no further. Thus, If we are ask'd Whether GOD is Infinitely Perfect? There needs no Intermediate Idea to compare the Idea of GOD with that of Infinite Perfection, since we may discern them on the very first view to be one and the same Idea dif∣ferently express'd, which to go about to explain or prove were only to cumber with needless words, and to make what is Clear, Obscure. For we Injure a Cause instead of Defend∣ing it, by attempting an Explanati∣on or Proof of things so Clear, that as they do not need, so perhaps they are not Capable of any.
But if it be made a Question Whe∣ther there is a GOD, or a Being In∣finitely Perfect? We are then to Ex∣amin the Agreement between our Idea of GOD and that of Existence. Now this may be discern'd by Intu∣ition, for upon a View of our Ideas we find that Existence is a Perfecti∣on, and the Foundation of all other Perfections, since that which has no Being cannot be suppos'd to have any Perfection. And tho the Idea of Existence is not Adequate to that of Perfection, yet the Idea of Per∣fection Includes that of Existence, and if That Idea were divided into parts, one part of it wou'd exactly agree with This. So that if we will allow that Any Being is Infinite in All Perfections, we cannot deny that that Being Exists; Existence it self being one Perfection, and such an one as all the rest are built upon. If unreasonable Men will farther demand, Why is it necessary that All Perfection shou'd be Centred in One
Being, is't not enough that it be parcel'd out amongst many? And tho it be true that that Being who has all Perfection must needs Exist, yet where's the Ne∣cessity of an All-Perfect Being? We must then look about for Proofs and Intermediate Ideas, and the Ob∣jection it self will furnish us with one. For those Many whose Parti∣cular Ideas it wou'd have joyn'd to∣gether to make a Compound one of All-Perfection, are no other than Creatures, as will appear if we con∣sider our Idea of Particular Being and of Creature, which are so far from having any thing to distinguish 'em, that in all Points they resemble each other. Now this Idea naturally sug∣gests to us that of Creation, or a Power of giving Being to that which before the exerting of that Power had none, which Idea if we use it as a Medium, will serve to discover to us the necessity of an All-Perfect Be∣ing. For in the first place, what ever
has any Perfection or Excellency (for that's all we mean by Perfecti∣on here) must either have it of it self, or derive it from some other Being. Now Creatures cannot have their Perfections from themselves be∣cause they have not their Being, for to suppose that they Made them∣selves is an Absurdity too ridiculous to be seriously refuted, 'tis to sup∣pose them to Be and not to Be at the same time, and that when they were Nothing, they were able to do the greatest Matter. Nor can they derive either Being or Perfection from any other Creature. For tho some Particular Beings may seem to be the Cause of the Perfections of others, as the Watch-maker may be said to be the Cause of the Regular Motions of the Watch, yet trace it a little farther, and you'l find this very Cause shall need another, and so without End, till you come to the Foundation-head, to that All-Perfect Being, who is the last resort
of our Thoughts, and in whom they Naturally and Necessarily rest and terminate. If to this it be Objected that we as good as affirm that this All-Perfect Being is his own Maker, by saying he is Self-Existent, and so we fall into the same Absurdity which we imputed to that Opinion which supposes that Creatures were their own Maker. The reply is easie, That we do not say he Made him∣self, we only affirm that his Nature is such, that tho we can't suffici∣ently Explain because we can't com∣prehend it, yet thus much we can discern, that if he did not Exist of himself no other Being could ever have Existed. So that either All must be swallow'd up in an Infinite Nothing, if Nothing can properly have that Epithet, and we must suppose, that neither we our selves, nor any of those Creatures about us ever had, or ever can have a Being, which is too ridiculous to imagine, or else we must needs have recourse
to a Self-Existing Being, who is the Maker and Lord of all things. And since Self-Existence must of ne∣cessity be plac'd somewhere, is it not much more Natural and Rea∣sonable to place it in Infinite Per∣fection, than amongst poor, frail Creatures, whose Origin we may trace, and whose End we see daily hastning? To Sum up all: Since there are Innumerable Beings in the World, which have each of them their se∣veral Excellencies or Perfections; Since these can no more derive their Perfections than their Being from themselves or from any other Crea∣ture; Since a Self-Existing Being is the result of our Thoughts; the First and only True Cause, with∣out whom it is impossible that any thing should ever have Existed; since Creatures with their Being re∣ceive all that depends on it from him their Maker; Since none can give what he has not, and therefore
he who Communicates an innume∣rable variety of Perfections to his Creatures, even all that they enjoy, must needs contain in himself all those Beauties and Perfections he is pleas'd to Communicate to Inferior Beings; nothing can be more Plain and Evident than that there is a GOD, and that the Existence of an All-Perfect Being is Absolutely ne∣cessary. Perhaps these Arguments are not in Form, I do not oblige my Self to follow servilely the Rules of Art, nor know I what better Judges will think of 'em, but they seem to me to be Clear, Rational and Conclud∣ing, which is all I aim at. And I hope the Reader will receive from hence more light into the way of Arguing, than she cou'd have gain'd had I spent as many Pages in pre∣scribing Rules and giving trifling Examples, which when they are known, merit only to be forgot a∣gain. But if some are better pleas'd
with the usual way of Syllogism, and think an Argument cannot be right∣ly managed without one, for their Satisfaction we will add another In∣stance. Suppose the Question were put Whether a Rich Man is Happy? By a Rich Man understanding one who possesses the Wealth and Good things of this World, and by Happy the Enjoyment of the Proper Good of Man. We compare the two Terms Riches and Happiness together, to discern if they be so much one and the same, that what is affirm'd of the one may be said of the other; but we find they are not. For if Riches and Happiness were terms Converti∣ble, then all who are Happy must be Rich, and all who are Rich must be Happy, to affirm the last of which is to beg the Question, and the con∣trary appears by the following Ar∣gument, which makes use of Satis∣faction with ones own Condition for the middle Idea or Common Measure.
He who is Happy is satisfied with his Condition and free from An∣xious Cares and Solicitude (for these proceeding from the want of Good, he who enjoys his proper Good can∣not be subject to them.) But Riches do not free us from Anxieties and Solicitude, they many times encrease them, Therefore to be Rich and to be Happy are not one and the same thing. Again, If there are some who are Happy and yet not Rich, then Ri∣ches and Happiness are two distinct things. But a Good Poor Man is Happy (in the Enjoyment of GOD who is better to him than Thou∣sands of Gold and Silver,) therefore Riches and Happiness are to be di∣stinguish'd. We may further consider, that if the Enjoyment of Riches can make a Man Happy according to our No∣tion of Happiness, they must be his Proper Good. Now if we compare the Idea of Riches with that which
we have of Man, we shall find in the former nothing but what's Material, External and Adventitious, but our Idea of the latter represents to us somewhat that Thinks, and so is of an Immaterial and more noble Na∣ture, a Nature altogether different from the former, and much more excellent and Superior to it; and by Consequence the less Noble cannot be the Good of the more, nor a Bo∣dy or an Extended Substance, the Proper Good of the Mind, a Spiritu∣al or Thinking Substance. So that upon the whole matter we find, that we cannot affirm a Man is Happy because he is Rich, neither can we deny it; Riches consider'd absolute∣ly in 'emselves, neither make a Man Happy nor hinder him from being so. They Contribute to his Happiness or they Obstruct it according to the Use he makes of 'em. As for the Common Rules of Dis∣putation they do more frequently Intangle than Clear a Question, nor
is it worth while to know any more of them than may help to guard us from the Sophistry of those who use them, and assist us in the managing an Argument fairly, so long as it is Tenable, and till we are driven from it by the meer dint of Truth. To be able to hold an Argument Right or Wrong may pass with some per∣haps for the Character of a Good Disputant, which yet I think it is not, but must by no means be al∣low'd to be that of a Rational Person; it belongs to such to detect as soon as may be the Fallacies of an ill one, and to establish Truth with the Clearest Evidence. For indeed Truth not Victory is what we shou'd contend for in all Disputes, it being more Glorious to be Overcome by her than to Triumph under the Ban∣ners of Error. And therefore we pervert our Reason when we make it the Instrument of an Endless Con∣tention, by seeking after Quirks and Subtilties, abusing Equivocal Terms,
and by practising the rest of those little Arts every Sophister is full of, which are of no service in the disco∣very of Truth, all they can do is to Ward off an Opponents blow, to make a Noise and raise a Dust, that so we may escape in the Hurry, our Foil being undiscover'd. It were endless to reckon up all the Fallacies we put on our selves and en∣deavour to obtrude on others. On our selves in the first place, for however we may be pleas'd in the Contem∣plation of our own Craft or to use those softer Names we are apt to give it, our Acuteness and Ingenuity; who ever attempts to impose on o∣thers is first impos'd on himself, he is cheated by some of those grand Deceivers, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, and made to believe that Vain-glory, Secular Interest, Ambition or perhaps Sensuality or Revenge, or any the like contemp∣tible Appetites are preferable to In∣tegrity and Truth.
Neither is it necessary to reduce the most usual Sophisms to general Heads, since that's already very well per∣form'd in a Book to which I'de rather refer you, Art of Thinking Pt. 3. Ch. 19, 20. than be at the trouble of Trans∣cribing, having nothing to add but this, that if I be not mi∣staken, all the false Arguings enumerated there, and what others you may happen to meet with may be discover'd and avoided by the Rules already given, and do indeed proceed, so far as they relate to the Understanding, from the Non-obser∣vation of some of 'em. But it is to little purpose to guard our selves against the Sophisms of the Head, if we lie open to those of the Heart. One irregular Passion will put a greater Obstacle between us and Truth, than the brightest Understanding and clearest Reason∣ings can easily remove. This every one of us is apt to discern in others, but we're blind to it in our selves.
We can readily say that it is Pride or Obstinacy, Interest or Passion or in a word Self-love that keeps our Neighbour from Conviction, but all this while imagine our own Hearts are very clear of 'em, tho' more Im∣partial Judges are of another Mind. I wish there were no Reason to think that there are some who at∣tempt to maintain an Opinion which they know to be false, or at least which they have cause to suspect, and therefore industriously avoid what wou'd manifest their Error. 'Tis hop'd however that the greatest part of the Disputers of the World are not of this number, and that the reason why they offer their Neigh∣bours Sophistical Arguments, is be∣cause they are not aware of it them∣selves; That what makes them so Positive is their firm persuasion that they are acted only by a Zeal for GOD, an honest Constancy and Stanch Integrity, tho at the very same time quite different Motives
move them under these Appearan∣ces. And indeed he must be an extra∣ordinary good Man, a Wonder scarce produc'd in an Age, who has no Irregular Passion stirring; Who receives no Manner of Tincture from Pride and Vitious Self-Love, to which all are so prone, and which hide themselves under so many dis∣guises; Who is got above the World it's Terrors and Allurements, has laid up his Treasure in Heaven, and is fully Contented with his Present Cir∣cumstances, let them be what they will, having made them the bounda∣ries of his Desires; who knows how to live on a Little very happily and therefore receives no Bias from his own Conveniency, nor is weigh'd down by the dead Weight of his Appetites and Interests; which ought to be the Temper of every Person who wou'd find out Truth, and who desires to make a Right Judgment in all things.
We all pretend to this it's true, and think our selves Injur'd if it be not believ'd that we are Disin∣teress'd and free from Passion, that no Humour or Private End, nothing but an honest Zeal for Truth gives warmth to our Discourses; and yet it often happens that e're we Con∣clude them, we give just occasion to have it thought, that how large so∣ever our Knowlege in other things may be, we are not well acquainted with our own Hearts. All which consider'd, how confidently soever we're perswaded of our own Inte∣grity, tho we think we have penetra∣ted to the very bottom of our Hearts, it wou'd not be amiss to suspect our selves sometimes, and to fear a Bias, even at the very instant we take care to avoid one. For Truth being but One, and the Rational Faculties not differing in Kind but in Degree, tho there may be different Measures of Under∣standing, there could not be such
Contradictions in Mens Opinions as we find there are, even in those who examin as well as in those who do not, were they acted only by the Love of Truth, and did not Self-Love perswade them that they shall find their own particular account by such an Opposition. I wou'd not be so understood as if I thought that in all Controversies one side must needs be Criminal, if not by Wilfully Opposing Truth, yet at least by an indulgence of such un∣mortifi'd Passions as estrange them from her. No, without doubt great allowances are to be made on the score of Education, Capacity, of Leisure, and Opportunity of In∣formation we have had. But this we may venture to say, that had we but a Modest Opinion of our selves, believing it as possible for us as for those who contradict us to be mi∣staken, did we behave our selves answerable to such a belief; were we seriously convinc'd that nothing
is so much our Interest as a readiness to admit of Truth, from what ever Hand it comes, greatest part of our Disputes wou'd have a better Issue than we generally find. At least if we cou'd not be so happy as to Con∣vince one another, our Contests wou'd be manag'd with more Tem∣per and Moderation, wou'd not con∣clude in such a breach of Charity, or at best in such a Coldness for each other, as they usually do. If we consider wisely we shall find it to be our Present Interest as well as our Future, to do that in Reality which all of us Pretend to, that is, to Search after and to Fol∣low Truth. And to do it with all that Candor and Ingenuity which becomes a true Philosopher as well as a good Christian, making use of no Arguments but what we really believe, and giving them up con∣tentedly when we meet with strong∣er. Our Present Interest, which is that which weighs most with the
generality, and to which we make all other considerations give place; For what is it we Contend for? They who have such little Souls as to bait at any thing beneath the highest End, make Reputation their Aim, and with it that Autho∣rity and Wealth which usually at∣tends it. But now Reputation can∣not be acquir'd, at least not a lasting one, by Fallacious Reasonings; we may perhaps for a while get a Name by them amongst unwary Persons, but the World grows too quick∣sighted to be long impos'd on. If a Love of Truth do not, yet Envy and Emulation will set other heads a Work to discover our Ignorance or Fraud, they are upon the same Design, and will not suffer us to go away with the Prize undeservedly. And besides, with how ill an As∣pect must he needs appear who does not Reason fairly, and by conse∣quence, how unlike is he to gain on those who hear him? There are but
three Causes to which false Arguments can be refer'd, Ignorance, Rashness, or Design, and the being suspected for any one of these hinders us ve∣ry much in acquiring that Reputa∣tion, Authority or Preferment we desire. I must confess were we sure the Fallacy wou'd not be detected, and that we shou'd not lie under Suspicion of it, we might gain our point; for provided the Paint do not rub off, good Colouring may serve a present turn as well as a true Complection: But there is little rea∣son to hope for this, because of what was just now mention'd, and for other Reasons that might be ad∣ded. Now what can be more provok∣ing than the Idea we have of a De∣signing Person? of one who thinks his own Intellectuals so strong and ours so weak, that he can make us swallow any thing, and lead us where he pleases? such an one seems to have an Intention to reduce us to
the vilest Slavery, the Captivation of our Understandings, which we justly reckon to be the highest Inso∣lence. And since every one puts in for a share of Sense, and thinks he has no reason to complain of the di∣stribution of it, whoever supposes that another has an over-weaning Opinion of his own, must needs think that he undervalues his Neigh∣bours Understanding, and will cer∣tainly repay him in his own Coin, and deny him those advantages he seems to arrogate. The most we can say for our selves when the weakness of our Argu∣ments comes to be discover'd, is that we were mistaken thro Rashness or Ignorance, which tho more pardona∣ble than the former, are no recom∣mending Qualities. If we argue falsly and know not that we do so, we shall be more pittied than when we do, but either way disappointed. And if we have added Rash Censures of these who are not of our Mind,
Pride or Positiveness to our Errors as we cannot so handsomely Retreat so neither will so fair a Quarter be allow'd as those who Argue with Meekness, Modesty and Charity may well expect. So that when we have cast up our Account and esti∣mated the Present Advantages that false Arguings bring us, I fear what we have got by a Pretence to Truth, won't be found to countervail the loss we shall sustain by the Discovery that it was no more. Which may induce us (if other Considerations will not) to be wary in receiving any Proposition our selves, and restrain us from being forward to impose our Sentiments on others. After all, 'tis a melancholy refle∣ction that a great part of Mankind stand in need of Arguments drawn from so low a Motive as Worldly Interest, to persuade them to that to which they have much great∣er inducements. It is strange that we shou'd need any other con∣siderations
besides the bare perform∣ance of our Duty, and those unspeak∣able advantages laid up for all such as do it sincerely, hereafter. When we have the Approbation of GOD and the infinite Rewards he has pro∣pos'd to those who study to recom∣mend themselves to him, for our Encouragement, how low are we sunk if the Applause of Men and the little Trifles which they can bestow weigh any thing with us! I am therefore almost asham'd of propo∣sing so mean a consideration, but the degeneracy of the Age requir'd it, and they who perhaps at first follow Truth as the Jews did once, for the Loaves only, may at last be attract∣ed by its own Native Beauties. §. V. As Nature teaches us Logic, so does it instruct us in Rhetoric much better than Rules of Art, which if they are good ones are no∣thing else but those Judicious Obser∣vations which Men of Sense have drawn from Nature, and which all
who reflect on the Operations of their own Minds will find out 'em∣selves. The common Precepts of Rhetoric may teach us how to re∣duce Ingenious ways of speaking to a certain Rule, but they do not teach us how to Invent them, this is Na∣tures work and she does it best; there is as much difference between Natu∣ral and Artificial Eloquence as there is between Paint and True Beauty. So that as a good Au∣thor well observes, L'art de Penser, p. 22. all that's useful in this Art, is the avoiding certain evil ways of Writing and Speaking, and a∣bove all an Artificial and Rhetori∣cal Stile compos'd of false Thoughts, Hyperboles and forc'd Figures which is the greatest fault in Rhe∣toric. I shall not therefore recommend under the name of Rhetoric an Art of speaking floridly on all Subjects, and of dressing up Error and Imperti∣nence in a quaint and taking garb;
any more than I did that Wrangling which goes by the name of Logic, and which teaches to dispute for and against all Propositions indefinitely whether they are True or False. It is an abuse both of Reason and Ad∣dress to press'em into the Service of a Trifle or an Untruth; and a mi∣stake to think that any Argument can be rightly made, or any Dis∣course truly Eloquent that does not illustrate and inforce Truth. For the design of Rhetoric is to remove those Prejudices that lie in the way of Truth, to Reduce the Passions to the Government of Reason; to place our Subject in a Right Light, and ex∣cite our Hearers to a due consi∣deration of it. And I know not what exactness of Method, pure and proper Language, Figures, insinua∣ting ways of Address and the like signify, any farther than as they contribute to the Service of Truth by rendring our Discourse Intelligible, Agreeable and Convincing. They
are indeed very serviceable to it when they are duly managed, for Good Sense loses much of its efficacy by be∣ing ill express'd, and an ill stile is nothing else but the neglect of some of these, or over doing others of 'em. Obscurity, one of the greatest faults in Writing, does commonly proceed from a want of Meditation, for when we pretend to teach others what we do not understand our selves, no wonder that we do it at a sorry rate. Tis true, Obscurity is some∣times design'd, to conceal an erro∣neous opinion which an Author dares not openly own, or which if it be dis∣cover'd he has a mind to evade. And sometimes even an honest and good Writer who studies to avoid may insensibly fall into it, by reason that his Ideas being become familiar to himself by frequent Meditation, a long train of 'em are readily excited in his mind, by a word or two which he's us'd to annex to them; but it is not so with his Readers who are
perhaps strangers to his Meditations, and yet ought to have the very same Idea rais'd in theirs that was in the Authors mind, or else they cannot understand him. If therefore we de∣sire to be intelligible to every body, our Expressions must be more plain and explicit than they needed to be if we writ only for our selves, or for those to whom frequent Discourse has made our Ideas familiar. Not that it is necessary to express at length all the Process our Mind goes thro in resolving a Question, this wou'd spin out our Discourse to an unprofitable tediousness, the Ope∣rations of the Mind being much more speedy than those of the Tongue or Pen. But we shou'd fold up our Thoughts so closely and neatly, ex∣pressing them in such significant tho few words, as that the Readers Mind may easily open and enlarge them. And if this can be done with facility we are Perspicuous as well as Strong, if with difficulty or not at all, we're
then perplext and Obscure Writers. Scarce any thing conduces more to Clearness, the great Beauty of wri∣ting, than Exactness of Method; nor perhaps to Persuasion, for by putting every thing in its proper place with due Order and Connexion, the Readers Mind is gently led where the Writer wou'd have it. Such a Stile is Easy without Softness, Copious as that signifies the omission of nothing necessary, yet not Wordy and Tedious; nor stuft with Nauseous Repetitions, which they who do not Think before they Write and dispose their Matter duly, can scarce avoid. The Method of Thinking has been already shewn, and the same is to be observ'd in Writing, which if it be what it ought, is nothing else but the communicating to others the result of our frequent and deep Me∣ditations, in such a manner as we judge most effectual to convince them of those Truths which we be∣lieve. Always remembring that the
most natural Order is ever best; that we must first prepare their minds by removing those Prejudices and Passions which are in our way, and then propose our Reasons with all the Clearness and Force, with all the Tenderness and Good-Nature we can. And since the Clearness and Con∣nexion as well as the Emphasis and Beauty of a Discourse depends in a great measure on a right use of the Particles, whoever wou'd Write well ought to inform themselves nicely in their Proprieties. a And, a The, a But, a For, &c. do very much perplex the Sense when they are misplac'd, and make the Reader take it many times quite otherwise than the Writer meant it. But this is not a place to say all that this Sub∣ject deserves; they who wou'd have much in a little, may consult an In∣genious Author who has touch'd upon't, Lock of Hum. Und. B. 3. Ch. 7. and from thence take
hints to observe how these little words are applied in good Authors, and how themselves may best use them to express the several Postures of their own Minds. In a word, I know not a more compendious way to good Speaking and Writing, than to chuse out the most excellent in either as a Model on which to form our selves. Or rather to imitate the Perfections of all, and avoid their mistakes; for few are so perfect as to be without fault, and few so bad as to have no∣thing good in them. A true Judg∣ment distinguishes, and neither re∣jects the Good for the sake of the Bad, nor admits the Bad because of the Good that is mingled with it. No sort of Style but has its excellency and is liable to defect: If care be not taken the Sublime which subdues us with Nobleness of Thought and Grandeur of Expression, will fly out of sight and by being Empty and Bombast become contemptible. The
Plain and Simple will grow Dull and Abject; the Severe dry and Rugged, the Florid vain and impertinent. The Strong instead of rousing the Mind will distract and intangle it by being Obscure; even the Easy and Perspicuous if it be too diffuse, or over delicate tires us instead of pleasing. Good Sense is the principal thing without which all our polishing is of little Worth, and yet if Orna∣ment be wholly neglected very few will regard us. Studied and artificial periods are not natural enough to please, they shew too much solicitude about what does not deserve it, and a loose and careless Style declares too much contempt of the Public. Neither Reason nor Wit entertain us if they are driven beyond a certain pitch, and Pleasure it self is offensive if it be not judiciously dispenc'd. Every Author almost has some beauty or blemish remarkable in his Style from whence it takes its name; and every Reader has a peculiar tast
of Books as well as Meats. One wou'd have the Subject exhausted, another is not pleas'd if somewhat be not left to enlarge on in his own Meditations. This affects a Grave that a Florid Style; One is for Easiness, a second for Plainness, a third for Strength, and a fourth for Politeness. And perhaps the great secret of Writing is the mixing all these in so just a pro∣portion that every one may tast what he likes without being disgusted by its contrary. And may find at once that by the Solidity of the Rea∣son, the purity and propriety of Ex∣pression, and insinuating agreeable∣ness of Address, his Understanding is Enlightned, his Affections subdued and his Will duly regulated. This is indeed the true End of Writing, and it wou'd not be hard for every one to judge how well they had answer'd it, wou'd they but lay aside Self-Love, so much of it at least, as makes them partial to their own Productions. Did we consider our
own with the same Severity, or but Indifferency that we do anothers Writing, we might pass a due Cen∣sure on it, might discern what Thought was Crude or ill exprest, what Reasoning weak, what passage superfluous, where we were flat and dull, where extravagant and vain, and by Criticizing on our selves do a greater kindness to the World than we can in making our Remarques on others. Nor shou'd we be at a loss, if we were Impartial, in finding out Methods to Inform, Persuade and Please; for Human Nature is for the most part much alike in all, and that which has a good effect on us, will generally speaking have the same on others. So that to guess what success we are like to have, we need only suppose our selves in the place of those we Address to, and consider how such a Discourse wou'd operate on us, if we had their Infirmities and Thoughts about us. And if we do so I believe we
shall find, there's nothing more im∣proper than Pride and Positiveness, nor any thing more prevalent than an innocent compliance with their weakness: Such as pretends not to dictate to their Ignorance, but only to explain and illustrate what they did or might have known before if they bad consider'd it, and supposes that their Minds being employ'd a∣bout some other things was the reason why they did not discern it as well as we. For Human Nature is not will∣ing to own its Ignorance; Truth is so very attractive, there's such a na∣tural agreement between our Minds and it, that we care not to be thought so dull as not to be able to find out by our selves such obvious matters. We shou'd therefore be careful that nothing pass from us which upbraids our Neighbours Ignorance, but study to remove't without appearing to take notice of it, and permit'em to fancy if they please, that we believe them as Wise
and Good as we endeavour to make them. By this we gain their Affe∣ctions which is the hardest part of our Work, excite their Industry and infuse a new Life into all Generous Tempers, who conclude there's great hopes they may with a little pains attain what others think they Know already, and are a sham'd to fall short of the good Opinion we have enter∣tain'd of 'em. And since many wou'd yeild to the Clear Light of Truth were't not for the shame of being overcome, we shou'd Convince but not Triumph, and rather Conceal our Conquest than Publish it. We doubly oblige our Neighbours when we reduce them into the Right Way, and keep it from being taken notice of that they were once in the Wrong, which is certainly a much greater satis∣faction than that blaze of Glory which is quickly out, that noise of Ap∣plause which will soon be over. For the gaining of our Neighbour, at
least the having honestly endeavour'd it, and the leading our own Vanity in Triumph are Real Goods and such as we shall always have the Comfort of. It is to be wish'd that such Propo∣sitions as are not attended with the Clearest Evidence were deliver'd only by way of Enquiry, since even the brightest Truth when Dogmati∣cally dictated is apt to offend our Rea∣ders, and make them imagine their Liberty's impos'd on, so far is Positive∣ness from bringing any body over to our Sentiments. And besides, we're all of us liable to mistake, and few have Humility enough to confess them∣selves Deceiv'd in what they have confidently asserted, but think they're obliged in Honour to maintain an Opinion they've once been Zealous for, how desirous soever they may be to get rid on't, cou'd they do it handsomely. Now a Modest way of delivering our Sentiments assists us in this, and leaves us at liberty to take either side of the Question as
Reason and Riper Consideration shall determine. In short, as Thinking conformably to the Nature of Things is True Knowledge, so th' expressing our Thoughts in such a way, as most readily, and with the greatest Clearness and Life, excites in others the very same Idea that was in us is the best Eloquence. For if our Idea be conformable to the Nature of the thing it represents, and its Relations duly stated, this is the most effectual way both to Inform and Perswade, since Truth being always amiable, cannot fail of attract∣ing when she's plac'd in a Right Light, and those to whom we offer her, are made Able and Willing to discern her Beauties. If therefore we throughly understand our Subject and are Zealously affected with it, we shall neither want suitable words to explain, nor perswasive Methods to recommend it. And since Piety and Vertue shou'd
In spite of the mistaken Customs of the Age be the principal Theme of a Christians Conversation; that which those who bear that Sacred Name ought always to regard some way or other, even when it might be unseasonable to speak of it directly, the way to be good Orators is to be good Christians, the Practice of Religion will both instruct us in the Theory, and most powerfully in∣force what we say of it. Did we truly relish the Delights of GOD's Service, we cou'd neither refrain from talking of the Pleasure, nor be so ill-natur'd as not to strive to Com∣municate it; and were we duly warm'd with a Zeal for his Glory and concern for our Neighbours Soul, no Figures of Rhetoric, no Art of Per∣swasion wou'd be wanting to us. We shou'd diligently watch for Opportunities, and carefully im∣prove them, accommodating our Dis∣course to the Understanding and Genius of all we cou'd hope to do good to.
Besides, by being True Christians we have Really that Love for others which all who desire to perswade must pretend to; we've that Probity and Prudence, that Civility and Mo∣desty which the Masters of this Art say a good Orator must be endow'd with; and have pluck'd up those Vicious Inclinations from whence the most distastful faults of Writing pro∣ceed. For why do we chuse to be Obscure but because we intend to Deceive, or wou'd be thought to see much farther than our Neighbours? One sort of Vanity prompts us to be Rugged and Severe, and so possess'd with the imagin'd Worth and Solidi∣ty of our Discourse, that we think it beneath us to Polish it: Another disposes us to Elaborate and Affected ways of Writing, to Pompous and improper Ornaments; and why are we tediously Copious but that we fancy every Thought of ours is ex∣traordinary? Contradiction is indeed for our advantage as tending to make
us wiser, yet our Pride makes us impatient under it, because it seems to Lessen that Esteem and Deference we desire shou'd be paid us. Whence come those sharp Reflections, those imagin'd strains of Wit, not to be endur'd amongst Christians, and which serve not to Convince but to Provoke, whence come they but from Ill-nature or Revenge, from a Contempt of others and a desire to set forth our own Wit? Did we write less for our selves we should sooner gain our Readers, who are many times disgusted at a well writ Discourse if it carries a tang of Osten∣tation: And were our Temper as Chri∣stian as it ought to be, our Zeal wou'd be spent on the most Weighty things, not on little differences of Opinions. I have made no distinction in what has been said between Speaking and Writing, because tho they are talents which, do not always meet, yet there is no material difference be∣tween 'em. They Write best per∣haps
who do't with the gentile and easy air of Conversation; and they Talk best who mingle Solidity of Thought with th' agreableness of a ready Wit. As for Pronunciation, tho it takes more with some Auditors many times than Good Sense, there needs little be said of it here, since Women have no business with the Pulpit, the Bar or St. Stephens Chap∣pel: And Nature does for the most part furnish 'em with such a Musical Tone, Perswasive Air and win∣ning Address as renders their Dis∣course sufficiently agreeable in Pri∣vate Conversation. And as to spelling which they're said to be de∣fective in, if they don't believe as they're usually told, that its fit for 'em to be so, and that to write exactly is too Pedantic, they may soon correct that fault, by Pronoun∣cing their words aright and Spelling 'em accordingly. I know this Rule won't always hold because of an Im∣perfection in our Language which
has been oft complain'd of but is not yet amended; But in this case a little Observation or recourse to Books will assist us; and if at any time we happen to mistake by Spelling as we Pro∣nounce, the fault will be very Venial, and Custom rather to blame than we. I've said nothing of Grammar tho we can't Write properly if we trans∣gress its Rules, supposing that Cu∣stom and the reading of English Books are sufficient to teach us the Grammar of our own Tongue, If we do but in any measure attend to them. And tho Women are gene∣rally accus'd of Writing false English, if I may speak my own Experience, their Mistakes are not so common as is pretended, nor are they the only Persons guilty. What they most commonly fail in is the Particles and Connexion, and that generally thro a Briskness of temper which make them forget, or Hast which will not suffer 'em to read over again what went before. And indeed, those
who Speak true Grammar unless they're very Careless cannot write false, since they need only peruse what they've Writ, and consider whether they wou'd express em∣selves thus in Conversation. But for this and for Figures, &c. and indeed for all that relates to this Subject, Art of speak∣ing. I must refer you to an Ingenious Treatise which handles it fully, and to which I'me oblig'd in great measure for what little skill I have. Observing only, that whatever it is we Treat of, our Stile shou'd be such as may keep our Readers Attent, and induce them to go to the End. Now Attention is usually fixt by Admira∣tion, which is excited by somewhat uncommon either in the Thought or way of Expression. We fall a sleep over an Author who tells us in an ordinary manner no more than we knew before: He who wou'd Take must be Sublime in his Sense, and must cloath it after a Noble way.
His Thoughts must not be superficial, such as every one may fall into at the first glance, but the very Spirits and Essence of Thinking, the sum of many hours Meditation folded up in one handsome and comprehensive Period, whose Language is Intelligi∣ble and Easy that the Readers may not lose the pleasure of the Kernel, by the pain they find in cracking the Shell. The most difficult Sub∣ject must be made easy by his way of handling it; tho his Matter may deserve a Meditation, yet his Ex∣pressions must be so Clear that he needs not be read twice to be Under∣stood; these are to be Natural and Familiar, condiscending to the mean∣est Capacity, whilst his Thoughts are Great enough to entertain the highest. He Discourses always on a Useful Subject in a manner agree∣able to it, and Pleases that he may In∣struct; Nothing seems Studied in his whole Composition, yet every thing is Extraordinary, a Beautiful Harmony
shining thro all its parts. No Sen∣tence is Doubtful, no word Equivo∣cal, his Arguments are Clear and his Images Lively; all the Ideas he ex∣cites in your Mind, as nearly resem∣ble the thing they represent as Words can make them. Whilst th' exact∣ness of his Method, and Force of his Reason Enlighten and Convince the Mind; the Vivacity of his Imagina∣tion and insinuating Address, gain the Affections and Conquer the Will. By the weight and closeness of the former you wou'd take him for an Angel, and the tender and affable sweetness of the last bespeaks him a Friend. He considers that as mere Florish and Rhetorick are good for nothing, so neither will bare Reason dull and heavily express'd perform any great matter, at least not on those who need it most, whose Palates being deprav'd their Medicines must be administred in a pleasing Vehicle. Since Mankind are averse to their Real Happiness, he does not only
tell 'em their Duty but Interesses them in it; and thinking it not e∣nough to run 'em down with the strength of Reason, he draws 'em over to a Voluntary Submission by th' attractives of his Eloquence. For he has a peculiar Turn and Air which animates every Period, so that the very same Truth which was dry and Unaffecting in a vulgar Au∣thors words, Charms and Subdues you when cloath'd in his. He shews no more warmth than may convince his Readers that he's heartily per∣suaded of the Truths he offers them; and if it is necessary at any time to make use of Figures to give a more Lively Representation than plain Ex∣pressions cou'd, to discribe his own Pas∣sions and excite the same in others upon a just occasion, in a word to awaken a Stupid and Clear the Mind of a Prejudic'd Reader, his Figures are duly chosen and discreet∣ly us'd. For he knows that scarce any thing speaks a greater want of
Judgment than the shewing concern where there needs none, or is a worse fault in Oratory than the polishing a Wrong or a Trifling Thought, the neatness of whose dress may strike with Admiration perhaps at first sight, but upon a re∣view it will certainly appear Con∣temptible. And therefore as he does not abound in Superfluous Orna∣ments, so neither does he reject any thing that can promote his End, which is not his own Reputation, but the Glory of his GOD and his Neighbours Edification. He con∣siders the narrowness of the Humane Mind, and says all that is necessary but no more; Understands it so well as to know what will move and Please, and has so much command of himself as to give over when he has done enough. Yet he can ex∣haust the most fruitful Subject with∣out making the Reader weary; for when he enlarges it is in Things not Words, and he mingles Variety with∣out
Confusion. All the divers excellen∣cies of different Stiles meet in his to make up a perfect one, Strength and Ease, Solidity and Liveliness, the Sublime and the Plain. He's neither so Lofty as to fly out of Sight, nor so humble as to become Creeping and Contemptible. His Strength does not make him Rugged and Perplext nor his Smoothness Weak and Nice; tho every thing is Neat, there's not a grain of Affectation; he is gratefull to the Ear, but far remov'd from jingling Cadence. Brief when there is occasion without Dryness or Ob∣scurity, and Florid enough to en∣tertain th' Imagination without Di∣stracting the Mind. There's not an Antiquated or Barbarous Word to be found in him, all is Decent, Just and Natural; no peculiar or Affect∣ed Phrases, whether Courtly or Clownish, Grave or Burlesque. For Plain and Significant Language is ever best, we have a mistaken Idea of Learning if we think to pretend
to't by sending our Reader every minute to the Dictionary. Words out of the common way are only allow∣able when they express our Sense with greater Force than Ordinary ones cou'd, or when they are so significant as to ease us of Circumlocutions, a hard word which I cou'd not avoid without using half a dozen words. After all, it may not be amiss to take notice that Ornaments are common to Falshood and Truth, but Clearness and strength of Reasoning are not. They who wou'd pro∣pagate Error usually disguise it in Equivocal Terms and Obscure Phra∣ses; they strive to engage our Passi∣ons, rather than to Convince our Reason, and carry us away in the torrent of a warm Imagination. They endeavour to refute, or if they can't do that, to Ridicule the con∣trary opinion, and think this Suffi∣cient to establish their own. Being much better skill'd in pulling down former. Systems than in building
new ones, for it requires no great skill to Object, and there are many Truths which we're very Certain of, and yet not able to answer every Impertinent Enquiry concerning 'em. Their greatest Art is in con∣founding things, in giving a probable Air to what they write, in pretend∣ing to Demonstration where the na∣ture of the Truth does not require't, and in evading it where it does. An Immoral or Heretical Discourse therefore may be Cunningly but not well writ, for we can never plead for Error and Vice with true Eloquence. We may trick'em up in a handsom Garb, adorn'em with quaint Expres∣sions, and give them such a plausible turn as may enable them to do very much Mischief; but this is only a fulsom Carcass, the substance and Life are not there if Vertue and Truth are wanting. §. VI. For it is to little purpose to Think well and speak well, un∣less we Live well, this is our Great
Affair and truest Excellency, the o∣ther are no further to be regarded than as they may assist us in this. She who does not draw this Infer∣ence from her Studies has Thought in vain, her notions are Erroneous and Mistaken. And all her Elo∣quence is but an empty noise, who employs it in any other design than in gaining Proselytes to Heaven. I am therefore far from designing to put Women on a vain pursuit after unnecessary and useless Learning, nor wou'd by any means persuade them to endeavour after Knowledge cou'd I be convinc'd that it is impro∣per for 'em. Because I know very well that tho a thing be never so ex∣cellent in it self, it has but an ill grace if it be not suitable to the Per∣son and Condition it is apply'd to. Fine Cloaths and Equipage do not become a Beggar, and a Mechanic who must work for daily bread for his Family, wou'd be wickedly Em∣ploy'd shou'd he suffer 'em to starve
whilest he's solving Mathematical Problems. If therefore Women have another Duty incumbent on 'em, and such as is inconsistent with what we here advise, we do ill to take them from it: But to affirm this is to beg the Question, and is what I will never grant till it be better prov'd than as yet it appears to be. For if the Grand Business that Women as well as Men have to do in this World be to prepare for the next, ought not all their Care and Industry to Centre here? and since the matter is of Infinite Consequence is it equitable to deny 'em the use of any help? If therefore Knowledge were but any ways Instrumental, tho at the remot∣est distance, to the Salvation of our Souls, it were fit to apply our selves to it; and how much more when it is so necessary, that without it we can't do any thing that's Excellent, or Practise Vertue in the most Per∣fect manner. For unless we Under∣stand our Duty and the Principles
of Religion, we don't perform a Ra∣tional Service, it is but by Chance that we are Good or so much as Christians. We are their Property into whose hands we fall, and are led by those who with greatest Confi∣dence impose their Opinions on us; Are as moveable as the different Cir∣cumstances that befall us; or if we happen to be Constant in our first way, it is not Reason but Obstinacy that makes us so. A great deal of Good will be omitted, and very much Evil, or Imperfection at least, stick to us, if we are not throughly acquainted with the Law of God and the secret springs and windings of our Hearts, which is scarce to be ob∣tain'd without much Meditation and the helps that study affords. And as when a rash young Travel∣ler is about to run into dangerous pla∣ces beset with Theives and full of Pre∣cipices, if you have any hearty con∣cern for his safety, you'l not think it enough barely to shew him his way,
or even to tell him of the Danger, e∣specially if the entrance seems fair and inviting and treacherous Compani∣ons are upon the watch to decoy him into it: But you'l expose it in all its frightful Circumstances, endea∣vour to quicken his vigilance and ex∣cite his Passions, and all little enough for his Security. So it cannot be thought sufficient that Women shou'd but just know whats Commanded and what Forbid, without being inform'd of the Reasons why, since this is not like to secure them in their Duty. For we find a Natural Liberty within us which checks at an In∣junction that has nothing but Autho∣rity to back it; And tho Religion is indeed supported by the Strongest Reasons, and inforc'd by the most powerful Motives, yet if we are not acquainted with 'em, tis all one to us as if it were not. But having spoke of this in the first part we shall not farther enlarge on it here. Perhaps it will be objected that
we've said the great Truths of Religion carry a force and Evidence suited to the very Vulgar, and that GOD has not design'd All for Philosophers. And therefore if the way to the most ne∣cessary Knowledge be so very plain, and all Capacities are not fitted for higher attainments, what needs this ado about th' Improvement of our minds? the only thing necessary is to be good Christians, and we may be that without being Philosophers. Suppose we may: This will Justify such as want Time and Capacity, but can never excuse the Sloth and Stupidity of those who have both. For unless we have very strange Notions of the Divine Wisdom we must needs allow that every one is placed in such a Station as they are fitted for. And if the necessity of the world requires that some Persons shou'd Labour for others, it likewise requires that others shou'd Think for them. Our Powers and Faculties were not given us for nothing, and
the only advantage one Woman has above another, is the being allotted to the more noble employment. No body is plac'd without their own fault, in such unhappy Circumstan∣ces as to be incapable of Salvation, but some are plac'd in such happy ones as to be capable of attaining much greater degrees of Happiness than others if they do not neglect them: And shou'd these last do no more than the very utmost that is expected from the former, I know not how they wou'd acquit them∣selves, or what account they cou'd give of their great Advantages. And therefore tho no body shall be con∣demn'd because they Cou'd not, yet we have reason to fear if our Case be such as that we Might but Wou'd not receive Instruction. She then who makes this Objection must not take it amiss if we Judge of her in other Cases according to what she Pleads in this: She must never set up for a Wit, or a censurer of her Neigh∣bours,
must not pretend to be a fine Lady or any thing extraordinary: but be content to herd amongst the Drudges of the World who eat Their Bread in the Sweat of their Brows, if she says she wants Leisure; or in a less acceptable rank amongst the Fools and Ideots, or but one degree above them, if she says she wants Ca∣pacity for this Employment. It is one thing to be content with Igno∣rance, or rather with a less degree of Knowledge, on account of the Station that GOD has plac'd us in, and Another to Chuse and Delight in't thro a Stupid Carelesness, a fear of Trouble, or an Inordinate pur∣suit of the Cares and Pleasures of this Mortal Life. This last only shews our Disesteem of our Souls, our Con∣tempt of GOD and the Talents he has given us, and exposes us to all the dreadful consequences of such a neglect; to Punishments to which not only those who misemploy their Lord's Talent, but even they who
don't employ it at all, are Obnoxi∣ous. And indeed as unnecessary as it is thought for Women to have Know∣ledge, she who is truly good finds very great use of it, not only in the Conduct of her own Soul but in the management of her Family, in the Conversation of her Neighbours and in all the Concerns of Life. Educa∣tion of Children is a most necessary Employment, perhaps the chief of those who have any; But it is as Difficult as it is Excellent when well perform'd; and I question not but that the mistakes which are made in it, are a principal Cause of that Folly and Vice, which is so much complain'd of and so little mended. Now this, at least the foundation of it, on which in a great measure the success of all depends, shou'd be laid by the Mother, for Fathers find o∣ther Business, they will not be con∣fin'd to such a laborious work, they have not such opportunities of obser∣ving
a Childs Temper, nor are the greatest part of 'em like to do much good, since Precepts contradicted by Example seldom prove effectual. Neither are Strangers so proper for it, because hardly any thing besides Paternal Affection can sufficiently quicken the Care of performing, and sweeten the labour of such a task. But Tenderness alone will never dis∣charge it well, she who wou'd do it to purpose must throughly under∣stand Human nature, know how to manage different Tempers Prudent∣ly, be Mistress of her own, and able to bear with all the little humours and follies of Youth, neither Severity nor Lenity are to be always us'd, it wou'd ruin some to be treated in that manner which is fit for others. As Mildness makes some ungovernable, and as there is a stupor in many from which nothing but Terrors can rouse them, so sharp Reproofs and Solemn Lectures serve to no purpose but to harden others, in faults from which
they might be won by an agreeable Address and tender application. GOD himself waits to be gracious and administers his Medicines in the most proper season, and Parents shou'd imitate him in this, for the want of observing it, and of accom∣modating their Methods to the seve∣ral Dispositions they have to deal with, is perhaps the reason that ma∣ny Pious Persons lose the fruit of their Pains and Care. Nor will Knowledge lie dead up∣on their hands who have no Chil∣dren to Instruct; the whole World is a single Ladys Family, her oppor∣tunities of doing good are not les∣sen'd but encreas'd by her being un∣confin'd. Particular Obligations do not contract her Mind, but her Be∣neficence moves in the largest Sphere. And perhaps the Glory of Re∣forming this Prophane and Profligate Age is reserv'd for you Ladies, and that the natural and unprejudic'd Sentiments of your Minds being
handsomly express'd, may carry a more strong conviction than the Elaborate Arguments of the Learned. Such as fence themselves against the Cannon they bring down, may lie open to an Ambuscade from you. And whilst the strong arguings of the Schools like the Wind in the Fable, seems but to harden these Sturdy Sinners, your Persuasions like the Suns mild and powerful rays, may oblige them to cast off that Cloak of Maliciousness in which they are so much intangled. And surely it is worth your while to fit your selves for this: Tis a Godlike thing to relieve even the Temporal wants of our Fellow Creatures, to keep a Body from perishing, but it is much more Divine, to Save a Soul from Death! A Soul which in his estimate who best knows the value of it, is worth more than all the World. They who are thus wise shall shine as the brightness of the Fir∣mament, and they who turn many to
Righteousness as the Stars for ever; which is a Glory we may honestly Contend for, a Beauty we may law∣fully Covet; O that we had but Ambition enough to aspire after it! O that we had but so much at least as we see daily thrown away on a poor transitory Earthly Diadem, which sets uneasy on his head who wears it, and which a longer arm may wrest from his Brows! But alas it was in our fore-fathers days that the Kingdom of Heav'n was took by violence; they thought no∣thing, and we think every thing too much to Do or Suffer to obtain it! Not but that it is still as bright and glorious, as truly attractive, but we are dull and stupid we shut our eyes and won't behold its Charms. Were we but duly sensible of this we shou'd think no Posterity so desire∣able as the Offspring of our Minds, nor any state so great as the carrying a large Train of Followers with us to the Court of Heaven! So much
Knowledge therefore as is necessary to engage and keep us firm in our Christian Course, to fit us to help others in theirs, to stir us up to pur∣sue, and direct us in our endeavours after one of the brightest Crowns of Glory, does very well become us; and more than this I do not contend for, being far from desiring that any one shou'd neglect her Necessary Affairs to amuse her self with nice Speculations. No; She who has a Family is discharging part of her Christian Calling whilst She's taking care for it's Support and Govern∣ment, and wou'd be very much out, if she lock'd her self in her Study, when her Domesticks had need of her direction. But there are few of those to whom I write, who have not a good deal of time to spare, if you reckon whats thrown away on fantastic Impertinencies, and tis this I wou'd have better employ'd: Were not a Morning more advantageously spent at a Book than at a Looking.
Glass, and an Evening in Meditation than in Gaming? Were not Pertinent and Ingenious Discourse more becom∣ing in a visit, than Idle twattle and uncharitable Remarks? than a Nau∣seous repetition of a set of fine words which no body believes or cares for? And is not the fitting our selves to do Real Services to our Neighbours, a better expression of our Civility than the formal performance of a thousand ridiculous Ceremonies, which every one condemns and yet none has the Courage to break thro? CHAP. IV. Concerning the Regulation of the Will and the Government of the Pas∣sions. AS the Capacity which we find in our selves of Receiving and Com∣paring Ideas is what we call the Un∣derstanding, so the Power of Prefer∣ring
any Thought or Motion, of Di∣recting them to This or That thing rather than to another is what we mean by the Will: Whose Regulari∣ty consists in a constant Tendency towards such things as ought to be Prefer'd, or in a word, in Conformi∣ty to the Will of GOD. That GOD's Will is the Rule of ours is methinks so plain that it needs no proof; for why do we Prefer a thing but because we Judge it Best? and why do we Chuse it but because it Seems Good for us? Now GOD be∣ing Infinitely Wise all his Judgments must be Infallible, and being Infi∣nitely Good he can Will nothing but what is best, nor prescribe any thing that is not for our Advantage. This is I dare say what every one Thinks, if they think at all about the matter, and is the Rule they wou'd Act by, did they give themselves leave upon all occasions duly to Consider and Weigh what is propos'd to them. But as there are some Ideas which
our Understandings receive so early that they seem to be born with us, which are never totally absent from our minds, and are in a manner the source of all the rest; so there are certain Motions or Inclinations in∣separable from the Will, which push us on to the use of that Power, and determine it to the Choice of such things as are most agreeable to them. Nor shou'd we do amiss in following these Inclinations did they keep that Impression which the Author of Na∣ture gave them, which is towards Good in general, or towards him∣self, for he only is our True Good, and these are the Wings of the Soul which shou'd carry it on vigorously towards him. Whether there is not in us an In∣clination to do what is Fit, that is to think and Act agreeably to a Ra∣tional Nature, without considering our own particular advantage I shall not here dispute. For whether this be so or no, tis certain that in our
present Circumstances, we cannot separate Fit and Good in Reality, tho we may have distinct Ideas of them. What is really proper for Rational Creatures to do, tending necessarily to their Happiness, and nothing being able to make them tru∣ly Happy but that which is fit to be done. Besides, so pure an Incli∣nation being wholly abstracted from Self-Love and Prejudice is not subject to any Irregularity, and so needs not be spoken of here; and perhaps so few are acquainted with it, that it will hardly be known what we mean by it. An Inclination therefore after Happiness is that to which we shall at present reduce all the rest; which Happiness we pursue by remo∣ving as far as we can from that which is uneasie to us, and by uni∣ting our selves as much as we are able to some Good which we suppose we want. The former of these be∣ing indeed a pursuit of Good, tho
not so Directly as the latter. Good then is the Object of the Will, and hitherto one wou'd think there were no probability of our straying from the Will of GOD, and that there were so little need of advising us to Will as GOD Wills that it is impos∣sible we shou'd Will otherwise; because whenever we oppose our Wills to his, we change in a manner the very Constitution of our Na∣ture and fly from that Happiness which we wou'd pursue. But the misfortune is as has been once observ'd already, that we Will e're we are capable of examining the Reasons of our Choice, or of view∣ing our Ideas so exactly as we must if we wou'd Judge aright. And the frequent repetition of such unrea∣sonable Choices makes them Cu∣stomary to us, and consequently gives a new and wrong bias to our Inclinations, which upon all occasi∣ons dispose the Will to the Choice of such things as we suppose, tho by
mistake, to contribute to our Hap∣piness. Add to this, that the Passi∣ons which are certain Commotions in the Bloud and Animal Spirits ac∣companying these Inclinations, de∣sign'd in the Order of Nature for the good of the Body, as the Inclina∣tions were intended for the Good of the Soul, do so unite us to sensi∣ble things, and represent 'em with such advantage, that Spiritual Good which seems at a greater distance re∣lishes very little, and abstracted Truths do not find us so Impartial as to examin them throughly, and to give them their due Weight, when they're ballanc'd against such things as may be Seen and Felt; these being commonly preferr'd, not for their intrinsic worth, but for their outward Shew and the Bulk they carry. That we always endeavour to be Happy is sufficiently evident, and that we too frequently fly from GOD who only can make us so,
Experience sadly Demonstrates. Which cou'd not be did we not gros∣ly mistake our Happiness, as we cer∣tainly do whenever we Will any thing in opposition to the Will of GOD, whatever Appearance of Good it may happen to carry. 'Tis true the Will does always pursue Good, or somewhat represented to it as such, but it is not always, or rather very seldom, determin'd to the Choice of what is in it self the greatest Good. And though I sup∣pose we always Chuse that which in that Juncture in which it is pro∣pos'd seems fittest for our present turn, yet it is often such as we wou'd not preser, did we impartial∣ly examin and observe the Conse∣quences. But we will not do that, chusing rather to Act by the Wrong Judgments we have formerly made, and to follow blindly the Propensi∣ties they have given us, than to sus∣pend our Inclinations as we both May and Ought, and restrain them
from determining our Will, till we have fairly and fully examin'd and ballanc'd, according to the best of our Knowledge, the several degrees of Good and Evil present and future that are in the Objects set before us. The neglect of which is at once both our Fault and Misery; Our Fault in that we precipitate our Choice, refusing to Consider sufficiently to rectifie our Mistakes. And our Misery because we shall certainly be Disappointed sooner or later, and be convinc'd that what was so Hastily and Unreasonably Chosen, ought not even then to have been prefer'd, how Pleasant soever it appear'd, seeing it neither Was nor Cou'd be Good for us. It seems indeed the greatest won∣der in the World how any Man in his Senses can prefer the short Plea∣sures of Sin, which are attended even in this Life with Pain and Shame, and a thousand Inconveni∣encies, to the Present Delights of
Vertue, and the Prospect of a Feli∣city Infinite and Eternal, if he does at all compare them. An Eternity of Joys must needs be preferable to Fifty or Threescore Years of Sinful Pleasures, weigh them in what Scales you please, and supposing these much greater than ever any Sinner found 'em, especially since they are attended with Eternal Pains, and no perverse Inclination can make us think otherwise if it will allow us to consider. But it will not allow Consideration, or if it does a little permit it, it deceives us however with fallacious Salvoes. It fixes our Thoughts on a Present Un∣easiness which it says must be re∣mov'd, and our Desires gratify'd at any rate, without suffering us to weigh the ill Consequences of doing so. And perhaps the Wrong bias which we receive from our Evil In∣clinations does not consist in the per∣suading us that a Present Sinful Pleasure or Profit, is the Greatest
Good, or that it ought to be Pre∣fer'd before the Favour of GOD and Eternal Beatitude, which whenever we Think of we must needs ac∣knowledge to be infinitely greater, but in keeping us from a full Convi∣ction that th' one can't be Chosen without Renouncing th' other, and in making us unwilling to examine throughly, lest we shou'd want the pretence of Ignorance or Passion to excuse what our Consciences can't but Reproach us with as an unwor∣thy Choice, whenever we permit our selves to Reflect. So that the great aggravation of Sin seems to consist in this, That the commission of it is a pretending to be Wiser or Stronger than GOD, an attempt to out-wit him by Fine∣ness, or else by plain Force to wrest his Felicity from him whether he Will or no. For seeing we always Will Happiness, and yet wou'd be Happy after another manner than GOD Wills we shall, we express a
Desire, and an Endeavour so far as we're able to Oppose and Alter his Will and Order, by reconciling the gratification of a present unreasona∣ble Appetite with the Enjoyment of Happiness, tho he has declar'd they can't be reconciled, and made it in the ordinary course of things impos∣sible they shou'd. The Will of GOD then is the Rule of ours, and if it be ask'd how we shall come to the Knowledg of it? the Answer is ready, that the Eternal Word and Wisdom of GOD declares his Fathers Will unto us, by Reason which is that Natural and Ordinary Revelation by which he speaks to every one; and by that which is call'd Revelation in a stricter Sense, which is nothing else but a more perfect and infallible way of Reasoning, whereby we are Clearly and Fully instructed in so much of GOD's Will as is fit for us to know. We must therefore Improve our Reason as much as our Circumstan∣ces
in the World permit, and to sup∣ply its deficiency Seriously, Devout∣ly and Diligently study the Holy Scriptures than which (to use the words of a most excellent Person) a Christian needs un∣derstand no other Book to know the duty of his Faith and Life, Mr. Boyle Style of Scrip∣ture. tho indeed to understand it well, 'tis ordi∣narily requisite that a pretty num∣ber of other Books be understood. In the former Chapter we have laid down a Me∣thod of using our Reason so as to discover Truth, See P. 114, &c. by observing of which 'tis hop'd we may escape from considerable Errors, and consequent∣ly from great Offences. And tho I can't say we shall never be Mistaken nor Chuse amiss, yet our Infirmities will be very pitiable, such as our Just and Merciful Lord God will never impute to us, tho we our selves ought to be humbled for and always endeavouring to rectifie 'em.
After all, the best way to be fur∣ther Instructed in the Knowledg of our Duty is to Practise so much of it as we Know already. By keeping GOD's Commandments, we get such a sound and strong Constitution of Soul, as leads us naturally to our True Good. For as a healthy per∣son whose Tast is not vitiated, is di∣rected by that, without examining the Philosophy of Bodys to such things as are fit for the nourishment of his own: So a Divine Sensation gives us a lively relish of what's Good, and a perfect aversion to the contrary. It endues the Soul not only with a Sagacity of Understand∣ing to discern readily what is best, but likewise with such a Regularity of Will, as makes it even Hate and Abhor all evil ways. A most desirable Temper no doubt, the very top of Human Fe∣licity, but how shall we obtain it? We find our selves under the power of quite contrary Inclinations and
Relishes, and how to get rid of 'em we know not. This is indeed a ve∣ry wretched condition, the only thing that deserves our Sorrow, yet the Case is not so desperate, but that by the help of an Almighty Phy∣sician we may be Cured, if in good earnest we set about it. And because the not discerning our true Happiness and the being accustom'd to pursue a false one is the cause of our Disorder, somewhat must be done by way of Meditation and somewhat by way of Exercise. Now I know not any Subjects more proper for our Meditation on this and all occasions, than our own Nature, the Nature of Material Be∣ings, and the Nature of GOD; be∣cause it is thro the mistake of some of these that our Inclinations take a wrong bias, and consequently that we transgress against GOD, our Neighbour and our selves. For did we consider what we Are, that Hu∣mane Nature consists in the Union
of a Rational Soul with a Mortal Body, that the Body very often Clogs the Mind in its noblest Ope∣rations, especially when indulg'd. That we stand not singly on our own Bottom, but are united in some measure to all who bear a Human Form, especially to the Communi∣ty amongst whom we live, and yet more particularly to those several Relations we may have in it. Did we go on to consider what are the proper Duties and Enjoyments of such a nature as ours, that is, what performances do naturally result from those Capacities we find our selves endow'd with, which may therefore be reasonably expected from us, and what sort of Pleasures we are made to relish. Again, were we so far at least Philosophers, as to be able to pass a due estimate on Material Be∣ings, did we know 'em so well as not to prize them above their real value. Did we in the last place con∣template the Author of our Being,
from whom we Derive and to whom we owe our All; and insted of pry∣ing saucily into his Essence, (an insufferable presumption in Crea∣tures who are ignorant of their own) or pretending to know more of him than he has thought fit to communicate in his Word, and in that Idea of Infinite Perfection which he has giv'n us, Frequently, Serious∣ly and Humbly Meditate on what he has been pleas'd to unveil. Did we but employ so much of our Time and Thoughts on these things as we do on our Sins and Vanities, we shou'd not be long in discerning the good effects. For I question not but that we shou'd be convinc'd that the Body is the Instrument of the Mind and no more, that it is of a much Inferior Nature, and therefore ought to be kept in such a Case as to be ready on all occasions to serve the Mind. That the true and proper Pleasure of Human Nature consists in the ex∣ercise
of that Dominion which the Soul has over the Body, in govern∣ing every Passion and Motion ac∣cording to Right Reason, by which we most truly pursue the real good of both, it being a mistake as well of our Duty as our Happiness to consi∣der either part of us singly, so as to neglect what is due to the other. For if we disregard the Body whol∣ly, we pretend to live like Angels whilst we are but Mortals; and if we prefer to equal it to the Mind we degenerate into Brutes. The for∣mer indeed is not frequent, it is on∣ly to be found amongst a few Scru∣pulous Persons, who sometimes im∣pose such rigors on the Body, as GOD never requires at their hands, because they are inconsistent with a Human Frame. The latter is the common and dangerous fault, for the most of us accustom our selves to tast no other Pleasures than what are convey'd to us by the Organs of Sense, we pamper our Bodies till
they grow resty and ungovernable, and instead of doing Service to the Mind, get Dominion over it. Thus we learn what is truly to Love our selves: for tho Self-Love as it is usually understood has a very ill Character and is the Root of Evil, yet rightly apply'd it is Natural and Necessary, the great inducement to all manner of Vertue. They can∣not be said to Love their Body who wou'd not willingly suffer a little pain in a Finger to preserve an Arm, much more to save their Life; nor do they in reality love themselves, who wou'd not readily suffer any uneasi∣ness in their Body, which may con∣duce to the good of their Mind; and who do not prefer the least pro∣bability of bettering their condition in the next Life, to all the Conve∣niencies of this, nay even to Life it self. Again, when we consider that we are but several Parts of one great Whole, and are by Nature so con∣nected
to each other, that whene∣ver one part suffers the rest must suf∣fer with it, either by Compassion or else by being punish'd for the want of it, we shall never be so ab∣surd as to fancy we can do our selves a Service by any thing Injurious to our Neighbours. And finding both that we're en∣dow'd with many excellent Facul∣ties, which are capable of great Im∣provement, such as bespeak in us somewhat too Divine, to have it once imagin'd that it was made for nothing else but to move a portion of Matter 70 or 80 Years; to Act only on the Stage of an Unjust and Ill-natur'd World, where Folly and Wickedness usually go away with the Reward that is due to Wisdom and Vertue: And yet that for all these Excellencies, somewhat is still wanting to complete our Happiness, we do not find intire Felicity in our selves, but we are conscious of many wants which must be supply'd else∣where.
We therefore look about to see where we may meet with this Supply, and Material Beings with which we're compass'd do first pre∣sent themselves. These are the Ob∣jects of our Senses, it is at their pre∣sence that the Body tasts all its Plea∣sures, no wonder therefore if it en∣deavour to persuade us that our Good is here, tho a little Considera∣tion, if not our frequent disappoint∣ments when we seek no further, were sufficient one wou'd think to convince us that it is not. For when we come to weigh 'em in an impar∣tial Consideration we discern, that as they are GOD's Work they have a Perfection suitable to their several Natures, and are as perfect as is con∣sistent with the several Ranks and Stations they are plac'd in, so that consider'd Positively they are not to be Contemn'd, since they set forth the Wisdom, Power and Goodness of their Maker. But if we compare them with the Human Soul they
appear of little value, and of none at all in comparison of Him who made them; and since their Nature is be∣neath, and their Worth much less than ours, we cannot find our Hap∣piness in 'em. They contribute 'tis true to the Preservation and Ease of the Body, they help to make it fit for the Service of the Mind; But since a very few of 'em will do this, the rest are but a load and trouble, so far from being useful, that they indeed hurt us, unless they're made to minister to Charity and Contem∣plation. Let then these little things be drawn aside, these Clouds that hide the most adorable Face of GOD from us, these Mud-walls that en∣close our Earthly Tabernacle and will not suffer us to be pierc'd with the Beams of his Glory, and wound∣ed, not to Death but Life, with the Arrows of his Love and Beauty. In him we find that infinite Good which alone can satisfie us, and
which is not to be found elsewhere! Somewhat in which we lose our selves with Wonder, Love and Pleasure! Somewhat too ineffable to be nam'd, too Charming, too Delightful not to be eternally de∣sir'd! And were we not sunk into Sense, and buried alive in a croud of Material Beings, it might seem im∣possible to think of any thing but Him. For whether we consider the Infinite Perfection of his Nature, or the Interest we have in, and our in∣tire dependance on him. Whether we consider him as Maker and Go∣vernor of all things, as filling all places, intimately acquainted with all Events, as Righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works. Whether we contemplate his Al∣mighty Power; or what seems more suitable to our Faculties and Condition, the Spotless Purity of his Nature, the Moral Rectitude of his Will, which guided by Infalli∣ble Wisdom always Chuses what is
Best. And more particularly his In∣finite Goodness, his Beneficence to the Children of Men; that he is not only Good in himself, but that he is also Our Good, the only Amiable Being, who is altogether Lovely, and worthy of All our Love, the Object of our Hope, the Sum of our Desire, the Crown of our Joy, without whom we shall for ever Languish and Grieve; Enjoying whom we have nothing to Fear, nor any thing to Hate but what wou'd deprive us of that Enjoyment. If we consider how much he has done to render us capable of this Happi∣ness even when we fled from it; what affronts he has put up, with what Patience he bears our Follies and solicits our Return, in a Word, all the Wonders of his Love in Christ Jesus! We cannot sure do less than fix our Thoughts for ever on Him, and devote our selves Intirely to Him! All our Passions will be Charm'd, and every Inclination at∣tracted!
We shall no more dispute his Will, nor seek exemption from it, but with all Sincerity of Heart, and ardent Desire cry out, Lord what wilt thou have me to do? Not my Will Lord, but thine be done! The business of our Lives will be to improve our Minds and to stretch our Faculties to their utmost extent, that so we may have the fullest enjoyment our Nature will admit, of this ever sa∣tisfying and yet ever desirable, be∣cause an Infinite, and our True, Good. As to what is to be done by way of Exercise, not to enter too far into the Philosophy of the Passions, suf∣fice it briefly to observe: That by the Oeconomy of Nature such and such Motions in the Body are an∣next in such a manner to certain Thoughts in the Soul, that unless some outward force restrain, she can produce them when she pleases bare∣ly by willing them; and reciprocal∣ly several Impressions on the Body
are communicated to, and affect the Soul, all this being perform'd by the means of the Animal Spirits. The Active Powers of the Soul, her Will and Inclinations are at her own dispose, her Passive are not, she can't avoid feeling Pain or other sen∣sible Impressions so long as she's uni∣ted to a Body, and that Body is dis∣pos'd to convey these Impressions. And when outward Objects occasion such Commotions in the Bloud and Animal Spirits, as are attended with those Perceptions in the Soul which we call the Passions, she can't be in∣sensible of or avoid 'em, being no more able to prevent these first Im∣pressions than she is to stop the Cir∣culation of the Bloud, or to hinder Digestion. All she can do is to Con∣tinue the Passion as it was begun, or to Divert it to another Object, to Heighthen or to let it Sink by degrees, or some way or other to Modifie and Direct it. The due performance of which is what we call Vertue, which
consists in governing Animal Im∣pressions, in directing our Passions to such Objects, and keeping 'em in such a pitch, as right Reason re∣quires. By which it appears that it is not a fault to have Passions, since they are natural and unavoidable, and useful too; for as the Inclinations are the Wings of the Soul, so these give Life and Vigor to the Inclinati∣ons, by disposing the Body to act ac∣cording to the Determination of the Mind. But the fault lies here, we suffer 'em too often to get the Ma∣stry of the Mind, to hurry it on to what Objects they please and to fix it there, so that it is not able to con∣sider any Idea but what they pre∣sent. Whereas the Soul can if she please, and if she makes use of her Authority in time, divert the Course of the Spirits, and direct 'em to a new Object, by Limiting or Ex∣tending her Ideas, and by laying aside those the Passions excited, and
entertaining new ones. Nay, if we do but forbear to revolve such Considerations as are apt to continue the Commotion of the Spirits, it will cease of it self. This is what we can and ought to do, and if we do not perform it, we act rather like the Slaves of Sense than Crea∣tures endued with Reason; but if we do, we can hardly receive any Injury from the Passions. The way therefore to Govern 'em is to be always in a Temper fit for this, Recollect and Compos'd, hold∣ing our Minds in as even a poise as ever we can between Mirth and Melancholy, one of which Stupifies the Soul and the other Dissolves it; and both of 'em weaken and dispose it for Passion. Nothing but what feeds the ill humor will make Im∣pression whilst it is under the pow∣er of this, nor any useful thing stay in it, but it lies open to all manner of evil, when it is violently agitated by that. Too much of either ren∣dring
us unfit to Converse with our selves or others; such a mixture of both as makes us Serious without Sourness, and Chearful without Le∣vity, being the happy Temper. It is by surprize that the Passions in∣jure us, they violently attack our Reason when she is not prepar'd to receive them, so that the Will is de∣termin'd all of a sudden by Confuse Perceptions and Sensations. Nor is it easie to repulse them when once they have gain'd ground, because they often bribe our Guard, and get the Mastry of us by those very Considerations which shou'd have been arm'd against 'em. But Re∣collection, a sedate and sober frame of Mind, prevents this Mischief, it keeps our Reason always on her Guard and ready to exert her self; it fits us to Judge truly of all occur∣rences, and to draw advantage from whatever happens. This is the true Art of Prudence, for that which properly speaks us Wise, is the ac∣commodating
all the Accidents of Life to the great End of Living. And since the Passiveness of our Nature makes us liable to many Suf∣ferings which we cou'd wish to avoid, Wisdom consists in the using those Powers, which GOD has giv∣en us the free disposal of, in such a manner, as to make those very things which befal us against our Will, an occasion of Good to us. For if we do not live like Ma∣chines, but like Reasonable Crea∣tures, that is if we Observe, Exa∣mine and Apply whatever comes un∣der our Cognizance, every Turn in our own and our Neighbours Life will be Useful to us. It is not to be deny'd that we're generally Critical Observators on our Neighbours, but I'm afraid it is with an Ill not a Good Design. We do't to feed our Pride by an ungenerous insulting over their Infirmities, or thinking to Excuse and Justifie our own Faults by theirs. But we seldom set a
mark on the Precipices from whence they fell that we may avoid 'em, or note their False Steps, that ours may be more Exact. And indeed as things are usually manag'd, since Modesty, Breeding, or Sheepish Cowardise, restrains even those who are capable of bet∣tering Conversation, from Edifying Discourses, the only use we can make of that Time which the World borrows of us and Necessary Civili∣ty exacts, is to lay in Matter of Ob∣servation. I do not mean that we shou'd make Ill-natur'd Remarks, or Uncharitable Reflections on Par∣ticular Persons, but only that we take notice of the several workings of Human Nature, the little turns and distinctions of Various Tem∣pers; there being somewhat peculi∣ar almost in every one, which can∣not be learn'd but by Conversation and the Reflections it Occasions. For as to the main, we learn it by looking into our own Hearts, one
Person being but the Counterpart of another, so that they who thorowly Know themselves have a right Idea of Mankind in general, and by ma∣king reasonable allowances for Cir∣cumstances, may pretty well guess at Particulars. But even the Knowledge of our selves is not to be had without the Temper here recommended. For since the Passions do mostly depend on the Constitution of the Body, Age, Education and way of Living; so that the same Object does not on∣ly Affect several Persons differently, but variously moves the very same Person at several Seasons; and there was once a time perhaps, when that which puts us now in a ferment had no power to move us: We must therefore to the general considerati∣on of Human Nature already spoken of, add a more minute inquiry into our own; Observing our Parti∣cular Passions, that especially to which we're most inclin'd by Na∣ture,
on which all the rest in a man∣ner depend; and all the Peculiari∣ties that are to be found in our own Temper. Very great things many times depending on a trivial Hu∣mour; nor is it so often Reason, as our particular way of using it that determines our Thoughts and Acti∣ons. Now nothing less than a con∣tinual Watch and Application can procure us a sufficient Acquaintance with our selves, we cannot well dis∣cern what Objects most sensibly touch us; which is our weakest side; by what means it is Expos'd or Strengthened; how we may Re∣strain or rightly Employ a Passion we cou'd not Prevent; and conse∣quently grow strong by our very Infirmities, whilst we make them an occasion of Exercising and En∣creasing our Vertue; unless we're always in a watchful Frame, unless we make Remarks even whilst the Passion is working, and Constantly attend the least beatings of our own
Heart. Our own Heart which is indeed one of the best Books we can Study, especially in respect of Mo∣rality, and one principal Reason why we're no better Proficients in useful Knowledg, is because we don't duly consult it. Again, we shou'd endeavour to render Spiritual and Future things as Present and Familiar as may be, and to withdraw as much as we can from sensible Impressions, especial∣ly from such as attack us violently. She whose Mind is busied about the former will find 'em of Weight and Moment sufficient to employ all her Passions, whilst the other will be scarce taken notice of; or be look'd on with Indifferency, because they appear to deserve very little Admira∣tion, Joy, or Sorrow, and are not of value enough to discompose the Mind. And tho we have not Am∣bition to aspire to St. Paul's Perfecti∣on, who was Crucified to the World and the World to him, a greater Cha∣racter
than that of Ʋniversal Mo∣narch; tho we think it impossible to be wholly Insensible to it whilst we live in it: Yet sure we can't de∣ny that it is Possible, and very much our Duty, to be more indifferent to the Objects of Sense than the most of us are. For we certainly do amiss if we fix our Eyes and Thoughts so constantly on 'em, as that at last we take them for the most considerable things, and ima∣gine that our Happiness is here; or, tho we can't be so gross as to believe this, yet if we act as if we did; It wou'd become us much better to ar∣gue, that the Possession of these Worldly Advantages which Man∣kind so much contend for, is Good if it can procure us Eternal Felicity; and that the Want of 'em is an Evil, if it exclude us from the Kingdom of Heav'n. By which we learn how necessary it is to Retire and Meditate fre∣quently; and how much it becomes
us to keep out of the way of Thea∣trical Shows and inordinate Merri∣ments, and not so much as to enter into a Parley with those Pomps and Vanities we renounc'd in our Bap∣tism. For tho some extraordinary Tempers may make use of these to stir up the Powers of their Soul, and to give them a greater aversion to Vanity, as some Poysons are said to be Antidotes against others, yet for the most part they have an ill Effect: Because they deprive the Soul of real Joy and divine Serenity, by making too strong an Impressi∣on on the Senses, whereby the Ani∣mal Spirits are very much Mov'd and Exhausted, and being spent on trifles the Mind is left Dull, Un∣active, and Melancholy too, especi∣ally if it Reflect on its Actions as it ought; so natural and necessary is it, that Vain Mirth shou'd conclude in Heaviness.
Again, the Passions consider'd as Bodily Impressions only, excite us many times to the Gratification of the Animal in prejudice of the Rati∣onal Nature. For tho Mankind had Originally no Appetites but what might Innocently be satisfi∣ed; yet since our Degeneracy, and that we have lost the true Re∣lish of Good and Evil, they often give us false alarms, stirring us up to Pursue or Avoid what indeed we Ought not, if we consult our Good in the Main, and not the pleasing of a Part, nay the Worst part of us. But if we consider 'em as attending our Inclinations, they can do no hurt, let 'em be as Brisk and Active as they can, provided they fix on their Proper Objects. Now what these are is to be found by the Na∣ture of the Passions, by which we are led to the Use of 'em, since eve∣ry thing ought to be employ'd about that which it is fitted for. But this being already accounted for by Des
Cartes and Dr. More, Les Passions de l' Ame. in his excellent Account of Vertue. I cannot pretend to add any thing to what they have so well Discours'd. Only as a fur∣ther confirmation of what has been already said we may observe; That Admiration gives Rise to all the Passions; for unless we were Af∣fected with the Newness of an Ob∣ject, or some other remarkable Cir∣cumstance, so as to be attentively engag'd in the Contemplation of it, we shou'd not be any wise mov'd, but it wou'd pass by unregarded. And therefore 'tis very necessary not to be struck with little things, or to busie our Minds about 'em, but to fix all our Attention on, and to keep all our Admiration for things of the greatest moment, such as are those which relate to another World. We may further observe, that there is a leading Passion almost in every one, to which the Temper of
their Body inclines, and on which the rest do in a manner wholly de∣pend, especially if it be confirm'd by Education and Custom, so that if we duly manage this, we have the Command of all. Some are more subject to Fear, some to Hope, to Joy, Sorrow or the like, than others; but Love seems to be the predomi∣nant Passion in every one, and that which makes one of the former more remarkable than another, is only because it has been oftner mixt with Love. And indeed, since this is at the bottom of all the Passions, one wou'd think they're nothing else but different Modifications of it, occasion'd by some Circumstance in the Subject or Object of this Passion. Thus Desire is a Love to Good con∣sider'd as Future; Hope the Passion that disposes us to believe we may, and Fear that we shall not obtain it. Joy is a pleasant Commotion of the Soul in the Fruition of the Good we Love; and Sorrow a disagreeable one
occasion'd by the want of it, or pre∣sence of its contrary. The like may be said of the rest, for even Hatred tho it appear directly oppo∣site to Love, may be refer'd to it, the very same motion that carrys the Soul towards Good, carrying her also from those things which wou'd deprive her of it, which on that ac∣count are call'd Evils, and why do we Hate any thing, but because it does some way or other hinder our Enjoyment of what we Love? If therefore our Love be Right, the rest of our Passions will of course be so; and our Love which is a motion of the Soul to joyn it self to that which appears to be grateful to it, will then be right when our Notions of Good and Evil are; That is, when we do not take up with Imaginary or Par∣ticular, but pass on to the Sovereign Good, to GOD who is the only proper and adequate Object of our Love, as Sin is of our Hatred, all things else being no otherwise to be Pursued or
Avoided, than in proportion to the Relation they bear to these. So that if we Love GOD with All our Soul, as He certainly Deserves, and as we certainly Must if we wou'd be Happy; we shall be so taken up with the Contemplation and Admi∣ration of his Beauties, have so bound∣less an Esteem, such an awful Vene∣ration for, and so great a Contempt of all things in Comparison of Him; that our Desires will be carried out after nothing but GOD, and such things as may further our Union with Him. His Favour, and the Light of His Countenance will be the Object of our Hopes, nor shall we much Fear any thing but His Displeasure. No Grief will pierce our Heart but for our many Offences against, and our Imperfect Enjoy∣ment of Him. We shall perfectly Hate all evil ways, be Jealous of Sin at the remotest distance, and suspect every thing that has the least appearance of a Temptation. We shall be ex∣tremely Watchful over all our Acti∣ons,
and never Resolve upon any till we're fully assur'd it is conform∣able to his Will and Pleasure. Whi∣ther will not our Emulation rise, what Difficulties won't our Courage surmount, when th' Enjoyment of a GOD is what we aspire to! The defects of our Services, and our fail∣ings in our Duty towards Him, will be the only occasion of Shame; for Reproach from Men when suffer'd for His sake will be counted a high Encomium, and his Approbation our only Glory. If ever we are An∣gry it will be when His Laws are Contemn'd and Right Reason vio∣lated; a just Indignation will arise when the Worthless are Prefer'd, and Merit is left unregarded. His Favourites will be ours, we shall dispense our Good-will to every one proportionably as they are dear to Him; and shall think our Gratitude can never enough express it self, to that Bountiful Being from whom we receiv'd our All. And Oh! with
what Joy and Satisfaction of Mind shall we proceed in every step of this! how pure and exalted is that Pleasure, how highly entertaining, which results from the right use of our Faculties, and Fruition of the Sovereign Good! Happiness is the natural Effect as well as the Reward of an Ardent Love to GOD, and what necessarily flows from it, Uni∣versal Piety: That Holy Soul is al∣ways serene, and full of unutterable Bliss, whose Reason Directs, and whose Passions readily Obey, whilst both are Guided by his Will and Spi∣rit who is Infallible. She tasts a Pleasure which the World can nei∣ther give nor take away, nor can Worldly Minds so much as Imagine it: She is satisfied with the Past, Enjoys the Present, and has no Soli∣citude for, but a Joyful Expectati∣on of what's approaching. For why the Dawnings of a Blisful Endless Day, break forth already in that Happy Mind, whose Temper and
Constitution is Heavenly; it has a Foretaste, and thereby a well-grounded Assurance, of never-ceas∣ing Joys to Come! So far (by the way) is Religion from being an Enemy either to Na∣ture or Pleasure, that it perfects the one, and raises the other to the greatest height. It teaches us the true Use of the Creatures, keeps us from expecting more in them than we can ever find, and leads us to the Enjoyment of the Creator who only can satisfie us. For I wou'd fain know of any experienced Per∣son, whether any of the Delights of this World did ever answer Expecta∣tion when Enjoy'd, and whether the Joys of Religion do not exceed it? We come to the first with mighty hopes and are always Disap∣pointed, to the last we approach with Fear and Trembling, suppo∣sing it will rob us of all the Satis∣factions of Life, we shrink at the Pain and Difficulty, and thats the
only thing in which after a little Trial we find our selves much mi∣staken. Good Christians being in∣deed the truest Epicures, because they have the most tastful and high∣est Enjoyment of the greatest Good. For GOD is too Kind and Bounti∣ful to deny us any Pleasure befitting our Nature; he does not require us to relinquish Pleasure, but only to exchange the Gross and Insipid for the Pure and Relishing, the Plea∣sures of a Brute for those of a Man. He wou'd not have us enslav'd to any Appetite, or so taken up with any Created Good whatever, as not to be able to maintain the Em∣pire of our Reason and Freedom of our Will and to quit it when we see occasion. And this is all that the Rules of Self-Denial and Mortifica∣tion tend to so far as they are Ratio∣nal, they mean no more than the procuring us a Power and Dispositi∣on to do that which we come now in the last place to recommend, which is,
To sanctifie our very Infirmities, to make even the disorderly Com∣motions of our Spirits an occasion of producing Holy Passions. It were better indeed if they were rais'd upon a right Principle; that the Passions did not move the Mind, but the Mind the Passions; and that the Motives to Religion were not Sensi∣tive but Rational. However in the Infancy of our Vertue, it may not be amiss to make some use of our Vices, and what we advise if it serve no other end, 'twill help at least to break Ill-Habits and that's a conside∣rable benefit. Agreeable to which did an excellent Author be∣speak the Ladies sometime ago: Let her that is Amorous, Ladies Calling. place her Love upon him who is the Chiefest among ten thousand; she that is Angry turn her edg against her Sins; she that is haughty disdain the Devils Drudgery; she that is Fearful dread him who can destroy, both Body and Soul in Hell; and she that is sad re∣serve
her Tears for her Penitential Of∣fices. Which, with the rest of that Authors Ingenuous and Kind Advice, I heartily wish were not only to be seen in their Closets, but transcrib'd in their Hearts and Legible in their Lives and Actions. Now in order to this, if our guard has been surpriz'd, and some sensible Impression has strongly broke in upon us, so that we find our selves all in a ferment, let us manage the Opportunity discreetly, change the Object and hallow the Passion. Which is no very difficult thing, for when a Passion is boyling it will spend it self on any Object that we please to fix it on. And the Proper Objects of our Passions, be∣ing most considerable in 'emselves, and naturally most apt to move us if we'll but give them fair play, that is allow 'em a place in our Thoughts, they'll work out the other, and make our Passions what they shou'd be: We have a plain Instance of this
in Afflictions, in which our Grief is at first excited by some outward Cause, and when that has softned us, the Spirit of GOD who is ne∣ver wanting unless we Neglect or Quench him, improves this World∣ly into a Godly Sorrow that worketh Repentance not to be Repented of. Besides, as there is a Pleasure in the Passions as well as in all the ge∣nuine Operations of Nature, so there's a Pain accompanying 'em when misplac'd, which disposes the Mind to a readiness to rectifie them, that so it may enjoy the Pleasure without mixture of Pain. If there∣fore we assist it with a little Medita∣tion, it will readily come over; and tho we may find it difficult abso∣lutely to quash a Passion that is once begun, yet it is no hard matter to transfer it, so that it may pour forth it self in all its pleasing transports, without fear of danger, or mixture of uneasiness.
But a Caution will not be amiss, which is, that we don't mistake the Fits of Passion for a Spirit of Piety and Devotion. They are good be∣ginnings 'tis true, but if we're only wafted up to Heaven in our Closets, and shew forth nothing or very lit∣tle of it in our Lives and Conversa∣tions, we may cheat our selves with the conceit of being Holy, but nei∣ther GOD nor Man will be so im∣pos'd on. She who mourns for her Sins, tho never so bitterly, and yet returns to them at the next occasion, gives a very good Evidence of her Weakness, but none of her Repen∣tance. She who pretends to never so great transports of Love to GOD, and yet is wedded to the world, can part with nothing for his sake, nor be content and easie when He only is her Portion, gives Him good words, and makes Him many fine Complements and that's the whole of the matter. She who makes shew of great Awe and Reverence to∣wards
the Divine Majesty at Church and has no regard to Him in the World his larger Temple, as good as declares that she thinks his Pre∣sence confin'd to a place, or that she hopes to commute a Days neglect for an Hours Observance, and ex∣presses her Contempt of GOD much more than her Veneration. How can she profess to Hope in Him who is Anxious and Solicitous about the least Event? Or say that her De∣sires are fix't on GOD who has a great many Vanities and Sensual Ap∣tites to be Satisfied? Nor are we less out of the way when we tincture our Religion with our Passions, and fashion an Idea of it according to our own Complection not the tenor of the Gospel. Hence comes that great diversity we meet with both in Pra∣ctice and Theory, for as there is somewhat Peculiar almost in every ones Temper, so is there in their Religion. Is our Disposition Sad
and Cloudy, are we apt to take Offence, Suspicious and hard to be pleas'd? we imagine GOD is so, Religion is not our Joy but our Task and Burden, we become ex∣tremely scrupulous and uneasie to our selves and others. And if Re∣solution and Daring be joyn'd with our Melancholy, and Temptations fall pat in our way, we discard such a troublesome Religion and set up for Atheism and Infidelity. On the other hand, if we're Fearful and Timerous our Superstition has no bounds, we pay less regard to those Laws our Maker has prescrib'd, than we do to those Chimera's our own Fancy has invented to recon∣cile Him. A mistake which the Brisk and Jovial are sensible of, but not of the contrary extreme they run into; they discern that GOD's ways are ways of Pleasantness, and all his Paths are Peace, that Good Christians live the Happiest Lives, 'tis their Duty to Rejoyce evermore,
and all the good things of the World are at their service. All which is very true, but then it is as true, that their Pleasures are not Sensual but Rational and Spiritual, which is not a lessening, but an Addition to their Character; that we are to Use the World so as not to abuse either our selves or it, to testify on all oc∣casions our Moderation and Con∣tempt of it, to be ready to quit it, nay even to part with Life it self when ever they come in competition with our Duty. In a word, if our Anger against our own Sins pro∣vokes us to be Peevish with others, tho not so good as they shou'd be, it goes too far. If our Zeal finds fault with all who do not come up to our Heights, or who don't express their Devotion in our way, it is not ac∣cording to Knowledge, that is, it is not Discreet and Christian. If our great Love to GOD takes us up so much, that we think we may be morose and ill-natur'd to our Neigh∣bour,
we express it in a very disa∣greeable way: And I dare say it wou'd be more acceptable to Him, if insted of spending it all in Rapture and Devotion, a part of it were em∣ploy'd in Imitating his Beneficence to our Fellow-Creatures. To wind up all; The Sum of our Duty and of all Morality, is to have a Temper of Mind so absolutely Conform'd to the Divine Will, or which is the same in other words, such an Habitual and Intire Love to GOD, as will on all occasions ex∣cite us to the Exercise of such Acts, as are the necessary consequents of such a Habit. This frame and Con∣stitution of Soul is what we must all our Life time Labour after, it is to be begun, and some Proficiency made in it whilst we stay on Earth, and then we may joyfully wait for its Consummation in Heaven, the rea∣son why we cannot be perfectly Happy whilst we tarry here, being only because we can have this Tem∣per
but Imperfectly. The want of which is the Hell of the Damn'd, the degree of their misery bearing a pro∣portion to their opposition to the Divine Will. For Happiness is not without us, it must be found in our own Bosoms, and nothing but a Union with GOD can fix it there; nor can we ever be United to Him any other wise than by being like Him, by an Intire Conformity to his Will. Now she who has obtain'd this blessed Temper, whose Will is Right, and who has no Passion but for GOD's Service, is pleas'd that his Wisdom shou'd Chuse her Work, and only prepares to dispatch it with the greatest Diligence and Chearful∣ness. She keeps All his Precepts, and does not pick and Chuse such as are for her turn, and most agreeable to her own Humor; but as she does every thing for His Sake, so is she easy and pleas'd under all his Dispensations; is truly indifferent to
Applause, and fully content with GOD's Approbation. Indeed the Conquest of our Vanity is one of our last Triumphs, and a Satisfaction in all GOD's Choices for us, from a full Conviction that they are most for our advantage, the best Test of a Regular Will and Affections. For these are heights to which we can't arrive till we have travers'd over all the Paths of Vertue, and when once our Passions are reduc'd to this, I know not in what they can oppose us. Not but that we're strictly oblig'd to Provide for honest things in the Sight of Men as well as of GOD, to do nothing but what is of Good Re∣port; to Abstain from all Appearance of Evil; not to give Occasion of Slander to those who desire and Seek it; but to Let our Light so shine before Men, that they may see our Good-works and Glorify our Father who is in Heaven. But when we have done this, and have taken all possible care to ap∣prove
our selves to GOD and Man, can we be at Ease if we fail in the latter? Are we more desirous of a Good than a Great Reputation? and wou'd we not to get a Name a∣mongst our Fellow Servants, do any thing that may in the least Of∣fend, or be less acceptable to our Common Master? Can we bear the being Censur'd as Singular and Laugh'd at for Fools, rather than comply with the evil Customs of the Age? and are we much more Covetous of the Substance Vertue, than of the Shadow Fame? If it be so we're pretty sure that all is Right, and that GOD's will is the Rule, and his Glory the End of all our Actions. It goes to a good Womans heart to receive that Commendation which the good-nature or Civility of ano∣ther bestows on her, when she knows she does not Merit it, and to find whilst she's applauded abroad, a thousand Follies, Mistakes and Weaknesses in her own Mind. All
the use that she makes of her Credit and Esteem in the World, is to ex∣cite her to Deserve it, tho at present perhaps she does not, and Really to come up to that Character which all are Ambitious to have. Again, what is said of Submission and a perfect acquiescence in the Divine Will, is not to be so under∣stood as if it were a fault to change our Circumstances when we're fair∣ly and honestly call'd to't, or that we might not seek by honourable ways to enlarge them if they sit too strait. But it is design'd to correct that Complaining humor, which makes us always dissatisfied with the Present, and longing after a Change; which, how Religious so∣ever we wou'd appear, is a very sure sign that our Passions are not mortified nor our Will reduced to a due Regularity: As hers is without doubt who can be pleas'd when even her most innocent Desires are denied, when she is disappointed in
what she thinks her Best Designs. For such an one has nothing in her Temper that Sensible Impressions can so strongly fasten on, as to dis∣compose her Mind; and what can she meet with to seduce her to Un∣lawful, who desires not to be her own Chuser in Lawful and Indif∣ferent things? The Laws of GOD have a Natural and Inward Goodness, which wou'd recommend them to a Rational Mind tho they were not injoyn'd, and therefore no wonder that Tem∣per inclines one, Conveniency ano∣ther, and Reputation a third to the Practise of some of them. But a Will duly regulated passes over these and is acted by a higher Motive, she who is Religious upon a Right Principle regards the Will of GOD only, for that and that alone is able to carry her Uniformly and Constantly thro all her Duty. Thus Acts of Benefi∣cence, Liberality and Charity, are full of Lustre, they procure for their
Possessor a lofty Character, and therefore whether we Value them or no, we're willing however to seem to be fond of 'em. We fancy what mighty things we wou'd do were we in such or such a Persons Circum∣stances, and long to be Rich and Great that we may Relieve the Needy and Rescue the Oppressed. But we are not so forward in aspir∣ing after Poverty, tho nothing shews a Braver Mind than the bear∣ing it Nobly and Contentedly; we care not to be the Oppressed Person, that we might exercise Meekness and Forgiveness, Patience and Submis∣sion. Not but that the Vertues of Adversity are as lovely in them∣selves, and as Acceptable to GOD as those of Prosperity, or rather more so, because they express a greater Love to GOD, are more opposite to Vicious Self-Love, and do more e∣minently declare the Veneration we have for the Divine Wisdom and Goodness, which we can Adore and
Delight in, which we can Justify and Applaud even in the most un∣easy Circumstances. But they don't make so great a Figure in the World, they don't feed our Vanity so much, nor are so agreeable to Flesh and Bloud, and that's the reason why we care not for them. Tis true we profess that we de∣sire Riches and Honour, a great Re∣putation and Theater in the World, on no other account but to do GOD Service. But if we are real in this, why don't we perform so much as we might in our present Station? Alas! we Cheat our selves, as well as endeavour to impose on others; and under Pretence of seeking GOD's Glory, in Reality pursue nothing but our own. For had we indeed that Esteem for GOD and Intire Conformity to his Will, which is at once both the Duty and Perfecti∣on of all Rational Beings, we shou'd not complain of his Exercise of that Power, which a Prince or even an
Ordinary Master has a Right to; which is, to set his Servants about such work as he thinks them fittest for. If we allow that GOD Governs the Universe, can we so much as ima∣gine that it is not Govern'd with the Greatest Justice and Equity, Order and Proportion? Is not every one of us plac'd in such Circumstances as Infinite Wisdom discerns to be most suitable, so that nothing is wanting but a careful observation whither they lead us, and how we may best improve them? What reason then to complain of the Management of the world? and indeed except in the Morals of Mankind which are visibly and grossly deprav'd, I see not why we shou'd so much as wish for any alteration. The Wicked Prosper sometimes and what then? shall we grudge them their Portion here, since that's their All, and alas a very sorry one! Besides, this world is not a soil for perfect Happiness to Grow in,
Good and Evil are blended together, every Condition has its Sweet and Bitter, we may be Made by Adversity and ruin'd by Prosperity according as we manage them. Riches and Power put opportunities of doing Good into our hands, if we have a Will to Use them, but at the same time they furnish us with Instru∣ments of doing Evil. They afford us at once the Conveniencies of Life and fuel for irregular Appetites. They make us known to others, but many times hinder us from being acquainted with our selves. They set us in view, so that if our Example be Bright it becomes the more Il∣lustrious; but we must also remem∣ber that our Faults are as conspicu∣ous as our Vertues, and that Peoples eyes are most intent on those, and most inquisitive to find 'em, so that even our innocent Liberties are many times misconstrued. By Obscurity, and a Narrow For∣tune, we're depriv'd of somewhat
Necessary or Commodious to our Present Living, but are quickned to a more diligent concern for a Life to Come; we don't find our Good things here, and common Prudence will teach us to take care that we may enjoy them hereafter. If we do not Possess much, we have not much to Lose, nor such great Ac∣counts to make; have little Business and less Authority with others, but hereby the more Command of our own Time and Thoughts. Our Vertue is plac'd in an ill-light, and our Wisdom rejected with a What Impertinents are these, who prag∣matically attempt to Instruct their Bet∣ters? but we have fewer Temptati∣ons to shock the one, and greater Ad∣vantages, as things are commonly manag'd to improve both. We're expos'd to the Contempt and Outrage of the World, but that makes us less in love with it, and more ready to welcome Death, whene're it brings the kind Releasing Summons.
It may be thought a considerable omission that no directions have bin given, any further than the manage∣ment of our Own Inclinations and Passions; tho't be very advantage∣ous to know how to deal with other Peoples, both in regard of Educati∣on, and of the Influence that they have on ours. But I have this to say, that Education is a beaten Subject, and has been accounted for by better Pens than mine: And that in this as in all other things, we are to treat our Neighbours as we do our selves, shew 'em the unsuitableness of those Objects which Irregular Affe∣ctions pursue, and persuade them to a willing use of such methods as we take to Cure our own. It requires I confess, no little Skill to do this to purpose, and to convince them that we're really their Friends, whilst we strive to divorce them from such Objects as they're endear'd and fast∣ned to by a thousand tyes: And this is so nice a matter, so laborious a
task, that the more I consider it the more unable I find my self to give fit Directions for the performance of it. They who wou'd do that, must have a more exact Knowledge of Hu∣man Nature, a greater Experience of the World, and of those diffe∣rences which arise from Constitu∣tion, Age, Education, receiv'd Opi∣nions, outward Fortune, Custom and Conversation, than I can pre∣tend to. And perhaps there is no need of Directions since few will at∣tempt to practise them; for if a Pas∣sion that is young and tender gives us work enough, as the difficulty of Education plainly shews it does, they had need be very Kind, very Good, and very Wise, who set a∣bout the Cure of an Old and inve∣terate one. Nor can they who have so much Divinity in their Mind as to design such a noble work, be thought to stand in need of any ad∣vice how to perform it. However, I'le venture to say in
general, that we must never oppose Commotion with Commotion, nor be in Passion our selves if we wou'd reform anothers, else we lose many good Opportunities and seem to seek the gratification of our own humor rather than our Neighbours good. No discouragements shou'd shock us, no ungrateful returns shou'd sower our Temper, but we must expect and be prepar'd to bear many repul∣ses and wild disorders, and patient∣ly sustain that greatest uneasiness to a Christian Mind, the bitter ap∣pearance that our Hopes are lost, and that all the Labour of our Love is ineffectual! We must abound both in Good-Nature and Discretion, and not seldom make use of quite contrary Means to bring about the End we aim at. Removing all Fu∣el from the Passion sometimes; and sometimes Indulging it as far as In∣nocently we may; and if nothing else will do, give it line enough, that so it may destroy it self in its own Excesses.
But ah! will any one drive us to such a desperate Remedy as often Kills, and cannot Cure without a very great Care, and a more than Ordinary assistance of GOD's Grace, which they have little reason to hope for, who abandon themselves to Temptations, and push things to such Extremities! Will nothing less than Temporal Ruin which unreason∣able Passions naturally end in, serve to prevent Eternal? and it were well if even that wou'd do, for they usu∣ally involve in both. If therefore such as are in Passion are capable of hearing any thing but what sooths 'em in their own way, I wou'd beg of 'em for GOD's sake and their own, to grant but this one very easy and equitable Request, which is Calmly to Hear and to Consider what may be said against their darling Passion. For if it be Right it will stand the test of all that can be urg'd against it; if it be not, is it Good for them to retain and cherish it any longer?
And if they refuse to listen to the Kind, tho according to them, un∣seasonable and mistaken advice that is given, and seek no further than for Arguments to Justifie them∣selves, do they not by so great a Partiality secretly confess that they are in the Wrong, and wou'd not have it discover'd that they are so, because they're resolv'd with or without Reason to continue their ir∣regular Passion? And the cause of this strange Re∣solution seems to be this, That a Passion of any sort having got the hank of one, it becomes so Natural, so Agreeable, that the going about to wean them from it, looks like an attempt to deprive them of all their Joy; and they're hardly per∣suaded to part with what's a Pre∣sent Delight, let its Consequences be what they may, and tho the quit∣ting of it be in order to th' enjoy∣ment of that much Sweeter, as well as Nobler Pleasure, which
arises from the due use of Reason; and with which those Wise and Holy Souls are entertain'd, who prefer the relishes of a Rational be∣fore those of an Animal Life. But they ought not to think us their Enemies, when we endeavour their Cure, tho we happen to Lance and Scarifie them. They who are Sick of Passion are like People in a Lethargy, insensible of their Dan∣ger; nay they're fond of their Dis∣ease, and set themselves against our Medicines; tho the greater unwil∣lingness they show to be Disturb'd, so much the more need of Rousing 'em out of their pleasing slum∣ber. The more secure they think themselves, the more wretched is their Condition, for that's a sign that the Passion has got an intire Possession of their Soul, and has for∣tified all its Avenues against Reason and Wholesome Advice. And 'tis worth being remarqued, that our Inclinations how Innocent and
Harmless soever they appear, are always to be suspected if the Passi∣ons that accompany them are vio∣lent. For Violence does not An∣swer but Destroy the Use of Passion, it hinders th' Operations of the Soul, insted of disposing the Body to fol∣low her Directions Vigorously. And as to the Influence that ano∣ther Persons Passion may have on us, enough has bin said to warn us, not to dally with the Flame when our Neighbours house is on Fire, lest we be consum'd in it; and careful∣ly to avoid doing any thing which may excite, or encrease their Pas∣sions. But when we discern that the Plague is begun, let's remove with all possible speed out of the in∣fected Air. Great Passions arise from very small beginings, and that which appear'd Innocent at first if allow'd on that account, does often become our Ruin, or gives us at least the greatest trouble in overcoming it.
The CONCLƲSION. THUS you have Ladies, the best Method I can at pre∣sent think of for your Improve∣ment, how well it answers my Design the World must judge. If you are so favourable as to think it comes up to't in any measure, what remains but to put it in Prac∣tise, tho in the way in which you live, 'tis not probable that all of you either Will or Can, for reasons mention'd in the first Part, P. 72, &c. and particularly be∣cause of the great waste of your Time, without Redeeming of which there's nothing to be done. It is not my intention that you shou'd se∣clude your selves from the World, I know it is necessary that a great number of you shou'd live in it; but it is Unreasonable and Barbarous to drive you into't, e're you are capa∣ble of doing Good in it, or at least
of keeping Evil from your selves. Nor am I so fond of my Proposal, as not to lay it aside very willingly, did I think you cou'd be sufficiently serv'd without it. But since such Seminaries are thought proper for the Men, since they enjoy the fruits of those Noble Ladies Bounty who were the foundresses of several of their Colleges, why shou'd we not think that such ways of Education wou'd be as advantageous to the Ladies? or why shou'd we despair of finding some among them who will be as kind to their own Sex as their Ancestors have been to the other? Some Objections against this design have already been consi∣der'd, and those which I have since met with are either too trifling to deserve a serious Answer, or too Ill∣natur'd not to require a severer than I care to give them. They must either be very Ignorant or very Ma∣licious who pretend that we wou'd imitate Foreign Monastries, or ob∣ject
against us the Inconveniencies that they are subject to; a little at∣tention to what they read might have convinc'd them that our Insti∣tution is rather Academical than Mo∣nastic. So that it is altogether be∣side the purpose, to say 'tis too Re∣cluse, or prejudicial to an Active Life; 'tis as far from that as a La∣dys Practising at home is from being a hindrance to her dancing at Court. For an Active Life consists not bare∣ly in Being in the World, but in doing much Good in it: And therefore it is fit we Retire a little, to furnish our Understandings with useful Princi∣ples, to set our Inclinations right, and to manage our Passions, and when this is well done, but not till then, we may safely venture out. As for those who think so Con∣temptibly of such a considerable part of GOD's Creation, as to suppose that we were made for nothing else but to Admire and do them Service and to make provision for the low
concerns of an Animal Life, we pi∣ty their mistake, and can calmly bear their Scoffs, for they do not express so much Contempt of us as they do of our Maker; and there∣fore the reproach of such incompe∣tent Judges is not an Injury but an Honor to us, The Ladies I hope pass a truer estimate on themselves, and need not be told that they were made for nobler purposes. For tho I wou'd by no means encourage Pride, yet I wou'd not have them take a mean and groveling Spirit for true Humi∣lity. A being content with Igno∣rance is really but a Pretence, for the frame of our nature is such that it is impossible we shou'd be so; even those very Pretenders value themselves for some Knowlege or other, tho it be a trifling or mistak∣en one. She who makes the most Grimace at a Woman of Sense, who employs all her little skill in endea∣vouring to render Learning and
Ingenuity ridiculous, is yet very desirous to be thought Knowing in a Dress, in the Management of an Intreague, in Coquetry or good Houswifry. If then either the No∣bleness or Necessity of our Nature unavoidably excites us to a desire of Advancing, shall it be thought a fault to do it by pursuing the best things? and since we will value our selves on somewhat or other, why shou'd it not be on the most substan∣tial ground? The Humblest Person that lives has some Self-Esteem, nor is it either Fit or Possible that any one should be without it. Because we always Neglect what we De∣spise, we take no care of its Preser∣vation and Improvement, and were we throughly possess'd with a Contempt of our selves, we shou'd abandon all Care both of our Tem∣poral and Eternal Concerns, and burst with Envy at our Neighbours. The only difference therefore be∣tween the Humble and the Proud is
this, that whereas the former does not prize her self on some Imaginary Excellency, or for any thing that is not truly Valuable; does not ascribe to her self what is her Makers due, nor Esteem her self on any other account but because she is GOD's Workmanship, endow'd by him with many excellent Qualities, and made capable of Knowing and En∣joying the Sovereign and Only Good; so that her Self-Esteem does not terminate in her Self but in GOD, and she values her self only for GOD's sake. The Proud on the contrary is mistaken both in her Estimate of Good, and in thinking it is her Own; She values her self on things that have no real Excel∣lency, or which at least add none to her, and forgets from whose Libe∣rality she receives them: She does not employ them in the Donors Service, all her care is to Raise her self, and she little considers that the most excellent things are distributed
to others in an equal, perhaps in a greater measure than to herself, they have opportunities of advancing as well as she, and so long as she's puft up by this Tumor of Mind, they do really excel her. The Men therefore may still enjoy their Prerogatives for us, we mean not to intrench on any of their Lawful Privileges, our only Contention shall be that they may not out-do us in promoting his Glory who is Lord both of them and us; And by all that appears the generality will not oppose us in this matter, we shall not provoke them by striving to be better Christians. They may busy their Heads with Affairs of State, and spend their Time and Strength in recommending themselves to an uncertain Master, or a more giddy Multitude, our only endeavour shall be to be absolute Monarchs in our own Bosoms▪ They shall still if they please dispute about Religi∣on, let 'em only give us leave to
Understand and Practise it. And whilst they have unrival'd the Glory of speaking as many Languages as Babel afforded, we only desire to ex∣press our selves Pertinently and Ju∣diciously in One. We will not vie with them in thumbing over Au∣thors, nor pretend to be walking Libraries, provided they'll but al∣low us a competent Knowlege of the Books of GOD, Nature I mean and the Holy Scriptures: And whilst they accomplish themselves with the Knowlege of the World, and experiment all the Pleasures and Follies of it, we'll aspire no fur∣ther than to be intimately acquaint∣ed with our own Hearts. And sure the Complaisant and Good na∣tur'd Sex will not deny us this; nor can they who are so well assur'd of their own Merit entertain the least Suspicion that we shall overtop them. It is upon some other ac∣count therefore that they object against our Proposal, but what that
is I shall not pretend to guess, since they do not think fit to speak out and declare it. Some indeed are pleas'd to say, that tho this appears in Speculation to be a very Happy and Useful way of Living, it will be quite another thing when reduc'd to Practice. Va∣riety of Humours will occasion Re∣sentments and Factions, and per∣haps other inconveniencies not yet foreseen; nor can we expect that every Person there will be of such an agreeable, obliging and teacha∣ble Temper, as neither to Give nor Take Offence. And supposing the first Company were as tractable and as happily cemented by the mutual love of Vertue, and prudent Ma∣nagement, as we cou'd desire, yet how can we be secure of their Suc∣cessors, or that this as well as other good Institutions shall not degene∣rate? I agree so far with this Objection as to grant that our Proposal is not
such a piece of Perfection that no∣thing can be said against it, but is there any thing in this World that is so? Or do Men use to quit their Employments and Houses, their Wives and Children, Relations and Friends, upon every little pet, or because they very often find trouble or disagreeableness? do they not ra∣ther if they are good Christians, bear with Infirmities and endeavour to mend them? He then who wou'd Object to purpose must shew that the Good it may do is not equiva∣lent to the Evil which may attend it; that the Ladies will suffer greater Inconveniencies with, than without it, and that it will not in the Main be best. Otherwise we shall take li∣berty to believe that it is Humor, Covetousness or any thing rather than Reason which restrains him from Approving and Promoting it. There is a certain Pride in the Mind of Man, which flatters him that he can See farther and Judge better
than his Neighbour, and he loves to feed it by scrupling and object∣ing against what another proposes, who perhaps has not over-look'd those fine discoveries in which he hugs himself, but having view'd them on all sides has discern'd and despis'd their insignificancy. I wou'd only ask our Objectors whe∣ther they think the World so good as that it needs none, or so bad as that it is not capable of Amend∣ment? If neither of these, let them tell me whether Complaining and Wishing will ever do the business, or who is the greatest Benefactor to Mankind, he who finds fault with every Project set on foot to better and improve them, because it is not exactly after the Pattern in the Mount, that is indeed according to his own tooth and relish; it is not beyond exception, but has a touch of Humane Weakness and Ignorance mingled with it? Or he who vigo∣rously and sincerely with a pure
heart and a diligent hand, sets about doing what he Can, tho not so much as he Wou'd, were his abi∣lities greater? We're all apt enough to cry out against the Age, but to what purpose are our Exclamations unless we go about to Reform it? Not faintly and coldly as if we were unconcern'd for the success, and on∣ly wou'd do somewhat to still the reproaches of our Consciences and to exalt us in our own Imaginations, with the Pompous Idea of Zeal and Public Spiritedness; but with all our Might, with an Unwearied Indu∣stry and Vigor, I'me asham'd to say like that which the Instruments of Satan express in making Proselytes to Wickedness and Prophaneness; but rather with such as becomes the Servants of Christ, which bears some sort of proportion to the Great∣ness of our Master, the Importance of the Work and the Excellency of the Reward.
We do not expect that all who come into this Society will be per∣fect, but we will endeavour to make them and our selves so as much as may be. Nor shall any be admitted who either have not, or are not desirous to have, that Di∣vine yet humble, that Great and Generous, yet Meek and Condes∣cending Spirit, that unfeigned Love to GOD and all Mankind which was in Christ Jesus. We set no other Rules than those of the Go∣spel, Christianity being the highest Improvement of a Rational Nature, and every one's oblig'd to keep its Institutions whether they Live in such a Society or out of it. And as for that degeneracy which it may fall into, 'tis too general an objection to have any weight, and may as well be urg'd against Univer∣sities, all sorts of Government, and indeed against every thing, as against this. May be's and if's are endless, and he who undertakes to
provide against all Future Contin∣gencies, either believes no GOD or fancies himself to be one. A Prudent Man will look as far as he can, and provide to the ut∣most of his Knowlege and Pow∣er, but when that's done, he knows he's but a Man and there∣fore can't possibly Forsee and Reme∣dy all things. Let's then do what we Can, and leave the rest to our Great Bene∣factor and Governor, but let us set about our own part, not only when the way is open and easy, who shall give us thanks for that? but in spite of all Difficulties and Dis∣couragement, since we have so Glo∣rious a Leader, so indefatigable in his Labours, so boundless in his Love, such an Omnipotent Assister who neither wants Power nor Will to help us. The Peevishness and Obstinacy of such as Quarrel with our Labour of Love and set them∣selves
against all we can do to serve them, will only add to our Laurels and enlarge our Triumphs, when our Constancy in doing Good has at last o'ercome those Perverse Op∣posers of it. The End. ERRATA. PAge 22. Line 19 dele yet, p. 31. l. 13. d. not only—but against, p. 76. l. 5. r. imm-diate, p. 87. l. 11. r. Body, p. 168. l. 17. f. of r. the, p. 109. l. 8. after Thoughts add to, p. 135. Marg. l. 4. r. Part I. §. 45, p. 180. l. 15. f. a r. an, p. 185. l. 9. f. bad r. had, p. 260. l. 3. r. Ingenious.
