E2140 [ocm]12273097 197708
The Parliaments LETTER To the King of FRANCE Wherein they Declare their Resolution and Desires to his sacred Majesty, assented to by both Houses, September 29. Also a true Relation of a battle fought by the L. Strange, and the Inhabirants of Manchester, September 29. Together with the Proceedings of the Lord Fair∣faxe, and M. Hotham, against the Earl of Cumberland and the rest of the Cavaleers in the Northerne parts, with the manner of the Lord Fairfax joyning with Mr. Hotham. LONDON: Printed for Henry Seymour, October 1. 1642.
An exact and perfect RELATION OF A great battle fought by the Inhabitants of Manchester against the Lord Strange who came to plunder the said Towne. THe town of Manchester hath oftentimes bin opposed by the malignant Party and their Adherents, yet still hath defended them selves with much courage and magnani∣mity, insomuch that they have oftentimes bin masters of the field, and have had the day of tryumph over their Enemies and Adversaries.
But the Lord Strange whose hopes have oftentimes bin frustrated, took a se∣cond Resolution, and prepared himself to march against Manchester, with an intent to pillage the same, and to disarme all those that stood well-affected to King and Parliament. The said Lord Strange hath ever since his last attempt against Manchester, dayly endeavoured to raise a great power and strength, to assist His Majesty against the Parliament, and to put in execution his designs against the Inhabitants of the said Town, and having prepared and raised a great number, he marched towards Man∣chester with two and twenty hundred Horse and Foot, most of them being Pa∣pists, their minds thirsting after bloud; but the Inhabitants of Manchester having information of their comming, immedi∣ately resolved to put themselves in a po∣sture of Warre, and every man to stand upon his own guard, but before they had fortified the Bridge, the Lord Strange ap∣peared with his Forces, and at his com∣ming
thither, he demanded entrance, but ti was denyed him. Wherupon he commanded his soul∣diers to charge against the men of Man∣chester, and drew out divers troops, placing them against severall parts of the walls, insomuch that the City was invironed round with the Cavaleers, making many shots against them. But neverthelesse, such was the cou∣rage of the unndanted spirits that were within the town, that they resolved to sight it out to the last man, and for the space of 4. or 5. hours, the fight continued very furious, till the noble Lord Fairfaxe and M. Hotham, Son to that worthy cham∣pion Sir John Hotham, Governour of Hull, drew up their power and strength, and came with all speed towards Manchester, to assist the Inhabitants thereof against the Cavaleers. But so soon as the Malignant Party had information that the Lord Fairfaxe and Mr. Hotham were comming they present∣ly betook themselves to flight, not daring
to give battle against them. Thus was the Lord Strange with all his Cavaleers quite frustrated of their hopes, and beaten from the Town of Manchester. The greatest part of the Gentry and Commonalty of Yorke now begins to pluck up their spirits, and make head a∣gainst the Parliament Foes, having of late received many men and arms from Sir John Hotham, whose Son commands them, and their Army dayly encreaseth, the Lord Fairfaxe being Generall over them. They have won many victories, having taken divers strong holds for the service of the Parliament, which the Malignant Party had possession of, and they are also resolved to ceize upon all the Parliaments enemies in that County, wherupon Sir William Savile and many other Malig∣nants are fled to Pomfret Castle for Re∣fuge. But the Lord Fairfaxe is resolved to make chase after them, and to besiege the said Castle, there being great store of arms and Ammunition therin.
The Honourable Court of Parliament, having taken into serious consideration these particulars, and being desirous to discharge their duty to His Majesty and the Kingdome, to preserve the peace ther∣of, and to prevent the miseries of Civill Warre amongst His Majesties loving sub∣jects, yet notwithstanding they hold them selves bound to use all the means and power, which by the Laws and Goustitu∣tions of this Kingdome they are trusted with, for defence and protection thereof, and of the Subjects from force and vio∣lence. And to discharge their duties towards God, His Majesty, and the Kingdome, they do in these ensuing Propositions Declare their humble Desires. 1. That his Maiesty would be pleased to withdraw his forces. 2. That he would be pleased to recall the Commissions of Array. And lastly, that he would be pleased to withdraw his Person from those wicked Per∣sons whom he is now invironed with.
The Parliament having intelligence that the Ammunition that were sent to Ireland for the Re∣lief of the distressed Protestants, was taken by a French man of Warre, therfore after some debate thereof, it was resolved and concluded on by both houses, That a Letter should bee forthwith drawne up and sent to the King, which was to this effect, as followeth. That His Majesty would be pleased to make re∣stitution for such Arms, Powder, and Match, which was lately taken going out of Holland to Ireland by a French man of warre, which was done accor∣dingly. Sir John Hothams Son sallyed out of the Town of Hull with two Troops of Horse and 500 Foot, and joyned his Forces with the L. Fairfaxe, with an intent to cleer that County of the Cavaleers, which Letter was read at a Conference by the E. of Hol∣land. FINIS.
