E1971 [ocm]12098981 196780
AN ORDINANCE OF THE Lords and Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT, For the enabling the Committees herein named, to put in Execution severall Ordi∣nances of Parliament in the Counties OF Wilts, Dorset, Somerset, Devon and Cornwall, the Cities of Bristoll and Exeter, and the Town and County of Poole.   Die Lunae, 1. Julii, 1644. H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. London, Printed for Edward Husbands, and are to be sold at his shop in the Middle-Temple. Iuly 6. 1644.
Die Lunae, 1. Julii, 1644. An Ordinance of the Lords and Com∣mons in Parliament assembled, for the enabling the Committees herein na∣med, to put in execution severall Or∣dinances of Parliament in the coun∣ties of Wilts, Dorset, Somerset, De∣von and Cornwall, the cities of Bristoll and Exeter, and the town and coun∣ty of Poole. THe Lords and Commons taking into their con∣sideration the necessity of speedy raising Mo∣neys for the maintenance of the Army, and Garrisons that are or shall hereafter be in the Counties of Wilts, Dorset, Somerset, De∣von and Cornwall, together with the Cities of Bristoll and Exeter, and the Town and County of Pool, And for the reducing of the said Counties to the obedience
of the King and Parliament, Do Ordain and appoint the Persons hereafter named, to be Committees for the said se∣verall and respective Counties and Places; That is to say, FOr the county of Wilts, Philip Earl of Wilts. Pembroke and Mountgomery, Denzill Holles Esquire, Sir Edward Hungerford Knight of the Bath, Sir Nevill Poole, and Sir Edward Baynton, Knights; Alexander Pop∣ham, Edward Baynton, Edward Poole, Wal∣ter Long, Robert Jennor, Robert Nicholas, Edward Ash, Thomas Hodges, Philip Smith, John Ash, Esquires; Sir John Danvers Knight Edmond Ludlow, Alexander Thi∣stlethwayte Iunior, Edward Goddard, Thomas Bennet of Norton, Edmond Ludlow Senior. Walton Poole, John Goddard, Henry Hun∣gerford, Robert Hippisley and Edmond Warnford, Esquires; Robert Long of South∣wick, Thomas Goddard, William Sadler, John Read of Porton, Edward Stoaks, Hum∣phey Ditton, John Dove, Richard Hill, Ro∣bert Brown, Richard Talboys, Thomas Bai∣ly and William Jessy. For the county of Dorset; William Earl of Dorset. Salisbury, Thomas Earl of Elgin, Denzill
Holles Esquire; Sir Walter Erle Knight, John Brown, Edmond Prideaux, Thomas Erle, Thomas Moore, John Trenchard, Dennis Bond, William Whittaker, Roger Hill, Giles Greene, Richard Rose, Esquires; Sir Thomas Trenchard Knight, John Fitz-James Iunior; John Bingham, William Savage, Robert But∣ler, Richard Bradrip, William Sydenham ju∣nior, Francis Chettle, Thomas Crompton, Elias Bond, Bartholomew Hall, Thomas Ceely, Robert Rowe, Henry Henley and John Hill, Esquires; William Kerridge and Richard Bury, Gent. For the Town and County of Poole; John Poole. Bingham Esq; Governor; George Skut senior; Aaron Durell, Haviland Healey, William Skut and John Mellmoth. For the county of Somerset; Sir Edward Somerset. Hungerford, Knight of the Bath, Sir Francis Popham Knight, Alexander Popham, John Pyne, Hugh Rogers, John Ash, Roger Hill of Pounsford and George Searle, Esquire; Sir Thomas Wroth, Sir John Horner, Sir Ro∣bert Gorges, Knights; Edw: Popham, Samuel Horner, Henry Roles, Sergeant at Law, Wil∣liam
Strode, Clement Walker, James Ash, John Preston, Thomas Hodges, Henry Hen∣ley, William Long, Henry Bonner, Richard Hippisley, Jonathan Pits, Robert Paradine, Thomas Hippesley, Alexander Pym, William Pryn, Thomas English, William Caple, John Barnard, John Prickman and Robert Blake, Esquires, John Palmer, Roger Hill of Taun∣ton, Nicholas Saunders, Richard Trivilian, Lyslebone Long, Matthew Clift of Bath, Ro∣bert Morgan of Wells, and Christopher Pet∣tard Gent. Edward Ceely, Thomas Francis, and Henry Minterne. And for the City of Bristoll; Richard Vic∣caris, Bristoll. Luke Hodges, John Birch, Henry Gibs, James Powell, Edward Tyson and Robert Aldworth. And for the County of Devon; Sir John Devon. Bamfield Baronet, Sir John Speckot, Sir Ri∣chard Strode, Sir Edmond Fowell, Sir Shilston Calmadry, Sir Henry Rosewell and Sir John Young, Knights; Walter Young, Edmond Prideaux, John Maynard, John Harris of Karne, William Strode, Francis Rowse, John Waddon, John Rolles, William Fry, John
Crocker, Robert Savery, Elias Grymes, Ar∣thur Upton, Richard Gilbert, John Lutterell, Richard Mallack senior of Axmouth, Thomas Crew, Charles Vaughan, John Ware, Coll: John Beare, Tho: Beare, Henry Polexfin, John Kelly of Kelly; John Caws, Major of Plymouth; John Barton of Silverton; John Champneys, Thomas Boone, Philip Harris, Joseph Huntkine, John Marshall, Philip Francis, Thomas Ceely, Richard Evans, Ti∣mothy Alsop, Justinian Peard, Christopher Ceeley. And for the City of Excester; Samuel Clark, Exon. Adam Bennit, John Louering, Richard Cros∣sing junior; and Richard Evans. For the County of Cornwall; John Lord Cornwall. Roberts, Francis Buller, Richard Erysey, Tho: Arundell, Francis Godolphin of Treveneage, Anthony Nicholl, George Buller, and John Moyle junior; John Elliot, John Seyntaubyn, John Trefusis, John Moyle, John Carter, Nicholas Boscawen, George Kekewich, John Trefusis junior; Tho: Gewen, Richard Chiver∣ton, Christopher Worthivall, Antho: Rowse, Nicholas Wadham, Henry Wills, Robert Ben∣net,
Richard Carver, Edward Elliot, John Martin, Richard Penwaren, William Ceely and Robert Martin. Which Prsons, or any three of them, are hereby Autho∣rised and apponted to put in Execution within their respe∣ctive Counties and Places, these Ordinances following; That is to say, The Ordinance for Administrng the Nato∣nall Covenant, The Ordinance for the Fifth and Twentieth part, The severall Ordnances, Orders and Instructions for Sequestrations, And the Ordinance for the Weekly Assess∣ment; Which said Ordinance for the Weekly Assessment shall be put in Execution for three Moneths from the date of this Ordinance; And the said Committees respectively, shall do their utmost for the preservation of the said Coun∣ties from spol and plunder, and shall be likewise obedient to such further Instructions as from time to time they shall receive from both Houses of Parliament. And be it further Ordained, That all Power formerly given by any Order or Ordinance of Parliament to any person or persons, other then such as are named in this Ordinance for the putting in Execution any of the forenamed Ordinances in these Counties and places, is hereby repealed and made voyd. FINIS.
