E2899 R39502 [ocm]18424402 154411
At the Court at WHITEHALL The Sixteenth Day of February, 1688. PRESENT, The Kings most Excellent Majesty, His Royal Highness Prince George of Denmark, Lord Privy Seal, Duke of Norfolk, Marquess of Winchester, Lord Great Chamberlain, Lord Steward, Lord Chamberlain, Earl of Oxford, Earl of Shrewsbury, Earl of Bedford, Earl of Bathe, Earl of Maclesfeld, Earl of Nottingham, Viscount Faulconberg, Viscount Mordaunt, Viscount Newport, Viscount Lumley, Lord Bishop of London, Lord Montagu, Lord Delamer, Lord Churchill, Mr. Bentinck, Mr. Sidney, Sir Robert Howard, Sir Henry Capel, Mr. Speaker of the H. of Commons, Mr. Russel, Mr. Hambden, Mr. Boscawen. WHereas by the late Act of Uniformity, which Establisheth the Liturgy, and Enacts, That no Form or Order of Common Prayers be openly used, other then what is Prescribed and Appointed to be used in and by the said Book, It is notwith∣standing provided, That in all those Prayers, Litanies and Collects, which do any ways relate to the King, Queen, or Royal Progeny, the Names be alter∣ed and changed from time to time, and fitted to the present Occasion, accord∣ing to the Direction of lawful Authority: His Majesty was pleased this day, in Council to Declare His Royal Will and Pleasure, That in all Prayers for the King, to the Word King be added and Queen, to the Words Sovereign Lord be added and Lady; and that instead of the King's Name Charles or James, be used the Names William and Mary. That the first Petition for the King in the Litany, shall end thus, Thy Servants Wil∣liam and Mary, our most Gracious King and Queen. And that in the Prayer for the High Court of Parliament, instead of these words, Our Sovereign and his, be pla∣ced these words, Their Majesties and their. And that in the first and second Collects for the King, next after the Commandments in the Communion Ser∣vice, the words be read thus, The Hearts of thy chosen Servants King VVilliam and Queen Mary, that. And that in the Prayer for Christs Church Militant, the words be read thus, And especially thy Servants VVilliam and Mary our King and Queen. That likewise in the first Prayer in the Form to be used at Sea, the words be read thus, Our most Gracious Sovereign Lord and Lady King VVilliam and Queen Mary, and their Kingdoms. And that in all Prayers for the Royal Family, the Persons particularly to be Prayed for, be thus named and ex∣pressed, Catherine the Queen Dowager, her Royal Highness the Princess Anne of Denmark, and all the Royal Family. And His Majesty doth straitly Charge and Command, That no Edition of the Book of Common Prayer be from henceforth Printed, but with these Amendments; and that in the mean time, till Copies of such Edition may be had, all Parsons, Vicars and Curates within this Realm, do (for the preventing of Mistakes) with the Pen Correct and Amend all such Prayers in their Church Books, according to the foregoing Directions: And for the better Notice hereof, that this Order be forthwith Printed and published, and sent to the several Parishes; and that the Right Reverend the Bishops take care, that Obedience be paid to the same accordingly, within their respective Diocesses. John Nicholas. London, Printed by Charles Bill, and Thomas Newcomb, Their Majesties Printers. 1688.
