H73b [ocm]12146812 197140
LANCASTERS MASSACRE: OR, THE NEVV VVAY OF Advancing the Protestant Religion, and expressing Loyaltie to the KING and QUEENE. NAMELY, To cut the throats of Protestant men, women, and innocent Children, as lately the Papists and Malignants did at Lancaster. Related in a Letter from a Gentleman of great note in Lancashire, to a friend in London, who the Bookseller can name: which Letter is here printed verbatim. LONDON: Printed for The. Ʋnderhill at the Bible in Woods April 1. 1643.
A COPIE OF A LETTER FROM A Gentleman of great worth in Lancashire, to his friend in London, who the Stationer can name. I Have not time to write any large discourse, the news is not so good but you may heare enough of it; yet rather then let you be abused with falacies, I will give you the summe of all briefly. After the ta∣king the Ordnance from the Spanish ship, we carried them all safe to the Castle of Lancaster, within few dayes after the Earl of Darbie ad∣vanced towards us, all the Papists rising whol∣ly with him. Our Major having notice of it,
sent to Boulton and Manchester for relief for us: Mr. Ashton undertook the charge, and advan∣ced as farre as Garston, and hearing that the E∣nemie fled upon his coming, he returned to Preston. Whereupon the Earl re-advanced to∣wards us; and after some two houres hard fight, with the great slaughter of our Enemie, (for we could at several times see two or three of their Colours fall at once, and bodies lye on heaps) they dispersed themselves among the hedges, and at the back of the houses, and set the Town on fire. This inforced our men to retire to the Castle; whereupon the Enemie entred the Town, and killed man, woman, and children with all barbarous crueltie, drag∣ging poore people from their houses, and cut∣ting their throats with Butchers knives: they set fire round the Town and departed. We had no victuals in the Castle, the Well there was presently drunk drie: but we issued out again into the burned Town, took divers of the E∣nemies there remaining prisoners, and out of the store yet unburned, we victualled our selves for a good time. Thus we lay two or three houres, the Enemie encompassing us on
all sides but (we were without any feare of danger) at last the Major Generall and Master Ashton came to relieve us, they drew all the strength of Preston and adjacent parts with them; the Earl lying at Ellwell they drew to Cokeram, and so passed by him to us: the Earle who was no way able to have fought with them, took this opportunitie of the Town of Prestons weaknesse, and fell back upon it, and took it that night. Master Hopwood and Peter Shaw were there taken, and yet escaped again: I know not the losse there they received, I am sure it was over much; at my going post I left my Armour, Clothes, and an hundred Mus∣kets there, these are lost, I having nothing left. Vpon notice the Earl was marched towards Preston, Sargeant Major Sparrow, and Master Ashton followed him; he had the Town be∣fore they came: and as we are certainly inform∣ed, all this crueltie arises from the Earle of Darbie, who hath taken all the great Papists into his Counsell, who before were not ad∣mitted, who have put him upon this cruell massacre, and all rise with him as one man, and if it be in their power will not leave a true Pro∣testant
in these parts. If God and good people do not look upon us, which God grant they may, this Countrey will be open for the Queene to passe with her forces, who hath al∣readie sent 1100 to Shipton, toward Blagborne, being in haste I cannot inlarge: But rest, Lancaster, the 25. March. 1643. Your faithfull friend, J. H. FINIS.
