H2788B 816.m.10[47] R224692 99885597 185370
HORN's PROPOSALS, Humbly Offered to the Honourable House of Commons. Setting forth the only true and easie Method how to Change the Coin of this Kingdom, both Good and Bad, and in so doing, to Raise the King near 2000000 of Moneys, more or less according to what the Deficiency of the Coin and bad Money will amount to, if it was all full Weight and right Standard, which if I do not make Good by the Permission of this Honorable House, and with 20000 l. to begin with, both for Fund, and to Defray Charges, I dare lose my Life, I am so grounded in my Project, which is as follows. Imprimis, THAT there be 3 Mints, and 3 Grand Offices, besides the Offices for the Counties, to wit, One Mint and a Grand Office at London, another at York, and another at Exeter, and more if they can be allow∣ed, or fewer, if there be any Reason to the contrary; but supposing 3. then, I propose these follow∣ing Rules; First, To divide England and Wales into 3 Divisions, for which every Division hath a Mint, and a Grand Office. Secondly, THAT every County Change their Moneys distinctly; also that every Parish do the same; and where there are large Parishes, That every Ward Change distinctly, as they shall have Notice given them by a Messenger from the Office of the County, or from the Grand Office of the Division; and that every Parish or Ward (so coming to Change) chuse out such Persons to be with them during the time of their Change, as best knows the Inhabitants of such Parish or Ward, the bet∣ter to discover such as have so Metamorphiz'd the Coin. Having shew'd the Method of Changing; I now come to the Man∣ner or Changing, which is thus; First, I'll suppose there may be 2000000 of Moneys False and Deficient to be made Good, if allow'd; I will draw it into the Hands of 400000 Persons; Thus by giving Change for no Summ of false Coin,Note, That such whose Sums will not amount so high as 5 l. and that they may not part from their Moneys at any rate, the King may give them 10 d. for every Shil∣ling; and so Tally it as the others, and such as will take such Tal∣ly in Change, or buy the same shall have 2 d. in the Shilling Advance, which the o∣ther lost; which in 5 l. will be 16 s. 8 d. for which advance the King will have Buyers enough. Note that if these Mints may be removed from County to County, it will be the ea∣sier for the People. and the Deficiency in the Good under 5 l. which will cause People to joyn together, or sell their Moneys to such as have larger Sums, which they may do for a very small Loss, and have Buyers enough, if they have no Friend that they are minded to Joyn with; by doing of which will draw it into those 400000 Hands, before mentioned, if not many fewer. Then give them a Tally for this bad Moneys, and that which the Good wants of Weight in such Sums as they shall desire it: None being given under 5 l. and also give them their Tallies, passible in such Counties, as they desire them; provided that County have done, or begun to Change; and for the Remainder of the Good Moneys, give it them in Mill'd. Moneys. Secondly, How to make this be come all Good to the King, and to Raise him 2000000 of Moneys upon it, is thus; First, THAT every Tally pass as so much Ready Moneys, and that every time it pass in Payment, or is Sold or Lent, there be 2 d. deducted out of every Pound for the King, which is to be given to him that Receives the Tally, and Indors'd on the said Tally; and so all along, always making the Receiver of the Tally the Receiver of the King's Tax; and intrusting such Indorsements always in the Hands of him that owns the Tally, until they amount to 20 s. and then the Tally to pass no more in Payment, until the 20 s. of Indorsments be paid into the Office, and a new Tally given the Owner thereof in Lieu of his o∣ther Tally, that hath so wasted it self 20 s. and that the Prior-Tally be struck out: Thus if my Tally was first 5 l. in going thro' 24 Hands, it Raiseth 20 s. to the King, then in whose hands it lies it be carried to the Office, as I said before, and take a New Tally of 4 l. and so on until it be wasted to 20 s. then that the Owner thereof Receive in lieu of that Tally, having so wasted it self, 20 s. in Ready Moneys; and that the Master of the said Office be Impower'd to add the 20 s. so bought to the next Tally that comes to his Hand to be renew'd, and that he receive 20 s. in lieu thereof, which he had before given for the same; and that then the Prior-Tally be discharg'd. This I hope makes it plain, that it will make all this Moneys become Good to the King, whe∣ther there be more or less of it, excepting 20 s. in every County, which will be the last Tally of every County; so that by conse∣quence, having no Tally left to Charge it upon, it must be the Kings Loss, which will be but 51 l. throughout England and Wales. Secondly, It is convenient to give an Example, how these Tallies are to be paid, and how the Moneys will be Raised, and the Tally wasted; which to make it more plain, is thus; Impr. A. Hath a Tally of 5 l. A. pays this Tally to B. being indebted to him such a Summ, and gives B. also Five Groats more than the Tally of 5 l. which is Half for the King, and the other Half sunk; which Half for the King A. takes care to Indorse upon the Tally; so that A. hath lost Five Groats by his Tally of 5 l. and every time a Tally of 5 l. comes into his hands, he loseth Five Groats by putting it off. Note, That if there was no Tax laid upon this bad Moneys, then A. would lose but 10 d. per time by putting off his Tally, but since a Tax must be Raised, and the bad Moneys thrown away, and the Deficiency of the good Coin made good, it is no mat∣ter how great a Tax is laid upon it, 'twill the sooner be over, and the sooner Raise the Moneys for the King; and without grudging, by reason it must be throw'd away, one way or other; and there can be no other way found out, so pleasing and advantagious. Secondly, To shew how equally this will be Levied, and how easily; for as Cases now stands, the Rich and cunning Men hath ridded this bad Moneys out of their Hands, but the poorer Sort of Traders and Tenants cannot get rid of it; which if some such way be not taken to Disperse it again, that every Man may bear a Share of the Loss, according to his Dealings in the World, these poorer Sort of People must all be utterly ruined; but as to shewing how equally it will be Levied, and how easily; Supposing there be 2000000 of this Moneys; and it be drawn into 400000 Persons hands, at 5 l. per Person; then sup∣pose there may be 6000000 of People to make this Good, every one will contribute according to their Dealings. Suppose I Deal for 100 l. per Annum, and no more, if all my Dealings be in Tally, I pay but 14 s. towards wasting this Tally of 5 l. and towards Raising the King his 2000000 of Moneys, and soon proportionably according to his Dealings, for a Tally will thrust it self into the hands of such as are great Dealers; for they will never lie still, till they have spent themselves, Now hoping I have Laid all things so plain and easie, that they may be understood, but if any Objection may arise, I crave Leave to answer to the same; for it is as plain to me as the Alphabet; But it may be supposed, that so Great an Undertaking cannot be seen through at the first sight, which brings me to Subscribe my self, Your Honours most Dutiful Servant, And shall ever Pray, as in Duty bound. Note, That any Person may return his Tally out of one County into the other, at his pleasure, and make it become Payable any where. Note also, That the King hath but one Receiver in a County, that He pays to; so that the Tax is easily Gathered, for every Man is his own Collector, and his own Taxer; so that he can neither complain that he is too hardly Tax'd, or too severely dealt with by the Collectors; neither can he say he hath no Moneys to pay this Tax.
