H3362 [ocm]12072318 196748
HVLLS Managing of the Kingdoms Cause: OR, A brief Historicall RELATION OF THE Severall Plots and Attempts against KING∣STON upon HULL, from the beginning of these unhappy diffrences to thi day; and the means whereby through Gods blessing it hah been preserved, and the Kingdom in it. Expressed in five particulars, viz. I. In settling it in the hands of the Parliament. II. In ir Iohn Hothams rfuall to give His Majsty entrance. III. In the first Siege by the Cavaliers. IV. In the change of the Government. V. In the latter Siege by the Earl of Newcastle. To which is added, a short Relation of the present state of the Northern Counties, and the posture of the Eng∣lish and Scots Armies before York, with the manner of the siege; also, a Postscript to the Reader. Oculatus testis plus valet quam auriti decem. London, Printed for Richard Best at Grayes-Inne gate. Iune 18. 1644.
The Preface. FOrasmuch as the managing of the Cause of God and the Kingdom, against the Enemies of both, is the publike businesse of our times, and Hull was the Scene whereon the Prologue was acted, yea, I may say the action there was the very Argument of the worke, and Epitome of the whole war, it is very requisite that the Kingdome should be truely informed of occurrences there, and of the many wonder∣full deliverances that God wrought for that place; and the whole Realme thereby, and the instruments which his heavenly hand used for managing the businesse, wherein it is observable, hee hath done like a cunning workman, who doth many times with crooked instruments, make a straight peece of worke. Never any thing was to be done, but God found out Spirits, and gave abilitie to effect it. Now since he was pleased to honour the Inhabitants of that place with a great part of the action, give an Eye-witnessing Sojourner among them, leave to say so, whose notes of Observation were at first collected for his owne private use, although upon the earnest entreaty of many, they are now like to be made publique. And because I must say so much of the place, its not immethodicall to say something of the Inhabitants; Of all ages & Sexes betwixt seven and eight thousand, they are ordinarily civill, Charitable to the poore, as appears by their large contributions upon all occasions of Collections, for such as are in need; outwardly reli∣gious, having ever since the Reformation been blest with a learned and painfull Ministery, having also full Congregations on the Lords day, Lecture day, and all other extraordinary occasions; in matters indiffe∣rent conformable to Authoritie, & generally disliking independency; ma∣ny good, too many bad; much Wheat, much Chaffe. No People, no Place, more blest, so preserved. Policy prevailed not; Majestie overawed not; Treachery (I accuse no particulars, but leave every one to his just triall) undermined not; Force overcame not. O Hull! God was thy Counsellour, thy Protector, thy Watchman, thy Rock of Salva∣tion. Let Hull acknowledge it, the Kingdom know it, us all be thank∣full, especially we who had our particular shares in it, and say, Not unto us, Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name be glory.
HVLLS Managing of the Kingdomes Cause. BEfore I addresse my self to that which is the Theame of my dis∣course, something must be premised for the Readers better in∣formation, and more easie understanding of the insuing matter, a word or two therefore concerning the first budding of this Apple of Contention, or Hulls first Originall, and its scituation. It was at the first a poor Country Hamlet consisting of a few stragling Cottages, called by the name of Wike, the inhabitants li∣ved by fishing, it being commodiously situate hard by two rivers, Humber and Hull, for that kinde of Trade. In processe of time the inhabitants, as they advanced thei estates, so they bettered their dwellings, and reduced it into the forme of a Town, and by degrees converting their fisher-boats into Merchants Ships, it became a Port-town, and place of Merchan∣dise, by which new Trade, it increased in riches and pompe. After this it was endowed with many priviledges by severall Kings, and in further favour it was called Kingston upon Hull, and made a Corporation with a County annexed to it, at the first gover∣ned by Bailiffs, afterwards, and still with a Major and twelve Al∣dermen, at length they obtained favour of the King, that the Town might be walld and trenched about, which was done at their own costs, they made then four Ports or gates, viz. Hasell gates, Miton gates, Beverley gates, and North gates. After this, King Henry the eight, being informed of the naturall strength of the Town, by reason of the commodious situation there∣of in an Angle, having Humber on the Southside, and Hull on the East, in his progresse into these Northerne parts, turned aside to see the place, where (for the better security of the Country from for∣rain invasion) he erected two Blockhouses on the other side of the river Hull; one over against the South end of the Town, hard by the mouth of Hull, which commands the River of Humber, the other over against the North end which secures from the Land, and in the midway betwixt these he founded a very strong Castle, which com∣mands both the River and the Land, they are so seated, that they can clear one another with their Ordnance from an enemies assaul being all vvell fortified vvith Guns; from each of these to other
reared a wall eight yards high, and five yards thick, of brick-stone strongly cemented, the walls of the Blockhouses and Castle being of the m matter and thicknesse. The King tok such pleasure in the Town, and Countrey adjoy∣ning, which was convenient for his game, that he was a while resi∣dent here, and kep his Court in a large and sumptuous house, cal∣led the Mannor, now the Repository of Armes, or Magazine for the Kingdomes use. Moreover for the better fortification of the Town, the Inhabi∣tants built a Fort at the Southend, which is very well furnished with iron Gun, and one brasse Basilico 17. foot long, her weight 7000. which at the beginning of the latter Siege was carryed to the walls, which are singularly well fortified with brasse and iron Guns, both Culverins and Demicanon cutts. Before the walls is the Towns ditch both broad and deep, over which he three draw∣bridges, viz. at Miton, Beverley, and North gates, and before each gte is either a Horne-worke, a Halfe-moon, or a battery, and from one to another round about the walls to both the rivers, was made in Sir Iohn Hothams time, a Brestworke for Musquetiers, with a deep trench before it, over which lie two Drawbridges, to wit, at Beverly & Northgates, the other two gates are ram'd up with earth. But that which adds further to the strength of the Town, is that the Medowes and Moorish grounds on every side of the Town, and Blockhouses, may for the space of two miles be so overflown with salt water by cutting the banks at the Spring-tides, that an enemie cannot make any neer approach, (much lesse undermine) but by the bankes of the rivers, except some few medowes on the West side by Humber bankes that lie so high, they cannot be drowned, there was therefore a Fort Royall made on that quarter, about twenty score from the walls, to prevent an approach, which since the truly No∣ble Lord Fairfax came to us, was finished and fortified with Ord∣nance. Concerning the rise and Fortification of Hull, I need say no more, onely give me leave to invert that of the Poet, Iam Troja est ubi seges fuit. This Town thus situated, was by the State-polititians deemed the fittest place in these Northerne parts, for the Kingdomes Magazine in the expedition against the Scots. There was therefore sent hither great store of ammunition, and Arms for about thirty thousand men both Horse and Foor, all which were in the managing of Cap. Leg, and his Assignes, and for the further security thereof, as also of the Castle, Forts and Blockhouses, here was planted by the E: of Straf∣ford
a garrison of 1000 Souldiers under the command of Sir Th: Glmham; who continued here almost a yeer after the happy pacification betwixt his Majeste and our Brethren of Scotland, untill they were dismissed and dis∣banded by the Parliamen, and then the Magazine, Castle, Blockhouses, and the other Forts were committed to the care of the Towns-men, whose care in watching and warding was answerable to their trust. Afterward, when the great Court-Delinquents, which were not Parlia∣ment-proof, had withdrawn His Majesties person and affection from his Parliament, it was thought no little piece of State-policy, for the furthe∣rance of their Designes, which were then in hatching, to secure this Town and the Magazine; whereupon the Earl of Newcastle was forthwith ad∣dressed with letters in His Majesties name, full of Clemency to the Towns∣men, therby commanding and requiring, that the keyes of the Ports, Maga∣zine and Blockhouses, might be instantly delivered to the said Earl, who as it seemed, suspecting what the sequell of that errand might be, desired to passe unknown, calling himself Sir Iohn Savage, (an omen in it) and at his first landing was brought before the Major, under that name, till being known by some by-standers, he was forced to own both his name, and his errand. But the Major and Aldermen, and Townsmen, perceiving an e∣strangement betwixt the King and his Parliament, and the ground thereof, and knowing the Parliaments resolution, to establish the government in the hands of Sir John Hotham, demurred upon the businesse a few dayes, untill a letter came from the Parliament to command them to re∣ceive Master Hotham; hereupon, the fearfull, yet faithfull Towns∣men, resolved upon a-Petition to be sent to His Majestie; Humbly be∣seeching that His Mjestie would be pleased to agree with His Parliament, concerning that businesse, that so without fear, or breach of falty to ei∣ther, they might know in whose hands to entrust the strength of the King∣dome, together with their own lives and estates. At the same instant was Captaine Legge also in the town, and a strong partee of Malignants bestir∣red themselves for the Earl, flattering themselves with expectation of the Kings Royall favour towards the Town thereby, and I know not what ho∣nour and credit in the entertainment of so honourable a Personage, before a private Gentleman. In the mean while the well affected were uncessant in their endeavours for the choyce of the other, according to the Order of Parliament, and took care to inform the Parliament concerning the carri∣age of the businesse, who immediatly sent a summons for the Earl and Cap∣taine Leage to attend them at Westminster, who the next tide set forward on the journey, and gave over the claime. The day before came a second Letter from His Majestie, requiring either to receive the Earl, as our Go∣vernour, or to keep the Town in our own hands, and the Major to be sole
Governour. But the same day that the Earl departed, Master Hotham was freely received into the Town with three Companies of the trained bands, and the keyes of the Ports and the Magazine were surrendred into his hands. After a few weeks Sir Iohn Hotham sent down from the Parliament, be∣took him to his charge, and dismissed his sonne, drawing more Companies of the Trained bands of Yorkeshire into the Garrison, untill they amounted to the number of about 800. Afterwards the Breach betwixt the King and His Parliament growing wider, and he more remte, not onely in Person (being now come to Yorke) but in affection also, and the Malignant par∣ty beginning to shew themselves at Yorke, and at Hull too, he thought it high time to discharge the Town of some grosse Malignant Spirits, who now began to stickle and make Proslites. Not many daies after came the Duke of Yorke, the Prince Elector, the Earl of Newport, the Lord Willoughby, and some other persons of Honour: with their Attendants to see the Town, who were respectively entertained by the Major and the Governour, who spending that day in viewing the beauty and strength of the Town, were invited to a banquet by the Major, and to dinner by the Governour the next day, being St. George his day; but a little before dinner time, Sir Iohn Hotham being busie in his enter∣tainment of their Highnesse, hee was suddenly saluted by Sir Lewes Dives with a Message from His Majestie, that he intended to dine with him that day, being then within four miles of Hull with 300. Horse and up∣wards, whereat being startled for the present, he consulted with Mr. Pel∣ham, a Member of the House, and Alderman of Hull, and with some others what to do, whereupon, a Messenger was thought fit to be forthwith sent to his Majestie, humbly to beseech him to forbear to come, forasmuch as he could not without betraying the trust committed to him, set open the Gates to so great a Guard as he came attended withall. Upon the returne of the Messenger, who certified concerning the Kings advance towards the Town, he drew up the Bridge, and shut the Gates, and commanded the Souldiers to stand to their armes round about the walls. About eleven of the clock His Majestie with his Attendants came to Beverly gates, where calling for Sir Io. Hotham, He commanded the gates to be opened; whose frequent answer, to that reiterated command was, That hee was entrusted by the Parliament, for the securing the Town for his Majesties Honour, and the Kingdomes use, which he intended by Gods help to do; and herein, again and again he desired His Majestie not to mis-inter∣pret his action, protesting his Loyalty, and proffering that if his Majestie would be pleased, with the Prince and twelve more to come in, he should
be  wlcome, otherwise he could not, without betraying his Trust to the Stae, admit entrance to so great a Guard; but His Majestie refused to enter without his whole Train. About one of the clocke the Duke and the Prince Elctor with their Attendants, went forth to His Majestie, who departed not from the Gates till four of the clocke. All the while not the least disturbance was offered to Sir Iohn Hotham or his Souldiers, from the Townsmen, although they exceeded their numbers manifold, but all en∣couragement and convenient assistance, if need should require, although even wihin the walls we were not without a great partie of Malignants. About five of the clocke, having given to Sir Iohn Hotham one hour to consder what he did, Hs Majestie returned to the Gates, and receiving the e answer as before, he commanded Sir Iohn Hotham to be proclai∣m Traitor by two Heralds at Armes, and then retreated towards Bever∣ly six mles, where he lodged that night. The next morning came an He∣rald (and some others) from His Majstie with conditions of pardon, if yet he would open the ates; out the same answer, with humble submission being returned, His Majestie advanced toward Yorke that night. After this his Majesties Guard (as they called themselves) encreasing every day to a great number and strength, and to a height of Malignity against the Parliament, and Breathing out threats against Sir Iohn Hotham, and the Towne, it was thought necessary to try and engage the Inhabitants, by a Protestation for the maintenance of Hull, for the King and Parliament, and Kingdomes use, which was cheerfully taken by the greatest part of the people, but such as refused to take it were expelled the Town. Now Sir Iohn Hotham supposing that the aime of that party was princi∣pally to gain the Magazine, and that their malice were at an end, if it were removed, he sent all the great Ordnance back to London, as also great store of Armes and Ammunition, thinking now he should have rest, and be mo∣lested no more. Notwithstanding within a few weeks after the Ship cal∣led the Providence making an escape from the May-Flowre, which had ta∣ken her in Humber, and was bringing her to Hull, ran a shore upon Hol∣dernesse Coast with sixteen peeces of Ordnance, and great store of armes and ammunition, having been long expected by the Cavaliers, and now the tidings being carried to Yorke of her arrivall, they came post to bid her wel∣come, unburdened the Ship, armed themselves, and Countreymen whom they arrayed, and marched up against Hull, which forthwith they belea∣guered on all sides, quartering their men in all the Villages round about, and casting up some workes against the Town, on the Northside, where they kept their guards; they stopped our markets, cut off our Water, fired three of our Mills, raised a fort at Paull, a little Town in Holdernsse, upon
the edge of ubr, from whee they shot at our Ships, as they sailed to a , where they broke one of their ; and another at Hssell, from whence they shot at our keels and boats, a they passed up and down the River, where one of their Canoneers having never done any execution up∣on our vessels, levelled his Gun at a boat, and swore God dane him, he would sinke it at that sh or he would never shoot more, and so he gave fir; immediately the g broke, and tore out his bowels that he died ouright, it kild also one more that stood by him. ☞ And here not; That this was the beginning of this miserable War, the Viperous birth of the Ma∣lignant and Popish partie, which ere it be long will eat through the bow∣els of the Dam, as they themselves, like so many vipers have digged through the sides of heir mother the Kingdom of England that hath bred & brought them up.— Over against Paul upon Lincolneshire shore they made another Fore, whether they sent three peeces of Ordnnce in a Catch, which was battered by the May-flower, and the Ordnance was brought into Hull. All this while his Majesty was quarered at Beverley, and came sometimes to see the Leagues. In the mean while we were not idle in the Towne, but fortified our walls, and repaired our Out-workes: We had also frequent alarmes in the night, which cost many of them dear, we not sparing either owder or shot. We also cut the bankes, and overflowed all he grounds about the Town, whereby we retarded their approaches. We often sallied out and gave them alarmes: One night about 400. Townsmen and Souldiers advanced towards their quarters at Anlaby, but being encountred with a grea shower of rain, we made our retreat, which if it had not happened, we had met with the Enemie in the way, and welcomed them to Hull, for within two houres after we had entred the Ports, they marched up, about 200. towards the Town, and set fire to our Mills. Our Ordnance upon the walls were all loaden, but the Canoneers were to seek till the Enemie was gone almost out of Gun-shot, and then they sent after them, which made many of them through haste to fall into the ditches, among the rest the Earl of N. as was reported was over head and eares, on whose pertiwig one of his Gentlemen catching hold, it came off from his head; and weighing heavie with water, he thought it had been his head, so that he cryed out, that his Lordships head was shot off with a great bullet from the Town. Within a few daies after we sallied out again upon their quarters at An∣laby, where we fired their Magazine, beat them away, took 14. prisoners and made a retreat. So hereby perceiving our resolutions were firme for the maintenance of the Town, and despairing of any hopes for gaining
thereof, having besieged us almost a moneth, without taking their leaves they retreated to Yorke, and made ready for their other designes. Having hitherto failed (through the blessing of God) in all their at∣tempts against this poore Hull, they found out a new method of malignity against it, endeavouring what by policy and force they could not overcome, by fraud to undermine; and herein by proffers, and promises, and private messages in disguise; besides the Lord Digby was two or three times in town with the Governour, and Cyphers were agreed on for correspondencie. I am much your Servant I. G. Their witts were very working; but how farre they prevailed herein I intend not to determine, but will leave it to time and tryall to bring forth: but of this I am sure, nor small were our feares and distractions in the Town, on what grounds, whether reall or imaginary I have not to say, but they were much encreased upon Captaine Hothums entertainement after his e∣scape from Colonell Cromwell, and Bushells release out of prison upon ex∣change, who we supposed upon tryall would have been proved a Traitor to the State, (concerning the businesse of Scarborough) as also by a monitory Letter from Captaine Moyer belonging to the ship called the Hercules, which had all the yeare lain before the Town to keep the River, but how the Towne was secured and the Government changed I shall briefly relate. Notice being given late at might by Captaine Moyer aforesaid in a Letter to a private man, to be showne to the Major and Aldermen, of some dange∣rous designe at the Doore; and admonishing if they meant to be safe either now to stirre or never, they sent for some well-affected Townesmen, who immediately thought it fit to be doing, and forth-with acquainting some strangers of great note in the Towne with their jealousies, they craved their helpe and advice, who were very desirous (I beleeve) that the Towne should be secured, but were fearefull to engage themselves either by Coun∣sell or assistance, doubting what might be the successe, and so left it wholly to the discretion and managing of the Townesmen, not any of the strangers shewing themselves till the businesse was fully effected which was perfor∣med after this manner. The next day being Saint Peters day 29th. of Iune, 1643. about three of the clock in the morning, those that were first acquain∣ted with it went from house to house, giving notice to all their neighbours, especially to such as were zealously affected to the Parliaments Cause, con∣cerning what was to be done; forthwith above 1500. men were in readi∣nesse, who expected at their doores till the word of command was given from the Major, and then every man armed with his Musquet and fired Mach shewed forth himselfe, first uniting themselves into a body, and then dividing themselves into severall companies, with rock▪ Matches they ∣ched
up against the severall guards within the walls, and within the space of halfe an houre ceazed on all the guards of the Towne, fifty men also were sent from aboard the Hercules, who ceazed on the guard of the Ma∣gazine, the souldiers at every guard seemed to make some small resistance at the first, but at length understanding the ground of our attempt to be bot∣tom'd on nothing but loyalty to the State, in the security of the Towne, they were willing to resigne and joyne with us. A little resistance was made at the maine guard by a Captaine, kinsman to the Governour, whom we pre∣sently disarmed and secured. In the meane time some unarmed men were ferried over to the Garrison side, who dropping into the Block-houses un∣suspectedly by one and one, and acquainting the Commanders there whom they knew to be faithfull with the businesse, they armed themselves with the souldiers armes, guarded the Ordnance and secured them both. But the Captaine of the Castle having some notice of the designe; shut the Gates, and refused to give them any entrance, without a Letter from the Major under his hand for his warrant, which receiving he surrendred: Thus all the Guards being secured, we apprehended Mr. Hotham, and the Officers belonging to the Garrison, of whom we could have but the least ground of suspition. And here take notice by the way, of the wonderfull providence of God, who stirred up Spirits to attempt such an hazardous enterprize, which some feared would have cost many a mans life, and gave also such a blessing that the Town, Magazine, Castle, Block-houses & Forts should be all secured, without the losse of one drop of bloud, or the discharging of a Musquet, which if it had bin to be done any other way, must needs have cost infinit expence both of monies and of bloud. Sir I. Hotham in the mean while made an escape out of the Gates, after whom were discharged two great guns from the walls, but did him no harme (God be thanked) so riding on to the Ferry he thought to passe over into Holdernesse, where failing of a Boate he rode on to Beverly, but a Post from Hull was there before him, who had cer∣tified to Colonell Boynton what was done, so that meeting Sir Iohn Hotham in the streets, he laid hold on him as his prisoner, who after offering to make an escape, was knockt off his horse by a souldier, and had his face a little bruised with the fall, so forth-with they brought him prisoner to Hull, but he desiring not to be brought into the Gates because he feared a mischiefe, was conveyed by another way aboard the Hercules, where he was kept pri∣soner till he was sent up to London. The great businesse being now over, and the Towne and Garrison in some manner settled, they now proceeded to examine witnesses concerning such Officers and others as were under susition, and in many particulars about the affaires of the Government, and to settle the Country in a posture
of defence; For the better managing therefore of those weighty matters, as also for the approving of their owne integrity, the Major and Aldermen cra∣ved the advice and assistance of some strangers of good worth who were sled for refuge into the Towne, in particular Sir Mathew Boynton, sir Willi∣am Saint Quintin, sir Richard Darley, sir John Bourchier and some others who since are approved of by the Parliament, and authorized to sit as a Committee. Immediatly (because of the enemies approach at that instant to∣wards Beverly, which was at that present not strong enough to withstand them) letters were sent to Scarbrough to the Commander of Sir Iohn Ho∣thams house, which hee had fortified with very strong workes, thee pee∣ces of Ordnance, and above one hundred souldiers, forthwith to march with his company, and Ordnance, and Ammunition to Beverly, which ac∣cordingly was done, or else that Towne had been lost, and our men cut off; for the next morning the enemy not knowing what was done, came confi∣dently to the very workes unto the mouth of the Ordnance, calling for him that should deliver up the Towne, not expecting such a hot welcome for after two houres fight they were forced to retreat, leaving twenty foure slaine in the Towne, whereof divers were commanders, they had very many hurt and wounded, we tooke also eight prisoners of whom some were Offi∣cers, who confessed they expected that the Town should have been surren∣dred without many shots. We had slaine Captaine William Darley, and three common souldiers, and not many wounded. Letters also were sent to the Parliament, to informe them of the action at Hull, whereupon it pleased the Houses to passe an Ordinance of indempnity to the Major and Townesmen concerning the apprehending of Sir Iohn Hotham. When the newes was come to the enemy, they prickt up their eares, hoping we had inclined to their partee, or at least intended to stan upon our owne guard both against the King and the Parliament, to which by letters from severall quarters they did exhort us. The Earle of Kingston the Governour of Gainsbrough sent a letter to the Towne, desiring that he might be entertained as our Governour, promising that without all doubt he would procure his Majesties pardon for our by past obstinacy, and fa∣vour for the future; but he had a sutable answer returned, giving his Lord∣ship as much thankes as his bountifull offer deserved; whereby he under∣standing our firme resolutions, not onely to persist our selves in our due o∣bedience to the King and Parliament, but to endeavour to reduce others also to theirs; his Lordship thought himselfe well if he might keepe Gaines∣brough, which he did not long; for within a few weekes the Towne was ta∣ken, and his Lordship was slaine by his owne partes, with a great shot in the river Trent, as he was comming for Hull.
A Post also was sent from Hull with letters to the Lord Generall Fair∣fax, in which particular I cannot let passe a very remarkable providence of God, without its due observation, wherein is a mixture of a sore Iudge∣ment, and a sweet Mercy, a . Upon Friday being the day fol∣lowing Hulls action, and the same with that of Beverly, was the great Bat∣tell sought on Aderton moore, betwixt the Earl of New-castle and the Lord Fairfax, to the disadvantage of this noble and pious Lord, his Army be∣ing routed on the sudden to the amazement of both parties, when the nume∣rous enemies in the apprehension of all men, seemed to be utterly discomfi∣ted, and fled the field for the space of an houre & more, although they were five to one, (but of this a little time will discover more) this noble Lord upon the losse retired to Bradford with some of his scattered forces, but not being secure there for want of Ammunition, he charged through the ene∣my with his Son, the truely noble and valiant Sir Thomas Fairfax, and most of his Officers in chiefe, and some of his souldiers, and came to Leeds, where finding no safety, his Ammunition failing, (having been forced to make Match of Bed-cords) nor knowing which way to turne, being sur∣rounded with a Leion of enemies, and overwhelmed with sorrow for the losse of his men, (although the enemy lost five times as many) and which to him was more then all, for the Caue which lay bleeding in the midst of this Agony came a letter from the Major of Hull, to his Lordship on the Lords day at night late, to signifie that Hull was secured, his loose friends made fast, and all needfull supplies of Ammunition at his Lordships command: (here was Deus in monte) Forthwith he resolved for Hull, the enemy being then upon their march towards Leeds, the next morning there∣fore early he set forward towards Selby, where some Troops of the enemy laid to hinder his passage over the river, whom sir Thomas Fairfax held in skirmish till his Lordship with his Attendance was over the river, where sir Thomas was shot in the arme, and two or three more of his ollowers, but cut off some of the enemies horse, That night his Lordship rested two houres at Wressll Castle, and then he advanced towards Hull, whether he came on Tusday morning at two of the clock. Sir Thomas perceiving the enemies designe was to stop his passage over that Perry, wheeled about by Carlton Ferry, and rested that night two or three houres at Crowle in Lin∣colneshire, the next morning early he was way-laid by some forces from Gainsbrough, as he crossd the river of Trent, where they tooke his Plate, but he though much weakned with the losse of bloud, forced his way to Barton, and arrived at Hull in the after-noone. The enemy pursued him to Barton, and had taken many of his followers, if it had not been for our Catch which was sent up the river on purpose to guard them with her Ordnance.
And as God had provided Hull for this noble Generall and his Sonnes safety, so he preserved them likewise for Hulls security, for a Petition was presently sent from the Town to the Parliament, humbly desiring that the Government might be established upon his Lordship, which accordingly was granted; now that, for the making up of our breach, and the setling of our distractions, God should provide a person of such Honour, approved fidelity, solid discretion, godly life, and eminent courage to be set over us, was a mercy more then wee expected, I am sure more then wee de∣served. While the affaires of the Town took up the endeavours of the Father, the welfare of the Country possessed the desires of the Son, so that in a few weekes he had compleated an armie of 25. Troops of Horse, and 2000. oot and Dragooners, which were quartered in Beverly and the adjoyning Villages, which the Earl of Newcastle emulating, hee marched out with 15000. Horse and foot towards Sir Thomas his quarters, whose numbers though unequall, Sir Thomas with his handfull thought to encounter, not being yet certainly informed of his strength, & selecting the ground where he intended the charge, he sent forth his Scouts, who with the Enemies Scouts held some few skirmishes, three or four miles from Beverley, but discovering their numbers and force so farre exceeding ours, whose Troops as few in comparison, so were also most of them raw men, it was thought fit by a Counsell of War, forthwith to quit Beverley as not tenable, and rereat towards Hull, especially perceiving the Enemies designe was to send a partie into the way, where they had all advantages to stop their re∣treat, which from Hull wee could not relieve, the greatest part of our forces upon the noyse of their approach, being newly sent to Beverley, but before they deserted the Town, they maintained a sight at the Towns end with the Enemie untill they had made a full discovery; during which fight about 1000. of our new raised men, fresh water souldiers, took the opportunitie and left their Colours, some turned to the Eenemie, others lurked in the Countrey, who afterwards repented too late. On Munday the 28. of August at two of the Clocke in the afternoon we deserted Beverly, shortly after the Enemie entred, and sent a partee which followed the rear of our men, and were twice or thrice beaten back by our musquetiers. The rest of their men that stayed in the Town, fell to their old Trade of Plundering, spoiling, and stripping all ages and Sexes, for even many Women they stripped, some they imprisoned, all they spoiled, in a word before night they had plundered the whole Town, consisting of above 1000. families, and sent their booty of Cattell and goods to Yorke. There goes along with this Armie almost 1000. bloody women, many of whose fa∣ces and actions do make them too much to resemble the Poets hellish Har∣pies,
farre more cruell then the men, for they glean after them, and spar none; not women in childebed, many of whom they have robbed of all their linnen, without any pitty at all. Thus have they done also to all the Towns adjoyning: But to return to the Armies. That night we kept a partie in New-land, a mile and a half from Hull on the North, the Enemie quartered in Cottingham three miles from Hull. The next day being Tuesday, wee had some skirmishes without any considerable losse on either side. On Wednesday the 30. of August, we charged them with a small partee of Horse and foot, and pursuing them into Cottingham, slew a Livetenant Colonel, a Cornet of Horse, and about 30. more, took nine prisoners of them, without any losse to us. The next day we skirmished again with them, who fled as before till they came to the Towns end, where the Enemy rushed out in a very great body, upon sight whereof, our men retreated, but some having engaged themselves farre in the pursuit were taken prisoners, to the number of 15: or 16. That night we deserted Newland, it being too remote from the Town, which the next morning was taken up by the Cabs. On Saturday the second of September in the morning we perceived they had begun a worke against the Town, about thrice twelvescore from their quarter, against which we sent some bullets from the walls, so that they were a little retarded in their working: This night also they cut off our fresh water, we being supplyed with a spring two miles distant. The next morning we discovered a new Worke towards the Town, into which we sent them some tokens of their welcome, which some of them found to their cost. All this while we were imployed in fitting our platformes, and Fortifying the Walls with brest-works, and repairing the out-works, our Troops sallying forth into Holdernesse, and their Quarters round about, took every day some prisoners. Munday the fourth, they planted two pieces of Ordnance in their se∣cond worke, from whence thy shot bullets towards the Town. September the fifth, we discovered another Worke, East from the former by the banke of the River Hull, over which the next night they made a Bridge of boats, for their more free passage into Holdernesse, where they also planted two pieces of Ordnance. The same day we began to raise a Fort upon the bank of the same River, 18. score from the Walls, hard by the Charterhouse (which was an Hospitall for the poor, which my Lord was forced to demolish, at the Enemies first approach) where they kild us a woman-servant, as she was carrying earth, for the raising of the work, among an hundred more of her Sexe, who at that presnt were all disheartned and deserted the work, but afterwards all the women, even those of the best rank strangers and others, willingly
helped forward the workes, none after that receiving the least harme, in so much as though we cannot say (as some may) that we have our Virgins Troopes, yet can we boast of our Troops of Virgins, who shewed so much diligence, that many of our fortifications may deservedly be called the Vir∣gins Workes. After a few daies that worke being finished, his Lordship cau∣sed one brasse Gun to be planted in it, and kept a strong watch there, which did singular good service upon that Quarter. All this while from the North block-house and the walls we slew them many men. During this space they had made in the night another worke at Scowscots a little Towne a mile off, which his Lordship had not demolished, in pitty of the poore inha∣bitants; neverthelesse he sent forth a partee who pulled downe a house within nine score of the enemy, which might have been advantagious to them, who returned without the least harme. Sept. 8. In the morning they had raised another worke still neerer, about halfe a mile from the walls, which with the losse of very many of their men, we taught them to make stronger, both with our Canon, and our Musque∣teers under the opposite banke of the river, where we did keepe a continu∣all guard to their daily annoyance. This worke they every night repaired from the breaches that we made in the day, forcing their men, and killing some of them, whose feares made them slow at their businesse. This having finished they called their Fort-royall, where afterwards they planted, be∣sides other Ordnance, two brasse Demicanons, out of which they shot bul∣lets of thirty six pound weight into the Towne, and sometimes pierced the tops of the houses, without any more harme; but knowing that there was much combustable matter in the Towne, they made a furnace wherein they did heate their bullets, and shot them into the Towne like their rage red hot: whereupon his Lordship commanded tubbs of water to be set before every doore, set Guards at the end of every streete, and caused all the Flax, Powder, and other such combustible stuffe to be laid in the lowest Cellars, the Magazine to be more then ordinarily watched round about, and upon this occasion much Powder was delivered in to his Lordship upon the pub∣lique faith. Notwithstanding these bullets, little harme was done by them, (thankes be to God) and but three were slaine during the whole Siege within the walls, to wit, a man, a woman, and a child; although they have certified in Print among many other such truths, that they have slaine ma∣ny scores within the Towne, and battered downe a great part of it. And here if I should relate of the many strange and remarkable passages of Gods protection of many from these bullets, it would afford matter of much admi∣ration, but impertinent at this time. After this his Lordship caused two Culverins more to be planted in the Charter-house worke, and another Fort
to be made about twelve score wide of it, which flankerd upon the enemy as they lurked behind the bankes, with both which they were so battered, together with the walls and the North Block-houses, that they could not stand by their Ordnance, and one of their Demicanons was broken in the mussell from the North Block-house, so that they were constrained to re∣move their Gunnes into a lower worke; their urnace also was broken with another bullet, so that for many daies they shot no fiery bullets. Saturday the ninth. This night we sallyed out upon their quarters at An∣labie, three miles distant upon the West, about foure hundred Horse and Foote, and thinking to encompasse the enemy, entred at severall parts, but they (as it seemes) having notice of the designe, had relinquished the Towne, and drawne up their men into a body in the field, where after some fight with a small pattee of ours, who were to enter on that quarter of the Towne, they tooke a Lieutenant, an Ensigne, and many of their com∣pany prisoners, most of whom they cruelly wounded after quarter given, the rest of our men apprehending some default made good their retreat. Sunday the tenth. This day they shot some of their great bullets at the Church in Sermon time, but thankes be to God they mist their mark. Thursday the fourteenth. This day his Lordship caused the bankes to be cut, through which they were set wetshod in all their workes, except those upon the banke. After some daies when the water was a little abated, they found a dry banke in the mid way to Newland, on which they raised a new worke, which we fronted with a Counter-worke about a bow shot from the walls on Daringam banke. Saturday the sixteenth. This day almost one quarter of the North Block-house was blowne up through the unadvisednesse of a Canoneer, who with his lighted Match went to fetch Cartridges for his Gun, where were also some nine or ten Hand-granadoes, which firing rent the house, slew the man with foure more. But see the providence, had it been any quarter then what it was, it had laid the Block-house open to the enemies assault; yea further, in the very next roome were 12. barrells of Powder, whereof two were open, the barres were broken, and the doore burst open by the force, yet the powder was not fired, which if it had, the whole house had been blowne up, an hundred men slaine, besides more harme in the Towne, and a plaine way made for the enemies entrance, which God alone prevented. When they saw their fiery bullets did not speed according to their ex∣pectation, having threatned they would fire the Towne though they fetcht the fire from Hell, they sent their Granadoes towards us, all which came short or wide of the Towne, and did no harme at all praised be God, they were about a foot Diamer, and where they fell they tore up the earth, so
that two Horses might lye in the pitte. After this they removed to the West-side of the Towne, where they be∣gun to cast up works upon the bankes of Humber, a mile from Hull, and by degrees, stretched their fortifications within halfe a mile of us, these we countermanded with a Fort, which we raised hard by the West Iettie, (which safegarded the ships in the road) and some other lesser works in the medowes; at which fort my Lord Generall caused three Guns to be planted. To these works the Enemie brought one of their Demi-Canons, and some other Guns, as shall appear more at large, from whence they shot into the Town. Friday the 22. we kept a solemne fast at his Lordships order. September 26. Sir Thomas Fairfax crost Humber with 20. Troops of Horse compleatly armed, to joyne with the Lord Willoughby, and Colonell Cromwells forces in Lincolneshire; who both came over to consult with my Lord Generall, but made no stay. After our Horse was gone, the Enemy made a Fort at Paul a little Town in Holdernesse upon Humber side, and another at Whitecliffe in Lincolneshire, on the other side Humber, to stop our shipping, from whence they were beaten, and the works demolished by the Parliaments ships, and some musquetiers which were sent from Hull. Thursday the 28. This night their Magazine at Cottingham was fired, and nine of their great Granadoes, which they had provided for Hull, where (as Phalaris in his Brasen Bull) their firemaster generall was the first that suffered by his own Engine, and five or sixe more. September the 30. We elected our Major, and made a new Major of an old, which did not a little discourage the enemie, he being a man both faith∣full and active for the Cause, and whom my Lord Generall did desire might continue in the place. For till this they thought they had a more pre∣valent partie in the Towne, with some of whom they did iuggle by pri∣vate Messages and Letters for betraying some trust in the blockhouses, or else where, which they hoped the more easily to effect upon the change of the Major. About this time his Lordship wanting money for the encouragement of his Souldiers, issued out an Order for an assessement of 6000. pound upon the Townsmen and strangers, same part wherof hath been already gathered. Tuesday, the third of October. The spring tides did again overflow all their works, and made them wet lodging there. Wednesday, the fourth; By his Lordships order, this day was set apart for fasting and prayer, but the latter service of the day was put off till the Fryday following, by reason of a new Fort which the enemie had raised the night before, about a quarter of a mile from the walls on the Northside of the Towne: for his Lordship desired that all that were well affected,
would now shew forth themselves in casting down the worke; immediate∣ly 400. Townsmen and Souldiers, marched out towards them in the very front of their work, and beat them out of it, to the number of 40. who run∣ning to the next, where were almost as many more, vvere pursued by our men to the midlegge in vvater, and being beaten out thence likevvise, left their armes and vvorking tooles, and strove vvho should run fastest to Newland for his life. In their flight our Ordnance from the walls did great execution upon them. We had one man slain vvith a great bullet from Newland, and two hurt; of them there were three or four slain, seven taken prisoners, their armes and working instruments they brought in with them, demolished their works, and made a retreat: At the same instant our men sallyed out of their Halfe Moon on Daringam banke, against another fort of the enemie, which they cast down, and brought away what the Enemie had left upon their approach. After our men were entred the town, there ap∣peared a partee of their Horse at Newland, who with their drawn swords forced up their Foot to advance to the fort, from whence they had made that honourable retreat, to repair it again, and slew some of their men, before they could make them march on, because of our Ordnance, which plaid so fast upon them from the North Blockhouse, the Walls, and the Charterhouse Battery, That they could turne no way where they were not encoun∣tered with the bullets, wee saw from the walls, both many of their Foot and Horse fall. October 5. The affaires at Linne being setled for the King and Parli∣ament, there were sent to us from the Earl of Manchester 500. men very well armed, under the Command of Sir Iohn Meldrum, a Gentleman both valiant and trusty, and well deserving for the good Service he hath done both here and elswhere. October. 8. This morning we discovered a new work on the West, with∣in a quarter of a mile from the walls, hard by the Gallowes, which per∣haps the Reader may suppose will be the end of their works, without any mistake at all, for so it was here, these were their Hercules his pillars, or, Ne plus ultra, this hath alwaies been the place of execution, and so it was now, as shall appear more at large afterwards. October 9. Munday. This morning at day-break the Enemy made an assault upon our battery on the West Iettie, and an halfe moone neere ad∣joyning to it. Our Perdues being but nevvly dravvn off, they came up vvithout discovery, in number nine score, being ten select men for the De∣signe out of every company. As sudden, so fierce was their assault, and their welcome in the issue was as sharpe. Their first attempt was upon the halfe moone, which they scaled and entred, but were beaten out againe and a∣gaine by the stock of the Musquets, in the meane while the Musqueteers in the west jettie, which was within pistoll shot galled their reare: but failing
of their purpose here, they advanced to the Battery which they attempted to scale, but in vaine, the enemy all this while shot not one Musquet, inten∣ding nothing but Club-law, in the interim the Musqueteers in the halfe moone plaid upon them a pace: then crowding to the entrance which ad∣mitted but one at once, they were kild as they came and some of them dyed with God Damne me in the mouth; and novv being under our Musquets and Canon they fell to throw stones, whereby they hurt two or three of our men: their Commander in chiefe was one Captaine Strickland, who with divers more of his men, leapt upon the worke, and demanded a surrender, who were all beaten downe, and heslaine in the spot with a brace of bul∣lets in the breast; the rest seeing this made haste to run away, and then be∣ing within the levell of our Ordnance and Musqueteers, they fired on them a pace, so that many of them came short home to tell the newes. We had but a man slaine, and about 15. wounded, whereof one was Captain Kerby, who was hurt by the mistake of one of our new souldiers who knew him not. The number of the enemy is not so certainly knowne, there say dead within the sight of our workes 25. men, five taken prisoners; the country people report that most of them that came off were wounded. Here note, that it was their policy all this Siege to keepe even their owne men from the certaine knowledge of the number of them that were slaine, yet it is credibly reported by divers, that every night they carried away Cart loads of dead and wounded men from their workes; for those that were hurt or slaine in the day, they conveyed away in the night. The same day they kild us a Captaine, and two of his souldiers in the Charter-house worke with a Demi canon bullet. About this time also there were frequent motions made by divers for damming up the River Hull, that so the fresh water swelling up might stop their Mills, and over-flow all the waies, supposing thereby that they could not carry away their Ordnance; but his Lordship doubting thereof, consented not, and replyed that it were more honour to beat them away, which he hoped to doe in due time. Octob. 11. Wednesday. This day command vvas given that all men should be in armes at seven of the clock in the morning without the beating of the Drum, which accordingly was done. Now the enemy had for many daies expected an assault, who had therefore strengthened their Guards, and this day we supposed they had some notice of the designe, as appeared by their more then ordinary lighting of their matches before day breake in all their quarters. About an houre or two before we sallyed forth, order was given to the Guards on the North side of the Towne, to flash powder as if they were lighting many hundred matches, that the enemy might expect the assault on that side. At nine of the clock we sallyed out towards the West, in number about 1500. both Townesmen, souldiers, and Sea-men from aboard the Parliaments Ships, the Lion, and the Imployment, and four
Troops of Horse, the Foot was divided into three Squadrons, one small par∣tee charged the enemy in the front of their last worke by the gallowes, the second led on by Sir Iohn Meldrum on their left flanke, the third from the West Iettie charged their high workes on the banke of Humber. The ene∣my at the first received the charge gallantly, firing apace, but our men not a whit dismaid, marched up couragiously, and in a quarter of an houre beat them out of the worke, which was very strong, foure square, with onely one narrow entrance, in which was a barrell of powder blowne up, which scorched two or three of our men: from hence we pursued them to their o∣ther workes, which they manfully warded against us; but the charge being sharpe, they were forced to resigne, and retreat to a Fort, where they had planted two Drakes, and a Sacre cut, with which they did no execution upon u, in that we charged them on the flnke within the inside of their workes; then fled they to the next, where were planted four small Drakes in one carriage, about three quarters long a piece, and from thence to their high worke on the banke, where were planted a Demi-canon, and a Demi∣culverin, which they fied upon us, but did no harme; their Musquetiers in the meane time maintaining the sight from out of that Fort, and a fresh bo∣dy advancing with speed from out of their Leaguer, which was a quarter of a mile distant, put our Front to a retreat that the Reare might come up, who misjudging the worst, could not by all our Officers be perswaded to goe on, and so made a generall retreat, the enemy issuing out, and charging the reare, regained all their workes. Meane while the third squadron was not behind in their duty, for sallying out of the battery at the Ietty, they stor∣med their high work is, which some of them scaled, but not minding the re∣treat of the other, found a peece of hard service, two or three of them were knockt downe and sore wounded, whom their fellowes retreating, were forced to leave in the enemies hands. At this retreat my Lord Generall, and Sir Iohn Meldrum were not a little grieved, but that being no sutable meanes o redresse the default, they rallyed their force, and complyed in incouraging the men with all possible arguments; as from the consideration of the Cause of God, and the Kingdome, for which they now fought, the pri∣vate ingagements of many of them in the Towne, their owne Honour, their for∣mer experience of Gods assistance, the bad Cause, lives and hearts of the ene∣my: and his Lordship further promised a reall reward for their service at the latter end of the day, which according he performed. During this space our horse faced a great body of the enemies horse, who stood above a mile off, and durst not come neare because of our Ordnance. These arguments wrought such effect in the hearts of them all, that by a large acclamation they expressed their couragious resolution to charge them againe, so the word of Command being given, they quickly marched on in better order then before, not out-running their leaders, which was the
maine cause of the former default; his Lordship led on a squadron up a Lane towards their workes, and though earnestly intreated by both Officers and Souldiers not to hazard his person so far, was hardly perswaded to with∣draw. Sir John Meldrum led on a partee against the work by the gallowes, out of which they shot very sore, as they had done all the while our forces were uniting; a squadron of our horse also charged in with the foot on the flanke of that worke, it being the direct way to the other, and did singular good service. The service was so hot that the enemy was forced to fly, and so sharpely pursued that many of them threw away their armes; in briefe, in one quarter of an houre we beat from one Fort to another, till they left as their Guns, and our prisoners they had taken before; so turning their owne Guns upon them, we gave them five shots in their reare. We tooke 35. prisoners, and slew them as is verily supposed many men; we had three men slaine, twelve wounded, none taken by them but Captain Rainsborow, Captaine of one of the Parliaments ships called the Lion, who (as he saith) riding up to their horse, which he thought had been ours, was carried away captive, but since is released by Captaine Bushell, who begged him of the Earle of New-castle as his prisoner, whom he sent back to Hull, upon his promise of giving him 500. l. which hath bred some jealousie in the hearts of the Towne, but his Lordship hath examined the businesse, and sent him to the Parliament to give further satisfaction. The Guns we tooke were these, viz. a Demi-canon in weight 5790. which shoots 36. pound bullet, of which size they have one more, which we broke in the mussell on the North side of the Towne; these two they called the Queenes pocket pistolls, or their Gog and Magog. Also we tooke a Demiculverin, 4. small Drakes in one carriage, a Sacre cut, and two large Drakes all of brasse, 3. barrells and an halfe of powder, and many bullets both for the Demi-canon and the other Guns. In the high Fort by the Demi-cannon, there was a Furnace blowne with a paire of Smiths bellowes, for the heating of their bullets. One thing by the way take notice of, that this was the Lecture-day, and while his Lordship with his men went out upon the designe, the rest were in the Church praying for a blessing, which accor∣dingly succeeded, who in the prayer after the sermon had good cause to give thankes. Having thus taken their Guns, we sent for drawghts from the Towne, and brought them away upon their owne carriages, and slighted their workes; the enemies Troops stood still, all this while to beare witnesse vvhat vvas done, and their Foot kept a loose out of Gun-shot in their Lea∣guer at a gaze. The Alarum vvas given to all the Tovvnes neare adjoyning, so that they brought all the forces they could make to the Leaguer. We still kept their vvorkes, till the Canon vvas carried neere to the vvalls, and then vve retreated tovvards the Tovvne, vvhich gave them opportunity to advance to their vvorkes to see vvhat vvas left, then vvith a further retreat
we drevv them into the field, vvhich the rather they did in hope to recover their ovvne, or perhaps to save a little Honour in gaining our Guns at the Ietty: and novv did begin a very sharpe fight, vvhich lasted for the space of three houres, vvithout the least intermission; 200. of our men marched into their Fort at the gallovves, from vvhence they did good execution upon them. An hundred peeces of Ordnance vvere shot from the vvalls and the Fort Royall, and the Musquet bullets from the Ietty, the halfe moone, and the bankes vvhere our Musqueteers plaid, fell among them like haile, their Commanders forced them within pistoll shot of the Ietty, vvhere they lined a banke vvith 100. Musqueteers, against vvhich a small partee sallyed our, and forced them to run, leaving behind them for hast foure score Musquets, vvhich they tooke up and brought into the Jetty vvithout any harme; upon vvhich losse they lurked in their vvorkes and left off the fight. In this battell we had four slaine, Captaine Goodday shot through the Shoulder, and about 40. more wounded, some of whom are since dead. The number of their slain is uncertain, we saw many lye dead after the fight, whom the next morning they had conveied away, among the rest, divers of∣ficers were slain, and one Lievtenant Colonell, for whom their Chiefest Commanders made great lamentation, the Countrey people report that ve∣ry many that day were mortally wounded, and that they make great moane for their men, but more for their Guns, which drew teares from the eyes of some of the highest. When the sight was done, the Inhabitants of Hull sent great store of bread and meat, and many gallons of Sacke and Strong Beere to the Iettie, which came very seasonably for them that had been fighting all the day. The same day there was a battell hard by Hornecastle in Lincolneshire, where Sir Thomas Fairfax got a very great victory, with∣out any considerable losse, he slew 300. among whom were Sir Ingram Hopton, Captain Vernatte, with many other Officers in chiefe, and Gentle∣men of good note, as appeared by a letter sent from the new Lord Withe∣rington to the Earl of Newcastle, which was intercepted upon Humber the Friday after, and brought to the Lord Fairfax, wherein he also certified the Earl that their foot was all rowted. (for they took 800. prisoners) and their Horse so disperst, that unlesse he did forthwith raise his siege from be∣fore Hull, and come to their aid, they could not subsist, which was already done to his hand, for the next morning after the fight, we expected to hear from his Lordship, but his honour was gone, for fearing least my Lord Fairfax should go out for their other Guns, they conveyed them away in the night, drew off their men, and durst not continue the Siege any longer: In their march they pull'd up all the bridges, and broke open the Clow∣doores to fill the waies with vvater, to prevent our sallying out, and for very anger fired a Church, in particular the Church at Paul. And hear for certain know, that by their owne confession, they marched not away with
half the number that they brought, notwithstanding the many they took up by the Commission of Array, throughout all parts of the Country, so many dred, were kild, and took their opportunitie to run away; The al∣lowance of the common Souldier was a penny worth of bread, for 24. howres, but no pay at all, onely the Pioners that wrought in their workes had 1. s.—6. d. a day. October 18. Wednesday, This day was appointed by his Lordship, for a day of Thanksgiving, which accordingly vvas observed with very much so∣lemnity. The next morning after the Enemie vvas gone, vvhich vvas the tvvelfth day of October, vve began to cast dovvn their vvorkes on all sides of the Tovvne, but they had left such a stinke in them all, especially on the North, side, being all full of vvater and mire, that they almost poysoned our men, and had bred noysome diseases among their ovvn men, vvhich caused many hundreds to turn up their heels; but their memory vvill stinke to all ages, for so impious vvas their carriage in the Countrey, that novv Malignants are convinced, and their Blasphemy and oathes made even the prophane to ab∣horre them. While they were here, his Lordship of Newcastle bestovved on some of his follovvers, the houses and Lands of some that vvere come into Hull, especi∣ally Ministers, vvhose corn they inned, vvhose Houses they repaired, and furnished vvith plundered stuffe, which they had taken by rapt from others else vvhere, all vvhich they left, for the right ovvners and Incumbents to challenge, and ranne avvay in great haste, with the Armie, to seek a new quarter; but most of the corne is spoiled on the ground, and the whole Countrey had been undone, if it had not pleased God to enable us to beat them away on the sudden, who are now made so sensible, that they are ready to rise as one man, to assist my Lord Fairfax upon the least summons. All the time of the siege, which lasted six weekes and odde daies, we had plenty of all things (God be praised) being furnished with fresh water by very many Wells, which we had not ordinarily made use of before, we had good store of Beeves and Sheep, which fed in the medowes neare adjoy∣ning in the day, many of which we brought in in the evening, All our Guards were very strongly man'd, within the Walls by the Townsmen and strangers, and without by the Souldiers, who were every night in continu∣all skirmishes with the enemy, the Castle and the Block-houses had all the while mixed companies of Townesmen and Souldiers, the Ordnance was managed by the Mariners and Seamen that belong to the Towne; in briefe every man shewed his forwardnesse with fidelity for preserving the Towne, some perhaps for their private interest, others both that and the common good; we all passed upon duty every other night. And after the enemy came neare, and the weather grew cold, the Souldiers for their further incou∣ragement
had every night they watched six pence a man given them, by a free contribution from the inhabitants and strangers, collected by the Mini∣sters of the Towne, besides other private contributions to the wounded and sick, and six thousand pound assessment for the paiment of the army. During this siege we tooke above 140. prisoners of them, some of whom were arrayed men, who have since taken up armes with us. While they were here, their friends from abroad came sometimes to vi∣sit them, and to see Hull fired or taken, one of whom as we have been very credibly informed, came into their Workes, but had his head taken off with a Canon bullet from the Walls. Another came from Pomfret to see Hull fired, but failing of his expectation, returned home againe and found his own house on fire. Thus hath God brought to nought the malicious plots and at∣tempts of the enemies of the King and State against this Town, for the com∣passing whereof nothing hath been left unattempted. And now may I not well say the action here was the Epitome of the whole Warre, an abbrevia∣ry or compendium of the unnaturall broyles of England, which since have ensued? what hath been attempted against the Parliament, or any place, or the whole Kingdom, which is not represented here as in a Modell. By po∣licy, treachery, force, and this duplicated, Hull hath been assaulted, but God kept it as in the palme of his hand, for a hiding place and sanctuary for his people, I trust, till the storme be gone over. No place in this whole Kingdome hath tasted deeper of his goodnesse then Hull hath done in many deliverances; it seemes God ownes it, because he shkes the rod at it, and because he lookes for an amendment, he doth but shake it. Then let not us frustrate God of his end. In every particular hee hath been remarkable, especially in the latter Siege, on which may be set the Accent, wherein God did more for us then we expected, victualls were cheaper during the Siege then before, or since, he continued our vnion, when the Enemy hoped and we feared lest wee should be divided, he sent us 500. men to assist us, when the Enemy came neer, and our men were over-watched, yea I think he did more for us then ever we did pray for, we desired no more then a deliverance from their rage and tyranny, he gave that and a victory to boot, and that no small one, a Victory with a witnesse, that we that were but an handfull, should be inabled to encounter a great Armie, intrenched in their own works, when we were in the open fields, and after a repulse given us, that we should beat them out of all their works again, take so many guns, ruine that great Armie, and that with the losse but of four men; sure methinke it ought not to be forgotten of Hull, while it hath a being, This was the Lords own doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes. And as if this had been too little, but a greater obligation of duty and thankfulnesse must be laid upon us, the same 11. of Octo. he crowned our Forces with another victory at Horne Castle, as hath been related before.
And since he hath pursued us with one victory upon the neck of anothe, as it hath been observed by some, that our forces under the command of Sir Thomas Fairfax that most valiant Souldier and Patriot, under whose conduct they marched through most of the Northerne Counties, have been victorious in 13. Battels against the Enemie, within the space of six moneths, and that many times with great disadvantage in respect of numbers, inso∣much that the namy of Fairfax is to the Cabs a terrour, as the name of Scanderbag was to the Turkes. Besides the successe that God gave to ou forces upon all occasions of Sallying out of Hull, at Bridlinton Agnes-Bur∣ton, Cowlam, the Ile of Exholme, Gainsbrough, and other places, insomuch as we have so many of their Commanders now prisoners, that we are al∣most ready to complain of their number. About the latter end of April, the thrice noble Father and his Sonne uni∣ted their forces neer Selby, to which place the Governour of Yorke (by let∣ters intercepted, understanding the designe) drew forth all the forces, he could make to prevent their meeting, but failing therein he fortified the Towne. The Wednesday after, according to his Lordships order, we obser∣ved as a day of humiliation with fasting, and prayer for their good pro∣gresse; That night the Enemie sallyed out of the Town against our forces, but were beaten in again. The next morning early his Lordship set upon the Town, which after three houres very sore fight, and some repulses they gained, took the Governour with some Knights and Gentlemen of great note, and above 100 Officers besides, and more then 2000 common Souldiers, our horse pursued them toward Yorke and Pomphret, killing many in thei flight, and taking many prisoners, in summe, they tooke more prisoners within the Town, then they had foot that stormed it, and this was done with very small losse. Here vve could not but observe a speedy returne of our prayers, which obtained of God this mercy, which hath given such a turne to the businesse of the war, as we never had before. And here by the way give me leave to observe, that our victories in these parts have been so clear and conspicuous, that the Enemie hath ever given us leave to give thankes by our selves. This victory at Selby made them tremble at Yorke, where we gave them some Alarmes, but in regard of the multitude of prisoners which were ta∣ken we could not fall upon the City, for the safeguard whereof New-castle with his Army was forced to retreat, whom the Scottish Generall with his Army pursued at the heeles; who at this present being united in body and affection with our Generall and his Army, doth besiege the City. These two armies thus joyn'd, amount neer to the number of 30000. horse & foot, which are quartered in all the Village  and about the City, keeping their guard within lesse then a mile on all sides; their Scouts are in continuall skirmishes on all sides with the enemy, and march up many times to the Walls of the
City. Our guards are so many on all sides of the Citie, that not a man can goe in, or come forth without discovery, much lesse can the least provision be carried in to them. Our Guards being at such distance from the City, they cannot well sally forth in any parties to our prejudice, for first our men have more time to make ready, and thn while they assault one quarter, the two next can more easily strike in betwixt them and home, to intercept their retreat, as very many times they have found to their cost. In particular, upon Munday the third of Iune instant, a partee of horse sallyed out towards our Quarters at Clifton, intending to breake through and advance towards Scarbrough, be∣ing discovered, our horse divided themselves into three Squadrons, the mid∣dle charged them, the other two wheeled about upon their right and left, and charged them in the reare, and so having encompassed them, cut most of them off; took 67. horse, very few escaped to carry the news to Yorke. They are much straitned for flesh, meat, & salt, but of corne they have no lack, which will lengthen the siege, unlesse the Generalls in their wisedome shall thinke it convenient to storme it, which the souldiers are very desirous to doe. Concerning the Country, it is all well affected towards the siege, affor∣ding what provision they can for the Armies, according to the ability of a poore plundered people; it were well if such Counties as have lesse tasted of plunder, would give their speedy assistance in supplying them with provisi∣on, that so neither the Armies may want convenient food, nor this County be undone; the Scots desire nothing but meale, of which they boast they can make nine severall dishes. Parties have been sent abroad to many strong holds in the County, which after some assaults have been surrendred upon composition; for such is the Lord Fairfax his clemency towards their for∣ced men, giving them leave upon taking the Covenant to take up armes un∣der him, or to goe to their owne homes, that he hath won all their hearts to him, in so much that when they see themselves but a little straitned, they lay downe their armes, and refer themselves to his mercy, but all their Of∣ficers he keeps prisoners. Since the beginning of the siege, these strong holds have been taken, viz. Cawod Castle, in which were 3. Guns, and almost 200. souldiers with their Armes; also Crake Castle, a strong fort at Buttercram, Waltam Hall, where was taken sir Fra. Wortley with 150. souldiers; and the invincible fort at Ares-mouth, which hath very much conduced to the more easie conveyance of provision to the Leaguer, namely by water, in which fort were taken 5. peeces of Ordnance, 200. souldiers, 6. barrells of pow∣der, with an answerable quantity of Match and Shot; some other forts have been taken, whose names do not occur. I hope ere long we shall have both Scarbrough and Pomfret Castles, under the Command of the Parliament, although for the present our Holdernesse Troopes being gone abroad upon another designe, Sir Hugh Chomley starts out of his hole, and is sometimes doing some mischief. Upon Munday the third of this instant Iune, he sallyed
out to Buttereram, where he surprised Mr. Henry Darley, a faithfull mem∣ber of the Honourable House of Commons, and one of the Commissioners for the Scots Army, whose absence is very much bewailed. Letters from Scotland inform us, that that Kingdom is freed from some late insurrections both in the North and South parts, the great somenters thereof being secured, and their parties disperst. A Reserve of 12000. are upon the borders coming in, who we hope will soon free Northumberland from the plundering of Colonell Clavering. Prince Rupert is in Lancashire with his uncertain numbers, our best Intelligence sayes 8000, plundering and Arraying the Country, and is expected at the Leaguer. Sir Iohn Mel∣drum and Colonell Ashton are gone with 2000. to Manchester, to assist the Lancastrian forces against him; we hear they have given him a defeat, but forasmuch as it is not certain, I forbear to relate the particulars. The Earl of Manchester with his Foot forces, is joyned to the Armies before York his Horse is joyned with the other bodies of English and Scots horse, and do amount in all to 12000. which are gone forth in pursuit of Prince Ru∣pert. These three Armies thus joyned in Horse and Foot, amount to 40000. Our Ordnance for Battery, wee hear, were planted yesterday, and have made a breach in Clifford Tower, where they have planted two pieces of Ordnance. This day being the 7. of Iune, we hear, they have taken a small work from the Enemy; within a very few dayes its thought some great matter of action will be done, the Souldiers expect a command to fall on every day. The union that is among the Generalls, their Officers, and their Souldiers, mutually doth promise very fair, if our fleshly confidence and o∣ther sins prevent not a blessing. Iune 8. The Earl of Newcastle sent a Trumpeter to the Earl of Leven, and another to the Lord Fairfax, to one and the same effect, being in these words: My Lord, I cannot but admire your Lordship hath so neer beleaguerd this City on all sides, made batteries against it, and so neer approaches unto it, without signifying what your intentions are, and what you desire or expect; which is contrary to the Rules of Military Discipline and Custome. Therefore I have thought fit to Remonstrate thus much to your Lordship, to the end, that your Lordship may signifie your intentions, and receive ours. The Answer returned was thus: My Lord, at this distance I will not di∣spute with your Lordship the point of Military Discipline, in such cases; yet to give your Lordship satisfaction in that your Letter desires from me; your Lordship may take notice, That J have drawn my Forces before the City, with intention to reduce it to the obedience of the King and Parliament; whereunto if your Lordship shall speedily conform, it may save the effusion of much inno∣cent blood; whereof I wish your Lordship to be no lesse sparing then I am, that rests your Lordships humble servant, LEVEN. The Lord Fairfax returned an Answer much to that purpose. The Letters of the 8. of Iune do further signifie, that there were two
Mines ready to be sprung, to blow up the walls of the City in two places, and that t Scth focs hve taken the great Worke vvithout Skeldergate Posterne. Let us all look up to God, without whom all this arme of flesh is no better then an E∣gyptian Reed. The arrivall of more Irish Rebells is daily expected. O that the Protestants f England would now unite themselves as one man, for the cutting off of the Antichristian cew of Papists and Rebells, to the advancement of the glory of God, the establishment of the true reformed Protestant Religion, the honour of the King, the Priviledges of Parlia∣ment, the Liberties of the Subject, and the Laws of the Land; that peace may be upon us, and upon the whole Israel of God. THE POSTSCRIPT. COurteous Reader, whosoever thou art, if English blood doth run within thy veins, to thee I speak; and give me leave to conclude my Discourse in a few lines of Coun∣sell: Consider seriously the sad state of the Body of the Kingdom, which lyes wel∣tring in its blood, having its Head divided from it; If thou art a Member of this Body, as I know thou cllst thy self, then thou art, and canst not but be sensible; do then thy of∣fice for the whole: If an Hand to manage Arms, wound not the Body, but afford it all help thou canst: If an Eye; then first look upward, then round about thee, and weep for what thou canst not help; weep for the wound i'th neck, that hath made a separation be∣twixt the Head and Members: Weep for those many Noble parts that are quite out of frame: Weep for that great effusion of blood, whereby the Body seemeth to lye gasping: If a Tongue; O plead with God, who can alone make up this breach, and use all perswasive arguments to call home them that fight against the Body, least they do utterly behead it, and instead of the naturall, set on a woodden Head of Papall Prelacie, which cannot sit these Shoulders: If a Nose; then hast thou lost thy sense, if that thou dost not smell the Romish Foxes, and their wiles hatcht in the bottomlesse pit, whereby they seek to divide the King and State, that the Pope may over-rule. Pursue the sent, and thou shalt trace the footsteps of the English and Irish blood into the Romish Conclave. [See Romes Master-piece.] If a Back; put forth thy Nerves and strength [Money is the sinews of War:] and help to bear the burthen. If thou be a part at all of this great Body, then lay our thy self for to preserve the whole, especially that Noble part the Heart, that close compacted Body, that ceases not to move while there is any life, from whose two Ventricles of Blood and Spirits, life is conveyed to the remotest Members. If all this moves thee not, then art thou not a Member, but some Wen, or other excrement which makes the Body greater, but not better. Take heed thou be not like thee teeth or nails of a mad Bedlamer, that tear and rend the Body which doth give them being. In plain English, let every honest Protestant do the utmost of his power to free the Head, and keep the Heart, the King and his Par∣liament, out of the hands of English and Outlandish Papists, and Irish Rebells, who seek the ruine of them both, and our Religion to boot. Let Protestants now learn of Scoria's dogs, which were ever snarling at one another, but a Beare being got loose among them, they left their private jars, and joyn'd in one against the common Enemy. Foresee betimes what the successe will be, if that the Papists gain Hll, and other Garrison Towns, and the strongest hold in the Kingdom, at which we see they principally aim, then they will bring us to what terms they please, both for our Laws and the Protestant Religion. It makes me call to minde the Fable with which I will conclude; The Horse and the Stag were at sore difference about the rule of the Meadow, which bred a war betwixt them: The Horse, that he might subdue his Enemy, craved the helpe of Man, and gave him leave to mount the Saddle, and to rule the Bridle, and so he conquered the Stag, but himself was more sub∣jected to his Rider; for now expecting that the man should light, he sate so fast ith Saddle, curbing him with the reines, that he ne're since could be dismounted yet. Let not the Man of sin bestide the Lions Whelpe, but let every honest English Protestant pray, God grant that England may never know the Morall. FINIS.
Let the Reader be pleased to take notice, that this Intelli∣gence came since the former was printed off. Iune the 14th. THe posture of the Armies is altered, they are very close under the walls of Yorke, undermining them in many places. Lord Fairfax is possest of Walmgate suburbs, and hath fired the Gate. The Scots keep a strong Fort which they tooke towards Micklegate, which yet they cannot gaine because of Saint Iames Fort. The Earle of Manchester commands the Manner Yard, but not yet the Mannour; he is undermi∣ning Saint Maries Tower. On Tuesday night last nine horse made an e∣scape out at Micklegate, which were pursued, seven were taken, one slaine, and one escaped; their errand was to Prince Rupert, to hasten his
advance, or within foure daies they must sur∣render. The souldiers would gladly fall on, but the Generalls desire to save bloud, hope for a speedy surrender. Colonell Charles Fairfax hath done good ser∣vice in the North against Colonell Clavering. Five thousand Scots are upon the coast of Holder∣nesse ready to land, to goe to the Leaguer, and ten thousand more are ready to follow. The e∣nemy hath broken Owse Bridge, and Fosse Bridge in York, and drawne their Ordnance into the streets of the City. Published by speciall Command. FINIS.
