L1650a 99828240 207572
A LETTER TO A FRIEND in the COUNTRY. Giving an Account of the Proceedings of the Election of Parliament-Men for the City of LONDON, &c. SIR, I AM Debtor to you by Promise in my last to send you an Account of the Pro∣ceedings of our Election for Parliament∣men for this City, by this Post; which be pleased to take as follows. By the last I told you the Candidates Names, and the Interest that were made for the Late Members, and for the New Ones. I told you, that on Wednesday the Day of opening the Writ, there was a larger Appearance for the New Persons, viz. Sir W. Turner, Sir W. Pritchard, Sir S. Dashwood, and Sir T. Vernon, then was imagined, or foreseen even by their own friends; it was then judged that they had the most Hands: and the Poll was demanded by the Friends and Party of the late Members. The Poll was carried on that Day and Thursday, and then put off by Adjourn∣ment till Two of the Clock yesterday, being Friday; but the Books were not open till Four, at which time they proceeded till a little after Five, and having stayed for some time, and no person offering to Poll for some time, yet the Sheriff declared that the Books should not be Clos'd up that Night; and mightily won∣der'd, that the Citizens did not withdraw and leave the Hall, which he said was the Reason of his Declaration; but the Hall was not the emptier for his Speech, since he continued for half an hour after to take the Poll, tho' few came, and for some time none, it was then debated about the Adjournment thereof, and Sir R.C. (knowing the trouble of the Place, and therefore desires it not) said he must, be out of Town this day, being Saturday, and therefore desired it might be put off for some longer time, some urged for Munday, but that was over-ruled, and the further Poll was adjourned till Tuesday next, three a Clock, with this further Expression, (of the Officer that made the Proclamation) that the Books would be clo∣sed up at Five of the Clock that Evening, at, or before the Adjournment: The new Candidates that were there, demanded of the Sheriffs, that the Poll might be carried on de die in diem, till it were closed, and took witness of such their demand, but it could not be obtained, nor would it be allowed to proceed on the Poll before the day aforesaid, altho' desired by several Eminent Citizens; As to the Number of Votes by Com∣putation of most People that have observed the Electors give their voices, it goes much for the new ones, and the side of those that are true Church of England-men, and for whom the Members of that Church have shewn themselves Zealous and Mostly Unanimous; tho' it may be modestly Computed that one fourth part, that are for the old Ones are not dissenters in any thing from the Church of England, but in Ele∣ctions, and such State-matters; having now gi∣ven you the Particulars that occur to me of our Election; I must take notice of what you tell me of the unknown Person, that came down into your Country with a Printed List of Names of Members of the late Parliament, that preten∣ded that those Persons therein named, were a∣gainst making the Prince and Princess of Orange King and Queen of England, the Paper has been about the Town, and not regarded by men of any sense; for it is well known, that all those Persons have sworn Allegiance to their Majesties, and that several of them have testified their af∣fection over and over to the present Settlement, and tho' (as you say) he left several Lists, and told the Persons to whom they were delive∣red, that it was his Majesties Pleasure, and Command, that those Persons be not Chosen; Yet, as I perceive, you easily found out the Cheat, and put those persons to Rights that were surprised with such stories, and I do also assure you, that it would have been for the Service of the King and Government, if you as your intentions were, had come timely enough, to have seized the spreaders of such false Stories and Calumnies. And thus, SIR, I have in short given you the Truth of Matter of Fact, and am SIR, Your most Ob∣liged Humble Servant. POST-SCRIPT. SIR, I Have just now Advice that a Party of our Unkilling Horse are gone out, to bring in a strong Party from the Country to Poll; and they are to be here by Tuesday Noon at far∣thest: and some think this may be the greatest Service this Body of Horse will be put to. The Event hereof you may expect by Tuesday Post. London, Feb. 21. 1690.
