L2730 [ocm]12738571 199546
THE TRUE DISSENTER, OR, THE CAUSE Of those that are for Gathered Churches. BEING A Right State thereof, proposed and set∣tled upon its proper foundations: in Opposition to all Compliance that is Sinful, but in Order to that Obedience which is Lawful, and Conducive to the Healing of the Nation. Occasion'd by some late Writings, and especially by a Book entituled, The Cause of their Mix'd Churches against (or The Axe laid to the root of) Separation. Nonnulli propter quaedam in se offendicula de quibus pie, religiose{que} monebantur, Episcopatus officium non solum sine culpa, sed cum laude posuerunt. Quid ista? Nisi quia sine Episcopatu vel Clericatu salvi esse possumus: sine Christiana vero Religione non possumus. August. contra Crescon. lib. 2. c. 11. Printed in the Year MDCLXXXV.
THE PREFACE. ALthough there have been almost ever since the Reformation great Contests between the Episcopal Divines and Protestant Dissenters, yet 'tis no easie matter to shew, where lies the main Diffe∣ence. There hath been a great noise about Church-Government, and Ceremonies, but no very clear or distinct Knowledge of what is chiefly intended by these Termes. If we consult the Great Doctors, who have written in Defence of the Church of England, we find them to differ greatly amongst themselves, Whitgift, Sa∣ravia, Hooker, Bancroft, Bilson, Dow∣nam, Hall, Andrews, Usher, Cousins, Bramhall and Hammond, have given us their sentiments about the Episcopal Go∣vernment. Some assert that there is no Form of Church-Government de jure di∣vino; whence no Difference between a
Bishop and a Presbyter in Scripture ac∣count: And others are for the Divine Right of The Episcopal Government, who yet differ about the Offices of a Bishop and Presbyter. Some say that they are of the same Order, and Differ only in Degree. Others, that they are of Dif∣ferent Orders. Of those that hold them to be of Different Orders, there are some who make the Bishops the Apo∣stles Successours, and others think otherwise. Dr. Hammond doth aver, that every place of Scripture which men∣tioneth Bishops, or Presbyters, meaneth on∣ly Diocesan Bishops. But then he leaves us in the dark about the Office of the Pa∣rish Presbyter, which according to his No∣tion can by no means be an Office of Di∣vine Institution, and yet I must confess that Dr. Burnet hath offered very fair for the help of Dr. Hammond; for as Dr. Ham∣mond makes the Scripture Presbyters to be Diocesan Bishops: so Dr. BurnetPreface to his History of the Rights of Princes pag. 41. hath made the Deacons mentioned by St. Paul to the Philippians, and to Timothy, to signifie the office of Presbyters: and this is done to remove a vulgar prejudice, which is, that in the New Testament there
is no mention made of more than Two Orders [Bishops and Deacons] and that therefore the raising a Third Order was at first but an Humane and Political Device; but this (saith the Dr.) must vanish into nothing, if we carefully examine what is the Importance of the Term Deacon, which (as he will have it) signifies a Presbyter. But although Dr. Burnet hath shewn us where to find a Parish Presbyter in Scrip∣ture, notwithstanding Dr. Hammond had transformed the Scripture Presbyter into a Diocesan Bishop; its manifest that we have lost one of the Three Orders of the Church of England, and until some one or other doth find out under some other Scripture-Term an office to answer that of our Deacons, the Church of Eng∣land will be very little owing either to Dr. H. or Dr. B. Dr. Cousins and Dr. Zouch have in∣deed given us a very particular descripti∣on of the Church of England, but whe∣ther it be a just one is questioned by divers, and denyed by some. So that notwith∣standing the Severity of Paenal Laws against Nonconformists, it's a very great
difficulty to know what the Church of Eng∣land is, or what is the Episcopal Govern∣ment unto which Conformity is so strictly enjoyned, and I am sure it s impossible for any to conform with a good Conscience whilst they continue Ignorant of the thing unto which their Conformity is exact∣ed. Besides there are among the Conforma∣ble Clergy different Opinions about the Ce∣remonies, which are made Termes of our Communion with the Church of England. Some make them all parts of External Worship: and others affirm them only to be Decent Circumstances. Bishop Taylour saith that we have retain'd but One Ʋn∣instituted Ceremony that is a part of Exter∣nal Worship, viz. the Sign of the Cross; and Dr. Sherlock endeavours to prove that the Sign of the Cross is no part of Worship. And as it is so very hard to know what we must Conform unto, so it's not very easie to shew What the Dissenters would be at, or what parts of Conformity they like or dislike. Some can by no means be for Clergy Conformity who yet Conform as Lay∣men: and there are others among the
Dissenters who think that Ecclesiastical and Statute Laws require as full Confor∣mity from the People as from the Clergy, and that the Difference is only about the way of Discovering Assent and Consent. For what the Clergy do by Declarations and Subscriptions, that the People must do by their holding compleat Communion with the Church of England. In a word, Some Dissenters think that the consideration of better Edification is sufficient to Justifie their partial Seperati∣on from the Church, and others are of the Opinion that unless there lyeth some Sin in their way they are bound in Conscience to conform. On an Observation of these things I thought it highly expedient to Consult the Ecclesiastical Constitutions, and our Statute Laws, and see what light they gave touching the Ministry, Discipline, and Worship of the Church of England, and also to search the Writings of the most Judicious Nonconformists to find out what 'twas they did stick at, that I might, if pos∣sible, know where the Difference lay, and what was the cheif cause of all our Mala∣dies and hurtful Divisions. And this
much I have according to the best of my skill attempted in the ensuing Treatise, and I think I have given a right state of the Controversie, which may be reduced to these three Heads. 1. The Matter of an Instituted Gospel-Church. 2. The Form of such a Church: and 3. The Imposed Terms of Communion. I have shewn what the Church of Eng∣land, and what the Nonconformists judge of these things, and without Fear or Flattery have declared how great the Dif∣ference is, and must ingenuously confess, that such is the Constitution of those Church∣es the Dissenters generally do believe to be of God, that the Divine Right of a National Church Government, whether Episcopal, or Presbyterian, makes Union a thing impossible. The Controversie, which is about the Mat∣ter of Churches will soon be at an end, if the Church of England will but bring their practice to their avowed principles, which are published every time any are bap∣tized by their Clergy. It's true there are some Wise men amongst them who seeing this to be very clear, and finding that the Restraining their Practice
to their Principles would destroy their Mix'd Churches, have made a search af∣ter wider Principles, and have formed such a Notion about the Matter of Instituted Churches, as may be of use to the larger size of Presbyterians, but not to the Church of England, whose mixed Congregations cannot be brought within so narrow a Com∣pass as this new principle prescribes, so that though there is much weight and candour discover'd to be in the Notion, yet it doth not only look rare to the generality of Prote∣stants, who take it to be the squaring princi∣ples to a Corrupt practice, but it fall's short of its main design: However for the weight that's in it I have fairly proposed it. But the great Point in Controversie is about the Form of Instituted Churches. The True Dissenter doth think, that Dr. Cousins and Zouch have given the fairest account of the Form of the Episcopal Churches, and what mostly corresponds with the Ecclesiastical and Statute-Laws of this Land, as I have shewn, and if in this the Dissenter judge rightly the Episcopal species of Churches, the very species or kind of their Ministry and Discipline must be acknowledged to be destructive of those Churches the Dissenters do bold of Divine
Institution, and they cannot without Lay∣ing a violence on their Consciences approve it. The Dissenters not being able to find in Scripture any such Office as that of the Dio∣cesan Bishop, do esteem the placing such an Office in the Church to be very like the erecting a New Office in the Civil Govern∣ment, contrary to the Fundamental Laws thereof, or at least without the Consent of the Legislative Power. And as the Parish Minister is of an office of which the Sol∣licitudo Pastoralis, is no part, they find no such Office of Divine Appointment, nor can they see that such Ministers have any more Right to dispense the Holy Sacraments than either a Physitian, or Lawyer; for as they are Parish Ministers of Legal Establishment, they want what is Essential to the Office of a Gospel Presbyter, to whom alone the Authority and Obliga∣tion of Administring the Sacraments is by Jesus Christ committed, and therefore can have no more right to do it than either the Physitian, Lawyer, &c. have. Here then lyes a chief Ground of the present Separation, and that which makes separation more Necessary now than in Q. Elizabeth's dayes, for then the Solicitudo
Pastoralis was a part of the Parish Mini∣ster's Office, and although he was denyed the exercise of some Part of it, yet he re∣mained vested with the Authority and Obligation, but now, as I have proved, the case is altered, and the Diocesan Bishop and the Parish Minister made quite ano∣ther thing than before. Now the Bishop, as such, is not the King's Officer circa sacra, but Christs pastour of a Diocesan Church which is made a particular Church of the Lowest rank and the Parish Mini∣ster is not, as formerly, the Pastour of his Parish, But the Bishops Curate, a Sub-half-Presbyter. If the Species of their Church Govern∣ment be not as I have with Dr. Cousins and others represented it to be, 'twill be extremely necessary that the Reverend Bi∣shops do give us a more exact description of it, and shew us, whether the Dioce∣san Churches now by Law established be single Churches infimae speciei, and, whether the Bishop be the sole pastour of this Church: or Whether the Diocesan Church be a compounded Church made up of many many single Parochial Churches, and Whether the Parish Minister be vested
with the Pastoral Office and the Bishop is a Pastour of Pastours, or what else is the Church of England? The Controversie about the Imposed Termes of Communion I have handled only in the general, and do therefore refer the Reader to such as have enumerated the many particulsrs in the Liturgy, which to consent to is in the Judgement of the True Dissenter sinful,See Mr. Baxters first plea for Non∣conformists. and yet I have particularly shewn what it is the Law re∣quires Conformity unto, whereby Some Dissenters, who flatter themselves with the Fancy that their going to Church to escape the penalty of the Law is not Ap∣proving what the Law requires, may be undeceived. After I had given a just account of what I apprehended to be the Judgement of the Church of England, and of the TRUE DISSENTER, who is a thorough Nonconformist and cannot hold communion with the Parish-Churches in the Liturgick worship as by Law required, the Difference appeared to be so very great, that I could not but think it necessary to make some Enquiry after an Uniting Expedient but never could pitch on any thing at all agreeable, but that one dedica∣ted
some years ago to the Lord Marquess Halifax, which I have therefore very briefly and impartially Stated, and do humbly present the consideration thereof to our Superiours, as what may firmly Ʋnite the several Dissenting Protestants with the Church of England.
ERRATA. PAge 1. l. 8, 9. for Nonconformist r. Conformist. p. 10. l. 18. d. all. p. 15. l. 1. for Patients r. Pa∣tents. p. 16. l. 25. for change r. challenge. l. 26. r. and after [again] p. 23. l. 33. for 26. r. 20. p. 29. l. 29. for 16. r. 6. p. 33. l. 20. after [in force] r. may clearly see the Truth of this. p. 36. l. 7. after [find] r. the. p. 47. l. 29. d. all. p. 59. l. 6. for [or live] r. and live. p. 61. l. 30. for [Diocesan] r. Dio∣cess. p. 63. l. 25. after [must] r. so far. l. 33. after [themselves] add [to have any governing Power over the Parish, they own themselves.] p. 65. l. 2. after [they] r. will. l. 15. for Formed r. Framed. p. 66. l. 2. for the r. their. l. 15. for his r. this their. p. 93. l. 16. after [vita] r. et. p. 110. l. 25. for [the] r. He. p. 118. l. 10. for Counties r. Contries. p. 120. l. 10. after [much] d. as. p. 132. l. 27. for Face r. Free. p. 134. l. 32. for what r. that. p. 141. l. 4. for than r. that. l. 12. for taken r. taking.
THE TRUE DISSENTER. The Introduction. TIs too much known, that in this Kingdom, partly by a strict en∣joyning, and partly by a stiff oppo∣sing Uniformity, a most unhappy Division hath ensued: which of late years is come to a greater heighth than formerly, not only between the Conformist and Noncon∣formist; but between Conformist and N∣conformist on the one hand, and Nconfor∣mist and Nonconformist on the other. For, as some Conformists are for Severity against all Dissenters, others are for relax∣ing it as to some: and as some Nonconfor∣mists are against all Compliances, others are as much for some Conformity: so on all hands, there are strange Contentions, and Animosities, accompanied with too much Envy, Hatred, and every evil work. To bewail, and lament the mischievous effects of our Divisions, and their Causes
is the duty of all: To attempt the Heal∣ing of them is the intent of this present Discourse. It's no part of my province to pass Cen∣sures on any, 'tis the grief of my Soul to observe on both sides, what I dare not pub∣lish, but desire secretly to bear on my heart before the Lord. My principal business is to enquire impartially after the true cause of the present Distempers, and to offer what I humbly apprehend to be the only effectual way of Cure. And this I will do in this Method. 1. I will give a just description of the Church of England, and shew what she de∣clares her self by her Laws and Constitu∣tions to be: and what she requires from all English men that hold Comunion with her. 2. I will give a short, but true account of the Principles of Protestant Dissenters, and the Constitution of their Churches. In doing which, I shall shew where lies the chief ground of our Divisions. And then in the Third place. 3. I will propose, what is (as I think) the only Necessary thing to be done for the ending our Divisions, and the knitting all the Protestants of the English Church into a firm, and lasting Establishment in our present Religion.
CHAP. I. Some things Premis'd which are fit to be considered in order to our clearer under∣standing the Historical Description of the Church of England. The Descripti∣on given in several Aphorismes. What is required of all English men that hold communion with the Church of England particularly shewn. SECT. I. The Premises. IN giving a just Description of the Church of England, and of what she enjoynes as Necessary to Communion with her, I shall but do the part of an Unbiassed Historian. In my endeavours to know what the Church is, my Searches have been after the Truth of matter of Fact, touching what the Ecclesiastical constitutions and Rubricks, and Laws of the Land declare her to be. They go the wrong way, who first frame a platform of what the Church ought to be, and argue against Dissenters from such a fancy; yet this has been the practice of some great men amongst the Dissenters [even of Mr. Baxter] in their opposing Dissenters.
As for my own part, I wish with all my heart I could find the Church of England to be what she ought to be. I'm sure 'twou'd be much more for my peace and comfort in this life, as all know that know me: but 'twould be an Idle thing in me to proceed on mistakes, and dangerous to walk by a Mistaken Rule. I have spent some years in my endea∣vours to know what the Church of Eng∣land is, and have been the more curious in my disquisitions, because the great Doctors of the Church are so lame, and imperfect in the account they give of it. I have im∣partially raveld into those broken Histories we have left us of the first plantation of the Gospel by Joseph of Arimathea; and I have consulted several Charters, given to divers Abbies, especially that of Glastonbury, where I find some intimations of the Go∣spel's being first preached in that Island; I have diligently perused Malmesbury's Antiquities of Glastonbury, Bede, and many other of our English Historians; and have carefully compar'd my own readings with Bishop Godwins History of Bishops, Arch∣bp's Ushers Primordia, and Sir Henry Spel∣man, and have (as in another book, if God give life and opportunity, I intend to shew) framed some conceptions of the state of the Church from Joseph of Arimathea to King Lucius; from thence to the Com∣ing over of Germanus, and Lupus to repell
the Pelagian Heresy; from them to Austin the Monks coming to Canterbury; from that time to William the Conquerour; and from him to Henry the 8th, and from Hen∣ry the 8th. to the end of Q. Elizabeths Reign: and there I stop: For although the Church in all those periods ran through divers states, yet the Diocesan Episcopacy and the National Church Government by Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, and Chapters, &c. was never either by the Ci∣vil or Ecclesiastical Authority declar'd to be Apostolical, or de jure Divino, until King James first entred the English throne, and then it was. King James being brought up amongst the Scotch-Presbyterians, who were for the Divine Right of a National Church Govern∣ment, was in his tender years imposed on to belive throughly the Divine Right of a Nati∣onal Church Government in Thesi, and woful experience shewing him the mischiefs, that attended the Presbyterians in particular, he was easily induc'd by Bancroft to yield unto what Q. Elizabeth would never endure, viz the Divine Right of the National-Episcopal-Church of England. This being manifest (as I hope in the pro∣cess to evince), the Notion, which in my enquiry about the present state of the Church, I was, by the Constitutions and Law now in force, directed to frame, ap∣peared very new. I could not find it any
older then the first of King James. For till then, parochial Churches were by the Law of the Land esteemed the only particular Churches of Divine Right. Parish Mini∣sters were Pastors, and though denied the exercise of some part of their Power, yet not by any Law deprived of it. The Bi∣shops were not acknowledged to be Christs Pastours, but only the Princes Ministers, and consequently their Superiority above Presbyters was not given them by Christ, but only by the King the supreme Head and Ordinary of the Church of England; the Government of which Church as Na∣tional was but of Humane Constitution, owing to the Civil Magistrate alone for it's being what then it was. That this may with the greater convi∣ction appear to the Reader, I will give in short a true state of the National Church Government, that has been exercis'd in this Land. Which, on a diligent search in∣to our old Historians, who treat of Eccle∣siastical affairs, will be found to be what the Convocation in Henry the 8ths dayes declared it to be, which in effect is this, namely, That there are but Two orders only, viz. that of Priests, and that of Deacons in∣stituted by Jesus Christ, That the Superiorities or preheminences of one Bishop or Priest above another are only by an Humane Ordinance: whence it unavoidably follows, that the National Church Government which con∣sists
in the Superiority of one Bishop or one Priests being above another, can be but of Humane Constitution. Nothing can be more manifest, then, that anciently the Prelatic-Episcopal Office was but a Civil Office circa sacra deriv'd from the King, who is but a Civil person; that all that belongs unto the Bishops, as they are of an order and office superiour to that of the Presbyter, even the potestas Ordinis, & Jurisdictionis, is but Civil, deriv'd from the King, who, though but a Civil person, is the supreme Head and su∣preme Ordinary of the Church of England. These things I will distinctly evince. 1. That the King is but a Civil person, and what power soever is deriv'd from him is but Civil. That the King is the supreme Head of the National Church of England is a Truth too manifest; and too sacred to admit of the least doubt. But then it must be ob∣serv'd, that it is not to be understood, as if the King were a Spiritual Pastor, whose office as such consists in praying, preaching, and administring the Sacraments, &c. The supremacy in Ecclesiastical affairs belongs unto our King as he is supreme Civil Ma∣gistrate, and so it belongs to all such in every Countrey, whether Christian, Turk, or Pagan according to that in Rom. 13. Let every soul be subject to the Higher powers. Thus the Christian Churches in Thracia, Syria,
Egypt, receive their Patriarchs and lesser Bishops from the great Turk (as Grotius in his Learned Treatise de imper. Sum. potest. circa Sacra. c. 10. Sect. 30. doth evince,Non is sum, qui damnare au∣deam tot Chri∣stianas Ecclesi∣as in Thracia, in Syria, in Aegypto, quae patriarchas, aut minores Episco∣pos a Turcarum rege accipiunt; neque novam esse hanc Chri∣stianorum pati∣entiam docet nos Barlaamus Episcopus Cyra∣censis, cuus haec sunt verba, Pontificatus quilibet quo∣modo Bulga∣rensis dependet á principite illius gntis; & Tribalensis a suo principe: Antiochenae ve∣rò patriarchae Armeniorum Rex domina∣tur: Hierosoly∣mitano autem et Alexandrino Aegyptiorum imprissimus princeps. Nullus enim horum pontificatum recipit non probante, non decernente, & consentiente suo seculari pincipe.) Thus Zerobabel, Nehemiah, Esdras, receive power from Cyrus Darius Artaxerxes for the restoring the worship of God in Jury. Thus do our antient writers record that the Abbey of Glastonbury received a Charter from Cadwalla, a Pagan, but their King. From which I infer, that the supremacy be∣longs to Princes as they are Civil Magi∣strates, and that therefore it is somewhat different from that spiritual power, which consists in the ministring the word of God, and Sacraments. But I need not insist farther on the proof of this, seeing what I here affirm is but the established Doctrine of the Church of Eng∣land. In the Admonition added by Queen Elizabeth to her Injunctions, confirm'd by Act of Parliament the fifth year of her Reign, the Queen in explicating the true meaning of the Oath of supremacy, saith, That she would, that all her loving Subjects should understand that nothing was, is or shall be meant, or intended by the same oath, to have any other duty, allegiance, or bond requi∣red by the same oath than was acknowledged to be due to the most Noble Kings of famous me∣mory Henry. 8th. her Majesty's Father, or
King Edward the Sixth her Majesty's Bro∣ther. So far the Admonition. Now if we consult the Book of Martyrs, we shall find, that in a conference between Archbishop Cranmer and Dr. Martyn; the Archbishop doth shew what was meant by the Supremacy in the days of these Princes. Martyn demanding of the Archbishop, who was the Supreme Head of the Church of England? the Archbishop replies, Christ is the Head of this member of the whole body of the Universal Church. Why, quoth Martyn, you made King Henry the 8th supreme Head of the Church; Yea, said my Lord, of all the people of England as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal. And not of the Church, said Martyn? No, quoth Cran∣mer, For Christ is the only Head of the Church, and of the Faith and Religion of the same. The King is the Head and Governour of his people, which are his Visible Church. What, quoth Martyn, you never durst tell the King so? Yes that I durst, said Cranmer, and did; and in the publication of his Stile, wherein he was named Supreme Head of the Church, there was never other thing meant. By this we may clearly see what was in the days of thefe two Princes intended by the King's Supremacy, which is more fully expressed in some other clauses of the Ad∣monition, & in the 37th Atricle of the Church of England. In the Admonition its further added, That the Queen will challenge no other Soveraignty but this, namely, That under
God to have the Soveraignty and Rule over all manner of persons born within these her Realms, Dominions, and Countreys, of what estate either Ecclesiastical or Temporal soever they be, so as no other foreign Power shall, or ought to have any superiority over them. Besides her Majesty look'd on those who did labour to notify to her loving subjects how that by the words of the said oath, it may be collected, That the Kings or Queens of this Realm possessors of the Crown, may challenge Au∣thority and power of Ministry of Divine Of∣fices in the Church, I say her Majesty esteems all such persons, as thus interpret the oath, to be perverse and malicious persons, and their interpretation Sinister and malicious. Finally in the 37th Article established not ll only by the 13. Eliz. c. 12. but also by 14. Car. 2. it is express, That where we attri∣bute to the Queens Majesty the chief Govern∣ment, by which Titles, we understand the minds of some slanderous folks to be offended: we give not to our Prince the ministring either of Gods word or of the Sacraments, the which thing, the injunctions also lately set forth by Eliz. our Queen do most plainly testifie: But that only prerogative, which we see to have been given alwayes to godly Princes in Holy-Scriptures by God himself, that is, that they should rule all estates and degrees committed to their charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical, or Temporal, and restrain with the Civil sword, the stubborn and evil doers.
This is sufficient to evince that Kings never assum'd to themselves any part of that spiri∣tual power, which is given unto pastours by Jesus Christ, but only a Civil power, with all the Prerogatives belonging there∣unto, whence what is deriv'd from the Prince is but a Civil Power, called Spiritual or Ec∣clesiastical, not because it flows from one in the pastorall office, nor because the matters about which the power is conversant is pure∣ly and Evangelically spiritual, as Praying, Preaching, and Administring the Sacraments are, but from the quality of the persons en∣trusted with Ordinary Jurisdiction, and be∣cause the matters about which this power is exercised have some subserviency unto what is Evangelically spiritual. Sir John Davies in his Irish Reports in case of praemunire has an excellent discourse a∣bout this, where speaking of the things and causes now called Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, as Causes Testamentary, Causes of Matri∣mony and Divorce, and the like, he saith, Shall I express plainly and briefly why these causes were first denominated, some Spiritual, or Ecclesiastical, and others Temporal and Ci∣vil? Truly they were so called, not from the Nature of the Causes, but from the Quality of the persons, whom the Prince had made Judges in these causes. The Clergy did study spiritual things, and did profess to live Secundum Spi∣ritum, and were called Spiritual men, and therefore they called the causes; wherein Princes
had given them jurisdiction,Dr. Godol∣phin in his Abridgment. c. 11. §. 44. agrees with Sir John Da∣vies. Spiritual Causes, after their own name and quality, &c. So far Sir John Davies. The which being so, what can be more manifest than that the Episcopal power is Civil, a Magistratick power, and so in an∣tient story 'tis call'd. For I find that Patri∣cius who was the first, that successfully at∣tempted the setting up the Episcopal power in Ireland, and Palladius, who endeavoured it, reinfecta, in Scotland are said to have come from Rome with a Magistratick power, the Episcopal power being but Magistra∣tick; which is no more than what that lear∣ned Lawyer Jacobus Gutherius suggests, when he affirms, That the Heathen Roman Pontifs were vested with a Magistratick power,Vide Gu∣ther. de Vet. Jure Pontif. lib. 2. c. 1. & l. 1. c. 4. and had the name of Pontiffe rather a posse & Facere, as the learned high priest Scaevola observes, than a Ponte Sublicio as Varro and some others have it: which Magistratick power was not (saith Guther) given the Bishops until the time of Valentinian the first, and then it was. This passage of Guther necessarily leads me to the Consideration of that Title given the Emperours, and also to our Princes even that of Illustrious Pontiffs, which signi∣fies nothing more then a Magistratick Power circa Sacra, of which the Vestis Dal∣matica was an Embleme, and therefore worn by the Emperours; and by our Kings at their Coronation, and that in the times of our Saxon princes, for this consult
Sir Henry Spelman his larger Book of Tythes c. 29. §. 9. and Dr. Godolphin in his Abridge∣ment c. 1. This I presume is sufficient to evince, that the Bishops, who antiently deriv'd all their Episcopal power from the King were as such but Civil Officers. But to be more particular and express, I will further shew. 2. That all that belongs unto the Bishops as they are of an Order,By potestas Ordinis here is meant the power of giv∣ing Orders. and office Superiour unto Presbiters, even the Potestas Ordinis & Jurisdictionis is but Civil, and deriv'd from the King. Although the Bishops as such lay claim to no other power than that of Orders and Jurisdiction, yet antiently for several hun∣dred years these Powers were the undoub∣ted right of the English Crown, and our Kings have been the Absolute Lords and Dis∣posers of it. That the power of Jurisdiction was ever derived from the Temporal Princes unto the Bishops is too plain to need proof, yea that Excommunication was look'd on to be but an Act of Civil Jurisdiction is also very manifest. For as amongst the Monks Excom∣munication was an exclusion from common conversation, excommunicatione punire est a mense communi, & refectorio communi arceri, so in Henry the 3d dayes the Civil magistrate was to excomunicate the Jews, for this con∣sultJudaeos verò ad remitten∣das usuras, per saecularem compelli prae∣cipimus pote∣statem & do∣nec illas remi∣serint, ab uni∣versis Christi fidelibus per excommunica∣tioris sententi∣am eis omninò denegetur. M. Paris. ubi vi∣des hanc ex∣communicati∣onem per sae∣culcre brachi∣um inflictam esse. Wats his Glossary. Matth. Paris his History of Henry 3. ad an. 1245. and the Glossary on the word Ex∣comunication;
whereas if Excommunica∣tion had been esteemed an Ordinance of Christ, cutting any off from the Body of Christ, the Jews who never were of the Bo∣dy could not be cut off, neither should it have been an Act of the Civil Magistrate but of the Spiritual pastours. Furthermore it's very manifest, that the Kings of England regulated the manner of process in their Excommunications, shewing whom they might, and whom they might not Excom∣municate, and for this reason Lay-chancel∣lours have been ever since entrusted with this Power. And that both the Powers of Orders, and Excomunication belong unto the Prince is evident from what is inserted in the seve∣ral Charters, given unto divers Abbies. For the Saxon Kings, as well as William the Con∣querour, and his Successours have given both these Powers to whomsoever it pleased them. Thus Edgar, Edmund, Ethelslane, Edward, Elfred, Cuthred, Ethelard, Ina, &c. gave unto Glastonbury the Power of Orders as well as Jurisdiction, and in the Popes Confirmati∣on of Edgards Charter the Donation of these Powers is express too, Ordinatio vero tam Monachorum, quam Clericorum in Arbitrio Abbatis, & Conventus sit. Malmesbury. de gest. Reg. Anglor. lib. 2. c. 7. & 8. The like may be seen in several other Charters given unto Abbies, but I will at this time only observe
a passage I find in those patents by which Bishops in Edward the sixth his Reign were created, and it is this, namely, And we will and by these presents grant to the said N. now Bishop of N. That he may Lawfully, freely, and quietly be able lawfully to ordain and promote whatsoever fit Clerk wheresoever born within the said Diocess of N. On this it is that the Jesuite Sanders, as both Heylin and Dr. Godol∣phin do note, grounds his Assertion, that the very Power of Orders was by the 1. Edward. 6. c. 2. recognized to be in the King. In the same Patent Power is also given duely to correct, reform, and punish whatsoever Delinquents or criminal persons, by Eclesi∣astical Censures, and other lawful remedies of Ecclesiastical Jurisdictions. Thus we see that the potestas Ordinis & Jurisdictionis, though the whole of the An∣tient prelatick Episcopacy consisted in the enjoyment of it, is deriv'd from the King, who is but a Civil Magistrate and that that Orders and Excomunication are but Acts of Civil Power and Jurisdiction. Be∣fore I dismiss this point 'twill be expedient to inquire, How the Civil Magistrate pos∣sessed himself of these things, which really are spiritual and belong only unto spiritual Pastors, but not unto civil Magistrates. That we may arrive to the full know∣ledge of this, we must have recourse to the Usurpations of the Romish Clergy, who to the end they might possess them∣selves
of Temporal Preferments and Ho∣nours gave 'em the names of spiritual things and causes. This is excellently well deliver'd by Sir John Davis ubi supra. where speaking of the Ecclesiastical and Temporal Juris∣diction, saith, This distinction first began in the Court of Rome, where the Clergy having by the spiritual Jurisdiction gotten great wealth, their wealth begat pride, their pride begat Ingratitude towards Princes who first gave them their Juris∣diction, and then according to the nature of Ungrateful persons, they went about to extinguish the memory of the Benefit? for whereas their Jurisdiction was first deriv'd from Coesar, in the Execution whereof they were Coesars Judges, so as both their Courts and Causes ought still to have born Coesars image, and superscription as belonging un∣to Coesar; they blotted Coesars name out of the stile of their Courts, and called them Courts Christian—and the Causes, which in their Nature were meerly Civil, they called Spiritual and Ecclesiastical. So as if the Emperour should change his Courts and Causes again, say Reddite Coesari quae sunt Coesaris, they would cry out on the con∣trary part, Date Deo quae sunt Dei. Our Courts bear the name and title of Christ —And this point of their Policy is worth the observing, that when they found their Jurisdiction in Matrimonial Causes to be most sweet and gainful of all other, to the
end that Caesar might never resume so rich a perquisite of their spiritual Jurisdiction, they reduced Matrimony into the number of the Seven Sacraments. So far Sir John Davies. Moreover they immixed Spiritual and Temporal Causes, to the end they might with the greater colour give unto Temporals The name of Spiritual, and under a pretence of asserting their Spiritual Rights, usurp Temporal Domination, and the Rights of Temporal Princes. This much Stockly, and Tunstal two Po∣pish Bishops in Henry the 8ths dayes in their Letter to Cardinal Pool have observed, for they tell the Cardinal, that the Pope of Rome did by usurpation make a pretence to be over all, Vendicating to himself a Spiri∣tual Kingdom, but then changed it into a Temporal, preaching thereby the Flesh for the Spirit, and an Earthly for an Hea∣venly. In pursuance of this design, the Clergy instead of applying themselves to Divinity fell to the study of the Law,Hinc est quod vetus judicum Secu∣larium habitus idem per om∣nia Paramenta & adhuc ferè est cum Ecclesi∣asticorum viro rum Orna∣mentis. Wast's Glossary on the words, Clerici & Coifa. and possessed themselves of most places of great Trust in the Civil Government: Chancellours and Judges being chosen out of the Clergy, whence 'tis, that to this very day our Judges when on the Bench are vested with priestly Habiliments, as Dr. Wats in his Glossary assures us. This Practice of the Clergy continued until Henry the Thirds dayes as Matth:
Paris reports,Ne Causi∣dicus sit, vel lites agat. Spelmans coun∣cils. Omnes Scholares intactis Gram∣matices rudimentis, authoribus, & philosophis, ad leges properant audiendas, the which the Clergy did notwithstanding about the year 1052,Aures nos∣tras abhor∣renda fama circumstrepit, & inculcat assiduè, quod relictis quini∣mò procul, & abjectis philo∣sophicis disci∣plinis (ut ad praesens divi∣na scientia ta∣cemus) tota clericorum multitudo ad audiendas seculares leges concurrit. Epist. In∣nocentij. quar∣ti. in the Canons of Aelfric sent to Bishop Wulfin, 'tis express, that a priest should not imploy himself in worldly affairs, nor be a Lawyer. And Pope Innocent the 4th finding the Clergy's following the Law to prove rather prejudicial then profitable unto his chair, he sends out his Letters to England, Scotland, Wales, Spain, France, &c. in which he mentions how great a re∣proach it was that the whole multitude of the Clergy should mind nothing as it were so much as the Law. This Letter is in the Additamenta to Matth: Paris. All this I mention, that the Reader may see, how the Clergy being ambitious of worldly preferments and Honours, did ad∣dict themselves to the study of the Law, and that they might be the more success∣ful in their endeavours, they lay a claim to Spiritual Regiment, and mingling Tem∣porals with Spirituals, namely, Causes Te∣stamentary, Causes Matrimonial and such like, with Ordination and Excommunicati∣on, that under a pretence of vendicating to themselves a Spiritual power they might usurp the Temporal, the which for a long time in several instances they did, but yet not so intirely here in England, for by this mixture they gave unto our English Princes
on occasion to assume to themselves under the Notion of Temporal what was really Spiritual. The Priests making the Power of Orders and Excommunication to be but of the same spiritual nature with Causes Testamentary and Matrimonial, our Princes who knew that Causes Testamentary, &c. belonged unto them could not but think that matters of the same kind, viz. Orders and Excommunication, was as much theirs. This may serve to evince, That antiently the National Church Government was but a Civil Government, circa sacra: That the King, though but a Civil person, is the Supreme Head of the Church of England, that the Episcopal Order is but Humane, and all their Episcopal Power derived from the King; That the Potestas Ordinis & Ju∣risdictionis, which is essential to the being of a Prelatick Bishop, was antiently look'd on to be Spiritual in no other sence than Causes Testamentary and Matrimonial, and deriv'd from the King only. But, as I shall shew in the following part of this discourse, ever since the first of King James, the state of the Church of Eng∣land is much alter'd. For which reason in my giving a Description of the present state of the Church of England I could go no higher in my Inquiries than the first of King James, but yet thought it requisite to say somewhat concerning the Antient
state of this Church, lest some Reader should think that what I say of the present state is to be understood of the state of this Church throughout all ages. These things premis'd, I will now pro∣ceed to give a Just Description of the Church of England as now established, and shew what is required from all English men that will hold communion with her. SECT. II. A just description of the Church of England as now by Law establish∣ed given in several Aphorismes. Aphorisme. I. The Church of England as by Law esta∣blished is a National Church made up of Twenty Six Diocesses, and Two Pro∣vinces of which the King is the Su∣preme Head. I Have read somewhere of a Distinction by the Clergy between the National Church of England as a Church, and as In∣corporate with the state, maintaining the former to be jure divino, the latter only
jure humano: the Archbishop of Canterbury to be the Head of the One, and the King the Head of the other. Moreover they add, That the greatest part of the Popes Usurpation was on the Law of God, rob∣bing the Archbishop of the supremacy he had over the kings of this Realm, as seems to be intimated in a clause of the 25th Henr. 8th. c. 21. where this Power is restored to the Archbishop of Canterbury and his suc∣cessours, who by their discretions may grant unto the King and his Successors all such Li∣cences, Dispensations, Compositions Faculties Grants, Rescripts, Delegacies for Causes not contrary to the Holy Scriptures and Laws of God, as heretofore had been used and accustom∣ed to be obtained by his highness, or by any of his most noble progenitors at the See of Rome. By this clause it seems that at least some part of that Supremacy, which the Pope of Rome usurped and exercised over the Kings of this Realm, is given the Arch∣bishop of Canterbury and his successors, and by some it has been asserted to be in the Bishops over the King jure divino: which sort of supremacy over the Prince, is doubt∣less more pernicious than the Papal it self, for it exalts the Vassal above his Sove∣raign. In pursuance of some such principle as this, some of the Clergy in Queen Eliza∣beths time strugled for several Preheminen∣ces,
and took unto themselves an unlimited Power, making an Invasion on the Legisla∣tive Power of the Kingdom. Thus some of the Clergy contrary to the express words of the Act for Uniformity the first of Queen Elizabeth, made alterations in the Common prayer book; for where∣as in the said statute it is enacted, That all and singular Ministers in Cathedrals, or parish Churches—shall be bound to say and use the Mattins, Even-song,—Celebration of the Lords supper, and Administration of each of the Sa∣craments, and all other Common and open pra∣yer in such Order and Form as is mentioned in the said book so authorized by Parliament in the fifth and Sixth years of the reign of King Edward the Sixth, with One alteration or addition of certain lessons to be used on every Sunday in the year, and the Form of the Letany altered, and Corrected, and two sentences only added in the delivery of the Sacrament, and None other, or otherwise. But al∣though it were thus enacted, yet in the Com∣mon-prayer book then set forth, there were many alterations more than were specifyed in the said Act. The Form of the Letany is not corrected nor altered; Moreover there is some detraction from the very Matter of the Book, which is contrary to the statute; The following prayer is left out, [From the Tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, and all his dete∣stible enormities, Good Lord deliver us.] Besides concerning Addition and Alterati∣on
specified in the Act, there be divers and Sundry alterations well nigh in fifty material points, as may be seen in a Treatise entituled, Certain considerations drawn from the Canons. After this Whitgift openly, and boldly invades the Parliamentary Power, for when the Parliament in the 13. Elizabeth c. 12. required subscription to the Articles of Religion with this Exception, viz. To the Articles of Religion, which [only] concern the Confession of the true Christian Faith, and the Doctrine of the Sacraments, where the word [only] must needs exclude somewhat (saith the Learned parker of the Cross part. 2. (c. 8. Sect. 3.) which what can it be but matter of Ceremony, and of Church Go∣vernment to which the honourable state of the Parliament would bind no man, because they saw them controverted, not only by private men, but also by whole Churches, notwithstanding which (as Mr. Parker add's it's not unknown that our Reverend Fathers the Bishops require a subscription, not only to Faith and Sacraments, but also to the Discipline, Communion Book, Ceremonies, and all things else, so imposing articles of their own, which no subject by the Law is permitted to do, whence it sufficiently appeareth that a transcendent Power above the Law has been claimed by the Bishops, even in Queen Elizabeths days. Moreover after the 19th or 20th year of her Majesties Reign they add one momentous clause to the 20th Article of Religion, which was not in
the Books of Articles printed in Latin or English in the years 1562 and 1571 The Clause foisted in is this, namely, The Church has Power to decree Rites or Ceremonies; and authority in Controversies of Faith. And by the Church they understand the Bishops and their Clergy, whereby they plainly insinuate; that the Clergy without the Par∣liament may add what Ceremonies they please to the established worship, and de∣clare what is Heresie, what not, which is directly opposite to the first of Elizabeth. There is also in the 2d part of the Ho∣mily of The Right use of the Church, some∣what that seems to favour the Clergy's su∣premacy, as if they had a Power over Kings, and might Excommunicate them, and oblige all godly men and women to avoid and shun their company until they be reconci∣led to the Church. And according to the Example of our Saviour Christ and the primitive Church, which was most holy and godly and in the which due discipline, with severity was against the wicked, open offenders were not suffered once to enter into the house of the Lord, nor ad∣mitted to common prayer, and the use of the Holy Sacraments with other true Christians, until they had done open pen∣nance before the whole Church: And this was practiced not only upon Mean persons, but also upon the rich, noble, and mighty per∣sons yea upon Theodosius, that puissant, and
Mighty Emperour, whom, for committing a grievous, and most willful Murder, saint Ambrose, Bishop of Milain reproved sharply, and did also Excommunicate the said Emperour, and brought him to Open pennance. And they that were so justly exempted and banished (as it were) from the house of the Lord, were taken (as they be indeed) for men divided and seperated from Christs-Church even given to Satan, the Devil for a time, and their Company was shunned and avoided of all godly men and women, until such time as they by Re∣pentance, and publick pennance were recon∣ciled. So far the Homily, In which, Am∣brose his Excommunicating the Emperour is justified and to it 'tis added, That the godly must shun the Company of the Excomuni∣cated, the which shews what some of the Clergy have been aiming at, even in Queen Elizabeths days. The learned Parker in his discourse of the Cross lib. 2. c. 1. Sect. 21. agrees with me in this particular, for in evincing that some did subject the King to the Clergy he thus expresseth himself, What mean's else the Licence, which the King must have in some cases under the Archbishop's hand? What meaneth else their tying him to the Canons of the Church, as well as to the word of God? What meaneth else the New Tenent, That Bishoplike Authority over their Brethren is not from the Prince or at his Pleasure (as heretofore hath been taught)
but even Jure Divino, which Q. Elizabeth would never endure. So far Parker. By this little light, we may see from what principles the Assertion of the Divine Right of Episcopacy doth flow, and whither it tends. But what struglings soever there have been to introduce such doctrines about the Divine Right of Episcopacy and the prela∣tick Power which is destructive of his Majesty's supremacy; yet it must be ac∣knowledged, that touching the Govern∣ment of the Church of England as National, I am in the right in affirming the King to be the only supreme head on Earth of the Church of England, which word [only] is exclusive of a Domestick as well as of a forreign, yea of an Ecclesiastical, as well as of a Temporal Supremacy. Aphorisme II. This National Church ever since the first of King James has been, and now is declared to be a National Church of Divine Right. But the Spiritual guides are at a loss how to make it out. THough Queen Elizabeth could not be prevail'd with to acknowledge the Di∣vine right of a National Church Goverment, yet King James was soon engaged to be for it. Whosoever will consult the Con∣stitutions
and Canons Ecclesiastical agreed upon with King James his Licence, the first year of his reign, will find this to be So. For Can. 3. 'tis ordained, that, Whoso∣ever shall affirm that the Church of England by Law established under the Kings Majesty is not a True, and Apostolical Church &c. let him be Excommunicated ipso facto, and not be restored but only by the Archbishop af∣ter his Repentance and publick Revocation of this his wicked Errour. But more expresly in the 7th Canon, Who∣soever shall affirm, that the Government of the Church of England under his Majesty by Arch∣bishops, Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons and the rest that bear Office in the same, [namely, Lay-chancellours, Officials, Commissaries &c.] is An∣tichristian or repugnant to the word of God, is excommunicated ipso facto, and so to continue till he Repent, and publickly Revoke such his wicked Errours. So far the Canon. And what is this less than an Assertion, That the Go∣vernment of the Church of England as Na∣tional by Archbishops, Bishops, &c. is Apo∣stolical, and agreeable to the Word of God? 'Twill be here expedient that I give the Reader some further light touching the true meaning of the Canons, & shew what strength they receive from the Law of the Land. And That I may give a just account of the genuine import of these Canons, I must be∣seech you to observe on what Occasion those Canons were agreed on; for Occasio legis
indicat & mentem Legislatoris, & sensum le∣gis. The occasion of the Law must direct us in the interpretation of the Law. It must be then noted, that in Q. Eliza∣beths days the old Nonconformists struggled mightily for a Reformation of the Church of England. They found fault with the Constitution of the Government as it was by Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Archdea∣cons, Lay-chancellours &c. asserting all these offices to be repugnant to the word of God and Antichristian. They also gave other forms of Government, which they affirmed to be of Divine Institution. They did moreover find fault with the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church. And with their book of Ordering Bishops, Priests and Deacons, and frequently petitioned for a Reformation, and when all attempts for the obtaining the Countenance of Autho∣rity fail'd, they without the Magistrates leave endeavoured Reformation amongst them∣selves, which essays of the old Noncon∣formists, though countenanced by those of the Church of England that are called the Calvinistical party, yet met with great opposition from Whitgift and Bancroft. When King James came to the Throne he finding the Church in this Divided po∣sture, commands a conference at Hampton-court between the Bishops and some Lear∣ned Divines, who, (though Conformists yet) did favour the Disciplinarians; at which
time some things were altered for the bet∣ter, but the King being zealous for the Church of England, and very much in∣fluenced by the Bishops, Soon after called a Convocation in which with the King's licence such Canons were agreed on, as did most directly oppose the principles the old Nonconformists had of Church Govern∣ment, Ceremonies &c. So that whereas the Nonconformists affirm'd that the National Church of England as Governed by Arch∣bishops, Bishops &c. was not an Apostoli∣cal Church, they in the third Canon Ex∣communicate such by an ipso facto Excom∣munication. And whereas the Nonconfor∣mists also asserted, That the Government of the Church by Archbishops, Bishops &c. was not of divine Right, but repugnant to the word of God, and Antichristian, they Excommunicate all these by the 7th Canon. In like manner the Book of Com∣mon prayer with all the Scrup'led rites and ceremonies, and the Book of Ordering Priests and Deacons, are more strictly established then ever, and all persons what∣soever obliged under pain of an ipso facto Excomunication to give in their Assent and consent to every thing contained in them by the 4th, 16th, and 8th Canons. In some considerations against subscripti∣on published soon after the book of Can∣ons, I find that the old Nonconformists ex∣press themselves much to this purpose for
they say, That when as the Discipline and Go∣vernment Provincial and Diocesane, ministred and exercised by the late Archbishop deceased, and his suffragans, was diversly handled, dis∣puted, and controverted, not to be agreeable but repugnant to the Holy Scriptures, and necessary also for the repressing of Vice, the en∣crease of Faith and Christian Religion, to be Changed; they hereupon justly fearing, that the most vertuous and Christian Queen de∣ceased, upon Sundry complaints made in open Parliament against their most unjust grievan∣ces, would have reformed the same their man∣ner of government; they presently upon new advice and consultation taken, boldly and constantly avouched the same their Govern∣ment, to have been from the Apostles time, and agreeable to the Holy Scriptures, and there∣fore also perpetual, and still to be used and in no case to be altered by any King or Potentate whatsoever. By means of which this their enclining to the Popish opinion, and holding their Juris∣diction to be de jure divino, and professedly maintaining in the Homily (whereunto also subscription is urged) That the King and all the Nobility ought to be subject to Excommuni∣cation, their is now at length grown such a main position of having a perpetual Dioscesane pro¦vincial Government in the Church, that rather then their Hierarchy should stoop, they would cause the Kings supremacy, which he has over their said Jurisdiction to fall down to the ground: In
so much as by their supposition the King has no Authority, no not by his supreme Power, to alter their said Government at all. And to this end and purpose (as it seemeth) in their late Canons have they devised and decreed this book of Ordination to be subscribed unto. So far the Considerations against subscrip∣tion. From all which we may conclude, that they judged that the true reason of call∣ing this Convocation, was the many de∣bates against Episcopal Government, the many petitions for its removal, and that the Divine right of Diocesane and Provincial Bishops was asserted to prevent an Altera∣tion of the Diocesane, and provincial Go∣vernment and at last establish'd by their new Canons, the which sufficiently shews, that the great design and intendment of the abovemention'd Canons, is the establishment of the Divine Right of the national Church-Government by Archbishops Bishops &c. Thus you see that by the Canon-Law the Divine and Unalterable right of the Dio∣cesane Episcopacy was established, I say by the Canon-Law, for the Canons have the force of an Ecclesiastical Law. Though the Canons were not (as the Common prayer and Rubricks, are now) put into the Body of an Act of Parliament, yet they are in pursuance of an Act of Parliament, and therefore must be acknowledged to have the force of a Law. By the 25. Henry 8th. c. 25. The Cler∣gy
called to Convocation, by the Kings writ are enabled to Enact, promulge, and Execute all such Canons, Constitutions, or Ordinances provincial, which are confirm∣ed by the Kings most royal assent and licence. In pursuance to this statute, the Convoca∣tion Anno 1603 was assembled, by the Kings writ, and when assembled, they did desire his Majesties royal assent unto their Can∣ons according to the form of the foresaid statute of 25th Henr: 8. c. 25. And the King by his letters patents under the great seal of England did ratify and confirm them. Who then can say that these Canons thus confirmed by his Majesty have not the Po∣wer and strength of a Law? There are I confess some who say, that no Canons can be of legal force, but such as are in pursuance of the 27th Henr. 8. c. 15. drawn up by two and thirty Commissi∣oners of the Kings appointing, and confirm'd by the Kings Letters Pattents, the which thing has not yet been done, for as 'twas negle∣cted all the raign of Henry the 8th, so, al∣though in Edward the sixths days a com∣mittee of these Commissioners did compose a Book, yet 'twas not confirmed by the King; and the Convocation of 1603. was not an assembly of Commissioners, and therefore not of legal establishment. But this is grounded on a manifest Er∣rour, for the work of these 32 Commissi∣oners
was not to make new, 'twas only to reform the old Canons. New canons were (as I have proved) to be made by the Con∣vocation, and so were the Canons in dis∣pute; and although it be further objected, that in the Statute of 25. Henr. 8th c. 25. the Clergy of the whole Realm, which, they say, must be a National Synod, are only en∣abled to enact Canons, and that the Con∣vocation of 1603. was only Provincial; I must say, That nothing is more common than that the Provincial constitutions of Canterbury have been all along received by the Church of England. Whoever reads Lyndwoods provincial Constitutions, all which are, (by the 25. Henr. 8. c. 19. excepting such as are contrary or repugnant to the Laws, Statutes, and Customs of this Realm, or to the damage and hurt of the King's Pre∣rogative Royal, in force, and whatever pretence the Province of York may have for a plea of exemption, yet that doth not in the least invalidate the force of these Canons. It can only prove that that Province is not obli∣ged by them, it cannot prove that they are not of force in the Province of Canterbury. But whosoever is well acquainted with the antient Constitution of our National Church, will see little in these objections, whence I conclude that what is enacted by the Canons of 1603. are of legal force. But though the National Church government by Archbishops, Bishops &c. has been ever
since the first of King James declar'd to be de jure divino, yet the spiritual guides of the Church are at a great loss how to make it out. They are at a loss how to make the two Provincial Churches of Canterbury, and York to fall so into one as to become One National Church of Divine right: for their assertion, That the National Church consi∣dered as a Church not incorporate with the state, is of divine Institution, supposes the Church of England to fall under a purely spiritual consideration, and that none can be a governour in it but a Clergy man, one in the Priestly and Episcopal office. It's this that is the main difficulty. If the National Church, or spiritual polity be of Divine Right, then there must be by divine Appointment some spiritual person, a man in Holy Orders, one or more that must be it's Constitutive Head, or Regent part. But this notion is exclusive of the Prince, who is not in orders, and exalts a vassal in Orders above the King, which were a position therefore manifestly Traiterous, and dangerous for any to assert. And no wonder if upon this consideration Dr. Stillingfleet, and his complices be put to silence, whereas if this had not been some∣thing to hamstring them, they could not have been at any such loss about the Con∣stitutive Regent Head, being as easy (other∣wise) to be found out for the National, as it is for the finding out such a Head to the Provincial or Diocesane Church.
If the National Government of the Church be considered according to its An∣tient constitution, as it is but a Civil Go∣vernment circa Sacra, it becomes one by being united in one Head, the King; but this pleaseth not those, who are for a Divine right, they must have a man in orders to be supreme head of their national Church, and were it not for the Treason, that is in the notion, I am apt to think, they would be bold in assuring us, that the Archbishop of Canterbury is the supreme Governing Part. They have gone very far towards the asser∣ting this much, for the Archbishop is made primate of all England; and Metropolitane, and as such hath a supereminency, and some Power even over the Archbishop of York. In the year of our Lord 1072, or 1073. on an equal Scanning the controversie between Lanfranc Archbishop of Canter∣bury, and Thomas Archbishop of York it was resolv'd, that the Archbishop of York should be subject unto the Archbishop of Canterbury in all things, relating to the Christian Religion, that the Archbishop of Canterbury, might call a Council and apoint where it should be held, that the Archbishop of Tork, his suffragans and in∣feriour Clergy should be present, and shew themselves Obedient; That the Archbish∣op of York should receive a fatherly bles∣sing from the Archbishop of Canterbury, and swear Canonical Obedience unto Can∣terbury.
A particular account of this we have in Malmesbury de gestis pontif. Anglor. in the life of Lanfrank. and in Matth Par. the which Dr. Godolphin also observes in his Abridgement.Ʋbi tandem antiquarum auctoritatibus scripturarum probatum est, & ostensum quod Eboracensis Ecclesia de∣beat subjacere Ecclesiae Can∣tuariensi, & ipsius Archie∣piscopi, ut pri∣mati totius Bri∣tanniae disposi∣tionibus in om∣nibus quae ad Christianam pertinent Rli∣ginem, fideliter obedire: Ita quod si Archie∣is. Cantuar. concilium te∣nre volerit, ubique sibi utile vism fuerit, Eborac. Archiep. cum oibus suis suffraganeis, & subjectis Cleri∣cis, si praesn∣ti ebeat eis{que} canonicis dispsitionibus obediens existat. Benedictionem, etiam Episco¦palem ab ipso debeat accipere, & ei canonicam professionem addito jura¦ento praestare. Matth. Paris. in vit. Guil. Conquaestor. To this let us but add the 139th Canon, and we shall find great Representatives of the Kingdom, the King, Lords, and Com∣mons, are not the Church of England by Representation; but a National Synod of the Clergy, for it is there ordain'd, That who∣soever shall hereafter affirm, That the sacred Synod of this Nation [not the Parliament] in the name of Christ, and by the King's autho∣rity assembled, is not the Church of England by Representation, let him be Excommunicated and not restored until he repent and publickly revoke that his wicked Errour. Thus they have lying by them both a Body and an Head for a National Church, not incorporate with the state, They have a spiritual National Church by Represen∣tation, and a Spiritual Head, viz, a Sacred Synod and the Archbishop of Canterbury, but durst not own their Head, lest they fall into a premunire, and so whenever provoked to shew their Head, they seem, to be as men under an unaccountable surprize and amazement.
Aphorisme III. In this National Church of England, which is now by Canon Law declared to be of Divine Right, A Diocesane Church made up of many scores or hun∣dred Parishes, having no true Pastoral Churches under it, is a particular Church of the lowest rank or species, de jure Divino, and as such established by Statute-law. NOw there is not within this Kingdom a particular Church of Christs Insti∣tution, but what has many Parishes in it, according to this Doctrine. For there are no more Particular Churches than there are Diocesses nor any more pastours of Churches than there are Diocesane Bishops, that is, there are six and twenty particular Churches, and Six and twenty pastours in the whole Kingdom of England and Do∣minion of Wales, and no more. A Dioce∣san Bishop and a Pastour of a particular Church, do in the Episcopal Dictionary signi∣fie one and the same thing. That I may make this the more plain, I must shew what the Church of England means by a Diocesane Bishop, and prove that they hold the Diocesane Bishop to be de jure Divino.
The Diocesane Bishop is of an Order distinct from, and Superiour to that of the Parish Minister, Episcopacy is not meerly a Degree above the Parish Priest, but an Or∣der, as Archbishop Laud in his Letter to Bishop Hall observes, Here lies the main of the Cause (saith the Archbishop) whether Epis∣copacy be an Order, or Degree. An Order certainly, if it be of Divine, and Apostoli∣call Institution. For that which is but dif∣ferent by Degrees and Circumstantially, cannot be other than juris positivi. Now that which is proper to the Episcopal Order is the Potestas Ordinis & Jurisdictionis. The Power of Orders belongs to the Bishop as he is a Bishop, not as he is a Bishop, of this or the other place. So that as he is a Bishop, I mean Universally so over the whole world, he may consistent with the Order of Churches, Consecrate Churches, confer Orders in any place of the earth, that is, delegate Curates by giving them Power to Preach and dis∣pence the Sacraments, and administer Con∣firmation. But the Power of Jurisdiction is appropriate unto him, as he is confin'd to his See, and by this he acts as Ecclesia∣stical Judge in matters Spiritual. If this Episcopacy be a Divine Institution, the potestas Ordinis & Jurisdictionis is deriv'd from God unto the Bishop, not from the Prince, and therefore it cannot be said, that he receives it from his Election, (which is by a Conge D'eslire from the King) but
from the laying on the hands of the Arch∣bishop. For though he be elected, and the Temporalties are granted him (saith Godol∣phin in his Abridg: c. 3. . 6) yet he is not a Bishop before Consecration. After his Election to the making him a Bishop, 'tis necessary he receive a Confirmation, Con∣secration, and Investiture from the Arch∣bishop or Metropolitan, and after the Con∣firmation of his Election by the Arch∣bishop, he hath the potestatem Ordinis & Ju∣risdictionis. So far Godolphin. By making the Episcopal a distinct Or∣der from the Priestly, and appropriating this double Power to the Episcopal Order, it necessarily follows, that to the priestly Or∣der there belongs only the office of preach∣ing and administring the Sacraments; They have not any Power to confer Orders, or exercise Discipline, the utmost of their Po∣wer is but Declarative, and Suasory, or Executive, that is, they may preach, exhort, admonish, administer the Sacraments and execute the Bishops Orders, but have no Po∣wer to Ordain, confirm, or Excommu∣nicate. Here it must be carefully noted, that so long as the Bishops, and Priests are affirm'd to be of one and the same Order, differing only in Degree; whatever belongs to the Order belongs as well to the Priest as to the Bishops, though in a higher degree to the Bishop, whence the Power of Orders and
Jurisdiction belonged to the Priest, though for Order sake the Bishop was entrusted with the Exercise of it; and the priestly Or∣dination valid, though not so orderly; but by making the Episcopacy to be a di∣stinct Order from that of the Priests, the very Power of Orders and Jurisdiction is denied the priest, who, as such cannot be a Pastour, at most he is but a Semi-pa∣stour, the Bishops Minister or Curate, his or∣dination no more valid than that of a Dea∣con, for he has no other Power for the conferring Orders, than the Deacon has, and the Diocesane Bishop is not a Bishop of Bishops, he is not according to this Notion Episcopus Episcoporum, he is but Episcopus gregis, the priests being but ministring, not Governing officers under the Bishop. This notion I confess has a consistency in it, but to prove it scriptural is the great difficulty, and it's no part of my province in this place to enter on the controversy about the Divine Right of Episcopacy, my present work is only to evince, that the Law has established this Episcopacy de facto, and declares it to be juris divini, not juris divini mediati (as the Italian Papists affirm it to be) but juris divini immediati. This Distinction I mention to shew the difference between the Church of England, and the Church of Rome; For I'le not do the Church of Eng∣land the least wrong, in the Description I give of her.
It must therefore be here Observed, That the Romanists, who acknowledge the Episco∣pal Order and the Priestly to be one and the same, do derive the Episcopal Power, as di∣stinct from, and superior to that of the Priestly power from the Pope, and so deny the Episco∣pacy to be juris divini immediati, as may be seen in the History of the Council of Trent, and affirm it to be juris divini mediati. They say, that the Pope is primarily and immedi∣ately intrusted by Jesus Christ with the Episcopal power, and that the Bishops lean only on him immediately for it. But the Old Church of England look'd on the King, as the great Trustee of Episcopal Po∣wer, that the Episcopal was but a Civil Power lodg'd with the King and deriv'd from him to the Bishops. And now the Episcopal Power is said to be derived nei∣ther from the Pope, nor the King, but immediately from Jesus Christ: for the Epis∣copacy is an order distinct from the Priest∣hood, & juris divini immediati; and it is my business to evince that according to the Law the Episcopacy is juris divini. The which I will do first more generally, and then more particularly, by shewing that both the Power of Orders, and Jurisdiction is now only in the Bishop. In order to the proof of this, Two things must be observ'd. 1. That from the very beginning of the Reformation there have been a sort of People endeavouring the
Establishment of the Divine Right of this Episcopacy, and as preparatives to such an establishment, they either openly pleaded for the leaving in some passages in the Com∣mon prayer book, and Book of Ordering Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, as might in due time be improved for the advance of this Divine Right, or subtilly foisted in such passages as would most effectually suit their design, and as they had time so they did more publickly contend for this Right. The Truth of this may appear from what has been suggested under the first Aphorisme, and from the History is given us of Whitgift's Extramagistratical imposing the Three Articles, with the steps they made in King James his days, but especially in King Charles the first, and his late Majesties Reign. But 2. As on King James his entring Eng∣land, the Clergy had arriv'd to a greater boldness, touching their asserting the Divine Right of Episcopacy, So this Prince was by Principle every way prepared for the encouragement of these Bishops, and furthe∣rance of their designs. This much the King discovered assoon as he came into England, for in the Conference at Hampton Court (as Dr Barlow reports) King James taxed St Jerome for asserting, That a Bishop was not divinae ordinationis, the which emboldened Bancroft, Bishop of Lon∣don to say, that, unless he could prove his Episcopal Ordination lawfull out of
the Scriptures, he would not be a Bishop four hours. And in the same year the King issuing out writs to assemble a Convocation of the Clergy, it was ordained by the 36th. Ca∣non, That no person should be received into the Ministry but he that would subscribe to the 3 Articles, two of which were to this purpose, That the Book of Common Pray∣er and Ordering of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, containeth in it nothing contrary to the word of God, and that he alloweth the Book of Articles of Religion agreed upon by Arch∣bishops and Bishops of both provinces, and the whole Clergy holden at London in the year 1562. And that he acknowledgeth all and every of the Articles therein contained, being in number 39. besides the ratification, to be agree∣able to the word of God. By which subscrip∣tion they allow of all things contained in the book of Homilies, and of all things contained in the book of Consecration of Archbishops and Bishops and Ordering Priests and Dea∣cons, that is, they by their Subscription ap∣proved of the Divine Right of Episcopa∣cy, which I thus evince. In the preface to the Book of Orders it is affirm'd, That it is evident unto all men di∣ligently reading Holy Scripture, and antient Authors, that from the Apostles times there have been these Orders of Ministers in Christs Church, Bishops, Priests, and Deacons.
I grant that these words admit of a con∣trary sence, for without laying the words under a violence they may be understood of Two Orders only, namely, of the Or∣der of Bishops or Priests, and that other of Deacons, according to what is in the Ne∣cessary Erudition of a Christian man. And it will admit of a contrary sence too [these Orders] namely [these three Orders, Bishops, Priests and Deacons.] In Queen Elizabeths dayes, when a Subscription was not re∣quir'd either by Statute, or Canon Law to any Special sence, it was free for any to take it in either sence, and I question not but some took it in the One, and some in the other sence. But assoon as a Subscrip∣tion was enjoyned to signify an Approba∣tion of the three Orders, the case was alter'd, and this was effectually done by the 36th Canon. For the evincement of this take the words of some Old Nonconformists in their Con∣siderations against Subscription. But how doth the Subscription (you will say) to the book of Ordination, approve the Orders and Degrees of Provincial and Diocesane Bishops, to be by Divine Right rather than by Humane Ordi∣nance? How? (say they) why thus: It is evi∣dent (saith the preface of that Book) to all men diligently reading holy Scriptures, and antient Authors, that from the Apostles dayes, there have been these Orders of Mi∣nisters in Christs Church, Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons. Yea, and by the whole order of pray∣er, and of scripture read, and used in the Form of Consecration of an Archbishop or Bishop, it is apparent that the Order of an Archbishop or Bishop consecrated by that book, is reputed, and taken to be of Divine Insti∣tution; and therefore seeing the names of those Orders of Ministers must necessarily be taken and understood of such Orders of Ministers as be set forth and described in the body of that book, it must needs be intended, that the Ministers, by their Subscription should approve of the Orders of Ministers, mentioned in that book, to be of Divine Institution, and consequent∣ly, that Provincial, or Diocesane Ministers or Bishops have not their Essence and Being from the Nomination, Gift and Authority of the King. Besides, if we should otherwise understand it of such Bishops, as are mention'd in the Scripture, then for the Ministers to Subscribe to the book of Ordination, would no way justify those Officers, or Degrees of Mi∣nisters, which are described in that book, but would indeed utterly subvert, and over∣throw them. Because the Orders and Degrees of a provincial and Diocesane Bishop, of a Priest and a Deacon mentioned in that book, be of a far differing Nature, from those Orders and De∣grees of ministers,, which are mention'd in the Scriptures, they only agree in the name, and differ in nature. So far the Considerations against Subscription. Furthermore the Ministers of Lincoln
Diocess refuse to subscribe unto the 39th Article of Religion for these following Reasons. First, because the Book of Consecra∣tion of Archbishops, Bishops &c. doth not (where∣as the Article saith it doth) contain all things that are necessary, but omitteth some things, which by the Ordinance of God ought to be observed in the Ordination of Ministers, for the Priest receiveth not in his Ordination any Authority to govern the flock, and exer∣cise the Discipline of Christ, but only to preach the word and administer the Sacraments. Be∣sides they affirm, that there are some manifest untruths avouched in it (whereas the Article saith it hath nothing in it of it self ungodly.) As when it saith, That it is evident to all men diligently reading the Holy Scriptures, and antient writers, that from the Apostles times there have been these Orders of Ministers in Christs Church, [viz, Bishops, Priests and Dea∣cons.] Futhermore it contains Sundry Popish Errors and superstitions, as 1. That it alloweth and establisheth the Offices of Archdeacons, and Archbishops. 2. That Deacons, Priests, Bishops, and Archbishops are made several Orders, and Degrees of Ministry. By this its manifest, that the old Non∣conformists did conclude, That by enjoyn∣ing subscription unto the book of Ordinati∣on, the Divine Right of the Diocesane Episcopacy was asserted, for, by These or∣ders [viz. Bishops, Priests, and Deacons]
they were to understand these Three Orders, Bishops, Priests and Deacons. That the Episcopal Clergy understood these words in the same sence is too plain to need proof, for which reason I will on∣ly mention the Reasons urg'd by Archbishop Laud to evince the truth of this. To ob∣serve all that has been said by Sutcliff, and Bilson, Downam, and the many Episcopal writers whose books are extant, would be a work as troublesome as it is unnecessary: But this Archbishop in his letter to Bishop Hall thus argues, The antient word in the Fathers is Ordinatio Episcopi; and our phrase is of any of our Brethren the Bishops, he is one of our Order; and why doth the Church of England Ordain, or Consecrate every one that is made a Bishop, if it be but a Degree of the same Order? for when a Bishop is translated, or made an Archbishop, there is then no consecration, because they are Juris positivi. So far the Archbishop. In fine, as King James, and the subscribing Clergy in his days, were for the Divine Right of the Diocesane Episcopacy, so was King Charles the first, as may be seen in Whitlock's Memoirs, and several other places. Thus we see that in the Opinion of ll the Learned whether Conformist or Non∣conformist, the 36th Canon, which requires subscription to the Article of Religion en∣joynes
our allowing of the Diocesane Epis∣copacy to be juris divini. But here it must be noted, that although the Divine Right of the Diocesane Episcopa∣cy was then by Canon established, yet the Episcopalians had not arriv'd unto the ut∣most point they aimed at, for they acknow∣ledged that the Parish Presbyter receiv'd the Potestas Ordinis immediately from Christ, but the potestas Jurisdictionis was deriv'd un∣to him mediate, viz. mediante Episcopo, whence all Ordinations, by the Presbyters were valid, as Bancroft himself acknowledged. From this concession of the Bishops the old Nonconformists took the advantage to as∣sert the Pastoral Office of the Presbyter, and to prove that every Parish Presbyter ac∣cording to the Rule given by the Episcopal, must be acknowledged to be vested with the pastoral Power, whence they concluded, that the Parishes were substantially, and es∣sentially congregational Churches. This I will make as plain as possibly I can. The Learned Parker in his Ecclesiasti∣cal Polity, lib. 3. c. 10. gives us a just ac∣count of this Controversie between him∣felf, and Downam, shewing that the Episco∣palians of his time did hold that Jurisdicti∣on was derived unto the Presbyter imme∣diately from the Bishop. The which that they may with the greater Clearness prove, they distinguish between the Power of Order, and Jurisdiction; and again, between
the Power it self, and the Excercise of the Power, affirming that the Power of Or∣ders is deriv'd to the Presbyter immediate∣ly from God, but the Power, of Juris∣diction Mediate, and at his Institution; That the Priest receives the Power of Orders as a simple Presbyter, and the Power of Jurisdiction as a Pastour, but then they so frame their notion as to make the pastoral Office of the Presbyter to be but an Episcopal delegation, which is to be exercised under the Bishop as the Bishop shall direct, whence 'tis that they look'd on the Bishop to be the principal or special Pa∣stour, but the Presbyter to be a less principal Pastour, made so by an Accidental As∣signation of the Bishop; the Bishop was, they said, a Pastour Essentially, and the Presbyter a Pastor, only Accidentally. They did not at first deny a Presbyter to be a Pastour, but yet so minc'd the matter that they left him little more than the name, and the execution of the Bishops mandates. But these Episcopalians granting that the Power of Orders was deriv'd immediately from God to the Presbyter, the learned Parker takes the advantage of it to prove, that the parish Presbyter derived his Juris∣diction immediately from God. But in the first place he shews how the Bishops deal with the Presbyter, even as the Pope deal't with the Bishops, who according to the Popish notion derive their Power from
God mediante Papa,Nihil aliud Jurisdictio est quam Ordinis exercitium. and so receive it im∣mediately from the Pope: and then shews the vanity of their distinctions, asserting that Jurisdiction is nothing but the exercise of Orders.Recte enim adversus Bell∣arminum Guil. Whitakerus [qui dicit non conferri po∣testatem Ju∣risdictionis, quando con∣fertur potestas Ordinis, is pa∣rum ab insano est] Whence to assert that the Power of Juridiction is not conferr'd when the Power of Orders is conferr'd, is to act the part of a mad man, as the famous Whitaker in his controversy with Bellar∣mine observes; and even as the Bishops prove, that the Power of Jurisdiction is deriv'd immediately from God, so he proves that the Presbyter receives both the Power of Orders and Jurisdiction im∣mediately from God. And in his 15th (which is his last) Argument, he shews that the Bishops derive their Power from the Pres∣byters,Excepta Ordinatione (i. e.) excepta Presbytero∣rum electione, qui eum in praefidem eli∣gerent, ita nil- facit Episco∣pus, quod Presbyter non facit nisi ex Ordinatione & Electione Presbytero¦rum nisi quod illi Ex com∣muni onscisu Prebytero∣rum collatum st. not the Presbyters from the Bishops. The Bishops, saith he, were not from the beginning, Presbyters were long before them: and as St. Jerome observes, a Bishop hath no other Jurisdiction than what he re∣ceiv'd from the Presbytery. Quid facit Episcopus (saith St. Jerome excepta Ordinati∣one quod non facit Presbyter? That is, as Parker expounds it, the Bishop doth no∣thing more than a Presbyter, but by the Ordination of the Presbytery who chose him to that Office. Moreover this learned Parker proving even from the Episcopal concessions, that the Parish Presbyter was vested with the Power of Jurisdiction, deriv'd immediately
from God, he,Vide Par∣kers Eccles Pol. l 3. c. 16. § 2. p. 167. Church Cove∣nant p. 36. Mr. Hookers Sur∣vey of the sum of Church Discipline. part. 1. c. 4 p. 47. 48. as the old Nonconformist generally, did look on the Parish Minister to be a Pastour, and the Parish Assembly to retain the Essentials, and Substantials of a true particular Church, which they assert is Congregational. Of this judgement were the New England Ministers, and in special the Learned Hooker. The Episcopalians finding themselves thus pinch'd by the Nonconformists, they do not only deny the Presbyter to be vested with Jurisdiction, but moreover deny him the Power of Orders, so that whereas for∣merly they esteemed an Ordination by Pres∣byters to be valid, they alter their opinion, affirming, that the Potestas Ordinis & Ju∣risdictionis belongs only to the Diocesane Bishop; that the Parish Priest is no Essential nor Accidental Pastor; that the Diocesane Bishop is the only Pastor of the Diocesan Church which is a particular Church of the lowest rank and order, and the Parish Minister is but the Bishop's delegate, or curate. The bringing the Government of the Church to this point, was the attempt of Archbishop Laud but he was decapitated before a settlement of this sort of Dioce∣sane Episcopacy could be established. But soon after his late Majesty's Restoration, those of the Episcopal Clergy who were appointed by his Majesties Commission to review the books of Common prayer and
of Ordering Bishops, Priests and Deacons, did their utmost to frame all things accor∣ding to Arch bishop Laud's model; and in all those places where they found the word [Pastour] in the Common Prayer book spoken of the Parish Priest, they blot it out giving them no better name than Priest, or Curate. Thus in the Letany, the old Com∣mon Prayer book has it in these words [that it may please thee to illuminate all Bishops, Pastours, and Curates,] in the new it is [all Bishops, Priests, and Deacons]; and at the Communion in a Prayer for the whole state of the Church militant here on Earth, in the old 'tis [Give Grace to all Bishops, Pastours, and Curates,] but in the new [give Grace to all Bishops and Curates.] Moreover in the book of Or∣dering Bishops Priests, and Deacons, they have made such momentous alterations as do plainly evince that the Bishop is the sole Pastour. In the Preface to the book of Ordering Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, besides what I have already noted, there is a momentous difference between the old and the new; for whereas in the old it's said [that it is requisite that no man, not being at this present, Bishop, Priest or Deacon, shall execute any of the said functions, except he be called, tried, examined, and admitted thereunto, according to the form hereafter following,] in the new its thus, [no man shall be accounted or taken
to be a lawful Bishop, Priest, or Deacon in the Church of England, or suffered to execute any of the said functions except he be called —according to the forme hereafter following, or has had formerly Episcopal Consecration, or Ordination.] By this very alteration its manifest, that though the old book was against such men's Executing the Functions, that were not Episcopally ordained, yet they did not with the new deny them to be of the Priestly fun∣ction; and the new, by denying them to be of the Priestly Function, doth insinuate that there is nothing of the pastoral Office left the Parish Priest, for so long as the Pastoral Power belonged to the Parish Minister, their Ordinations were esteem∣ed valid though irregular, but now its not so. Again in the old book, in the Ordering of Priests, the Epistles and Gospels to be read were such as did shew their Office to be Pastoral, for Acts 20th from the 17th. verse to the 36th. which shews the Office of the Presbyter to be the same with that of the Bishop; and Matth. 28.18, 19, 20. and John 20.19, 20, 21, 22, 23. which speak of the Power of binding and loosing, was used to assure us, that they esteemed the Priest∣ly Office to be Pastoral, but are in the new book taken out of the Ordering of a Priest, and inserted in the Consecration of a Bishop. The which makes it very mainifest that they
depriv'd the Parish Priest of the Pastoral Office, giving it wholly to the Bishop. Whoever will consult the Exhortation and observe those two or three lines which precede that part of it, which Mr. B. Quo∣tes, will find that the design of the Holy Lessons taken out of the Gospel, was to shew them the Dignity and Importance of that Office, unto which they were call'd, for the Bishop tells them, That you have heard Brethren, as well in your private examination, as in the exhortation which was now made to you, and in the very Lessons taken out of the Gospel, and the Writings of the Apostles, of what dignity, and of how great importance this office is whereunto ye are called, the which words plainly direct us to conclude, that the Alterations of the Lessons do plainly shew an Alteration of the Office, and that though by the old Lessons the Office was Pasto∣ral, yet by the new Lessons it was not so. Besides in the old Exhortation, they were called [Messengers, Watchmen, and Stew∣ards, and Pastours of the Lord,] but in the new the word [Pastours] is left out. And whereas in the old the Bishop did ask, whether he did think in his heart, that he was truely called according to the Will of God and the Order of the Church of Eng∣land, to the [Ministry of Priesthood; in the new it is to the [Order] and Ministry, making thereby Priesthood an Order of it self distinct from those of Deaconship and
Episcopacy. And when the Bishops with the preists present lay their hands on the Ordained, the Bishop is more particular and express in shewing what his office is, for to what is in the old book they add, Receive the Holy Ghost [for the Office of a Priest in the Church of God, now com∣mitted unto thee by the Imposition of our hands.] In the Ordaining and consecrating of an Archbishop or Bishop in the Collect, to shew what they mean by Bishops, by way of Explication its added in the new, to all Bishops [the Pastors of thy Church,] and that it may be a truth past doubt that the Bishop is of a distinct Order from a Priest he is to be Ordained again, and therefore the two Bishops, who present him to the Archbishop say [most Reverend Father in God, we present unto you this godly, and well learned man to be [Ordained] and consecrated Bishop] and in that Prayer for the Bishop [Almighty God &c] whereas in the old book 'twas [Replenish him so with thy Truth —that he may faithfully serve thee in this office to the [Edifying of thy Church,] in the new it is [to the well Governing thy Church.] And when the Archbishop and other Bishops present o lay their hands on the elected, and ccording to the old book were to say [Receive the holy Ghost &c] in the new its added [for the Office, and work o a Bishop in the Church of God now mmitted unto thee by the imposition
of our hands in the name of the Father &c.] Now let any impartial or unbyass'd Reader duely weigh all that has been urg'd out of the Canons of 1603. and the accompt I have here given of the steps, our Episco∣palians made in the latter end of Q. Elizabeths reign, but more especially in King James, King Charles the first, and his late Majes∣ties reigns, especially the great Alteration of the book of Ordering Priests and Dea∣cons, he cannot but conclude with me, that now that Law, which establisheth the Book of Consecrating Bishops, and Ordering Priests and Deacons, hath settled the Epis∣copal Order as distinct from the Presbyters, and hath taken from the Presbyter the Po∣wer of Government and placed it only in the Bishop, who according to the Book of Consecration receives his Office as Bishop [i. e. as of an Order distinct from and su∣periour to that of Presbyters] by the im∣position of Episcopal hands, yea so very strict is the Act of Uniformity in this point, that it doth not only establish the book with the alteration of the Epistles, which suffi∣ciently argues a Translation of the Pastoral Power from the Presbyter to the Bishop, but moreover, though ever till now Presby∣terian Ordinations were esteemed Valid by the Civil Magistrate, though irregular, yet now they are in effect declared Null and void, not only by establishing the above∣mentioned alteration in the preface to the
Book of Orders, but by an express clause in the very Act it self, where 'tis enacted, That from and after the feast of St. Bartho∣lomew, which shall be in the year 1662. No Person who now is incumbent, and in the possession of any parsonage or benefice, and who is not already in holy Orders by Epis∣copal Ordination, or shall not be, before the said feast day of St. Bartholomew, ordained Priest or Deacon according to Episcopal Ordination shall have, hold, or enjoy any Pasonage with cure, or other Ecclesiastical Promotion within this Kingdom, &c. but shall be utterly disabled, and ipso facto depriv'd of the same, and all his Ecclesiastical Pro∣motions shall be void as if he were naturally dead. So far the statute of the 14. Car. 2. but what can be more plain than that there is an essential alteration made on the Pres∣byters Office, for hereby, though formerly they being vested with the Power of Or∣ders, in being denied Jurisdiction, nothing but the exercise of the Power was denied them, for Jurisdiction is but the exercise of Orders as Parker, and the Archbishop Spalatensis and before them the learned Whitaker against Bellarmine have pro∣ved, I say hereby both the Power and Exercise is taken away. That the Presbyters Ordination is by this clause of the statute made void and null as if the man had been naturally dead is express, and that this doth most plainly
infer the nullity of their Power of Orders and Juridiction is also as undoubtedly true, so that the Presbyters Office is an office without the Power of Orders and Juris∣diction, he wants an Essential of the Pasto∣ral Office, and the Bishop alone is the Pastor of the Particular Diocesane Church which is a single particular Church, I say, [single] Church for it hath but one Pastor, that is, It's a particular Church of the lowest or∣der, and the Parishes are but parts of this single Church, their Ministers but sub-half-Presbyters who have no other Power, but what is deriv'd unto them from the Bishop. All which doth now most exactly accord with the Instrument of the Bishops by which they gave Institution to a parish Priest, which is in these words, Instituo te ad tale Beneficium, & habere curam Animarum de tali parochia, & accipe curam tuam & meam. Vide Cooks Reports 4. 79. a. Digbie's case. Here 'tis manifest that the Bishop has a special cure in the Parish, which he trans∣ferr's on the Parish Minister for saith he Accipe curam tuam & Meam. This may suffice touching the Form of the Diocesan Constitution, I will now very briefly speak of the Matter of a Diocesan Church.
Aphorisme. IV. All Baptized Christians, not excommuni∣cate, whether Papist, or Protestant, whether Heretick, or Schismatick, Drunkard, Adulterer, or otherwise debauched, that are Subjects of this Realm,  live within the Bounds or Limits of any Diocess, are the Matter of which a Diocesan Church is made up. 1. THat the Diocesan Church is made up of Baptized Christians is too mani∣fest to need proof. And that whoever is baptized must, if Adult, personally (if an Infant, by his Godfathers and God∣mothers) profess to renounce the Devil, the World, and the Flesh, is plain in the Rubrick about Baptism. But yet 2. it must be acknowledged, that by the 68th. Canon made in the year 1603. No Minister shall refuse or delay to Christen any Child according to the form of the Book of Common Prayer, that is brought to the Church to him upon Sundays, or Holy Days to be Christned, convenient warning being given him thereof before, on pain of being sus∣pended from his Ministry the space of three Months. And in the 29th Canon, no Parent
shall be urged to be present at the Baptizing his own Child, So that let the Child be of Jewish, Pagan, Mahometan, or notoriously debauched Parents, and brought to the Pa∣rish Minister to be Christened according to the Common Prayer-Book, this Child is a Member of that Diocesan Church, in which it was baptized, or afterwards, in which it shall live. 3. How wicked soever any Baptized or Christened Inhabitant within the Diocess may be, yet if not Excommunicated, or doth say he doth humbly and heartily desire the Lords Supper, he is to be admitted, if he will take it according to the form in the Common Prayer Book prescribed. The Truth of this is not only confirmed by the Rubrick, but by constant Practice of the whole Clergy, who admit the vilest Adulterers, Drunkards, and other Pro∣phane Persons to that Sacred Ordinance. Besides 4. That all such, unless Excommunica∣ted majori excommunicatione, remain Mem∣bers of the Diocesan Church, is clear from what is enjoyned all Ministers in the 68th Canon, who are obliged to bury any Corps, that is brought to the Church, or Church-Yard in such manner, as is prescribed in the Common Prayer Book, I say, any Corps, unless the Party deceased were denounced excommunicate majori excommunicatione, for some grievous or notorious Crime, and no
Man able to testifie his Repentance. At which time the Parish Priest or Curate must pronounce him a Saint in these Words [for as much as it hath pleased Almighty God of his great Mercy to take to himself the Soul of our Dear Brother here departed.] But to do the Church of England right, it must be acknowledged, that the new Ru∣brick saith that [the Office ensueing [viz. that to be read at Burials] is not to be used for any that dy unbaptized, or excommuni∣cate, or have laid violent Hands on them∣selves:] So that all that have been Bap∣tized, and not Excommunicate, nor have laid violent hands on themselves, what Wickedness soever they have been other∣wise guilty of, they must to the very last moment of their Lives, be esteemed Mem∣bers of the Church of England. 5. They must be Subjects of this Realm, and Inhabitants within some one of the 26 Diocesses. A Subject because the Church is not of larger Extent than his Majesties Dominions, an Inhabitant within some one of the 26 Diocesses, which restrains it to English Subjects, but then it must be obser∣ved that all English Men, excepting what live either in Scotland or Ireland, if in any place beyond the Seas do belong to London Diocess; As for Exempt peculiars, some of which belong to no Diocess, we speak not of them, nor do they make any such Altera∣tion in the State of the Church, as to
militate against any thing I have urged. And so much touching the Matter of a Di∣ocesan Church. Aphorisme V. There are certain things imposed by Canon and Statute Law, as necessary Terms of Clergy and Lay Communion. 1. THere are several things required of the Clergy as necessary Terms of their being admitted unto the Exercise of the Ministerial Office. 1. They must Assent and Consent to every thing in the Book of Common Prayer, the Book of consecrating Bishops and Ordering Priests and Deacons, to the Book of Articles and Homilies. This much is enjoyned by the 36 and 37th Canons, and the Act of Uni∣formity. And this Subscription must be Absolute without any Reserves. To sub∣scribe so far as agreeable to the Word of God, or Law of the Land is not suffici∣ent. In his Majsties Declaration prefixed to the Book of Articles 'tis express, That no Man must Print or Preach to draw the Ar∣ticles aside any way, but shall submit to it in the plain and full meaning thereof. And
shall not put his own sence or comment to be the meaning of the Article, But shall take it in the Literal and Grammatical sence. And my Lord Ch. Jus. Coke saith, That he heard Wray▪ Ch. Jus. R. R. pasc. 23. Eliz. report, That where one Smith subscribed to the 39 Articles of Religion with addition [so far forth as the same were agreeable to the word of God] that it was re∣solved by him, and all the Judges of England, That this subcription was not according to the statute of 13. Elizabeth, because that statute required an Absolute subscription, and this subscription made it Conditional. And Godolphin in his Abridg. Eccles. Laws. c. 13. §. 8. saith, That the addition [so far as agreeable to the Law of the Land▪] is not good, the old lear∣ned Parker suggests the same thing, com∣plaining that such as offer'd to subscribe [so far as agreeable to the Law] were not admitted. And even in this very day a Doctrinal interpretation, will not be allow∣ed. But. 2. All the Clergy must declare their satisfaction in the above described Dioce∣sane Constitution, as to Declare that they will not endeavour any alteration of it, whereby they all do sufficiently discover to the world that they approve not of Congregational Bishops, nor do they look on the Parishes to be any other than parts of the Diocesane Church, nor themselves
to be no Pastors, to be but sub-half-presby∣ters, for the making the Parish an entire Church, or the Assuming to themselves the pastoral Power is destructive of the Dioce∣sane Constitution. 3. They must all swear to observe all the Canons. This much is required from them when they are to take the Oath of Canonical Obedience unto their Ordinary. Canonical Obedieddience is such obedience as the Canons and Constitutions rightly made and published do require. So Lind-wood; Canonica Obedientia est Obe∣dientia Secundum Canones & Constituti∣ones rite editas & publicatas. The Rule then of their Licita & honesta (for they swear to be obedient to their Ordinary in omnibus licitis & honestis) are the Canons, and their swearing Obedience thus, is to swear that they will be obedient secundum Canones. I might here be very particular in shewing what they are bound unto in swearing to observe the Canons, but I wave it as easy for any to do, and somewhat foreign to my purpose. II. The Terms required of the Laity. 1. All those who bear office, as Majors and Aldermen in Corporations, commission'd Officers in the Militia, must swear to the present Government of the Church. And so must the Vestry men, who are the principal▪ and most famous part of the Par∣rish. All these do so fully declare their
approbation of the present Church Govern∣ment that they never endeavour an altera∣tion of it. 2. All the Laity are required to approve of the Government of the Church, as Apostolical, to hold Communion in their Rites and Ceremonies as approvers of them, and to fix in the Parish as a part of the Diocesane and not to hold Communion with any others that are English men. In Can. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. 'tis ordained, That whoever shall affirme that the Church of Eng∣land by Law established is not a True and an Apostolical Church [i. e.] A Church formed and  according to Divine institution] or whoever affirms, that its worship contain∣ed in the Book of Common Prayer, and administration of Sacraments is a Corrupt Superstitious, or Unlawful worship of God, or that any of the 39 Articles are in any part Superstitious, or Erroneous, or such as he may not with a good Conscience subscribe unto, or that the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England are such as being Commanded by lawful authority, men who are Zealously and godly affected may not with a good Conscience approve them, use them, or as Occasion requires subcribe unto them, or that the Government of the Church of England by Archhishops and Bishops, &c. is repugnant to the word of God, or whoever shall affirm or teach that the Form or Manner of making and consecrating of Bishops, Priests
or Deacons containeth any thing in it that is repugnant to the Word of God, are to be Excommunicated ipso facto, and not to be restored until they repent and publickly revoke such their wicked Errours. In the Ninth, Tenth, and Eleventh Canons all such are accursed, who shall separate themselves from the Church of England, and combine themselves together in a new Brotherhood, or whosoever shall affirm, That such Ministers as refuse to subcribe to the Communion Book, and the Adherents may truely take unto them the names of another Church, not established by Law, and dare presume to publish it that this pretended Church hath of Long time groaned under the bur∣den of some certain grievances imposed upon the members thereof beforementioned by the Church of England, or whoso∣ever shall maintain, that there are within this Realm other Meetings, Assemblies or Congregations of the Kings born subjects than such as by the Laws of this Land are held and allowed, which may rightly chal∣lenge to themselves the name of True and Lawful Churches, let them be Excom∣municated and not restored but by the Archbishop after Repentance and publick revocation of such their wicked Errours. So far these Canons, which plainly enough shew that the Conformists, who are sworn to them, do hold the Church of England to be in her Constitution, Government,
service, Administration of Sacraments &c. so very agreeable to the word of God, that what persons soever presume to as∣semble together, and erect Churches of different constitution, worshipping God in any other manner than is prescribed by the Law of the Land, cannot possibly make their Assemblies true Churches, but if they affirm them to be true Churches, they fall under the curse. And doth not this make it apparent that the Conformity of the People, as well as Clergy is required as an Overt act of their approving the Episcopal Church constitution, Government, and way of worship, and in∣deed of disliking all other waies, that are observ'd by any of the Kings borne subjects in this land. Now that which is a further confirmation of all this, is, that in the 98th. Canon, All such as will not personally promise and avow, that they will faithfully keep, and observe all the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England, as also the prescript, form of Common Prayer, and likewise subscribe to the Three Articles, unto which the Clergy are required to subscribe, are in the esteem of the Church of England Factious, and there∣fore whenever they find themselves griev'd or oppressed by their inferiour Governers are de∣nied the Relief of an Appeal. Furthermore by the 27th Canon, All those, that refuse to kneel at the Reception of the Sacrament, and to be present at publick
Prayers according to the Orders of the Churh that is, as the 18th Canon shews, All those, who refuse reverently to kneel when the Gene∣ral Confession, Letany, and other Prayers are read; and will not stand up at the saying of the Belief, and how at the name of Jesus, testifying by lowly Reverence their inward Humility, Christian Resolution, and due ac∣knowledgement that the Lord Jesus Christ the true and eternal Son of God is the only Sa∣viour of the world, nor say in their due places and audibly with the Minister, the Confession, the Lords Prayer and the Creed, nor make such other answers to the publick Prayers as are appointed in the book of Common Prayer, and Administration of Sacraments, All such as refuse to do either of these things, are to be denied the Communion and what Minister so∣ever shall wittingly admit them, he is lyable to a suspension. But doth not this sufficiently evince, that all these things, viz. Kneeling at the Sacrament, a reverent joyning with the Church in her Prayers, Bowing at the name of Jesus, making Responses &c. are made necessary terms, of our Communion with them. All these things are sine qui∣bus, non. Now as our Lay conformity is by Ca∣non Law strictly requir'd as an overt act of approving of their Church state, Ceremo∣nies, &c. so is all this enjoyned by Statute Law too. In the 1. Eliz. c. 2. which by 14. Car.
2. is applicable to the present Common-Prayer book, and book of consecrating Bishops, and Ordering Priests and Deacons, 'tis enac∣ted, That if any person or persons what∣soever shall by any open words declare, or speak any thing in the Derogation, Depraving, or Despising of the Book of Common Prayer, or of any thing there∣in contained, or any part thereof, that then every such person, being thereof Law-fully convicted shall forfeit for the first Offence, an hundred marks, for the second four hundred marks, and for the third all his Goods, and Chattels, and Imprisonment during life. Besides in the same Statute 'tis enacted That all and every person and persons inhabiting with∣in this Realm, &c. shall Diligently and Faithfully endeavour themselves to re∣sort to their Parish Church—upon every Sunday—and then and there to abide Orderly and Soberly during the time of Common Prayer upon pain of punishment by the Censures of the Church. But can any man of Common sence think that the Law which requires our diligent and faithful resorting to Church, our sober and Orderly demeanour at Church in the time of Common Prayer, doth not exact our Presence as an overt act of our Approving the worship which we must be present at? The Learned in the Law tell us, That though a man go to
Church and abide there during the whole service, yet may he be lyable to the pe∣nalty of this Law, for there are four Ad∣verbs in the Statute. 1. Diligently, which denotes Attention, 2. Faithfully, Devotion. 3. Soberly, Gravity, and 4. Orderly, Decen∣cy. All which ought to be observ'd, so that if he walk or talk in the Church [or deport himself irreverently] thereby shew∣ing his Dislike of the Service, during the service of God there, he may be punished, upon this Act, as if he were absent. See Cok. Ch. J. B. R. Rolles 193. c. 41. Foster's case. and Cawley on. 1. Elizabeth c. 2. Whoever will consider the many Laws that strictly enjoyn our constant communi∣cating with the Church of England in her worship, and most severely forbids our pub∣lique worshipping of God in any other way, cannot but see that the Diocesane Church frame, Ministry, and worship is set up as the best yea as the Only way in which the Kings borne subjects are to worship God publickly. These Statutes that forbid all other wayes of worship, do it thus, that they shall not meet above four besides the family on pretence of the exercise of Religious worship in any other way or man∣ner then according to the Liturgy, and practice of the Church of England, the which shews that the Law doth not only call for our communicating with the Church of England, as Approvers of whatever is by
Law established in that Church, but such Approvers as content themselves with the Church worship alone. They must be fixed members of the Diocesan Churches, and constantly hold communion with them in the Liturgick worship, and not be at an Assem∣bly where the worship is in other manner then according to the Liturgie and practice the Church of England on pain of five shil∣ings for the first offence and as much more as the Magistrate shall judge meet to put on him for the preacher, or House, or Poor, not exceeding ten pounds. Thus you see that the Local presence of the Laity are both by Canon, and Statute Law required as an overt act of our appro∣ving their Church, frame, Worship and Ceremonies, and this much is enjoyned on grievous penalties, both on Soul and Body, the which shews that our Law∣givers have been greatly concerned for our closing with the present worship and abiding only by it. Its a Rule laid down by Bishop Tailor, that the Gravity or Lessening the sin of Disobedience unto Humane Laws is to be measured by the Penalty. He commits a great Sin that breaks a Law which is esta∣blished upon great penalties. His reason is, Because 'tis regularly to be presumed, that the Supreme Power puts much upon it, when he is so earnest for its Observation. Rem, quae culpa caret, in damnum vocari non con∣venit,
saith the Law Chap. 2. de conf. If there be no fault there ought to be no punish∣ment, they are Relatives, and ought also to correspond in their degree. Quis dubitavit hoc sceleratius commissum (saith Austin) quod est gravius vindicatum? Ut juxta mensuram delicti sit, & plagarum modus, Deut. 25.2. When Ecclesiastical punishments are su∣peradded to a Civil Law, or a Civil punish∣ment to an Ecclesiastical Law, it is to be presumed that the Law-giver puts much up∣on it. He can by no means more amply and more earnestly signifie his purpose of oblig∣ing strongly thn by using both the Tempo∣ral and Spiritual Sword. See Bishop Tailors Duct. Dubit. lib. 3. c. 1. n. 16. 19. Seeing then the Magistrate hath used both the Temporal, and Spiritual sword to oblige the People to rest satisfied in confining themselves to the publick wor∣ship by the Liturgy, what can be more manifest then that they would have us joyn with them as Approves of the Dio∣cesan Church kind Ministry and worship? This much I count is enough to shew what is required of the People as terms of Communion with the Church of England; and what I have laid down in these five Aphorismes may serve to shew so much of the state of the Church of England as the Dissenters are concerned to know. For in the Description of this Church I have shewn what kind the single Churches by
Law established are of, namely Diocesan; A particular Church of the lowest rank, and order is made up of many score or hundred Parishes under one Pastour, the Diocesan Bishop; whose Parish Ministers have no Governing Power committed to them, nor are their Parishes any more than Oratories or Chappels of Ease unto the Bi∣shop; The matter of which these Churches are made up, are such baptized Christians as are the Kings born-Subjects, and not ex∣communicate, and live within the limits of the Diocess, how wicked, how sinful, and debauched soever they be: The things they impose on the People, as Terms of Com∣munion are their approving the Diocesan Church Frame, the Liturgick worship, and Ceremonies, and a submission unto the Diocesan Bishop. The next part of my work is, to give a true account of the principles of Protest∣ant Dissenters about the Ministry, Worship, and Discipline of the Church of England, and what is the state of the Churches of these Dissenters.
CHAP. II. What the Protestant Dissenters hold touch∣ing the kind of Diocesan Churches, Ministry, Discipline, and Worship. The opposition there is Between the principles of the Church of England, and the Dissenters impartially stated. The grounds of the present Division faithfully laid down. I Might be very particular in shewing the sentiments which several▪ Dissenters have of the Diocesan Constitution, how that they esteem it at best but an Humane In∣vention: but 'twill be sufficient that I do 1. In the general shew, that such is the Difference between the fore described Dio∣cesan Church kind, and that of the Pres∣byterian, and Independent, that the One is destructive of the other. 2. More parti∣cularly shew wherein the difference be∣tween them doth lye as to the Matter and Forme of an Instituted Church, and the Terms of Local Communion, the which can be no sooner done, but an Ordinary capaci∣ty may see where lyes the Ground of the present disease, and malady that hath so very grievously tormented the Churches of Christ in these Nations.
Sect. I. The Present Diocesan kind of Churches, In consistent with and Destructive of the Presbyterian, and Congregational kind of Churches more Generally shewn. BEfore I proceed to the proof of this General 'twill be necessary, that I tell the Reader, that though the present Dio∣cesan Constitution be destructive of the Presbyterian, and Congregational kind of Churches, yet there is no such inconsisten∣cy between the Old English Episcopacy and the Presbyterian, or Congregational Church kind, for both Prebyterian, and Congregationalist can cheerfully submit un∣to any Bishop, as he is the King's Officer circa sacra; They all hold his Majesty's Supremacy in Ecclesiastical, affairs, and will submit unto such an Episcopacy as was in the beginning of Queen Elizabeths, and in King Edward the Sixths Reign. But it is the new species of Episcopacy, which was never by statute Law established before the 14. Car. 2. that is so very opposite un∣to, and destructive of the Presbyterian and Congregational kind of Churches. Now that this Episcopacy is Destructive of the Presbyterian, and Congregational kind of Churches, or Church Government, is a
truth so great, that it cannot but be matter of wonder, & surprize to thinking men amongst the Learned to see, that there are any, who in the least doubt it. For what more certain then that its naturally impossible to settle either the Presbyterian, or Congregational Church Government in this, or any other Nation, and yet not destroy the new Epis∣copal species, what man of sence can be per∣swaded to conclude, that though this Epis∣copal Church Forme be de facto erected, yet no hurt is done the Presbyterian or Congregationalist; Or who can reflect on the strugglings, there have been in this King∣dome between these several Church Go∣vernments, and not be convinced of this. The Canons in 1640 imposed the Et coetera oath, which had these words in it [I. A. B. will never give my consent to alter the Government of the Church by Arch∣bishops, Bishops, Deanes and Archdeacons &c.] But could any man take this Oath, and yet consistently with it Consent to the set∣ting up either the Pesbyterian, or Congre∣gational Church Government? No verily and why, but that such is the Nature of the Episcopal Government and such that of the other two Governments, that nei∣ther of them can be set up but to the Al∣teration of the Episcopacy, unto which they are not to consent. After this the Solemn League, and Cove∣nant
was impos'd that was for a Reforma¦tion of the Government of the Church according to the word of God, and the best reformed Churches. This Oath I think was taken both by Presbyterians, and Congregationalists, but could either keep this Oath, and not root up the Diocesan Episcopacy? No, they could not, and there∣fore in it they swear that they will in their places endeavour the extirpating that very Episcopacy, to which the Et coetera oath did before oblige men. But in 1662. there is another Alteration made, the Episcopal Government (not ac∣cording to Bishop Usher's model, but ac∣cording to this new species) was de facto set∣tled in pursuance of the act of Uniformity, which enjoyned subscription of Assent and Consent unto it, on which occasion near two thousand Presbyterians, and Congrega∣tional Ministers left their places. And afterwards the Oxford Oath, obliging all these Nonconforming Ministers to swear they would not endeavour any alteration of the present Episcopal Government, on the penalty of not coming within five miles of a Corporation &c. did drive many from their habitations. But why could not these Prerbyterians, and Independents give in their Assent and Consent to the Episcopal Government, was it not because 'twas inconsistent with that kind of Government, which was either
Presbyterian or Congregational, which they believed to be of Christs Institution? More∣over our Governours who were sensible that these different Governments and Oaths were inconsistent, to the end they might secure the present Episcopacy, do pass a severe Act against all attempts for the setting up either the Presbyterian, or Congregational Church's Government. This was done the 13. Car. 2. c. 1. where 'tis enacted That to the end no man hereafter may be misled into any Sedition or unquiet demeanour out of an opinion—that there lie's any obligation up∣on him from any Oath, Covenant, or Engage∣ment whatsoever to endeavour a change of Go∣vernment either in Church or State—if any person or persons shall maliciously, and ad∣visedly by writing, printing, preaching, or other speaking express, utter, publish, declare, or affirme—that—there lie's any obligation up∣on him, or any other person from any Oath, Covenant, or engagement whatsoever to en∣deavour a change of Government either in Church or State— that then every such person and persons so aforesaid offending shall incur the danger and penalty of a proemunire —And it is hereby declared that the Oath usually called the Solemn League and Covenant was in it self an Unlawful Oath &c. So far the Statute. And what greater care can be taken to secure the Episcopal Church Government? For this very reason also in the Act of Uniformity all the Clergy
must abjure this Solemn League and Cove∣nant, and all declare, that they will on no pretence whatever endeavour an alteration of the Government of the Church, and not only the Clergy, but all Mayors, and Aldermen of Corporations, yea and all the Vestry of every Parish and all Nonconfor∣mist Ministers, that will live within five miles of a Corporation, must declare that [they'l not endeavour an alteration of the Church Government] which words plainly import as much objectively as the Et coetera-Oath (though [not endeavouring] be some∣what less than [not consenting] as a Re∣verend Divine hath observ'd. From this consideration that there are several Statutes, which oblige men by De∣clarations, Oaths, &c. to the present Dio∣cesan Church Government against an altera∣tion of it, an Argument of great weight doth arise, which proves that the Species of the present Episcopacy is different both from the Presbyterian, and Congrega∣tional Species. The Argument I thus form. Either these Declarations, Subscriptions and Oaths do oblige the Declarer, Subscriber and Swearer to a Church of a Species diffe∣rent from the Presbyterian or Congregati∣nal, or they do not. If not, then our Go∣vernours obtain not their end in destroying the solemn League and Covenant; for a man may consistently enough pursue the
ends of that Covenant, in erecting either the Presbiterian, or Congregational Govern∣ment, and not act contrary to the above∣mentioned Declarations, Subscriptions and Oaths, for those Governments are of the same Species with the present Episcopacy. Besides on this supposition no hurt was done to the Church of England in the late times of Usurpation, for the same Species stood still, yea you may depose Lord Bishops, Deans, and Chapters, Archdeacons, &c. and put down their Courts, and share of the Lands without an Alteration of the Species of the present Episcopacy; yea further should all Diocesane Bishops be deposed, and a Con∣gregational Bishop set up in every Parish, the Species is not altered: Furthermore, one that hath declared, and subscribed, and ta∣ken the Oath that he'll not endeavour an alteration of the present Government, may do all that in him lyeth to pull down Dio∣cesanes, and say that he did swear only not to endeavour an Alteration of the Species but not of the Degrees; and so not act con∣trary to his Oath or Subscriptions. Yea the Assembly of Divines, and all those who were for Bishop Ushers Model, were not only for Episcopacy in genere, but for an Episcopacy of the same Species. But doth not this contradict common Sence? What are the Presbyterians and Congre∣gationalists Episcopal Men, and yet suffer the loss of all, because they subscribe not
unto that Species of Episcopacy which they are for. But if the present Episcopacy be of a different Species, not only from Presbytery, and Independency, but from Bishop Ushers Model; If the present Episcopacy, Pres∣bytery and Independency be of different Species, then the putting down one and erecting of another contrary Species, is the destroying one to the Exaltation of the other, and if the present Species of Episcopacy be distinct from the Congregational, and the Episcopal Species be erected and not the Congregational, 'tis impossible to obey the Law in conforming unto the Episcopal Species, and yet at the very same time, in the very same act, keep alone to the Con∣gregational Species. This much flows from the Consideration that Archbishop Laud and the Convoca∣tion in 1640. did impose the Et coetera Oath to prevent an Alteration of the Episcopal Species of Churches; and the Imposition of the Covenant for the altering that Spe∣cies; and the Abjuring the Covenant and subscribing unto the present Episcopacy, and declaring and swearing they'l not endea∣vour an alteration of the present Episco∣pacy. There are other Considerations that evince the same, on which I will at this time insist, ingenuously confessing tha I am owing to the Learned Mr. B. for the To∣picks
on which I proceed, and though, since his late shamefull Tergiversation, his Au∣thority is not worth a straw, yet his Reasons remain herein impregnable, and because as expressed by him they are very strong, I will for the most part keep his words, though I will not confine my self unto them. It must still be remembred, that the great point in controversie is, Whether the Diocesan Churches and Bishops be of the same kind with the Presbyterian, or Congregati∣onal Churches, and Bishops, but more especial∣ly, Whether the present Episcopal Churches, and their Bishops be according to the Congre∣gational species? I express it thus, because those who contend with us carry it that way, and therefore I will for the future in this part of the Controversie keep to it as thus worded. That the matters in debate be brought unto the fairer issue, we must consider in what predicament a Church and a Bishop are, which we shall find to be in that of Rela∣tion, unto whose Essence or Definition there belongeth the Subject, the Fundamentum (seu Ratio fundandi), and the Terminus. Now where these are not the same, or any of these, the Relation is not the same: be∣cause where an Essential ingredient is wan∣ting the Essence is wanting. Again, it must be noted, that many natural Relations are so founded in an Act past, that the Re∣lation
resulteth from it without depending on any thing future. As God is Creatour, Quia jamcreavit; Pater est qui genuit. But there are other Relations, which are founded in meer Undertaking, Mandate Authority, and Obligation to future Actions: As he is a Tutour, a School-Master, a Pilot, a Bishop, a Husband, &c. who by Mandate and Undertaking is Authorized, and Obliged to such and such works, implyed in their names. And in these cases nothing more specifieth the Offices than the work of the Office; which is the nearest end. And these nearest ends are ever essential to such Rela∣tions, I say, the nearest ends, not remote ends. Besides, it must be further noted, that though Relatio in forma Relationis non reci∣pit magis & minus: ex. gr. Titius non est magis pater quam Sempronius: yet quoad Sub∣jectum & aliquando quoad Fundamentum, & Correlatum it may recipere magis, & minus, so that magis & minus shall change the Species. This is in such case wherein the alteration of Quantity altereth the Capaci∣ty of the Subject quoad finem essentialem, For instance, To the being of a house some quan∣tity is necessary to the end, which is Habi∣tation, and there is no house properly that is no bigger than an egg shell; so to the be∣ing of a Ship or Church. So also in Societies, the whole world, or a kingdom is too big to be a Family. And a Family too little to be a Kingdom. These differ principally in
their Ends, and next in the Quantity of the Subject matter, because every Quantity is not capable of the same essential end. These things being premis'd I will pro∣ceed to some other Arguments, which I will so distinctly form, that if possible I may at the same time shew what manner of Church the Lay-Dissenters generally, and their Dissenting Brethren, who are for Lay conformity, do say is of Divine Institution; and by comparing the one with the other see whether these Church's Dissenters are for, be of the same kind with the present Episcopal. But this in the next Section, where I must be more particular. SECT. II. The Difference between the present Epis∣copal Churches, as to Kind, and Form. IN shewing the difference (seeing I design to be Argumentative in my procedure) I'l first give you my Reason for a specifical Difference between the Episcopal, and Congregational Churches, and 'tis this. Where the specifying Ends differ, there the species of Relations differ.
But in the Churches in Question the Speci∣fying ends differ. Ergo. The Major being unquestionable I will manifest the truth of the Minor, by shewing in two distinct columns what are the Ends of a particular Church in the Judgement of those, who are for the Congregational species, and of those, who are for the present Epis∣copal. The Ends of a particu∣lar Church, as described by the Congregational. The Ends of a Particu∣lar Church, as describ'd by the Episcopal. 1. Communion Sensi∣ble, and External. 1. Communion Internal in Faith, such as we have with the Abyssine. 2. This Communion is Local, or Presential. 2. It is distant onely and not presential at all; For as Diocesan we never see each other its like in our whole lives. 3. It is personal by all the Body of the Church. 3. It is mot personal (as External and Sensible) but only by the Intervention of Delegates, Messengers, Officers or synods of such. 4. It is in the same In∣dividual Acts of Gods pub∣lick worship. 4. It is only in eadem specie of publick worship and sacred Actions, that we have Communion, but not in the same Individual Actions of worship.
5. If is by waching over  or helping each other to∣wards Heaven, by provo∣king each other to Love and to Good works, and if a Brother offend to tell him of his fault; to comfort each other, and to live to∣gether in Holiness, Love, and Peace
5. We have no con∣verse  with one another at all as Diocesan, we never meet together, pray together, Hear together, exhort or watch over, or help each other, for we never know one of five hundred in the Diocess any more than men of another countrey. 6. To be related to the same pastours, as those that are their Ordinary Teachers, Governours, and Guides in publick worship, as labouring amongst them, and being ensamples to the flock. 6. We hear not the same Teachers, we have not the same Guides to resolve our Doubts, and to Instruct us as we need. We have the same Bishop not to call the people, but the Parsons, Vicars, &c. but not one of many hundreds of the Diocess ever seeth him. These are most of the Differences in their Ends. And is it not Notorious that these Essentiating Ends of the two sorts of Socie∣ties are distinct, and therefore the Societies are Essentially distinct. But seeing it is most manifest that there is a specifick Difference between a Congre∣gational, and Diocesan Church, I need not insist much on this, the great thing to be evinc'd is, That a parochial Assembly as in pursuance of Law now formed, is not a single Church, but part of one; upon which reason
it is mainly Istick, that the parochial Assem∣blies, as by Law established, do differ from a Congregational Church in the Specifying ends. Now here it must be noted, that al∣though Parochial Communion is sensible and external, Local or Presential, yet it is not personally of a whole Church, for a Parish is but a part of a Diocesan, which is but a single Church, the Parish wants the Perso∣nal presence of a Pastour amongst them; for as I shall shew hereafter, they have no Pa∣stour at all with them, nor any other Go∣verning Officers to constitute them an Or∣ganical Body, so that they are not related to the same Pastours as those, that are their Ordinary Teachers, Governours, and Guides in publick worship, as Labouring amongst them, and being ensamples to the Flock. I argue this A divers Fundamentum, vel Ratio fun∣dandi, proveth a diversity of Relations. But a Congregational Church, and a Parish Assembly as in pursuance of the Law of the Land form'd and fram'd, have fundamenta that are in specie divers. Ergo. I might fairly enough affirm, that the Controversie lying between a Congrega∣tional, and Diocesan Church, if I shew that the Congregational and Diocesan Church have fundamenta, that are in specie divers, the present Parish Assemblies have funda∣menta very different from Congregational
Churches, for our Discourse is of Organical Churches, and its undoubtedly true, that where there are no Governing Officers there is not an Organical Church, and yet that the Governing Officers, by Law establish∣ed belong not to a Parish as such, but to a Diocess, and that therefore the Parish fall's not under consideration but as 'tis a part of the Diocesan. But that my Argument may be the more convincing, I will have a more special regard unto the frame and make of our present Parish Assemblies as in pursuance of the Law they are now erected, in shew∣ing the different fundamenta of a Congrega∣tional Church, and the Diocesan, and so stick to this, that the Parish Assemblies do want the fundamenta of a Congregational Church. Now the fundamentum of the Relation of a Particular Congregational Church is ei∣ther 1. of the Relation of the Church to God. 2. Or their Relation as fellow mem∣bers one to another. 3. Or of their joynt Relations to their Pastors or Bishops. 4. Or of their Pastors relation to them. For a Church is not only compounded of various materials, but its Form is a compound of these Four Relations set together, and every one is essential to it, so that where any of these is wanting, the form is wanting. As these four Relations are Essential to the Form of a particular Church, so the foundation of every of these Relations is Mutual consent.
The which Mutual Consent must be in order to the abovementioned specifying Ends. 1. The Relation of the Members, Pastours, and the whole Church to God, is founded in Gods Consent and theirs. Gods Consent is signifyed by his Scripture Institution and Command, and therefore cannot be said to consent to any Church form, but what is agreeable to his revealed will in the Scrip∣tures. 2. By his qualifying and disposing the persons, and so Consent's not to the No∣toriously vicious and uncapable, for they are not qualified, nor duely disposed unto it. 3. By his providential giving them op∣portunity. The Relation of all these to God is secondarily founded in their own con∣sent, that it may be a contract. They give up themselves first to God. 2. The Relation of Members to each other, is founded in an Explicite or Implicite Consent amongst themselves, for after they have given up themselves to God, they give up themselves to one another. 3. The other two Relations, which is of Pastor to the People, and of the People to the Pastours, is founded on mutual Consent, for the specifying Ends already said of such a Relation. These being the several Fundamenta of those Relations that are essential to the form of a Congregational Church, we will ex∣amine whether they may be found in the present Parish Assemblies.
1. Then, as the Parish Assembly is form'd after the Diocesan model, God consents not. 2. Nor do the people Consent, for their Ordinary meeting together is not because of any Mutual Consent either explicite, or implicite for any Church ends, but because they inhabit in such a Parish, and the Law requires them to go to Church. The Parish∣ioners do not explicitly nor implicitely give up themselves to God, nor to one ano∣ther to hold personal Communion together in all the Ordinances of Christ according to the order of the Gospel. That they do not consent Explicitly is granted by all, and that they cannot be interpreted to consent implicitely, unless by some overt act they discovered so much, is very clear. But by what overt act do they shew that they consent implicitely? Tis true, they actu∣ally convene and meet together at the Parish Church, but this is not for the Essen∣tiating Ends of a particular Church; they meet not there as related to a Pastor that doth ordinarily Teach, Govern, and Guide them, as I will more fully shew by and by. 3. Nor is there a mutual Consent be∣tween Pastour and People. As for the Parish Minister he is so very much obliged to the Diocesan Constitution by Declara∣tions, subscriptions, and Oaths, that he can∣not be esteemed implicitely to consent to be
their Pastour, for he is sworn unto the Diocesan, as the only Pastor of the Diocess, and the Vestries the principal men of the Parish, declare the same too. Besides no∣thing more clear than that the foundation of their assembling together is their being Baptized Christians, Living within such a Parish, over whom a Minister is imposed by the Patron and Bishop. Thus they differ spe∣cifically in the Fundamenta of the Relation. Another Argument to prove that the present Parish Assemblies are not Congre∣gational Churches, is taken from the Con∣sideration that they want such a Specifying Governing Head. Every Society, Corpor∣ation, or Body politick hath a supreme Go∣verning part, and as is the Governing part, so is that Society or Organick Body. If the Governing parts of several societies are specifically different, the Bodies Politick are also specifically different. A Corporation is specifically different from a Community or Inorganick Assembly, If then the Parish Assemblies as particular Assemblies are Inorganick, and fall under Government on no other account than as they are parts of a Diocess, they are of a different species from Congregational Churches which are Bodies Politick. But the Parishes as they are particular Assemblies are not Organick, they have no Governing Head with them. Or thus. If the Parish Assemblies that in pur∣suance
of the Law are de facto framed, have not a Presbyter or Pastour over them, they differ in specie from Congregational and Presbyterian Churches. But the Parish Assemblies, &c. have not a Presbyter or Pa∣stour amongst them. Ergo. In proving the Minor, two things must be done, 1. We must consider what is Essential to the Office of a Presbyter or Pastor▪ and 2. Shew that the Parish Minister wants what is essential to the Office. I. As for what is Essential to the Office of a Presbyter or Pastour. The Presbyter or Pastour, being made after the image of Christ, he is Teacher, High Priest, and Ruler of his Church: Every Pastour has all these Offices in a Subserviency unto Christ. He has Authority and Obligation to Teach: To be the Churches Guide in publick worship, in Prayer, Praise, and Sacrament of Communion. He hath Au∣thority and obligation to Rule the flock by the word of God and exercise the Church Keyes of Discipline. Under this head, I must with the Learned Mr. B. grant. 1. That no Action whatsoever as per∣formed at the present, or for some excepted season, is essential to the Pastoral Office. A man ceaseth not to be a preacher or Pastour assoon as the Sermon is done, and he is out of the Church. When a man is asleep, or on a journey he endeth not his Office. Nor yet when he is interrupted by
sickness or persecution. Nor doth a Church cease to be a Church when the Assembly is over. There is a difference between the Constitution, and Administration; the status, and Exercitium; the Office, and Exercise. Yet 2. The exercise as intended, and as the Relative End, or Terminus of the Obliga∣tion, and Authority, is essential to the Office. For when it is a Relation, that we Question, and that consisteth in Obligation and Autho∣rity, there is no doubt but 'tis ad aliquid, and is specifyed by the Action, or exercise to which men are obliged, and authorized. And it Being a Calling which we speak of, and that durante vita capacitate, it must be such Action as is intended to be ordinary, and constant. So that though the Power, or Habit may be pro tempore without Action, or Exercise; yet this Power, or Office, to which Exercise, as intended is Essential, cannot be where there is a Stated, or Ordi∣nary, and constant suspension of the Exercise. If the Exercise be by Law or Custom Statedly suspended durante vita, there an Essential of the Power, and Consequently the Power it self is null'd. Where there is a Stated suspension of the Exercise, there the Obligation is taken away: and whoso∣ever consents to such a stated suspension of the exercise, must be interpreted to disclaim the Authority, and Obligation to exercise, or consent to live in the neglect of a duty to
which by Office he is obliged. Yea more∣over, he that consents not to do the work of a Minister, the whole work, and that for more than a tryal or present occasion, and is not obliged and authorized to that work, at least statedly as his intended ordi∣nary course of life, is no Minister of Christ. He is no Gospel Presbyter. II. But the Parish Ministers as such, are under no obligation to Teach, neither have any Authority or Obligation to Rule. 1. As Ordained priests, they have no Obligation to Teach. This is manifest from Canon 57. which ordains, that the Sacra∣ments are not to be refused at the hands of. Unpreaching Ministers, that is from those that have not the Ability to preach, or by Preaching to Teach the People. The Un∣preaching Minister being ordain'd Priest receives at his Ordination the entire office of a Parish Priest, but yet may not have an Ability, and therefore not an Obligation to Teach; though an Ability and Obligation to Teach is Essential to a Congregational Pastor, yet a Parish Minister may be vested with the entire office of a Parish Priest without abi∣lity and Obligation to teach, any other∣wise than a Child of six years old can by reading Prayers and Homilies. 2. The Parish Minister hath not receiv∣ed neither Authority, nor Obligation to Rule the flock by the word and exercise of the Keyes of Dicipline. 1. That he hath
not Authority nor Obligation is sufficiently proved from the present book of Consecra∣ting Bishops and Ordering Priests and Dea∣cons. 2. The Exercise is durante vita stated∣ly suspended, and so cannot be considered as intended, which yet is essential to the Office. 3. I might here be large and enu∣merate several particulars, which shew, That the Parish Minister hath no part of the Ruling Power left him. But I wave it as unnecessary. Because what appears is enough. 3. I must muster up again thus much, A Parish Minister as such, differs from a Congregational Bishop, because he hath not the same Foundation for the Relation. Ubi non est idem fundamentum, ibi non est eadem Relatio. There is not the same Election, no nor Consent. Election, or at least Consent of the people is the Foundation of the Con∣gregational Bishops Office over the Con∣gregation. It is necessary to his pastoral Relation to that Church. But the Parish Minister is by the Patrons choice, the Bi∣shop's approbation, institution, and induction fully setled in Title and possession, yea a compleat Parish Minister without the peo∣ple's Knowledge or Consent. So that as a Parish Minister, his Office in Relation to the Parish is not founded on their Consent. This much may suffice to shew, that such are the Kinds of Presbyterian, but
especially of Congregational Churches (which is by most said to be of the same kind with our Parishes) I say, such are the kinds of these Churches, and such the Form of their Government, that they differ tota specie from the Diocesan, or present Parish frame; yea such is the kind of the Diocesan that it it destroyes both the Presbyterian and Con∣gregational kinds of Churches. I will in the next place consider the difference be∣tween these Churches as to their Matter of which each Church is composed and made up. Sect. III. The different Matter, of which the Pa∣rish, and Congregational Churches are composed. TOuching the Matter of the Congre∣tional on the one hand, and the Episco∣pal Churches on the other, there is a very great difference. That none are fit matter for particular Churches, but Baptized Christians is the Judgement both of Episco∣palians and all the Nonconformists. And that nothing less then the Profession of a Saving Faith gives right to Baptism, and consequently to Church Communion, is
held by both the Church of England, and all Dissenters. But yet the Practice of the Church of England is very different from their Princi∣ple, for they admit to Communion all Bap∣tized Christians, that are the Kings born Subjects, living within the Bounds of their Diocess, and not excommunicate, how wicked, prophane, and debauched soever, and (as has been already shewn) this the Inferiour Clergy must do: But the Con∣gregational keeping exactly to the Church of England Principle, admit none to Church Communion, but such as make the professi∣on of Saving Faith, credibly significant of the thing professed. So that really and de facto the matter of these Churches do differ in specie, the one made up of such as are vi∣sibly Regenerate, and the other of those who are Regenerate, and visibly Unregene∣rate also. This very thing has occasioned many trou∣blesom thoughts to divers Learned and Thinking Men of the Church of England, That they must require the profession of Sav∣ing Faith from all they baptize, and yet in contradiction to this their avowed Principle, admit all manner of debauched Persons to these Sacred Ordinances. For hereby as their practice in Admissions to the Sacra∣ment of the Supper is dissonant from their Principle, so their Principle justifies the Congregationalist in his separation.
Mr. Humphrey a great Antiseparist, An. 1669. in a Paper of Animadversions upon the late Parkers Ecclesiastical Polity gave us a just account of this point in these words, The Congregationalists (saith he) they stand here, The Church of Christ is a Number of truely Faithful Regenerate Persons. The Visible Church is defined by a Profession of true Regenerate Faith, and of no less than that, according to the most general Opinion of Protestant Divines. In our Parishes now they alledge, there is no pro∣fession made of true Grace by any unto Membership, at least not such as is credi∣ble, and consequently no visible Church among' us. As for profession of Infants at their Baptism, that is as good as nothing to them, seeing Profession is a thing not to be required for it self, but for the signify∣ing it to the Church, or Minister what the Person is, who makes the Profession, that accordingly he may admit or not admit them to their Communion. And as for Confirmation, they will say it is not so used, nor can any prove it to be instituted to that use in the Gospel. It follows that our Parish Churches being not Companies of Professors, they must gather their Churches that are such, and here lies the ground of Separation. Let me see what this Person will say to this point, but let him not do it rawly, without considering the Weight which is herein included. For
if there is nothing to be said by him, but that all the Members of our Parishes are indeed such Professors, that is, a number of such as have, or do so credibly profess their Faith, Repentance, Regeneration, and the saving Grace of God, that the Minister has received, or doth receive them thereupon, as a People endowed with all this Grace supposed, and that the visible Church must be granted according to our Protestants, and the Book of Liturgy to be a number of such, and no less Profes∣sors than such: I doubt me he will prevail little more with the Nonconformist of this make, than to root them in their Pra∣ctice, and tempt them to judge that Sepa∣ration is indeed from this Principle a most apparent result, and undenyably conclu∣ded. What man is there that dares revive Mr. Blake's Cause, and defend it against Mr. Baxters Right to Sacraments. So far Mr. Humfrey in his Animadversions on Parker's Ecclesiastical Polity: but since in a late Treatise entituled, The Ax laid to the Root of Separation. Sect. 2. p. 35, 36. He is more express in these words, 'If the Com∣mon Opinion be received, and a profession of no less than True Grace, or a Regenerate Faith, be the Rule of Admission to the Church and Sacraments? I do not see in the first place, but we must all give up the cause of our mixed Churches (Parochial or National) to the Se∣paratist. They who require such a profession in
the Adult as necessary to give Right to Church Communion, and do indeed understand them∣selves, will say, it must be a profession de pre∣senti, Serious, Intelligent, resolved, with whatsoever else is needful to make it credibly significant of the thing they profess. So that the Person Professing must be indeed Regene∣rate to be able to make it, and the Persons that receive him, must look on him as Regenerate upon his making it: and what more can be imagined, for the yielding to the Congregatio∣nalist his whole Foundation? It is true, that some will persist, and say, the Independent doth require also a Church Covenant besides this Profession: But this is in good earnest to impose upon them. The Judicious among 'em will avouch, That let but a man make his Pro∣fession of the Baptismal Covenant, and his Profession be only thus qualifyed, which Mr. Baxter in his Books still insists upon; and there is nothing besides, but what on necessity doth arise upon a man's joyning meerly in a Society, is, or can be required of any. It is this Profession individuated into a particular Congregation is all they do, and will stand up∣on, even so understood, so qualifyed, so explai∣ned. But now such a Profession as this, will they all say, is incompatible with our Paro∣chial, National Churches. There are none can make a Profession of what they have not. There are but few here and there that are Re∣generate, and consent indeed to the Cove∣nant, in the Sence as the Baptismal Cove∣nant
is understood. There are but few that are Elect, in comparison of the multitude of others. And seeing there are none but these few (as I say) are able to make such a profession; it is they who ought and must be gathered out of the rest into their select Congregations. And what can be offered with more reason, if this indeed were Christ's Rule of Communion? I must for my part, protest therefore, as one that loves to be plain and single hearted; I see not in good earnest, but either we must come off from this Rule, or we must come over to their gathered Congregations. All this and much more doth this Lear∣ned and Reverend Author freely, and with much Strength of Reason and Sincerity profess. Here then lies a difference between the Matter of Congregational, and that of Parochial Assemblies, or Diocesan Churches. The Congregational Churches are made up of such matter as the Generality of Pro∣testants, the Church of England, and espe∣cially Mr. Baxter affirm it ought to be, but the matter of the Parish Assemblies is such as all these Worthies say it must not be. The Congregational Churches are for their Matter made up according to the Rule of all Protestants generally, and of the Church of England in particular. But the matter of Parochial Assemblies, or Diocesan Churches is contrary to the Protestants and Church of Englands Rule. Now then do I after Mr. Humfrey assume, that the Church of
England, (and Mr. Baxter together) must come off from this Rule, or go over to the Congregational gathered Churches. But to make this as plain as I can, it must be observed that in this part of the Contro∣versie Mr. Humfrey (who either hath more clear apprehensions, or is more sincere than Mr. B.) doth not only confess that the Episcopalians are under a necessity of going over to the Congregationalist, or of alte∣ring their Rule; but in opposition to the Congregationalist proposes another Rule of Church Membership or Communion: which Rule, because it doth (as I am well assur'd) find good acceptance amongst some very Learned and Judicious Men of the Church of England way, I will in short give a just account of it, and shew that according to this Rule the matter of Parochial or Dioce∣san Churches differ in Specie from, the con∣gregationalists, and that whilst the Congre∣gational keep to the said Protestant Prin∣ciple, they cannot hold communion with Mr. Humfrey's Churches. The Notion this Worthy Divine hath of a Church, is more large than what hath been commonly received; for whereas it hath been generally held by all Protestants, That the Church, even that Church which is that Corporation of Christians, unto which the World is to be brought in by the Preaching of the Gospel, consists only of the Regenerate and Elect. Mr. H. adds, that
it consists moreover of the Unregenerate, that is, of Multitudes, whereof the Elect are but a Few. Not that the Unregenerate, reduplicative qua unregenerate, but specifica∣tive, as they fall under some certain Qua∣lifications, are Church Members. He distinguisheth between the Mysti∣cal Church, and the Congregate Church, or Church Political, and saith, that as none but the Regenerate are Members of the former, so the Unregenerate also may be Members of the latter, but then that this may be cleared up, his discourse is of a Twofold Co∣venant, an Universal and Particular: the Universal Covenant or Law, which is the Instrument of Gods Government over all the World, and is the Rule for all men to obtain Life by, is that Covenant which God made with Man after the Fall, offering Life on easier Terms than the Covenant of Innocency did. Of this Covenant or Law there have been three Editions, 1. An edition before the Law. 2. Under the Law. 3. Under the Gospel. And as the Administration of this Covenant has been threefold; so has the Faith, which is the Condition thereof, been diversifyed. But in every Edition, Saving Faith is the Condition thereof, so that no one can be in this Covenant without Saving Faith, and whosoever are in this Covenant, they are Regenerate, and of the Mystical Church. The particular Covenant, which is the
Instrument of the Conventional Gorvernment which is over some certain Persons, as they are gathered, or joyn'd together into So∣cieties, unto which they are called out of the world for the glorifying Gods name in that worship and service of Him, which he hath instituted by his positive Law, pre∣cepts, or Ordinances in order to their ac∣knowledging him to be their God in a pecu∣liar manner, is not a Covenant that gives right to Life, but such as gives right to the outward Ordinances and priviledges of the Gospel. So that this particular Covenant is a step towards the Universal, and all those that perform the condition thereof are brought but into the way to Life. To be in this particular Covenant, or under this Conventional Government, and to be a member of a Congregate Church is the same, which Congregate Church he makes to be the immediate Recipient of outward Ordinances. Thus you see there are two distinct Co∣venants, which entitle to distinct priviledges on distinct Conditions. There is the Uni∣versal Covenant, which gives right to eter∣nal life, on a Regenerating Faith, so that none are in this Covenant but the Regene∣rate, the Elect, who are members of the Mystical Church. And there is a particular Covenant, or the Covenant of Advantage; which gives right to outward Ordinances and priviledges, and such persons, that have a
Faith short of Saving Faith, may be in this Covenant, the Unregenerate as well as Regenerate and so are members of the Con∣gregate or political Church, for that Faith which is the Condition of this Covenant is not a Regenerating Faith. Nor is it the Shadow or Outward Shape of a Saving Faith, but a Faith specifically different from Saving Faith and a real thing, of which a man may make a Sincere profession, and remain Unregenerate. But though the man that hath this Faith only remains Un∣regenerate, yet he is in a much better Con∣dition than such as have it not. For this Covenant is a Covenant of Advantage in divers Respects, for it gives Right to the outward priviledges, and Ordinances of the Gospel. So that now you may see why, though it be said that the Unregenerate may be in this Covenant yet not qua unre∣generate, but Specificative, viz, as Unrege∣nerate Believers. The Author looks on this Political Church as a School wherein such persons as are wrought on by the Gospel so far as to receive that Faith, which is the Condi∣tion of this Covenant of Advantage, and are Baptized, may there, by the use of of the Ordinances as a means of Grace be brought up to that Sincerity of Heart, and Life, which yet they have not and which God hath made the Condition of their Sal∣vation.
That then which lyes on this Learned Au∣thor as his principal work is to shew, what this Faith is, which falls short of justifying Faith, and yet is the condition of the Co∣venant of advantage, and entitles to Bap∣tism and other outward Priveledges of the Gospel, and that the whole of this Notion is a Scripture Notion. The Faith, which falls short of saving Faith, and gives right to Baptism and Church Communion consists in an owning the true God and his worship in opposition to all False Gods and false Religion, and consequently a subjection to the or∣dinances of that Worship Himself hath ap∣pointed, whereby they are converted from Heathenism to Christianity. This is obvious in his Book, but in one place he is more particular, where he pro∣duces the Brittish Divines in the Synod of Dort for the making an initial Faith, as they call it (intending by it a Faith, yet short of saving Faith) to be a ground for our taking men to be qualified Members, but finding the main thing wanting, which is to tell then unto what Degree such a Faith must come, which is short of Justification, and yet gives Right to Baptism; he does ad∣venture to pitch the measure and fix the point, when it hath been supposed that no Stint could be set, till it came to saving. It is a Faith (says he) receiving the Doctrine of the Gospel, and advancing to that Degree
as makes a man willing to come into the Society of Christians. That is, A Dogmatical Faith made perfect by consent upon the account of Ge∣neral Grace, as the fundamentum juris doth give Title to Church Communion. This Faith, which he insists upon makes them willing to submit unto Christ, to come into his School, and be governed by the Laws thereof. A man receives the Christian Doctrine so far as to conform him∣self outwardly unto it. He believes that Christ is the Son of God. He owns the Tri∣nity, and stands not actually guilty of any such Notorious Sin, as, if he were in the Church, he must be turned out for it. He is one that is a Saint by reparation from Pa∣ganism unto Fellowship with the Political Body of Christians, and yet is not so by se∣paration from all Ungodliness unto Fellow∣ship with the Mystical Body of Christ. And he is one that together with his entring the Covenant of Advantage, doth engage him∣self also Conditionally, though not Absolutely to the Terms of the Covenant of Life, say∣ing Amen to the Sanction of it. Now in this account Mr. H. has given us of a Faith, short of what is saving, we may easily see wherein he differs from others, who go not the common way, and wherein this Faith of the Unregenerate differs from the Faith of Gods Elect. It differs from the other Notions that some have given us of it in this, They make
the Faith short of saving to be the outward Shell, or Carcase of saving Faith, but he makes it specifically different from saving Faith, and in assigning the difference he tells us, That though this Faith be Consensu for∣mata, yet the Consent, which is essential to this Faith, differs specifically from the Consent of saving Faith: Actus specificantur ab objectis, and the Consent of the Dogma∣tical Believer is but to observe the external part of Religion. All these outward Rules and Laws that are for the Regulating his outward Conversation he will regard and obey, but to go further he'll not absolutely promise. He indeed Conditionally engages himself to the terms of the Covenant of Life. He expects not the Remission of Sin, nor Salvation, but on his having that Faith, which is the Term of the Covenant of Life. Here I confess it must be acknowledged that an unregenerate Man may go so far, and remain Unregenerate, and though Un∣regenerate, may yet make the Profession of so much Faith without Hypocrisie. The Pro∣fession may be Serious and Credibly signi∣ficant of the thing professed, though in other respects he too manifestly shews him∣self to be Unregenerate. But saving Faith goes further, it purifies the Heart, it brings all the Powers of the Soul into subjection to our Lord Jesus Christ. He consents not only to the External Du∣ties
of a Christian, but moreover he enga∣ges to subject himself to all the Laws of Christ, even to those which are for the regu∣lating the very propensities and Dispositions of the soul. Thus we see he offers something plausi∣ble in his Adventure and speaks more in∣telligibly than either Mr. Blake, Sir W. Morrice, or any others, that have gone be∣fore him. For he endeavours to stint the mea∣sure of a Dogmatick Faith, which he saith is a Faith Consensu formata, and this Con∣sent absolutely is only to submit to the ex∣ternal Government of Christ, to those Laws and Rules, which respect the outward Con∣versation and this he saith is sufficient to give right to External priviledges and Advantages, for by this Faith, a man is brought into the School of Christ, and so has many advantages above the Pagan, Mahometane or Jew. He is outwardly a Christian and as such hath a Right to the outward priviledges as the Outward Jew long ago had. This Covenant of Peculiarity, of which the Dogmatick Faith is the Condition, was, he saith, made first with Abraham, un∣til which time the whole world was only under the Universal Covenant, a Cove∣nant of Grace which gave to the Regenerate Believer a Title to Justification and Eter∣nal life. But God made this Covenant with
Abraham, and afterward by Moses, and enlar∣ged it in this Gospel day. The Author gives many notable Reasons to confirm the truth of this as to the Jews, and from the consideration, that the Gen∣tiles are graft in on the same olive the Jews once were, argues very learnedly to prove, that 'tis thus now in this Gospel day. And in his discourse touching the General Grace of God, by the participation of which the Chri∣stian Church in the first notion of it, (saith he) should be defined, he tell's us 'tis a strange thing that Divines should be able to to see, How Christ, how the Spirit it self (or its help) can be the fruit of Universal Grace, and yet their eyes be holden as not to see the External Ordinances to be so, while they make the Church to consist of Regenerate only. Note here, when Mr. H. endeavours to define General Grace so exactly as he does by that Free Act or Favour of God where∣by he respects all men with the vouch∣safement of the same means of Salvation, so far as he will, he is not to be understood, as if he placed it inan equality of means vouch∣safed alike to every Individual person, which were an impertinent abuse of him, who accounts it General, because vouchsafed to the Reprobate as well as to the Elect, and affirms that God will's if man will's, or that all should have the means and the same means in this sence, viz, not so as that they
actually have them, or shall enjoy them (for some have the Gospel sent them and some have not) but so as they have a right to them if they be willing, and no Minister can refuse them. This alone serves his pur∣pose, Go teach all nations baptizing them gives them a Right by vertue of Christs Com∣mission, though providence perhaps gives them never any possession. There is one thing more to be regarded in his Notion, and but one thing, and that is his taking the Covenant of Advantage Complexly, so as to include the Covenant of Life together with them, and so there is no man can enter this Covenant, but his Faith must be Saving, and his Obedience Universal. But if the Covenant of Advantage be taken precisely, such a Faith as receives the Doctrine of Christ in oposition to all other Religion, and subjection to the Ordinance (as the Condi∣tion, of the Covenant of peculiarity, or Gods Conventional Government) and a Life with∣out Scandal is all that is of Necessity to a mans Admission. But then he also distin∣guisheth between What is required of persons, that come into the Church, or to the Sacra∣ments; and what is required so as else they may not come: and saith, no more is necessary to a man's coming so as without it he may not come, but what is necessary only to the Cove∣nant of peculiarity considered precisely in Contra-distinction to the Covenant of Sal∣vation,
though, that is also necessary to the person that comes, which is required also in their complex Consideration. This I think is the Substance of Mr. Humfreys notion fairly and impartially stated, for the clearer understanding of which, we must carefully keep in mind these distinctions. Between the Mystical Church. Political Church. Covenant of Salvation, Peculiarity, or Advantage. Grace General. Special. Dogmatick Saving Faith the Condition of the Covenant of Peculiarity. Life. Distincy Priviledges of these 2 Covenants 1. That of Peculiarity. The means of Salvation. 2. That of Life, Justification, and Salvation. Unregenerate Reduplicative. Specificative. A Being in the Covenant of Peculiarity Complexly. Precisely. These Distinctions (I say must be heedfully minded, for the hinge of all turnes on them. The discourse is of the Political Church, which is more comprehensive than the Mystical, taking in some of the Unregene∣rate, who are to be considered Specifica∣tive, they performing the Conditions of the Covenant of Advantage, or peculiarity that is, thoseof the Unregenerate, who have a Dog∣matick Faith Consensu formatam, whereby they own God, receive the Christian Doctrine;
and subject themselves to the Ordinances of Christ, which they are enabled to do by General-Grace, have a right to Baptism and the Lords supper, though not to Justifica∣tion and Life. Now if we consider the Covenant of peculiarity Complexly, taking in the Covenant of Salvation, so none are members of the Church, but the Regene∣rate, and Regeneration is required of all that come into the Church, though not as a Term of their Admission. This in short, if I mistake him not, is the Author's Notion which indeed deserves Consideration, it being an ingenious at∣tempt for the vindicating the practice of such as admit those to the Sacraments, who have on them the visible marks and chara∣cters of Unregeneracy. Having thus impartially given the just State of his Notion, I will now shew that though it may give some Colour to the Pra∣ctice of the Conforming Clergy in some Parishes, yet 'twill not remove those dif∣ficulties that lye in the Congregationalists way. Not that I design here an Examinati∣on of his Notion, for I am in this Treatise but giving a True state of the Controversy between the Church of England and the Congregational. But this much I must observe. 1. That according to the Principles of the Generality of Protestants, even of the Church of England her self as well as of Congregationalists, the present Parishes want
fit matter for a particular Church, and so want an Essential. For Mr. H. ingenious∣ly confesseth, that if those, who have not the Marks of Regeneration on them be not fit matter for Gospel Churches, the Pa∣rishes want fit matter, and so are not particu∣lar Churches of Christ's appointment and not to be communicated with. 2. That according to Mr. Hs. own Rule, the present Parishes want fit matter for a Gospel Church, for though Mr. H. doth hold that the Unregenerate are fit mat∣ter for a Gospel Church, yet not as such, and so its not every Unregenerate person is fit matter, but some only, even those who have that Faith, which is the conditi∣on of the Covenant of Peculiarity. A pro∣fession of which Faith (if required, for where therere is no reason of Questioning a Person, his willingness or offering himself is this profession with Mr. H.) is necessary to an admission to Church Communion. But we see no such profession in the Church. Besides Mr. H. adds, that those who have a Right to the Sacraments must subject them∣selves to the Government of Christ, and not lye under Scandal, nor be actually guil∣ty of such Sins for which they must be ex∣communicated if they were in. But to an Admission unto Parish Communion 'tis suf∣ficient that you are the Kings born Subject, that have been baptized, and not excommu∣nicated, though of a very scandalous Life and
Conversation, and grossly ignorant of the First Principles of the Christian Religion. So that Mr. H's Rule is too short and too narrow for the Church of England's Pra∣ctices, and won't in the full at least excuse the Parish mix't Communions, nor can his Treatise be look'd on therefore as a satis∣factory Plea for the same, the edge of his Ax being so far blunted as it hurts not those who are now call'd Separatists. In a word, so long as the Congregationa∣list can defend the Old Church of England (which is the true Protestant Principle) about the fit matter of an instituted Gospel Church, their withholding Communion from the mixt Parish Assemblies will be sufficiently justifyed even by Mr. Humfrey himself, who labours so very hard to con∣fute it. SECT. IV. The Dissenters cannot approve of those Terms of Communion imposed on them by the Church of England. 1. THe Ceremonies impos'd as necessa∣ry to our holding communion with the Church of England, are in the judge∣ment of the True Dissenter parts of exter∣nal Worship, and because not particularly
instituted by the Lord Jesus Christ, Unlaw∣ful. It must be here confessed that the Church of England is as much against the introdu∣cing any Humane Inventions into the wor∣ship of God, as the Dissenter can be. She holds all Uninstituted Worship to be Un∣lawful. To make Ceremonies Parts of Worship she disavows. And that she may defend her self against the Old Non∣conformists, and the present true Dissen∣ter she denies the Ceremonies in controver∣sie to be parts of Divine External Wor∣ship. For indeed the Controversie between the Church of England and the true Dis∣senter lies in this, whether the imposed Ceremonies are parts of external Divine Worship? Or whether they are but Decent Circumstances of Action? All sound Protestants affirm that no Ciuil or Ecclesiastical Power can justly add any thing to the Worship of God. They all hold, that all uninstituted Worship is False Worship unlawful Worship. If then the true Dissenter can prove, that the imposed Ce∣remonies are by the Church of England made parts of External Worship, they ob∣tain their point. And that they are made parts of External Worship, the Dissenter urges the Churches making them direct, or immediate expressions of the Reverence of the Heart unto God.
Their Argument runs thus, What is a direct or immediate expression of the Honour and Reverence of the Heart to God, is a part of External Wor∣ship. But the imposed Ceremonies are direct and immediate Expressions of the Honour and Reverence of the Heart to God. Er∣go, They are parts of External Worship. The Proposition is undenyable, and there are Arguments innumerable to prove the Assumption, and such as are taken from what several Sons of of the Church of Eng∣land say of their Ceremonies, when they tell us that the Decency of Circumstances doth lye in the expressing of Reverence and De∣votion unto God. The True Dissenter is as much for the Decency of those Circumstances that be∣long to Religious Actions as they are Acti∣ons, as the Church of England can be, but then they hold with such as Bishop Abbot, that Decency doth most immediately respect Men, not God, and that Decent circum∣stances of Actions, when used in Publick Worship, are of the same kind with those Decent Circumstances us'd on any Solemn civil occasion, and not being expressive of the Reverence of the Heart to God are no parts of Worship, but respecting Men, and suited to the Solemnity of the Assem∣bly, are no other than what becomes every
solemn Assembly, though met on civil occasions. A Decent Habit, Posture, and Place in convenient time belongs to all Solemn As∣semblies, whether met for Religious or Civil ends, and indeed what is judged most Decent in Civil Assemblies is in many re∣spects made the Rule of Decency in Religi∣ous Conventions: whence 'tis, that as in divers Counties there are different Cu∣stoms observed in their civil meetings, so there are proportionally a like difference in their Religious Assemblies. Not that in every particular, but in some things only, there is an exact agreement, and in most things some Similitude and Likeliness. But the Church of England making their Ceremonies expressive of Reverence and Devotion unto God, do make them more than meer Decent Circumstances of Action. They cloathing them with Significancy and making them expressive of inward Worship do make them parts of External Worship in which as such, because not Divinely insti∣tuted, the true Dissenter cannot communi∣cate with the Church of England. II. The True Dissenter doth also refuse to communicate with the Church of Eng∣land in her Liturgick Worship. Not that they esteem it unlawful meerly because there are in their Liturgy Stinted forms of Prayer, but because they believe that many of those particular Prayers contained in their Litur∣gy
are both for matter and manner unsound, and because these Forms are imposed as the only publick Prayers of the Church to the exclusion and suppression of the use of all other Prayers. The Dissenters are misrepresented by those, who say they are against the use of all prescribed Forms of Prayer, as if they would not hold communion with any that use them, how sound soever for Mat∣ter and Form, and though used with, but not to the exclusion of Spiritual and Free Prayer: I say, when they are thus repre∣sented they are abused, and a fair account of their Principles touching these things is not given. But this they hold, I. They cannot com∣municate with any in those Prayers that are known to them to be very corrupt and superstitious, and yet impos'd as sound. Nor 2. Can they confine themselves to any particular Form of Prayer how sound soe∣ver to the exclusion of the use of Spiritual and free Prayer.
Sect. V. Wherein the True Dissenter doth agree, and wherein he differs from the Church of England. I. THey agree with the Church of Eng∣land in the Doctrinals of Religion; taking Doctrinals as distinct from those Do∣ctrines that Relate to the Constitution of particular Churches, Ministry, Ceremonies and Discipline. They are for Decency in Worship; as much  for the use of Decent Circumstances of actions as the Church of England, and are not against prescribed Forms of Prayer as such. Besides they do believe, that there are many sound Belie∣vers and good Christians of that Communi∣on, who do belong to the Mystical Body of Christ, and shall be saved in the day of the Lord, yea comparing the Church of Eng∣land with all the Churches in the World, (excepting the Protestant Reformed Chur∣ches abroad and in Forreign Plantations, and the Dissenters at home) they esteem the Church of England in most things to be more agreeable to the Rule of the Word than those other Churches. II. The Dissenters do further hold, That 'tis the incumbent duty of all men to do
what they Lawfully can, for the Peace of Christians in this Kingdom. III. That if they could Conscientiously hold Communion with the Church of Eng∣land in all Ordinances occasionally, 'twould be their Duty to do so constantly. Not that they think it Duty to communicate constantly with every Church with which they may Lawfully hold communion occa∣sionally. But they judge the Frame and Constitution of the Church of England, its Ministry and Government to be such, and the Circumstances in which English men-stand with reference to the Church of England, that in this case, If compleat Com∣munion occasionally was Lawful, Fixed Communion would be a Duty. The Rea∣sons for this are these. 1. The holding compleat Communion with the Church of England occasionally supposes the Terms of Communion with the Church to be Innocent and Lawful, which once granted, constant Communion on the account of its being enjoyned by Law∣ful Authority becomes a Duty. Government is so very necessary for the conserving Peace in the World amongst men as men, that in whatsoever we can lawfully, we ought to shew our Regards and the Honourable Respects we bear both to the Government, and them that are in Authority. The doing this is to obey Na∣tures Dictates, besides, the Fifth Com∣mandment,
and the Example of Jesus Christ and his Apostles direct us unto this. In all things lawful we ought to obey the Higher Powers, not only for Wrath, but for Con∣science sake. What a man to escape the Wrath of a Magistrate may lawfully do, that for Con∣science sake, and to escape Divine displea∣sure, he ought to do. In a matter of this Nature we ought to be serious, and delibe∣rately consider, That if to escape the Penal∣ty of a Twenty Pound a Month, we can lawfully hold Communion with the Church once a Month, whether, if the same Pe∣nalty should be by Law against abstain∣ing from Church every Lords Day, we should not think it as lawful every Lords Day. If it be answered in the affir∣mative, as I presume it will be by those who judge it lawful to communicate once a Month to escape Wrath (for the same Cause will have the same Effect,) then 'twill follow that we must do as much for Conscience sake. We must do all that law∣fully we can for Conscience sake, as well as for Wrath. In all things▪ we must needs be obedient. 2. The Peace both of the Church and State makes constant Communion a Duty, if occasional Communion be lawful: For whatever lawfully we can do for Peace we must do. If it be possible, saith the Apostle, As much as lyeth in you live peaceable with all
Men. Rom. 12.18. Follow Peace with all Men, Hebr. 12.14. The very advanta∣ges, which the Nation where we live, and all men who profess the Protestant Religion both at home and abroad will be pertakers of, is sufficient to oblige all good Men to do what lawfully they can for peace. Shall we do more for escaping the wrath of men than for Conscience sake to evite the displeasure of a Terrible God? Is not the publick Weal more to be regarded than the Advantages of private Families, and yet will we do more to prevent a private mischief than a publick? Is not the peace of Church and state more to be valued than that of a single family, and yet will we conform to ob∣tain the peace of Families, and refuse to do so for the peace of the whole Kingdom and Churches at home and abroad. Constant Communion with the Church of England is enjoyned by Authority, and 'tis what will contribute to the peace of the Kingdom, and to the Healing our Breaches, to the strengthening the Protestant inte∣rest at home and abroad, to the weaken∣ing popery, which proves so fatal unto Civil States, and therefore unless Conformity, or Lay-communion be unlawful, it must be done. These things are so plain and manifest, that even the Conformists call for it, and Mr. Baxter and Mr. Humfrey (men of great Learning and Judgement among Dissenters)
affirm and Practice it, and therefore when ever they Preach, 'tis in conjunction with the Church of England. They disavow the gathering from the Church. But then II. Their disagreement may be reduced to those three Heads, as must be brought here again into remembrance. 1. The matter. 2. The Form of instituted Churches, and 3. The Terms of Communion. 1. Some Dissenters judge that the Parish Assemblies, of which a Diocesan single Church is made up, want fit matter for a particular instituted Gospel Church, and so are not particular Churches. Not that they hold that there is not one good Chri∣stian that holds Communion with the Pa∣rish Assemblies. But the Assemblies as made up of all Baptized Persons not ex∣communicate, how ignorant, how wicked, and how scandalous soever they may be that live within such Parish Bounds are un∣fit matter for a particular Church of Christ's Institution. And yet of such (as hath been noted in the foregoing Chapter) are the Diocesan Churches made up. Now all know that there cannot be a Christian Church where there is not Christian mat∣ter. The matter is an Essential Constitu∣tive ingredient. If then in the Parish Churches there are not a competent Num∣ber of Christians, that is (saith Mr. Bax∣ter) a competent number of Regenerate Persons, (for in the Dictionary of all Pro∣testants
generally a Christian and a Regene∣rate Person are of the same signification) or as Mr. Humfrey (who would be thought to widen the Church, and with whom an Un∣regenerate Believer is a Christian) of such as have a Dogmatick Faith (i. e.) such as do own the Doctrines of Christ, and in opposition to the worship of False Gods, and False Religions do close with Christ's Worship, his Ordinances and Institutions, and submit themselves to Christ's Govern∣ment, and abstain from such notorious Sins for which Church Members are to be cast out) they are not fit matter for the Building a particular Church. I add, if the Parishes wanting fit matter for a particular Church, according to the old Protestant Rule, must want the Essence of a Church; how much more then must they want it, if they want what is fit matter according to Mr. H's Rule. Mr. H. a great Antiseparatist (as I but now said) doth protest, that if by the old Protestant Rule we must judge who are fit matter for a particular Church, the cause must be yielded up unto the Congre∣gationalist, for that the Parishes do most undoubtedly want fit matter. But 2. Whether the Parishes want fit matter, or not, 'tis past doubt that the Form of their Church constitution is opposite unto, and destructive of both the Presbyterian and Congregational Church Species.
Here I will (as before I did) confine my Discourse to the Opposition there is between the Form of the Parishes, by Law esta∣blished, and the Congregational. That they are of different Species, that, the Parochial Form as suited to the Dioce∣san Model, is different from, and destru∣ctive of the Congregational kind of Church∣es being already proved, I will shew, How the Dissenters do from this consideration ar∣gue against communicating with the Church of England in their Parish Assem∣blies. That the Reader may the more clearly comprehend the scope of the Dissenters Arguments, he must carefully observe, that the Dissenter esteems the Form of the Pa∣rish Assemblies as Diocesan to be Uninsti∣tuted, to be violations of the Second Com∣mandment, yea destructive of Christ's In∣stitutions: that is, the kind of the Dioce∣san Church, Ministry and Discipline to be destructive of Christ's instituted Churches, Ministry and Discipline. The Lord Jesus Christ, who eminently is King of Saints, hath instituted particular Churches to Rule and Govern them. A particular Church is a particular Polity, in, and over which the Lord Jesus Christ rules. Now that same Lord, who is their King, is their Lawgiver, and he has shewn after what Form his Church shall be made. He has given us the fashion of the House, the
Laws and Ordinances. He has appointed Offices, and given commission to his Offi∣cers, and laid down Rules for the exercise of their Offices. Christ hath prescribed the several Offices, he has shewn the several Works, and the divers Powers of these Offi∣cers, and how they shall enter on their Office. And whoever will narrowly search into this thing will find, That the Lord Christ hath so formed, and framed his Churches, that they may obtain the great end, for which they were ordained, to wit, the per∣fecting the Saints, the edifying the Body of Christ, till we all come in the Unity of the Faith, and of the Knowledge of the Son of God, unto a Perfect Man, unto the mea∣sure of the Stature of the Fulness of Christ; and the Officers appointed for this great Work are such, who in an especial manner bear on them the Image of Jesus Christ's Mediatorial offices, of Prophet, Priest and King, (as before hinted) being the Churches Teachers, Guides in Worship and Gover∣nours. Besides the Churches thus form'd and fram'd according to Christ's own Ap∣pointment, are enriched with Special and Peculiar Priviledges, which none else with∣out the Guilt of the Highest Usurpation, can lay any claim unto. All which aright considered, it undoubtedly follows, that to break down Christ's Instituted Form of Churches, depose his Officers, destroy his Offices, lay aside his Laws and Rules of
Government, set up a New Species oppo∣site unto, and inconsistent with Christ's Churches, make new Offices, set up new Officers, and lay a claim to all those Privi∣ledges which are peculiar to Christ's own Instituted Churches, is a complicated Sin, in whose Bowels there is all imaginable ag∣gravations. It is a Sin as odious as that of Witchcraft, yea 'tis a rejecting the Lord Christ, and a saying we will not have this Man to reign over us. In fine, the doing all this in the Name of Christ makes the Ini∣quity the more hanious; for to do so is to set Christ against himself, and a committing the worst of Villanies in the name of the most Holy Lord. This much is so very plain, that in Thest all agree to the Truth hereof, even Papists as well as all manner of Protestants. If then the Congregational kind of Churches, or the Presbyterian be of Christ's appointment, seeing the present Diocesan is so very inconsistent with and Destructive of them, 'tis impossible that either Pres∣biterian, or Independent that understand them∣selves, and know what the Diocesan Con∣stitution is, should be able conscientiously to hold Communion with any in the destru∣ctive Diocesan frame: For to do so is to communicate with them in what is set up to the Destruction of Christ's Kingdom. I'le illustrate this by a famiiar compari∣son. Let us suppose the Monarchial Go∣vernment
to be established on the surest foundations, and the whole Nation under an Oath to be true to this Government, and Faithful to their Prince; can any Persons notwithstanding this, go about to form themselves according to a Republican Model, change the old Offices, depose the Kings Officers, Rule and Govern themselves by other Laws, and this be done consistently with their Allegiance. Is not this an ab∣horrent thing in the very thoughts? Is not this a casting off their Prince from the Go∣vernment, and a destroying the Monarchy? In like manner the Diocesan and Congre∣gational kind of Churches, being according to us, as inconsistent with each other, as the Republican and Monarchical Govern∣ment, if the Congregational be of Christ's Institution, what can the breaking down the Congregational Bounds, changing the Congregational Offices, deposing their Of∣ficers, setting up new after the Diocesan Model, and governing by other Laws and Rules, but a rejecting of Christ, a destroying his Government, and open breach of our Allegiance to him? The thing is too plain to be more largely insisted on, and those who are for the Di∣vine Right of a Diocesan Epopacy see this clearly enough, who therefore allow not any of their Members to communicate with us, or any kind of Churches opposite to theirs.
3. If the constitution of the Church of England had been sound both in Matter and Form, yet so long as their Terms of Com∣munion are such as are in the judgement of the Dissenter sinful, 'tis unlawful for them to hold Communion with the Church of England. A Church, which for its constitution is sound, may impose such sin∣ful Terms of Communion, whence it un∣avoidably follows, that those, who are conscientiously perswaded of the Sinfulness of the Terms, ought not to communicate with the imposing Church. That we must not sin for the Sake of Communion with any Church is granted by all, the Controversy then as to this part of it lies here, whether the imposed Ce∣remonies, and Lyturgy made necessary both by Ecclesiastical and Canon Laws to Comunion be sinful? If sinful, we may not communicate with the Church of England, if not sinful, yet, so long as Dissenters lye under plain, and manifest Convictions of Conscience, that they are sinful, they must not commu∣nicate with the Church in their Liturgies and Ceremonies. This is the Protestant Doctrine, and un∣less the Church of England can prove the Matter and Form of their Churches to be agreeabl to the Divine Rule, and their Terms of Communion to be Lawful the true Dissenter must be ceared from the re∣proach of being a Schismatick.
In a word, the Disease of the Churches this day in England, and the chief grounds of the present Division lies here. The Diocesan Churches, as above describ'd as to their Matter and Form, their Ministry and Discipline are by Law established, as of Divine Right, as the only Churches and Ministry for English men in this Kingdom to fix their Communion with. The strict imposing the Controverted Ceremonies, and the severe punishing all those, who do not incorporate and fix their Communion with the Church of England on Her own terms, and punishing all those that worship God in any other way than according to the Li∣turgy and Practice of the Church of Eng∣land is the great reason of the present Divi∣sions that are amongst us. CHAP. III. The onely effectual Remedy for these Di∣seases humbly proposed. THe Cause of our Divisions being shewn, My last work is to offer with all due submission, what may heal our Breaches, and our Divisions, and cure our Diseases. In doing which I must descend into a more
particular enquiry after the Nature of the Disease, as it doth variously affect Persons of Divers tempers, and complex∣ions, and constitutions. For there are amongst Dissenters men of different Prin∣ciples touching the Diocesan Church State, and amongst Conformists there are men of divers Statures too, some of a greater lati∣tude than others, and some men of very narrow Souls; which therefore does re∣quire much caution in those materials which have been, and are to be humbly proposed for Union. A care to be sure must be had to secure Christ's Institutions, together with the Peace and Quiet of the Nation. And this in such a way as may relieve tender Consciences on both sides, even those, who are zealous for the Divine Right of Paro∣chial or Congregational Churches, and those also who think themselves deprived of what is necessary to Salvation, if the Divine Right of Episcopacy be destroyed. And some there are who think no publique Worship can be acceptable, but the Book of Common Prayer: Others will be for a Directory, and cannot content themselves without the use of Spiritual and Fe Prayer. To be yet more distinct and particular, 1. The Christian Religion as Protestant, and the Civil Government must against all Assaults, be defended. 2. Tender Con∣siences of divers sizes must be releived.
That is, the Tender Consciences of Dissen∣ters must be relieved in a way consistent with the Peace of Conscientious Confor∣mists. There are Holy and Judicious men on both sides, who are good Christians, good Protestants, and Loyal Subjects, of very different Opinions touching Episcopacy and the way of Worship. About Episcopacy: There are some of the Dissenters so very much disgusted with it, and with Clergy Men's being concerned in Civil Affairs, that they never yet could be brought to the Understanding, how they may be reconciled to their being his Majesties Officers; though Episcopacy were declared to be of Humane constituti∣on, so long as they must be still under the Bishops Inspection and charge, even when with the greatest chearfulness they can sub∣mit to some of the Gentry's, being placed in Office above them. But this may be from want of consideration. There are others both among the Dissenters, and Con∣formists, who are not for, and yet not so much against the Prelatick Episcopacy, nor against those Honours it shall please his Majesty to confer on them, but they can obey them, as his Majesties Bishops, though not as Christs, with perfect satisfaction. On the contrary, there are also among the Conformists a sort of Divines, who look on the Divine Right of Episcopacy, as a Fundamental Doctrine,
and that 'tis as impossible to be saved with∣out a Bishop, as 'tis without the Sacraments. Their Bishop must be of Divine Right, or not at all; such are those new strange me∣teors Mr. Dodwell, Dr. Sherlock, and their Partakers. About Worship. Again, some are for the present stinted Worship. Others for a stinted Liturgy, but not for this. And Others there are for None, they are for a Directory only. Now our Rudiments for Union must be adjusted to the Relief of all these. The First thing then that is to be had in our Eye is, the Defence of our Religion and Government. For the securing which 'tis absolutely ne∣cessary, That a National Church Govern∣ment be established on its ancient Basis. For seeing the whole Kingdom is become Christian, our Religion is National; and therefore the Government (which must be of as ample extent as the Religion) must be National. We know that it is naturally impossible to keep up Order in a Nation among men as men, but by a National Civil Government. And for the same Reason, 'twill be as impossible to preserve Peace and Order among men, as Religious in a Na∣tion without a National-Church-Govern∣ment. hat Wisdom of our Ancestours, which was the Prodct of Long Experience, was
seen in nothing so much as in the erecting a Nationl Government within this Land. The Heptarcy amongst the Saxons, though under one Monarch, proved fatal. For the Power of those little Princes being Regal, they were as so many little Territories di∣vided from each other, each endeavouring to greaten it self by the Spoils of others; which occasioned cruel Animosities and Wars to the mutual ruine of each other: which misery continued as long as the Hep∣tarchy. The like would be, should the Govern∣ment of the Church (I speak now of its ex∣ternal Polity) be divided into several distinct Diocesses independent on each other, without any other dependance on their Prince, than the little Saxon Kings had on their Monarch. Verily we are owing to the National Con∣stitution of our Church Government for the Peace there is between Bishop and Bishop, and all those Ligaments therefore or Bonds, that are necessary to the keeping us together as a National-Church-Corpora∣tion, and Body Politick must be fixed and held inviolable. And this (we must know too) is not only necessary on the account of Peace among our selves, but because it is also the great Bulwark against all Forreign and Popish Invasions, and Usurpation. For to the completing a National Church
Government among us, 'tis absolutely ne∣cessary That the Supreme Regent Head (which is an essential constitutive part) on Earth be within our selves, whose interest it is to exert the utmost of his Power to de∣fend the Church, of which he is so princi∣pal a part. Destroy the National Church Govern∣ment, and we are a naked people, open to all manner of forreign and intestine Violence. There will be no defence against Heresies, nor against the mischievous papal usurpations. It is in the next place further requisite, That the Humane Right of this National Church Covernment be also resolved, no∣thing being more manifest than that in Christs Gospel there is no Institution nor Platform for a National Church Govern∣ment. The Civil Magistrate is entrusted with a Power to regulate all those disorders amongst the Churches, that have any influ∣ence on the State. He is the Superiour Ci∣vil Powers, and as they have any Interest in the State, and fall into a National Cor∣poration, that interest must be so framed as not to clash with the Civil Government. If there had been a National Church Go∣vernment of Divine Right, be it either the Episcopal or Presbyterian, it would be of fatal consequence to the Government of Kingdomes.
That 'tis the will of God that a Natio∣nal Church should be under Government, I acknowledge readily; for 'tis to be subject to the Higher Powers; but to assert any Spe∣cial kind of a National Church Govern∣ment to be jure divino, even when no par∣ticular Species of Civil Government is af∣firmed to be divinely instituted, is to give the Church Government a preheminence above Civil Government, and to make all Humane Laws so to warp, as still to be∣ware of interfering with the National Church Constitution. For 'tis apparent, if the spe∣cial kind of Government be ordained of God, its Governours and General Laws must be of divine right. Besides, the Le∣gislative Power for the Making of particu∣lar Laws in subserviency to the General, must be in Church Governours, that is, the Clergy; whereby the King, Lords and Commons are robb'd of what by the Laws of Nature belongs unto them. Many other things might here in the way be urged to shew, How pernicious to the Government of Civil States the asser∣ting of the Divine Right of Episcopacy is: but I must make that another Business. In the Third place then, after this (to be more express and particular) for securing the Christan Protestant Religion, and Civil Government, there are these Two things on∣ly will be sufficient, A Subscription to
the Articles of Religion, with a Taking the Oath of Supremacy and Allegiance. 1. A Subscription to the Articles will secure our Religion, and if the Subscription be required but according to the Statute of 13. Eliz. c. 12. it will afford no trouble to the Dissenters Conscience. Let us declare our Assent, and subcribe to all these Articles of Religion, Which concern only the Confession of the True Faith, and the Doctrine of the Sacraments comprized in a Book imprinted and entituled, Articles, &c. where the word [Only] must needs exclude matter of Ce∣remony and Church Government, which have been controverted by the Learned in most places. Whereas if a Subscription be required otherwise, there are many sound Protestants like to be choaked, and the Division must continue where it is. Or, if there should be any New Article substi∣tuted in the room of these, against the Di∣vine Right of Episcopacy, and the use of the present Liturgy, it would but make many of the present Clergy, on the other hand to become Nonconformists. 2. The Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance secure our Government. The one is the sure Test of a Protestant, (if not, let that be added which is taken by the Parliament) and the other is the Test of a Loyal Subject. If any Scruple the taking Oaths, and will give Pecuniary Caution, 'tis tantamount, and probably greater security to the Go∣vernment,
for many are more afraid to part with their Money than with the Fa∣vour of Almighty God. The Second thing to be had in our eye, is the Relief of Tender Consciences. And now as for this. 1. If Parochial or Congregational Assem∣blies, which according to the Practice of the Primitive Churches abroad and in Eng∣land, may be acknowledged to be compleat particular Churches, and suffered to enjoy the Liberty of exercising all that is proper to particular Churches of the lowest Rank and Order, the Dissenters will be Relieved. Especially 2. If these Parochial Churches, whose Pastour is vested with a Fullness of Power to administer all Ordinances, even Disci∣pline, be left to their Liberty, Whether they will have a Liturgy, or use Spiritual and free Prayer. 3. If the Diocesan Bishops hold by no other Right than they did in Queen Eliza∣beth's days with some regulation, it may conduce to the Relief of all sorts. For 1. If the Parochial Churches enjoy whatever is necessary to their Constitution, what need they scruple to look on, and re∣spect the Bishop as his Majesties Officer? All will surely acknowledge that Christians must be subject to the Higher Powers, and be obedient to all their just Laws, and Ho∣nour
those that are by the supream Power placed over them. And as all Christian men fall under a twofold Consideration, namely, that of Men, and that of Christi∣ans, so they may (for ought I can see to the contrary) be employed in two distinct capacities, that is, to be both a Minister of Christ, and of the King, especially consi∣dering that their Ministry for the King re∣lates unto matters about the Church, which most naturally falls under the cognizance of such. Besides, 2. Though the Bishop be by the Law of the Land as a Bishop, no other than the King's Officer, seeing, if he be consecrated, he hath nothing wanting to the being of a Bishop, he may by those, who are zealous for their Divine Right, be esteemed as such. The esteeming him such, is but matter of Opinion, and so long as he keeps it to him∣self, and makes no encroachment on the King's just Prerogatives, there is no dan∣ger in it. I know there will be matter of Difficul∣ty in adjusting this point to satisfie all, for those who esteem the Bishops to be of Divine Right, will be for their Consecratn; and those who are zealous against the Di∣vine Right, cannot easily distinguish between these Bishops, as they are Bishops of Christ, and Bishops of the King, and therefore will be afraid to shew any respect to them, least they be interpreted to own them as Bishops of Christ.
To solve this Difficulty, it may be hum∣bly moved, That some Bishops may be made so only by his Majesties Letters Pattens; and tha others, where the greatest part of the Clergy in any particular district desire it, may be consecrated: And if in that District any Parishes Scruple to obey the consecra∣ted Bishop, let them be exempt from the Bishops Jurisdiction, as heretofore has fre∣quently been done. An Act of Parliament with these Regu∣lations, takn in these who are now Dis∣senters, into me Church of England, make∣ing them Legal Parts thereof, will end our Divisions, and make the Church of Eng∣land formidable unto all its Adversaries. For here will be an accession of several Lear∣ned and Holy Men made to the Church; all animosities removed, heats at an end, Love, Peace and Religion flourish, to the satisfa∣ction of the People in general, and to the greatning his Majesties due Prerogatives and Glory. Hereby all Parties have offered to them as much as they can reasonably desire. The Dissenters enjoy their longed-for-Liberty; and the Bishops lose nothing of their Gran∣dure. They may keep their Baronies and and all their Church Lands, we envy them not; and those that are zealous for an opi∣nion, let them enjoy it. If any will rejoyce in the present Liturgy, they may. And why may not others (if our Governours
give leave) be at Peace with their Dire∣ctory? And all this to the securing the Go∣vernment of the State. Only it must not be forgotten, that here is nothing in all this yet intended, but some First Lineaments to be improved by the per∣fective Skill and Wisdom of our Superi∣ours, according to the Statesman's Art, as may best conserve our Religion and Govern∣ment in a way agreeable to its antient con∣stitution. To conclude, If the National Church Government in this Land was ever recog∣nized to be but an humane, External Civil Polity, touching Ecclesiastical matters: If Parochial or Congregational Churches, and not the Diocesan, have been by our Laws of Divine Right; if the leaving it to the choice of particular Churches, whether they use this or the other Liturgy or Di∣rectory as they thought best be agreeable to that antient Constitution: and conse∣quently if such a Platform for Union be in all parts of it most exactly correspondent with the Sentiments which our Fore-Fa∣thers had of the Constitution of the Go∣vernment both of Church and State: then may this small endeavour of mine be look't upon perhaps by such as please to be of some Signification. The Proof of these Postulata is the Work of a greater Volume. FINIS.
