11017 S102248 99838040 2397
THE FIRST PART OF A TREATISE CONCER¦NING POLICY, AND RELIGION. Wherein the infirmitie of humane wit is amply declared, with the necessitie of Gods grace, and true Religion for the perfe∣ction of policy; And by the way some political matters are treated; Diuers principles of Macchiauel confuted; And ma∣ny aduises geuen, tending no lesse to religious piety, then to true policy; With a confutation of the arguments of Atheists, against the prouidence of God, which is clearly proued throughout the whole. Written by THOMAS FITZHERBERT Esquire, and Catholique priest, for the benefite of youg Statists. Sit homen Domini benedictum a seculo &c. The name of God be blessed for euer, and euer, for wisdome, and fortitude are his, and he changeth times, and ages, and transposeth, and ordaineth king∣domes at his pleasure. Dan. 2. Printed at Doway by LAVRENCE KELLAM, at the signe of the holie Lambe. M.DC.VI.
Visis testimonijs duorum doctorum virorum qui hunc librum se legisse fatebantur, nihil∣que in eo Fidei Catholicae, aut bonis moribus con∣trarium reperisse, eundem approbaui, & vtiliter praelo committi posse censui. Actum Duaci 18 Aprilis 1606. Georgius Coluenerius S. Theol. Licent. & professor, & librorum in Academia Duacena censor.
TO MY SONNE EDWARD FITZHERBERT. KINDNES, saith the prouerbe, wil creepe where it can not goe; The meaning is, if I be not deceiued, that such is the force of loue and affection, that when it can not manifest it selfe so amply as it wold, it wil show it selfe in some sort as it may; the which is now verified in me; For, wheras I haue neuer hetherto had the meanes, & oportunity to manifest my affection towards you, by reason of my departure from you and my cuntry, in your infancy, & my continual ab∣sence euer since, (for the space of these three and twenty yeres) I can no longer forbeare to geue you some testimo∣ny of my loue, by the particular addresse of this treatise vnto you; For, although I intend it generally to al my cuntrymen, for the publyk good, yet I can not but wish the best part of the benefit to you, to whom the fruite of al my labours is most due, both by a special prerogatiue of nature, and also by the particular priuiledge of my owne desire, and your desert. Therfore, to the end you may reape the benefit which I wish you of this treatise, you shal vnderstand, that al∣though part of the subject is policy, yet my meaning is not to animat you to the study, or practise therof, for that in my many yeres trauel, & seruice of forrayne princes, (wherin I haue obserued the successe of many, great
negotiations, & bene my selfe emploied in some) I haue learned by experience, that the old prouerb, Of little med∣ling commeth great ease, is verified in nothing more then in matters of state; the practise wherof may wel be com∣pared to the vse of fire, which though it be most necessary for man, yet is most dangerous to deale with, and doth men some times irreparable dammages, be they neuer so circumspect. And this I say, for that I haue knowne very many stats-men of greate sufficiency, much perplexed, and diuers ruined, not so much by their owne inconside∣ration, as by the difficulties, and dangers incident to the handling of state-matters, which are subiect to infinit ac∣cidents, and hazards, impossible to be fore-seene and pre∣uented, by the witt, or industry of man; And therfore the only point of state, which I wold haue you to learne, or at least to practise, is, to serue God and your prince, with al duty and loyalty, yeelding (as our Sauiour com∣mandeth) To Caesar that vvhich is Caesars;Matth. 22. and to God, that vvhich is Gods: And euer to perswade your selfe, that ho∣nesty ioyned with piety, & prudent simplicity, is the hig∣hest and surest policy that may be: for as Salomon saith; Qui ambulat simpliciter,Pro. 10. ambulat confidenter, & qui deprauat vias suas manifestus erit. He vvhich vvalketh simply and plainly, vvalketh cōfidently & surely, & he that rūneth an vndirect course shal be made manifest. And this our Sauiour also taught his Apostles,Natth. 10. and vs al, when he said. Estote Prudentes sicut serpentes, & simplices sicut columba. Be you prudent like to the ser∣pent, and simple like to the doue; whereof I shal not neede to say more vnto you here, for that I haue sufficiently hādled this matter in this treatise, in the which I wold wish you for your better instructiō, to obserue specially these points following. The first is; The natural imbecillity of mans wit; the
consideration wherof is most necessary for euery man, to he end he may not only beware of presumption, and an uer-weening of his owne wit (the danger wherof I haue eclared in the first, and second Chapter) but also haue ecourse to the remedies which God hath ordained for ans infirmity; that is to say, continual praier to him for he light and helpe of his grace, and the councel of dis∣creete, and wise frends; of both which points I haue trea∣ed at large, partlie in the 28. Chapter, and partly in my ules for young statists; wherto I remit you. The second obseruation which I wish you to make, is, of the course of Gods prouidence in the affaires of men, s how he disposeth not only of kingdomes and states, but lso of particular mens affaires, working his wil in them, nd by them, some times manifestlie, and some times y secret operation, permitting euil to the end to draw good therof, and seruing him selfe of mens wills, wits, olicies, and power, as also of al other his creatures, nd of al manner of causes, natural, moral, and ac∣idental, for the execution of his holly wil, and secret udgements; The consideration wherof infinitely im∣orteth euery Christian man, as wel for the discharge of is dutie towards God, as also for his owne special come∣ort, throughout the whole course of his life. For he that alwaise hath the prouidence of God before is eyes, and acknowledgeth his merciful disposition in what soeuer befalleth him, is neither puffed vp with pride  prosperity, nor deiected with sorrow in aduersity, nor et dismayed with the apprehention of dangers, but al∣waise holdeth an euen and stedfast course, resigned to Gods wil, grateful for his benefits, not repining at his unishments, knowing that al wil turne to his good, if the ault be not in him selfe; whereby the seruants of God
receiue infinit cōsolation, wheras those who haue not the like consideration of Gods prouidence, haue neither any stay of them selues in prosperity, nor any true comfort in aduersity, but being no lesse dissolute in the one, then des∣perate in the other, perish many tymes in both, through Gods iust Iudgement. And although you shal find matter considerable concerning this poynt, throughout this whole discourse, yet I specially recommende two Chap∣ters to your reading, to wit the 25. and 26. where I haue declared the causes why God permitteth good men to be afflicted, and wicked men to prosper in this world, which being wel waied may yeeld you, as I hope, both consola∣tion, and instruction. The third poynt to be obserued is, the seuere Iustice of God in the punishment of sinne,Exod. 20. (Visiting the iniquityes of parents vpon the children vnto the 3. and 4. generation) which as I haue made most euident in princes, and their states, so may it also be obserued in priuate men, and particular families. Therfore the instruction, which I wold wish you to take by this point, is, that the true cause of the decay and ouerthrow of most families, is the same that I haue showed by euident examples to be the ruin of king∣domes, & states, to wit the sinnes of men, punished eyther in them selues, or in their children and posterity, wherby whole families are extirped, races extinguished, ancient houses decaied, and personnal defects, or imperfections, continued sometimes in families for many decents. Wherby it may appeare, how simple they are, who hope to eternize their names and families, by wicked meanes, and how absurdly many men vse to saye, that he is happy whose father goeth to the deuil (because wicked men leaue many times their children rich, with il gotten goods) whereas experience teacheth, that although God of his
secret Iudgements suffreth euil men to prosper for a while for such causes as I haue signified in the 26. Chapter) yet e punisheth them, and dissipateth their ill gathered sub∣ance sooner or later, wher vpon groweth the prouerbe: ale parta, male dilabuntur; Goods il gotten, are il spent. Et vix udebit tertius haeres; And they seeldome descend to the third neratiō. VVherfore we may say with far more reason, that e is vnhappy whose parents sinnes may drawe the male∣ction, & wrath of God vpon him; and that most happy he, who fearing God, and being descended of vertuous arents, enheriteth not only their wel gotten goods, but lso Gods blessing for their vertues; For such a one hath a sting stock, and an indeficient treasure, yeelding an as∣red fruite to him, & his; which I wish you alwayse to re∣ember, to the end you may liue in the feare of God, at it may please him to blesse you with his grace, and al mporal happines, yea and to prosper, and perpetuate our posterity, for his owne glory, and the good of your untry; For, Sic benedicetur qui timet Dominum;Psal. 127. So shal he be lessed who feareth God. Furdermore you shal find in this treatise diuers political recepts, and rules, which though as I said before, I doe ot aduise you to practise, yet it can not hurt you to know, nd the rather for that many of them may be applyed to e condicion, or state of any particular man; such being e connexion of al the parts of prudence, (wherof po∣cy is one) that they concurre, and communicate in many ings, in so much that an aduise may be very political, r good for the administration of state, and withal very econnomical, or fit for the gouernment of houshold, yea nd necessary for the direction of any priuat man, in his articular affaires; of which kinde, diuers wil occurre nto you, in reading this treatise.
In like manner, whereas I haue interlaced many thing against Atheists, which you, and other good Christians, may perhaps omit to reade, as not pertaining any way to you, I think good to aduertise you, that you may also find therin matter woorth your consideration, for that I haue by the occasion of their obiections, cleared diuers douts, explicated many difficultyes, & decyded some notable questions; which may serue, not only for the confirma∣tion of our Christian fayth, but also for the edification of any good Christian reader, yea and stirre him vp to the admiration of Gods infinite wisdome, iustice, mercy bounty, & omnipotent power, and to the due reuerence, and feare of his inscrutable Iudgements. Moreouer, hauing had desire both to delight, & profit my readers, I haue sowed in this my gardain (as I may tearme it) the seede as wel of moral, as of political doctrin, and haue watered it aboundantly with al kind of history, yea more perhaps then wil seeme conuenient to some cu∣rious and seuere censurers, who may desire to haue al things restrained to the limits of their lyking; Neuerthe∣lesse, I wold haue such to vnderstand if any such there be that I haue bene the more copious in examples, for the better and more cleare confutation of Macchiauillian, & Atheistical politikes, who referring al the effects of Gods secret Iudgements, yea and of many of their owne errours to chance, are best conuinced by experience, which is cheefely deduced from history, and showed best by multi∣tudes of examples. Therfore I wold haue you to think that I inuite you to the reading of this treatise, as to a gardain, in the which I hope you shal find variety of faire flowers, and holsome hearbs; wherof I wish you first to take a ful view, & after to make your selfe a nosegay of what you like best, for I
can not expect that you, or any other, wil like and allow, f euery thing alike, which I treate, or teach in this Trea∣tise, no more then it can be expected, that many guests in∣ited to a feast, be it neuer so wel furnished, shalbe al of hem contented alike with euery dish: and therfore euen s many dishes are prouided, not so much that al the guests ay eate of euery one, as that euery guest may haue some ish to his liking; euen so I haue proposed to my readers ariety of matter in this discourse, not so much hoping hat al of them wil be pleased with euery thing therin, as hat euery one of them may find some thing to content him To conclude; I wold not haue you expect in this my Treatise, any curiosity of exquisit words, or fine filed phra∣es, or other ornaments of eloquence, because nether my declining yeares, (where with my stile is also declined) neither yet the grauity of the matter which I handle, doe seeme to me to permit any other then a plaine stile, and familiar manner of writing, accommodated to common capacity for the publike good; Besides that I perceiue by such english bookes, as I haue chanced to see, printed in England of late, that the english tongue is much altered since I came thence, and therfore I may wel feare, that the language currant in my time (which I am forst to vse because I neuer vsed, nor learned other) may now seeme no lesse barbarous to some men, then diuers new woords, nd phrases seeme strange to me; But howsoeuer it be, I hope my louing, and courteous cuntrimen, wil measure this my woork rather by the matter, and my good mea∣ning, then by the language, or manner of composition, and that for supplement of al defects, they wil accept the abundance of my good wil, and desire of their benefit, which hath moued me to take this paines, to treate of a
necessary subiect, neuer handled before in our tongue, fo ought I know; In which respect I hope it may be the more grateful vnto them; And this being al which I haue thou∣ght needful to aduertise you touching the Treatise follo∣wing, I referre you to the preface for your further satisfa∣ction, concerning my further intention, as wel in this first part, as in the second, which by Gods grace shal follow in tyme, if God geue me lyfe and health; And in the meane whyle, I wish you al contentment, and the abundance of Gods grace, taking my leaue with this benediction of the Psalmist. Benedicat tibi Dominus ex Sion, & videas bona Hie∣rusalem omnibus diebus vitae tuae, & videas filios filiorum tuorum, pacem super Israel. The last of october. 1605. Your louing Father. T. FITZHERBERT.
THE PREFACE, VVHERE IN IT IS SIGNIFIED VVHO ARE POLITIKS; Hovv they erre in Religion; and vvhat difference there is betvvixt them and other heretykes; Also vvhat is the intention of the Author in this Treatise, and in the other part therof that is to follovve; And lastly some foundations are layed for the proofe of Gods prouidence in humaine affaires. AMONGST many errors concerning Religion which are currant in this our vnfortunate age, none is more dangerous or pernitious then the opinion of such, as are commonly called Politikes; so named, not because they practize true and perfect policie, but because they e∣steeme them selues, or are of many falsly repu∣ed, for prudent and politike men: and therfore as the Latin word Tirannus which at first did signify a monarche,Calepin Varro. & alij. and absolute inge, came afterwardes by the abuse of roial authority to signi∣y only a Tyrant, and as in like manner the word Latrones signified t the first such as were the guards of princes, and grew in time y their disloyalty to be vnderstood of Robbers, & theeues;VVhat the name of politike signifieth pro∣perly. VVhat policy is. so al∣o though the name of a Politike doth signify in deede such a one s practiseth that parte of humaine prudence which concerneth tate, and is properly called Policy, yet by the abuse of such as pro¦esse the same, it beginneth in al languages to be taken in euil arte, and is commonly applyed only to those,The name of a politike com∣monly taken in euil part and of vvhom it is vnderstood. Politiks peruert the order of na∣ture. who framinge a olicy after their owne fancy, no lesse repugnant to reason, then o conscience & religion, change al the course of true wisdome nd prudence, and peruert the order of nature it selfe, preferring hinges lesse worthy, before the more worthy, inferiour thinges efore superiour, corporal before spiritual, temporal before ternal, humane before deuine, the body before the soule, earth efore heauen, and the world before God.
Hovv & vvhen politikes ar he∣retiks in the highest degree.2. Therefore whereas these politikes erre no lesse in religio then in polycie, they also deserue the name of heretickes, and are so indeede in the highest degree, when obstinacy concurreth with their error. For others which teach false doctrine in matter of religion,The difference in matter of reli∣gion betvvixt politiks & other heretiks. doe erre only in some parte of the Catholike faith but politickes erre in the whole. Heretikes either impugne our Sauiour Christ, or his Saintes, or his spowse the Churche, or some parson of the blessed Trinitie, but politikes make warre against al these, yea against Deitye it selfe. Heretikes admit∣ting some groundes of Christian faith, doe denye and deride the rest; but politikes seeming to admit al, doe in deede deny, contemne, and deride al. Heretikes though they reiect some parte of true religion, yet they haue some religion; but politikes admittinge in shew al religions, haue in truth no religion, deny∣ing either God him selfe, or at lest his prouidence in the affai∣res of men, which is the ground of al religion. Finally heretykes vndermine and shake the foundations of Christianiy,Politiks ouerthrovv the foundations of Christianity. but po∣litikes doe vtterly ouerthrow it; for although they graunt, and acknowledge the necessity of religion, aswel to the institution, as also for the administration, and conseruation of common∣wealth, yet they so litle consider the nature, dignity, and true effectes therof, that they preferre in al thinges, reason of state before reason of religion, as though religion were ordained only for the seruice of commonwealth; Yea, and which is more to be lamented,Hovv politiks abuse religion. they vse it no otherwise then as nurses vse fables of bug-beares to terrify litle children withal, to make them the more obedient; as though religion or beleefe of a God, were only a matter of opinion, consisting in phantasy, and imagination, and deuised to keepe men in awe, & feare of eternal punishment, to make them the more obedient to temporal lawes; in which respect those which holde this opinion care not greatly what re∣ligion be professed, so that the people perswade them selues that there is some God which punisheth euil men, and rewardeth the good, whereby they doe not only ouerthrowe al religion, but also vtterly destroy and ruyne in tyme, the kingdomes & com∣monwelthes where they gouerne, as shal euidently appeare in this Treatise. 3. And whereas it seemeth to me that this error proceedeth
principally of two causes, the one;VVhence the er∣ror of politike proceedeth. for that many men haue so reat a presumption of their owne wisdome, that they measure herby al thinges, as wel deuine as humaine; and the other for at they know not, or at least,This treatise de∣uided into 2. parts. doe not duely consider the na∣re, force, fruit, and dignity of true religion in Commonwelth; wil therefore deuide this Treatise in to two partes. 4. In the first, I wil shew the insufficiency of mans wit, po∣cy, and power, for the institution,The contents of the first part. gouernment and conserua∣ion of common wealth, with out the peculiar help & assistance f Gods grace, which can not be had with out true religion. n the second parte I wil declare that true religion is a most ex∣ellent and diuine thinge,The contents of the 2. part. not consisting only in conceite and pinion of men, but flowing from the very fountaine of nature t selfe; as being the end whereto aswel euery man, as also com∣onwealth is naturally ordayned; and that therefore not only al articuler actions of men, but also al policy and reason of state,  to be leueled, and squired by the rule thereof, and that no∣hing can be truly political or good for state which swarueth rom true religion, and lastly I wil proue that only one (to wit he Christian Catholike religion) is truly political, or fit for gouernment of states. 5. Of these two parts, I present vnto thee, good Reader,The principal intention of the author in this treatise. at his tyme, only the first, and although my principal intention herein, is no other, but to show the weaknes of humane policy, nd the necessity of true religion for the perfection thereof, ne∣ertheles for the better satisfaction of such as by reason of the ubiect which I handle, may perhaps expect some furder dis∣ourse concerning state, I haue determined to touch some poli∣ical matters now and then by the way, as occasion shalbe offred, & to lay doune in the end some general aduises & rules of policy, ot for men already practised in affaires of state (of whome I hal euer be glad to learne) but for such only, as are willing to pply them selues thereto, and haue no experience thereof, whome I desire to set in the high waye, & direct course of a ound and perfect policy grounded on Gods grace, and true piety, to the end they may proceede to theyr practise, with more ight, lesse danger, and better successe to them selues and the rinces whome they serue, and consequently to the publike
good, which depēdeth on nothing more, then on the wel hand¦ling, and good successe of matters of state. Hovv far the au¦thor meaneth to touch religion in this treatise.6. And for asmuch, as one part of my subiect being Religion, and I by profession a Catholique Priest, it may perhaps be ima∣gined that I wil touch some matters, which may be offensiue or vngratful to such as professe the religion now established in our cuntry; I think good to aduertise thee, good Reader, that my meaning is not in this first part to handle any matter of religion now in controuersy betwixt protestants & Catholiques, neither yet in the latter, any furder then the same shal be necessarily con∣ioyned with matter of policy;Atheists ar cō∣mon enemies both to Catholi∣kes & protstāts. Only I desire such protestants or puritanes as shal read this part, to hold me excused, if for the confusion of their common enemies, and ours (I meane Athe∣ists, for such are the Politikes whom I especially impugne) I alleadge some times some examples of Gods extraordinary assi∣stance geuen to his seruants miraculously by his Angels, Saints, or otherwaise,VVhy examples of miracles are alledged in this treatise. seeing there can not be a more euident argument for the proofe of Gods prouidence, then the same; And if any man doute whether such miracles haue bene, or maye be donne in these our daies, I wish them not only to consider those few examples of our time, which I haue had occasion to mention, but also to enforme them selues sufficiently of the many most notable miracles showed by almighty God the last yere, at the Image of the blessed virgin Mary neere to Sichem in Brabant, which are so fresh in memory, and so euident in the parties who recea∣ued benefit therby, that they can not with any show of reason be denied.Many notable miracles donne this last yere in Brabant. But no maruel if such things are douted of by some which heare of them in these daies, seeing the stupendious mira∣cles of our Sauiour him selfe, and of his Apostles & seruants in al ages, haue not bene beleeued of al those that saw them, but of those only whom it pleased God to illuminate with his grace.Plutark, in the life of Coriola∣us. And therfor I say with Plutarke, and Heraclitus two painim Philo∣sophers, that the greatest parts of Gods woorkes are vnknowne to men for lack of beleefe. The errour of polityks pro∣ceedeth partly of Atheisme.7. Moreouer, whereas the errour of politikes, as wel in matter of state, as in religion, proceedeth in greate part of meere Atheisme (in respect that they beleeue not that God hath care of man, or taketh account of his actions, or disposeth of king∣domes,
and states at his pleasure) I haue therfore determined early to proue the prouidence of God in the affaires of men, d especially in the gouernment of state, and to answere parti∣larly the arguments of the politikes, or Atheists,A foundation layd for the proof of Gods prouidence. F. R. P. in his re∣solution. Cicero de legib li. 1. There vvas neuer any people, or nation so barba∣rous, but they acknovvledged a God, & his prouidence. Plutar. li. contra Colotem. epicu∣eum. against the me; To which purpose I think good also to lay some founda∣n of my future building, here in this preface, for the more eare confutation of their errour in that behaulfe, wherin I eane to be the breefer, partly because some others haue most cellently treated the same matter in our tongue, and partly cause the diuinity and prouidence of God is of it selfe so eui∣nt in nature and reason, that as Cicero following Plato saith. ere vvas neuer any people in the vvorld so barbarous, or irreligious, but t although they knevv not vvhat God they ought to serue & adore, yet they e vve that they ought to serue and adore some God, by whose proui∣nce they were to be gouerned. In which respect Plutark also th, That vve may find some citties voide of money, theaters, and of faire d sumptuous buildings, but none vvithout temples for the seruice of God. 8. Whereupon it followeth necessarily,The general and vniforme con∣sent of al natiōs cerning Gods prouidence de∣riued from na∣ture. not only that there is God, but also that his prouidence disposeth, & gouerneth the aires of men; For whence could this vniforme consent, and inion of Gods prouidence, and his deity springe, and flow into e minds of al people & nations, in al times, and ages, but from ture it selfe, for Cicero as saith. Omni in re consentio omnium gentium  naturae putanda est; The consent of al nations in any thing vvhatsoeuer, is be accounted the lavv of nature:Cic. Tuscul. quaest. li. 1. and therfore whatsoeuer is vniuer∣, and cōmon to al men, must needs be natural; and being natu∣ it can not be vaine, for as Aristotle saith. Deus & natura nihil fa∣nt frustra. God and nature doe nothing in vaine: as for example,Aristot. de caelo li. 1. sum. 6. te. 32. man naturally inclined to learne, and know truth, to loue, and de∣e good, to hate and eschew euil, which inclynations, and de∣es in man were vaine, if there were no truth to be knowne, thing good which might be loued and desired, or nothing d which might be eschewed. And so in like sort, if there were  God to worshipp and serue, nor any deuine prouidence in ans affaires, the natural inclination of man to religion, that is say, to the worship and seruice of God were vaine, and conse∣ently erroneous in nature, which were absurd to say. And this so manifest that wheras Aristotle teacheth that some things areAristot To. pl. li. 1. c. 9.
euident to reason,As euident to reason that God is to be honored, as to sense that snovv is vvhite. Arnob li. 7. con∣tra Gentes. and some to sense, he putteth for example  the first, that God and our parents are to be honored; Whereof fait he, whosoeuer douteth hath no lesse neede of punishment the he should haue neede of sense, if he denied snow to bee white To which purpose also Arnobius saith, that he which deniet that God made and gouerneth the world, hath neither vnder¦standing, nor yet sight, or common sense. 9. For who is so sensles that shal behould and dewly conside the very workes of nature, their immensity, multitude, an beauty, their admirable effectes, their wonderful order, thei conexion, and subordination in the heauens, in the ayre, in th elements,VVorks of na∣ture prooue that there is a God and Creatour of al things. in the earth, and in al creatures, especially in ma himselfe (in whome there appeare so many miracles of natur such art in the composition, such wisdome in the disposition such conformity of one parte to an other, and such perfectio in the whole that he is worthily called Microcosmus, a litle wordl who (I say) considereth this, and can doubt that there was som Creator and Author therof, of infinit power and wisdome; Fo who is so simple, that seeing a goodly pallace, of so excellent an rare workmanship, that it draweth the eyes of al men to behol it, doth not presently acknowledg it to be the worke of som notable Architect; for a notable effect can not be with out notable cause. 10. Furthermore (to omit many other considerations whe of I wil speake otherwhere) if a man note and consider the won¦derful wisdome that appeareth in the harmonious compositio of contraryeties, or as I may tearme it in the dissonant conco of contrary motions and qualities in Gods creatures; as the mo¦tions,Diuers conside∣rations forcing man to acknovv∣ledge a Creator of infinit vvis∣dome and povver. of the sunne, and the moone, and other plannets, not onl different one from another but also contrary to the motion o the highest spheere, and yet al of them caried with such a perpe¦tual, equal, and constant course, that thereof redoundeth th vsual and ordinary counterchange of night and day, of monethe and yeeres, of winter and sommer, and al other tymes and sea¦sons, necessary for the production of the fruite of the earth, an the conseruation of al liuing creatures. And againe if we add thereto the contrary qualities of the foure elements, reduced t a temperature in the constitution of al earthly thinges, wher¦vpon
depend the 4. contrary humours in the body of man, and other liuing creatures, and those humours tempered also with ertaine equality wherein consisteth the health, life, and con∣uation of the said creatures; If a man (I say) wil consider this, can not imagine either that it was at first ordained, or els it  continued by chance, seeing there appeareth therein such an finit wisdome, that no reason, wit, or wisdome of man, can fficiently comprehend it. 1. And wheras some doe say,Hovv God and nature are al one, and hovv they are distin∣guished. that it is not God but nature which rketh al this; I aske them what they meane by nature, whe∣er it be a thing that hauing reason, and vndersting in it selfe, oueth al creatures according to the proper nature and kind of ery one of them, for in that sence God and nature is al one, in hich respect he is called Natura naturans, that is to saye, Nature hich geueth nature to al things, wherfore Seneca defineth nature thus;D. Tho. 12. 9. 85. ar. 6. Seneca li. 4. de beneficijs c. 7. The difinition of nature accor∣ding to Seneca. atura nihil est nisi Deus & diuina ratio toti mundo & eius partibus in∣a; Nature is nothing els but God, and a diuine reason inserted, or put o the vvorld and into euery part therof. But if they meane by the oord Nature, a certein power, influence, or instinct which with∣ut any sence, or vnderstanding in it selfe hath an operation en in senseles things, inclining and mouing them to a certain d, it must needs follow that the same nature, influence, or wer, hath that motion force and operation from some supe∣our essence which hath vnderstanding, and is of infinit power d wisdome, who created, moueth, guideth, and conserueth it;  which sence Aristotle defineth nature to be; Principium motus,Nature defined by Arist. phis. li. 2. tex. 1. & ietis, the begining of motion and rest, and saith, that it is to be numbred ongst those causes vvhich doe vvoorke for an end; whereupon S. Tho∣as inferreth notably that nature must needs be directed by the ouidence of God, for nothing which is voide of vnderstāding,D. Thom. in li. 2. phis. lec. 12. Nature directed by Gods proui∣dence. Plato in Timaeo. Marsil. Ficin. in compend. in Timaeo. c. 1. d sence can tend to a certaine end, except it be directed by me that knoweth the end, as an arrow can not tend to a cer∣ine marke, except it be shot by some one that knoweth the acke, & in this sence nature is nothing but the instrument of God, d so Plato treateth of nature in Timaeo, as Marsilius Ficinus obser∣eth very wel. 12. This is so euident in reason that by the consideration ereof the heathen Philosophers attained to the knowledge
of a deity,Rom. 1. for as S. Paule saith. By those thinges that are visible in th vvordle, they came to vnderstād that there vvas an inuisible God vvho mad the same;Hovv the hea∣then philoso∣phers attained to the knovv∣ledge of a Deity. knowing right wel by the light of reason that no∣thing can be cause and author of it selfe, and noting such a su∣bordination of inferiour causes to superiour, and such a con∣nexion, and coherence of al thinges visible on earth and in the heauens, that they easely ascended, as it were, by degrees, from the lowest to the highest, and so to the contemplation of the Author and gouernour of al, whome they concluded to be eternal with out begining or end, of infinit wisdome, bounty, maiesty and power, incomprehensible and ineffable; And therfore Simonides the Poët being asked of Hieron the tiran of Sicily what God was;Cicero de natu deorum. li. 1. demanded a daies respite to answere, & being then asked againe his opinion, craued two daies more and after againe a longer time, and in the end said; That the mo he thought vpon him, the lesse he knevv vvhat he vvas. And no maruail seing he is infinitly great without quantity, infinitly good with∣out quality, he moueth al thinges and is not moued, he changeth al thinges, and is not changed, he is in euery place, and contai∣ned in no place, euery where present, euery where whole, in a thinges, and yet included in nothing, with out al things and ex∣cluded from nothing, vnder al things, and oppressed by no¦thing, aboue al thinges, and yet not eleuated, or sustained by any thinge, but sustaineth, and mantayneth al thinges, finally bing the cause, begininge, and end of al thinges, or rather al i al, yet he neither is, nor can be said to be any thinge of al. Psal. 96. The incompre∣hensibility of the deuine nature.13. So that in respect of his incomprehensibility we may we say of him with the Psalmist. Nubes & caligo in circuitu eius. Cloude and darknes doe inuirone him; and Posuit tenebras latibulum suum He hath hidden himselfe in darknes, and yet considering the euident and shyning light of his deytie, most manifest in al hi workes,Psal. 18. whereof the Psalmist also saith: The heauens declareth glory of God, and the firmament shovveth forth the vvorkes of his hande we may wel say with S. Paule; Lucem inhabtat, he dwelleth i light;1. Tim. 6. which light neuertheles he calleth, Inaccessibilem, inacces¦sible; for although there is nothing more manifest then the cle sonne of his diuinity; yet so infinit is his nature & so incompre∣hensible is the light thereof,Arist. metaph. 2. text. 1. that Aristotle him selfe confesset
that the vnderstanding of man can no more comprehend the euine essence, and the proprieties thereof (though they are ost manifest in nature) then the eye of the owle can behold e light of the sunne. 14. For this cause,The deuine na∣ture insinuated by the old phi∣losophers, vvith dyuers attri∣buts. Arist metaph. li 1. Idem. Metaph. li. 12. text. vltimo. not only our deuines but also the olde hilosophers being not able to expresse his infinite and ineffable ature by any proper name, doe insinuate the same by many tributes; Aristotle calleth him the First cause, the first mouer, and the st beginning, to whom he ascribeth the gouerment of the worlde, hich he compareth to a family, gouerned by one maister, or ord, and to an army conducted by one General, Mercurius Tris∣egistus tearmeth him vnderstanding, nature, necessity, the bgininge idst, and end of al thinges. Plato calleth him the father, gouernour, and,Mercut. in Paemandro cap. 3. Plato. in Timaeo. Parmen Sophis. phaedro. & li. 6. de rep. Platoes doctrine concerning God & his prouidēce in the gouern∣ment of the vvorld. Plato. li 34. de. legib. dia. 10. ng of the vvorld, beauty, and goodnes it selfe, By the participation herof al thinges that are good and faire, haue their name and ture, in so much that he teacheth expresly, that God is only  be beloued for him selfe, and nothinge else in the world to be eloued, but for him; and that his prouidence extendeth it selfe, ot only to the gouernment of the world in general; but also to uery thinge in particuler, which he laboreth to perswade by iuers symilitudes, & examples. As of a good Phisitian that hath re to cure al diseases, aswel litle as great; Of a father, or maister f a family, who looketh carefully to al thinges that are therein; f a good gouernour that hath an eye & regarde to euery thinge  the Cittie: And lastly to a Captaine-General of an army, who as it were the life, and soule thereof, and conducteth and gui∣eth it, and euery parte of it by his directions. 15. To which purpose Cicero also testifieth that the whole hooles, as wel of the Peripatetiks, as Academicks, did teach,Cicero Acad. quaest. li. 1. that od is the soule of the vvorld, and the perfect vvisdome and prudence vvhich uerneth al thinges in heauen, & in terris ea que pertinent ad homines,Cicero de finib & nut deo. lib. 3. and ose thinges in earth which belonge to men; And the same as cero also witnesseth was the doctrin of the Stoikes.The foolish opi∣nion of Epicurus reiected by al other philoso∣phers. Cicero. de natu∣ra deorum. li. 2 Al which hilosophers, reiected, and derided the ridiculous opinion of picurus who framed to himselfe, a fantastical cōceit of a certaine lle God, who he said had a delicate and a transparent body, and ued in such continual ease & repose, that he would not trouble imselfe with the gouerment of the worlde. In fauor of which
opinion some haue obiected out of our holy Scriptures that ou Lord God after the creation of al thinges.Gen. 2. An obiection out of the scrip∣tures in fauour of the opinion of Epicurus. Aug. de. Gen. ad lit. li. 4. c 1 & in senten. Aug apud Prosperum. 277. The obiection ansvvered by S. Augustin. Requieuit septimo die a vniuerso opere, quod patrarat; Rested the 7. day from al the work that he had made; as though his rest shoulde consist in not med∣ling with the administration of the world, and gouernment o his creatures; To which obiection S. Augustine answereth thus Creatoris omnipotentia &c. The omnipotent and deuine vertue an power of the Creator is the cause of the subsistence or beinge o euery creature, which deuine vertue and powre if it should a any time cease from the gouernment of those thinges that i created, the very kind and nature of al thinges must needes pe∣rish and fal to nothing. And therefore whereas our Sauiour sait Pater meus vsque nunc operatur. My Father doth worke euen vntil thi time;Ioan. 5. he signifieth the continuance of his worke in the admini∣stration and gouernment of his creatures. In which respect th Scripture also saith of the diuine wisdome,Sap. 8. that pertingit à fine &c. It reacheth from end to end strongly, and disposeth al thinge sweetly. And to the same purpose the Apostle said to the Athe∣nians;Acts. 17. Hovv the vvord requieuit sep∣timo die in Genesis are to be vnderstood. In ipso viuimus &c VVe liue, vve are moued, and haue our begining and being in him; that is to say in almighty God. For if he should with draw his hand or operation from vs, wee could neither liu nor moue, nor haue any being at al: and therfore it is to be vnder∣stood that God did so rest from al his workes the 7. day, that h made no newe creatures; and not that he ceased to conserue an gouerne those which he had made. Cicero l. 3. de nat. Deo 4.16. Thus farre S. Augustine in answer of this cauil, whereto  also adde that, as Cicero saith very wel; He vvhich confesseth there i a God and yet denieth him the gouernment of the vvordle, and the comu∣nication of his grace, and goodnes to his creatures, contradicteth himself and destroieth diuinity; for that he denieth to almighty God that vvhic is most proper to the deuine nature, and most excellent in it, yea and taxeth him most absurdly eyther with want of wisdome (if he say that God knoweth not how to prouide for his creatures) o with want of bounty and goodnes, if he say that he knowet how to doe it and yet wil not, or els with lack of power, if h wold doe it and can not.The author of nature foūtaine of al goodnesse and vvisdome. For reason and philosophy teachet that the author of nature, beinge the fountaine of al goodne and wisdome, as I haue said, yea goodnes and wisdome it self
ust needes be of such infinite bounty that he wil not forsake d neglect his owne creatures; and of such infinite wisdome d power that he both knoweth how to prouide for them, nd also is able to doe it; not with labour and toile, as Epicurus olishly imagined, but with al facility, by his only wil and oord; conforme to that which the Psalmist saith of the creation f al thinges: Ipse dixit & facta sunt, ipse mandauit & creata sunt;Psalm 148. e spake the vvord and al thinges vvere made, he commanded and they vvere cuted;No maruel that God gouerneth and moueth al things by his only vvil seeing the soule doth the like in the body of man. Seneca de conso∣lat. ad Heruan. ca. 8. Gen 1. &. 2. Psal. 8. And this the Stoicks did shew by a very euident and fa∣iliar example of the soule of man, which with the only wil oueth and gouerneth the body and euery parte thereof as it steth. And euen so (saie they) al thinges in the wordle are with facility made moued and changed by the wil and power of od, whose deuine spirit (as Seneca saith) is equally dispersed roughout al he whole, per maxima & minima, as wel through e least as through the greatest thinges. 17. And now to adde a word or two of Gods particular pro∣dence in mans affaires, can it be with any reason denyed, that e hath a more special care of man, then of al other thinges in rth, seeing he ordayned al earthly thinges for him, and him for s owne seruice, creating him to his owne Image,The great care and loue of God tovvards man. and induing m with a reasonable soule, capable of the knowledg of his uine nature, to the end he might loue worship and serue him? his not only our holy Scriptures, but also the most learned ilosophers doe acknowledg, as Trismegistus, Plato, Aristotle,Trismegist. in Paemādro ad Ta∣trū. & ad Asclep. Plato in Timaeo & li. 4. de legib. & in Alcibiade Ari∣stot. li. 10. Ethic. Iamblic. Porphi∣rius. Plotinus, apud Marsil Fia∣num in Compen∣dio in Timaeum. c 6. The consideratiō of religion and of the Church of Christ ministreth inuincible proo∣fes of Gods pro∣uidence. & al atonickes and Peripateticks who do constitute & place the end and icity of man, in the knowledge and contemplation, loue and orship of God, yea in a perfect coniunction, amytie, and vnity ith him, as I wil proue at large in the second part of this Trea∣e, where I shal purposely speake of the dignity, fruit, and ne∣ssity of Catholike religion in commonwealth; the consideration hereof wil afford most inuincible proofes of the infinit wis∣me, power, bounty, maiesty and prouidence of almighty od, manifestly seene aswel in the perspicuous euidence, purity, d excellency of the Christian Catholike faith, as also in the mirable institution of the ecclesiastical monarchy, that is to say e Church of Christ, and in the conseruation thereof so many ndereth yeares togeather against the fury of al infernal and
terrestrial power, besides the manifest concurrence of a diuin prouidence in the wonderful force of holy Sacraments in God Church, and power of holy men both dead and liuing, and thei stupendious, and miraculous workes. 18. Al which as they are necessarie for the perfection of commonwelth (as I wil make it euident) so doe they infallibly demonstrate the course of Gods prouidence therein, and there∣fore in both respects are to be handled by me amply in the secōd parte of this Treatise, and sometimes touched by occasion in this first part, wherein also the prouidence of God in the dispositio of mens affaires,Hovv the pro∣uidence of God in mens affaires shalbe proued in this treatise. shal be sufficiently proued, by the infirmity of man, and his natural seruitude and bondage to almighty God by the consideration of Gods miraculous operation in the ouer∣throwe of mans policy and power: by the dependance of a humaine designments or actions on the wil of God: by his dis∣position of States and kingdomes, by the punishment thereof fo sinne. And lastly by the very arguments of Athiests themselues which shal not only be clearly confuted, but also proued to b notable proofes of Gods prouidence.The Conclusion of the preface. 19. And because al these pointes shable sufficiently debate and confirmed in the discourse followinge, I remitt thee (goo Reader) thereto, and wil conclude this preface concerninge th prouidence of God with S. Augustin; who explicateth notabl this our Christian doctrine,Aug. solilo q. ca. 14. in these wordes; for asmuch (sait he) as thou, o Lord, gouernest al thinges dwelling within the and art alwaise present in euery place, and hast care of euer thinge that thou hast made, thou art so attentiue to that whic I doe, and dost keepe such watch ouer mee day and night, a though thou hadest forgoten al other thinges in heauen & had care of nothinge but me;A notable saing of S. August. concerning the prouidence of God. for the immutable light of thy ligh is neither the greater for seinge one only, nor the lesse for be¦holdinge diuers and innumerable thinges; For as thy sight do comprehend perfectly al thinges togeather, so with the sam perfection it comprehendeth euery thinge particularly, and co¦sidereth al thinges as wel as euery one, and euery one aswel as a without diuision or diminution, or any change on thy part, & Thus saith S. Augustin of Gods particuler prouidence, whic shal suffise concerning the same for this time.
20. Now then to come to the point which I determined st to handle in this discourse, to wit, the insufficiency of al  maine policy for the gouernment of state, two thinges are st to be considered for the declaration thereof; The one is the tural infirmity of man; And the other, the condition and state cōmonwelth; both which pointes I wil handle with as great rspicuity as my determined breuity wil permit.
THE TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS SHEVVING THE CONTENTS of the first part of this Treatise. AN epistle of the author to his sonne wherein he aduertiseth him what he wold wish him to obserue in this Treatise. The preface wherin it is declared who are politiks, hovv they erre i matter of Religion, and hovv they differ from other heretikes; Also wh is the principal intention of the author in this Treatise; And finally som grounds are laid for the proofe of Gods prouidence in humane affaires. For the proofe of the imperfection, and insufficiency of al humane policy the natural imbecillity of man, and weaknes of his wit, with the caus therof are declared; And by the way it is signified what danger, and d¦triment grovveth to man by selfe loue, and presumption of his ovvne wi with an exhortation to humility. Cap. A further declaration of the infirmity of man, and the imbecillity of  wit, and policy by the consideration of his natural bondage to almigh God, and of his blindnes, and ignorance in his ovvne affaires, and cons¦quently of the necessity of Gods prouidence for his gouernment, & directio as wel in publik as priuat matters. Cap. For the more ample proofe of the insufficiency of humane wit a policy, diuers examples are alleaged of the errour of politiks, and world wise men in matters concerning them selues, and their states, by occasi vvherof it is also debated how farre a man may trust a reconciled ene and how true prudence, and Christian charity may concurre vvith distr and suspicion. Cap. By occasion of the former examples it is debated whether the Emper Charles the 5. did prudently in passing through France vpon a sa conduct, and of the danger he was in, and how he escaped; Also conc¦ning the errours of Henry the 3. King of France in the slaughter of  Duke of Guise, and the Cardinal his brother. Cap. Of Errours committed by vvhole Senats, namely of Rome, and Veni vvith the conclusion of the premisses, and an admonition to politikes conc¦ning their folly and ingratitude towards almighty God. Cap. The vveakenes of al humane policy is proued by the nature of comm¦vvelth, that is to say by the natural mutability, and instability therof, ¦emplified breefly in Empires, Kingdomes and other States. Cap.
The imbecility of mans wit, and policy is furder proued by the imperfe∣on  of al political science, with a consideration of the imbecility of law-ker, exemplified in Solons lawes, by occasion wherof a political que∣on is debated concerning sedition. Cap. 7. The imbecility of law makers is also exemplified in certaine wicked, and  surd lawes of Licurgus, Plato, and Aristotle, with certaine obserua∣ns no lesse pious then Political. Cap. 8. The imperfection of humane lawes, is shewed by the defects incident to  w; and first what law is, to what end it is ordained, and what it can forme in commonwelth. Also an exact comparison of the law of the flesh ugnant to commonwelth with political law, wherby it appeareth that litical law can not suppresse the carnal law. Cap. 9. An answere to an obiection made in fauour of political law, supposed  be sufficient for the suppression of vice, if it take sufficient order for the od instruction, & education of youth whereof the impossibility is shewed, d in conclusion the necessity of the law of grace to supply the defecte of po∣ical law is inferred. Cap. 10. The insufficiency of humane policy is furder proued by the vncetainty of  e successe of mens wisest designments, and for the better explication therof is declared what are fate, fortune, and chance, and that according to the nion of the best Philosophers fate doth not derogat from the freedome of ans wil, and much lesse from the prouidence of God; and by the way some athis said of Astrology, and force of the starres. Cap. 11. A furder consideration of fate, and fortune, according to our Christian  ith, and the doctrin of our holy Scriptures, and how almighty God woor∣th his wil in the affaires of men, by casual, and accidental meanes. Cap. 12. Dyuers examples of sundry accidents, wherby the plots, and desygnments  greate politikes haue bene dissipated, and ouerthrown; And concerning ices that for a time haue bene proffitable, and in the end haue proued per∣cious. Cap 13. Of the force of suddaine chances, and vnexpected euents in the ouerthrow  wel of mans power, as of his policy; And of the hazards, and doutful ents of battailes, and other enterprises of warre, and that al the successe erof dependeth vpon the prouidence of God, geuing victory sometimes by ret concurrence with secondary causes, and sometimes by manifest, and iraculous meanes. Cap. 14 For the furder proofe that the successe in vvarre depēdeth vpon Gods vvil,  d prouidence, examples, are aleadged of miraculous victories in euery age
since our Sauiours time, with the conclusion of this point concerning chances and vnexpected euents. Cap. 15. The insufficiency of mans policy and povver, for the conseruation of com∣monvvelth is shevved by the consideration of Gods Iustice in the punish∣ment, translation, and subuersion of states for sinne, vvhich point is han∣dled in 7. chapters next ensevving; And first the Iustice of God in punishing the sinnes of men is proued by arguments drawn from nature it selfe. Cap. 16. For the more euident proofe that God ouerthroweth states and kingdome for sinne, it is first proued that they depend on his prouidence; Also it i signified for what causes God geueth the gouernment of kingdomes, or states to men; And finaly for what kind of sinnes, and in what cases he puni∣sheth, or destroieth whole commonvvelths. Cap. 17. Examples of the seuerity of Gods Iustice vpon kingdomes, and states f sinne; And first of the subuersion of the most potent empire of the Chaldae∣ans, and of their admirable citty of Babilon, and for what sinnes the sam was ouerthrovvn; And that the euents therof testified by proane authors ansvvered exactly to the prophesies in our holly Scriptures. Cap. 18 Of the destruction of Hierusalem, and of the greate calamityes of th Iewes euersince for their sinnes, and hovv the prophesies of Daniel and  our Sauiour him selfe were fulfilled therin, wherby the prouidence and Iu∣stice of God is euidently proued. Cap. 19 Other examples of Gods seuere iudgements vpon commonwelths for sinn and particularly for negligence in the execution of Iustice vpon offender and for the sinnes of the flesh. Cap. 20 That the three conquests of our cuntry by the Saxons, Danes, an Normans, proceeded of the sinnes either of the princes, or of the people or of both; and what their sinnes were which deserued so greate a p¦nishment; Also by the way it is discoursed, what greate mercy God sh¦vved tovvards the Britons, and English from time to time. Cap. 21 Of the conqust of the kingdome of Naples by Charles the 8. King o France, for the sinnes of the kings therof, vvith the conclusion inferrin vpon the premisses, the prouidence, and iustice of God in the dispositio of states, and the insufficiency of man for the gouernment therof vvithou Gods assistance. Cap. 2 The imbecility of mans vvit is furder discouered by the ansvvere of cer¦taine obiections of Atheists against the prouidence of God, and first som vvhat is saide of the inscrutability of Gods Iudgements, and of mans igno¦rance in ordinary, and triuial things; And hovv that ignorance is the m
er of Atheisme, Cap. 23. The obiections of the Atheists are discussed, and ansvvered, vvherby it  peareth that their arguments against Gods prouidence are notable and dent proofes of the same; And first hovv it standeth vvith the prouidence, stice, and mercy of almighty God to suffer so much sinne, euil, and mischeef the vvorld. Cap. 24. Of the affliction of good men in this life, and that the same is a notable  gument as vvel of Gods prouidence, bounty, and iustice, as of his loue them, vvith much comfortable doctrine for the afflicted seruants of od. Cap. 25. Of the great longanimity, & pacience of almighty God tovvards vvicked  en, and of the causes of their prosperity, by occasion vvherof their pit∣ul, and miserable state is declared, vvith some good admonitions to m. Cap. 26. Of the variable, and vncertaine euents, that are common to good and  il men in this life, as vvhy the good, and bad, do many times prosper, or  afflicted alike; Also vvhy one man is some times punished for the faults an other, vvhy some are chastised in this life, and others not, and finally hy almighty God doth manifest his Iudgements to man in some things, d concealeth them from him in some other; And that in al this the proui∣nce of God clearely appeareth. Cap. 27. It is inferred vpon the premisses that no sinful policy can be truly counted  ise or political, and by occasion therof it is declared vvhence true vvisdome vvhat it is, and vvherein it consisteth; As also the difference betvvixt isdome, prudence, and policy, and lastly the necessity of grace to the per∣tion of policy is signified; vvith a consideration of the dangers, and diffi∣ties incident to matter, of state. Cap. 28. Certaine general rules or aduises no lesse pious then political, for the  struction of such as desire to manage matters of state, and haue no ex∣rience therof, to the end they may deale therin with lesse danger, and dif∣ulty. Cap. 29. Other general rules for a yong statist aduanced by his princes fauour to  of his councel; as what he is to consider in him selfe, in his prince, and in e matters that are to be consulted. Cap. 30. VVhat a councellour ought to consider in his prince, as namely his consci∣ce,  his commodity, and his reputation. Cap. 31. VVhat a councellour is to consider in matters to be consulted. Cap. 32. For the better, and more particuler instruction of yong statists concerning
matters to be consulted, a matter of state is debated, to wit what is to  considered in a deliberation touching the maintenance of a ciuil warre, in forraine cuntry. Cap. 33 An other question is debated for the furder instruction of a yong statist to wit, whether a princes state can be assured by wicked policy, by the occa¦sion wherof many principles of Macchiauel, and of the politikes his follo∣wers are examined, and confuted by reason of state, without the considera∣tion of Gods Iustice. Cap. 34 The argument of the last chapter is prosecuted with the consideration o Gods iustice in punishing wicked princes by the ministery of al his creatures Also some what is said of the enormity of murders, and Gods seuere punish¦ment therof. Cap. 35 It is furder debated whether al sinful policy be against reason of state, by occasion wherof some things are obserued touching the course of Gods proui∣dence in the conseruation and dectruction of states and by the way som what is said of sorcery, and how dangerous the practise therof is to princes And finally it is concluded, that al wicked policy is pernicious to state, an that the wisdome of politikes, or Macchiauillians is neere folly. Cap. 36
TABLE SHEWING BRIEFLY THE PRINCIPAL POINTES THAT ARE handled in the first part of this Treatise. Adam Riginal iustice lost by the fal of Adam. chap 1. num 7. Mans nature more glorified now by the occasion of Adams sinne, then it should haue bene if dam had not sinned. cap 12, num 36. w it stood with Gods iustice to suffer Adam to be tempted: cap 24, num 11. hether God did iniurie to Adam in sufferinge him to be tempted: Ibid. hy it was not conuenient that God should hinder the temptation of Adam ough he knew he would fal: cap 24, num 12. Adulterie ulterie permitted by Licurgus amongst the Lacedemonians: cap 8, num 6. w rigorously the Saxons in Germanie being painims punished adultrie: p 20, num 11. The hurt that followeth of vnlawful procreation: Ibid. Affiction Affiction: And how tribulation is the patrimonie of good men: cap 25, um 12. God purgeth the sinnes of good men with temporal affliction in is life: cap 25. num 3. Good men are sometimes afflicted for their fathers ffences: num 4. For an admonition of their natural infirmitie: num 5. To anifest to the world their vertu: num 6. That their miraculous workes ay redound to his glorie: num 7. For the conuersion or confusion of their ersecutors: num 8. For the example & consolation of the weaker that are fflicted: num 9. To moue euil men to imitate their vertues: num 11. To aue trial and experience of their owne valour: num 12. e affliction of good men an euident argument of the immortalitie of the ule: cap 25. num 14. It exempteth them from the occasions of sinne: num 6. It is the ordinarie and highe way to wisdome: num 18. It tempereth the xorbitant humors of men: num 19. It teacheth them moral philosophie: bid. It enricheth their experience: num 20. It encreaseth & perfiteth vertu: um 21. It maketh them conforme to Christ their maister and head: num 22. riefe summe of the benifit of affliction in good men: cap 25. num 26. No∣able considerations of Seneca concerning the same: num 27.28. e difference betwixt affliction and punishment. cap 27. num 19. Certaine ases wherein afflictions are not punishments. num. 20. Three conclusions gathered of the premisses. num 22.23. Alured ng Alured being greatly distressed by the Danes, was conforted by a vision of S. Cuthbert: cap 21. num 9. He expelled the Danes out of England which would not be Christians: num 10. The mercie of God to his posteritie to the fourth generation: Ibid. Et cap 15. num 15. Angels ngels may erre in the iudgment of future thinges depending on the wil of God or man: cap 1. num 13. ngels haue an exact knowledge of al natural causes: cap 1. num 14.
Man ordained to supplie the roome of Angels: cap 1. num 15. Atheists Atheists are cōmon enimies both to Catholikes and Protestants. In pre¦tio: num 6. The ingratitude of Atheists taxed by Seneca: cap 2. num 23. Two sortes of Atheists, some in opinion, and some only in wordes: cap 23. n Of Atheists in beliefe and their grosse folly. cap 23, n, 19. Atheists haue not t true light of natural reason. Ibid. Al their arguments doe notably bewra their ignorance and folly: num 21. The chiefe arguments of Atheists against the prouidence of God: c 24. n  Their blindnes: n 2. Their arguments reduced to four heades. Ibid. Oth arguments of the Athiests: cap 27. num 1. The answere: num 2 3 4 5. B Babilon The wealth, strength, & beautie of the cittie of Babilon. cap 18. num 1. T destruction therof: num 2. The great desolation of the place where it stoo num 5. The particular causes why God destroyed it. num 7 8 9. Balbus The strange escape of Michael Balbus being readie to be executed: cap 35. n Battaile The doutful euent of a battaile is greatly to be feared: cap 14 num 4. The practize of Levvis the 11. to ouercome an enimie without battaile: ca 14. num 5. The force of suddaine chances in battailes: cap 14. num 8 9 10 11. Of the force of suddaine feare in battailes: cap 14. num 12 13 14 15 16. Examples of battailes lost by diuers other accidēts: cap 14. num 17 18 19 21 2 Blasphemie Pope Pius the 5. commanded don Iohn de Austria to giue battaile to th Turkes at Lepanto, and of the miraculous successe thereof: cap 15. num 2 For how smale causes wicked men blaspheme God: cap 23. num 13. A storie of a blasphemous gamester miraculouslie punished: cap ibid. num 16 How blasphemies are punished in Spaine: cap ibid. num 17. Blasphemers stoned to death in the law of Moyses: Ibid. Blasphemie against Christ or our Lady punished amongst the Turkes: Ibid. A decree of S. Levvis king of France against blasphemers: cap 23. num 18. Blasphemie vnpunished may drawe the wrath of God vpon the whole com¦monwelth: Ibid. Blood Blood euer repaied with blood: cap 35. num 57. Bondage The natural bondage of man to God: cap 2. num 7. The difference of seruitude betwixt one man and an other, and the bondag that al men owe to God: cap ibid. num 8. The ancient philosophers acknowledged the bondage of man to God: ca ibid. num 9, The bondage that man oweth to God for his redemption. Ibid: A furth consideration hereof: cap ibid. num 12. Brittanie The diuers mutations in Brittanie since the Romans conquered it: cap 6. n The miserable estate of the Brittans inuaded by the Picts & Scots: cap 21. num Their recourse to God for helpe: num 4. Their vngratefulnes to God: Ibi Their sinnes & vices: num 5. Their new inuasions: ibid. They called in th Saxons for their defence which turned to their ouerthrowe: Ibid. Their r¦lapse: num 6. The vices both of the Cleargie and Layitie: Ibid.
C Cade he garboiles and tumults in England raised by Iack Cade and his fellowes: cap 7. num 4. Cadvvalladar g Cadvvalladar flying into France acknowledged Gods iustice vpon him fe and his people: cap 21. num 7. Canutus tus sonne to Svveno inuaded England: cap 21. num 17. His great vertu d pietie: num 18. A memorable acte of his. Ibid. Chance thing of importance to be left to chance: cap 32. num 11. Change e often change of gouernment in the Roman empire: cap 6. num 5. Charles e often changes & innouations of diuers states in Italie: cap 6. num 6 In the almes of Scotland, France, Flanders, & other kingdomes adioyning: Ibid. o documents cōcerning the changes & mutabilities of states: cap 6. num 7. e passage of Charles the 5. through France into Flanders. cap 4. num 1. he dangers that he escaped in that passage. num. 2. The familiar welcome f the young Dolphin saying, yeald thy selfe Emperour. How he let fal a ch Diamond to gaine therby the good wil of Madame de Estampes: ibid. s great deuotion. num. 3. Chastillon sieur Chastillon Admiral of France sought his owne destruction: cap 3. num . His error: num 13. His answere to Monsieur du Tore to tel the king at there was no Count Egmonts in France: ibid. Children ants punished corporally for their parents sinnes, & why. cap 27. num 16. hildren are part of their parents goodes. Ibid. e good deedes of parents rewarded in their children, and why. Ibid. e natural markes and properties of parents descend to their children. cap 7. num 17. with the difference betwixt that which is made by arte and that which is engendred: Ibid. Pithon borne with the figure of a launce vpon is body. hy innocent children perish with wicked men in the general punishments f commonwelths: cap 27. num 18. They perish corporally sometimes to e saluation of their soules: num 25. e children of tirants punished for their fathers tirranny. cap 35. num 42. xemplified throughout the residue of this chapter. Christ the weaknes and infirmitie that appeared in our Sauiour Christs humani∣e: cap 24. num 30. The stupendious effectes of the infirmitie that appea∣ed in his passion: num 33. The weake instruments he vsed for the conuer∣on of the world: Ibid. His omnipotencie manifest therein: num 34. e prouidence of God and the diuinitie of our Sauiour Christ manifest in e miraculous conuersion of the worlde: cap 24. num 35. hether the passion of Christ did free his seruants from suffring: cap 25. um 23. Christ to be imitated in the bearing of his Crosse: cap 25. num 25. ristian doctrine seemeth repugnant to mans nature. reason, and sence: ap 24. num 33. Clement ment was the watchword of him who killed the Duke of Cuise, and the name of him who slwe the King of France: cap 31. num 9. Comission e danger of associats in Commission when they are not sincere frendes: ap 29. num 23. nces sometimes dissauow their Commissions after some wicked fact is
done by their order, & sometimes doe pick quarrels, & take smale occasio to make away the instruments of their owne wickednes: cap 29. num 3. Commonvvelth The nature of cōmonwelth: c 6. num 3. wherin & of whom it cōsisteth: num The wisdome of Aratus in reforming the cōmonwelth of Sicione: cap 7. n No sufficient meanes to make a perfect commonwelth by humane lawes  magistrates: cap 9. num 4 The commonwelthes where the carnal law gouerneth cap 9. num 18. Se more: cap 10 num 19. The good and il of the commonwelth and of the prince are conioyned: ca 43. num 13. Confederacie Henrie the 3 of France his confederacie with the Protestants and the succe thereof: cap 4 num 8. Considerations cōcerning townes or states confederated: cap 33. num 19, Necessarie for a prince to discouer the endes of the principal confiderates in matter of warre: cap 33. num 22. Conquest The cōmission that God gaue the Romans to conquere the world: cap 17. n The causes of the three conquests of our countrie by the Saxons, Danes a Normans: cap 21. num 1, 3, 5, 8. S. Dunstan prophecied of the conquest England: num 15. The conquest of the kingdome of Naples: cap 22. num 1. The iudgment Phillip de Commines thereof: num 2. The tirranny crueltie and vicious liu of the kinges of Naples: Ibid. Their chasticement: num 3. The admiral facilitie of the conquest of Naples: Ibid. The euident punishment of G vpon the kinges therof: num 4. A prophecie of the cōquest therof: Ibid. T kinges of Naples depriued of their kingdome especially for one sinne: nu Consent The consent of al nations is the voice of nature: cap 2. num 22. Conspiracies Opinion of the princes weaknes is the mother of conspiracies: cap 31. n 50 Macchiauillian remedies aganist conspiracies: cap 34. num 6. Conscience Remorce of conscience an argument of Gods iustice in the punishment sinne: cap 16. num 2. The horror of a guiltie conscience: ibid. num 4. The tormented conscien of Nero hauing killed his mother: num 5. The torments of a guiltie conscience: cap 22. num 7. Alfonso strangly tormented with the horror of his owne conscience: ibid. The difinition of conscience: cap 31. num 1, 2. The worme of conscience ¦teth at one time or other: num 3. VVhy it is frequent and not continu ibid. VVhat remorce of conscience breedeth: ibid. Henrie the 3 of France reiecting conscience in the breach of his oath out threw his estate: cap 31. num 9. The torment of conscience which tirants endure: cap 34. num 41. The tormēted conscience of K. Richard the 3. after he had killed his neph cap 34. num 43. Consultations Concerning matters to be consulted: cap 32. num 1. Counsel A tempting of God to contemne humane counsel num 6. The necessarie co¦currence of deuout prayer therewith: num 13 A Councel is not to be contemned because some of the motiues haue fail cap 30. num 15. The answer of the wise Phocion to the Athenians hauing d¦swaded
them from an enterprise which afterwards fel out wel: Ibid. ounsel grounded vpon conscience and iustice neuer to be repented: cap 30. num 16. The answere of Aristides to Dionisius the tirant who demanded one of his daughters in mariage: Ibid. espect of others mens greatnes pernicious in councelles: cap. Ibid. num 22. o wicked counsel more pernicious to state then that which is giuen for the benefit of state cap 31. n 5. Proued by examples of K. Pharao. and the Iewes: num 6. Of King Astiages, and K. Amulius: num 7. Of the famous captaine Aetius: num 8. Of Caesar Borgia; Of the Q. of Hungarie, and of Henrie the 3. of France. Ibid. Of Andronicus Comnenus who meaning to kil Isacius Angelus or the assurance of his state, caused his election to the imperial dignitie: ap 35. num 20. hy a womans counsel is neuer good but vpon a suddaine: cap 32. num 13. Councellors any councellors necessarie for princes: cap 29. num 12. Et cap 32. num 8. e points that are to be considered of a younge councellor: cap 30. num 1. Eight pointes to be considered in the councellor him selfe: Ibid. he aduise which Basilius the Emperor gaue his sonne, whom to choose for is councellors: cap 30. num 5. ow a councellor ought to admonish his prince of his error: cap 30. num 7. The wise saying of Parisatis mother to Cyrus to this purpose: Ibid. VVho hey are that commonly ouer-shoote them selues herein: Ibid. e discreet modestie of Haephestion councellor to Alexander: cap 30. num 9. How a councellor ought to speake to his prince, and of his prince: num 10. Councellors by conniuencie are partakers of their princes faultes: Ibid. A notable answere of Themistocles to Euribiades who tooke vp his staffe to strike im: Ibid. councellor ought to be constant in his opinion: cap 30. num 11. Incōstancie  a councellor an euident signe of folly: Ibid. hy young men are not fit to giue counsel: cap 30. num 11. VVhy olde men esolue slowly & maturely: Ibid. councellor ought to be free from passion and particular affection: cap 30.  21. The danger euil councellors incurre by geueing euil counsel to their rinces: num 25. Euil councellors hateful to the people and punished by em: exemplified in Emson and Dudley put to death by Henrie the 8. to satis∣e the importunitie of the people, who demanded iustice against them for he euil counsel they had giuen to Henrie the 7. Ibid. e punishment of a wicked councellor is a debt due to the whole common∣welth: cap. 30. num 27. VVhat Comineus noteth of a councellor of the uke of Burgundie: Ibid. VVhat a councellor is to consider in his prince: cap 31, num 1. The prin∣ipal thinge that a councellor ought to regard: num 2. How a wicked coun∣cellor endangereth the state of his prince: num 4. VVhat a councellor ould hould for a chiefe ground: num 57. ecessarie for a councellor to knowe the state of forraine princes: cap 32. n 2.  councellor should be affable and curteous to strangers, and why: Ibid. e difference that may be noted in the abilitie of councellors: cap 32. num 8.  princes councel ought to be composed of men of different humors: n 9. Crueltie
The fruite of crueltie: cap 34. num 29. Dangers not remedied but increase by crueltie: num 55. Cowardes are cruel: cap 35. num 30. Crucifixes The experience of what the Painims thinke at the first of Christ Christ crucified: cap 24. num 31. VVhat conceit some Painims in China had of crucifixes vse amongst Christians: Ibid. The subtiltie of the diuel to hinder the shewing of crucifixes to the Painims in China: Ibid. D Danger Why God suffereth his seruants to fal into danger: cap 4. num 4. VVhat is to be considered concerning danger & the preuention therof: cap 32. num 11. How many wayes a wicked prince is endangered: cap 34. num 39. Defects The defects of nature may be and often are supplied by the light of grace cap 28. num 18. Example of diuers in whom grace supplied natural defects: Ibid. Of Dani being but a childe: of Ananias, Misael, and Azarias: num 19. Of Iudith: num 20. Of Moyses: num 21. Of Dauid: num 23. Of S. Antonie. S. Catharin of Alex¦andria. Of S. Catharin of Siena. And of S. Francis. of Paula. Deformitie The absurditie and inhumanitie of Aristotles Law, ordaining the exposition of lame and deformed children: cap 8. num 17. Deformitie of body, doth not preiudice the beautie of the minde: Ibid. Kinge Cressus verie deformed of bodie yet a very wise and excellent prince cap 8. n. 18. A storie of a deformed priest made Archbishop of Cullen. n. 1 Delay The danger of needeles delay. cap 29. num 14. In what cases delay is necessa∣rie. Ibid. num 16. Designments Of the execution and successe of designments. cap 11. num 2. No man ca warrant the good successe of his designments. Ibid. num. 3. A designment of Charles duke of Burgūdie ouerthrowne by a chance. c 13. n 3. A good designment is not to be left of for feare of false rumors. cap 31. num 54 Diogenes Mans impossibilitie to execute his owne designments without Gods permis∣sion. cap 35. num 7. VVhat Diogenes said to a disciple of his whom he ha forbidden the tauerne. cap 34. num 40. Dissention A storie of the dissention of two young men of Siracusa about their concu∣bine. cap 7. num 15. The trouble that often riseth by the dissention of women. cap 7. num 19. Ex¦emplified in the two daughters of Fabius Ambustus, the one married to a no∣ble man, the other to a plebiean. The dissention betweene the duches of Sommerset and queene Catharin Parre, falling at variance for the precedence. Ibid. num 20. A great armie of Christians dissolued by the dissention of the kinges of En∣gland and France. cap 14. num 11. Dissimulation The difference betwixt fiction and discreete dissimulation. cap 31. num 30. Discreet dissimulation commendable in a prince. Ibid. Distrust No lesse folly to distrust al men, then to trust euerie man: cap 3. num 7. Ho distrust may be called the mother of securitie: num 8. How distrust and suspicion, may stand with true prudence and charitie: n. Diuision The danger that groweth to a prince by maintayning diuision amongst hi subiects: cap 7. num 16. Princes by maintayning diuision doe but helpe t
et their owne house on fire: Ibid. he danger of Machiauels doctrine concerning diuision: cap 7. num 21. chiauels doctrine concerning diuision confuted: cap 34. num 10. Diuel e diuel affecteth the title proper to Diuinitie: cap 1. num. 1. d reuealeth sometimes his secret iudgments to wicked spirits, and how: ap 36 num 7. VVhat thinges the diuel can fore-tel: num 8. His collusion in orcerie: num 15. He can not be forced by man by any natural meanes: Ibid. E Edvvin dvvin brother to K. Adelstan set to sea, with only one seruant in a boate without saile: cap 31. num 3. VVhat hapned to K. Adelstans cup-bearer who gaue vnto him that wicked counsel: Ibid. Edvvim vvin kinge of Northumberland made a Christian: with a notable discourse of his conuersion: cap 17. num 11. Edvvard Edvvard the Confessor succeeded Canutus: cap 21. num 20. The conquest of England reuealed vnto him: num 21. A parable signified vnto him in his ision num 22. The exposition of the parable: Ibid. VVhat he saied at his death: num 24. ng Edvvard the second broached with a spit: cap 34. num 25. Embassadours e practize of the Lacedemonians in employing embassadours: to wit to hoose such to send on their embassages, as were ether publike, or at the east secret enemies: cap 29. num 22. e practize of Levvis the 11. when he emploied a greate embassadour: cap bid num 23. Empire e man oftentimes the cause of the destruction of a whole empire: c 7. n 3. The Empire of Rome offered by publike proclamation to whome soeuer would giue most for it: Ibid. 30. Emperors declared by the soldiars in the pace of 15. yeares: Ibid. Employments hat hapneth to those that vnaduisely seeke great emploiments: cap 28. um 41. e assistance of wise and sincere frendes most necessarie in greate emploi∣ments: cap 29. num 22. The treacherie of seruants or followers to be feared n emploiments: num 24. Enimie w far a man may trust a reconciled enemie: cap 3. num 5. econciled enemie is not to be trusted: num 6. what maner we may distrust our enemies: num 7. e doctrine of Epicurus and his fellowes: cap 9. num 17. Epicurus e counsel which Metrodorus a disciple of Epicurus gaue to his brother: Ibid. Error e error of Henrie the 3. of France in the slaughter of the Duke and Cardinal f Cuise: cap 4. num 5. The reuoult of the principal townes of France against im: The great miserie of him selfe and his court that ensued: num 7. error of the senat of Rome: cap 5. num 1. An other error of the same n 6. error of the Venetians: cap 5. num 8. An other error of the Venetians: n 9. wo foule errors of Solon: cap 7. num 13. herin Licurgus erred: cap 8. num 2. en erre many times in that which they presume to knowe best: cap 23. n 10. Ethelred e offence of Ethelred in whose time the Danes conquered England: cap 21. num 16. Ethelred expelled out of England by Sueno: num 17. He recouered
England: Ibid He died for sorowe: Ibid. Euil VVherin al euil consisteth: cap 24. num 3. VVhy God permitteth sinne and other euils: num 13. The worlde is more perfect and complete by the euil that is therin: Ibid. The nature of earthly thinges requireth a mixture of good and bad: Ibid. Though euil considered by it selfe seemeth inconue∣nient, yet to the composition of the whole world it is necessarie: num 15. No euil in the world but good doth come of it: num 17. The office of rea∣son and wisdome is to distinguish betwixt good and euil: num 22. The Lacedemonian saied merily he had chosen the lesse euil when he had cho∣sen a little wife: cap 28. num 14. Extremities VVhat a man must doe in extremities: cap 32. num 12. In extremities the coū∣sel of a simple man may be good, and why: num 13. VVhat princes should doe in dangers and extremities: cap 36. num 30. An ex∣ample hereof in king Dauid: Ibid. F Factions Why Machiauillians thinke that factions amongst subiects are good for their princes: cap 34. num 12. Factions in the commonwelth are dangerous to the prince: cap Ibid. num 13, Factions amongst great men most dangerous: num 14. Princes make facti∣ons and can not afterwardes hinder the bad effect of them: Ibid. Falshood He that is false to God wil not be true to men: cap 29. num 30. The practize of Cōstantius Caesar commanding the Christians to depart from his seruice: Ibid. If falshood & fraude were permitted amongst men no commonwelth could stande: cap 31. num 18. Once false euer suspected: num 27. Falshood hateful to God and man: num 28. Fate VVhat the Platonicks teache of Fate: cap 11. num 15. S. Augustines doctrine concerning fate: cap 12. num 3. S. Gregories doctrine concerning fate: Ibid. How Christians ought to vnderstand the worde fate: num 4. The prophane vse of the wordes fate and fortune ouer common at this day: num 5. Fauorits An aduertisement to the fauorits of princes: cap 29. num 26. The dāgers that the fauorits of princes incurre by the hatred of the people: ib. Feare No passion bereaueth a man of his sences more then suddaine feare: cap 14. num 12. The suddaine feare and amazement of a Spanish captaine in France: Ibid. Rome surprised by Arnulphus the Emperor through a suddaine feare, which hapned by the occasion of starting a hare: cap 14. num 13. A battaile lost by the Christians to the Soldan thorough a suddaine feare, caused only by a horse that was let loose: cap Ibid. num 15. The diffinition of feare: cap 16. num 3. Feare concurring with hate makes it more dangerours to him that is hated: cap 34. num 4. The prince adding feare to the hatred of his subiects, re∣doubleth his owne feare and danger: num 5. Feare turneth vpon the au∣thor: Ibid. The infelicitie of such princes as seeke rather to be feared then to be belo∣ued: cap 34. num 29. Exemplified in Demetrius K. of Siria Alfonso and Ferdi∣d
Kinges of Naples: num 31. In Lodouic Sforza Duke of Milan: In K. Iohn England: num 32. Feastes y publike feasts & plaies were first instituted: cap 34 num 11. Ferdinand nand king of Naples died for sorrowe: cap 22. num 5. His soule ap∣red after his death: num 6. Fidelitie e fidelitie of Licurgus solicited by the wife of his brother king Polidectes rry with hir with promise to destroy hir childe in hir wombe: c 8. n 1. erein fidelitie cōsisteth: c 31. n 18. Cōcerning truth & fidelitie in a prince: 7. Fidelitie most necessarie in the prince for cōseruation of the cōmon∣lth: n 19. How the fidelitie of the prince redoundeth to his good: n 20. e fidelitie of Ferdinand brother to Henerie kinge of Castile. num 26. Flatterie uncellor ought to auoide flatterie: cap 30. num 6. Flatterie is the ruine  princes state: Ibid. asant example of a rude philosopher concerning flatterie: num 8. Fortune ortune, Chance, and Fate: cap 11. num 3. Some borne fortunat: num 2. e superstitious worship of fortune amongst the Gentiles: num 4. VVhat ges they ascribed to fortune, chance, and fate: num 6, 7, 8. S. Augustin reiecteth the name of fortune: cap 12. num 4. The effects of tune attributed to God by holie Scriptures: num 6. difinition of fortune according to the Platonicks: cap 13. num 12. Frendship t frēdship not to be respected whē publike matters are hādled: c 30 n 24. t Popilius the Roman being sent embassador to his old frend K. Antio∣ said vnto him touching their former amitie: Ibid. G God e workes of nature proue that there is a God and Creator of al thin∣ges: prefat. num 9. Diuers considerations forcing man to acknow∣ge a Creator of infinit power and wisdome. Ibid. How God and nature l one, and how they are distinguished. num 11. How the heathen Phi∣phers attained to the knowledge of a deitie. num 12. Platoes doctrine cerning God and his prouidence in the gouernment of the world. n. 14. y God is called Dominus in the scripture: cap 2. num 7 & 8. The necessitie Gods gouernment and direction for the conseruation of man proued by reasons. num 11.14.15. & 24. nfinit wisdome of God in disposing of al thinges: cap 12. num 9. In t maner God disposeth of the actions both of good and bad men. num Nothing casual or accidental to the wil of God: Ibid. erueth him selfe of the euil wills of men for the execution of his holy  cap 35. num 32. Guardes actious election of Emperors by guardes and armies of soldiears: cap um 10. The ruine of many Emperors by their guardes: num 11. The kes great guardes of Gianizaries dangerous to his state: num 12. itle securitie that wicked princes haue in their guardes: cap 34. num 28. Guise great affection of the people of France to the duke of Guise and the Car∣l: cap 4. num 6. Their deathes: num 9. See more cap 31. num 9. H Hate cessiue wickednes exposeth a prince to excessiue hatred: cap 34. num 3. o force or power can sufficiently resist the hatred of many: num 4.
Politikes seeke absurdly to remedie hatred by feare: cap 34. num 4. Hat and feare are the causes of conspiracies: num 5. The hatred of subiects m dangerous to princes by the experience of al ages: proued by examples  of diuers histories: num 15. Examples out of our owne historie to the sa purpose: num 25. An in euitable danger which a prince generally hated must needes incura cap 34. num 30 & 31: No prince generally hated can longe liue in securit n 35. Euerie litle error of a prince generally hated is verie dangerous: Ib No vigilancie sufficeth against the hatred of men: cap 34. num 36. The gr vigilancie of Alexander the tirant, killed by his wife: Ibid. Of Claudius t Emperor poisoned by his taster. Of Dionisius the Emperor murdred by  owne chamberlins: Ibid. An other danger proceeding of humane infirmitie: cap 34. num 38. Exemp¦fied in Iulius Caesar. In Archias tirant of Thebes. In Charles the last duke  Burgundie. Henerie Henrie the 5. of England crowned in France: cap 7. num 18. Henerie The notable escape of Henrie Earle of Richmond from K. Edvvard the 4. a Richard the 3. cap 31. num 18. Herod Herods owne sonne slaine amongst the Innocents: cap 8. num 24. Augu Caesar said that it was better to be Herods pig then his sonne, and why: Ibi Hierusalem The miraculous destruction of Hierusalem by the Romans: cap 15. num VVhy Titus the general of the Roman armie refused to be crowned after  had taken the cittie of Hierusalem: Ibid. The destruction of Hierusalem prophecied by Daniel: cap 19. num 1. Also our Sauiour: num 2. The siege of Hierusalem 40. yeares after our Sauio passion: num 3. Hierusalem besieged by Gods special prouidence at a f of Easter: num 6. The extreame famine in Hierusalem being besiedge num 7. The people of Hierusalem constrained to eate Horses, Asses, Do Rats, Mice, the leather that couered their shieldes and bucklers, and  very dunge out of the stables: Ibi. A noble woman knowne to eate hir ow childe that suct at hir breast: Ibid. Hipocricie No hipocricie can suffice to couer a tiranny: cap 31. num 15. Hipocricie encreaseth the hatred of God and man against a tirant: Ibid. Hughe The passion of S. Hughe a childe, crucified at Lincolne. Another in No¦wich: cap 19. num 15. Humilitie An example of the humilitie and patience of K. Dauid: cap 36. num 30. An¦ther example of him: num 31. An example of K. Henrie the 6. of England: n The notable effect of praier and humilitie when God doth absolutely dete¦mine to destroy a prince: Ibid. Humors The diuersitie of wills and humors in euerie commonwelth: cap 7. num 2. I Ievves The wonderful punishment of God vpon the Iewes before the siege Hierusalem: cap 19. num 4 Their extreame miserie being besieged: n Their bowels ript vp in hope to finde gould: Ibid. The number of the that died & were slaine in the siege: num 10. The Iewes banished out of Ciprus, and a law made that it should be dea for any Iew to arriue there though he were driuen thither by tempest a¦nst
his wil: cap 19. num 12. The continuance of Gods punishment vpon m euer since: vnder Traian, and Adrian. vnder Antonius Pius, Marcus Au∣s, and Seuerus: vnder Constantine. In the time of Theodosius, Arcadius, and orius. In England. Amongst Turkes, Moores, and Christians: from m 12. to num 26. forbiden by edict to behould their owne coūtrie a far of: cap 19. n. 13. eason of the stinke which the Iewes haue about them: num 15. fauour done to the Iewes by Iulian the Apostata: cap 19. num 17. The dification of their Temple miraculously hindred: num 18. By an earth∣ke: by fire from heauen: and by the signe of the Crosse which appeared he ayre: Ibid. Iewes purchased licence for mony to goe to Hierusalem to bewaile the ersion of their Temple: cap 19. num 20. S. Hierom an eie witnes. num A Iew in England had seauen of his teeth pulled out one after an o∣: num 25. Iewes shal be conuerted in the end of the world: cap 19. num 29 The ses why God hath ordained that they shal remaine a distinct people m al other notwithstanding their general dispersion: num 30. The Ie∣ ought not to be expelled from amongst Christians: num 32. The reason y they are suffered to liue in Rome: Ibid. Information anger of taking information in matters of state by obscure questions: 30. num 18. How informations are to be taken in importāt matters: n 20. formation litle to be esteemed when the informer doth not vnderstand drift of the propounder: Ibid. Ingratitude ans ingratitude towardes God: cap 5. num 10. A notable discourse of ug. concerning the same. num 12. Instruments iustice vpon euil instruments: cap 29. num 31. Alexander the great at obsequies of his father, commanded publike iustice to be done vpon se whom he him selfe had secretly employed to kil him: num 32. Intelligence ncellor ought to procure frequent intelligence out of forraine cuntries, of what matters: cap 32 num 4. t benefit a councellor shal reape by frequent intelligence: Ibid. Inuasion reuentions which Francis the first K. of France vsed against the inuasion harles the Emperor: cap 14. num 5. nuader ought to seeke battaile and why: Ibid. Ironside d Ironside slaine vpon a preuie as he was easing him: cap 21. num 17. Gods Iudgments ustice of God most euident though his iudgments are inscrutable: cap num 1. A notable sentence of S. Aug. hereof: num 2. intollerable presumption and folly of those which make them selues ges of Gods iudgments: cap 23. num 12. Their wit compared to the wit m that would seeke to put al the world with in the compasse of a nut∣l: Ibid. reasons of Gods iudgments in particular are secret and vnknowne: cap num 23. Many reasons may be giuen of Gods iudgments in general: d. VVhy God manifesteth his iudgments in some thinges and concealeth em in other some: num 24. Not fit for vs to knowe them: Ibid. They are dden from vs for our good: num 25. Iustice
Rome sacked and spoiled by the Gaules for an act of hostilitie and iniustice, contrarie to the law of armes: cap 5. num 6. A great plague and famine in the citties of Rome and Laurentum for negli∣gence in the execution of iustice: cap 20. num 1. & 2. The Lacedemonians grieueously punished for omission of iustice, and for the sinnes of the flesh: cap 20. num 5. Humane iustice punisheth whole commonwelths though euerie one therein hath not offended, and why: cap 27. num 18. Gods iustice is the first and principal cause of the ouerthrow of wicked prin∣ces: cap 35. num 3. Al creatures are the instruments of Gods iustice for the punishment of sinne: Ibid. Princes are the ordinarie ministers of Gods iustice: cap 35. num 5. How priuat men are the ministers of Gods iustice: Ibid. Some men are the ministers of Gods iustice by chance or against their wil: Ibid. The secret operation of God in mouing men to the execution of his iustice: num 6. How wicked men are the ministers of Gods iustice: num 7. How sinners execute Gods iust;ce vpon them selues: Ibid. The Emperor Iustine had bene a swineheard: cap 35. num 8. K Kinge Kingdomes Gods merciful prouidence in the protection of the Kinges Majestie our Soueraigne: cap 35. num 21. The desolation and ruine of many ancient kingdomes: cap 6. num 5. King∣domes and crownes often obtained by wickednes: cap 9. num 24. The Queene of Hungarie procured aide of Soliman the great Turk who de∣priued both hir and hir sonne of their kingdome: cap 13. num 14. Al kingdomes and states disposed by the infinite wisdome and wil of God: cap 17. num 1 S. Aug. argument to proue the same: num 2. The consideration of the particular causes why God giueth kingdomes to men: cap 17. num 9. To some for the comfort of his seruants: Ibid. To some for the punishment of some wicked prince: num 13. To some for the punishment of a wicked people: num 14. To some for the execution of his iustice: Ibid. To some in rewarde of some seruice done him: num 15. To some for some good deedes of wicked parents: num 16. To other some for some good deedes of vertuous parents: num 17. To some in reward of moral vertues: num 18. To other some in reward of infused vertues: n. 19. The prouidence of God in the disposition of kingdomes: cap 22. num 7. Al the calamities of kingdomes are punishments for sinne: num 13. L Lavves Foure kind of lawes amongst the Romans: cap 7. num 6. Gods inspiration necessarie for the making of good lawes: num 8. A notable saying of Plato to this purpose: Ibid. The lawes of foure famous lawmakers exami∣ned and reproued: num 10. Of the lawes of the Lacedemonians reformed by Licurgus: cap 8. num 1. How he erred: num 2 A ridiculous law of his: num 3. Theft, lasciuiousnes, and adulterie allowed by Licurgus. num 4.5.6. Licurgus and Solon accounted by antiquitie the mirror of lawmakers: cap 8. num 8.
The impious lawes of Plato in his commonwelth: cap 8. num 9. Plato con∣trarie to him selfe: num 11. Lawes ordained in vaine when the occasions thereof are permitted: num 12. Two absurd lawes of Aristotle: cap 8. num 16. & 21. Aristotle against him selfe: num 20 An obiection of his answered concerning the exposition of children: num 23. The difinition of law: cap 9. num 1. Law is the soule and life of the com∣monwelth: num 2. Al lawes are defectiue: num 3. The imperfection of written and vnwritten lawes: num 4. Better to be gouerned by good lawes then by the wil of the best man, and why: cap 9. num 4 Two principal endes whereunto humane lawes doe tend: num 5. VVhere in the force of humane lawes consisteth: num 6. How many wayes the penalties of the political lawes may be escaped: cap 9. num 11. Anacharsis compared lawes to the spiders web, which takes only the litle flyes: Ibid. An exact comparison of the political law with the law of the flesh: Ibid. VVhere vnto the political and carnal lawes doe tend: num 12. The commonwelth wherin the carnal law gouerneth: cap 9. num 18. The carnal law hath hir Aduocats, Orators, and Teachers: num 17. Religion, Docters, and Preachers: num 19. The punishment which the carnal law threatneth: num 28. The insufficiencie of political law for the reformation of vice acknowledged by Licurgus: cap ibid. num 35. Also of late by a wise Painim in China. The force of the law of grace for the reformation of vice: cap 10. num 20. League Simeon and Leui cursed by their father Iacob for violating their league with Si∣chem and Hemor: cap 31. num 32. Saules posteritie punished for his breach of league with the Gabaonits: num 33. The great regard which Iosue had of his oath and league with the Gabaonits. The obligation of lawful leagues: Ibid. The motiues or ends of lawful leagues to be considered: cap 33. num 20. Di∣uersitie of ends causeth the dissolution of leagues: num 21. In what case a prince may support a forraine league not vnited: num 23. Licentious life Licentious and carnal men content to buy their delighters with mony, and many voluntarily to beggar them selues to obtaine their filthie pleasure: cap 9 num 29. The beastly and brutish mind of some licentious men: num 34. The sonne of the famous Dion being restrained by his father from his licen∣tious life which he had led in his fathers banishment, cast him selfe despera∣tly from the top of a house and broke his neck: cap 9. num 31. A notable epistle of S. Boniface an English man to K. Ethelbald to withdraw him from his licentious life: cap 20. num 11. The vnfortunate ends of the kinges Celred, Osred, and Ethelbald in punishment of their licentious liues: cap 20. num 12. See more of this matter in the let∣ter S. and the word sinne. Loadstone The causes of the admirable properties of the Loadstone vnknowne: cap 23. num 3. Loue The benefit of loue and frendiship in a commonwelth: cap 34. num 11. The loue and vnion of members of the political body, most necessarie for the conseruation thereof: Ibid. Lye
Great difference to be noted betwixt telling a lye, and concealing the truth: cap 31. num 30. A lye most vnseemely in the mouth of a Prince. Ibid. M The insufficiencie of Machiauillian remedies cap 31. num 28. Three thinges to be considered and noted of Machiauillians: num 48. Machiauel VVherin consisteth the greatest part of Machiauels policies: cap 34. num 2. His principal remedie cōsisteth in extremitie of wickednes: num 3. Machiauel was not the inuentor of his policies: num 7. An obiection in fauor of Macchiauillians: cap 34. num 45. The answere: n 46. An other obiection of the Machiauillians: num 50. the answere to the same num 51. How Machiauels frendes excuse him at this day: num 60. VVhy Macchiauillian policies are against true reason of state: cap 35. num 2. Magistrat The magistrat a speaking law, & the law a dumbe magistrat: cap 9. num 3. As the magistrat should gouerne the people, so should the law gouerne the ma∣gistrat: num 4. The negligence of magistrats in the execution of iustice draweth the wrath of God vpon the whole commonwelth: cap 17. num 27. Malice The malice of the diuel and wicked men turneth to the benefit of the good and the glorie of God: cap 24. num 19. One pretending to kil Promotheus strooke him with a sworde and lanced an inward impostume with in his body, which otherwise could not haue bene cured: Ibid. The malice of the diuel and euil men like to the bloody thirst of the horse-leech, & why: cap 35. num 19. Man No man without defect: cap 1. num 6. The causes of mans natural infirmitie and weaknes: num 6. The instabilitie of mans nature compared by Heraclitus to a runing water: cap 2. num 3. Mans nature changeth euerie minute of an hower, and compared by Seneca to the emptying of an hower glasse: Ibid. Man alwaies dying: Ibid. S. Aug. discourse of the frailty and miserie of man: num 4. For what end the good giftes of body and minde are bestowed vpon man: cap 2. num 6. Al mans actions depend wholy on the wil of God: num 10. As also al thinges necessarie for his life: num 15. His insufficiencie to prouide for him selfe: Ibid. & num 24. A sound aduise of Plato concerning what man should craue of God: num 25. The first blowe that God giueth a wicked man when he wil destroy him is in the braine: cap 3. num 13. A consideration of mans imbecilitie and weaknes of wit, and of the neede he hath of Gods direction: cap 5. num 10. Mans corrupt nature thirsteth afrer thinges forbidden: and compared to a torrent or violent flood: cap 9. num 7. His promptnes to learne euil: n 15. Seneca saith, that man may be thought to profit wel who becometh none of the worst: Ibid. A tribunal in the soule of man: cap 16. num 16. VVicked men Of the impunitie and prosperitie of wicked men: cap 26. num 1. God spareth wicked men sometimes to giue them time to repent: num 3. VVhat the Pai∣nims obserued herein: num 4. God forbeareth wicked men sometimes for
good mens sakes: num 7. How much it may auaile an euil man to be in the companie of a good man: num 8. God spareth wicked men sometimes vntil they haue yealded some good fruite: cap 26. num 13. Some for some good deedes they haue done: num 19. Some for some good deedes of their progenitors: num 21. Some to drawe them thereby to loue him: num 22. Some for the punishment of other some: num 23. God exalteth wicked men sometimes for their punishment: cap 26. num 25. Their prosperitie is a preamble to their destruction: num 26. An example of Policrates the tirant who cast into the sea a Diamond of inestimable valwe: num 27. An other example witnessed by S. Ambrose, of a wicked man who vanted that he had neuer in his life felt any crosse or misfortune: num 28. The fearful estate of wicked men: cap 26. num 34. VVicked men spared some times vntil their iniquities are complete: Ibid. VVicked men more foolish then children, and compared to Esops cock: cap 36. n 36. VVicked men compared to Lisimachus, who sould his kingdome for a draught of water: num 37. Massacre Matters The massacre of the Protestants in Paris: cap 3. num 12. Three thinges to be considered in euerie matter: cap 32 num 5. Necessarie to knowe the state of the matter with al the circumstances: num 6. VVhat is particularly to be considered in euerie matter: num 7. VVhat is to be fore∣seene and prouided for in euerie matter: num 10. Melancholike The Melancholike iudgment most sounde: cap 32. num 9. Miserie He is miserable which neuer suffered miserie: cap 25. num 13. A wise saying of the famous Lady Catharine Q. of England: Ibid. num 19. He which neuer tasted of miserie is ignorant of the one halfe of the nature of thinges: Ibid. num 20. Miracles Many notable miracles done this last yeare in Brabant. Prefat. num 6. VVhy examples of miracles are alledged in this treatise: Ibid. Monie Mony lent to maintaine a forraine war in danger to be lost: cap 33. num 10. Places or townes giuen in pawne for mony in danger to be lost: num 11. How mony is to be bestowed in the maintenance of a forraine league: cap 33. num 25. VVhat effect mony may worke: Ibid. How mony is to be besto∣wed vpon true frendes, and how vpon suspected parsons: num 27 & 28. Mony and forces concurring worke great effects: cap 33. num 29. No trust in affection bought with monie: Ibid. A man corrupted with mony wil be faithful to no man: num 30. Mule A fable of a Mule moralized in mans presumption: cap 2. num 2. VVorldly pompe and honors compared to the packsadle of the Mule: Ibid. num 5. A worthie saying of Seneca. Ibid. Murder Liuerotto hauing traiterously murdred his vncle was also traiterously mur∣dred him selfe: cap 31. num 46. An other example of a traiterous murder by Christierne K. of Denmark: Ibid. Machiauel inferreth the necessitie of murder somimes for a princes securitie: cap 34. num 53. A Machiauillian prouerb: Dead men bite not. num 54. Seleueus K of Siria forsaken of his subiects for a murder: num 55. Gods wonderful prouidence and iustice in the strange discouerie of murders:
c 35 n 60. The woundes of a dead body bleede if the murdrer come wher it is: Ibid. The discouerie of the murder of Ibicus: n 61. An other strange sto∣rie of a murder discouered: n 62. A murther discouered by a dog: num 63. A craftie answere of the diuel to cause a murder: cap 36. num 18. N Nature The difinition of nature according to Seneca: Prefat. n 11. Nature difined by Aristotle: Ibid. The incomprehensibilitie of the diuine nature: num 13. Nero Nero the Emperor killed his mother: cap 16 num 5. Neutralitie An absurde law of Solon forbiding neutralitie in a publike sedition: cap 7. num 14. In what cases neutralitie is to be allowed or dissalowed: num 22. Neutralitie vnlawful in diuisions concerning Gods seruice: Ibid. Neutra∣litie condemned in matters concerning the iust defence of the prince or the commonwelth: n 23. Neutralitie in priuat quarrels commended: & compa∣red by Plutarck to the buskin of Theramenes, which serued for both feete: Ibid. O Oathes The Roman magistrats and senat most exact in the obseruation of oathes and promises, euen to their enimies: cap 31. num 23. A notable example of Marcus Atilius Regulus to this purpose: Ibid. Sextus Pompeius would not break his oath to be Emperor of the world: num 24. Matters in controuesie decided by oathes at the tombes of martyrs in the pri∣mitiue Church: cap 31. num 37. VVhat S. Aug. affirmeth of his owne know∣ledg: Ibid. Oblation Oblation of the first fruites after haruest generally vsed in Aristotles time: cap. 2. num 22. Obstinacie Obstinacie in opinion vnfit for councellors: cap 30. num 13. From whence obstinacie in opinion proceedeth: Ibid. Opinion Folly for a wise man not to chang his opinion when there is cause: Ibid. A necessarie exception to be vnderstood in the opinion of a wise man: Ibid. Original sinne The reasons why the baptised are not exempt from miserie after the remission of original sinne: cap 27. num 19. Ouerthrovves The Lacedemonians ouerthrowne in the plaine of Leuctra by Gods iust iudg∣ment for their sinnes of the flesh: cap 8. num 7. The children of Israel twice ouerthrowne although God appointed them a captaine and bid them giue battaile: cap 12. num 18. The Roman Empire ouerthrowne by the same meanes that preserued it for a time: cap 13. num 9. The ouerthrowe of Hanibal by a Roman: cap 14. num 12. See more in the letter V word Victorie. Examples of great numbers ouerthrowne by a few: cap 14. Exemplified from: num 26. to num 36. P Parents The euil example and bad instruction of vicious parents: cap 10. num 4. Many vicious parēts desire to haue their children like to them selues: n. 3. Some couetous parents recommend vnto their children auarice for a vertu: num 4. A wicked exhortation of a great prince to his owne sonne: Ibid. Patience The example of Gods patience towardes sinners to be imitated by men: cap 26. num 5. Perfidiousnes
perfidious prince teacheth his subiects to be traiterous to him selfe: cap 31. num 20. Perfidiousnes is a signe of a base & vile nature: num 27. The dan∣gers which accompanie perfidiousnes in a prince: Ibid. How the Painims obserued Gods iudgmēts vpon perfidious persons: cap 31. num 34. Periurie Gods notable iudgment vpon Cleomenes and Calippus for periurie: num 35. & 36. Periurie miraculously punished at Rome in the time of S. Gregorie: n. 38.  notable example of Elfred a noble man of England miraculously punished at Rome for periurie: num 39. The letters patents of K. Adelstan testifying the same: num 40 eriurie notably punished in Lotharius K. of Austrusia: cap 31. num 41. In Earle Godvvin father to K. Harrold: num 42. In K. Harrold his sonne: num 43. In Charles duke of Burgundie: num 44. In Caesar Borgia: num 45. In Christerne K. of Denmark: num 46. In the duke of Burbon: num 47. In Henerie the 3. of France: num 48. Philosophers The bad liues of the wisest and best Philosophers amongst the Painims: cap 10. num 11. Their learning: Ibid Their controuersies about the chiefe and soueraigne good, and about God him selfe. Their exhortations and pre∣cepts: Ibid. The vertu of the ancient Philosophers what it was: cap 10. num 12. Platoes communitie of women a verie sinke of sinne: num 13. The couetousnes of Aristotle who vsed to sel the oyle wherein he had bathed him selfe: num 14. Plutarcks opinion of the liues of the best Philosophers: num 15. Lucians dis∣course of their maners: num 16. Their dissention concerning important matters: num 18. Pictures An excellent ordonance of Aristotle forbiding wanton and lasciuious pictures: cap 8. num 13. Plato VVhy Plato sighed behoulding many notable young men that came to heare his lecture: cap 10. num 7. Plots Three thinges to be considered in plots and designments. The inuention; the execution; and the successe: cap 11. num 2. Plots are seeldome or neuer executed in the field as they are ordained in the chamber: cap 14. num 7. Policy VVhat policy is. Prefat. num 1. VVherein humane policy chiefly consisteth: cap 7. num 1. The imperfection of al political science: num 5. No sinful policy can be truly wise: cap 28. num 1. No true policy admiteth any impietie: num 36. God doth iustly turne Machiauillian policies to the ouerthrowe of the contri∣uers. Proued by sundrie examples: cap 31. num 5.6 7.8.9. Levvis the 11. ouertaken in his owne policy: cap 3. num 1. His manifest error: num 2. VVhat learning he required in his sonne: num 3. Caesar Borgia Duke of Valence ouerthrowne by his owne policy: cap 3 num 4. The answere of Hernando Gonales vnto him in excusing him selfe for the breach of his promise: Ibid. The plot of the Duke of Nothumberland against the Ladie Marie: cap 13. num 6. His ouerthrowe by Gods prouidence: num 7. The Ladie Maries pre∣seruation: num 8. Roderic K. of Spaine ouerthrowne thorough his owne policie: cap 13. num 14.
VVhether euery sinful policy be against reason of state: cap 36. num 1. Ho and when wicked policy may be a meanes to conserue a state. num 24. Ho wicked policy may both benefit and hurt the state at one time: num 26. A example hereof in the kingdome of Israel: num 27. Three conclusions that wicked policy can not stand with reason of state: ca 36. num 34. The necessitie of Gods grace to the perfection of policy: num 35. That al wisdome or policy grounded on wickednes is meere folly: n 36 Politickes VVhat the name of politike signifieth properly: Prefat. num 1. Politikes per∣uert the order of nature: Ibid. How and when politicks are hereticks in the highest degree: n 2. Politiks ouerthrowe the foundations of Christianitie Ibid. How politicks abuse religion: Ibid. The simpathie betwixt the head and the members in the body politick: cap 17. num 26. A notable historie of Andronicus Comnenus Emperor of Constantinople an egregious politick: cap 34. num 19. An obiection of the politiks: cap 35. num 39. The answere to the same: n 40. A second obiection of the politiks: cap 36. num 1. The answere to the same: n 2. A third obiection of the politicks: n 21. The answere to the same: n 22. The wisdome of politiks wherein it consisteth: cap Ibid. num 38. Protugal Portugal voiage: anno. 1589: cap 14. num 9. The reason of the armes of Por∣tugal: cap 15. num 20. Prayer and Pro∣cession The miraculous effects of publik praier, and processions in cases of neces∣sitie amongst Christians: cap 2. n 17. A great plague in Rome remedied by publik praier: num 18. The siege of Constantinople miraculously raised: num 19. The great drought in the Ilands of Chio & the miraculous remedi thereof by processions of Christians: num 20. An excessiue drought in the Ilands of Phillippinae relieued by prayer: Ibid. A great drought in France re∣medied by praier: num 21. A wise praier of Ion a pagan Poët cap 2. num 26. Examples of the great force of deuout praier: cap 29. num 8. Gods wil not superable by force, nor euitable by policy, but flexible to praie cap 36. num 20. Presumption Presumption a great impediment to man for the knowledg of God and him selfe: cap 1 num 3. Presumption of a mans owne wit most dangerous, and why: num 4. How generally the infection of presumption raigneth: num . The damage that ensueth of selfe loue and presumption: cap 2. num 1. Prince No meanes in political law to reforme a vicious prince: cap 9. num 32. VVhat princes that haue al doe notwithstanding want: cap 30. num 6. The least defects of princes are commonly noted and knowne to their sub∣iects: cap 31. num 15. Pompey the great noted of singularitie for scratching his head with one finger: Ibid. Caesar for going il girded; and the like of some others: Ibid. The reputation of true and not fained vertu requisit in a prince: cap 31. num 16. VVhat the effects of vice are in a prince: Ibid. A prince is the rule of his subiects: num 22. A prince is the image of God in two respects: num 29. His bad example ouerweigheth good lawes: Ibid. The benifits that re∣dound to the prince of the puritie of conscience: num 52.
he greatnes of princely authoritie is to be measured by the stabilitie the∣reof: cap 32. num 17. The answere of Theopompus of Lacedemonia to the Queene his wife: Ibid. o power or policie can defend a prince from the resolution of some one man: cap 34. num 27. od punisheth wicked princes more seuerely then priuat men, & why: c. 35. num 22. The exemplar punishment of wicked princes without the ministrie of man; and by the ministrie of man: contayning many strange and fear∣ful examples; from num 23. to num 35. VVhat a prince reduced to any extremitie is to consider: cap 36. num 3. How dangerous it is for him to be curious to knowe Gods secret councels: n 14. Promise The danger of breach of promise: cap 33 num 29. Prouidence foundation layed for the proofe of Gods prouidence: Prefat num 7 There was neuer any people or nation so barbarous but they acknowledged a God and his prouidence: A notable saying of S. Aug. concerning the prouidence of God: num 19. he experience of Gods prouidence in the reliefe of mens necessities shewed by examples: c 2. n 17. The prouidence of God the nurse of mankind: n 22. l goods imparted to man by Gods prouidence: cap 12. num 7. The effects of Gods prouidence attributed often to the next and imediate causes: num 10. How the effects of Gods prouidence is attributed to chance: num 11. The effects of Gods prouidence wrought often by most casual meanes: n. 13. VVhy Atheists doubt of Gods prouidence: c. 23. num 1. See more cap 24. n. 35. Obseruations concerning Gods prouidence in the conseruation and destru∣ction of states: cap 36. num 23. Prudence The difinition of Prudence: cap 28. num 11. The end of euery action truly prudent must needes be good. num 12. Prudence prefereth the greater good before the lesse, and the chiefest good before al other: num 14. A difficultie proposed concerning other partes of prudence, with the satisfaction of the difficultie: num 36. Prudence diuided into three partes: Ibid. A prudent practize of the wise Cosmo de Medices, and of Philip the 2. K. of Spaine in propounding important matters to their councellors: cap 30. n 23. Punishment The iustice of God in punishing sinne: cap 16. num 1. Punishment of sinne a debt due to the author of nature: num 3. The subiects punished for the sinnes of the prince, and princes punished for the sinnes of the people: cap 17. num 24. & 25. VVhy the punishment of one man redoundeth sometimes to many: num 28. God differeth sometimes the punishment of wicked men to punish them in time and place more conuenient: cap 26. num 9. An example of Gods puni∣shment deferred: Ibid. VVhy God differreth the punishment of euil men: num 11. God looseth no time in the punishment of wicked men by delay: n 12. Continual impunitie and prosperitie of wicked men an assurance of their reprobation: num 30. God is vehemently angrie with sinners when he doth not punish them: ibid. How it is to be vnderstood that God hardned Pharaoes hart: num 35. VVhy some sinnes are punished in this life and not others: cap 27. num 8. How the good and bad are punished many times togeather: num 9. How
good men participat of the faultes of euil men: Ibid. How the good and th bad are distinguished in the sight of God though they be punished toge¦ther num 10. The doctrine of S. Chrisostome concerning the punishment  sinne: num 11. VVhy some men are cut of by iustice of God and not other Ibid VVhy al are not punished alike in this life that sinne alike: num 11 How it standeth with Gods iustice to punishe one for an others faultes: nu 13. The place of Ezechiel and Exodus answered: num 14. & 15. The miseries o this life are not punishments in Christians but only when they are some o¦fence: num 19. No man knoweth for how smal an offence God wil punish a prince in h parson or state: cap 31. num 4. Exemplified in Dauid, Moyses and Ezechias. Q Quarrels Phillip de Comines reproued for allowing in a young prince, to norish quar∣rels amongst the Ladies of his court: cap 7. n 19. A quarrel begunne bet∣wixt two boies in Italie caused much bloodshed: num 21. Councellors should leaue their quarrels at the councel chamber doore: cap 30. n 22. VVhat Aristides of Athens being sent Embassador with Themistocl who was his enemie, said vnto him at his departure out of the towne: Ibid R Reason What dominion reason hath ouer the sensual powers: cap 1. num 9. Religion How far the Author meaneth to touch Religion in this treatise: Pref. n 6. The progresse of Christian Religion in China at this present: cap 24. num 32. The necessitie of true Religion in commonwelth: cap 36. num 35. Remora The strange propertie of a fishe called Remora: cap 23. num 4. Repentance No man knoweth how longe or litle God wil expect his repentance: cap 16 num 36 The danger of delay of repentance: Ibid. God giueth not time o repentance to al sinners alike, and why: num 37. Sinners compared to thie∣ues and robbers, which some of them escape many yeares, others fewe and some are taken and hanged for the first robberie they commit: Ibid Reputation The great care the Romans had of their credit and reputation: cap 5. n 4. The reputation of a prince greatly to be regarded of a councellor, and why cap 31. num 10. The danger of the losse of a princes reputation: Ibid. VVher∣in the reputation of a prince consisteth: num 11 12 13. Machiauel aduiseth hi prince to seeke to haue the reputation of Religion and vertue: num 14. The reputation of true and not fained vertu requisit in a prince: num 16. & 49. A mans credit and reputation in a matter of trust likened to a glasse which being once broken is not reparable. num 27. The reputation of the prince power and greatnes: num 50. Augustus Caesar laboured greatly to conserue the reputation of his greatnes: num 51 The great Zerxes ruined by the losse of reputation: Ibid. VVhen the losse of reputation is chiefly to be feared, and when not: num 53 & 54. In what case an vniust blemishe of reputation i to be tollerated: num 56. Restitution Restitution made by the senat of Rome to the Ardeatins of a peece of land wrongfully detained: cap 5. num 3. Revvard Of reward and punishment: cap 9. num 9. The rewardes the law of the flesh proposeth: num 20. The rewardes of vice are certaine for the most part: num 21. Rewardes with out desart: num 23. The K. of France tooke from
one of his subiects al his offices and dignities for runing away and gaue them to one that ran ten myle farther then he: Ibid. Riches The riches & other goods of this world haue no true goodnes in themselues, for if they had they would make them truly good which posesse them: cap 1. num 5. VVordly wealth and pleasures accompanied with dangers and dis∣commodites: Ibid. Couetousnes fed and norished with riches: cap 25. num 17. He that looseth his riches, looseth the matter wherewith a great euil is fed and norished in him: Ibid. The reason why the goodes and euils of this life are common to good and euil men: cap 27 num 7. VVhy God giueth temporal goods to some that craue them and not to other some: num 8. S Secrecie Secrecie in matters of state most necessarie: cap 29. num 27. Matters of se∣crecie like to a myne, which hauing any vent is wholy frustrat: Ibid. The answere of Peter of Aragon to Pope Martin the 4: Ibid. A general rule to be helde concerning secrecie: num 28. Princes esteeme nothing more in their seruants then secrecie: Ibid. Dangerous to be partakers of princes secrets: Ibid. The answere of Phillipides the Comedian to K. Lisimachus: Ibid. ecrecie most requisite in a councellor: cap 30. n 17. Of Alexander the great who shewed a secret letter to Haphesion: Ibid. Secrecie the best and surest bond of matters of state: Ibid. The admirable secrecie of the Roman senat: Ibid. Some men ouer secret, and some to open: num 18. Some intending to be secret discouer their secrets: Ibid. Securitie Vherein the greatest securitie that can be had by humane meanes consisteth: cap 34 num 52. VVhether any princes state can be secured by iustice and moral vertu: num 56. The greatest securitie of princes consisteth in the loue of their subiects, which vertu procureth: num 57. Sedition principal point of political science, ether to preuent seditions, or quickly to appease them: cap 7. num 14. Sedition compared to a sparke of fire, that may fal into such matter as may set a whole house on flame: Ibid. edition a principal cause of the subuersion of states: cap 34 num 14. Sinne l sinnes and offences redound to the offence of God though sometimes they seeme to be committed only against man: cap 16. num 7 & 8. hree kindes of sinnes for the which God punisheth whole commonwelths: cap 17. num 21 22 & 23. xamples of Gods seuere iudgments vpon whole commonwelths for the sinnes of the flesh: cap 20. num 4 5 6 7 & 8. Spaine conqered by the Moores for the sinnes of the flesh: num 8 9 & 10. he enormions sinnes of the cleargie, nobilitie, and people of England at the time of the conquest therof by the Normans: cap 21. num 23. o man can escape the punishment of sinne: cap 22. num 14. inne shuts the eies and punishment openeth them: cap 31. num 3. Slaue orde and slaue correllatiues proper to God and man cap 2. num 8. The difi∣nition of a slaue num 9. The slaue and the free man both slaues alike to God: Ibid. A lord or a slaue by nature according to Aristotle: num 13. Sorcerie orcerie most hateful to God and dangerous to princes: cap 36. num 14 The
collusion of the diuel in sorcerie: n 15. Examples of princes abused by sor∣cerers: num 16 17 & 18. Starres No influence of Starres can force the wil of man: cap 11. num 10. The mo learned philosophers did exempt mans wil from al constraint of starres: num 11. How Bardasenes proued that the starres did not force the wil of man: num 12. How many waies the force of the starres may be frustrated: num 13. The vncertaintie of the iudgment of Astrologers by mens natiuities: num 14. State No wit or power of man able to vphould a state when God wil punish it for sinne: cap 22. num 15. The imprudence of those who presume to deale in matters of state, without any regard of Gods asistance: cap 28. num 39. And in the greatest matters of state without experience: num 40. The practize of matters of state like the practise of phisick: num 42. How dangerous it is for young men to medle in matters of state: num 43. The commoditie of a good intention in vndertaking matters of state: cap 29. num 2. The difficulties and dangers that are to be considered in matters of state: num 3. The benefit of prouidence and fore-sight in matters of state: Ibid. The benefit and necessitie of prayer for the good successe of matters o state: num 8. The famous captaine Aetius prefering reason of state before conscience, bot destroyed him selfe and endangered the Roman Empire: cap 31. num 8. The highest point of state: cap 33. num 2. Reason of state verie variable: n. 8. Gods wil to conserue or destroy states not alwayes absolute: cap 36. num 29. VVhat the intention of a statist ought to be: cap 29. num 1. Three thinge to be considered of statists: num 5. Two thinges to be practized of statists: Ibid. A statist ought to measure the matters he vndertaketh with his abili∣tie: num 18. & 19. Better for a statist to acknowledge his defect then to ac∣cept a chardge he can not performe: num 20. A younge statist ought to begin his practize with smale matters: num 21. A young statist like to a phi∣sitian: Ibid. A young statist compared to an Iuie tree: num 22. Many mat∣ters not to be vndertaken at once of a young statist: num 25. Successe The euil successe of two expeditions of S. Levvis of France against the Infi∣dels: cap 12. num 16. The euil successe of an other expedition, made for the recouery of the holy land by the solicitation of S. Bernard: num 17. The dis∣grace and obloquie which the holie man incurred for the same; and how it pleased God to cleare him of that imputation by a publike miracle: Ibid. Suspicion How suspition is excluded from prudent circumspection: cap 3. num 10. An English prouerb to this purpose: Ibid. T Tarantola The admirable propertie of the Tarantola: cap 23. num 5. The bitinge or stin∣ging of the Tarantola cured by musick: num 6. Time Time not to be lost. cap 29. num 14. Timoleon An attempt against Timoleon ouerthrowne by a strange accident: cap 13. num 1. The opinion of Plutarck there vpon: Ibid. Tirants Tirants are slaues to those by whom they keepe others in slauerie: cap 13. n. 13. Tiranny can not be hid: cap 31. num 15. The speedy fal of tirannical states noted by Aristotle: cap 34. num 8. How Denis
represented to Damocles the miserable state of a tirant: num 42. Tiranny like a laborinth which hath no issue: num 45 A tirant conuerting his tiranny to a royal and iust gouernment shal be much more secure then by continuance of tiranny: num 46. Examples of tirants which assured their estates by iu∣stice & vertu: num 48. How a tirant may make him selfe generally beloued: num 51. The miserable end of tirants can not be attributed to chance, and why: num 59. The miserable end of tirants obserued dilligently by al historiographers and referred to Gods iustice: cap 35. num 33. The children of tirants punished for their fathers tirranny: num 42. Confirmed by sundrie examples of Baasa K. of Israel: num 43. of Manahen K. of Israel: num 44. of Denis tirant of Si∣cily: num 45. Of Ptolome K. of Egipt: num 46. &c. Treason rinces loue the treason but hate the traitor: cap 29. num 29. Treachecie Andronicus punished for his treacherie towardes Onias: cap 31. num 34. Charles Duke of Burgundie worthelie betraied: num 44. Caesar Borgia punished for his perfidious treacherie: num 45. Trust The extreame folly of such as trust wholy in themselues: cap 5. num 11. V Vertu The vncertaintie of the rewarde of vertu by political law: cap 9. num 27. It ouerthroweth men many times to haue done too good seruice: Ibid. Some as wel princes as other are of that nature, that when they thinke they cannot reward a man commodiously to his merit and contentment, they hould him euer after for an eie sore, and seeke to be rid of him on way or other: Ibid. The paines which worldly men conceiue to accompanie vertu seeme to them ineuitable except vertu it selfe be auoided: cap 9. num 28. Nothinge more yrkesome to euil men then vertu: num 30. The great auersion of wicked men from vertu: num 31. Impossible to finde teachers of true vertu in a prophane commonwelth: cap 10. n. 9. Difference betwixt vertuous & learned men in a cōmonwelth: n 10. The great vertu of many Saxon kinges whereof eight were canonized, be∣sides sixtie princes of royal blood: cap 21. num 8. The force of vertu consisteth in suffering or ouercoming euil: cap 24. num 25. The rewardes of vertu far greater by the occasion of euil: num 26. The true and ful reward of vertu reserued for the next life: cap 25 num 14. Vertu giueth reputation to the possessors thereof: cap 30. num 3. & 4. Vice Vice easily learned and vertu very hardly: cap 9 num 16. One only tast of vice is enough to make a man vicious euer after: Ibid. The ministers of vice soo∣nest exalted to honor: n 22. Victories God is the giuer of victories; And why he ouerthroweth many times the stronger by the weaker: cap 14. num 37. God giueth victorie three wayes: by secondarie, by casual, and by miraculous meanes: num 34.39 & 40. Ex∣amples of miraculous victories in the olde testament num 42. Vlisses Examples of miraculous victories in euerie age since Christ. c. 15 per totum. Vlisses companions transformed into beastes. cap 1. num 8. Vnion Hope of future blessinges by the vnion of the three crownes of England, Sco∣tland, and Ireland. cap 35. num 21.
W VVar War in England betwixt the K. and the Earle of VVarwick: cap 7. num 1 The euents of warre most doubtful? cap 14. num 1. Hanibal feared t euents of war: Ibid. The chance and decay of fortune in war exemplified  many famous captaines: n 3. The diuers casualties of warlike attempts: n Speedie execution most necessarie in matters of war: cap 29 num 15. Concerning the maintenance of a ciuil war in a forraine cuntrie: cap 33. nu 1 2 3 4 5 & 6 Good counsel of Alcibiades concerning the maintenance of  forraine war: num 7. Ciuil warres end often to the cost of the forrener tha maintained them: num 8.9 10 11 12 13 14 15 & 16. Considerations concer∣ning those which demande succour in matters of war: num 18. See more touching matter of war in the wordes Battaile, Conquest, ouerthrowe, and victories. VVelle Of a strange welle in Lucania: cap 23. num 4. A welle in Darbishire whic ebbeth and floweth four times in an houre: Ibid. Free-vvil Mans free wil not subiect to fate according to the opinion of the most anci∣ent Philosophers: cap 11. num 9. VVhy God gaue free wil to man: cap 24. num 4. Six reasons giuen for th same: Ibid. Free wil was giuen to man for his great benefit, and for God great glorie: num 10. VVilliam VVilliam the conqueror minister of Gods iustice to conquer the English: cap 21. num 25 His tiranny vpon al states: Ibid. His extreame crueltie: num 2 The English had not one day of repose during 21 yeares of his raigne: n 27. The crueltie and auarice of K. VVilliam Rufus sonne to the Conqueror: Ibid. He was killed by chance with an arrowe as he was hunting: Ibid. VVisdome True wisdome the particular gifte of almightie God: cap 1. num 7. The benefit of wisdome: cap 24. num 21. VVisdome the especial gift of God according to Plato: cap 28. num 3. VVha wisdome is and wherein it consisteth according to our holy Scriptures: nu 7. He which truly feareth God is wise for his temporal good, and why: num 9 No man is wise in exposing him selfe to Gods indignation: num 10. Th difference betwixt wisdome and prudence: num 11 No man so wise that he knoweth alwaies what is conuenient for him selfe: n 17. The wisest worl∣dly man is a foole in that which importeth him most: num 32. VVhy the simplest seruant of God is wiser then the wisest wicked man: num 33. The wisest man liuing playeth the foole sometimes when he attempteth any thinge against the wil of God: cap 35. num 11. VVit The cause of mans natural infirmitie, and the weaknes of his wit: cap 1. num 6. The opinion of many Philosophers of the weaknes of mans wit. num 11. Two notable sayinges of Socrates and Archesilaus to this purpose: Ibid. The imbecilitie of wit acknowledged by Salomon: num 12. Y outh Youth corrupted by lasciuious bookes and ballads: cap 9. num 17. An obiection that the good education of youth is sufficient for the insti∣tution of a perfect commonwelth: cap 10. num 2. The answere to the same, shewing diuers impediments that hinder the good education of youth: n FINIS.
FOR THE PROOFE OF THE IMPER∣fection and insufficiencie of humaine policy; the natural infir∣mitie of man, and the imbecillitie of his vvit, vvith the causes therf are declared. And by the vvay it is signified, vvhat dan∣ger and detriment grovveth to man by selfe loue and presump∣tion of his ovvne vvit, vvith an exhortation to humilitie. CHAP. I. WEE read in Plutarke that there were certaine sentences grauen vpon the gate of Apolloes temple at Delphos, whereof one, was,Plutarke: vpon this vvord. E∣grauen vpon the gate of Apolloes Temple. as it were, a salutation of the people to Apollo, con∣taining a certaine profession of their faith, and beleefe of his Deitie; which the diuel who de∣uded them in that Oracle, ascribed to him selfe. An other was  good lesson or aduise of Apollo to the people, in recompence herof; The first was, this word Ei in greeke, which signifieth hou art, whereby the diuel who alwayes seeketh to be honored s God, tooke vnto him selfe the proper and true title,The diuel affe∣cteth the title proper to Diui∣nitie and attri∣ute of diuinitie, alluding to the name which God geueth to im selfe in the Scripture, to wit, Ego sum qui sum, I am he which m. The other (to wit Apolloes lesson,Exod. 6.3. or aduise to man) was  hse-auton, know thy selfe: that is to say, know thy owne imbe∣cillitie or weaknes. 2. Therfore to transferre this from the Gentils to vs Christi∣ns, and to apply it to my present purpose;The knovvledge of God, induceth mā to the know∣ledge of him selfe Arnob. lib 7. contra Gentes. I say that these two entnces haue such reltion, and correspondence, the one to the other, that by vnderstanding the first, we may come to the consideration of the latter, and by the knowledge of the latter, we shal the better conceaue the first For as Arnobius noteth very wel if we know and consider that God only is, that is to ay, that he only hath essence, and being, of him selfe, as being
the first and principal cause of al natural causes and effectes, t Author, Creator, Moouer, and Conseruator of al thinges,  cannot, but consequently acknowledge that we haue no tr essence, nor being of our selues, and therby we come also to t knowledge of our owne fraylty, and infirmitie; which is the fo said lesson that Apollo gaue vnto man, in saying gnothse-au Know thy selfe.The knovvledge of our selues, in∣duceth vs to the knovvledge of God. Againe this knowledge of our selues, inducet and leadeth vs in some sort to the knowledge of God; for whe we wel consider our owne imbecility, frailty, and mortality with the mutabilitie, and inconstancy of humaine thinge we easily perceaue that we are not absolute or yet haue any tr being of our selues, but that we depend as al other thinges do vpon some supernaturl power, that is to say, vpon the com¦mon Father, Author, and Creator of nature and of al natur thinges: and so we come to vnderstand, not only that there is  God,Plato in. Alcib. but also what is our duty, and obligation to him, in respe of our dependance vpon him. Therfore Plato teacheth tha to the attaining of vertue and wisdome, two thinges are most r¦quisite in man, the first, to know God, and the second to kno him selfe. 3. Now then; one of the greatest impediments that hinde man from knowing either God or him selfe,Presumption a great impedi∣ment to man for the knovvledge of God, and of him selfe. is a vaine conceit and presumption, that many men haue of their owne witt and sufficiency, which draweth them into infinite errors, absu¦dities, and dangers, both of bodie and soule: for it ingendret in them obstinacie, arrogancy, a spirit of contention, contra¦diction, and singularity, indignation and disdaine of other me contempt of counsel, and of al help, humaine and diuine; an not only error, but also heresie, infidelity, and atheisme. F those that presume ouermuch of their owne wittes, and me¦sure al thinges therby, doe commonly beleeue no more the they know, and vnderstande: and therefore seeing them selu vnable to sound the depth of Gods iudgementes or to compr¦hend many misteries of our Christian & Catholique faith, with in the compasse of their capacitie, they fal many times into fla heresie, or atheisme. 4. This disease of presumption (for so I may tearme it bein a mortal sicknes of the soule) is much the more dangerous f
that it so affecteth,The presump∣tion of a mans ovvne vvit most dangerous, and vvhy. or rather infecteth & blindeth the vnder∣tanding of man, that euerie one seeth it sooner then he that is cke therof, who cōmonly thinketh him selfe to be very sound nd wel. For reason, which in the diseases of the bodie is able o iudge thereof aright, being it selfe wel at ease, is in this case e parte it selfe that is diseased, being possessed with such a hrensie that it perceaueth no more the lamentable case it is in, en doth a madde or frantike man see his owne madnes: in hich respect it is in very manie incurable; for that they take uch pleasure in their owne sickenes, that they wil admit no ure, nor so much as anie counsel for their remedie. 5. And truely if we consider how general the infection ther∣f is amongst men, though not in al a like, and how few there re that perceaue it in them selues; we shal see what cause we al aue, (for I admonish my selfe herein as wel as others) to feare east we haue some touch thereof, more or lesse. And to this urpose, let euery man examine him selfe, how often in his life, e hath held & stifly defended some false conceite and opinion f his owne, how apt he is stil to doe the like;Hovv generally the infection of presumption raigneth. how wel he li∣eth his owne doinges; how loath he is to confesse an error, or o seeme to be ignorant, or yeld to an other man: let euery one (I say) consider this wel, and he shal see what cause he hath to uspect some spice of this phrensie in him selfe, which wise men ought the rather to eschew, and abhorre, for that it is the pro∣er disease of fooles; for as our English prouerbe saith, None so old as blind Bayard, nor any man more confident of his owne witt, and knowledge, then he that hath least, or none at al. 6. Wheras on the other side, the wiser a man is, the better e seeth and considereth, as wel the general imbecillitie, and weaknes of man, as his owne particuler defectes, from the which no man in this life can be free;No man vvith∣out some defect. and weighing wel how itle al that he knoweth is in respect of that which he knoweth not, and how vncertaine al humaine knowledge is, & how sub∣iect to error, he acknowledgeth his owne frailtie, & ignorance, Non alta sapiens (as the Apostle saith) sed humilibus consentiens,Rom. 12. not conceauing highly of him selfe (nor medling with matters a∣boue his reach) but limiting his conceites in al humilitie within the compasse of his capacitie, which is a necessarie & essential
point of true wisdome,The cause of mās natural infir∣mitie, and the vveaknes of his vvit. as I wil declare more at large hereafte But to th'end that the natural infirmitie of man, and his igno¦rance may the better appeare, the cause therof is first to be co¦sidered, for so we shal the better vnderstand the effect. 7. Therfore although man at his first creation, had al th powers of his soule vigorous, & perfect in their nature, promp and readie to the execution of their functions,Original Iustice lost by the fal of Adam. as his reaso and vnderstanding cleare, his wil and affection ordinate, an inclyned to good, and his sensual powers so bridled by origina iustice, that they yealded due obedience to reason: Yet whe original iustice was lost by the fal of our first father Adam, an the light of Gods grace extinguished, not only reason was muc weakned, and the wil disordered, but also the sensual powe so corrupted,S. Tho. 1. 2. q. 85. art. 3. or rather infected, that they haue euer since runn head-long to their obiects with such violence, that they com¦monly draw the wil after them: whereof diuers reasons may b giuen, but one or two shal suffice, to wit, that althouh the wi be so placed betwixt reason and sense, that it may inclyne it self to either, yet it contracteth a kind of frendshippe, and amiti with sensuality, a long time before it be acquainted with reaso (as we see by experience in children, who are some yeares ledd by sense, before they come to the vse of reason) wherupon i followeth,The vvil often ouercome by sen∣suality. that the wil hauing alreadie found the passion of sen¦sualitie, stronge, familiar, and pleasant, and after feeling the fir motions of reason, weake, vnwonted, and disgustful, doth pre¦sently giue it selfe so fully ouer to the pleasures of the sense that it hardly recouereth it selfe euer after; especially seeing w can neuer come to the future good that reason promiseth vs, b by the conquest of concupiscence, and sensualitie, the whic geuing vs present paiment of an apparant good (to wit pleasur and delectation) entangleth & bewitcheth vs in such sort tha we are cōtent to rest, & repose therin; yea & to yeald our selu prisoners to pleasure, and to desist from the pursuite of the fu¦ture good, and true felicitie that reason promiseth vs. Homer. Hesod. Ouid.8. This the Poets represented in the companions of Vlisse who returning with him towardes Ithaca, where they were t receaue the reward of their labours, were so bewitched by th way with the pleasant, and delectable cuppes of Cyrces, that the
would passe no further, but remained with her,Vlisses compa∣nions transfor∣med into beasts by Cyrces. and were trans∣rmed into beastes: as in truth al those may be said to be, that nding to the true felicitie which nature hath proposed to man e so drunken by the way with the delight, and pleasures of e world and the flesh, that they giue them selues ouer therto, d becmme, Sicut equus & mulus quibus non est intellectus.Psal. 31. Like a se, or a mule that hath no vnderstandinge. 9. Wel then, the wil of man being thus peruerted, what mar∣ile is it,VVhen mans vvil is peruerted by sensuality his vnderstanding is easily ledde in to error. if reason and vnderstandinge be so corrupted therby at it be drawne to error; for we see, that as men are affected,  commonly they vnderstand and iudge: in which respect loue called blind, for that it obscureth and blindeth the vnderstan∣ng of man in such sorte, that it can not descerne the truth. fficile est (saith the latin prouerbe) amare & sapere It is hard to ue, and to be wise. For where affection beareth swaie, reason is rced to obey, and therfore no man is thought to be a compe∣nt and fit iudge in his owne cause,Arist lib. 6. Et cap. 4. nor yet in the cause of those home he dearely loueth. And for the same reason Aristotle af∣rmeth: that intemperance corrupteth the iudgment of man, ecause the wil being seduced and the affection drawne therby,Intemperance, corrupteth mans iudgement. e light of reason and vnderstanding is so obscured & darkned y passion, that it can not discerne good from euil. And the same  also signified in the booke of wisdome, where the Holy Ghost eclaring the cause why a good man is some tymes taken sud∣ainly out of this life, saith, Raptus est, ne malitia mutares intellectis.Sap. 4. e was taken suddainly away, least malice or inordinate affection, should ange, or corrupt his vnderstanding. Therfore although reason since e fal of our first father,VVhat domi∣nion reason hath ouer the sensual povvers. doth stil retaine so much dominion uer the sensual powers, that it may subdue them with the assi∣ance of the wil, rectified and guided by grace; yet when the wil  peruerted, reason either is wholy seduced and deceaued ther∣y, or at least remaineth so weake, and powerles, that it looseth he commaund and dominion which it ought to haue, and ther∣ore the Poët saith; Video meliora probóque, deteriora sequor.Ouid. Metam. lib. 7. in prine. I see and pproue that which is best, but I followe the worst. 10. Hereto I may adde also an other reason of the error in mans vnderstanding, to wit, the difficultie of the obiect therof, for that truth, (which is the obiect of the vnderstanding) is not
only inuolued,The difficulty of the obiect of mans vnder∣standing. and wrapped like the kernel of the nutte, in  many shells & rindes of abstruse doubtes, and difficulties, th many times it is hardly found, but also it is so incountred wi falshood and error, disguised with the shew & apparance  veritie, that the best wittes are often deceaued there with; a therefore no maruaile if the wisest men of the world doe ma times goe astray, stumble, & fal into the obscuritie of the mani¦fold, and intricate doubtes, questions, controuersies, perplexi¦ties, & vncertaine euentes that daily occurre in humaine affaires. The opinion of man principal philosophe s cō∣cerning the im∣becility of mans vvit. Cicero. A cad: quest: li. . & 2.11. This the wisest Philosophers did so wel consider, that man of them affirmed; that nothing in this world can certainly b knowne and vnderstood, by reason of the error in mans sense imbeciltie of their wites, breuitie of their liues, and the obsc¦ritie of truth; of which opinion were, Socrates, Plato, Democrit Anaxagoras, Empedocle, and al the new Academicks; in so muc that Socrates was iudged by the Oracle, to be the wisest man the liuing, because he was wont to say, Hoc solum scio, quod nihil s I know only this, that I know nothing; whereto Archesilaus adde that not so much as that could be knowne, which Socrates sai he knewe, to wit; that he knewe nothing. And although the Philosophers, may seeme to haue exceeded in exaggerating the ig¦norance of man (therby to represse, & correct, as it may b thought, the presumption that many men had of their ow knowledge, and wisdome) yet they sufficiently signified therb their conceit of the weakenes of mans iudgement, and imbeci¦litie of his wit. 12. Therefore to reduce the extremities of opinions in thi matter to a meane,The vvisest man doth often erre vvithout the help of Gods grace. I neither wholy euacuate and annihilate ma knowledge and prouidence, as they seemed to doe, neither ye with others extend, and enable it further then may be iustl granted to mans imbecilitie. For as I confesse that man (thoug corrupt of nature, and weake in wit and iudgment) may neuer¦theles, with the ordinarie concurrance, and assistance, that Go geueth to his creatures, know, foresee, & determine man thinges notably, both for his priuate, and publike good; so I al∣so affirme, that except he haue some supernatural light of God grace to illuminate his vnderstanding, and to rectifie, and guid
his wil, the wisest man shal many times absurdly erre: and that erfore it is conuenient, for euery man, how wise soeuer he old him selfe to be, to acknowledge the same in al humilitie to mighty God, and to craue true wisdome of him,An exhorta∣tion to humility as his special ft, following the example of the wise man, in the booke of isdome which treating of the excellency of true wisdome, and cknowledging it to be the special gift of almighty God, craued  at his handes, and withal signified notably, the weaknes of ans wit and iudgment, with the reason thereof, in these wor∣es; Da mihi domine &c:Sap. 9. Giue me o Lord (saith he) that wisdome which as∣steth thy seate and cast me not of from the number of thy seruantes, for that  am thy bondslaue, and the sonne of thy bondwoman, a weake man and of orte l fe, vnable to vnderstand aright vvhat is iustice and lavve,The imbecillity of vvit acnovv∣ledged by Salo∣mon. and who∣euer is the most perfect and excellent amongst the sonnes of men, he is to be counted as no bodie, if thy vvisdome doe not assist him; for the cogitations f mortal men are doubtful and feareful, and al our prouidence is vncertaine,  reason that the corruptible bodie doth aggrauate the soule, and this earthly abitation doth depresse the vnderstanding. 13. This, and much more to this purpose saith the wise man r rather the Holy Ghost by him,True vvisdom the particular gift of almighty God. teaching that true wisdome is he particular gift of almighty God, and that without the light f his grace, mans iudgment, and vnderstanding is obscure, his onceits, and designements ful of doubt and feare, his proui∣ence, and foresight vncertaine, and therefore Salomon wisely duiseth. Ne innitaris prudentiae tuae &c. Rely not vpon thy ovvne vvis∣ome, but in al the course of thy life thinke vpon God,Prouerb. 3. and he shal direct thy epps. And to the same purpose Ecclesiasticus saith, Ne te extollas &c: oe not extolle thy selfe in thy ovvne conceite like a bul,Ecclesi. 6. lest perhaps thy force nd pride be beaten dovvne by folly, that is to say, lest for punishment of thy pride, God giue thee ouer to thy selfe, that thou maist fal by hy owne folly. S Paul also exhorteth the Romaines, and in them l other Christians, Non plus sapere quam opertet sapere,Rom. 12. sed sapere ad brietatem. Not to be vviser then a man ought to be, but to be soberly or modestly vvise that is to say; that a man goe not aboue his reach, not (as I may tearm it) out of the sphere of mans infirmitie,Arist. lib. 1. & 3. de anima. nor attribute to him selfe greater perfection of nature then he hath, considering that though almighty God hath placed him in the highest degree of al those creatures that haue sense; yet he hath
giuen him the lowest ranke of those that haue vnderstand hauing subordinated him to Angels,Angels may re in the iud∣gement of future things depēding on the vvil of God or of man. of whome those of  most inferior and lowest order, haue an vnderstanding far m cleare, and excellent then he; and yet so neuerthelesse th their knowledge is also limited. For if we consider them in th owne nature, without the supernatural helpe of God, they  erre, and be deceaued; as in the iudgement of things to co that depend not vpon natural causes, but only vpon the wil  God, or yet vpon the free wil of men. 14. Hereof the Philsophers were not ignorant, & th¦fore Porphyrius the Platonick, seeking to giue some probable re¦son,Porphyr apud Io Picum Miran∣dul. cont. Astro∣logos. why the sprits that gouerned the Oracles, lyed many time saith; that hen they iudged of thinges to come by the starres, they mig be deceaued. And yet in the opinion as wel of Philosophers, as D¦uines, Angels haue a most exact, and certaine knowledge of natural causes,Angels haue a perfect and ex∣act novvledge of al natural causes. & of the effects therof, hauing naturally in the selues the formes, or representations of al natural things, whi therfore they behold and see with al euidency, and perspicuit whereas man doth vnderstand nothing but by discourse, or b meanes of phantasie, & sense, both which are greatly subiect  error, in respect that they depend vpon an organ so corruptib as mans body is, which many tymes being il disposed, wholy op¦presseth the vnderstanding,Plutar: in vita Catonis. (as we see in fooles and mad me and doth obscure it more or lesse in al men. In which respec Nearchus the Pithagorian (as Plutark affirmed) was wont to cal th body of man,Plato in Phae∣don. pestem animae, the plague of the soule. And Socrates, Pla and al their followers held most constantly, that the more th soule is abstract from the senses, the more clearly it vnderstan¦deth; and that because in ths life it can neuer be wholy separat from the same, therfore it can neuer in this life attaine to perfec knowledge & true felicitie. Man ordayned to upply the roome of An∣gells. Mat. 12.15. This was their opinion, and being wel vnderstood, it i not dissonāt from our Christian doctrin, which is, that althoug man is ordayned to supply he roome, and place of the Angell that fel, and therfore is made capable of their perfection,  meane as wel of their knowledge as beatitude (in which respec our Sauiour saith of soules glorified, sunt sicut Angeli, they are  vnto Angells) yet he can not attaine vnto it in this life, which
but as the way wherein he is disposed, led, and guided thereto y the light of Gods grace; which disposition is to be perfected, nd consummated by the light of glorie in the next life. Wher∣ore the Apostle saith, Ex parte cognoscimus, &c:Mans knovv∣ledge most vn∣perfect in this life. we knowe in this fe, but only in parte, or vnperfectly, but when that vvhich is perfect shal me, (that is to say when we shal attaine to the vision of God, nd perfect beatitude) then that vvhich is vnperfect shalbe euacuated;1. Cor: 13. When I was a child, I spoke like a childe, I thought like a childe, I vnder∣oode like a childe, But when I became a man I layed away al childishnes. hus saith the Apostle, signifying that as the vnderstanding and nowledge of an infant, is most vnperfect, in respect of the nowledge and iudgement of a man;Mans knovv∣ledge to be per∣fited in the ne lyfe by the vi∣sion of God Ibid. Psal. 35. Aug: lib: de ci∣uitat: dei ca. 29. so is al the knowledge we aue in this life most weake and vnperfect, in respect of that hich we shal haue in the next, quando videbimus facie ad faciem, hen we shal see God face, to face, & in lumine eius videbimus lumen, &  his light shal see light. For as S. Augustin saieth of Angells, we al see al creatures more truly, and clearly in the wisdome of od, then in them selues, by reason that we shal see them in eir cause, and in the very arte whereby they were made. 16. This I haue said to shew that he which attributeth to im selfe, any perfection of knowledge or vnderstanding in is life, exceedeth the limittes of mans nature, and taketh vpon him the knowledge of Angells, or of a soule glory∣fied, whereto it is no more possible for any man in this life to arriue by any natural meanes, then for a beast or an vnreasonable crea∣ture, to attaine to the knowledge & vnderstanding of a man: which I wil yet make more euident in the next chapter.
A FVRTHER DECLARATION OF THE IN¦firmity of man, and his imbecillity of wit, with a considerati of his natural bondage to Almighty God, and of his blindn and ignorance in his ovvne affaires; And consequently of t necessity of Gods prouidence, for his gouernment and directio as vvel in publike, as priuatte matters. CHAP. 2. AS selfe loue and presumption of a mans ow witte are very discomendable in al such as a infected therwith; so are they most hateful a hurtful in those,The dammage that ensueth of self-loue and presumption. that hauing good natural ¦lentes, and giftes of body and minde, doe with flowe in wealth, dignity, and authoritie, who vaine conceit of their owne sufficiency being seconded wi the pride of their prosperity, and confidence of their powe makes them many tymes so insolent, that the wise man sait of such kind of men: It is better to meete a raging Beare, that hath  her whelpes,Prouerb. 17. then a foole that is confident in his folly. For such co¦monly contemne both God and man, and runne such an vnbrid¦led and exorbitant course, that they ouerthrowe, not only the selues, but also al such as depend vpon them. 2. Therfore for as much as the sayinge of the royal pro¦phet Dauid is truely verified in such men, to wit, homo cum in h¦nore esset,Psal: 48. &c: man when he was in honor did not vnderstand, and th¦fore was compared to brute beastes, and made like vnto them; I wish  might happe vnto such men as we reade in the fable,A fable of a mule moralized in mans pre∣sumption. Plutarke in Con∣uiio Sapient. it chance once to a Mule in Lidia, which beholding in the water his ow shape, & seeing his longe legges, his tall stature, his feiture ( it seemed to him) very faire and comely, his braue pack-saddl adorned with plumes of feathers, bells, and other furniture, w so transported with suddaine delight and ioy, that first he bega to braye then to leape and kick, and after to runne: but as  was in the midst of his carriere, he chanced to remember th his father was an Asse, that his longe legges and tall stature, w
giuen him to make him the more able to labour and toyle, and at his braue furniture, was but a saddle to carry a packe, and nally that he was borne, and ordeined to serue, and to beare ot only burdens, but also stripes, if he did not his duty: which hen he remembred, he was so confounded, that he suddainlie aid his course, and retourned quietly to his accustomed labour nd occupation. The like I say, I wish might happe to such as dmiringe ouermuch their owne good partes, and the giftes herewih God hath blessed them, are puft vp with such pride, at forgettting wholy both God & them selues, they run head∣ng to their owne ruine and perdition. And therfore to re∣oke such men from their dangerous course, to walke the se∣ure way and trodden path, which nature hath laid open to ad them to true honor and felicity, I wish that they would re∣ember, and consider certaine things figured, and represented,  the fable of the Mule. 3. The first is, the state and condition of Man,Iob. 17. as that rottenes nd filth (as Iob saith) vvas his father, that vvormes are his brethren, d sisters; that he is dust; and shal retourne to dust; being replenished vith miseries, he florisheth and fadeth againe vvithin a vvhile like a ovver, and vanisheth avvay like a shaddovve, and neuer remaineth in e state; such being the instabillitie of mans nature,The instability of mans nature. that the ore we fix our cogitation theron, to find out some stay, and ue being therin; the lesse we find it, euen as, the more a man resseth or wringeth water in his hand, the lesse he holdeth.Plutark vpon the vvord Ei.  which respect Heraclitus was wont to say, that as a man can ot enter twise into one and the selfe same running water or uer, by reason that it fleeteth, and passeth away continually;  we cannot possibly find the substance and nature of man, wise in one state. For as time which measureth it, so changeth il, that one instant succeedeth and destroyeth an other, one inute an other, one hower an other, one day an other, and he like in weekes, monthes, and yeares: so also mans substance nd life, which is measured, & wasted by time,Mans nature changeth euery minute of an hovver. Senec. ep. 24. suffereth change nd mutation euery yeare, euery month, euery weeke, euery ay, euery hower, euery minute, euery instant, vntil it be cleane onsumed, in so much that our life (as Seneca saith) is but a conti∣ual death: for we are dailie and howerly dyinge, seing some
parte of our life is cut of euery day, and euery hower; not onl in our old age, and decaying yeares, but also in the very flow of our youth. For though then we growe and increase in ¦ture and strength, yet our life stil decayeth and decreaseth, sei we haue euery day so much lesse to liue. And as the voiding  emptying of an hower glasse that is continually runinge, do not consist only in the falling of the last graine of sand,Seneca Ibid. but  the whole defluction thereof from the very beginninge: so o death, saith Seneca, doth not consist only in the last hower  our life,Man alvvayes dying. when we cease to be, but in the wasting and consumi course thereof from our first natiuity: so that our last gaspe  not so properly our death, as the end and cōsummation thereo For although thereby we arriue to the periode of death, yet w were goinge towardes it longe before. Aug: de verb: Dom. Ser. 1.4. In this respect. S. Augustin saith very wel, that we shou haue lesse cause to feare, if we were made of glasse. For w (saith he) is more fraile and brickle then glasse; and yet vve see it is ke and may continue whole ages. And although it be subiect to breaking  accidents, yet there is no feare that it may perish, neither by old age or sic¦nes:S. Augustines discourse of the frailty and mi∣sery of Man. wheras we feare not only innumerable chaunces, which bringe  to his end, and neuer ceasse to threaten his ruyn, but also the iniury of ty which wasteth vs continually, so that we may auoid perhaps a blowe or fal, or such other mishaps, but vve can neuer auoid our end; vve may s and eschewe, those perills which are external, but internal which da growe vvithin vs, vve cannot eschevve. Thus saith this graue, an learned Father; which how true it is, daily experience doth d¦monstrate vnto vs, so that we may truely say with the Psalmi Homo vanitatis similis factus est,Psal. 143. dies eius sicut vmbra praetereunt. Ma was made like to a very vanitie, his dayes passe away like a sha¦dowe. 5. The second point which I would wish those men to co¦sider, is, that al those external giftes, either of body or of fo¦tune (as they are tearmed) which so dazel their eyes,VVorldly pōpe and honors com¦pared to the packsadle of the mule. that the cannot see their owne weaknes, may wel be compared to t braue packsaddle of the Mule; which though it be neuer  gaye and gorgeous, is but a base thinge, and hath nothing in  selfe to be esteemed, seruing only for the more commodio and easy bearing of the burthen that is laid theron, yea, a
is not only burthensome in it selfe, but also if it be not wel and ariely vsed, gauleth the back of the poore beast that beareth it,  much as would the packe it selfe, that is laid vpon it. Euen  honors, dignities, wealth, pleasure, and al worldly pompes  commodities, that seeme so glorious in the eyes of most men, aue no true goodnes in them selues (for as Seneca saith wel If ey were truly good,Seneca ep. 87. they would make them good which possesse them) ut are ordained to make men beare more contentedly the eauie burthen of miseries, and afflictions incident to this life, d yet neuerthelesse are not only burthensome them selues hat is to say accompanied with corrosiues, crosses,VVorldly welth and pleasures accompanye d vvith dangers and discommo∣dities. anxietie of ind, and dangers) but also if they be not wel and warilie vsed, e more pernitious to their owners and possessors, then the erie miseries of the world, for the comfort and remedy whereof ey are ordained. For the greatest afflictions of this life can but ly ouerthrow the bodie, & no way hurt the soule, but greatly ofit it, (if a man beare them patiently) but worldly wealth, easures, and commodities, doe ouerthrow eternally both die and soule, if they be abused; that is to say, if they be not garded only as thinges transitory, and referred principally to taining of eternal felicity. Therfore S. Paul giueth this pre∣pt to Timothy for rich men; Diuitibus huius saeculi praecipe, &c:1. Timoth. 6. ue (saith he) this precept or instruction to the rich men of is world, to wit, that they looke not too high, nor fixe their ope in vncertaine riches, but in the liuing God, who doth fur∣sh vs aboundantly with al thinges necessarie for our vse, and at they labour to be rich in good workes, giuing and com∣unicating their goods freelie, to the end they may make a good undation of treasure for the time to come to obtaine true fe. Thus saith the Apostle. 6. Thirdlie to proceede with the application of the fable; would haue these men to remember,For vvhat end the good giftes of body and mind are be∣stovved on man. Cicero offic. lib. 1. that their good gifts of odie and mind, are not (as I may tearme it) of their owne pur∣ase, but bestowed vpon them by their Creator, not only for em selues, but also for others; no man being borne (as Cicero ith) for him selfe, but for the maintenance of humaine so∣etie, wherof euerie one is a member, and therfore not to liue  sport, pleasure, & idlenes; but to labour each one in his qua∣lity
and degree, for the common and publike good. In whic respect,Iob. 5. Iob admonisheth vs, that, Homo nascitur ad laborem,  auis ad volatum; Man is borne to labour, as the bird is ordained to fly Finally, I would wish them alwaies to haue in mind, that wha¦soeuer dignitie, excellency, and priuiledge of nature they clai to them selues; yet they nether are, nor can be free and at the owne libertie, but are by an irreuocable law, and decree of na¦ture, perpetually subiect and bound to the seruice of God the Creator, and the author of nature, as his slaues and bondmen yea, with such condition, that if they doe not sattisfie their dut in that behalfe, they shal be chastised, and punished, not wi stripes, as was the Lydian mule, or only with temporal pain but with eternal; and so much the more greuouslie, by ho much they are more potent and powerful then others. For  the booke of wisdome saith,Sap. 6. Mighty men shal suffer torm mightely. The natural bon¦dage of man to God.7. And for as much as the explication of this point of ma natural bondage, and seruitude to God, may helpe greatly to t decyphring of the weaknes of mans wit, and his other infirm¦ties, I thinke good to speake somewhat more particular thereof.Aug de gen. ad lit lib. 8. ca. 11. Isidor Petrus. Comestor. S. Agustin and other learned Fathers haue wel obseru in the holy Scriptures, that almighty God is not called ther Dominus that is to say Lord, in the creation of any other creatu but of man, and that then the Scripture saith, Formauit D¦minus Deus,Genes. 2. &c: Our Lord God framed, or made man of the slyme of  earth. And againe afterwards, when it is declared that God  put man in Paradise,Ibid. it is said; Tulit ergo Dominus Deus hominem, & Our Lord God tooke man and put him into Paradise. Whereup S. Augustin saith thus;S. Augustines obseruatiō vvhy God is called Dominus in the Scripture. Aug. de gen. ad lit. lib. 8. ca. 11. Nunc vbi ad id ventum est, &c. Now w it came to passe that God placed man in Paradise to labour there and to k it, the Scripture saith: Sumpsit Dominus Deus hominem, &c. Our L God did take man and put him into Paradise, not because God is not  the Lord of al other creatures as wel as of man, but because this vvas vvrit only for man to admonish him hovv much it behooueth him, not only  haue such a Lord and maister, but also to liue in al obedience vnder his co¦mandement, and not licentiously to abuse the povver that God hath g him; Thus far S. Augustin. 8. To this purpose it is to be noted, that God is called Domi
only in respect of the seruitude and bondage, that man, and al is other creatures owe vnto him. For as father and sonne, mai∣er and seruant, husband and wife, are correlatiues, and can ot be the one, but in respect of the other;Lord and Slaue Correlatiues pro¦per to God and man. Psal: 115. so also is Dominus nd seruus, Lord & slaue. Wherto the Psalmist seemeth to allude, ying to almightty God; ô Domine o Lord. And yeelding present∣ the reason why he calleth him so, he addeth. Quia ego seruus us & fllus ancillae tuae: because I am thy bondman, and the nne of thy bondwoman. And for this cause nothing is more equent in holy Scripture then the names of Dominus and seruus plyed to God, and man. Where also to shew the nature and ndition of this bondage, the same is compared to the bon∣ge, that by the law of nations the slaue oweth to his Lord and aister. Where vpon the royal Prophet saith:Psal: 122. As the eyes of bond∣en are vpon the handes of their Lords, and the eyes of bondwomen vpon  eyes of their mistresses: so are our eyes vpon our Lord God vntil he haue rcy vpon vs. And S. Paul teaching Lordes and maisters how they ould cōport them selues towards their slaues:Colloss. 4. You Lordes (saith ) doe nothing to your slaue, but that which is iust & rightful, knovving at you haue also a Lord and maister in heauen. Signifying therby, as Thomas noteth, that as they were Lordes and maisters to their ues; so is God Lord and maister to them, and to al other men.Lect. 4. in cap. 5. ep. ad Colloss. herein neuertheles it is to be considered, that the seruitude d subiection which man oweth to God, is without al compa∣son, infinitly greater, and more obligatory,The difference be¦tvvixt the ser∣uitude of one man to another, and the bondage that al mē ovve to God. Ambros. in ep. ad Coloss. ca. 4 then is that which y bondman by the law of nature or nations, can owe to his ord. And therfore S. Ambrose vpon the same wordes of S Paul, th that he signified to Lordes and maisters, that they were not nly Lordes, but as it were in a shaddowe; (hauing only com∣andement of the body) and that the inuisible God, author of  thinges, is the only and true Lord of body and soule. 9. This bondage of man to God was acknowledged by the ost ancient, and learned Philosophers. For Pithagoras teaching,The ancient philosophers ac∣knovvledged the bondage of man to God. Cicero de sene∣ctute. Plato de leg. at it is not lawful for any man to kil him selfe, vseth the same  an euident and knowne principle, to proue his doctrine, say∣g That no man ought to depart out of the station of this life without the mandement of God. To which purpose also Plato saith: That God o lesse offended if a man kill him selfe, then any Lord or maister would
be, if his slaue should doe the like. The reason is, for that man be  the bondslaue of God by nature, is wholy his, and not his ow Fot as Aristotle saith:Aristot. li. 1. polit. The definition of a slaue. A slaue is a man, that is an instrument of  maister, and wholy at his disposition. In which respect also humai lawes ordaine, that a slaue be held as part of the goodes a possesions of his Lord, as being wholy his, no lesse then his o or his asse; the which must needes be vnderstood much more  haue place in man towardes God, in respect of his obligatio and subiection to him,The bondage that man oweth to God for his redemption. infinitly greater then can be the obl¦gation or subiection of one man to an other; especially if  doe adde to the former considerations, an other reason of o seruitude and bondage to almighty God: to wit, the inesteem¦ble price payed for vs by our Sauiour IESVS CHRIST, God  man, who of his infinite bounty shed his most pretious blo to redeeme vs from the thraldome of the diuel and sinne, to t end we might serue him in the freedome of righteousnes  iustice. Whereto S. Paul aludeth, sayinge. Let euery man rem in his vocation wherein he is called to the Christian faith; wert thou ca beinge a bondslaue? let not that trouble thee, for the bondslaue that is ca to the faith of Christ,1. Cor: 7. is made a freeman of our Lord, and the freem becoming a christian is a bondslaue of Christ; you are bought for a g price. &c: Thus saith the Apostle, signifying that the slaue, a the freeman, are equally slaues of our Sauiour Christ, in respe of the price that he paied for them both,The slaue and the freeman are both slaues alyke to God. Ibid. and that  slaue no lesse made free from sinne by his vocation to the  the freeman. In which respect the Apostle calleth the  slaue, Libertum Domini, A free-made man of our Lord 10. Hereupon I inferr two thinges, the one, that seeing m is the bondslaue of God,Al mans acti∣ons depend vvholy on the vvil of God no man of what degree, quality, or c¦dition soeuer he be, can be free or at his owne liberty, to dispo of him selfe or his owne actions, but dependeth wholy vpon t wil of almighty God, his Lord. Therefore S. Paul saith. Non  vestri,1. Cor. 6. empti enim estis pretio magno. You are not your owne,  you are dearly bought. And againe in an other place. Siuè v¦mu siuè morimur Domini sumus,2. Cor. 5. whether we liue or dye, we  our Lordes. 11. The other conclusion, which I inferr vpon our bond  to God, is, that no man, be he neuer so wise, rich, and pote
hath sufficient meanes in him selfe for his owne conseruation,The necessity of Gods Gouerment & direction for the conseruation of man. hich I say, not so much in respect of the need that euery man ath one of an other (yea and many times, of the vilest, & basest reatures that are) as for the necessity that al men haue of the ouernment and direction of almighty God their Lord, as wel o illuminate their witt and vnderstanding, as also to prouide hem of al thinges necessarie for their liues, and for their priuate, t publike good.Eccle. ca. 11. Whereof the Holy Ghost aduiseth vs in Eccle∣asticus saying: Ne dicus sufficiens mihi sum? Say not I am sufficient t my selfe. For (as he also saith in the same chapter) bóna & ala, vita & mors, paupertas, & honestas à Deo sunt.Ibid. Al thinges good d bad, life and death, pouerty and wealth are of God. And although  may seeme to some, perhapps needles, and superfluous for me o offer any further proffe of a matter so euident as this, yet for smuch as there are ouer many, which (as I haue said before) artly for lack of faith and beleefe of Gods prouidence, and par∣ely vpon a vaine presumption of their owne abilities, doe as∣ribe al the remedies of their necessities either to their owne isdome and industrie, or to secondary or inferiour causes, and ot to the first cause which is the prouidence of God.Psal. 15. I wil ther∣ore breifly say somewhat of this point. 12. The royal Prophet saith.A further Con∣sideration of mans bondage to almighty God. Dixi domino Deus meus es tu quo∣iam bonorum meorum non eges. I said to my Lord, thou art my od, because thou hast no need of my goods. Where he sheweth he reason why he calleth him his Lord, and his God, to wit, or that almighty God being the first cause, the very fountaine f goodnes the begininge and end of al thinges whatsoeuer, is  absolute of him selfe, that he hath no need of man or any hinge else. Wheras man hauing no substance, being, or good∣es, but that which he hath of God, dependeth wholy vpon im, as al other creatures doe. And therefore doth worthily ac∣nowledge him for his God (that is to say) for his Creator, uthor, and Conseruator; and oweth him al subiection, serui∣ude, and bondage, as to his natural Lord and maister. wher∣pon it followeth necessarylie, that he nedeth his assistance, elpe, and direction, not only as his creature, but also as his ser∣ant, and bondslaue. Where vpon also S. Augustin saith,Aug. de. Gen. act. lit. lib. 8. cap. 11. Deus ostra seruitute non indiget, &c. God doth not need our seruitude or
bondage, but we neede his gouernment and commandeme that he may both imploy vs, and also keepe and conserue vs:  therfore he is our true and only Lord, because we serue hi not for his good and comodity, but for our owne good  conseruation. Thus far S. Augustine. Aristot. polit li. 1. A Lord or a slaue by nature accor∣ding to Ari∣stotle.13. This also apeareth by the reason of the natural bonda of one man to an other, according to the doctrine of Aristo who saith: That a seruant or slaue by nature, is he, that is n of him selfe sufficient and able to gouerne him selfe, but ha neede of the direction and gouernment of an other; And t a Lord, and maister by nature, is he, that doth so excel in w¦dome, that he is able to guide and direct both him selfe  others, and that it is profitable and necessarie for a bondsla to be gouerned by a Lord and maister, in respect that he c¦not sufficiently gouerne him selfe. 14. This being true in a kind of natural bondage of one m to an other (whereof Aristotle treateth) much more forcibl and euident is the reason in the natural bondage of al manki to God;The absolute ne∣cessity of Gods help and dire∣ction for man, and vvhy. for that no man needeth so much the helpe and dir¦ction of an other man, as al men need the assistance and help  God. Neither is any mans wit so farre inferiour to the wi of an other man, as al mens wittes and vnderstandinges are i¦feriour to the infinite wisdome of God, whose healp and di¦ction is absolutly necessary for euery man, for two reasons ¦pecially. 15. The one, for that the thinges that are necessary for m life and conseruation,The first Reason. are nether in man him selfe, nor in  power, but depend wholy vpon the wil and pleasure of Go which no man can doubt of, that cōsidereth the doctrine eith of Christians or of Paynim Philosophers, or the consent and c¦stome of al nations,Al things neces∣sary for mans life depend on the vvil of God. or yet manifest experience. For who see not how little it auayleth any man to toyle, and labour, in tilli the ground, in sowing, planting, or in traffique by sea, or lan if God do not giue heate, cold, raine, windes, and faire weath in their seasons, wholesomnes of ayre, encrease of the fruits  the earth, yea and the fruits them selues? Psame. 103.16. Therefore the kingly Prophet saith of almighty Go That he watereth the mountaines from aboue, to the end the earth
bring hay for cattle, and herbes for the vse and seruice of man: bread to engthen his hart, and wine to make him merry, and oyle to exhilarate  face, and that when he openeth his hand, al things are filled with his unty, and when he turneth awaye his face, they perish and turne to their st. Thus saith the royal Prophet. And this dependance of an on Gods prouidence for al things belonging to his conser∣tion, was signified amplie by almightie God him selfe to the ople of Israel, when he gaue them the law vpon mount Sinai,Leuit. 26. omising them, that if they kept his cōmandements, he would ue them raine in due season, and that the earth should bring orth al kind of herbs and plants, that their trees should be aden with fruite, that their vintages, & haruests should ouer∣ke one an other, with such aboundance, that they should not e able to consume the old store, before they should haue new: ey should liue in peace, and securitie, & that neither noysome easts, nor the sword of the enemie should molest them: of al hich he also threatned them the contrarie, in case they would ot obey him, and afterwards he fully performed the one, and e other, blessing them with peace and plenty when they ser∣ed him, and punishing them with famine, pestilence and warre hen they offended him. 17.Luc. 11. For this cause we Christians by our Sauiours instruction d commandement, doe daily pray vnto God, to giue vs,The miraculous effects of pu∣blike prayer and processions in cases of necessitie amonst Chri∣stians. The experience of Gods proui∣dence in the relife of mens ne∣cessities, shevved by examples. A great plague in Rome reme∣died by publike prayer an. 590. Baron. an. 590. Gregor. Turo∣nens. li. 10. c. 1. hist Franc. Panem strum quotidianum, Our daily bread and sustenance: And doe vse not nly priuate but also publike praiers, processions, fastinges, and ortifications in al cases of necessitie, aswel to auert Gods rath, as to obtaine his grace and benefits for the common ealth, whereof admirable, and miraculous effects haue bene nd are many times seene amongst Christians, for the vndoub∣ed proofe of Gods prouidence in al thinges belonging to our onseruation, which I could confirme by manie most manifest xamples in al ages, but three or foure shal suffice for this time, ecause I am also to touch this point hereafter. 18. In the yeare of our Lord 590. there was such a cruel plague nd pestilence in Rome, that al the inhabitants of the citie were most destroied therewith; for remedie whereof S. Gregorie the reat (then newly chosen Pope) commanded that publike rayers, & processions should be made for some daies; whereby
the wrath of God was appeased, in such euident manner th S. Gregorie did also ordeyne other solemne processions to gi God thankes for the benefit receaued; as appeareth in his ow workes,Gregor. in Re∣gistro in princ. Indict 10. & Greg. Turon. li. 10. Baron. an. 590. besides the testimonie of other approued authors. An at the same time (as constant fame hath euer since reported there publikly appeared an Angel putting vp his sword vpo the topp of Moles Adriani, now called by the same occasion th Castle of S. Angelo. 19. Also in the yeare of our Lorde 717. the Saracens an Arabians beseiged Constantinople three yeares together with wor huge armie and nauie,The seige of con∣stantinople mi∣raculously ray∣sed an. 717. but at length through the prayers of  German, (who then was liuing and Patriarke therof) and the fre¦quent processions of the people, made in the honor of the ble¦sed virgin Mary patronesse of that cittie; the armie of the In¦deles, was for the most part consumed with famine, cold, & pe¦stilence,Beda. de. 6. aetat: in fine: an 718. Paul. Diac. li. 6. . 47. and the nauie wherein those which remained, meant  haue retired them selues, was with a fierie haile that fel vpon  from heauen, sunk and vtterly destroyed, excepting ten ship wherof fiue came vnto the handes of the Christians; God so di¦posing for his owne greater glorie, that the particulers there might be knowne. In memory of which notable miracle the was a feast instituted, & yearlie celebrated, to giue God thanke for the same,S. Theophanes Cedrenus, Menologium Ba∣silij 15. Augusti. as appeareth not only in S. Theophanes, Cedrenus a others, but also in the Martirologe, and Calender of the Greeks. 20. But to ommit many other examples of ancient time, an to come to our dayes, within the memory of man. It chanced  late in the yere of our ord 1594.litterae annuae. an 1594. that there was so greate  drought, and danger of a general famine in the Iland of Ch which is now vnder the Turke, that the people thereof des¦pairing of humaine help, determined to haue recourse to the d¦uine.The grat drought in the I∣land of Chio, and the mira∣culous remedie therof by pro∣cessions of Chri∣stians. And therefore, for as much as the inhabitants there were of foure seueral professions of religion, one of Turks,  other of Iewes, the third of schismatical Greekes, & the fo of Romaine Catholiks, they al agreed to implore the mercie and fa¦uor of almighty God, by publike processions, euery one accor∣ding to the custome of their religion, which the Turkes perfo¦med first, the Iewes next, and the Greekes next after, witho any comfort or releife; but the fourth day that the Romane Cath¦likes
made their procession, it pleased God to giue them such re of raine, that their necessitie was remedied, and the Chri∣an Catholique religion greatly confirmed, to the confusion th of the Turkes, and Greekes and the conuersion of many  them. And now againe of late in the yeare 1603.litterae annuae an 1603. not yet ful o yeares agoe, the people of certaine townes in the Ilandes of ilippinas lately conuerted to the Christian faith by the Fathers  the Socictie of IESVS, were in like manner in great feare of in through an excessiue drought in al those partes,An excessiue drought in the Ilands of Philip∣pinae releeued an. 1603. and relei∣d by the like meanes with aboundance of raine which fel the ne day that the procession was made, whereas other people of e townes and countries adioining (who vsed not such meanes  obtaine Gods fauor) receaued not the like benefit, as it is tified by late letters from those partes, newly printed by pu∣ke authoritie. 1. Hereto I also adde an other moderne example whereof I  selfe was an eye witnes in Paris about the yeare of our Lord 7. at what time there was such a continual drought,A great drought in France, remedied by prayer an. 1587. for many nethes togeather, that a general famine was greatly feared, ereby the Magistrates spiritual, and temporal were moued  ordaine that the reliques of S Genouefa Patronesse of Paris uld be caried in solemne procession, as at diuers other times ey had bin in other publike necessities, with manifest benefit the cittie of Paris, whereto the successe was answerable also this time. For whereas there had not bene one dropp of raine many monethes before, it began the same day of the processi∣ in the afternoone to raine aboundantly, and so continued ny dayes after, where with the people were wonderfully mforted. And I remembre wel that some of our country, who ing the preparation for the procession iested greatly at it ying it would now be seene what wonders S. Genouefa could orke) were much confounded, as some of them vnto whose des this treatise may come, if they be yet liuing, cannot but member. 22. This I haue said (as I also shal haue occasion to say more her where) to shewe the manifest experience of Gods proui∣nce in our affaires, and our dependance thereon for our con∣uation, which may also be confirmed not only with the do∣ctrine
of the most learned Philosophers,The consent of al nations is the voice of nature. Cicero, tuscul. quaest: lib. 1. but also with the vn¦uersal consent and opinion of al nations (which Cicero calleth the voice of nature) seeing the general custome of al people in  ages, hath bene to craue al kind of temporal benefites of Go by publike prayer and sacrifice, as al histories doe testifie. T which purpose Aristotle signifieth that the vse was in his tym and had bene from al antiquitie,Oblation of the first frutes after haruest gene∣rally vsed in Aristotles time. Arist: eth. lib. 8. ca. 9. Ibid. ca. 12. to sacrifice to God present after haruest, to offer vp vnto him the first fruites of his ow giftes, in thankes giuing for the same. And he also teachet that man oweth to God a filial loue as to his father, because  receaueth of him his essence, being, & nourishment. In whi respect also Plato calleth the prouidence of God: Matricem gene humani;The prouidence of God the nurse of mankind. Plato lib. 2. de lg. & lib. 10. de ep. Plutar. in his Tratise vvhy O∣racles ceased. The testimonie of Seneca con∣cerning mans dependance on the prouidence of God. Seneca. lib. 4. de benef. c. 6. The nourse of mankind. And Plutarke in like manne saith: It is that louing and charitable mother, which bringeth forth, a conserueth al thinges for the vse of man. 23. Therfore to omit infinite other testimonies of Philoso¦phers which might be alleaged, I conclude this point with t famous Seneca, who to confute the Athiestes of his time, and  shewe withal their ingratitude towardes almighty God the Creator and Conseruator, rehearseth many benefites that ma hath receaued of God, aswel generally in the heauens, as als particulerly euery one in his owne person, and then addeth the wordes. Seing thou doest greatly esteeme (saith he) the gifts, why art thou so vngrateful, not to acknowledge th selfe a debtor to him that bestowed them vpon thee? When  hast thou the very breath that thou drawest? Whence th light, wherby thou disposest of thy actions? whence the blood wherin thy vital heat, and spirits are conserued? When those exquisite sauors, meats, and sauses, so aboundant th they euen tyre, and cloy thy appetite? Whence these prou¦cations of languishing pleasures? Finally, whence hast tho this very ease, rest, and repose wherein thou wallowest an wasts thy selfe? If thou be grateful, wilt thou not say, with th poët:Verg. log 1. Deus nobis haec otia fecit, namque erit ille mihi semper Deus; th is to say, God gaue me the same, and he shal be my God for eue And a little after he addeth. But if thou say, that not God, b nature hath giuen thee al this, dost thou not vnderstand, th thou dost but change the name of God, and cal him nature,
whom thou mayst apply what name soeuer expresseth any hea∣enly force, or effect, for so many may his names be, as he gi∣eth gifts. Ergo nihil agis, ingratissime mortalium. Therfore,Ibid. c. 7. & 8. The ingratitude of Atheists ta∣xed by Seneca. o thou ost vngrateful of al mortal creatures, thou dost but tryfle hen thou sayest that thou art a debtor to nature, and not to od: for God is neither without nature, nor nature without od, but both is one, as if thou shouldst haue receaued a benefit f Lucius Annaeus Seneca, and wouldst say, that thou art not a etter to Seneca: but to Anneus, or to Lucius. Dost thou not see at thou chāgest not thy creditor, but his name? Euen so; what∣euer thou callest God, be it nature, fate, or fortune, al are but uers names of one God, according to the diuers vse and exer∣se of his power. Thus far Seneca; reprouing notably the ingra∣tude of Atheists, as Cicero also doth, saying.Cicero. de legib li. 2. He that is vn∣gratful to God deserueth not the name of a man. Horat. li. 2. ode 13. The second rea∣son of mans in∣sufficiency to prouide for him selfe, to vvit, be∣cause he knovv∣eth not vvhat is conuenient for him selfe. Eccles. 7. Hierom in. li. Habac. ca. 1. A sound ad∣uise of plato con∣cerning vvhat man should craue of God. Ibid. Plato in Alcibi∣ade 2. Hier. in ep. ad. Ephes. li. 2. ca. 4. That he deserueth not the me of a man who inioying those things which the earth produceth for his e, is not thankful to God for the same. Thus much for the dependan∣e of man vpon the wil and prouidence of God for his conserua∣on, which is one of the two reasons that I intended to yeeld, hy Gods help and direction is absolutly necessary for man. 24. The other reason is, because mans wit is so weake and ind, that he knoweth not what is good and couenient for m selfe, and much lesse for others, where vpon the Poet saith? uod quisque vitet, nusquam homini satis cautum est in horas; that is to y: No man is so wyse, and wary that he knoweth at al tymes what to oyde. And the booke of Ecclesiastes saith to the same purpose. uid necesse est? &c. VVhat needeth a man desire or seeke thinges aboue him fe, seing he knoweth not so much, as what is necessary and conuenient r him selfe and in the dayes of his peregrination? 25. Therfore S. Hierom compareth almighty God, to a wise hisition, who giueth not to his patient hurtful thinges, though e desire them neuer so instātly. And likneth man to a sick man, ho many tymes desireth that which would be his death if it ere granted him. In which case, Mercy (saith he) were cruelty: uia voluntas tua contra te petit. Because thy owne wil desiers against ee. Wherefore Plato giueth sound aduise neuer to craue of al∣ighty God absolutly any thing that partaineth to our temporal ate, but with condition, to wit, if it be conuenient for vs: r that as S. Hierome also saith in an other place; Id quod, oportes
orare nescimus, & saepè contra nos petimus, estimantes esse pro nobis!  know not what it is conuenient to pray for, and many tymes we  those thinges that are against vs, thinking that they be good for vs. A the Apostle him self saith also to the same purpose.Roman. 8. Spirit ¦uat. &c. The spirit of God doth help our infirmity, for wee know not  nor what wee should pray. 26. This is manifest by the vaine and foolish desiers of  yea of the wisest, that wish and earnestly desier some tymes  thinges as are most pernitious for them; In so much, that it  wel be said vnto them, as our Sauiour said to his two Apos who desired to sit the one on his right hand, and the other  his left:Matt. 20. Nescitis quid petatis: You know not what you may  wherefore Plato comendeth a certaine poet called Ion,  when he heard his freends other whiles craue of God  thinges as were not conuenient,A vvise prayer of a Pagan Poet. was wont to pray thus. O Iup giue vs good thinges, wherther we aske them or no, but those thinges  are euil giue vs not,Plat. in Alcib. 2. though we craue them neuer so much? And th foolish desiers of men the Poetes signified by the fable of Pha who hauing by his importunity,Ouid. metam: li. 1. & 2. obtained of his father Pha the guiding of his chariot, burnt both the world and him sel And Cicero also signifieth the same by an other fable of Thaes who craued of Neptune three wishes whereof one was the ¦struction of his owne sonne Hippolitus,Cicero. offic. lib. 3 which being obtain he remained al his life after most sorrowful and inconsolable. The conclusion of this chapter inferring the necessity of Gods prouidence for mans conserua∣ton.27. Seing then man is so weake of power and wit, that  him selfe, he neither can sufficiently prouide for him selfe,  ther yet knoweth what is conuenient for his owne estate, it f¦loweth necessarily, that the prouidence of God his Lord  Creator is most needful for his conseruation and directio throughout the whole course of his life; nor only in his priua and particuler affayres, but much more in publike matters, p¦taining to the gouernment of the commonwelth: for the be prooffe whereof, and of the insufficiency of al humaine wit  policie, I wil laye downe some examples of the errors of so famous Politickes, who by their owne imprudence haue eith ouerthrowne, or else greatly indangered, them selues and the estates.
OR THE MORE AMPLE PROOFE OF THE insufficiency of humane vvit and policy, diuers examples are alleaged of the errors of Politikes, and vvorldly vvise men. By occasion vvhereof it is also debated, hovv farre a man may trust a reconciled enemy, and hovv true prudence & Christian charity, may concure vvith distrust and suspition. CHAP. 3. LEWIS the eleuenth King of France, one of the most politicke Princes that France euer had,Philip de Comi∣nes de reb. gest. Lodouici. 11. in. cap. 33. eing at warrs with his owne brother Chares duke of Normandy: Francis duke of Britany: and Charles duke of Burgundy, and desiring greatly to seperate the last from the other two, to the end e might the better be reuenged on them, solicited him by his mbassadors to come to conference with him, which the Duke alded vnto, so that the meeting might be in a towne of his wne in the frontiers of Flanders and France,Levvis the 11. of France ouer∣taken in his ovvne policy. for his better secu∣ty: where with the King was wel contented. The meeting erfore being apponted at Peronne (whither the Duke was come ith his army) and safe conduit sent to the king by a letter of e dukes owne hand, the king went theter without any for∣es or guard, to shew the confidence he had in the Duke, to the nd to oblige him the more, and to gayne his good wil. But the uke seing now his enemy in his power, and vnderstanding at he same time, that Liege was reuolted from him by the solicita∣on of certaine Embassadors of the king, tooke him prisoner, nd would not release him vntil he had recouered the towne of ege, whither he forced him to accompany him with no smal anger of his person And in the end hauing made him graunt to ome hard conditions in fauor of his confederates (against home the king had especially plotted that conference and reaty) he released him. 2. Now then who seeth not in this example,The manifest er∣ror of King Levvis. how grosly his great Politike erred in two things, wherein it might be pre∣sumed
that a man of any experience could not haue bene  ceaued. The one, that hauing employed certaine agents or ¦bassadors, to stirre vp the towne of Liege against the Duke,  did not countermaund it, when he resolued to put him selfe in  his handes; for who could be so simple, as not to consider t if the practise should take effect (as it did) whiles he should  in his power, not only the peace and amity which he desired  make, would be hindered therby, but also his person enda¦gered? For that the Duke should haue iust cause to detaine hi at least vntil he had done him reparation of the wrong. 3. The other error was, that he would vpon any security  safe conduit, put him selfe to the curtesy & mercie of his enem without an vrgent, and ineuitable necessity; knowing how lit assurance is many times in wordes or oathes, when present co¦modity either priuate or publike, is offered by the breach ther Besides that, his owne rule (which he was wont to say,  al the latin he would haue his sonne to learne,VVhat learning Levves the 11. required in his sonne. to wit, Qui nes dissimulare, nescit regnare He which knoweth not how to disse¦ble, knoweth not how to raygne) might haue moued him  haue doubted in his enemy, that which he practysed him self and was apt enough to suspect in his best frinds. And this he ha iust cause to feare in the Duke of Burgundy, whome he had dece¦ued before by a false composition, which he made with him  Constans, & brake presently after, wherby he had both incited & also taught him, to paye him with money of the same stam Wherein may be noted as wel his notable error, as also Go prouidence and iustice in punishing his double dealing with t like, according to the saying of our Sauiour; Qua mensura, & VVhat measure you shal make or giue to others,Matt. 7. the same shal be measure or made to you againe. 4. No lesse notable an example both of the one and of th other, may be obserued in Caesar Borgia duke of Valence, who great wisdome Machiauel so much admireth,Machia. princ. Caesar Borgia Du  of Valence the paterne of machiauels prince: ouer∣throvvne by h s ovvne policy. that he maketh hi a mirrour and paterne for a prince; whome he might mo iustly haue made a mirrour of mischeife, and paterne of al perfi¦diousnes, cruelty and impiety. This Caesar being after the deat of his father spoyled of al the estates that he had by force an fraud layed to geather in Italy, and in danger as he thought o
his life, or libertie at least,Guicciat. hist. lib. 6. by the displeasure of Pope Iulius the se∣ond that then raigned, resolued to flie for his securitie to Har∣ando Goncales, general in the kingdome of Naples, for Ferdinando ing of Aragon and Castile; forgetting, or not considering, the anifold causes of offence that he had giuen to him, and to the ing his maister in sundry occasions, and so trusting to his safe onduict, he put him selfe into his handes, and was shorly after ent by him prisoner into Spayne, by order from the King; hereof Goncales excused him selfe, pretending that his faith and fe conduit, ought not to hinder his execution of the King as maisters commandement, against whome he said he could iue no securitie: and so the Arch-politike of his time, who had y subtiit & treachery, ouerthrowne very many, was him selfe y God iust iugment ouer-reached, and (as I may tearme it) ipt in his owne play, to his vtter ruine and ouerthrow, as vpon n other occasion shalbe declared more amply hereafter. 5. Therfore what was become of al his accustomed craft? here were al those profound policies, that excellent iudg∣ēt, that sharpnes of wit,Hovv farre a man may trust a reconciled enemie. those rare inuentions that made him uch a worthy patern of Machiauels prince? for whether we res∣ect true wisdome, or the common craft and subtilitie of world∣e men (which is now commonly called machiauillian policie) e erred in the principles of both; for subtilitie and craft, which xcludeth al charitie, teacheth so to distrust, as neuer to trust, or to pardon an enemie, nor to leaue to hate, hurt, & reuenge, hen oportunity is offered, notwithstanding any reconciliation. Besides that, the mallice of men so farre extendeth it selfe in uch cases, that politikes hold it not secure for him that doth of∣fend any man, to trust him euer after. To which purpose the talian prouerbe saith. Chi offende non perdona mai, whereby it is signified, that he which doth any notable iniurie to an other man, can neuer after with his owne saftie trust him, or yet spare im if he may ouerthrow him, for feare that at some time or other he may seke to be reuenged; so that this Arch-politike ac∣cording to the rules of his owne art and profession, should haue neuer put his life into the hands of one whome he had once of∣fended, and much lesse of an open enemie reconciled. 6. And as for true wisdome though it euer keepe it selfe
within the boundes of charitie, and teacheth vs not only  p¦don, but also to loue our enemies, yea and to doe them  pleasure we conueniently may; yet it so ioineth the pruden  the serpent, with the simplicity of the doue, that it warneth vs to b¦ware of them,Seneca. A reconciled enemie not to be trusted. Ecclesiast. 12. and not to trust our liues or states in their hand when we may auoid it, remembring euer the councel of Se who saith. Neuer beleeue that he wil be faithful vnto thee, who of  enemie is become thy friend. Which also the Holy Ghost teacheth i the booke of Ecclesiasticus; where it is said. Neuer beleeue or tr thy enemy, for as old Iron groweth euery day more rusty then other; so i¦creaseth his rancor; and if he humble him selfe, and crouch vnto thee, y haue an eye vnto him, and keepe thy selfe from him; place him not  vnto thee, least he put thee out of thy place, and make thee know to thy c how true are my wordes. And againe to the same purpose, Salom saith in his parables.Prouerb. 26. VVhen thy enemy shal speake softly vnto thee (th is to say) shal flatter thee or speak thee faire, then trust him not,  then his hart is ful of mischief. In al which the Holy Ghost instr¦cteth, and aduiseth vs to be warie, but not malicious; to be ci¦cumspect, but not suspitious; to haue an eye to a reconcile enemie, but not to hate or hurt him, or to reuenge old wronge Therefore Salomon coūterpe vseth the foresaid doctrin with pr¦ceptes of compassion, & charity towardes our enemies, sayin VVhen they enemy falleth,Prouerb: 24. be not glad therof, and let not thy hart reioyce  his ruyn, least our Lord seinge it, be displeased with thee, and turne  wrath from him.Prouerb: 25. And in an other place; if thy enemie (saith he)  hungry, gue him meat, if he be thirsty giue him drinke, and thou sh cast coales vpon his head, and our Lord shal reward thee, Thus far th kinge and prophet,Rom. 12. whose wordes S. Paul also reciteth, and o Sauiour confirmeth by his commandement; saying; Loue yo enemies, and doe good to them which hate you. &c. 7. Thus then we see how true wisdome, and Christian ch¦rity concurre, and how the prudence of the serpent, is to be ioy¦ned with the simplicity of the doue,In vvhat man∣ner vve may di∣strust our ene∣mies. in so distrusting our ene¦mies that we leaue not to loue them, and yet louing them s that we trust them no further then may stand with our ow safeti, euer fearing the malice of mans nature, which is so ab¦struse ad hidden, that no man can be assured of his best fren and much lesse of a reconciled enemie. In which respect, it i
wisdome so to loue and trust our friendes that we remember thal, that they may become our enemies;Seneca. ep. 3. And therefore Seneca uiseth vs so to liue, that our actions may be as iustifiable fore our frends as before our enemies. To which purpose o the Holy Ghost in the booke of Ecclesiastes saith: Ab ini∣cis tuis seperare, & ab amicis tuis attende.Eccles. 6. Seperate thy selfe from y enemies, and beware euen of thy frends. And in an other ce; A filijs tuis & domesticis attende.Eccles. 32. Take heede of thy owne ildren, and of thy how should seruants; which neuerthelesse not to be vnderstood, as though a man should trust no bodie, hich were not only a miserable case, but also extreme folly. r as Seneca saith. It is as foule a fault, and as great a folly in a man, to eue and trust no body, as to beleeue and trust euery man: and many,Seneca. ep. 5. No lesse folly to distrust al men then to trust euery man. Plut: in Dion. th he, whiles they feare to be deceaued, do teach men to deceaue them, ging them iustly there vnto, by suspecting them wrongfully. The which tark also confirmeth saying; That fooles for lack of wit to prouide erwayes for their owne securitie, doe thinke it the safest and wisest y to distrust al men, and so in the end they procure their owne ruine. 8. Therefore in this point of confidence, and diffidence e wisdome consisteth (as al vertue doth) in the meane, to wit, at we nether trust, nor distrust al men,Hovv distrust may be called the mother of se∣curity. nether commit our es and whole estate to any mans wil and pleasure, but only in e of necessitie, and then also to make discreete choyce of ap∣oued, wise, and vertuous friends, but neuer of a reconciled emie. And in this sence it is wel and wisely said; that Diffiden∣ est mater secuitatis; Distrust is the mother of security. 9.Hovv distrust and suspicion may stand vvith true prudence and charitie. Cor. 13. Chrisost: hom. 33. in. 1. Cor. 13. But now perhaps you wil aske me how the rule of perfect aritie, and of true prudence can agree herein, seeing charity as Paul saith: non cogitat malum; doth not thinke any euil, that is  say (as S. Chrisostome expoundeth it) suspecteth no euil; how en can I distrust my reconciled enemie, but I must suspect at he wil betray me? Whereto I answere, that two thinges are  be considered in charitie, the one that it beginneth at a mans fe, for no man is bound so to loue an other, that he hurt him fe: the other is, that as S. Paul testifieth also of charitie,1. Cor. 13. non it perperam: it doth nothing foolishly or vnaduisedlie. For  S. Chrisostome saith, expounding the same place, Charitas non t temeraria, &c: Charitie is not rash and headie, for it maketh
a man wise, graue, and constant. 10. Now then to shew how suspition is excluded from t prudent circumspection, which charitie admitteth, it is to  vnderstood,Hovv suspition is excluded from prudent circum∣spection. that I may be warie and circumspect, though I  not suspect, but only vpon a general supposition of mans or¦narie frailty and malice, and the inscrutabillity of his hart, I  in a doubtful case take the surest way, to wit, that although, verely hope that my reconciled enemie be so good, and ho a man, that there resteth no malice in his hart towardes me neuerthelesse I wil be so considerat and prouident, that put t case he should haue the wil to hurt me, yet he shal not haue t opportunitie or occasion to doe it by any act of mine: in whi sence our english prouerbe may be wel vnderstood, which sai If my freend betray me, I beshrew him; but if my enemie betray me, I besh my selfe. And this aduised and warie proceeding is so far fro breach of charitie, that it standeth wel with al kind of loue  frendshippe, betwixt frind and frind, father, and child, brot and brother, man and wife, prince and subiect. And therfore respect that it seemeth to include some kind of suspition,  withal admitteth al charitable affection it is called by some, Be¦uola suspitio, a frendly or louing suspition: in which sense S. C¦sostome saith.Chrisost. hom. de S. Susanna. Maleuola suspitiones sunt calumniantium; beneuola s¦pitiones sunt gubernantium; Malitious suspitions are proper to C¦lumniatours; beneuolous, and frendly suspitions belong to G¦uernours. 11. Therefore to returne to duke Valentin, hereby we may  that he was destitute, not only of true wisdome, but also of wit, and reasonable discourse, when he, in whose handes,  brother or frend could euer be secure, expected securitie in  hands of his enemie, and perswaded him selfe, that faith sho be kept with him, who had neuer kept it with any man. But ¦cause I shal haue more occasion to peake of him hereafter, I  passe to a moderne example of mans ignorance and weaknes,  the miserable end of Monsieur Chastillon,Monsieur Cha∣stillion. Admi∣ral  France fought his owne destruction. Admiral of France  sacred at Paris, who for the great opinion of his wisdome  prudence, had the conduct of al the affaires of the Protesta in France, some yeeres in the first troubles in the time of Ki Charles the 9.
12. when after some yeares of cruel warre in France betwixt e Catholikes, and the Protestants, peace was concluded in the are 1570. & for the better assurance thereof, a mariage agreed on betwixt the most Christian King that now raygneth, en called King of Nauare, and the sister of Charles the 9. en King of France, al the cheife heads, and leaders of the Pro∣stants, were inuited by the King to the court, aswel for the emnization of the mariage,The massaker of Protestants at Paris an. 1570. as for the confirmation of the ace, whereupon there was held an assembly of the Protestants Rochel, to determine whether it were conuenient that they ould al goe to the court or no, and it seeming good vnto them at some of the principal, especially the Admiral should stay at me to preuent the worst, in case there should be any double aling on the Kinges part, the Admiral only was of opinion that was conueniēt they al, & especially he him selfe should goe, & eaged many reasons to that purpose; and finding them neuer∣elesse vnwilling therto the put them in mind how oft he had alded to them, contrary to his owne opinion in diuers con∣tations, and therfore requested them, that in this they would ndescend vnto him, not doubting but it would turne to the blike benifit of their cause. Wel, to be breife, they yealded to him, rather to satisfie his importunity, then for any liking ey had therto, and so he went with the rest, and within a few yes after their arriual at Paris, both he and they al (excepting me two or three that escaped by chance) were slayne, by order  the King 13. Who seeth not here an euident example of mans igno∣nce & weaknes, in the Admiral, who hauing in so many occasi∣s before this tyme of his ouerthrowe, shewed him selfe so udent and prouident, that he could nether be ouercome by rce, nor circumuented by fraud had not now so much wit,The errour of the Admiral of France.  to follow the wise aduise of ohers, but thought it safe and cure for him and them, to aduenture (as a man may say) al their ods in one bottome, yea and without any necessity to put em selues to the mercy of a Soueraine King whome they had  highly and so many wayes offended. And this may be the more ondered at in the Admiral,Estien, Pasqui lib. 5. epist. for that in the beginning of the cond troubles, he wisely foresawe the like danger, and incon∣uenience
to him selfe, and warely auoided it. For, the  hauing got some inkling of the Protestants intention to  new broiles, and fearinge most the Admiral in respect of  great iudgement and experience, both in matter of warre  peace, sent vnto him Monsieur du Tore his cosen to adur him that he had great and important affaires to communi with him, wherein he would gladly haue his aduise, and the¦fore desired him to repaire to the court with speede; The A¦miral hearing the message and suspecting (as it should seeme that the King ment no good towardes him, said to Monsieur  Tore,The ansvvere of the admirable of France to the King. that he should tel the King from him, that there were  Count Egmonds in France; meaning that he wold not suffer his he to be out of so easely as Count Egmond had done latelie before Flanders. And this was al the answere he would giue him; w¦by it appeareth how circumspect he was and suspicious of  King, when as yet he had giuen him fatre lesse cause of offe then afterwardes when he had the second time rebelled ag him yea and forced him to make a dishonorable peace, and  notwithstanding he could not be disswaded from putting h selfe and al the rest of his frends into his hands;The first blovv that God giueth a vvicked man, vvhen he vvil destroy him, is in the brayn. so blind is  wit and iudgement of man, when God determineth to pu∣nish him, for then the first blowe that God common∣lie giueth him, is in the braine, wherby he taketh from him his iudgement, that he may runne headlong vpon his owne ruine,Psal. 9. and as the Psalmist saith of the sinner, be ouer reached in his owne plots and inuentions.
Y OCCASION OF THE FORMER EXAM∣ples, it is debated in the next chapter, vvhether the Emperour Charles the 5. did prudently in passing through France, vpon a safe conduict; and of the danger he vvas in, and hovv he escaped. Also the error of Henry the 3. King of France, in the slaughter of the Duke of Guise and the Cardinal. CHAP. 4. IT shal not be amisse to consider here,The passage of Charles the fifth through France into Flanders. Surius in com∣mentario rerum in orbe gestarum anno. 1539. by the oc∣casion of these examples, whether the most va∣liant, prudent, and pious Emperour Charles the 5. commited an error or no, when after many yeares warre, betwixt him, and Francis the first of that name King of France, and the sayd ings disgrace at Pauia, and his imprisonment in Spaine, he passed otwithstādinge through France vpon a safe conduict giuen him  the King, to giue remedy to the tumultes lately before raysed  Gant: wherein the good successe, aswel of his safe passage as of e speedie pacification of those troubles, may seeme to be no ale argument of his prudēnt designment; neuerthelesse waigh∣g the matter according to reason of state, & not according to e successe (which depending wholie on the hand of God is any tymes good & fortunate, though the councel and design∣ent be imprudent) I can not approue his resolution therin, for e reasons aboue declared, and the extreme danger that he ex∣osed him selfe vnto, and the smale profit he could expect to eape therby, incomparison of the dammage that might haue ucceded to him and his estate, if he had bene made away, or etained. For although it imported him very much, presently to uench that fire kindled in Flanders, before it should growe to  greater combustion; yet the danger therof was not so great, as ould haue bene in the inconuenience of his death or imprison∣ent, if it should haue chanced. 2. For; the reuolte of the coūtry might haue bene remedied
ether by force, or perhaps by faire meanes, as longe as he  life and liberty: but the other had bene remediles; and the gr¦test detriment that could befalle him; & therfore not to be ¦uentured vpon, but only when it could not be auoyded  this no doubt, was his owne opinion when he came into  being admonished of his great danger, not only by his sister th Queene of France, but also (as some men thinke) by the Kin owne sonne the Dolphin,The dangers that Charles the 5. escaped in pasing through France. Surius ibidem. who in respect of the good affection  did beare him, from the time that he had bene hostage for  father in Spaine, cast him selfe vp behind the Emperour vpon  horse, at his first arriualle before he alight (vnder couler to gi him a familiar welcome) & clapt him vpon the shoulder, sayi vnto him openly and merily, Yealde thy selfe Emperour; but af tould him secretly in his eare of the councells resolution to  him, whereupon the Emperour thinking it necessary to ga Madame d' Estampes (who was greatly fauored by the King,  thought to be his enemy) tooke occasion as he was talki with her, to let falle before her a rich diamond as it were  chance, and when she of curtesy tooke it vp to restore it vn him, he would not receaue it againe at her handes, but intre¦ted her to accept it as his gift, whereby (as also by his go perswasions) it is thought he procured her frendshippe, whi cōcurring with the indeauours of his sister the Queene of Fran and his owne good diligences done with diuers of the Counc was thought to facilitate his escape. 3. But who, or whatsoeuer was the meanes therof, it is  to be doubted, but that it proceeded principally from the pro¦dence and mercy of almighty God towardes him. To whi purpose it is to be considered, that it was reported not only  his owne seruantes, but also by the Embasadours of Flanders th attēded vpon him in al that iourney, that he spent 2. or 3. how euery night in praier vpon his knees,Surius ibid. The great deuo∣tion of Charles the fifth. & asmuch euery morni secretely in his chamber: in regard whereof, and of the gre seruice he had done, and was to doe to Gods Church, it may  presumed that God did specially fauour & protect him, wher¦of it pleased his Diuine majesty also to giue publicke testimon by deliuering him twise whiles he was in France from euide danger of death; the one time from stifeling in a smoake, th
vpon a suddaine was raised in great aboundance by an arteficial e, vpon a steare, as he was going from his chamber,Idem. Ibid. and an ther time from the fal of a great borde that light some part of it pon his head and brake it. And although it might haue bene eaued that these thinges proceeded of some practice (in hich respect the King would haue punished the authors therof  death, for the better satisfaction of the Emperour) yet he ould not suffer it, but obteined their pardons. 4. By these dangers, & the happie escape of the Emperour (in∣riour in wisdome to no prince in his time) three things may e∣dently be gathered. The first, his error: the second, th'in firmity nd weaknes of mans wit: the third, Gods most merciful and rouident care in the preseruation of his seruantes,VVhy God suf∣fereth his ser∣uants to fal into dangers. whome he ffereth some time to erre and to fal into great dangers and dif∣culties; partely for their humiliation, and to exercise their ith, patience, and confidence in him, for their greater merit; d partly to make manifest aswel to them selues as to al others, e louing care he hath of them, and that as the Psalmist saith; lus iustorum à Domino, & protector eorum in tempore tribulationis.Psal: 36. he health and saluation of iust men, is from our Lord, and he is heir protector in the time of trouble. Here then may al Princes earne of this prudent and pious Emperour, what is their best emedie in like cases of danger, to wit, to haue recourse, as he ad, to almighty God, and to craue his assistance, reposing them elues alwaies vpon his merciful prouidence, and saying with he worthy King and Prophet. Oculi mei semper ad Dominum,Psal; 24. quo∣iam ipse euellet de laqueo pedes meos, that is to say; My eies are alwayes pon our Lord, for he wil deliuer my feete from the snare. 5. I might adde to the errors in this kinde,The errour of Henry the third of France, in the slaugther of the Duke & Cardi∣nal of Guise anno. 1588. diuers other ex∣mples, notorious in this age, but I omit them for breuityes ake, to speake a word or two of Henrie the 3. King of France, and f his error and want of iudgment in the slaughter of the Duke, nd the Cardinal of Guise, whereof I am able to say much of my wne knowledge, for that I was at the same time in his courte nd pallace at Blays in the seruice of his mother; and wondered ot a litle to see & heare, many that were acompted very wise∣men, applaud to the Kinges act, as most prudent and necessarie, n so much that when any man vrged that it was against con∣science
to kil them in that manner especially the Cardinal,  commonly answered, That reason of state required it. Which  moued me to thinke euen then vpon writing some disco concerning the necessarie concurrance of the reason of  with conscience and religion, though I haue not had oppo¦nitie to performe it vntil now. 6. Neuertheles leauinge apart the consideration whe the act was in it selfe lawful or no, and weighing the circ¦stances therof,The great affe∣ction of the peo∣ple of France to the duke of Guise and the Cardi∣nal. only according reason of state; I thinke no  wil denie, that the King knowing the auersion, and aliena of his people from him selfe, their exceedinge great affection  the Duke of Guise & to al the princes of his family, and the c¦federacie of al the principal townes of France with them; y and with the Pope and the Catholike King (for the defence of C¦tholike Religion, in respect of the fauor that the King of Fra had shewed to the Protestants both at home and abroad)  man (I say) wil denie, but that he should in al reason haue s¦ficiently prouided him selfe of money and forces, before he ¦solued to kil the Duke, & especially the Cardinal, in such an odio manner as he did, whereby he was sure to incurre the censu of the Church, and thereby to giue a sufficient pretext to  owne subiects to take armes against him, and to forreine Princ to assist them. 7. But he was at that time so vnprouided of al meanes, to r¦presse the fury of his enemies, & to defend him selfe, that a pr¦cipal man about him, who at the first did greatly approue his  tould me within a few daies after, that he had greatly ouers him selfe, in doing it at such a time, when he had nether  principal towne at his commandment, nor forces in the feil nor money in his purse: which was indeed most true, as I  testifie vpon my owne knowledge. For as for the townes,  of the cheife and next vnto him,The reuolt of the principal to∣vvnes of France against Henrie the third. to wit, Orleance whereof he  counted him selfe most sure (by reason that the gouerno therof was wholy at his deuotion & the Citadel in his hand)  the very first that declared it selfe against him, within lesse th 2. daies after the act; the example wherof, Paris, Roane, and al t Parlamental, and other principal townes presently followed, in  much that there neuer passed 3. or 4. daies but there was new
of the reuolt of some one great towne or other; whereupon en∣ed so great necessitie and pouerty, not only to the King, but o to al the nobility in his court, that I thinke the like hath sel∣me bin seene in the court of any prince. For the townes sea∣g presently, & intercepting in their iurisdiction al the kinges ts, and receits, and the goods and reuenewes of al such as ere with him, reduced them to such necessitie, that they were ced to coyne their plate into money, and yet neuerthelesse thin a while they had not wherewith to buy them selues ate; In so much that the greatest and richest prince of France, s forced to borrow of one of his owne Chaplins al the money  had, which was but 30.The great misery and necessitie of the King of France, and al his court. crownes as the preist him selfe tould ) and the Queene was constrained to send away almost al her dies, and maides: (who in respect they were women were fered by the townes to passe) and the King for his parte was bate of money, as I vnderstood by one of his treasures who s my great freend, that for the remedie of his necessitie, and furnish the expence of his remoue to Tours (whither he was ced to flie) he had no other meanes but to make three new icers, vpon cōdition to prouide him amongst them 30. thou∣d crownes, which was al the stock and store he had for that sent, to susteine the waight of so great a warre, as he had by  owne ouersight drawne vpon him selfe. . And for his forces, it appeared presently how weake they re, for al his guardes and such other souldiers as he then had die, or could leauie in 2. or 3. monethes space, being sent to eance to assist the Cittadel (which held for him against the wne) were so few in number, that vpon the first newes of Mon∣r du Myenes march thitherward with no more then 3. or 4. ousand men, they abandoned the Cittadel; yea and the King m selfe was faine to flye downe the riuer in al hast to Tours,Henry the 3. of France his con∣federacy vvith the Protestants and the successe therof. ere after some time he was forced (for want of other remedy)  take the resolution to ioine with the Protestants, which ough it increased his forces, for the present, yet it so redou∣ed the hatred and fury of his enemies, that it did accelerate  distruction, which shortly followed, as I shal haue occasion  declare more particulerly other where. 9. Herein thou maiest obserue (good Reader) how this great
King (who in cunning subtility and al Machiauillian policy  inferior to none in this age) erred neuertheles most absurd that which a man would now thinke a child would hardly  bene deceaued in; so easelie is an error seene when it is past,  so hard to be foreseene, and preuented, especially where p reigneth, from the which very few men, or none are free in ¦ters that touch them selues. But because I shal haue occas to speake also hereafter of other errors of particuler men, I  ad to the former some examples of the errors of whole Coun and Senates. OF ERRORS COMMITTED BY VVHO Senats, namely of Rome, and Venice, vvith the conclus of the premisses; and an admonition to the Politikes, concern their folly and ingratitude tovvards almighty God. CHAP. 5. WHAT marueile is it that particuler men,  they neuer so wise, be ouerseene in matters state, seeing that the most wise and gra Senats haue also erred therein many time whereof I wil for breuities sake, allea only 3. or 4. examples. Cicero reporteth that Senat of Rome hauing taken great sommes of money of certa tributarie citties to make them free,An errour of the Senate of Rome. forced them after to  their old tribute without restoring to them the money that t had paied for their freedome,Cicero li. 3 de officijs. which he saith was; Turpe impe A shame to their empire; Piratarum enim (saith he) melior f des, quam senatus; For the faith of pirats, was better then the Fa of the Senat. 2. This then being so great a fraude that in any wel gou¦ned commonwelth it could not passe vnpunished in priu men, must needes be a foule and shameful fault in a whole S¦nate, not only for the iniustice of the fact, but also for the en they committed in gouernment, to wit, in giuing to their s¦iects
an example of fraudulent, and deceitful dealinge, which ing, as it were, authorised by their publike act, would the re easely insinuate it selfe into the cōmonwelth, to the great riment therof. To which purpose Cicero saith;Cicero. lib. 3. de legibus. Princes and go∣ors, when they offend, doe not only endammage the commonwelth, in t they are corrupted them selues, but also in that they corrupt others, and  more by their euil example, then by the offence it selfe. 3. Seeing then nothinge can be more pernicious to any state en that fraud and iniustice should haue course therin) for, as ero saith Faith is the foundation of iustice,Cicero: office. lib. 1. & 2. and iustice the stay of te) the Romane Senate did erre most absurdly in opening the e to al kind of cosenage in the commonwelth by their owne mple, besides the losse of reputation which must needes fol∣w therof to their empyre, as wel with their owne subiects, also with their friendes and confederates; a thinge so dange∣us to state, that the same Senat informer tymes, being better uised,Restitution made by the Senate of Rome, to the Ardeatines. T. Liuius. Dec. 1. li. 4. Idem. Dec. 1. li. 3. did make restitution and reparation of like wronges to couer their credit with their confederates and freends, and erfore they restored to the Ardeatins, a peece of land which the ople of Rome had against al reason and equity adiudged and ken to them selues some yeares before, when the said Ar∣tins, and the Aricinians being in controuersie for that land, d remitted them selues and their cause to their iudgment. 4. Likewise at other tymes the Senate resolued to deliuer ost notable men, to their enemyes,The great care the Romans had of their credit and reputation. rather then to infringe iu∣ce, and incurre the infamy of fraude, and deceite; In which spect, T. Verturius, and Spurius Posthumus both of them Consulls d T. Mutius, and Quintus Aemilius tribunes of the people, were liuered prisoners to the Samnites,Cicero. li. 3. de officijs. rather then the Senat would tify the peace they had made with them; Besides that the fa∣ous Consul, M. Attilius Regulus being taken prisoner in Africke dismissed vpon condition that the prisoners of the Carthagi∣ns should be also deliuered, was by his owne motion sent ck by the Senat, because they nether thought good, to de∣er the prisoners, nor yet to lose their credit, and reputation  iustice, by recouery of their Consul, contrary to the con∣tion. 5. But perhaps you wil say that the error which I here re∣proue,
was cōmitted when the commonwelth was g corruption, and declyned from the integrytie of vert  iustice wherein it flourished in former tymes; therfore  consider the same commonwelth in her purity, I meane in  beginning aboute 120. yeares after the expulsion of the Ki For although the Senat did at that tyme giue many notable ¦amples of singuler prudence and exact iustice; yet it failed s times in both, to the great dammage of the state. An other errour of the Roman Senate.6. When Brennus the Brittaine (as some say) being Capta of the Gaules that pasted into Italie, beseiged a towne ca Clusium, beyond the Alpes, and demanded of the inhabita some parte of their territorie; the Clusians finding them sel to weake to resist them,The seige of Clusium by the Gaules. craued succour of the Romans, who  Embassadors to treat peaceably with the Gaules in their beha during which treatie and seige, there chanced to passe some  of hostilitie betwixt the Gaules & the Clusians, wherein the G perceiued that the Roman Embassadours contrarie to the law  armes, had borne armes against them, and killed a princi personage of theirs; whereupon they presently sent to R to require the Romanes to punish their Embassadours for re¦ration of the wronge which they had done them; But the Se¦tours although (as Liuy confesseth) they knew wel enough t the Gaules demanded no more then was reasonable,T. Liuius Dec. 1. li. 5. y they were partly so partial in the behalfe of their Embassado and partly so confident of their owne forces, that they not o refused to doe them iustice, but also made the same Embassad Generals of an armie to be sent to succour the Clusians. Vpon  knowledge whereof the Gaules were incensed with such fu that calling God and man to witnes of the wrong, they prese¦ly raised their seige from Clusium, and went directly in al ha Rome,Rome sacked and spoyled by the Gaules. and by the way ouerthrew the armie of the Romanes, en the cittie, sacked, spoiled, and burnt it, with the greatest da¦mage & disgrace to their state, that euer the Romans receiued  the space of aboue 1100. yeares after that Rome was built, I me vntil the first sack thereof by the Goths. 7. The which may be ascribed partely to Gods iust iudgme in punishing their iniustice, & partely to their error, in that  to much contemned so huge an armie of so valiant people, a
exasperate them by open iniuries, & to drawe them vpon them lues with redoubled fury, whereas they should in al reason of te, haue sought to pacifye and diuert them by al conuenient eanes, considering that he is not wise that feareth not the ubtful euents of warre, especially at home, where the victory  an enemy is most dangerours, and in this case most of al, where e whole state was to be aduentured against an outragious mul∣tude of desperat vagabonds that had nothing to loose; so that is error was no lesse costly to the commonwelth, then inexcu∣ble in the Senate. 8. Hereto I might ad diuers examples, of the Senat of Venice to e which Guicciaidin saith,Guicciard: hist li. 4. It is fatal some yeeres to be deceaued diuers nes. But two examples shal suffice, the first may be their reso∣tion to make league with Lewis the 12. King of France, to assist m in the conquest of Milane against Lodouicus Sforza Duke ereof, following the opinion of Antonius Grimanni,Ibid. li. 4. hist. which Guic∣rdin saith proceeded partly of passion, and partly of a desire to  large their dominions, by ioyning Cremona to the rest of their tes in Italy,The errour of the Venetians in making league vvith Levvis the 12. of France. notwithstanding that Marchio Treuisano had dis∣aded the same with most strong and pregnant reasons, repre∣nting vnto them by examples then fresh in memory, how dan∣rous it would be for them, to bring the French into Italy, and  haue so potent a neighbour in the state of Miliane as a King of ance, whereof they saw the effect shortly after, when King wis had it in his possession; For then were they in such feare  his forces, that they durst deny him nothing that he deman∣ed of them, as Guicciardin noteth,Guicciard. li. 4. in fine. in their deliuering of Cardinal scanius brother to duke Lodouicus, and of Baptista viscount and uers other noble men of Milane who had put them selues into eir protection, vpon their publike safe conduict, with expresse ention of safeguard against the French. 9. An other error of theirs more dangerous, and damma∣ble vnto them then the former; was, their great ouersight, as∣el in their vnaduised proceedinges towardes their confederate d freend Francis the first of that name King of France,Guicciard. li. 8. initio. The erour of the Venetian in ioyning vvith K. Francis of France. as also in e iniuries which they did to the Pope, & the Emperour Maximi∣an, wherby they draue them al, that before were diuided, to ite them selues with the King of Castile and diuers other prin∣ces
against them in the league of Cambray.n. 10. And neuertheles  the Pope demanded of them the restitution of a towne or two his, vpon condition not to enter into that league, nor to ra the same, but rather to procure the dissolution therof, they ¦fused it, by the perswasion of Dominicus Treuisano Procurator  S. Marks, though other of the grauest and wisest Senatours  of contrary opinion: Therfore the issue of the matter w that al these princes ioyning their forces togeather accordi to their agrement, spoyled them of al their possessions in Ital and deuided the same amongst them selues, and had prosecut their victory further, if the Pope had not bene a mediator  them, and procured their peace vpon their humble submission  the Emperour, whome they most wronged. 10. Seing then these famous and renowned Senates consisti of so many wise and graue men,A consideration of mans imbecil∣lity, and weak∣nes of vvit, and of the need he hath of Gods direction. haue committed so grosse err to their owne great preiudice, and danger of their state; w assurance can any man haue of mans wit, plots, & defygnme if he confide either in him selfe alone, or in the only coun and iudgment of man. And therfore considering what I ha here before discoursed concerning the condition and state  man, his natural subiection, seruitude, and bondage, to his L God and Creator, his dependance vpon his holy wil and pr¦uidence, his frailty and imbecillity, his blindnes of wit,  weaknes of iudgement, his frequent errors, be he neuer so wis and lastly his necessity in respect of al this, to craue, and ha his Lord and Creators assistance, direction, and protection; h vngratful and simple are those men that presume so far of the owne wits and sufficiency, that nether for their priuate, nor  publike affayres, they make any account of Gods healp or ¦sistance?The ingratitude of such as do not acknovvledge the bounty of God tovvards them. vngratful (I say) for that hauing good partes and ¦lents, and many temporal blessinges, which nature and rea teacheth them not to be (as I haue said before) of their o purchase and prouision, but of the liberality and bounty  ¦mighty God, they doe neuertheles so admire the gift, that th forget the giuer, and so enioy the benefit, that they doe not  much as thanke him that bestowed it vpon them; yea and  steede of thankes, prayse, honor and seruice which they o him, doe render him contempt, dishonor, and disseruice. A
therfore no meruaile if almighty God, in punishment of so great gratitude, doe giue them ouer many times, to a reprobate se, to the end, that as they offend him by an ouerweening of eir owne wisdome, so they may be punished, yea and perrish  their owne folly; This ingratitude of man,Aug. lib. Soliloq. S. Augustine wor∣ly calleth; The roote of al spiritual euil, the drie and burninge wind t blasteth al our corne, and stoppeth vp the fountaine of Gods mercie ards vs. 11. But herein appeareth not only the ingratitude, but also e extreame folly of such men (be they accompted neuer so se) seeing that their weaknes and imbecillitie is so manifest uen to them selues if they list to consider it) that they may ea∣y perceaue that they are not absolute of them selues,The extreame folly of such as trust vvholy in them selues. but that ey depend vpon a higher power, and yet neuertheles they are vnaduised, as to cast them selues into the innumerable dāgers, d difficulties of this world without regard, yea with contempt d offence of him, on whome they depend, and who only can ect, and guide them aright; wherein they may be compared to me simple & self-willed fellow, that wil needes put him selfe  sea in a terrible tempest without a pilot, or vndertake a iorney rough a dangerous desert in a darke night, either without a ide, or else hauing a deare and louing freend to guide him, eth him so vnkindly, and contemptuously by the waie, that  forceth him to forsake him in the midst of the wildernes, d so perisheth worthily through his owne follie, and in∣atitude. 2. Therefore I conclude with this notable sentence of S. Au∣tin, speaking to man. Thou receauest (saith he) the benefit,Aug. li. 4. me∣ditat. doest not acknowledg th'author thereof; the gift is manifest & ough the giuer be hiden, yet thy owne reason may teach ee, that it is not thy due, but the gift of an other: And ther∣re whosoeuer the geuer be, thou maist thinke, that as he hath stowed exceding much vpō thee; so he hath loued thee much, ing he would giue thee so much; And this being so,A notable dis∣course of S. Austen concer∣ning the ingra∣titude of man tovvards God. what ex∣eame folly is it, not to seeke and desier the loue of such a po∣t and kind louer, and what peruerse ingratitude, and impiety it, not to loue one that loues thee so exceedingly? If then thou e and esteeme his gifts, loue him that bestowed them vpon
thee, and loue them as thinges that are subiect to thee; an thinges that should serue thee, as pledges of thy spowse, as g of thy freend, as benefits of thy Lord; and so as thou maist  be mindful how much thou art his debter, yea and loue his g not for them selues, but for his sake, not togeather with  but for him; & lastly loue them so, that thou maist loue him,  them, and aboue them. Thus saith this famous and learned ¦ther, which I wish al men would print in their hartes, and p¦ctise in their workes, for so should their, councells and delibe¦tions be more free from error, and their actions from il succe the which many times is not so properly the fruit of mans in¦mitie, as a punishment of God for sinne, as it may appeare by  examples alreadie alleaged, and shal more plainely hereafte when I shal purposelie treate of Gods iustice.Chap. 16.17.18.19.20.21.22. THE INSVFFICIENCY OF MANS VVIT and policy, for the gouernment of commonwelth, is proued  the nature of commonwelth, to vvit, by the natural mutabilli & instabillity therof, exemplified breifly in Empires, Kingdom and other Estats. CHAP. 6. HItherto I haue laboured to shewe the insu¦ciency of mans wit for the gouerment of co¦monwelth by the natural infirmitie of man now I wil proue the same by the nature commonwelth it selfe, which is a thinge mutable, so intricate, so ful of difficulties, subiect to accidents, vnpossible to be forseene and preuent and hanging, as a man may say, vpon so many gymmols, that  humane wit or power, is of it selfe able to assure & establish The natural mutabilitie and instabilitie of cōmonvvealth.2. For the proofe hereof, we are first to consider the natu mutabillity and instabillity of commonwelth, which consisti of men, must needes be subiect to the same mutation and co¦ruption, whereto al men and humane thinges are subiect, by  inuiolable decree and law of God, the author of nature, w
hath irreuocably ordained, that whatsoeuer is compounded ei∣er naturally of elements, or artificially by the industrie of men al be dissolued; and that whatsoeuer groweth and increaseth al decrease & perish. And therfore we see that al earthlie inges haue their beginning, their growth and increase, their te and consistance, their declination and decay, & finally their ssolution. For besides infinite external causes by the which ey are sooner or later corrupted, and consumed, euery thinge eedeth in it selfe an internal sicknesse, which in the end doth euitably bring it to corruption. The Iron and other metalls, eed a rust; the corne & other fruit, a worme; the cloath, a moth, ens bodies and other liuing creatures, disseases which destroy em in the end, and so in like sort, commonwelth ingendreth it selfe, disorders, discord, and dissention, which sooner or la∣r bring it to ruyne. 3. For the better explication hereof,The nature of commonvvelth. and of the nature of mmonwelth, it is further to be noted, that as the health and tegritie of euery thing that is compounded of different and trary qualities, consisteth in the equal temperature of the said alities; so of the distemperature and inequality thereof, grow∣h the corruption and dissolution of the said compound. For here there is a continual conflict of contrarieties (euery one orking according to his owne nature and propertie) it can not , but that in time one wil abound, and an other decay, one eare and wast an other, and so in the end one ouercome, and tinguish th'other, whereby the composition must needes soo∣er or later be dissolued. 4. And this we see verified, not only in al natural bodies, ompounded of contrarie humors, or elements (as in men, easts, hearbes, trees, plants, and such like) but also in the poli∣ke bodie, that is to say in commonwelth it selfe,VVherein and of vvhome a commonvvelth consisteth. consisting in he combination of persons of different sexes, orders, degrees, nd qualities; as of men, and women, prince and subiect, rich nd poore, noble and base, bound and free, good and bad, and of nnumerable particuler men, differing amongst them selues in rofession of life, faculties, trades, and occupations, in manners nd affections, and yet al vnited, and combined togeather in the ommunion of one law, and gouernment. Wherefore euen as
mens bodies, being compact of contrary elements, and  with different, and contrarie humors, are so much the  healthful, sound, and durable, by how much the said hu are better and more equallie tempered amongst them sel (which neuerthelesse can neuer haue such an exact and per temperature, but that in time they wil consume one an oth and consequently destroie the bodie with the affect) euen so  politike bodie, that is to say the commonwelth, is so much  sounder, and florisheth the longer, by how much the tempe¦ture of the different orders and degrees therein, is better,  more equally composed.Plat. 8. de repub. Which temperature Plato calleth:  harmonie consisting in an equal and concordant disparity, or inequali wherwith the commonwealth is (as it were with a certai bond) knit and vnited in it selfe. 5. But for asmuch as it is not possible, that the said polit harmonie and consonance, can be for euer preserued in the co¦tinual discord and conflict of contrarie degrees, humors, incli¦tions, affections and passions; it must needes follow that  bond, that is to say, the harmony being interrupted and broke the cōmonwelth shal fal to disorder, and consequently deca As both Aristotle and Plato do teach,Arist: li. 5. Poli. ca. 12. Plato. de Rep. li. 80. and is also most manifest the experience of al ages and times, and of al kingdomes  commonwelthes, either past, or present, as (to say somewh breefly of both) we see euidently in the ancient kingdomes  Iuda,The desolation and ruine of many auncient kingdomes. and Israel, of Egipt, Macedony, Persia, Parthia, Lacedemony,  in the commonwelth of the Carthaginians, Athenians, Corinthi Thebans, and such others, al of them famous in times past,  some of them florishing no lesse in al kind of learning and ¦mane wisdome, then in armes and militarie discipline, and n vtterly perished;The often chāge of gouernment in the Roman Empire. Tit. liuius. in so much, that there is scant any monum or memory of them. And hath not also the like chanced to  mighty and potent empires of the Assirians, the Medes, the Gree and the Romans, whereof the last, which was also the mighty of the rest, had so many changes in a few ages, to wit in 6 yeares space, that it receiued al formes and kindes of gouerme passing first from Kinges to Decemuiri, that it to say, ten goue¦nours: from the Decemuiri, to Kinges againe; from them to C¦suls, from Consuls againe to Decemuiri, from them to the Tri
of soldiars, from Tribunes to Consuls, from them to Perpetual Dicta∣s, from Dictators to Triumuiri, and from them to Emperours, der whome the Empyre being miserably rent, and torne with il warrs, became in the end to be a pray and spoyle to al rbarous nations. 6. And if we looke to the kingdomes and commonwelthes ich stand on foote at this day, as namely our owne country,The diuers mu∣tations in Bri∣tany since the Romans con∣quered it. Polidorus virgi∣lius in hist. Angl. d what changes and mutations there haue bene therin, since was first conquered by the Romans, how many kinges it hath d at once, to wit 7. how oft it hath bene conquered by stran∣rs, as by Saxons, Danes and Normans; what ciuil warrs, and ody battailes there haue bene since the last conquest, first in g Stephens tyme, after in the Barrons warrs, and after againe twixt the howse of Lancaster and Yorke, for the space of aboue  yeares, wherein we read that one only kinge, to wit, Edward  4. was present and fought him selfe in 8. or 9.Philippus Com∣mineus in hist. de reb. gest. Lodo∣uici. c. 50. seueral bat∣es, and that during the same tyme there were slayne & bani∣ed 80. Princes of the blood royal. And againe if we add therto e depositions, expulsions, imprisonments, & murders of Kinges diuers ages, and tymes, and the frequent rebellions of the iects against their princes, for exactions, extortions, and in∣uation of Religion. And if we also consider in Scotland,The reuolutions and diuisions in the Realmes of Scotland France Flanders, and other kingdomes adioyning. Ioan. Laesleus de Orig. Scot. Froysart. Popli∣nier. Froysart. Mercu∣rius Belgicus. our xt neighbour, the like or rather greater reuolutions, which e caused the violent or vntymely death and distruction of r. 9. Kinges and regents, in these 2. last ages. And great mu∣ions and domestical diuisions which haue miserably distra∣d, & almost ruined France, no lesse heretofore at diuers times, en now of late; As also the most frequent or rather conti∣al commotions in Flanders, seldome or neuer quiet in times st, and in great garboile at this present. And againe if we cast r eyes somewhat further to the countries next adioininge, to the Empire in Germanie very potent in former times, & w much decayed; or to Spayne, first subiect to the Romans,Roderic. To∣letan. Ioan. vas∣saeus. er to the Goths, and then conquered by the Mores (solicited d brought in by the Spaniards them selues) then diuided into  or. 7. seueral kingdomes and states, and now at length after ntinual ciuil warre for 6. or 7. hundreth yeares togeather, re∣ced againe not many yeares agoe to one monarchy. Finally
for breuities sake (to range no further abroad then Italy) if weigh the innouations that haue succeeded therein, as wel this last age (by the bloody warrs betwixt the French and  Spanish for the states of Milan and Naples,The often chan∣ges and inno∣uations of di∣uers States in Italy. Blond. Sabel: lib. Singonius Guicciard. subiect sometim Kinges and Princes of their owne, and now made prouince Spayne) as also the mutation in former times not only in the states, but also in Rome it selfe, taken, and sacked, or at least be¦ged 13. or 14. seueral times, and in al other partes of Italy miser¦bly distressed, spoiled, and ruined partly by the frequent irr¦tions, and inundations of barbarous nations, (as Goths, Vand Alans, Huns, and Lumbards) and partly by inuasions of Germa Emperours, and lastly by domestical and ciuil wars, proceedi otherwhiles of the ambitions of tirants in many particuler c¦ties, and sometimes of the furiours faction of the Guelfs and ¦belins (which for some yeares filled al states, citties, townes,  and priuate howses with cruel slaughters and murthers of p¦rents, kinsfolkes, frinds, and of al sortes of people) someti againe by populer tumults and seditions, whereby there h bene noted in Genua ten notable changes of that state in  space of 30. yeares, sometimes the common people preuailin ¦gainst the nobility; and some times the nobility against the p¦ple, by which meane they are now brought to so low an eb that wheras they were able in times past to hold Compete with the state of Venice, yea and tooke the Duke of Venice pris¦ner in a battaile at sea) wherein they had 200. gailles of th owne (they haue not now past 25. and the same also waged  paied by the Catholike King; if (I say) we weigh and conside this, we may drawe from hence two notable documents. Tvvo Documēts concerning the mutability and change of States.7. The first, the casualty and vanity of al humane pow honor, dignity, dominion, and glory, seeing they doe not o perish sooner or later, but also are subiect, whiles they  such mutation, and accompanied with infinit corrosiues and ¦flictions, which consideration may iustly moue vs to eleuate  cogitations from al earthly delights, to the contemplation  desire of the heauenly,Seneca praefat. in li. 1. natural. quaest. that are ineffable, incomprhensible,  eternal. For as Seneca saith; nothing is more contemptible then  he doe not raise and eleuate him selfe aboue himselfe. 8. The other document is, that considering the natural
obilitie, inconstancy and infirmity as wel of commonwelth as f man him selfe, and of al earthly creatures; no humane wit,  power, is more able to defend any kingdome, or common∣elth from declination, and decay, then to preserue a man from  sicknes and mortalitie, or other earthly thinges from cor∣ption. HE VVEAKNES OF MANS VVIT AND policy, is further proued by the imperfection of al political science, vvith a consideration of the imbecillity of lavv-makers exem∣plified in Solons lavves. By occasion vvhereof, a political que∣stion is debated concerning sedition. CHAP. 7. IN the last chapter I shewed the insufficiencie, of mans wit for the gouernment of state, by the natural mutabilitie and instability of common∣welth: now I wil further proue the same by the defects and imperfection of humane policy.VVherein hu∣mane pollicy principally con∣sisteth. And whereas the policy of man (for as much concerneth gouerment of commonwelth) consisteth either the institution, and the execution of good lawes, or in wise uncells, deliberatiōs, plots, & designments; I wil first speake lawes, and shew their insufficiencie for the establishment of te, not only in respect of the infirmitie of the law-maker, but so for the imperfection incident to lawe it selfe; I wil speake  either a parte, and first of Law-makers. 2. For this purpose I wish thee (Good reader) to remember hat I haue proued before in the beginning of this Treatise cō∣rning the imbecilitie of mans wit, which I haue declared to e such, that no man can without the light of Gods grace, suf∣ciently knowe and vnderstand what is conuenient and necessa∣e for him selfe: which I made manifest, not only by reason,ca. 2. nu. 14. and e authoritie of holy Scriptures and graue authors, but also by uident examples of the errors of great politikes and wisemen,ca. 3.4. & 5. ho haue bene either ruined, or at least greatly endangered by
the meanes whereby they thought to profit, and aduance the selues.Cicero de Diui∣natione. Whereupon I may wel inferre with the prouerbe, Qui s semitam non sapit, an alijs monstrabit viam? he which knowes  the way him selfe, can he teach it to an other? that is to say,  that knowes not what is good and fit for him selfe, can he  able to iudge & determine what is conuenient for other men, ¦pecially for a whole commonweth?The diuersity of vvils & humors in euery cōmon∣vvelth. To this purpose it is to  considered, (as I haue signified before) that there are such m∣titudes of people, such difference of degrees, qualities, and con¦ditions, and such peruersity of wills, humors, and affections  euery commonwelth, that no humane wit is able to reduced the to that perfect temperature, and harmony, which is requisite  the conseruation of ciuil vnity and amity, to the end that al m continually concurre in the obedience of one lawe, in one kin of gouernment, and liue therin contented each one in his ¦cation, in security, peace, and plenty, which euery law-maker gouernour of commonwelth, ought to procure. 3. This may partly be iudged by the gouernment of a fami be it great or litle, which is many times turned vpside dow and disolued by the peruerse humor of some one, or two, n corrigible by any councel or chastisment of the head thero What meruaile is it then, if in whole kingdomes and commo welthes, amongst so many thousands of different persons, and  different humors, there are many so exorbitant and turbule that no wit, nor power of man, can be able to tame or temp them?One man often∣tymes the cause of the destru∣ction of a whole Empire. Plutar. in Paulo Emilio. Roderic. Tole tan. li. 5. de reb. Hispan. c. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. Liuius Dec. 3. lib. 2. Plutar. in Iul. Caesare. And doe we not see many times, that the couetousnes,  the lust, or the treason, temeritie, or folly, or the ambition  some one man, endangereth or ouerthroweth a whole empyr The kingdome of Macedony was lost through the couetousnes  Perseus king thereof; The treason of one count Iulian offended  the lust of Roderike King of Spayne (who deflowred his daughte was the cause that the Mores conquered Spayne, and posses 6. or 7. hundred yeares. The temerity of Terrentius Varro, whe he was Consul of Rome and gaue battaille to Hannibal, caused t great ouerthrowe which the Romans receaued at Cannae, to th great danger of their commonwelth, which in the end was v¦terly ouerthrowne by the ambition of Iulius Caesar. 4. But what should I speake of a King of Macedony, or a Ki
of Spayne, or a Consul of Rome, or a Iulius Caesar, when the turbulent umor of a base fellow, or pety companion, such a one I meane,  a Blacksmith, or a Iacke Cade, or a Iacke Straw,The Garboyle and tumult in England raised by Iacke Cade and his fellowes. Stovv. Haul. Holinshed. hath bene able to ut al England in a garboyle, to the great danger of the state; eing then one fault or error of some one man, may ruyne, or danger a kingdome, how shal mans wit or policy be able, sus∣cienctly to preuent the inconuenience that must needes growe y the infinit faultes and errors, which in tract of tyme are ōmitted in euery commonwelth, by so many thousands as are erein, through the folly or malice of men. 5. Furthermore, if we consider what the politike science whereby commonwelths are instituted, and gouerned) is able  performe, and how far it may extend it selfe, we shal easely e how litle perfection and establishment any state can receaue y the law-maker, or gouernour therof, be he neuer so politike. or whereas other sciences and artes were (as Aristotle teacheth) uented by some, augmented, and amplifyed by other,Arist. li. 2. Ele∣ch. c. vltimo. and rought in time to perfection, it falleth out otherwayse in the olitike science, which is so vncertaine and varyable, that al∣hough the rules & precepts therof,The Imperfe∣ction af al political science. were many hundreth yeares goe deliuered by most famous Philosophers, and explicated, and mplified since by infinit authors ancient and moderne; yet both ason and experience sheweth, that it neuer arriueth, neither n arriue to perfection. For nether one and the selfe same po∣cy, is fit for al commonwelthes (as one art or science is fit and onuenient for al kind of men) nether is commonwelth so du∣ble in one manner and forme of gouernment, that the selfe me policy wil euer serue for the same; seing al cōmonwelthes re subiect to mutation, and many tymes one is engendred by he corruption of an other, euery one requiring different lawes, nd a different policy. 6. And although the commonwelth doe remaine in one orme of gouernment, as either in a Monarchy, Aristocracy,Foure kind of Lavves amongst the Romans. or a opoular State; yet such is the variety of times and instability of the umors and affections of men, that new lawes and different po∣cies wil be necessarie thereto. And therfore where as the Ro∣ans had 4. kind of lawes, as Cicero testifyeth, one was De abro∣andis legibus, to abrogate and repel lawes,Cicero de le. by the vertue and
authority wherof, many lawes made by very wise men, were ¦terwards by their posterity annulled and repealed, as vnprofitab and vnconuenient. 7. The same may be obserued in the very lawes of Go which haue varied according to the different state of man a times, as it is euident by the lawe of Nature, the lawe of Moys and now lastly the law of Grace. The reason whereof S. Augus giueth saying;Aug. li. 3. con∣fess. c. 7. That it is not to be wondered at, that God ma different lawes, in different times; seeing that in one day, and  one house, and in one man, one thinge is conuenient to o member, and another to another, and one thing to one man and another, to another: and that the thinge which is exp¦dient now, wil an hower hence be vnlawful and inconuenie Whereby it appeareth that time which breedeth certaintie  iudgment and experience in men, for the perfection of oth sciences and artes, doth so change, & abolish lawes and po¦cies, that it causeth in law-makers and gouernours, ignoran errour, and confusion. 8. For this cause Plato affirmeth expresly, that no man be  neuer so excellent of wit, or neuer so prudent and practis in affaires,Gods inspiration necessary for the making of good Lavves. can be able without the inspiration and assistance God, to make sufficient lawes for the perfect establishment of commonwelth. And therfore in the institution of his ov written commonwelth, and of the lawes therof, he craueth help of almighty God, and otherwhere saith. That as brute beasts  not be happily gouerned by beastes, without the help of man: so man can  be wel & happily gouerned by man, without the help of God. And aga in an other place he teacheth;Plato. 4. de le∣gibus. that as men cannot liue witho lawes, so neither could men haue had sufficient lawes, from P¦metheus (that is to say from the prouidence of man) if Iupiter h selfe the creator of al,Idem, in Minoe. Idem in Prota∣gora. had not sent Mercurie to men with lawe be the interpreter of his diuine wil. Whereby he signifieth mi¦cally after his manner, that without Gods special assistance,  wit nor prouidence of man can suffice to institute, and co¦serue any state or commonwelth, either by the meanes of la or otherwise. 3. Reg. 3. 2. Paral. 2. 9. This also Salomon knew and acknowledged, who therfo craued wisdome of almighty God for the gouernment of
people, adding; Quis enim potest iudicare populum istum, populum m hunc multum? For who can without thy helpe,Sap. 9. iudge and gouerne is thy people, so many in number. And againe; Giue me o Lord that wis∣me which assisteth, thy seate, for I am a weake man; Et minor ad intel∣tum indicij et legum; And not of capacity to vndersstand what is iudgmēt d lawe; Thus said this prudent King, considering, and humbly knowledging his owne infirmity, in respect whereof almighty d gaue him greater wisdome, wealth, honor, and glorie, then er had any earthly Prince. 10. But now for the further proofe of this matter, let vs exa∣ne some of the lawes of 3 or 4. of the most famous law-makers at euer were; that by the discouery of their errors, the weak∣s of mans wit in the institution and administration of cōmon∣elth, may the better appeare. And whereas some haue founded instituted commonwelthes indeed, and some only in writing,The lavves of foure famous Lavvmakers ex∣amined and re∣proued. serue for patternes for others; I wil speake here only of four of eatest fame, of either sort two, as of Solon the Athenian, Licur∣ the Lacedemonian, Plato called the Deuine, and Aristotle maister Alexander the great. 11. When the commonwelth of the Athenians, hauing bene uerned for many yeares togeather by the lawes of Dracon, s fallen to decay through the excessiue couetousnes & rigour rich men, whome the poorer sort (being loaden with debts & t able to pay them) were forced to serue as slaues by sentence the iudges, (wherupon there arose daily infinite tumults and ditions) it seemed good to them al, to recommend the reforma∣n of their whole state to Solon, a man so highly esteemed for  wisdome, that he was accounted one of the 7. wisemen of eece,The Reforma∣tion of the com∣monvvelth of the Athenians by Solon. Plutar. in Solone. who perswading him selfe that it could not be conueni∣tly reformed, except the poore were releeued & eased of their bts, resolued to abolish & cancel al contracts and obligations  debts past, imparting his minde therin first to some of his in∣e freends, who seing his resolution, borrowed great store of oney, & emploid it in land, whereupon it followed that when on published his new lawe (which he called Seysacthia that is  say A discharge of debts) they remained exceedingly enriched, eir creditors defrauded, and he much suspected of deceit, as to ue had secret intelligence with his frends, and part of their ine.
Tvvo soule er∣rors of Solon about the refor∣mation of the Athenian com∣monvvelth.12. And although it seemeth that therin he had wronge  he lost by his one law, as some write 15. talents which  owing him) yet he can not be excused in two thinges, the one that he caused not his frends to restore the money which th had guilfully borrowed; and the other, that without exami¦tion of the particuler causes and reasons of euery mans debt,  ordained a general abolition of al debts good and bad; where aswel those which were able to pay, as the vnable were disch∣ged, and al creditours without difference defrauded,Cioe. offi: li. 2. contrarie al equitie and iustice, which (as Cicero saith speaking of the li case) requireth aboue al thinges,Great iniustice committed by Solon. Ibid. that euerie man haue his ow and that equal regard be had to the right, aswel of the rich, as  the poore (which saith he) is no way obserued; Cum locupl suum perdunt, & debitores lucrentur alienum; When riche  loose their owne, and debitors gaine that which belongeth other men. Besides that, in this case the necessitie was not s to breake iustice so notoriously; for that the inconuenien might haue bene remedied otherwise, without iniurie to a as partly by the meanes,Hovv Solon might haue re∣formed the com∣monvvelth vvithout the breach of Iustice. which he him selfe also practised,  wit, by raysing the money, and partly by borrowing some gr sommes with the which he might haue made at least some co position with the creditours, in behalfe of the debitors & h repaied the money after in time by penalties, confiscations,  some moderate taxes, whereby the poore might haue bene  the present releeued, and no man wronged. Cicero Ibid.13. Therfore Cicero greatly commendeth, Aratus, who w the cittie called Sicione had bene 50. yeares opprest by tyra and he him selfe banished with 600. others of the richest m therin, first found meanes to kil the tyrant, and after hau called home al those that were banished, and finding difficu in restoring them to their goods and liuings (which were the possessiō of other men & had bene in 50. yeares space alie¦ted by many contracts, and bargaines of sales, dowries, leases  such like) thought it not conuenient, either to take the said ¦uings from those that possessed them, or yet to leaue the ot vnsatisfied.The vvisdome of Aratus in forming the y of Scone. And therfore he borrowed a great some of mon of Ptolomeus King of Alexandria, & examining euery mans cau & making an estimate of the landes, so delt betwixt the par
that for readie money, some of them were content to leaue their ssession, & others to sel their right, and surcease their claime, hereby peace and concord was made, al men satisfied; Et sic par (saith Cicero) cum Ciuibus agere, & non alijs sua eripere,Ibidem. alijs dare na; So it is fit to deale with subiects, and not to take from some their e, and to giue it to others to whome it doth not belong; as Solon did, o therfore was to be blamed, not only for errour, but also r iniustice. 14. I omit other errours of Solon, which might be obserued the forme of his commonwelth,An absurd lavv of Solon forbidding neu∣trality in a pu∣blike sedition. Plutar in Solone. to come to the examina∣n of one of his lawes, by the which he ordained, That who∣uer in any publike sedition, should be neutral and take neither part, uld remayne euer after infamous; his reason was, for that he ought it not conuenient, that any man should so much loue  owne ease, as not to participate of the trouble of the com∣onwelth whereof he was a member. Which reason, togeather th the lawe, Plutark worthelie and wiselie reiecteth,Idem, in his booke of instru∣ctions for such as deale in matters of state. for that would be an assured meanes to put (as it were) fyer to gun∣wder, and to set al the commonwelth on a flame, without pe of any internal remedie; For (saith he) euen as in sick body, he hope of helpe with in it selfe, is to be expected from the partes that sound (and therfore when the body is wholy corrupted, there is no helpe emedy but from abroad) euen so in politike body sicke with sedetion,Solons lavv reiected by Plu∣tarke. he internal remedie is to come from the whole and sound partes therof; at is to say; from such as are neutralls, who may labour with e one part and with the other to compound the quarrel; for therwise where al is in tumult no remedie can be expected; ex∣t it come from abroad.Ibidem. A principal point of poli∣tical science either to pre∣uent seditions, or quickly to appease them. And therfore Plutarke houldeth it for e highest and principal point of politike science in any gouer∣ur, know how either to preuent seditions, that they neuer owe, or else quickly to appease them, when they are growne,  they neuer so litle. For euen as the least sparke that is, may fal to such matter, that it may set a whole house on fyer; so the st ciuil sedition may fal amongst such persons, & in such time, t it may put a whole commonwelth in combustion, and vt∣lie ruine it; and for this cause, wise gouernours haue an eye t only to dissentions concerning the commonwelth and pu∣ke matters; but also of priuate quarrels, though it be amongst
meane men, for that many times they redound to the publike d¦triment: wherof of Plutark recounteth a notable example. 15. Two young men of Siracusa were so great freends, th the one of them being to goe abroad vpon an occasiō, recome¦ded vnto the other the care of his concubyn; the other in hi absence, being ouercome with loue and lust, abused her;  reuenge wherof,Plut. Ibidem. A Storie of the dissention of tvvo yong men of Syacsa. his freend at his retourne corrupted the othe wife, by which meanes there grew a great quarrel betwixt them and the matter comming to the notice of the Senat, wise Sen gaue councel to banish them both, least their priuate quarr might breed some publike sedition; But his aduise was negl¦cted, wherupon it followed that the freends of either takin their partes, made within a while such a tumult and ciuil warr in the cittie, that the whole state was ouerthrowne therby. 16. But as al priuate quarrells may proue dangerous to th commonwelth, so most of al when they growe betwixt gre personages.Phil. de Com. Cron. du roy Louis ca. 138. The danger that grovveth to a prince by main∣tening diuision amongst his subiectes. In which respect, Philip de Comines blameth grea such princes, as doe not seeke to compose dissentions and qua¦rells amongst some of their greater subiects, but rather nouri them by fauoring one partie more then the other, wherein th doe no other (saith he) but helpe to set their owne howse ¦fier. 17. Wherof he alleageth 2. notable examples: the one of t Queene of England (wife to Kinge Henrie the 6.) who taki part with the Duke of Sommerset against the Earle of VVarwi was a special cause of that warre,VVarre in En∣gland betvvixt the K. and Earle of VVarvvicke. Ibidem. which the Earle made ma yeares togeather, against the King and house of Lancaster to the vtter ouerthrowe, and therfore (saith he) the Queene shou haue done much moe wisely, if she had shewed herselfe  the first indifferent betwixt the two parties, and helped to ¦gree them. 18. The other example which he alleadgeth, is, of Charles t 7. King of France: who when he was Dolphin tooke parte with t Duke of Orleance,Henry the fifth of England crovvned in France. against the Duke of Burgundy in a priuat quar of theirs. In reueng wherof the Duke of Burgundy, called Hen the 5. King of England into France, and helped to crown him and his sonne after him kings in Paris. 19. And whereas Philip de Comines seemeth to take it for
inconuenience, that a young Prince should sometimes for his port,Philip de Comi∣nes reproued for allovving in a young Prince to nourrish quar∣rels amongst the Ladies in his court. Plin. de viris il∣luster. Liu. dec. 1. lib. 6. The troubles that often arise by the dissension of vvomen. and pleasure nourish some iarres & quarreles amongst the adies and Gentlewomen of his court, I can not but dissent from im therin: for that womens iarres may make mens warres. And xperience hath taught, that mutations haue sometimes hapned n States by womens quarrels. As in Rome, where Fabius Ambustus auing maried his two daughters, the elder to a noble man cal∣d Sulpitius (who was after made Consul) and the younger to a ebiean called Licinius Stolo (who by the lawes was not capable f that dignitie) it chansed that a disgust fel betwixt the two sters, for that the younger visiting the elder (who was then ife to the Consul) and houlding her selfe to be contemned of er, in respect of her meaner estate, lamented so pittifully to her ther, that to appease her, he practised with the people to ake his sonne in-law Licinius Stolo Consul, in derogation of the ncient law and custome, which excluded the plebeians from the onsulshippe. And although the cheife Senators opposed them erto, with might and maine, as to a great nouelty, and a matter ery preiudicial to the dignitie of the Senate, yet he preuailed, & ot only procured a decree, that from thence forward the ple∣eians might be Consuls, but also obtained the election of Licinius olo his sonne in-law. And this was done, to satisfy the disdaine f a woman against her owne sister. 20. But more dangerous & lamentable was the quarrel of wo sisters in-law in England, in the time of Edward the 6.The dissension betvvene the Duches of So∣merset and Q. Kath. Parre in England. where∣f the one was Queene Catherine Parre, lately before wife to King enry the 8. and then married to the Lord Thomas Seymer Admiral f England, and the other was the Duches of Somerset, wife to the ord Protector of England, brother to the Admiral. These two La∣ies failling at variance for the precedence,Sander. de schis∣mate Anglic. lib. 2. which either of them hallenged, the one as Queene Douager, and the other as wife to he Protector (who then gouerned the King, and al the Realme) rewe their husbands into the quarrel, and so incensed the one f them against the other, that the Protector procured the death f the Admiral his brother; whereupon also followed his owne estruction shortly after: for being depriued of the assistance and upport of his brother, he was easely ouerthrowne by the Duke f Northumbarland, who caused him to be conuicted of fellony
and beheaded. Loe then what inconuenience followed of t falling out of two women: therfore Aristotle wisely aduise Princes to haue care,Aristot. Poli. li 5. ca. 2. that their wiues doe no disgraces, nor gi iust cause of disgust to the wiues of their subiects, for that (sai he (commonwelthes haue bene ouerthrowne by such meane 21. But what maruaile is it if the quarrels of women may  dangerous to the commonwelth, seeing a famous and pernitio faction in Italy,A quarrel be∣gun betvvixt tvvo boyes in Italy, caused much blood∣shed. Tarcagnota hist. mundi par. 2. l. 15. began by the occasion of a quarrel betwixt t boyes, whereof the one gaue the other a box on the eare: in r¦uenge whereof, the father of the boy that was stroken, cut of th hand of the other that gaue the blowe, whose father making th quarrel his owne, sought the reuenge of the iniurie done to  sonne, & began the faction of the Neri, and the Bianchi, that is  say, black & white, which presently spred it selfe throwout Italy & was the occasion of spilling much Christian blood. Whereb we may see how necessarie it is for gouernours to haue an eye  quarrels, though amongst meane persons: and how dangerous is for a Prince to make diuision in his state betwixt great pers¦nages,The danger of Machiauels do∣ctrin concerning diuision. Arist. l. 5. Pol. c. 11. to ballance & counterpeise one of them with an oth to the end they shal not conspire against him, as Machiauel cou¦selleth absurdly, following the old tyrannical precept. Si vis  nare, diuide. If thou wilt raigne, make diuision. As though it should  alwaies in the Princes power, to moderate the same at his pl¦sure, whereof no mortal creature can assure him selfe, (be he n¦uer so wise or potent) And therfore we may say of such dāgero courses,Ecclesiast. c. 3. as saith the booke of Ecclesiasticus. Qui amat periculum, p bit in illo. He which loues danger, shal perish in it. 22. Neuerthelesse to retourne now to Solons law (which co¦demneth neutrality in publike seditions or factions) althoug in some cases the said law would be pernitious to commōwelt yet in some other I hold it so necessary,In vvhat cases Neutralitie is to be alovved, or disalovved. as that no man cou doe his duty either to God, or his country, except he should p the same in practise. As for example, if the quarrel were for m¦ter of religion, or touching either the seruice of God, or the p¦blike good of the commonwelth, or for the iust defence of th lawful prince, and gouernour therof; in which cases al neutrality were vnlawful. For when there is question of Gods seruice, to be neutral,Neutrality vn∣lauful in diui∣sions concerning Gods seruice. Luc. 11. were nothing else but to betray Gods cause, and
declare a mans selfe to be his enemie, according to our Sauiours ying. Qui non est mecum, contra me est, & qui non colligit mecum, spergit; He which is not with me, is against me, he vvhich gathereth t vvith me, scattereth. And therfore the neutrals in that case, are ose whome the Holy Ghost calleth Tepidi, men that are luke∣rme, of whome the Scripture saith in the person of God; vti∣m esses aut calidus, aut frigidus, sed quia tepidus es,Apocalip. 3. euomam te ex ore o: I would thou vvert either hot, or cold, but because thou art but luke∣rme, I wil therfore spit thee out of my mouth. 23. Againe in the other case,Neutralitie con∣demned in mat∣ters concerning the iust defence of the Prince or commonvvelth. where the controuersie concer∣th the good of the commonwelth, or the iust defence of the ad therof, neutralitie were in effect treason, and should merit t only the note of infamie (as Solons law ordained) but also y rigorous punishment whatsoeuer. And therfore in al such ses, al men are bound in conscience and duty without delay,  declare at least their good wil & affections to the maintenāce  the iust cause, and when perswasions wil not suffice, then to ploie al their force, yea & their liues for the suppression of the ditions, rather then to suffer them to preuaile. 24. But in other cases (as when some particuler mens priuate ssention doth growe to a publike sedition, or when the con∣tion is not betwixt the head and some of the members, but etwixt the members them selues) to adhere to either partie (as lons law commanded) were no other then in steede of water,Neutrality in priuate quarrels condemned. herewith to quench fier to cast in oyle to nourish & augmēt  to the great danger and detriment of the whole state. There∣re in such a case, the neutral & indifferent man may best helpe  remedie the disease of the commonwelth, putting on (as Plu∣ke saith) the buskin of Theramenes, which serued for both feete,Plut. in his in∣struct. for such as deale in matters of state. at is to say, dealing indifferently with both parties to draw em to composition, not for his owne ease, or to auoid the par∣cipation of the publike or common calamitie (as Solon in his w supposed of al neutrals) but to extinguish the fier kindled  the commonwelth, or at least not to minister further matter erto by any act of his. This then we see how Solon erred in his wes, & ordinances,Arist. polit. li. 2. ca. 10. though Aristotle seemeth to preferre him efore al other law-makers, censuring and controwling al the est, and excusing him in that, wherein others reprehended him,
and concluding him to be an excellent law-maker, as also Pl doth,Plato de legib. who for patternes and examples for al such as shal instit commonwelths and lawes, proposeth Minos, Solon, and Licurgu,  which last, I wil therfore speak next. THE IMBECILLITY OF LAVV-MAKERS I also exemplified in certaine wicked and absurd lawes of Licu¦gus, Plato, and Aristotle, with certaine obseruations no le¦pious then political. CHAP. 8. Plat. in Licurgo.LICVRGVS was no lesse famous for his ro birth, then for his great wisdome, and me vertue, who being brother to Polidectes King  Lacedemony, succeeded him in the kingdome  the earnest request of the people (in respe that his brother left no issue, but only his v great with child) and being earnestly solicited by her to ma with her, with promise to destroy the child in her wombe ( the end that his kingdome might be the more assured) he  not only refuse it, but also when the child was borne, & prou a Sonne, he proclaimed him King, taking only to him selfe t tutele of him, and the gouernment of the realme during his m¦noritie, with intention in the meane time to reforme it, b growne to great corruption,Of the lavves of the Lacedimo∣nians reformed by Licurgus. and al most vtterly decaied; & the¦fore he abolished most of the old lawes, and ordained new, the vse whereof the Lacedemonians flowrished many yeares abo al the rest of the Grecians, in so much that they had the domi¦on of al Greece for some time. 2. Neuertheles if we examine his commonwelth, and  lawes thereof, we shal find, that he failed both in true p¦dence,Hovv Licurgus erred in framing his common vvelth rather for vvarres then for peace. and in moral vertue. For whereas a good law-mak ought to frame his commonwelth no lesse to Religion, Iustic and Temperance, then to fortitude, that it may stand & flowris as wel in time of peace, as in time of warre, his lawes tend principaly to make the people valiant, and warlike, whereup
it followed, that the Lacedemonians flowrished so long as they d warres, and when they came to enioie peace, they felle to cay with in a while (as Aristotle noteth) wherby the error of urgus euidently appeareth.Arist. poli. li. 2. ca. 7. For as peace is not ordained for arre, but warre for peace, as motion and labour is ordained r rest (in which respect Cicero sayeth: VVarre is so to be vndertaken,Cicero. offic. lib. 1. that peace may be attained therby) so in like manner, a common∣elth is rather to be framed and ordained for peace, then for arre; And yet so for both, that it may stand by both. In which spect the commonwelth of the Athenians as Plutarke noteth,Plutark in Pho∣cione & pelo∣pida. ose Pallas for their patronesse, who was called both Polemica & litica, that is to say, VVarlike, and Ciuil: as also the Thebans had for eirs, Harmony, which was held to be the daughter of Mars and us, wherby they signified, that the harmony of cōmon-welth nsisteth in the consonance, and coniunction of military and il discipline;Iustinia. Institut. in proemio. which also Iustinian signified in the institutes of e ciuil lawe, saying: Imperatoriam maiestatem, &c. It is conuenient t the Imperial maiesty, be not only decked, and adorned with armes, but  defended with lawes. . But in the commonwelth of the Lacedemonians this was no y performed; For, the lawes of Licurgus, tending only to make em stronge, laborious, and valiant, could not make them reli∣ous, iust, and truly temperate, which for ciuil discipline and aceable gouerment is most requisite. For, as for lawes tending  religion, we find none made by Licurgus,A ridiculous lavv of Licur∣gus Plutar. in Licur∣go. not any religious act his, but only one more rediculous, then religious, as that he dicated an Image to laughter, which he made a God, or at least ould haue to be worshiped for a God, to make the people erry at their publike feastes, and meetinges. And as for lawes rtaining to iustice, he made few, and one amongst the rest; hich opened a great gap to iniustice, and to al consonage & de∣it; for he ordained, that it should be lawful for any man, to ale any kind of meate (so that he were not taken or disco∣red in the doing of it) and that boies and children should ue so litle allowed them to eate,Idem. Ibid. that they should be forced to ole, and steale for their better prouision, to make them ther∣ the more industrious, nimble, and quick of spirit, and others ore wary & watchful to keepe wel that which they had, in so
much that he which could steale most cunningly was most co¦mended. 4. But who seeth not that this was the next way to fil t commonwelth with theeues;Cunning theft and deceit allo∣vved of in the lavves of Licur∣gus. For is it likely that those who fro their infancy are brought vp in stealing, & pilfering trifles, wil ¦terwardes (when they haue got the habit & hability therof) f beare to steale thinges of greater importance? Or can thee  practise their occupation with more safety any way to beco in the end most expert, and thereby pernitious to the commo¦welth, then with the warrant, and vnder the protection of th law? seeing the penaltie which was ordained for them that we taken with the maner, was not inflicted for the iniustice of th fact, but for their lack of skil and dexterity in the performanc which must needes make euery one labour to excelle in th act of the euery: Finally when the law not only permitteth,  also induceth men to deceaue, some times, and in some thing doth it not also dispose, and as it were, direct them to decea as ofte, and howsoeuer they may? Therfore good and wise la makers, seeke to preuent euils, and to cut of the occasions  vice, and not to minister matter or occasion thereto, which  our corrupt natures, needeth a bridle to restraine it, and nor  spurre ro prick it forward. 5. And this may also be said in respect of an other lawe of ¦curgus inducing to intemperancy, and al kind of incontinen For although he ordained some thinges notably for the educ¦tion of youth;Idem. Ibid. tending as it seemed, to the repression of con¦piscence, and dissolute life, (as a very spare and homelie diet hard bedding of reedes (or as some write) no beds at al,Iustin. li. 3. con¦nual labour and exercise, one only garment, for the whole yea and such like) yet it appeareth that his meaning was no ot therin, but only to make them able to endure the labour, a¦toile of warre; For he ordained other lawes so much in fauo and furtherance of lust, & of al carnallity, yea in the worst kin that it may iustly be said,Plut. Ibid. he made his whole commonwe worse then a burdel; For he instituted certaine wrestlinges an dances,Absurd lavvs of Licurgus ten∣ding to Lasciui∣ousnes. and other exercises of boyes and wenches naked, to b done in publike at diuers times in the yeare, in the presen both of young & old men, which what effect it might worke
the mindes and manners of their citizens, any man may easely dge; especially seeing both their lawes & customes, permitted at men should be enamored of boyes, which was held for lau∣ble and necessary for their good education, it being presumed t their louers would carefully instruct them in vertue. 6. Furthermore adultry which was punished with death,Leuit 20. l Iulia. not ly by the law of Moyses, but also by the law of the Romans and her nations, as a thinge pernitious to commonwelth, was not ly permited, but also approued by Licurgus his law; ordaining,Adulterie per∣mitted by Licur∣gus amongst the Lacedimonians. t if an old man married a young wife, she might with her hu∣nds licence, make choice of any young man that she liked to ue a child by him, which her hushand brought vp as his owne. d if a valiant, or vertuous man (as good soldiers were termed ere) liked wel of an other mans wife, he might demand leaue her husband to haue issue by her, which was not denied, but ought cōueniēt for their commonwelth to maintaine there in good race, and breed of valiant men,Plut. in Licurg. as Plutark signifieth in fence of this law of Licurgus. 7. This then being soe;Arist. li. 2. pol. ca. 7. The ouerthrovv of the Lacedimo∣nyans in the playne of Leu∣ctra, by Gods iust iudgement for their sinnes of the flesh. Plut. narratione amator. Diodorus Sicu∣lus. li. 15. ca. 14. ca. 20. nu. 3. what maruaile it is that al sinne of e flesh and beastlines raigned more in Lacedemony, then any ere els in Greece, as Aristotle witnesseth? Nay what wonder is it t almighty God of his iust iudgment plagued them for it in  end? with a memorable ouerthrow in the plaine of Leuctra, ere they lost the dominion of Greece, by the occasion, and for nishment of a horrible rape, committed by two of their citti∣s, as I wil declare more at large when I come to treate of ds iustice. 8. And for the present, to conclude concerninge Licurgus and n, I wil not stand vpon other thinges reproued by Aristotle he lawes of Licurgus, seeing it is euidēt ynough by that which aue touched before, that these two mirroures of law-makers r so were Solon & Licurgus accounted of al antiquity) may serue lesse then others of meaner marke,Licurgus and Solon accounted by antiquitie the mirrours of Lavvmakers. for examples of mans infir∣ties, and of the weaknes of his wit in matters of common∣lth; to whome I wil now adde Plato, & Aristotle, who though ey founded no commonwelthes as the other two did; yet they med in writing ether of them one, in the which they labou∣ to shewe, both the excellency of their owne witts, and the
perfection of humane policy, wherin neuertheles they euiden¦ly shewed the imbecility and imperfection of both. Plato lib. de re∣pub.9. For what can be more absurd, or more impious, then  community which Plato ordained in his commonwelth,  only of goods and possessions, but also of women, to the e that no man should haue any thinge proper, or peculier to h¦selfe;The impious Lavves of Plato in his common∣vvelth. in so much that fathers, and mothers, should not kno their owne children, nether yet any child know his owne p¦rents, whereby he thought to establish in the commonwe such a perfect vnity, that no man should be able to say, this  mine, or this is thine, but euery one haue a general care of  where as if that law were put in practise, the vtter ouerthrowe commonwelth, and of al humane society must needes follo thereon. 10. For matrimony being taken away, and such a pro¦cuous,Promiscuous & beastly procrea∣tiō in the lavves of Plato. and beastly procreation introduced, the natural loue b¦twixt parents, and their children, brethren, kinsfolkes,  alyes, and al consanguinity, kindred, & affinity would be qu abolished; horible incest betwene kinsfolkes, brethren and ¦sters, father and daughter, mother and sonne; (which al nati abhorre) would ordinarily be commited, & in occasion of qu¦rells, which sometimes could not be auoided, one brother wo kil an other, the father, the sonne, & the sonne the father, for la of knowledge one of another; besides many other great inco¦ueniencies,Arist. polit. lib. 2. c. 1. 2. 3. 4. declared very particulerly and at large by Arist in his politiks, who also proueth very euidently, that the v which Plato sought to establish in his commonwelth by this la would not follow theron, whereby appeareth his double err Al which I omit for breuities sake, to speake a word or two of other law of his;Another most absurd Platoni∣cal lavv. who hauing ordained that young men sho for increase of their strength and agility of body, exercise th¦selues naked, at certaine times, and in certaine places appoi for that purpose, called Gimnasia, commanded also (not as Li¦gus did, in Lacedemonia that young girles & wenches should d naked amongst boies, but far more absurdely, that women  the flower of their youth, should dance, runne, wrestle, ride,  doe al exercises with younge men naked, aswel as they; wh (saith he) whosoeuer misliketh, vnderstandeth not how profitable it is
the commonwelth. 11. But who could imagine that the prince of philosophers or so was Plato esteemed) could so farre forget him selfe, as uing instituted and framed his commonwelth to al kinde of rtue, as to the only meanes to arriue to perfect felicity (for hich purpose he gaue notable documents, and precepts, and de excellent lawes concerning al vertues,Plato contrarie to him selfe. & amongst the rest uching chastity) who (I say) considering this, could imagine t this professor, maister, and teacher of vertue, this commen∣r, and commander of chastity, would not only permitte, but o ordaine a thing so contrary to his owne profession, to the d of his commonwelth, and to his owne lawes, precepts, and unsels, as the lasciuious aspect of naked women? wherby the r of concupiscence being kindled in men, and the bridle of na∣al modesty taken from women, what else could follow ther∣, but al beastly dissolution, and carnallity of life as wel in the e as in the other. 12. For precepts are giuen, & lawes ordeined in vaine against cōtinēcy, when the occasiōs, prouocatiōs, & nourishmēts ther∣ are permitted: which whosoeuer vseth to admit,Lavves ordained in vaine against vice, vvhen the occasions therof are permitted. plaieth with e flame, as doth the flye, and commonly is burned therby. For w many doe we see daily ouercome with vice (and especi∣y with that of the flesh) because they wil not forbeare the oc∣sions? we may put fier to straw when we wil, but we can not ench it when we wil: it is in our power and choice to combat th our enemy, but the victory is not in our handes: and so we y easely enter into the conflict, and admit the allurements of ne when we list, but can not so easely ouercome it, nor yet tire our selues when we list. And therfore in this kind of com∣t, the veriest coward getts the victory, that is to say, he which eth at first, or rather dareth not abide to see so much as the ce of his enemy: in which respect the Holy Ghost aduiseth vs; gite a fornicatione; Flee from fornication. And Iuuenilia desideria fuge;1. Cor. 6.  & auoyd youthly desires: & againe, Sicut a facie colubri, fuge peccata: s from the face of a serpēt, so flee & runne away from sinne.2. Tim. 2. Eccl. 21. For who∣euer delighteth to admit the occasions, who soeuer (I say) oth not shut vp the dores, and windowes of his eyes & eares, to e inticements of lust, but is cōtent to entertaine them into the
secret cabinet of his hart, though he were stronger then Sa holier then Dauid, wiser then Salomon, let him make account  be vanquished as they were. 13. Therefore Aristotle Platoes scholler, knowing how ¦sely men are corrupted, by the hearing and sight of wanton  lasciuious obiects, and especially children (whose first impres of good or bad are hardly remoued euer after) ordaineth in  written commonwelth, that they shal be kept from the hea of wanton talke,An excellent or∣donnance of A∣ristotle, forbid∣ding vvanton talk, and lasci∣uious pictures. Aristot. lib. 7. po∣ic. 17. and from the sight of lasciuious comedies,  such other representations as may moue them to carnal cogi¦tions, which inflame concupiscence to al disordinate appeati In respect wherof he commandeth, that the magistrats shal  suffer in the commonwelth, any dishonest images, or wan pictures, which may represent any vncleane or lasciuious act  the beholders; which when I consider, I can not but lamen litle care that is cōmonly had thereof in Christian commonw¦thes; where not only most mens mouthes ouerflow with dis¦nest and beastly talke, but also al places are furnished with w¦ton & lasciuious pictures and images, as with special ornamen which also many keepe in their bed chambers, and most sec clossets and retraites, to the end they may satiate their libidi eyes, and prouoke their spent, and languishing lust, with the f¦quent and greedy aspect thereof. I am shamed to say the r and haue saied this by the way, constrained by the iust grie which I conceaue of so great an abuse, which hauing bene  allowed, and forbidden by Paynims, is neuerthelesse permi amongst Christians. 14. But to retourne from whence I digressed, I concl that these Platonical lawes had bene more fit for a Sardanaphalu a Helogabalus, if they had written of commonwelth, then  Plato, who professed him selfe to be a phisition of soules, a ref¦mer of manners, a teacher of temperance, and the schoolmais of al vertue; so blind is man (be he neuer so wise) with out t light of Gods grace. Arist lib. 2. polit. c. 1. . 3. 4 5. 6 7. 8.15. But perhapes some may thinke that Aristotle, his scho¦ler (who was the wonder of the world for his wit, and vnd¦tooke to censure and syndicate him, and al other lawmakers b¦fore him) saw clearer in matter of lawes, and commonwe
then they; let vs then examine him a litle, and we shal find that  erred more absurdly then any of them. 6. This may appeare by two of his lawes:Tvvo absurd lavves of Ari∣stotle Arist. lib. 7. polit. cap. 16. whereof the one s, that if a man had any deformed or lame childe, he should  it out like a whelpe and expose it to perrish. And the other s, that if a man had aboue a certaine number of children, hich number he would haue to be determined according to rie mans ability) his wife should destroy the fruit in her mbe, when she found that she had conceaued.Ibidem. Wherein he wed him selfe more vnnatural and inhumane then the very it beastes; For as Cicero saith very wel;lib. 3. de finib. These two thinges can not ee together, to wit, that nature would haue procreation, and that it uld not haue the creature when it is borne, to be beloued, and conserued:  which appeareth (saith he) euidently in bruit beasts, whose labour  care in the conseruation of that which is borne of them is such, that we  acknowledge the force and voice of nature therin. VVherefore, it is ma∣est, (saith he) that as we naturally shunne and abhorre al kind of ife; so also vve are naturally moued to loue the issue of our bodies. Thus th Cicero, who also other where saith;Cicero offic. lib. 1. vvher as it is common to al ng creatures to haue a care of those thinges, which they haue brought h, nature hath giuen specially to man a loue to his children,Ibid. and a care rouide them al thinges necessary: Thus saith he and common ex∣rience teacheth it to be true. 17. What then can be more dissonant from reason and na∣e,The absurdity and inhumanity of Aristotles lavv ordeining the exposition of lame and defor∣med children. then that a man who is borne and naturally inclined to cle∣ency, humanity, and piety, should shewe him selfe vnkind, & humane, not towards beasts, but towards men, not towards angers, frends, or seruants, but towards his owne children, & t for no fault of theirs, but for some defect or deformitie of dy which they could not remedie; and ought rather to mooue an to compassion, and pitty, then to cruelty? Besides that ch corporal defects do not for the most part hinder the opera∣n of the mind, and vnderstandinge; and therefore it may very el happen by the execution of this inhumane law of Aristotle,Seneca ad Lucil∣lum, ep. Deformity of body doth not preiudice the beautie of the mind. t only that a father shal be depriued of a sonne, but also that e commonwelth shal loose a necessary and notable member. r (as Seneca saith) Ex casa vir magnus exire potest, & ex deformi, ilique corpusculo formosus animus, & magnus. A notable man, may
come out of a poore cottage, and a beautiful and high mind, out of a  and deformed body. 18. Could corporal imperfections and deformities exch Aesope from the number of philosophers?King Craesus ve∣ry deformed of body, yet a vvise and excellent Prince. Gueuerra in vita Marci Aurelij. or take from Craesus  reputation of a most excellent and wise prince? who inui Anacharsis the philosopher to come to his court, wrote of hi selfe, that although nature had made him deformed, crook backt, one eyd, lame of a leg, a dwarfe, and as it were a mon amongst men; yet he thought him selfe so monstrous in  thing, as in that he had no philosopher in his court, and of  councel. 19. The like may be said of a notable, though very deform Bishop of Cullen,Guliel Malms∣bury li. 2. ca. 10. of whose great wisdome and vertue, VVillia  Malmsbury giueth testimony, declaring the occasion of his ad¦ment to that greate Archbishopricke in this manner. An E¦rour of Germany (saith he) being a hūting, & wādering by ch with very few or none with him, in a morning (vpon the su before lent, called Quinquagessima,) came to a poore parish ch dissembling him selfe to be a soldier and desired to heare ma the parish preist being a man so deformed of body that he  Penae portentum naturae,A storie of a de∣formed priest made Archbi∣shoppe of Cullen. almost a monster of nature, said masse ∣fore him, and as the Emperour wondered with him selfe, t almighty God, who is of infinit beauty & maiesty, would su so deformed a creature to serue him in such a high and di mistery, it chanced that the priest reading the verse of the Tr which was that day;Psal. 99. Scitote, quoniam Dominus &c. know you th Lord is God, and that he made vs, and not we our selues, pronounc the same in such a different tune and voice, from that which  had read before, that the Emperour tooke it as a thing ordai by almighty God, to answere his cogitation, and began to h such a reuerent opinion of the priest, that hauing enformed h selfe after masse, of his great vertue, he made him Archbishop  Cullen, much against his wil. In which charge he behaued hi¦selfe with singuler cōmendation, as wel for the temporal, as sp¦ritual affaires, and left behind him a notable memory, both  great wisdome, & also of singuler sanctity, & holines of life, & Whereby appeareth the absurdity of Aristotles lawe. For if it h bene in force where this deformed Bishopp was borne, t
Church had wanted a notable pastor, and the commonwelth an cellent, and principal member. 20. Furthermore it is manifest by Aristotle him selfe,li. 5. Ethic. ca. 11. Aristotle aga∣inst him selfe. that is law of exposition of children is most vniust, and iniurious to e commonwelth: For whereas he proueth in his Ethicks, that man may not kil him selfe, he affirmeth amongst other thinges, t he which besides the course and forme of law doth hurt an her, who nether defendeth him selfe nor hurteth him, doth urie to the commonwelth. Therefore how much more iniu∣ous is it, to destroy an innocent child, that can nether defend m selfe, nor hurt any other, and might in time doe notable uice to the commonwelth. 21. The like also may be said of the other law of Aristotle,Arist. li. 7. Pol. c. 6. The absurdity of Aristotles lavvs concerning the destruction of children in their mothers vvombe Cicero orat. pro Cluentio. ncerning abortion, or the destruction of the childe in the mo∣ers wombe, being a thing, punished seuerely by al good lawes,  iniurious not only to nature, but also to commonwelth, which  depriued therby of a designed cittyzen, as Cicero tearmeth it, eaking of a Woman of Miletus in Asia, who hauing procured ortion of her childe a litle before her time of trauel, was con∣mned to death. Neque iniuria (saith he) quia designatum Reip. em sustulisset; And very iustly, for that she had made away one that s designed to be cittizen of the commonwelth. In which respect e ciuil law doth greuiously punish al wilful abortion after con∣ption, whether the child haue life or no,ff. de paenis. li. si aliquid. parag. qui abortionis. inflicting death if the ilde were alreadie quick, and other waies banishment with nfiscation of the goods of the offendours, if they be noble or  accounte,Siluester verb. Aborsus. Armilla ibid. and condemnation to digge in the mines if they be ore. Besides that our Canonists doe teach it to be a mortal ne, either to procure abortion after conception (though the ilde be not quick) or voluntarily to hinder conception, or to use sterility, because it is (say they) Contra bonum prolis generandae; gainst the good of generation, which nature ordaineth for e continuation of mankind, and maintenance of humaine so∣itie. 22. Therfore whereas Aristotle him selfe aduiseth that the ab∣tion be procured after conception, before the child haue life, dding this reason, for that (saith he) to doe it after,Arist. ibid. vt sup. were nefas,  wicked act) his reason excuseth not his absurditie in this law,
and condemneth him of wickednes in the former,Aristotle confu∣ted by his ovvne assertion. concer the exposition of children. For if it be a wicked act to kil a qui child before it be borne, much more wicked and cruel is the  to expose it to destructiō & death after it is borne, when it h more sense and feeling of hurt, and naturally moueth more  compassion. 23. But perhaps some may say, that he which exposeth  layeth forth a child doth not kil it,An obiection anvvered. Exod 2. Plut. in Romulo. Iustin. li. 1. for that it may hap (as ma times it hath) that the child may be taken vp by some other a nourished, as it chanced, to Moyses, Romulus, & Remus, Cyrus, Kin of Persia, and diuers others; wherto I answere, that although th prouidence of God, ouercome many times the mailce of ma yea & turne it to good: yet mans offence is neuer a whit the le nether can a chance that hapneth after an act, alter the nature  the act; I meane, it can neither rectify it, if it be il done,  make it il, if it be wel done. And therefore I say, that seing reas and the law of nature commandeth, (as I haue shewed befor that euery one haue a special care of the life and conseruation  his children, he which not only forsaketh his owne child, t hath not any way offended him, but also exposeth it to peril  death, can not be excused of vnnatural dealing, inhumanity,  impiety, though some stranger should chance afterwards  proue more humane and pyous towards it, then the father hi selfe. 24. Wel then to conclude this point, I say of Aristotle  Augustus Caesar said of King Herod,Macrobius lib. 2. Saturnal c. 4. (when he vnderstood that ¦mongst the innocents which he caused to be killed after th birth of our Sauiour, one of his owne sonns was slaine) It is be (saith he) to be Herods pig, then his sonne.Herods ovvne sonne slayne a∣mongst the In∣nocents, And this he said, for th pigs were not killed in Iudea because the Iewes did not eate  swines flesh. And euen so I say, it were better to be a beast in A∣stotles commonwelth then a man, for beasts should be assure cared and prouided for by their dammes, wheras the children  men should be in danger to bee forsaken both of father and mo¦ther, and so to perrish. An other ab∣surd errour of Aristotle.25. And here I can not forbeare to say somewhat of an othe constitution of his, which I know not whether it were mo absurd or ridiculous. Thou maist remember (good reader
that I made mention a litle before of a notable law of his forbid∣ng in his commonwelth, the vse of lasciuious pictures, & ima∣s, lest young men, and especially children, might be corrupted  maners by the sight therof; neuerthelesse he exteth in the e law, the Images and pictures of certaine Gods; In whome aith he) the custome allovveth lasciuiousnes;Lasciuious pi∣ctures and ima∣ges of Gods ab∣surdly allovved by Aristotle. meaning no doubt the inted and graued stories of the adulteries of Iupiter, Mars, and us, and other Gods and Godesses, set forth euery where a∣ongst the Painims, as wel in publike places, as in their priuate wses, and temples. Wherein may be obserued the ridiculous surdity of this great philosopher, not only in matter appertai∣ng to religion, (which I remit to be examined other where) t also in matter of cōmonwelth, yea & concerning his owne  before mencioned; for what would it auaile to take away  other wanton pictures, & representations that might corrupt e mindes of yought, when he expressly alloweth the vse of the ciuious pictures of the Gods, which must needes corrupt them uch more, and as it were instil into them, vicious affections & sires to geather with their religion, yea by the example of their ods, by the imitation of whome they could not but hope to aine aswel to perfection of vertue, as to eternal beatitude & licitie, beleeuing as they did, that they were true Gods? 26. For how could any man he perswaded that adultery de∣ued punishment or was not a great, yea a diuine vertue, seing rs taken tardy with Venus,Mens mynd cor∣rupted amongst the gētils by the sight of the las∣ciuious pictures of their Gods. or Iupiter stealing away Europa in ape of a bul, violating Loeda in forme of a swanne, & entring in  the howse of Danae by the loouer, like a goulden shewer? ould not any man that should be religiously deuoted to these ods, be animated by the sight therof to doe the like? yea and ildren learning their religion, and not only hearing, but also ing euery where by pictures and Images, that such acts were mmitted by their Gods, could they imagine that the same ere euil, and not to be imitated? This is very wel declared by cian of his owne experience, who in his dialogues maketh Me∣ppus say thus,Lucian. in ∣nippo. VVhen I was yet but a boy (saith hee) and heard out  Homer and Hesiod of the adulteries, fornications, rapes and seditions of  Gods; truly I thought that those thinges vvere very excellent, & beganne en then to be greatly affected towardes them; for I could not imagine that
the Gods them selues would euer haue comitted adultery if they  esteemed the same lawful and good. Thus saith he. And the like ¦nifieth also Chaerea in Terence, who beholding a table wherin it  painted how Iupiter deceaued Danae,Tetent. in Eunuc. when he came in, at  top of the howse, saith, that he was greatly encouraged to  flower a young maide by the example of so great a God; A  Deum? (saith he) Qui templa coeli summa sonitu concutit. Ego hom hoc non facetem? Ego vero illud ita feci & lubens? But what God was  marry he which shakes the highest temples of the heauenes with thunder,  therfore might not I that am but a poore wretch doe the like? yes truly I  and that with al my harte. 27. Loe here the effect, that the sight of such lasciuious p¦ctures of the gods,Aristotles absur¦ditie manifest. must needes worke in the mindes of such  should behold them, and be withal religiously affected toward them. And therfore Aristotle permitting these, and forbiding  other, to preuent the corruption of youth, might be compa to one that should make a law to forbid the burning of how except it were with some artifical or wild fier, that could not  extinguished; For such may be said to be the fier, of concu¦scence kindled in the minds of men or of children, by religi acts, or representations which make impressions that neuer ¦ter can be rased out againe, so longe as the affection to the sa religion remaineth. But hereof I shal haue occasion to say m in the second parte of this Treatise, when I shal treat of  dammage which false religion breedes in commonweth;  therfore for this time I conclude, that Aristotle failed, and e no lesse, or rather much more absurdly, then the other law ¦kers, whose errors he censured and controuled. 28. Hereby two things appeare euidētly; the one, the weak of mans wit when it is not supported and directed by the gr of God;The vveaknes of mans vvit and the imperfection of lavves infer∣red vpon the pre¦mises. and the insufficiencie, and imperfection of hum lawes, through the weaknes of the law-makes, who intendi many times to make good and wholesome lawes for the ben∣ of the commonwelth, doe ordaine thinges very inconuenie and preiudicial therto; which Cicero obserued in some of t wisest men of his time; I can tel you (saith he) of Marcus Cotta wi lawe concerning priuate iudgments,Cicero de rep. in fragmentis was abrogated by his owne brother  same yeare that it vvas made, and the lavves of Licinia, and Mutiae made
tvvo most wise Consuls, were in the iudgemēts of al men not only vnprofitable, t also pernitious to the commonvvelth, as also the lavves called Liuiae were rogated by the Senats in an instant. And in like manner, I hold the lawes eiae, and Apuliae to be nothinge worth. Thus far Cicero. The like hereof might be exemplified in euery commonwelth, but this al suffice at this time concerning law-makers. And now let vs onsider law in it selfe, what it is, to what end it is ordained, and hat it can performe in commonwelth, for the perfection and tablishment therof. HE IMPERFECTION OF HVMANE LA∣vves is further shevved by the defects incident to lavv: And first vvhat lavv is, to vvhat end it is ordained, and vvhat it can performe in commonvvelth. Also an exact comparison of the lavv of the flesh) vvhich is contrary to commonvvelth) vvith political lavv, vvherby it appeareth that political lavv can not ouercome the carnal lavv. CHAP. 9. PLATO speaking generally of al law,Plato in Mino. de rep. & de leg. as wel writ∣ten as vnwritten, defineth it to be; A reasonable rule leading and directing men to their due end, for a pu∣blike good, ordaining penalties for them that transgressé, and revvards for them that obay. And Cicero more breefly thus;Cicero. li. 1. de. legib. Idem. Ibid. Lavv is (saith hee) the highest or chiefe son grafted in nature, cōmanding those thinges vvhich are to be done, and bidding the contrary. And againe. Lavv is the force of nature, the vn∣rstanding and reason of a wiseman, the rule of right and wronge.The definition of lavv. And eaking more particulerly of written law, he saith it is; The rea∣ and vnderstanding of a wise man, who ordaineth in vvriting vvhat he inketh good, by vvay either of cōmandement, or of prohibition. Lastly e Ciuilians most breifly, & properly define it thus.Accurs. in instit. ff. de legibus. & Senatus constit. 3. Lex est sanctio cta, iubens honesta, prohibens contraria. Law is a holy decree, (that to say, a decree which ought not to be broken) commanding ood and holy thinges, and forbidding the contrary.
Plato. de leg.2. This law Plato calleth, the soule that giueth forme  life to the cōmonwelth, & the ancor that staieth & assureth it  Cicero saith,Cicero l. 3. de leg. Lavv is the soule and life of the commonvvelth. that neither any house, nor citty, nor nation, nor y humane kind could stand with out it. 3 Neuertheles how excellent or necessary soeuer it is fo commonwelth, yet it is to be vnderstood, that al lawes wha soeuer (that are meerly humane) are defectiue and insufficient for the perfect gouerment of a state.Al lavves defe∣ctiue. Lavves vvriten or vnvvriten. Idem. Ibid. The magistrate a speaking lavv, and the lavv, a dūme magistrate For whereas humane lawe consist ether in written statutes & decrees, or in the command∣ement and ordinances of a wise magistrate (which magistrate Cicero therfore calleth A speaking law, as he also calleth the law, A dumme magistrate) it is euident that nether of both a part, no yet both concurring, can suffice. 4. As for the first, wheras written lawes are vniuersal, an concerne the actions of men,The imperfection if vvritten lavves. which are infinit and particular, it is not possible that any law-maker should extēd his lawes so far, that they may sufficiently prouide for al cases that may occurre but that he must leaue place for the determination and iudge∣ment of men according to equity, as not only Aristotle, but al the Ciuilians themselues doe teach,Arist. ethic. li. 5. c. 10. Iulian. li. 19. ad edictum. ff. de legib. & senatus constit. 3. & Iu∣lian. li. 89. diget. and the experience is dail seene therof in the necessity of interpretation and mitigation o lawes, in dispensations, and in appellations from law to con∣science, wherby the imperfection of al written lawes sufficient appeareth. And as for the ordinances of wise magistrats, it is ma∣nifest by that which I haue said before concerning the errors o wise gouernours & law-makers, that the weaknes and blindne of mans wit,The imperfecti∣on of vnvvrit∣ten lavves. Better to be go∣uerned by good lavves, then by the vvil of the best man, and vvhy. Arist. polit. li. 3. c. 2. VVhere good lavves gouerne God doth gouer∣ns. and the corruption of his nature is such, that he ca nether see so cleerely in al cases, nor yet be so voide of affectio and passion, that he shalbe able alwaies to determine, decree and iudge according to equity. In which respect Aristotle disp¦ting whether it were better that a commonwelth should be go∣uerned by good lawes, or by the wil of the best man, preferret the gouernment of lawes before the other, saying, that The lavv i as it vvere a pure and cleare vnderstanding: vvhereas the vnderstanding o the best man is ioyned vvith sensual appetite, vvherby it may be corrupted And that therfore where the law gouerneth, there God gouer¦neth with the law, but where man gouerneth, be he neuer s wise and vertuous, there a cruel beast (to wit concupisence an
passion) entreth in to the gouerment with him, and many times bscureth his vnderstanding, and peruerteth his wil.As the magi∣strates should go∣uerne the people so should lavv gouerne the ma∣gistrate. Iulian li 15. digest. ff. de legib & Se∣natus. constit. 3. Cicero de leg li. 3. For which ause the magistrates ought in al cases, wherein the meaning of he law is cleare, to iudge and determine, according to the pre∣cript therof (as the Ciuil law it selfe ordaineth) and Cicero saith, at as the magistrate gouerneth the people, so should the lavv gouerne the agistrat. Wherupon I infer, that seing no law-maker can so su∣iciently prouide for the gouernment of commonwelth by the tter of the law, but that he must leaue infinit cases, yea and the terpretation of the lawes themselues to the determination & dgment of men (who are also on their parte defectiue,No sufficient meanes to make a perfect com∣monvvelth by human lavves or magistrates. to wit biect to passion and error) it followeth that nether the law ithout the magistrate, not the magistrate without the law, nor t both cōcurring, can suffice for the perfect gouernmēt of cō∣onwelth, but should be for to supply the defects of the other. nd therfore I conclude, that there is no sufficient meanes & ssured, to establish any state by humane lawes. 5. This wil be more euident if we cōsider what are the special nds wherto lawes are ordained, & what they can performe. wo thinges are principally intended by them:Tvvo princial ends vvhereunto humayne lavves do tend. the one the ad∣inistration of iustice by the decision of causes, controuersies, nd sutes, betwixt partie, and party; The other is, the reforma∣on of manners, and repression of vice, for that it is pernicious  commonwelth. Of the first, I haue already spoken sufficient∣, hauing declared as wel the weaknes of the law-maker, and agistrate, as the imperfection of the law in the determination f causes, and therfore I wil enlarge my selfe here a litle further oncerning the later, which is suppression of vice and reforma∣on of manners, and wil declare that humane lawes can not su∣ciently performe, either the one, or the other. 6. For if lawes were able to reforme mens manners,ff. de legib. & Se∣natus consult. tit. 3. Isidor. li. 5. E∣timolog. The force of hu∣mane lavves consisteth in precepts, prohi∣bition, permissi∣on, revvard and punishment. or to presse vice, they must doe it either by precept, or by prohibition, or y permissiō, or by rewardinge, or by punishinge: for in these fiue thin∣es consist al the force of humane lawes, as the Lawiers them elues do testifie. As for the two first, to wit, precept & prohibition, ey are altogeather vnable and insufficient to bring the cor∣pt nature of man to any perfection of vertue. For what other elp haue we therby but only the knowledge of our duty; which
knowledge alone as Aristotle saith,Arist. lib. 2. Ethic. cap 4. helpeth little or nothing to vert wherof the praise and commendation consisteth in action, and operation. F it nothing auaileth though we know neuer so much, if we, d not put our knowledg in practise. And as it little profiteth a si man to knowe what meate is good for him, when he hath suc a loathing to it that he can not eate it; euen so the corrupt na∣ture of man hath little helpe or remedy by the knowledge of hi duty; when vertue is so loathsome vnto him, that he can not brooke it.Seneca ep. 95. Preceptes alone litle auail to the obtaining of vertue. For as Seneca saith; Nihil proderit dare praecepta, nisi pri amoueris obstantia praeceptis. It is to little purpose to giue precep except thou first remoue the obstacles therof. Therfore the poe saith truely. — si possem, sanior essem; Sed trahit inuitum, noua vis, aliudque cupido, Mens aliud suadet, Video meliora proboque, Deteriora seauor. That is to say, I would be better if I could, but a new and strange fo dravveth me against my vvil, and sensuality perswades me one thing and reason an other; I see and approue the better, but I follow the vvos Also the Apostle speaking in the person of our corrupt natu testifieth the same saying.Rom. 7. Scio quia non habitat in me &c. I know t there dwels no goodnes in me, that is to say, in my flesh, for I haue a g wil or desire, but I can not performe it, for I doe not the good which I des to doe, but I doe the euil vvhich I would not doe. Thus far the Apostle wherupō it followeth that the precept & prohibitiō of the la (wherby we haue only the knowledge of good and euil) littl auaileth vs for the attaining of vertue, except the infirmitie & corruption of nature be cured by some other meanes. For A¦mus (saith Seneca) vt ad praecepta posit ire,Sene. ep. 95. soluendus est: that is to s The soule must be loosed from the bonds that tie & entangle it, or other v it can not followe the good precepts that are giuen. But what if the pr¦hibition of euil doth hurt also, if it be not otherwaies helped? Rom 7. Prohibition of it selfe rather hur∣teth then other vvayes.7. This the Apostle proueth clearly, to shew therby the inf¦mitie of the Mosaycal law, considered in it-selfe without Go grace; Peccatum (saith he) non cognoui, &c. I knew not sinne but  th law, for I knew not concupiscence, but because the law said, th shlt not couet. And sinne by the occasion of the cōmandment hath wroug al concupiscence in me: thus far the Apostle. And how true this
cōmon experience may teach vs; seing nothing is more proper nd peculier to the malice of mans nature, then the desire to doe hat which is forbidden, and commonly for no other reason, but ecause it is forbidden, which the poët signifieth elegantly, ying. Cui peccare licet, peccat minus;Ouidius. 3. de arte amandi. ipsa potestas Semina nequitiae languidiora facit. &c. Nitimur in vetitum semper, cupimusque negata: Sic interdictis imminet aeger aquis. e which hath leaue to sinne, sins lesse, for the liberty to sinne weakeneth e very roots and seedes of sinne:Mans corrupt nature thirsteth after thinges forbidden. Horatatius. 1. Carminum. od 3. we alwayes striue to doe that which is rbidden vs, like to the sick man, who thirsts most after forbidden wa∣; And an other Poët saith to the same purpose. Gens huma∣ruit per vetitum nefas. Mankind runneth head longe to sinne when it is bidden him; For euen as a torrent or land-floud running a vio∣nt and precipitous course, and meeting with any stop by the ay becomes the more furious, and with redoubled force makes selfe way, and beareth downe al before it: Euen so mans cor∣pt nature, being carried headlong with vnbridled desiers, & ding it selfe repressed or hindered with any law or comand∣ent, breaketh downe the bankes and bounds of duty with  doubled fury, in such sorte, that it committeth double offence:  wit, it doth not only do the euil that it desireth, but also bre∣eth the law, as the Apostle insinuateth saying; Lex iram operatur.Rom. 4. c. The law worketh or causeth vvrath, for vvhere there is no lavv, there is  breach of lavv. Whereupon Saint Augustine saith,In decerptis ex August. The letter of the  killeth, for it makes a man rather knovv euil, then eschew it, and by t meanes rather encreaseth then diminisheth sinne, for that mans concupi∣nce, or vnlavvful desire is accompanied also vvith the breach of the lavv; herby it appeareth that law in cōmanding or forbidding, help∣h not sufficiently to the reformation of mans corrupt nature. 8. And can Permission or conniuence with euil (which is an¦her point of the law) worke any greater effect? who seeth not at the same doth nothing else but bewray the imbecillity and  perfection of law,Permission she∣vveth the imbe∣cillity of lavv. seing it is forced to permit that which it adly would, and should remedy, but can not. And therfore I il proceede to treate of Revvard, & Punishment, wherein as Solon as wont to say, principally consisteth the gouernment of com∣monwelth.
And Isidorus saith; Legis proemio aut poena vita m¦ratur humana.Isidor. li. 50. Eti∣molog. Mans life is wholy gouerned, by the reward or p¦nishment of the lawe. Of revvard and punishment.9. Now then for as much as these two haue al their oper¦tion about the effectes of vertue or vice, that is to say about goo or bad actions (which are only rewarded and punished by law) and not about the causes and rootes therof, to wit the good or bad habits or affections of the minde (from whence spring al good or euil actions) it is manifest, that though they may be motiues to good, yet they can not be effectual and sufficient meanes to worke it. For so longe as the cause remaineth, so long wil the effects followe therof at one time or other. 10. For as trees are yeerely cropped, and vines lopped, ye whiles the rootes remaine sound, they bud a fresh, and bring forth new bowes, leaues and fruit; euen so, although euil & sinful acts be punished in wicked men, yet if the causes from whence they proceede (to wit the inordinate affections and passions) be not taken away, they produce the same effects soo∣ner or later, openly or secretly. For what commonly followeth of the punishment of a vicious act, when the habit of the vi remaineth, but that the offendour sinneth more warily an othe time? and how often doe men offend the lawes with our puni¦shment, yea with out any feare or danger therof? That man (sait Cicero) vvho feares nothing but a iudge and vvitnes,Cicero de leg. vvhat vvil be  doe in the dark, or vvhen he finds a vveake and rich man alone, of vvho he may haue the spoyle? 11. Furthermore how many waies may the pennaltie of th law be auoided? Some escape it by their power (in which res∣pect Anacharsis compared lawes to the spiders webbe, whic takes only the litle flees,Plut. in Solon. whiles the great-ones breake throug it) and some againe auoid it by corruption either of the Iudge witnes,Hovv many vvayes the pe∣naltyes of politi∣cal lavves may be escaped. or iurie; and some by fauor and freendship, & other by negligence of officers, which doe not execute the lawes, an some by the Princes pardon. But what shal we say of such as of∣fend the law not only with out punishment, but also with re∣ward? And to the end that this may the better appeare, and tha with al we may see what force law may haue for the suppressiō of the malice of mans nature, let vs consider the force of a con∣trary
law, which euery commonwelth encountreth and im∣ugneth political law, to wit, the law of the flesh, whereof the postle saith; Video aliam legem, &c.Rom. c. 7. I see an other law in my body re∣gnāt to the lavv of my mind. And for as much as this lawe hath al∣o her precepts, prohibitions, rewardes, and punishments,An exact com∣parison of poli∣tical lavv, vvith the lavv of the flesh to shevv the ad∣uantage of the later. let vs ut it in ballance with the ciuil and political lawe, weighing the ne with the other, that we may see whether wil be like to ouer∣eygh in man voyd of Gods grace; and consequently in com∣onwelthes that relye only vpon humane policy and power. 12. It is therfore to be considered, that the carnal law flo∣inge from the very bottome of mans corrupt nature, is so uch stronger, and more forcible then the other, to moue and aw him, by how much it is more internal and familiar with im, and the end or scope therof more agreable and consonant  his corrupt humour, wil, and affection.VVherunto the political and carnal lavves do tend. For political law ten∣eth only to, Bonum verum, and bonum commune. A true good, and the mmon good, consisting in solid and perfect vertue; whereas the rnal law tendeth to, bonum apparens, and bonum priuatum. An appa∣at and priuat good, cōnsisting only in mans owne profit, pleasure, d delectation, wherto euery one is of his owne corrupt nature clined. 13. The like may be said also of the statutes and decrees of the e and the other, that is to say, their precepts,The statutes of the political and carnal lavv. and prohibiti∣ns, consisting in commandments, negatiue, and affirmatiue, herein the carnal law hath also the like aduantage, in respect  the greater facility of the precepts therof, and the difficulty  the thinges it forbiddeth. For wheras the ciuil and politycal w commandeth vs to loue our neighbours as our selues, and  prefer the publike good before our priuate, to be temperate, d continent, not to steale, not to deceaue, not to commit for∣cation, or adultery: the law of the flesh being opposite in al, ommandeth the contrary, as to loue our selues better then our eighbour, to prefer our priuate good before the publike, to eale, and deceaue for our commodity, to commit fornication, d adultery for our pleasure, and to conclude al in one pre∣pt it saith, Ede, bibe, lude, post mortem nulla voluptas. Eate, drink, and,  merry, for after death ther is no pleasure. 14. These statutes of the carnal lawe the Holy Ghost layeth
downe notably in the booke of wisdome, speaking of wicke men in these wordes: Dixerunt impij. &c. The wicked sayd, let  enioy the goods that we haue,Sap. 2. and vse the creature in this time of our yo without delay: let vs fil our selfe with wine and oyntements, and let vs  loose the flovver of the time, &c. let vs leaue euery where the signes of  mirth, for this is our part, and this is our lot; let vs oppresse the poore  man, and let vs not spare widdovv, nor haue respect to the hoary hea of any; and let our strength be the lavv of iniustice. Loe here the statut of the flesh, which how much more consonant and agreable the are to mans corrupt nature, and how much more easy to be pe¦formed then the statutes and decrees of the political law, th commaund and forbid the contrary, I need not to declare. 15. For who knoweth not that to learne vice a man hath n need of any great wit,Mans prompt∣nesse to learne euil. or of a Councellour, or of cōpulsion; wh is so simple that hath not wit inough to be wicked? whereas t be vertuous we need not only wit, and capacity, maisters an teachers, but also lawes, stripes, prisons, gyues, and gibbets; an yet (as Seneca saith) VVe may thinke vve profit vvel if vve be none of th vvorst;Seneca ep. 75. so that he which is either left to his owne corrupt natur or hath no other then humane helpe, is drowned in vice an sinne,Ibid. before he come within a kenning of the port of vertue VVe are (saith Seneca) taken vp by the vvay, vve labour to come to vert being already entangled and intercepted by vice; And no maruaile, see¦ing men voyd of grace, (for of such I speake) haue nether suffi¦cient armes to defend them selues, nor refuge where to sa them selues. For reason which is their only weapon, not bein strengthned by grace, is so weake and brickle, that it breaket at the first blowe, and morall vertue (wherein consisteth  their hope & refuge) is so hard to be attained, that a man rece¦ueth many deadly woundes of his enemy, before he can arri where it is. Besides that, his danger is the greater, for that th war is so domestical, and intestine, that he is not secure fro him selfe; for that he is to fight not only with the world and th diuel, but also with his owne passions and affections, in so muc that his greatest feare may be, lest he him selfe betray him self and render him selfe prisoner to his enemyes. 16. Furthermore we see that our procliuity to vice, and o auersion from vertue is such, that as it sufficeth to flesh a do
only once vpon sheepe,vyce sely learned and vertue very hardly. to make him a sheepe-werryer as long he liueth; euen so one only taste of vice is enough to make a an vicious euer after; wheras many acts are required to the rtayning of the habit of any one vertue, and so timely is mans eendship with sensuality the mother of vice, and so late his nowledge, and vse of reason which leadeth to vertue, that he ath gone halfe the way to vice, before he knowe where vertue welleth: by meanes wherof he cōmonly groweth to be vicious ery early, to wit, in his child-hood, and vertuous very late, if er he proue vertuous at al; for the way to vertue is longe and d of difficulties, but the way to al kind of vice is easy,Eccle. ca. 21. & as Salo∣on saith, Complanata lapidibus; euen, and wel paued, short, and one in a trice; Haud procul illa habitant, breuis est via qua sit eundum.Hesiod. ice dwelleth nor far from vs, the way is short, and al in descent. hereupon the Poët saith, facilis descensus auerni,Vergi. li 6. AEnead. the descent to el is very easy. Finally of these two wayes our Sauiour saith, ta porta et spatiosa via est, &c. The way is broade &Math. c. 7. spacious that leadeth  perdition and many enter in therat; but the gate is straite, and the vvay is rovv which leadeth to life, and few men find it. Thus we see,The aduantage that the carnal lavv hath of the political lavv. how reat aduantage the law of the flesh hath of the political law, in spect of the facility that men find to fulfil the precepts therof, hich in some are nothing else but to be vicious. 17.The carnal lavv hath her Aduo∣cates, Orators, Philsophers and teachers. But what, doth it want any thing wher with political law furnished, which it hath not also in high degree, to be able to old this competence? hath not this carnal law, (trow you,) er Aduocates, Orators, Philosophers, and teachers, to publish d proclaime it, to plead it, to teach it? how say yow, by al the ct of Epicurus? whose doctrine consisted principally in the pre∣pts of this law, and impugning as much as he durst the ciuil d political law? In which respect al Epicurians were bannished t of many good commonwelthes of Greece as Plutark testifieth, d that worthely.The doctrin of Epicurus and his follo∣vvers. For Epicurus hauing made a demand in cer∣ine questions which he wrote, whether a wise man would not e against the political lawe, if he might be sure to escape puni∣ment? answered freely therto; yes truly. And writing to Idome∣us (one of his schollers) he admonished him seriously not to biect him selfe to the lawes and opinions of men, whensoeuer e might hope to auoid the penaltie of the lawes. And Metrodorus
a disciple & familiar frend of his writing to his brother,Metrodorus a disciple of Epi∣curus. forbad him to goe to the warrs, & to endanger him selfe for the publike good of Greece, aduising him to drinke good wine at home, and to treat him selfe wel, that his body might receaue al pleasure, and contentment:Idem in his trea∣tise that a man can not liue me∣rily in the sect of Epicurus. Philip. 3. concluding that the cheife and soueraigne good, consisteth in the bellie, and in the pleasures therof. This is the philosophy that belongeth to the law of the flesh, & experience sheweth what numbers of professors there are therof in euery commonwelth. Quorum Deus venter est (as the Apostle saith) whose bellies are their Gods. whose indeauors tend to nothing, but to their priuate pleasure and commodity, who employ their witts, studies and penns to nothing so much, as to publish and promulgate the carnal lawe, in ambrous and lasciuious bookes, wanton poems, and scurrilous and baudy ballads,Youth corrupted by lasciuious bookes and bal∣lads. which abound euery where to the corruption of youth, and consequently to the preiudice of the commonweale, and to the great shame, in my fancy, of the magistrats that see it and suffer it. 18. Moreouer to the end we may see that this carnal law wil yeeld in nothing to the political, hath it not also commonwel∣thes wherin it gouerneth, and a prudence & pollicy appropriate vnto it?The cōmon-vve∣alths vvhere in the carnal lavv gouerneth. politike Princes and magistrats that practise it? yea and politike writters that teach and maintaine it? How say you by al Tyrannical states, where al is drawne to the pleasure or particuler benefit of the Prince? Are not the same ruled according to the precepts of this lawe? Doe the magistrats and gouernours therof practise any other policy but prudentiam carnis,Rom. 8. as the Apostle calleth it, the prudence and vvisdome of the flesh? And Machiauel whose workes are so highly esteemed of many states-men at this day; doth he teach any other gouerment,Machiauel de principe. then that which proceedeth from the principles of this law, to wit from selfe loue and parti∣culer interest? 19. And this were not much to be wondered at, if it had not also a Religion conforme to it selfe;The carnal lavv hath religion, doctors and pre∣achers. with doctors and preachers to defend, preach, and teach it. For as political law hauing the help and assistance of true Religion, is more perfect, & worketh far greater effect in commonwelth, for the establishment and conseruation therof (as in the second parte of this Treatise shalbe made manifest) so also the carnal lawe beinge masked
with the vizard of some religion either true or false , is of farr greater force to ouerthrowe and destroy Commonwelth; and therfore it seeketh alwaies to haue either the apparance & shew of true religion (in which respect Machiauel teacheth his ty∣rant to be an hipocrite) or else it serueth it selfe of some new fan∣gled and false religion;Machiauel de principe. which the Apostle signifieth when amongst opera carnis, the workes of the flesh,Gal. 5. he numbreth sects of heritikes. And such is especially the religion of some sectaries at this day, whose doctrine tendeth wholy to the liberty of the flesh, and by consequēce, to the destruction of political law, as I would shew here, but that I haue purposed to doe it hereafter in the se∣cond parte of this treatise, more amply then this place wil permit. 20. But perhapps you wil say that the other law in rewarding and punishing surmounteth this, and represseth it in such sorte that it can haue no force in any wel gouerned commonwelth? Let vs then examine this alitle, and we shal find that the political lawe hath no oddes of this in that point:The Revvardes the lavv of the flesh propo∣seth. for this hath also re∣wardes and punishmentes as wel as that. The rewardes which this proposeth are diuers, for it promiseth for some thinges, the pleasure and delectation which is sought in the action, with the which, the partie doth thinke him selfe so wel satisfied, that he is contented many times to bestowe much money, yea to venture his life to obteine it. Some times againe it proposeth some gaine or commoditie, which may accompanie or follow the fact. And lastly it findeth meanes other whiles to rob vertue of her reward, and to applie it to it selfe, in so much that there is no remunera∣tion promised by the political law, wherof the carnal law may not some times giue hope to such as follow it; as I wil make eui∣dent by the comparison of the one with the other, wherby it shal appeare that the carnal law hath euery where the aduan∣tage. 21. Therfore I say that the rewardes propose for vertue by the political law, are vncertaine in respect of the other, for ne∣ther is there any at al assigned for very many good acts, nether yet al those rewards that are promise are performed;The Revvardes of vice are cer∣taine for the most part. wheras the rewards of vice are commonly more certaine. For either they goe before the act (as it falleth out in bribes and many other cases
of vnlawful gaine, where the reward is paied (before hand)  they accompaine the fact (as in al cases of intemperance and in∣continency, wherin only pleasure is sought, and in cosenages & deceites which bring present gaine) or else they followe vpon the fact, as when some vnlawful act is done vpon promise of fu∣ture pay; so that for vice the reward is alwaies either assured, or at least hoped for and expected, which is no smal motiue to in∣duce men therto; wheras for vertue there neither is any reward to be had many times, nor yet hope of any by political law, as we see by experience in very many men, who liue laudably in the commonwelth al their liues, and yet are so far from hauing any remuneration, or from expecting any, that they thinke them selues happy in that they can escape the penalties of the lawe. The ministers of vice soonest exalted to ho∣nour.22. But let vs proceede a litle further. Is there any reward for vertue so assured by political law, that vice can not, yea doth nor, daily obtaine it? Hath it not honor many times for reward, as wel as vertue? who sooner riseth to the highest offices, and credit in some courts, then the minister of the Princes pleasures, or in∣struments of his wickednes? As Seianus vnder the Emperour Tibe∣rius?Sueton. in Tibe∣rio Claudio Nerone. Two slaues called Narcissus and Pallas vnder Claudius? Tigelli vnder Nero? Pexennius Cleāder, Regilius, Iulianus & other slaues vnder Commodus? Al which gouerned both the Emperours & the em∣pire:Lamprid. Hero∣dian. Pero. Maxia. de vitis Imperat. to whom I might adde diuers other, if I thought it conue∣nient. For whether we looke to former times, or to the present, we shal find euery where, as many aduanced by euil meanes as by good; for no man is so wicked, but if he haue money, he may hope for any preferment whatsoeuer. Curia pauperibus clausa est, dat census honores, Census amicitias,Ouid. eleg. 7. pauper vbique iacet. The court (saith the poët) is shut vp to poore men, and welth giueth honors, welth giueth freendshippe, & the poore ma lieth euery where in the dust. Philip. de Comi∣nes Cron. du Roy Louys c. 7.23. And if we also consider how Princes commonly bestowe their rewardes, we shal see that merit is least respected, which Philip. de Comines sheweth by a pleasant example of Lewis the ele∣uenth kinge of France, and Charles duke of Burgundy, who after the battaile (which was fought betwixt them at Montlehery in Fra) being determined to reward & punish such as had deserued wel
or il in their armies, & finding that diuers ran a way on both sides whiles the battaile was doubtful (some one on the one side a hū∣dred miles estward, and others on the other side as much west∣ward) the Kinge of France tooke from one of his subiects al his offices and dignities for running away,Revvards vvithout desert. and gaue them to an o∣ther that ran ten miles further then he; and the duke of Burgundy depriued also one of his, of al his goods & authority, for the like cause, & with in a while after gaue him more then euer he had before, wherby (saith Comines) it appeareth that Princes be∣stowe their rewards & fauors, not like angells, but like men, as they are. 24. Seeing then vice hath not only particuler rewardes either of gaine or commodity, or of pleasure at least (which contenteth some more then gold) but also hope of the rewardes due to ver∣tue it selfe, either by the Princes error and infirmity, or by his fauor, or by purchase, or by accident & chance,Kingdomes and Crovvnes often obtayned by vvickednes. (wherby many wicked men are also aduanced,) what aduantage could the poli∣tical law haue of the other by proposing reward, though it were neuer so great? Do we not see Crownes & Soueraignties, wherin most men place the greatest felicity of this life) doe we not (I say) see the same procured by murders, mischiefes, and most wicked meanes? And doth Machiauel propose any lesse reward to his Prince for extreame wickednes, then assurance in soueraig∣nity; so that the most wicked man that is hauing hope to get or conserue a Crowne, or other soueraigne state, by some murder or mischiefe, what greater, or so great reward could he expect for al the vertue in the world, by obaying political lawes?VVicked men honored for gods. Haue not very many in ould time got diuine honors, though they were most wicked men, as Iupiter, Venus, Bacchus, Hercules, Tiberius Caesar, and diuers Emperours as bad as hee? And so it would stil fal out, if Christian relgion had not expelled Ido∣latry out of the world. So that we see, political lawes, with out the help of Gods grace and religion (for so I consider them here) can not assigne so great a reward for vertue, but that the wic∣kedst man in the world may hope also to haue it, though he fol∣lowe and obay the law of the esh. 26. But a man may say, that many wicked men which pro∣mise them selues great gai or aduancement, by some wicked
act, get nothing in the end but rackes and ropes in recompenc therof;Vertuous men disgraced, and punished. which I graunt, but then let vs also consider on the other side, how many notable men either loose their liues in the action for the which they should be rewarded; or insteed of the reward which they deserue, get nothing but ignominy, banishment, ha∣tred of their Princes or people,Plutark. in their liues. death, and vtter ruine; as Marc Cariolanus, Furius Camillus, Scipio, Cicero, Themistocles. Aristides, Pho∣cion, Dion the Sicilian; and infinit others, of whome some were depriued of their dignities, others banished their cuntries, and others shamefully put to death by publike authoritie, after they had done great seruices to the Commonwelthes, & states wher∣in they liued. 27. And did not Lewis the .11. King of France discouer a greate secret,Philip Commi a 92. concerning the humours of Princes, in rewarding seruices past; when he said, Il perd souuent d'auoir trop bien serui. It ouerthro∣weth men many times to haue done too good seruice; signifying that princes are more willing to haue others beholding to them,The vncertainty of the revvard of vertue, by political la∣vves. then to be them selues beholding to any. And that some as wel Princes as others, are of that nature, that when they see their obligation so great to any man, that they thinke they can∣not commodiously reward him to his satisfaction and merit, they hold him but for an eye-sore, and seeke to be rid of him one way or other. Therfore how vncertaine and casual is the reward of vertue by political lawes, seeing the distribution therof is in the handes of such, as for some particuler respect, or interest of their owne, may not onlie forbeare to reward, but also some times vndoe and destroie, those that haue best deserued of them and th commonwelth? Thus much for Reward. 28. Now to speake of Punishment, wherin consisteth the grea∣test force of anie political law for the repression of mans malice, let vs see what are the penalties or punishments where with the law of the flesh terrifieth men,The punishments vvhich the car∣nal lavv threat∣neth. to diuert them from vertue, & to draw them to vice: for although it can not of it selfe inflict any punishment vpon the true louers of vertue, who tread downe and triumphe ouer al the power of the flesh, and of the lawes therof: et it setteth vp certaine scar-crowes to fright the simple soules that it deceaueth, proposing vnto them far greater diffi∣culty, labour, & paine, then there is indeed in the practise & ex∣ercise
of vertue; which difficulty they hold for no other then a cōtinual affliction, & as it were a penalty or punishment inflicted vpon such as labour to be vertuous, by meanes whereof they contemne the penalties of political lawes, esteeming them not only more easy to be auoided, but also more tollerable to be borne then the other; I say more easy to be auoided, for that ne∣ther is there a penalty imposed for euery offence, nether are those that are ordained, alwaies exacted of offendours, (for as I haue noted before they are many times escaped, either by power, or by fauor, or by corruption of officers, or by their necligence, or by the Princes pardon) whereas the paines that worldly men conceaue to accompany vertue, seeme to them ineuitable, ex∣cept vertue it selfe be auoided; wherto no man can arriue, but by the straite, narrowe, and paineful way, which I haue before described. 29. And againe the penalties of political lawes,Penalties of the political lavv, seeme more tolle∣rable to vvicked men then pe∣nalties of the carnal lavv. seeme to them more tollerable then the other, for that al penal mulcts, consist either in paiment of money, or in infamy, or in corporal, or capi∣tal punishment. If in money they feare it not much, for they are cōtent to buy their contentment there with, & many we see doe voluntarily begger them selues to obtaine their pleasures. If the penalty consist in infamie, what care they for the same, who hold inne for no shame, but for an honour,Psal. 51. & (as the Psalmist saith) Cloriantur in malitia, they glory in malice, & latantur (saith Salo∣mon) cum male fecerint, & exultant rebus pessimis,Prou. 2. quorum viae peruer∣s, quorum gressus infames sunt; VVho reioyce when they haue done amisse and exult in the woorst thinges, whose wayes are peruerse, whose stepps are infamous: If the punishment be corporal, or capital, they esteeme the practise of vertue fare more painful. 30. For what afliction, prison, restraint of liberty, torment or death can seeme so greuous to a man giuen ouer to lust and plea∣sure, as to afflict him selfe by restraint of his owne wil,Nothing more yrksome to euil man thē vertue. to con∣quer and subdue his owne vnbridled affections, to chastise his body, to the end to make it obedient to the spirit, to mortify and crucifie him selfe, to dye to his lust, and concupiscence, yea, and to be as it were his owne butcher and hangman, to execute al this vpon him selfe, not for once or twice, or for a day or two, or for now & then, but daily, continually, and with out initermission
(for otherwise true vertue can nether be attained, not c¦ued) can any thinge (I say) seeme more irksome, or any p¦shment more corporal, or capital, to sensual, and fleshly m destitute of Gods grace:1. Cor. 2. Qui non percipiun ea quae sunt spiritus D vvho haue no feeling nor apprehension of matters belonging to the spirit of God? 31. Corporal torments they thinke with Epicurus, the greater they are, the sooner they dispatch a man out of paine, and th lesse they are, more tolerable they are. And death they hold for an end of misery: but these labours and paines which they ima∣gine to be in continual exercise of vertue, they take for a conti∣nual and neuer-dying torment, & for an euerlasting death, so that very many are so disgusted with the only conceite, and appre∣hension therof,The great auer∣sion of vvicked men from vertu. that they wil not take so much as a tast of vertu to auoid any penalty of law whatsoeuer, as we see daily in many malefactors that are incorrigible. And againe diuers that haue al∣ready made some entrance into the course and way of vertue, are therby so tiered, & wearied with in a while, that they vtterly despaire euer to arriue to any perfection therein (such men I meane as haue no light nor help of Gods grace) in so much that one Sextius a gentleman Roman (of whome Plutarcke writeth) hauing giuen him selfe to the study of philosophy,Plutarck. li. de tranquil. animi. and the pra∣ctise of moral vertue, was with in a while so discouraged, that his freends had much a doe to keepe him from drowinge him selfe.AEmilius Prob. in Dione. And Aemilius Probus testifieth that the sonne of the famous Dion of Sicily being restrainted by his father from the licencious life which he had led for some time in his fathers banishment, desperatly cast him selfe from the top of the howse, and broke his owne neck. No meanes in Political lavv to reforme a vicious Prince.32. But put the case that the subiects might be made vertuous by the feare of punishment, what remedy is there for the Prince, when he is of a bad and maligne nature? Truly none: for he fea∣reth no penalty of the law, being him selfe aboue the law: and as for good councel, if any man dare giue him any, he contemneth it. What good did the good councel, and precepts of the diuine Plato & the famous Dion, to the two tirants of Sicily the father & the sonne called Dionisius, who to requite them for their good instructions, sould Plato for a slaue, & banished Dion out of Sicily?
what benefit reaped the wicked and cruel Nero, by al the good discipline he receaued of the wise Seneca, vpon whom he exer∣cised his cruelty no lesse then vpon al others? And what effect wrought the good education, example, and instructions, which the Emperour Marcus Aurelius (called the Philosopher) gaue to his sonne Commodus, who succeeding him in the Empire, was far more detestable and hateful for his vice, then his father was renowned, and beloued for his vertue? 33. If then there be no sufficyent meanes, by lawes, educa∣tion, councel, or exhortations, to reforme the vicious and cor∣rupt nature of a wicked Prince, who seeth not that by conse∣quence, there is no assured meanes, to make the commonwelth vertuous? For though it be neuer so wel ordered, and disposed in the body, yet it may receaue such corruption from the head, that it may perish therby. For as Pliny saith: Euen as in mens bodyes.Plini. li. 4. e. so also in commonwelths the dissease is most greeuious and dangerous, which proceedeth from the head, And we see commonly that the manners of the people, are conforme to the manners of their Princes. 34. Now then to conclude,No sufficient meanes in poli∣tical lavv, to make the com∣mon vvelth ver∣tuous. what sufficient meanes is there in political law, to suppresse the law of the flesh, and to make the Prince and people truly vertuous? Is it precepts, or prohibitions? nothing lesse; for seeing they consist but in wordes, they are easily contemned: and as I haue shewed before, prohibition doth encrease the disease (that is to say) the offence and sinne, rather then remedy it: and as for permission of euil, it doth but bewray the weaknes of political law, and shew the force of car∣nal law, which the other is fayne to permit, because it can not redresse it: What then? is it punishment or reward? neither of both; for as I haue signified, either the offences are so secret, that they are not subiect to punishment, or the law is deluded, and the penalties auoided many waies; or if not, yet in respect of the paines that wicked men imagine to be in the exercise of ver∣tue they are litle feared And as for reward; what reward ordeined by law can so satisfie a sensual man, as pleasure, which he holdeth for his soueraigne & cheife good, & for the only felicitie of his life; in so much that I haue heard some men, most wickedly pro∣test and sweare that if it were not for the pleasur s of the flesh, their liues would be loathsome and hateful vnto them.
The insufficen∣cy of political lavv for the re∣formation of vice acknovv∣ledged by Licur∣gus Arist. polit. li 2. ca. 7.35. Therefore Licurgus dispaired with great reason to make either the King or the subiects in his commonwelth vertuous by the force of lawes. For which cause he ordained (as Aristotle saith) that the Kings of Lacedemony should not be perpetual, but gouerne for a time, least some euil King (if his gouernment were for tearme of life) might destroy the commmohwelth. 36. Also this insufficiencie of political lawes, and of al other humane meanes to reforme the maners of wicked men, was, as it seemeth, wisely noted and considered of late by a wise and lear∣ned Painim in China,The same ac∣knovvledged of late by vvise Painim in China. who being of him selfe of a good and ver∣tuous disposition, and hauing proued by experience that nether the religion which he professed, nor the lawes of his country, nor mans owne industrie, nor yet any other natural or human meanes, sufficed to conquer and subdue the lawes of the flesh, dispaired, as it seemed, euer to attaine to any perfection of ver∣tue, vntil he met with the fathers of the Societie, who at th present preach the Christian faith in China,Littera annua dela Cina del. an. 1601. of whom he demāde whether the law, which they taught, were able to reforme, the bad and maligne nature of a wicked man, and to make him truly vertuous; And vnderstanding by them the supernatural and di∣uine force of Gods grace communicated to man by the meanes of Christian religion, (which in that respect is called the law of grace) and that by the helpe therof, any wicked man may vn∣doubtedly ariue to al perfection of vertue, he inclined presently to be a Christian, which afterwards vpon further, and more perticuler knowledge of our Christian Catholique doctrine, he most gladly and religiously performed. But of this point, to wit of the necessity of true Religion, and the force therof in the re∣formation of maners, I am to speake more amply in the second parte of this Treatise, and in the meane time I haue here suffici∣ently shewed, that political lawes are altogether insufficient to represse vice, and consequently to establish a perfect policy and gouerment of commonwelth.
AN ANSVVER TO AN OBIECTION MADE in fauor of political law, supposed to be sufficient for the suppre∣ssion, of vice, if it take sufficient order for the good instruction, and education of youth. But the impossibillity therof is shewed, and in conclusion the necessity of the law of grace, to supply the defects of political law, is inferred. CHAP. 10. BVt some perhaps wil obiect that lawes doe not so wholy relie vpon punishment and rewarde; or vpon the other points which I haue handled before, but that they haue also other helps to reforme vice, and plant vertue in the common∣welth, and that therfore Zaleucus, Carondas,Cicero de ligib. li. 2. and Plato, did say (as Cicero testifieth (that it also belongeth to lawe, to vse perswasions and instructions, and not to terrifie only with threates; For as S. Augustine saith of heretikes;Aug. ep. 48. Si ter∣erentur &c. If men should be only terrified and not taught, the gouernment might seeme to be wicked and tirannical. Furthermore lawes may or∣daine (as they commōly doe) that children be brought vp from their very infanc, in al kind of vertue, and furnished with pre∣cepts of philosophy, which being sowed like good seed in the mindes of youth, as in a fertile and wel manured soile, ma in time wax ripe, and bring forth very good fruit, to the publike benefit of the commonwelth. 2.An obiection that good edu∣cation of youth is sufficient for the Institution of a perfect com∣monvvelth. For what can be more effectual for the planting of vertue in the minds of men, then good education, wherby the tender age of children ma be framed like wax to receaue the impre∣ssion of vertuous habits; For as the younge and tender twig is ea∣sely bowed an way, and being once set streight, so groweth al waies after, and at length when it is become a tree, wil rather breake them bowe; euen so a mans nature being framed to ver∣tue in his infancie and strengthned therin by good custome, may growe in time to such perfection, that nothing shalbe able to
draw or diuert it from a vertuous course. For Adolesceus (saith Salomon) iuxta viam suam cum senuerit non recedet ab ea. that is to say;Proerb. . The young man when he comes to be olde, wil not leaue the course which he held when he was younge. Hereupon it may be inferred; that if the lawes ordaine publike schooles, and vniuer∣sities, and take sufficient order for the education & instruction of youth, in al kind of learning and moral vertue, they may with the helpes of punishment and rewarde, suffice for the instruction of a good and perfect commonwelth. The ansvvere to the former obie∣ction, shevving diuers impedi∣ments that hin∣der the good edu¦cation of youth.3. To this I answere, that although good instruction and education may greatly healp to make the comōwelth vertuous; yet in such commonwelths as are gouerned only by humane meanes, and pollicy, it cannot worke the desired effect, by rea∣son of diuers impediments that wil vndoubtedly occurre. First we see in al commonwelths, that many very vicious parents de∣sire to haue their children like vnto them selues, and therfore are not only negligent in procuring their good education, but also help to corrupre them by their euil example, and also by in∣dustry and bad instructions, taking no lesse delight to see them abound in vice, then vertuous men doe, to see their children replenished with vertue. 4. The couetous, and auaritious man, that hath enriched him selfe and increased his liuing by fraude, vsury, extortion, & other vnlawful meanes, encourageth his childrē to doe the like, not only by his owne example, but much more by the gaine that they are to reape therby; besides that such couetous parents, doe not stick to recommēd vnto their children,The euil exam∣ple and bad in∣struction of vi∣cious parents. auarice for a vertue, and al maner of fraudulent and vnlawful gaine, for lawful pur∣chase, & points of good husbandry. In like sort the licentious man, who accounteth his owne loose life for no sinne but solla∣ce, cannot dislike, or reprehend that in his children, which he al∣loweth in himselfe; yea and I haue heard of a great Prince, who being much giuen to the sinnes of the flesh, and seeing his sonne more vertuously inclined, so much disliked it in him, that he se∣riously exhorted him to beget bastards, to the end to fortifie & strengthen his howse. And the like may be noted for the most parte in al sortes of bad and vicious men, whose euil example & pernitious precepts, are commonly of more force to draw their
children to vice, then any instruction of maister, or teacher, can be to moue them to vertue. 5. Secondly, very many, or rather the far greater part of the commonwelth cannot, though they would,The greater part of the common vvelth vncapa∣ble of such edu∣cation, as  re∣quisit to ma them truly vertuous. giue their children that good education that were conuenient to make them truly vertuous, partly for want of meanes and ability to beare the charges therof, & partly because they are forced to bring them vp to some trade or occupation, wherby they may be afterwards able to liue: who therfore cannot be tyed to such rules or man∣ner of life, as were necessary for the vertuous education of youth which with our continual restraint, and diligent ouersight of maisters and correctors, easilie falleth to vice. 6. Thirdly, it is to be considered, that of such as shal receaue the good instructions, & education which the law may ordaine, a great number wil be of that peruerse and maligne nature, that they wil reape no benefit thery. For as Seneca saith;Seneca ep. 95. The maligne and peruerse nature of many not capable of good instruction Non semper d actiones rectas praecepta perducunt, sed cum obsequens ingenium est; Precepts and instructions doe not induce al men to vertuous actions, but ly such as are of apply able & obedient natures: wherof we dailie see the experience in very many youthes, whome neither labour, nor industry, nor good and vertuous example, nor seuere cor∣rection, nor yet any other humane meanes, can so much as dis∣pose to take any taste of vertue. 7. Fourthly, although many youthe may proffit greatly in vertue for a time, whiles they remaine vnder the chardge and correction of maisters, and are seperated from the occasions & examples of vice, yet afterwardes when they shal be deliuered from the bridle of restraint, and the yoake of obedience, verie many of them wil become vicious. This was wisely considered by Plato in his schollers; For beholding one day a great company of towardly, and notable young men that came to heare his lec∣tures, he sighed deeply, and said to him selfe; I feare me that many of these being the seede and children of men,Plutarke. wil hereafter become examples of humane infirmity. 8. Thus said he: and if he had cause to feare this in such as being alreadie mature in yeares, and ripe in iudgment, gaue thm selues to the study and practise of vertue of their owne free election; what may be feared of children, who for the most part
are held in a vertuous course by compulsion, or because they haue yet had no tast or trial of worldly delightes rather then of their owne choise,Very many af∣ter vertuous education doe fal to vice. or for the loue of vertue? what else, (I say) may be feared, but that when they shal see them selues at liberty and come to tast the pleasures of the world, they wil fall to vici∣ous life, yea and that many of them wil (as the old prouerb saith) of young Saintes, become olde diuells? wherof wee haue dailie experience in great numbers of young men, who hauing had notable education, and made great progresse in vertue and lear∣ninge, doe neuertheles become afterwards very vicious and wicked; so that if we consider how manie there wil be in anie prophane commonwelth that wil receaue no benefit of good in∣structions, either by the negligence, euil example, or bad per∣swasions of their wicked parents, or by reason of their pouerty, or because their estate requireth other imployment in trades or occupations, or by their owne peruerse and incorrigible natu∣res, or by humane frailtie (wherby manie fal dailie from vertue to vice) we shal find that the least parte of the common welth, by farr, wil be bettered by any good education that political lawes alone may ordaine. 9. This wil be much more manifest if we adde hereto some other considerations concerning the maisters,Impossible to fynd teachers of true vertue on a profane commonvvelth. and teachers of vertue, by whose insufficiency, negligence, or euel example the youth is many times in al commonwelths il instructed & cor∣rupted, besides that it may wel be said, that in a prophane com∣monwelth their cannot be found any such sufficient and able men for the education of youth, as were conuenient to make them, and the whole commonwelth truely vertuous; wherein I wish to be noted, that I make no smal difference betwene a vertuous and a learned man, for if the question were onlie to find learned scholmaisters and readers to make good schollers, I would easelie graunt that such prouision might be made, and order taken that there would be no want of good Grammarians eloquent Rethoritians, subtile Logicians, profoūd Philosophers and men excellent in al humane learning, yea and that they might make so manie notable schollers that a great parte of the commonwelth might become learned. 10. But the question being here, not of expert Pedagoges
and scholemaisters but of good & vertuous men that may teach true vertue, as wel by their owne example and practise,Difference betw∣ixt learned and vertuous men in a Common∣vvelth. as by their precepts; I may boldly say of such, that none at al can be found in commonwelths, void of Gods grace and true religion, from the which al true vertue floweth, as from the fountayne, and without the which no man can be truly vertuous, as I wil make most manifest in the 2. parte of this Treatise, wherto this question properly belongeth. And in the meane tyme for some satisfaction of the Reader, I wil breefly touch here in this place, one consideration belonging to this matter, to wit, the expe∣rience of al former tymes and ages, concerning such as haue ben the principal professors of vertue in prophane commonwelths; as what their habilities, and sufficiencie hath bene for the tea∣ching of true vertue, wherby also it may be iudged what perfe∣ction any such as they, (I meane men void of Gods grace) can worke in any commonwelth. 11. For this purpose it is to be considered,The had lynes of the vvisest and best Philoso∣phers amongst the Paynimes. what manner of men the grauest, wisest, and best Philosophers were, who in ty∣mes past tooke vpon them to be the true louers of wisdome, tea∣chers of vertue, and reformes of mens manners, whose wisdo∣me neuertheles was, (as the Apostle tearmeth it) Mere folly;1. Cor. 3. Aug. ep. 131. vvhat vvas the learning of the Philosophers. Their contro∣uersies. Their exhorta∣tions and pre∣cepts Themistius in Orat. ad Valen∣tem. Eccles. hist. li. Aug. de ciuit. li. 19. c. 1. Hieron. li. 2. comment. in ca. 13. Mathei. For al their learninge and knowledge was, (as Augustine saith) nothing else but ianglinge sophistry, tovvers built in the ayre, proude error, vayne & rious lyes, their controuersies were infinite, their dissentions endles, and irreconciliable, about no lesse matters then the so∣ueraigne and cheefe good, yea and about God him selfe: hol∣ding, concerning the first, 288. seueral opinions, and 300. a∣boute the latter. Their eloquence, exhortations, and precepts, were not as S. Hierome saith) that litle seede of mustard (whereof our Sauiour speaketh in the gospel) which being sowed in the feeld of mans hart, groweth to be a greate tree; But it was a kind of seed that had no viuacytie, quicknes nor life in it, as tastles wormeaten seed which yeeldeth either no fruit at al, or nothinge else but weedes, or perhaps some pot hearbs that faded and perished straitght. 12.The vertue of the ancient Philosophers vvhat it vvas, And what shal we say of their vertue which was so much admired? was it any thinge else but vanity? no truely. For al∣though some of them seemed to excel, some in one vertue, and some in an other, (wherby a few in very many ages were coun∣ted
vertuous) yet they were al so farr from true vertue and goodnes, that it may iustly be said of them; that euen as a pur∣blind man, or one that hath but halfe an eye, may be held (as the prouerbe saith) for a king amongst blind men: so in that infi∣nit number of wicked men, who pestred and poisned the world with their wickednes in time of Paganisme,vvicked men not better one then another, but lesse euil. those few which were not so wicked & vicious as the rest, were reputed for good and vertuous; not because they might truely be said to be better then their fellowes, but because they were lesse euil; Fabritius the famous Romane (saith S. Augustine) shal be lesse punished,Agustin. cont. Iulian. pelag. then the wicked Catalin, not because he was better then Catalin, but because he was no so bad as he. And so may we say of them al that although some of them seemed to haue some vertues that others had not, or were not in some thinges so vicious as the rest, yet they were al of them loa∣den with vice,Rom. 1. as the Apostle testifieth, who describeth them to be men; Giuen ouer by almighty God to a reprobate sence, and to the desires of their owne hartes,The testimony of the Aposte con∣cerning the abo∣minable lyues of the philoso∣phers. to al ignominious passions and vncleanes, replenished with al iniquity, malice, fornication, couetousnes and vvickednes; ful of enuy, murders, contention, deceyte, malignitie, and detraction, contumelious, proud, hauty, inuentors of mischiefe; &c. 13. Thus saith the Apostle of the olde philosophers, wherof if it were lawful to dout (considering the authoritie of the wit∣nes) sufficient testimony and confirmation might be had out of prophane authors,Plato proued to be very vicious, by his ovvne vvorkes. yea out of their owne woorkes. For who is he that readeth and considereth the absurd lawes of Platoes com∣munity of women, and the promiscuous generation (which I haue mencioned, and reproued before) wil not discouer in him, a verie sinke of sinne, from the which he belched out such bea∣stly doctrine and lasciuious lawes, wherin neuertheles he followed the opinion and doctrine of his maisters, Socrates, and Pithagoras, two of the most famous Philosophers that euer had bene before his tyme. Aristotle accu∣sed of great vi∣ces by diers n his ovvne me. u. cotra Philoo. o. c. 1.14. And what shal we say of Aristotle, Platoes scholler whome diuers that liued in the same age, did testifie to be a most wicked man; Cephisodorus the disciple of Isocrates, charged him with de∣liacy, intemperance, & gluttonie. icon the pithagorian, said h was so couetous that he vsed to sel the oyle wherein he bathed himselfe. Demochrs objected against him, that he betrayed his
owne countrie Stagira, to the Macedonians. And finallie, Aristocles the Peripateticke, who tooke vpon him to defend him against others, confesseth that two thinges commonly reported of him were probable, that is to say, that he was vngrateful to his mai∣ster Plato, & that he secretly intised away the adoptiue daughter of his deare frend Hermias the Eunuch, and maried her, of which Eunuch, he had bene also before so feruently enamored, that bulides saith, he made a kind of mariage with him; & Theocritus of Chio wrote an epigrame of their beastly loue and conuersa∣tion; yet this is he who hath written most exactly of al moral vertue in his booke, de Ethicis, to de moribus, that is to say of manners, and was the Prince or head of the Philosophers called the Peripa∣eticks. 15. And is it not likely that al the rest of them were as vaine nd vicious as hee? yes truly; the trueth wherof may be gathered out of Plutark,Plutarke. li. de. industria anima∣lium. Plutarkes opini∣on of the liues of the best philoso∣phers. who being him selfe one of the grauest of al the atter sort, in sect a Platonick, and maister to the Emperour Traian, in his dialogue of the industry of beastes, giueth to vnderstand nder the name of Autobulus, that not only Socrates and Plato, but also al other philosophers not withstanding their outward shewe and ostentation of some vertues, were generally as intem∣perate, incontinent, & wicked as any cōmon or ordinary slaue. 16. But of al other prophane authors Lucian painteth them,Lucian. dial. in Scripto; negro∣mantia vel Me∣nippo. s a man may say, in their coulers. For in his diologues he brin∣geth in Menippus speaking of the Philosophers thus; Because I was, (saith he) vncertaine vvhat course of life to hold, I thought good to goe to he Philosophers, & to take their aduise, that they might direct me therein,Lucians discourse of the manners of the old philo∣sophers. not nsidering, that as the prouerbe saith, I cast my selfe out of the frying pan in o the fier, for I found amongst them al thinges more vncertaine, then mongst any sort of men, in so much that the life of the veriest Idiot, seemed to me more happye then theirs. For vvhen I beheld their liues, I perceaued hey were cleane contrary to their owne precepts and doctrine; those vvhich aught that money and riches vvere to be contemned, did gape after nothing more then ganie, lending to vsury teaching for hyre, and doing al for money; hose which in vvordes seemed most to contemne glory, referred al the whole rse of their liues therto. And finally, those that openly spake most against luptuousnes and pleasure, secretly sought & imbraced nothing else. Thus farre Lucian.
17. Wherby we may see what maisters and teachers, what guides, and physitions the ignorance, weaknes, and blindnes of man hath had, or may hope to haue, in commonwelths that rely vpon the wit and pollicy of man; yea and what vertue men that are void of Gods grace can plant in other men to make them truly vertuous, seeing that with a litle good seede of moral doctrine they sowe so much cocle and darnel of il example, that the ver∣tue which they teach, is as it were, suffocated and choaked euen in the very blade, in such forte, that it can yeeld no good fruit; The dissention amongst the old philosophers concerning most important matters. 2. Tym. 3.18. For who is he that should heare the professours and mai∣sters of vertue disagreeing amongst them selues, and scolding euery day in their schooles one against an other, ayming continu∣ally at a marke which they neuer hit, professing to teach that which they neuer knewe, and to giue that which they neuer had them selues, Euer learning (as the Apostle saith of heretickes) and neuer comming to the knowledge of truth, reprehending vice in a men, and neuer reforminge it in them selues, who (I say) should see this, and would not rather dispaire, euer to be able to attaine to vertue, then be encouraged by their perswasions to the studdy and practise thereof. No political lavv can mae a commonvve∣alth vertuous.19. Therefore I conclude, that considering the impediments that occurre in prophane commonwelths, on the behalfe as wel of the instructors and teachers of vertue, as of those which are to be instructed, that is to say, seeing that not only the maisters are on their parte insufficient for the vertuous education of youth, but also the farre greater parte of the youth them selues, either incapable of good instructions, or not much the better for it, for the reasons before declared; It followeth that no law meerly political can by any good education of youth make a pro∣phane commonwelth vertuous; wherto if we adde that, which before I haue also proued concerning the insufficiency of al po∣litical lawes, for the suppression of the carnal law, and the refor∣mation of maners; it followeth necessarilie that some supernatu∣ral help is requisite for the perfect institution, and gouerment of a commonwelth, which helpe I wil other where proue to consist in the law of grace, that is to say, in true Religion, wherby the defects of political law may be supplied, and the law of the flesh suppressed.
20. For the law of grace doth illuminate the vnderstanding, fortifie and strenghten reason, represse sensuallity, facilitate the way to vertue, (which it maketh sweete, dilectable, & pleasant) representeth to the vnderstanding, the turpitude, lothesomnes,The force of the Lavv of grace for the reforma∣tion of vice. horror, and danger, of vice, and finally it addeth to the tempo∣ral rewardes and penalties of political law, the euerlasting and eternal; so that political law being seconded, and supplied by the law of grace, that is to say true religion, may reforme the cor∣rupt manners and nature of wicked men, and worke that effect in commonwelth for the which it is ordained, as I wil euidently proue hereafter in the second part of this Treatise, where I shal treat of the necessitie and dignitie of religion in the common∣welth. In the meane time this shal suffice in this place to shewe the imperfection of that parte of policy which cōsisteth in hu∣mane lawes. THE INSVFFICIENCIE OF HVMANE PO∣licy is further proued by the vncertainty of the successe of mens wisest designments: & for the better explication thereof, it is declared, what are Fate, Fortune, & Chance, & that ac∣cording to the opinion of the best philosophers, Fate doth not de∣rogate from the freedome of mans wil, and much lesse from the prouidence, of God: and by the way some what is said of Ast∣rology, and of the force of starres. CHAP. 11. HAVINGE shewed the imperfection of huma∣ne lawes, (wherin consisteth one parte of mans policy) it resteth now that I treate of the other parte, consisting in councels, plots & desig∣ments, either for war, or for peace, and that I shew also therin the weaknes of mans wit and power, and his insufficiency for gouernment of commonwelth, without the supernatural help of Gods grace and assistance. 2. That this may appeare, three thinges are principally to be considered in plots and designments; the first, the inuention; the
second the execution;Three thinges to be considered in plottes and de∣signments, the Inuention, the Execution, and the Successe. the third the successe. To the first is requi∣red wisdome in the cōtriuer; to the secōd not only wisdome but also dexterity, yea and power in the executour; and to the third good happ, commonlie called good fortune. Of the first, to wit the inuention of plots, and wisdome in the contriuers, I haue spoken sufficientlie heretofore, hauing shewed the weaknes of mans wit by euident examples of the manifest and absurd errors,Ca. 7. & 8. Ca. 3.4.5. as wel of the wisest Philosophers in the ordinance of lawes, and the institution of commonwelths, as also of most politike Prin∣ces, yea and of the grauest and wisest Senats in their deliberations; and therfore I wil now treate here especiallie of the execution, not only of politicke plots, but also of powerful and potent attempts,Of the execution and successe of designments. al which depend principally of the successe, and of the good or il hap of the executours. For be the councel, plot, & enterprise neuer so prudently contriued, or neuer so wisely, dex∣terously, and powerfullie executed, yet if good hap answer not the expectation in the successe, al is in vaine; and which is more, we see often times that many vnaduised and foolish designments succeed very wel,Foolish design∣ments succeed vvel many times by chance. Arist. li. de bona fortuna. Some borne For∣tunat. more by hap (as men commonlie say) then by cunning; which Aristotle noteth in such as are horne fortunate; Who (saith he) following the secret impulse & motion of their owne natures and dispositions, haue commonly good and fortu∣nate successe, yea some times contrarie to al humane reason; in so much that when they deliberate much, and rather follow discourse of reason, then their owne inclination, they loose their good fortune, and haue il successe; wherupon groweth the pro∣uerbe,An old prouerb, fortune fauoreth fooles. fortuna fauet fatuis; God sends fooles fortune, which, common experience teacheth to be true in verie manie simple men, who are farre more fortunate through out the whole course of their liues, then others that are farre wiser then they. The which Aristotle ascribeth to the gifte of God, the author and mouer of nature,To be borne for∣tunate is the gi∣fte of God. and of al natural inclinations, who giueth better hap to some men then to others, as he also distributeth diuersly his other gifts, not to al men alike. 3. Neuertheles speakinge generally, the common axiome is true in most men, to wit, vnusquisque sibi fingit fortunam suam, euery man frames his owne fortune, that is to say, euery one is happy, or vnhappie, according to the course he taketh, or the diligence
he vseth. For as the Spanish prouerbe saith,Dilligence the mother of good fortune. diligentia es la madre de buena ventura, diligence is the mother of good hap; which yet is so to be vndrestood, that although those commonly speed the best, which vse the best & wisest meanes;No man can vvarrant the good successe of his designments. yet no man can either by any industrie, or humane wisdome, warrant the good successe of his designments, for that so variable and infinite are the acci∣dents and suddaine chances which daily occurre in mens affai∣res, that no wit of man can fore-see them, & much lesse preuent them; God hauing so ordained (for his owne greater glorie) to check the pride and presumption of man, lest if he had as wel the euent and successe of his plots in his owne power, as the contri∣uing of them, he would not knowe him selfe, nor acknowledge any dependance vpon his wil; therfore some times it seemeth good to his diuine wisdome, to ouerthrowe and delude the highest policies, and deepest deuises of men, by such meanes as they least expected, and could neuer imagine, which I wil shewe by sundrie examples. But for asmuch as men commonly attri∣bute al suddaine accidents, and vnexpected euents, either to for∣tune and chance, or to fate, to the derogation aswel of Gods prouidence, as of the freedome of mans wil; I craue thy patience (good reader) whilest for the better explication of this matter, I say somwhat here by the way of Fortune, Chance, and Fate,Of Fortune, Chance, and Fate. as what they truely are, and how they haue bene, or are il vnderstood of manie, and in what sense we may ascribe therto the effects we see either natural or moral: wherby also the prouidence of God, and the freedome of mans wil shalbe made manifest. 4. Such is the force of suddaine chances, and vnexpected euen∣tes, as wel for the bad successe of mans affaires,The superstitious vvorshipp of Fortune amongst the Gentills. that the supersti∣tious Gentils imagininge the same to proceed from Fortune, did worshipp it for a goddesse, perswading them selues that al the prosperitie, or aduersity of man in this life, depended principally of it: and therfore the Romanes attributing vnto it al their feli∣city, & the greatnes of their Empire, called it the Nurse, Piller,Plutark. de for∣tuna Romano∣rum. and Head of the citty of Rome, and dedicated to it diuers images, and most gorgeous and sumptuous temples. 5. But it is to be vnderstood that amongst the Gentills, the ignorant and common people did vnderstand by Fortune one thinge; and the wise & learned conceaued another. For although
the vulger sort imagined that fortune was a goddesse, as the poëts faigned, gouerninge al the actions & affaires of men at her pleasure, giuing good, or bad successe not according to their merits or demerits, but as it were by chance (in which respect shee was alwaies painted blind) yet the learned and wise,Ast. li. 2. Phisico. held Fortune to be nothing else, but as Aristotle termeth it. Causam per accidens;Boeti. li. 3. de conso. prosa. A cause by accident or chance; or as Boetius calleth it, Effectum per accidens, an effect by chance, which hapneth at vna∣wares; wherfore the satirical poët deriding the common peo∣ples superstitious opinion of Fortune, saith thus. Iuen Satyr. 10.Nullum numen habes, si sit prudentia, sed te Nos facimus fortuna Deam, coeloque locamus. That is to say, thou fortune hast no power where wisdome is, yet we make thee a goddesse and place thee in heauen. 6. And whereas three thinges were commonly conceaued to haue grate power vpon the councells,VVhat thinges vvere ascribed to fortune by the Genills. actions, and liues of men, to wit Fortune, Chance, and Fate, the best learned did distin∣guish them, and determine of them in this manner: To Fortune they ascribed only those things, which happen to men rarely & vnexpected, whiles they worke or doe any thinge by discourse of reason, and for a certaine end or purpose. As for example, when a man diggeth the ground only of purpose to laye a foun∣dation of a buildinge, and findeth by chance a treasure which he did not looke for, they called it fortune. 7. To ChanceChance. they ascribed such thinges, as happen to men in like manner, seeldome and vnexpected, whiles they are wor∣king or doing any thinge without discourse of reason, and to no certaine end or purpose. As for example when any thinge good or bad chanceth to a man whilest he is sleepinge, or to in∣fants, or brute beasts that doe not worke by discourse of reason. 8. To FateFate. or destiny they did attribute those effects only which proceed necessarily from al superior, and inferior causes, con∣nected togeather, and subordinated one to an other, by the dispositiō, & with the influence of the first cause which is God. In which sense those effects were called fatal, which proceed of the motion, influence, and operation of the heauens, starres, planets, elements, and other inferiour bodyes subordinate to them; as the counterchange of day & night, and of the sea∣sons
of the yeare, and al such effects in the bodyes of men, bea∣stes, and other earthly creatures, as are caused by the ordinary course, motion, influence,The Ancient Philosophers did subiect Fortune, Chance & Fate, to the prouiden∣ce of God. and operation of al the said supe∣riour bodyes. Neuertheles the graue and learned Philosophers did subiect al these three, (to wit Fortune, Chance, and Fate) to the prouidence of God, disposing of al his creatures according to his wil and pleasure, which Cicero affirmeth plainely of the opinion as wel of Aristotle, and the Peripatetikes, as of Plato, and the Aca∣demicks, of whome he saith thus;Cicero. Acad. quaest. li. 1. They taught that the soule of the world is that perfect wisdome vvhich vve cal God gouerninge al thinges as vvel in earth pertaining to men, as also in heauen vvhich (perfect & deuine vvisdome) they called sometimes necessity or fate, because nothing can be othervvise then it is determined or ordained by it, and somtimes they called it fortune by reason that it doth or worketh many thinges which we cannot foresee, for that we are ignorant of the causes therof; thus far Cicero; This was also the opinion of the Stoicks as appeareth euydently in Seneca, who hauing taught that the names of almighty God, may be as many and different, as are his giftes, or the effects of his workes, concludeth thus; what soeuer thou callest God be it nature,Seneca li. 4. de benefi. c. 7. fate, or fortune, al are but diuers names of one God; accordinge to the diuers vse and exercise of his power. 9. Thus saith Seneca the famous Stoick according to the opi∣nion of the cheefe of his sect, which held as the Peripatetikes, and Platonickes did, that God being the first cause, doth gouerne the world by the meanes of al inferiour causes, mouing and dis∣posing the same, to produce effects, accordinge to their natures and properties;Mans frevvil not subiect to fate according to the opinion of the philosophers. wherin neuertheles it is to be obserued concer∣ning fate, that these Philosophers did not imagine any such fa∣tal necssity to redound of the combination, concurence, and cooperation of al these causes, that could force the wil of man, or depriue it of liberty and free election in actions, either good or bad, which election they affirmed to be in the power of man, as apeareth not only in Aristotle (who proueth the same not∣ably in his Ethicks) but also in Plato and al Platonicks,Arist. ethi. li. 3. c. 4. al of them vrging to that end; that otherwise al punishment of offences were vniust, al reward of vertue vndeserued, al exhortations councel and lawes, altogeather nedeles and superfluous, which to say were most absurd, and iniurious to al commonwelthes,
and to humane societye, yea and to nature it selfe, from the which the vse thereof floweth as from their foūtaine, in which respect al the grauest and most learned Philosophers did vtterly reiect the opinion of the Chaldean Astrologers, who did attribute a fatal necessity to the starres, wherby they taught men were compelled to doe wel or il with out any freedome of election on their partes, the absurditie whereof is most euident. No influence of starres can force the vvil of man.10. For natural reason teacheth that how soeuer the influ∣ence of the starres and superiour bodies may moue, incline, & dispose the wil of man to affections or passions, by reason of the coniunction that the soule hath with the bodie; (which is the proper organ wherby it worketh) yet those superiour bodies cannot any way force the wil of man, because his soule farre excelleth al bodilie and corporal thinges, in dignitie & perfe∣ction of nature, and therfore cannot be forced by them, nor by any thinge that is inferiour to it selfe. In which respect the best Philosophers affirme, that the soule of man is so farre from be∣ing subiect to any fatal necessitie or compulsion, proceeding either of the starres,Plato in Timoeo & li 10. de rep. plotinus Ennead 2 li. 3 ca. 8 & de. fato c. 8. & 10. Marsil. Ficin. Argumento in li. Plotoni de Fato. c 8. or of the order and connexion of bodilie causes, that when it doth not subiect it selfe to the bodie, but worketh accordinge to the rule of reason, it is not onlie it selfe free from al violence or force of fate, but also manie times freeth and exempteth the bodie from the same, as Plotinus and other Platonickes affirme. 11. This also the best Astrologers (that haue bene Philoso∣phers withal) haue of them selues taught;The most lear∣ned Astrologers did exempt mans vvil from al constraynt of starres. as Ptolomeus, who sheweth how many waies the inclinations of the starres may be auoyded, and giueth for a general rule this knowne sentence; Sapiens dominabitur astris & adiuuabit opus stellarum; A wise man may ouer-rule the starre, and help them in their operation; As we see for example in bodies of weake constitution by nature, which by care and industrie (as by phisick,Ptolom. in Qua∣dpat & in li. de indicijs. dyet, good aire) and such other meanes are longer preserued then bodies of better com∣plection natural, which vse not the same meanes; also we see the like effects in the natural conditions of men, for that some of very had inclination, according to their natiuities, are by educa∣tion and doctrine made good;Cicero Tscul. qual l. 4. as we read of Socrates, who by the iudgment of Zopirus the physiognomer, and also by his owne con∣fession
was inclined to al kind of vice, though by philosophy he became a mirrour of al moral vertue; And some of the other fide, that are of a very good disposition natural, are by bad edu∣cation, il company, and counsel, corrupted and peruerted. 12.Bardasenes apud marsil. Picin. in Summa li. plo∣tini de Fato. c. 1. Furthermore Bardasenes the Sirian (who was him selfe a famous Astrologer) proueth that the starres are neither causes of al the actions of men, neither yet can force mans wil. And amongst diuers other notable arguments he alleadgeth one most euident; to wit,Hovv Bardase∣nes proued that the starres do not force the vvil of man. that al the people of euery commonwelth doe vse at some one time, to doe some one act either religious or ci∣uil, though they be euery one of them borne vnder a diuers con∣stellation: as for exāple, the Iewe doe infallibly circumcise their sonns the 8. day after they be boe, & euery satterday keepe their Sabboth, resting from al kind of worke, as the Christians also doe celebrate the Sunday. And in like manner the Gentiles had their feastes which al of them kept vniformally vpon cer∣taine daies, and their assemblies for election of offices, and for other affaires of the commonwelth, which vniforme, and one act of so many men borne vnder different constellations, can not be caused by the starres, the operation and effect wherof cannot be one and the selfe same, when their aspects are so dif∣ferent as they must needes be in the natiuities of many parti∣culer men: And therfore (saith he) that one act proceedeth of their owne vvills moued therto by discourse of reason, or by force of religion, lavves, custome, and suchlike. 13. Moreouer al the Arabian and Hebrevv Astrologers doe agree that the fatall effects of the starres,Hovv many vvayes the force of the starres may be frustra∣ted in the opi∣nion of the best Astrologers. are frustrated somety∣mes, by the indisposition and contumacy of the matter, or by the mobility therof; and somtymes by the oposition of a gene∣al and vniuersal fate to a particuler mans fate; as when the fate of any particuler man is encountred wih the fate of a whole country or kingdome wherof he is a member; or when the ser∣ants fate is crossed with the fate of his maister, or the fate of the soldiar by the fate of his captaine;Ioan. picus Mi∣rand contra Astrol. and againe otherwhiles fatal effects are hindred (say the Arabian Astrologers) aswel by the liberty of mans wil, as by the prouidence of God, which (as abbyn Auenzram teacheth in his booke of natiuityes) doth ouerweygh al fate whatsoeuer.Rabbi Auenz. in initio. li. de gauit Trismegistus apud lactantium li. de origine. erorris. To which purpose also the an∣cient
Hermes Trismegistus saith, Vnica custodia pietas; pium enim ho∣minem, nec daemon malus nec fatum tenet; nam Deus liberat pium ab om∣ni malo; The only sure garde of man is piety, for neither any vvicked spirit nor fate can hold or bind the godly man vvhome God deliuereth from al euil. Thus saith hee. The vncerteinty of the iudge∣ments of Astro∣logers by mens natiuities.14. And here I wish to be noted by the way what certainty may be had of the iudgments of Astrologers by mens natiuities, when al the fatallity which any of them can imagine to proceed of the starres, is so many wayes euacuated; besides that Ptolo∣maeus the prince of Astrologers confesseth himselfe, that no man is so skilful in the art of Astrology,Ptolom. li. Apo∣toles traducto.  Ioan. Pico. Miran. Idem in li. 100. verbor. but that he is deceaued many times, and that they only who are inspired by almighty God, can truly foretel perticuler euents. And Porphyrius who of al the Platonicks did most fauour Astrologie, affirmeth that the spirits which gaue oracles in times past, were them selues deceaued, and lyed otherwhiles when they iudged of thinges to come by the starres,Chap. 1. as I haue signified before vpon an other occasion. The platoniks teach that re∣ligious acts are effectuos mea∣nes to diuert al fatal effects.15. But to conclude concerninge al fatallity proceeding ei∣ther of the starres, or of the connexion of causes; the Platonicks referring al effects what soeuer, either fatal or accidental to the disposition of Gods prouidence, (as I haue declared before) doe teach that the most effectual meanes to diuert or frustrate any fatal effect, is adoration consisting in the true worship of God, that is to say in deuoute prayer, and other acts of sincere and true Religion, wherby may be obtained the fauour and prote∣ction of him, vpon whose wil depend al causes and effects what soeuer. As Iamblicus the great platonick teacheth expresly, concluding that by the help & fauour of almighty God,Iamblicus de misterijs AEgip∣or. nos ipso a fato eximire possumus, we may exempt and free our selues from fate; as also that God being humbly and sincerly adored, multa mala repellit, quae alioqui naturaliter euenire, doth repel and turne from vs many euils, which otherways wold naturally hap vnto vs. Thus much concerning the opinion of Philosophers tou∣ching Fate, Fortune, and Chance.
A FVRTHER CONSIDERATION OF FATE and Fortune, according to the Christian Catholike faith, and the doctrine of our holy Scriptures, & how almighty God wor∣keth his wil in the affaires of men by casual and accidental meanes. CHAP. 12. I HAVE in the last chapter declared the opini∣on of the best Philosophers concerning Fortune, Chance, and Fate, and proued that though they taught some thinges casual and accidental; yet they acknowledged with al, both the libertie of mans wil, and also the supereminent power of Gods prouidence, And now in this chapter I wil breefly shew howe the same agreeth with our Christian Catholike faith, and debate some other thinges pertaining to this matter. 2. S. Augustine, though he reiect the name both of Fortune, and Fate, as neither wel vnderstood by the common sorte, nor wel vsed of poëts, and some others that professed learning, yet in sub∣stance he agreeth with the opinion of the best and most learned Philosophers saying of Fortune thus. Fortune is vnderstood to be in those thinges which seeme to hap by chance,Aug. quaest. su∣per Genesin. li. 1. not because Fortune is any deuine power, but because such accidents, doe by the ordinance of God proceede from causes that are secret and vnknovvne to vs. And againe in an other place;Aug. li. 5. de ci∣uit. Dei. ca. 9. vve Christians (saith hee) doe not affirme that those causes which are said to proceede of fortune, are no causes at al, but that they are secret and idden from vs, and therfore vve doe attribute them to the vvil, either of al∣mighty God or of some spirits. Thus farre S. Augustine, giuing to vn∣derstand that the suddaine and vnexpected chances which are called effects of Fortune, doe particulerly proceed from the pro∣uidence of God, vsing the ministry of spirits or other creatures, for the execution of his wil. 3. And as concerning Fate; wheras some vnderstand the same to consist only in the constellation of the starres, (as I haue sig∣nified
before) and some thought it to proceede of the order and connexion of al,S. Augustins doctrin concer∣ning fate. as wel inferiour as superiour causes; the first he vtterly reiecteth, and the later he admitteth in some sorte, to wit, so that neither the freedome of mans wil, nor the proui∣dence of God be denyed thereby, wherein neuertheles he al∣loweth not the name of fate, as a word not to be vsed amongst Christiās;Aug. l. de ciuit. De li. 9. therfore he saith. Omnia fato fieri; &c. we Christians doe not say that al thinges are donne by fate, nay we rather affirme that nothinge is done by fate; For vve shew that the very name of fate is vaine, and to no purpose, as it is commonly vsed and vnderstood to be in the constellation of the starres, wherin euery man is borne or conceiued, and yet neuertheles vve doe not deny the order and connexion of causes wherin the wil of God is most potent, but we doe not cal that order by the name of fate. Thus far S. Augustine, who also a litle after, to shew that no order or con∣nexion of causes (which the Philosophers called fate) can ne∣cessitate or force the wil of man,Idem. saith thus. It doth not follow that because God hath ordained a certaine order of causes, therfore there is nothing in the arbitrement or power of our wills, which vvills beinge the causes of our vvorkes and actions, are to be reckoned amongst the causes vvhich God hath ordained. Thus saith this learned Father; signifying, that seing God hath giuen freedome to our wills, and ordained that they shalbe causes of our actions, it is as natural to them to wor∣ke freely and with out compulsion of any other cause, as to fyer to heate, or water to wet, or to other causes to produce their natural effects. Hovv Christians ought to vnder∣stand the vvord fate.4. Lastly to shew to what cause al these thinges, that are called fatal are to be referred, and what we Christians ought to vnderstand by this word fate; he saith thus. If any man doe attribute this effect to fate, calling the vvil and povver of God by the name of fate; Sententiam teneat,Aug. li. 3. de ciuit Dei cap 1. linguam corrigat, let him hold his opinion, and correct his speach. Thus farre S. Augustine, To whom I wil adde one other witnes of our christian doctrine concerning fate, to wit the fa∣mous S. Gregory the greate (from whome we Englishmen re∣ceaued the Christian faith) who hauinge signified that certaine hereticks called Priscillianistae taught that euery man is borne vnder a certaine constellation of the starres,S. Gregoryes do∣ctrin concer∣ning fate. Grego. Hom. 10. in Euang. luc. which they held to be his fate, or destiny, addeth these words: Sed absit a cordibus fidelium &c. But let it be farre from thr harts of Christianes to thinke or say
that any thinge is fate or destiny; for he only who created man gouerneth his life; and man vvas not made for the starres, but the starres for man; And therfore if the starres vvere the fate or destiny of man, it should follow, that man should be subiect to those thinges, vvhich are ordayned for his seruice; Thus saith S. Gregory, agreeinge both with S. Au∣gustine, & also with the old and best philosophers in substance of opinion concerning fate, and reiecting the verie name thereof with S Augustine, because the common people aswel amongst Christiās, as amongst the Painyms vsed the same too prophanely. In which respect also S. Augustine reiecteth the name of Fortune,S. Augustin re∣iecteth the very name of fortune as not to be vsed of Christians. so farre disallowinge the vse therof, that in his later daies, when he censured al his workes and writings, he retracted the same in a booke of his written when he was a young man, & newly be∣come a Christian, wherof he saith thus. 5. Non placet mihi, &c.Aug. li. Retract. ca. 4. It displeaseth me that in that worke I named Fortune so oft, though I meant not therby any goddesse, but the accidental euent of thinges, vvher vpon these vvords are commonly vsed in speach, perhaps, peraduēture, perchance, &c. al which neuertheles are to be referred to the deuine prouidence; Thus saith he to teach vs that it is the duty of Christians, not only to auoid the prophane opinions of the pagans, concerning fate and fortune, but also their prophane man∣ner of speach, or writing therof.The profane vse of the vvords Fate and Fortu∣ne ouer common at these daies. What then would he say if he were now liuing, and saw the writinges of some Christians of no smal estimation, aswel historiographers as others, who not with standing the aboundant matter, and occasion that the sub∣iects which they handle doe offer vnto them, to obserue the course of Gods prouidence; doe seldome or neuer speake therof, but referre al kind of effects and accidents to fate or fortune, more prophanely then many of the Painyms were wont to doe, in whom a man shal find very pious and religious obserua∣tions of Gods infinit wisdome, prouidence, and iustice; Truly if S. Augustine (I say) were liuing and should see such workes, he would not thinke them fit to be read of Christians. 6. But now to proceede, and to leaue a parte the considera∣tion of fate or destiny, and to speake a litle more of Fortune, or Chance,The effects of for∣tune attributed to God by holy scriptures. according to the sense and doctrine of the holy Scriptures the wisest and most learned Philosophers, (as before I haue de∣clared) called almighty God Fortune, acknowledging therby
that from his prouidence proceedeth al the variety of prospe∣ritie and aduersitie, and al the good and bad successe which the superstition of ignorant men did commonly ascribe to Fortune. And although our holy scriptures doe not apply the prophane name of Fortune to the in finite maiesty of God, yet they attribute vnto him al the effects therof,1. Reg. cap. 2. and therfore they say; Dominus mortificat, &c. Our Lord doth mortify and reuiue, empouerish and enritch; humilitate and exalt, raise the needy from the dust, and the poore from the durt, that he may sit vvith princes and possesse a seat of glory; for to our lord belong the thrasholds or limits of the earth. 7. Hereof the Scriptures also doe aford vs infinite examples, by the which the course of Gods most particuler prouidence (in matters that are commonly ascribed to Fortune or Chance) is re∣presented as it were in a glasse,Al goods impar∣ted to man by Gods proui∣dence. to the eyes of the Christian rea∣der, who may learne therby how almighty God the author and fountaine of al goodnes, doth impart to men not only the goods which are called, Bona animi & corporis, The Goods of the body and of the mind (as knowledge, learning, wisdome, strength, beauty and such like,) but also Bona fortunae, the goods of fortune, (as riches dignitie, honour. &c. God gaue to Sampson exceeding strength, to Iudith extraordinarie beauty,Iud. ca. 14.15.16. Iudith ca. 10. 3. Reg. ca. 3. and to Salomon not only admira∣ble wisdome and knowledge, but also infinit riches. And as for the varietie of prosperous and aduerse Fortune, the holy scriptu∣res also teach vs, that the same depend wholy vpon the hand and prouidence of almighty God. This we see in Iob, most for∣tunate for a time in his owne person,Iob. 1.2. & 24. in his wife, children, freends, and substance, and againe for a while most vnfortu∣nate and miserable in al, and yet in the end more rich and pros∣perous then euer, who in the midst of his miserie and losses, did comfort himselfe with the consideration of Dominus dedit Domi∣nus abstulit; Our lord gaue it and our lord hath taken it a way. wherein it is also to be noted, that the diuel desiring to afflict him, could not touch him or any thing of his, without the particuler ly∣cence of almighty God. 8. In like manner the wonderful wisdome and particuler prouidence of God appeareth no lesse in the strange and variable accidents that hapned to Ioseph,Genes. ca. 37.39.41. & 42. sold for a slaue by his owne bre∣theren, transported in to Egipt to a kinges pallace, and from
thence to a prison, there fettered and manacled for a time, and yet afterwards exalted to the principal and chiefe charge of a kingdome, wherupon followed the conseruation,Exod. cap. 2.3.4.5.6. not only of his father, but also of his brethren that solde him. What should I speake of Moyses exposed in his infancy in a basket to the mercy of a riuer, found and taken vp by a kinges daughter, nourished as her sonne, then forced to flee, for the slaughter of a man,1. Reg. cap. 16. 2. Reg. cap. 2.16.17.22.23. and yet in the end aduanced to be captaine general and gouernour of the people of God to deliuer them from captiuity. Or what neede I speake of Saul who as he was seeking his fathers asses. was anoynted king by the prophet, obeyed by the people, pros∣perous for a while, and yet in the end miserably slaine in a bat∣taile against the Philistines. Or of Dauid transferred from a shee∣phooke to a scepter, victorious against al forreyne enemies, yet persecuted by his owne sonne, driuen out of his pallace, dispi∣sed, and reuiled by his subiects, and afterwards restored to his former tranquillity, peace, and dignity.Dan. cap. 4. Or of Nabuchodonosor deiected and cast downe from his Imperial throne to the com∣pany of brute beasts for a time, and yet afterwards raised againe to his ancient state, dominion, and glory.Esth. cap. 3. & 7. Or of Aman most po∣tent for a while by the fauor of Assuerus, and at last vpon a sud∣daine hanged vpon the gallous that hee had prepared for poore Mardochaeus. In al which the holy Scriptures doe manifestly re∣present vnto vs the admirable prouidence of God, though such like effects are commonly attributed to fortune or chance. 9. But what neede I (I say) alleadge these examples out of our holy Scriptures, seing that from the begininge to the end, they are nothing else but as it were a perfect and liuely portrait of the diuine prouidence,The infinite vvisdome of God in disposing of al thinges. expressing the abstruse and hidden councels of almighty God, and the inscrutable course which he holdeth in the disposition of mens affaires, thereby to teach vs where vnto al the mutations and changes, the good and il suc∣cesse, and the suddaine chances and euents which so diuersly distract the states of man, are to be referred; Wherby we may also learne how sweetly his infynit wisdome disposeth al thin∣ges, working his holy wil not only in his creatures, but also by them, making them his instruments and ministers; yet in such sort that the effects which are seene, doe not seeme to proceed
from him, but are commonly attributed to the next and imediate causes, when the same are apparant, which we may obserue not only in the common speach of men, but also in the holy scrip∣tures themselues. 10. As for example, we reade that almighty God signified to Salomon,1. Reg. cap. 11. that for his Idolatry his kingdome should be deuided, in his sonnes tyme, and that the prophet Ahias Salonites also du∣ring Salomons raigne, tould Hieroboam (who was after king of Israel) that God would giue him ten of the twelue trybes, which Salomon gouerned, and that only two tribes should remaine to Roboam Salomons sonne:3. Reg. 11. yet when this came to be executed the scripture declareth that Hieroboam & the ten tribes deuided themselues from Roboam, because he refused the coun∣cel of old men (who aduised him to content the people) and followed the aduise of young men who had bene brought vp with him:The effects of Gods prouidence attributed often to the next and immediate causes. and councelled him to giue them hard answeres; which indeed was the next and imediate cause of their rebel∣lion, though the first and principal cause was the ordinance of God for Salomons synne, and therfore the Scripture saith in the same place, that; Non acquieuit rex &c. The kinge did not giue content∣ment to the people,Ibid. & paralip∣cap. 11. because God had cast him of, to the end it might be ful∣filled, which the Prophet had foretould to Hieroboam; And when Roboam had assembled a mighty army of a hundreth and fourescore thousand to fight against Hieroboam and the 10. trybes that fol∣lowed him, God commanded the prophet Semeias to forbid him to fyght with Hieroboam,Ibid. Quia mea hoc gestum est voluntate. Because (saith almighty God) it was done by my wil. Loe here how the reuolt of the 10. trybes from Roboam seemed to proceed only of his error, though it proceeded principally from the wil of God, who serued himselfe of Roboams error, as of a meanes to punish in him, as wel his owne sinnes, as the sinne of Salomon his father. 11. In like manner when some second and imediate cause is not aparant and euident,Hovv the effect of Gods proui∣dence is attri∣buted to Chanc. the effect is commonly attributed to Chance, which also may be obserued in the holy scriptures, wherof I wil alleadge some few examples, to shew therby how almighty God vseth casual meanes for the execution of his wil. We reade that two phophets at seueral tymes tould king Achab from almighty God, that he should dye a violent and blouddy
death, for spilling the inocent blood of Nabath and sparing Bena∣dad king of Siria; and afterwards when he went to fyght against the Sirians, Michaeas the prophet also tould him that he should be killed in the battaile, in so much that he said; Si reuersus fueris in pace non est locutus in me Dominus.3. Reg. ca. 22. Paral. ca. 18. If thou retourne aliue our lord hath not spoken in me. Neuertheles afterwards when the scripture de∣clareth how he was killed, it saieth thus? Vir quidam tetendit arcum in incertum saggittam dirigens, & casu percussit Regem Israel &c. A cer∣taine man bent his bow, and shooting his arrow at randome strooke the king of Israel by chance; So that almighty God executed his holy wil vpon Achab by Chance; yea and signifieth the same in his scriptures in such sorte, as nothing could seeme to be more ca∣sual, or accidental, though it was his special ordynance long before. 12. The like also may be noted in the booke of Machabees; for when Iudas Machabaeus fought against Gorgias, it is signified there as a matter of Chāce, that some of the Soldiars of Iudas were killed. Contigit (saith the text) paucos ruere Iudeorum:2. Machab. 12. It chanced that a few of the Iewes were slaine; Neuertheles it appeareth afterwards that it was Gods particuler iustice and iudgement vpon them, for there were found vnder their cloakes some thinges that had bene offered to Idols, which they had secretly brought before from lamnia, and therfore the Scripture saith afterwards;Ibid. Omnibus go manifestum est ob hanc causam eos corruisse; It was therefore mani∣fest to al men, that they were slayne for this cause. 13. Wherto I may adde for more euident proofe,The effects of gods prouidence vvrought often by most casual meanes. & the bet∣ter explication of this matter, that we find also many times in the holy scriptures, that almighty God vsed otherwhiles to execute his iustice, and sometimes to worke other effects of his rouidence, by the most casual and accidental meanes that may e, to wit, by lotts, as when the marriners did cast lotts in a great tempest to find out the cause therof,Ionae. c. 1. and the lot fel vpon Ionas whom God ordained to punish for refusing to preach to the Niniuits.Iosuae. 7. And Acham hauing stolen part of the spoyle of Hierecho was by the special commandement of God discouered by a lot, and put to death for his offence. 14, Also Saul being assigned by almighty,1 Reg. 10. God to be King and annointed by Samuel, was chosen neuertheles by way of lots. And
finally the Apostles them selues did cast lottes to choose Matthias to supply the place of Iudas, which election they tooke to be the special worke of God, & therfore they said. Ostende Domine quem elegeris ex his duobus.Act. 1. Shevv o lord which of these tvvo thou hast chosen. Such then and so particuler is the prouidence of God, that euen those thinges which seeme to be most accidental, are directed, and guided by him for the executiō of his wil in the most impor∣tant affayres of men, yea and of his owne spouse the Church. 15. Therfore we may not so referre the effects which we see, & the successe of mens actions,Nothing casual o accidental to the vvill of God. to inferiour causes, or to chance, that we deny therin the wil & prouidence of God, to whome nothing is casual or accidental, he being the first cause from the which proceede al other causes and effects, and who serueth himselfe of them for the working of his wil, giuing such succes∣se to the intentions and actions of men,God disposeth of the actions as vvel of good as bad men, acor∣ding to his se∣cret and iust iud¦gements, & not according to their intentions. be they good or badde, as for his owne glory, and the execution of his secret iudgments is most conuenient; And therfore as he permitteth the sinns and errours of euil men, to vse and turne them to his seruice; so doth he many times frustrate the good designments and indeauors of holy and good men, when the same are different from those ends, which he in his deuine prouidence and secret iudgments hath proiected. 16. This hath bene most euident in diuers vnfortunate ex∣peditions of Christian Princes against the Saracens and Turkes, namely of Lewis, the 9. kinge of France. A man so admirable for his vertue,Paul. Emilius in Lodouic. 9. and so glorious for his miracles both in his life, and after his death, that he was canonized, and is serued in the Church of God for a Sainte; who neuertheles making two voya∣ges against the Infidels,The euil successe of tvvo expedi∣tions of S. Levves of Frāce against the infidels. the one into Egipt & the other into Barba∣rie. was in the first, after many calamities bothe by sea and lande, ouerthrowne with his whole army, and forced to redeemne his life and liberty, with such conditions as it pleased Gods ene∣mies to impose vpon him: and in the later voyage he dyed of the plague, which so afflicted the whole campe of the Christian Princes his confederats, that they were forced to raise their seige from Tunes, when they had brought it to extremity. And in both the voyages such was the misery of the Christians by shipwrack at sea, and by famine and pestilence on land, that it seemed God
fought for his enemies against them, so terrible and inscruta∣ble are his iudgments. 17.Paulus AEmilius in Lodouico 7. Sigon. de regno Italiae. an. 1147. The like hath chanced also in other expeditions of Christian kinges and Emperours, for the recouerie of the holy land; wherof one was made at the motion, and instant solicita∣tion of S. Bernard, who hauing perswaded Lewis the 7. king of France to vndertake the same,The euil successe of an other expe∣dition made for the recouerie of the holy land by the solicitacion of S. Bernard. induced also Conrade the Empe∣rour and many other princes therto, partely by preaching, and partly by many wonderful miracles which he did at a dyete held at Spyre in Germany; and yet the successe therof was so bad, that the holy man incurred much disgrace and obloquie, which he bore with greate patience, saying, that seing the weaknes of men was such, that they would needes accuse either God or him for their il successe, he was content to beare the blame that God might be excused. And yet neuertheles it pleased God to cleare him shortly after of that imputation, by a publike miracle, for a blind child being brought vnto him by his parents to be resto∣red to his sight, he desired publikely of almighty God,Guliel. Abbat In vita sancti Bernardi. li. 3. c. 4. that if his deuine maiestie did moue him to perswade the voyage to the holie land, yea and did cooperate with him therin, that then it would please him to restore sight vnto the child, or otherwise not, where vpon the child recouered his sight presentlie, and al men admired no lesse the sanctitie of the holy man, then the se∣cret iudgments of almighty God, who had made him his instru∣ment to procure the execution of his iustice vpon his owne people. 18. We read in like manner,Iudic. c. 20. The children of Israel tvvise ouerthrovvn although God appointed them a captayn & bad them geue battaile. of two great ouerthrowes giuen to the children of Israel, not withstanding that at both times almighty God himselfe encouraged them to giue battaile to their enemies, yea and the first time appointed them a captaine or leader, for the iust reuenge of an enormious iniurie done vnto them by the tribe of Beniamin, which reuenge neuertheles it pleased not God to giue them, vntil he had first punished them by the hands of their enemies for their owne offences, so that God disposeth not alwaies of the successe of mens actions ac∣cording to their good or bad intentions, but according to his owne secret and iust iudgments, prospering sometimes the bad designments of euil men, and ouerthrowing the good en∣deauours
of his seruants, as for his owne greater glorie, and the reward, exercise and punishment of them or of others, by the meanes it seemeth to his wisdome most conuenient; And yet alwayes soe, as neither the wicked by their good successe shal escape the punishment due to their bad intentions, or actions; nor the good shal loose the merit and reward of their good mea∣ninges & labours, though they succeede neuer so il in the sight of men. 19. Thus then I haue sufficiently declared, what are Fate, For∣tune, and Chance, and that they no way empeach the freedome of mans wil, and much les the course of Gods prouidence, where vpon they principally depend. I haue also shewed that almighty God serueth himselfe as wel of al casual and natural causes, as of the good or bad designmentes of his seruants, or enemies, giuing such successe there vnto, as for his owne glorie, and the execution of his holy wil, and iust iudgments, is most requisite. And therfore I wil now proceede to proue the insufficiencie of man for the gouernment of commonwelth, by euident examples of Councels, pollicies, and attempts, of the wisest and most potent Politikes, deluded by suddaine chances, and vnexpected euents, or rather by Gods proui∣dence, vsing the same, as a mea∣nes to worke his wil, and to make men see their owne weaknes.
DIVERS EXAMPLES OF SVNDRY ACCI∣dents vvherby great plots and designments of great Politikes haue bene dissipated, and ouerthrowne: and concerning poli∣cyes that for a time haue bene profitable, and in the end haue proued pernicious. CHAP. 13. WEE reade in Plutarke that the people of Sicily being oppressed with diuers tirants,Plut. in Timo∣leon. An attempt against Timo∣leon ouerthroun by a strange accident. craued assi∣stance of the Corinthians, who sent them for their succour a captaine of theirs called Timoleō a man famous not only for military discipline, but also for moral vertue & piety. This Timoleō had within a while so good successe, that the tyrants dispairing euer to be able, either to ouercome him, or to defend them sel∣ues by force, one of them called Icetes suborned a coople of des∣perat companions to kil him, who perswading them selues that they might best performe it, as he should be sacrificing vnto his Gods, and wholy attentiue to his deuotions, watched an op∣portunity for that purpose; and finding him one day in the tem∣ple readie to sacrifice, they drew neere him to execute their in∣tent; but as they were readie to strike him, one of the stāders by, who suspected nothing of their intention, vpon a suddaine gaue one of the cōspiratours such a mortal wound, that he fel dead in the place: the other seeing his fellow killed, & thinking that the conspiracy was discouered, fled to the Altar, tooke hold therof, craued pardon of the Gods and of Timoleon, & promised that if he would saue his life, he would discouer al the practise; in the mea∣ne time he that killed the other conspiratour being fled, was ta∣ken & brought backe, calling God & man to witnes that he had done nothing but a most iust and lawful act, in killing him that had killed his father, which being knowne to some that were present, & testified by them to be true, filled al the assistants with admiration of Gods prouidence, who by such a suddaine and vnexpected accident, had not only ouerthrowne the pernitious
plot, and designment of the wicked tirant, and preserued Timo∣leon, but also had executed his iustice vpon a murderer. The definition of Fortune accor∣ding to the pla∣tonicks. Plut. Ibid.2. Hereupon Plutark maketh a notable discourse of Fortune following the opinion of the Platonicks, concerning the same (which they define to be, Demoniacum potestatem &c. An angelical power connecting diuers and different causes to produce some effect) and therfore he noteth in this historie how the good Angel of Timo∣leon,Proclus in Com∣ment. in Timaeū. did for his preseruation assemble, and, as it were, chayn to∣geather thinges that had of themselues no coherence, making one of them, the begining of an other. For although the murder of his father that killed the conspiratour, had no connexion with this conspiracy against Timoleon; yet, neither that murder had bene reuenged, if this conspiracy had not followed, nor yet this conspiracy had bene discouered and ouerthrowne, but by the occasion of that murder committed longe before.Plutarck ascri∣beth the preser∣uation of Timo∣leon to the pro∣uidence of God by the meanes of his good angel. Philip. Comin. ca. 58. Thus dis∣courseth Plutark vpon this accident, which although he refer∣red to Fortune (speaking therof according to the opinion of Platonicks) yet he ascribed it principally to the prouidence of God, who by the ministry of a good Angel protected and preser∣ued his seruant Tymoleon, in respect of his great piety & deuo∣tion, And this being wel vnderstood, is no way repugnant to our Christian and Catholike doctrine. An other exam∣ple of a great de∣signment of Charles duke of Burundie ouer∣thovvn by a chance.3. But to come to examples nerer our time, Charles Duke of Burgundy being at warre with Lewis the 11. kinge of France, had for his confederats the dukes of Guienne and Brittany, wherof the first was the kinges owne brother, and hauing bene in former times twise deceaued by the said King with false treaties, and now desirous to quite him with the like, offered him to aban∣don his two confederats vpon condition, that he would restore vnto him certaine townes which he had of his vpon the fron∣tiers, aduertising his confederats in the meane time, that his meaning was not to forsake them, or to keepe any conuenant with the Kinge, but only to recouer his owne, and then to de∣lude him as he had bene deluded before by him. The Kinge sus∣pecting no deceit, accorded to the conditions, and sent his Em∣bassadours to Duke Charles to take his oath, for the performance of the couenants on his parte, the Duke sware, or rather for∣sware himselfe (promising vpon his oath that which he meant
not to performe) and then sent his Embassadours in like man∣ner to the King to take his oath; In the meane time before the Embassadours arriued where the king was, it pleased God so to dispose that the Duke of Guienne the kinges brother, and con∣federat to Charles died, which the king vnderstanding, and seing him selfe already deliuered by his brothers death of the danger of ciuil warre which he most feared; refused to sweare, and to stand to his couenants, and soe al the crafty deuise, and suttle plot of Charles was ouerthrowne, by the suddaine accident of his confederats death, which he neuer dreamed of, and he him∣selfe forsworne for nothinge. 4. Hereto I wil adde Caesar Borgia Duke of Valence,The ouerthrovv of Caesar Borgia (Macchiauels mirrour for a prince) by a sud∣dayn chance. whome Machiauel so highly admireth (as before cap. 3. I haue signified) that he proposeth him for a patterne or exāple to his prince, this Caesar being become exceeding rich and potent by the help and authority of Alexander the 6. his father, and fearing nothing so much as his fathers death,Guicciard. li. 6. whereby it might chance that some enemy of his might be chosen to succeed him, studdied and la∣bored by al meanes possible to preuent that inconuenience, and to procure that the election of his fathers successor might fal in to the hands of him selfe and his freendes, which when he had prouided sufficiently as he thought, it chanced by such meanes, as I wil declare after a while, that not only his father died, but also that he him selfe fel so extreamly sick at the same time, that he could execute nothinge of that which he had before resol∣ued; wherby it came to passe (God so disposing of his iust iud∣gments) that an enimy of his fathers and his being chosen to succeede, he was with in a while vtterly ouerthrowne. In which respect, he him selfe was wont afterwards to confesse, and la∣ment the imbecillity of mans wit,Guicciard. li. 6. for that when he thought he had fore-seene al the inconueniences that might happen vnto him by his fathers death, and prouided to preuent them, he ne∣uer so much as imagined that he should be so sick at the same time,Caesar Borgi thinking to poy∣son an other poi∣soned his ovvne father and him selfe. that he should not be able to put any of his designments in execution. 5. And herein it is also to be noted for the further proofe of the matter in hand, that he him selfe was the cause as wel of his owne sicknes, as also of his fathers death, and consequently of
his owne ouerthowe, by a wonderful chance that hapned con∣trary to his expectation; for hauing inuited his father and Cardi∣nal Cornetti to a vineyard, with intent to poison the Cardinal, to the end to inherit his goods, he recomended a certaine poisoned bottle of wine to a trusty seruant of his, with special chardge to keepe it safe, and to giue it to none without his expresse order, but so it fel out by his seruantes negligence, or rather by Gods iustice,Psal. 7. that as the Psalmist saith. Incidit in foueam quam fecit, he fel him selfe into the pit that he made for others. For his father comming in to supper very hot, and thirstie, by reason of the great heates, and calling for wine, the seruant that had charge of the bottle, not knowing it was poisened, but imagininge only that it was some special wine more pretious then the rest, and not hauing any other ready, (for that the prouision was not brought from the pallace) gaue him of that wine,Guccird. ibid. wherof not only he, but also his sonne Caesar Borgia dranke, and being both poisened ther∣with, the father (who was old and weake) died presently, but the sonne being young, and more able to resist the force of the poison, had time to take great and potent remedies, wherby after longe and dangerous sicknes he hardly escaped, and what became of him after, shalbe declared in the second part of this treatise whē I come to speake of Gods iustice vpon wicked men which in him was very exemplar; And in the meane time we see how God did frustrat his wicked plots, and pernitious pro∣iects, by accidents which he neuer dreamed of, and much lesse could preuent. And this I wish the rather to be noted in him then in others, for the great account that Machiauel and al other politiks make of his rare wisdome and iudgement. Sander. de Scism. Anglic. Ihon Stovve in Edou. 6.6. But now to come to an example in our owne country which many may yet remember. The lord Iohn Dudley Earle of warwicke and after duke of Northumberland in king Edward the 6. his time meaning to aduance himselfe and his family; married the lord Gilford Dudley his fourth sonne, to the lady Iane daughter to the duke of Suffolk, pretending to make her queene after king Edward,The plott of the Duke of Nor∣thumberlande against the lady Mary. in preiudice of the lady Mary, daughter to king Henry the 8. and sister to the said king Edwarde, and by the reason of the kings lingering sicknes, had time to vse al the meanes which he thought conuenient for the accomplishment of his desire,
and therfore procured partly for freendshipp, and partly for feare, not only the consent of al the lords of the Councel, but also the hands and subscriptions of 400. others, noble men and gentlemen, of the most principal through out the realme, in so much that there seemed to want nothing for the assurance of his designments, but only to haue the Lady Mary in his hands, whome therfore he caused the councel to send for in the Kinges name, vpon pretence that she should come to comfort the Kinge; which she obeyed, not suspecting any sinister meaning in the Duke 7. But as she was vpon the way, yea and with in halfe a daies iorney of London, ready to fal in to the snare, it pleased God that she receaued aduise of the Dukes designments from one of his owne councel, where vpon she returned suddenly, and with in a while after that she arriued at her owne howse, she had ne∣wes of the King her brothers death. And although she was vt∣terly destitute of men, money, councel, and al other humane meanes to enable her, to resist so great an aduersary as the Duke, (who had al the treasure and strength of England in his hands) yet such was her trust in God for the iustice and right of her title, that she caused her how shold seruants presently to proclaime her Queene in the country townes there abouts; wherupon, first the common people of the countries adioyning, and afterwards diuers gentlemen of account repaired vnto her,The Duke of Northumber∣land his ouer∣throvv by Gods prouidence and iustice. in so great number, that the Duke of Northumberland and the councel (who had already proclaymed the Lady Iane in London & in diuers other partes) thought it conuenient to leuye forces, and to make a Royal army, wherof the Duke himselfe for the authority of his parson should be general. The Duke put him selfe then pre∣sently into the feeld, leauing the chardge of the citty and tower of London to the Lords of the councel, who promised him al fi∣delity: neuertheles seeing him absent, & vnderstanding the great concourse of the people to the assistance of the Lady Mary, and considering with al the equity of her cause, they agreed amongst them selues to proclaime her in London which they did presently, and committing to prison the Lady Iane, they sent order to ap∣prehend the Duke him selfe, who was so dismayed there with when he vnderstood it, that he vtterly lost courage, and suffered
him selfe to be taken prisoner at Cambridge and brought to London where he was after executed. 8. Here now we see this great designment of the Duke, that was fortified with the consent of al the Councel, and nobi∣lity of the Realme suddenly ouerthowne, by such accidents as passed his power to preuent, to wit; First by the discouery of his intention disclosed by one of his owne councel, at such tyme, as if it had bene concealed but one halfe day longer, it had by al likelyhood taken effect.The Lady Mary her preseruation from her enemies throuh Gods prouidence. Secondly by the Kings death, ensuing so soone after, that the Duke had no time to vse his name and authority to sease vpon the Lady Maries person, which he would haue done, if the King had liued but a few dayes longer. Al which the good Lady considering, togeather with the other cir∣cumstances of the matter, to wit, the affection, concourse, and assistance of the common people, the suddain change of the councells resolution, the dismaye, and speedy apprehention of her potent aduersary, and lastly her victory, in such an important, & doubtful quarel, without the spilling of one droppe of blood, and al this with in twelue or thirtene dayes after her brothers death, she wisely & gratefully acknowledged the benifit wholy from Gods hand. And therfore ordained for the inscriptions of the angells, stamped in her raigne, this verse of the psalme; A domino factum est illud,Pal. 117. et est mirabile in oculis nostris; This was done by our Lord, and it is wonderful in our eyes. By these examples and infi∣nit others which might be alleaged, it is euident that there is no surety in the councells and plots of men, be they neuer so wise, except they be guided particulerly by the spirit of God; for when they haue built (as a man may say) towres of policy as highe as the tower of Babel, a sudden blast of an accident vnexpected, shal cast them downe to the very ground, to the confusion many times, and ruine of the builders, and contriuers therof. 9. But what shal we say of councels & policies, that seeme not only to be grounded vpon great reason,The Romaine Empire ouer∣throvven by the same meanes that preserued it for a time. and contriued with great prudence, but also succeed for some tyme notably wel, and yet in the end proue to be pernicious, whereof we haue seene sufficyent experience in the Romaine empyre, which was ouer∣throwne in course of time by that which for many yeeres see∣med to be the strength and security therof. For wheras the first
Romane Emperours, hauing oppressed the commonwelth by ar∣mes, perswaded themselues that their state was to be established and conserued by the same meanes, wherby it was gotten, and, therfore resolued, that the safety therof, and of their persons consisted in strong guardes, garisons, legions, & armies of soldiers to be distributed throughout al the partes of their dominions, it is euident that the same was in the end, one of the principal cau∣ses of the vtter ouerthrow of the Empyre, though at the first it seemed greatly to establish and assure the same. 10. For after the death of Nero (when the family of the Cae∣sars was ended) not only the guardes deputed for the custody and safeguard of the Emperours persons, called Pretoriani milites,The factious ele∣ction of Empe∣rours by guardes and armies of souldiars. but also the legions, and armyes, disposed, and placed in diuers quarters of the Empyre, seeing as wel the persons of the Empe∣rours, as also the strenght of the Empyre in their owne hands, did arrogat vnto them selues such authority and liberty to choose new Emperours, that they set them vp and pulled them downe at their pleasures: wherby in lesse then one yeare after Neroes death,Suetonias Plutarck. 4. Emperours, Galba, Otho, Vittellius & Vespasian were chosen by the guardes which forced the Senates to admitt and confirme them: and their insolency grew to such extremity in time,Elis Spartian. that after the death of the Emperour Pertinax whom they killed, they made offer of the Empire by publike proclamation, to whosoeuer would giue most for it. And whereas there were but only two that offered money for it, to wit, Sulpicianus, and Didius Iulianus, they gaue it to the later, partly because he gaue them ready mo∣ney, and partly because Sulpicianus was father in law to Pertinax whome they had slaine, and whylest not only the Emperours guardes, but also the soldiars of euery army tooke vpon them to make Emperours, it fel out some tymes, that there were as ma∣ny Emperours chosen at once, as there were diuers armies in the Empyre; in so much, that in the tyme of Galien & Valerian,Trebel. Pollio in trigita tyrannis. there were no lesse then 30. Emperours declared in sundry places, in the space of 15. yeares: where vpon it followed that the Empyre being pyttyfully rent & torne with ciuil warres was so weakned, that it became a spoyle and pray to the Goaths, Vandals, Alans, Huns, Lombards and such other barbarous nations. 11. Thus was the Romane Empire ouerthrowne by the same
meanes, that were nor only ordained to conserue and mantayne it,The ruine of many Emperors by their ovvne guardes. but also did indeed for a tyme preserue it from many dangers, both domestical, and forreine; to wit, as wel from inuasion of forreine enemyes, as from rebellions of subiects, which by the Emperous guardes, and the ordinary legions dispersed through out al partes of the Empire, were either easely preuented, or speedily repressed. For which cause the Emperours them selues were content to stand (as it were at their mercie, to the end they might by them, rule and command others: which though to some it was a safegaurde and security, yet to many others it brought ruyne and perdition,Sueton. Iulius Ca∣pitol. Alius Lam prid. Trebel, pollio. Flauius vopisc. as to Caligula, Pertinax, Caracalla, Heliogabolus, Pupienus, Balbinus, Phillipus Galien, Seuerus, Macrinus, Aurelianus, Iulius Maximinus, Probus, with diuers others, some of them slaine by their owne gaurdes, and some by their soldiers. 12 This inconuenience the Emperours of the Turkes doe seeke to remedy in their tyrannycal dominion (which they also vphold by force as the Romans did,Lazaro Soranzo in his Ottoman. par. 1. though with lesse danger) For although they haue aboue 300. thousand horse and foote euer in readynes vnder their Coronells & Captaines in Europe, Asia, & Africa, yet they keepe them alwayes a sunder & so dispersed, that they neuer come togeather in any number, vnles they be to be emplyoed in some forrein warre:The Turks great gardes of Giani∣zaries dangerous to his state. neuertheles their guards of Gianizaries which they haue alwayes neere about them for the security of their persons, to the number of 13. or 14. thousand, haue proued many tymes no lesse dammageable then dangerous to their states, for they haue not only some tymes set vp the younger brother against the elder, & helped the sonne to depose the father,Paul. Iouins. comment retum Ture in Bata∣zete. 2. Lazaro Soranso, in his Otto man∣no. par. 1. but also euen in this our age, haue taken the most confident officers, and greatest fauorits of the Turke from him by force, & cut of their heads, yea and compelled him to pardon them, yea and to giue them what soeuer they would demand to appease them. 13. Wherupon two considerations may be gathered; the one, the infelicity of tyrants,Tyrants are Sla∣ues to those by vvhome they epe others in slauery. who whiles they seeke rather to be fea∣red then to be beloued, are forced to make themselues subiects and slaues to those by whom they keepe other in subiection and slauery: wherby we see how true it is which Seneca saith. Quod alieno metu magnum est, suo non vacat. That which is great by others feare,
is not void of feare it selfe. The other cōsideration is, how ticle is the state of Princes, how weake their policies,The dangerous and ticle state of princes vvithout Gods Special protection. how vncertaine the successe of their plots, & cōsequently how needful it is for them to craue and haue the special protection of almighty God in al their designements and actions, seeing the meanes wherby they labour to preserue themselues from dangers, proue many tymes more dangerous in the end, then the dangers them selues which they seeke to auoide. 14.Roderic K. of Spaine ouer∣throvvn throvvgh his ovvne policy. Lucas Tudensis. an. 713. This may furder appeare by the policy which Rodericke King of Spayne vsed to assure his state against the children and frends of King Vitiza, whom he had deposed, for fearing least his subiects might rebel in their fauour, he dismantled al the strong holds and places in Spayne, and disarmed the people, wherby though he strengthned his state, in regarde of domestical danger yet he weakned it in respect of forraine attempts, in so much that the Moores inuading him shortly after,Ioan. vasaeus in. Cron. an. 714. Baron. nno. 713. Beda. hist. Ec∣cles. li. 1. c. 14 & 15. & ouerthrowing him in bataille, found so litle resistance afterward, that in 7. or 8. moneths they conquered almost al Spayne. The like also may be said of the Britons to whom their owne policy proued most per∣nicious: for being molested and oppressed by the Picts and Scots, they called in the Saxons for their defence,The Britons conquered by the same meanes, vvherby they meant to defend them selues. who for some tyme serued them to good purpose, but in the end they conquered them and their cuntry. In like manner the Queene of Hungary thought it good policy to procure the ayde of Soliman the great Turke against Ferdinand King of the Romans, brother to the Emperour Charles the 5. and for a while she was releeued & sup∣ported therby, but in the end, Soliman commnig into Hungary in parson, with pretence to succour her, depriued her & her sonne of their kingdome: as also Amurates one of Solimans ancesters, conquered the greatest part of Greece by the like meanes and occasion. 15. But perhaps you wil say that this was so grosse a folly in Christian princes (to trust to the help of such potent and perfi∣dious infidels) that it is not to be alleaged for an example of po∣licy. I graunt, that it was folly, but such follies are committed by the wisest Princes and their councells, when God wil punish them: for he either taketh from them their witts, to the end they may erre and precipitate them selues, or he ouerthroweth
their wisest designments, by such meanes as they can not ima∣gin, or els he bringeth them to such exigents, that they are for∣ced wittingly to take some dangerous, and desperat resolution wherby they are ruyned. And this I say hapneth many times, to the mightiest and wisest Princes, when they forget their duty to God, and confide ouer much either on their owne wisdome and policy, or vpon their power and strength, as I wil make it yet more manifest in the two chapters next ensuinge. OF THE FORCE OF SVDDEN CHANCES and vnexpected euents, for the dissipation as vvel of mans po∣vver, as of his policy, and of the hazards and doutful euents of battiles, and other enterprises of vvarre. And that al the suc∣cesse therof dependeth vpon the prouidence of God, giuinge vi∣ctory some times by secret concurence vvith secondary causes, and some times by manifest and miraculous meanes. CHAP. 14. ALTHOVGH the successe of mens affaires is most vncertaine,The euents of vvarre most doubtful. variable, & subiect to infinit chances and hazards; yet in nothing so much as in matters wherin mans power is most seene, to wit,Supplement of Plutarc in Epa∣minondas. in matters of warre: wherof the euents are so doutful and dangerous, that (as Iason said to Epaminondas) he is not wise that doth not feare them.Plutar in Pho∣cion. And therfore it is noted of Phocion a most excel∣lent captaine of the Athenians, that although he was chosen 45. times general of their armies, yet he him selfe did euer perswade them to peace, fearing the successe of warre. And Hannibal ha∣uing bene for 16.Hannibal fea∣red the euent of vvarre. yeres victorious in Italy, and forced at length to defend his owne country, which was Carthage, (where Scipio the Roman had already ouerthrowne two great armies of the Car∣thagenians, and was ready also to present him battaile) he douted so much the euent therof, that crauing cōference with Scipia, he sought to perswade him to peace,Liius dec 23. li. . representing vnto him the ha∣zard of warre, and aduising him to consider in the prosperous
course of his victories, not only what had hapned to other men,Idem. To make peace is in the hands of man, but vic∣tory is in the hands of God. Ibid. but also what might happen to him selfe, and that to make peace was in his owne hands; but if he once came to battaile, the vi∣ctory should be only in the hands of God. And lastly that. Nus∣quam minus quam in bello euentus respondent. The euents of thinges doe no where lesse answere the expectation of men then in warre. 2. Thus said Hanibal,Idem. who may also wel serue for an example of his owne admonitions; For though he had bene many yeares togeather the terrour and scourge of the Romans, and the most famous and renouned captaine then liuing, yea and was, as it were growne old with victories in forreine cuntries,The ouerthrovv of Hannibal by a Romaine. Ibid. euen be∣fore the very gates of Rome; yet he was at length vtterly ouer∣throwne at home by a Roman, a young man interiour to him in reputation, experience, and forces; and in that battaille which most imported him, and wherin by the iudgement of al men, he emploied al the endeuor, military art, and skil he had, or which could be required in a most prudent and valiant captaine. 3. This change and decay of fortune in warre,The chance and decay of fortune in vvarre exem∣plified in many famous cap∣taines. Machab. li 1. ca 5 Iust. in li. 1 Plu∣tarc. may be exem∣plified in many others, as famous captaines as euer were, as in the worthy Iudas Machabeus, Cyrus King of Persia; Pirrus King of E∣pyrus, Marcellus, Pompeius Magnus, Marcus Antonius competitor of Augustus Caesar, the Emperour Constantius, and Heraclius, Belisarius, Edward the 3. King of England, our famous coūtry man. Iohn Talbot the first Earle of Shrewsbury, whose name is yet terrible to the French; the great Earle of VVarwick in the time of Edward the 4. and Charles Duke of Burgundy, Nicolo Piccinino. Levvis the 12.Polidor. Virg. Phil. Comin. Guicciard Pero Mexia Suriu. King of France. And now lastly in our memory the Emperour Charles the 5. al which (with many others who for breuities sake I omit) hauing by many notable victories got the fame and renoune of most famous captaines, either were at last disgratiously killed, or else receiued some greate ouerthrowes, or had at least some notorious decay of their wonted prosperous successe. 4.The doubtful ∣uent of a battll is greatly to be feared. The consideration hereof hath moued diuers most valiant captaines to auoid the aduenture of battailes as much as might be, and rather to seeke to ouercome their enemies by strata∣gems, practices, & delayes as Q. Fabius Maximus who by such mea∣nes distressed Hanibal much more then others could doe by mayne battailes: and therfore Enninus the poet said of him; Cun∣ctando
restituit rem; He repaired the state of the Romans by delayes. And it is also written of the valliant Franciscus Sforza Duke of Mi∣lane,Elus apud Ci∣cet offic. l. 1. Silua de vatia le∣ction. c. 1. part. 2. that he would neuer ioyne battaile with an enemy but whē he could not otherwise choose. 5. And Lewis the 11. King of France (who was no lesse valerous in warre then prudent in peace) feared nothing more, as Philip de Comines testifieth,Philip commi ca. 17.26. ct. 125. then the hazarde of warre, and specially of a battel, which by al meanes possible he sought to auoide: inso much, that when any enemy entred into France, he procured to make peace or truse with him, what soeuer it cost him: as ap∣peared when Edward the 4. King of England was there, with a strong army,Phil. Comin ca. 29. ct. 64. to whom he gaue a great some of ready money, & graunted to pay him a try but of 50. thousand crownes a yeere, besides diuers pensions to his councellers, and other hard condi∣tions, rather then he would hazard a battaile with him, knowing the casualty therof, and that as Cominaeus saith: Vne battaille perdu á mauuaise queúè.A battail lost hath an yl taile; and vvhy. Comin ibid. A battaylle lost hath an il tayle, or consequence. For it re∣doubleth the hope and courage of the victors, it astonisheth, and discourageth the vanquished, it shaketh the fidelity of sub∣iects, it ministreth matter & oportunity of conspiracy to malcon∣tents, of reuolt to townes, & of alienation to confederats, who commonly sway with the good successe. And for this cause, not only king Lewis the 11. but also other wise Princes haue vsed, when an enemy hath bin ready to enter into their countryes,Idem. ca. 64. The practise of Lvvis the 11. K. of France, to ouercomme an enemy vvith out battail. to dismantle al the townes in his way, that were not tenable, and to fortify the rest, retiring thither al the cattle and prouision of the country, and destroying al the corne upon the grownd therby to consume him by famine, longe seiges, and al kinde of delayes, rather then to seeke to ouerthrowe him by a mayne battaille. This was prudently practised by Francis the first King of France, at such time as the Emperour Charles determined to enter into Pro∣uence with a great army,Martin du Bellay. The preuenti∣ons vvhich Francis the first K. of France v∣sed against the inuasion of Charles the Em∣pero. in so much that when King Francis vn∣derstood that the people of the country resisted the destructions of their corne, and other commodityes, he sent his army to de∣stroy it, where by the Emperour finding al townes fortifyed, and no prouision abroad, was forced after he had beseiged Marcella some moneths, to retyre himselfe for lacke of victualles. And this I haue thought good to signify by the way, for that Philip de Co∣mines
and Martin du Bellay (both of them notable historiagra∣phers and councellours, the first, to Lewis the 11. and the other to Francis the first) doe greatly approue this maner of proceeding in these Princes, and propose it for a rule of state to al such Kinges and Princes, as being in possession of their kingedomes & states, are inuaded by forreyners, though for those that inuade & seeke to conquere,Phil. de Comin ca. 29. The inuader ought to seek bat¦tail; and vvhy. Philip de Comines thinketh it conuenient to seeke battaile, to make short worke, by reason of the difficulty to be succoured, and of the infinit dangers and inconueniencyes that happen by delayes to an army of strangers in a forreyne country. Besides that he which inuadeth, and seeketh to conquere, com∣monly aduentureth no more but his present army, and that in hope to get a crowne; wheras the Prince in possession, aduentu∣reth his whole state against nothing, and a state is lost many ty∣mes, with the losse of a battaile at home, if the victory be wel followed. 6.The diuers cas∣ualtyes of vvarlike at∣tempts. But to retourne to speake of chances and to touch some particularityes, thereby to shew euidently the weaknes of mans wit and power, and the casualty of warlike attempts, let vs con∣sider by how many accidents the mightiest armyes are many ty∣mes dispersed and dissipated, and the greatest enterprises ouer∣throwne: as somtymes by the death of some one man; somtymes by the dissention of Leaders and Captaynes, or by the mutiny of soldiers; somtymes by tempest or vnseasonable weather; som∣tymes againe by plagues or diseases in the Campe; otherwhiles by sudden feares that fal vpon the soldiers without cause;Guicciard. ii. . and somtymes (as Guicciardine noteth) by a commandement either not wel vnderstood, or il executed; by a litle temerity or disor∣der, by some vaine worde or speach of the meanest soldier; and lastly (saith he) by infynit chances which happen at vnawares, vnpossible to be foreseene and preuented by the wit or coun∣cel of any Captaine,Phil. Comines c. 5. 7. Hereto I also adde out of Cominaeus,Plots ar seeldom or neuer execu∣ted in the field as they ar ordey∣ned in the cham∣ber. that be the councel neuer so wel taken and the plot neuer so wel layed, it is seldome or ne¦uer executed in the feeld, as it is ordained in the chamber: and that some tymes by the least motions or occasions that may be, the victory is wonne or lost; which (saith he) is a great mistery, wherby kingdomes and states rise or fal;Idem Ibid. & hereupon the same author
groundeth two conclusions no lesse piously then wisely, the one that no humane wit is able of it selfe, sufficiently to gouerne an army of men; and the other that God reserueth to him selfe the successe of battailes, and disposeth of the victory at his pleasure. 8. This wil be made cleare by examples, by the which I wil shew first the force of sudden chances in battailes, and other en∣terprises of warr; and after, that al victory proceedeth from the prouidence and hand of God, and not from the policy and po∣wer of men. As concerning the first, we see many times that great designments are broken,The force of sud∣dyne chances in battailes, and vvarre. and potent armyes dissolued by accidents, with out any force or stroke of enemy. When Lewis the Emperour, (called Lewis of Bauier) was in Italy with a great army and ready to beseige Florence, vpon the confidence he had in the valloure and assistance of Castruccio of Pisa,Peto Maxia. in Ldoni Baaro. whome the Flo∣rentines feared more then any man liuing, it chanced that the said Castruccio dyed, wherupon the Emperour broke his desygn∣ment, and returned into Germany with his armie. 9. Also in the tyme of the great schisme betwixt Vrbanus the 6. Pope of that name, and Clement the false Pope, who was called Clement the 7.Paul. AEmil. in Catolo. 6. and liued in Auignion. Lewis Duke of Anio vncle to Charles the 6. kinge of France, went into Italy with a huge army, wherin he had aboue 30. thousand horse, partly to deliuer Iane Queene of Naples (who was beseiged by Charles Durazzo ne∣phew to Lewis King of Hungary) and partly to depose Pope Vrbanus in fauor of Clement, and when he had already entred Italy, and be∣gan to make warr in the terrytorie of Bolonia (which belonged to the Church) and was likely in al mens opinions (by reason of his great forces) to obtaine his desyre in al he pretended, he sud∣denly fel sick and dyed, wherupon al that great army dissolued it selfe,Levvis duke of Aniou his death  Italy. Paul. AEmilius in Lodouico. 9. and euery man returned from whence he came. 10. The like hath chanced diuers tymes by some great plague and mortallity in armyes, as in that of the Christians which be∣seiged Tunes in Africk, vnder the conduct of Lewis the 9. called now S. Lewis, (as I haue declared cap. 12. before vpon another oc∣casion) which army was so molested with pestilence, that it was forced to rise from the seige at such tyme, as the towne was brought to extremity, & must needes haue rendred it selfe with in a few dayes. And to omit al other more ancient examples of
this kind, the Queene of Englands army sent to Portugal in the yeere 1589. in fauor of Don Antonio,Portugal viog an. Dom. 1529 receauing no losse to speake of by the enemy, was so consumed with a strange sicknes, that of 18. thousand which went therin, there returned not men enough to bring home the ships, wherof some were left behinde for lack of marryners. 11.Paul. AEmilius in Phillipo. 2. In like manner a potent army of Christian Princes going to beseige Hierusalem, and hauing already taken Ptolomais was dissolued by the dissention of Phillip the second King of France. and Richard the first king of England. For wheras the first preten∣ding cause of retourne departed vpon a sudden,A great army of Christians in the holy land dis∣solued by the dissention of the kings of Englād and France. the other fearing that he meant to inuade England in his absence, could not be per∣swaded to stay longe after him, wherupon followed the surcease of the enterprise, & the dissolution & retourne of the whole army. 12 Furthermore such is the force of suddaine feares which fal vpon men somtymes by meere chance with out any iust cau∣se, that the greatest armyes are vtterly ouerthrowne therby.Of the force of suddain feare in battails. And no maruaile, seeing no man is so valiant, but that he may be sea∣zed and transported with a sudden feare. And therfore the Lace∣demonians before they went to fight, were wont to sacrifice to the Muse,Plutarck. in tra de Ira reprimen∣da. sto obtaine their assistance against the furious assalts of sudden passions; which taking Reason many tymes at vnawares, and as it were at an aduantage, doe so oppresse it, that they be∣reaue a man of al iudgment and discourse for a tyme,No passion be∣reaueth a man of his senses more then suddaine feare. and no pas∣sion more then feare; wherof I saw my selfe a notable experience in a most valiant spanish Captaine in France, in the tyme of the league, who going out of his garison with certaine troupes vpon an occasion, and meeting by chance with the enemy where he least suspected, tooke such a fright that he ran home with might and mayne, and tould vs (for I was there the same tyme) that al the soldiers were cut in peices, & that he him selfe escaped very hardly, neuertheles with in 5. or 6. howers after, they al retour∣ned home safe, and not so much as one man hurt, though they came scattered one after another, for they al fled as wel as he, and the rather by his example, which would haue vtterly disgra∣ced him, if in very many occasions before he had not got the re∣putation of one of the most valiant men of his nation, in which respect, it was rather wondered at in him, then blamed.
Rome surprised by Arnulphus the mperour through a sud∣dayn feare. Sionius de Reg∣no Italico an. 896.13. But to hew the like effect of suddaine feares in whole ar∣myes vpon diuers accidents; When Arnulfus the Emperour besei∣ged Rome, it chanced that a hare being start by some of the camp ran towards the citty, and that a great number of the soldiers pursued her with great noise & cryes, which the Romans seeing from the towne, and conceauing that the enemyes ment to giue some furious assalt therto, were surprised with such a feare, that they abandoned the walles and rampaires, and the enemy taking the opportunity skaled the walles and tooke the towne. A battayl l st by the Christians to the Turks through a sud∣deyn feare. Nauelerus. Chron. an. 1396.14. Also when Sigismond king of Hungary who was after Em∣perour, gaue battaile vnto an army of the Turkes neere to Nico∣polis, and was assisted with great numbers of Frenchmen, and of diuers other nations, the french horsemen being in the vangard and seeing themselues after a while hardly prest, alighted from their horses to fight on foote; their horses being loose, ran al back toward the camp, which he Hungarians and others that were in the reereward seeing, & imagining that the horsemen were al killed, tooke such a fright therwith that they ran a way, wherby the Turke got a notable victory with great slaugh∣ter of the Christians, especially of the French who were almost al slaine. The Christians ouerthrovvn by the Soldan through a sud∣deyn feare. Paul AEmilius in Philipo 2. Nauelerus in Chron.15. Also at Ptolomais in Egipt which the Christians beseiged two yeeres togeather, the Soldan who came with a great army to suc∣cour it, gaue them an ouerthrow by the like chance, of a horse which being let loose ran back to the camp, for wheras diuers of the soldiers called one to an other to stay him, many ran out of their rankes to take him with such disorder, that they seemed to those that were behind and somewhat farre of, to run a way; wherupon a great part of the Christian army began to fly; and this hapned at such tyme as the Soldan with his soldiers being put to the worse were running out of the feild, who neuerthelesse seeing the Christians fly, called backe his men, charged them a fresh, and got the victory. Phil. Comin. ca. 85. Charles duke of Burgundy ouer∣throvvn by the Svvitzrs at Granson.16. Charles duke of Burgundy beseiging Granson, and vnderstan∣dinge that the Switzers came to succour it, went to meete them to giue them battaile; The soldiers of the vangard, as they were marching, meaning to take a better way, retyred a litle back: the reereward seeing the same, imagined that they fled, and began
themselues to flee, wherupon the rest also did the like, and in conclusion the Duke & al ranne a way, abandoning their artillery & camp to the spoyle of the Switzers, who were exceedingly en∣riched therby and yet killed but only 7. men, for al the rest saued themselues by flight. Thus much concerning sudden feares, wherto I wil adde a few more examples of other accidents. 17.Examples of bat∣tayls lst by dy∣uers other acci∣dents Osotius. li. 7. ca. 36. Gildo gouernour of Africk vnder the Emperours Arcadius and Honorius rebelled against the empire; And his owne brother Maszil was employed against him for General, who had not in a certaine occasion a boue 5000. men, to fight with 70000. And the armyes being so neere togeather that they were ready to charge one another,Gildo gouernour of Afri ouer∣throvvn by a strange accident. Mascezil beganne to make motions of peace and receauing some hard & crosse language of one that bore an Ensygne, stroke him vpon the same arme that held it, wherwith the Enseigne fel, & diuers others that followed seeing the same, and conceiuing that he which bore it had yeelded it, came in great hast and yeelded themselues, wherupon Gildo fled away with a great parte of the army and the rest rendred it selfe. 18.Guiccia. li. 5. The French ouer∣throvvne by the Spaniards, through a vvord mistaken. Also in the battaile of Cirignola in the kingdome of Naples betwixt the Spaniards & the Frenchmen, aword of the Count de Nemours who was General of the French being misconstrued by his soldiers, was a great cause of their ouerthrow; for the battaile being already begon, and the Count finding that he could not passe a certaine dich (ouer the which he had thought to aue led some part of his army to charge the Spaniards on the other side) cryed vnto the soldiers that followed him, back, back, meaning to lead them another way, but they not knowing the cause, vnder∣stood that he had bid them fly, which they al began to doe, and others seeing the same followed the example: & it chanced also at the same tyme that the Count was slayne; wherupon the whole army of the French ranne away, and left the feild and victory to the Spaniards. 19. Againe who soeuer hath read any thing of the ancient warres, or hath any experience of these of our tymes, cannot be ignorant what confusion may be bred in a battaile by a little dis∣order growing vpon some suddaine accident,Battayles lost by a litle disorder. Liui. dec. 3. li. 10 wherby armyes many tymes are causes of their owne ouerthrowe: as it chanced to Hanibal in his last battaile with Scipio, wherin his owne Ele∣phants
turning back vpon his horsemen, so brake and disorde∣red them, that the Romans taking the aduantage therof easily put them to flight, The battail of Fury in France, in the yere 1590.20. The like to this hath happened sometymes in this our age, & namely a few yeeres past in France, in the yeere of our lord 1590. in the battaile of Yury, betwixt the King of France that now is, and the Duke de Mayne then general for the league, in which battaile the horsemen of the league flying back vpon their owne footemen, brake them in such sort, that the enemy entring with al, easily defeated them. The victory in battails depen∣deth ometymes vpon vvynd and vvether, as vvel by land as by sea21. Lastly to shew euidently the force of chance in warr; is there any thing more vncertaine or inconstant then winde and weather? and yet neuertheles therupon dependeth many tymes the successe of battailes and other warlike attempts, especially by sea, where the wind and weather doe predominate, and doe check al the power of men. For who is ignorāt that be the Nauy neuer so potent, it can neither goe out of the harbour, nor arriue where it should, to encounter the enemy, if wind and weather be not fauourable? Which also is as necessary and important for the obtaning of uictory in a conflict by sea, wherin the first ad∣uantage that the expert sea man seeketh to get of his enemy, is to winne the wind of him: which wind changing also somety∣mes during the conflict, doth giue both the aduantage & victory to the enemy.The battail of Leāto betvvixt the Christians and the Turs. As it fel out in the battaile of Lepanto betwene the Christians and the Turcks, wherin the wind being first fauoura∣ble to the Turcks, changed suddenly and droue al the smoke of the artillery and smal shot vpon them, wherby they were so blin∣ded,Surius in com∣mentar. 1571. that they were easely and speedily ouerthrowne: wherof I shal haue more occasion to speake more particulerly cap. 15. number 28. hereafter. 22. And this chanceth in like manner in battailes vpon land; & therfore wise captaines seeke not only to haue the sunne, but also the wind on their backs; for it often falleth out, that a stor∣me of haile or raine in the face of an army, or a violent wind dri∣uing either the dust or the smoke of shot & artillery vpon it,The great victo∣ry f Hannibal at Cannae. gi∣ueth the victory to the enemy. As in the famous battaile at Canae when Hannibal ouerthrew the Romans, and slew 4000. foote and 2700.iu. dec 3 li. 2. horse, and tooke 3300. prisoners, he had the wind in his fa∣uor,
which being in his back, & with al so violent, that it droue the dust into the eyes of the Romans, did greatly facillitate his victory. 23.The victory of Scipio Assati∣ticus against Antiochus Liui. dec. 4. li. . The like or rather a far greater victory got Scipio Asiaticus against Antiochus King of Syria, whom he put to flight and slew 5000. footemen and 4000. horse with the losse only of 349. men, by the help of a foggy mist, and a shewer of rayne; for the mist was so thick that the huge army of Antiochus could not one part of it see another, wheras it wrought no such effect in the smal ar∣my of the Romans; and againe the rayne so weakned the bowes and slinges of the soldiers of Antiochus, that they serued to litle purpose, wheras the Romans vsing onl swords and dartes re∣ceiued no dammage therby. And to come nearer our tyme,Pero Mesia. in vitis Impet. in Adlto. Guiccia. li. . we read that Adulfus the Emperour was slayn, and ys whole army ouerthrowne by Albertus, by reason that the sunne was in their faces. 24. Also amongst some other causes of the losse of the great battaile of Ghiaradadda betwixt the Venetians and the French; Guicciardin obserueth,The battail of Chiaradadda lst by the Venetians through a shoure of rayne. that a shewer of rayne which fel as they were fighting, made the ground so slipery vpon a suddayne, that the footemen of the Venetians could not hold their footing, to defend themselues against the french horse, by which meanes they were easely broken and the greatest parte of them slayne. 25, This then we see how great a sway chance beareth in bat∣tailes and enterprises of warre,Hovv little con∣fidence is to be had in the poli∣cy or povver of man for the good successe of a bat∣tail. and consequently how litle con∣fidence is to be reposed in the wit, policy, power, or endeauor of men for the good successe therof, which depēdeth vpon infi∣nite accidents, chancing so diuersly (according to the difference of persons, tymes, places, and circumstances) that nether the wisdome of any General can foresee them, nor any diligence, dexterity, or industry of soldiers preuent them, though al should concurre in the highest degree: for be the soldiers neuer so obe∣dient, dexterous, and diligent, and the captaine neuer so wise & valiant; yet what assurance is there of good successe when a sud∣den danger shal so dismay both Captaine and soldiers, that ne∣ther the one shal know what to command, nor the other how to obey, when an erronious conceit of some few, or the bad exam∣ple of some one, or a word mistaken, or a blast of wynd, or a
shewer of rayne, & innumerable other accydents, not possible to before seene or remedyed, shal giue the victory to the weaker, yea to those that are in a manner vanquished. The successe of battails depen∣deth vvholy on the vvil and se∣cret iudgements of God.26. But now to demonstrate not only that al humane policy, power, & force is vaine, but also that God disposeth of the suc∣cesse of battailes and warlike attempts, according to his holy wil and secret iudgments: it is to be considered that as the wor∣thy Iudas Machabaeus said, Non in multitudine exercitus victoria belli sed de caelo fortitudo est.Machab. li. 1. c. 3. The victory in warre doth not consist in the multitude, or greatnes of the army, but al fortitude and strength is from heauen; And to the end that the same may apeare to be true;Examples of a great number ouerthrovvne by a fevv Iustin. li. 2. I wil first shew by diuers examples, that a handful of men, many tymes ouerthrow many thousands, and after I wil make it manifest, that the same doth proceed for the hand and prouidence of God. Mighty armies of Darius and Xerxes ouer∣throvvn by a fevv.27. Milciades the Athenian, hauing but eleuen thousand sol∣diers, ouerthrew Darius king of Persia, who had 600. thousand: as also not long after Themistocles with a smal number ouercame 700. thousand foote, and 300. thousand horse, brought into Greece by Xerxes kinge of Persia, who escaped by flight in a litle fisher bote, wheras not long before the earthe and sea was scarse able to hould him. Idem Ibid. The battail bet∣vixt Alexander and Darius.28. Alexander the great with lesse then 40000. ouercame Darius who had 600. thousand, of whome he killed two and twenty thousand, and lost but nine footemen, and a hundred and 20. horse: and in his second battaile he killed threscore and one thousand foote, and ten thousand horse, and tooke 40000. prisoners, with the losse of an hundreth and 30. foote and 150. horse. Plutarck. in the life of Paulus AEmilus. Belsatius. Clauius. Procopt. l 2. de bella vandil. Iohan. Vassae in ebton. an. 588. Lue. Tuens. Sanctus sidor.29. Paulus AEmilius a Roman, in his second consulate, being farr inferiour in number of soldiers to Persaeus king of Macedonia, too∣ke him prisoner, and slew 25. thousand of his men with the losse of 80. Romans. Bellisarius with 5000. ouercame 50000. Vandals. Claud us a captaine of Recaredus king of Spaine, with 300. soldiers slew and put to flight threscore thousand that came into the confynes of Spaine to the succour of the Arrians conducted by Bsea or Baso a subiect of Guntran king of Orleance. Abderama the Moore entring France with 450000.Arrians ouer∣trovvn by Losa. Saracens was defeated by Charles Martelle who with the losse of 1500. men, slew Abderama &
the greatest parte of his nobility, and 3. hundreth 70. and fiue thousand Saracens. 30.Iohn Froysart in Chron. The Count of Flanders ouer∣throvvne by the inhabitants of Gant. The people of Gaunt rebelling against the Count of Flanders their Soueraigne, & being so blocked on al sides that they were like to perrish with famine, issued desperatly out of the towne with 5000. onl, and gaue battaile to the Count though he had 40000. men, whom they put to flight and pursued euen into the towne of Bruges, whence he escaped very hardly in the night disguised,VValter of Ple∣temburg, ouer∣threvve the Muscouits. wherupon almost al the townes of Flanders yealded to them. 31. VValter of Pletemburg great Maister of the Knights of Prussia, with a smal number in respect of his enemy slew 100000. Musco∣uits and lost but only one man. And a few yeeres after,Tilman. Bredem bach. de bello Liuoni. Idem. Ibid. the Litua∣nians hauing not boue 30. thousand, slew 90. thousand Muscouits with the losse of 20. men. 32. And here further it is to be noted,VVhen man is most confident of his ovvne po∣vver, he hath Commonly the vvorst successe. Iustin li. 34. The Corinthians subdued by the Romans. that when man is most insolent, and confident of his owne power, and most contem∣neth his enemye, then many tymes he hath the worst successe, wherof I wil also alleadge a few examples. The people of the country of Achaya (wherof Corinth was the cheife city) being very confydent of their owne power, abused certaine Embassa∣dours of the Romans, who in reuenge therof sent an army to make warre vpon them; This army semed to them so litle in res∣pect of theirs, that they made sure account of victory; and ther∣fore when they went to battaile they tooke with them waynes and cartes to bringe home the spoyles of the Roman army, and placed al their parents, wiues, & children where they might see the conflict, but they were al ouercome, their wiues and chil∣dren made prisoners, the towne of Corinth taken, and al the peo∣ple therof sold for slaues. 33.Plut. in ecullo. Tigranes the King of Armenia being assisted with diuers o∣ther Kings his confederats,Tigranes King of Armenia o∣uerthrovvne by the Romans. had an army of aboue two hundreth and twenty thousand armed men, wherof 50000. were horse, to fight with Lucullus the Roman, who had not aboue 12. or 13. thou∣sand horse, and foote, in which respect he was so contemned by his enemyes that not only euery one of the Kings, but also al∣most euery particuler Coronel desired of Tigranes that he with his troupes might haue the honour to fight with him alone; and
Tigranes him selfe iested at him, saying, that if he came as Embas∣sadour he had many men, but if he came to fight, he had very few. In conclusion they fought, and Lucullus had the victory, and killed of the enemy a hundreth thousand foote, and almost al his horsemen, and (which was most admirable) he lost but 5. men in al, and aboute 10. others were hurt. Basilius great D k of Musco∣u, ouerthro∣vn by the Po∣lonians. Cromer. in orat. funci. in oltu Sgismundi.34. Basilius the great Duke of Muscouy being to giue battaille to the Polonians trusted so much to his owne strength (hauing an army of 80. thousand men) that when he might haue taken them at an aduantage as they passed a riuer, he would not, but bragged that he would let them passe ouer, to the end that after∣wards he might driue them al before him like beasts into Musco∣uia: neuertheles it so fel out that the Polonians got the victory, and slew 40. thousand Muscouits, and tooke 5000. prisoners; so dangerous a thing it is for any man to contemne his enemy vpon confidence of his owne strength.Dangerous to contemne an enemy. Plidor Virg. hit. l. 19. 1556 35. But what neede I alleadge forreine examples seeing we haue at home some most notable in this kinde. Iohn Kinge of France at the famous battaile of Poictiers,Ihon King of rance taen in the battail of y reby Ed∣vvard the black prince. betwixt him and Edvvard the black Prince sonne to Kinge Edvvard the. 3. had 60, thousand men, and the Prince had not aboue 8000. which made Kinge Iohn so confident, that being earnestly solicited by the Popes Legate to accept such reasonable conditions of composition as the Prince offered him, (which were to restore vnto him, al the pri∣soners, castells, and townes that he had taken of his before in that warre, and further to bind him selfe by oath not to beare armes against him for some yeeres) he would admit no other condition, but that the Prince should yeeld him selfe prisoner, and al his army to his mercy; wherupon the Prince gaue him battaile, & tooke him & his sonne Phillip prisoners, with a thou∣sand seuen hundreth others of the nobility, slew 6000. soldiers, had the spoyle of his camp, and carried away aboue 100. ense∣ignes. 36. And afterwards at the battaille of Agincourt, in France betweene Henry the 5.The battail of Aginurt be∣tvvixt the En∣gh & Frch. King of England, and the Dukes of Orleance and Barbon in the time of Charles the 6. King of France; the French so farre exceeded the English in number of horse and foote, and made such sure account of the victory, that being ready to ioyne
battaile,Polid. li. is. 2. an 14. 19. they sent a messenger to King Henry to know what he would giue for his ransome, yea and prepared a triumphant cha∣riot to carry him away prisoner when they should take him; but God so disposed, that he tooke the two Dukes prisoners, & slew almost 20000. of their men, and lost not aboue fiue or six hun∣dred of his, or, as some write, not a hundreth. 37. I omit many other examples, which might be alledged; And now to shew whence al these admirable victories proceed, I wil conclude with that which almighty God said vnto the children of Israel when he gaue them the law,God is the giues of victories. Leuitit. 26. promising them that if they serued him, Persequemini, saith he, mimicos Vestros &c. you shal pursue your enemyes, and they shal fall before you, fyue of yours shal geue chase to a hundreth strangers, and a hundreth of you, to ten thou∣sand; Thus said almighty God, and to the same purpose also Moy∣ses, prophecing of the greate ouerthrowes which the enemies of the children of Israel should geue them, by the iust iudgements of God for their wickednes, demanded, how it should come to passe, that one shuld ouercome a thousand, & two,Deuicr. 32. ten thousand whereto he also answered Quia Deus suus vendidit eos. Because their God hath sold them, and geuen them ouer to their enemies.VVhy God ouer∣throvveth many times th stron∣ger by the vvea∣ker. And the like must needs be confessed in al such cases, such being the stile of almighty God, (when he meaneth to punish men for sinne) to confound the strong by the weake, as wel to beat doune the pride of the potent and mightie, who confide in their owne strength, as also to shew his owne power & glory in those thinges,God the Lord of hosts & armies. Isai 37. Ierem. 9. Ezechiel. 30. wherin man is most powerful and glorious, to wit in matters of warre, armies, battailes; and therfore our Lord is commonly called in the Scriptures Dominus exercituum. The Lord of host and armies. 38. And although it seemeth most commonly that the victory in warre proceedeth either of the valour, or power of him that ouercommeth, or of the error, cowardyze,Hovv God ge∣ueth victorie by secondarie causes or weaknes of the vanquished, or else otherwhiles of chance; yet it is not therfore to be denied to proceede from the prouidence of God, who dispo∣sing al thinges sweetly worketh his wil by secondary causes, (as I haue declared before) for some times hee giueth valour and courrage, some times he taketh it away, other whiles he doth dissipate and frustrat prudent councels, and policies, and other whiles againe he bereaueth men of their iudgments, to the end
they may erre, (when their sinnes deserue it or his secret iudge∣ments require it) some times he worketh by such secret & hid∣den causes, that the victory seemeth to men to be got by chance, though to his deuine prouidence and wisdome nothing is acci∣dental. Eccle. 46. et 47. Indic. 4.5.6.13.14.15. Psal 143.2. Machab. 10. Psal. 17. et. 141.39. To Iosue, Debora, Gedeon, Sampson, Dauid, and Iudas Machabe∣us he gaue extraordinary courrage, and valour; yea and as Dauid saith of him selfe. He taught their hands to fight, and made their armes like bowes of brasse. Wherby they got most notable victories, me∣morable to al posterity; He daunted the courrage of Zara the Aethiopian,2. paralip. ca. 16. and of his million of men; wherby they al fled, and were most of them slaine, of whome the scripture saith. Exterruit Dominus Aethiopes coram Asa, et Iuda, fugeruntque et ruerunt vsque ad in∣ternecionem; Our Lord cast a feare vpon the Ethiopians before the face of King Asa, and Iuda, and they fled and fel with great slaughter; He in fa∣tuated the crafty and politik councel of Achitophel wherby Dauid was deliured from his sonne Absalon;2. Reg. 17. He permtted the spirit of errour to deceaue the prophets of King Achab that he might runne vpon his owne ruine:3. Reg. c. 22. Dedit Dominus (saith the prophet Mi∣cheas to Achab) Spiritum mendacij in ore omnium phrophetarum tuorum, Our Lord hath giuen the spirit of lies in to the mouth of al thy prophets. La∣stly though his deuine maiestie determined, that the said King Achab should be killed by the Syrians (in that battaile wherto his false prophets encouraged him) neuertheles he ordained,God geueth vi∣ctories by casual meanes. that the same should be executed by casual meanes, for so the scrip∣ture saith, as I haue signified before in the 12. chapter. 40. Loe then how almighty God whose wisdome and po∣wer is infinit, whose councels are incomprehensible, and iudg∣mēts inscrutable doth not only vse meanes which seeme to men accidental & casual; but also serueth him selfe of the wits, wils, hartes, and handes of al men, yea of their very errours and euil wils, for the execution of his holy wil, to giue victory where and when it pleaseth him; to humiliate the hautie and proude, and to exalt the humble;Psal. 9.3. Reg. 20. Psal. 32. Vt sciant quia homines sunt. That they may knowe they are men. &. Quia deus est dominus, that God is their lord: And that Rex non saluatur per multam virtutem. The Kinge is not saued by his owne great power, nor the gyant by the greatnes of his strength; But that (as it followeth in the same place) Occuli domini super metuentes cum:Ibid. The
eyes of our Lord are vpon them which feare him and trust in his mercy. 41. And although it seemeth good to his deuine wisdome or∣dinarily to worke and execute his wil as wel in warre as in other affaires of men, by such a secret concurance with secondary cau∣ses, that his operation therin is not apparant to the eyes of men (therby to leaue place for the merit of faith, as he doth in like forte in al the course of his gouernment of the world, and his disposition of humane affaires:) yet somtimes for his owne gre∣ater glory and the greater confusion of his enemies, and to make it manifest vnto al men that the successe of mens actions depend vpon his wil;God geueth vi∣ctory many ti∣mes by miracu∣lous meanes. he giueth victories in such wonderful and mira∣culous maner, that the most incredulous and faithles man can not deny it to be his worke. 42. This may appeare by very many examples,Examples of mi∣raculous victo∣ries in the old testament. Exod. ca. 14. not only in the old testament but also in the histories of later times. Of some of the first kind I wil only make a breife mention, because they are notorious to al Christians. King Pharao and al his host pursu∣ing Moyses and the children of Israel, were drowned in the red sea: The army of the 5. Kinges of the Amorrheans was destroied with haile from heauen, yea & the sunne,Iosue. ca. 10. Iudic. c. 7. & moone stood stil a whole day while Iosue fought against them. Gedeon with 300. men who did but sound their trumpets, and beat their pots and flagons one against another, ouercame an innumerable multitude of the Ma∣dianits and Amalecits, who were so dismaied and confounded that they killed one an other. Sampson with the iawbone of an asse, slew a thousād Philistines.Iud. ca. 15.4. Reg. ca. 7. Benadad King of Syria beseiging the Israe∣lites, and hauing almoste famished them, tooke such a fright in the night, that he left the camp, & ranne away with his whole army. The angel of God killed in one night a hundred 4. score and 5. thousand in the campe of Sennacherib King of Assria. Iudith deliue∣red Bethulia from the seige of Holofernes,4. Reg. ca. 19. Iudith. ca. 13. who had a hundreth and forty thousand in his campe. And lastly to omit diuers others, 5. Angels appeared on horsbacke in the ayre,Machab. li. i. c. 10. defending Iudas Macha∣beus against Timotheus & castinge thunderbolts at him & his army, wherby they were put to flight, and aboue 20. thousand of them slaine. 43. But what? hath not almighty God also manifested his owne power and glory in like manner, since the time of our Sa∣uiour
Christ in al ages, euen vntil this wherin wee liue? I might alleadge an infinit number of most notable examples, out of the histories of al cuntries & times; but for breuities sake I wil only relate one or two of euery age,Examples of mi∣raculous victories in eue∣ry age since Christs time. for the instruction of such as cal in question the credit of the holy scriptures in the miraculous vi∣ctories afore said; or doe any way doubt of Gods prouidence in humane affaires, or else expect the good successe either of their policies, or of their powerful attempts, otherwise then at the hands of almighty God. FOR THE FVRTHER PROOFE THAT THE successe in vvarre dependeth vpon Gods vvil and prouidence, examples are alleaged of miraculous victories in euery age since our Sauiours time; vvith the conclusion of this point concer∣ninge Chances and vnexpected Euents. CHAP. 15. The miraculous destruction of Hierusalem by the Romans. Anno 72. Iosephus de bel∣lo Iudaico. li. 7. c 18.WHo soeuer considereth the predictions, and prophecies not only of the ancient Prophets, but also of our Sauiour him selfe, concerning the seige and destruction of Hierusalem, (which were fulfilled in the first age, 38. yeeres after our Sauiours passion) and weigheth with al the prodigious signes and tokens which were seene before the same, and the admirable effects that followed, (as that eleuen hundreth thousand Iewes perished, partly by their owne ciuil dissentions during the seige, and partly by the enemies sword) who soeuer (I say) considereth the same, he can not deny, but that God gaue them in to their enemies handes; which Titus ge∣neral of the Roman army acknowledged him selfe when he had taken the City, and seene the infinite numbers of dead bodies, and the extreame calamitie of those which were liuing.Philostratus. li. 6. And therfore he refused to be crowned, saying to them that asked him the cause, that he was not author of such a wonderful ex∣ploite, but that God being angry with the Iewes, had vsed him
as his instrument to execute his iustice vpon them. But because I shal haue occasion hereafter to speake more particulerly of this seige, and of the cause therof, & of Gods notable iustice shewed therein; it shal suffice only to haue made this mention therof in this place, to shew, that the victory of the Romans proceeded from the hand of God, and not from their owne power. 2. In the second age,A miraculous victory of the Emperour Mar∣cu Aureliu. Anno. 176. when Marcus Aurelius the Emperour made warre in Germany, against the Marcommani, Quadi, and di∣uers other barbarous nations to the number of 977. thousand, and was no lesse afflicted and al his army with thirst for lack of water, then oppressed with the multitude of enemies, he sought releefe from his false Gods, by the prophane sacrifices and pray∣ers of his Idolatours priests, & seeing no fruite therof, he com∣manded a Christian legion, which serued him in his armie to pray vnto their God for releefe and victory, vpon whose praiers God destroyed the army of the enemies with thunder, lightning, and fiery haile; And at the same time refreshed the Emperours army with such store of raine that it serued them to drinke & quench their thirsts, wherby the Emperour had a most notable victory which he acknowledged as obtained by the praiers of the Chri∣stian legion; and therfore did not only honour it euer after, with the title of Fulminatrix, (that is to say the Tuunderer) but also graunted to al Christians exemption from persecution, by pub∣like edict. And this appeareth by the letters of the Emperour him selfe to the Senat testifiing the same,Euseb. ecclesiast. hist. li. 5. ca. 5. orosi. li. 7. ca. 15. Iustin. et Tertul. Apolog. ca. 5. et ad Scapulum c. 4. wherof not only Euse∣bius, Orosius, and many other historiographers make mention, but also Iustin the philosopher and martyr, and Tertulian who in their apologies for the Christiās, obiect the same to the heathens their enemies, as a matter so manifest, that they could not deny it, be∣sides that there remaineth euen to this day, a monument,Baron. an. 176. and memory of it vpon the famous piller erected by Marcus Aurelius in Rome, and dedicated to his father in law the Emperour An∣tonius. 3. In the third age S. Mercury not longe before his martyrdome,Anno. 254. Meta∣phrastes. Surius in eius vita 20. decem The Persians o∣uerthrovvn mi∣raculously by S. Mercury. (being but a priuate soldier in the army of Decius the Emperour, and fighting against the Persians) had a sword giuen him by an Angel, and was encouraged by him to presse into the midst of  nemies battaile, which he did with such valour, that he slew
the King of Persia, wherby the whole army was discomfited; in recompence wherof the emperour Decius aduanced him greatly and gaue him very honorable chardge in his army, though with in a while after, vnderstanding that he was a Christian, he caused him to be most cruelly tormented and executed. 4. In the 4. age the famous Emperour, and honour of our cuntry Constantine the great,Anno. 312. as he was going from Britany to∣wards Italy with smal forces against Maxentius the Tirant, (who had a hundred & 70.Maxentius mi∣raculously ouer∣throvvne by Constantin the great. thousand foote men, & 18. thousand horse) saw in the ayre at midday a Crosse with this insciption, In hoc vince. Ouercome in this, and the next night after our Sauiour also appeared vnto him, (though he was yet a painim) and she∣wed him the same Crosse which he had seene in the ayre the day before commanding him to beare it in his standard, and assu∣ring him of victory. Wherupon Constantyne confering with cer∣taine Christians which were in his army, receaued of them in∣structions of the Christian faith & determined to be a Christian; in testimony wherof, he made that famous standard called the Labarum,Baron. 20. 312. wherin was contained the forme of the Crosse which he had seene in the ayre, wherby he did not only ouerthrow the tirant Maxentius, but also was most victorius euer after during his life, in so much that when soeuer any parte of his army was di∣stressed, it was presently releeued by transporting that standard thither. Euseb. li. 1. de vi∣ta. Constant. ca. 20.24.25.26.5. This apparition of the Crosse with the vision of our Saui∣our afterwards, and the miraculous victory of Constantine is testi∣fied many wayes; Eusebius bishop of Caesarea liuing at the same time wrote the history vpon the report of Constātine him selfe; who,Mephrasies 20. Octob. he saith, affirmed it to him with an oath; Also Artemius, who was then a soldier in Constantines army, obiected the appari∣tion of the Crosse afterwards to Iulian the Apostata, affirming that not only he,Euseb. hist. li. 9. ca. 8. et in vita Constant. c. 32. but also the whole army did see it, which he tould him, he might vnderstand to be true by many of his owne soldiers,otim. li. 3. who were there present, and saw it as wel as hee. Fur∣thermore Nazarius a pagan orator, in his panaegirical oration made in prayse of Constantine, in the presence of him and of the whole Senat of Rome, attributed his victory against Maxentius to the miraculous assistance of God, declaring amongst other
thinges as a matter notorious amongst the Gaules, (who are now Frenchmen) that there was seene in diuers partes whole armies of certaine celestial men, which passed through the country towards Italy, publishing and proclaiming by the way,Baron. anno. 312. that they went to assist Constantine. Lastly the Senat it selfe ere∣cting a thriumphant Arke in the honor of Constantine, and in me∣mory of his victory, did signify that he obtained the same instin∣ctu diuinitatis, by the instinct or help of God, as appeareth yet to this day in the inscriptions vpon the said Arke. 6.Anno. 338. Sapores K. of Persia driuen from isibis vvith gnats. Hieron. in croni. Theodor. & hist. li. 2. ca. 30. Anon. 63. Socrat hist. li. 3. c. 17. In the same age Sapores Kinge of Persia by the prayers of the holy Bishop of Nisibis called Iames, was driuen from the seige therof with gnats and flees. As also the Emperour Iulian the wic∣ked Apostata fighting against the Persians was slaine with a lance or speare, no man knewe by whom; in so much that Calistes one of his owne guarde, writing afterwards the story of that warre in verse, saith that he was kild by a Daemon, that is to say a spirit: and he him selfe acknowledged it to proceede from the hand of God for his malice to our Sauiour Christ, casting his owne blood with great fury in to the ayre saying; vicisti Galilee:Theodoret. l. 3. c. 20. O Galilean (meaning our Sauiour) thou hast ouercome mee; 7. Also in the same age the Emperour Theodosius the elder sur∣named the great, ouercame Eugenius the tirant:Anno 94. Ang. de c uit. dei li 5 ca 26. The miraculous victory of the Emperour Theo∣dosius aainst Eugenius. Potius orando saith S. Augustin, quam pgnando, rather by praier then by fightinge. For after he had by long and feruent praier recomended his cause to almighty God, it pleased his deuine maiestie miraculously to as∣sist him with a great storme of winde and tempest, which did not only cast back his enemies dartes and arrowes against them selues (wher with great numbers of them were slaine) but also wrested their weapons out of their ands, and so dismaied them that they were defeated with al facility, which,August. Ibid. as S. Augustine testifieth, one of the soldiers who fought vnder Eugenius and es∣caped from the battaile) reported to him. Besides that Claudianus a pagan poet who wrote at the sane time, acknowledged the mi∣racle writing of Theodosius in these wordes. O nimium dilecte Deo,Claudianus Pa∣niger ad Honor. in eius 30. consul. cui militat ther Et conurati veniant ad classica venti. that is to say; O dearly beloued of God for whom the very ayre fighteth and the windes come coniured at the sound of the trompet.
Aug li. 5. de ciuit. de ca. 23.8. In the 5. age S. Augustine who then also was liuing, re∣counteth for a miracle & the special worke of God (as no dout it was) that Rhadagaisus King of the Goths comming before Rome with a huge army of aboue 200.Anno. 406. Orosius. thousand men, was with out the losse or wound of any one Roman, vtterly discumfited, and him selfe with his children,Anno. 425. Theodoretus hist. li. 5. ca. 36. Socrat. li. 7. ca. 42. Ncepho. li. 14. cap. 4. taken and slaine. And in the same age almighty God miraculously destroyed Roylas a Scythian and his puissant army with thunderbolts, and fier from heauen, when he approached to Constantinople, which he ment to haue beseiged in the time of Theodosius the younger. 9. But most wonderful, and miraculous was the ouerthrow of the Saracens in the same age as they were comming to suc∣cour Nisibis,Anno Domini. 420. Socrat. lib. 7. ca. 18. beseeged by an army of Theodosius the younger. For almighty God strooke in to them such a terrout and feare of the Christian army,A miraculous ouerthrovv of the Saracens by an army of Theodosius. with an imagination that they were inclosed and assayled by the same on euery side, that a hundreth thou∣sand of them cast them selues armed in to the riuer Euphrates, wherin they perished with out stroke of enemy: the which was vnderstood to haue bene performed by the help and ministery of Angels, who a litle before appeared to diuers in Bythinia as they were going to Constantinople, and bad them signify vnto the Constanstinopolitans, (which at that time were in great feare of that huge army of the Saracens, that they should haue the victory, to which purpose they said they were sent by al∣mighty God to giue them assistance. 10. What should I speake of Clodoueus King of France, who being yet a Painim,Clodeueus the first Christian King of France. Anno. 499. Paul AEmilius in Clodoueo. in the same age gaue a notable ouer∣throwe to the Almaines by Gods assistance, which he obtained by a vow that he made to be baptised if he got the victory; which vow he presently after performed, and with al planted the Chri∣stian faith amongst the French. I forbeare (I say) to recount the perticulers therof and of other miraculous victories in that age, seeing we haue in our owne country a most notable example of a victory obtained by the Britons, who being assailed by a great number of Pictes,Anno. 429. A miraculous victory of the Britons against the Pelagians. & dispairing of their owne forces, craued the praiers and help of S. German, a French bishop being come thi∣ther at the same time to cleare the country from the infection of the Pelagian heresie, vnder tooke the conduct of them, and
ordayned that when they should come to fight & ioyne battaile they should cry al togeather Allelluya. 3. times, which they did,Bed. lib. 1. c. 20. and so obtained a glorious victory, as our famous cuntriman S. Bede reporteth in his ecclesiastical history of our country. 11. In the 6.Anno. 544. The citty of Ser∣giopolis miracu∣lously defended against Cosdroes Procopius de bello Gothico. age Cosdroes King of Persia vnderstanding that the citty called Sergiopolis was voyd of soldiers to deffend it, thought to surprise it vpon a suddaine, but when he arriued there, it pleased God that the walles seemed to him to be so fur∣nihed with soldiers that he was astonished ther with, knowing right wel that there were not so many soldiers in the towne; and therfore vnderstanding it to be miraculous, he returned with out making any further attēpt against it. This miracle was attri∣buted to the merits of S. Sergius patrone of that citty. And some yeares after this, an other Cosaroes also King of Persia,Anno 593. Euagrius li. 6. ca. . though he was no Christian, yet vnderstanding of great miracles done by S. Sergius, vowed to giue a ritch gift to his church if he obtained vi∣ctory in a battaile which he was to fight, and afterwards he per∣formed it, sending thither a very ritch Crosse of gold set with pretious stones with an inscription in greeke containing the hi∣story therof. 12. In the 8.Anno 60. Aimonius lib. 3. ca. 87. & 88. age we read that when Theodobert and his brother Theodorick both Kings of France, ouerthrew Clotarius sonne of King Chilperick, an Angel was seene in the ayre fighting for the 2. bretheren;Anno. 602. As also the next yeere after a Saint appeared in like sorte fighting in the ayre against the Romans in behalfe of Ar∣nulphus the Longobard Duke of Spoleto in Italy,Paulus Diaco. l. 4. ca. 5. S. Sabinus seen fyghting in the ayre. the which appari∣tion was knowne to be of S. Sabinus the martyr by his picture, which at the same time was deuoutly kept in the churches dedi∣cated vnto almighty God in honour and memory of him. 13. In the 9.Anno. 718. Rodericus To∣letan. li. 4. ca. 2. The miraculous victory of Pela∣gius K. of Spain against the Sa∣racens. age also Pelagius King of Spaine being driuen in to the mountaines of Asturias by the Saracens (who before had conquered, and then possessed al the rest of Spaine) was forced to fortify him selfe in a caue, where the Saracens beseiged him, and being destitute of al humane helpe & hope, he had recourse to almighty God through the intercession of the blessed virgin Mary, which had so good effect, that the arrowes and darts of the Saracens turned back vpon them selues, and slew so many of them that the rest began to flee: wherupon King Pelagius issued
with his soldiers, (who were but 1000. in al) and pursuing them killed very many,Ioan vasscus. ano. 718. Ius Tdens Roet. Tolet. and the rest. & the rest eyther perished in the mountaines, or were drowned by the riuers which at the same time did ouerslowe some partes of the country; and this is testified by al the Spanish historiographers. Anno. 749.14. In the same age Pepin King of France being to fight against the Saxons and Westphalians, made a vow to almighty God and S. Swibert,Baron tom 9. Annal. ho anno. A miraculous victory of Pepin K. of France. S. Svvybeyt an English Saint. (an English Saint) that if he got the victory he would make a sollemne pilgrimage to S. Swiberts toumb; afterwards when he came to ioyne battel with his enemies, there appeared such a miraculous & heauenly light vpon his whole army, & his enemies were so astonished and dismaied there with, that they presently offered to yeeld them selues, declaring what they had seene, and so the King taking hostages of them made an end of that warre,Ludgetus Monast epist. ad Axfri∣du de mirac. S. Svvibetti. and acknowledging Gods mercy and fauor therin, through the intercession of S. Swibert, performed his pilgrimage bare foote accompanied with great numbers of his Nobility, as witnesseth S. Ludgerus bishop of Munstar. Anno. 880. Kinge Alured mira ulosly overthrevv the Danes. Polid. lib. 5. Cul. Mlmes li. de gst reg Angl. li. 2 c. 4. Roger. de Houd. Annal. part. 1. Ingul∣phus. Hist. Angl. an. 872.15. In the 9. age the famous Alured or Alfred King of the West Saxons, and the first founder of learning in our vniuersity of Oxford, being spoyled almost of al his state, and brought to great extremity by the Danes, was comforted and encouraged by a vision of S. Cuthert, who appeared not only vnto him, but also to his mother in their sleepe, promising him victory of his enemyes, and recouery of his state, and to the end he might the rather beleeue it, he fore told him and his mother certaine thin∣ges, which succeeded presently after. Wherupon he gathered new forces by sea, and land, assailed his enemies and recouered his owne, deliuered Rochester, London, and other townes from the seige of their enemies, and partly killed them, & partly droue them al out of the country, except some few whome he permit∣ted to remaine vpon condition they should be Christians; Fina∣ly hauing also enlarged his dominion by the conquest of the kingdome of the Mercians,Polid. Ibid. he gaue greate gifts & made ritch of∣ferings to almighty God in honour of S. Cuthert in the Church where his reliques were kept, ascribing al his victories & good successe to his merits and intercession. Anno. 825.16. In the same age Ranimirus King of Leon, & Asturias in Spaine
hauing refused to pay the yerely tribute of virgins (which Mau∣regatus one of his predecessours had graunted to the Moores,The miraculous ouerthrovv of the Moores in Spaine by King Ranimirus. Ioan. valaeus. cron. an. 825. Roderic. Tolet. li. 4. cap. 1 Rode. san. par. 3. ca. 10. Io Vasse. in cron. an. 825. did also make warre vpon them, and being assisted by S. Iames who was seene visibly to fight for the Spaniards vpon a white horse, slew about 70000. of them with smal forces; In memory wherof the Spainards hve euer since vsed to cal vpon God & S. Iames in thir warrs, as Englishmen doe vpon God and S. Georg. Besides tht the letters patents of Kinge Ranimirus, wherby he graunted to the church of S. Iames in Compostella certaine yeerely tributs to be paied therto, (in which letters this story is declared) are yet kept, and yeerely read publikly in the churches of the dioces∣ses of Compostella in memory of this victorie. 17. In the 10.Anno 915. The Saacent miraculously ouerthrovvn in Apulia. Sigo. de regno. Ital. an. 915. Luit. prand li. 2. c. 14. The Scithians miraculously defeated by the Emperour of Constantinople. Hist. Ioan. Cuto. palat. age when the Saracens entred Apulia in Italy with exceeding great forces, Pope Iohn the 10. of that name sent an army against them, which though it was farre inferiour in number; yet ouerthrew them, and following the victory kil∣led them euery man, which was especially attributed to the help of the blessed Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul, who were seene figh∣ting for the Christians. In the same age, Iohn Simisces Emperour of Constantinople, had a notabe victory against the Scythians by the helpe of S. Theodorus the martyr, in the day of his feast, who was seene by al the Emperours army fighting before them vpon a white horse and breaking the rankes of the enemy; in memory wherof the Emperour reedyfied the church where he was buried, which had bene for some tyme before vtterly ruy∣nated 18. In the 11.Anno. 1098. A miraculous victory of God∣frey of Bullen in the holly land. Paul AEmil. in Philippo. 1. S Antonin. Tit. 16. c. 13. ss. 5. Guliel. Tyrius de bello Sacto lib. 5. c. 23. & lib. 6. c. 14. & 22. Baron. To. 11. an. 1098. age in the voiage to the holy land vnder Godfrey of Bullen the Christians being beseeged in Antioch, with a great multitude of Turks, Saracens, & Persians, & extreamly afflicted with famine, S. Andrew appeared to a deuoute preest in the army, & cōmanded him to tel the Christian Princes, & captaines from him, that if they would dig in S. Petres church in a certaine place wher he appointed, they should finde the Speare wher with our Sauiours side was perced, & that carrying the same before them in their battaile, they should assuredly haue the victory; the preist after 2. or. 3. apparitions and admonitions of the Apostle, did the message to the Princes, the place was digged where it was assigned, the speare found, great hope of good successe concei∣ued
by al, a resolution taken to issue out vpon the enemy, and that the Popes legat should beare the holy Speare in the enter∣prise. This being so ordayned, and euery man in order, and ready to make the attempt, there fel vpon them al a heauenly dew, which gaue such vigour and force, as wel to their horses, as to themselues, (almost starued before with thirst and famine) that they assayled the enemy with redoubled hope and courage, and obtained a most famous victory.Apud Paul. AEmil. Ibid. And Baldricus bishop of Dole who liued at the same time, testifieth that he was tould by some of the soldiars, who were there present, that there appeared in the ayre three men on horsbacke, leading after them great trou∣pes, and that they fought for the Christians, these three were supposed to be, S. George, S. Demetrius, and S. Mercurius. Anno. 1099. Antoninus hist. tit. 16. c. 13. pat. 7. Hierusalem mi∣raculously taken by Godfrey of Bullen.19. And in the the yeare following the Christian army lying before Hierusalem, hauing for a month togeather assailed it in vaine, (in so much that the souldiers began to shrink away) there appeared vnto them a man in resplendent and glistering armour vpon Mount Oliuet, who made signe to those which were going away to returne, whereby the whole army receiued such courrage, that they gaue a fresh assault, and with in awhile got the towne, Godfrey of Bullen, & his brother Eustathius being the first that entred the same. A miraculous victory of Al∣fonso King of Portugal. Anno. 1139. L. Andreas Re∣sendius de Anti∣quit. portugallia lib. 4.20. In the 12. age Alfonso the first king of Portugal being en∣corraged by our Sauiour, (who appeared vnto him crucified, and promised him victory) gaue battaile with 4000. to 4. hun∣dreth thousand Saracens, conducted by 5. Kings whome he ouer∣threw, and therefore whereas he was wont before that time to beare for his armes a white field only, he added thereto (in me∣mory as wel of the 5. wounds of our Sauiour, as of the 5. Kings which he ouercame) 5. escuchons, in forme of a plaine crosse azure, and in one of them. 30. plates, in token of the 30 pence, for the which our Sauiour was sold, which plates the Kings his successors distributed equally into 5. escuchons in euery one 5. in a decussis,The reason of the armes of Portu∣gal. that is to say in forme of a greate †. or S. Andrevves crosse, (called in armory a saltier) so that the plates being coun∣ted saltier wise as they stand, (whereby the plate in the midst is numbred twyse) there are six in euery escuchon, which in al make vp the number of 30. plates. And as for the 7. castels gold
in a bordure geules (which are also parte of the armes of Portu∣gal) they were added to the 5. escuchons afterwards, vpon the conquest of the kingdome of Algarbes, wherein are. 7. principal cittes, signified by the 7. castels; and this I haue thought good to note by the way, as wel to geue some satisfaction to such as are curious in the serch of Antiquities, as also to shew the religious gratitude of Kinge Alfonsus towards our Sauiour, in leauing such a monument of his merciful apparition, and of the admirable victory which he gaue him. 21.Anno. 1212. A miraculous ouerthrovv of the Sarazins by Alfonso K. of Castile. In the 13 age the memorable battaile was fought in Spaine betwixt Memelius King of the Saracens and Alfonsus the 8. King of Castile where in were killed 200. thousand Saracens, and but 25. Christians, which almighty God shewed euidently to pro∣ceede from his hand, as wel by the apparition, of the crosse of our Sauiour Christ, which was seene at the same time in the ayre, as also for tha presently vpon the aproach of a banner, wherein was painted the Image of the blessed virgin Mary patronesse of the prouince of Toledo, the army of the infidels which vntil that time had stood firme and vnmoueable, began to fly,Roder. Tolet de reb. His. lib. 8. Ca. 10. and was with in a while vtterly ouerthrowne, as witnesseth Rodoricke. Archbishop of Toledo, who was present at the battaile. 22. In the 14.The Venetians miraculously recouered their state age the Venetians hauing receaued many dis∣graces and great ouerthrowes by the Genueses, were brought to such extremity that they determined to make peace vpon what conditions soeuer it should please their enemies,Iacobus Philip. Bergomas in sup∣plem. chron. Anno. 1371. and as they were consulting therupon in their Senat, there rose a voice a∣mongst them vpon a sudden (no man knew from whence it came) which said, o Venetians you haue only one, to wit Pisa∣nus, who may ouercome the Genueses. This Pisanus was a Senatour of Venice and then in prison, for hauing lost a great battaile by his negligēce (as it was supposed) at Pola in Istria where he com∣manded the Venetian army. Therfore Andreas the Duke of Ve∣nice and the rest of the Senate being much amazed to heare the said voyce, & holding it for some deuine oracle, went al of them presently to the prison to deliuer him, and made him admirall and captaine general of their nauy, by whose wisdome, and va∣lour, their state was not only conserued, but also restored to the former dignity.
23 There occurreth also in the same age an exāple of our owne cuntry wherin the assistance of almighty God was notorious, considering the meanes vsed to obtaine the same, and the admi∣rable effect that followed Edward the 3.Anno. 1345. The victory of the English a∣gainst the fnch in the battaile of Creci. King of England be∣ing in France at Creci in Picardy, with a smal army, and pursued by Philip. the 6. King of France with a huge host, had such con∣fidence in almighty God, that he douted not to giue him battaile, although the French being assisted by the King of Bohemia, and his sonne Charles King of the Romans, were more then 8. times as many as the English,Io. Froysart in cron Machab. li. 1. c. 3. to wit 100. thousand; wheras the English were but 13000. and 100. in which respect King Edward conside∣ring with the good Iudas Machabeus, that: Non est differentia in con∣spestu Dei liberare in multis et in paucis; There is no difference in the sight of God to deliuer with many or few; resolued to seeke his protection and help, and therfore the night before the battaile he retired him selfe shortly after supper in to his chamber, where he con∣tinued in prier vpon his knees vntil midnight, and the next day which was the day of the battaile, not only he him selfe and his sonne the black Prince, but also the greatest parte of his army were by his order confessed and communicated, & such was the force of their deuotion, & confidence in God, that they gotte the most famous victory that the english men euer had, for they tooke 80. enseignes and slew the King of Bohemia, 10. or 11. Princes; 1200. Knights, and men of account and 30000. others of al sortes, and the King of France him selfe hardly escaped by flight: which vi∣ctory was (as it seemeth) prognosticated and signified from heauen, the moring before the battaile; for the sunne being al∣ready vp and shyning vere faire, there fel suddainly such a won∣derful obscurity and darknes vpon the two armies,Io. Frois. ibid. that Froysart who liued in the same age and writeth the story, doth attribute it to an eclipse of the sunne which he saith was most terrible; wheras it is crtaine by the calculation of the eclipses of that yeere, that naturaly there could be none at that time, wherupon it may be inferred, that it was some supernatural, and prodigious signe pretending the deuine prouidence, and ordinance, in the ouerthrow of the French and victory of the English. Anno. 148.24. In the 15. age Mahomet the great Turke after the conquest of Constantinople, sent a great nauy & army to beseige Rdes which
then was in the possession of the Knights of the order of S. Iohn (now called the Knights of Malta) & after many violent assaults giuen to the towne, his soldiers,Rodes miracu∣lously defended against the Turk. Io. Naucler in Cron. were so terrified with the vision of a Saint or Angel, which fought against them, that they fled al away in such hast, that one of them opprest and killed an o∣ther. 25. In the same age the nauigation of the East Indies being dis∣couered by the Portugals, the King of Congo,A miraculous ouerthrovv of Paynimes in the East India. Io. Maffaeus. in hist. Indi. in the cost of Africk was by them conuerted to the Christian faith who dying a Christian left two sonns, the one called Alfonsus a Christian, & the other a Paynim, who though he was the younger, yet pre∣tended to exclude his brother Alfonso from the succession to the crowne, because he was a Christian Alfonso fearing his owne weaknes, (in respect that the greatest parte of the realme fol∣lowed his brother) first recōmended his cause by continual prayer to almighty God, and then assembled the Christians and such others as would assist him, and finding in conclusion that he had not aboue 36. armed men, and the rest very few in number in respect of his brothers great power, he ordained that when they should come to fight, they should al togeather cal vpon the name of Iesus, and S. Iames, which they did, and so put to flight the Infidels, and tooke both his brother and the Liuetenant of his army prisoners, who confessed that there appeared such a heauenly light vpon the Christian army and such numbers of horse men fighting for them, that they were forced to fly.Dyuers miracu∣lous victoryes obtained by the Portingals & Spayniards in the east and vvest Indias, left vnmen∣tioned for bre∣uities sale. Anno. 1532. Surius. in Com∣ment. Guintium in Hungary mira∣culously defen∣ded against the Turk. Anno. 1565. 26. I might adde hereto diuers other most miraculous & stu∣pendious victories, which it hath pleased God to giue to the Por∣tugalles and Spaniards, against the infidels, in planting the faith in the East & west Indies, as wel in the 15. as in the 16. age, which was the last, and ended but 3. yeeres agoe, but I let passe the same, and wil conclude with two or there memorable examples nea∣rer home, and in the memory of some yet liuing. 27. In the 16. and last age Solyman the great Turk was repelled with great losse and shame from a litle towne in Hungary called Guintium, by an Angel or some who fought against him in the ayre on horsbacke, and droue backe his army as it was entring into the towne. And some yeeres after, not aboue 40 yeere agoe a huge army also of Soliman beseeging the towne of S. Michel in
the Iland of Malta,The miraculous defence of S. Mi∣chels in the I∣land of Malta. was after three months seige, and many most furious batteries and assaultes giuen therto, forced to retire with the losse of 23. thousand Turks, by the intercession and healpe of the blessed Virgin Mary, S. Paul protector of that Iland and S. Iohn Baptist patron of the order of the Knights of Malta,Pietro Gentile. de Vanlonio, of the seige of Malta. that de∣fended the same: which was sufficiently acknowledged by the Turks them selues, who demanded of the Christians what wo∣man that was which shewed her selfe some times during their assaults vpon the castel of S. Elmo, accompanied with two men, the one an old man with a longe beard & a sword, and the other a young man clad in skinnes, by which discription (agreeing with the pictures of S. Paul and S. Iohn, Baptist as they are com∣monly painted in our Churches) it appeareth that almighty God deliuered the towne from the barberous furye of the Turks by their merits, togeather with the intercession of the blessed and most glorious Virgin Mary. Anno. 1571. The victory of the Christians against the Turk at Lepanto, Catena in vita F 5.28. A few yeeres after in the yeere of our lord 1571. almighty God gaue to the Christians a famous victory against the Turks at Lepanto, and reuealed it as wel before hand, as at the time of the battaile to pope Pius 5. of holy memory, who hauing not only recōmended the good successe therof to the praiers of al Chri∣stian people in general, and to many great seruants of God in perticuler; but also vsed of his owne part al manner of deuotion, and godly meanes to obtaine Gods merciful assistance therin, had such assurance giuen him of the victory by the holy Ghost, that he sent Monsieur Odescalco bishop of Penna to Don Iohn of Austria ge∣neral of the Christian nauy with a charge to tel him,Pope Pius quin∣tus commanded Don Ihon de Austria to geue battail to the Turks at Le∣panto. that he com∣manded him, with al the authority which God had giuen him to giue battaile to the enemy with the first comodity, assuring him on the behalfe of God that though he were inferiour in forces he should haue the victory, and the like assurance he also sent him by Don Hernando Carrillo count of Pliego (whome Don Iohn had sent to him vpon busines) as also by Marco Antonio Col∣lunna General for the Church, and by many other Captaines which came to demaund his benediction when they went to the battaile. 29. And afterwards at the tyme and instant of the victory being walking with Monsieur Bartolomeo Bussotti his Treasurer ge∣neral,
and treating of important affaires,The victory of the Christians at Lepanto reuea∣led to Pius quin∣tus at the time of the battail. he went from him vpon the suddaine, opened a window, and stedfastly beheld the hea∣uens, and after a while shutting the window againe he returned to the Treasurer ful of ioy and said vnto him, it is not now tyme to treate further of this matter, but to giue God thankes for the victory which he hath giuen our nauy against the Turkes, and then he retired him selfe to his praiers. 30. This the said Treasurer did not only set doune at the same time in writing with a particuler note of the month, day, and ho∣wer, but also tould it to diuers of his particuler freendes before the newes came of the victory, which by reason of contrary windes, staid so longe that the Pope said many times he meruai∣led of it;Selin the great Turk ascribed the victory to the praiers of pius 5. Also Selin the great Turk who then raigned was so per∣swaded, that this victory of the Christians proceeded of the prai∣ers of Pope Pius, that when he vnderstood of his death which hapned the yeere following, he ordained great feastes & trium∣phes for three daies togeather in Constantinople. 31. Moreouer the manner and greatnes of the victory being considered, it is euident that God fought for his seruants.The manner of the victory of the Christians at Lepanto. Sur. in Cōment. anno. 1571. Anton. Cicatellus in vita. Pij 5. For wheras the Turk had 300. gallies and the Christians not fully 200. & the wind at first was contrary to the Christians and fauo∣rable to the Turks, it pleased God that the wind calmed present∣ly, and an other wind arose from an other part, which draue al the smoke of the artiliry and of the smal shot vpon the Turks, and so blinded them that it healped the Christians greatly to get the victory, which they obtained with incredible speede, to wit, in 4. howers. In which time they slew Hali Bassa the General and 30000. Turks, and tooke 3000. prisoners, and a 130 gallies besides 80. which they sunke, and lastly deliuered 15000. Christian slaues; so that we may say with the Psalmist: Deus respexit &c.Psal. 101. God had res∣pect vnto the praiers of the humble, and despised not their petitions; let these thinges be written in an other generation;The cōclusion of this chap. infer∣ring the vveak∣nes of mans pol∣licy and povver and Gods proui∣dence in the dis∣position of mane affaires. and the people vvhich shal be crea∣ted vvil praise our Lord. 32. In these examples good reader thou maist haue noted the miraculous proceedings of almighty God, disposing of mens po∣wer, forces, and pollcies, according to his wil, and geuing such euent and successe to their most powerful entreprises, and at∣tempts, as for the confusion of the proude and presumptpuous,
or for the comfort & releese of the humble which trust in him, or for the demonstration of his owne power and glory seemeth to his wisdome most conuenient, and thou hast seene the same witnessed not only by the holy Scriptures, but also by examples of al ages since our Sauiour Christ, confirmed partly by the grauest writers and historiographers, and partly by monuments and memories therof yet extant; and partly by the confession of Paynims, and enemies to Christian religion. 33. Who then that shal duly consider the same, can be so faith∣les, and incredulous as not to beleeue, or so impudent to deny, either the prouidence of almighty God in humane affaires, or else that the successe of mans policies deliberations and enter∣prises, depend wholy vpon his wil? wherto if we adde what I haue also proued in the former chapter, to wit, that al suddaine chances, and vnexpected euents, (which do many times delude and dissipate mans policies and power) do proceede from no o∣ther fortune or fate, then the ineffable wisdome and inscrutable iudgments of almighty God, seruing him selfe of al inferiour causes to produce al kind of effects. Two thinges, must needes follow theron; the one that no policy or power of man, is of it selfe sufficient, and able to conserue any kingdome or common∣welth, but needeth therto the help and assistance of God. The other is that therfore the surest and wisest way for any gouer∣nour or prince is to recomend him selfe, his state, his councells, his designments & al his actions continually, and in al humillity to Gods merciful direction, vpon whome only dependeth al the good successe therof; and the prosperity and security of al states, and commonwelthes; Therfore I conclude with the prophet Hieremy;Hierom. a. 17. Maledictus homo qui cōfidit in homine, et ponet carnem brachium suum. Cursed is the man which trusteth to man, and maketh fleh his arme; This wil be yet more euident by the discussion of the next point which I promised to handle to wit, the iustice of God in puni∣shing commonwelths for sinne wherof I wil treat in the next chapter.
THE VVEAKNES AND INSVFFICIENCY of mans vvit, policy and povver for the conseruation of com∣monvvelth, is shevved, by the consideration of Gods iustice in the punishment, translation and subuersion of states for sinne; vvhich point is handeled, in 7. chapters next ensuinge; and first the iustice of God in punishing sinne is proued by argumēts dravvne from nature it selfe. CHAP. 16. I Haue hitherto shewed the insufficiency of man for the gouernment of commonwelth, aswel by his owne natural infirmity and weaknes, of wit, as also by the nature of commonwelth, which I haue proued to be subiect to such mu∣tability, and to so many accidents, and chances, vnpossible to be foreseene, or preuented, that it passeth al the policy or power of man to giue sufficient order, and assurance to the same; wherto I thinke good to adde yet an other consi∣deration, to wit, Of the iustice of God,The iustice of God in uni∣shing sinne. punishing the sinnes of men in euery commonwelth; wherupon follow many tymes muta∣tions, and changes therin, yea, and the vtter subuersion and ouerthrow therof, for the offences either of the people, or of the princes, or of both. And although there is nothing more manifest then the same, either in reason, or experience, (in so much that it may perhaps seeme to some zealous men, a needles, and superfluous labour to produce any proofes therof) yet for that there are many in these dayes who either doe not beleeue it, or at least doe not obserue, and consider it (as it were con∣uenient) I haue thought good to say somwhat touching the same, to the end, that not only mans weaknes and infirmity euery way, but also the course of Gods prouidence in mens affaires may be the more euident; which later point is also one special part of the subiect which I haue vndertaken to handle in this treatise.
2. Therfore first to speake of Gods iustice in general, who∣soeuer doubteth whether God doth execute his iustice vpon men, let him but harken to the voice of nature in himselfe, and in al other men,Remorse of con∣science an argu∣ment of Gods iutice in the punishment of sinne. to wit, the prick and remorce of conscience, which al men naturally haue, after offence committed. For what else is the same, but as I may tearme it, a sumner, or an aparitor of the author of nature, summoning, and cyting euery offender to appeare before his trybunal, whose voice, when a guilty cō∣science heareth, it is vexed with anguish, feare, and horrour, wherupon the holy Ghost in the booke of wisdome calleth wic∣kednes;Sap. 17. Iob. 15.16. Timidam; timerous, and feareful, and Iob, saith of the wic∣ked man: Vndique terrebunt eum formidines &c: Feares shal terrify him, on euery side, & shal enwrap and intangle his feete, and the sound of ter∣rour shal alwayes be in his eares.Statius 2. Hereupon also the poët saith; O caeca notentum consilia, ô semper timidum scelus; O how blind are the desygn∣ments of euil men, and hovv fearful is wickednes alvvayes? The vvicked man naturally feareth punih∣ment. Cicero. Tuseul. quaest. 2. The d finition of feare.3. But what is it that the wicked man naturaly feareth? is it not the punishment due for his offence? for he that feareth must needes feare some euil that may befal him; for feare is (as Cicero saith) Opinio impendentis mali, the opinion of some euil that hangeth ouer a man, or as Philo saith Futuri mali expectatio, the expectation of an euil to come; Now then; the euil that the guilty conscience of man naturally feareth, can be nothing else but punishment for sinne, for that his feare and the effects therof grow vpon no other cause, but vpon the knowledge of his owne offence, both na∣ture and reason teaching,Punishment of sinne a debt due to the author of nature. Math. c. 6. that euery fault deserueth punishment, and that the same shalbe exacted as a due debt by the author of nature. In which respect the sinnes of men are called debita, debts, as our Sauiour himselfe called them, when he taught vs to say; demitte nobis debita nostra; forgiue vs ô Lord our debts, that is to say our sinnes, or offences. As also he compared the place de∣puted for the punishment of sinne in the other life, to a prison for a debt, exhorting euery one to make peace with his aduer∣sary if he haue any here in this life;Math. c. 15. Luc. ca. 12. Lest (saith he) thy aduersary de∣liuer thee to the Iudge, & the Iudge giue thee into the hands of the minister of iustice, and so thou be cast in prison; truly I say vnto thee thou shalt not be deliuered from thence, til thou haue payd the last farthinge. Thus said our Sauiour, signifying that punishme for sinne is no lesse
due to be payed then any debt whatsoeuer. 4. This I say nature it selfe not only notifyeth to euery man by a secret instinct, but also giueth him a tast therof in the worme or remourse, wherupon the Satyrical poët speaking of wicked men, saith elegantly thus; —Curtamen hos tu Euassisse putas,Iuuenal. Sair. 11. quos semper conscia facti Mens habet attonitos, & sardo verbere caedità Paena autem vehemens, & multo saeuior illis, Quas & Seditius granis inuenit, & Radamanthus Nocte dieque suum gestare in pectore testem; That is to say, hovv canst thou thinke that those men escape vnpunished,The horrour of a guilty Consci∣ence. whom the knowledge & cōsideration of their owne wickednes euer holdeth astonished, beatinge them, as it were, with stil and secret stripes, for truely neither the seuere iudge Seditius, nor yet Radaman thus, did euer inuent so vehement, and cruel a torment, as it is for a man, day, and night to carry the testimony of his owne wickednes in his owne brest Thus saith the poët, the truth wherof appeareth in the horror of many wicked mens consciences, vexed with fearful phantasyes, dreadful drea∣mes, terrible thoughts and cogitations, distraction, madnes, and dispaire. 5. We read of Nero that after he had killed his mother,Suet. ca. 34. he was continually exagitated (as himselfe confessed) with phantasies of the apparition of her ghost, and with conceits that the furyes persecuted him with burning torches,Phil. Commi. de reb gstis Caro∣li. 8. Guiccir. li. 1. and Alfonsus King of Na∣ples hauing vniustly, & cruely murthered 24. of his Barons, could neuer sleepe quietly for the representatiō of their shapes which alwayes vexed him in his dreames; Also of such kind of men the Satirycal poët saith thus. Hij sunt qui trepidant & ad omnia fulgura pallent Cum tonat exanimes,Iuuneal. Sti. 15. primo quoque murmure caeli Non quasi fortuitò, nec ventorum rabie, sed Iratus cadat in terras & vindicet ignis; the sence is this. These are they which tremble and waxe pale at euery flash of lightninge, and are almost dead at euery clap of thunder, as though the wrathful hand of God were povvring downe fier vpon them,Set. in Tibri & Caio. for punishment of their wicked∣nes Thus saith the poët, wherof Tiberius and Caius Caligula two most wicked Emperours may serue for example, who trembled
alwaies and hid them selues when they hard any thunder. 6. The cause of al this is no other but that almighty God the author of nature hath ordayned as S. Chrisostom witnesseth,Chrisost. To. 1. concio. 4. de La∣zaro. A tribunal in the soule of man. that conscience shalbe, as it were, a tribunal in the soule of man, to the end that euery one being the accuser, witnes, yea and Iudge of his owne sinne, and condemning him selfe by his owne sen∣tence, may either repent and doe satisfaction, or else expect the due punishment therof from the deuine iustice, & acknowledge it for most iust when it shalbe inflicted vpon him; For seing al sinne doth impugne and transgresse the law of nature, it fol∣loweth that the punishment of sinne doth most properly be∣longe to the author of nature, who as he made nature and her lawes, so doth he most iustly exact the pennalty due to the trans∣gression therof. 7. And euen as we see in commonwelths betwext Princes & their subiects, that particuler iniuries done to particuler men against the political lawes, redound to the offence of the Prince as head of the commonwelth, (in which respect though the wronged remit the trespasse done to them, yet the Prince iustly punisheth the offender) euen so it falleth out betwext God, and man;Al offenses re∣dound to the offence of God, though some∣tymes they seeme to be committed only against man. Psal. 6.2. Math. ca. 16. ca. 17. nu. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. The vniforme consent & pra∣ctise of al nati∣nos in crauing pardon of God for sinne i an infallible argu∣ment of his iustice. Cicero Tus. c. quaest. for although mans offence may sometimes seeme to be committed only against man, or humane authority; yet it re∣doundeth to the offence of God, vpon whose authority and po∣wer pedendeth al the power and authority of man, and from whose supreame and eternal law doe flow al other good and iust lawes; so that although men, either punish or remit the faults of men, yet the offendours are not exempt thereby from the pu∣nishment of God, except they also satisfy his iustice, who sear∣ching the hartes, & reynes of men, and taking account of eue∣ry idle word, is the iust iudge. Qui reddit vnicuique iuxta opera sua; vvhich yeeldeth to euery one accordinge to his vvorkes; rewarding and punishing some in this life and some in the next, and some in both, wherof I wil say more, & yeeld some further reason after a while. 8. In the meane time I wish to be considered as an other euident argumet of Gods iustice, drawne also from natture it selfe, that the constant and vniforme consent and practise of al nations, and people (which Cicero saith is nothing else but: vox
naturae, the very voice of nature) doth giue manifest testimony of the truth hereof. For to what end were al the propitiatory & expia∣tory sacrifices ordained and vsed, not only amongst the faithful people of God, but also amongst the Heathens, Greekes, and Romans, yea and al barbarous nations, but to pacifie the wrath of almighty God, and to obtaine remission and pardon of punish∣ment due to sinne. 9.The experience of Gods iustice vpon sinners. Finally the most certaine experience of Gods iustice vpon sinners (confirmed not only by the testimony of most graue and learned authors of al times and countries, but also by daily ex∣amples euident to be seene) teacheth and conuinceth that God is Deus vltionum the God of punishment; Deus fortis et Zelotes &c.:Psal. 93. Exod. 20. A mighty and Iealous God, who visiteth and punisheth the iniquity of the father vpon the children, vnto, the 3. and 4. generation. 10. But for asmuch as I am also to touch this matter hereafter, and to treat of the punishment not only of tirants and wicked men, but also of heretical and schismatical Kinges, partly in this first part of this treatise, & partly in the second, I wil ther∣fore here in this place speake only of Gods iustice extended vpon whole commonwelths, King∣doms, and Empires, & for some introdu∣ction therunto, I wil first say somwhat of his prouidence in general, in matters concerning the states of Kinges and Princes, as farre as I shal thinke conuenient for this place.
FOR THE MORE EVIDENT PROOFE THAT God ouerthrovveth states and Kingdomes for sinne, it is first proued that they depend on his prouidence, and that they are at his disposition; also it is signified for vvhat cause God giueth Kingdomes and states to men; & finaly for vvhat kind of sinns and in vvhat cases he punisheth or destroyeth, vvhole common∣vvelths. CHAP. 17. I HAVE in the beginning of this Treatise suffici∣ently declared, as a matter most euident in na∣ture and reason, and confessed by al philoso∣phers, that al creatures in heauen and earth, haue not only their essence, and being, but also their natural proprieties, and what soeuer is good and commendable in them of their first cause, that is to say, of almighty God their Creator. Wherupon it is necessarily to be inferred,Al humane povver, and au∣thority procee∣deth from God and dependeth on his vvil. Apoc. 19. Rom. 13. Prouerb. ca. 8. that al humane power, authority, and dignity what∣soeuer proceedeth from him, and dependeth on him, who for his owne seruice and greater glory imparteth the same to men, no lesse then other of his gifts. In which respect the scripture giueth him the supereminēt title of, Rex regum, & Dominus domi∣nantium; the Kinge of Kinges, and Lord of Lords: and furder saith, that Non est potestas nisi a Deo; there is no povver but from God. and that by him, Reges regnant & principes imperant: Kinges raigne, and Princes rule; wherupon also it followeth, that al kingdomes and states are disposed by his infinit wisdome and holy wil;Al kingdomes and states dispo∣sed by the infinit vvisdom and vvil of God. For if al power be deriued from him, and if Kinges and Princes raigne and rule by the authority which he giueth them; then they are no other but his ministers subiects & vicegerents, accountable for that which they haue of him, and to be gouerned and guided by him, placed, and displaced, punished, rewarded, and disposed, both they, and their states, as it shal please him.
2.Aug. li. 5. de cluis dei. ca. it. S. Augustine argument to proue the depen∣dance of states vpon the proui∣dence of God. This also may be inferred vpon his prouidence in farre lesse matters, or rather in al other thinges; Wherupon S. Augu∣stin reasoneth thus; Seeinge (saith he) the highest, and true God hath giuen order and conueniency, and as it vvere a certaine peace, agreement, and harmony of parts not only to heauen, earth, and man; but also to euery litle and contemptible creature, to euery feather, to euery flovver, or hearb, and to euery leafe, it is not to be beleeued that the kingdomes of men; or their gouernments are not also ordered by the lavves of his prouidence. Thus rea∣soneth this learned and holy doctor, as who would say, if God haue care of lesser thinges, it can not be imagined that he negle∣cteth the greater; the care whereof no lesse partaineth, but ra∣ther more to his infinit bounty, wisdome, and power: For al∣though the prouidence of man (which is limited, with in the straight and narrowe bounds of humane infirmitie,) extendeth it selfe sometimes to the least matters only, because it can not comprehend the greatest, and sometimes to great matters and not to smal, because it can not sufficiently comprehend both, yet the prouidence of almighty God being infinit,The prouidence of God extendeth it selfe to al things litle and great. extendeth it selfe to al thinges, because he is no lesse infinit in wisdome, and power, then in bounty and goodnes, and therfore, as he is crea∣tor of al thinges, he also careth and prouideth for al things; and as it is fit for his incomparable goodnes to care for the least thinges in the world, so is it conuenient for his infinit wisdome, and power, to care and prouide for the greatest, and especialy for matters of kingdomes and commonwelths, which most im∣port, and are of that nature, (as I haue sufficiently showed throughout this whole treatise) that they surpasse the capacity, wit, and power of men. 3. Wherupon it followeth that if almighty God should ex∣clude the same from his diuine prouidence, there should want sufficient meanes in nature for the gouernment & conseruation of the world, which were absurd to say; and therfore I wil con∣clude with S. Augustin: Non tribuamus (saith he) dandi regni po∣testatem &c. let vs not attribut the povver of giuinge Kingdomes or Empires to any other but to the true God,August. Ibid. ca. . vvho giueth felicity in the Kingdome of heauen only to the pious and godly, and bestovveth the kingdomes of the eath, vpon good and bad accordinge as it pleaseth him, vvhome nothing pleaseth vniustly. Thus saith he, and to the same purpose S. Hierome
saith, Regna Dei gubernantis mutantur, & finiuntur arbitrio. &c. King∣domes are changed,Hieron. in da∣niel. ca. 2. and ended by the wil of God, who gouerneth al, and the causes therof are knowne to him who made al. 4. Thus saith S. Hierome expounding a notable sentence con∣cerning this matter in Daniel the prophet,The dependance of states vpon the prouidence of God proued by the prophesy of Daniel. who hauing vnder∣stood by reuelation from almighty God as wel the dreame or vi∣sion of Nabuchadonosor, as also the interpretation therof (wherby was signified the translation of his empire first to the Medians and Persians, and after to the Grecians, and lastly to the Romans) was strooken with such an admiration of Gods prouidence, and po∣wer in the disposition of Empires, and Kingdomes, that he brake forth into these wordes,Dan. ca. 2. Sit nomen domini benedictium a seculo &c. The name of our Lord be blessed for euer and euer, for al wisdome and strength is his, and he changeth times and ages, and translateth, constituteth and ordaineth Kingdomes at his pleasure. Thus said the prophet. 5. The truth wherof is so euident by the euent of that vision of Nabuchadonosor, and of the other prophesies of Daniel, that no painim or infidel, who shal duly consider the same, can with rea∣son deny it, or doubt of it, seeing al that which he foresaw, and foretould so many hundreth yeeres before, hath bene from time to time, and daylie is accomplished, and fulfilled, as the histories of al times and experience plainly shew.Idem. Ibid. The accomplish∣ment of Daniels prophes concer∣ning the empyre of the vvorld and many par∣ticuler king∣domes. Idem. ca. 11. For he prophesied not only of the translation of the Empire of the world from nation, to nation, as before I signified, but also of the perticuler warrs, and the contentions, of the successors of Alexander the great, especially of the Kinges of Syria and Aegipt, of their victories and ouerthrowes, of their leagues, their mariages, and the fraudu∣lent practises of one of them against an other, and of the afflicti∣on of the Iewes during the time of those warrs, especially by the persecution of Antiochus Kinge of Syria, (wherof the bookes of Machabees doe treate at large) as also of the fal of the Roman em∣pire, Mach. b. c. 5. 6. 7. 8 9. of the very time of the comminge of our Sauiour Christ, of his passion and death, of his Church and kingdome, and of the amplytude and eternity therof, and al this he prophesied so per∣ticulerly, and clearly, that whosoeuer shal conferre his predicti∣ons with the euents testified by prophane authors, namely by Pausanias Iustin, Polibius; Q. Curtius, Appian, & Iosephus, and with our scriptures, & ecclesiastical writers, he can not but acknow∣ledge
the verity therof. 6. This was so manifest to the very painims,Hierem praefat. in Daniel. The Cauel of Porphir a∣gainst Daniel; prophesy con∣futed. that Porphiryus the Platonicke philosopher noting the accomplishment of al that which Daniel prophesied in the 11. chapter, concerning the successors of Alexander the great, affirmed that it was a historye of matters past, written in the time of Antiochus Epiphanes, and published as a prophesie in the name of Daniel, which is easely cōfuted as wel for that the 70. interpreters translated it amongst others partes of scripture, almost a hundreth yeeres before the time of Antiochus, as also because Iaddus cheefe bishop of the Iewes shewed the same to Alexander the great at Hierusalem, to proue vnto him that a Grecian King should subdue the Persian empire, which Alexander expounded of him selfe, and was en∣couraged therby to giue battaile to Darius,Iosephus li. 11. antiquit. whom he defeated and depriued of the kingdome of Persia and Media; And this was 160. yeeres before Antiochus. Besides that the euents of al that which Daniel prophesied of thinges to follow the time of Antio∣chus vntil this day, as of the fal of the Roman empire, and the ri∣sing of the kingdome of Christ, that is to say of his Church and of the encrease and admirable propagation therof through out the world, doe not only cōfute the calumniation of Porphiry, but also proue most manifestly the prouidence of almighty God in the affaires of men,Iosephus the Ievv proued the prouidence of God by the ve∣rity of Daniels prophesyes. Ioseph. li. 10. an∣tiquit. ca. 12. as Iosephus the famous Iew obserued in the same prophesies for matters past vntil his time, conuincing ther∣by the Epicurians, and al other Athiests who denied the proui∣dence of God in humane affaires; VVhen I consider (saith he) the prophesies of Daniel, I can not but vtterly condemne their ignorance, vvhich deny the prouidence of God ouer men, for how could it come to passe that his predictions should fal out to be so true as vve see, by the euents they are, if the course of the vvorld, and vvorldly affaires vvere guided by chance; Thus saith Iosephus, who neuerthelesse saw not the accomplishment of a great part of Daniels prophesies, which these last 15. ages that haue passed since his death, haue made manifest vnto vs.Dan. ca. 2. Hovv the pre∣diction of Da∣niel to Nabucha∣donosor, hath ben fulfilled from time to time, and dayly it. 7. For where as the vision of Nabuchodonosor interpreted by Daniel signified that the empire of the Caldeans should be ouer∣throwne by the Medians and Persians, and they againe by the Gre∣cians, and the Grecians by the Romans, and that the Roman empire should be crushed, and brused by astone cut out of a hil without
handes, (that is to say by our sauiour Christe borne of the blessed virgin Mary with out the help of man) and that the said stone should grow to be a mighty mountaine, and fil the whole earth, by which mountaine was signified the Church of Christ propaga∣ted through out the whole world, which should subdue to her obediēce, not only the Roman empyre, but also al other earthly kingdomes and states in time; whereas (I say) al this was signi∣fyed by Daniel to Nabucodonosor,The verity of Daniels pro∣phesy much more manifest to vs then it vvas to Iosephus. Iosephus neither saw the decay and fal of the Roman empyre, (which flowrished cheefly in his time) nor the subiection therof to the empire of Christ and his vicars or substituts in earth (who haue already aboue 1500. yeres possessed the very seat of the Roman Emperours:) Wherupon I conclude, that we who haue seene & daylie doe see the accō∣plishment of these prophesies,Dan. ca. 2. God disposeth of kingdomes and states by the mi∣nistery of men. Isay. 10. more then Iosephus did, haue far greater cause, and more reason then he to acknowledge the ma∣nifest verity therof, and to admire the infynit wisdome, & won∣derful prouidence of almighty God, and confessing with Daniel, (as before I signified) that: Ipse mutat &c. It is he which changeth times and ages, and transferreth, and setteth vp kingdomes; though he vse therin the ministery of men, who are no other but his instru∣ments to execute his wil.Men the instru∣ments of God many times though they knovv it not. Isay ibid. In which respect he called the King of the Assirians, the Rodde of his wrath, and his staff, and compared him to An axe and a savv, which men vse for their seruice, be∣cause he ment to make him his instrument for the punishment of the Iewes, though the said Assirian had no such intention, nor any imagination therof,; as it was also signified by the pro∣phet, who hauing called him, the rodde of his wrath, and his staff, added: Ipse autem non sic cogitabit, &c. but he shal not thinke so, neither shal his hart so conceiue which shalbe wholy set vpon conquest, and vpon the destruction of many nations. 8. And this secret operation of almighty God, for the ex∣ecution of his wil,The dependance of states vpon Gods prouidence proued by the prophesy of Za∣chary Zacha. ca. 6. is not to be vnderstood to haue place, only in Kinges and Princes and in particuler men, but also in whole kingdomes and empyres, which are in like man∣ner secretly moued, gouerned, and disposed by him, the which is notably signifyed in the prophet Zachary, when the an∣gel who shewed him the vision of 4 Chariots, said vnto him; Ista sunt quatnor venti caeli, qui egrediuntur vt stent coram dominatore
orbis terrae; These are the 4. windes of the heauen,Hieron. in each a∣an ca. 6. which goe forth to stand before the gouernour of the whole earth; that is to say as S. Hierom ex∣poundeth it; These are the 4. clymats or partes of the world, which attend to know the wil of almighty God:Idem. Ibid. Nihil enim haec 4. regna absque domini voluntate fecerunt, for these 4. kingdoms or em∣pyres (saith S. Hierom) did nothinge without the wil of our Lord. And a litle after the prophet speaking of the horses in the 4.The commission that God gaue to the Romans to conquer the vvorld. Hierom. Ibid. chariot (which signifyed the Roman empyre) saith, Qui erant robustissimi &c: those vvhich vvere the strongest vvent forth and sought to goe & runne ouer the earth, and he (to wit, the Angel) said goe, and vvalke ouer the earth &c. wherin the prophet giueth to vnderstand that the Ro∣mans had a particuler commission or licence of almighty God to conquer the world, which is signifyed in that the angel said vnto them; Ite & perambulate terram: goe and vvalke ouer the earth, that is to say (saith S. Hierom) Pedibus conculcate & substernite regna; sub∣due kingdomes, & tread them vnder your feete. 9.The considera∣tion of the par∣ticuler causes vvhy God geueth kingdomes to men. But this prouidence of God in the disposition of king∣domes or states wil the better appeare, if we consider the par∣ticuler causes why he giueth the same to some rather then to o∣thers; For besides the general cause proceeding from the reason and nature of commonwelth it selfe, to wit, the conseruation of the body politicke, by the supreame power and authority of the head, for the administration of iustice, defence of the weake,3. Reg ca. 16. remuneration of the good, and punishement of the bad, (in which respect the queene of Saba saith to Salomon; Constituit te do∣minus regem &c. our Lord hath made thee Kinge to the end that thou maist doe iustice and iudgement) besides (I say) this general cause indif∣ferent to al Princes, as being the end and ground of al princely authority, there are other particuler respects, for the which God raiseth and aduanceth some men to supreame dignity, wherof I wil recount such as occurre to me at this present. 10.God geueth do∣minion to some for his ovvne greater glory. Constantin the great. Sometymes God giueth dominion to some men for his owne greater glory, and the aduancement of true religion, for which cause he gaue the Roman empyre and al felicytie tempo∣ral to Constantine the great, as appeared by his extraordinary vo∣cation to the Christian faith, & his miraculous victoryes, & by the propagation of Christian religion, and the subuersion of Ido∣latry which ensued therof. The like may be said of an English
King called Edwin King of that part of England which is on the northside of the riuer Humber (al which was then called Northum∣berland) to whom almighty God gaue that kingdom for his owne glory and the aduancement of Christian religion, as may appeare by the circumstances therof which for that they are very rare, and remarkable I wil breefly relate. Edvvin King of Northumber∣land. Beda. hist. eccle. li. 2. ca. 12. Polid. li. 411. This Edvvin sonne to Alla second King of Northumberland was depriued of his kingdome being very younge by Edelfred, and forced to flee to Redoaldus King of the East Angles, who though he receaued, and treated him at first with al curtesie, yet afterwards at the earnest sute of Edelfreds embassadours, determined either to kil him, or to deliuer him vnto them; Edvvin vnderstanding the same, and being maruelously perplexed therewith, was comforted by an Angel appearing vnto him in the habit of an old man, who demanded of him what he would giue one who would not only deliuer him of his care and affliction but also restore him to his kingdome, and when Edvvin promised that he would be most grateful for it; he asked him furder, if the same partie should teach him a heauenly doctrin for his eternal good, whether he would imbrace it or no, which he also promised most wilingly: wherupon the old man approaching nere vnto him, laid his right hand vpon his head and said, when this shal be done vnto thee, remember then that thou performe thy promise, and so vanished away; within a while after Edvvin was aduerti∣sed that King Redoaldus by the perswasiō of the Queene his wife, had not only changed his minde, but also resolued to giue him assistance against Edelfred, wherof he shortly after saw the effect; for by the healp of Rodoaldus,K. Edvvin made a Christian. he ouerthrew and slew Edelfred, and recouered his kingdome; Some yeeres after S. Paulinus preaching vnto him the Christian faith, and not finding him so forward as he desired, was moued by the spirit of God to lay his hand vpon his head, and to aske him whether he remembred that signe, wherupon Kinge Edvvin calling to mind his vision, cast him selfe downe at the feete of Paulinus, and promised to beleeue and embrace the doctrine which he preached, and after a while was baptized with al his nobility and people; Thus writeth S. Bede our countriman, wherby it is manifest that almighty God be∣stowed that kingdome vpon Edvvin, for his owne glory and ser∣uice
and for the conuersion of him and his people to the Chri∣stian saith. But now to proceede. 12.Cirus aduanced to the empyre of the Chaldeans for the comfort of the people of God. Isay. ca. 45. Some times God aduanceth men to the gouernement of a kingdome for the cōfort of his seruants; so we read in Isaias the prophet, that God wold geue the empire of the Chaldeans to Ci∣rus King of Persia, to the end he might deliuer the Iewes from their captiuity. In which respect he called him, his seruant, his a∣noynted, and his pastor, or sheapherd, 200. yeeres before he was borne. 13.1. Reg. ca. 16. 4. Reg. ca. 19. Dauid made King for the pu∣nishment of K. Saul. Sometimes God giueth a kingdome to some one to whome it doth no way appertaine, for the punishment of the King therof; so he raised Dauid against Saul: and Iehu against the sonnes of Achab King of Israel, which Iehu was anointed King by the prophet, to the end he might destroy al the children and posterity of Achab, which he performed. 14.Sometymes a vvicked man reigneth for the punishment of a vvicked people. Hier. in Daniel. ca. 2. Iob. Osc. ca. 13. Some times also he permitteth some wicked man to ob∣taine a crowne or kingdome for the punishment of the people thereof; Vt malus malos puniat: (saith S. Hierome) that a wicked man may punish others for their wickednes. To this purpose Iob saith; God makes the hipocrite, or wicked man raigne for the sinnes of the people; and to the same purpose also almighty God said to the people of Israel by the prophet Ose: Dabo tibi regem in furore meo. I wil giue thee a King in my fury;Grego. in illud. 1. Reg. 9. which S. Gregory expoundeth thus In furore Dei Rex datur, cum malis petor praeesse decernitur; a King is giuen in the fury of God, when he giueth to wicked men a Kinge more vvicked then the. Thus farre S Gregory; Which may also be notably confir∣med out of Plutark though he was a painim, who saith,Plut. de sera∣numinis vin∣dicta. God vseth the ministery of a vvicked King to execute his iustice. that God doth serue him selfe of wicked tirants as of hangmen to execute his iustice vpon others, no lesse or more wicked then they: & that as poisons are some way medicinable, and necessary to purge bad humours, & cure diseases, euen so tirants are necessary to purge the sinns, and cure the vices of wicked subiects. To vvhich end (saith he) Phalaris te tirant was ordained by almighty God to gouerne the Agrigentins; and Marius the Romans;These that haue a tirannical prince, ought rather to blame themselues, then ins. and therfore Apollo him selfe also said to the Scicionians that they had neede of whppinge maisters to scourge them in good earnest; Thus saith Plutarke Therfore when God gi∣ueth such a King, it hal be wel to remember the councel of S. Gregory who saith; Let not those which haue an euil gouernour accuse him,
for the same,Greg. li. moral. 25. cap. 20. seing they deserued to be subiect to such a one; but let them ra∣ther blame themselues, for it is vvritten, I wil giue thee Kinges in my fury &c. thus far S. Gregory. Some ar aduan∣ced by almghty God, in revvard of some seruice donne to him. Ezechiel. ca. 29.15. Otherwhiles God giueth a kingdome, or encrease of do∣minion to a wicked man in reward of some seruice which he hath done him; so he gaue al Egipt to Nabuchadonosor King of Ba∣bilon, because he had bene his minister in the execution of his iustice vpon the citty and state of Tyrus: Nabuchodonosor, (saith almighty God by the prophet) did me great seruice with his army a∣gainst Tyrus, and hath receiued as yet no reward, neither he nor his army for the same; Behould I wil giue him the land of Egipt and it shal be a recom∣pence, for his army, and for the paines he tooke in my seruice. Thus saith the prophet; wherby we may gather how bountifully almighty God wil reward such seruices as are done him willingly,The vvonderful bounty of al∣mighty God, in revvarding ser∣uice donne him vnvvittingly. and with intention to serue him, seing he also liberally rewarded a seruice done him vnwittingly, for Nabuchadonosor made warre vpon Tyrus, not with intent to serue God therin, but either for some reuenge of inuiryes, or for ambition to encrease his dominion. 16. In like manner, sometimes God giueth gouernment and dominion to an euil man for some seruice done vnto him by his parents or progenitors,VVicked men aduanced some∣tymes or prospe∣red by some good deeds of their vvicked progeni∣tors. 4. Reg. 9.10.13.14. though they were as wicked as hee; wherof we haue an example in Ioachaz, Ioas, Ieroboam, and Zachari∣as Kinges of Israel, who though they were Idolaters, linealy des∣cended of Iehu an Idolater as wel as they, yet raigned al of them, & succeeded one an other by a perticuler priuiledge of almighty God, for the seruice which Iehu their progenitor did him in extin∣guishinge the howse of Achab: wheras by the ordinarie course of Gods iustice, al the other Idolatrous Kinges of Israel were depri∣ued of their kingdomes by violent death, either the father or the sonne, or both, in so much that it neuer descended to the 3. generation, except in the posterity of Iehu, to which God gaue it vntil the 4. generation for the cause before declared. God aduanceth sometymes vvic∣ked men for the good deserts of their vertuous parents. Seneca. li 4. de benefis ca. 32.17. Also some wicked men are aduanced to soueraignity for the vertues of good men their parents, or progenitors, for which cause almighty God continued the crowne & kingdome of Iuda for many dissents, in the posterity of the holy King Dauid, though many of them were most wicked men, and this the painims also acknowledged, as appeareth in Seneca, who saith that some doe
raigne because some one of their ancestors was a good man, for whose sake they are aduanced to gouernment, not because, saith Seneca, they are woorthy of it; Sed quia alius pro illis meruit. But be∣cause an other deserued it for them: so that (saith hee,) God giueth a king∣dome to an vngratful man, not for his owne sake, or for any merit of his, but to pay an old debt to some of his progenitors. 18.God geueth or amplifyeth a kngdome some∣times in revvard of moral vertue. Lastly an Empire or kingdome is sometimes giuen by al∣mighty God and sometime amplified and encreased in reward of the vertue, iustice, and piety of him which possesseth it, I meane not only vertues infused (as true religion, iustice, and piety pro∣ceedinge of Gods grace) but also moral vertues, wherto honour and dominion, is so due by the law, and course of nature, that who so euer should excel al other men therin, should therby de∣serue not only to be more honored then they, but also to haue dominion ouer them, and as A istotle teacheth,Arist. polit. li. 2. & 5. he should natura∣ly be their King, and Lord; Besides that the godnes and bounty of almighty God is such in rewardinge al vertue and goodnes what so euer, (accordinge to the merit, and worth of euery act) that wheras moral vertues proceedinge only of the force of na∣ture, can not deserue heauenly, and eternal reward, (which is supernatural) he recompenceth them temporally in this life, sometimes with welth and riches, sometimes with prosperous successe, or other temporal contentments, and sometimes with honour dignity and dominion;Aug. de ciuit. dei li. 5. ca. 15. and therfore although S. Augustin doth not acknowledge the vertues of the Romans to be true vertues, (for that they were commonly referred to vaine glory) yet he affirmeth that God gaue them the empire of the world in reward of their ciuil, and moral vertues,The empyre of the vvorld ge∣uen to the Ro∣mans for their ciuil, and moral vertues. meaninge therby that although they were not truly vertuous, yet because they were more vertuous then other nations, God gaue them dominion and commandement ouer al others: what then may be supposed of his bountyful goodnes in rewardinge true vertue in his ser∣uants (I meane infused vertue proceedinge of his grace) seinge he so liberally recompenceth the vnperfect vertues of his ene∣myes; it is not to be doubted, but that he wil reward the same, not only with euerlastinge glory, but also with temporal felicy∣tie, when it shalbe necessary and conuenient for their eternal good.
Hovv God ge∣ueth kingdomes or temporal feli∣city in revvard of infused ver∣tues.19. For although temporal felicitie being considered simply in it selfe as a thinge transitory & not truly good, can be no due reward for the infused vertues (which in respect of the dignity of Gods grace from which they proceed, doe merit a heauenly & euerlastinge rewarde) yet if we consider temporal happines, as it may be referred to the seruice of God, and so made a meanes to attaine to eternal felicitie, it may be not only truly good, but also a true and proper reward of religious piety, and other infu∣sed vertues.Psal. 33. In which sense the royal prophet saith; Rich men haue wanted and bene hungry, but those which seeke our lord; Non minuentur omni bono; shal not vvant any good vvhat soeuer. That is to say, they shal haue al good, spiritual and temporal; including in this word good, al such temporal thinges, as may be necessary to saluation; (for what soeuer is contrary therto,God geueth not temporal felici∣ty to al his ser∣uants but only to such of them as vvil vse it vvel. is neither good nor profita∣ble but bad and pernitious) and therfore God doth not giue temporal felicity to al his seruants, but only to such of them as he knoweth wil, with the helpe of his grace vse it wel to his ho∣nour and glory, and to such it is not only a reward for vertue, but also a furtherance & healp to saluation; wheras to wicked men, though it be also Gods guift, (yea and some times giuen them in recompense of some good act or worke of theirs as I wil signify more at large hereafter) yet it is not properly to be accompted a reward but a punishment,ca. 26. nu. 5. not a blessing but a curse, not felicitie but misery, by reason that it maketh them more insolent, proud and licentious, and by consequence encreaseth their damna∣tion. 20. Now then to returne to speake of kingdomes, empires, earthly glory, and encrease of dominion, it is not to be doubted but that as almighty God doth bestow them vpon euil men yea vpon the worst men,ca. 26. ca. 26. (partly for the causes lately declared, and partly for some other respects wherof I wil speake here after) so also he giueth them some times to his seruants in reward of their vertue, so far forth as he seeth it necessary for his owne glory and seruice, and for their eternal good. And this I would proue more at large in this place by many reasons and examples, but that the question more properly belongeth to the 2. parte of this Trea∣tise, where I shal purposely speake of religion. 21. Therfore I wil now prosecute that which I haue already
touched before, and am specially to handle in this place, to wit, the iustice of God extended vpon kingdomes & commonwelth for sinne,The considera∣tion of Gods Iu∣stice extended vpon states for sinne. Three kinds of sinnes for the vvhich God pu∣nisheth cōmon∣vvelthe. and wil make it manifest by euident examples that al mutations, and ouerthrowes of states and kingdomes, doe prin∣cipaly proceede from the iudgments of God, for the sinnes of men, which sinnes to speake therof breefly and in general, may be reduced to three kindes; For, as there are 3. thinges specialy which doe maintaine and vphold al commmonwelthes, and for the which God doth blesse and prosper them (the first religion and pietie towardes God; the second iustice and equity amongst men; and the third good disciplyne in life and manners) so also 3. other things contrary to those doe subuert commonwelths, and prouoke the wrath of God against the same. 22. The first is, al sortes of false religion, superstition,Sinnes concer∣ning religion Ido∣latry, heresie and schimse, and such sinnes as belong therto; For the which the kingdome of Israel was by Gods iust iudgment de∣stroied in the time of the old law, as also since Christs time al Greece. And the easterne parts of Christendome haue bene ouer∣runne, and are stil tirannyzed by the Turke, as shalbe amply decla∣red in the second part of this Treatise.Iniustice. The second is al sortes of iniustice, as rapine, imoderat exactions, oppression of the poore, effusion of innocent blood, calumniation or slanders, and such like,Eccle. ca. 10. for the which God punisheth kingdomes and states as the holy Ghost signifieth in Eclesiasticus saying. Regnum de gente in gen∣tem transfertur &c. A kingdome is transferred from natiō to nation, for in∣iustice, iniuries, calumniations, or slanders, and diuers deceits; and hereof I wil alleadged diuers examples after a while; The 3.Dissolute and licentious life. kind con∣sisteth in licentiousnes, and disolution of life & manners, as shal appeare herafter by perticuler examples of Gods punishments vpon commonwelths for the sinnes of the flesh. 23. And in al this it is to be vnderstood,In vvhat cases God punisheth a vvhole common∣vvelth. The first case, Genes. ca. 18.0 19. that almighty God punisheth or destroieth whole commonwelths for sinns, especi∣ally in 4. cases: the first is, when any of the fore said kindes of sinne is growne to be so vniuersal & general in a cōmonwelth, that few or none, are free from it, as it was in Sodome and Ghomor∣ra which God destroied with fier from heauen for the abomina∣ble sinne of sodomy, wherwith al the in habitants were infected from the highest to the lowest, as the scripture testifieth.
The second case.24. The second case is, when the prince or gouernour of the commonwelth is a notable offendour in any of the sinns before mencyoned, wherby he iustly draweth the wrath of God, not only vpon him selfe but also vpon al the commonwelth, such being the simpathy in the body politicke, betwixt the Prince & the subiects, as in the body natural, betwixt the head and the members;The simpathy be∣tvvixt the head and the mēbers in the body po∣liticke. The Subiects pu∣nished for the sinnes of the prince. 2. Reg. ca. 21. 2. Reg. c. 24. 2. Paral. ca. 28. and therfore as the hurt or dammage of the head may redound to the destruction of the whole body; euen so the sinne of the Prince may procure the wrath of God against the whole commonwelth, wherof we haue diuers examples in the holy scriptures; The iniustice which King Saul vsed towards the Ga∣boanits was punished in the people with 3. yeeres famine 40. yeeres after in king Dauids tyme; and for king Dauids sinne in numbring the people there perished 70000. of them with pestilence; and in like manner for the sinnes of King Achaz: Humiliauit dominus In∣dam, saith the scripture, God humbled & afflicted al the people of Iuda, who also were afterwards carried away into captiuity with their King Ioachin, by Nabuchadonosor for the sinnes of King Manasses, great grandfather to Ioachin; and hereof I shal also haue occa∣sion to alledge some moderne examples after a whyle. The third case.25. And the like also hapneth to Princes, & their whole state for the sinnes of the people, which is the 3. case wherein God punisheth whole commonwelths for sinne; for as almighty God sometymes prospereth and blesseth the Prince for the peoples sake,Princes puni∣shed for the sin∣nes of the people. and the people for the Princes, so also he punisheth other∣whyles the Princes for the offences of the subiects, as Samuel sig∣nifyed to the people of Israel when he had annointed Saul their King,1. Reg. ca. 12. saying vnto them, that if they feared, and serued God, he wold protect both them and their King, and if they perseuered in their malice both they and their King should perish together.. 26. Also for the sinnes of the people, God suffred K. Dauid to fal, whereupon followed the death of 70. thousand men who perished by Pestilence;2. Reg. c. 24. The participatiō of merit and de∣merit betvvixt Prince, & their Subiects. Greg. li. 5. in Iob. c. 14. by the occasion whereof S. Gregory tea∣cheth notably the communication of merit and demerit in the commonwelth, betwixt the Princes & their subiects, saying; The good King Dauid sinned and the people vvas punished; for according to the deserts of the people, the harts of the Princes are disposed; and a little after The deserts of the people & their gouernour are so conioyned, that often time,
the liues and manners of a good people, become woorse for the sinnes of a bad Prince, and the liues of a bad Prince, become better for the merit and good desert, of a good people. Thus saith S. Gregory. 27. The fourth caseThe fourth case. is when the magistrats doe notably ne∣glect the execution of iustice, for as S. Gregory faith, vvhen the vices of the subiects are dissembled, and vvinked at by the gouernours,The negligence of magistrats in the execution of iustice dravveth the vvrath of God vpon the commonvvelth. Greg. Ibid. they are re∣serued for the iudgement of God, who being the supreme Iudge, then iustly exercyseth his authority, and power, as wel to punish his ministers (that is to say, the Magistrats) for their negligence, as also to supply their defects, in punishing others, and ther∣fore in such case he commonly imposeth some general penalty vpon the commonwelth, whereof we haue a notable example in the ouerthrow,The children of Israel punished for a secret fault of one man vn∣punished. Iosu c. 7. which God suffred the people of Israel to re∣ceiue for the offence of one only man, to wit Acham, who ha∣uing stolne part of the spoyle of Hiericho, contrary to Gods com∣mandment was not discouered and punished by the Magistrats, and therfore God said vnto them, that he would abandon them vtterly except they serched out, and punished the offender; Yf therfore he punish so seuerely the omission of iustice, when the sinne is secret, and vnknowne to the Magistrats, much more may wee thinke he wil doe it, when publike sinnes are permit∣ted, or dissembled by them;ca. 20. nu. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. as shal appeare by sundry examples hereafter. 28. And therfore for this tyme I conclude this point, and chapter with an obseruation of S. Augustin concerning the par∣ticipation of merit, and demerit amongst men,VVhy the pu∣nishment of one man redoundeth sometymes to many. Aug. de ciuit. d li. 1. c. 9. to wit that the punishment of one doth redound some tymes to al men, To recom∣mend vnto vs, saith he, the consideration of the strait bond, and vnity of humane society, to the end we may vnderstand therby, hov careful we ought to be, to hinder the offence of God in other men, as wel as in our selues, seeing we are al, quasi vnum corpus, as it vvere one body, and subiect in some cases to paye the temporal penaltyes, one of an others of∣fence. Thus much in general concerning for what kinds of sinne, and in what cases God punisheth whole common∣welths. 29. And now to come to particuler examples of kingdomes, and states, vtterly ouerthrowne, or greeuoussly punished by al∣mighty God, for sinne, I wil make choyce of some most mani∣fest,
amongst very many, which doe occurre vnto me, and  beginne with two, testified partly by our holy scriptures, and partly by prophane authors, who declare the euents which the scriptures long before prophesied and foretold, The one exam∣ple shal be the ouerthrowe of the great empire of the Chalaians, and the other of the destruction of Hierusalem, and the vtter su∣buersion of the state of the Iewes. EXAMPLES OF THE SEVERITY OF GODS iustice vpon kingdomes and states for sinne, and first of the su∣buersion of the most potent Empire of the Chaldaeans, and of their admirable citty of Babilon and for vvhat sinns the same vvas ouerthrovvne, and that the euents therof testified by pro∣phane authors, ansvvered exactly to the prophesies in our holy scriptures. CHAP. 18. NOTHING was more famous in old time not more celebrated by al historiographers,The magnifi∣cence and riches of the Chaldaean emre. Tetul. aduer. Iudeos. Metast. henes de rebus. Indicis. li. 4. Dan. 2. The vvelth beauty and strength of the citty of Babilon. Solin. ca. 60. Plin. li. 6. ca. 26. Diodor. Sicul li. 3. Strabo li. 16. Hieron. li. 5. in Isay c. 14. Arist. lib. 3. Poltic. then the riches & magnificence of the Chaldean Em∣pire, which besides the oriental countries, from India to Aethiopia included al Aegipt, Africk, and Spaine, in which respect Daniel the prophet said to Nabuchadonosor who was King thereof, Tu es rex regum, et potesta tua in terminos vniuersae terrae; Thou art Kinge of Kinges, and thy power extends it selfe to the bounds of the whole earth, besides that the wealth strength, and beauty of Babilon (the Imperial seate of the Ch∣dean Kinges,) was such, as it giueth sufficient testimony of the great power of that Empire. For the walles were 50. cubits thick, and 200 cubits high; the citty was foure square 15. miles from one corner to an other, and 60. miles in compasse; in so much that Aristotle affirmeth that when it was taken, those which dwelled in the furthest parte of the citty, did not heare of it in 3. daies; It had 100. gates, with the thre sholds and posts of brasse;
great numbers of marble tempells, and golden images; whole streets shining and glyttering with gold and pretious stones, and amongst other temples, there was one of Belus 4. square,Herodat. li. . contai∣ning 2. stades euery way, which was a quarter of a mile in length, and a myle in compasse, in the midst wherof there was a tower, which as wel in bredth, as in height, contained a stade, that is to say halfe a quarter of a mile, vpon the which were raised 8. other towers, one aboue an other, with easy staires to mount vp to the top, where there was a chappel with a sumptious bed, and a table of gold; finally such wonderful things are written by graue authors of artificial mountaines, orchardes, and gardens, called,osius apud Io∣sephum. Diodor. Sicul. li. 3. horti pensiles, hanging gardens, and such other thinges, that they seeme incredible. 2. Hereby we may geather how admirable was the welth of the Kinges of Babilon,The destruction of Babilon pro∣phesied 200. yere before it hapned. Isay. ca. 13. and how great the power of their monar∣chy; wherof the destruction was prophesied by Isaias 200. yeeres before it hapned, who said in the person of God. Ecce ego suscitabo super eos Medos &c. Behold I wil raise against them the Medians, & Babi∣lon which is so glorious amongst al other kingdomes, and so notable, and fa∣mous in the pride of the Chaldaeans shal be ouerthrowne. And in like mā∣ner, Ieremias the prophet aboue 60. yeeres before it was taken,Ierem. ca. 1. said: Suscitauit dominus &c. Our Lord hath stirred vp the spirit of the King of the Medians against Babilon, and his meaninge is to destroy it; Also Daniel the prophet interpreting to Baltasar King of Babilon the wordes Mane Thecel, Phares,Dan. ca. . (which were written miraculously on the wal before him as he was bāqueting with his nobility) fore∣told him the very day before it was taken, that God had giuen his kingdome to the Medians & Persians, al which was accompli∣shed the night followinge, when Darius Kinge of Media and Per∣sia (whome Xenophon called Ciaxares) beseeging Babilon tooke it on a suddaine, with the help of his nephew,Zeno. li. 7. Hovv the pro∣phesy of the de∣structiō of Babi∣lon vvas accom∣plished, by the testimony of pro∣phane autors. Xenophon. Ibid. Herodat. li. 2 Cirus the persian in the time of a great feast, when the King, nobility, and people, con∣temning their enemies by reason of the great strength, of the cit∣ty, attended only to banquets and sportes, as both Xenophon, and Herodotus do testifie, who doe also declare the meanes how they tooke it, conforme to the predictions of the prophets, to wit, by a stratagem of Cyrus, who caused certaine ditches to be cut and opened, to draw away the riuer Euphrates, which passed
through the towne, wherby the channel was left drye, and the soldiers entring suddenly surprised it with out resistance. Ieremy. ca. 15.3. Of this drawing away the riuer Ieremy prophesied plainely saying, Desertum faciam mare eius, et siccabo venam eius; I wil make h sea (that is to say her great and famous riuer Euphrates) desert, and I wil drye vp the vaine or channel therof. And againe; Vada praeoccup sunt: her fords or waters are preoccupaied or intercepted. and againe Sic∣citas super aqaus eius et arescent; her waters shal become drye. 4. Thus began the execution of Gods wrath vpon Babilon and vpon the empire of the Chaldaeans, which was then translated to the Medians and Persians, according to the predictions of the prophets; which predictions neuertheles were not fulfilled al at once but in processe of tyme; for the prophets fore told not only the surprise of the citty,Ierem. ca. 51. but also the vtter desolatiō thereof and of the whole cuntry of Babilon; Murus ille Babilonis latisim (saith Ieremy) suffossione suffodietur &c. That exceeding broad wal of Babylon shal be vndermined,Idem. ca. 50. and digged vp, and the high, and magnifical gates therof shal be burnt; And againe in an other place speaking to the Babilonians, he saith. Confusa est mater vestra. &c. your mother, (that is to say, Babilon,) is wholy confounded, and made euen with the ground &c. and al those which shal passe by it shal be amazed, & shal kisse at it in respect of the plagues that shal fal vpon it.Isay ca. 13. Also Isaias prophe∣sied that it should become a wildernes, saying Non habitabitur vsque infinem, nec ponet ibi tentoria Arabs, nec pastores requiescent, sed re∣quiescent ibi bestiae; &c. It shal not be inhabited to the end, nor the Ara∣bian (who driues his cattel from place to place to seeke feeding for them) shal not pitch his tents there, nor so much as shepheards shal re∣maine there, but it shal be a receptacle for vvild beasts. 5. Al this, I say was fully accomplished afterwards, for Darius the sonne of Histaspis the Persian, tooke Babilon againe the second tyme,Her lot. li. 3. Instin. li. 1. about 40. yeeres after the first surprise, by the occasion of the rebellion of the Babilonians, and then he raised the strong and stately walles therof: & though the citty was left standing yet it fel by litle and litle to dessolation, especialy after the building of Seleucia by Seleucus Nicanor, and of Ctesiphonte by the Kinges of the Parthians,Plinius ca. 6 li 26. from which time forward it grew to be dispeopled, in so much that in the time of Adrian the emperour,Hierom li. 5. in Esay. c. 13. in finae. there was no∣thing left of Babilon but a poore wal which serued in S. Hierome
tyme, as he witnesseth, for an inclosure of al kind of wild bea∣stes, which were reserued and kept there for the recreation of the Kinges of that country,The great diso∣lation of that place vvhere Babilon stood. when they came to hunt in those partes; and those which haue traueled lately that way, affirme, that al that part where Babilon stood, is so ful of Lyons & sauage beastes, yea and of murdering theeues and robbers, that the pas∣sengers are faine to haue gardes of soldiers for their safety; which I also note by the way, as an accomplishment of the prophesie of Ierem who said, Habitabunt ibi dracones cum fatuis sicarijs;Ierem. 50. dragons or beasts of the desert vvith vvicked murderers shal dvvel there. 6.Bagadat novv cauled nevv Ba∣bilon, a dayes iourney distant from vvhere the other stood. Bozius de ruinis gent. & regno. Not a greene hearb or tree in the territory of old Babilon Plin. nat. hist. in 6. ca. 26. Herodot. li. 1. The admirable fertility of the Cntry of Ba∣bilon in times past. Lastly it is certainlye reported by others which haue bene there, that there is not there about any towne or village (for Bagadt which is now called new Babilon, is a daies iorney from the place where the old stood) nor so much as a tree or greene hearbe in al that territory, but that al is (as the prophet Ieremy foretold) Deserta et arenes, desert and drye, wich may be wondered at, considering the admirable fertility therof in times past; for (as Pliny saith) it was the most fruteful country of al the east, and He odotus affirmeth that the ground yeilded ordinarily 200. for one, and some yeers 300. & he forbeareth as he saith, to recount other perticulers therof because the same would seeme incredi∣ble to such as had neuer seen it. 7. But for as much, as the prophets doe also specify the per∣ticuler causes that is to say, the sinns wherby the Babilonians and Chaldaeans incurred the wrath of almighty God, and deserued so great a punishment, I wil breefly lay them downe in the pro∣phets owne wordes.Esay. ca. 13. The particuler causes vvhy God destroyed Babi∣lon. The pride of the Babilonians. Esayas speakinge of Babilon in the person of God, said: Quiescere faciam superbiam infidelium, & arrogantiam forti um humiliabo; I wil make the pride of the miscreants, or infidels to ceasse, & I wil humiliate the arrogancy of the strong: And in an other place the same prophet speakinge to Babilon of the calamities that should fal vpon her said; Vniuersa venerunt super te &c. Al thy miseries fel vpon thee for the multitude of thy vvitchcrafts,vvitchrafts. Esay. ca. 47. Ibid. & for the hardnes of the harts of thy inchanters &c. stande forthe vvith the multitude of thy vvitch∣crafts, vvherin thou hast laboured, euen from thy infancy, and see vvhether they can profit thee any thinge. Thy astrologers,Superstitious Astrology. and those vvhich vvere vvont to cōtemplate the starrs, & to cont he monthe to te thee thinges to come, let them novv comeforth, and saue thee if they can; Behold they are al made like
straw or stuble the fier hath burnt them, euery one of them hath erred in his way and none can saue thee. Hierem. ca. 51. The cruelty of the Babilonians tovvards the people of God & their temple. Hierem. ca. 50.8. Also Hieremias conforteth the Iewes in their captiuity say∣ing in the person of God; Reddam Babiloni &c. I wil render to Babi∣lon, and to al the people of Chaldea al the euil and hurt they haue done in Syon; And againe; the foundations (saith he) of Babilon are fallen, the vvalls are destroyed, for it is the reuenge of our Lord, and the reuenge of his temple; Dan. ca. 5. Idolatry and the profanation of holy vessels.9. Lastly Daniel expounding to Baltasar the last King therof, the inscription written vpon the wal by the hand, which appea∣red as he was banqueting with his nobility, signified vnto him that God had giuen his kingdome vnto the Medians and Persians, as wel for his pride and Idolatry, as also because in that banquet he prophaned the holy vessells of the temple, which Nabuchadonosor his grādfather had brought from Hierusalem, when he led the Iewe into captiuity, so that the special sinns for the which God did ouerthrow the mighty and potent empire, were pride, witchcraft; the superstitious vse of astrologie, cruelty towardes the people of God, and the destruction of his temple in Hierusalem, Idolatry, and the profanation of holy vessells dedicated to Gods seruice; wherby we may see how hai∣nous the said sinns were in the sight of God, and how greuious is the penalty of sinne;Hieron. li. 5. in Esay. ca. 14. Al human povver but dust & asshes vvhen God stryketh for sinne. and Lastly how true it is which S. Hierome saith, speaking of the subuersion of that mighty empire; Al hu∣mane power, (saith he) is but dust and ashes. VVhen the wrath of God striketh for sinne. Thus much concerning the destruction of Babilon, and the translation of the Chaldean empire to the Medians, and now I wil proceede to treat of the destruction of Hierusalem.
OF THE DESTRVCTION OF HIERVSA∣lem, & of the great calamities of the Iewes euer since for their sinnes; and hovv the prophesies of Daniel and of our Sauiour him selfe vvere fulfilled therin; vvherby the prouidence and iustice of almighty God, is euidently proued. CHAP. 19. I OMIT for breuityes sake the prophesies of Esayas & Hieremias,Isay ca. 10. & 3. Hierem ca. 29. and wil only speake of two other, the one of Daniel, and the other of our Sauiour him selfe.The prophesy of Daniel of the destruction of Hierusalem. Daniel writing after the first destruction of Hierusalem by Nabuchadonosor, du∣ring the captiuity of the Iews in Babilon, and auing prophesied of the reedificatiō of the temple, saith furder n these wordes;Dan. c. 9. Et post sexaginta duas hebdomadas occidetur Chri∣us &c. After threescore and two vveekes (that is to say. 490. yeeres) compting the weekes by yeeres & not by dayes to wit, 7. yeeres o euery weeke) Christ or the Messias shalbe killed, & the people vvhich hal not be his people, and the citty & sanctuary shalbe destroied by a people hat shal come vvith their captayne, and the end of it shalbe destruction, & fter the end of the warre shal follovv, the determined desolation. 2. This was the prophesie of Daniel of the destruction of Hie∣rusalem, and of the cause therof aboue 500.The prophesy of our Sauiour of the destruction of Hierusalem. yeeres before it hap∣ned; which our Sauiour him selfe foretold more perticulerly, who a litle before his passion going downe to Hierusalem from the mount Oliues (whence he had the ful view and prospect of the citty) wept for the compassion he had of the misery that was to fal vpon it, saying; Venient dies in te &c:Luc. 19. The dayes shal come in thee Hierusalem, that thy enemyes shal enuirone thee round about, & shal stray∣en thee on euery side, and shal not leaue in thee, one stone vpon an other, ecause thou knevvest not the tyme of thy visitation;Luc. 21. Math. 24. Marc. 13. And againe after∣wards he sayd to his disciples; VVhen yee shal see Hierusalem beseeged with an army, then knowe yee that the desolation therof is at hand; Then hose vvhich are in Iudea let them fly to the mountaynes, and those vvhich
are in the midst of it, let them depart, and those vvhich are in the country adioyning, let them not enter into it, for that these are the dayes of reuenge, to the end that al those thinges vvhich haue bin vvritten therof may be ful∣filled; vvoe be to vvomen vvith childe, and to nurses in those dayes for them shalbe great misery vpon the earth and vvrath vpon this people, and they shal fal in the face of the svvord, and shalbe caried captiues into al nations, and Hierusalem shalbe trodden vnder the feete of the gentils. 3. And afterward againe when the women of Hierusalem be∣wayled and lamented him when he went to his passion, he sayd to them;Luc. ca. 23. weepe not for me (o yee daughters of Hierusalem) hut for your selues and your children, for loe the dayes shal come vvhen they shal say happy are the barren and the wombes that haue not borne children, and the pa that haue not giuen suck; then they shal begin to say to the mountaines, f vpon vs, and to hills couer vs &c: Thus sayd our Sauiour, which I haue set downe the more particulerly to the end we may cons¦der how the euent corresponded to his prophesie, by the tes∣timony of prophane authors, and especially of the famous Iose∣phus the Ievv, who was an eye witnes and partaker of the cōmon calamity of his country, though being blinded no lesse then the rest, he had not the grace to acknowledge the true cause therof. The siege of Hie∣rusalem 40. yeres after our Sauiours passiō.4. Although there passed almost 40. yeeres before the seege of Hierusalem after our Sauiours death, yet almighty God began much sooner to execute his iust iudgments vpon the Iews in most euident and rigorous manner, not only in Hierusalem & Iudaea, but also in al other partes where they dwel∣led, it seeming conuenient to his iustice, that as they were from al partes assembled in Hierusalem at the time of his passion,The vvonderful puni hments of God vpon the Ievves, many yeres before the siege of Hierusa∣lem. Ioseph li. 2. de bello Iudao. ca 21. & in 42. Idem. de bello Iudaico li. 2 ca. 1. 20. & li. 7. ca. 28. and al consenting to his condemnation, so they should in like sort pay the penalty therof in al parts, wheresoeuer they liued; and therfore with in 7. or 8. yeeres after our Sauiour suffred, there were infinit numbers of them, slaughtered in al the cittyes of Syria, Aegipt, and other countryes, by conspiracies of the people against them, as in Seleucia 50000. In Damascus 18000. In Casa∣rea 20000. In Scithopolis 13000. In Ascalon 2500. in Alexandria 50000. 10000. more in other cittyes of Aegipt, and 5000 in Ioppe. 5. And with in a few yeeres after, Claudius the Emperour ba∣nished al the Ievves out of Rome by a publick edict, & out of al the
country of Iudea;Sueton. in Clau∣dio. anno. 51. Ioseph. li. 20. de antiquit. ca. 6. & de bello Iu∣daico li. 2. ca. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. Idem li. 20. de antiquit. ca. 4. besides that the citty of Hierusalem was mise∣rably infested with theeues, robbers, murderers, magitians, false prophets, and seditious persons, prophaning the very temple with blood, in so much that 20000. were killed, and the most of them stifeled in a tumult in Hierusaldm, at a feast of Easter (as we cal their Pascha:) Al which Iosephus recounteth as the pream∣bles to their ruyne; besides that their gouernours did vse such tiranny vpon them vnder the emperours Caligna, Claudius, and Nero, that very many of them were forced to abādon their coun∣try and the rest to rebel,Idem. li. 2 de bello. 22. ca. which brought vpon them the armyes of the Romans, first vnder Cestius gouernour of Syrya, who burned spoyled and ransacked al Palestina, & beseeged Hierusalem it selfe; nd after againe Vespasian destroied al the country and great numbers of the people with fier and sword,Idem. Ibid. li. 3. ca. 2. 3. 4. whiles also in the meane time they were miserably afflicted with famine and ciuil warrs, by reason of 3, seueral potent factions, which arose a∣mongst them,Idem. Ibid. li. 6. ca. 1. first in the prouinces abroad and after in the citty f Hierusalem, where the seditious slew great numbers of their duersaries in the temple it selfe & committed with al such ho∣ible sacriledges, and other abominable mischeefes therin,Ioseph. de bel. Iud. li. 6. c. 16. that osephus saith therof. Non recusabo dicere &c. I vvil not forbeare to say hat which sorrowe forceth me to vtter, I verily think that if the Romans ad not come when they did against those most wicked men of my nation, ei∣her the earth would haue opened and swalloed vp the citty, or an other de∣uge vvould haue drovvned it, or thunderbolts or fier from heauen, vvould haue destroied and consumed it. 6. Thus saith Iosephus, and this was the state of the Ievves when Vespasian being chosen emperour of the Romans left the chardge and prosecution of the warre against them to his sonne Titus, who presently after planted his seege before the citty of Hierusalem, whiles the Ievves according to their yeerly custome,Hierusalem be∣seeged by Gods special proui∣dence at a feast of Easter. were assembled there, out of al parts to celebrat their feast of Pascha; which time was no dout ordayned by the special proui∣dence of God for that seige, partly to the end, that the time of their punishment might answere to the time of their offence, (for that they had put our Sauiour to death at their Paschal feast) and partly to the end that the reuenge might be the more com∣plete vpon the whole nation, by reason of the infinit number of
them that were assembled there for the celebration of the fea from al parts of Iudaea, and the countries adioining. Hovv our Sa∣uiours prophesy vvas fulfilled. Luc. 19. Ioseph. de bel. Iud. li. 6. ca. 13. & li. 7. c. 7. & 8. The extreeme fa∣mine in Hieru∣salem beseeged.7. The towne being beseiged was with in a few daies enui∣roned by the Romans according to our Sauiours prophesie, not only with a trench, but also with a wal, in such sort, that no li∣uing creature could issue out any way; by meanes wherof, and of the great multitude of people with in the towne, there grew with in a while such extremity of famin, that they were forced to eate, not only horses, asses, dogs, rats, and mice, and the lea∣ther that couered their sheildes and bucklers, but also the very dunge out of the stables, yea and a noble woman was knowne to eate her owne childe that suct vpon her brest wherin no dout was fulfilled the prophesie of our Sauiour,Luc. ca. 23. when he said; Beat steriles &c. Happy are the barren, and the bellies which haue not brought forth children. &c. 8. But to proceede; In the meane time the beseiged were no lesse infested with cruel sedition and warrs amongst them selues,The extreeme misery of the Ievves beseeged. then with famine, or the assaults of their enemies abrod, In so much that they filled the citty & temple with their owne blood, and such as were taken by the Romans, were by the co∣mandement of Titus, crucified before the walles of the citty to the number of 500 euery day,Ioseph. li 6. ca. 1. vntil at length, (as Iosephus repor∣teth) there wanted both crosses for the bodies, and place for the crosses, so that there clamorous sentēce of Crucifige giuen against our Sauiour Christ,Luc. 23. was iustly executed vpon them selues. 9. Also great numbers of them, who being forced with fa∣mine sought to saue their liues by yeelding them selues to their enemies,Ioseph. de bel. Iud. li. 6. c. 15. were neuertheles killed by the Syrian and Arabian soldi∣ers, and their bowells ript vp in hope to find gold therin, vpon a report, or at least a conceite, that the Iewes did swallow their gold to convaigh it out of the citty by that meanes; and such was the mortality and misery within the citty by famin, pesti∣lence and the cruelty of the factious one against an other,Ioseph. li. 6. de bello indaico. ca. 14. that as Iosephus reporteth, al the sinkes, void places and retreats, yea the very streets were ful of dead bodies, which were continually cast out from the howses and trodden vpon like dust and durt,Isay. ca. 19. wherin the prophesie of Isaias was fulfilled who said; Facta su morticinia &c. Their carcasses became like durt or dunge in the mydst of the
streets. And although it was ordained at the first that the dead bodies should be buried at the publike charge of the citty to, re∣medy the contagion which daily encreased by the pestilent sa∣uor therof, yet the number grew with in awhile to be so great, that there was not place to bury them, in so much that the liuing were forced to cast the dead ouer the walles in to the ditch of the towne in so great numbers,Ioseph. de el. Iud. li. 6. c 14. that Titus the General of the Ro∣mans seeing it, and noting the filth and corruption that issued out of their woundes and plague-sores, loathsome to behold, exclaimed saying, that it was some extraordinary punishment of God vpon them for their sinns, and not any effect of his seige, as I haue also declaredca. 7. before, when I treated of miraculous victories. 10. Finaly after 5. months seige,Hierusalem ta∣ken & destroyed after 5. months siege. Ioseph. li. 7. ca. 10. the temple and citty were burned, and the walles razed excepting one litle peece therof, which was left for some shelter and defence for the soldiers who were to remaine in those parts, besides some peeces of 3. owers which Titus commanded should be left for a monument nd remembrance of his seige, wheras al the rest of the citty was so destroied (as Iosephus saith) that it seemed neuer to haue bene nhabited; which our sauiour signified when he said.Luc. 19. Et proster∣ent &c. And they shal lay thee flat vpon the ground,Ioseph. li. 7. c. 17. The number of the Ievves that dyed and vvere slaine in the siege, and of the captiues. and one stone shal ot be left vpon an other in thee; To conclude; the number of those which were slaine and died during the seige was (as Iosephus re∣orteth) a million, and a hundreth thousand, and of the capti∣es 97000. (wherof Iosephus him selfe was one) and of those ome were condemned to the publike workes, others of the tronger and handsomer sort carried in triumph, and such as ere vnder the age of 17. yeers, were sold for litle or nothing, nd those which remained in the country were loaden with uch greuious impositions and tributes, that they liued in conti∣ual misery and slauery. 11. Thus much concerning the destruction of Hierusalem,The continuance of Gods punish∣ment vpon the Ievves euer since the destruction of Hierusalem. Esay. ca. 5. herof I thinke the like hath not bene read or heard of in al an∣iquity; But what? was the iustice of God satisfied and his wrath owards the Ievves appeased with this? No; for (as the prophet say said) when he prophesied of the lamentable destruction, nd dessolation of the citty: In omnibus his non est auersus furor eius,
sed adhuc manus eius extenta; his wrath was not auerted from them with al this but his hand is stil stretched out to punish them. 12. This may euidently appeare by the wonderful calamities, which fel vpon them after, not only in Iudaea, but also in al o∣ther places where they were dispersed;Anno. 116. &. 117. as first, in the next age, in the tyme of Traian the emperour,Euseb. in Chron. 18. an. Traiani. Euseb. li. 4. ca. 2. & in chron. Infinit numbers of Ievves slaine in diuers parts of the vvorld in the tymes of the Emperours Tra∣ian and A∣drian. with in lesse then 50. yeeres after the subuersion of Hierusalem; Infinita eorum millia &c. (saith Eusebius) Infinit thousands of them were killed for their rebellions in Egipt, Mesopotamia, and the Iland of Cyprus: for in Alexandria in Aegipt, where they liued in great multitude, al of them were put to the sword; in Macedonia they were vtterly extinguished, and in Cyprus they were al either killed, or banished, and a law made that it should be death for any Iew to arriue there, though he were driuen thither by tempest against his wil, and a few yeeres after, Iulius Seuerus being called out of Brittany by the emperour Adrian and sent into Iudaea (to represse a rebellion of the Iewes) destroied almost al the country. Dion. in Ha∣driano.13. For as Dion writeth, he dismanteled 50. strong forts, and razed or burnt 985. townes and villages, and killed aboue 50000. Iews in battaile, besides that an infinit number of others either died by fier,Hierom. in Za∣chariam. ca. 11. Anno. 137. famine and pestilence; or were sold for slaues; And such saith (S. Hierome) as could not be sould were translated into Egipt, or els perished by shipwrack, famine, or by the sword of the Gentils;Euseb. Ecclesiast. hist. li. 4. ca. 6. Ievves forbid∣den by edict to behold their ovvne cuntry a farre of. Iulius capitolin in Anton. an. 141. The affliction of the Ievves vnder Anto∣nius Pius, Mar∣cus Aurelius, and Seuerus. Ammianus li. 22. Anno. 178. Spartian in Se∣uero. Baron. an. 199. And the emperour hauing lately before reedified the citty of Hierusalem and called it after his owne name Aelia, Adria commanded by publike edict, that no Iew should euer after enter into the territory or iurisdiction therof, nor so neare vnto it that he might behold it from any hil or high place; Short∣ly after Adrians tyme they were also miserably afflicted by the emperour Antonius Pius for an other rebellion, and after him a∣gaine by Marcus Aurelius, who being wearied with their conty∣nual tumults, (as saith Ammianus Marcellinus) exclaymed against them, saying, that they were worse then the Marcomani, Quadi, and Sarmatae, whome he held to be the most beastly of al barba∣rous nations; And againe some yeeres after they were subdued and destroied by the emperour Seuerus, who triumphed for his great victory against them, and renewed the decrees of Adrian, for their exclusion from the sight of their country, by meanes
wherof they were counted no better then vagabondes. 14.Tertul. contra. Iudeos ca. 11. & Apologet. ca. 21. And therfore Tertulian who wrote in the same tyme said of them thus: Dispersi, palabundi caeli & soli sui extorres, vagantur per orbem sine homine, sine Deo rege; They wander about the world, dispersed scattered and banished from their natiue soyle and ayre,The paynimes called the Ievves faetentes Iudaei. stinking Ievves. Amianus Marcel∣linus li. 22. hauing neither God nor man for their King; Quibus nec aduenarum iure, terram patriam salu∣tare conceditur; who may not so much as in guest-vvise salute or see their ovvne country; Thus said Tertulian, and so odious & hateful became they afterwardes to al men, that they were tearmed Foetentes Iu∣daei, filthy and stinkinge Iewes, as appeareth in Amianus Marcelli∣nus a Pagan historiographer.The reason of the stink that the Ievves haue and the remedy vvhich they haue sometymes vsed for the same. 15. Wherof some also yeeld a perticuler reason manifesting Gods malediction vpon them, to wit, that al Iewes haue a filthy and loathsome sauor continually, euer since their dispersion, and that they perswade them selues that the same can not be cured, but with drinking the blood of Christians; for which cause they haue killed many children at diuers tymes, and in di∣uersSee Math. Pae∣ris and Ioan Capgrau. of the passion of S. Hugh a child crucifyed at Lincolne anno. 1255. and an other at Nor∣vvich. an. 1146. Surius 24. martij. Ioan. Math. Ep. ad senatum. po∣pulumque. Brix∣ianum. Chrisost. orat. 2. aduer. Iudeos circa. anno 313. The misery of the Ievves in the tymes of Con∣stātin the great, and Constantius his sonne. Hieron. in chron anno. 353. Sozomen li. 4. ca. 6. countries, & perticulerly in Trent in the yeere of our Lord 1475. at what time they miserably tormented and crucified a young child of 20. months old called Simon, by whose body so many wonderful miracles were done, when it was found, that he was canonized for a Saint, and the Iewes being taken for the fact, confessed that one of the causes that moued them therto, was to drinke his blood for remedy of their stinking disease, as writeth: Iohannes Mathias Tiberinus a learned phisitian who liued in Trent at the same time. 16. But to returne to the former ages from whence I haue a litle digressed. After the time of the emperour Seuerus they rebel∣led also against Constantin the great, for the which great numbers of them had their eares cut of, and were by the emperours com∣mandement dispersed throughout al countries with that and o∣ther markes of infamy, for the general reproach and shame of al the nation; and not many yeeres after there were many thou∣sands of them slaine in Iudaea, without respect of young or old, and 3. or 4. of their cheife citties, and very many of their tow∣nes were burnt in the time of Constantinus sonne to Constantin the great for an other rebellion. 17. And here I can not but note by the way for the furder
manifestation of Gods wrath towards them, that although the emperour Iulian the apostata who succeeded Constantius,The fauour done to the Ievves by Iulian the Apostata tur∣ned to their con∣fusion. fauored them so much for the short time of his raigne (which was but 20 months) that he gaue them leaue, not only to returne to Hierusalem to inhabit there, but also to reedifye their temple, yet it rather turned to their confusion, then to their cōtentment and commodity; For first, as concerning the reedification of their temple, when they had made collections of great sommes of money (wher to as wel women as men most zealously con∣tributed as much as they were any way able, with intention to make it more beautiful, & sumptuous then euer it was) they lost both their labour and charges, being forced by 3. prodigeous accydents to surcease the woorke after they had began it. 18. For when al thinges necessary for the building were pro∣uided,The reedifica∣tion of the tem∣ple in Hierusa∣lem miraculous∣ly hindred. Dan. 9. the foundation layd vpon the ground workes of the old temple, the walles rising apace, the Iewes tryumphinge and in∣sulting against our Sauiour Christ and the Christians (who were much dysmayed in respect of the cleere prophesies of Daniel for∣telling the perpetual dessolation of the temple) it pleased al∣mightye God that first an earthquake dissolued the foundation, and ouerthrew the wall that was begon,Anno. 363. and then a fyer from heauen consumed as wel the tooles and instruments of the workemen, as also al the tymber and other matter prepared for the building, yea and burnt very many of the Iewes themselues; and lastly for their furder confusion, and that it might be ma∣nifest vnto them from whence al this proceeded, there appea∣red a crosse in the ayre, and the apparrel of al those which were present was also miraculously besprinkled and marked with crosses, which could neuer after be washed out, nor taken away by any meanes, wherwith the Iewes were so confounded, that they defisted from their worke, and many of them became Christians. Ruffin. li. 1. ca. 37. Socrat. l. 3. c. 17. Greg. Nazian. orat 2. in Iulia∣num. Chrisost. orat. 2. aduersus iudeos.19. This story is written by Ruffinus, Socrates, S. Gregory Nazi∣anzen and S. Chrisostom who saith; Huius rei nos omnes testes sumus no∣stra enim aetate ante annos viginti haec acciderunt; we are al witnesses of this matter, for it hapned in this our age litle more then 20. yeers agoe. Loe then how litle the fauor of earthly kinges and Princes auaileth when the heauenly King disfauoreth and punisheth for sinne,
and also how true it is which the royal prophet saith;Psal. 126. Nisi domi∣nus aedificauerit domum &c: Except our Lord build the hovvse, they la∣bour in vaine vvho build it. 20. And now as concerning the aboade of the Iewes at Hieru∣salem afterwards, it is euident that they remayned not long there but that with in a while after Iulians death (who dyed presen∣tly after that this chanced) they were not only expelled thence, but also forbidden again to enter into the citty,Circa. anno. 389. for we read that within 20. yeeres after or there abouts,The Ievves pur∣chased licence for money to got to Hierusalem to bevvail the sub∣uersion of their temple, in the tyme of Theodo∣sius. in the tyme of the em∣perous Theodosius and Valentinian, their custome was to purchase licence for money yeerely to goe thither to bewaile the sub∣uersion of their temple in the anniuersary day therof, as wit∣nesseth S. Hierome who liued many yeeres in those partes and wrote there at the same tyme his learned commentaries vpon the lesser prophets, wherin he notably describeth the mise∣rable state, as wel of the whole country as of the Iewes themselues; which therefore I thinke good to lay downe in his owne wordes. 21. As for the destruction of the strong citties (saith he) which were wont to be in Iudea, I think it may better be iud∣ged by the eye then by the eare, better by sight then by report, and I especially who now am in this prouince,Hieron. in So∣phoniam. ca. 1 S. Hierome an eo vvitnesse of the desolation of Iudaea and the misery of the Ievves. can not but see it, and approue those thinges which haue bene written of it, for we see now scant any litle monument of the old ruynes in some of the greatest cittyes which flourished in tymes past; In Silo, where the tabernacle and ark of the testament of our Lord was, the very foundations of the altar scant appeare; Gabaa that great citty of Saul is pulled downe to the very ground; Rama and Bethoron and the other famous citties built by Salomon are now litle Villages; And a litle after: And at this present day the perfidious and traiterous Iewes are forbidden to enter into Hierusalem, except it be to weepe and bewaile the subuer∣sion of their temple,As the Ievves bought the blood of Christ, so they vvere saine af∣tervvards to buy their ovvne teares. for the which also they are forced to pay money, so that as in tymes past they bought the blood of Christ, so now they are faine to buy their owne teares and can not be suffred so much as to weepe of free cost; you shal see in the day that Hierusalem was taken and destroied by the Romans, that wooful people, old women at deaths dore, and old men loaden
no lesse with raggs then with yeeres, come flocking thither be∣aring the testimony of Gods wrath in their very bodies and ha∣bit: And a litle after. A woeful multitude of miserable people (whome yet no man pittieth) assemble them selues there to lament the ruyne of their temple, and whiles they haue yet their cheekes bedewed with teares, and their naked armes stret∣ched vp to heauen, and their haire spred about their eares, the pitti lesse soldier asketh them some reward to suffer them to weepe a litle longer; and can any man who shal see this dout but that this is the day of their tribulation, and the time of their calamity, anguish and misery wherof the prophet speaketh? Thus saith S. Hierome of the infelicitye of the Iewes and their ex∣clusion from Hierusalem in the tyme of Theodosius. Chrisost. orat. 2. contra Iudaeos.22. Furthermore S. Chrisostome writing some yeeres after in the time of the emperours Arcadius, and Honorius, affirmed that the Iewes hauing lost their liberty and country, were contempti∣ble and ridiculous to al men through out the world from the east to the west,Circa. an. 397. and to the very extremitty and further most bounds of the earth. The misery of the Ievves in the tymes of Arca∣dius and Hono∣rius. Cod. Theod. li. 24. anno. 418.23. Their misery also in those tymes appeareth by 2. lawes of Honorius the emperour, the one against them, & the other in fauor of them: by the first he ordaynd, that no Ievv should haue, any kind of honour or office in the commonvvelth, and that such as already had any should be depriued therof; the other law made in their fauor, was, to represse the fury of the people against them in al parts; For that for 4. yeeres togeather before that law was made, their sinago∣gues were burnt, and they them selues dispitefully and cruelly handled euery where, which the emperour restrayned by a publike edict, least otherwise they might be vrterly extingui∣shed. The calamities of the Ievves in al Christian cuntryes since the yere of our Lord. 600. Aimoinus & ap∣pendix ad Greg. Tuto. an. 614. Ioan. vasaei chron Hisp. anno. 694. Glaber. li. 3. ca. 7. Baron. an. 1009.24. And who is able to recount al the plagues and calamyties which since that tyme haue fallen vpon them euery where, and how they haue bene oppressed, spoyled, bannished, and massa∣cred, whersoeuer they haue liued; In France 90000. of them were forced either to be baptised or to flye the coūtry, in the yeere of our Lord 614. In Spayne (a conspiracy of theirs being de∣tected in the yeere 694.) al their goods were confiscate, them selues made slaues, and their childeren vnder the age of 7 yeeres taken from them and christened. In the yere 1009. it being dis∣couered
and published that certaine Iewes in France, had inte∣ligence by letters with the prince of Babilon,Naucler. in anno 1948. Pero Mexia. de vitis imperat. in caro. Nauclerus. anno. 1492. and had procured the subuersion of a most famous church in Hierusalem wherein was the Sepulcher of our Sauiour, there was such a general ha∣tred conceiued against them throughout Christendome, that they were tormented & slaine in al places where they dwelled, some hanged, some drowned, some burned, others put to the sword, besids very many that to auoide torments killed them selues. Also in the yere 1348. infinit numbers of them were mas∣sacred in Spayne, France, Germany, & Italy vpon a report that they had poysned the wells in al these countries, and caused a great mortality of people; which died at the same tyme: and af∣ter againe in the yeer 1492. al Iewes were expelled out of Spayne to the number of 124000. families of whome there dyed 2000. of the plague, as they were remouing, and the like rigour was vsed against them in Portugal some yeeres after. 25. Also in our country in the time of King Richard the first,The misery of the Ievves in En∣gland vvhyles they liued there. Polidorus in Ricar. primo. Idem. in Ioan. great numbers of them that then dwelled in Lincolne and Yorke were slayne, as wel women as men, in a tumult of the people; And vnder K. Iohn they were miserably oppressed with taxes and impositions, and such of them, as would not pay what was de∣manded of them, were cruelly tormented vntil they gaue satis∣faction: and amongst others it is written of one of them, that 7.Mattheus paris. Hist. in Ioanne. of his teeth were pulled out one after an other, before he would graunt, to pay a taxe of ten thousand marks,Polidor. in Ed∣vvardo. 1. which he was con∣tent at last to pay to saue the rest; Lastly vnder King Edvvard the first they were al banished out of England by acte of Parla∣ment. 26.Ievves at this present euery vvhere contem∣ned, and oppres∣sed, as vvel a∣mongst Turks and Mores, as amongst Christi∣ans. And at this present time experience sheweth that wher∣soeuer they yet dwel amongst Christians, they liue in al cōtempt & subiection, being as it were slaues to them whome they most hate, and so odious is the race and name of them in most Chri∣stian countryes, that it is compted infamy to be descended of them, or to marry with them, although they become Christians: in so much that in Spayne and Portugal where there are great num∣bers of baptised Iewes, (whome they cal Christianos nueuos, nevv Christians) no man is capable of any Knighthood, or yet (in some places) of any dignity Ecclesiastical, or temporal, if he be any
way discended of them, which is specially enquired of, by ex∣presse commissions sent forth for that purpose, neither is this their oppression or seruitude only amongst Christians, but also amongst Turks and Moores, as graue authors doe testify, and those which trauel their countryes doe finde by experience. The blyndnes of the Ievves, and their hardnes of hart, their grea∣test plague. Aug. in psal. 9.27. Finaly we may ad hereto an other plague surpassing al the rest, which God hath laid vpon them for the consummation of their infelicity and misery, I meane their blindnes and hardnes of hart, which is not only of it selfe, magna damnatio, a great dam∣nation, as (S. Augustin calleth it) but also doth exclude them from al remedy, so long as it continueth. Isay ca. 6.28. This the prophet Isayas signifyed when he said, Excaeca cor populi huius, &c: Make blind the harts of this people, and agrauate their eares, and shut vp their eyes, lest peraduenture they may see with their eyes and heare with their eares,Psal. 68. and vnderstand with their harts and be conuer∣ted, and I moued to heale them. Also the royal prophet Dauid to the same purpose: Obscurentur (saith he) oculi eorum &c: Let their eyes (o Lord) be obscured that they may not see, and lay a perpetual load or burthen vpon their backs. And the same was also signifyed or ra∣ther prophesied by Moyses when he threatned the people of the Iewes saying: Percutiet te dominus amentia &c. Our Lord wil stricke thee with madnes,Deuter. ca. blindnes and fury of mynde, that thou maist goe gro∣ping in the midday as the blind man gropes in the dark, and mayst not direct thy waies, but alwaies sustaine shame and reproach, and be opprest with violence, and not haue any man to deliuer thee. 29. Thus said Moyses threatning the children of Israel (in case they should forsake their Lord God) but propheticaly descri∣bing the inuincible blindnes and miserable state wherin the whole nation of the Iewes should liue after our Sauiours passion, vntil the end of the world; at what tyme our Lord hath promi∣sed to haue mercy vpon them;The Ievves shal∣be conuerted in the end of the vvorld. Rom. ca. 11. and therfore the Apostle said that the blindnes of the whole nation of the Iewes in general should continew: Donec plenitudo gentium intraret: vntil the fulnes of the gentils should enter, that is to say vntil al nations should be conuerted; Et sic omnis Israel saluus fieret; and so al Israel should be sa∣ued: and to the same purpose the psalmist saith; Conuertentur ad vesperam; They shal be conuerted towards the eueninge (that is to say) to¦wards the end of the world.Psal. 58.
30. Now then al this being considered, and that not with standing their dispersion through out al countries for 1500. yee∣res space, they haue euer conserued vntil this day their name, and nation, we cannot but acknowledge with S. August:Aug. in psal. 58. that almighty God hath of his prouidence and iust iudgment signed, and marked them like Caine,Genes. 4. The causes vvhy God hath orday∣ned that the Ievves shal stil remaine a dst∣inct people from al other, not∣vvithstanding their general dis∣persion. Psal. 58. that they may neuer be extingui∣shed, but remaine alwayes a distinct people from al other, to beare and indure the deserued scourge of his wrath, and to serue not only for a manifest example of his iustice, but also for an euident testimony against them selues and al infidels, of the om∣nipotent diuinity of our Sauiour Iesus Christ, whome they cruci∣fied, and of the verity of our Christian religion which they im∣pugne. 31. This S. Augustin wel considered, who expounding this verse of the psalme; Ne-occideris eos, nequando obliuiscantur populi mei; saith that it may wel be vnderstood, as the wordes of our Saui∣our to his father concerning the Iewes, as though he should say: Istos inimicos meos qui me occiderunt noli tu occidere,Aug. in Psal. 58. maneat gens Iudaeo∣rum; These my enemies (o father) who haue killed me, doe not thou kil, but let the nation of the Iewes remayne; wherof he also yeeldeth two rea∣sons, the one that they remaining in continual affliction, may be a testimony to the world, as wel of their owne sinne and great ingratitude to almighty God, as also of his iustice in punishing the same; the other reason is, Quia necessarij sunt credentibus gentibus;Aug. Ibid. Because they are necessary for the gentils which beleeue; & why? mary (saith hee) to the end that (as the psalmist saith) almighty God may shew vnto vs his mercy in our very enemies: that is to say, that by their ob∣stinance and reprobation, we may see his mercy towards vs in our vocation; besides that,Aug li 12 con∣tra Faustum. they serue vs also (saith he in an other place) for porters to beare and carry after vs the law and the prophets, in testimony of the doctrine of our Christian catholique Church. 32. In which respect S. Bernard saith notably,The Ievves ought not to be expelled from a∣mongst Christ∣ans, and vvhy. Bernard. ad e∣piscop. clerum. & populum spir. ep. 322. Non sunt perse∣quendi Iudaei, non sunt trucidandi, nec effugandi quidem &c. The Iewes are not to be persecuted, they are not to be killed, no nor to be chased from amongst vs: and then giuing the reason therof, he saith; Viui qui∣dem apices nobis sunt. &c. They are liuely letters, representing vnto vs the passion of our Lord, for they are dispersed into al countries, to the end that whiles they pay the penalty of their horible crime, they may be witnesses of
our redemption; Besides that (saith he) if they were cleane extinguished, how should the promise of their reduction, and conuersion in the latter end of the world be ful filled? Thus reasoneth S. Bernard, which I haue thought god to note by the way, to satisfie the scruple of some in these daies who are scandalized to see the Iewes suffred to liue in Rome,VVhy the Ievves are suffred to liue in Rome, & other Christian citties. and other Christian countries, not considering, as it seemeth, the perticuler prouidence of God therein, who so or∣daineth it for their greater punishment, his owne greater glory, the manifestation of his loue towards vs, the confirmation of our Christian religion; yea and for the saluation of some of them, whome it pleaseth him to cal to the Christian faith, whi∣les neuertheles their whole nation in general beareth the heauy burthen of their owne malediction, which they gaue against them selues,Math. ca. 27. when they cried. Sanguis eius super nos, et super filios no∣stros. His blood light vpon vs and vpon our children. 33. Thus much concerning the iustice of God vpon the peo∣ple of the Iewes for their sinne, which sinne, as it was the grea∣test that euer was committed, so also it hath had, and stil hath the greatest and most rigorous punishment, that euer was laid vpon any nation or country, and is so euident, that it cannot be denyed. OTHER EXAMPLES OF GODS SEVERE iudgments vpon commonvvelths for sinne, and particulerly for negligence in the execution of iustice vpon offendours, and for the sinnes of the flesh. CHAP. 20. A great plague and famin in the citties of Rome and Laurentum, for negligence in the execution of iustice. Plutat. in Ro∣mulo.BVT to leaue the scriptures apart for awhile, and to prosecute this matter a litle further with the ex∣amples of prophane authors, we read in Plutark that when Romulus King of Rome, and Tatius King of the Sabins after cruel warrs, had made their com∣position to gouerne the Romans and Sabins ioyntly, their fel a strange kind of plague and famin in the citties of Rome and Lau∣rentum,
for 2. murthers commited by the Romans and Laurentins, the one by the kinsmen of Tatius vpon certaine embassadours of Laurentum (which murder Tatius neglected to punish) and the other by the frends of the said embassadours vpon Tatius, in re∣uenge of the iniustice done by his kinsmen, and suffered by him, which also Romulus let passe vnpunished; whervpon it being no∣ted, that the plague and famine encreased strangely in both cit∣ties, and a common opinion conceiued that it was a punishment of God vpon them for those murthers committed; and not pu∣nished, they resolued to doe iustice vpon the offendours, which being done, the plague ceased presently in both places. 2.Plutar. in Ca∣millo. Also the same author ascribeth the sack of Rome by the Gaules to the iust iudgment of God vpon the Romans, for two in∣iustices committed by them; The first was the vniust banish∣ment of Camillus; The second, their refusal to punish certaine embassadours of their owne, who being sent to treat peaceably with the Gaules in behalfe of the Clusians, committed acts of ho∣stility against them contrary to the law of armes: and when the Gaules sent to Rome to demand reparation of the iniury,Rome sacked & spoyled by the Gaules, in puni∣shment of tvvo iniuries commit∣ted by the Ro∣mans. the Ro∣mans not only refused to giue them satisfaction, but also made their embassadors who had done the iniury, Generals of an army to assist the Clusians against them, not with standing that the Fe∣ciales (who were certaine officers ordained by Numa Pompilius, to determine of the iust and lawful causes to make peace or warre) made great instance to the Senat that the embassadours might be punished, lest the penalty of their fault might otherwise fal vpon the commonwelth, as indeede it did; for the Gaules giuing battaile to the embassadours, easely ouerthrew them, and pro∣secuted their victory, spoiled, & sacked Rome, as I haue declaredChap. 5. nu. 6. before vpon an othet occasion. 3. Herein I wish to be noted how greuious a sinne it is in the opinion of the very Paynims themselues, and how dangerous to commonwelth, to neglect and omit the punishment of wron∣ges and iniuries done therin; Wherby the offences of particuler men, are made the sinnes and offences of the whole state, and draw the wrath and punishment of God vpon the same. Wherof an other example may also be gathered out of the same author and history,Plut. Ibid. concerning the cause and manner of the first com∣ming
of the Gaules into Italy, and of the great spoyle they made in Tuscane, which seemed to proceede of the iust iudgment of God for the like necligence in the execution of iustice. The cause vvhy the Gaules came into Italy.4. For one of the cuntry of Tuscane called Aruntius, hauing his wife taken from him, and kept by force by a noble man cal∣led Lucumo, and finding no remedy by iustice (by reason that his aduersary was supported by the Magistrats) was so incensed therwith against the whole state, that he went into France, and caryed with him some of the grapes and other commodities of Italy, to inuite the Gaules to attēpt the inuasion of Tuscane, wherto he easely perswaded them, & serued them for their guide, God so disposing of his iustice, as it seemed, that he to whome the state had done the wronge, should be the meanes and instru∣ment of the punishment due for the same. Plutat. in his treatise intituled Narrationes ama∣totiae. Diodor. Sicul. li. 15. c. 14. Cicero. de diui∣nat. li. 1. The Lacedemo∣nians greuously punished for o∣mission of iustice & for the sinnes of the flesh.5. Hereto I wil adde an other notable example in the same kind, of the ouerthrow of the Lacedemonians, & their losse of the empyre of Greece, by the iust iudgmēt of God for the like offence, as both Diodorus Siculus, Plutark Cicero, and others affirme, and the euent it selfe made it manifest, the story is thus. 6. Two Lacedemonians passing ouer the playne of Leuctra, were lodged & courteously entertayned in the howse of one Scedasus, who had two hansome women to his daughters, and returning that way shortly after, and finding the two young women at home, and their father absent, first rauished, and after killed them both; Their father at his returne finding his daughters slaine, and vnderstanding who had bin the doers of it, went to Lacedemonia to craue iustice against the malefactors; but so potent were they and their freends there, that he could by no meanes obtayne it, wherupon after infinit malidictions powred forth in the sorrowe of his hart against them, and their whole state, he went home and desperatly killed him selfe vpon the graue of his daughters; Not long after, warrs growing betwixt the The∣bans, and the Lacedemonians, the soule of Scedasus appeared to Pe∣lopidas (one of the cheefe captaynes of the Thebans) and encou∣raged him to giue battayle to the Lacedemonians in the plaine of Leuctra, where he and his daughters were buried, telling him that their death should be there reuenged, and so afterwards it fel out. For there the Lacedemonians lost not only the the battaile,
but also the empire of Greece, which they had many yeeres be∣fore possessed; Wherin may also be noted how God executed his iustice vpon them in an other respect. For wheras the sinne of the flesh was growne in Lacedemonia to such excesse, as that no part of Greece was so much infected therwith (as I haue signified before) it seemed conuenient to the diuine iustice, that the same should also be a meane to draw his further wrath vpon their whole state, that so they might be punished by the meanes of that sinne, wherby they had most offended. 7. And truly though many sinnes are compted more hay∣nous and are more seuerely chastised by humane lawes then the sinnes of the flesh, yet almighty God hath not more rigo∣rously punished any in whole countryes & states then the same; as to omit the examplar plague that fel vpon Sodoma and Gomor∣rha by fyer from heauen,Gen. ca. 19. Examples of Gods seuere iud∣gements vpon vvhole common∣vvelths for the sinnes of the flesh. Li. Iudic. ca. 20. Ibid. ca. 19. for the detestable sinne against nature (which in that respect is called Sodomy) we read in the holy scri∣ptures, that al the whole trybe of Beniamin excepting only 600) was slaine by the childeren of Israel by the commandement of almighty God, for a rape that those of the towne of Gabaa com∣mitted vpon the wife of a Leuit, whome they abused in such ex∣cesse that shee presently dyed, wherupon the other trybes assem∣bled them selues, and first demanded to haue the malefactors de∣liuered vnto them, and then vpon the refusal therof, consulted with almighty God whether they should inuade them or no, which God commanded them to doe, and appoynted them a captaine,Chap. 12. nu. 20. & although in two battailes the childeren of Israel had the woorst (for such cause as I haue declared before vpon an o∣ther occasion) yet in the 3. battaile; Percussit eos Dominus (saith the scripture) in conspectu filiorum Israel &c. Our Lord stroke those of the tribe of Beniamin in the sight of the children of Israel. Who killed of them 25100. men, that bore armes; wherby we may see no lesse then by the former examples, as wel the enormity of the sinne of the flesh, as also that the refusal to doe iustice vpon a few offendours of one towne of Gabaa, drew al the tribe of Beni∣amin into the participation of the offence, which was therfore punished in them al alike. 8. But to omit the later consideration (to wit, of the omis∣sion to doe iustice vpon offendours) and to say some what more
concerning the punishment of God for the sinnes of the flesh, we haue a notable and fearful example therof in the kingdome of Spayne,Spayne conque∣erd by the Mores for the sinnes of the flesh. conquered by the Moores and possessed by them 700. yeeres for that offence; For when the kingdome had flourished, as wel in religion as power, from the tyme of King Recared (the first Catholique kinge therof) for the space of 120. yeeres, the wicked kinge Vitiza being a man giuen ouer to al lust,Roderic. Tole∣tan. li. 3. de rebus Hisp. c. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. and car∣nallity, infected and corrupted al Spayne, not only with the bad example of his owne dissolute life (hauing many wiues at once besides diuers concubines) but also with abominable lawes, wherby he gaue leaue to al sorts of men to haue as many wiues and concubines as they listed, yea & forced priestes, and such as would haue liued chast, to marry; by which meanes al Spayne be∣came with in a while to be no better then a common stew or brodel. And although almighty God according to his accustomed mercy expected their conuersion & amendment al the time of his raigne, & laied only the penalty therof vpon him, whome he depriued both of his crowne and of his eye-sight, by the meanes of Roderick who succeeded him in the kingdome: yet when the said Roderick followed his stepps as wel in his vicious life,Idem. Ibid. Ioan. vasaeus. chron. an. 11. as in the maintenance of his abominable lawes, it pleased God of his iustice to permitt him to giue the occasion both of his owne ruyne, and also of the ouerthrow of al Spayne by the sinne of the flesh, wherwith the whole kingdome was, as it were, ouer∣flowed. 9. For whereas King Roderick had sent a kinsman of his owne called Count Iulian, embassadour into Africk, and in the meane tyme rauished his daughter, or (as some write) his wife; the Count vnderstanding it at his returne, was so incensed therwith against the king, that in reuenge therof he practised with the Moores to bring them into Spayne, who with his assistance con∣quered it so speedily, and with such destruction of the people, that the punishment of God was most euident therin. For ha∣uing first ouerthrowne King Roderick (whose body could neuer after the battaile be found) they subdued almost al Spayne in 8.Almost al Spayne conque∣red by the Mores in 8. months.Ioan vassaeus in chron. an. 714. months, or in 14. as some say, and slew 700000. of al sortes of people; besides great numbers of captiues, which they sent pri∣soners into Barbary, and from that tyme forward they remayned
in the possession of that kingdome, or of some great part therof for the space of 700. yeeres. 10.The subuersion of Spayne by the Mores attributed by vvyse and holly men in the same age, to Gods iustice for their sinnes of the flesh Baron. anno 745. This example of the conquest and subuersion of Spaine for the sinns of the flesh, was so famous, and so much obserued, by godly and wise men at the same time when it hapned, that S. Bonifacius, a countriman of ours and bishop of Mentz in Germany (who liued in the same age, and conuerted the Saxons and Frisons from paganisme to the Christian faith) proposed it to an english King called Ethelbald King of the Mercians, to with draw him from his dissolute life; and for as much as his epistle to him con∣teineth very notable matter, I wil alleage here some part ther∣of, translated out of the latin, wherin this zealous, and blessed bishop hauing reprehended the King for his loose life, saith furder thus. 11. I beseech you deare sonne in our Lord,Baron ed. an. A notable epi∣stle of S. Bonifa∣cius an English man, bishop of Mentz to King Ethelbald to vvith dravv him from his dis∣solute life. that if this be ttue which is reported of you, you wil repent and amend your life, remembring how vnfitte it is for you, who haue the Image of God created in you, to conuert the same in to the Image of the deuil by licentiousnes, and that you, whome no merits or deserts of your owne, but the bountiful piety of almighty God hath made a prince, and King, to gouerne many, should make your selfe slaue of the diuel by the sinns of the flesh; For as the Apostle saith, what sinne soeuer a man comitts, he makes him selfe slaue therof,Hovv rigorusly the Saxons in Germany being painimes puni∣shed adultery and fornication. and the Paynims them selues who know not the true God, doe obserue in this point, that which God orday∣ned from the begining, liuing in al true loue and loialty with their wiues, and punishing adultery, and fornication. For if in old Saxony, where there is no knowledg of Christ, either maide or wife doe cōmit adultery or fornication, she is first strangled, and after burnt, and he that corrupted her is hanged ouer her; or else she is stripped naked to the middle, & whipped by chast matrons from towne to towne, and prickt with sharpe kniues vntil she dye therwith. If therfore the gentils who know not God, haue such a zeale and loue to chastity, what should you doe, that are a Christian King; Therfore haue pitty vpon your owne soule, and vpon the miltitude of your people which pe∣rish by your example, for whose soules you are to yeeld ac∣compt. Consider also this, that if the english nation (as the
very Painims in France and Italy doe cast in our teeth) doe con∣temne mariage,The hurt that follovveth to commonvvelth of vnlavvful procreation. and giue them selues ouer to vnlawful lust, it must needs follow that the children which shal proceede of them wil degenerat, and al the people grow euery day worse and worse, and become at last cowardly and weake in warre, vnstable in faith, shameful and reprochful amongst men and hateful to God, as it hath already chanced to the Prouensals, Burgundians and Spaniards, who falling from God by the same meanes, are now by his iust iudgment seuerly punished for the same by the Saracens, with the losse of the Christian faith. 12. Thus wrote this famous bishop a few yeeres after Spaine was conquered by the Moores,Baron. eod. an. and further added certaine exam∣ples of Gods iustice extended vpon some english Kinges, for their licentious life and other offences,The vnfortunat ends of the kings Celred, Osred, & Ethelbald, in punishments of their licentious liues. as vpon Kinge Celred predecessor of Ethelbald, who he saith was not only a deflowerer of religious women, but also a breaker of ecclesiastical priui∣ledges, and that therfore God suffred a wicked spirit to take and posesse him, as he was banquetinge with his nobility, and to kil him after that he had made him blaspheme almighty God, and to the same cause he also attributeth the vnfortunate end of O∣sred King of Northumberland, who he saith was Earundem culparum reus, guilty of the same faults, and that therfore God suffred him to be miserably killed. Thus this holy man admonished King Ethel∣bald; who as it may be presumed, contemned his councel, and therfore receiued at Gods handes, the punishment which the blessed bishop had threatned him,Polidor. li. 4. & suplement Epi∣tomes hist. Bedae. for he was afterwards cruelly murdered as appeareth in our histories. 13. This I haue said, with desier that it may serue for a do∣cument to al princes & maiestrats to labour by al meanes to re∣presse and reforme that vice of the flesh, not only in them selues, if neede be; but also in their subiects, lest if it grow to excesse in either, it may draw the wrath of God vpon the whole com∣monwelth, wherof I haue declared the reason in the 17. chap∣ter. Therefore now I wil proceede to other examples of Gods wrath executed vpon commonwelths, & wil lay downe only 4. most manifest. Three in our owne country, and the fourth in the kingdome of Naples.
THAT THE THREE CONQVESTS OF our country by the Saxons, Danes, and Normans proceeded of the sinnes, either of the Princes, or of the people, or of both; and vvhat their sinnes vvere vvhich deserued so great a puni∣shment; Also by the vvay, it is declared vvhat great mercy God shevved tovvards the Brittans and English from tyme to tyme. CHAP. 21. IF WE consider the three diuers conquests of our country since it receiued the Christian faith, and the state therof at the same time, to∣geather with the iudgment and testimony of the grauest authours that haue written therof;The causes of the 3. conquests of our cuntry by the Saxons Da∣nes & Normans we shal easely see that the same haue proceeded of no other cause but of the sinns of the Princes, or of the peo∣ple, or of both, For although the infirmity of man is such, that there neuer wanteth matter for Gods iustice to punish in com∣monwelths (by reason wherof we see that in al countries the people are scourged more or lesse from time to time, not only perticulerly euery one in his owne person, with misaduentures, sicknes, losse of goods, death of children & such like, but also ge∣nerally with plagues, famin, inundations and warrs) yet the su∣buersion of commonwelths neuer chanceth, but for some great excesse of sinne, either in the Prince, or in the people, or in both; & commonly after many warnings & admonitions giuen by gentle and sweete corrections, such being the longanimity and patience of al nighty God, that he laieth the axe at the foote of the tree long before he cut it downe, and trieth al meanes to cure the sores of his seruants, by lenitiues and fomentations, rather then by caueres and incisions, or by cutting off the infe∣cted member, which he neuer doth but when there is no other remedy. 2. This course we see he held with his owne people, for though hee often chastised them with famine, pestilence, inua∣sions
of enemies and ciuil warres;The proceedinge of almighty God tovvards his ovvne people like to the course he held vvith the Britans. Hierem. ca. 2. Hierem. ca. 5. yet after a while he euer re∣stored them to tranquillity, plenty & peace, vntil at length they proued so incorrigible, that the prophet lamented in the person of God, that al his fatherly correction was lost vpon them, say∣ing; Frustra percussi filios vestros. I haue beaten and chastised your chil∣dren in vaine; and againe the said prophet saith to almighty God; Percussisti eos &c. Thou hast beaten them (o Lord) and they haue not bene sory; thou hast afflicted them, and they haue refused to receaue thy disci∣pline; As who would say, there is noe other remedy left, but reprobation, subuersion, and vtter extirpation of them; & ther∣fore almighty God gaue them ouer into the hands of their ene∣mies;4. Reg. ca. 17. first the ten tribes in Samaria which were al taken with their King Osee and translated into Syria, and after also the other two tribes in Iuda, were caried into captiuity by Nabuchadonosor King of Babilon,4. Reg. ca. 23.24.25. where they remained 70. yeeres; & though they were after restored to their country and their temple reedified, yet at length they were for their extreame ingratitude and per∣uerse obstinacy vtterly ruynated, as I haue declared before. The pacience vvhich God vsed tovvards the Brittans before their conquest.3. The like proceeding almighty God vsed with our coun∣try in the time of the Brittans after they receaued the Christian faith, for he chastised them some times with dearth and famine, some tymes with pestilence, and other whiles with incursions of their enemies, and with ciuil warrs amongst them selues, so long as the same sufficed to reduce them to repentance and a∣mendment of their liues, as some tymes it did; which our fa∣mous country man S. Bede, and the ancient Gildas called the Sage, doe testifie, declaring that the Brittans being driuen partly by fa∣min,The miserable state of the Bri∣tans inuaded by Pictes and Scots. Gildas de exci∣dio Britan. and partly by inuasions of Scots and Picts, either to abandon the country, or to hide them selues in mountaines woods and caues, craued help of the Romans writting vnto them that la∣mentable epistle, wherof Gildas maketh mencion, in the which they said; Our barbarous enemyes doe driue vs to the sea, and the sea dri∣ueth us back to them againe, so that of two kind of deaths we haue our choice, to wit, whether we wil haue our throats cut, or els be drowned; Thus wrote they to the Romans:The Britans dest∣itut of humane he, had re∣course to the de∣uine, and obtay∣ned it. 4. But being not succored by them, by reason of their great warrs at the same time with Attila, they begane to haue recourse to the mercy of God, and to rely wholy vpon his helpe (as the
fore said authors report) and so with his assistance assailed their enemies out of the caues, and woods where they lay hid,Beda. ecles. hist li. 1. ca 14. Gildas de exci. Brittan. and not only gaue them great ouerthrowes, but also droue them out of the country, & shortly after had such plenty of corne, fruite, and al kind of victualls, that the like had nor bene seene,The Britans by prosperity be∣came insolent, and vngratful tovvard God. nor heard of before in many ages; wherupon followed the effect which Moises noted and lamented in the children of Israel; In∣crassatus est dilectus (saith he) & recalcitrauit; The beloued people of God was made fatte, and then they began to kick, that is to say (as he ex∣poundeth it presently) Incrassatus, impinguatus,Deuter. 32. Ibid. dilatatus dereliquit Deum factorem suum: Being become faire and fatte, they forsooke their God and Creator, and so it fel out with the Brittans. 5. For they proued so vngratful for Gods great mercy to∣wards them, that (as the foresaid authors affirme) they fel into the extremity of al mischeefe and wickednes:Beda. hist. li. 5. ca. 14. The vices and sinnes of the Bri∣tans. Non solum secula∣res viri &c. Not only secular men, but also the ecclesiastical, giuing them selues wholy to dronkenes, to animosity, and contention, enuy, cruelty, ha∣tred of truth, loue of lyes, and al vice; wherupon our Lord scourged them againe with such a pestilent mortallity, that with in a while there were not men enough a liue (as these authors te∣stify) to bury the dead,Idem. Ibid. Nevv inuasions of the Britans by Picts, and Scots. and when that sufficed not to reuoke them from their vicious liues; Non multo post (saith S. Bede) a∣crior gentem peccatricem vltio diri sceleris secuta est; Shortly after a sharper punishment of such detestable wickednes followed vpon that sinneful peo∣ple; For the Picts and Scots began againe to make such irruptions vpon them, that not being able to withstand them,Idem. Ibid. The Britans ca∣led in the Sax∣ons for their de∣fence vvhich by Gods iustice tur∣ned to their vt∣ter ouerthrovv in the end. Idem. ca. 15. Idem. ca. 16. The repentance of the Britans for their sinnes, and God mercy tovvards them they were forced to cal in the Saxons to assist them, Quod domini nutu (saith S. Bede) dispositum esse constat. &c. VVhich it is manifest was done by Gods disposition, to the end that their wickednes might receaue due punish∣ment. For with in a while the Saxons did confederate them selues with their enemies, and picking quarrells against them, destroi∣ed al the country with fier and sword, burning vp howses, vil∣lages, and townes, and killing al sorts of people, in so much that many fled into forreine countries, and others hid them selues amongst the hills, mountaines and woods, vntil acknowled∣ging the iust iudgment of God vpon them, they called to him for mercy; Vnanimo consensu auxilium caeleste precantes; Crauing help from heauen with vniforme consent; wherwith Gods mercy was mo∣ued
to giue them Ambrosius Aurelianus for their captaine, and diuers notable victories by his meanes, and especially at Black∣amore in yorke shere (for so was called Mons Badonicus. as saith Polidore) where they made such great slaughter of them,Pol. Virgil. li. 3. that for some yeeres, they did not further molest them, God so disposing in reward of their repentance at that time. 6. For being as Gildas saith myndful of their former calami∣ties and afflictions laied vpon them for their sinns,The relapse of the Britans into their former vices. al sorts of men, spiritual and temporal, as wel the Princes as their subiects, did euery one his duty in his vocation; At illis (saith Gildas) de∣cedentibus. &c. But they being dead, and an other age succeeding igno∣rant of the miseries past,Gildas de excidi. Britan. and corrupted with present ease and pleasure, al trueth and iustice was so subuerted, that there appeared not so much as any signe therof in al the fore said states of men; Excep∣tis paucis et valde paucis. Excepting a few, and those very few; for the Kinges (saith hee) were tirants, and the Iudges, most vvicked and cor∣rupt,The vices of the clergy and laity in Britanny. Idem. Ibid. the priests negligent of their duty; Raro sacrificantes et nunquam puro corde inter altaria stantes; Seeldome sacrificing and neuer comming to the altar with a pure hart, ignorant, impudent, simoniacal, and lasciui∣ous; and al sorts of laimen loaden with wickednes, with mur∣der, paricids, pride, adulteries, swearing, periuries, blasphemies, and al iniquity. 7. And to shew some particularities of this, and how iustly the vengeance of almighty God was powred vpon the whole nation,Gild Ibid. The horrible sin∣nes of the princes of Brittany be∣fore the conquest thereof by the Saxons. Galfrid monu∣met. hist. li. 12. ca. 15. King Cadvval∣ladar fleing into France, acknovv¦ledged Gods iu∣stice vpon him selfe, and his people for their sinnes. the same author toucheth breefly the liues of some of the kinges and princes that were in his time, as of Constantius, Aurelius, Conanus, Vortiporius, Cuneglasus and Maglocunus, taxing them with tiranny, periury, sacrilegious murders, and parricids, (committed euen before the holy altars) adulteries, horrible incestes, breach of vowes, of religion, and chastity, yea and 2. of them with beastly Sodomy; for the which enormityes, and the general corruption and wickednes of the whole nation, he threatneth or rather prophesieth vnto them the vtter ruyne and destruction which shortly after worthily fel vpon them, as the British cronicler Geffrey of Monmoth, also acknowledgeth saying that King Cadwalladar (who was the last of the race of Britans) vsed these wordes as he fled by sea into France, with the reli∣ques of the Britan nation; Vae nobis peccatoribus ob immania scelera
nostra, &c. VVoe be to vs sinners for our greuious sinnes wherwith we haue neuer ceased to offend God vvhiles we had time of repentance, and therfore novv the punishment of God falleth vpon vs, vvhich rooteth vs out of our natiue soyle. Thus said King Cadwalladar, and much more to the same purpose, wherby, as also by that which I haue said before it euidently appeareth that the sinnes of the Britans, as wel of the Princes as of the people, was the cause of their ouerthrowe, and of the conquest of their country by the Saxons. 8.Of the conqust of the English by the Danes. And now to speake of that which followed in the raigne of the said Saxons & English, & how almighty God punished them also for their sinnes, it cannot be denied but that there were a∣mongst them many holy men and great Saints of God, as wel of the kinges, as of the bishops, prelats, religious men, and others;The great ver∣tue of many of the Saxon kings vvhereof 8. vvere canonized beside 60. prin∣ces of royal blood. Guliel. Malsmsb li. 2. 5. 13. Martirol. Roman. & alij. Chap. 20. nu. 10. Baron. anno. 745. The great vice that rayned in England vvhen the Danes made their first inua∣sion. as 8. Kinges, aboue 60 Princes of royal blood (to wit, sonnes, daughters, nephewes, or neeces of kings) and 35. bishops, be∣sides a far greater number of religious and holy men and wo∣men, also famous for their holy life and miracles, before, or af∣ter their deaths, that they were and are held and honored for Saints, neuertheles there neuer wanted amongst the rest of the Princes, and people, matter, and as I may tearme it, fewel, to kindle the wrath of God against the whole realme, in so much that S. Bonifacius bishop of Mentz in Germany (of whome I haue spoken before) writing to an archdeacon in England called Hec∣ert about the yeere of our Lord 745. exclaymed against the vices of the english Christians saying; In auditum malum est prae ceteris se∣culis &c. The like mischeefe hath not bin heard of in former ages, to vvit, that a Christian nation should far exceede & surpasse the Sodomits in sinne, and that contemning lavvful marriage, & the custome of the vvhole vvorld, and the precept of God, they should liue in continual incest, adultery, and abominable vvhoredome, euen with religious vvomen. 9. Thus wrote S. Boniface in the same age, & not many yeeres before that the Danes first entred England,The Danes infe∣sted & troubled the English by piracies and vvarres 200. yeres. Circa an. 740. Polidor li. 5. hist. Angl. wherby it may wel be iudged that for those enormious sinnes of the flesh, which he so much reprehended in the English, almighty God chastised them, not only by ciuil warres, which seeldome ceased there whiles there were many kinges, but also by inuasion of the Da∣nes, who first by piracyes & after by open warrs, cruelly infested and troubled the realme at diuers and sundry tymes, for the
space of almost 200.ds vvrath appeased to∣vvards the En∣glish by the prayers and me∣rits o the Saints of the nation. Polid. li. 5. hist. Anglic. K. Alured being greatly distressed by the Danes vvas conforted by a vision of S. Cuthert. Gulielmus Mal∣sburiensis de ge∣stis Anglo. li. 2. ca. 4. Polidor. li. 5. Ingulphus Hist. Angl. yeeres, vntil at length, the iustice of God was satisfied and his wrath appeased by the prayers and merits of the Saints of the nation, as it was reuealed to the good King Alured, or Alfred founder of the famous vniuersity of Oxford, who hauing had many yeres warres with the Danes, and being driuen by them at length to great extremity, and forced to re∣tire him selfe into a certaine fenny and marish ground in Somer∣setshyre, with his mother and other of his nobillity, was comfor∣ted with a vision of S. Cutbert, who appeared not only to him, but also to his mother in their sleepe, telling them that wheras the english had for a long tyme before borne the heauy pen∣nance of their sinnes, by the inuasion and molestation of the Danes, God would of his mercy ease them therof: Indigenarum Sanctorum meritis, for the merits of the home borne Saints, or holy men of the nation. And therfore bad him be of good comfort, for that he should with in a while be restored to his former state and haue the victory of his enemyes, which after proued most true. K. Alured ex∣pelled al the Da∣nes, vvhich vvould not be Christians. Polid. virg. hist. li. 5. Idem. li. 6.10. For he recouered al that which he had lost and droue the Danes out of England, excepting such as were content to become Christians, to whome he gaue the kingdomes of Northumberland, and of the Eastangles, who duringe his tyme neuer moued more warre, & they of the easterne parts stirring afterwardes against his sonne called Edvvard the first, were by him vtterly ouer∣throwne, as also the other in Northumberland, in like manner and vpon like occasion, were subdued by his grandchild Adelstane who made England a monarchy, which so remained and flouris∣hed without further infestation of the Danes,The mercy of God tovvards the posterity of the good King Alured to the 4 genration. Guliel. Malmsb. li 2. ca 8. Ingulphus hist. Anglorum. during the raigne of 4. Kings the successors of Adelstan, to wit, his 2. bretheren, Edmond and Eldred (who succeeded one an other) and the 2. sonnes of Edmund called Edvvin and Edgar, which Edgar was for his excellent vertues and prosperous raigne called; Honor & de∣liciae Anglorum, the honor & delight of England, or as Ingulphus te∣armeth him, honor & rosa regum, the honor, and rose of Kings, of whom it is written hatt in his tyme al ecclesiastical orders flow∣rished, learned and vertuous men were highly esteemed, al ciuil and forrein warrs ceased, Scotland was tributary to him, and he was called the King of Albion, being no lesse powerful by sea then by land; no yeere of his raigne passed wherein he built not
some monastaries, or else did not some great and notable good to his country, and such were his vertues and so great the fame of his felicity, that there came principal men out of al countries adioyning to see him, and to be acquainted with him. 11 Loe then how the promise of S. Cubert to Kinge Alured was fulfilled, partly in him, and partly in his posterity to the 4. generation, and how the Danes were expelled, and the english flourished, when the penalty of their sinnes past was paied, and Gods wrath appeased, by the merits of the Saints or holy men of the Iland as S. Cubert signified. 12.The Danes re∣turned into En∣gland for the punishment of sinne. Polidor. hist. Angli. li. 7. Therfore wheras the Danes returned againe into england shortly after Edgar in the raigne of his sonne Etheldred, and not only molested it with incursions (as they were wont) but also conquered and possessed it for a time, it may wel be presumed that they were but the instruments of Gods iustice therin for the punishment of sinne, as wel as in former times; and although the iudgments of God are so inscrutable, that no certaine iud∣gment can be made therof, furder then it pleaseth him selfe to reueale; neuertheles speaking probably according to the course of his diuyne iustice declared in the the scriptures in like cases,The Danes con∣quered England (as it may be thought) for the sinnes of K. Ed∣gar, and his sonne Etheldred. it may be thought that the said conquest made by the Danes, pro∣ceeded of the sinns partly of the famous King Edgar (though he were dead before) and partly of his wife Alfreda, and lastly of their sonne Etheldred in whose time the country was conque∣red; For although King Edgar excelled in al piety and vertue in his later daies (as I haue declared) yet he did an act in his youth wherof it may be thought his children and posterity paid the penalty. 13.Polid. Virg. hi. Anglic. li. 6. VVhat the of∣fence vvas of K. Edgar, and Alfreda his vvife. This I say for that after the death of Elfleda his wife (by whome he had King Edvvard the martyr) he fel in loue with Al∣freda wife to a noble man called Ethelvvolfe, whome with her consent he caused to bee killed, to the end he might marry her; and how greuous this sinne of his was in the sight of almighty God, and how iustly punished in his posterity, we may wel iud∣ge by the like offence of King Dauid, who to the end he might marry Bersabe procured the death of Vrias her husband,2. Reg. ca. 1 for the which the prophet Nathan tould him from almighty God, that the sword should neuer depart out of his house, and that his
sonne in the cradle should dye therfore, besides that God permit∣ted for punishmēt of that sinne, that al his other children except Salomon died most vnfortunatly;Idem. ca. 13. For Amnon hauing deflowred his sister Thamar was killed by his brother Absolon; & Adonias by Salomon, & lastly Absolon rebelling and fighting against his owne father Kinge Dauid,3. Reg. ca. 2. was miserably slaine, hanging on a tree by the haire of the head;2. Reg. ca. 18. & therfore no meruaile that the like sinne of Kinge Edgar was also seuerely punished in his children. 14. To this purpose it is to be noted, that his marriage pro∣ued most vnfortunate, not only to the fruite that proceeded therof, and to the whole realme (as shal be declared here after) but also to King Edward his sonne by his former wife, who suc∣ceeding him in his kingdome, was shortly after killed by the meanes of Alfreda his stepmother,Polid. Virg. li. 6. in fine. The seuerity of Gods iustice in punishing sinne. for the aduancement of her sonne Etheldred, wherin I can not but note by the way, the se∣uerity of Gods iustice in punishing sinne, seeing the said young Prince being so holy and innocent of life, and so higly in Gods fauor, that presently after his death many notable miracles were done at his body, and he canonized for a Saint, yet he could not escape the temporal punishment due to his fathers offence. 15. But to proceede, such was the common opinion of the innocencye and holines of this young King Edvvard; and of the enormity of the sinne committed by Alfreda in the murther of him, that the conciete of most men was at that time (as VVilliam of Malmsbury witnesseth) that the conquest of England by the Da∣nes was a punishment of God for the same;Guliel Malms. de gestis Reg. An. li. 2. c. 9. which may wel be presumed, especialy if we adde therto the offence, not only of his father (wherof I haue already spoken) but also of his bro∣ther Etheldred, for whose cause he was murdred, and in whose time that conquest hapned; for it may be thought most conso∣nant to the iustice of almighty God, that Etheldred being the sonne of the wicked Alfreda, and fruit of the cursed marriage, yea and with al most wicked him selfe,S. Dunstan pro∣phesyed of the conquest of En∣gland. Idem Ibid. c. 10. Polid. Virg. li. 7. Ingulphus Hist. Angl. should beare the penalty as wel of his owne, as of both his parents sinnes. This holy S. Dunstan Archbishop of Canterbury fore saw, and foretold of him, partly at his coronation (saving, that for his mothers sinne in the murder of King Edward, both he and his childrens should be seuerely punished, and his kingdome transferred to strangers)
and partly afterwards, when vpon displeasure taken against the Bishop of Rochester, he beseeged him in the said Citty, and was nothing moued, either with the humble sute of S. Dunstan, or els with his threats of the wrath of God, and S. Andrew, pa∣tron of the church of Rochester vntil at length S. Dunstan gaue him a hundreth pounds in money, for the which he was con∣tent to raise his sege; where vpon the holly man sent him woord, that seeing he preferred money, before God and his Apos al those mischeefes which God had ordained, should shortly fal vpon him, meaning the inuasion of the Danes, and losse of his kingdome, which fel out to be true. 16. And if we consider the manner of his life, and the nature,The offences of K. Etheldred in vvhose tyme the Danes conque∣red England. Eccli. ca. 10. and quality of his offences, we shal find, that they were the very same which the scriptures affirme to be the cause of the transla∣tion of kingdomes, from one nation to an other wherof the boke of Eclesiasticus saith Regnum de gente in gentem transfertur &c. kingdomes are transferred from nation to nation for iniustice, iniuries, ca∣lumniations, and diuers deceits. In which kind of sinnes, King Ethel∣dred greately exceeded, for he had his eares so open, and sho∣wed such fauour to al kind of accusers and calumniatours, that (as Polidor Virgil saith) no mans life was in security;Polidor. li. 7. besids that vpon euery light occasion, he spoiled, and banished the richest, and welthiest of his subiects, being geuen withal to al kind of riot, and dissolution; and therfore william of Malmsury writeth of him breefely thus; Eius vitae cursus saeuus in principio, miser in medio,Guliel Mal. de ge reg. li. 2. ca. 10. turpis in exitu; The course of his life was cruel in the begining, miserable in the midst, and shameful in the end.Polid. Virg. li. 7. K. Etheldred expelled out of England by Sueno King of the Danes, vvho reyned there fiue yeres. K. Etheldred after Suenos death recouered England again; and vsed his former cruelty and impiety. 17. Furthermore he was so cowardly & base minded, that he was no lesse contēptible to strangers abroad, ethen hateful to his owne subiects at home; wherupon the Danes tooke courage a∣gaine to enter England, who first made him graunt them a yeerely tribute, wherwith they were content for a time, & after turning thither againe, forced him to flie into Normandy and to leaue his kingdome to Svveno their King who exercised al kind of cruelty vpon the English, and enioyed the kingdome as long as he liued, which was not past 5. yeeres, after whose death Etheldred recoue∣red it againe, and possessed it 2. yeeres, whilst Canutus sonne to Svveno was held occupied at home with a rebellion of the people
of Norvvay, in which meane while, Etheldred returned like the dogge to his old vomit of cruelty and iniustice, especially against the Danes (who then had bene for some yeeres planted and mar∣roed in England) causing many of them to be killed with cruel torments,Idem. Ibid. and amongst others, Sigifredus, and Morgandus two of the noblest of them, were falsly accused of fained crimes, and put to death for the same; besides that Prince Edmund sonne to Etheldred rauished the wife of Sigifred, being a woman no lesse ad∣mirable for her beauty, then commendable for her chastity, al which when Canutus vnderstood,Canutus sonne tovv Svveno in∣uaded England. being moued with desire as wel to reuenge these iniuries done to his countrimen, as also to recouer the kingdome of England conquered by his father, pas∣sed ouer thither with an army, and put al to fier and sword; wherupon Etheldred died for sorrow,K. Etheldred died for sorrovv. Edmond Iron∣side sonne to K. Etheldred. Canutus king of England. and although his sonne Ed∣mund surnamed Ironside, after diuers conflictx & a combat fought hand to hand with Canutus possessed the one halfe of England by cōposition, yet with in a yeere Canutus enioyed the whole by the suddaine death of Edmund, slaine vpon a priuie as he was easing him selfe, and so he remained absolute King therof, as long as he liued, which was about 20. yeeres after. The mercy of God tovvards the English in turning their conquest to their comfort.18. Herein neuertheles it is to be noted, how the mercy of almighty God concurred with his iustice, and moderated the ri∣gour therof, for that of his infinit bounty he determined by this conquest as it seemeth, rather to chastise, correct, and redresse England then to ruine and oppresse it, and therfore after he had some what satisfied the seuerity of his iustice not only vpon the realme, by the 5. yeeres cruel raigne of Sweno (who ransacked and spoiled al sorts of men, as wel ecclesiastical, as temporal) but also vpon the persons of Etheldred and his sonne Edmond, he gaue them Canutus sonne to Sweno for their King, who though he was a stranger,The great vertu and piety of K. Canutus. yet gouerned with al clemency and good ex∣ample of life, doing continualy acts of piety, making good and holsome lawes, easing the people of taxes and impositions, and deseruing wel of al states, by the meanes wherof England flori∣shed in his time in peace and plenty, of whome I can not for beare (this occasion being offred) to declare here by the way a notable act, which I wish al Princes would wel waigh and consider in the height of their prosperity.
19.Polid. Virgil. Angl. hist. li. 7. in fine. A memorable act of K. Canu∣tus. It chanced once that as he was walking at Southamton by the sea side some of his noble men flattered him, and extolled aboue al measure his great power, calling him the most mighty and potent King of al Kinges commanding absolutly ouer men, land and sea, wherupon to correct their flattery (and to shew mans infirmity) he went to the very sea side, and sitting downe there, said to the waues (as the tide was comming in) I com∣mand you, that you touch not my feete, and being presently wel washed with a waue that came in vpon him, he arose, and tur∣ning to his noble men, said, Loe my Lordes you cal me King of Kinges and Lord of land and sea, though I can not command one of these litle wa∣ues of water; therefore know yee, that the only King of Kinges, and he that commandeth land and sea, is the father of our Lord Iesus Christ,Henricus Hun∣tind hist. Angl. li. 6. by whose wil and prouidence al thinges are gouerned; And hauing said thus he returned to VVinchester, and tooke the crowne which he vsed to weare vpon his head, and put it with his owne handes vpon an image of Christ crucified, which was in the church of S. Peter and Paul, and would neuer after weare any crowne so long as he liued. 20. Though this may seeme to be a digression from my mat∣ter, yet I haue thought good to recompt it here, as wel for the rarenes of the example, as also that it may appeare how merci∣fully God dealt with the people of England to giue them such a kinge, by whose piety their conquest turned to their comfort. And this his mercy appeared much more afterwards,Guliel. Malsm. de gest. reg. li. 2. ca. 12. Polid. Virg. li. 8. Ingulphus. hist. Henric. Huntind. li. 6. Roger. Houed. Annal. par. 1. S. Edvvard the Confessor sonne to K. Etheldred succeeded Canu∣tus. when it pleased his diuine maiesty so sweetly to dispose, that after the death of Canutus, and his two sonnes Haraldus and Hardicanutus, or as Polidor calleth him Cunueus, which two raigned but 6. yeeres the crowne returned againe to English blood, yea & to so excellent a Prince as was S. Edward the Confessor, who raigned in al tranquility peace and felicity aboue 23. yeeres, so that it may seeme that almighty God sought, not only by so great benifits, but also by the good endeauor and example of two such vertu∣ous & pious Kinges, to induce the people of England to reforme their liues, which had bene before so corrupted, by the euil ex∣ample, negligence, and bad gouernment of Etheldred; But when he saw their obstinacy and ingratitude towards him to be such that neither seuerity, nor lenity, could reclaime them, he gaue
them ouer into the handes of the Normans, partly to punish them according to their deserts, and partly to consummate the puni∣shment due to the sinns of Edgar and Etheldred; For which cause it may be thought he would not suffer the good King Edward (who was Etheldreds sonne) to haue any issue, or any other then liuing of the race of Etheldred, to succeede him in the kingdome; for at the same time liued Edgar, sonne to Edmund Ironside and his two sisters,Cul. Malms. de gest. reg. Angl. li. 2. c. 13. Guliel. Malms∣bury. li. 3. de VVilhelmo. 1. Christine; who was religious in a monastery at Ramesey, and Margaret, who was after married to Malcolme King of Sco∣tlād; And Edgar (as VVilliam of Malmsbury witnesseth who wrote in the time of King Henry first sonne to the Conquerour) hauing bene tossed and tumbled too, and fro, with great variety of fortune Nunc (saith he) remotus, & tacitus canos suos in agro consumet; He now wasteth and consumeth his hoary haires far from the court, in a silent and quiet country life. 21. But what soeuer may be supposed of Gods iudgments in this point, the other concerning the punishment of God vpon the people for their sinns is euident enough, partly by the cir∣cumstances and the euent,Guliel. Mal. de gest. reg. Angl. li. 2 c. 13. The conquest of England by the Normans reuea∣led to S. Ed∣vvard in a vi∣sion. Alredus Abbas in vita Edvvard. apud Surium 5. Ianuarij. and partly for that it pleased almighty God to reueale the same to King Edward him selfe alitle before his death, who liuing in a trance 2. daies togeather, signified when he came to him selfe, that two religious men whome he had knowne in Normandy to liue and die with great edification) had appeared vnto him, and tould him from almighty God, that after his death the kingdome should for a time be giuen ouer into the hands of Diuels, and wicked spirits for the sinns of the clergy and people. And further he said, that when he made in∣stāce to haue leaue to signify the same vnto them to the end that they might repent, & auert the wrath of God from them selues as the Niniuits did, the said religious men answered that it would be to no purpose, for that neither they wold repent, nor God would forbeare to punish them, and when he furder insisted to know when the wrath of God would be appeased towardes them and their sinnes remmitted,Guliel. Mal. vbi Supra. A parable sig∣nifyed to King Edvvard in his vision. they answered him in this parable. 22. When a greene tree; say they, being cutte of in the midst, and one part thereof separated from the other the breadth of 3. akers, shal with out helpe come togeather againe, flowrish, and
fructify, then shal they receaue some comfort,Alredus. Ibid. and their sinns be remitted; This he tould to the Queene his wife, the Lord Robert Steward of his house, Harald (who was after Kinge) and Stigand bishop of Canterbury, al which were present when he came out of his trance, and the euent shewed shortly after, the truth of the first part therof, when Duke VVilliam of Normandy slew King Harald, and conquered the realme,The exposition of the parable. and brought al the states therof to miserable seruitude; and as for the later part (to wit the parable) some haue expounded it, that it was fulfilled, when Henry the first married Maude the King of Scotlands daughter, whose mother Margaret was daughter to Edmund Ironside & neece to Edward the Confessor, as I haue signified before; so that the tree, that is to say, the raigne of English Kinges being cut asunder by the death of Kinge Edward in whome it ceased, was seperated from the trunke the breadth of 3. akers, that is to say, the raigne of 3. Kinges, to wit Harald, VVilliam the Conquerour, and VVilliam Rufus, and came togeather againe in Henry the first, when he ma∣ried the forsaide Maude, who was (as I haue said) daughter to Margaret and she daughter to Edmond Ironside, and the tree fructi∣fied when Maude the Empresse issued of that mariage, who was mother to Henry the 2. in whome ceased the raigne of strangers in England, al his successors being naturally english. 23 But to returne to speake of the sinns of the people, which according to the prophesy of S. Edward deserued so great a pla∣gue,Guliel. Malmesb. hist. Angl. li. 3. d VVilhel. 1. we may sufficiently vnderstand the same by the testimony of VVilliam of Malmesbury liuing in the same age, who saith, that although al learning, religion, and vertue had flowrished many yeeres amongst the english, yet a litle before the comming of the Normans the same was vtterly destroied and decaied;The enormious sinnes of the Clergy Nobility & people of En∣gland at the tyme of the con∣quest therof by the Normans. For the priests (saith he) were so vnlearned that they could skant pronounce truly the very vvordes of the sacraments, and diuin seruice; and such was the ignorance generally of al men, that a gramarian was held for a wonder, religious men were wholy giuen to delicacy and kept no rules of religion, the noble men and gentlemen gaue them selues ouer to gluttony and laciuiousnes, there was no respect of religion, nor care of iustice; in so much that the common people serued for no other then a praie to the nobility, who spoiled & ransacked them at their pleasure; It was a common
custome, when men had got their maidseruants with child, ei∣ther to send them to the stewes, or to sel them for slaues, droun∣kenes, and al the vices that commonly accompany the same, or follow therof, were generally through out the realme; Thus saith VVilliam of Malmsbury in substance. Alred. in vita Edvvardi. VVhat S. Ed∣vvard said at his death con∣cerning the sin∣nes of the En∣glish, and the conquest to fol∣lovv in punish∣ment thereof. VVilliam the conquerour mi∣nister of Gods iustice to chastise the English. Polid Virgil li. 8. in fine. Idem. li. 9. per totum. The tiranny of VVillam the conquerour v∣pon al states.24. Also S. Edward him selfe when he declared his vision said, that the magistrats as wel spiritual as temporal, were no better then ministers of the diuel, that God was euery where dishonored, law contemned, truth trodden vnder foote, pitty and mercy banished, cruelty held for a pastime and entertain∣ment; and therfore (said he) the wickednes of the english is now com∣plete, and growne to the height, and the reuenge and punishment therof is shortly to follow. 25. This was proued to be true by the euent with in a yeere after, when William Duke of Normandy called the Conquerour came into England, whome God made the instrument and minister of his iustice to chastice them, for being admitted and crowned King (presently after the bloody battaile wherin King Harald & 20000. men were slaine) he began to tiranize vpon al states, he spoiled the nobility of their landes, goodes, dignities and of∣fices, to giue the same to the Normans, he opprest the people with infinit, and intollerable taxes, and impositions; he depriued cit∣ties, bishopricks and monastaries, of their immunities, and pri∣uiledges, forcing them to redeeme them of him againe, for great sommes of money; he tooke from churches & religious howses, not only such money as they had in store, but also the holy ves∣sels dedicated to Gods seruice; he abolished the old lawes and ordained new, and caused them to be written in the Norman tounge, which the english vnderstood not, wherupon there grew great confusion in the exercise therof, in al sorts of actions and pleas, as wel criminal as ciuil, & many wrongfully lost their lands and goods, and many their liues, and a gate was opened to al kind of iniustice. 26. Furthermore he was not content only to spoyle the en∣glish of their wealth, but also depriued them of their pleasures, taking from very many noble men, and gentlemen their parkes, and chases for his owne vse, yea and ouerthrew howses, chur∣ches, villages and whole parishes to make forrests, in so much
that (as Polidor virg:Polidor. Virg. li. 9. witneseth) to make the chase which now is called nevv forrest he dispeopled and made desert al the country betwixt Salisbury and the seaside for 30. miles space, and when diuers of his nobility by reason of his tiranny rebelled against him, he tooke occasion therupon to vse al kind of seuerity,The extreame cruelty of K. VVilliam the conquerour. and cruelty, not only vpon their persons when they fel into his han∣des, but also vpon whole countryes and prouinces, which he so spoyled and ransacked, that they lay wast for some yeeres after; Finally his gouernment, during the tyme of his raigne, seemed to tend to nothing else, but to extirpate, and extinguish the race, and name of the English. 27.The English had not one day of ease or repose during the 21. yeres of vviliam Conquerours raigne. The cruelty and auarice of K. vvilliam ufus sonne to the conquerour. Polid. Virg. li. 10. Wherto if we add the frequent warrs in England in his tyme, partly by rebellion of his subiects, and partly by inuasion of strangers, as of Danes and Scots, we shal find that England had not one yeere, no nor one day of ease and repose during the 21. yeeres of his raigne; which calamity also continued, or rather encreased for 13. yeares after his death, by the succession of his sonne VVilliam Rufus, who far exceeded his father in cruelty, aua∣rice, oppression of his subiects, and contempt of God and man, by reason wherof, he was so hated of the people, that when his death was knowne which was most suddaine and exemplar, (for he was killed by chance with an arrow as he was hunting) the people were so transported with ioy, that they went euery where to the churches to giue God thankes therfore, as for the happiest newes that euer came to England, in hope that the last day of his life would be the first day of their liberty; If therfore we consider al this, we shal euidently see how true the pro∣phesie of S. Edvvard proued when he said, That England should be giuen for a tyme into the handes of diuels, and vvicked spirits, for the sinnes of the nobility, clergy, and people. 28. Here then I conclude, that wheras the first conquest,The conclusion of this chapter concerning the three conquests of England, and the causes thereof. seemeth to haue proceeded of the sinnes as wel of the people as of the princes, and the second of the offences rather of the princes then of the people, the last was (as S. Edvvard testifyed) in punishment of the peoples sinnes, rather then of the princes; Wherby we may see as before I noted, the simpathy in the body politike, no lesse then in the natural body, betwixt the head and the members, in the participation of punishment for sinne
or reward for vertue; Which may serue for a motiue to al Prin∣ces and magistrats,An aduertise∣ment to princes, and magistrats. to haue special care to auoid the offence of God, not only by their owne good liues, but also by punishing and reforming the sinnes of their subiects, lest their negligence in ether, may draw Gods wrath vpon both, to the destruction of the whole commonwelth. Thus much for the three conquests of our country. OF THE CONQVEST OF THE KINGDOME of Naples by Charles the 8. King of France, for the sinns of the Kinges therof, vvith the conclusion inferring vpon the pre∣misses the prouidence and iustice of God in the disposition of states, and the insufficiency of man for the gouernment therof, vvith out Gods assistance. CHAP. 22. THE fourth example which I promised was of the kingdome of Naples geuen by almighty God into the handes of Charles the 8.The conquest of the kingdome of Naples. King of France for the sinns of the Kings therof, as al men generally conceiued, and the effect it selfe seemed to make manifest, wherof also Philip de Comines (who was councellour to the said King Charles,Philip. de Comi∣nes in Carolo. 8. and ser∣ued him in the action) giueth notable testimony, which I thinke good to set downe in his owne wordes in respect of his grauity & authority, who speaking of the cruelty and tiranny of Ferdi∣nando King of Naples, and of his sonne Alphonso in causing 24. noblemen their subiects to be most cruelly murdered in prison, discourseth first of their vices and wickednes, and after of Gods iust iudgments vpon them for the same.Philip. Comines. The iudgement of Philip de Co∣mines of the cō∣quest of Naples for the sinnes of the Kings therof. Of the first he saith as followeth. 2. No man (saith he) was euer more cruel, more wicked, more vicious, nor a greater glutton then Alphonso, though his father Ferdinando was more dangerous then he, for in making men faire weather and good cheere, he commonly betraied
them, as he dealt by Count Iacques whome he murdered villa∣nously, though he were Embassadour with him for Francisco Sforza Duke of Millan, and so he dealt also with many others, neuer vsing mercy towards any, no not so much as towards his owne neare kinsman,The tiranny, cruelty, and vi∣cious life of the kings of Naples. besides that he neuer had any pitty or compassion of his poore people, for he made a very marchandise of his kingdome, in so much that he forced his subiects to feede, and fatte his hogs, and pay for them if they chanced to dye, he bought vp al the oyle and graine in the country before it was ripe, and sold it after, extreamly deare, compelling them to take it at his price, and whilst he sold, no man might sel any; If any nobleman or gentleman, were more rich then the rest he forced him to lend him great sommes of mon he tooke from his no∣bility their races of horses, or els made them keepe them for him, wherby he had many thousand of horses, mares, and colts; Both the father and the sonne tooke many women by force; They neuer had reuerence, nor respect to the holy Church, they sold bishopricks, as for example that of Taranto which Ferdinando the father sold for 13000. duckets to a Iew for his sonne, who he said was a Christian, he gaue Abbeis to falkoners with charge to keepe him a certaine number of haukes at their expnces; Al∣phonso the sonne neuer kept any lent, nor made so much as any show to keepe it, and for many yeeres togeather he was neuer confessed, nor comunicated, and to conclude, it is not possible to doe worse then they did both. 3. Thus saith this author of the liues and manners of these 2 Kinges, and then he further addeth concerning Gods iudg∣ments vpon them, it may (saith he) seeme to the readers that I haue said this of some particuler passiō, or hatred towards them, but (in good faith) I haue not saied it to any other end,Philip. de Com. Ibid. Charles the eight K. of France the Comissary of God to chastise the ings of Na∣ples. then to continue the course of my history, and that it may appeare, that this voiage of kinge Charles to Naples proceeded only of the wil of almighty God, who ordained that so young a Kinge desti∣tute of councel money, and al sufficient meanes for such an en∣terprise, should be, as it were, his comissary to chastise these Kinges who were wise, potent and rich, & had many wise Coun∣cellours and graue personages about them, and many subiects and frends, and allies abroad in Italy, whome it imported to
conserue and defend that kingdome, & yet neuertheles (though they foresaw the storme long before) they could not find mea∣nes to auoid it, nor make resistance any where, for, excepting only the castle of Naples,The admirable facility of the conquest of Na∣ples. there was not any place, towne, or fort that staid King Charles one whole day; in so much that Pope A∣lexander said very wel, that the Frenchmen came with chalke in their hands like harbingers, to make and take vp their lodgings where they list, for they had not occasion so much as to put on their armour in al the voiage. The euident pu∣nishment of God vpon the kings of Naples.4. Therfore I cōclude according to the opiniō of very many good religious men, & other of al sorts of people (& the voice of the people is the voice of God) that God did punish these kinges visibly & in such euidēt māner, that it might serue for an exam∣ple & admonition to al Princes to liue wel, according to the cō∣mandmēts of God; for these Kinges wherof I haue spoken lost their honours and realme, great riches, & moueables of al sorts, and their owne persons in the end, three of them in the space of one yeere or litle more; and as I haue vnderstood of some that were very neare them,A prophesy of the conquest of Naples. they found in pulling downe an old chappel, a booke, wherof the litle was, The truth with her secret councel, in which booke was contained al that hapned after vnto them, and when they three only had read it they burnt it. 5. Thus much I haue thought good to set downe in the wor∣des of this wise and graue author, to the end that not only the bad liues of these Kinges, but also his iudgment may appeare concerning Gods iustice shewed vpon them and their whole kingdome for the same; And this may also be confirmed by the other prrticulers,Chiceiardin li. 1. hist. K. Ferdinand of Naples dyed for sorrovv. which Guicciardin, recounteth of them and of the successe of that warre, signifing that Ferdinando the father being very wise, & vnderstāding of the intention of king Charles to come to inuade his kingdome, feared so greatly the successe, in respect of his owne bad life and his sonnes, that he labored by al meanes possible, by embassadours and frends to diuert him from his purpose, offering him to pay him a yeerly tribute of 50000. duckets, and to hold his kingdome of him by fealty and homage, and when he saw that nothing would preuaile, he fel sicke for sorrowe, and died before king Charles entered into Italy.
6. And Alphonso his sonne (who then succeeded him in the kingdome) though he bragged long before that he would goe as farre as the mountaines to meete king Charles if he came for∣ward (which he said he would neuer beleeue he durst doe) yet afterwards when the French were in Italy, & came as farre as Rome, he tooke such a fright that he cried out euery night, he heard the frenchmen comming, and that the very trees and stones cried France;Gucciardine. Ibid. and as Guicciardin affirmeth (who was not a man either easely to beleeue, or rashly to write fables) it was credi∣bly and constantly reported,The soule of K. Ferdinand ap∣peared after his death. that the spirit of Ferdinando his fa∣ther appeared to one that had bene his phisition, and bad him tel his sonne Alphonso from him, that he should not be able to resist the frenchmen, for that God had ordained that his pro∣genny should after many great afflictions be depriued of their kingdome, for the multitude and great enormity of their sinns,The kings of Na∣ples depriued of their kingdome especially for one sinne. and especialy for that which he had done by the perswasion of Alphonso him selfe in the church of S. Leander in Chiaia neare to Naples, wherof he tould not the particulers. 7.Guicciard. Ibid. The torments of a guilty con∣science. Furthermore the same author signifieth that Alphonso was exagitated with suspitions and feares, whiles he was waking, & in his sleep with the representation of the noble men whome he had caused to be secretly murdered in prison (as I haue de∣clared before (and that being in this miserable perplexity he resigned his crowne to his sonne called, Ferdinādo (as his grādfa∣ther was) & ranne away into Sicily in such hast, that his mother in law with whome only he cōmunicated his intention, being desirous to flee with him, could not perswade him to stay for her so much as three daies which shee earnestly desired, to the end she might haue that comfort at least to be Queene of Naples a ful yeare, but he tould her that if she would not goe presen∣tly with him, he would leaue her, protesting,Philip. Comin. in Carolo. 8. K. Alphonso being strangely tormented vvith the horrour of his ovvne con∣science fled into Sicily. as Philip de Comines testifieth, that if any sought to stay him by force, hee would cast him selfe out of the windowes, asking her further if shee heared not euery one cry France, France. And thus being tormented with the horrour of his owne conscience, and the terrour of Gods iust iudgments already fallen vpon him, he fled into Sicily, taking with him only diuers sorts of delicat wines (which he had al∣waies loued ouerwel) and some garden seedes to sowe, and a
few iewels, and a alitle money, without giuing any order in the world to his goods and moueables which he left in great quan∣tity in the castle of Naples. 8. But being arriued in Sicily and touched with Gods grace, he fel into the account of his bad life past, and of Gods iustice executed vpon him,K. Alphonso died in Sicily very repentant. and meaning to doe some satisfaction for the same, he entred into Religion and did great almes, and pen∣nance, in which state he dyed within awhile of t e stone, with the extreamest torments that could be imagined, as some of the Religious with whome he liued told afterward to Philip de Comines, as he himselfe writeth. Idem. ca. 19. K Ferdinand sonne to Alfon∣so being forsaken of his subiects fled into Sicily, and dyed there9. And to conclude the tragilical history of the Kinges, his sonne Ferdinando to whome he resigned his crowne, hauing as∣sembled al his forces, durst make no resistance any were to the Frenche but fled before them from place to place, vntil at length almost al his subiects forsooke him, and rebelled against him; whereupon he fled also into Sicily, & with in awhile died there. 10. Loe here the miserable calamity which for the sinnes of these Kings fel not only vpon them, but also vpon their whole kingdome, seruing for many yeeres after for a praye and spoyle to forreine nations, vntil at length Gods wrath being ap∣peased, & his iustice satisfied he gaue it the repose which it now enioyeth vnder the Catholique King of Spayne. Certein aduer∣tisments infer∣red vpon the premisses.11. This shal for this tyme suffice for the exemplyfication of Gods iustice in general vpon commonwelths for the sinnes of the Princes and people wherein I wish certaine thinges to be noted, which occurre vpon the due consideration of the pre∣misses;The prouidence of God in the disposition of kingdomes. First, the prouidence of almighty God in the affayres of men and particulerly in the disposition of kingdomes, and empires seeing he correcteth, punisheth, transferreth, & ouer∣throweth them for sinne. Hovv hateful sinne is to al∣mighty God.12. Secondly how enormus & hateful a thinge, sinne is to al∣mighty God, and how terrible are his iudgments for the same; seeing the offences of a part of the commonwelth, as either of the Prince or subiects, may cause the calamity of the whole. Al the calami∣ties of kingdo∣mes are punish∣ment for sinne.13. Thirdly that al the miseryes and calamityes which fal vpon kingdomes and states, are no other but the effects of Gods iustice, punishing in them the sinnes and offences of men.
14. Fourthly how necessary it is for euery particuler man to auoid the offence of God, not only for the publike good of the commonwelth (to the punishment wherof his sinnes may redound) but also for his owne particuler benefit; For seeing the seuerity of Gods iustice is such that he punisheth sinne in whole commonwelths (wherin many times some good men participate of the punishment due to wicked mens offences) no particuler man that is an offendour can make account to be exempt from the penalty due to his owne sinne,No man can es∣cape the punish∣ment of sinne. but that he shal pay it sooner or latter, here or hence, of which point I shal haue occasion to speake more amply hereafter. 15. Lastly it followeth vpon al this discourse,No vvit or povver of man able to vphold a state, vvhen God punisheth it for sinne. that no wit or power of man is able to vphold any state when God stri∣keth & punisheth the same for sinne; wherby appeareth the in∣sufficiency of man, for the gouernment of cōmonwelth, with∣out the help and asistance of almighty God which is the point that I specially intended to proue throughout al this Treatise. THE IMBECILLITY OF MANS VVIT IS further discouered by the ansvvere of certayne obiections of the Athiests against the prouidence of God; and first somvvhat is said of the inscrutability of Gods, iudgments, and of mans ignorance in ordinary, and triuial things, and hovv that ig∣norance is the mother of Atheisme. CHAP. 23. SEEING I haue made it euident that God doth execute his iustice vpon whole kingdo∣mes and commonwelths, in punishing them for sinne (wherupon as wel his prouidence in humane affaires, as also mans imbecility and weaknes is necessarily inferred) it resteth now, that for confirmation therof, and for thy furder satisfaction (good Reader) I cleare certayne doubts and difficulties which occurre in this matter, and serue for stumbling blocks to such
as are weake in faith, to cast them headlong into the depth of Atheisme,VVhy Atheists dout of the pro∣uidence of God. who measuring the infinite power and wisdome of God with their owne weaknes, wil beleeue no more then they know, and cal in question the prouidence and iustice of God, because they cannot comprehend the reason of his secret iudg∣ments, not considering that although nothing is more euident nor apparant,The iustice of God most euident though his iudg∣ments are in∣scrutable. euen to the vnderstāding & eyes of men (as I haue partly declared already) then the execution of Gods iustice here on earth; yet nothing is more abstruse, inscrutable, and in∣comprehensible, then his iudgements, that is to say, the reasons and causes why, and the manner how he proceedeth therin, which the royal Prophet signifyeth very aptly saying;Psal. 35. Iustitia tua sicut montes Dei, iudicia tua abissus multa; They iustice (o Lord) is like to the highest mountaynes, and they iudgments like to a bottomlesse sea; That is to say, as on the one side thy iustice may be compared to the mightiest mountaynes, not only for the sublimity and im∣mobility, but also for the perspicuity and euidence therof; so on the other side they iudgments may be likened to a bottomles sea, for the vnmeasurable depth and profundity of them, which the Apostle cōsidering, exclaymed, O altitudo diuitiarū &c. O hovv vvonderful is the deapth of the riches of Gods vvisdome and knovvledge;Rom. ca. 11. hovv incomprehensible are his iudgments, and vnsearchable are his wayes! who knoweth the sence or meaning of our Lord, or vvho is his councel∣lour? Aug. de verbis Apostle. ser. 20. A notable sen∣tence of S. Aug. concerning the inscrutability of Gods iudgments.2. Thus saith the Apostle; wherupon also S. Augustin. Quaeris tu (saith he) rationem? Dost thou seeke a reason of Gods iudgements? I for my part wil feare and tremble therat; reason and argue thou, and I wil vvonder and admire, dispute thou, and I wil beleeue, I see the pitt, but can∣not sound the deapth, & seeing the Apostle saith that the wayes of God can not be found; thinkest thou to find them out? To search thinges inscrutable, is as vnpossible as to see thinges inuisible, or to speake thinges ineffable. Thus saith this famous and learned father, acknowledgeing his owne imbecility, & incapacity, for the comprehension of Gods iudg∣ments, though neuertheles for his sharpnes of wit, his excel∣lent knowledge and learning, both humane and diuine, and o∣ther notable gifts of nature, he was inferiour to few men that haue liued either before him or since, and yet now a dayes euery iangling sophister and poore grammarian, euery shallow and
idle headed cōpanion, plungeth himselfe boldly into the depth of Gods secret councells, and either must haue a reason therof,Men exact rea∣sons of Gods se∣cret councels, & yet knovv not the reasons and causes of comon effects. or else he wil deny his iustice, his prouidence and his deytie, not considering in the meane tyme how litle men know, or can conceaue of common and triuial thinges, which are daily before their eyes. 3. For who is he that can yeild the true causes and reasons of al such natural effects as we daily see in common experience? as of the properties of the load stone which doth not only draw yron vnto it,Leuinus Lemnius de occulto na∣turae mirac. li. 3. c. 4. The causes of the admirable pro∣perties of the loadstone vn∣knovvne. Poca de hidro∣graphic. hispa∣nice. Idem. Ibid. but also hath an admirable vertue for the vse of nauigation; For, the needle of the compasse being touched with the head of the load stone, euer turneth to the north pole; wher∣as if it be touched with the other end, it turneth south ward, and being rubbed with the one side, it looketh eastward, and with the other side, westward; which vertue is strēgthned & re∣doubled, as some Spanish nauigatours writ, if the Loadstone be made hot in the fier & laid sometime in the oyle of Crocomarcium; as also they say, it is vtterly lost and extinguished, if the stone be steeped in the oile of quicksiluer; besides they obserue that the said needle of the compasse neuer standeth iust north, but only in one meridian, to wit,Idem. Ibid. in that which passeth by the Iland of S. Maria (which is one of the Azores, otherwise called Terceras) and of S. Antony, which is the most westward of the Ilands of Ca∣bouerde, and that in al other meridians it inclineth more or lesse to the east or west. 4. Who then is able to yeild the true cause therof?A strange vvel in Lucania. Baptist: Fulgoso li. r. de dict. & fact. mirab. ca. 6. or of in∣finit other secrets in nature, as of the fountaine in Lucania in the kingdome of Naples which (as Baptista Fulgoso witnesseth) a man shal find very cleare if he goe to it with silēce, but if hee speake, it is presently troubed; or of a wel in the,A vvel in Dar∣bishire, vvhich ebbeth and flovveth 4 tymes in an hovvre. The strange pro∣perties of the fish called Re∣mora. Bapt. Fulgoso. Ibid. Peak forest some two or three mile from the bath of Bucston in Darbishire, which wel, being on the side of a high hil, ordinarily ebbeth and floweth with great equallity and proportion, 4. times with in the space of an hower, or there about, whereof I haue bene my selfe an eye witnes; or of the wonderful propertie of a litle fish called Remora not past a spanne long, which is able to stay a ship vnder saile, wherof the experience hath bene diuers time seene, as in the naual battaile at Actium, betwixt Augustus Caesar and Antoni∣us,
wherin the ship of Antonius was staied by that fish in such sort that he was faine to imbarke him selfe in an other. Also As Caius Caligula the emperour passed once to Antium by sea his galley being vnder saile & rowed with 400.Plinius histor. natut. li. 32. c. 1. oares was detai∣ned by a Remora, and could not be moued, vntil some who con∣iectured the cause, diued into the water and tooke away the fish from the side of the galley wherto it had fastned it selfe; And hereto may be added the strange property of an other fish cauled Torpedo,Idem. A fish cauled Torpedo. Ibid. which being taken with an anglerod so benummeth the arme of the fisher that he is forced to let the rod falle. 5. And although I doe purposely forbeare to speake here of infinite other examples notorious in this kinde (for that they are common to be found in such as write of the natures and properties as wel of liuing creatures, as of waters, trees, hearbs, plants, & such like) yet I can not omit to declare some particulers of the propertie of a kind of spyder,The admirable property of the Tarantola. which is found only in Apulia in the kingdome of Naples, and is cauled Tarantola, or Phalangium. 6. This spider is not venimous or poisonful at any time of the yeere, but in the greatest heats of summer, at wha time if any man be bitten,The biting or stinging of the Tarantola cured by musick. or venomed therby, he receiueth no cure but by musicke, in which respect, musicians doe ordinarily in the summer time, passe with their instruments from village to village to cure such as are venomed by the Tarantola, who are therfore called in that country Tarantati, as witnesseth Alexander ab Alexandro,Alexan. Genial diarf. li. 2. ca. 16. who saith, that as he and others of his company trauailed through Apulia in the heat of the yeere and heard musicians playing vpon diuers instruments in euery vilage; they inquired the cause, and vnderstood that they were such as cured the Tarantati;The manner hovv those vvhich are veno∣med by the Ta∣rantola are cured. wherupon he and the rest being desierous to see the experience therof, dismounted from their horses and went into a howse where one was to be cured, whome they found not only speachles but also senseles in appearance, and yet ne∣uertheles after that the instruments had sounded a while, he began first to moue his handes, and then his legges in measure according to the sound and stroake of the instruments, and at length rose vp and danced with a good grace, and when the
musicians ceassed to play (as of purpose they did to shew vnto the beholders the strange nature of that disease) the sick man fel downe againe as though he had bene dead, and when they retourned to their instruments and plaied againe, be arose and danced as before, vntil at length al the venime & poison wher∣with he was infected, was dissipated and dissolued, and so he retourned to his senses, and recouered perfect health;Idem. Ibid. And further the said author testifieth, that if there be any infected and not fully cured he can neuer forbeare to dance, when soe∣uer he heareth any musick. This I haue thought good to relate for the strangnes therof, vpon the report of so graue an eye-witnes as was the author that writeth the same, wherto I might adde many other so stupendious effects, and secrets of nature, that al mans wit faileth in the consideration of the true causes therof. 7. But what neede I speake of thinges so rare and strange seeing no humane wit is able to comprehend and vnderstand the admirable science and art which almighty God hath vsed in the creation of the least flower, worme, flea, or flee, vpon the earth? For as Lactantius saith; Deo soli nota sunt opera sua &c.Lactan. li. 7. ca. 2. No humane vvit able to vnder∣stand the art vvhich God hath vsed in the crea∣tion of the least creature in the vvorld. No man knovv∣eth fully the parts of his ovvne body. G len. de An tom. administrat. o Lactan. de Ira. dei. ca. 14. Gods workes are knowne to him selfe alone, and man can not attaine to the vn∣derstanding therof by disputing or arguing, but by learning of him who only knoweth them and can teach him. Thus saith he. 8. But if any man desire to see how shorte is the sight of his owne vnderstanding in thinges aboue him selfe let him consi∣der how litle he knoweth of him selfe as what his owne soule is, which giueth him life, or of what members and partes his body is inwardly compacted, and what is the office, vse, and function of euery bone, vaine, arterie, & sinewe which no man fully vn∣derstandeth as Galen him selfe coffesseth, saying that those, who doe applie them selues to the study and speculation of Ano∣tomies al their liues, are deceaued therin, and therfore Lactan∣tius saith: Multa esse constat in corpore, quorum vim, rationemque perspi∣cere, nemo nisi qui fecit, potest; It is manifest that there are many thinges in the body of man, the force and reason wherof no man can conceiue but he which made them; neuertheles by that which is vnderstood therof, Gallen,Galen. de vsu par∣tium. li. 3. being a Painim notably inferred against the Epi∣curians (whome he calleth beastes) that the creator of man must
needes be of infinite wisdome bounty and power. 9. Furthermore, what is either more conuenient or profi∣table for man to know and vnderstand exactly then his owne constitution and complexion, the state of his body and the true causes of his disseases wherby he may conserue his health,The true causes of mens disseases vnknovvne many times. re∣medy and preuent sicknes, and prolong his life; and yet ne∣uertheles we see that neither the complections of mens bodies, nor the causes of their disseases are perfectly knowne, either to the patients them selues, or to the phisitians, be they neuer so wel learned or practized, so that many times the ignorance therof, breedeth error in the cure, and consequently procu∣reth the death of the patient. 10. But what meruaile is it, that there are infinite thinges in nature, and many in man him selfe, which man doth not know or vnderstand, seeing he is deceaued and erreth many times in that which he presumeth best to knowe,Men erre many times in that vvhich they pre∣sume to knovv best ca. 4. 11. 12. as it is ma∣nifest by al the precedent discourse concerning the imbicillity of mans wit, which I haue already sufficiently shewed, as wel by reason and testimony of most learned and graue authors, as also by examples of the errours of the wisest Philosophers and, greatest Politikes, who haue absurdly erred in those thinges wherin they haue sought to make the greatest shew and often∣tation of their knowledge and wisdome. Sap. ca. 9.11. Therfore I conclude with the wise man that seeing, we hardly attaine to the knowledge of thinges in earth, and find out with la∣bour euen those thinges which are in our sight; Caelestia quis inuestigabit VVho shal be able to find out heauenly thinges, or who knoweth (o Lord) thy councels and meaning, except thou giue wisdome and send thy holy spirit from the highest? Thus saith he wise man in the booke of wisdome, and this is euident ynough by common experience, as I haue already declared. The intolerable presumption and folly of those vvhich make them selues iudg∣ges of Gods iudg∣ment.12. What then may we say of those men, who make them selues iudges of Gods iudgments, and limite his infinite wisdome and power within the compasse of their smal capacity? may it not be said of them that they are as wel and wisely occupied, as if they should seeke to put al the world into a nut shel? which how vnpossible soeuer it is, yet it may be said to be more proba∣ble then the other, for betwixt the whole world and the shel of
a nut, there is some kind of proportion, by reason that neither of them is infinit, but haue both of them their limits & bounds; but betwixt a thing infinit (as is Gods wisdome and power) and a thing finite or limited (as is the created vnderstanding of man) there is no proportion at al; and therfore it is no lesse then meere madnesse for any man to seeke to comprehend the infinit wisdome and power of almighty God, within the straite and narrow limits of his vnderstanding and to make his weake and light wit the plummet to sound the bottomlesse sea of the in∣scrutable iudgments of God. 13. And truly if we consider the reasons that moue men many times to cal in question, or to deny the prouidence of God, we may wonder no lesse at their grosse ignorance and folly, then at their impiety;Tvvo sortes of Atheists, some in opinion and some only in vvordes. I meane such as are Atheists in opi∣nion; For some there are (and that ouer many in these wicked daies) who though they openly blaspheme the holy name of God, and most wickedly curse, defye, yea and deny his deitye, yet they rather doe it vpon some rage and fury, hen for that they beleeue as they say, for so farre are wicked mn transpor∣ted many times with fury and passion, when they are hindred of their desires,For hovv smal causes vvicked men blaspheme or deny God. Propertius. that no reuenge vpon any creature can content them; and therfore they seeke to be reuenged vpon the Crea∣tor him selfe, blaspheming, or denying him for euery trifle, which also the Poëts amongst the Painims obserued in the humours of men in their times towards their God. 14.Ouidius. Propertius describing the desperat passion of a woman for∣saken of her louer saith of her. —Et queritur nullos esse relicta Deos, Seing her selfe forsaken she complaineth Straight that there are no Gods. And in an other Poët, a forlorne louer made the periurie of his mistrisse, & her beauty withal, an argument to proue that there were no Gods. Esse Deos credamne? fidem iurata fefellit, Et manet in solito qui fuit ore decor. Shal I beleeue that there are any Gods, seeinge She hath forsworne her selfe, and yet is as Faire as euer she was?
And an other Poët chargeth the Gods with cruelty, for no greater a reason, but because serpents are said to renew their youth yearly, when they cast of their old skinns, and yet be∣auty of women hath no such priuiledge, but fadeth without remedy. TibullusCrudeles diui serpens nouus exuit annos, Formae non vllam Fata dedere moram. O cruel Gods; the serpent euery yeare chan∣geth his skinne and reneweth his youth, and yet the Fates haue graunted no stay nor repaire to beauty. 15. Thus did the Poëts expresse the fury of mens passions de∣nying God and his prouidence, or blaspheming him for euery triffle, which also how truly it may be applyed to our tyme, such may be witnesses as doe haunt dyin-hovvses, and heare the horrible blasphemies of many gamesters, who when their suc∣cesse answereth not their expectation, stick not presently to deny God or to blaspheme his holy name, or his Saints; wherof I thinke it not amisse to recount a notable history of the mira∣culous punishment of a blasphemous gamester which hapned in the citty of Luca the 30. of march in the yeare of our Lord 1588. 16. The story is thus, Iacomo Pietro disant Romano a young man of 26.A story of a blasphemous gamster miracu∣lously punished. yeeres of age hauing lost his money at dice, powred out many blasphemies against almighty God, and seeing a picture of the blessed virgin Mary, tooke vp the dice and aimed with his eye and hand to throw them at it, which when he attempted to doe, and streached out his arme to that purpose, it broke in the midst of the bone, betwixt the showlder and the elbow, and he him selfe fel downe in a sownd, and being hardly recouered by them that were present, remayned in such horrible torment, that both he and they acknowledged the manifest hand of God therin, in so much that one of the best surgeons in the towne called Rocco, beinge sent for to cure him, and vnderstanding the cause & manner of his hurt, refused to deale with it, wherupon he was carryed to the Hospital, to be cured there; the fame wherof caused great concourse first of the cittizens of Luca, and after of the country people to see the picture of the blessed vir∣gin,
and it pleased God so to satisfie their deuotion, and to glo∣rifie his sonne our Sauiour in his holy mother, that very many wonderful miracles were daily done there, and al sortes of disea∣sed persons were cured; wherupon the magistrates of Luca cau∣sed the said miracles to be printed, and the bookes to be pu∣blished the yeere following, at what tyme I my selfe was not far from Luca at Genua, where I remained almost 2. months, and heard the constant fame of the dayly miracles that were done there, which vpon so iust an occasion, I haue thought good to signify in this place, to the glory of God and the honor of the blessed virgin, as also to the end it may appeare, that although almighty God is of infinit patience and longanimity, yet neuer∣theles he otherwhiles taketh exēplar reueng euen in this world of iniuries done in this kinde, either to him selfe or to his Saints and seruants; wherof I could alleadge innumerable examples, if this place did permit it, where my purpose is not to speake, but only by the way, of this sort of Atheistical blasphemers, who are Atheists rather in wordes then in beleife or opinion. 17. Therfore this might suffice concerning them, but that I can not but lament, that so great an impiety as blasphemie is being so common in England, as it is,Hovv blasphe∣mies are puni∣shed in Spayne. both passe there vnpuni∣shed, wheras in other coūtries the least blasphemies are seuerely chastised, in so much that in Spayne, I haue knowne a man set in the market place the greatest part of the day, gaping with a gag in his mouth, for swearing only Porla vida de dios by the life God, wheras other Atheistical blasphemies are more rigorously puni∣shed by the Inquisition; And with great reason, seeing the law of Moyses ordayneth,Leuit. ca. 24. Blasphemers sto∣ned to death in the lavv of Moyses. Dan. ca. 3. Blasphemy a∣gainst Christ pu∣nished amongst the Turks. that he which should blaspheme the name of God should be stoned to death, and Nabuchodonosor a Pagan and Idolatrous King, being moued with the miracle of the 3. chil∣dren, made a decree that whosoeuer should blaspheme the name of the God of Israel should be killed and his howse de∣stroyed; yea and the very law of the Turks and Mahometans orday∣neth great pecuniary penaltyes and 60. bastonades for such as blaspeme our Sauiour Christ or his mother; as diuers Christians who haue traueled in Turky do testifye. 18. And amongst the decrees of Christian princes, we find one of the holy S. Levvis King of France who commanded that al
blasphemers,Ciles Corozet de propos memora∣bles. A decere of S. Levvis K. of France against blasphemers. should haue their tounges perced with a hot yron, and when some complayned vnto him of the seuere execution therof, he wished that his owne tounge were perced in like manner, vpon condition that the name of God might be no more blasphemed in his kingdome, wherby Christian princes and magistrats may learne, what zeale, and iealousy of Gods ho∣nor they ought to shew in the rigorous punishment of such hor∣rible blasphemies,Blasphemy vn∣punished may dravv the vvrath of God vpon the vvhole commonvvelth. ca. 23. as are now euery where ouer common. And truly how dangerous the permission therof may proue to their states and commonwelths in tyme (through Gods iust iudge∣ment) it may be coniectured by that which I haue alreadie dis∣coursed concerning the participation of merite & demerite be∣twixt the commonwelth and euery member therof; seing that (as I haue declared before) some great offence of some one man may drawe the wrath of God vpon a whole kingdome, es∣pecially when the magistrats are negligēt in punishing the same; For so, it is made the offence of the commonwelth which re∣mayneth engaged to pay the penalty. Thus much concerning this kind of Atheists in woords. 19. But now to speake of an other sort of Atheists, who though they are more wary and spare of their speach,Of Atheists in beleefe and their grosse folly. yea and many tymes shrowd them selues vnder some shew of re∣ligion and pietie, yet in opinion and beleefe are truley A∣theists (not acknowledging the prouidence of God in humane affayres) of sueh (I say) that although many of them are estee∣med for great wise men, yet when I consider the reasons that induce them to Atheisme, I cannot but greatly wonder at their grosse folly, seing that how wise soeuer they seeme either to them selues, or to other men, it is euident that their Atheisme proceedeth of meere ignorance and blindnes, as it also doth in al other that are infected therwith, who by the iust iudgment of God haue their harts so obscured and possessed with igno∣rance and errour,Atheists haue not the true light of natural reason. Iob. ca. 38. that they loose the very light of natural rea∣son in thinges pertayninge to their saluation; wherin is verified the saying of Iob: Aufereturab impijs lux sua; VVicked men shal haue their light taken from them, which is the greatest punishmēt & ma∣lediction that God layeth vpon the most wicked men for their sinnes. In which respect the scriptures euery where testify of the
Iews; That their harts were blinded, their eares dulled, & their eyes shut vp;Isay. 6. Ioan. 12. Rom. 11. Act. 28. Mat. 13. Marc. 4. Luc. 8. Psal. 68. Rom. 1. to the end they might neither see vvith their eyes, nor heare vvith their eares, nor vnderstand vvith their harts; And in like manner the Apostle saith of the Philosophers, that for punishment of their wicked∣nes they were not only giuen ouer to a reprobate sence, but also that their foolish harts were obscured in such sort, that esteeming them selues for wise men, they became fooles. 20. Therfore I say that for as much as by the iust iudgment and malediction of almighty God, this blindnes of hart and ob∣scurity of vnderstanding is common to al Athyiests; it may truly be said that ignorance and blindes are the true mothers of Atheisme,Ignorance the mother of Athe∣isme, and vvhy. seeing no man that hath the true light of natural reason can doubt, either, that their is a God, or that he gouer∣neth the affaires of men, as we may perceaue by the ancient Philosophers, who being guided by the only light of reason, ar∣riued to the knowledge as wel of Gods prouidence in humane affaires, as of his deity; and therfore it is no meruaile that the Psalmist calleth al Atheists fooles in diuers places, as,Psal. 52. The holy Scrip∣tures doe calle Atheists fooles. Psal. 91. Dixit insi∣piens &c. The foole said in his hart there is no God, And againe spea∣king of the admirable magnificence of Gods workes, and of the profound depth of his diuine councells, he addeth; Vir insi∣piens non cognoscet, et stultus non intelliget haec; The vnwise man shal not know these thinges, and the foole shal not vnderstand them, And lastly reprehending the folly of such wicked Atheists, as thinke that God doth not see their iniquity, nor yet that he wil punish them You vnwise men (saith he) vnderstand,Psal. 9. and you fooles be wise at last; he which planted the eare vpon the head of man, can not he heare? and he which framed and made the eye, can not he see, and consider? and he which doth correct and chastise al nations, wil not he punish? 21. Thus you see how the Psalmist treateth Atheists with the title of fooles, and now to shew further how worthy they are therof, and how true it is, that ignorance is the mother of Atheisme, it is to be considered,Al the argu∣ments of A∣theists doe nota∣bly bevvray their ignorance and folly. that al their reasons against the prouidence of God doe notably bewray their ignorance and folly, partly because they are notable arguments against them (as I wil shew after a while) and partly because it is euident therby that the only reason why they calle in question the prouidence of God, is, because they vnderstand not the reason of his iudgments in
some thinges; so that the ground of their doubt and infidelity, is no other, but their ignorance; and rherfore they argue much like, as if a blind man should say, that the sunne shineth not because he is so blind, that he seeth it not; For no otherwise can they conclude vpon their reasons against the prouidence of God, the which is so manifest in infinite thinges, and by such euident arguments, (as I haue pertly shewed already and wil doe more amply hereafter) that the obscurity of some points can not preiudice the cleere light of the rest, but ought rather to moue men to acknowledge their owne infirmity, and to admire the ineffable wisdome of God, and to say with Lanctantius;Lactan. de Ita. dei. ca. 1. Hoc differt ab humanitate diuinitas, quod humanitatis est ignoratio, diuinitatis sciencia; This difference there is betwixt diuinity and humanity, that ignorance is proper to humanity, and knowledge to di∣uinity. 22. This wil be most manifest if we examine some of their principal arguments, and although for answere therof I must endeauor to yeild some reason of Gods iudgments in some thin∣ges, I would not haue any man to thinke that I presume to sound the depth therof, or to wade further therin, then I shal be warranted and guided either by the holy scriptures (wherin it hath pleased God to reueale some part of his councells in behalfe) or by the writings of Gods seruants, and Saints, whome his diuine maiestie hath illuminated, for the instruction of the weake in faith.
THE OBIECTIONS OF THE ATHEISTS are discussed, and ansvvered: vvherby it appeareth that their arguments against Gods prouidence, are notable and euident proofes of the same; And first, hovv it standeth vvith the prouidence, iustice, and mercy of almighty God, to suffer so much sinne, euil, and mischeife in the vvorld. CHAP. 24. THE principal arguments of the Atheists con∣sist in these points following.The cheife argu∣ments of A∣theists against the prouidence of God. If God (say they) haue care of men, and be with al infinitly wise, bountiful and omnipotent, why doth he suffer so much euil and mischeife in the world? why is innocency oppressed? truth obscured? vertue of most neglected? vice embraced? good men despised? euil men honored, and aduanced? yea and those which serue God best, and are counted most deare vnto him, more oppressed and afflicted many times, then his greatest enemyes? Either (say they following their old maister Epicurus) God can remedy this and wil not, or he would and can not, or he neither can, nor wil, or he both can and wil; If he can remedy it, and wil not, he is not (say they) infinitly good and bountiful; if he would and can∣not, he is impotent and weake; and if he neither can, nor wil; he is neither omnipotent nor infynitly merciful and good; (and by consequence he is not God) and if he can and wil, why doth he not (say they) remedy such great inconueniences, why doth he not exterminate al euil out of the worlde, cherish and honor his frendes, punish his enemyes, aduance vertue, suppresse vice, maintaine and support innocency and truth; and why suffereth he such confusion as we see dayly in mens affayres, by reason of the variable and vncertayne euents good and bad, which are common to al men alike, be they iust or vniust? wherein (say they there rather appeareth meere chance and casualty, then a diuine prouidence.
2. Thus argue they, wherto I say, as S. Augustine said of some arguments of the Platonicks;Aug. de ciuit dei. li. 22. ca. 11. Ecce qualibus argumentis diuinae omni∣potentiae humana contradicit infirmitas, quam possidet vanitas, that is to say, behold vvith vvhat vvise arguments the omnipotency of God is contra∣dicted by the infirmity of man, posest vvith vanity; Thus said S. Augu∣stine of certaine obiections of the Platonicks,The blindnes of Atheists in that their arguments are notable profs of Gods proui∣dence. against some points of Christian religion. And so may I say with farre more reason of these arguments of the Atheists, which are so farre from confirming their assertions, that being wel wayghed, they cleerely proue the contrary, and conuince them notably of ig∣norance and blindnes, seeing that the same reasons, wherby they impugne the omnipotency, bounty, iustice, wisdome and prouidence of almighty God, are cleere and inuincible proofes therof, as I wil make manifest in this chapter, and the three other next ensuing;The arguments of Atheists, re∣duced to 4. heads. For wheras their arguments may be reduced to foure heads, the first concerning the permission of euil. The second concerning the affliction of good men. The third tou∣ching the prosperitie of wicked men. And the fourth concer∣ning the variable and vncertaine euents, that are common to good and euil men in this life, I wil treat of al these 4. points se∣uerally, and first of the causes why God permitteth so great euil in the world as we dayly see. Aug. de vera re∣ligione, ca. 12. & 23. Al euil consist∣eth either in sinne, or in the punishment of sinne. Idem. li. 1. re∣tractat. ca. 9. & de libero. ar∣bit. ca. 1.3. And for as much as al euil consisteth (as S. Augustin saith) In peccato; or In paena peccati, either in sinne, or in the penalty of sinne, that is to say, either in the offence of God, or in the misery & affliction which God iustly inflicteth vpon men for the same; and againe, seeing that al sinne proceedeth from mans free wil (in which respect S. Augustin also affirmeth, that the free vvil of man vvas the cause of al the euil in the vvorld) it shalbe necessary for the clearing of those difficulties, and the explication of this whole matter, to consider two thinges; the one, why almighty God gaue free vvil to man; and the other, how it could stand with his mercy and goodnes to suffer man to be tempted, knowing that he would abuse his free vvil, and consequently incurre his indignation, and draw vpon him selfe al that misery which since hath fallen vpon him. 4. As for the first point, to wit, the causes why God gaue free vvil to man, though many reasons & causes may be giuen for the
same, yet I wil content my selfe, with these few following.VVhy God gaue free vvil to man. First the dignity of mans nature did require it, for seing it pleased al∣mighty God not only to create him of an intelligent, and reaso∣nable nature, and to his owne Image,Genes. 1. Psal. 8. but also to make him Lord  of the earth and of al earthly creatures, and as it were his Lieu∣tennant and vicegerent ouer them, it was most conuenient also for man to be Lord of his owne wil, that is to say, not to be moued, or to worke by necessitie or compulsion (as other crea∣tures inferiour to him doe) but freely and by election of his owne wil, by which freedome of wil, and by his vnderstanding, he became the Image of almighty God his Lord and Creator,Damascen. li. 2. de fide ortho. ca. 12. as witnesseth S. Ihon Damascen; wherby it appeareth that it was most honorable for him, and requisit to the dignity and excel∣lency of his nature to haue free wil. 5. Secondly God gaue freevvil to man that it might appeare  therby, that although he ordayned man for his seruice, yet he had no neede of him; For wheras men, the more neede they haue of their seruants, the more they seeke to bind them vnto their seruice, and to depriue them of liberty and freedome of wil, almighty God meaning to shew that he had no neede of man, gaue him free vvil to doe what he would. 6. Thirdly, that therby his iustice and equity might appeare,  in rewarding and punishing euery man according to his deserts,Ignat. ep. ad Magnes. Iust in. mart. in Apolog. Itaen. li. 4. c. 71. & 72. Basil. in psal. 61. Aug. li. de vera religione. ca. 14. which could haue had no place, if man had not free vvil, vpon the which is grounded the reason of merit and demerit, and conse∣quently of reward and punishment, as not only al our diuines, but also the paynim philosophers doe teach. 7. Fourthly; to shew his infinit bounty in proposing to man so highe a reward, as euerlasting glory, to be obtayned by the  meanes of freewil, helped and assisted with his grace.Chrisost. ho. 22. in Genes. Hieron. ad Da∣masum. ep. 146. Arist. li. 3. ethic. c. 4. 8. Fiftly, to the end, that the endles treasure of his riches might appeare, seing that he would not appoint, or ordayne for man, any certaine measure or limits of his rewards, but gaue him free wil to merit with the healp of his grace, and to obtayne as  much as he list. 9. Sixtly to shew his omnipotency and infinite wisdome in  gouerning the affayres of man, seing that the freedome of their wills is no way able to hinder the execution of his wil, for as
much as al the actions of men, be they neuer so voluntary or freely done, yea the actions of wicked men, do finally concurre to the working of his holy wil, through the admirable disposi∣tion of his wisdome & omnipotency, much like as if a man were able to direct the arrowes of al the archers in the world to hit one butt, though they were shot al at rouers, and at infinite sun∣dry markes,Aug. de ciuit. dei. li. 22. ca. 1. This S. August: signifyeth saying, Multa fiunt a malis &c: Many thinges are done by euil men against the vvil of God, but such is his vvisdome and povver, that al those thinges which seeme to be contrary to his vvil, do finaly tend to those ends which he of his bounty and iustice hath fore∣seene and ordayned, thus saith S. Augustin. Freevvil vvas giuen to man for his great benefit and Gods great glory. Hovv it stood vvith Gods goodnes to suffer man to be temp∣ted. God did no iniu∣ry to man in suffering him to be tempted. Eusebius. de pre∣parat. euangel. li. 6. ca. 5. God gaue Adam sufficient meanes to ouercome the temptation if he vvould. Aug de ciuit dei. li. 14. ca. 27.10. Hereto other reasons might be added; but by these it ap∣peareth sufficiently, that it was most conuenient for man to haue free vvil, not only for the glory of God, and the manifestation of his infinite power, wisdome, iustice, and mercy; but also for the dignity of mans nature and his exceeding great benefit; 11. And now to speake of the other point proposed, to wit, how it could stand with Gods infinit goodnes to suffer man to be tempted, knowing that he would fal into sinne, misery, and dam∣nation. I say first that almighty God did man no iniury therin, in respect that he had giuen him sufficient meanes to ouercome the tēptation of his aduersary with al facillity, if he him selfe would. For as Eusebius bishop of Caesaria noteth very wel, God gaue not only freewil to man, but also the light of vnderstanding, reason & conscience, euer mouing him to good; wherto he incited him also with the promise of reward for vertue and wel doing, and terrifyed him with threats of punishmēts, in case he should trās∣gresse his law; wherto I add that he was also ready to assist him with his grace, if he would haue put his confidence in him, as tea∣cheth S. Augustin, who saith, Homo sic erat institutus &c. Man vvas so framed and ordayned, that if he had trusted vpon the healp of God, he had ouercome the temptation of the euil angel. VVhy it vvas not conuenient that God should hinder the temp∣tation of Adam though he knevv he vvould fal.12. Secondly I say that although almighty God did know that man would abuse freewil to his owne hurt and damnation; yet it was not conuenient that therfore he should exempt and free him from temptation afterwardes, for that, as on the one side temp∣tation had serued man for a notable occasion of merit, and con∣sequently of great benefit to him selfe, if he had resisted it (as he
easely might haue done if he had listed) so also on the other side, when he fel, it ministred to almighty God sufficient occasion and matter, to shew his infinite mercy, iustice, wisdome, and omni∣potency, in turning the same not only to his owne glory, but also to mans benefit and to great good many wayes; For which cause S. August: saith, that although God knew that man would sinne,Aug. de ciuit Dei li. 22. ca. 1. et. li. de corrupti. et gra. ca 10. et. 12. et in enchirid ca. 27. yet he made him of a mutable nature, & suffered him to be temp∣ted, because he foresaw what great good he would draw out of his fal. Iudicans potentius & melius esse &c. Iudging it to be better and more for his glory, and for the manifestation of his power, to doe good by the occa∣sion of euil, then not to suffer any euil at al to be done.Chrisost. hom. de lapsu primi homnis 10. More for Gods glory to dravve good out of euil then not to suf∣fer euil to be. And S. Chrisostome also saith: Deus praescius futurorum &c. God, vvho knovveth al thinges to come, made man to his ovvne image and likenes, and gaue him precepts, fore∣seeing both his transgression, and also the great good, vvhich his diuine vvis∣dome vvas determined to dravv out of the same. Thus saith S. Chrisostome. 13. And now to recount some of those goods and benefits which almighty God did foresee would redound vpon mans sinne, and withal to answere the obiection of the Atheists concer∣ning his permission of euil. The first good or benefit may be, that the world it selfe is much more perfect and complete therby;VVhy God per∣mitteth sinne & other euils. The vvorld is more perfect and complete by the euil that is ther∣in. The nature of earthly thinges requireth a mix∣ture of good and bad. Aug. de triplic habitaculo. For although euil being considered in it selfe, is hateful and loath∣some; yet being wayghed togeather with al other thinges, which are necessary to the composition of the world, we shal find it to be also cōuenient for the same, for diuers respects. First, for that the very nature and condition of earthly thinges, doth seeme to require a mixture of good and bad; for seeing that in heauen there is nothing but goodnes and felicitie, and in hel nothing but badnes and misery, it was very conuenient that this our terrest∣rial world, which is betwixt both, should in some degree parti∣cipate of both. To which purpose S. Augustin saith, that God hath made 3. habitations, or mansions, to wit, the highest, the lowest, and one in the midst, wherof the two extreames are altogeather contrary, and the other in the midst hath a great affinity or like∣nes with both the extreames. 14. For wheras almighty God did compact the world of con∣trarieties, as of 4. contrary elements,The vvorld com∣pacted of contra∣rieties. contrary qualities of moy∣sture and drynesse, heat and cold, of light and darknes, day and night, soft and hard, high and lowe, it was conuenient also that
he should permit the oppositiō of euil to God, to the end that the good might therby become more prespicuous, eminent, & lau∣dable,Arist problem. Sect. 22. q. 11. & Rhetoric. li. 2. for Contraria (saith the philosopher) iuxta se posita magis elu∣cescunt; Contrary thinges being set togeather doe make each other more apa∣rant; And euen as a shaddow in a picture, or a litle mole or wart in a beautiful face, or a foyle vnder a diamond, though they are of themselues imperfections, yet being considered in their compo∣sition they are ornaments therto,Aug. enchirid ad Laurent. ca. 10. euen so saith S. Augustine: That which is called euil, being wel ordayned and disposed in the vniuersity of thinges, that is to say in the whole world; Eminentius commendat bona, vt magis placeant & laudabiliora sint; Doth more eminently or excel∣lently set forth good thinges to make them the more delectable and com∣mendable. 15. Thus farre S. Augustin, who also in an other place concer∣ning this matter saith notably: that euen as a man of a very short sight,Aug. li. de or∣dine ca. 1. & li. 2. ca. 4. who in a great table ful of checher worke or marquery should be able to see no more but some one or two litle peeces therof, could not discerne the cunning of the workman in the composition of the whole, but would perhaps blame both the worke,Though euil con∣sidered by it selfe semeth inconue∣nient yet to the composition of the vvhole vvorld it is ne∣cessary. & the workeman; euen so it chanceth to ignorant men, who not being able to comprehend in their weake vnderstan∣dinges, the great arte vsed by almighty God in the cōposition of the whole world, are many tymes scandalized with the conside∣ration of some particuler thinges; wheras (saith he) if they could lift vp their eyes to see and consider al the whole togeather, they should find euery thinge notably ordayned, and disposed in due manner and place. 16. Hereof we see euident examples in euery man, in euery howse, in euery comōwelth. For if we regard some partes of man in them selues, they are but vnseemely and loathsome, yet being cōsidered with the whole body,Some partes of man vnseemly and loathsome in themselues yet necessary for the body. they are conuenient & necessary; the like also may be said of some homely places, needles to be named in the most beautiful pallaces or of some base & odious of∣fices in cōmōwelths which neuertheles are most necessary therto, as of catch poles, promotors, hangmen and such like; yea saith S. Augustine Quid sordidius meretricibus & laenonibus?Aug. li. 2. de or∣dine. ca. 4. &c. VVhat is more filthy then bawds and queans, neuerthelee they are sometymes necessarily per∣mitted in cittyes? Lastly to conclude, what more offendeth mans
eare then a discord in musick,A discord in musick vvel pla∣ced graceth the harmony. yet being wel placed with good cordes in a musical composition, it greatly graceth the harmony and giueth contentment to the eare, and euen so al euils in the world being regarded apart by them selues, seeme inconuenient and absurd, but being considered togeather with the vniuersity of al other thinges, doe help to the consummation and perfe∣ction therof, as shal appeare more euidently by the consideration of these points followinge. 17. It is to be considered that there is no euil in the world, but good doth come of it one way or other,No euil in the vvorld but good doth come of it. whether the euil be in thinges natural, or in thinges moral; For although in thinges na∣tural there is nothinge absolutly euil (for whatsoeuer is natural is of God, & consequently good) yet that which is against the na∣ture of any thing,Hovv good com∣meth of euil in natural thinges. Arist. li. de g∣nerat. & cor∣rupt. c. 3. and helpeth or tendeth to the corruption of it, may be accompted euil in respect therof: but for as much as according to the philosopher: Corruptio vnius rei est generatio alterius; The corruption of one thinge is the generation of an other, it followeth that whatsoeuer is hurtful to one thinge, that is to say, to that which it corrupteth, the same is conuenient and good for that which is to be engendred therof; And such is the prouidence of God in al his creatures, that there is nothing in the world so vile or base, so loathsome, so stinking, or so poysonful, but it is good for some thinge, or for some vse or other, as dayly experience teacheth in dust, ashes, durt, yea and the very ordure of men and beasts (which serueth to many good purposes) and the like may be said of poysons which sometymes are made medicinable, and may be put also otherwayes to necessary vses,Diogenes laert: in vita. Socratis Plato. in phae∣done. Plutarc. as in some coun∣tryes they haue ben vsed for the execution of iustice in the pu∣nishment of malefactours, in stead of halter, sword, water, fyer, or other instruments of iustice. 18. The like appeareth in morall euils,Cicero. Tuscul. li. 1. I meane such as pro∣ceed of the malice of men, as al sinne or sinful actions, which are cōmonly hurtful either to him that cōmitteth them,Hovv good commeth of sin∣ful actions. or to some other man; and yet both wayes doe euer turne to some good or other; First as concerning euil actions tending to the hurt of o∣thers, what benefits doe grow to men many tymes by the malice of their enemies?Genes. 37. c 41. how could the loue and good wil of Iosephes breetheren haue profited him so much as did their hatred, and
malice, which was the meanes to aduance him to great honor and dignity; and doth it not fal out otherwhiles, that an enemy meaning to destroy an other man doth preserue his life? as it chanced to one Promotheus,Plut lib. de vtili∣tate capiendo ab inimicis. of whome Plutarke writeth that his life was saued by his enemy; who meaning to kil him, strooke him with a sword, and lanced an inward impostume with in his body which otherwaies could haue had no cure; In like sort we see that the malice of the diuel and wicked men against good men,The malice of the diuel and vvicked men turneth to the benefit of the good and the glory of God. in procuring their persecution, torments & death, turneth to their exceeding great benefit, and to Gods great glory (as I wil declare more at large after a while) and when soeuer God per∣miteth any mischeefe or euil to fal vpon euil men by other mens malice, the same is either a warning for their amendment, and consequently an effect of Gods mercy; or else a due punishment for their sinne, & so an acte of his iustice wherby he is glorified. 19. And as concerning the sinnes of men which are hurtful only to them selues sometimes they turne also to their good, by making them see their owne weaknes, and to relye, more then before, vpon Gods grace & assistance: and sometimes they serue for example to other men,2. Reg. ca. 11. Math. 26. as the fal of the prophet Dauid, and of S. Peter, are warninges and motiues to vs to take heede how wee trust to our owne strength: sometimes againe mens sinns are a pu∣nishment of sinne, as in the philosophers of whom the Apostle saith that they VVere giuen ouer to al wickednes in punishment of their ingratitude to almighty God,Rom. 1. and of their Idolatry. Hovv al sinne turneth to good.20. Lastly when or how soeuer sinne is committed it tur∣neth to Gods glory, in respect that he either sheweth his mercy in pardoning it, or his iustice in punishing it, and so he is glorified therby, which is the greatest good in nature, and the end of al good,Prou. c. 16. wherto he ordained al thinges what soeuer; for, Vniuersa propter semetipsum (saith the scripture) operatus est Dominus, impium quoque ad diem malum; Our lord made al thinges for himselfe, and the wic∣ked man also for the euil day, that is to say, euen as almigty God made al other thinges for his owne seruice (in which respect he is cal∣led in the scipture Alpha et Omega,Apoc. 22. the begining and the end) so also he ordained the punishment of the wicked for his owne glory, reseruing them for the euil day, that is to say for the day of iudgment, to shew as wel his iustice in punishing them, as his
bounty and mercy in rewarding the good.Benefits vvhich redound to man of sinne and o∣ther euils in the vvorld. Hereby it appeareth that the very sinnes of men, doe alwaies turne to good some way or other, no lesse then al other euils, the which also wil be yet more euident, if we consider some other special benefits that redound to man of sinne, and of the euil that is in the world. 21. First, the infinit goodnes and mercy of God was moued therby to giue to man such excellent remedies against the same, that the benifits which he receiueth by them, doe far surpasse the harmes which proceede of the euil, as the benefit of wis∣dome, wherof Salomon saith in his parables; Melior est sapientia &c.Prouerb. c 8. The benefit of vvisdome. VVisdome is better then al the most pretious thinges in the world, and no∣thinge that can be desired of men may be compared vnto it. Thus saith he of wisdome: the office wherof is not only to distinguish betwixt good and bad, but also to teach vs our duty to almighty God, and consequently the way to eternal saluation, where vpon La∣ctantius discourseth notably thus. 22. If there were no euil nor danger,Lactant. li. de Ira dei ca. 13. The office of reason & vvis∣dome is to distin∣guish betvvixt good and euil. nor any thinge that could hurt a man in the world, al matter for wisdome to worke vpon were taken away, and so it should be needles; For if no∣thing were proposed to vs but only good, what neede should we haue of discourse, vnderstanding, knowledge or reason, when we should find euery thinge apt and commodius for vs, which way soeuer we should turne our selues; as if a man should bringe infants, that haue not the vse of reason, to a banquet of sweete and holsome meats, it were no danger for them to eate what soeuer their eye or apetite should moue them vnto, nei∣ther for that purpose should they neede discretion; but if there were some vnholsome or poisned meates amongst the rest, they might receaue great dammage or death therby, not beinge able to discerne betwixt the one and the other. Therfore we see that we haue neede of reason and wisdome rather in respect of the euil then of the good;Man hath farre greater good by vvisdome then harme by euil. and that God doth not take away euil from vs, because he hath giuen vs so great a remedy as wisdome, wherin there is far greater good and pleasure, then trouble and greife in euil; For that by wisdome we come to know God, and by that knowledge we attaine to immortality, which is perfect felicity; Thus saith Lactantius. 23. But what? Haue we only the benifit of wisdome in re∣compence
of euil?Euery harme hath a help and euery inconue∣nience a remedy. Chrisost. in ca. 6. Math. hom. 15. Euery vice hath an oposit vertue, and euery euil a good vvherby it may be ouer∣come. If there vvere no euil many ex∣cellent vertues vvould be obs∣cured or extin∣guished. Haue we not also for euery euil a particuler good, for euery harme a helpe, for euery sore a salue for euery vice a vertue, for euery incōueniēce an assured remedy if we list to vse it? Omnia mala (saith S. Chrisostome) habent contraria bona per quae superentur; Al euils haue their contrary goods by the which they may be ouercome. By the vertue of chastity, we subdue al the vices of the flesh, by humility we conquer pride, by iustice we sup∣presse al iniquity and iniustice, by liberality we ouercome aua∣rice, and lastly by fortitude and patience we triumphe ouer al the miseries of the world; and wheras these and such other ver∣tues are the proper ornaments of man, wherby he excelleth bruite beasts and is made like to God, it is to be considered that some of the chiefest of them would be vtterly extinguished, and the rest wholy obscured, if there were no sinne nor euil in the world. 24. For if there were no passions, no intemperance, no iniu∣ries, no afflictions, how could there be any vertue of cōtinency, patience, temperance, or fortitude, which consist either in re∣straint, and suppression of passions, or in the suffering of iniuries, or in the toleration of miseries & afflictions? Also if there were no sinnes of the flesh, what commendation could be giuen to chastity? If there were no pride, who should be praised for hu∣mility? If no man were either couetous or prodigal, who should be counted liberal?By vice vve knovv the vvor∣thines of vertue. For as by darknes we knowe the benefit of light, by paine the contentment of ease and pleasure, by sicknes the treasure of health; so by the turpitude and loathsomnes of vice, we know the worthines and excellency of vertue. 25. Therefore Lactantius saith very wel; If al euil were taken a∣way,Lact. de ira ca. 13. Chrisost. hom. de lapsu. Adami. The force of ver∣tue consisteth in suffering or ouer∣comming euil. there would not remaine so much at any signe of vertue, wherof al the force consisteth in sustaining or ouercomminge euil; and S. Chrisostome, Tolle (saith he) congeriem malorum & non erit plenitudo virtutum; Take away the heape of euil out of the world, and there shal be no plenitude or fulnes of vertue; Tolle persecutores, & non erunt martires; tolle adulterij amatores, & non erit perfectio castorum. Take away persecutours, and there wil be no martires, take away the louers of addultry, and chast men wil haue no praise of perfection.Chrisost. Ibid. And then he concludeth Ergo ex compa∣ratione malorum fit laus bonorum. Therfore of the comparison with euil men, groweth the commendation of the good. Thus reasoneth S. Chriso∣stome.
26. Hereto I adde, that the excellency of vertue & the bene∣fit which we haue therby, doth not appeare only by the com∣parison therof with vice,The revvards of vertue far grea∣ter by the occa∣sion of euil. but much more by the consideration of the rewarde due thereto, which rewardes are farre greater now by the occasion of sinne, and of the euils that follow ther∣on, then they could haue bene, if man had neuer sinned, or fallen into misery. For; although he was ordained to eternal glory and should haue enioyed it, if he had neuer sinned; yet he could not haue had it in so high and ample a degree, as now; see∣ing he should not haue had those occasions and that matter of merit, which now he hath by his continual combat and conflict with sinne, mans life being no other as Iob saith,Iob. 7. Mans life a con∣tinual vvarfare. but Militia su∣per terram. A warfare vpon the earth; wherin euery soldier deserueth different honour and crowne, according to his different labours and vallour shewed against his enimies: in which respect the Apostle describeth, as it were, a combat & fight betwixt vs and our enemy the diuel, who he saith doth assault vs with; Ignea tela, fiery darts, & spiritualia nequitiae, spiritual armes of wickednes.Ephes. ca. 6. Thes. ca. 5. And therfore he aduiseth vs to put on the armour of God, the corslet of iustice and charity, the sword of the spirit (which he expoundeth to be the word of God) the sheild of faith, and the helmet of hope of salua∣tion; And further,2. Timo. ca. 4. he saith of him selfe that he had fought a good fight, and therfore expected the Crowne of iustice which the iust Iudge reserued for him: and of al the faithful in general he teacheth, that no man shal be crowned that shal not fight lawfully. 27. But if there were no sinne nor temptation, there could be no fight, if no fight, no victory, if no victory, no crowne; wher∣by it appeareth what benefit redoundeth to man by sinne and other euils,Of the conquest of sinne and euil, proceedeth the merit of eter¦nal glory. seeing of the conquest therof proceedeth the great glory which God giueth to his seruants, not only in heauen eter∣nally, but also euen in this world, by the glorious memory had of them continually in his church. 28.The vnspeaka∣ble benefit vve haue by the pas∣sion of our Sa∣uiour through the occasion of sinne. Furthermore who can sufficiētly expresse the good which we reape by the passion of our Sauiour Iesus Christ, wherby he payd the penalty of sinne, with such a copious redēption, & ine∣stimable benefit to man, that we may iustly sing with the church. O felix culpa quae talem meruit Redemptorem. O happy fault that deserued such a Redeemer; For he not only cancelled the obligation of our
debt, and subdued the diuil and sinne; but also made vs able to conquer them both, leauing vs the endles treasure of his owne merits, with meanes to apply the same to our owne benefit; wherby al our defects may be aboundantly supplyed, our po∣uerty enriched, our wracks repayred, our woundes and diseases cured,Man triumpeth ouer sinne and al euil through the merits of Christs passion. and our weaknes strengthned in such sort, that the most infirme and weake man liuing, may by the healp therof, trium∣phe not only ouer sinne, & al the mischeife, and malignity of the world, but also ouer the malice and power of the diuel, yea and turne al the same to his eternal good; In so much that the least crosse or trouble that a man may haue in this life, being patien∣tly endured for the loue of God,No man can iu∣stly complaine of the euil that is in the vvorld. 2. Cor. ca. 4. may through the merits of our Sauiours passion worke in him (as S. Paule saith) Aeternum gloriae pondus; An euerlasting waight of glory; so that no man hath iust cause to cōplayne of the euil that is in the world, seeing the same may serue him for matter and meanes of exceeding merit and euerlasting blisse, if he wil but craue assistance of him, who de∣nyeth it to no man, but inuiteth al men to come vnto him, say∣ing:Matth. 11. Apoc. ca. 3. Venite ad me omnes &c; Come to me al yee that labour & are loaden and I wil refresh you. And againe; Ecce sto ad ostium pulsans si quis aperiat mihi; Behould I stand at the dore knocking, if any vvil open vnto mee. 29. Loe then how almighty God turned the sinne of Adam and al mans misery to mans great benefit and felicity, yea and to his owne exceeding glory, seeing therin he shewed his infinit mercy and bounty, his iustice, his wisdome, prouidence and om∣nipotency, though he did it in such admirable manner, that to wordly men, his omnipotency seemed infirmitie, and his wis∣dome folly. And for as much as the explication of this point may serue, not only for the confirmation of that which I haue he∣therto laboured to proue (touching the benefit and great good that redoundeth to man of the fal of Adam) but also for an eui∣dent demonstration of the prouidence of God,Of the infinit vvisdome and omnipotency of God shevved in the passion of our Sauiour for the benefit of man. yea and of the di∣uinity of our Sauiour Iesus Christ against al Atheists or Infidels, that deny or dout of the one or the other; I wil briefly say some∣what first of the infirmity which appeared in his humanity, and then of the omnipotent effects wrought therby. 30. As for the first what greater weaknes could be in man,
then that which our Sauiour shewed in him selfe,Of the vveaknes and infirmity that appeared in our Sauiours humanity. when hauing for 33. yeeres space endured the miseries of this life, in pouerty, thirst, hunger, and cold, he suffered him selfe to be betrayed by his owne disciple, apprehended by his owne people, mocked and skorned, reuyled, blasphemed, falsly accused, scourged, crowned with thorne, and in the end ignominiously crucified betweene two theeues? Could any man (I say) shew greater in∣firmity then this, or any thing seeme more foolish and absurd to wise men of the world, then that God should become man, and subiect him selfe to so great ignominy and misery, or that men should worship such a one for God? what maruaile is it then,Act. ca. 17. The preaching of Christ cruci∣fied seemeth at first ridiculous to paynims. that when the Apostle preached him amongst the Philosophers at Athens they laughed at him; or that the infidels to whome the faith of Christ is preached at this day, doe at the first, vntil they haue some light of Gods grace, hould it for most absurd? 31. Hereof the experience was seene of late in China, from whence it is writtten by letters dated at Macao the 25.Litterae annuae de Macao 25. Ianua∣ry. 1602. of Ianuary 1602. That whereas Fa. Matteo Ricchi of the Society of Iesus had obtayned leaue of the King of China to repayre to his court, to present vnto him certaine rare thinges, hoping therby to take occasion and opportunity to preach the Christian faith to the King and his nobility (as hee and other of his Society had done some time before in diuers townes of China vpon the sea cost,The experience of vvhat the paynims thinke at the first of Christ crucified. with no smal fruite and gayne of soules) it chanced that a go∣uernour of a citty, by the which he passed, vsing more rigour towards him then others had done, and rifeling al his stuffe, found a crucifixe, which when he saw he demanded what it was, and being very particulerly informed by the Father what it signified,VVhat conceit some paynims in China had of crucifixes vsed amongst Christi∣ans. The subtility of the deuil to hin∣der the shevv∣ing of crucifixes to the paynims in China. and what the Christians beleeued and taught concer∣ning him whome it represented, he fel into a long discourse in∣ueying bitterly against Christians and their religion, concluding that they must needes be very wicked men & inhumane, seeing they could find in their harts to behold such a pittiful spectacle: besides that diuers other principal men who greatly fauored Fa∣ther Ricchi and the Christians did perswade him very earnestly (of great good wil as it seemed) to leaue al his crucifixes behind him, or at least not to shew them to any, assuring him that the very sight therof would disgust al men, and make them abhorre him.
32. But the Father perceiuing the subtilty of the diuel (who sought by such meanes to make him ashamed of the signes and badges of Christian religion) would not consent therto, but car∣ried them along with him to the court, where he and his fel∣lowes haue since had so good successe in preaching the Chri∣stian faith,The progresse of Christian reli∣gion in China at this present. Littera annua delie Isoe Phi∣lip. del. anno. 1603. Christ crucifyed a scandal to the Ievvs and folly to the gentils. 2. Cor. ca. 1. that they haue conuerted and baptized many, and ob∣tayned both a howse and a church for the exercyse of Christian religion, as it is aduertised from the Ilands of Philippinae by let∣ters dated at Manila the eleuenth of Iune in the yeere 1603. and printed here very lately with priuiledge and publike authority. This I haue thought good to relate by the way, to declare how the experience of this tyme sheweth the truth of that which the Apostle said of Christ crucified, to wit, that he was: Scanda∣lum Iudaeis & stultitia Gentibus. A scandal to the Ievves and folly to the Gentiles. Ibid. The stupendious effects of the in∣firmity that ap∣peared in our Sauiours passiō33. But if we consider the stupendious effects of this infirmity and supposed folly, we shal euidently see that our Sauiour Christ for his owne greater glory; Elegit infirma mundi vt confunderet for∣tia; Made choyse of the vveake of the vvorld to confound the stronge; and therfore after his poore life and ignominious death, he vsed no other instrumenrs for the publishing and preaching of faith but only a few poore,The vveak inst∣ruments our Sa∣uiour vsed for the conuersion of the vvorld. simple, and ignorant fishers, and some such other men of mecanical occupation, who subdued infinit num∣bers of people to the obedience of his law, not by might but by miracles, not by force of armes (as Mahomets law was established, and is stil maintained) nor by the power of Princes, but by prea∣ching and perswations, consisting in the plaine and simple nar∣ration of a doctrine, which seemed no lesse repugnant to reason, then to mans nature and sense.Christian do∣ctrin seemeth repugnant to mans nature reason & sence. For, besides that, they taught the incomprehensible misteries of the blessed Trinity, the diuinity of Christ borne of a Virgin, & the resurrection of the dead (which were thinges surpassing mans reason and capacity) the moral doctrine which they preached with al, was no other then the continual mortification of the flesh, abnegation of a mans wil, voluntary pouerty, remission of iniuries, the loue of our ene∣mies, hate of the world, of our parents, of our selues, and such like points of perfection in Christian religion, which mans cor∣rupt nature hardly brooketh, or rather abhorreth; and al this
with out any promise of recompence in this life, but in hope only of reward in the next. 34. Yet neuertheles such was the omnipotency of our Saui∣our Christ, that by the meanes of such weake instruments,The omnipotēcy of our Sauiour Christ manifest in the vveaknes of his instru∣ments. and of a doctrine so repugnant and vnsauory to mans sense and reason as this he hath confounded the wise men of the world, beaten downe the power of the proude and potent, ouerthrowne Ido∣latry, and the empire of the Deuil (which had bene established for some thousandes of yeers before amongst the gentils) and lastly he hath propagated his faith and extended his kingdome throughout so many nations, as haue bene & are daily brought to the obediēce of his church, not with standing the violent op∣position & persecutions raised against it by the prince of darknes assisted with the power of pagan, heretical, and scismatical em∣perours, Kings & princes, & of al the wicked men of the world; as shal be further declared in the second part of this treatise, 35. This then being euident in al mens experience, who can be so absurd to deny either the prouidence of God in the affaires of men, or yet the diuinity of our Sauiour Christ? Can it be said,The prouidence of God and the diuinity of our Sauiour Christ manifest in the miraculous con∣uersion of the vvorld. that there was no such man, and that the story of him and his disciples was fained? How then became the world to be Chri∣stian, the miraculous conuersion wherof giueth manifest testi∣mony of the truth in this matter? For let al histories be read, al antiquityes searched, and al monuments vewed and considered, they al concure to the confirmation of this most admirable con∣uersion, wrought by no other meanes then these which I haue declared; And this being so, no man can with any shew of rea∣son or common sense, deny our Sauiours wonderful prouidence, infinit wisdome, ineffable goodnes, and diuine power, not only in working such incredible, and yet most manifest effects, by such impotent and weake meanes,VVhat good God drevv out of euil by our Sauiours passiō. but also in drawing so much good, out of so great euil, as strength out of weaknes, wisdome out of folly, felicity out of misery, merit out of malice, life out of death, and out of sinne saluation; seeing he confounded the strong by the weake, he conuinced the wise and learned by the simple and ignorant, he made misery, as it were the ladder to mount to felicity, he turned the malice of the diuel and wicked men, to the merit and glory of the good, he destroied death by
his death, and gaue life to the dead; and finally by the sinne of Iudas and of those that crucified him, he wrought the saluation of the world. 36. Thus then we see how the fal and sinne of Adam, though it brought al misery to the world, yet is not only recompenced, but also made most beneficial to man, through the infinit mercy of our Sauiour,Mans nature more glorified novv by the oc∣casion of Adams sinne then it should haue bin if Adam had not sinned. Rom. ca. 6. in whome, and by whose merits, mans nature is now more glorified, then it should haue bene if Adam had not sinned, nor our Sauiour suffered: which the Apostle signifieth, making a notable Antithesis betwixt our Sauiour Christ & Adam, and prouing that the benefit which we haue by our Sauiour, farre exceedeth the losse and dammage which wee receiued by Adam, concluding that, Vbi abundauit delictum superabundauit gra∣tia; VVhere the sinne and offence abounded, there grace is farre more aboun∣dant. Wherupon I conclude that it was more conforme, to the wisdome, prouidence, and bountiful goodnes of God, to per∣mitte man by the freedome of his wil to fal into sinne, and mi∣sery, with intention to giue him such excellent remedies, then either not to giue him free wil, or hauing giuen it him, to hinder the operation therof, or not to suffer any euil at al to be; Thus much concetning Gods permission of sinne and euil. OF THE AFFLICTIONS OF GOOD MEN in this life, and that the same is a notable argument, as vvel of Gods prouidence, bounty and iustice, as of his loue to them; vvith much comfortable doctrine for the afflicted seruants of God. CHAP. 25. HAVING declared by some probable reasons, how it stood with the prouidence and infinit goodnes of almighty God, to permit man to fal into sinne and misery, I wil now satisfie the other difficulties, concerninge the affliction of good men, and the prosperity of wicked men, and shew, that the same are the proper effects sometimes of his
iustice, and sometimes of his mercy, and that with al they are manifest arguments, of his prouidence in humane affaires. 2. Therfore, wheras tribulation seemeth to be, as it were, the proper patrimony and portion of good men,Psal. 33. Tribulation the patrimony of good men. for Multae sunt tribulationes iustorum (saith the roial prophet) the afflictions of the iust are many (as it may appeare by the liues of al the best beloued seruants, and saints of God, yea and of our Sauiour him selfe) it is to be vnderstood, that God hath of his infinit wisdome so ordained it, for many notable reasons, wherof I wil here lay downe diuers, aswel for the consolation of the afflicted, as for the proofe of the matter in hand. 3. First wheras the frailty of mans nature is such that no man is so free from sinne,1. Ioan. 1. God purgeth the sinnes of good men vvith tem∣poral affliction in this life. Chris. concione 4. ca. 16. ex Luca. Tom. 2. but that he offendeth almighty God some∣times more or lesse (for as S. Ihon saith Si dixerimus &c. If we say we haue no sinne, we seduce and deceaue our selues and there is no trueth in us) God of his mercy purgeth the sinns of his seruants with tem∣poral afflictions in this life, to the end he may reward their good workes with eternal glory in the next. For as S. Chrisostome saith, Iusti afflicti hic purgantur, & in alia vita maiorem merentur gloriam; Iust men being afflicted in this life are purged, and deserue greater glory in the other life. For this cause, the holy King and prophet Dauid paied the penalty of his homycide and addultry by the death of 3. of his children, and the rebellion of one of them,2. Reg. ca. 11.12.13.15.16.17.18. to wit Abso∣lon; and by many other afflictions vntil Gods iustice was satis∣fied. 4. Secondly, good men are sometimes afflicted in this life,Good men are somtymes affli∣cted for their fa∣thers offences. 2. Reg. ca. 12. Ioan. 9. for some offences of their fathers, or of some of their pro∣genitors, as the innocent infant of K. Dauid died in the cradle for his fathers sinne, and for this cause, the Apostles asked our Sauiour whether the blind man whome he cured, was borne blind for his fathers sinnes or no. And how it standeth with the iustice of God to punish one for the sinnes of an other,Chap. 17. nu. 24.25. &c. Chap. nu. 13.14. &c. as the father for the sonne, or the subiect for the prince, I haue partly declared before, and wil declare more amply after a while. 5. Thirdly, God suffereth good men sometimes to fal into diuers tentations and troubles to shew them the imbecility of humane nature, lest otherwaies they might forget them selues,
by reason of the spiritual gifts and graces,Tribulation ser∣ueth to good men for an ad∣monition of their natural infirmity. 2 Cor. 12. Chris. hom. 26. in 12. ca. 2. ep. ad. Cor. which he communi∣cateth more largely to them, then to other men. For which cause the Apostle saith that God gaue him the Angel of sathan to beat him, which angel of sathan S. Chrisostome expoundeth to be the Iewes, and al the enemies of the gospel of Christ, who persecuted and afflicted S. Paul. 6. Fourthly if the seruants of God should alwaies liue in prosperity, many would thinke that they embraced vertue and serued God for temporal reward, wheras being in aduersity and misery, they make it manifest that they loue and serue him for him selfe,The vertue of good men is made manifest to the vvorld by their affliction. Iob. ca. 1. and for the discharge of their duties, as appeared by the example of Iob whome the diuel did calumniat saying to al∣mighty God; That Iob did not serue him for nothinge, or in vaine, seeing he did blesse and protect him, his family and al his substance; but touch him (saith he) a litle in his welth and possessions, and thou shalt see he wil curse thee; neuertheles when God had giuen the diuel leaue to afflict him, not only in his substance and children, but also in his owne person, it then appeared that he had not serued God for temporal respects, but for the duty that a creature oweth to his Creator. For he blessed & thanked him, as wel for his losses and afflictions, as for his welth and prosperity saying: Dominus dedit &c.Ibid. Our Lord gaue it and our Lord hath taken it away, the name of our Lord be blessed. 7. Fiftly wheras almighty God doth for his owne glory and the edification of others,Hovv the mira∣culous vvorkes of many good men redound vvholy to Gods glory by their afflictions. Good men are persecuted some∣times for the cō∣uersion or con∣fusion of their persecutours. Mar. ca. 13. worke many times great miracles by his seruants, he suffereth them to indure many temporal afflicti∣ons, to the end that the infirmity of humane nature appearing therby in them, the glory of their great graces, workes, and mi∣racles, may redound wholy to him. 8. Sixtly God suffereth his seruants to be troubled and perse∣cuted for the conuersion or confusion of their persecutours his enemies, to the end, that if they wil not be conuerted, the con∣stancy and patience of his seruants may serue for a testimony against them, and therefore our Sauiour said to his disciples of their persecutors: You shal be beaten in their sinagogs, and shal stand before Presidents and Kinges for me; In testimonium illis, For a testimony against them. 9. Seauenthly, God permitteth the tribulation of the best &
iustest men, for the example and consolation of the weaker,God permitteth the tribulation of the best men, for the example and consolation of the vveaker that are affli∣cted. Tobiae ca. 2. who may be animated therby to beare their tribulation with pacience, yea and to hold it for a token of Gods loue towards them, seeing he exerciseth and chastiseth his best beloued ser∣uants, and dearest freends. 10. For this cause God suffered the good Tobias to be stroo∣ken blind. Vt posteris (saith the scripture) daretur exemplum patien∣tiae eius, sicut & sancti Iob; That an example might be giuen to the poste∣rity, as wel of his patience, as of the patience of the holy Iob.Seneca li de pro∣uid. ca. 6. This also Se∣neca the painim philosopher seemed to consider, saying: VVhy doe good men suffer much aduersity? Vt alios pati doceant nati sunt in ex∣emplare; That they may teach others to suffer, for they are borne and ordai∣ned to serue for patterns and examples to other men. 11. Eyghtly; when euil men see good men suffer many cala∣mities and miseries,Hovv the affli∣ction of good men, may moue euil men to imi∣tate their ver∣tues. and therby vnderstand that they are of no more diuine nature then them selues, but subiect as wel as they to al humayne infirmities, they may also perceaue that it is not impossible for them to imitate their vertues, if they wil vse the same meanes that they doe to attaine thereto. 12. Ninthly; the patience, fortitude, charity, and other ver∣tues of good men, are by their afflictions made knowne not only to the world (for Gods greater glory and their comenda∣tion) but also to them selues for their owne spiritual comfort, as S. Augustin noteth very wel; For vntil they were tried,Aug. li de ciuit dei ca. 9. Good men by tri∣bulation, haue tryal and expe∣rience of their ovvne valor and vertu. Seneca de con∣sola ad Marcian. li. 1. ca 6. & de prouiden. ca. 4. Sap. Cap. 3. Affliction is the fornace vvherin good men are tryed and pu∣risyed. Sene li. de pro∣uiden. ca. 3. & 4. nei∣ther the world nor yet themselues knew their valour. To which purpose Seneca faith that euen as the good pilott and mariner can not shew his art and skil when he hath a prosperous wind and calme sea, but in tempests and stormes; euen so the good man can not shew his vertue nor yet haue any proofe of him selfe in continual prosperity, but in the difficulties, trauerses, and crosses of aduersities. 13. For this cause tribulation is compared in the scripture to the fornace, wherein gold is tried, Tanquam aurum (faith the boke of wisdome) In fornace probauit cos, God did trie his seruants like gold in the fornace. And to the same purpose Seneca also saith: Ignis aurum probat, miseria fortes viros: Fier trieth gold, and misery men of va∣lour. And speaking other where to the prosperous man that ne∣uer passed this trial he saith. I iudge thee to be miserable because thou
didst neuer suffer misery;Senell. de pro∣uiden. ca. 3. & 4. He is miserable vvhich neuer suffered misery. hast thou past thy life with out contradiction? neither thus thy selfe nor any man else knowes what thou art able to doe, for to the end that a man may know him selfe, it is necessary that experience teach him his owne ability. Thus farre Seneca. 14. Thenthly we learne by the tribulation of good men, that there is an other life after this wherin vertue is rewarded and vice punished;The tribulation of good men, is an euident ar∣gument of the imortality of the soule. Cicero de fini∣bus. for seeing that the best men, and greatest seruants of God haue commonly no rest nor repose, and conse∣quently no reward of vertue in this life, it must needes follow that they shal be rewarded in the next: For otherwise vertue, which is most natural & proper to man (being as Cicero defineth it, Natura adsummum perducta; nature brought to her height or perfection) should be giuen to man by nature, not for his good, but for his hurt, seeing it consisteth in the contempt and restraint of al the commodities and pleasures of this life, not for a day or two, or for a few yeeres, but euen vntil the hower of death; and ther∣fore it followeth that the reward therof is reserued for the next life,Lact. li 7. ca. 9. & 10. The true and ful revvard of vertue reserued for the next life. which Lactantius inferreth notably vpon the nature and office of vertue; If vertue (saith hee) doth not euil, but vvel, in that, it contemneth vice and filthy pleasures, and feareth not, to endure any paine, sorrovv or deah it must needs follovv, that it shal attaine to some greater good, then that vvhich it contemeneth and reiecteth; but that good (saith hee) can not be in this life, for that vertue endeth not but vvith death, yea, and many times shevveth it selfe, in the contempt of death, and therfore the good vvhich it deserueth and expecteth, must needs be after this life. Thus reasoneth Lactantius, prouing therby the immortality of the soule. 15. Seeing then vertue of her owne nature depriueth men of the pleasures and commodities of this world, and that also vertuous men are many times by Gods special ordinance loaden with afflictions during their liues, euen natural reason teacheth that there is an other life after this, wherin they are to receiue the reward of their vertue;2. Cor. ca. 15. In which respect the Apostle saith very wel; that vve christians vvere the most mise∣rable men in the vvorld, if it vvere not for the hope vve haue of euerla∣sting glory. 16. Furthermore God permitteth his seruants to be afflicted sometimes with many temporal losses, to the end to take from
them the occasions and matter that engendreth or nourisheth vice and sinne, as riches, honour,The afflictions of good men ex∣empteth them from the occa∣sions of sinne. 1. Timo. ca. 6. and other worldly content∣ments, which make men forget both God and them selues; and therefore the Apostle saith, Qui volunt fieri diuites, incidunt &c. Those vvhich desire to become rich, doe fal into temptation, and into the snare of the diuel, and into many vnprofitable and hurtful desires vvhich cast men headlong into perdition. Thus saith the Apostle. 17. This also the very painims saw and acknowledged, Hast thou lost (saith Seneca) thy substance and vvelth?In excerptis lib. Seneca. perhaps if thou hadst not lost it, it vvould haue destroued thee, vvhere as novv thou shalt be in lesse danger, and happy art thou if vvith thy vvelth, thou hast lost couetousnes,Couetousnes fed and nourrished vvith riches. and yet though it doth remaine vvith thee, thou art in better case then be∣fore, for that thou hast lost the matter vvher vvith so great an euil vvas fed and nourrished to thee. Thus far Seneca; Therfore when almighty God fore seeth that some seruant of his (for whome hee orday∣neth eternal glory) wil abuse his riches, honour, health of body or any other worldly commodities, to the hurt of his owne soule, he mercyfully depriueth him therof,Sap. 4. yea sometimes also of his life. Ne malitia mutet intellectum (saith the scripture) Lest ma∣lice may change his vnderstandinge. 18. Moreouer although God giueth his seruants the light of grace wherby he doth illuminate their vnderstāding, yet he doth not therby exclude them from the ordinary meanes to attaine to wisdome,Tribulation the ordinary and high vvay to vvisdome. I say ca. 28. amongst the which none is either more ordinary or effectual then affliction, according to the saying of the prophet: Vexatio dabit intellectum; Tribulation vvil geue vnderstan∣dinge. 19. This I say for two causes;Tribulation tō∣pereth the exor∣bitant humours of men. Surius in com∣ment anno. 1535. Prosperous men cōmonly vvant vvit. Hovv affliction teacheth men moral philoso∣phy. the one because affliction tem∣pereth and setleth the exorbitant humours of men, which so a∣bound commonly in continual prosperity that their iudgments are greatly blinded, and hindred therby, in which respect the famous lady Katherin Queene of England, and daughter to Ferdi∣nand K. of Spayne was wont wisely to say: That if she must needes make choice either of continual prosperity, or continual aduer∣sity, she would choose the latter; For in affliction (saith she) no good man can want consolation, where as in prosperity most men vvant vvitt. To this purpose S. Chrisostome saith very wel, that affliction doth teach men moral philosophy; For (saith he) it ouercommeth, or
qualifieth al the turbulent passions and affections of men,Chris. hom. 26. in 12. ca. 2. ep. ad corinth. as, enuy, lust, co∣uetousnes and selfe-loue, it beateth dovvne pride and arrogancy, it quickneth sloth, it induceth to patience, it discouereth the basenes of humaine thinges, and cureth al the disseases of the mind. 20. The other why affliction maketh men wise, is, for that it greatly enricheth their experience,Affliction enri∣cheth mens ex∣perience. Experience the mistresse of fooles. Fevv men vvi∣se by other mens experience. Seneca de proui∣den. c. 4. which as the prouerbe saith, is Stultorum magistra, the misteresse of fooles, that is to say, it makes fooles wise, and for as much as few men wil be the wiser, by o∣ther mens experience, vntil they be beaten with their owne rod, it is conuenient that men passe dangers & difficulties and suffer some affliction, therby the better to know the vanity of the world, which no man knoweth so wel as he that tryeth it. For as Seneca saith, he that alwayes hath bin fortunate and neuer ta∣sted aduersity: Ignorat rerum naturae alteram partem, is ignorant of the one halfe of the nature of thinges, and can neuer truely vnderstand how true it is,Ibid. that Accepimus peritura perituri, vve that are to perish haue receiued thinges that also shal perish; by the due consideration wherof mans cogitation & desire may be eleuated from thinges terrestrial,VVherin true vvisdome con∣sisteth. Psal. 118. mutable and fraile, to celestial and eternal, wherein consisteth true wisdome; In which respect the royal Prophet saith; Bonum est mihi quod humiliasti me vt discam iustificationes tuas; It is good for me (o Lord) that thou hast humbled me by affliction, to the end I may learne they iustifications. 21. Therfore wheras this is the ordinary way, wherby men attaine to true wisdome, God suffereth also his seruants to passe by the same, though he giue them with al a greater light and measure of grace, then to other men, wherby he also confir∣meth,Hovv tribula∣tion encreaseth and perfecteth al vertue. fortifieth, and encreaseth their vertues; For by tribula∣tion, their charity & loue to God is kindled, their faith strength∣ned, their hope redoubled, their patience not only proued, but also augmented, their wills made more pliable and conforme to Gods wil, their prayer more frequent and feruorous, and finally their inward consolation so much the greater, by how much more greeuous their afflictions seeme to be. Wherfore the Psal∣mist saith;Psal. 93. Secundum multitudinem dolorum meorum in corde meo, con∣solationes tuae laetificauerunt animam meam; According to the multitude of the sorrowes of my hart, thy consolations (o Lord) haue giuen ioy to my soule.Christ. in 2. cor. 2. hom. 16. And S. Chrisostome: Quemadmodum (saith he) abundant passiones
&c. Euen as our passions and suffringes doe abound, so aboundeth also our consolation. 22. Lastly wheras it pleased our Sauiour Christ not otherwayse to enter into glory but by suffring a most bitter passion, (for as he said himselfe: Oportuit Christum pati, & ita intrare in gloriam suam;Luc. 24. It vvas conucuient that Christ should suffer, and so enter into his glory; he hath also ordayned that his seruants shal not otherwise arriue therto, but by the same way; I meane,Good men by af∣fliction are made conforme to Christ their mai∣ster and head. not otherwise partici∣pate of the ioyes of his kingdome, but by the participation of his crosse and passion, and no meruaile? For Christ being our head, and wee his members, how can it be conuenient, that an afflicted and tormented head, should haue a pampered body and delicate members? or that the Lord and maister should liue in labour and payne, and the slaue in ease and pleasure, and that we should get that for nothing, which our Sauiour bought & pur∣chased so deare, seeing we cannot obtayne any thing of great vallew in the world it selfe, but with much care, trauel & toyle? For difficilia (saith the prouerb) quae pulchra; Those thinges that are fayre are ful of difficultyes. 23. How then can we make account to attayne to the hea∣uenly kingdome and the inestimable ioyes therof,VVhether the passion of Christ did free his ser∣uants from suf∣fring. Rom. 8. by liuing in ease and delights? Marry (say some in these dayes) the account is easely made, and the reason ready at hand. Our Sauiour payd the price, and made the purchase for vs that be faithful, wherby we became, Haeredes dei, & cohaeredes Christi: heyres of God & coheyres vvith Christ; And therfore (say they) being heyres, we shal in he∣rite by the vertue of his suffring and purchase, though we suffer nothing our selues, for he both suffred and satisfied for vs; thus say they. 24. The ful answere hereof, would require a longer discourse then this place wil permitt;VVee cannot raigne vvith Christ except vve suffer vvith him. Ibid. but to say somewhat breefly for the explication of the matter in hand, it is to be vnderstood; that where the Apostle calleth vs; Heyres of God, and coheyres of Christ, He addeth imediatly; Si tamen compatimur, vt & conglorifi∣cemur; signifying that vve are coheyres with Christ vpon condition that vve suffer vvith him, to the end we may be glorifyed vvith him; And therfore in our Sauiours suffering, it is to be cōsidered, that he not only redeemed vs from death therby, and set vs in the
way of euerlasting life, but also went before vs, carrying his crosse to giue vs both example and courrage to follow him, which saint Peter plainly teacheth saying;1. Pet. ca. 2. Christus passus est pro nobis &c. Christ hath suffred for vs, leauing you an example that you may followe his footsteps; Thus saith the Prince of the Apostles. 25. Wherin hee giueth vs to vnderstand, that our Sauiour by his passion did not free and exempt vs from suffring, but inuited or rather obliged vs there vnto; which also our Sauiour him selfe teacheth more expresly;Math. c. 10. Christ to beimi∣tated in the hea∣ring of his crosse. Si quis (saith he) vult venire post me &c. If any man wil come after me, let him deny him selfe, and take vp his crosse and follow me; And hereto also tended al his doctrine consisting in the renunciation of the world, in the mortification of the flesh, in hatred of our selues, and in the patient sufferings of the maledictions and persecutions of wicked men; which he taught to be the strait and narrow way, which leadeth to the kingdome of heauen; Al which (to omitt other testimonies for breuities sake) the Apostle comprehended in these few wor∣des;Act. c. 14. Per multas tribulationes oportet nos intrare in regnum Dei; VVe must enter in to the kingdme of heauen by many tribulations; Wherin neuer∣theles almighty God sheweth sufficiently his mercy and great compassion of our infirmity,1. Cor. ca. 10. The mercy of God tovvards his afflicted and tempted seruāts. seeing, as the same Apostle affir∣meth; He suffreth vs not to be afflicted or tempted more, then with the helpe of his grace we may be able to beare, yea and also; Dat cum tenta∣tione prouentum; Giueth vs with tentation encrease of grace; And as the Roial prophet saith, he is not only alwaies present with his ser∣uants in tribulation,Psal. 90. but also in the end; Eripit eum, & glorificat cum, doth deliuer him, and glorify him. 26. Seeing then I haue here proued that affliction is to good men the fornace wherin they are purged, purified, and refined in this life, a necessary testimony to them selues and others, of the infirmity of humane nature,A breif summe of the benefits of affliction in good men. an assay (as it were) and trial of their owne strength, a manifestation of their faith charity, hope, patience, fortitude and other vertues, an example, encou∣ragment, and edification to others, a comfort to them selues, a confusion to the enemies of God and theirs, an euident argu∣ment of the soule, and of Gods iustice in rewarding the iust in the next life, the hammer and hatchet of vice, the nourse of vertue, the mother of experience and wisdome, and (as I may
tearme it) a magazine of merit, and finally the pathe that our Sauiour him selfe troad before vs, to lead vs therby to euerla∣sting glory; who can deny that the tribulation of the good, is not only a manifest argument of Gods infinit wisdome, iustice,Affliction, an assured token & pledg of Gods loue. Tob. 12. mercy, and prouidence, but also an assured token and pledge of his loue & fauor towardes them? and therfore the angel said to the good Tobias, Quia acceptus eras Deo, necesse fuit vt tentatio proba∣ret te; Because thou wast acceptable to God, it was necessary that tempta∣tion should proue thee. And the Apostle saith; Our Lord chastrseth him whome he loueth, and scourgeth euery sonne whome he receaueth: and a∣litle after, what sonne (saith he) is these,Hevbrae. ca. 12. God chastiseth vvhome he loueth. whome his father doth not correct? for if you be out of discipline, wherof al the children of God are made partakers, it is it a token you are bastards and not lavvful children; Thus saith the Apostle for the comfort of the afflicted seruants of God. 27. And this also the painims them selues notably conside∣red, as amongst others the famous Seneca,Seneca de pro∣uiden ca. 1. Notable conside∣rations of Se∣neca concerning the afflictions of good men. who giueth notable in∣structions to the same purpose; when thou seest (saith hee) good men tossed and turmoyled, and euil men liue in pleasure, and delight, remember that we are wont to restraine our children with seuerity of discipline, and to giue more liberty to our sla∣ues; and the like thou maist thinke of almighty God, who suf∣fereth not good men to liue in ease and pleasures, but doth proue exercise and harden them, and therby prepareth them for him selfe; And againe afterwards:Idem. Ibid. ca. 4. God (saith he) doth lay vpon the best men, labours, sicknes, sorrowes, and other incomodi∣ties, much like to a captaine in the warre, who committeth the hardest and most dangerous exploits, to the best and most valiant soldiers; and euen as the soldier chosen and asigned, for the ex∣ecution of some heroycal and worthy enterprise,Afflictiō ought to be esteemed as an honour and fauour at Gods hand. doth not mur∣mur and grudge against his captaine for the same, as though he had done him wronge, or bare him euil wil, but rather holdeth himselfe to be honored and beloued of him: euen so we are to thinke, that God doth honour and loue vs when he thinkes vs worthy to combat with aduersity. 28. Thus far Seneca, who also signifying in an other place,Seneca. Ibid ca. 5. with how prompt and ready a wil we should receiue any crosses or afflictions at Gods handes, saith in the person of an afflicted
man;Resignation of mans vvil to Gods vvil in af∣fliction taught and practised by the paynims. Hoc vnum (dij imortales) &c. O yee immortal Gods, for one thinge only I may complaine of you, to wit, that you did not sooner notify vnto me your wil in this behalfe, for if I had knowne it, I would haue offred my selfe to suffer al that which now I willingly accept at your handes; wil yee haue my chil∣dren, or any part of my body, or my life? take al; for I am wel content to returne vnto you al that which ye gaue me, and therfore yee shal not neede to take it from me by force, for no∣thinge can bee taken from him who giueth al he hath with a good wil. 29. Thus saith this painim, which I haue alleadged the ra∣ther, that wee Christians who haue receiued the light of grace, and of the Christian faith, may be a shamed of our selues, when we murmure against God for euery litle crosse or tribulation, seeing the painims both taught and shewed such resignation of wil to the wil of God,A shame for Christians to be lesse resigned to Gods vvil then paynims. to suffer what soeuer he should lay vpon them, though they had neither any light nor help of his grace, nor yet any promise, and much lesse assurance of eternal reward, or any other motiue, but only the consideration of the duty of a creature to his Creatour; wheras wee haue not only the same reason which they had, to moue vs therto; but also the rules and precepts of our religion, the promise and assurance of ineffable and incomprehensible rewards, the examples of the most paineful life and passion of our Sauiour him selfe,The example of Christ and al his Saints inuiteth Christians to suffer affliction vvillingly. and of inumerable persecutions, afflictions, and torments, ioyfully endured by his Apostles, and infinit other Martires, besides the continual crosses which al the Confessours and great Saints of Gods church haue either voluntary taken and borne of them selues, for the loue of God, or els willingly and thankfully recei∣ued, from the handes of others. VVe ought to ioy and glory in affliction; and vvhy.30. Al which ought to moue vs to the patient, yea and ioy∣ful suffring of what tribulation soeuer it shal please God to in∣flict vpon vs, and to say with the Apostle; Gloriamur in tribulatio∣nibus, VVe glory in afflictions. Seeing, that as hee also saith in an other place,Rom. ca. 5. 2. Cor. ca. 4. The conclusion, inferring that the infliction of good men is a natoble argu∣ment of Gods prouidence. That tribulation of ours which for the present is short and light, doth worke in vs an eternal waight of glory aboue al measure; wherupon I conclude, that the affliction of good men being duly considered with the circumstances and reasons therof, is
so farre from being an argument against the prouidence, iustice and mercy of God, that it notably proueth and confirmeth the same; and thus much for this point. 31. Now then it resteth that I proceede to an other point, which I promised to treat of; to wit, why God suffereth euil men to prosper, and forbeareth many tymes to punish them in this life, at least so greuously and publikely as they seeme to de∣serue, wherof many notable reasons may be giuen, not only out of Christian authors, but also out of paynims,Plutark. de sera numinis vindicta & namely Plutark who wrote a notable treatise of this matter against the Epicurians, wherin he proued the prouidence of almighty God in the affay∣res of men, by his patience towards euil men, and their prospe∣rity, as I shal haue occasion further to declare now and then in the next chapter. OF THE GREAT LONGANIMITY AND patience of almighty God, tovvards vvicked men, and of the causes of their prosperity; By occasion vvhereof, their pittiful and miserable state is declared, vvith some good admonitions to them. CHAP. 26. AMONGST al the wonderful effects of Gods secret iudgments concerning man, there is none more admirable then the impunity and prosperity of wicked men; For,Nothing more admirable then the impunity & prosperity of vvicked men. what may seeme more wonderful and strange, then that almighty God, being of infinit maiesty, power and iustice, should suffer such excesse as we dayly see of sinnes and offences, committed against him selfe, and not only forbeare often tymes to punish the offendours, but sometymes also to bestow al temporal prosperity & felicity vpon them; the consideration wherof so much perplexed & troubled the Royal prophet, that he saith it made him stagger. For vvhen I considered (saith he) the peace and prosperity of sinners; Penè moti,Psal. 72. sunt peeds mei, penè effusi sunt gressus mei; I almost lost my footinge, and vvas al∣most
put out of my pase; and S. Aug: expounding these wordes of the Psalme,Psal. 91. Thy cogitations (o Lord) are most profound; saith, that there is no sea so deepe, as is the cogitation or iudgment of God, that wicked men flowrish, and good men are afflicted, in which depth or profundity,Aug. in Psal. 91. saith he, Naufragat omnis infidelis, euery vnfaith∣ful man makes shipwrack, that is to say, is drowned in the depth of Atheisme, doubting or denying the prouidence of God in mans affayres. 2. Neuertheles so merciful is almighty God in this behalfe, that he is content him selfe to serue for the pilot to deliuer vs from the danger of this golfe, hauing reuealed vnto vs many no∣table causes & reasons of his admirable iudgments in this point, though al men haue not grace to see and consider them; and therfore I wil endeauor to lay downe some of them in this place, speaking first of his Longanimity & patience towards wicked men, and after of their prosperity. 3. First then it is to be considered, that such is the mercy of almighty God towards al sinners,God spareth vvicked men to giue them tyme to repent. Sap. 11. Iob. c. 24. and his desire of their repen∣tance, that as the wiseman saith: Dissimulat peccata hominum prop∣ter panitentiam; he dissembleth, and seemeth not to see the sinnes of men, to the end they may haue tyme to repent. For which cause, he sometymes spareth the most wicked, as Iob, signifyeth saying, Deus dedit ei locum penitentiae, at ille eo abutitur in superbiam. God gaue the vvicked man tyme and place of repentance, but he abuseth it to pride. 4. This consideration was not vnknowne to the Paynims, and therfore Plutarke saith:Plut. de sera. vin∣dicta. VVhat the pay∣nims obserued in Gods patience tovvards sinners that as almighty God doth commonly ex∣terminat and cut of such wicked men as he knoweth to be in∣corrigible (for that they are hurtful as wel to others as to them selues) so also he spareth such as erre rather of ignorance or fraylty, then of malice; giuing them tyme to repent; and to the same purpose he alleadgeth examples of diuers that had bene somtymes very wicked, and became afterwards men of notable vertue, wherof we see also dayly experience. Idem. Ibid. The example of Gods patience to¦vvards sinners  be mitated by men.5. And here I can not omit an other notable consideration of his, cōcerning the great patience of God towards sinners, which he wisheth al men to propose as an example to them selues, therby to moderate their exorbitant passions of anger and desire of reuenge; For if (saith he) vvise men are vvont oftentymes to cal to
mind, and imitate the patience and moderation of Architas, Plato, and o∣ther philosophers (vvho vvould neuer correct or punish their slaues in their anger) much more reason is it, that vve haue alvvayes before our eyes and imitate, the patience and longanimity of almighty God (the true patterne of vertue & goodnes) accustome our selues by his example to moderation, clemency, and benignity, as to most perfect and diuine vertues; Thus saith this paynim. 6. But if we extend the example of Gods patience a litle fur∣ther to the pardon and remission of iniuries done vnto vs (as God pardoneth our iniuries & offences done vnto him) we shal make this consideration much more Christian and proffitable to vs,Gods patiente to be imitated in remission of in∣iuries Mat. ca. 18. especially seeing our owne pardon dependeth vpon our imi∣tation of almighty God in this point, as we may learne by our Sa∣uiours parable of the maister of the family, who hauing remitted al the debt of his seruant, greeuously punished him afterwards, because he did not pardon his fellow, as he was pardoned him selfe. Therfore I conclude with S. Cyprian,Cyp. li de bone patient. that seeing almighty God (who is both our Lord and Father) is the author and true mircour of patience, it is fit that we imitate him therin, For ser∣uants (saith S. Cyprian) ought to conforme them selues to their Lord and maister, and children should not degenerate from the vertues of their father. Thus much for the first point. 7. Secondly, God forbeareth sometymes to destroy wicked men for some good mens sake who liue & dwel amongst them,God forbeareth vvicked men somtymes for good mens sake. Exod ca. 32. either for that his wrath is pacified by their prayers (as when Moyses obtayned pardon for the children of Israel whome God threatned to destroy for their Idolatry) or els when the punish∣ment which the wicked deserue would bring such a general de∣solation to a whole country, that the good must needs participat therof; In which case almighty God forbeareth sometymes to execute the rigour of his iustice. 8. And this our Sauiour may seeme to haue insinuated in the parable, wherin he signified that the cockle,Math. ca. 13. and darnel should be suffred to grow with the good corne vntil haruest, least if it were weeded out, the corne might be pulled vp with al; and therfore when God determined to destroy Sodome and Ghomorra, Abraham said confidently vnto him, Non est tuum &c.Genes. ca.  It is not thy property or custome (o Lord) to destroy the iust togeather with the vniust;
Wherto also almighty God answered, that if there were but ten iust men in al the citty of Sodome he would spare it for their fa∣kes;Hovv much it may auaile an euil man to be but in the com∣pany of a good man. wherby we may see how much it may auaile an euil man to be but in the company of good men, or to haue one good man in his howse, seing God would haue spared so great and populous a cittie if there had bene but ten iust men therin: which may also further appeare by the example of those 276. men which sailed with S. Paule towards Rome,Act. ca. 27. whome God deliuered from drowning for S. Paules sake, as the Angel signified vnto him saying, Donauit tibi Deus, omnes qui nauigant tecum; God hath giuen thee al those that sayle with thee; Of whome none perished, though the ship was cast a way. 9. Thirdly it falleth out many times that almighty God sus∣pendeth and differreth his iust punishment due to euil men,God diserreth somtymes the pu∣nishment of the vvicked to pu∣nish them in tyme and place more conuenient 4. Reg. c. 19. to inflict it vpon them in time and place more conuenient for his glory, their greater confusion, and example of others; as the scriptures testifye of the most wicked and blasphemous Sennache∣rib King of the Assirians when he beseiged Hierusalem and blas∣phemed almighty God most abominably; For although God destoried his whole army miraculously in the night, yet he de∣forred his personal punishment for a time, and therfore he said of him by his prophet: Reuertetur in terram suam &c. He shal retourn into his owne country,Ibid. and there I wil destroy him with the sword; which was fulfilled shortly after in Niniue, where he was slaine in the temple of his false God Nesrac by two of his owne sonnes, whom God vsed as his instruments to punish him more notoriously, as wel for his Idolatry, as for his blasphemy. Plut. de sera nu∣min. vit dicta.10. This point Plutark exemplifieth in diuers wicked men, as to omit others in one Bessus, who had secretly killed his owne father and was not discouered a longe time, vntil at length being inuited to diner with diuers others,An example of Gods punishmēt diforred, re∣counted by Plu∣tark. and arriuing at the place where he should dine, he fel into a rage vpon a suddaine against certaine yonge swallowes that cried in their nest, in so much that he pulled them downe and trode them al vnder his feete: and being reprehended by others which were present; Why (saith he) did you not heare how they said that I killed my father; Which being marked, and notice giuen therof to the magistrates, he was examined, and confessing the murder was worthily execu∣ted
for the same; wherby it appeareth that God suspended the punishment of this parricide to inflict it vpon him in a more strange and notorious manner for his owne greater glory & the terrour of others. 11. To which purpose Plutark discourseth notably of Gods great wisdome and iustice in punishing euery offendour,Ibid. Notable conside∣rations of Plu∣tar vvhy God deferreth the pu∣ment of euil men alead∣ging also for the same, the Poët Pindarus, who said that it belon∣geth to almighty God only, as to the author of iustice to deter∣mine when, how, where, and how much euery sinner is to be punished, and therfore (saith Plutark) euen as those which haue no skil in phisick can not with reason controle a skilful phisi∣tion or surgeon for that hee deferreth the lancing of an impo∣stume, or because he draweth blood, or purgeth his pacient ra∣ther to day then to morrow, so we who knowe not the secret iudgments of God, neither ought, nor can controle his procee∣dinges, when he punisheth sooner or later;God knovveth hovv & vvhen to apply the due remedies to the malica of men. neither yet can we affirme or conceiue any other thing therof, but only that he knoweth best how to apply the due remedy to the malice of men, by punishing euery offence in due manner, measure, tyme, and season. 12. And herein also this same author hath other notable considerations, as that almighty God may securely delay the pu∣nishment of wicked men, because they can not escape his hands by flight, or by any other meanes, wheras we (respecting as wel our owne impotency, as the breuity of our liues) are forced ma∣ny times to punish with speed, lest the offendour may otherwise scape vnpunished; But God (saith he) who is omnipotent,Plutare. Ibid. and to whome in respecte of his eternity, the whole life of a man is but like the daw∣ning of the day; yea and lesse then an instant or moment,God looseth no tyme in the pu∣nishment of vvicked men by delay. VVicked men vnpunished cō∣pared to priso∣ners condēned to death and not executed. looseth no tyme by delay, hauing al wicked men as it were, in a continual prison and in fetters, from vvhence they can noe flee or deliuer them selues, be they neuer so potent or subtile; and therfore although vve see them many times liue prosperously and pleasantly, vve are to thinke (saith he) no othervvise of them, then of prisoners condemned to death, amongst vvhome there are many so care∣lesse, that they iest sport and play vntil the halter be about their necks. Thus saith this pagan phlilosopher of Gods sufferance and patience towards wicked men, and of their miserable estate, seeing that how wise or potent soeuer they seeme to be, they haue no way
or meanes, to escape the rigour of Gods iustice, but by repentance and amendement of their liues. And thus much for the third consideration. 13. Fourthly when almighty God doth foresee that some wicked men wil doe in time some good worke, to his glory or to a publike good, or that he shal haue good and vertuous chil∣dren (as Plutark noteth) God doth tolerate and suffer him vntil he haue yeelded his good fruit;Plut. de sera nu∣min. vindicta. God spareth vvicked men somtymes vntil they haue yeil∣ded some good fruit. much like (saith Plutark) as the lawes ordaine, that women condemned to death for some hay∣nous offence, be neuertheles repriued and spared if they be with child, vntil they be deliuered, which being done, the law is exe∣cuted vpon them: and euen so (saith he) though almighty God determine to punish wicked men, yet he forbeareth to doe it otherwhiles, in respect of the good fruit which they wil produce in time. 14. This the prophet Michaeas signifieth of the people of the Iewes,The people of the Ievves spared vntil Christ vvas borne of them. Mich. ca. 5. who for their wickednes deserued to be destroied longe before they were, but in respect that our Sauiour Christ was to be borne of them, their destruction was differred vntil after his birth and passion; and therfore the prophet saith. Propter hoc &c. For this cause God wil suffer them for a time; In quo parturiens pariet; Vntil one, that is to say the Virgin Mary, shal haue brought forth her∣childe. Put. Ibid de sera num. vind. The difference betvvixt mans ignorance and Gods infinit vvisdome nota∣bly obserued, by Plutark.15. Furthermore of this point Plutark discourseth notably, shewing also herein the diference betwixt the iudgement of men, and the iudgement of God, or rather betvvixt mans igno∣norance, and Gods infinit wisdome; For euen as (saith hee) an ig∣norant man in husbandry, seeing a peece of ground ouerrunne with brambles, shrubs, and bushes, and ful of mire and durt, holdeth it for barren and nothing worth, wheras the skilful husbandman doth therby know the fertility of it; euen so we (saith hee) seeing some bad fruite of good & generous natures, doe vtterly condemne them, and thinke them vnworthy to be permitted in humane society; wheras almighty God who sear∣cheth the minds and hartes of al, and knoweth that the bad fruite, which those good natures yeld, proceedeth rather of the fertility and generosity therof, then of sterrility or defect, suffe∣reth the same, and expecteth vntil nature haue discharged her
selfe of her superfluities, that so it may bring forth in time the good fruit, which by his wisdome, and prescience he foreseeth: and therfore as sometimes he cutteth of wicked men in respect of some great mischeifes they would doe,VVhy God cut∣teth of some vvicked men & spareth some o∣thers. if they should liue (fo∣reseeing that their future offences would be greater then their former, and their secret sinns worse then their publike) so also he spareth some for the good he knoweth wil in time proceed from them. &c. Thus discourseth hee, giuing also examples of many, who though they continued wicked al their liues, and were in the end punished exemplarly by almighty God, yet did some notable good acts before their death. 16.God forbeareth some euil men rather then o∣thers because they vvil doe more good then others. And although the good which some tirants and wicked men doe, doth not perhaps counteruaile the hurt and dammage which many particuler men, or the whole commonwelth recea∣ueth by their wickednes; yet it is to be considered, that for as much as they are in their very tiranny and iniquity the instru∣ments and ministers of Gods iustice (as I wil further declarenu. 23. hereafter) it is not vnfit for the great mercy and bounty of al∣mighty God, to spare them and to vse the ministry of them, ra∣ther then of other wicked men, so much the longer, by how much the more he may expect with al some better fruit of them, then of others such as they. 17. For such is his bountiful goodnes,God suffreth no good to be lost that his creatu∣res may conueni∣ently yeild. Luc. 13. that as he suffereth no euil in the world, but to the end that good may come therof; so he wil suffer no good to be lost that any creature of his may conueniently yeald; This our Sauiour him selfe giueth vs to vn∣derstand by the parable of the figge tree, which hauing bene in the vineyard three yeares, and yelded no fruit, the maister of the vineyard was content to let stand one yeare longer, ordaining with al that it should be pruned, dressed, digged about and dun∣ged, to the end it might fructify if it were possible, and that if it gaue no fruit the fourth yeere, it should be then cut vp. 18. Thus signified our Sauiour the longanimity and patience which God vseth towards sinners, and his exceeding great care and desire to draw some good fruit from them, how barren or bad soeuer they be; and thus much for this point. 19. Fiftly almighty God not only spareth,God spareth and prospereth some vvicked men for some good deedes they haue done. and forbeareth wicked men, but also doth giue them temporal happines here in
this life, for some good deedes they haue done; To which pur∣pose it is to be considered, that as no man is so free from sinne, but that he committeth sometimes some frailties, which God of his iustice punisheth either in this life or the next, so also no man, or at the least very few, are altogeather so void of grace and goodnes, but that they doe, or haue done sometimes in their life some good worke, which almighty God of his iustice, or liberal∣lity wil reward; For as our Sauiour him selfe witnesseth. He which giueth but so much as a cup of cold water in his name.Math. ca. 5. No good deede shalbe vnre∣vvarded. Ca. 17. nu. 15. Non perdet mercedem suam; Shal not loose his reward. Yea and which is more, such is his mercy and liberality, that he recompenseth some∣times such as doe him seruice vnwittingly, as I haue declaredEzech. ca. 29. els where by the example of Nabuchodonosor King of Babilon, to whome God gaue the kingdome of Egipt, for the seruice he had done him vnwittingly, in the destruction of the people of Tyrus. 20. But now for asmuch as the whole course of wicked mens liues, is such, that they iustly deserue eternal damnation, it is to be vnderstood that almighty God, as wel for the manife∣station of his mercy, as for the satisfaction of his iustice, rewar∣deth their few good workes temporally in this life,Many vvicked men haue their heauen in this vvorld. to the end he may giue them in the other the ful measure of punishment, which their wickednes deserueth; and for this cause no doubt, very many which shal be damned eternally for their wicked liues,Iob. 21. haue their heauen in this world, who as Iob saith. Dacunt in bonis dies suos & in puncto ad inferum discendunt; Lead their liues in pleasure, and in a moment descend to hel. 21. Sixtly God forbeareth sometimes, and spareth wicked men,God forbeareth or prospereth euil men somty∣mes for the good deeds of their progenetours. 4. Reg. ca. 9.10.13. & 14. yea and giueth them temporal blessinges (as riches ho∣nour and prosperity) for some good deeds of their parents or progenitours; So wee see in the scriptures, that God not only gaue the kingdome of Israel to Iehu, but also continued his chil∣dren & posterity in the possession therof to the fourth generatiō (though they were al wicked schismatikes and Idolaters) in re∣ward of the good seruice which Iehu had done him in destroving the howse of Achab,Chap. 17. nu. 16. as I haue noted before, speaking of the causes, why God giueth kingdomes to euil men; Also God for∣bore to destroy King Ioas and the people of Israel, yea and gaue
them great victories against the Kings of Siria;4. Reg. ca. 13. Propter pactum quod habebat cum Abraham, Isaac, & Iacob; For the couenant hee had made with Abraham, Isaac & Iacob: Of whome they were des∣cended. 22. Seuenthly God giueth many times, releefe in affliction and prosperity to wicked men, to draw them to the loue of him by temporal benefits; For this cause he deliuered the Idolatrous Kinge Achab and the Israelites his subiects from a cruel famin,3. Reg. ca. 18. & 20. God giueth tem∣poral benefits to vvicked men, to dravve them therby to loue him. Deuter. ca. 37. Ezech. ca. 3. wherwith they were afflicted, and after gaue them two notable victories against the Syrians; and for the same cause God hath promised, and gaue many miraculous victories, and much tem∣poral felicity to the people of the Iewes, cherishing and tendring them, as Moyses said, Quasi pupillam oculi, Like the apple of his eye. Though they were alwaies: Populus durae ceruicis, A stiffnecked peo∣ple, Generatio praua & exasperans; A wicked and an exasperating gene∣tation. And therfore in the end he did exterminat them vtterly for their ingratitude. 23. Eyghtly the prosperity of the wicked is sometimes neces∣sary for the iust punishment of others as wicked,God prospereth vvicked men somtymes for the punishment of others. 4. Reg. c. 17 & 25. or more wic∣ked then they, in which case God maketh euil men the iustru∣ments of his iustice, and prospereth their designments and at∣tempts so farre forth as is conuenient for the chastisment of others; So God prospered the Assirians and Babilonians, in the conquest of Samaria and Iuda, the Goths, Vandals, Alans, Huns and other barbarous people, in the subuersion and direption of many Christian countries; the Turks and Moores, in the subduing of Grece and Spaine, and lastly the Saxons, Danes and Normans in the 3. seueral conquests of our country, as I haueca. 20. & 21. ca. 17. nu. 14. declared already when I treated of Gods iustice in punishing the Spainards, Brittans and English; I haue also spoken perticulerly of this point in the causes why God giueueth kingdomes to euil men, where the reader shal see some other thinges concerning this matter wor∣thy obseruation. 24. Wherto I adde,God casteth the roddes of his vvrath into the fyer, vvhen he hath vvorne them. that commonly when almighty God for the execution of his iustice vpon others, hath vsed the ministry of euil men, he also extendeth the seuerity of his iustice vpon them, casting the rods of his wrath into the fier, when he hath worne them vnto the stumps, which was signified by the pro∣phet
Isay of the King of the Assirians,Isay. ca. 10. whose ministery God meant to vse in the punishment of the Iewes, and therfore he cal∣led him the Rod of his wrath,Ibid. and his staffe, adding that when he had fulfilled al that which he was to doe in Sion and Hierusalem, Visitabo (saith he) super fructum magnifici cordis regis Assur. &c. I wil visit (that is to say) I wil punish the magnificent King of the Assiri∣ans for his proude hart; and the same we see verified commonly in al tirants, who being no other but the instruments of Gods iu∣stice,Plut. de sera num. vindie. and as Plutarke calleth them, his hangmen, doe feele in the end his heauy hand vpon them selues; As I wil make most eui∣dent hereafter. And thus much for this point. God exalteth vvicked men somtymes, for their punishmēt. Claudian. li. 1. in Ruffinum.25. Ninthly God not only spareth, but also many tymes ray∣seth and exalteth wicked men for their punishment, that is to say, to confound them the more by their fal. —tolluntur in altum (saith the poët) vt lapsu grauiore ruant: They are lifted vp on high, that they may haue the greater and fouler fal: which the prophet Dauid signifyeth to be a great and terrible effect of Gods wrath. For, speaking in the person of a repentant sinner fallen from prosperity to misery,Psal. 101. Potum meum (saith he) cum fletu miscebam &c I did mixe my drinke with teares before the face of thy vvrath, and indignation, because thou didst eleuate & lift me vp, to cast me dovvne to the ground. And the same he insinuateth in many places, where speaking of the destruction and ouerthrow of wicked men, he first maketh mention of their exaltation: The enemyes of God (saith he) vvhen they are honoured and exalted,Psal. 36. shal va∣nish avvay like smoake; and againe, I savv the vvicked man eleuated and lifted vp farre higher then she Cedar trees of Libanus,Ibid. and I passed by & hee was not, and I sought him and his place vvas not found. And Iob to the same purpose,Iob. 24. saith of euil men: Eleuati sunt ad modicum. &c. They are lifted vp for a vvhile, and shal not subsist, but shalbe humbled 26. This also was obserued by the Paynims, and therfore Cae∣sar in his commentaries saith,Caesar. Coment. li. 6. that sometymes when almighty God determineth to punish men greuously for their wickednes, Concedit illis res secundiores & diuturniorem impunitatem, quo grauius ex rerum commutatione doleant; He graunteth them the greater prosperity, and longer impunity, to the end that they may the more feele their affliction
by change of their fortune. Thus saith he, acknowleging with the Christians the seuerity of Gods iustice, and his secret iudgments vpon wicked men, in that he exalteth them, to the end to hum∣ble them and lifteth them vp, to throwe them downe, and see∣meth to fauour and cherish them,Prosperity to many vvicked men, is but a preamble to their destruction when he meaneth to destroy them, giuing them many tymes their owne harts desires, for a pleasant preparatiue to their bitter potion, which he ordayneth for them, euen in this life; as the Royal prophet sheweth ex∣presly in the children of Israel, when they offended almighty God most greeuously, murmuring against him in the wildernes for lack of meate, and distrusting his prouidence and power to feede them, to whome neuertheles he gaue such aboundance that the scripture saith; It rayned flesh vpon them like dust,Psal. 77. and fea∣therd foule like the sand of the sea, and they did eat therof their bellyes ful, Et non fraudati sunt a desiderto suo; and vvere not deceaued or skanted of their dsire. But what followeth? Adhuescae eorum erant in ore ipso∣rum &c. Behold, their meat vvas not yet out of their mouths, vvhen the vvrath of God fel vpon them, and killed the fattest amongst them &c. Thus saith the psalmist of the children of Israel, and so it falleth out many tymes with other wicked men who wallow in welth and pleasure for a tyme, and are but as it were fatted like beasts for the slaughter, whereto they are by Gods iust iudgment re∣serued. 27. And this they may feare so much the more, by how much more prosperous and happy they seeme to them selues or others;The more pospe∣rous vviced men are, the more cause they haue to feare Cicero de fini. li. 5. wherof we haue a notable example in Policrates the tyrant, who hauing had a most prosperous tyranny, and not so much as any check of fortune, or euil hap in al his life, so much suspected the issue therof in him selfe, that he sought purposely some occasion of greefe, and to that end did voluntarily cast into the sea a dya∣mond which he was wont to weare of inestimable valew; but so it chanced, that the dyamond was swallowed by a fish, and the fish shortly after taken by some fishermen his subiects, who fin∣ding so rich a iewel in the belly of the fish, and thinking it to be a fit present for their prince, brought him his diamond againe; Not long after it was his fortune to be taken in the warrs, and hanged vp aliue vntil he died, partly with famin, and partly with the parching heate of the sunne.
28. To the same purpose it is written, that S. Ambrose bishop of Milan, hearing a wicked man, in whose howse he was lodged, vant that he had neuer in his life had any misfortune,In the life of S. Ambrose. sicknes, crosse, or cause of greefe, made great hast to get out of his howse, least the wrath of God might fal vpon it whilst he was there, and that presently after his departure the ground opened and swallowed vp the howse with the maister therof, and al his family. 29. Neuertheles such men as these might perhaps seeme ei∣ther happy, or at least not vnfortunare, if they might purchase many yeres of prosperity and pleasure so good cheap, as with only a few dayes misery in the end,VVicked men purchase eter∣nal misery vvith a fevv yeeres prosperity but so hard and miserable is their condition, that they are further to pay an eternal penalty of their sinful prosperity, as shalbe shewed in the next considera∣tion, and how miserable also their life is (though it seeme neuer so happy) I wil declare at large herafter. 30. Therfore the tenth and last consideration shalbe, that many tymes God giueth to wicked men, not only impunity in this life,Continual im∣punity & pros∣perity of vvicked men an assuran∣ce of their repro∣bation. Ca. 25. nu. 26. but also al temporal felicity for an assured token of their reprobation, & as it were an earnest-peny of their eternal dam∣nation: for as there is no greater signe of Gods loue to his chil∣dren, and of their election, then that he keepeth them in disci∣pline (as I haue amply declared in the last chapter) so there is no greater token of his wrath towards sinners, and of their repro∣bation, then if he neuer correct or chastice them; and therfore the psalmist saith.Psal. 9. Aug. in Psal. 9. God is vehemētly angry vvith sin∣ners vvhen he doth not punish them. Exacerbauit dominum peccator secundum multitudi∣nem irae suae non quaeret, the sence is (as S. Augustin expoundeth it) that a sinner doth somtymes exasperat so farre our Lord, that he vvil not punish him in this life, for Multum irascitur (saith he) dum non exqui∣rit &c. Our Lord is vehemently angry vvhen he doth not punih mens sinnes, but seemeh to forget and ouersee them. For then he reserueth them for the horrible and euerlasting torments of hel fire. 2. Macha. ca.31. And therfore the scripture teacheth, that when Goddoth not suffer sinners to goe long vnpunished; Magni beneficij est indi∣cium; It is to be taken fora great benefit. And that the longer he for∣beareth them, the more like it is that he wil punish them with al seuerity and rigour In the day of iudgment; In which respect Iob hauing recounted many particularities of the prosperity of
wicked men in this life (as their security, impunity, health, ple∣asures, and happines in their children and goods) concludeth thus; In diem perditionis seruatur malus, & ad diem furoris ducetur;Iob. 22. The vvicked re∣serued for the day of fury. The wicked man is reserued for the day of distruction, and shal be led to the day of fury. Thus saith Iob, meaning by the day of fury, the day of iudg∣ment, either particuler (which euery man passeth at his death) or vniuersal at the end of the world; in both which the wicked shal receiue the most dreadful sentence of euerlasting dam∣nation. 32. And this day of iudgment, is whorthely called in the scripture the day of fury and wrath:VVhy the day of iudgment is ca∣led the day of fury. For that almighty God wil then power forth an vnspeakable and euerlasting vengeance vpon the wicked as it were in wrath and fury, leauing no fur∣ther place nor time for mercy, which vengeance also shal be so much the greater, and the torments of the wicked so much the more greeuous, by how much more prosperous, pleasant, and delicious their life hath bene in this world: as S. Ihon signifieth of them in the Apocalipse vnder the name of Babilon.Apoc. 18. Quantum glorificauit se, & in delitij fuit (saith the angel) tantum date ei tormen∣tum; Giue torment to Babilon, that is to say to the wicked, accor∣ding to the measure of the glory and delights vvherin they haue liued; The consideration wherof fully satisfied the scruple & doubt which the Royal prophet saith made him stagger, when he saw the the peace & prosperity of wicked men, wherin as he signifieth,Psal. 72. The end of vvic∣ked men princi∣paly to be consi∣dered. he could not be satisfied: Donec intrem (saith he) in sanctuarium Dei, & intelligam in nouissimis eorum; vntil I entred into the consideration of Gods secret iudgments, and of their last end, that is to say of their eter∣nal damnation. 33. Loe then how smal cause wicked men haue to flatter them selues, or to glory ouer much in their prosperity,The felicity of euil men most vnfortunat; & vvhy. Aug. ep. ad Mar∣celinum. when with al they are loaden with sinne; for then they may wel feare, that their sinful prosperity is nothing els but a punishment of sinne: whereupon S. Augustin saith; Nihil est infalicius &c. Nothing, is more vnfortunat then the felicity of sinners, whereby their penal impunity is nourished, and their malice strengthned and encreased; And alitle after; VVhen God suffereth sinners to prosper, then his indignation is the greater towards them and when he leaueth them vnpunished, then he punisheth them most of al. Thus saith he: and the reason is, for that then God
giueth them ouer to their owne desires, and to the passions of their harts, wherby they daily encrease their owne damnation: which S. Grigory notably representeth to the consideration of al men,Ezech. ca. 3. in his exposition of these wordes of Ezechiel; If the iust man fal from righteousnes to iniquity, I wil lay a stumbling block before him. The discourse of S. Gregory is some what prolix, and yet be∣cause it containeth notable doctrine, I thinke good to lay it downe here with some litle abridgment. Gregor. in c. 3. Ezech. The fearful state of vvicked men notably repre∣sented by S. Gre∣gory. Genes. ca. 15. 1. Thessal. 2. VVicked men spared somtymes vntil their in∣iquities are com∣plet. Apoc. c. vltimo. Ezech. 3.34. Hoc nobis (saith he) cum tremore considerandum est. &c. This is to be considered of vs with trembling, that when the iust and omnipotent God is angry with our sinns and wicked∣nes, he iustly permitteth vs to be so blinded, that we fal into greater and more greuious sinns, in which respect Moyses said of the Amorrhaeans, that their wickednes was not yet com∣plete, and the Apostle S. Paul speaking of the Iewes saith, that they persecuted Gods seruants, and hindred the preaching of the gospel, to fil vp the heap and number of their sinns; and S. Ihon saith in the Apoc: He which hurteth let him hurt stil, and hee vvhich is filthy vvith sinne, let him become more filthy: and in this place of Ezechiel almighty God saith that he vvil lay a stumbling block before him, vvho shal fal from iustice to iniquity, as vvho vvould saye, that because the sinner vvil not by repentance, see vvhere he novv stumbleth, therfore God vvil iustly forsake him that he may stumble worse other vvhere. 35. And herin it is to be noted (saith S. Gregory) that wheras it is said that God doth lay a stumbling block in the way of a sinner It is not meant that he vrgeth, or presseth him to sinne, but that he wil not deliuer him from sinne, as also it is written of Pharao that God would harden his hart,Hovv it is to be vnderstood that God hardned the hart of pharao. because he would not mollify it by his grace; It is therfore to be vnderstood, that when our merciful God doth giue vs time of repentance, and we turne it to the encrease of our fault, he also of his iust iudg∣ment turneth the same to our greater damnation;Rom. ca. 2. The vvicked man abuseth Gods patience ann mercy to his ovvne greater damnation. and therfore the Apostle saith, dost thou not know, that the benignity, and mercy of almighty God, doth moue and lead thee to repentance and thou by thy hard and impenitent hart, doest as it were hoard and lay vp in store for thy selfe his wrath in the day of wrath, and of his iust iudgment. Thus saith the Apostle, wherby we see, (saith S. Gregory) that a sinner doth heape vpon him selfe the
wrath of God, when he emploieth the time in sinne which God giueth him to repent, for then seeing him abuse his mercy, and patience, he iustly permitteth that for as much as he would not forsake sinne to liue euerlastingly, he may encrease his sinne to dye eternally. 36. Thus saith S. Gregory in substance,Gods iustice al∣vvayes to be fea∣red. which I would to God al men would wel consider, and learne therby not so farre to presume of Gods mercy as to contemne his iustice, nor to say with the sinner in Ecclesiasticus, Peccaui & quid accidit mihi triste?Eccli. ca. 5. I haue sinned, and what haue I fared the worse? But to remember that which followeth there, to wit; Altissimus est patiens reddittor,God is slovv but a sure paymai∣ster. Valer. Maximus lib. 1. ca. 1. almighty God is a patient paymaister, that is to say he paieth or puni∣sheth slowly, but surely; and as a certaine Paynim said; Tardita∣tem supplicij, grauitate compensat, he recompenseth the delay of punihment, with the greeuiousnes therof. And therfore although God is so mercyful that many times he expecteth the repentance of sin∣ners, vntil their sinns be growne vnto a certaine degree and measure (as before is noted of the Amorrhaeans whome he said he would spare vntil their iniquities were complete,Gen. c. 15. and as also he said by his prophet to the people of Iuda and Israel,Amos. 2. that he would beare with them for 3. sinns but not for the 4.) yet for as much, as the degree and measure of sinns,No man knovv∣eth hovv long or litle God vvil expect his repen∣tance The danger of delay of repen∣tance. and the time which he is content to expect before he punish, is knowne only to his diuine maiestie, no sinner can promise to him selfe either secu¦riy, or yet delay of his punishment one minute of an howre, but rather may feare that the oftener God hath called him, and the more he hath forborne him, the more likely it is, that he wil neuer cal him againe, nor forbeare him any longer, especially seeing he vseth not one kind of proceeding with al men, nor ex∣tendeth his mercy to al men alike. 37. For as it falleth out with theeues and robbers in regard of the punishment of the lawes (which some of them escape many yeeres, others fewer,God giueth not tyme of repen∣tance to al sin∣ners alike; and vvhy. and some are taken and hanged for the very first robbery they commit) so also it fareth with other sinners and wicked men in regard of Gods iudgments towards them; For although he expect some of them to repentance many yeares, yea and vseth many meanes to inuite and draw them therto (to shew therin his infinit bounty and goodnes) yet to
others he giueth lesse time and meanes, and to some very litle, cutting them of in the first greeuous sinne, that they are knowne to commit; for the example no dout and terrour of others, to the end that none shal haue cause to presume ouermuch of his mercy,Philip. 2. Math. 24. Luc. 12. Death like to a theefe that stea∣leth vpon a man at vnvvares. Eccl. 5. but that euery one may as the Apostle aduiseth; VVorke his saluation with feare and tremblinge: in which respect our Sauiour him selfe also admonisheth vs: To watch continualy, and to stand as it were vpon our guard, because we knowe not, at what howre the theeefe (that is to say our death) wil steale vpon vs; and therfore also the holy Ghost saith in Ecclesiasticus; Ne differas de die in diem &c. Differe not thy repentance from day to day, least the wrath of God suddenly fal vpon thee, and destroy thee in the day of reuenge. Thus much concerning the prosperity of wicked men. OF THE VARIABLE AND VNCERTAINE euents, vvhich are common to good and euil men, in this life; as vvhy the good and bad doe many times prosper, or are affli∣cted alike, Also vvhy some are punished in this life, and others not; and vvhy one man is punished for the faultes of an other; and finally vvhy almighty God doth manifest his iudgments to man in some thinges, and concealeth them from him in some other; and that in al this, the prouidence of God cleary appe∣areth. CHAP. 27. HAVING yeelded some probable reasons in the former chapters of Gods permission of euil and of the affliction of good men, and pros∣perity of the wicked, I wil now labour to sa∣tisfie some other difficulties and doubts, that moue some curious and vnsetled spirits to cal in question the prouidence of God;Other argumēts of the Atheists. who reason thus. If only euil men (say they) who shal haue eternal payne in the other life, were prosperous in this; and good men only afflicted here,
for whome eternal felicitie is ordayned other where, there might seeme to be some more reason of a diuine prouidence therin; but seeing al temporal good and euil is indifferent, and common to good and bad men, and that the good are many tymes punished togeather with the bad, and that some of∣fences are punished here and others not; of what other cause (say they) may al this seeme to proceede then of meere chance? which as they suppose guideth the affayres of men. 2. To answere to al this, and first concerning the variable euents which chance indifferently to good and euil men,Touching the variable euents of this life com∣mon to good and euil men. Eccle. c. 8. I say that the same hath bin sufficiently considered hertofore, of such as haue neuertheles acknowledged and taught the particuler prouidence of God ouer men, as namely the Preacher who saith in Ecclesiasticus: that amongst many vanities of vncertaine euents which he obserued in the world; the worst is, that many tymes there hapneth to the iust, that vvhich the wicked deserue,Eccle. c 9. and that the desert of the vvicked falleth vpon the iust. And againe afterwards; Al thinges (saith he) chance a like to the iust, & to the vvicked, to the good & bad, to the cleane and vncleane, vvherupon the harts of the children of men, are replenished vvith malice and contempt. 3. Thus saith he,The Preacher im¦pugneth the opi∣nion of Atheists grounded vpon the indifferency of good and euil accidents to good and euil men. Ibid. Hier. in ca. 8. Eccles. wherin he denieth not Gods iust iudgment and prouidence ouer men (which he plainly teacheth in the same place saying, that the vvorkes of iust and vvise men are in the hands of God) but signifieth that the wicked take occasion by the va∣riable and vncertayne euents of thinges, to thinke (as S. Hierome saith vpon this place) that the prouidence of God doth not go∣uerne this world, seing there seemeth to be so much confusion therin: which opinion or conceit of the wicked, the Preacher notably impugneth the and confuteth in the same place, tea∣ching two thinges; the one, the inscrutability of Gods iudg∣ments in the disposition of humane affayres,The inscrutabi∣lity of Gods iudg¦ments noted by the Preacher. Eccles. c. 8. The variable e∣uents of this life proceed from the prouidence of God. wherupon he saith that hauing applyed his mind to vnderstand the reasons of the variety which is to be seene in the course of wordly mat∣ters; Intellexi (saith he) quod omnium operum Dei &c. I vnderstood that no man can find the reason of the vvorkes of God which are done vnder the sunne, and that how much more any man shal labour to know it, so much lesse he shal vnderstand it. Thus farre the Preacher, wherin we may see that although he affirme it to be impossible to vnderstand the
true reason and causes of the variable euents in the world; yet he teacheth that they proceede from Gods prouidence and iudg∣ments, in that he calleth them his workes. S. Hieroms ex∣position of the place of the Preacher. Hier. Comment. in Eccl. c. 8.4. Therefore S. Hierome expounding those wordes of the Preacher saith, that he which seeketh the causes and reasons why this, or that is done, and the world gouerned with diuers euents, as why one man is blind, another lame, one sound, an∣other sick, one poore another rich, one noble another ignoble, he shal but breake his braine, and vex his mind to no purpose, and vnderstand nothing in the end, and yet (saith S. Hierome) the Preacher giueth vs to vnderstand with al that there are cau∣ses, and the same most iust, why euery thing falleth out as we see, though (as he also saith in the same place) Seruantor incerta in futurum;The cause of many thinges are kept secret and vncertaine vntil the day of iudgment. They are kept secret and vncertaine for the tyme to come, that is to say for the next life, Quia tunc erit iudicium nunc certamen; For then shal be the time of iudgment, wheras now is the time only of our con∣flict: and therefore who soeuer is heere afflicted, he knoweth not whether his affliction proceede of Gods loue toward him, as it did to Iob, or of his hatred, as it doth to euil men whome he punisheth for their wickednes; Thus saith S. Hierome of the inscrutability of Gods iudgment, according to the doctrine of the Preacher whome he inter∣preteth. The Preacher ob∣serueth the va∣nity and misery of this vvorld by occasion of the variable & vn∣certaine euents therof. Eccles. c. 1.5. The other thing which the Preacher laboured to teach and proue by the variable and vncertaine euents of this world, is the vanity and misery therof; and how necessary it is for man to contemne the same, and to seeke to attaine to true stability and felicity in the next life; which (he saith) Is to be obtained only by the feare of God, and the keeping of his commandements; Therfore he not only beginneth his notable treatise with this sentence; Va∣nitas, vanitatum omnia vanitas; Vanity of vanities al thinges are vanity; but also doth euery where inculcate the same, and concludeth therwith adding these memorable wordes;Ibid. ca. 12. The strict iudg∣ment of God ob∣serued by the Preacher. Finem loquendi &c. Let vs al heare the end of al speach, feare God and keepe his commande∣ments, for this is euery man (that is to say, for this end was euery man ordained and created) and God shal bring al thinges that are done in this world into iudgment, yea and euery hidden and secret thing what soeuer, be it good or bad. 6. Thus saith the Preacher, wherby we may see that al∣though
he wel waighed and considered that good and bad men are subiect a like to the variable and vncertaine euents of this world; yet he was so farre from denying the prouidence of God therfore, that he representeth the same vnto vs by the occasion therof, admiring the inscrutability of his iudgments, and sig∣nifiing the vanity and misery of the world, with the way and meanes to attaine to true felicity, to wit; by the feare of Gods iustice, and the obseruation of his commandements. 7.S. Augustins doctrine concer∣ning the varia∣ble and vncer∣taine euents of this life. Aug. li. 20. de ci∣uit. dei. ca. 2. The same doctrine also S. Augustine draweth out of the same difficulty, explicating it notably with some other points appartaining to this matter, saying, that although we vnder∣stand not the iudgments of God in his variable disposition and distribution of good and euil thinges, to good and bad men; yet we learne therby to contemne those goods and euils, which are common to both, and to thirst after those goods only which are only proper to good men, and to eschew the euils which are only proper to euil men;Aug. de ciuit. dei. li. 1. ca. 8. & this S. Augustine explaineth further in an other place in these wordes: Placuit diuinae prouidentiae. &c. It hath pleased the diuine prouidence to ordaine and prepare eternal goods for the iust, which the vniust shal not enioy, and euerlasting euils for the vniust, from which the iust shal be free; and therfore he would haue these transitory goods and euils to be common to both in this life;The reason vvhy the goods and euils of this vvorld are com∣mon to good and euil men. to the end that we may neither to much seeke or desire those goods which euil men may haue, as wel as wee; nor yet basely or shamefully flee those euils, which may fal to good men, as wel as to euil men without pre∣iudice of their vertue and goodnes. Thus farre S. Augustine, who also prosecuting this matter further, giueth further reason ther∣of, and sheweth notably Gods infinite wisdome & prouidence, in that he diuersly disposeth of mens affaires, giuing prosperity to some, and not to others, and manifestly punishing or rewar∣ding some here, and some hence. 8.August. Ibid. God sheweth (saith he) his owne operation in the vari∣able distribution of good and euil thinges. For if he should not liberaly graunt temporal goods to some which seeke and aske them of him, men would say, that the same are not at his dispo∣sition: and if he should graunt them to al that doe or would aske them, men would suppose that he were to be serued for no
other rewardes,VVhy God gi∣ueth temporal goods to some that craue them and not to others VVhy some sin∣nes are punished in this life and not others. and would rather become couetous and auari∣cious in his seruice then godly and vertuous; In like manner if he should manifestly punish euery sinne in this life, men would thinke there were no other life nor iudgment or punishment hereafter: and if hee should punish no sinne manyfestly here in this world, men would imagine that he had no care or proui∣dence of their affaires. Thus saith S. Augustine of the cause why God bestoweth the temporal goods of this world vpon some, and not vpon al; and why he punisheth some here, and some hence. VVhy the good and bad are pu∣nished many tymes togeather.9. But now (say you) why doth he punish the good togea∣ther with the bad, as we see many tymes he doth with some ge∣neral plague or sicknes, famine or warre, wherof as wel the good, as the bad, beare the burden and feele the scourge? wher∣vnto I answer, that as God of his mercy doth sometymes for∣beare the bad in respect of the good (as I haue signifiedca. 26. nu. 2. before) so also sometymes he iustly punisheth the good with the bad, yet in such sort, that therin he alwayes extendeth his mercy a∣boundantly towardes them:Aug. de ciuit dei ca. 9. Hovv good men participat of the faults of euil men. to which purpose S. Augustine saith that good men deserue sometymes to be punished with euil men because they doe otherwhiles participate of their faults, by rea∣son of some conniuence with them (I meane some negligence in not correcting, reprehēding or coūseling them when they might doe it) for which cause the psalmist prayeth to almighty God: Ab ocultis meis munda me,Psal. 18. & ab alienis parce seruo tuo; Make me cleane o Lord from my hidden faults & doe not punish me for the faults of other men. Besids that as S. Augustin also saith, they are iustly punished with euil men;Aug. de ciuit. dei li. 1. c. 9. Non quia simul agunt vitam malam; Sed quia simul amant vi∣tam temporalem; Not because they doe liue an euil life with them, but be∣cause they loue this temporal life ouer much vvith them. And finaly (saith he) because they doe sometymes commit some sinnes (vel rara vel tanto crebriora quanto minora; Either seldome, or so much the ofter by hovv much lesse they are) of which sinnes they iustly bare the penalty.Hovv good and euil men are dis∣tinguished in the sight of God though they be punished togea∣ther. 10. Herein neuertheles the mercy of God towards them is euident, in that the same punishment serueth for their purgation in this life to purify & prepare them for euerlasting glory, wher∣as to the wicked which are punished with them, it serueth for no other, then as I may terme it, an antepast to their euerlasting
damnation,Aug. Ibid. & this S. Augustine notably teacheth in these wor∣des; When we see (saith he) good men afflicted togeather with euil men, we are not to thinke that they are not therfore distin∣guished from them in the sight of God, for it is to be considered that the punishment & affliction may be al one,The Affliction may be al one, and the afflicted of different na∣ture and desert. and yet the pu∣nished or afflicted be of different nature and consideration: for as gold is purified and straw consumed by one and the selfe same fyre, so one and the selfe same affliction purgeth and purifieth good men, wheras to euil men it is but a beginning of their hel and eternal torments, and therfore we see also euidently diffe∣rent effects in them both; For wicked men in their affliction de∣test & blaspheme almighty God, wheras good men in their suf∣feringes doe pray and prayse him; so much it importeth to con∣sider, not what the affliction is that is suffred, but what and who they are which suffer the same; Thus saith the famous and holy Father, declaring notably how it standeth with Gods iust and merciful prouidence to punish sometymes the good with the bad. 11. Al which I wil conclude with S. Chrisostome,The doctrin of S. Chrisost. con∣cerning the pu∣nishement of sinne. Chrisost. in Luc. ca. 16. concion 3. Tom. 2. who yeel∣deth also the like notable reasons, why God punisheth some, and spareth others in this world, clearing with al some other difficulties. If al men (saith he) should be punished here accor∣ding to their deserts, wee should al perish, for wee al deserue it; Againe, if no man should be punished heere, many would be∣come carelesse, yea and say, that there is no prouidence of God in the affaires of men; For seeing that now when the hand of God is manifestly seene vpon many men, there want not some which powre forth such blasphemies,Ibid. VVhy some are cut of by iustice of God and o∣thers not. what would they doe if there were here no punishment at al? But perhapps some wil (saith S. Chrisostome) that those which are cut of by the iustice of God for their sinns, doe many times breake forth into blas∣phemies and dye in despaire by occasion of their punishment, and so encrease their owne sinne and damnation; wheras other∣waies they might perhappps in tyme amend; wherto he answe∣reth, that if God did not foresee that they would not amend, he would not cut them of in sinne, but would giue them time to repent, and that therfore foreseeing their impenitence, he ex∣ecuteth his iustice vpon them, aswel to giue them their due de∣sert,
as also to terrifie others by theire example. Thus saith S. Chrisostome in substance. VVhy al are not punished alike in this life, vvho sinne alike. Ibid.12. But why then (say you) are not al punished a like who sinne a like (for many times we see that of those which are par∣takers of one fault, some are seuerely punished in this life, and others not at al? wherto S. Chrisostome answereth, that he which paieth the whole penalty of his sinne here, paieth none in the other life, and he which paieth part here paieth lesse there, & he which is not punished here with his fellowes, eyther amendeth by their example, or if he do not he draweth vpon him selfe a great reuenge which wil surely falle vpon him in the end. And this saint Chrisostome confirmeth with the answere of our Sauiour to the Iewes who complained to him of the cruelty of Pilat when he mixed the sacrifices of the Galileans with their blood.Ibid. Some punished for the example of others. Luc. 13. Doe you thinke (saith our Sauiour) that those Galileans were greater sinners then the rest, because they were so afflicted? nay I say vnto you that except you doe pennance, you shal al perish; and thnke you that those 18. men vpon whome the tower fel in Siloe, and killed them, deserued it more then al the inhabi∣tants of Hierusalem? nay I say vnto you, that except you repent you hal al perish alike. Thus said our Sauiour, to signify as wel that God wil infallibly punih al wicked men sooner or later, as also that he punisheth some for the example of others; according as wee see many times (saith S. Chrisostome) that a maister of a family bea∣teth some of his slaues, to the end their correction may serue for a warning to the rest of their fellowes. Hovv it stan∣deth vvith Gods iustice to punish one for an others faults. 2. Reg. 12.13. But yet there resteth no smale difficulty to be cleared, to wit how it standeth with the iustice of God, to punish one for the offences of an other, especially infants for the sinnes of their parents? as the innocent child of Dauid who died in the cradel for his fathers sinne; and in like manner we see in general affli∣ctions of commonwelths, that not only good, and holly men, but also innocent children (who doe no waye participat of the offences of the princes or the people) are afflicted, or doe cor∣porally perish with the rest; and herein the dout may seeme to be the greater for that the Prophet Ezechiel saith,Ezechiel. 18. that the Sonne shal not beare the iniquity of the father, nor the father the iniquity of the sonne, but that the righteousnes of the iust man shal be vpon him, and the iniquity of the wicked man shal fal vpon him selfe. To which purpose
it may also be obserued, that whereas almighty God threatned in Exodus to punish the sinnes of Parents in the children to the 3.Exod. 20. Hovv Gods threats of puni∣shment vntil the 4. generation are to be vnderstood. Chrisost. ho. in psal. 84. To. 2. Hieron. in Isay li. 18. ca. 65. Aug. li. contra. Adi∣mant. c. 7. Greg. in 21. ca. Iob. ca. 31. and 4. generation; the ancient Fathers vnderstand the same of wicked children, who imitat their parents in their wickednes, for so S. Chrisostome, S. Hierome, S. Augustin, and S. Gregory doe interpret it; of whome S. Gregory (to omit the other for breui∣ties sake) saith vpon the same place. Quisquis patris iniquitatem non imitatur, nequaquam illius delicto grauatur. VVho soeuer doth not imitat his fathers iniquity, is not punished for his sinne. And further adding the reason why God threatneth to punish to the 4. gene∣ration, he saith, that because wicked children may see the euil life of their wicked parents to the third & fourth generation, & be induced by their example to offend God,Greg. Ibid. therfore Vsque ad eos extenditur vltio, qui viderunt quod male sequerentur. The punishment is extended to those who haue seene the euil example which they haue follo∣wed. Thus saith S Gregory, wherby it maye appeare, that only wicked men, and not innocent children, or good men are to suffer for the offences, either of their parents, or of any other. 14. For the clearing of this difficulty it is to be considered,Ezech. 18. The difficulties cleared and the place of Ezechiel interpreted. that whereas the prophet saith, that the Sonne shal not be punished for the father, nor the father for the sonne; It is to be vnderstood of spiritual punishment, and eternal damnation of the soule, and not of temporal punishment in body, goods, or other temporal things, so that the sence is; that no man shal be punished in his soule, or damned eternally for the only fault of his parents, when he hath not deserued it him selfe;Hieron. li. 6. in Ezech. c. 18. Chrisost. 5. in spal. 8. Aug. li. 6. trac. Iulian 25. & in Encherid c. 4.6. for so the anciēt Fathers vndestand the woords of the prophet, not denying but that good men or innocent children may iustly be punished in their persons or goods, for their fathers sinnes; for such reasons as I wil declare after a while. 15. Neither doth the ancient Fathers exposition of the place of Exodus before mencioned contradict the same,Exod. 20. The obiection out of Exodus ansvvered. Greg. in 21. ca. Iob. ca. 31. for although they seeme to vnderstand it only of wicked children (who i∣mitating the wickednes of their parents shal be punished to the 4 generation) yet S. Gregory in the same place exemplifieth his owne interpretation not only in euil men, but also in innocent children, who he saith are sometimes possessed and vexed by deuils for the only sinnes of their parents; wherby it appeareth
that he vnderstandeth the punishment threatned in Exodus partly of corporal or temporal punishment, in goods, honour, and such like (in which sence the good and innocent are included as wel as the wicked) and partly of spiritual or eternal punishment, as wel as corporal, which is to be vnderstood only of wicked men, who imitating the bad exāple of their wicked parents make their offences their owne, and therfore may iustly be punished for the same al manner waies, to wit, corporally and spiritually, temporally and eternally. Infants puni∣shed corporally for their parents sinnes, & vvhy.16. But now to speake more particulerly of the temporal pu∣nishment of infants or good men for the sinnes of their parents; I say, that although almighty God doth neuer punish them eter∣nally, or spiritually, for the faults of their progenitours, yet it is most agreable to his iustice, that they pay sometimes a corporal and temporal penalty for the same, as wel in respect of their participation, of one, and the selfe same nature, as also because they areD. Tho. 1.2. q. 87. art. 8. c. Children are part of their pa∣rents goods. The good deeds of parents re∣vvarded in their children, and vvhy. Tertul aduers. Marcion. li. 2. Plutark. de sera num. vindic. The difference betvvixt that vvhich is made by art, and that vvhich is engen∣dred. part of their parents goods; in which respect, God doth as iustly punish a father in his children, as in his house, lands, cattle or the rest of his substance. And seeing also the merits or good deedes of parents are temporally rewarded in their children (who enherit their honours, dignities, and other commodities, no lesse then their lands, by reason of their natu∣ral discent, and dependance of them) it is also most iust by the same reason, as Tertulian affirmeth, that they temporrally partici∣pate of their disgraces, harmes, and incommodities; wherof Plutarck yeeldeth the reason, obseruinge notably the difference betwixt that which is naturally engendred, and that which is made by art: For, saith he, artificial things are made by work∣men, but not of them; that is to saye they are not made of their substance or nature, and therfore being seperat from their au∣thors, they haue no furder communication with them, but chil∣dren are engendred of the very substance and nature of their pa∣rents, which remaineth in them, and descendeth also by genera∣tion,Idem. Ibid. The natural pro∣perties and cor∣poral markes of parents descend to their childrē. from them to their posterity. 17. And for the confirmation hereof, he obserueth also that the resemblance, and natural properties, or corporal marks of some parents, are continued in their families for many des∣cents, yea and sometimes not appearing in the second or third
generation, doe neuerthelesse shew them selues in the 4. or 5. or others ensuing some ages after; whereof he bringeth an ex∣ample of one in his time called Pithon, who being descended of the founders of Thebes, and the last of that race, was borne with the figure of a lance vpon his body, which had bene in former ages a natural marke of those of that family, and discon∣tinued in them for many yeres; wherby, saith he, it maye appeare that one, and the selfe same nature of parents doth propagat, and extend it selfe to their children, and posterity, and that therefore it may iustly be punished or reward in them. 18.Idem. Ibid. Humane iustice punisheth vvhole commu∣nities though euery one therein hath not offen∣ded; and vvhy. This also the same author confirmeth by the custome and practise of humane lawes, which doe iustly reward or punsih whole citties, colledges, or corporations, though euery parti∣cular man, or woman, therein haue not deserued it, by meanes whereof such as come afterwards to be members of the same communities, doe also participat of the same rewards or penal∣ties, only by reason of their communion in that pollitical body; which neuertheles, saith Plutark,Ibid. seemth not to haue so greate reason of iustice, as the punishment or reward of a whole race, or progeny for the offence or good desert of their progenitour, whose nature stil liueth in them. Thus reasoneth this painime most excellently defending the iustice, and prouidence of God against the Atheists of his time, whereby we may also gather how conuenient and iust it is, that some good and holly men, yea and innocent children,VVhy innocent children perish vvith vvicked men in the gene∣ral punishments of common∣vvelths. nu. 24.25.26.27. who are no waie partakers of the com∣mon offences of the people, doe neuerthelesse temporally suf∣fer with the rest in some general punishment of a whole com∣monwelth, by reason of the natural simpathy, and vnion of the members of political bodies, no lesse then of bodies natural; as I haue also noted before, in the 17. chapter, where I treated of Gods iustice in punishing the subiects for the sinnes of the Princes. 19. And this wil be yet more cleare if we consider the course of Gods prouidence in this point,Hovv God tem∣pereth his iustice vvith mercy in the affliction of men. and how he tempereth his iustice with mercy in the afflictions, and punishments of men. To which purpose it is to be vnderstood, that euery one who is afflicted, is not punished, and this I saye for diuers causes, first, for that sometimes afflictions falle vpon men not for any
offence,The difference betvvixt affli∣ction and pu∣nishment. Al afflictions are punishments of sinne in infi∣dels, but not in the baptised, and vvhy. Aug. li. 13. de Trinit. ca. 16. & li. 2 de pec. mer. ca. 33. The reasons vvhy the bapti∣sed are not ex∣empt from mise∣ries, after the remission of ori∣ginal sinne. The miseries of this life are not punishments in Christians, but only vvhen they are some offence. but either naturally, or casually, only through the course of humane infirmity, in which case, how soeuer al kind of afflictions may be truly called punishments in infidels, who are not regenerat by baptisme and cleansed from original sinne (whereof humane miseries are some part of the penalty) yet to Christians (to whome both original sinne and the paine due thereto is remitted) they are as S. Augustin teacheth, left after baptisme, by the special prouidence of God, not as punishment, but for their exercise and to serue them for matter of greater merit, to make them like to Christ their head, whose members they are, to the end that suffring with him, the maye raigne with him; and lastly, to draw them from the loue of wordly vanities, and of this ttansitory life, to the due consideration and desire of heauenly ioyes, and life euerlasting. Therefore I saye, that wheras al kind of miseries are now since the falle of Adam, and his losse of original iustice, incident to the life and state as wel of man, as of other liuing creatures, the same are not punish∣ments in the regenerat, but only when they are inflicted vpon them, either by diuine or humane iustice for some offence; for otherwise when they falle vpon them, either by course of nature, or by meere accident, though they are afflictions, yet they neither are, nor can properly be tearmed punishments. Certain cases vvherin afflicti∣ons are not pu∣nishments. Iob. 1. Tobiae. 12. Ioan. 9.20. Further more I haue declared amply in the 25. Chapter that men are sometymes afflicted, not for sinnes but for their probation and greater merit, as Iob and Tobias were, and some∣tymes only for the manifestation of Gods glory, as the man was of whome the Gospel speaketh, who was borne blind, to the end that our Sauiour might be glorifyed by his cure. Other∣whiles also God suffreth his seruants to be afflicted for their pre∣seruation from sinne:. Cor. 12. as S Paule was molested by the Angel of Sathan, lest otherwise he might be proud of the grace and gifts which God had geuen him; for which cause also God depri∣ueth good men otherwhiles not only of their temporal and cor∣poral commodities (lest they may be seduced and corrupted thereby) but also of their liues,Sap. 4. nu 5. & 17. ne malitia mutet intellectum, lest malice may change their vnderstanding, as I haue signifyed more amply in 25.Insants perish corporally some∣tymes to the sal∣uation of their soules. Chap. 25. chapter. And in like manner it may be said of infants, and in∣nocent children, that they may through Gods merciful proui∣dence
perish corporally, in some general affliction to the sal∣uation of their soules, which if they liued might be damned e∣ternally. In al which cases and diuers other (whereof I haue also spoken before) it is to be vnderstood, that innocent men may be afflicted, & yet not punished, though neuertheles others may be iustly punished in them. And the reason is for that the calamity of one person may haue many different considerations, according to the difference of Gods iudgements vpon him that is afflicted,Hovv the affli∣ction of one man vvhich is no pu∣nishment to him may be a puni∣shment to others. The different considerations vvhich may be had in the affli∣ction of some one man. Aug. li. 6. quaest. sup. Iosue. c. 8. and vpon others whome his affliction may some way concerne. As for example; the suddain death of some one (whe∣ther it hap by Gods special ordinance for the saluation of his soule, or only by natural or casual meanes) may by the secret disposition, and prouidence of God, serue for a due punishment to his parents, for temporal reward (due also by Gods iustice) to his enemies, for an example, and admonition to some, for an edification to others, and finnally for the glory of God; and this S. Augustine insinuateth notably, saying. For as much as the visible af∣flictions or deaths of men may be either profitable, or hurtful to those vpon vvhome they are inflicted, our Lord knovveth in his secret prouidence hovv to dispose the same iustly to euery one; Etiam cum aliorum peccata in alijs vlcisci videtur; euen then vvhen he seemeth to punish the sinnes of some in others. Thus saith S. Augustine. 21. Now then of these premisses I gather three conclusions. The first is,The first conclu∣sion gathered of the premisses. that one man may iustly beare the temporal penalty of an other mans faults, either in respect of some interest or pro∣priety which one may haue in an other, or of some coniunction, or communion in nature (for both which respects children are punished for the sinnes of their parents) or els by reason of a na∣tural simpathy in a politicke body (as when whole common∣welths are afflicted for the offences of some members thereof) in which cases there is a iust participation of merit and demerit, and consequently of reward and punishment. 22. The second conclusion,The second con∣clusion. is that in the afflictions as wel of whole communities, as of particuler men, for the sinnes of o∣thers, God disposeth, and distributeth the same to euery one in such weight, measure, and manner, as to his infinit wisdome seemeth conuenient for the punishmēt of some, & benefit of o∣thers, & his owne glory, reseruing the reasons, & causes therof,
as it were, locked vp in the secret cabinet of his inscrutable iud∣gements for such respect as shalbe declared after a while.nu. 23. & 24. The third con∣clusion. The reasons of Gods iudgements in particular are secret and vnknovvn. Many euident reasons may be geuen of Gods iudgements in general.23. The third conclusion resulting of the satisfaction of this last difficulty, and of al the former, is that although the reasons of Gods iudgements in particuler (I meane concerning particu∣ler men) are secret and for the most part vnknowne either to them selues, or to any other in this life, yet many euident, and manifest reasons may be geuen of his iudgements in general, as why one man is punished for an other, why the wicked are pros∣perous, and the iust afflicted, why some sinners are chasticed in this world, and others not, why good and wicked men are sometymes punished togeather, & finally why al temporal good and euil is common to them both. VVhy God ma∣nifesteth his iud¦gements in some things, and con∣cealeth them in other.24. And herein also it is to be considered, that God sheweth his mercy and prouidence towards man, as wel in concealing the one from him, as in reuealing vnto him the other, for as by the light and knowledge which we haue of his iudgements in general, we are moued the more to admire his infinit wisdome, to acknowledge his prouidence, and to honour and loue him: so by not knowing his iudgements concerning our selues in par∣ticular, we are admonished of our owne infirmity & ignorance, and of our absolut dependance vpon his wil,Not fit for the slaue to knovv the councels of his Lord and maister. Ioan. ca. 15. as his creatures, ser∣uants, and slaues, to whom it doth not appertayne to knowe the councells of their Lord and maister, further then it pleaseth him to manifest the same vnto them; For as our Sauiour him selfe saith. Seruus nescit quod faciat dominus eius; the slaue knovveth not vvhat his Lord or maister doeth: By the consideration wherof we are moued also to serue him with so much more feare, by how much we lesse knowe his wil and pleasure concerning vs and our affayres. 25. This S. Gregory doth notably signifye, who expounding the history of Iob saith, that almighty God speaking vnto him, did admonish him to suffer his affliction with so much more pa∣tience, by how much lesse he vnderstood for what cause he suf∣fered the same; and to the same purpose S. Gregory discourseth amply in the same place of the variable and diuers euents, which fal out dayly in the different estats and condicions of men, and concludeth that it is most necessary, that we should not know
and vnderstand the secret iudgments of God therin;Necessary for man not to knovv the sea∣cret iudgments of God. Greg. li. 29. ca. 18. in 38. ca. Iob. To the end (saith he) vve may the better knovv our selues, and knovving our selues may feare and be humbled, and being humbled, may not presume any thinge of our ovvne strenght, but craue and seeke the helpe of our Creatour, by the vvhich we may attaine to euerlasting life, vvheras by trust and confidence in our selues we may perish for euer; Thus saith S. Gregory, wherby we may see how true it is which S. Chrisostome saith;Chris. in Psal. 142. The iudgments of God are hid∣den from vs for our good. Iudicia Dei ab∣scondita sunt a nobis, pro nobis; The iudgements of God are hidden from vs, for vs, that is to say, for our owne good. So that the great wis∣dome, prouidence, and mercy of God towards vs, appeareth no lesse in that he concealeth his iudgments from vs in many thinges, then that in many other he manifesteth the same vnto vs. 26. And hereby, as also by al the precedenr discourse, it is euident that the reasons which Atheists vse against the proui∣dence of God, are notable arguments to proue the same,The conclusion of this chapter, inserring the euidence of Gods prouidence and the blindnes of Atheists. and doe conuince them as wel of extreame ingratitude towards their most merciful, prouident, and louing father; as also of in∣tollerable presumption and inexcusable ignorance and blind∣nes; I say presumption and blindnes, in that they thinke them selues able to measure the infinit wisdome of their Creator by the inche (as I may tearme it) of their short and sillye capacity, whiles in the meane tyme they are so blind that they see not the cleare light of his prouidence, which shineth and manifesteth it selfe in the admirable disposition and gouernment of al his creatures. Attingens (saith the booke of wisdome) a fine vsque ad finem fortiter, & disponens omnia sua∣uiter; That is to say,Sap. ca. . Reaching and extending it selfe powerfully from one end to the other, and disposinge al thinges sweetly; And this shal suffiice at this time for this matter.
IT IS INFERRED VPON THE PREMISSES that no sinful policy can be truely accompted vvise or political; And by occasion therof it is declared, vvhence true vvisdome is, vvhat it is, and vvherin it consisteth. Also the diference betvvixt wisdome, prudence, and policy; and lastly the necessity of grace to the perfection of policy is signified: vvith a consideration of the difficulties and dangers incydent to matters of state. CHAP. 28. IN the former discourse (good reader) I haue proued especially two thinges, the one is the weaknes of mans wit, policy, and power; and by consequence his insufficiency for the go∣uernment of commonwelth with out some su∣pernatural assistance; The other is, the depen∣dance of al states, empires, and kingdomes, vpon the prouidence, absolute wil, and disposition of almighty God; wherupon, though many notable conclusions may be inferred, yet I wil for this time, only inferre one, to wit, that no policy which is sinneful,No sinful policy can be truely vvise or political and vvhy; and offenciue to God, can be truly wise and political; For if al kingdomes & states, depend wholy vpon Gods wil and disposition, it is manifest that nothing which offendeth God can be good for state, nor by consequence political. And although I meane to treat this point specially in the second part of this Treatise, where I wil proue that there is no true vtility in sinne and wickednes; yet I haue thought good to lay downe some groundes therof in this chapter. 2. And to the end, the discourse hereof may be the more cleare,Policy a branch of vvisdome. I wil first declare what is wisdome, and wherin it consi∣steth: For seeing policy is but as it were a branch therof, it shal be conuenient first to consider the nature of the roote or tree, that we may therby know the property and nature of the
branch; And to this end it is to be considered, first whence wis∣dome is, and afterwards what it is, wherby it shal appeare that true wisdome, and consequently true policy, can no way stand with wickednes. 3. For the first; it is euident,VVisdome the special gife of God according to Plato. by the doctrine as wel of the best philosophers, as of our holy scriptures, that wisdome is the special gift of God, which Plato taught not only concerning absolute wisdome (consisting in the speculation and knowledge of diuine thinges) but also of ciuil or political wisdome and prudence, which he saith is neither giuen to man by nature,Plato 4. de legib. & in Minoe. VVisdome not giuen by nature, nor taught by Philosophy, nor got by industry. nor taught by philosophy, nor got by industry or experience; and therfore in his booke of political lawes, he craueth it of almigh∣ty God as his especial gift, acknowledging that no humane wit, can with out his particuler inspiration, and assistance, ordaine sufficient lawes, for the gouernment of commonwelth, as I haueca. 7. nu. 8. already signified here. 4. This also our scriptures teach aboundantly,Eccli. ca. 1. God the only autor and giuer of vvisdome ac∣cording to the Scriptures. Ibid. ca. 15. Eccli. ca. 1. deriuing al wisdome from almighty God, as from the true fountaine therof saying, Omnis sapientia a domino Deo est; Al wisdome is from our Lord God; Et à deo profecta est sapientia &c. VVisdome came from God, and it shal abound in the mouth of the faithful man, and the gouernour or Lord of al wl giue it him; And againe, Fons sapientiae verbum Dei in excelsis; The fountaine of wisdome is the word of God on high, That is to say the sonne of God, who is therfore called; Sapientia patris. The wisdome of God the father. 5. For this cause S. Iames aduiseth vs,Ep. Iac. ca. 1. Si quis vestrum (saith he) indiget sapientia, postulet à Deo & dabitur ei; If any of you neede wisdome let him aske it of God, and it shal be giuen him;3. Reg. ca. 3. Salomon and Iesus the sonne of Sirach obtay∣ned vvisdome of God by prayer. Eccli. ca. 51. and Salomon craued it of almighty God, and obtained it, and Iesus the sonne of Sirach saith of him selfe. Cum adhuc iunior sum &c. VVhen I was yet but younge I craued wisdome expresly in my prayers, and before it was yet time to vse it I required it, and profited much in it, and therfore I wil giue glory to him who gaue it me. Thus saith the Preacher, wherto I might adde infinit places of scriptures to the same purpose, if it were needeful. 6. Seeing then true wisdome is, according to the opinion both of philosophers and diuines, an especial gift of almighty God, it must needes follow that it can haue no communication
with sinne and wickednes, or with any thinge offenciue to Gods and therfore Plato with al his followers doth teach,Plato in The age. & in ep. ad Sy∣racusan. VVhat vvis∣dome is accor∣ding to Plato. that for as much as true wisdome is nothing els, but as it were the light of the cheefe and true good (that is to say of almighty God) re∣flected vpon the soules of men, no soule defiled with sinne, is any whit more capable of this light of true wisdome, then the ayre being ouercast with cloudes is capable of the sunne. And this doctrine of Plato agreeth notablye with our holy scriptures which teach,Sap. 1. A soule desiled vvith sinne, not capable of vvis∣dome. Eccli. 43. that In maleuolam animam &c. VVisdome wil not enter into a soule possest with malice, nor dwel in a body subiect to sinne. And therfore the Preacher saith, that God giueth wisdome; Homini bono; To the good man. & pie agentibus, and to those which doe wel and godly. 7 This wil be more euident by the consideration of what wisdome is,VVhat vvis∣dome is, vvherin it consisteth ac∣cording to our holy scriptures. Iob. ca. 28. and wherin it principally consisteth. Therfore first to speake of the doctrine of our holy scriptures, and after of the opinion of Philosophers; Iob hauing asked this question; VVher is wisdome to be found, and what is the place of vnderstanding? answereth him selfe saying; Ecce timor domini ipsa est sapientia & recedere a malo intelligentia; Behould the feare of God is wisdome it selfe, and to forsake euil is vnderstanding.Eccli. ca. 19. Thus saith Iob: which the Prea∣cher confirmeth sayinge. Omnis sapientia timor Dei, & in omni sa∣pientia dispositio legis; Al wisdome is the feare of God, and in al wisdome is the disposition of the lavv, That is to say (as we read in the greeke text) Factio & operatio legis,True vvisdome consisteth in the feare of God and the execution of his lavv. The doing and vvorking of the lavve, sig∣nifiing that al wisdome consisteth in the feare of God, and in the execution of his law, which is as much to say, as in keeping his commandements; wherof three reasons may be giuen. 8. The first, because he which feareth God and fulfilleth his commandements, hath the ground and principal part of wis∣dome,The principal part of vvis∣dome, to respect in al thinges the glory of God, and our eternal good. Matth. 16. Eccli. c. 37. for in al his actions he principally respecteth two thin∣ges, the one, the glory of God (for the which man and al other creatures were cheefly ordained) and the other, the eternal good of his soule which most importeth him; For as our Saui∣our saith. VVhat doth a man gaine though he get the vvhole vvorld, if he loose his soule? And therfore the Peacher saith very wel; Sapiens est animae suae sapiens: He vvhich is vvise, is vvise for his soule. 9. The second reason is, for that he which feareth God and
keepeth his commandements, doth therin worke wisely,He vvhich truly feareth God is vvise for his temporal good and vvhy. not only for his eternal good (as I said before) but also for his temporal and worldly good: seeing therby he conserueth him selfe in the protection and fauor of him who is the author and giuer as wel of the one, as of the other, and hath a special and particular care of such as feare and serue him, for as the Psalmist saith. Oculi domini super metuentes eum.Psal. 32. Psal. 33. The eyes of our Lord are vpon them that feare him. Et aures eius in preces eorum; and his eares are atten∣tiue to their praiers: and such is his loue towards them & the regard he hath of them, that as our Sauiour saith;Math. ca. 10. Psal. 33. He numbreth the very haires of their heads: Et custodit (saith the psalmist) omnia ossa eorum, and preserueth al their bones, to the end that there shal not any one of them perish. 10. Therfore as no man either is or can be counted wise or happy, who by contempt of almighty God,No man is vvise in exposing him selfe to Gods indignation. and breach of his commandements, exposeth him selfe to his indignation (wher∣by both he, and his may vtterly perish) so also he which by the feare of God and the obseruation of his law procureth his conti∣nual fauor and protection, is not only truely wise, but also truely happy: which Aristotle him selfe acknowledged,Arist. li. 10. ethi. ca 7. He vvhich pro∣cureth the fauor of God, is both vvise and happy according to Aristotle Idem. Ibid. ca 8. The lavv of God is the rule of al prudent actions. The difference betvvixt vvis∣dome and pru∣dence. The obiect of vvisdome. The difinition of vvisdome. Cicero offic li. 2. Aug. li. 14. de trinit. ca. 1. The office of pru∣dence. who tecahing that true wisdome and felicity doe cheefly consyst in the con∣templatiō of God & heauenly thinges, affirmeth the wisest man to be the happiest of al others: because hee is most grateful to God, and best beloued of him, and protected and benefytted by him. 11. The third reason why the feare of God and the keeping of his commandments is true wisdome, is, because the law of God is the true rule, and squire, by the which al prudent actions are to be measured, for it comprehendeth in it selfe & teacheth al true vertue and goodnes, without the which there can be no true prudence: as shal appeare by the circumstances due, and requisit thereto, according to the doctrin of Philosophers; wherein in by the way it is to be noted, that although wis∣dome, and prudence in common speach are commonly con∣founded, yet there is betwixt them this difference; that wis∣dome hath for her obiect, not only humane, but also diuine things, and therefore is defined both by Philosophers and di∣uins to be; fciencia diuinarum humanarum{que} rerum & eorumquae illarum rerum sunt causae, The knowledge of things diuine, and humane, and of
their causes,Basil in princip. prouerb. Arist. Motal. Ni com li. 7. ca. 5. & ethi. li. 6. D. Tho. 2.2. q 27.2. Cicero de nat. deor. li. 3. Aug. li. 83 quaest. 31. Basil in princip. prouerb. The difinition of prudence. wheras the office of prudence is duly to consider, and wel to direct humane affaires, and is called by S. Thomas. Sapien∣tia in humanis rebus, wisdome in humane things, consisting, as both Ci∣cero and S. Augustin teach, in the knowledge, of things good, bad, and indifferent; and is defined, verum expetendarum fugiendarumque scientia, the knowledge of things to be desired, or fled, or as S. Basil saith eorum quae agenda & non agenda sunt cognitio. The knowledge of those things which are to be donne or not to be donne, Whereto 3. circum∣stances are principally required. 12. The 1. is, that the end of euery action be truely good, which Aristotle teacheth to be the first and principal circum∣stance requisite to prudence,Arist li. 6. ethic. ca. 4. Idem. ca. 12. The end of euery action truely prudent must needs be good. The meanes and circumstances of euery prudent action are good and iust. Arist. in ethi. and therfore he affirmeth that who soeuer applieth his wit and iudgments to worke for an euil end, although he haue neuer so good successe therin, yet he can not be called truely wise or prudent, but crafty or subtile. 13. The 2. circumstance is, not only that the end of euery action be good (as I haue said) but also that the meanes to at∣taine to that end, be correspondent therto, that is to say, that they be also good and iust, yea and wel and iustly done; To which purpose Aristotle prescribeth circumstances of due time, place, and manner, to be considered in euery vertuous and prudent action, teaching with al that who soeuer fayleth in any of the said circumstances,Idem li. 6. is not vertuous, nor by consequent prudent,Ethic. e. 12. Macrob. in som∣no scrip. li. 1. Vertue and pru∣dence so ioyned that they can∣not be seperated. Basil in princip. prouerb. for that prudence and vertue are so ioyned, that the one can nor possible be with out the other; and therfore Macro∣bius assigning our of Plato six partes of prudence, accompteth circumspection for one, which he saith consisteth in the con∣sideration of the circumstances of euery action, that the same be lawful, good, and iust; whereupon S. Basil saith. Quisquis pru∣dentiam recte sectatus fuerit &c. vvho soeuer follovveth the rule of prudence truly, he shal neuer svvarue from vertu, nor fal into vice. 14. The 3. circumstance to be considered in eury prudent action is, that wheras there are certaine degrees of goodnes in thinges, some being good, other better, and one the best of al, (whrto al other thinges are to be referred, which is therefore called by the philosophers: Sumun bonum; The cheefe good, and also, Finis bonorum,Cicero de finibus li. 1 2.3.4. & 5. & offic. li. 3. The end of al good thinges) it is (I say) specially re∣quired to prudence, to make a true estimate of the valew and
wroth of euery thinge,Prudence pre∣ferreth the grea∣ter good before the lesse, and the cheefe good be∣fore al other. Plutarc. de amore frater. Arist. 6. Ethic. D. Tho. 2.2. q. 27. ar. 2. and not only to reiect thinges absolutly euil, or of euills to choose the least (as the Lacedemonian said me∣rily he had done, when he had maried a very litle wife but also of good thinges to choose the best, preferring those thinges which are absolutly good, before al other goods what soe∣uer, and making the cheefe good, the scope and end of al his actions. 15. Now then seeing these three circumstances are requisit to true prudence, to wit to choose a good end, to vse and pra∣ctice good and vertuous meanes; and to esteeme euery good thing in the degree that it deserueth;Hovv he that feareth God pra∣ctiseth the 3. cheefe points of prudence. it is euident that he who feareth God and keepeth his commandements, most exactly, p rformeth al those three thinges not only in euery pariculer action but also throughout the whole course of his life, tending in al thinges to goodnes and vertue, vsing al iust and vertuous meanes, and esteeming euery thinge according to the true worth and valew therof; For he preferreth the soule before the body, eternal thinges before temporal. the goods of the body before the goods of fortune, the goods of the mind before them both: and finnally he referreth and directeth al his actions and the whole course of his life to the seruice and glory of God,Apoc. 1. Arist. Metaph. li. 1. Trimegist. in paeman. c. 3. whome both diuines and Philosophers teach, to be the begining and end of al creatures, as I haue partly shewed already, and wil doe more amply in the second part of this treatise when I shal speake of religion.In the preface. 16. But here perhaps some wil say, that there are necessarily required to prudence certaine partes which I haue not yet men∣cioned, as sagacity of wit, a good memory, & a sound iudgment,A difficulty proposed concer∣ninge other parts of pru∣dence. Arist. ethic. li. 6. c. 9. & 10. wherby wise men doe prudently consider, iudge, counsel, or∣daine, and execute; and that these partes (as Aristotle teacheth) proceede partly of a natural hability, and partly of longe expe∣rience. In which respect he most approueth the iudgment and counsel of old men; wherupon it followeth that it sufficeth not to prudence to feare God and keepe his commandements, except a man haue with al the other partes aboue mencioned, which many good and holy men want, either in respect of some natural defect of wit, memory, and iudgment, or for lack of experience.
The satisfaction of the difficulty proposed.17. For the better satisfaction hereof, one thing is to be con∣sidered, which I haue before amply treated and proued, to wit the natural imbecility of mans wit, which I haue shewed to be such in the wisest worldly man that liueth, that he knoweth not what is conuenient for him selfe,No man is so vvise that he alvvayes knovv¦eth vvhat is cō∣uenient for him selfe. Chap. 2. & 3. &c. The light of Gods grace ne∣cessary for the perfection of prudence. and much lesse for others; wherby he desireth and seeketh many tymes that which tur∣neth to his vtter ruyne: wherof I alleadged many reasons and examples; by the which it is manifest, that the most necessary part for the consumation and perfection of humane prudence, is some supernatural and diuine light, to illuminat the vnderstan∣ding of men, & to mooue and encline their wils to make choice of that which may be most conuenient for them and others, without which light the wisest worldly men (I meane such as haue most excellent talents, & parts of nature and are wicked withal) are but like to blind men, and goe as it were groping in the darke;Eccli. ca. 11. The vvisest vvorldly men, are as it vvere blindsold. Prou. ca. 4. Wherfore the Preacher saith. Error & tenebrae peccatori∣bus concreatae sunt; Error & darknes are created togeather vvith sinners, that is to say ignorance and blindnes are connatural to wicked men. And againe Salomon saith: Via peccatorum tenebrosa &c. The vvay of the vvicked is darke and obscure, and they know not vvhere they shal fal; Wheras on the contrary side he saith of the iust: Iustorum semita quasi lux splendens;Ibid. The path or vvay of the iust (that is to say of those that feare God and keepe his commandements) is as it were a resplendant light vvhich stil encreaseth vntil it be cleare day. And for this cause also the psalmist saith of the law of God, that it is, cleare and bright,Psal. 18. The good habi∣lities of nature are encreased & perfected by grace. and that it giueth light vnto the eyes: that is to say, the light of grace, wherby the good habilities natural of Gods seruants are encreased and perfected, & their actions prospered so farre forth as almighty God thinketh it necessary for their good, his glory, and the execution of his wil. 18. Wherto I adde that also the defects of nature may be and many tymes are,The defects of nature may be, and often are supplied by the light of grace. supplyed by the light & helpe of grace, in such sort that the seruants of God may, and many tymes doe exactly performe al the parts of prudence, though they haue no natural hability for the same: such being the force and effects of grace, that it perfecteth humane nature, which though it aspire and tend to perfection, yet can not possibly attayne therto in many thinges, without some supernatural helpe; as I wil euidently
proue in the second parte of this Treatise, when I shal treat of Re∣ligiō: & now in the meane tyme for the better proofe of the mat∣ter in hand, I wil only lay downe some examples of the seruants of God,Examples of di∣uers in vvhome grace supplied natural defects. who not withstanding either their natural defects and imperfections, or their want of experience, haue by the con∣duct of grace most prudently and wisely behaued themselues in most important matters. 19.Daniel being but a child of 12 years old iudged the cause of Su∣sanna. Dan. ca. 13. Theodor. in 1. ca. Ezech. Ignatius Martit. ep. ad Magnes. Suspicius Seuer. li. 2. Sacrae. histo. Aug. serm. 242. Dan. c. 1. Ananias, Misael and Azarias. Iudith. ca. 7.8.9.10.11.12.13. Iudith heroycaly and vvisely per∣formed a glo∣rious enterprise. For who seemed more vnfit to vndertake the iudgment of great causes then Daniel whiles he was a child of 12. yeres old, (as Theodoretus testifieth) or as other graue and ancient Fathers affirme, not much elder (and therfore no lesse vnripe in expe∣rience then in yeares) and yet neuertheles being assisted by the spirit of God he confounded the addulterous iudges in the cause of Susanna, which he most prudently determined; besides that the scripture witnesseth that God gaue such profound know∣ledge and wisdome not only to him, but also to Ananias, Misael and Azarias whiles they were al children, that they farre surpas∣sed al the wise and learned Chaldeans. 20. And was there euer any glorious enterprise, more wisely contriued, more couragiously attempted, or more heroically performed, then the ouerthrow of Holofernes, slaine by a holy woman, no lesse timerous of nature, then weake of iudgment and void of experience through the infirmity of her sex? 21. Againe, what sufficiency was there in Moyses for the per∣formance of so great a chardge as almighty God layed vpon him;Exod. c. 3. first in his embassage to Pharao, and afterward in the gouernment and conduct of his people through so many dangers and diffi∣culties? This was acknowledged by Moyses him selfe,Moyses acknovv∣ledged his in∣sufficiency for the conduct of Gods people. Exod. Ibid. who con∣fessed his owne insufficiency & weaknes, saying to almighty God; Quis sum ego &c: VVho am I o Lord? that is to say what is there mee that I shal goe to Pharao; and conduct the children of Israel out of Egipt? And againe afterwards being vtterly discouraged with the consideration of his want of eloquence and vtterrance, and of his other infirmities, he desired to be excused saying.Ibid. ca. 4. Glossa interlin. Hovv God sup∣plyed the defects of Moyses. Obsecro domine mitte quem missurus es, I beeseche thee o Lords send whome els it please thee; Wherupon God did not only promise him his owne continual assistance, but also appointed Aaron to helpe him, and to speake for him to the people in al occasions, promising with
al to be in the mouthes of them both. Exod. c. 18.22. Besides that, lethro cosen to Moyses did also afterwards by Gods great prouidence, teach him a notable pointe of policy for the gouernment of the people; wherin it may be noted by the way,God concurreth vvith his ser∣uants somtymes immediatly, and sometymes by meanes of others how sweetly almighty God directeth and guideth his seruantes concurring with them, and mouing them sometimes immediatly by secret inspiration, and sometimes by the help and meanes of others, wherby Moyses being as it seementh altogeather vnskilful, and vnexpert in matters of state, did neuertheles many yeres most prudently and happily gouerne the people of God, as wel in warlike, as in other ciuil affaires. 1 Reg. ca. 16. 2. Reg. c. 2. & 5.23. In like manner if we consider either the yeres or educa∣tion of Dauid (when being very younge he was called from the shepe cote to the Courte, and shortly after anioynted Kinge) and if we weigh with al his wise,Dauid directed and guided in al his gouernment by almighty God 2. Reg. c. 7. victorious, and glorious go∣uernment for 40. yeeres togeather, we must needs confesse that the same proceeded of Gods assistance, and not of his owne suf∣ficiency, whereof almighty God admonished him by Nathan the prophet saying; Ego tuli te &c. I tooke thee from the pastures whn thou followedst thy flocks, and made thee Kinge of my peple of Israel, and I was with thee, and assisted thee in al thinges wher soeuer thou didst goe. I kild al thy enemies before thy face, and haue magnified thy name amongst the great ones of the earth; Thus said the prophet Dauid in the person of almighty God, and this also Dauid him selfe (who best knew him selfe, and the fauors which God had done him) gratefully aknowledged,Dauid gratfully acknovvledged Gods assistance Psal. 17. & 143. Psal. 17.16.15.24.133. calling almighty God his Protector, his stay, his refuge, his buckler or sheild, his strength, his hope, his glory, and humbly beseeching him in al his occasions, to illuminat him, to protect and defend him, to direct his course, and to guide his steps. 24. Furthermore to omit the most admirable conuersion of of the Christian world to the faith of Christ by poore and igno∣rant fihermen (wherof I haue spoken before) and to say some what of later examples;Chap. 24. nu. 23. & 24. S Antony the hermit most pru¦dent & learned vvithout hu∣mane lerning or experience. S. Athan. in. va S. Antonij. Who can sufficiently admire the wis∣dome and prudence of S. Antony the hermite, who withdraw∣ing himselfe from the world to the wildernes, in his young and tender yeares, became neuertheles so iudicious, wise, and lear∣ned, that the famous S. Athanasius (who wrote his life) saith of him thus; He was very wise, and this was wonderful i him, that
hauing had no last at al of humane learning, yet he was; Ingeniosissimus, & prudentissimus; Most ingenious and prudent; For example wherof S. Athanasius recounteth certaine disputations which passed betwixt him, and some famous pagan Philosophers, whome he conuinced with arguments no lesse subtil then sound and learned.The admirable learning of S. Katherin of A∣lexandria. Metaphastes. Baron. Anno. 307. & alij. 25. The like also is testified by graue authors of S. Katherine of Alexandria in Greece, who being but 18. yeres of age, defended the Christian faith against the learnedst Philosophers of her time, whome shee confuted and conuerted. 26. And to her I may adde an other S. Katherin of Siena, who being brought vp from hir infancy in religion,F. Raimundus Capuen. in vita S. Kater. Senen. The learning & vvisdome of S. Katherin of Sena. Anno. 1375. with out any experience or practice of worldly affaires, was neuertheles so prudent and of such notable judgement, that the Florentines hauing warre with Pope Gregory the 11. intreated her to goe to Auignion in France where he resided, to craue and treat peace for them, which shee did with such wonderful wisdome, and efficacy, that the Pope was content to remit the conditions to to her, though afterwards it tooke no effect, by reason of new troubles raised in Florence by some seditious persons, who were opposit to the peace; Besids that, whilst shee remained in Auignion, shee filled the whole Court with the admiration, aswel of her learning, as of her prudence, re∣soluinge and satisfiing great doubts and difficulties propoun∣ded vnto her, by three of the most learnedst Prelats of that age, who of curiosity meant to try her hability in matters of lear∣ning.The infused ler∣ning and vvis∣dome of S. Ber∣nard. Guild. Abbas. Claraual. in vita Bernar. li. 2. ca. 2. & li 4. c. 3. Carol. Sigon. de reg. Hal. an. 11.30. & 1134. S. Franciscus de Paula, void of humane experi∣ence, yet admi∣rably vvise. 27. Also how admirable was the learning, wisdome, and prudence of S. Bernard, who retiring him selfe from the world to a monastery at two and twenty yeres of age, became not only so learned, as appeareth by his notable workes; but also so wise and prudent, that he was diuers times called from his cloister into Italy and other parts, to compound great quarells, and con∣trouersies, which he did with great satisfaction, and admiration of al men. 28. Finally who euer knew or vnderstood lesse of worldly matters then Robert le Roy, otherwise called now Franciscus de Paula, sounder of the religious order of the Minimes; who forsooke
the world and went to the desert being but a boy, and euer after liued a monastical life, and neuertheles was of such wisdome and prudence,Philip. Com. ca. 130. that Philip de Comines a most graue and wise coun∣cellour of Lewis the 11. King of France, saith that he heard him diuers times discourse in the presence as wel of King Lewis, as of King Charles his sonne, so prudently of great and difficult mat∣ters, that it seemed he was inspired by almighty God, and that the holy Ghost speake by his mouth, for otherwise (saith this author) he could not haue spoken of such matters as he did. 29. I omit diuers other examples for breuityes sake, seeing by these it sufficiently appeareth how true it is which the Psal∣mist saith.Psal. 18. Hovv the lavv of God giueth vvisdome. Lex domini sapientiam praestat paruulis; The lawe of God gi∣ueth wisdome to children; That is to say, to simple and ignorant men; and the reason is, for that the law of God conteineth the precepts, and rules of al true wisdome and prudence, teaching vs what is our duty to God, to our neighboure, to our superi∣ours, inferious, and equalls; how, and what to loue; how, and what to hate; how to command, how to obay, to what end to direct our intentions and actions; how to liue, how to dye, and lastly how to arriue after the stormes and tempests of this life, at the secure port of eternal felicity, wherto true wisdome directeth and addresseth her whole course. 30. And this is not only to be vnderstood of the written law of God,The vvritten lavv of God ful of al vvisdome. that is to say the holy scriptures of the old and new te∣stament (in the which as S. Chrisostome saith; Non est sillaba vel api∣culus. &c. There is not a sillable, nor so much as a tittle, wherin there is not hidden some great treasure) but much more it is to be vnderstood of the law of God vnwritten,The infused lavv of God. Hieremiae ca. 13. infused in to the hartes of Gods seruants; wherof almighty God said by the prophet; Dabo legem meam &c. I vvil gue them my lavv in their bovvels, and I vvil vvrite it in their hearts. Which vnwritten or infused law is, as S. Augustin saith nothing els but:Aug. li. de spir. & littera ca. 21. Ipsa presentia Spiritus Sancti &c. The very pre∣sence of the holy Ghost, &c. by vvhom charity is spread and printed in our harts, vvhich charity is the consummation of the law, and end of the com∣mandement 31. Thus saith S. Augustin of the infused law of God, which doth not only teach men true wisdome (as doth the written law) but doth also giue it them,The infused lavv both tea∣cheth and gi∣ueth true vvis∣dome. making them the temples of
God, and habitacles of the holy Ghost; by whose grace the good natural talents of many seruants of God are encreased and perfe∣cted, their defects supplied, their infirmites cured, the eyes of their vnderstandings illuminated, and their iudgments guided and directed; by meanes wherof they are replenished with hea∣uenly wisdome, and enabled to performe al the partes of true prudence, to wit, to deliberate maturely, to iudge soundly, to councel securely, to ordaine and command exactly, and to exe∣cute effectually; and so they worke in al thinges, no lesse prudently then happily, being moued and led by the only au∣thor of wisdome and happines, in whose hand are the harts of al men, and vpon whose wil dependeth  successe of al actions whatsoeuer. 32. Therefore I wil infer hereupon certaine conclusions;The first con∣clusion. Eccli. ca. 1. The feare of God is the beginning and perfection of vvisdome; and vvhy. The first, that, as the Preacher saith, the feare of God is not only; Initium & radix, The begininge and roote, but also; plenitudo sapientiae: The consummation or perfection of vvisdome; For those which sincerely feare God, haue consequently the light & helpe of his grace, wherby they may, and many times doe arriue to the perfection of wisdome and prudence, wheras otherwise there is no possibility to attaine therto; al humane wisdome, be∣ing of it selfe (as I may tearme it) lame, and vnperfect,Al humane vvisdome is of it selfe lame and vnperfect. vncer∣taine and subiect to infinit errours (as hath bene amply proued through out this whole discourse) so that wicked men although they haue neuer so good partes of wit and iudgement naturally, and may by the force and meanes therof doe many thinges pru∣dently and wisely,The vvisest worl∣dly man is a foole in that vvhich most im∣ports him. yet for as much as they alwaies play the fooles notably in that which importeth them most (to wit, in thinges pertaining to their eternal good or euil (and doe also erre very blindly and absurdly many times in temporal affaires, they ne∣ther haue any perfection of wisdome, nor can be truly counted wise. 33. Wheras on the other side the seruants of God who haue good parts natural, and the light and helpe of grace with al,Hovv the ser∣uants of God are vvise. doe not only worke most prudently alwaies in matters that con∣cerne their eternal good or euil, but also deale in al thinges whatsoeuer with farre more light, certaintye, and security, then wicked men of like good partes and talents natural. And al∣though
the seruants of God haue sometimes some natural de∣fect of wit and iudgement,VVhy the sim∣plest seruant of God is vviser then the vvisest vvicked man. yet for as much as such also doe al∣waies discharge the partes of true prudence in matters which import them most, and may haue also, and many times haue, with the helpe of grace, such a supplement of their natural im∣perfections, that al of them may, and many of them doe, per∣forme the office of prudent and wise men in al affaires (which wicked men neither doe nor possibly can doe) I conclude,The perfection of humane vvis∣dome consisteth in Gods grace. that the perfection of humane wisdome consisteth in Gods grace, and that the simplest seruant of God may more truly be accomp∣ted wise, then the wisest, I meane the subtilest and craftiest wic∣ked man whosoeuer. 34. This the roial prophet acknowledged in him selfe, com∣paring the prudence and wisdome which God had giuen him by the obseruation of his commandements, with the wisdome and prudence of his enemies & of the wisest worldlings, saying; Super inimicos meos &c.Psal. 11.8. Thou hast made me (o Lord) wiser then my enemies, with thy commandements or law, and I haue vnderstood more then al they vvhich taught mee, and I haue bene vviser then old men, because I haue sought to keepe thy commandements. The 2. conclusiō.35. The second conclusion is, that (as the booke of Eeclesiasti∣cus signifieth) Non est sapientia nequitiae disciplina, & non est cogitatus peccatorum prudentia.Eccli. ca. 19. Nothing that is offensiue to God, can stand vvith true vvisdome or prudence. Supra nu. 7. & sequent. The discipline of vvickednes is not vvisdome, nor the cogitations or plotts of sinners are not prudence. For seeing true wis∣dome consisteth in the feare of God and in the obseruation of his commandements (as I haue sufficiently proued) nothing that is offenciue to God, or contrary to his law, can stand with true wisdome. And againe seeing prudence and moral vertue are so connected, that they can not be seperated, yea and that not only the end of euery prudent action, but also the meanes must necessarily be good and vertuous (as I haue amply decla∣red) it must needes follow that whatsoeuer is vicious,Supra. nu. 13. impious, or wicked, is excluded from true prudence. In which respect prudence is called in the scriptures,Prou. ca. 9. Prudence called in the scripture the knovvledge of holy men. The 3. conclusiō. Scientia Sanctorum. And ther∣fore Salomon saith; Principium sapientiae timor Domini, & scientia sanctorum prudentia; The feare of God is the begining of wisdome, and the knowledge of holy men is prudence. 36. Hereupon also follow two other conclusions, concer∣ning
policy; The one that no true policy can admit any impiety,No true policy admitteth any impiety. wickednes or offence of God. The other that al humane policy with out the light and help of Gods grace is vncertaine and de∣fectuous; And for the better vnderstanding hereof, it is to be considered, that as prudence is a part of wisdome,Policy a part of prudence. so policy is a part of prudence, and that prudence is also deuided into three partes. The first personal; the second Oeconomical; and the thirde political Personal prudence consisteth in the speculation and practise of such thinges, as belong only to particuler men:Prudence diui∣ded into 3 parts. Oeconomical prudence respecteth al thinges belonging to household;VVhat is politi∣cal prudence or policy. and political prudence is that which considereth matters pertaining to commonwelth; and this kind of prudence is properly called policy. 37. Therfore as prudence being a branch of wisdome, can not disagree from the nature therof (no more then the branch from the nature of the tree) so also policy being a part of pru∣dence,Policy can not disagree from prudence. must needs be conforme and agreeable therto (in which respect euery political act must needs be prudent, and euery pru∣dent act concerning commonwelth, must needs be political) wherupon it followeth that seeing true prudence excludeth al wickednes and impiety, true policy doth also exclude the same. 38.The 4. conclusiō. And againe seeing true wisdome & prudence are the spe∣cial gifts of God (as I haue shewed) and that without the light and helpe of Gods grace,Al humane po∣licy is vnperfect and defectuous vvithout the light of grace. al humane wisdome is ful of imperfe∣ction and obscurity; vncertainty and error; it followeth also by the like consequence, that the like iudgment is to be giuen of al humane policy, to wit, that it is of it selfe imperfect, vncer∣taine, obscure, and erronious, and to be perfected, assu∣red, rectified and guided by the light of grace; which is the point that I haue specially laboured to proue throughout this whole Treatise. 39.The imprudence of those vvho presume to deale in matters of state, vvithout any regard of Gods assistance.Therfore to conclude this chapter and to draw also to the conclusion of this first parte of the whole treatise, I can not but lament and wonder at the imprudence of two sorts of men. The one is of those who make no doubt to deale in matters of policy and state, without any care or regard of Gods helpe and assistance, yea with offence of God; wherby they expose not
only the matters which they mannage to dangerous errors, and to al euil successe: but also the princes whom they councel, and the commonwelths where they gouerne, to Gods indignation, and consequently to vtter ruine, as I haue partly proued already in diuers parts of this Treatise, and wil proue more amply in the second part therof. The imprudence of those that presume to me∣dle in the grea∣test matters of state vvithout experience.40. The other sort of imprudent men, in my fancy are those, who are so farre transported either with a conceit of their owne witts and sufficiency, or with a desire to deale in great matters, that they aspire to nothing more, then to meddle in matters of state, yea and boldly embarke them selues in the greatest that doe occurre, before they haue any experience or practice therof in the world, or haue so much as reflected vpon the natural im∣becility of mans wit, and the weaknes of humane policy; or of the insuperable difficulties and dangers incident to matters of state, which are such as doe many tymes ouerthrow and disgrace the most wise and expert negociators. 41. And therfore it hapneth very often to those who so gree∣dily and aduisedly seeke such employments,VVhat hapneth to those vvhich vnaduisedly seeke great em∣ployments. as it doth to a man, which in faire weather putteth him selfe to sea in a litle boat or fregot for his recreation, when vpon the suddaine there riseth a storme that carrieth him into the maine sea, and so tosseth him to and fro, that he not only looseth al the pleasure which he ex∣pected, but also scapeth hardly with his life, and therfore with many a sigh and heauy groane he looketh back to the land from whence he came, but neuertheles is forced to goe whether the windes and tempests carry him, and perhaps perisheth in the end by the violence of the storme: and euen so (I say) it fareth many tymes with those which embarke them selues vnaduisedly in matters of state; for with in a while they finde them selues so per∣plexed, that they desire to returne to their former repose and quietnes, but yet they are forced to goe whether the course and current of their affayres doth carry them, yea and sometymes perish amidst the manyfold dangers which commonly do ac∣company state-matters, wherof the practise may wel be compa∣red to the practise of phisicke. The practise of matters of state lie the practise of Phisie.42. For although some phisicians exercise their science with more iudgment and better successe then others, yet none is so
skilful and fortunate that he can alwayes warrant the cure of his patient; and young beginners many tymes kil three, before they saue one; And euen so Statists, how expert soeuer they be, can neuer warrant the good successe of their plots and design∣ments, and for the most part at the first doe marre many matters,Young Statists marre many matters before they make one. before they make one; in so much that I accompt him no lesse happy then wise, who can be the wiser not only by other mens errors, but also by his owne: and as I hold him for the wisest man which erreth the least; so I take him for the happyest and best at ease, who meddleth the least,He the vvisest that erreth the least, but the hapiest he that medleth the least in matters of state. or not at al in matters of state, seeing there was neuer any that dealt in many, but he er∣red in some: and sometymes we see that the least error worketh both his ouerthrow who committed it, and also the ruyne of whole kingdomes and commonwelths. Wherfore I conclude with the spanish prouerb; A quel es Rey, que nunça vio Rey; He is a King that neuer savv Kinge. That is to say, he is a happy man who neuer had to deale with the affaires of princes, or state-matters. 43. I say not this to dehort, or disswade al men from dealing with matters of state (which is a thing so necessary for the ser∣uice of God, and princes, and for the good of commonwelth, that it is both honorable, yea and meritorious when it is done with circumstances conuenient and requisite thereunto) but my meaning is to signify with what great consideration and cir∣cumspection al men ought to vndertake such negociations, es∣pecially young men,Dangerous for very young men to deale in mat∣ters of state. Plutark in his treatise vvhe∣ther an old man should deale in matters of state. who haue not had any experience or pra∣ctice thereof, and therfore can not haue the mature and ripe iudgment which is necessary therto; For which cause the Athe∣nians did ordaine that no man vnder 50. yeeres of age should be called to giue aduise in the affaires of their commonwelth. And although a man may be (as very many are no doubt) sooner ripe and able to mannage any matter whatsoeuer; yet reason and experience teache, that the younger a man is, and the lesse pra∣ctice he hath, the more he is like to erre. Wherfore I craue thy patience (good Reader) while I set downe here a few general rules for young beginers, aswel for their instruction, as also for the discouery of the difficulties which occurre in the gouern∣ment of commonwelth.
CERTAINE GENERAL RVLES OR ADVI∣ses no lesse pious then political, for the instruction of such as desire to mannage matters of state, and haue no experience thereof; to the end they may deale therin vvith lesse danger and difficulty. CHAP. 29. FIRST, he that meaneth to apply him selfe to matters of state, must see that his intention be cleare and pure,A pure and good intention, most necessary in a Statist. that is to say, that he be not moued therto by vaine glory, ambition, coue∣tousnes, or any vicious or vnlawful desire; for that the same are too weake foundations to vp∣hold waighty affaires, being accompanied not only with the offence of God, but also with passion, wherby mans iudgment is blinded, and many times drawne to errour; And therfore the cheefe and principal intention of a Statist ought to be,VVhat the in∣tention of a Statist ought to be. the ser∣uice of God and his Prince, and the publike good of his country, whereto euery man ought principally to direct and leuel al his actions, which otherwise can not be truly vertuous and wise, nor conforme to the duty of a good Christian man nor yet haue the assistance and blessing of almighty God, which for the good successe of al mens affaires is most requisite. For as the roial pro∣phet saith.Psal. 126. Nisi Dominus aedificauerit domum, in vanum laborauerunt qui edificant eam. Except our Lord doe build the howse, they labour in vaine which build the same. 2. This foundation being laid, any negociation be it neuer soe waighty and important may be built therupon,The commodities of a good inten∣tion in vnderta∣king matters of state. for foure reasons. First, for that a mans reason and iudgment bing free from passion and selfe loue, he shal more clearly and soundly both deliberate and worke in al occasions. Secondly for that it is most likely that almighty God seeing his good and holy inten∣tion, wil concurre & cooperate with him in al his negociations. Thirdly though it would not please almighty God (for his secret
iudgments) to blesse and prosper his actions, yet he wil assuredly giue him the reward of his good intention; And lastly, for that in case he fal into the great difficulties and dangers, that are in∣cident to dealing in matters of state, yet he shal haue the com∣fort and consolation of a good and cleere conscience,Horat. li. 1. ep. ad Mecaenat. A cleare cons∣ciene a brazen vvalle. Li. 4. de benefici. ca. 21. which as the Poët saith is: Murus ahaeneus a brasen wal; and the most as∣sured anchor in al the stormes & tempests of this life; Quae etiam obruta delectat (saith Seneca) which euen when it is oppressed, or ouerwhelmed doth delight. Thus much for the first rule. 3. Secondly; it shal be conuenient for a young Statist, wel to waigh and foresee the difficulties and dangers which he may by al likelyhood incurre by dealing in matters of state,The difficulties and dangers, to be considered in matters of state. either through the nature and condicion of the matters which he is to handle; or through the treachery and pefidiousnes of those with whome he is to deale; or through the malice and emula∣tions either publike or secret, which in courts neuer want; or els through the ielosie of Princes who (as Comineus wel noteth) doe easely suspect and distrust their best seruants in matters concerning their state; or lastly,Phil. Com. cron. Lodouic. Il. ca. 26. through the vncertainty of the successe of busines, which is in no mans hand to warrant, as hath bene sufficiently proued.Chap. 13. By al which meanes we see many times most important matters miscarry, to the great greefe, disgrace, yea and vtter ouerthrow of the negociators,The benefit of foresight and prouidence in Statists. especially when they haue not foreseene the same; wheras by considera∣tion and foresight, they might perhaps haue preuented inconue∣nience, or at least haue bene better armed to beare their misfor∣tune which patience. 4.Plutark in his treatise of in∣structions for Statists. Therefore Plutarke worthily compareth improuident and vnaduised negociators, to one that should fal before he were aware into a coale pit or mine, where though perhaps he escape with life yet he cōmonly receiueth some hurt; or at least is won∣derfully astonished and amazed, not only with the fal, but also with the obscurity and horror of the place, which to those that goe in of purpose, and with resolution to indure it, is nothing so noysome or loathsome. 5. Thirdly he ought to obserue alwaies three thinges, which I haue largely proued throughout this whole discourse;3. thinges to be considered of Statists. the first is the imbecility and weaknes of mans wit; the second the vn∣certainty
of the successe of al mens actions: & the third the pro∣uidence of God in the disposition of al humane affaires. These three thinges, I say, euery Statist should haue continually before his eyes, to the end, that seeing his owne infirmity, and the vncertainty of the successe of al his designmēts, he may consider his danger, as wel of errour in his determinations, as of euil hap in his actions, and consequently haue recourse to the remedies ordained for the same by the prouidence and mercy of God:The councel of Tobias to his Sonne. Tobiae. ca. 4. acording to the aduise which old Tobias gaue to his sonne for the direction of the whole course of his life, to whom amongst many other notable precepts he gaue this. Aske counsel alwaies of a wiseman (saith hee) and continually blesse and prayse God, and beseech him to direct al thy course, and let al thy purposes and pretences be fixed and setled in him.Tvvo things to be practised of al Statists. Thus said Tobias, or rather the holy Ghost by his mouth aduising notably two thinges, necessary to be practised of al men, for the remedy of their natural imbecility; to wit, to take councel of wise men, and to craue the assistance of God, for that we are neither so absolute of our selues, but that we neede in al thinges Gods helpe and assistance (as I haue sufficiently proued) neither yet so gouerned and guided by al∣mighty God,Chap. 2. that we ought to contemne the helpe of man; such being the course of his diuyne prouidence in humane affai∣res, that he doth his wil not only in men, but also by them, and with their cooperation; in which respect S. Paule did not stick to cal him selfe and the other Apostles Adiutores Dei. The helpers of God in the conuersion of the gentils.1. Cor. 3. Extreame folly in men to trust vvholy in hu∣mane vvisdome and povver. Exod. ca. 18. A tempting of God to contemne humane helpe and councel;6. Therfore as it were great folly, pride, and presumption in man, so to trust in him selfe, or in humane wisdome & power as to neglect the prouidence and assistance of God, so were it one the other side extreme neglicence, yea and a tempting of God, so to relye vpon him, as to contemne al humane helpe and councel: which we may learne by the example of Moyses, who though he was instructed, inspired, and conducted by almighty God him selfe, yet refused not the good councel of Iethro for the manner of his gouerment, which almighty God also allowed in him:1. Reg. 20. 2. Reg 19. & 16. 1. Reg. c. 21. 22. 24. as also one the other side Kinge Dauid, though he tooke the counsel of his frendes, councellours, and seruants (as of Ionathas, Achitophel, Ioab and others) and vsed also his owne pru∣dence,
as wel in the deliberation, as in the execution of his affai∣res, yet he neuer omitted to consult with almighty God, by his prophets and preists when hee conueniently might do it; yea and (as I haue signified other where) continually craued the assistance, illumination,Chap. 28. nu. 25. and direction of almighty God in al his actions. 7. And this concurrēce of diuine helpe with humane diligen∣ce, is notably expressed in the scripture,Iudic. 7. Concurrence of humane dili∣gence vvith di∣uine helpe ne∣cessary. where it is signifyed that Gedeon gaue order to his souldiars to cry in their conflict with the Madianits, Domino, & Gedeoni; To our Lord God, and to Gedeon, & gladius Domini, & Gedeonis, the svvord of God, and Gedeon; And againe in the relation of the greate victory which Asa King of Iuda had against the Aethiopians the scripture saith that Cadente Do∣mino contriti sunt, & exercitu illius praeliante.Paralip. ca. 14. They vvere vtterly ouer∣throvvne, our Lord killing them, and the army of Asa fighting, which is as much to say, as man doing his endeuour, and God geuing the good successe. This also the very paynims knew, and obserued so wel that Plutark noteth it seriously in the battaile betwixt Per∣seus King of Macedony, and Paulus Aemilius the Roman.Plut. in P. AEmil. For where as Perseus when he should haue fought, with drew him selfe from the feild vnder colour to Sacrifice to Hercules, he saith, that God doth not vse to fauor such idle fellowes, as presume of his helpe, and wil doe nothing them selues; For God (saith he) hath so ordayned, that he which wil hit the marke, must shoote, and he which wil winne the goale must runne, & he which wil haue the victory, must fight; and therfore God fauored and helped Paulus Aemilius who craued force and victory with his armes in his hands; A dios rogando (as the spanish prouerb saith) y con la maça dando: praying to God and laying on load vvith his club: 8.The benefit and necessity of prayer for the good successe of matters of State. But to say some what here particulerly of a special meanes to procure the help and assistance of God; nothing behoueth a Statist more then daily to recommend his actions to his diuine maiesty by feruent and deuout prayer, the force and benefit whereof is vnspeakable, no lesse in al kind of temporal matters then in spiritual,Matth. 6. & 7. Marc. 11. Luc. 11. Exod. c. 17. for the which we haue not only our Sauiours doctrin and warrant, but also infinit examples of holy and wise men in diuine and humane histories. Whyles Iosue fought with the Amalecits Moyses prayed vpon the mountayne and obtayned
the victory.Examples of the greate force of deuout prayer. The two Annae being barren, were by prayer made mothers, the1. Reg. c. 1. one of the prophet Samuel, and theS. Ioan Damas∣cen orat de nati∣uit. B. Virgi. other of the virgin Mary,3. Reg. c. 3. 4 Salomon by prayer obtayned wisdome: KingR. c. 19 Ezechias recouered health, and had victory against the Assirians; The threeDan. 3. children were deliuered from fyer, And to speake of la∣ter times,Aug. de ciuit. dei li. 5. c. 26 Theodosius the emperour surnamed the greate, as S. Au∣gustin witnesseth, preuayled against Eugenius the Tyrant more by prayer then by force; and the like is also testifyed by graue wri∣ters, ofPro∣cop. de bello gothico. Narses the Eunuch, Lieutennant to Iustinus the emperour, whose greate victories were attributed to his prayers and greate deuotion towards the blessed Virgin Mary, who asEuagrius li. 4. ca. 23. Euagrius af∣firmeth appeared to him many tymes before his battailes, and gaue him directions for the same. Paul. Diacon. li. 18 Cedren. Theo∣phan. Naucler. Baron. an. 621. 622. 623. Gulies. Malmesb. de gest. reg. Angl. li. 2 ca. 3. Roger de Houe∣den Annal. par. 1. an. 871. Baron. an. eo∣dem.9. In like manner the famous ouerthrowes which Heraclius the emperour gaue to Cosroes King of Persia (of whom he recouered Hierusalem, and al the east parts) are ascribed by the best historio∣graphers that write thereof, to the greate deuotion and prayers which he partly vsed, and partly procured for the good successe of that warre, where in diuers miraculous accidents hapned, which I omit for breuities sake. We read also in our English hi∣stories that King Ethelred (elder brother to the famous Alfred, or Alured, founder of the vniuersity of Oxford) being incamped a∣gainst the Daynes, and aduertised by his captaynes at such tyme as he was going to masse, that the enemy assayled his camp, bad them attend to the defence therof, for that he wold heare masse before he wold goe out of his tent, as he was daily accustomed to doe; In the meane tyme his brother Alfred with the rest of his captaines, who had ioyned battaile with the enemy, were in greate danger to bee ouerthrowne, where King Ethelred hauing heard masse, came himselfe in person, and fynding his souldiars alreddy flying away, he recalled them to the battaile, thrusting him selfe into the midst thereof, Cuius virtute saith the history, & Dei miraculo;Guliel Malmes vbi supra. by vvhose vallor, and the miraculous helpe of God, the Daynes were put to flight, and their King slaine, with diuers of their nobility, and many thousands of the souldiars. 10. Also in the Spanish histories, we haue a notable example of the wonderful force and effect of prayer in a noble man of Castile called Hernandes Antolino,Vassae. chron. an. 941. in the time of Garsias Hernandes
Count of Castile, who had greate warres with the Moores. This Antolino being no lesse deuout then valiant, was wont to spend many houres euery day in prayer, and going one day to pray be∣fore a battaile which the Count of Castile was to geue to the Moores, he was so absorpt, and rauished with deuotion, that he forgott him selfe and continued therein during al the tyme of the battaile, wherein neuertheles it pleased God to shew visi∣bly, that his prayers proffited, and preuailed more, then his pre∣sence could haue donne; For one in his shape and armour and vpon his horse, made such slaughter amongst the enemyes that they were forced to flee; In so much that the count and al the army being fully persuaded, that they had wonne the battail by the meanes of Antolino sought for him to geue him the thanks and praise, which they thought his greate vallour deserued, and although they found him not in the field, but in his tent, much ashamed of his absence, yet assuring them selues that they saw both his horse, and armour in the battaile they caused them to be produced, and then it appeared as wel by the wounds and wearines of his horse, as by the signes of the bloues vpon his armour, that some angel had vsed them in his steede, and that God had geuen them victory through the merit of his prayers. 11. To this purpose also may serue those examples of the fa∣mous victories of Edvvard the 3. King of England against the French at Crecy in Picardy; and of the Christians against the Turke at Lepanto in our dayes; as also of many other miraculous victo∣ries, whereof I haue made ample relationChap. 15. Chri∣sost. de nat. dei, hom. 5. The testimony of S. Chrisostom concerning the force of prayer. heretofore out of ap∣proued authors, and therfore I remit the reader therto, and end concerning prayer with this sentence of S. Chrisostom; Vis orationis, (saith he) vim ignis extinxit &c. The force of prayer hath extinguished the force of fyre, shutt vp the mouth of lyons, geuen victories in vvarre, appea∣sed stormes, and tempests, expelled diuels, opened the gates of heauen, bro∣ken the bands of death, cured disseases, reconciled enemyes, deliuered citties from earthquakes, and defended them as vvel from the punishment of God, as from the treasons, and attempts of men; Finally it hath ouercome al sorts of euil. Thus saith S. Chrisostome of the wonderful efficacy of prayer when it is accompanied with such circumstances as are requisit to make the same acceptable to almighty God, whereof I omit to
speake here, because it properly belongeth to those that write expressely of spiritual matters. Thus much concerning prayer and diuine helpe. The necessity of humane councel. Eccli. ca. 32.12. And now to say yet a word or two more, concerning hu∣mane counsel, the holly Ghost giueth a notable aduise, saying, Fili sine consilio nihil facias, & post factum non penitebis. My sonne doe no∣thing vvithout councel and thou shalt not afterwards repent thee. And againe;Pro. 15. Qui agunt omnia cum consilio reguntur sapientia. Those vvhich doe al thinges with councel are gouerned with wisdome. And this point I hold to be absolutly necessary, not only for younge men, or o∣thers of smal experience, but also for the eldest and most expert; For Nemo omnibus horis sapit; No man is vvise at al hovvres. And as the prouerb saith; Tvvo eyes see more then one; And therfore the famous Scipio Africanus did euer consult al his affayres with Caius Laelius; and Cicero confesseth that in his consulship,Plutark in his treatise intitu∣led vvhether an old man should deale vvith mat∣ters of state. Pro. 15. Many councel∣lors necessary for princes. he did nothing with∣out the aduise of the philosopher Publius Nigidius; and for this cause princes haue diuers councellours, to the end that matters being pondered by diuers, al circumstances may be duely exa∣mined and considered: for as Salomon saith: vbi sunt plures consili∣arij confirmatur cogitationes; plots and designments are confirmed or esta∣blished, where there are many councellours; for some find out one in∣conuenience, some an other, some one remedy, and some an other, whereof I shal haue occasion to say more hereafter. 13. Therfore I conclude for the present that a young Statist following the rule and counsel of Tobias,The conclusion concerning the concurence of deuout prayer and humane councel. Matth. 10. that is to say fixing his hart and his hopes vpon almighty God, adding the continual vse of deuout and feruent praier, to humane counsel and dili∣gence, and ioyning therby the VVisdome of the serpent with the sim∣plicity of the doue, piety with policy, gifts of grace with habillity of nature, and finally the wisdome of God with the prudence of man, shal deliberate and worke in al occasions, no lesse hap∣pily then wisely; and this shal suffice for the third rule. 14. Fourthly it importeth greatly that after mature consul∣tation of any matter of state,Tyme not to be lost. and serious recommendation ther∣of to almighty God, no time of action be not fore-slowed with needles delaies after the matter be determined; for tyme may so alter the state of any affaire, be it neuer so wel and wisely reso∣lued, that the oportunity of execution may bee vtterly lost and
the busines with al; and therfore the common prouerb aduiseth. To strske while the iron is hot; for as the poet saith:Lucan li. 1. The danger of needles delay. Nocuit differre paratis. Delay is alwaies hurtful to those who are readdy to execute; and especially in matters wherin there is any competence of enemies, who euer watch diligently to take al oportunities and doe often preuaile them selues greatly, of the negligences and delaies of their aduersaries. 15.Speedy executiō most necessary in matters of vvarre. And although this aduise is necessary in al matters of state, yet it is most behoueful, and requisit in warlike affaires; wherin we see many times, that speede and diligence is more important then great force; for speed being commonly accom∣panied with sudden terrour and feare,The force of suddaine feare. doth open the way to smal force, and enable the same to worke great effects; And therfore Agathocles one of the tirants of Sicily, hauing but a few soldiers, and exhorting them to the speedy and sudden inua∣sion of Chartage said;Iustin. li. 42. In repentino metu non modicum victoriae momen∣tum; Sudden feare wil be of no smal moment and importance for the ob∣taining of the victory; Which was proued to be true by the euent, and is daily seene by the experience of surprises, camisadas, and al other suddaine enterprises of warre. 16. To conclude this aduise, one general rule is to be held,In vvhat cases delay is neces∣sary. that to temporize or delay time is neuer good but in three cases. The first when matters are not maturely consulted and wel di∣gested (wherin neuertheles al due diligence is to be vsed, lest time and oportunity of action, be spent and lost in consultation) The second case is, when there is some iust and important im∣pediment of the execution. The thrid is in cases of extremity which passe a mans power and wisdome to helpe, for then the only remedy is to temporize and winne time, which produceth many accidents that could neuer be fore-seene & imagined, and discouereth soueraigne remedies for the most desperat cases; and therfore Pericles was wont to say,Plutark. in Pe∣ricle. Tyme the vvi∣sest councellour that is. A mans ovvne hability vvel to be vveighed. That time is the wisest counce∣lour that is: Thus much for the fourth aduise. 17. Fiftly let euery younge Statist consider and measure his owne hability, to the end he doe not vndertake any matter a∣boue his reach or capacity; for no man how excellent soeuer he be, is so perfect that he excelleth in al thinges, and therfore the Poëts fained that the Gods them selues had not al gifts alike,
but that some excelled in one, and some in an other; and the Apostle saith that God distributeth his gifts vnto men diuersly; Diuidens singulis prout vult;1. Cor. ca. 12. Deuiding them vnto euery one as it pleaseth him; to the end we may haue neede one of an other. And this also common experience teacheth; for some excel in depth of iudgment, others in sharpnes of wit, others in eloquence, others in memory, others in science and learninge, and of them some in one kinde and some in an other. A Statist ought to measure the matters he vn∣dertaketh vvith his hability.18. Now then, it is conuenient for euery one wel to waigh his owne talents, and how they sort with the busines in which he is to be emploied; as if he be to perswade, whether he haue the gift of vtterance and eloquence; if he be to passe couenants and conuentions of leagues or mariages, whether he be a la∣wier; and if he be to treat of matters of warre whether he be a soldier, and so in like cases; for otherwise he shal proue, Asinus ad liram, An asse at a harpe, as the prouerb saith, and not only dis∣grace him selfe and them that sent him, but also loose his labour and his busines. VVho they are commonly that vnderta e grea∣ter matters then they can per∣forme.19. They that erre in this point are those commonly which either haue such an inordinate desire to be medling in great matters, that they care not what they vndertake so they be doing; or els haue an extraordinary conceit of their owne wits and sufficiency: and therfore as it shal be good for euery one to moderate in him selfe the first, to wit, the desire of dealing; so for the remedy of the later,A young Statist should not mae him selfe iudge of his ovvne sufficiency. it shal be secure for any man (in my fancy) not to rely wholy vpon his owne opinion concerning his sufficiency but partly vpon the iudgment of others, receiuing rather emploiment from his prince or other superiours, then offering or intruding him selfe therto, vntil he haue made some good trial of him selfe; for by that meanes if the busines speed wel he shal haue the thankes and honour of it, and if it succeede otherwise, he shal auoid great part of the blame. Better for a Sta∣tist to acknovv∣ledge his ovvne defect then to accept a charge vvhich he can not performe.20. But if he find that his superiours knowe him not, so wel as he knoweth him selfe, & that they would employ him in mat∣ters wherin he hath neither experience nor hability; it shal be lesse shame for him to confesse his defect, and either to refuse the commission, or to craue an associate furnished with the parts that he wanteth, then to accept the charge, and to faile
in the performance; Moyses being commanded,Exod. c. 3. by almighty God to goe in embassage to Pharao King of Aegipt, for the deliuery of the children of Israel, humbly excused him selfe as vnfit for such a waighty charge, by reason of the impediment in his speach; for the remedy wherof God gaue him an assistant, to wit, his brother Aâron, who being very eloquent might speake for them both. wherby not only subiects, which are to be emploied, may learne to consider and acknowledge their owne deffects; but also princes may learne so to employ their subiects, that one may haue the parts that an other wanteth, and supply each one the deffects of an other. 21. Sixtly,A young Statist ought to beginne his practise vvith smal mat∣ters. it shal not be amisse in my opinion for a younge beginner, to enter into his first practice with matters of smal importance, and to proceed to greater by degrees, as his experi∣ence and hability, shal growe and increase; like vnto the wise phisition, who when he begineth to practise taketh in hand easy cures, and medleth not with inueterat and dangerous diseases, vntil he hath got both experience and credit;A young Statist like to a phisi∣tion. And so I would wish a young beginner in matters of state, to fly busines of great waight and difficulty and rather to procure at the first, some honorable commission or embassage of congratulation, or con∣doling, including some ouerture of an important treaty, rather then to deale in the treaty it selfe, which requireth great pra∣ctise, experience, and wisdome. 22. And if he be emploied in any such treaty, I would wish him to be contented rather to be a second, or an assistant then cheife in commission,A young Statist compared to the iuy tree. The assistance of vvise and sincere frendes most ne∣cessary in great employments. The practise of the Lacedemoni∣ans in employ∣ing embassa∣dours. Aristot politi li. 2. c. 7. and so to groue for a while like the vine or iuy, by the support of an other tree. Or if his dignity be such as can not admit a second place, to procure, as much as may be, to haue such assistants, as are not only men of sound iudgment and wisdome, but also his sincere frends, such being commonly the emulation and ambition in courts, that he may otherwise make accompt that his owne associats wil curiously obserue e∣uery litle errour of his, and take aduantage therof for their owne better credits. 23. To which purpose it is to be considered that the Lacedemo∣nians vsed to choose such to send on their embassages as were either publike, or at least secret enemies; to the end that one of
them might serue for a spye ouer the others actions; and the like may stil be vsed,Philip. Com. Cron. du Roy Louis. c. 26. The practise of K. Levvis the 11. of France vvhen hee em∣ployed a great embassadour. and is no dout many times. And Philip de Comines noteth of Levvis the 11. King of France, that he was wont someti∣mes when he sent a great embassadour, to giue secret commis∣sions a part to some meaner man in his company, vsing the other for a shew and for matters of complement, or perhaps to the end he might beare the greatest parte of the charges of the embassage (as commonly great men doe) rather then for the dispatch of important affaires; and the like of both these examples may wel be practised by princes when they send great embassadours, and especially when he that is cheife in commission is rawe and vn∣expert, and therfore it shal be conuenient for such a one to con∣sider the same, to the end he may the better looke to his owne carriage, and procure (as I said before) to haue about him wise and assured frends to aduise him,The danger of associats in com∣mission vvhen they are not sincere freends. lest otherwise his owne assi∣stants may let him commit some grosse errours, and so handle the matter, that al the negociation shal turne to their honour by the discouery of his imbecility. 24. And this he may feare not only in his associats and fello∣wes in commission, but also in his followers and seruants; a∣mongst whome some one of more spirit and talent then the rest, may seeke to make his aduantage of his maisters weaknes;The treachery of seruants to be feared in em∣ployments. as it chanced to an embassadour whome I knew, whose Secretary noting in him some negligence in the dispatch of aduises, when occasion required, preuented commonly his maisters letters with his owne; Besides that, being emploied by his maister to procure aduises & intelligences, he concealed the most important mat∣ters from him, and wrote them him selfe to some principal coun∣sellours, whose good grace he gained so farre therby, that they procured his aduancement at his returne, wheras the embassa∣dour was held vnworthy of further preferment and liued euer after in disgrace. 25. Seuenthly I would aduise a young beginner not to charge him selfe with many matters at once,Many matters not to be vnder∣taken at once of a young Statist. as some doe who can not endure to see any man emploid but them selues, wherof it follo∣weth that some one or two businesses succeeding il (as com∣monly amongst many some doe) they receiue more disgrace therby, then reputation or thankes for al the rest, though they
succeed neuer so wel: Therfore it is wisdome for any man (espe∣cially for such as be nouices in affaires of state) to take in hand but few matters and to dispatch them wel; like to a man that hath but a weake stomache, who is to take heede,A young Statist like to a man of a vveake sto∣mache. that he nei∣ther ouerlay it with the quantity, nor yet pester it with diuer∣sity of meates, for that one wil hinder the disgestion of an∣other. 26. And this I wish to be considered especially of such, as are the fauorits of princes,An aduertis∣ment to the fa∣uorits of princes. who many times desiring to haue al in their owne handes, doe not stick to charge them selues with much more then they can attend to dispatch in due manner and season, to the exceeding great detriment, as wel of parti∣culer men, as of the state in general: wherby they expose not only them selues but also their princes to such hatred of the no∣bility and people, that there follow therof many times commo∣tions and rebellions,The dangers that the fauorits of princes in∣curre by hatred of the people. in so much that their princes are either forced to abandon them to their enemies, or els to perish with them; as to omit forraine examples, wee haue seene by experi∣ence in England in the time of King Edward the second and King Richard the second, against whom the nobillity and commons did take armes for the hatred they bore to their fauorits, Piers Ga∣ueston, the two Spensers, Robert dela vere Earle of Oxford, & others their adherents, vpon whose persons they discharged their fury,Polidorus virgil. in Hist. Angl. exercising vpon them al kind of cruelty, except vpon the earle of Oxford, who saued his life by flight into Holland, and ended his daies in banishment; and herto may also partly be ascribed the the vnfortunate ends of both those Kinges, who were after∣wards deposed and cruely murdered. 27. Eyghtly; nothing is more necessary in handling matters of state then secrecy,Secrecy in mat∣ters of state most necessary. I meane matters intended or consulted before they come to execution, for they are like to a myne, which hauing any vent, is wholy frustrat, and of no effect; therefore Peter King of Aragon being demanded from Pope Martin the fourth, what he meant to doe with the great fleet, wherwith he afterwards recouered Sicily from the french men, answered that if he thought his shirt did know it he would burne it. 28.ca. 30. nu. 17. But because I am to speake of this point of secrecy here∣after,
I wil giue here only one general rule, to be held and pra∣ctized of younge Statists,A general rule to be held con∣cerning secrecy. which is not to communicat any im∣portant matter of state to any man whatsoeuer, except he be to be employed, or his counsel to be vsed therin; and whosoeuer fayleth in this point, is not fit to handle any matter of impor∣tance, nor shal euer haue credit with princes, who esteeme no∣thing more in their seruants then secrecy;Princes esteeme nothing more in their seruants then secrecy. In so much that a prince in these our dayes (whome for some respects I forbeare to name) caused a faithful seruant of his (whome he also loued dearly) to be killed, for feare hee should reueale a secret which by chance he came to knowe;Dangerous to be partaker of princes secrets. Plutark in his treatise of tal∣king to much. wherby we may see how dan∣gerous a thinge it is, to be partakers of the secrets of princes; and therfore Philippides the commendian being willed by Kinge Lisimachus to aske some fauor of him, beseeched him to doe him what fauor it might please him, so that he imparted vnto him none of his secrets; And thus much for this point. Vnlavvful em∣ployment to be auoyded.29. Ninthly, a young Statist is to haue special care to auoid al kind of vnlawful employments; as to be instrument of any wickednes for his princes seruice; for besids the offence to God, (who wil assuredly punnish the same sooner or later) he may wel thinke that his prince also wil neuer trust him after, how soeuer he be satisfied with the seruice for the present; for prin∣ces many tymes are contented to take the benefit of a seruice done by euil meanes, and yet euer after hold suspected, and hate the malicious nature and disposition of him that did it, whome they vse no otherwise then poyson only to serue their turne though they detest the malignity of it:Plutark in his apotheg. of King and Captaines. Princes loue the treason, and hate the tray∣tour. and therfore Augustus Cae∣sar was wont to say, I loue the treason, but I hate the traytour; and al wise princes hold it for a rule, that where there is no bridle of conscience and feare of God, there is no fidelity towards man to be expected. 30. We reade that Constantius Caesar, father to the emperour Constantine the great, hauing commanded that al such Christians as would not adore his Gods, should depart from his seruice, ba∣nished neuertheles al those who denyed their faith, and retayned the others in his seruice and fauor,He that is false to God, vvil not be true to man. wherof he gaue this reason, that those which had so litle conscience to be false to their God could not be true to him. And Henry the 5. King of England, pre∣sently
after his fathers death, banished from the court,Polid. virgil. i Henr. 5. al such as had bin councellous, instruments, or companions of his riots before, perswading him selfe that they were not to be trusted a∣bout his person; and so it commonly falleth out when princes are wise, and enter into the due consideration of them selues, and their consciences. 31. But such other princes as giue them selues ouer to vice & sinne, and make no conscience of any thinge,Princes somty∣mes disauovv their cōmisions after the fact. doe not only com∣monly disauow their owne commissions (after that some wicked act is committed by their order) but also vse to pick quarrells or to take very smal occasions to make away the instruments of their owne wickednes, either to rid them selues of the suspicion, and infamy therof, or for the iealousy they haue of the maligne natures of their instruments, or for feare they may discouer their practises if they liue, or some tymes for other respects; God so disposing (by his iust iudgments) to make them the execu∣tours of his iustice,Gods iustice v∣pon euil instru∣ments. vpon those who preferred their seruice be∣fore his. 32.Iustin. li. 11. So did Alexander the great at his fathers obsequies com∣mand publike iustice to be done vpon those whome he had him selfe secretly employed to kil him. So did Tiberius emperour di∣sauow his commission giuen to a soldier to kil Agrippa,Tacit. li. 1. Annal. telling him that he should answere the matter before the senate; as he did also put to death Seianus his great fauorit, and instrument of much mischeefe. And in like sort dealt Caesar Borgia with a fauo∣rite of his; And Henry the 8.Sander. li. 8. de schism. Angl. Ioan. Stovv in Henr. 8. et ali King of England with some councel∣lours and seruants of his; and so also haue some others in these our dayes bin by sundry deuises made away in diuers courts and countryes, when they had serued the appetits of some great per∣sonages, whome for iust respects I forbeare to name: which may serue for an aduertisment and warning to al men, to take heede how they suffer them selues to be employed by any man in matters vnlawful and offensiue to God; Et faelix quem faciunt,Happy is hee that taketh heede by other mens harmes. aliena pericula cautum; Happy is he vvho can take heede by other mens harmes. 33. The tenth aduise which I giue to a younge Statist, is, that if his prince doe him the honour to make him of his councel, he consider wel what is the duty of a councellour; to which pur∣pose
I wil set downe some rules, wherin neuertheles I meane not to frame an exact councellour as Cicero did an oratour, and Xenophon a prince, and Castiglione a courtier, neither yet doe I take vpon mee to aduise old councellours, whose experience must needes surpasse mine, but only to giue some aduertisments, to such as haue not any great experience or practise in matters of state; and for as much as it requireth some larger discourse, then were conuenient to prosecute in this chapter, it shal serue for the subiect of the next. OTHER GENERAL RVLES FOR A YOVNG Statist, aduanced by his princes fauor to be of his Councel; as vvhat he is to consider in him selfe; in his prince; and in the matters that are to be consulted. And first concerning the Councellour him selfe. CHAP. 30. The points that are to be conside∣red of a young councellour re∣duced to 3. heads.THE points that are in my fancy to be princi∣pally cōsidered of a young councellour, though they may be deuided into many members, yet may be reduced to three heads; The first con∣cerning him selfe; the second concerning his prince; and the third touching the matters that are to be consulted; Of al which I wil say some what, with the perspicuity,8. points to be considered in the councellour him selfe. A councellour ought to be truly vertuous and religious. God doth assist and illuminat good men in matters of coun∣cel. 3. 4. 5. 7. 8. &c. and breuity that I conueniently may. 2. As for that which toucheth him selfe; he is to regard cheefly eight points. The first is, that he procure by al meanes, not only to haue the reputation of vertue and religion, but also to be indeed truly vertuous and religious, for two causes: The first to obtaine therby the assistance of Gods grace, which how necessary it is for the illumination of mans vnderstandinge in al matters of councel, appeareth throughout this whole discourse, and especially in the 28. chapter, where I haue proued that true wisdome prudence and pollicy, are the special gifts of almighty God, and not otherwaies to be obtained but by the obseruation
of his commandements. 3. The other cause why it behoueth a councellour, to be truly religious and vertuous, is, for that such is the force of ver∣tue, that it giueth credit to the possessors therof, and maketh them more easely beleeued and their councel better accepted;Vertue giueth reputation to the possessours of it. and therfore we see that al men of discretion and iudgment doe demand councel rather of those who are reputed wise and ver∣tuous, then of wicked men who haue only reputation of wis∣dome; for as S. Ambrose saith.Ambro. de offi. li. 2. c. 10. VVhere vertue and vvisdome concurre al good councel is to be expected. VVhere wisdome and vertue are con∣ioyned. Magna erit consiliorum salubritas; There is al good and holsome councel to be had, and al men (sath he) are willing to heare the wise and vertuous man, as wel for the admiration of his wisdome, as for the loue of his vertue; In which respect he also saith, that men addresse them selues commonly for councel to those who are more vertuous then them selues; For no man (saith hee) hath reason to think him,Ambr. Ibid. who is inferiour to him selfe in manners. to be his superiour in wisdome and councel. 4. Furthermore such is the dignity and authority of vertue,The dignity of vertu is such that euil men beare respect therto. that euil men beare a reuerend respect therto, and stand, as it were, in awe of good men; wherof we haue an example in Herod, who although he held S. Ihon Baptist in prison, and would not follow his councel in the matter of his diuorce; yet for the re∣uerence he bore to his vertue, he consulted many other things with him, and followed his aduise therin; and as the scripture also saith metuebat eum, he feared him;Marc. c. 6. and no dout but wise and ver∣tuous princes, much more esteeme and respect the councel of wise men that are vertuous, then of others of equal wit and iud∣gement, that are vicious and wicked,Pro. c. 12. The councel of euil men com∣monly fraudu∣lent. A councellour ought to haue great regard to the gouernment of his family & priuat affayres. knowing that as Salomon saith. Consilia impiorum fraudulenta; The councells of the vvicked are fraudulent, & that he who hath no care of his conscience & duty towards God, wil haue lesse care of his duty towards men. 5. The second point is that he also giue satisfaction to the world of his wisdome, by the good and wise gouernment of his family; For no wise prince can thinke him a fit man to councel him, or to gouerne vnder him, that can not gouerne him selfe and his owne family, and therfore Basilius the emperour aduised his sonne to choose those for his councellours, who had giuen proofe and experience of their wisdome in the good conduct
and direction of their owne priuat affaires; Wherupon also S. Ambrose saith.Ambro. li 2. de offic. c. 112. No man fit to councel an o∣ther that cannot coūcel him selfe. An idoneum putabo, qui mihi det consilium, qui non dat sibi? Can I thinke him fit to councel me, who can not councel him selfe? For he that is a foole in his owne busines can neuer be wise in the busines of other men. And therfore S. Paule declaring the duty of a bihop, requireth that he be such a one, as gouerneth wel his owne family; For Si quis, saith he, domui suae praesse nes∣cit,Timo. 3. quomodo eclesia Dei diligentiam habebit? If a man can not go∣uerne his owne house, how shal he gouuerne the church of God? A councellour ought to auoid al flattery. Terentius in Andr.6. The third point is, that in al his speaches and conference with his prince, he vse al sincerity, truth & plainnesse, with out flattery; For although the common prouerb say; Obsequium ami∣cos, veritas odium parit, Flattery gaineth freends, and trueth hatred; Yet as there is nothing more pernicious to princes then flattery, so by consequent there is nothing more vnfit to be vsed of coun∣cellours, whose office is, and special care should be, to vndece∣aue their prince in al thinges, wherin they are any way decei∣ued, and to labour therin so much the more, by how much lesse other men doe it, seeing one of the greatest infelicities of prin∣ces is,Princes that haue al; vvant one to tel them truth. Seneca de bene∣ficijs li. 6. ca. 30. that al or most men flatter and soothe them in al thinges, and few or none deale sincerly or plainly with them. In which respect Seneca saith; Quid omnia possidentibus deest? Ille qui verum dicat; VVhat vvants he vvho hath al? Mary one to tel him truth; Which therfore the faithful councellour should doe, for otherwise the prince should liue in continual errour & ignorance of his owne estate,Flattery the ruine of princes state. Quint. Curtius li. . and especially of his imperfections, yea and in great peril of ruine; for as Curtius saith; Regum opes &c. The stats of princes are oft∣ner ouerthrovvne by flattery then by force. 7. Neuertheles if the councellour haue occasion to admo∣nish his prince, of any errour or fault of his, he ought to doe it with great discretion,Hovv a coun∣cellour ought to admonish his prince of his er∣rour. Plutark in his treatise of fla∣ery. and moderation, vsing (as Parisatis mo∣ther to Cirus was wont to saye) wordes of silke, and launcing the soe like a good surgeon with such dexterity that he may cure it, and not exasperat his prince and make him lesse capable of his good councel; Those that offend in this kinde are com∣monly such as presume ouer much either of their owne wits, and power, or of their princes weaknes, or of his ouer great
fauor and familiarity, or of the neede that he hath of them,VVho they are that commonly ouershoote them∣selues in admo∣nishing or con∣tradicting their princes Arran li. 8. de re∣bus Allexand. Vnseasonable li∣berty of speach, odious to princes or els perhaps are of nature seuere, insolent, or passionat, for such sometimes doe forget them selues, yea & take a pride in contra∣dicting or admonishing their princes with lesse duty and respect then were conuenient. 8. Such a one was Calisthenes, of whome Arrianus writeth that he made him selfe odious to Alexander the great; Tum ob intempestiuam liberatem, tum ob superbam stultitiam; Both for his vnsea∣sonable liberty of speach, and also for his proud folly. Such a one also was a Philosopher that liued in the court of Dionysius the elder, tirant of Sicily;Plutarc. for wheras the tirant being delighted with his owne poems was wont to impart them publikly to certayne Philosophers which liued in his court, to haue their opinions,A pleasant ex∣ample of a rude philosopher. there was one amongst the rest who could not flatter nor indure the vanity of the tirants humour, but tould him plainely that his verses were nothing worth, and that it was a shame to heare them; wherwith the tirant was so offended, that he comman∣ded his gard to take him presently & to carry him to the mynes to worke there amongst condemned persons: afterwards, the same Philosopher being released, and retourned to the court at the sute of his freends, it chanced, that the tirant caused a cer∣taine poeme of his owne to be read in the presence of him and of al the other Philosophers, commanding them to speake their opinions therof; al the rest extolled the worke to the skies, some praising the inuention, and others the vaine and grace of the verse, euery one striuing who should commend them most, vntil it came to the turne of this Philosopher, who in stead of giuinge his censure, called suddainly to the guardes of the tirant, saying, come maisters carry me away to the mynes, for I can not endure this extreame folly; and the tirant being, as it chanced, in a good humour tooke it not ill, but was content to turne it to a iest and laughed wel at it. 9. But this Philosopher seeking to auoid Silla, fel into Charib∣dis; for fleeing base flattery he fel into an other extremity,The discreet mo∣desty of Haephe∣stion councellour to Allexander. Q. Cutius de reb. gestis Alexand. to wit, impudent insolency, which is no lesse vnfit and absurd for councellours; who are to imitate the discreet and prudent mo∣desty of Haephestion councellour to Alexander the great; For al∣though he alwaies admonished Alexander discreetly & freely as
occasion serued, yet he euer did it in such sort, that it feemed ra∣ther to be Alexanders wil and pleasure he should so doe, then that he challenged any such right to him selfe. The like stile ought a councellour to vse in contradicting or admonishing his Prince, obseruing exactly his disposition and humour, for that no man is alwaies disposed alike to receiue contradiction or to heare of his faults, especially in the presence of others; and ther∣fore fit time and place is alwaies to be chosen for that purpose, and some plausible preamble to be vsed of the princes prayses for some of his good partes, which in such case is no flattery, but a spurre to vertue, and may serue for a preparatiue to the pill of admonition which he meaneth to geue him; so that he geue it in so good tearmes and with such dutiful respect,Al speach pro∣ceeding of pas∣sion insolency or contempt, odious to princes. Prou. ca. 27. A vvound at a freends hand, better then the kisse of an enemy Hovv a councel∣lour ought to speake to his prince, and of his prince. Counsellours by conniuency are partakers of their princes faults. that the Prince may perceiue it proceedeth not of passion, or of a spirit of contradiction, or of audacious insolency, or of contempt (al which are to princes most odious) but of intire loue & affection to him, for so wil he (if he be wise) take the admonition in good part, & say with Salomon, that a vvound at a freends hand is bet∣ter then the kisse of an enemie. 10. To conclude, a Councellour may hould this rule, to speake alwaies in this manner freely to the prince him selfe, though it be of his errours; but neuer to others of him, other∣waies then in his honour and commendation, and though the prince be neuer a whit the better for the admonition, yet it may suffice his councellour to haue done his dutie, and not to be par∣taker of his princes faultes, as otherwise he should be, if he should not in al dutiful manner aduise and admonish him, as oc∣casion should require: and therfore though he should feare to incurre his displeasure for his plainesse, yet he ought to discharge his conscience,Plu in The∣misto. and to say as Themistocles said to Euribiades (who tooke vp a staffe to strike him for his free speeche) strike me so that you heare me after. Finally, a councellour should not ex∣pect that his prince should alwaies follow his aduise nor afflict him selfe much if he doe not: For though princes geue to their coūcelloures great liberty to say what they wil, yet they reserue a greater to them selues, that is to say, to doe what they list; and thus much for the third part. 11. The 4. poynt that a councellour is to consider in him
selfe, is,A ouncellour ought to be con∣stant in his opi∣nion. Inconstancy an euident signe of folly. Seneca in pro∣uerbijs. Ibid. Arist. 6. Ethic. that it behoueth him to be graue and constant in his opinions; For leuity and inconstancy is a most euident signe of folly. And to this end it shal be necessary for him maturely to deliberate and fully to consider the matter propounded, before he giue his opinion; for as Seneca saith: Sunt duo contraria consilio, festinatio & ira; Two thinges are contrary to counsel, hast, and anger; and againe; Deliberandum est diu (saith he) quod statuendum est semel; The thinge that is once to be determined, is to be deliberated by leysure; and to the same purpose Aristotle saith, that a wise man ought to councel slowly and to execute speedily.VVhy very young men are not fit to giue councel. VVhy ancient men resolue slovvly and maturely. 12. Therfore he excludeth very young men from counsel in matters of state, for that (saith he) their natural hear maketh them ouer hastie and headlonge in giuing their opinions, besides that by reason of their want of experience, there doth not oc∣cure vnto them many reasons, or difficulties to be considered, in which respect they resolue easely and speedily, and with lesse iudgement; wheras ancient men both by reason of their colder humour, and also of their greater experience (which ministreth vnto them more matter of discourse, and more doubts to be resolued) determine slowly and with farre more iudgment; so that speedy resolutiōs, are arguments of weaknes of wit or want of iudgement, and therfore to be fled of councellours, as more proper to women, whose counsel men commonly say, is neuer to be taken but vpon a sudden, wherof I wil declare the reason hereafter.nu. 24. 13. The 5.Obstinacy in opinion vnfit for councellours. point is to auoide the other extremity opposit to leuity, to wit obstinacy and wilfullnes, which is no lesse vnfit for a wise councellour then the other; For obstinacy is euer ac∣companied with contempt of other mens opinions and con∣tention; and is therfore an enemy to resolution, which can ne∣uer be taken where obstinat and contentious men meete in a councel.From vvhence obstinacy in opi∣nion proceedeth. Chap. 1 nu. 3. 4. & 5. &c. Folly for a vvise man not to change hi opi∣nion vvhen there is cause. This defect proceedeth commonly either of pride and presumptiō of a mans owne wit (wherof I haue spoken sufficiē∣tly in the begining of this discourse) or of a false conceite that many men haue, that it is a shame for a wise man to change his o∣pinion, which is farre otherwise: for although a wise man ought not to doe it lightly, and with out great reason, yet when there is sufficyent cause, it were great shame and folly not to doe it
and therfore Seneca the stoick (who according to the opinion of those of his sect,Seneca li. 4. de benefi. ca. 34. A necessary ex∣ception to be vn∣derstood in the opinion of a vvise man. Idem. Ibid. held that a wise man neuer changeth his opinions) expoundeth it in such sort that he includeth in the opinion of a wise man a necessary exception, to wit, if nothing hap that may alter the case, and therfore he also saith that; It is the property of fooles to ssure them selues ouer much of the euent of their councelles and determinations; and that a wise man knoweth what sway errour beareth in the affaires of men, how vncertaine al humane things are, and how many accidents hinder good and wise designments; Wherupon he con∣cludeth; that it is no shame for wise men to alter their opinions when oc∣casion requireth.Plat de Rep li. 10 A vvise man cō∣pared to a good gamster, by Plato. And Plato compareth a wise man to a good gam∣ster, who doth accomodate his play to the chances of the dice; and so saith he should a wise man accomodate his counsels and course of life to the occasions, which changing and varying with the time, doe often require new deliberation. 14. Neuertheles it is herein to be cōsidered, that this change with the occasions,In vvhat case a vvise man may change his opi∣nion. is conuenient only when the occasions change the fundamental and cheefe reason of the first resolu∣tion; For wheras in al matters of councel many reasons may concurre to one end, wherof some may be more important then other, and some one perhaps the ground and foundation of the rest, it falleth out otherwhiles that change of times and variety of occasions,VVhiles the cheife and foun∣damental rea∣sons of the de∣sygnment stand good, the councel is not to be chan∣ged. doe alter some considerations, and circumstances, and not the grounds and fundamental reasons of the matter; In which case the resolution is not to be changed, for otherwaies men should be like weather-cokces, which change with euery wind, seeing time produceth alwaies some new difficulties, and changeth some part of the reasons in al matters that require any long time for the execution; Wherupon may follow some alte∣ration of circumstances in the designment, though the resolu∣tion may stand good for the principal. 15. Wherfore it were great temerity and leuity in any man, to condemne others mens counsells,A counsel not so be condemned because some of the motiues haue fayled. Plat. in Timolon & in Phocion. because some of the moti∣ues that induced them therto haue failed, or because the suc∣cesse hath not in the begining answered their expectations, as may appeare by the example of the wise Phocion of Athens, who hauing diswaded the Athenians from a certaine enterprise which succeeded wel, being reproched therwith by some of his aduer∣saries,
said, that he was right glad of the good successe; and yet nothinge repented him of his opinion; and this he said partly because he foresaw a bad sequele of their good begininge (as after it fel out) and partly because a wise man dischargeth his part and duty,A good begin∣ning hath many tymes a bad se∣quel. if his counsel be wel grounded vpon good and soūd reasons, though the successe be not so good as he expected, seeing the euent of al mens counsels is only in the hands of God, and cannot be assuredly foreseene, and much lesse warrantted by the wisdome of any man,Chap. 11. 12. & 13. as I haue sufficiently declared other where. 16. To conclude this point, a wise man ought alwaies so to ground his opinions and counsels vpon reason, conscience,Counsells groun∣ded vpon cons∣cience and iustice neuer to be re∣pented. Plut. in Timo∣leon. and iustice, that what soeuer succedeth he shal haue no iust cause to repent or retract the same; and therfore Aristides hauinge said to Dionysius the tirant (who demanded one of his daughters in mariage) that he had rather see her burned then maried to a tirant, would neuer retract or recal his wordes, though it did cost him the life of his sonne; For when the tirant had slaine his sonne, and asked him whether he was stil of the same mind con∣cerning the mariage of his daughter, he answered that although he was sory for that which had hapned to his sonne, yet he re∣pented not that which he had said; which constancy of Aristides Plutark greatly commendeth, as proceeding (saith he) of a notable and complete vertue; And thus much for the 5. point. 17. The 6. point necessary in a councellour is secrecy wherof I haue said somewhat before,Secrecy most re∣quisit in a coun∣selour. Plut. in Alexan∣dro. and here adde that councellers must vnderstand that their mouthes are sealed vp by their prin∣ces, as Haephesions mouth was by Alexander the great, who ha∣uing shewed him a secret letter said nothing to him, but tooke of his sealing ring and put it to his lips; This I say a young coun∣selour must vnderstand to passe betwixt his Prince and him,Secrecy the best and surest bound of matters of state. Valer. li. 2. ca. 2. The persians ho∣nored silence for a God. Aminian. Mar∣cellin. li. 21. when his Prince doth him the honour to make him of his coun∣sel, or to treat with him of matters of state, wherof secrecy is as Valerius saith; Optimum & tutissimum vinculum; The best and surest bond. And therfore it was so much esteemed amongst the Persi∣ans, that they honoured Silence for a God; and such was the care and respect that the Romans had therto that when King Eumenes came into the senat to demand assistance against King Perseus it
was neuer vnderstood,Liuius li. 42. The admirable secrecy of the Romane Senat. as Liuy witnesseth either what he said, or what any answered, vntil the warre which the Romans made at his request was ended; such being the secrecy of the Roman Se∣natours (though very many in number) that as Valerius saith, it seemed that,Valer. li. 2. c. 2. Not so much as one man heard that which was committed to the eares of so many. 18. Neuerthelesse great discretion is to be vsed herein; for a man may as wel be ouer secret in some cases,Some men are ouer seacret and some to open. as to open. I haue noted sometimes that some great princes and councellours for feare of discouering their designments, haue either forborne to take sufficient information, & instruction, of such as could best informe them,The danger of takinge infor∣mation by obs∣cure questions. and might haue bene trusted (wherby they haue gone blindly to worke) or els they haue sought to informe them selues in cloudes, by such darke & obscure questions, that they haue bene falsly & ill informed; for the parties with whome they conferred, making a false coniecture of their drift, and answer∣ring them according to their owne sense (far otherwaies then- they would haue done, if they had knowne their meaning) haue abused them against their wils. Some intending to be seacret, discouer their secrets.19. Againe, some there are, who intending to be very secret, play as a man may say, willy-beguile them selues. I knew a councellour, who being commanded by his prince to giue him his opinion in a matter of exceeding great importance and se∣crecy, thought to informe him selfe of some circumstances so cunningly, that his meaning should not be so much as guessed at: but the party with whome he treated being of an excellent iudgment, presently vnderstood it, and though he answered him to his great satisfaction, yet not thinking him selfe any way bound to secrecy for that the councellour neither had taken his oath, nor his worde, nor had shewed any confidence in him for that matter) he wrote it to a great personage, with whome he had correspōdence, by which meanes it was with in a month after so publike that it came into the gazetta of Rome, and from thence was published throughout Christendome, as the coun∣cellour him selfe hath since tould me; so that in seeking infor∣mation by riddels, and obscure questions, two inconueniences may be feared, the one to receiue a false information, and the other to discouer the designment against a mans wil.
20. Therfore to preuent these inconueniences,Hovv informa∣tions are to be taken in impor∣tant matters. my opinion is, that when information must needes be taken (as in some ca∣ses it is absolutly necessary, especially for enterprises to be made in forreine cuntries, vnknowne to him who would lay the plotte) it shal be conuenient, if a sufficient enformer may be found, who is knowne to be of a good & sincere conscience, to deale plainely with him, and to shew confidence in him, ta∣king neuertheles his oathe of secrecy to bind him the more, and to vse other meanes of curtesy and benefits to oblige him, and to doe this with the liking and leaue of the prince, for the coun∣cellours better discharge; But when such a confident & sincere informer can nor be had, my opinion is, that although it shal be good to vse al possible meanes & diligēce to learne what may be learned with out discouery of the intention, yet neuertheles no great foundation is to be made of an information taken by such meanes, except it be of a matter of fact, wherin no man that knoweth the truth, can falsly informe,An informa∣tion little to be esteemed vvhen the informer doth not fully vnderstand the drift of the pro∣pounder. A councellor ought to be free from passion & perticular affe∣ction. except he wil wilfully lye, for of matters of discourse, depending vpon the iudgement of the informer be he neuer so wise, smal reckoning is to be made, when he doth not fully vnderstand the drift and inten∣tion of the propounder. Thus much concerninge the sixt point. 21. The 7. point which a councellour should consider in him selfe is, that in the deliberation of al matters whatsoeuer, he be cleare and free from al passion, and particular affection, that is to say from al respects, either of loue, hatred, or enuy to any; and this (I say) for that wise princes are wont exactly to obserue the humours and dispositions of their councellors, and to make smal account of the aduise or persons of such, as they find to be subiect to any of the foresaid imperfections; and with great rea∣son; For as Salust saith: Non facile animus &c. The mind doth not ea∣sely see the truth, where passion and affection beareth svvaye;Salust. in Cato∣lin. Passion and af∣fection blind the iudgment. Besides that, passion not only blindeth the vnderstanding of man, but also doth soe corrupt his wil, that although he see the truth, yet he wil not embrace it; which Iustin obserued very wel in King Antiochus and his councellours; For when Hanibal had coun∣celled him to inuade Italy, his councel (saith Iustin) was reiected,Iustin. hist. li. 3. partly because the cheefe councellours, & fauorits of Antiochus,
feared that if it were admitted, Hanibal might grow in more cre∣dit and fauor with Antiochus then they, and partly because An∣tiochus him selfe doubted left his owne glory might be in some part obscured if he should be thought to doe any thinge by Ha∣nibals aduise;Envy maketh a man somtymes enemy of his ovvne good. Plutark. in his A∣pophtheg. of K. and Princes. so pestilent is the passion of enuy and emulation, that it maketh a man sometimes enemy of his owne good, no lesse then of the publike. 22. Therfore Aristides of Athens being sent embassadour with Themistocles who was his enemy, willed him at their depar∣ture out of the towne, that they might leaue al their emulations and quarrels behinde them at the gate,Coūcelors should leaue their quar∣rels at the coun∣cel chamber dore least their priuate passi∣ons might hinder the publike good of the commonwelth; and so in like manner al councellors, that haue any particular quar∣rels, or disgusts amongst them selues, should leaue them at the councel-chamber dore, when they enter therin. And the like may also be said of the respects of priuate freendship or of other mens greatnes and fauor with the prince;Respects of other mens greatnes pernicious in Councels. which respects are many times no lesse hurtful in councels then enuy or hatred, for that they make men conceale their owne iudgements, because they wil not disgust some freend or some great man, that hol∣deth a contrary opinion; in so much that it falleth out many times, that some fauorite of the prince, hauing once vttered his conceit, though none of the wisest, carieth after him al the rest with out contradiction, and so the best opinions are either con∣cealed, or not so wel debated, as were conuenient. 23. For the preuention and remedy of this inconuenience, the wise Cosmo de Medices Duke of Florence,A prudent pra∣ctise of the vvise Cosmo de Medi∣ces & of Philip the 2. King of Spayne. and Philip the 2. last King of Spaine vsed to propound their most important matters, to their councellours, first by writting, commanding them to set downe their opinions also in writing, with their reasons, and not to cōmunicate the same with any other, & afterwardes if they thought it needful, they assembled them in their pre∣sence, to heare them debate and defend their owne opinions, which proceeding was very prudent in my fancy, for so euery councellour gaue his opinion freely with out passion or respect to any other, and for his owne honour and reputation defended it so farre as reason would beare him, wherby matters were throughly debated and wel discussed.
24. To conclude this point, councellours must say of al particuler respects as Popilius the Roman; being sent embassadour to King Anttochus his old freend, said vnto him of their former amitie; Facessat priuata amicitia &c.Iustin. li. 34. Priuat freend∣ship not to be respected vvhen publike matters are handled. VVhat Coun∣sellors ought al∣vvayes to haue before their eyes. The dangers that counellors incurre by giuīg euil councel to their princes. Euil councellors hateful some∣times to their princes. Polid. Virg & Io. Sto. in Henr. 5. Fare wel priuat freendship when publike matters are in hand; this I say should councellours, when they come to the councel table, both say and practize, laying a side al priuat and particular respects either to one ano∣ther, or to them selues, as hauing nothing els before their eyes in al their deliberations, but the publike good, to wit, the ser∣uice of God, their prince, and their country. 25. The 8. and last point which I would wish a young coun∣cellour to consider concerning him selfe, is the danger of punis∣hment both humane and deuine, which he shal incurre, if he corrupt or seduce his prince by euil councel, for that his prince him selfe if euer he haue the grace to see his owne errour, can not but hate and detest the author and councellour therof; As did King Henry the 5. who repenting the riotous course of his youth, banished from the court al those which had misled and seduced him, as I haue notedChap. 29 nu 28. Euil councel∣lours hateful to the people and punished by them. Ibid. nu. 24. Stovv in henry. 8. before. And though he escape the disgrace or punishment of his prince, yet he may iustly feare the hatred of the people and his owne destruction to enswe therof; as I haue also signified before vpon an other occasion, in Piers Gauerston, the Spensers, & other councellours of Edward the 2. and Richard the 2. to whome I may ad Emson and Dudley, put to de∣ath by King Henry the 8. in the begining of his raigne, to satisfie the importunity of the people, who demanded iustice against them, for the euil councel they had giuen to King Henry the 7. in matters of exactions, impositions, and pecuniary penalties. 26.Plutarc. in his treatise that philo¦sophers should conuerse vvith princes. The vvicked coūcellors of diuers tyrants notably punished A vviked coūcellour, like to one that poys∣neth a publike fountaine. And Plutarke also noteth that the councellours and fa∣uorits of Apollodorus, Phalaris, Dionysius, Nero, and other tirants, were racked, stead, burnt, and otherwise most cruelly tormented by the people, and iustly (saith he) for that he vvhich corrupteth, or seduceth a prince, deserueth no lesse to be abhorred of al men, then one that should poison a publike fountaine vvherof al men should drinke; Seeing that vpon the princes example & authority, dependeth the good or euil estate of al his subiects; and therfore he which misleadeth the prince, doth notable iniury to the commonwelth, and oweth the penalty therof, as wel to the people as to the prince himselfe.
In which respect Plutarke also noteth of Tigellinus, a wicked coū∣cellour and corrupter of Nero,Plut. in Otho. The punishment of a wicked coū∣sellor is a debt due to the com∣monvvelth. that the people after Nero his death made continual instance for his punishment, as for a pu∣blike debt due to the commonwelth, which at lenght they ob∣tained of Otho successor to Galba. 27. But though neither the prince nor the people doe exact this debt of a wicked councellour, yet he shal be sure to pay it eternally to almighty God,The danger of eternal damna∣tion to a wicked counellour. Rom. ca. 1. if he repent not and satisfie his iustice otherwise. For if not only those which doe euil are worthy death (as the Apostle saith) but also those: Qui consentiunt facientibus, which con∣sent therto; much more guilty are the councellours of euil, who are either the principal authors therof, if they inuent it, or abet∣ters and associats in the highest degree, if they approue and ra∣tify it; And therfore how hateful such are to almighty God, it appeareth by the examples of Achitophel and Amon, the one councellour to Absolon,2. Reg. ca. 17. Hester ca. 7. Amon and A∣chitophel punis∣hed by almighty God in this life for their vvicked councel. and the other to Assuerus, whose wicked councells God did not only frustrate and infatuate (as the scipture speaketh) but also punish most exemplarly in this life, making the one of them his instrument to execute iustice vpon him selfe, and turning the wicked councel of the other to his owne distru∣ction. As also the like may be obserued in Gods iust punishment vpon Cardinal VVolsey, & some other councellours of King Henry the 8.Sand. lib. 1. de schism. Angl. of whome I shal haue occasion to speake more at large in the second part of this treatise. And Philip de Comines seriously noteth,Phil. Com. cron. du Roy Louis ca. 28. Vvhat Comi∣neus noteth of a councellor of the duke of Burgūdy how a counceller of the Duke of Burgundy called mon∣sieur Contay hauing geuen a cruel counsel to the Duke (to put to death crtaine hostages of Liege) liued not long after, which some who were present and heard him, did in a manner pronosti∣cat, saying that they wold warrant him he would not liue a yeare to an end: whih, saith he, fel out to be true, for he died with in a while; Thus then it appeareth how true the latin prouerb is: Consilium malum consultori pessimum; Euil counsel is worst to the councel∣lour.Hesiodus. Euil councel vvorst o the councellour. This shal suffise for those points which a young councel∣lour ought to consider in him selfe.
VVHAT A COVNSELLOVR OVGHT TO CON∣sider in his prince; as namely his consicence, his commodity, and his reputation. CHAP. 31. A COVNCELLOVR is to consider in his prince principally three thinges. His conscience,A councellour is to consider in his prince, hs cons∣cience, commo∣dity and reputa∣tion. his commodity, and his reputation; of which 3. I place commodity in the midst, for that it is to be ballanced & waighed with both the other, seeing nothing can be truly commodious which is not agreeable to both, & no temporal commodity can recompence the losse of either of them. And first to speake of conscience; The word Conscience,VVhat the vvoord consci∣ence signifyeth. D. Tho. 2. d. 24. q. 2 at. 4. c. is diuersly vnderstood, and commonly taken for an act consisting in the application of our knowledge to our actions (for that Conscientia is Scientia cum alio, Knowledge with an other thing. In which sence, conscience may erre, when we erre in knowledge, or apply our true knowledge erroneously to our actions) therfore I wil not treate of conscience here in this sence, but only as it is theIdem 1. p. q. 79. ar. 3 in cor. The definition of Conscience. Remorse of cons∣cience. Origen li. 2. in ep ad Rom. c. 2. first natural habit in the soule of man, which neuer erreth, and so Conscience is the purest, and highest part of reason wherby we doe naturally discerne betwixt good and euil, reiecting the euil and approuing the good; Wherupon groweth remorse and repentance in our soules after an euil act, and contentment after a good: in which respect Origen saith that conscience is. Rector & paedagogus animae &c. The gouer∣nour and paedagogue of the soule, where by it is deuerted from euil, moued to good, admonished, reproued, and chastised; S. Basil,S. Basil apud D. Thom. 1. p. q. 79. ar 13. ca. Aug. li. 2. de li∣bero. arbit. c. 10. as S. Thomas no∣teth, called it naturale iudicatorium, the natural faculty of Iudgement; where of S. Augustin speaketh when he saith that there are in the soule of man, certaine infalible rules, true and incommutable lights of ver∣tue whereby euery one conceaueth and iudgeth truly of the ge∣neral principles of the office and duty of man S. Chrisostome spea¦king of conscience, saith,Chrisost. To. 2. concio. 4. de de Lazaro. that almighty God hath placed it in
the soule of man,Conscience pla∣ced in the soule of man as a Iudge of his actions. as a Iudge which is euer vigilant, and attentiue to his actions, incorruptible, in exorable, inflexible, and serching into his very cogitations and intentions, where vpon it follo∣weth that after any sinne or offence committed, a mans owne conscience iustly iudgeth and condemneth him, with out any other accuser or witnes then him selfe.D. Tho. quod li. 3. ar. 6. 1. Conscience is a natural lavv alvvayes agrea∣ble to the lavv f God Rom. 2. Lastly S. Thomas calleth it Lex naturalis; A natural law or the law of nature, by the light whereof the very painims know those things which are com∣manded by the law of God, as the Apostle testifieth, saying; The gentils who haue not the law (that is to say the written law of God) doe naturally performe those things which are of the law, and not hauing the law, are to them selues a law, and shew that they haue the worke of the law written in their harts, their ovvne consciences geuing testi∣mony vnto them, and their secret cogitations accusing or defending them in the daie of Iudgement; Thus saith the Apostle. Whereby it appea∣reth that those which liue according to the rule of reason,VVho doth ac∣cording to cons∣cience or against conscience. the law of nature, and the law of God (which are alwaies conforme one to the other) doe according to conscience; and on the other side, those which decline and swarue from any of them, doe against conscience. Nothing truly commodius that is against cons∣cience. Math. ca. 5.2. Now then for as much as our eternal felicity dependeth vpon the integrity and purity of conscience (in which respect our Sauiour saith: Beati mundo corde &c. Happy are the cleane in hart, for they shal see God) It followeth that nothing can be truly com∣modious which is contrary to conscience, for what soeuer hin∣dreth our greatest good and commodity, that is to say our salu∣ation, and draweth vs also to the greatest misery that can be, to wit, to eternal damnation, the same is not good and profitable but mischeeuous and pernicious, for (as I noted other where out of our Sauiours wordes) vvhat doth it profit a man to gaine the vvhole vvold if he loose his soule?Matth. 16. And therfore S. Augustine saith very wel, that he which counselleth a man contrary to his saluation hath pallium consulentis & venenum perimentis;Aug. in Psal. 119. The cloake of a Councel, lor, and the poison of a killer. Whereupon it followeth that the first and principal thinge that euery councellour ought to regard is,The principal thinge that a Councllour ought to regarde that his councel be so grounded vpon conscience, that God be not offended, nor his princes conscience wounded there with: which latter were of it selfe no smal infelicity though God,
should not otherwise punish the euil act; For as on the one side, There can be no greater happines in the life of man,No greater hap∣pines in this life then tranquility of conscience. Aug. de ciuit. dei li 21. Iuuenal. No greater mi∣sery then a tor∣mnted consci∣ence. The vvorme of conscience biteth at one tyme or o her. Chris in 16. Luc. concio. 4. VVhy the sting of conscience is frequent & not continual. Greg. in Iob. 21. Sinne shuts the eyes, and punish∣ment openeth them. Iob. 21. then the tranquil∣lity and quietnes of conscience (as S. Augustin saith) so on the other∣side there can be no greater misery or torment then. Nocte, die∣que suum gestare in pectore testem. To carry day and night the testimony of a mans vvickedne in his ovvne brest. 3. And although princes doe not alwaies at the first feele the prick of conscience, whiles the pleasure or commodity of wic∣ked ounsel is yet fresh, neuertheles afterwards they are stoung and vexed therwith at one time or other; such being the nature of the worme of conscienc, that though sometimes it seeme to sleepe, yet otherwhiles it gnaweth and byteth bittrly; God ha¦uing of his infinite wisdome and mrcy so ordained (as S. Chriso∣stome witnesseth) Lst if it were continual, it hould not be supportable, and if it vvere not frequent, it might quickly be forgotten or contemned: but howsoeuer it may seeme to sleepe in prosprity, it neuer fay∣leth to prick and sting in aduersity, giuing testimony to wicked men of Gods iust iudgment vpon thm; For as S. Gregory saith. Culpa claudit oulos, & pena aperit; Offence, or sinne shuts the eyes, and punishment openeth them. To which purpose also Iob saith of the wicked man; Cum reddiderit (Deus) tunc sciet, VVhen God shal punish him, according to his deserts, then he vvil knovv, that he hath sinned. The Children of Iacob being taken for spies and deteined in Egipt, fel presently into account of their sinne in selling their brother Ioseph, saying: Merito haec patimur &c. VVe suffer this vvorthely;Gen. 42. And Mauritius the emperour seeing his children killed before his face, & him selfe also designed for the slaughter, acknowledged Gods iustice saying; Iustus es domine &c. Thou art iust o Lord,Nicephor. li. 18. ca. 40. Guicc. li. 1. ca. 22. nu. 6. 7. 8. and thy iudge∣ment is right, and ful of equity. The like maye be noted in Alphonsus King of Naples of whome I haue spoken before, and infinit others whome I omit for breuities sake; And this al wicked councel∣lours ought wel to consider and feare; in respect of the hurt that may ensew thereof, as wel to them selues,Remorse of cons∣cience breedeth hatred of the euil councel and o the coūcellour. Guliel. Malsmesb. li. 2. c. 6. as to their prin∣ces, for that the worme of conscience breedeth not only re∣morse, and repentance of the euil act, but also hatred both of the counsel, and the councellour; As it did in King Adelstan the first monark of England after the entry of the Saxons, who being seduced by the bad councel, and and false suggestions of one
of his fauorits,Matth. vvestmo∣nast. an. 934. banished his brother Edvvin vniustly, comman∣ding him to be set to sea, with only one seruant, in a boat with∣out saile, wherein he perished; which when King Adelstan vn∣derstood, he fel into the account of his owne offence, and so much repented it, that he not only tooke vpon him 7. yeres pen∣nance, but also grew by little and little to detest and abhorre his fauorit, who had counselled him therto; in so much that in the end he cut of his head, taking occasion vpon certaine woords of his, who being his cup-bearer, & comming one daye to geue him drinke in a sollemne and publike feast, and chancing to stumble with one foote and to recouer him selfe with the other, said, So one brother helpes an other. Whereupon the King remēbring the losse of his brother, was so moued there with, that he caused him presently to be taken and executed. 4. Furthermore a counceller is to consider that councelling his prince against conscience, he endangereth not only his prin∣ces soule (as I haue signifyed before) but also his temporal state,Hovv a vvicked councellor endā∣gereth the state of his prince. exposing him and it to the iust wrath & punishment of almighty God, vpon whose wil depend the states of al princes, as I haue lar∣gely proued already. Besids that no man knoweth for how smal an offence in the sight of man,No man knovv∣eth for hovv smal an offence God vvil punish a prince in his person or state. Nume ca. 20. Deut. c. 1. 1. Reg. ca. 15. Example of Moy¦ses, Dauid, Saule, and Ezechias 2. Reg c 24. 4. Reg. ca. 20. 2. pa c. 32. Isa. c. 38. God may punish a prince in his person or state. Moyses for a litle distrust in the promise of God, dyed before he entred into the land of promise. King Saul was reiected of almighty God, and disposessed of his kingdome, for reseruing some part of the spoyle of Amalec at the request of the people, contrary to the commandement of the prophet. Dauid was punished with the losse and distruction of 70000 of his sub∣iects, for numbring them. And Ezechias for his vaine glory in shewing his treasure to the embassadours of the King of Babilon, was threatned by the prophet with the spoyle of his pallace, and captiuity of his posterity, which after was fulfilled. 5. But of al other acts against conscience; for the which God punisheth princes and their states,No vvicked coū¦cel more perni∣cious to state, then that which is giuen for the benefit of state, and vvhy. none are more pernicious to state, then such as are committed with intention and hope to benefit the state; for how litle soeuer some of them may seeme to be in their owne nature, yet they haue one circumstance which doth greatly agrauate them, and maketh them very hay∣nous in the sight of God, seeing that wicked pollicyes doe com∣monly
proceede of distrust or lack of beleefe in the prouidence of God; For no man who sincerely beleeueth that al states depēd vpon Gods wil and prouidence, can with any reason perswade him selfe, that any thing which is offensiue to God, may be good for state;God doth iustly turne macheuil∣lian pollicies to the ouerthrovv of the contriuers. Prouerb. 10. and therfore no meruaile if almighty God (who of his iustice punisheth sinners many tymes, by the same meanes wherby they offend him) doth often turne the wicked pollicies of Macheuillians to their owne ouerthrow, ordayning that (as Salomon saith) Quod timet impius veniat super eum. That which the vvicked man feareth may falle vpon him. 6.An example of Pharao. Exod. 1. So it fel out to Pharao who fearing least the children of Israel might multiply ouermuch to the danger of his state, oppressed them wrongfully, & cōmanded that their male children should be cast into the riuer, as soone as they were borne; Neuertheles the more they were oppressed, the more they encreased & mul∣tiplyed. And through the special prouidence of God, Moyses was saued from drowninge, & nowrished by Pharaos owne daughter, and by his ministry the children of Israel were deliuered, Egipt, spoyled, and Pharao himselfe with al his army drowned.Ibid. ca. 12. 14. So it also fel out to the Ievves, who fearing lest Christ,An example of the Ievves. Ioan. 11. if he should liue any tyme, would draw so many to beleeue in him, that the Romans might easely destroy their temple & nation (for want of people to defend the same) resolued to kil him, and so drew vpon them selues, and their temple, the destruction which they sought to preuent; God so disposing for punishment of their wickednes, that the Romans did afterwards vtterly destroy their temple and country, as I haue amply declared in the 19. chapter; and here∣upon S. Augustin notably saith;Aug. Tract. 4. in Ioan. That vvhiles for feare of loosing their temporal state, they contemned the eternal; they iustly lost both. 7.Iustin. li. 1. An example of King. Astiages. Also the like iustice and iudgement of almighty God may be noted in King Astiages, who fearing that his daughters issue might depriue him of his kingdome, thought to preuent it by the murder of her sonne Cyrus, commanding Harpagus to destroy him as soone as he was borne; but God so disposed that the child was saued contrary to the expectation of them both, and that afterwards he dispossessed Astiages of his kingdome, with the assistance of Harpagus, whom Astiages had made the instrument of his wickednes. So also it hapned to Amulius who thinking
to assure his owne state by the murder of his two nephewes,Idem. li. 4. 3. Plutarc. in Ro¦mulo. An example of K. Amulius. Romulus and Remus caused them to be laid forth in the woodes, when they were new borne, to the end they might be deuoured of wild beasts, or perish otherwaies, whom neuertheles it plea∣sed God to preserue, and by the meanes of Romulus to disposses Amulius of his kingdome. 8. But to speake of Christians. In the time of the emperour Valentinian the third,Paul. Diac. li. 15. Attila the Scithian and King of the Hunnes (who called him selfe Flagellum Dei the scourge of God) inuaded the Roman empire with an army of eleuen hundreth thousand men, and hauing already possest him selfe of al Pannonia (called Hungary euer since) passed through Germany into France, vsing al kind of cruelty vpon al sorts of Christian people, threatning vtter ruine as wel to Christian religion, as to the Roman em∣pire; whereupon the famous captaine Aetius being assisted with Theodoricus King of the Goths, and diuers other princes, presented him battaile in France not farre from Orleans, in which battaile there were slaine a hūdreth & four score thousand on both sides, and Attila ouerthrowen in such sort, that he had no meanes to saue his owne person, but by retiring him selfe into his campe, where he fortified him selfe, and neuerthelesse might easily haue bene either killed or taken, and Christiandome therby deliue∣red of a most potent and dreadful enemy,The famous cap∣tain Aetius pre∣ferring reason of State before conscience dest∣royed him selfe and endangered the Roman Em∣pyre. if Aetius wold haue donne his endeuour therto; who preferring reason of state, be∣fore true Christian zeale, and Gods seruice, spared him, fearing lest if he were vtterly ouerthrowen, the Gothes (who had already conqured al Spaine, and a greate part of France, wold be farre more dangerous to the Roman empire, being free from the feare of Attilla, who was cōmon enemy to both, for which res∣pect, he suffred him to escape away with the relikes of his army into Hungary; which by the iust iudgement of almighty God turned as wel to the destruction of Aetius, as to the greate danger of the empire; For Aetius being returned most tryumphant to Rome, fel shortly after into the disgrace of the emperour, who suspected, that he had spared Attilla to the end to make him selfe emperour by his assistance, where vpon he slew Aetius with his owne hand, and Attilla hauing with in a while repaired his army was more terrible and noysome to the Roman empire
then before, for he came into Italy putting al to fire and sword, he razed Aquileia to the ground, tooke Pauia, sacked and de∣stroied Milan, and marched towards Rome to beseege it, which he had donne, if he had not bene diuerted from it by Pope Leo the greate, who going him selfe in person to him, perswaded him to desist from the enterprise, and to retire him selfe into Hungary, which he did presently; And being demanded of some of his nobility, why he changed his resolution so suddainly, he answered that he durst not doe otherwaise,Blondus decad. 1. li. 2. Sabellic. Enncad. 8 li. 1. Baron. an. 452. for that two graue old men appareled like priests, stood by Pope Leo al the time of their conference, with swords in their hands, and threatned to kil him if he did not satisfy him. But to returne to Aetius; we see herein the bad successe of his pollicy, and how it turned to his destruction, when he preferred reason of state before conscience and the seruice of God. 9. Hereto I may adde some others of later time, of whome I haue also spoken before vpon other occasions, as Caesar BorgiaCaesar Borgia. (the mirrour of Machiauels prince) who determining to poison Cardinal Cornetti, poisoned his owne father and him selfe.Chap. 13. nu. 4. & 5. Guicciar. li. 6. hist. In like manner the Queene of Hungary thinking to mayntaine her selfe and her sonne in the vniust possession of that kingdome,The queene of Hungary. Surius in cōmen. an. 1541. against Ferdinand then king of Romans, and after emperour, craued aide of Solyman the great Turk, by whome both she and her sonne were depriued thereof. And lastly I may conclude with a most manifest example of Gods exemplar iustice in this kind, exten∣ded a few yeares past, vpon Henry the 3. king of France, who reie∣cting conscience in the breach of his oth,Henry the 3. K. of France reie∣cting conscience ouerthrevv his estate. ouerthrew both him selfe and his state, by the same meanes whereby he thought to preserue both; to wit by the slaughter of the Cardinal and Duke of Guise, after his reconciliation with them, confirmed on his part by solemne oathes, with many imprecations, and maledi∣ctions against him selfe (geuing him selfe to the deuil, body and soule) in case he ment, or should attempt any thing against them, receiuing also the blessed Sacrament publikely for their furder assurance;The death of the Duke of Guise, and of the Car∣dinal his bro∣ther. which promise and oathe he was bound in consci∣ence to performe, not withstanding any former act or desert of theirs; yet neuertheles he caused the Duke to be killed in his owne presence, and the Cardinal the next daye after, whereby he
thought he had so assured his estate, that he vanted with greate ioye and triumph, as wel to the queene his mother as to his fauorits, that he was then king (meaning that during the Dukes life, he had bene King only in name, and not in deede) whereas it fel out through Gods iust iudgement, that the Dukes death, was the meanes to depriue him both of his kingdome and life; For, not only al the principal tounes in France reuolted presently from him (for the horrour and hatred of the fact) but also he him selfe, with in 8. monthes after, hauing leuied 50. thousand men for the seege of Paris,Henry the 3. K. of France slayne in the midest of hi army. Clement vvas the watchword of them vvho killed the Duke, and the name of him vvho slevv the King. Iob. 5. was miserably slaine, in the midst of his army, by a poore simple friar called Clement: whose name I note, for that S. Clement was ordained by the King, to serue for the watchwoord to those, who slew the Duke; and not with out mistery, through Gods special prouidence, fignifying, as it were prophetically the name of him, whose hand should reuēge it. Whereby it may appeare how dangerous, and pernicious al counsels, or attempts against conscience, are to state, in respect of the offence of him on whose wil depend al states, and who, as Iob saith. Apprehendit sapientes in astutia eorum &c. Ouerreacheth the vvise men of the vvorld in their ovvne craft, and suttlety, and dissipateth the councels, and plots of vvicked men. Therfore it may truly be said of Machiauillian princes, and their wicked councellours, as the prophet said of the King and councellours of Egipt Stulti princi∣pes &c.Isay. ca. 16. The princes are fooles and their vvise councellers haue giuen foollish councel, our Lord hath cast amongst them the spirit of giddines, and hath made them stagger and erre in al their vvorkes, like a reeling and vommi∣ting dronken man. Thus much touching the respect which coun∣cellrs ought to haue to conscience, wherof I shal haue occasion also to say more in the last chapter. The reputation of the prince greatly to be re∣garded of a cū∣celour & vvhy. Thom 22. 9 73. ar. 2 & 3 Prouerb. ca. 22.10. As for reputation (which is also called Honour, estimation, fame, good name, or credit) no smale regarde is to be had therto, when there is any question of the princes commodity, seeing that of al external goods it is the principal, & most pretious, and (as S. Thomas affirmeth) most like to the goods of the minde, wher∣upon Salomon saith. Melius est bonum nomen quam diuitiae multae. Good name is better then great riches; Which is euident in matter of state, for that reputation conserueth the states of princes many times, no lesse or rather more then wealth and force. In which respect
Tiberius Caesar was wont to say, as Tacitus noteth;Tacit. li. 4. annal. That although the deliberations of al other men, doe commonly consist in the consideration of vtility and profit; yet the state of a prince is such, that he ought principally to respect fame and reputation; And the reason is,The danger of the losse of a princes reputa∣tion. for that the losse of reputation, is not only the signe and (as I may say) the pre∣amble of a princes fal, but also the occasion therof many times, because therwith decaieth & falleth commonly the affection of freends and the repect, feare, and obedience of subiects; wher∣upon followeth the subuersion of states. 11. Now then,VVherin the re∣putation of a prince consisteth. wheras the reputation of princes consisteth especially in 4. thinges, to wit, wisdome, valour, vertue, and power; al councel tending to commodity is to be waighed with the estimation therof, for nothing that may impaire the honour of the prince in any of these, can be accounted truly commodi∣ous for him;Philip. de Com. ca. 57. Therfore Philip de Comines aduiseth touching the princes wisdome, that if he be not very wise, and of good partes, great care be had that strangers be not admitted to his presence,The care to be had of the repu∣tation of vvis∣dome in the prince. especially to treat with him, lest the discouery of his imperfe∣ction in that behalfe, may blemish his reputation, and animate his enemies to contemne him; And the french historiographers affirme, that the opinion which men had of the wisdome of Charles the 5. King of France called the wise, auailed him more a∣gainst the English, then his force;Du Haillan in Charls le sage. in so much that the dispat∣ches which he made in his chamber, were more feared (say they) then his armies in the feild 12.The reputation of valour. The like also is to be said of the opinion of valour in a prince, which maketh him no lesse redoubtable to his enemies, then beloued of his freends and subiects; wheras the opinion of his effeminacy or basenes of mind maketh him contemptible to al men, and often causeth the deposition, and destruction of princes, as it did to Sardanapalus the great Assirian King;Iustin. li. 1. Paulus AEmilius in Chilper. Naucler. chron. 1400. Arist. li. 5. Polit. The reputation of vertue and re∣ligion. to Chilperic King of France, to VVenceslaus the emperour, and to many others. 13. And as for vertue (where in I include also religion) A∣ristotle teacheth that the only reputation, and opinion therof, is a notable stay, and prop to a princes state, in respect that al men commonly conceiue that a vertuous, and religious prince is in the fauour, and protection of almighty God; And therfore
Achior cheefe captayne of the Amonits councelled Holofernes when he made warre vpon the children of Israel, to informe him selfe whether they had committed any greate offenses towards their God, where by they might loose his fauour, assuring him that otherwaise it wold be in vaine to assayle them, for that their God wold defend them. And the like conceit it seemeth that Loelin prince of wales had of Henry the 3.Matheus Paris in Hen. 3. King of Englād, for when certaine bishops who were sent by the King to treate with him to reduce him to obedience, threatned him with the Kings greate power, and forces; he answered that he feared more his almes, then his armies, meaning that he douted lest in respect of his greate charity and piety, God would protect and assist him, and that otherwaise he wold little esteeme his force, & power. So much it importeth a prince to haue the reputation of vertue, and religion, which serueth for a bridle to his enemies both do∣mestical, and forrein, to withhold them from al attempts against him; Besids that it causeth that his faults, and errours are either not beleeued, or more easely excused, or the blame therof laied vpon his councellours. Macchi. in princ. Macchiauel ad∣uiseth his prince to seeke to haue the reputation of religion and vertue. The absurdity of Macchiauels doctrin impug∣ning it selfe. Terent. in Eu∣nuch. Cicero. de offi. Nothing that is dissembled can last long. Math. c. 8.14. And for these causes Macchiauel also councelleth his prince, to procure by al meanes to haue the reputation of a reli∣gious, iust, and vertuous prince, though he teach him withal to be a most wicked tyrant; wherin I can not omit by the way to note the absurdity of his doctrin, notably impugning & contra∣dicting it selfe, seeing he wil haue his prince to seeme a lambe, and be a woolfe, and to make shew of a Saint, and be indeede a diuil; which is no more possible then as the commical Poët saith. Cum ratione insanire, to be madde with reason; For al fayned things (saith Cicero) fade and fall away like flowers, and nothing that is dissembled can long last, which our Sauiour him selfe cō∣firmeth saying expresly of hipocricy; Attendite &c. Take heede of the leuen of the Pharises that is to say hipocrisy, for nothing is secret that shal not be reuealed nor any thinge hid that shal not be knowne. 15. And this is more euident in disembling and hipocritical tyrants,Tiranny cannot be hid. then in any other sort of men; for that so violent is the flame of tyranny, that it breaketh out through the weake and clouen walls of hipocrisy, and discouereth it selfe to the world; such being the state of publike persons, and especially of princes
(whose actions are subiect to the eyes and censures of al men) that their least faults cannot passe either vnknowne or vncon∣trold of the people; as Plutark affirmeth,The least deffects of princes are commonly noted and knovvne to their subiects. Plut. in his inst∣ructiōs for those that mannage matters of state. notably aduising princes to haue a special regard to al their actions, for that their least de∣fects, or imperfections are noted; which he confirmeth with examples of diuers princes, as of Pompey the great, noted of sin∣gularity for scratching his head with one finger; Lucullus censu∣red to be ouer delicate in his dyet; The famous Scipio blamed for sleeping much; And Caesar for going il girded: What then shal we say of tyrannycal acts,No hipocrisy can suffise to coue a tiranny. such as Machiauel commendeth in his prince, I meane murders, breach of promises and othes, fraudes and deceit, and al kind of iniustice? Can any man with reason thinke that the same can be sufficiently couered with any cloake of hipocrisy; or can a people be so simple, or senseles as not to know, and see a tyranny when they see the manifest effects, and feele to heauy wayght therof in them selues? Therfore what els can follow of hipocrisy in a tyrant but that his subiects shal hate him much more, and the sooner conspire his ouerthrow,Hipocrisy encre∣seth the hatred of God and man against a tyrant Iob. 20. as of one no lesse odious to God then to man? whereby the scripture shalbe fulfilled, which, saith that The heauens shal reueale the iniquity of the hipocrite, and the earth shal rise against him. 16. But because I am to speake purposely, and much more amply of this matter in the 2. part of this treatise, it shal suffise to haue said thus much here by the way,The reputation of true and not of fayned vertue requisit in a prince. VVhat true ver∣tue in the prince vvorketh in the subiects. VVhat are the effects of vice in a prince. and withal to inferre thereupon, that the reputation of vertue which is necessary for the conseruation of a prince, must be grounded vpon true vertue, and not vpon vaine shewes and hipocritical dissimulations; for, as true religion, iustice, and vertue, ioyned with princely power, engender in the subiects admiration, respect, reuerence, and loue towards their prince: so impiety iniustice, and intempe∣rance in him, breede in the subiects either hatred, or els contēpt of person. For of the crymes of impiety, and iniustice (as periury, deceit, & cruelty) proceedeth hatred; and of the vices that grow of imtemperance (as lasciuiousnes, dronkennes, and such like) is engendred contempt, as I wold declare here more at large, but that I reserue the furder discourse therof to the 2. part of this treatise, where I determine to speake of the princes vertues more particularly, and amply, in respect that al perfection of
vertue proceedeth from Gods grace, and true religion, whereof I am to treate there. 17. Neuertheles I thinke good to say some what more in this place,Cōcerning truth and fidelity in the prince. concerning one special vertue very requisit in a prince for his reputation, to wit, truth, fidelity, and constancy, in the exact obseruation of his oathes, promises, and word; whereof I am the more willing to treat for that Macchiauel alloweth, and commen∣deth al manner of falshood, deceit, trechery and periury in a prince, when he may hope to gaine, or to benefit his state ther∣by. But how impious and absurd his doctrin is in that behalfe, yea and how pernitious to princes and their states, it wil the more euidently appeare if we consider how dangerous and dam∣mageable al falshood, and deceit is to commonwelth; for the conseruation whereof, nothing is more necessary then truth, and fidelity, as wel in the prince, as in the people. 18. Therfore Cicero teacheth that Fides, which we may calle fidelity (consisting as he sayth,Cicero. li. 1. de offic. VVherin fidelity consisteth. Idem. pro Sext. Ros. in the verity, & constant performance of woords, promisses, & couenants) is fundamentum iustitiae, the founda∣tion of iustice which is the special proppe & stay of state, in which respect he calleth it commune omnium praesidium. The common defence, or refuge of al men;Idem. li. 2. de offic. Valer. li. 6. ca. 6. & also sayth, that nulla res vehementius rempublicam continet quam fides. Nothing doth more firmely vnite and hold together the commonwelth then fidelity; and Valerius calleth it; venerabile numen & certissimum humana salutis pignus. A venerable and deuine power, and the most sure pledge of humane security;Dionis Halicar. li. 2 Lii. li. & 2. and the Romans so much esteemed it that they buylded, and dedicated a Temple to it, as to a God∣desse, in which temple al leagues, truces, couenants, and im∣portant bargains, were publikly made & sworne, which were so religiously obserued, that who soeuer broke them, was held for a cursed, and damned creature, and vnwoorthy to liue in humane society. And with greate reason, for if falshood and fraud were permitted to haue course in commonwelths,If falshood and fraud vvere per∣mitted amongst men no common∣vvelth coulde stand. what traffick or commerce with strangers or frends? what assurance in leagues with forrain princes, in contracts and mariages, in promises, and bargains, in buying or selling? what loue? what society? what cōmonwelth? which cōsisteth in the cōmuni∣cation of commodities one with an other, & florisheth so much the more, by how much euery one tendereth, and desireth the
publyk good more then his owne, in which respect it is called R spubica, that is to saye,  e publik. And therfore if trusty and faithful dealing ould faile amongst men, there woold be no more iuil ciety amongst them then amongst Tigres, and bea∣res, foxes, and wolues, catts, and doggs; which the Apostle insinuateth notably when he exhorteth the Ephesians, and in them al other Christians to vse al sincerity, and truth one with an other, because we are al combined in one mistical body; Prop∣ter quod (saith he) deponentes mendacium &c.Ephes 4. Therfore laying aside al lies, let euery one of you speake the truth to his neighbour; Quoniam sumus inuicem membra. Because we are al members one of another. 29. Hereupon it followeth, that fidelity is not only most ne∣cessary in the subiects, but also in the prince,Fidelity most ne∣cessary in the prince for the conseruation of the common∣vvelth. for the conserua∣tion of the commonwelth; for seeing nothing is more requisit for the maintenance of the political body then the vnion of the head with the members therof, that is to say of the prince with the people, and nothing againe more necessary therto, then their trust and confidence one in an other (which can not be where there is no fidelity) it followeth, that nothing is more requisit for the conseruation of both the prince, and the people, then fidelity in both; without the which neither the subiects can assure them selues of their princes protection, nor the prince be satisfied of the loyalty of his subiects. 20. And to speake here particulerly of the prince; it is to be cō∣sidered, that the want of fidelity and sincerity in him,The force of the princes good or bad example in the common∣vvelth. is most dangerous not only to the common welth, but also to him selfe, as it wilbe euident if we waigh the force & effect of the good or bad example of the prince, & how potent a motiue it is to induce his subiects to vertue or vyce, seeing as Salomon sayth, and experi∣ence teacheth that; Qualis est rector Ciuitatis, tales sunt habitantes in ea.Eccli. 10. Such as is the gouernour of the Citty, such are the inhabitants therof. Ther∣for I saye that as the example of the princes fidelity doth redo∣und both to the good of the common welth,Hovv the fide∣lity of the prince redoundeth to his ovvne good. & also to his owne security (for that the people doth learne therby to be not only faithful one to an other, but also dutiful, & loyal towards him) so also the example of perfidious & double dealing in him, doth woorke the contrary effect,A perfidious prince teacheth his subiects to be trayterous to him selfe. and teacheth his subictes to be no lesse faithlesse, and traiterous towards him, then fraudulent, and
trecherous one towards an other, which may turne as wel to his destruction, as to the hurt of the commonwelth. 21. But perhaps some Macchiauillian wil say, that although the prince for his owne commodity do vse sometimes to violat his faith, yet he may so seuerely punish it in his subiects, that no in∣conuenience shal follow of his example, either to the common∣welth or to him selfe. 22. Wherto I answere, that the prince can not with reason, expect that the seuerity of lawes,The princes bad example ouer∣vveyeth good lavves. Claudian. or other polityk meanes, shal represse in his commonwelth any vice which shal be autorized by the example of his owne practise; for as the Poët saith. —Totus componitur orbis Regis ad exemplum nec sic inflectere sensus Humanos edicta valent, vt vita reg ntis That is to say, al the world is framed after the model of the king and no lawes or edicts can so moue the minds of men, as doth the life of the gouernour;Plutar. de do∣ctrina princi∣pium. which Plutark confirmeth notably, saying. That euen as a squire, or rule, must be straight in it selfe before it can make other things straight; so the prince (who is, as it were, the rule of his subiects) ought first to rectify him selfe,The prince is the rule of his sub∣iects. before he goe about by lawes or other meanes to rectify his commonwelth: for he that is falling (saith Plu∣tark) is not fit to vphold others; nor he that is ignorant, to teach; nor he that is incorrigible, to correct; nor he that is him selfe disordred, to put others in order. Thus saith he, geuing to vnderstand that a vicious prince who seeketh to make his subiects vertuous by rigour of lawes, laboureth in vaine, like vnto one that buildeth with one hand, and puleth doune with the other,A bad prince vvho maketh good lawes buil∣deth vvith one hand & putteth doune vvith the other. chap. 4. nu. 28. &c. and so destroieth more in one daie, then he can build in many: for so doth the bad example of the prince, corrupt more in a daie, then his lawes can correct or amend in a yere; as is euident ynough by that which I haue lar∣gely discoursed els where of the procliuity of man to vice, with the facility, and many meanes found in euery commonwelth to escape the penalties of lawes. 23. This the ancient Romans so wel considered that their ma∣gistrats,The Roman ma∣gistrats and Se∣nat most exact in the obserua∣tion of othes. and Senat were most exact, and punctual in the obserua∣tion of oathes, and promisses euen to their very enemies, for the regard they had not only to iustice, and to their owne reputa∣tion, but also to the consequence of their good example in the
commonwelth; to which purpose I alledged before vpon ano∣ther occasion the example of the woorthy consul Marcus Atti∣lius Regulus, who being taken prisoner by the Carthaginians,Chap. 5. nu. 5. Cicero. li. 3. de offic. and dismissed vpon his oath (promising either to procure the deli¦uery of certaine prisoners, or to returne him selfe to Carthage) was sent back by the Senat with his owne consent, because the Senat did neither think it conuenient to deliuer the prisoners, nr to recouer and retaine their consul contrary to his oath. And the like I haue also noted before in the same place of T. Ve∣turius, and Spurius Posthumus consuls,Chap. 5. nu. 4. Cicero li. 3. de offi. and of T. Mutius and Q. Ae∣milius tribunes of the people, who were deliuered prisoners to the Samnits, because the Senat wold not ratify the peace which the said consul and Tribunes had made with them; To whome I may ad L. Minictius. C. Manlius. Q. Fabius and C. Apronius men of greate dignity,Valer. li. 6. ca. 6. deliuered also by order of the Senat to the em∣bassadours of Carthage, and of the citty of Appollonia, for some a∣buses which they committed against the said embassadours con∣trary to the law of nations. 24. The like notable examples of particuler men amongst the painims may also be alledged, wherof I wil relate only one or two for breuities sake. Sextus Pompeius, sonne to Pompey the great, hauing warres with Antonicus the Triumuir,Sextus Pompeyus vvold not breake his oath to be emperour of the vvorld. Plutar. in Anton. and meeting with him at the sea side vpon a treaty of peace, inuited him to supper in his galley, geuing him his oath for his assurance, and being demanded secretly by Metrodorus the Pyrat, whiles they were at table, whether he wold haue him waye anker, and sette saile, and so make him selfe lord of the world, he answered, that it was not his custome or condition to forswere him selfe, estee∣ming it neither honorable, nor profitable for him, to gaine the empire of the world by periury. 25.The care vvhich Li urgus had of fidelity. Plutar. in Licur. No lesse care of fidelity had Licurgus brother to Polidectes King of Lacedemonia; for, hauing taken vpon him the gouern∣ment of the kingdome after his brothers death, at the instance of the people vntil his brothers wife, who was greate with child, should be brought to bed, and the child of yeres to gouerne, and being sollicited by her, to marry with her, vpon her promise to kil the child in her woomb, therby to assure his state, he not only refused it, but also proclaymed her sonne King, as soone as
he was borne taking only the tuition of him vntil he came to age,nu. 1. as I haue declared more at large in the 8. chapter. 26. I neede not to adde hereto any examples of Christian prin∣ces whose religion both teacheth and bindeth them to be more exact and precise then paynims in like cases; Neuerthelesse, I I cannot forbeare to speake of a notabl act in this kind of the most Christian and vertuous prince Ferdinand brother to Henry the 3.Ferdinand bro∣ther to Henry K. of Castile. of that name King of Castile, which Ferdinand being le t by his brothers testament tutor to his sonne King Iohn the 2. (an in∣fant of 8.Luc. Marin. Sicu∣lus de reb. Hisp. li. 11. months old) and being vrged greately by the three staes of Castile to take the croune to him selfe, wold by no mea∣nes consent therto, saying that he wold neuer be false, either to his brother dad, or to his nephew liuing, to whom he had pro∣mised fidelity; for the which God rewarded him, as it seemeth with in six yeres after with the kingdome of Aragon, whereto he was chosen by the free election of the nobility, and cōmons of the realme. Lo then how greate respect not only this Christian Prince, but also the paynims before named, had to sincerity and fidelity, as wel for the causes before mencioned, as also for the very detestation, and hatred of perfidiousnes, being a vice of it selfe most odious, and vnwoorthy of princely dignity. 27. For where as al other vices and sinnes for the most part, are or may be attributed either to frailty, or errour (wherby they seeme many times more woorthy of pardon) perfidiousnes is euer presumed to proceede from a trecherous,Perfidiousnes is a signe of a base and vile nature. maligne, vile, and base nature, and therfore not excusable in princes, whose proceedings ought to be in al things real, generous, noble and heroycal; in which respect one false, and trecherous act may suffise to eclipse, and obscure the glory of many greate vertues in a prince,Plut. in Alexan¦der. as Plutark noteth in Alexander the greate, who causing certaine Indian souldiars to be killed after they had rendered them selues vnto him vpon his woord, spotted and stayned (saith he) the renoune of al his glorious conquests and royal vertues with the ignominy of that one act; and the reason is, for that so elicat is mans credit,Once false, euer suspected. and reputation in matter of trust, and confidence, that it is like to a glasse, which being once bro∣ken is not reparable; and therfore he that is once knowne for a lyer, is not beleeued when he saith true, and he that is once repu∣ted
to be false, is euer suspected, and according to the general rule of the law. Semper presumitur malus in eodem genere mali.Li. si cui ff. de ac∣cusat. Bart. in li. Cassius de Sena. The dangers vvhich accom∣pany persidious∣nes in a prince. Is euer presumed to be vvicked in the same kind of vvickednes; Whereupon it followeth that a faythles prince, is hated of his subiects, suspe∣cted of his best frends, irreconciliable with his enemyes, beloued and trusted of none, and betrayed or forsaken of al men in his greatest necessities, and that woorthily; seeing he him selfe ge∣ueth the euil example which other men follow to his ouer∣throwe. 28. But here the pollitike, or Macchiauillian wil say, that a wise prince hath sufficient remedyes against these inconueni∣ences, to wit, strong gards, garrisons, and fortresses, besids his owne pollicy, assisted with the prudence of faythful and vigil∣lant councellours, whereby he may securely make his commo∣dity in al occasions, without feare of any dammage that may ensew therof to his person, or estate.The insuffici∣ency of Macchia∣uillian remedyes. Thus saith the Macchia∣uillian most absurdly, as it wil appeare if we consider whence groweth the danger that the prince incurreth by perfidious and deceitful dealing, which being most hateful not only to man, but also to God, doth draw vpon him both diuine, and humane punishment, against the which neither these,Falshood hate∣ful to God, and man. nor any other Macchiauillian remedyes can warrant him. 29. And first to speake of the offence of God and deuine pu∣nisment ensewing therof. We fynd in holly scriptures, that no∣thing is more detestable to almighty God then a deceitful, or doble dealing man, and therfore the Holly Ghost saith in the parables. Os bilingue detestor; I doe detest a dooble tongued mouth. And againe in the same place. Abominatio Domini est omnis illusor.Prouerb. 8. Ibid. ca. 3. Euery deceiuer is abominable before God. And the royal Prophet coupling the deceiuer with the blood-sucker, saith of them both. Virum sanguinum & dolosum abominatur dominus: God do h abhorre the bloody,Psal. 51. and deceitful man; And speaking of the guylful tongue of Doeg he thretneth the vengeance of God to him, and al such; saying. Lingua dolosa; propterea &c. A deceitful tongue; God vvil therfore destroy thee eternally he vvil pul thee vp, and remoue thee from thy tabernacle,Psal 11. God exacteth nothing more of man then truth. and roote thee out of the land of the liuing. Loe then how odious al frau∣dulent, and dooble dealing is to almighty God, who being, Ipsa veritas, truth it selfe, exacteth nothing more of man created to his
image,A prince is the Image of God in tvvo respects. then verity and truth, and much more of a prince then of any priuat person, for that the prince is his image, not only by reason of the natural gifts of his soule (as al other men are) but also in respect of his office, wherby he representeth his per∣son, as his lieftenant, in the administration of Iustice, wherof fidelity and truth is the foundation,nu. 48. as I haue declared before. 30. Wherein neuertheles it is to be vnderstood that although al real plaine and true dealing be most requisit in a prince, yet he is to vse greate discretion,Greate prudence to be vsed of princes in playn∣nes. and prudence therin, for that infi∣nit occasions occurre, wherin princes ought to conceale and couer their intentions, with more care and cirumspection then al other men, especially in matters to be executed: where∣fore greate difference is to be noted betwyxt telling a lye,Greate difference to be noted be∣tvvixt telling a lie and concea∣ling the truth. The difference betvvixt fixion and discreete dis∣simulation. Discreete dissi∣mulation com∣mendable in princes. and concealing the truth, which the latins do signify in two proper woords, to wit simulatio, and dissimulatio, wherof the fyrst (which we may tearme simulation, or fiction) is euer vnlawful, & ther∣fore neuer to be vsed; and the later, (which we maye calle dis∣cret dissimulation) is both lawful and commendable, yea and some tymes so necessary in princes, that it may wel and truly be sayd; Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit regnare. He which knovveth not how to dissemble, that is to saye discreetly to couer and cloke his inten∣tions when occasion requyreth, knoweth not hovv to raygne. The which how and in what cases it may be donne and practised whithout offence, I wil declare particulerly and amply in the se∣cond part of this treatise, where I meane to resolue many dout∣ful cases of state, according to the rule of conscience, for the in∣struction of yong statists; and in the meane tyme I saye here with Salomon (who was him selfe a most wyse & potent prince) that;Prouerb. ca 17. A lie most vn∣seemely in the mouth of a prince. Ibid. ca. 30. Ibid. ca. 10. Aug. cont. Cres∣con. li. 3. ca 9. A lyer the child of the deuil. Ioan. 8. Non decet principem labium mentiens. A lying lippe or mouth doth not beseeme a prince; In which respect he also prayeth to almighty God; verba mendacia longe fac a me; O lord preserue and keepe me farre from lying vvoords; And agayne in an other parable he sayth. Qui nititur mendacijs pascit ventus; He vvhich trusts to lyes feeds the vvynds; that is to saye, as S. Augustin expoundeth it, fit esca spiritibus malis; he becomes the meate, or pray of vvicked spirits, or of the deuil, whose, imitatour, or rather whose child he maketh him selfe. For as our Sauiour saith the deuil is; Mendax & pater eius; A lier and the father of lies, and is therfore called Diabolus which signifieth a deceiuer.
31.Macchiauels prince perfidious and periured. What then shal we saye of such a prince as Macchiauel frameth, to wit a most trecherous, perfidious, and periured person; can he deserue to be called the Image, lieutenant, or minister of God, whose similitud, and likenes, he defaceth in him selfe, whose commission he abuseth, and whose holly name he shamefully profaneth? what els can he expect at the hands of God, but seuere punishment, not only in the world to come, but also in this life if he repent not? This may appeare by mani∣fest examples wherof I wil alledge some out of approued autors, both ancient, and moderne, to shew the impious absurdity of Macchiauels doctrin, allowing perfidiousnes and periury in a prince, as necessary sometimes for the benefit of his state. 32. And first to speake of our holly Scriptures, we read in Genesis, that Simeon, and Leui the children of Iacob,Genes. 49. were cursed by their father at his death, for that they had violated their league made with Sichem, and Hemor,Ibidem. 34. Simeon and Leui cursed by their father Ia∣cob, for viola∣ting their league vith Sichem. and Hemor. whome they destroied with al their citty, contrary to their promise, and couenant. Maledi∣ctus (saith Iacob) furor eorum quia pertinax &c. Cursed be their fury be∣cause it was obstinat; and prophesing furder of the temporal punish∣ment, which God wold inflict vpon their posterity for the same, he added. Diuidameos in Iacob, & dispergam in Israel; I wil deuide them in Iacob, and disperse them amongst the children of Israel. Which was fulfilled afterwards, as S. Hierome witnesseth,Hieron. in tradi∣tion. hebraicis in Genesim. for that their tribes had not their habitation apart as the others had, for the tribe of Leui was distributed in diuers citties amongst the other tribes, to be their Leuits, and priests, and the tribe of Simeon, had their dwelling with the tribe of Iuda, and as the hebrewes af∣firme, serued for scholemasters in al the other tribes,Pererius in Ga∣nes. ca. 49. and got their liuing by teaching children. 33. In like manner the punishment of God was notable vpon King Sauls posterity,2. Reg. ca. 21. Iosue. 9. Sauls posterity punished for his breach of league vvith the Gaba∣onits. for his breach of league which Iosue made with the Gabaonits; where in it is to be noted, that although the Gabaonits craftily circumuented Iosue, & induced him by fraude and deceit to make legue with them, putting on their old shooes, and torne clothes, and affirming that they were a people dwelling in a farre cuntry, and that being moued with the fame of his victories, they were come so many daies iourney to meete him that they had worne out their shooes and clothes in their
voiage (whereas they dwelt not farre of, and in the very land of promise which God had geuen to the children of Israel) ne∣uertheles when Iosue discouered their deceit,The greate re∣gard which Iosue had o his oth and league with the Gabaonits. Ibid. he had such regard to his oath that he wold by no meanes violate it, but answered to the children of Israel when they murmured against him; Iu∣rauimus eis (saith he) VVe haue svvorne vnto them in the name of the lord God of Israel, and therfore we may not touch them lest the vvrath of God faule vpon vs if vve breake our oath.The obligation of lavvful lea∣gues. Thus saith Iosue whereby we may learne how greate is the obligation of al iust, and lawful leagues, or other couenants passed by oath; and how dange∣rous is the breach therof, in respect of Gods iust and seuere Iud∣gements vpon the offenders in that behalfe, whereof the expe∣rience was seene aboue 300. yeres after Iosues time in the breach of that league by Saule, for the which the children of Israel were afflicted with three yeres famin in Dauids time,2. Reg. 21. and 7. of Saules children, and family were deliuered into the hands of the Gaba∣onits, and cruified by them in punishment of Sauls offence. 2. Mach. ca. 4. Andronicus pu∣nished for his trechery towards Onias.34, Furdermore we read in the booke of Machabees that An∣dronicus, a fauorit of King Antiochus, was by the iust iudgement of God, and the commandment of Antiochus him selfe, shame∣fully put to death in the same place, where he had killed Onias the heigh priest, who had rendred him selfe vnto him, vpon his promise of scurity.Hovv the pay∣nims obserued Gods iudgements vpon perfidious persons. Poliaen li. 2. Also the examples hereof are very notable amongst the Ethnicks who obserued dilligently the Iudgements of God vpon traitrous and perfidious persons; And therfore when Tissaphernes the Perssian made warre against the Grecians, and broke a truce which he had made with them for 3. months. Agesilaus reioysed greatly saying. VVe are beholding to Tissaphernes for making th Gods his enemies, and our frends, wherfore lette vs boldly geue him battaile, And so he did, and gaue him a great ouerthrow. Plutar in Apoph. Lacedem. Gods notable iudgement vpon Cleomenes for his periury.35. Plutark also recounteth a notable history of Cleomenes king of Lacedemonia, who hauing made truse with the Argiens for 7. daies set vpon their campe in the night, and taking them vn∣prouided by reason of the truse, made greate slaughter of them, and bing reproched with the breach of his promise, & oath, he iested at it, saying that he swore truce for the daies, and not for the nights; but so it fel out, saith Plutark, in punishment of his falshood and periury, that it serued him to no purpose; for
whereas he assailed the citty presently, hoping to take it with al facility, he had a shameful repulese by the women which dwelt therin, and after falling furiously madde, he tooke a knife and rippd vp his owne body from his very heele to his hart, and so died laughing. 36. The same author also signifieth,Plutarc. in Dion Calipus punis∣hed by almighty God for peury. that one Calippus being iustly charged with a conspiracy against Dion of Sicily, and ha∣uing denied it with many solemne oathes in the Temple of Ceres, was by Gods iust iudgement slaine with the same dagger wher∣with Dion was killed before by his consent. I omit diuers other examples, which might be alladged out of prophane historio∣graphers to adde a few out of Christian, and more moderne authors. 37. The seuere iudgements of God vpon men for the sinne of periury, haue bene alwaise so euident amongst Christians,Matters in con∣trouersy decyded by othes at the tombes of mar∣tyres in the pri∣mitiue church. Aug. ep. 137. that the custome was in the primitiue church to decide matters in controuersy by oathes at certaine holly places, and the toombes of martires, where almighty God did ordinarily extend his iustice vpon periured persons; which custome as S. Augustin witnesseth, was in vre in his time at Millan, wherof he saith; Nos nouimus Me∣diolani &c. I my selfe haue knowne, that in Milan at the memory of Saints (where diuels doe miraculously and terribly confesse the truth) a certaine theefe vvho vvent thither vvith intention to deceiue by periury,VVhat Saint Augustin affir∣meth of his ovvne knovv∣ledge and pra∣ctise. Idem. Ibid. vvas compel∣led to confesse his theft, and to restore that vvhich he had stolne. Thus saith S. Augustin, signifiing with al that he had sent a priest of his called Bonifacius, and another who had accused him of certaine crimes, to the body of S. Felix at Nola in Italy (where he saith greate miracles were then wrought) to the end that the bad con∣science of one of them, might be discouered there, either by feare, or by deuine punishment; And furder debating in the same place, why God, who is euery where, and to be adored in spirit and truth doth shew his power and iudgements miracu∣lously in some places, and not in some other, he concludeth, that it is to be left to the inscrutable iudgements of God; For,Ide Ibid. faith he, as he geueth his graces, and gifts diuersly vnto his ser∣uants, to one the grace to heale and cure disseases, and o ano∣ther to discerne spirits, and not al gifts to al alike: so also he wil not that these kind of miracles be donne in al places alike.
Thus saith S. Augustin in substance. Grego. Homil. 32. in Euangel.38. But to proceede. S. Gregory testifieth, that the same cu∣stome of trial of truth by oathes in holly places, was also vsed in his time,Periury miracu∣lously punished at Rome in the time of S. Gre∣gory. namely in Rome at the bodies of S. Processus, and S. Mar∣tinianus, wherof he saith. Periuri veniunt, & a daemonibus vexantur, demoniaci veniunt & liberantur. Periured persons come thither, and are vexed with diuels, and such as are possest with deuils are deliuered. And the like is also witnessed by Gregory of Tours of the body of S. Pan∣cratius in Rome,Greg. Turon. de gloria Matt. ca. 39. whome he therfore calleth. Valde in periuris vlto∣rem; A notable punisher of periury; And saith that assoone as the party, who came thither for his purgation, did forswere him selfe, he was either presently possest by the deuil, or els fel doune dead vpon the ground;Idem. Ibid. ca. 103. And he affirmeth the like of the body of S. Polieuctus in Constantinople. A notable ex∣ample of a no∣ble man of En∣gland miracu¦lously punished for periury.39. But of this matter we haue a most famous, and auten∣tical example in our owne histories. Elfred a noble man of En∣gland in the time of King Adelstan, conspired against him with certaine others, and being accused therof, stood vpon the denial, and because the prooues were not sufficient to conuince him, he was sent to Rome (as the custome was then) to make his pur∣gation by oath at the body of S. Peter, where he swore contrary to his owne conscience, and presently fel doune before the Aultar, and died with in three daies after; Vpon the aduertise∣ment whereof king Adelstan (to shew his gratitude and deuo∣tion towards S. Peter) gaue al the lands of Elfred vnto the church of S. Peter in the Abbey of Malmesbury with letters patents,Guliel Malmesb. de gest. Reg. An∣gl. li. 2. ca. 6. wherin after the grant of the said lands, he declared the whole matter as it passed in these woords. 40. Scient sapientes &c. Be it knowne to al wise men of this our cuntry,The leters patēts of King Adel∣stan testifying the history aboue mencioned. that we haue not taken vniustly the foresaid lands, neither haue geuen to God an vnlawful spoile, but that we haue had them by the iudgement, as wel of al the nobility of England, as also of Iohn the Apostolical Pope of the Roman church by the death of Elfred, who was the enemy of our life, and felicity, and consented to the wickednes of other our enemies, which conspired to put out our eyes at the toune of winchester, after our fathers death; from the which God of his greate mercy de∣liuered vs; where vpon their conspiracy being discouered, and
Elfred sent to the Roman church to purge him selfe before Iohn te Apostolical bishop, he tooke his oath at the Altar of S. Peter, and presently fel doune to the ground, and was caried away by his seruants to theThis scole of the English vvas not vvhere the English hopital is novv (as Poli∣dore vergl erro∣neously concei∣ueth) but vvhere the hospital of S. Spirito is neere to S Peters. schoole of the englihmen, where he died the third night after, and then the Apostolical Bishop sent vnto vs, to know what we wold haue to be donne with the body, and whether it should be buried in christian mans burial, which at the earnest, and humble sute of his kinsfolkes, and other of our nobility, we were content to graunt, and so we signified vnto the Pope, by whose consent he was buried amongst other Chri∣stians (though vnworthy therof) and so al his possessions litle and greate were adiudged to vs, which we haue thought good to signify by these letters to the end that so long as Christianity shal raigne, it may be knowne how we gotte the foresaid possessi∣ons, which we haue now geuen to God & S. Peter, it seeming to vs most iust, to geue the same to them who ouerthrew our ene∣my in the sight of al men and gaue vs the prosperous raigne and kingdome which we enioye. Thus farre the letters Patents of King Adelstan,Guliel. Mal. Idid. which VVilliam of Malmesbury who liued in VVilli∣am the conquerours time, citeth out of the original that then was extant in the Abbey, where he wrote the history. 41.Regino Chron. Aymoyn li. 5. ca. 21. Sigon. de reg. Ital. an 869 Naucler. Chron. an 867. Baron. an. 868. Also some yeres after in the same age Lotharius King of Austrasia (which contained al Lorraine, and Flanders and some part of Germany Burgundy and France) came to Rome accom∣panied with al his nobility in the time of Adrian the second to be absolued from the excomunication which he had incurred in the time of Pope Nicolas the first, for his deuorce from his lawful wife Theutperga and his mariage with VValdrada his con∣cubine; and wheras he had bene also furder accused to the sea Apostolik of diuers crimes concerning the same matter he was content for his purgation therof, to receiue the blessed Sacra∣ment at the hands of Pope Adrian together with his nobility; which he did, protesting for his part, that he was cleare of those things whereof he had bene accused, which also his nobility confirmed, though it was most false; as afterwards it euidently appeared by the exemplar punihment of God vpon thm al; For whereas they dparted hortly after from Rome homewards, there fel amongst them such a strange dissease, that Lotharius ha∣uing
seene the death of most of his noble men before he came to Luca, fel sicke there him selfe, and with in a few daies after, died at Placencia, and of al those who receiued the blessed Sacra∣ment with him,Vbi supra. there liued not any one to the yeres end, as testifieth Regino, Aymoinus, Sigonius, Nauclerus and diuers others. Henry Huntend. hist. li. 6 Ingulphus hist. Angli an. 153. Polidor hist. Angli. Periury notably punished in Earle Godvvin father to K. Ha∣rold.42. And now to returne to our owne cuntry. Earle Godwin father to King Harrold hauing procured the vntimely death of Alfred brother to King Edward the Confessor, denied it continu∣ally with sollemne oathes, and especially once, when he dined with the king, at what time occasion being offred to speake of that matter, he tooke a piece of bread and praied to God that the same might be his last, if he were any way consenting, or priuy therto, and so eating the bread was choked therwith, and died there in the Kings presence. 43. It is also obserued and testified by the most of the old historiographers of our cuntry, that the ouerthrow of K. Harold by VVilliam the conquerour, was a iust punishment of God vpon him for his periury;King Harold slayne by VVil∣liam the conque∣rour in punish∣ment of his per∣iury. The story is breefly thus. Harold being in Normandy with duke VVilliam in the time of King Edvvard the Confessor promised to assist him after the death of the king in his pretence to the crowne of England, which he also confirmed by sollemne oath, whereupon Duke VVilliam fianced his daughter vnto him, and for that she was not then of yeres to be maried, he tooke Harolds oath to performe the mariage with in a ceraine time after. But when the time appointed for the mari∣age was expired, and Harold shewed no care to performe any part of his promises, the Duke sent messengers vnto him to re∣quest of him the accomplishment therof, but he in steede of geuing satisfaction to the Duke, derided and abused his messen∣gers, causing some of their horse tailes to be cutte of, and o∣thers to be lamed, and afterwards when King Edward died, he practised not only to exclude the Duke from the croune, but also procured it for him selfe, pretending that his promise to the Duke was made for feare, and that therfore it could not bynd him. And when the duke was entred into England with his army, and solicited him by messengers to haue care of his conscience, representing vnto him the seuere Iudgements of God vpon per∣iured persons, offring to come to some reasonable composition
with him, he made no account therof, neither yet of the admo∣nition of his owne brother called Gurth, who aduised him seri∣ously before the battaile to retire him selfe, and to leaue the conduct of the army vnto him, and others who were not bound to the duke by any oath or promise, lest other waise God might suffer them al to be ouerthrowne for his cause; whereto he an∣swered, that he wold put it in venter and that God should be Iudge therof, & so geuing battaile was slaine him selfe, & al his army ouerthrowne, whereupon also followed the conquest of the cuntry. And although the said conquest might seeme to be a punishment of God vpon the whole realme for the sinnes of the people (as I haue amply declared before) yet the particuler disgrace which happened to King Harrolds person may wel be thought to haue proceeded of Gods iust iudgement for his per∣iury, and so the English croniclers which wroote in that age,Chap. 21. nu. 22.22. & 23. or neare that time doe signify, as Ingulphus, VVilliam of Malmesbury,Ingulphus hist. Angl. Hen. Huno. Hist li. 6 Guliel. Malmesh. li. 3. roger. Houed. Annal. par. 1. Henry Huntindon, Matthevv of vvestminster, Matthevv Paris and Roger Houedon, which last speaking of that victory, saith; Vere & absque dubio Dei iudicio ascribenda est, qui puniendo scelus periurij, ostendit se Deum nolentem iniquitatem; Truly and vvithout dout it is to be ascribed to the iudgement of God, vvho punishing the crime of periury, shevved that he is a God vvhich doth not allovv of iniquity. 44.Philip. de Comi∣nes. Chron. du Roy Louis ca. 83. & 91. Charles Duke of Burundy vvor∣thily betrayed. But to come nearer to our time Philip de Comines noteth the manifest Iustice of God in the disgraceful death of Charles last duke of Burgundy, through the treason of Campobachio an Italian, shortly after that the said Charles had betraied the count S. Paule sent him prisoner to Levvis the 11. King of France, not with standing that he had geuen him saufe conduct to come into his country. 45.Caesar Borgia punished for his perfidious tre∣chery. Furdermore I cannot omit Caesar Borgia though I haue spoken of him before diuers times. For as Macchiauel worthely maketh him a mirrour for his tyran in respect of his many fold vices, so he may worthyly be proposed for an example of Gods iustice, in respect of the manyfold Iudgements of God diuersly extended vpon him, and particularly in the punishment of his perfidiousnes and periury, where by he had deceiued and rui∣ned diuers principal personages, as Liuerotto, Vittellozzo,Guicciardin li.  Pagolo Vrsino, and the duke o Grauina, whome he caused to bee stran∣gled
after they had rendred them selues vnto him vpon com∣position, and emploied them selues faithfully in his ser∣uice;Liuerotto ha∣uing trayterous∣ly murdred his vncle, vvas also trayterously murdered him selfe. Idem. Ibid. wherein Gods iustice may be noted by the waye in Liuerotto who a little before, had cruelly and trayterously murdred his owne vncle, and diuers other principal cittizens of Fermo, ha∣uing inuited them to a banket in his owne house, which perfidi∣ous trechery of his, God punished as it seemed, by the trechery, & perfidiousnes of Caesar Borgia, who also receiued the like mea∣sure him selfe of others, with in a whyle after; For whereas he had taken the oaths of 40. principal personnages to assist him after his fathers death, he was forsaken of them al, and after∣wards putting him selfe in to the hands of Hernando Gonsales Gouernour of Naples, vpon his saufe conduit he was also be∣trayed by him, and sent prisonner into Spaine, as I haue signi∣fied els where.Chap. 3. nu. 4. 46. The like Iustice of God may be noted also in Christiern K. of Denmark,Surius anno. 1517. An other exam∣ple of Christiern King of Den∣mark. and Norvvay, who maried a sister of the Emperour Charles the 5. in the time of Henry the 8. king of England. This Christiern beseeging Stockholme in Suecia tooke it by composition, binding him selfe to certayne conditions, not only by oath, but also by receiuing the blessed Sacrament, which conditions he obserued for some dayes, til he had the Castle, & al the strongest places of the towne in his owne hands,Olaus Mag. li. 8. ca. 39. & that he had furnished them with men, & munition, & then inuiting al the noble men, and magistrats to a banket, to the number of 94 he imprisoned them, and after killed them, with a greate number of the citti∣zens, & fynding that very many escaped by hidinge them selues, he promised by proclamation, life and liberty to al those which were left aliue, where vpon they al shewed them selues and were al of them miserably slayne. And with in a while after he was driuen out of his kingdome by his owne subiects, and when he had wandred from cuntry, to cuntry, in al pouerty and mi∣sery, for the space of 10. yeres, he was receiued againe by some of the cheefest of his nobility, who though they promised him obedience and assistance vnder their hands and seales, neuerthe∣les they tooke him prisoner vpon his entrance, and with in a while poysoned him in prison; and so his perfidious falshood was iustly repayed with the like; after whose deposition, and
death his vncle Frederick a woorthy prince,Munster Geo∣graph li. 4. was chosen King of Denmarke, of whome our most gracious, and renoumed Queene is lineally descended. 47.Martin du Belley anno 1527. The Duke of Bur∣bon slaine at the siege of Rome in punishment of his periury. About the same tyme also the Duke of Burbon being fled from Francis the first King of France, to the seruice of the Empe∣rour Charles the 5. and made by him gouernour of Millan, so ex∣asperated the people by his exactions and cruelty that they rose against him, in so much that to pacify them he bound him selfe by oath to certayne conditions, praying withal to almighty God, that in case he did not exactly, performe them, he might be killed with a bullet in the first occasion of warre which should be offred; Neuerthelesse he fel afterwards againe to his former course, without regard of his oath, and being with in a while after made general of an army of the Emperours in Italy, he was tumultuously carried by the souldiars against his wil to the siege of Rome, where he was presently slayne with a peece of Artillery of his owne, negligently discharged by his souldiars,Paulus Iouius de expug. vrbis Romae. and so he payed the penalty of his periury, according to the Iud∣gement and sentence which he had (as it were prophetically) geuen against him selfe. To conclude;The notable Iud∣gement of God vpon Henry the 3. K. of France, Supra nu. 9. to these may be added Henry the 3 last King of France on whome almighty God exten∣tended his iustice in this kind most notoriously a few yeres past, as I haue particulerly declared in this chapter vpon an other oc∣casion, and therfore shal not neede to repeat it here. 48. Now then; I wish al Macchiauillians to consider here three things, which are euident by these examples: The first;3. Things to be considered and noted of Mac∣chiauellians in the premises. how detestable al perfidiousnes and periury is in the sight of God; The second; how dangerous it is to princes in respect of Gods wrath, which may be like to falle vpon them and their states for the same through the seuerity of Gods iustice, against the which no humaine wit, or power is able to defend them; The third is, a necessary consequent of these two, to wit,The insufficiency and vanity of Macchiauillian pollicie for the defence of a vvicked prince. that al Macchiauillian remedies (consisting as is before said partly in humane prudence, and dilligence, and partly in force, and strength of gards, garisons, fortresses, and such like) are most friuolous and vaine when God is offended, and wil punish for sinne; where vpon it followeth also that the foresaid remedyes are in like manner insufficient to protect a perfidious prince
from the danger of humane punishment, which is commonly but a sequele and effect of the iust iudgments of God, in whose hand are the hartes and wills of al men, and who vseth the same as his instruments to execute his iustice vpon princes when they deserue it,Chap. 7. nu. 7. as I haue signified before, and meane to declare more amply here after in the 35. chapter. 49. Besids that it is euident inough in true reason of state, that although there were no danger at al of Gods wrath, yet these and such other Macchiauillian policies, are not only in∣sufficient to preuent or remedy the inconueniences which wic∣ked princes incurre by the hatred of men, but also doe many times encrease their dangers, and helpe to praecipitat them to their vtter destruction, wherof I forbeare to treat more particu∣larly here, partly because it wold require a longer discourse then for this place is conuenient, & partly because I shal haue sufficiēt occasion, to speake therfore amply in the 34. chapter, where I wil examine certaine principles of Macchiauels doctrin, and shew the vanity thereof for the better instructiō of a yong Sta∣tist. And in the meane time this shal suffise for as much as cōcer∣neth the vertue of fidelity in he prince; with this cōclusion, that because the danger which groweth to princes by fraud and de∣ceit, proceedeth principally from the Iust Iudgements of God, as I haue amply declared, therefore the yong Statist and councel∣lour whome I informe,Al reputation of vertue ought to be grounded vpon sincerity and truth. ought to vnderstand concerning this, as wel as al other vertues, that the reputation therof which he is to desire and procure in his prince, is to be grounded, not vpon vaine shewes, and apparances of counterfet vertue (which God of his Iustice wil discouer, and punish sooner or later) but vpon the solid foundation of sincerity, and truth, which is the surest piller, and stay of al humane actions, and most grateful both to God and man; and therfore the wise man saith. Qui ambulat sim∣pliciter,Prouerb. .20. ambulat confidentur. He which walkes simply, and plainely, vval∣keth boldy and surely;Ibidem. Et qui deprauat vias suas manifestus erit; And he vvhich runneth an vndirect course shal be made manifest. The reputation of the princes povver and greatnes.50. It resteth now that I saye somewhat though very bree∣fely, of the reputation of a princes power and greatnes, the losse and decay wherof emboldneth his enemies, discourageth his frends, and laieth open his person to the contempt of al men,
any his state to infinit dangers. For as the reputation of a princes greatnes, welth, and power, striketh a terrour and feare into the harts as wel of his subiects, as of strangers, and with holdeth them from conspiring against him:Opinion of the prines vvea nes is the mother of conspiracyes. so also the opinion of his weaknes, worketh the contrary effect, and is the very mother, and nurse of rebellions, conspiracies, and al hostile attempts, and no man knoweth how smale an attempt may ouerthrow the greatest state in the world. seeing it dependeth only vpon the successe, which no man can warrant, & many times is such that it deceiueth al mens expectation; and therfore the surest and wisest way is, to vse al preuentions, that nothing be attempted against the state. 51. To which purpose the reputation of a princes power, force, and greatnes is greatly auaylable,Augustus Caesar laboured greatly to conserue the reputation of his greatnes. Tacit. li. 1. annal. Iustin. li. 3. The great Xerxes ruyned by the losse of reputa∣tion. Al benefit of the prince to be vvayed vvith his reputation and conscience, but not in like degree. Reputation, though it be the cheefe external good, is inferior to conscience & vvhy. Ambrose li. 1. de offic. c. 12. The benefits that redound to the prince of the pu∣rity of conscien the which Augustus Cae∣sar knew so wel, that hauing lost an army in Germany of 40000. men, yet he continued the warre for no other necessity or reason as Tacitus noteth, then to maintayne the opinion and reputation of his power, lest otherwise he might growe to be contemned as the great Xerxes was; who hauing terrified al Greece with his huge army of a million of men, was vpon his ouerthrow and re∣tourne into Persia so dispysed, that he was killed by one of his owne subiects. So dangerous it is and dammageable to a prince, to loose reputation how great soeuer he be. Wherupon I con∣clude that it importeth a wise councellour to measure and waigh al the commodity and benefit of his prince, as wel with his reputation, as with his conscience; though not in like degree. 52. For although reputation be the cheefe external good of man (as I haue signifyed before) yet it is inferiour to the inter∣nal (that is to say to the goods of the minde, wherof a pure con∣science is the principal, seeing therin consisteth the cheefe fel∣icity of man in this life as S. Ambrose saith; Besides that, the benefit which redoūdeth to princes of purity of conscience is the fauor and protection of almighty God to them and their states, here in this world, and eternal reward and saluation of their soules in the next; and the dammage that enseweth of a corrupt and sinful conscience, is Gods indignation in this life) wherby the greatest monarches and their monarchies haue perished) and
euerlasting dānation in the world to come;The dammage that nsueth to the prince of a bad conscience. Hovv farre the gaine or losse of reputation may hurte or auaile. Rom. 8. Wheras on the other side, al the benefit or dāmage, that the gaine or losse of reputatiō can yeild (being considered in it selfe) extendeth no furder then to the fauor or disfauor of men, who can neither vphold whome God ouerthroweth, nor ouerthrow whome God protecteth; For as the Apostle saith. Si Deus pro nobis &c. If God be with vs, vvhat matter makes it who is against vs. 53. Wherupon it followeth that whether we regard, the dig∣nity and benefit of conscience & reputation, or els the dammage that enseweth of the blemish of either of them;The losse of repu∣tation is cheifly to be seared vvhen conscience is stayned. the respect of conscience is far to be preferred before the other, and that the losse of reputation is then principally to be feared, when consci∣ence is also stained; For then the prince lying open to the con∣tempt and hatred as wel of God as man, hath no deffence but may wel feare and expect punishment from both, and the ra∣ther for that the losse and want of reputation, is one special meanes wherby God vseth to execute his iust iudgment on wicked princes; it being most consonant to iustice and reason that those who contemne and disobay their soueraigne Lord, King, and Creator, should be ruined by the contempt hatred, and disobedience of their owne subiects; and this danger (I say) is iustly to be feared, when both reputation and conscience are stained. The losse of repu∣tation is no∣thing so dange∣rous vvhen con∣science is cleare.54. But when conscience is pure and entiere, the losse of re∣putation is noth ng so dangerous; For although the iustest and best men, are sometimes so calumniated, that they incurre in∣famy and disgrace through the practice of the wicked; yet for as much as the same hath no ground at al, it vaniheth away like smoke, and is euer through Gods iustice discouered and cleared in the end to their greater reputation and honour, and in the meane time they haue the comfort, not only of God protction, as I haue said, but also of their owne consciences; the good te∣stimony wherof giueth in such cases inestimable consolation,2. Cor. c. 1. Th comfort of a good conscience against calum∣niations. A good desyn∣mnt is not to be lest of for feare of false rumours and therfore the Apostle saith. Gloria nostra haec est testimonium con∣scientiae nostrae. The testimony of our conscience is our glory. In which respect wise and vertuous princes, though they haue euer due care of their reputation, yet doe not so much regard false ru∣mours when their conscience is cleare, as to forbeare the
execution of any good and necessary designment for the feare therof, but follow the example of the wise and valiant consul Fabius Maximus; Qui non ponebat rumores ante salutem:Plut. in Fabio. Cicero. li. 1. Of∣ficio. VVho preferred not rumours before the good of the commonwelth. For although his de∣laies against Hannibal were through the malice of his enemies much calumniated and generally condemned, by the common people (as proceeding of cowardize) yet he was nothing mo∣ued therwith, holding it, as he said, for greater cowardize to leaue a good purpose for feare of mens tongues, then to leaue the field for feare of an enemy. In which respect he continued his course, vntil he had therby wasted and consumed the forces of Hannibal, with security to the Roman state, for the which,Ennius apud Ci∣ceron. li. 1. de offic. he was afterwards highly commended, because (as Ennius saith) Cunctando restituit rem. He repared and restored the state of the Romans by delaies. 55. Neuertheles in such cases also, al dilligence is to be vsed by princes and their councellours,Good fame not to be contemned vpon confidence of a good consci∣ence. Aug Ser. 49. c. 1. & de bono vi. duitatis c. 21. The preseruatiō of a mans good name is necessa∣ry for his neigh∣bour. Aug. Ibid. to take away the scandal that may grow of the erroneous conceit of their actions, though their consciences be neuer so cleare; wherupon S. Augustin saith. That he vvhich trusting to his conscience neglecteth his fame or good name, is cruel; And therof he yeeldeth this reason, Because (saith he) he killeth the soules of others; for although he doe not the euil that is supposed, yet the very supposition therof serueth for a stumbling block to ouerthrow such as are weake and il dis∣posed; and therfore S. Augustin also saith, That conscience and fame being tvvo thinges, the one of them is necessary for vs, and the other for our neighbour, and that he, vvhich keepeth his conscience cleare, doth good to himselfe, but he vvhich preserueth his fame doth good to others. 56.Plut. ep. ad Dio∣nisyum. 2. VVhy a man should seeke to leaue behind him an euerla∣sting fame. In vvhat case an vniust ble∣mish of reputa∣tion is to be tole∣rated. For this cause also Plato requireth in euery good and ver∣tuous man, that he haue special care to leaue behind him an eternal reputation and fame of his vertues, to the end, to stirre vp not only men of his time, but also al posterity to the imitation therof; the which is most necessary in publike persons, and es∣pecially in princes; for that their example inciteth to vertue or vice much more then the example of priuat men; and therfore not only reason of state, but also conscience bindeth them to be most careful of their reputation and good name, and not to permitte the lest blemish therof (though it be neuer so vniust, if
it may be conueniently remedied, but when it can not be helped without some greater detriment to them selues or to the com∣monwelth, then it is to be tolerated and borne with patience; for both reason and conscience require, that the publike and common good be preferred before any mans particuler benefit, and that of two inconueniences the lesse be chosen, wherof also conscience is to be iudge. 57. Therfore I conclude that wheras commodity, consci∣ence, and reputation, are to be respected in al deliberations con∣cerning princes affairs,Conscience is the touchstone of al reputation and commodity Cicero. de offic. li. 1. A councellour should hold for a ground that nothing is prof∣fitable that is not honest. conscience ought euer to predominate, and to serue for the touchstone and rule, as wel of reputation as of al temporal commodities; and therin a councellour shal wel discharge his duty, if in al his consultations he hold the knowne axiome of Cicero for his ground, to wit, that. Nihil est vtile quod non sit honestum. Nothing is profitable which is not honest; Which point Cicero discourseth and teacheth notably in his offices, and I meane to proue at large in the second part of this treatise, where I shal haue occasion to treat of true vtility. And thus much touching what a counseller is to consider in his prince. VVHAT A COVNCELLOVR IS TO CONSI∣der in the matters vvhich are to be consulted. CHAP. 32. Concerning mat¦ters to be consul∣ted.AND now to come to the last point of my diui∣sion that is to say, what a councellour is to regard in the matter it selfe that is to be con∣sulted; it is to be vnderstood, that although the affaires of state are infinit, and therfore can not be sufficiently reduced to particular rules; yet some things are generally to be considered in al matters what soeuer, wherof I wil here touch some such as occurre to me at this present. 2. First for a necessary preamble, or preparatiue to al delibe∣rations in matters of state, it is to be considered, that in respect
of the connexion which particuler affaires of state,Necessary for a councelour to knovv the state of forreine prin∣ces. either haue or may haue, with the general state of forreine princes, it is con∣uenient & necessary for a coūcellour to haue bene a trauiller, or otherwise to procure by al meanes to haue an exact knowledge and vnderstanding, not only of his owne princes state and affai∣res, but also of the estates & affaires of other princes, especially of such as are his princes neighbours; enemies, or confederats. 3. To his end two thinges are requisite,A counsellour should be affa∣ble & courteous to strangers and vvhy. that he be affable and courteous towards al men, and willing to heare them, and to conferre with them, especially strangers, for that he may le∣arne by them many thinges, more then otherwise he can come to know, of the state of forrayne princes and countries. For as the Spanish prouerb saith; Mas sabe el necio en su casa, que el cuerdo en la agena; A foole knoweth more in his owne howse, then a wise man doth in another mans. And although a councellour may perhaps by this facility be many tymes troubled whith impertinent mat∣ters; yet he shal withal vnderstand many thinges, which may import him to know, and there is no man so wise, but he may sometymes heare of a simple man, somwhat that may serue him to very good purpose; and therfore the trouble in this case is to be borne with patience, in respect of the benefit that he may reape therby. 4.A councelour ought to procure frequent intel∣ligence out of forrayne cun∣tryes and of vvhat matters. The other thinge necessary for a councellours better in∣formation, is to procure frequent aduises, and intelligence by lettres from al partes, of the state, humours, and dispositions of forrayne princes; of al changes and innouations in their courts and countryes; of the marriages and alliances of them, their children, and their most powerful subiects; of embassages to and fro, and their treatyes, of prouisions and preparations for warre, by sea and land, and their intentions therin; of al taxes and impositions laid vpon the people, or other leuies of money, of the diuisions that fal out amongst the nobility, or common people, of their discontentments; and fynally of al matters that may tend, either to the establishment & strengthning, or to the weakning or innouation of other princes states. For although a councellour shal by this meanes heare many vntruths: yet he shal very oft receiue aduise of important matters,VVhat benefit a councellour shal reape by frequēt intelligence. wherof he may make good vse and benefit, and being a man of iudgment,
and hauing intelligēce with many he may easely discerne truths from falshoods, by conferring their aduises togeather, especially if he take order that his intelligencers doe not know one of an others employment. Finally, he shal by this meanes, not only iudge better, and more clearly of al matters occurring for his princes seruice; but shal also make him selfe much more grate∣ful to his prince, by his dilligence, and more intrinsecal with him by the occasion of his frequent aduises of forreyne newes, which princes are alwayes most desierous to heare: And thus much for the first point. S. Tho. 22. q. 51. Arist. li. 6. Ethic. 3. Thinges to be especially respe∣cted in euery matter.5. Secondly a councellour is to consider that in al matters of councel, three thinges are specially to be respected; (as S. Thomas noteth following Aristotle) the first a due end; the second con∣uenient meanes, and the third fit tyme and season; that is to say, that the end and meanes be not only lawful, iust, and honorable in them selues, and in their owne natures; but also conuenient, and proportionable as wel one to another, as also to the person, state, and power of the prince: for if ther be any inconuenience, or disproportiō in any of these, I meane if the meanes be not cō∣uenient for the obtayning of the end, or if the end or meanes be impossible, or aboue the might and power of the prince, or base, or any way vnfit for his state and person, or if the councel be guien out of due tyme and season, especially to late, it looseth al grace, and cannot be accompted either good or prudent. Plato. in Phedro. Necessary to knovv the state of the matter vvith al the cir∣cumstances. One litle circum∣stāce vnnovvne may cause great errour in the re∣solution. Vvhy vvise men doe not alvvayes iudge vvith like prudence. VVhat is parti∣culerly to be con∣sidered in euery matter.6. To this purpose I say, that according to Platoes rule, he, who is to giue his opinion of any matter whatsoeuer, ought first to vnderstand & know fully the state therof with al the circū∣stances. For mans iudgement is grounded vpon his knowledge and guided therby, and some one litle circumstance vnknowne, may wholy alter the case, and cause great errour in the resoluti∣on, in so much that a simple man who knoweth more of a mat∣ter, may iudge more wisely therof then a far wiser man that knoweth lesse; And the reason why wise men doe not alwayes iudge with like wisdome and prudence in al causes, is com∣monly, because they doe not vnderstand them alike. 7. But to proceede; the state and circumstances of the matter being once fully knowne to the councellour, he his then to passe to the consideration of the inconueniencies, difficultyes,
dangers, discommodityes and commodities therof, which may minister different arguments, pro et contra, in the discussion and decission wherof the prudēce of a councellour is specially seene. 8. And here I note by the way (though perhaps, I may seeme somwhat to digresse from the matter) that some men which haue great viuacity and sharpnes of wit to find out inconueni∣ences, to foresee dangers, and to propound obiections, douts,The difference that may be no∣ted in the ability of councellours. and difficultyes, haue not maturity of iudgement to cleare and decyde them, or to find out remedyes; and that some other who are more mature and sound in iudgement, are lesse sharpe of wit: & againe that some who are of good capacity, haue so litle cou∣rage, that they are dismayed with euery difficulty, and therfore cannot easely resolue vpon any thing; wheras some others of lesse capacity, & more courage resolue far more easely and bet∣ter in any occasion, so that we may say with the poet; Non omnia possumus omnes; VVe cannot al doe al thinges.Phil. Com. Cron du Roy. Louis ca. 27. VVhy it is con∣uenient for prin∣ces to haue many counsellours. And therfore Philip de Comines obserueth very wel, that it is conuenient for princes to haue many councellours, to the end that one of them may sup∣ply the defects of another; For the wisest (saith hee) erre oft tymes, either through passion, or through hate, or affection, or through the indispo∣sition of their persons, especially after dinner, and if any (saith he) thinke that such ought not to be made counsellours,Al councellours erre at one tyme or other. it may be answered that vve are al men, and that vvhosoeuer wil haue none to bee of a princes councel, that erre at any time in speach or opinion, or are otherwhiles moued and led with passion, or affection, he must seeke them in heauen, for in earth none such are to be found. Thus saith he, who was him selfe a graue and wise councellour; which I note here by the way to the end that young councellours may learne, neither to assure them selues ouermuch of their owne opinions, nor rashly to condemne o∣thers of their follow-counsellers, if they erre and be deceaued sometimes. 9. And to prosecute this digression yet a litle further,A princes coun∣cel ought to be composed of men of different hu∣mours. The melancho∣like iudgment most sound. I also adde that it is necessary for a prince to haue his councel compo∣sed like mans body, that is to say, of men of different complexi∣ons and humours, to the end that the cholericke heate and hasty feruor of some, may be tempered with the flegmatick coldnes and slow resolution of some other; and that the viuacity of some mens sanguine spirits, and eleuated wits, may be some what de∣pressed
and counterpoysed with the maturity of some o∣thers melancholike iudgments (which Aristotle holdeth to be foundest in matters of state) wherby the whole body of the coū∣cel may be reduced to a perfect temperature,Aristot. problem. Sect. 30. quest. 1. so that the predo∣minant quality therin be sound iudgment in most, or in some at least, which may helpe to correct the peccant and offensiue hu∣mours of the rest, restrayne the superfluity of ouer-flowing con∣ceits, cleare doubts and difficulties, and satisfie obiections which proceede many tymes from them who are not able to resolue them, and serue to great purpose in councells, to whet the wits and open the vnderstanding of men of iudgment. This I haue thought good to touch by the way that the young counceller whom I aduise, may vnderstand some what as wel of the nature of a councel, as of the office and duty of a councellour. 10. But now to retourne to the consideration of matters to be consulted, it is requisite that a counceller doe prudently waygh, and compare the discommodities with the commodi∣ties, and inconueniences with the remedies, the difficulties, and dangers with the possibility, and probability to ouercome them; and not to reiect a very commodious and honorable desynment because it is costly, or some way discommodious or difficult and hard, or some way dangerous; for as the prouerb saith. There is no commodity vvithout a discommodity,No commodity vvithout a dis∣commodity. nor any thing honorable vvhich is not difficult; And therfore it is to be foreseene, and prouided that the commodities ouerwaigh the dammages, that the gaine quite the cost, that euery inconuenience haue a due remedy, that euery difficulty be some way facilitated,VVhat is to be forseene & pro∣uided for in euery matter. that euery im∣portant danger may be probably preuented or escaped; that of commodities which cannot be had togeather, the greater be chosen, and of inconueniences, when al cannot be auoyded, the least be admitted; al which being foreseene and probably pro∣uided for, any important action whatsoeuer my be determined, councelled, and vndertaken, notwithstanding that some diffi∣culties, and dangers may be incident therto. For he that wil not take paynes to crack the nut,He that vvil hazard nothing shal vvinne no∣thing. cannot eate the kernel, and he that wil hazard nothing, shal winne nothing; For nought venture (saith the prouerb) nought haue. 11. Yet this is to be vnderstoood, that the danger be not ouer
great; which may partly be prouided for, if it be foreseene,VVhat is to be considered con∣cerning danger and the preuen∣tion therof. Better one bird in the hand then tvvo in the bush Tacit. Annal. Resolutions are to be grounded vpon probable reasons & suffi∣cient meanes. that the greatest danger rather concerne some circumstance of the matter, then the principal parte, or the whole body of the plot, that the benefit expected, doe farre exceede the losse or detri∣ment which may be feared; that no certaine thing of moment be left or aduentured for a thing vncertaine (for better one bird in the hand then two in the bush) that of matters doubtful which can not fully be resolued, the lesse doubtful or more assured be prefer∣red; and finally that the hope of benefit be grounded vpon pro∣bable reason, and sufficiente meanes to atcheiue the same, and not vpon chance, which is so vncertaine that no man may safely build any important matter theron. And therefore Tiberius Caesar held it for a ground of state, as Tacitus witnesseth. Non omittere caput rerum, neque se in casum dare;Nothing of im∣portance is to be left to chance. Not to let slip the first opor∣tunities, nor to aduenture him selfe or his affaires vpon chance, that is to say, not to hazard him selfe or his estate in any enter∣prise, when he had not sufficient probabillity of good successe. 12. For although the euent of al plots that are put in execu∣tion, is casual, depēding vpon the wil of God (as I haue amply de∣clared) yet it is a wise mans part to doe that which lieth in him, to assure it by al probable and conuenient meanes, and then to leaue the rest to Gods disposition; for otherwise he should tempt God and offend him by his negligence, as I haue signifiedca. 29. nu. 6. before; and therfor without this probability of assurance, no matter of importance ought to be attempted by a wise man, except in desperat cases,In extremities a man must trust to God and his good fortune. when the necessity and exigent is so great and so suddaine (as sometimes it falleth out to be) that there is no time or place for discourse; For then there is no remedy but to trust only to God and a mans good fortune, which falleth out many times better then by humane discourse can be expected or immagined; As it did to Iulius Caesar, who finding him selfe vnable to giue battaile to Pompey, because his forces were not arriued,Of Iulius Caesar and his fortune. Plut. in Iulio. Caesare. and being in the meane time constrained to disguise him selfe, and goe to sea in a litle fregot, in such stormy weather and rough seas, that the Pilot would not passe forth, discouered him selfe vnto him, and bad him set saile and goe for∣ward in any case, for that he carried Caesar and his fortune, which succeeded wel, for therby he escaped at that time, and
after ouerthrew Pompey, and became Emperour of the world; But this he did because he had no other remedy, thinking it better to put him selfe to the mercy of the sea, then of his enemy. 13. And in such desperate and sudden exigents when there is no time and place for wisdome or discourse,In extremityes the councel of a simple man may be good and vvhy. Arist de bona fortuna. the councel of some woman or simple Idiot may be better then of the wisest man; For that (as Aristotle saith) some such being by the gift of God borne fortunate, and following the impulse and motion of na∣ture, may aduise or execute more hapily then men of great wis∣dome, who pondering al thinges in the ballance of reason and discourse, doe not follow many times a fortunat motion in them selues, or happy councel of others, because they see not some good and reasonable ground for the same, wherby they forgoe and loose their good fortune, and this is the reason why the common prouerb saith,VVhy a vvomās councel is neuer good but vpon a sudden. That a womans councel is neuer good but vpon a sudden; For when women councel according to their first mo∣tion, they may councel fortunatly, either by chance, or by some natural impulse or motion; wheras falling to discourse of reason or to deliberation, they seldom or neuer coūcel wisely, through the infirmity and weaknes of their iudgement.Ibid. And to this purpose Aristotle alleadgeth the old prouerb; Fortuna fauet fatuis; Fortune fauoreth fooles, as I haue signifiedca. 12. nu. 2. before, where I haue spoken somewhat of this point. Nothing to be left to chance but in case of necessity.14. Hereupon I conclude two thinges; the one that except in case of necessity, a wise man ought to leaue nothing to chance that may be any way assured by reasonable meanes, in respect of the danger thar may ensew therof; For although dangerous coūcells grounded vpon hope of good fortune, speed wel some∣times by meere chance, yet they proue most commonly perni∣tious,Eccli. ca. 3. He vvhich loues danger shal pe∣rish in it. and therfore the wise man saith wisely. Qui amat periculum peribit in illo; He which loues danger shal perish in it. 15. The other conclusion is, that seeing men are many times put to such sudden extremities, that they haue no time or opor∣tunity to aduise themselues,The necessity of the dayly recom∣mendation of our actions to God. or sufficiently to consult with o∣thers, it is most necessary that they arme and prouide them se∣lues against the same by frequent praier and by daily recomen∣dation of al their actions to almighty God, the author and giuer
of al good successe, to the end that he may in such cases, guide, protect and prosper them as I haue sufficiently declared before and can not repeat too oft,Chap. 29. nu. . for that I hold it to be the soundest aduise that any councellour can giue vnto his prince. Thus much for the second consideration. 68. The third shal be to ponder and examine diligently not only the present state of the matter, and the immediate or next sequels therof, but also what may be like to succeed from time to time, and especially what may be the conclusion or (as I may tearme it) the vpshot of the whole; For many times it falleth out that designments prosper and succeed wel for a while, and ouerthrow the authors and attempters in the end,The ouer sight of some coūcellours. not so much by fortune or chance, as by ouersight of the councellour or con∣triuer therof, who being deceaued with the appearance or hope of some present or neare commodity, foreseeth not, or else ne∣glecteth some future and final disgrace:Some improui∣dent coūcellours compared to sick men. much like to the sick man, who following his owne appetit, eateth or drinketh some thinge which refresheth and contenteth him for the present, and augmenteth his desease or killeth him in the end. In this point al wicked and machiauellian councells faile for the most part, which doe often succeede wel for a tyme through Gods per∣mission (for secret causes knowne to his diuyne wisdome) but in the end doe destroy princes and their states,VVherin al vvicked or ma∣chiauillian coū∣cels fayle for the most part. partly through the iustice of almighty God, and partly by errour of the coun¦cellours in true reason of state, as I hope to proue substantially and amply in the 34. and 35. chapter. 6. In the meane tyme I adde for the present a fourth cōside∣ration to the same purpose, to wit,Commodity to be vvayed vvith stability and se∣curity. that a wise councellour ought to waigh the commodity of euery thinge with the sta∣bility and security therof, and not to aduise his prince with a few yeres, present pleasure, or benefit, to purchase many yeres future payne or discommodity; but rather to endure some dis∣aduantage or dammage for a tyme, when therby he may attay∣ne to some stable and permanent good afterwards; which he may learne by the course that nature holdeth in humane and worldly affayres, ordayning motion for rest, buisnes for repose,The course of na∣ture to be fol∣lovved in the de∣liberation of matters of state. labour for ease, and payne for pleasure. In which respect a wise man laboureth when he is young to rest in his old age, & taketh
a loathsome potion, or bitter pil to recouer health, and willing∣ly endureth al temporal misery to attaine in the end to eternal felicity. This I say not only nature, but also true wisdome (which alwayes followeth the course & steps therof) doth teach vs no lesse in matters of state, then in al other humane affaires. 17. Therfore by the same reason a councellour ought also to preferre a certaine and durable commodity;Plutark in his tre¦atise vvhether a prince ought to be learned. though it be lesse, before a greater that is short and vncertaine; To which purpose Theopompus King of Lacedemony answered the Queene his wife very wel, when shee lamented to him that he would leaue his roial authority lesse to his children, then he had receiued it of his father (because he had ordained certaine controlers of the Kings called Ephori):The greatnes of princely autho∣rity to be measu∣red by the stabi∣lity therof. No (saith he) I shal leaue it them greater because, it shal be more firme and sure; Thus said hee, wisely measuring the benefit of princely authority not so much by greatnes, as by surety and stability, wherto al the councels and endeauors of wise councellours and statists ought cheefly to tend;vvhat is cheefly to be considered concerning sta∣bility. yet with this considerarion, that although of worldly thinges some are more stable and permanent then others, yet there is no true stability in any of them, & that therfore al wise mens coūcells are specially directed to the attaining of heauenly thinges, in the which is true stability and eternity, wherof I shal speake more in the last chapter.True stability is in eternity. Thus much for considerations to be had in general concerning matters to be consulted. Sufficient rules cannot be giuen in particuler concerning mat∣ters of state.18 And for asmuch as sufficient rules cannot be giuen in par∣ticuler concerning the same, in respect that the affayres of state are infinit and variable, by reason of the infinit occasions and accidents that fal out daylie to be considered (al which may re∣quire different considerations, according to the different nature and quallity of the matters, and the sundry circumstances of ty∣mes, places, and persons) I haue therfore thought good for ex∣ample sake and the instruction of young Statists, to handle and debate here, some one matter of state by way of discours. And because occasion is offered often tymes to deliberat about the maintenance of a ciuil war in a forreine country, I wil set downe my opinion what aduise a young Statist may safely giue concer∣ning the same.
FOR THE BETTER AND MORE PERTICV∣lar instruction of a young councellour concerning matters to be consulted; A matter of state is debated, to vvit, vvhat is to be considered in a deliberation, touching the maintenance of a ciuil vvarre in a forraine country. CHAP. 33. WHo soeuer shal giue aduise concerning the maintenance of a ciuil warre in a forraine country,Concerning the maintenance of a ciuil vvarre in a forraine cun∣try. it shal be conuenient for him in my fancy, to consider principally these points fol∣lowing. 2. First, the equity and iustice of the cause, as wel of his prin∣ces parte (to wit,The equity of the Cause to be con∣sidered. whether it may be iust and lawful for him to giue the assistance demanded) as also whether their quarrel which demand the same, be lawful and iust or no. For if iustice and equity want in either of both, no commodity that a prince can receiue or expect, can counteruaile the dishonour, danger, and dammage,Psal. 75. which he shal assuredly incurre by the offence of almighty God. Qui aufert spiritum principum, & terribilis est apud reges terrae. VVho takes away the life of princes and is terrible to the Kin∣ges of the earth; And wil assurdly exact the penalty therof of him,The highest point of state. or perhaps of his estate, or of both, sooner or later, which is the cheefe and highest point of state to be considered in al delibe∣rations of princes seeing the destruction and vtter ruine of them and their estates, proceedeth principally of the offence of God, as I haue partly made euidentChap. 16.17.18.19.20.21. et 22. already, when I treated of the iustice of God, and wil make more manifestChap. 35. hereafter. 3.Iust motiues on the princes part to giue succour. It is also to be considered what good and iust motiues his prince may haue on his owne part to giue the succours deman∣ded, which may be reduced to four cases. The first when he may doe therby some notable seruice to God,Some notable seruice to God. which is alwaies in it elfe not only honorable, but also profitable, as it were, money put to interest in respect of the reward, that he shal receaue
assuredly at Gods hands for the same, howsoeuer it succeed for the present. Obligation of oth, promise, or gratitude.4. The second case is, when he is bound by oath, promise, or gratitude, to succour the partie that craueth his aide: for in such case the omission therof, when it may iustly and conueni∣ently be done, were both offensiue to God, and also dishonora∣ble, yea and dangerous to a prince, as wel in respect of Gods pu∣nishment for his periury (whereof I haue spoken amply in the 31.nu. 17.18. &c. chapter) as also for the bad example & iust occasion he should giue to others, his allyes, and confederats, yea and to his owne subiects to forsake him in his necessity. A iust pretence to a forreine crovvne or state.5. The third case is when the prince of whome the succour is demanded hath a iust pretence to a forraine crowne or state, for the obtaining wherof he may hope to haue a party by main∣taining a iust quarrel in the same state or country; wherin res∣pect is to be had, that the princes owne forces be sufficient for the execution of his enterprise,A forreine vvarre not to be principally grounded vpon hope of a party. that he shal no neede to relie further vpon his party, then only to facilitate the same, for if his hope of good successe, either in obtayning his pretence, or in conseruing or maintaining of it afterwards, doe chiefly de∣pend vpon the good wil, fidelity, and strength of such a party, he builds (as a man may say) vpon the sand, and puts in aduen∣ture his labour, charges, and reputation. A lamentable example of Se∣bastian K. of Portugal. Hieron. Conesta∣gio del vnio de li. reg. di Portu∣gallo li. 2. 6. Hereof we haue had a lamentable example a few yeres past in Sebastian King of Portugal, who hoped to make him selfe King of Marroco vnder couler to restore therunto Muley Mahomet, wher∣of he made so sure accōpt that he caried a crowne with him to crowne him selfe kinge there, not cōsidering that his aduersary Muley Moluco, (who was then in possession of that kingdome) was not only most valiant for his person, but also able to put into the feild for his defence aboue 100000. horse and foote, against whome neuertheles Kinge Sebastian vndertooke the enterprise with an army of 3000. soldiers or therabout, the most parte of them vntrayned, besides that neither he him selfe, nor any that did command the army vnder him had euer borne armes before, in so much that he trusted as it seemed to the conduct and forces of Muley Mahomet his confederat, who when he came to trial was not able to bringe to the feild 2000. men; so that aduenturing
with so few to fight with aboue 40000. horse, & 10000. foote (& as some say a farre greater number) his army was presently inclo∣sed on al sides, & so opprest with multitude, that he lost both the battaile & his life So perilous a thing it is for a prince to ground any desygnment of a forreine warre vpon conceite either of the weaknes of an enemy, or of the strength of a confederat, and not vpon sufficient forces of his owne. But to proceede. 7. The fourth case is,A forraine vvarre to be mantayned to a∣uoid a domesti∣cal. when to auoid some imminent danger of inuasion or warre at home, or other great vexation, a prince is forced to hold his enemy occupied in his owne country by supporting there a iust quarrel against him: wherin though he may spend largly without feare of losse, (in respect of the pre∣sent security which he purchaseth,Good councel of Alcibiades con∣cerning the maintenāce of a forreine vvarre. and exemption from greater expences and danger at home) neuertheles it shalbe wisdome for him in my fancy to practise the councel which Alcibiades the Athenian gaue to Tistaefernes, in like case, to wit, not to giue grea∣ter succour then may suffice to keepe the warre stil on foote as wel to gaine tyme (which often remedieth the greatest inconue∣niences) as also to extenuat and weary both parties, in such sort, that whether the warre end by victory or composition, they may haue no ability to assaile him, which he may wel feare, though the party which he assisteth should preuaile. 8. For this purpose it is to be considered,Ciuil vvarrs end often to the cost of the forreiner that mantayned them. that ciuil dissenti∣ons end many tymes to the cost of the forreine prince who man∣tayned the same, whether they end by victory of his enemy, or of his confederat, or els by their composition; For his enemy if he ouercome, remayneth more irritated, and more obli∣ged to seeke reuenge then before; and his confederat if he vanquish the other, and succeede him in his state, is more like to proue an enemy then a freend, especially if the quarrel of the o∣ther was not personal (that is to say proceeding of some perti∣culer iniury done to his persō) but a quarrel of state, as cōmōly it is, for in that case whosoeuer shalbe gouernour of the same state wil be his enemy notwithstanding any benefit receiued;Respect of grati∣tude encountred vvith reason of state litle auai∣leth. Guichiard. nel auisi polit. For ex∣perience teacheth that respect of gratitude for benefits past, litle auaileth when it is any way encoūtre ith reasō of state which (as Guicciardin saith) vince ogni partito; doth with princes ouerwaigh al other considerations, and is so variable according to the variety of
occasions and successe of affaires that it changeth daily,Reason of state very variable. and of a freend this day maketh an enemy to morow, in which respect the leagues and amity of princes is commonly very vnsure, be the obligation neuer so great K. Henry the 7. Polid virgil hist. Angl li. 26.9. Henry the 7. King of England became an enemy to Charles the 8. King of France in defence of the Duke of Britany for reason of state, though the said Charles did lately before assist him with men and money against King Richard the third, and helped to make him King of England.Elizabeth Q. of England. Sand. li. 2. de Schism. Angl. And what greater benefit could one prince receaue of an other, then the late Queene of England re∣ceiued of the Catholike King Philip the 2. King of Spaine, who when he was King of England, and married to her sister, saued her life, which otherwise shee had lost for conspiracy against her said sister, yet neuertheles shee became the greatest enemy he had, and so continued during his life. 10. Moreouer it commonly falleth out, that the party whom a forreine prince helpeth to aduance,Money lent to mantaine a for∣reine vvarre in danger to be lost. remaineth his debter for the charges bestowed in his succour; wherupon it followeth many times, that the creditor looseth both his freend and his money. For if he trust to bare promises of repaiment, he is in danger to be serued as was Edward the black prince,Edvvard the black Prince. who going in person with a great army into Spaine to succour Peter the King of Castile vpon his promise to repay him al his expences,Polid virg. hist. Angl. li. 19. was after the victory so delaied and deluded by him, that he was faine to returne without any satisfaction; by the meanes wherof he was constrained to lay such impositions vpon his owne subiects in Aquitany for the paiment of his soldiers that they rebelled, and he lost the greatest part of that country. Places or tovv∣nes giuen in paune for money ma e enemies of frends.11. And put the case he haue any places, or townes deliuered him in consideration of his expences, or for his better security (which any prince that shal giue succours to forrainers hath reason to seeke) then his frend many times for reason of state becomes his enemy to recouer the places, which he gaue him before: And so also it falleth out commonly whensoeuer ciuil warrs and dissentions come to end by composition of the parties deuided, who for them part willingly agree and ioyne against the forreiner, that mantained their diuision, especially if he haue any hould or footing in their country, though it were at
the first with their owne consent, wherof I wil alleadge a few examples, as wel ancient as moderne. 12. In the Barons warrs in England in the time of King Iohn,The Barrons vvarrs in En∣gland. Polidor Virgil. hist. Angliae li. 15. Paul. Aemil in Philip 2. Lewis the 8. then sonne to Philip the 2. King of France assisted the Barons against their King and being called by them into England and proclaimed King therof, was shortly after by common consent, as wel of them as of al other english, driuen out a∣gaine. 13. Also Philip Duke of BurgundyPhilip duke of Burgundy. to be reuenged of the Duke of Orleance and of Charles the 7. whiles he was yet but Dolphin, cal∣led Henry the 5. King of England into France, and assisted him first to make him Regent and after to crowne,Pol. Virg. in Henr. 5. & 6. not only him but also Henry the 6. his sonne king of France in Paris, yet in the end he made his peace with king Charles aforesaid, and helped him to depriue the English of al that which either they had got by his meanes, or els held before by title of inheritance. 14. In like manner Charles the 8.Charles the 8. K. of France. King of France was most ear∣nestly sollicited to the conquest of Naples by the Neapolitans them selues,Philip Comin. in Carol. 8. c. 2. & 39. who neuertheles shortly after helped to expel the gua∣risons and forces which he left there, not with standing they had receiued great benefits of him. 15.Elizabeth Q. of England. In this age also the late Queene of England supported the Protestants in the first troubles of France against their king to her great charges, and when they made their peace in the yere of our Lord 1562. they al ioyned with the catholikes against her to recouer of her Haure de Grace, which they had before giuen her for the assurance of the money, which she had lent them. 16.Philip the 2. K. of Spaine. And now lastly not with standing the chargable and co∣stly succours of men and money that the french catholikes rece∣iued of the catholike King of glorious memory, yet they for∣sooke him al most al in the end, and ioyned with his and their aduerse party, and made warre against him to recouer of him some few townes in the frontiers of Flanders which they had giuen him before for his and their security. 17. Therfore although these thinges doe not alwaies suc∣ceede in this manner; yet for as much as most commonly they doe, and that nothing is more vncertaine then that which de∣pendeth vpon the wil, affection or gratitude of other men, or
vpon reason of state (which,Nothing more vncertaine then that vvhich de∣pendeth on the vvil of men or reason of state. as I haue said, doth vary and change daily according to the variety of occasions) I hold it for a spe∣cial point of prudence in a prince to take the surest way, to wit, not to engage him selfe to farre, nor to aduenture more then he careth not to loose, in the maintenance of a ciuil warre in a for∣raine country, except when either the seruice of God, some iust obligation, or the conseruation of his owne state, doth neces∣sarily require it. Thus much concerning such points as are to be waighed on the behalfe of the prince that is to giue the succour. Considerations concerning those vvhich demand succour.18. Furthermore great consideration is also to be had of the state and condicion of the parties which demand it, as whether they be able to ouercome their aduersaries, or at least to stand and maintaine their quarel, with the assistance which they craue or may be giuen them, for otherwaies it were great imprudence in any prince to vndertake their maintenance, but rather to en∣deauor by way of treaty betwixt them and their aduersary to compound the quarrel, and therby to make him selfe grateful to both parties. 19. And for as much as it many tymes falleth out, that the a∣bility and power of the party, which craueth assistance, con∣sisteth not in the strength of some one potent & absolut prince, but in the force of many princes,Concerning tovvns or states confederated. townes, or states confederated and leagued togeather, it is in such case specially to be conside∣red, how, or vpon what reasons the said party is vnited. 20. To this purpose it is to be noted, that in al confederacies and leagues wherin many vnite them selues,The motiues or ends of leagues to be considered. the confederats are moued therto, either with one motiue or end (as in the Can∣tons of the switzers, or in the league which the Pope, the king of the Romans,Philip de Com. Cron du Roy. Charles ca. 23. the king of Spaine, the Venetians, and the Duke of Milan made against Charles the 8. king of France, for the deffence of Italy, wherin al of them were interessed) or els they are moued therto,The common end of the french league. The particuler ends of many in the french lea∣gue. with diuers and sundry motiues, some with one, and some with an other; as for example in the late French league or vnion, some entred only for the conseruation of the catholike religion (which was the common and pretended end of al that party) others entred for particular respects, as either for passion, or for ambition, or for the freendship of some man on the one
side, or hatred of some on the other, or for hope of future gaine, or for present profit and commodity, or such like. 21. Now then those that are led by particuler respects,Diuersity of ends causeth the dis∣solution of lea∣gues. doe not for the most part remaine any lōger in any league, then they may hope to obtaine their desires, and when they are perswa∣ded that they may sooner obtaine the same by adhearing to the aduerse party, they are easely induced therto; and hereupon fol∣loweth commonly the dissolution of such leagues and confede∣racies; For which cause the strength and power of any league, is not to be measured so much by the multitude of confederats (be they neuer so great and potent) as by their concurrence and agreement in one and the selfe same end:A fevv vnder o head strn∣ger then many vnder different heades Philip. Commin. Cron. du roy Louis c. 26. for as a few men vnder one head, are stronger then many vnder many and different heads (as Philipus Comminaeus noteth very wel) so a few principal persons or townes vnited to geather for one and the selfe same cause, are to be reputed farre stronger, and more like to stand, then very many, though much more potent, if they haue many and different ends. 22.Necessario for a Prince to dico∣uer the ends of the principal confederats. Therfore it much importeth a prince which shal support a foreine league to discouer as much as he may, what end or motiue induced the heads and principal confederats to enter therin, wherby he shal the better discerne, what their force and strength may be, and how they may be like to stand and main∣taine their quarrel, for if they haue al one end, they may be re∣puted the stronger, but if their ends be diuers they can not long stand, as we haue seene by experience of late in the french league, which not with standing the great succours both of men and money giuen them by the catholike King, dissolued rather of it selfe then by any forces of enemy,The dissolution of the French league through the diuersity of ends. by reason that very many of the gouernours of townes and cheefe pillers therof, concurred not in one end with the whole league, and therfore when they receiued satisfaction of their particular desires, or saw them selues out of hope therof, they easely changed their party. 23. To such leagues I say vnited only in exterior shew,In vvhat case a prince may sup∣port a forreine league not vni∣ted in one end. and not in one common end, I hold it not secure or conuenient for a prince to giue succour, except he be moued therto by some iminent danger of inuasion or other great dammage, which he may feare to receiue from the enemy occupied (as I haue signi∣fied
before) whiles he neither prepare for his better deffence at home,nu. 7. or at least may winne time, which in al extremities is to be sought, and often remedieth the greatest inconueniences. 24. Moreouer for as much as the succours demanded, or giuen, consist commonly either in money, men, or in both, and that it may import a prince for the furtherance of some iust pre∣tence, or obligation of his owe, or for some publike good to employ not only his forces but also his money largely, to main∣taine and support a forreine league, I wil adde somewhat con∣cerning the same, to the end that a young Statist may the better vnderstand, both what to aduise, and also how to deale therin. 25. Therfore, first concerning the bestowing of money, I say that although it can not be denied but that money may doe very much in al busines of this quallity (for Quid non mortalia pectora cogit auri sacra fames?Hovv money is to be bestovvd in the mantaynāce of a forreine league. vvhat effect mo∣ney may vvorke. VVhat doth not the detestable hunger of gold compel men to doe? yet ordinarily the effect that money can worke is but to dispose the wills and minds of men to the desired end, which disposition neuertheles in some that receaue the money, is none at al, in others very litle, and in most very doubtful, and to be suspected; For, those to whome thou giuest thy money either are thy enemies, or thy freends, or els neutral: if they be thy enemies, commonly they take thy money, to impouerish thee, to enrich them selues, and to employ thy owne money against thee when they shal see time: if they be thy frends, thy money worketh litle, for that their owne good wil and frendship, bin∣deth them vnto thee more then thy money; if they be neutral and become thy frendes for the profit thy haue by thee, their frendship wil last no longer then the profit continueth, and when they may thinke to get more by thy enemy then by thee, they wil be his frends for the same reason that they were thine; and although they shal haue neuer so great benefit by thee, they wil perswade themselues that thou seekest thy owne commo∣dity and not theirs, and that thou art beholding vnto them, for that they doe voutchsafe to take any thinge of thee. The desire of mo∣ney encreaseth vvith the vse and possession therof. Cicero. offic li. 2.26. And for as much as the hunger and desire of money doth encrease with the possession and vse therof, the more thou giuest them, the more they wil desire, for as Cicero saith. Fit dete∣rior qui accipit, & ad idem semper expectandum paratior; He which taketh
or receiueth money is made worse therby, and alwaies the more ready to ex∣pect the like. So that if thou doe not euer giue them, when, and how much they shal expect, or demand of thee, they wil hate thee more for that which thou dost not giue them, then they haue loued thee for that which they haue receiued already; For as SenecaSeneca. saith. Vetus & nota ingratitudo est, dati immemores meminisse negati, ideoque rarae & tepentes gratiae feruidae & frequentes quaerelae;A benefit recei∣ued soone for∣gotten, a benefit denyed, remem∣bred euer. It is an old and notorious ingratitude to forget a benefit receiued, and stil to remember a benefit denied, wherupon it follovveth, that thanks are rare and told, and complaints feruent and frequent. 27. I say not this for that I thinke it not conuenient to ne∣gociate with money to gaine & entertaine the affectiōs of men, but to signifie that it is to be done with great consideration; for as Pliny saith. Inconsideratae largitionis comes paenitentia est;Plin. li. 7. ep. Money to be be∣stovved vvith great considera∣tion. Liberality to be vsed tovvards true frends and vvho they are. Repentance euer accompanieth the inconsiderat emploiment of money. Therfore to say somewhat of this point, my opinion is, that it is conuenient for any man, that doth negociate with money in a strange coun∣try, to haue his purse alwaies open, for such as are true frends to him, and the league, as wel to gratify them, and to recompence their good wils, and good offices, as also to helpe their necessi∣ties and to enable them to vphold their party. 28. And those may be accompted true frends, whose end is either the common end of the whole league,Hovv money is to be bestovved vpon suspected persons. or so dependant therof, that it can not be otherwise obtained, but by the good successe of the league; and to such, money may be euer securely giuen, when their necessities, or the publike good of the league shal require it: but to others, litle or nothing is to be giuen, in my fancy, except it be to buye of them some important places, or to recompence intelligences, or seruices already done, and therfore it shal be conuenient to vse al diligence (as before I signified) to discouer the true motiues that induced euery one, to whome money is to be giuen, to enter into the league. 29. And in case it may seeme needful, to aduenture some∣what to entertaine some few principal men, though neutrals, or suspected (to diuert them rom compounding with the enemy) it shal be conuenient in my fancy to giue them largely, and more then the enemy is like to giue them,The danger of breach of pro∣mise. and precisely to accomplish what els shal be promised, for otherwise they wil acknowledge
no obligation, and when the enemy shal giue them more, they wil follow him, and if promise be not kept with them, they wil esteeme them selues to be mocked, & for very disdaine wil passe to the enemy; and of al this, I saw daily experience in time of the league in France, where the Catholique King bestowed many millions, in pensions, in entertainments which many re∣ceiued, and after became his open enemies; some of them be∣cause they were not punctually paied their entertainments; o∣thers because (as they pretended) promise was not kept with them in other things; and some others againe, either because they could not haue what soeuer they demanded, or because others had more then they. 29. But how much soeuer shalbe bestowed vpon one or o∣ther,Money and for∣ces concurring vvorke great effects. there is no security, or assurance, in negociating with mo∣ney alone, except the same be either accompanied, or shortly seconded with sufficient forces, which concurring therwith may worke great effect, and therfore the Oracle said to Philip of Macedony; Hastis pugna, argentatis & omnia vinces. Fight vvith siluered speares, and thou shalt ouercome al; Aduising him therby, to employ money and forces togeather, for as for negociation with money alone, the longer it continueth, the more danger there is to loose both the money and the busines, for no trust is to be had in affection bought with money, and not grounded on reason and vertue.No tust in affe∣ction bought vvith money. Cicero. offic. li. 2. In which respect Philip King of Macedony, said very wel to Alexander his sonne, who sought to gaine from him the good wills of the Maccedonians with gifts and bribes; VVhat a mischeefe (saith he) persvvadeth thee to thinke that those wil be faithful vnto thee, vvhome thou hast corrupted with money. 30. Thus much for this matter, wherof much more might be said if the question were reduced to particular persons and cun∣tries which might minister other important considerations of difficulties according to the nature strength or weaknes of the places,A man corrup∣ted vvith money vvil be faithful to no man. and the conditions, and habilities of the persons who were to be succorred or impugned, which I forbeare to pro∣secut any furder to passe to an other matter; meaning to debate, whether the remedies which politykes teach against the dan∣gers and inconueniences growing of wickednes, be sufficient in reason and true policy to assure the state of a wicked prince, by
the occasion wherof I wil examine diuers principles of Macchi∣auellian doctrin, and shew the absurdity therof, to the end that the young Statist whome I informe, may vnderstand, as wel what to auoid, as what to embrace in matter of policy, and that a princes state, can not be assured by wickednes. ANOTHER QVESTION IS DEBATED FOR the furder instruction of a yong Statist, to vvit, vvhether a princes state can be assured by vvicked policy; by the occasion vvherof many principles of Macchiauel and of the politikes his follovvers, are examined, and confuted, by reason of state, vvithout the consideration of Gods iustice. CHAP. 34. NO man that is endewed with reason wil deny, that wickednes in a prince, maketh him hateful to his subiects and consequently endangereth his estate, which al Macchiauellians and poli∣tikes, know so wel,VVherein con∣sisteth the grea∣test part of Mac∣chiauels polli∣cies. that the greatest part of their policy consisteth in deuising remedies against the same, to the end that their prince may be securely wicked, that is to say, that he may purchase and enioy al worldly pleasures, and commodities, per fas & nefas; by right or wrong, without danger of any reuenge of man, not fearing the wrath, & iustice of God, because they beleeue not, that there is a God, or at least that he medleth with the affayres of men. 2. Now then, for as much, as I haue already sufficiently pro∣ued through out this whole treatise, that God disposeth of prin∣ces, and their states, and punisheth them for sinne when they deserue it (where vpon it also followeth that al Macchiauillian, and wicked policies, tending to the conseruation of wicked princes, are not only friuolous and vayne, but also noysome, and pernicious to their estates) therfore I wil here in this chapter, lay aside the consideration, of Gods prouidence and iustice, and exa∣mine the sufficiency of Macchiauellian pollicies only according
to reason of state; to shew thereby the absurdity of politikes; who thinke them selues able to warrant and defend a prince in wickednes, plunging him first into needles dangers, and then endeuoring to apply some remedies:Politykes do first dravve princes into dangers, and then seee to re∣medy them. Folly to admit an inconuenien∣ce in hope of an vncertain reme∣dy. as if a man should poyson his frend, making ful account to cure him afterwards, whereas it is the part of a wise and politike man, rather to preuent the danger and inconuenience, then to admit it vpon confidence of remedies, whereof no man liuing can warrant the successe. This I say, for that Macchiauillians doe most absurdly endanger their princes by their wicked counsel, in hope to deliuer them after∣wards by their policies, where of the successe is not in their hands, but so vncertayne and subiect to chance and hazard, that no wit or power of man, can assure it, as I haue most amply pro∣ued in the 11.12. and 13. Chapters. 3. But let vs see some of their remedies. One of the principal (according to the doctrin of their maister Macchiauel) is, extre∣mity of al mischeefe and wickednes,Macchia. de princi. Macchiauels principal reme∣dy consisteth in extremity of vvickednes. Macchiauel vvold haue a prince to be either a Saint or a deuil. which Macchiauel teacheth to be farre more secure for a prince, then mediocrity betwixt vertue, and vice, therefore he wold haue his prince to be either the best man liuing, or the woorst, that is to say, either to be a Saint, or a deuel; whereof his reason must needs be (if he haue any at al) that he which holdeth the middle way betwixt vertue, and vice, & doth sometymes wel, and sometymes il, must needs incurre the offence and hatred of some men whereby he shalbe endangered; wherfore he thinketh it conuenient for such a one to practise the common prouerb, to wit; Qui semel verecundiae fines transierit &c. He that hath once past the bounds of shame, must be notably impudent; That is to say, he that is once ouer the shooes in sinne, and iniquity, must for his saufty, goe ouer head and eares; as though the way to remedy a dissease were to nourish & encrease the cause therof,Macchiauels absurditie in seeking to reme∣dy a dissease b encreasing the cause thererof. Excessiue vvic∣kednes exposeth a prince to exces∣siue hatred. Cicero offic. 2. as to cure a dropsy, with continual drinking, or a burning feauer with whot wynes, and spice; or to cast oyle into the fyre to the end to quench it; for so doe Macchiauillians, who to remedy the danger that groweth to a wicked prince by hatred, do make him more hateful, and by the extremity and ex∣cesse of wickednes, expose him to the extreme and excessiue ha∣tred of al men, and consequently to ruine and perdition. 4. For as Cicero saith; Multorum odijs nullae opes nullae vires po∣terunt
resistere. No force, power,No force or povv¦er can sufficien∣tly resist the ha∣tred of many. Polities seeke absurdly to re∣medy hatred by feare. Feare concur∣ring vvith hate, makes it more dangerous to him vvich is hated and vvhy. or vvelth can suffise to resist the hatred of many; and much lesse of al men; yes saye they; Oderint dum me∣tuant. Let them hate him (be they neuer so many) so that they feare him; For feare shal so represse their hatred, that they shal not dare to attempt or execute any thing to his preiudice. Thus say they but most absurdly, For, feare, in a mind possest with hate, is no∣thing els, but, as it were; Vnguis in vlcere; A mans naile, or a scratch in an vlcere or botch which is exasperated thereby, and the paine of the patient greatly agrauated; And although feare do in some sort delay and represse the fury of hatred, yet it makes it much more secure for the hater, and more dangerous to him that is hated. 5. For, those who hate without feare, doe many times at∣tempt vnaduisedly to their owne destruction, but those which both hate and feare, do deliberat, and execute with much more maturity, and consideration,The prince ad∣ding feare to the hatred of his Subiect, redoo∣bleth his ovvne feare and dan∣ger. Senca Treaged. & consequently with lesse danger to them selues, and more to their enemy; so that when the prince doth adde feare to the hate of his subiects, he redoobleth both his owne feare, and also his owne peril. Wherupon the tragical Poët saith. —Qui sceptra duro saeuus imperio regit, Timet timentes, metus in autorem redit. That is to saye, he vvhich gouuerneth by seuerity, and cruelty feareth those vvhich feare him, and the feare turneth vpon the author,Feare turneth v∣pon the author. or cause therof. And as Seneca the stoick saith. Necesse est vt multos timeat, quem multi timent. He must need be in feare of many, vvhom many feare.Cicero offic. li. 2. Also Cicero following Ennius the Poët saith notably thus; Quem metuunt ode∣runt &c. Men hate him vvhome they feare, and euery one desireth the de∣struction of him vvhome he hateth, and no force or povver of Empire be it neuer so greate can long stand if it be prest vvith continual feare of the subiects. Thus saith Cicero, declaring the danger that groweth to a prince by hatred and feare, which are the most forcible and vrgent motiues that may be, to moue a people to conspiracies,Hatred and so are the Cau∣ses of conspira∣cyes. as wel amongst them selues, as wih forreiners, both to deliuer them selues of their feare, as also to discharge their hatred and ire vpon their prince. wherefore Aristotle doth reckon hatred, and feare amongst the principal causes of the destruction of monar∣chyes,Aristot li. 5. Poli. and tyrannys.
6. But here saye the Macchiauillians; for this cause hath the prince his gards,Macchiauillian remedyes against conspiracies. armies, and fortresses to defend him selfe from al attempts both forraine and domestical, besids the vigilancy, and policy which he vseth for the preuention of conspiracies, disarming and empouerishing his subiects, forbidding their as∣semblies, and publik conuentions, and al other meanes which may breede loue, trust, and confidence amongst them, terrifiing them also often times with the frequent shew of his gards, and garrisons to make them seruile, and base minded, suffering them to be vicious, and dissolute of life to make them effeminate, not permitting them the vse of schooles, or other meanes, whereby they may become learned, wise, and politike, employ∣ing his spies euery where for the discouery of euery mans in∣tention, nourrishing diuision amongst the greatest to counter∣peise one with an other, suspecting al men, be they neuer so much bound to him, and finnally cutting of by one meanes or other, al those whose power, courrage, or wit, he may think to be dangerous to his state; wherby he shal be secure and free from the danger which may grow vnto his person or state by the hate of his subiects. Macchiauel vvas not the im∣uentor of his pollicies.7. Thus say they; whereto I answere, that if Macchiauel or some other politikes, in these our dayes, had ben the first inuen∣ters of these policies, & that they had neuer ben yet tryed, and put in practise, it might with more reasō be supposed, that there were or might be some assurance, and security therin for a wic∣ked prince, but seeing al this, or whatsoeuer els Macchiauel, or any politike doth teach for the conseruation of a tyrant,Macchiauillian policies knovven and practised in al ages by vvicked princes to their ruine. hath ben practised in al tymes and ages, by tyrants and wicked prin∣ces (who neuertheles haue al, or the most part of them peri∣shed, and bene ruyned by the hatred of men) who seeth not the insufficiency therof, for the assurance of a prince in wic∣kednes. Arist. lib. 5. polit. c. 11. Macchiauillian pollicies reiected by Aristotle a∣boue 2000. yeres agoe.8. Can Macchiauel, or any other politike teach more to this purpose, then we fynd written aboue 2000. yeres agoe by Ari∣stole in his politikes, who shewing the meanes whereby tyrants seeke to preserue them selues, and their states, ministreth to Macchiauel and his followers al the matter, and substance of their wicked policies; which neuertheles were not approued by A∣ristotle
as sufficient for the cōseruation of tyranny, but reproued and vtterly reiected by him; in which respect he declareth how vnsure tyranny is,The speedy fal of tyrannical states noted by Aristotle. Aristot Ibid. c. 12. and exemplyfyeth the same in al the tyranni∣cal states, which had bene before, or in his tyme, shewing how speedily they al perished, excepting only foure, whereof the first continued a hundreth yeres, the second 73. and six monthes, the third 33. and the fourth 22. yeres. And the cause of the long con∣tinuance of the first, & second, he ascribeth to the moderat and iust gouernment of the tyrants, who though they got their states tirannically, and held them by vsurpation, and force (in respect whereof they were called tyrants) yet they gouerned with such moderation, and iustice, that they were greately beloued of their subiects. 9.Aristot ibid. ca. 11. To which purpose Aristotle also obserueth that the state of a tyrant is so much the more sure, by how much more moderat it is, and nearer to the iust gouuernment of a king; wherein the Macchiauillians may note, both by the doctrin and experience of Aristotle, that the extremity of wickednes and tyranny,Macchiauillian pollicy contrary to Aristotles doctrin and ex∣perience. is the high way to carry a prince head-long to his destruction, not∣withstanding al their preuentions aforesaid, whereof some part are most necessary for the conseruation of any princes state, as gards, garrisons, fortresses, vigilance of consellours, diligence of spyes, & intelligencers, as also such other part of those pollicies,VVhat is to be reiected and vvhat alovved in the Macchia∣uillian remedies aboue mencio∣ned. as is conforme to reason, iustice, and conscience; but the rest, I meane those points of hindring loue, and confidence amongst the subiects, immoderat pilling and polling them, making them effeminat, ignorant, & base minded, nourishing debate amongst greate personages, and cutting of such as are more eminent in credit, power, courrage and wit then the rest, these I say, and al such as are against charity, iustice, and conscience, are against al true policy, and so farre from helping to conserue a tyrant, that they helpe to ruine him; as here in this chapter it shal appeare concerning some of these points in particuler, and some in ge∣neral, so farre as I shal think it necessary for this tyme, leauing the examination of the rest to the second part of this treatise, whereto they more properly belong. 10. And now to speake of some of them,Macchiauels do∣ctrin concerning diuision cōfuted. what can be more cō∣trary to true reasō of state, then to hinder trust, cōfidence, & loue
amongst the people, without the which there can be no com∣monwelth? For without loue, and confidence there can be no fidelity, and without fidelity, no iustice, and without iustice, no commonwelth;num. 18. as I haue declared sufficiently in the 31. Chapter, where I treated of the necessity of fidelity in the prince. VVhy publike feasts and plaies vvere first insti∣tuted.11. For this cause al ancient law-makers, and founders of commonwelths, haue ordayned in al countries and citties, pu∣blike feasts, playes, and assemblyes, where the people may meete togeather, not only for their recreations, but also to make them knowne one to an other, to the end that of their acquayntance and conuersation may grow loue,The benefit of loue and frend∣ship in Common vvelths. Arist. li. 2. polit. c. 2. and frendship, and the same redound to a general vnity for the conseruation of peace in the whole commonwelth; And therfore Aristotle saith that frend∣ship is; Maximum bonum ciuitatibus. The greatest good that can be to com∣monvvelths, for saith he; By the meanes therof they shalbe free from sedi∣tion. Also Solon esteemed this amity, and vnion of mynds, to be so necessary for the conseruation of humane Society,Plutar. that being demanded what commonwelth was best, and most like to con∣tinue;VVhat common vvelth Solon liked best. Plutar. in Solon. Such a one saith he, vvherein euery man doth take the iniury which is donne to an other, to be donne to him selfe; and to the same purpose he made a law in Athens, geuing leaue to euery one to take vpon him the iust quarrel of any other, and to demand reparation of the wrong, as if the matter concerned himselfe, which constitu∣tion of Solon,The loue and vnion of mem∣bers of the poli∣tical body most necessary for the conseruation thereof, Plutark commendeth greatly; As a meanes saith he, to accustome the people to feele and redresse the greeues and iniuryes one of an other, as being all members of one bodie; whereby we may vnderstand that the vnion and loue of the members of the political body (that is to say the commonwelth) is no lesse necessary, then the combination of the parts in the body natural; which Seneca tea∣cheth notably in these woords. Vt omnia inter se membra &c. As al the members and parts of mans body,Seneca li. 2. de Ira. ca. 31. doe agree together, for the conseruation of the vvhole, vvhich also redoundeth to the good of euery part in particuler, so all men ought to agree to the benefit one of an other, for that vve are borne to liue in society, vvhich cannot be conserued but by the agreement and loue of the parts thereof. Thus saith Seneca. VVhy Macchia∣uillians think that factions amōgst subiects ar good for their princes.12. How then can it stand with true policy, or reason of state, to hinder this vnion, and loue of the people, or to sowe and nourrish factions amongst them, and especially amongst
greate personages, whereby seditions, tumults and garboyles may grow in the commonwelth; Marry, say the Macchiauil∣lians, it standeth notably wel with the reason of our princes state, who seeketh not the general good of the commonwelth, but his owne particuler benefit, and therfore for as much as the vnion and frendship of his subiects may animat and enable them the rather to conspire against him,A machiauil∣lian prouerb, and priniple confuted. it is good policy and reason of state for him, to maintayne factions amongst them, accor∣ding to the old saying; Si vis regnare diuide; If thou vvilt raigne, make diuision. 13. Thus say they; of whome I wold gladly learne,The good and yll of the common vvelth and of the prince are conioined Factions in the common vvelth dangerous to the prince. Plutarke in his instructions for such as deale in matters of state. how they can in this case separat the peril of the commonwelth, from the peril of the prince, to make this good policy for him; can the body be in danger without the danger of the head? hath it not bene seene manny tymes, that some priuat quarrel growne at first betwixt meane personages, hath after passed furder to a multi∣tude, and from them come to be general to the ruine of a whole state? and therfore Plutark wysely compareth sedition to a little sparke of fyre, which falling into straw, or other dry matter, in some corner of a howse, setteth the same on fyre, wherby in the end a whole toune is burnt; in which respect he counteth it for one of the most special points of political scyence to take away al occasion of sedition, and when it groweth to appease it quickly. 14. Aristotle also teacheth the same very seriously,Arist. Polit. li. 5. ca. 2 3. & 4. Sedition a prin∣cipal cause of the subuersion of Staes. affirming that sedition is the cheefe cause of the mutation, and subuersion of commonwelths, shewing how many wayse it may a rise, and how it may be remedyed, and that it is alwaise dangerous, but then most pernicious, when it groweth amongst greate persona∣ges, and therfore he aduiseth to remedy the same if it be possible in the very beginning, for that;Idem Ibid. c. 4. Principium dicitur esse dimidium to∣tius; The biginning is said to be the one haulfe of the whole; And little se¦ditions at the first,Factiōs amongst great men most dangerous. grow after to be greate especially amongst greate men, whose discord, saith he, dravveth the whole commonwelth after them; whereof he alledgeth diuers examples, which I omit because I haue treated this matter already in the 7. Chapter v∣pon the occasion of a law of Solon,nu. 14. where I haue shewed how dangerous, & pernicious some seditions haue bene which haue
sprong but amongst women and boyes,num. 19.20. & 21. and I haue also furder declared the danger of nourrishing diuision amongst greate per∣sonages by a domestical example of the vtter ouerthrow of King Henry the 6.Ibid. nu. 17. and al the house of Lancaster, whereof the first ground and occasion was, that the Queene his wife maintayned the di∣uision betwixt the Duke of Somerset, and the Earle of Warwick; And to the same purpose I haue also alledged other examples out of Philip de Comines with his opinion and aduise to al princes to la∣bour with al speede to compound the quarrels,Ibid nu. 16. & 18. Philip. Com. de reb. gest. Lodou. c. 138. that falle out a∣mongst their nobility, and not to nourrish them by any meanes, lest they should kindle a fire in their owne house, which after they shal not be able to quench. Whereby it may appeare how dangerous & absurd is the councel which Macchiauillians geue to their princes, to nourish factions in their commonwelth, and especially amongst the greatest personages,Princes may make factions, and can not af∣tervvards hin∣der the bad ef∣fects thereof. as though, princes were omnipotent, and had the harts, and wils of al men in their hands, to moue, and sway, incense, or temper, in such manner, & measure, as it shal please them, which is only in Gods hand & power to doe. So that it is euident in this case, that the Macchi∣auillians expose their prince to manifest danger without any as∣surance,num. 11. & 12. or sufficient probability of remedy, which in matter of state is most absurd, as I haue declared in the 32. Chapter. Macchiauillian policies make princes odious, to their subiects.15. The like may also be said of their other pestilēt policies be∣fore mencioned, cōsisting in al kind of cruelty, iniustice & wic∣kednes, wherby they make their princes most odious to al men, and by consequent, draw them into manifest danger, from the which they are not able to warrāt or defend them by al their po∣licy: as it may appeare by the experience of al ages, and former times vntil this wherin we liue,The hatred of subiects most dangerous to princes by the experience of al ages. seeing al histories do testify that the more wicked and tiranical princes haue bene, and themore they haue incurred the hatred of men, the sooner they haue bene ruined; some by open rebellions of their subiects; some others by their general defection in fauor of strangers, others by secret conspiracies of a few, and others also by some desperat attempt of some one man, not withstanding al their policies, power, or force of gards, armies, fortresses, or other humane meanes. Cicero offic. li. 2.16. This point Cicero proueth by the examples of Phalaris a most cruel tirant (whome al the people of the Agrigentius oppressed
in a general tumult) & of Alexander the tirant of Phaerae,The danger of hatred exempli∣fied by. Cicero. Diuers of the first kings of Rome ruynated by hatred. killed by his owne wife; & of Demetrius K. of Maccedony forsaken of al his subiects in fauor of K. Pirrhus; To whome we may adde Romulus the first foūder of the Roman Empire, who hauing made him selfe hateful to his Senatours, was murdred by them, in the very Se∣nat house. As also L. Tarquinius Priscus his 3. successor being become odious to the people for his iniustice & fraud towards the child∣ren, of Ancus Marcius (whome he depriued of their kingdome, though he was left their tutor by their father) was slaine by two shepherds. In like manner Tarquinius superbus (the 7. and last king of the Romans) who vsed al the tirānical policies aboue mencio∣ned, violating al lawes humane & deuine,T. Liuius. Dec. 1. li. 1. for the conseruation of his estate, was neuertheles driuen out of his kingdome by his subiects, & the name of king & kingly authority abolished a∣mongst the Romans in hatred of him, for the space of 500. yeres. 17.Examples in the Empyre of Rome and Constan∣tinople. And if we looke into the Roman Empire after Iulius Caesar we shal find that neither policy, nor power, could defend many emperours of Rome, and Constantinople, against the hatred of men, as (to omit others who perished vpon other occasions) it may appeare bySueton Trāqui. Iulius Caesar him selfe, Caius Caligula, Claudius, Nero, Domitian,Aelius lamprid. Commodus,Spartian. Didius Iulianusd Caracalla,Iul. Capitolin. Opilius Macrinus and his sonne Diadumenus,Lamprid. Heliogabalus, Alexander Seuerus, Iulius Maximinus,Trebellius pol∣lio Galienus,Sextus Au∣rel. victor. Philipus,Flauius Vopis∣cus. Aurelianus,Pomponi∣us laetus. Constans the firstIoan. Baptista Egna∣tius. Zonaras Nicetas Chonia∣tes. Gra∣tian; valentinian the third, Basilicus, Zeno, Mauritius, Phocas; Heracleona with his mother Martina, Constans the second, Iustinian the second, Phillipicus, Constantinus the sixt Nicephorus Stauracius, Leo Armenius, Michael the sonne of Theophilus, Nicephorus surnamed Phocas, Ioannes Zemisces, Michael Calaphates, Stratioticus, Michael Parapinaceus, Andro∣nicus Comnenus and diuers others who hauing incurred, the hatred either of their subiects in general, or of some particuler persons, were some of them poisoned, and others violently slaine, either by the fury of the people, or by their nobility, or by their owne gards, & soldiars, or by their wiues, cōcubins, or seruants, or by other particuler men: besids that some others of them were de∣posed, and either confined into Monastaries, or depriued as wel of their eyes and noses, as of their empyre; and one amongst the rest, to wit Zeno (a most cruel and craftie tyrant) was put into his Sepulcher aliue, by the consent of his wife, whyles he was
drounk,Cedren. in Cōp. Zonaras Annal. To 3. Ioan. Baptista Egnat. in Zonone. or as some write, taken with a fit of the falling sicknes, being also so hated of his owne seruants, and gardes, that when he came to him selfe and cried for helpe out of the Sepulchre, no man assisted or pittied him, and so he died raging, and tearing, his owne flesh with his teeth, as it appeared afterwards when the tomb was opened. 18. And although euery one of these was not so suttle, nor so politike, nor yet so wicked as Macchiauel wold haue his prince to be, yet it is euident in them al, that the hatred of subiects is most pernicious to princes, and in some of them it appeareth manifestly, that no humane power, or wicked pollicy, can war∣rant, and assure, the state of a prince generally hated, seeing that diuers of the aboue named,Epito. Ioan. Bap. Egnatij. excelled not only in imperial power, but also in suttlety, craft, perfidiousnes, periury, deepe dissimu∣lation, cruelty, and al such wickednes, as Macchiauel requireth in his prince. As (to omit others for breuities sake) the last whome I named of the Emperous of Constantinople, to wit Andronicus Com∣nenus, was soe eminent and egregious in al tiranical pollicy, that Egnatius woorthily calleth him.Nicetas Chonia∣ces in Andronico Comneno. li. 1. Callidissimum mortalium; The most crafty of al mortal men, of whose manner of gouernment, I wil saye somewhat breefly, to the end it may appeare how little security a prince may haue by wicked policy against the hatred of men. 19. This Andronicus hauing with greate art and suttlety, ob∣tained to be tutor to the young Emperour Alexius sonne to Emanuel,Andronicus Comnenus em∣perour of Con∣stantinople, an egregious poli∣tyke. made him selfe shortly after, his companion in the Empire, procuring the death of the Empresse mother to Alexius and of diuers others, whose liues he thought to be preiudicial to his pretence, and with in a while also caused the young Em∣perour him selfe to be murdred, notwithstanding his former oath of fidelity solemnly confirmed with receiuing the blessed Sacrament. And being then Emperour alone, and finding him selfe to be hateful to his people, he practised al the tiranical polic, which could be duised for his owne conseruation; He garded his pallace,Idem. li. 2. His gards of barbarous stran∣gers, and his great dog. and person, with strong gards of barbarous strangers, and the most desperate fellowes that could be found, who could neither speake nor vnderstand the language of the country; and he had besids euery night at his chamber dore a-
huge mastife dogg,Idem li. 1. & 2. His vvicked in∣struments. so fierce that he durst fight hand to hand with a lyon, or with an armed man on horse back; He was also prouided of wicked instruments for the execution of his wil in al cases, as spies, promoters, and false witnesses, whereby many noble men were killed, imprisoned, or banished, for no other cause, but for that he feared, that either their credit with the people, or their power, or their welth, or their wit, might proue in time dangerous to his state; 20. Yet neuerthelesse knowing right wel,Idem li. 2. His care of the administration of iustice in all things vvhich did not touch his particuler benefit or plea∣sure. that the more his empire florished in iustice, the more it wold be to his honour, benefit, and security; he shewed such special care thereof, that he excelled many notable princes therin, not only prouiding for the election of iust and wise officers, but also seuerely pu∣nishing those, who either did, or permitted, any wrong to be donne to the meanest or poorest subiect he had. Besids that he ordained, and gaue most liberal allowance to al magistrats for their maintenance, to the end,Idem Ibid. that they should not haue any neede, or pretence to take bribes, and such as were proued to be corrupt, he punished so exemplarly, that with in a while no magistrat durst take so much as a present of any man, though it was neuer so voluntarily offred; he shewed him selfe affable, and courteous to the poore, and seemed ful of pitty and com∣passion when he heard their complaints, and did them exact iustice, and further tooke such order for the releefe of the ne∣cessities of the common people, that al kind of vittails were most plentiful and cheap, the ground wel tilled, and manured; the countries wel inhabited, villages and citties much augmen∣ted, and the commonwelth greately enriched. 21. Such was the care he seemed to haue of iustice,He furnished his commonvvelth vvith good ma∣gistrats and his court vvith vvic¦ked Counsellours and iudges. and of the publike good, which neuerthelesse he respected no further then it might tourne to his owne particuler benefit or pleasure, wherof he preferred the consideration, before al things what soeuer, as al tirants doe. For as he prouided the commonwelth of notable magistrats, so he furnished his court and councel with wicked councellers and Iudges, void of al conscience, who executed his wil vpon al such as incurred his dislike, or suspicion, banishing some, spoiling others of their goods, de∣priuing others of their eyes, drowning and murdring diuers se∣cretly,
and condemning many publikly vpon false pretenses, of whom neuerthelesse he him selfe would seeme to haue greate compassion.Idem. li. 1. He suspected & made avvay his most faithful seruants. As for example; vnderstanding that one Isacius a noble man had taken armes against him in the Iland of Ciprus, he picked a quarrel against two of his owne trustiest seruants and fauorits, because they were greate frends of the other, and cau∣sed them to be accused of treason, comdemned, & executed, and when sute was made vnto him after their deaths, that their bo∣dies, which were hanged vp, might be taken doune and buried, he seemed so much to pitty their case,His deep dissi∣mulation, and fayned piety. that he shed aboundance of teares, lamenting that the sentence of the Iudges & the seue∣rity, & authority of the lawes, must needs ouerweigh his desire, & the affection that he beare them.Idem. li. 2. And when any were toucht with matter of sedition, not only they them selues, but also al their whole kindred,His horrible cruelty craftily couered. and familes were condemned and ruined, to the end that none should be left of their race to reuenge it. The which neuerthelesse he seemed rather to permit, and suffer to be donne, then him selfe to ordaine it; For he caused his Iud∣ges and magistrats to geue those sentences by publik Edict, with plausible preambles, shewing their care of the saufty of the Emperours person, and referring it not to his commande∣ment, but to the deuine inspiration, as a thing necessary for the seruice of God, and the good of the commonwelth. Andronicus had the quintes∣sence of Macchi∣auels policy.22. Here now I appeale to any Macchiauillian, whether An∣dronicus had not the quintessence of Macchiauels policy before Macchiauel was borne, and whether he wanted ether desire, wit, or wickednes, to conserue his estate against the hatred of men, if it had bene possible to haue donne it by wicked meanes. Therefore let vs see the end, which was such, that it may serue for an exemplar warning to al Macchiauillian politikes. 23. Whiles Andronicus gouerned in this manner, his cruelty and iniustice did purchase him more hatred, then the good which he did for the publik could recompence, which filled him euery daye with new feares,Idem. Ibid. His feares and suspicions. suspicions, and iealousies, es∣pecially after that he was pressed with warres by VVilliam King of Sicely; who hauing ouerthrowne some of his armies, and taken Thessalonica, and other townes of importance, marched towards Constantinople, wherwith the people beganne to take courrage,
and to discouer their hatred towards Andronicus daily more and more, which put him in such feare of conspiracies,His sorceryes & vvitchcrafts. that he con∣sulted with sorcerers, and witches, and especially with one Se∣thus a magician, who deuined by a basen of water; And one daye when Andronicus desired to know the name of his successor, Se∣thus shewed him in the water the two letters. I. and. S. whereby he and his councellours coniectured that it should be Isacius (who was rebelled against him in the Iland of Ciprus, as I haue de∣clared) neuerthelesse,Hovv he vvas ouerreached in his sorceryes. for as much as there was another Isacius sur∣named Angelus at the same time in the court, a man of so quiet a spirit, and so smal courrage, that Andronicus him selfe (as suspi∣cious as he was) did no way suspect him, one of his special counsellers, suggested to him, that it were good to command the said Isacius Angelus to be taken and put in prison to preuent the woorst, lest, saith he, we may seeke the viper abrod in the field, when perhaps we haue him in our bosome; And though Andronicus seemed at first to contemne Isacius, as a man no way to be feared, yet at last it was resolued by him and his councel that he should be taken, and for that purpose, Stephanus (one of his chief councellours and worst instruments) went him selfe with certaine of his catchpoles to the house of Isacius,Hovv his vvic∣kednes turned to his ouerthrovv. who de∣fending him selfe, killed Stephanus, and ran presently with his sword bluddy in his hand through the market place, to take Sainctuary in the cheef church of the towne, imploring as he went, the aide of the people; and declaring what he had donne, and why; The people flocked after him to the church, pittying greatly his case, and commending his act; and at length their courrage encreasing with their multitud, they began to embol∣den one an other first to defend Isacius,Isacius fearing to loose his lyfe vvas suddenly made Emperour. and after to make him- Emperour, which being propounded to the whole assembly, was accepted and allowed of them al, though he him selfe neither desired it, nor so much as dreamed of it, but thought him selfe wel apaied if he could saue his life. 24. This resolution being taken amongst them they proclai∣med him emperour, first in the church, and after in the streets,Andronicus forsaken of al his subiects. which was approued with general consent of the nobility and people of the citty, who came al to yeeld him obedience and to assist him; Andronicus seeing him selfe forsaken of al his subiects
durst not trust to the strength neither of his pallace, nor of his gards, nor of his greate dogg, but fled away in a boat, and was shortly after taken,The revvard & miserable end of his tyranny. and brought back loden with yron chaines, skorned, and reuiled by the people, his haire of his head and be∣ard pulled away, his teeth strooken out, his right hand cut of, and a few daies after, one of his eyes being pulled out of his head, he was set vpon a skabbed cāmel, appareled ridiculously, and caried through the streetes to be shewed to the people; who cast vpon him al kind of ordure, and filth, euery one contending who should deride him, or abuse him most; and at last, he was hanged vp by the heeles, his apparel torne from him, and his na∣ked body wounded by who soeuer wold stricke him, as many did in diuers manners, some for sport, some for reuenge of iniu∣ries, some to try their swords, and some their strength, til at length he was hacked and hewed in pieces. Loe here the fruite of Macchiauillian policy,The fruite of Macchiauillian pollicy. the lamentable issue of wickednes and tiranny, and the smale assurance that tirants haue against the hatred of their subiects, either by vsurped power, or impious policy; whereto I might adde a special obseruation of Gods iust Iudgements, but that I haue determined not to vrge the same in this chapter. Thus much concerning the Roman and Greeke Emperours. Examples out of our histories. Polidor virgil. i 7.25. I may also produce many other notable examples of this matter out of the historyes as wel of our owne country as of al others. For what caused the destruction of Edmond Ironside who was murdred vpon a priuy,Idem. lib. or the continual rebellions in the tyme of king Iohn;Idem. lib. or the vntimely death of Edward the 2. bro∣ched with a Spit;Idem. lib. or of Richard the 2. first deposed, & after slayne in prison; or yet of Richard the 3. forsaken of his nobility, and commons and killed at Bosworth field?Syr Thomas Mo∣re in King Ri∣chards lyfe. what els, I saye, was the cause thereof, but the hatred of their subiects? And as for the last of these, I meane Richard the third, if we consider his mali∣gnant and trecherous nature, his cruelty, his deepe dissimulati∣on, his diuelish deuyses & inuentions (as wel to gett the crou∣ne, as after to conserue it) his murders and mischeefes, and his other horrible impiety, wee shal not find him imferiour to the most famous tyrants of former tymes for al impious and wicked policy, which neuerthelesse could not free him from the dan∣ger
of destruction, which the hatred of his subiects drew vpon him. 26.An Example of Caesar Borgia. But what neede I alledge other examples seeing the mir∣rour of Machiauels owne prince, (to wit Caesar Borgia) may serue for a witnes of this matter? For though he so farr surpassed al former tyrants in wickednes and tirrannical policy, that Macchi∣auel made special choyse of him, to frame his wicked prince by the model of his tyranny, yet could not he vphold,Guicciat. li. 6. and conserue his state against the hatred of men, but being abandoned by his subiects, and frends, became a notable example not only of hu∣man imbecillity, but also of the woful end of such as trust to wicked policy, as I haue declared before vpon other occasions,Chap. 3. nu. 4. & chap. 13. nu 4. & 5. 27. And though al former examples should fayle vs, yet one or two of the last age stil fresh in memory, might suffise for a warning to princes,Christiern k. of Denmark. Surius in Com∣ment. an 1517. Olaus mag. li. 8. c. 39. Henry the 3. k. of france. how they incurre the general hatred of their subiects, I meane the lamentable end of Christiern king of Denmark, first driuen out of his kingdome by his owne people for his tyrannical cruelty, and after also taken, imprisoned, and poysoned by theim: (as I haue signified before) and of Henry the 3. last king of France, who though he be not to be numbred amongst the wicked tyrants before mencioned, yet may serue for an example of the smale assurance that a prince may haue a∣gainst the hatred of his people, seing that an army of 40000. men, could not defend his person against the resolution of a simple man, who slew him in the midst of them al;No povver or po∣licy can defend a prince from the resolution of some one man. whereby wee maye see how true it is which Seneca saith. Qui suam vitam contemnit, tuae dominus erit; he vvhich contemnes his owne life, shal be mayster of thine. 28. Hereupon therefore it followeth that no princes power or policy can sufficiently warrant, and assure his estate against the vniuersal hatred of men,The little secu∣rity that vvic∣ked princes haue of theyr gards or armyes. num. 11. especially considering the little se∣curity, that wicked princes, when they grow to be hated, haue, of their owne gards, or armyes; which though they are the spe∣cial meanes of their defence, yet serue many times for no other end, then to butcher and slaughther theym, as I haue declared before in the 13. chapter,Sueton. where I haue alleged the examples of Caligula,Spartian. Caracalla,Lamprid. Heliogabalus, Philip,Trebellius pol∣lio. Gallien, Machrinus,Flau. Vopi∣scus. Au∣relianus,Iulius Capitol. Maximinus, and others slayne partly by their souldiars & partly by their gardes, not with standing the greate liberality
which many of these Emperours vsed to buy their affections and fidelity; As it maye be wel obserued (to omit dyuers others) in Maximinus,Iulius Capitol. in Maximin. of whome Iulius Capitolinus saith. Ea astutia fuit, vt milites non solum virtute regeret, sed etiam praemijs et lucris sui amantissimos red∣deret. He was so crafty, that he did not only gouerne his souldiars by vertue, but also wanne their affections by gifts and rewards: and yet neuertheles they conspyred diuers tymes against him, and at length when he was denounced publike enemy by the Senat, and some what distressed in his march towards Rome for lack of vittayles, they killed him, and his sonne in their tents, and sent their heads to Rome. 29 And herein I wish two things to be noted; the one, the fruit of cruelty;The fruite of cruelty. for this Maximinus being made Emperour tyran∣nically by his souldiars against the wil of the Senat, followed the principles which Macchiauel teacheth his prince, perswading him him selfe,Idem. Ibidem. as Iulius Capitolinus testifyeth; Nisi crudelitate imperium non teneri; That he could not hold the Empire but by cruelty, wherein he so ex∣ceeded; that some called him, Cyclops, some Busiris, some Scyron, some Typhon, and some Phalaris, and therefore in the end he recei∣ued the iust reward thereof, at the hands of his owne soldiars, to whome notwithstanding his greate donatiues he became no lesse odious then to other men. The other thing which I wish to be obserued,num. 12. & 13. The infelicity of such princes as seeke rather to be feared then to be beloued. is that, which I haue also touched in the 13. chapter, concerning the greate infelicity of such princes, as seeke rather to be feared then to be beloued, for though they are forced for their owne safty, to become slaues to those, by whome they keepe others in slauery, yet they are not secure thereby, being stil in danger not only of others, but also of them who should defend them, whose mercenary minds, are so inconstant, and subiect to corruption, that the liues of the princes whome they gard, are euer salable, and therefore neuer warrantable by any humane policy, or power; for let the prince geue them neuer so much, to bind them to his seruice, yet he that shal geue, yea or promise more, may winne them from him, as it hath fallen out diuers tymes to the Roman Emperours, who haue ben sold by their souldiars, and gards, not for reddy money, but for the pro∣mise of greater summes, then could be expected at their hands, as Plutark noteth in the gards and souldiars of Nero,Plutar. in Galba. corrupted by
Nimphidius in fauour of Galba, vpon promise of a greater do∣natiue then could afterwards be performed, which saith he caused the destruction both of Nero and Galba; for the souldiars forsooke Nero in hope of the payment promised; & killed Galba because he could not pay it; so tickle is the trust that princes re∣pose in mercenary men, and so vnsure the state that is to be vp∣holden by such vnsure, and weake propps, which many tymes fayle, when there is most neede of them. 30.An inuitable danger vvhich a prince generally hated must needs incurre. Furdermore an other especial and ineuitable danger is to be noted, which any prince generally hated must needs incurre, to wit, the defection of his subiects in al occasions of inuasion from forraine cuntries, for although he be neuer so strong at home in gards, garrisons, and fortresses, and his subiects also so poore and weake that they neither dare, nor can rise against him, yet if forraine princes do inuade him, either vpon a quarrel of state (which amongst princes that are neighbours neuer wan∣teth) or vpon ambition to enlarge their dominions, what re∣medy hath he against the general hatred of his people, who haue then sufficient oportunity, and meanes to be reuenged of him, and to free them selues from the yoke of his tiranny, by taking part with the forrainer, whereof the experience hath bene seene often times. 31.Iustin. li. 39. Demetrius king of Siria. We read in Iustin that the subiects of Demetrius king of Siria abandoned him for the hatred which they bore him, and tooke part with a knowne counterfeit, cauling him selfe Alexander, pretending to be of the roial race (as did Perkin VVarbeck in Eng∣land) which Alexander they accepted for their king, being so in∣censed against Demetrius, that they were content (saith Iustin) to admit any who soeuer, to be rid of him. Also the last kings of Naples, no lesse rich & potent then wickedly politik,Guicciard. li. 6. Philip. Comin. in Carolo 8. Alfonso and Ferdinand kings of Naples, being most hateful to their subiects for their tyrannical gouernment, were forsaken of theim al, & betrayed to the french, to whome they yeelded theim selues with out any resistance; as I haue signified so amply in the 22. chapter that I shal not neede to speake furder thereof in this place. 32. Also Lodouic Sforza Duke of MilanLodouic Sforza duke of Milan. may serue for a notable example of this matter. For when Levvis the 12. King of France, made warre against him, and had already taken diuers principal
townes,Guicciardin. li. 4. and forts in the state of Milan, Duke Lodouic knowing him selfe to be very odious to his subiects for his greate exacti∣ons, and impositions, and fearing lest they wold abandon him, assembled the people of Milan to recouer their good wills, and not only remitted diuers taxes which he had imposed vpon them, but also gaue them many reasons and excuses of his for∣mer proceedings; neuertheles such was the hatred which they had conceiued against him, that within a few dayes after, they tooke armes, killed Antonio Landriano his treasurer, forced him to flee, cauled in the french, & yelded the toune and them selues to their obedience.Polidor. vergil. in Ioan. King Ihon of England. Haue we not seene also the like effect of ha∣tred in England, in the tyme of king Iohn when the Barons and nobility of the realme cauled in Lewis the 8. king of france whi∣les he was Dolphin, and proclaymed him king, choosing rather to liue vnder the ancient enemyes of the English nation, then to o∣bay king Iohn their natural king, who as Matthew of westmin∣ster wryteth.Matth. vvest∣mon. anno. 1216. Exosum se praebuit &c. Made him selfe hateful vnto them, as vvel for the murder of his nephew Arthur, as for his adulteries his tyrāny, his exactions, the continual seruitude vvherin he kept England, and lastly for the vvarre vvhich his deserts procured, in respect vvherof. vix alicuius meruit lamentatione deplorari, he deserued not to be lamented scarcely of any man. Thus saith he. I forbeare to alledge many other notable histories to the same purpose, for that I hold it needeles in a matter so eui∣dent as this. 33. What then shal we say of Macchiauels pestilent precepts for the preseruation of a prince already infected,Macchiauel seeking to expel and remedy one poison vvith an other poysoneth his prince dooble. and poysoned with wickednes? Can we say ought els, but that whiles he seeketh by one poyson to expel or remedy an other, he poysoneth him doo∣ble, and killeth him out right? For a wicked prince adding, as Macchiauel aduiseth, wickednes to wickednes, and cruelty to cru∣elty, doth accumulat vpon him selfe hatred vpon hatred, which as I haue declared, wil breake out sooner or later to his ouer∣throw. The danger vvhich tyrants incurre by the ordinary errours proceeding of humaine imbe∣cillity34. Neither can the Macchiauillian helpe his maisters cause, by saying that such wicked princes, as haue perished by the ha∣tred of men, haue committed some errour or other, which they should or might haue foreseene, and auoided; for, I haue made it manifest throughout this whole discourse, that the imbecil∣lity
of mans wit and power is such, that no man liuing is able to foresee and preuent al the dangers and accidents which may oc∣curre in the affaires of men to the ouerthrow of their designmēts which I haue euidently proued by examples of the absurd er∣rours as wel of the wisest Senats and councels,Chap. 3. 4. & 5. as of most po∣litik men. Where vpon it followeth that the prince who expo∣seth him selfe to the general hatred of men incurreth notable danger. 35. For euen as tounes of warre, or fortresses which haue no enemy neere, do, or may commit many errours in matters pertaining to their defence, with out any danger, but being be∣seeged by their enemies, are sometimes surprised by the occa∣sion of their least ouersight or negligence; so it fareth with princes, who, so long as they are generally beloued,Euery litle er∣rour of a prince generally hated ys very dange∣rous. are little or nothing preiudiced by many errours which faule out in their gouernment, but being once, as I may terme it, beseeged with the hatred of their subiects, and neighbours, they are ruined some times with the least errour which they or their magistrates commit; For the hatred of men when it is general, may be com∣pared to a swelling sea, which enuironing a ship on euery side, doth otherwhiles ouerwhelme it with the impetuosity of waues and sometimes againe entreth in at euery little leake, or rift, and sinketh it. Euen so also the general hatred of men, doth not only ouerthrow a princes state, by potent, and powerful attempts, but also by taking aduantage of euery little errour, or accident which may help to ruine it. And therfore,No prince gene∣rally hated can long liue in secu∣rity, & vvhy. for as much as the we∣aknes of mans wit, and the variety of times, and occasions pro∣duce alwaise some dangerous accidents in the states of princes, either by their errours, or otherwaies (where vpon their indu∣strious, and watchful enemies, especially at home, may take ad∣uantage) it followeth that no prince generally hated can liue long in security be he neuer so dilligent, vigilant, or suspicious of al men, as Macchiauel wold haue his prince to be. 36. Who could vse greater vigilancy,Cicero de offi li. 2. No vigilancy suffyseth a∣gainst the gene∣ral hatred of men. or dilligence for his owne conseruation, or be more suspicious then Alexander the tiran of Phaeres, who though he loued his wife Thebes very dearely, yet neuer came to her chamber, but he caused both her coffers, and her selfe to be searched, to see whether she had any weapon
hid in hir garments, and neuerthelesse was killed by her in the end? Could any man be more prouident for his owne safty then was Claudius the Emperour,Sueto. in Clau∣dio. who wold neuer goe to any banket, but where his owne gards and souldiars serued the table, and neuer visited any sick man, whose chamber was not searched before by some of his gards, euen to the very beds and bedstraw? and yet he was poisoned at last by his owne taster, whome he neuer suspected;Idem in Domi∣tiano. What should I saye of Domitian the Emperour who was so feareful and suspicious of al men, that he made the walls of his galleries, where he vsed to walke, to be sette ful of a kind of bright and cleare stone called Phengites, wherin he might see what soeuer was donne behind him? and neuerthe∣lesse he was murdred by his owne chamberlins. 37. Many such other examples might be alledged of princes, who besids their great gards, and armies for the defence of their persons vsed also al humane dilligence, being ielouse and suspi∣cious of al men, and yet neuerthelesse were ouer-reached, some times by those whome they most feared, and sometimes by those whome they least suspected, or best trusted. Whereto I ad (as I haue also noted els where and can not repeat too oft) that some times the most prouident,Most prouident and polityke princes ouerth∣rovvn some tymes by their ovvne pollicyes. and politike princes, are through the imbecillity of humane wit, ouerthrowne by their owne po∣licies, that is to say by the same meanes, whereby they seeke either to benefit them selues, or to hurt and destroy others; as hath sufficiently appeared by the examples of Caesar Borgia him selfe,Chap. 3. 4. & 13. the Admiral Chastillon in France, Henry the third last King of France, and diuers others of whome I haue spoken before in sundry parts of this treatise. A nother dan∣ger proceeding of humane infir∣mity.38. But what security can a wicked prince haue by gards or other humane prouidence, and dilligence, seeing we see some∣times that the wisest and best garded being aduertised of some imminent danger, either haue not the hap to vnderstand it, or the wit to beleeue it;Plutar. in Iulio Caesar. So it hapned to Iulius Caesar,Iulius Caesar. who as he was going to the Senat, receiued a memorial, wherein the conspi∣racy against him was discouered, and being willed to read it presently, for that it imported him greatly, was so troubled with the presse and importunity of suters, that he could not attend vnto it, and so was killed the same daye in the Senat house. Also
Archias a tirant in Thebes being inuited to a supper,Idem. in pelo∣pida. Archias a ty∣rant of Thebes. where his death was conspired, receiued a letter from a frend of his contei∣ning an aduice of the conspiracy, and being desired by him that brought it, to read it out of hand, for that it concerned matters of greate importance, he answered that it was no time then to negociat, and so laying it a side,Philip. Com. in Lodouico 11. c. 83. & 91. Charles duke of Burgundy. was slaine with in two houres after. In like manner Charles the last duke of Burgundy, who as I haue declared before, was killed at Nancy by the treason of Cam∣pobachio an Italian, was aduertised and forewarned thereof by Lewis the 11. king of France; Neuerthelesse perswading him selfe that his aduertisement proceded either of malice to Champobachio or of a desire to depriue him of his most necessary, and trusty ser∣uant, wold not beleeue it, but loued him the better for it; besids that, one who was priuy to the conspiracy being condemned to dye for an other matter, and determining to reueale it to the duke, thereby to obtayne his pardon, made sute vnto him to speake with him, promising to aduertise him of some things which it imported him greately to know; but the duke wold not be intreated so much as to heare him, and so the man was executed, and the duke slaine with in a few daies after. 39. Now then I wold gladly know of Macchiauel, and his followers,Hovv many vvayes a vvi∣cked prince is endangered. what security they can promise their prince in extre∣mity of wickednes, seeing it is euident by the reasons and ex∣amples alledged, that the extreame hatred which extreame wic∣kednes draweth vpon them, doth, not with standing al their power and policy, woorke their ouerthrow by so many meanes, as I haue declared, to wit, by open rebellions, or the general in¦surrection of a whole people, by the enterprise of a few, by the attempt of some one man, by the disloialty, and trechery of fai∣ned frends, fauorits, souldiars, and gards, by the defection of subiects in fauor of some enemy forrain or domestical, by the neligence of officers, and ministers, by the casualty of al humane affaires, and designments, and lastly by the errours wherto al hu∣mane wit and policy is subiect (which to princes that are ge∣nerally beloued are nothing so dangerous) by al which meanes, the strongest, mightiest, and most politik tirants haue bene ouer∣throwne at one time or other, 40. So that the absurdity of Macchiauel, is most manifest in
true reason of state,Macchiauel ex∣poseth his prince to an assured danger, and geueth him not so much as a∣probable re∣medy. Plutare in his treatise, hovv to knovv, vvhether a man haue pro∣fited in vertu. The surder a prince procee∣deth in macchi∣auels policies the more he endan∣gereth him selfe. seeing that in councelling princes to wic∣kednes and tiranny, vpon confidence of humane force and po∣licy, he exposeth them to an assured danger, and doth not geue them any assured or probable remedy, but rather heapeth dan∣ger vpon danger, by encrease of cruelty and of al tirrannical im∣piety; In so much that it may be said to Macchiauels prince, as Diogenes said to a disciple of his, whome he had forbidden the tauerne; for seeing him one day running from the tauerne dore, where he stoode, into the tauerne to hide him selfe from him, he cauled vnto him saying, come back thou foole for the furder thou goest forward, the more thou art in the tauerne: and so may we saye to Macchiauels prince, that the furder he proceedeth in his dangerous course of wicked policy, the more he endan∣gereth him selfe, and as the Poët saith. Incidit in scillam cupiens vi∣tare charibdim, that is to say, Seeking to auoide scilla he fauleth into char∣ribdis, or as our English prouerb saith, he leapeth out of the frying pan, into the fire. 41. But put the case that a Macchiauillian, or wicked prince could by Macchiauels policies assure his estate from al forraine and domestical danger, yet he should infallibly pay such a greeuous penalty of his wickednes euen in this world,The torment of conscience vvhich tyrants endure. that he should reape neither pleasure nor proffit thereby; For such excesse of impiety (as Macchiauel requireth in his prince) is euer accompa∣nied not only with hatred of men, and infamy, but also with greefe and anguish of mind, infinit suspitions, and feares, weary dayes, restles nights, dreadful dreames, and continual torment, and horrour of conscience, yea and many tymes with distraction madnes, and despayre, as I haue signifyed in the 16. Chapter where I haue already handled this point,u. 2. 3. 4. 5. & 6. and therfore wilbe the breefer here, meaning only to adde some 2. or 3. examples, which there I thought good to omit. 42. The elder Denis tirant of Sicily though he raigned 38. yeres in greate welth,Cicero Tuscul. quaest. lib. 5. Denis tirant of Sicily. and magnificence, yet liued in such continual feare, ielously, and suspition of al men, that he durst neuer trust any barber to dresse him, but taught his owne daughters to shaue whiles they were very young, and when they came to be of any yeres, he wold not suffer them to vse the rasor, but made them burne a waie the hayres of his beard with walnut-shels,
made red hote, and hauing two wiues, he alwaise caused them to be searched, before he wold come to them, and when he had occasion to treat any thing with the people, he spoke vnto them from the top of a high towre; And how miserable also his whole life and state was, he him selfe declared sufficiently, when Da∣mocles one of his flatterers admiring his greate welth, dominion, magnifycence, and maiestie said that he thought no man liuing more happy then he. Wherupon Denis asked him whether he wold try how happy he was, & take a tast of his felicity;Idem. Ibidem. & when Damocles was content there with, he caused him to be sett vpon a sumptuous bed (as the vse was then) richly couered, and cub∣bards of plate to be furnished with siluer and golden vessel, ta∣bles replenished with al kind of delicat meates, and most beau∣tiful boyes attending thereon; besids that, there was no want of precious oyntments, and sweete perfumes, excellent musick,Hovv Denys re∣presented to Da∣mocles the mi∣serable state of a tyrant. and whatsoeuer els might delite the sences, in so much that Da∣mocles thought him selfe to be a happy man. But at length, casting vp his eyes, he was aware of a bright, and sharpe sword hanging ouer his head by a hayre, with the point dounward (for so had Denis ordayned) which when he saw, he had no more pleasure in beholding his fayre boyes, or his rich furniture, or to eate of his dainties, or to heare his musick, but desired the tirant to geue him leaue to be gonne, for that he wold be no longer happy; Thus did Denis wel expresse the infelicity and misery of wicked tirants, how pompious, potent, or magnificent soeuer they may seeme to be. 43. I omit to speake of the Emperours Nero,Chap. 16. nu. 5. Claudius and Do∣mitian, and of King Alfonsus of Naples, of whome I haue spoken before,Sir Tho. More in the story of k. Richard the 3. The tormented conscience of k. Richard the 3. after he had killed his ne∣uevvs. & I wil only touch the wretched state of K. Richard the third, after he had murdrd his neuewes, as sir Thomas Moore des∣cribeth it in the story of his life in these woords. I haue heard (saith he) by credible report of such as were secret vvith his chamberers, that after this abhominable deede donne, he neuer had quiet in his mind, he neuer thought him selfe sure; vvhen he vvent a broad, his eyen whirled about, his body vvas priuily fenced, his hand euer on his dagger, his coūtenance and manner, like one alvvay reddy to strik; he took no rest a nights, lay long wa∣king, and musing, sore vveried vvith care, and vvatch, rather slumbred then slept, troobled vvith feareful dreames, suddainly sometymes started vp, leapt
out of his bed, and ranne about the chamber; so vvas his restles hart tossed, and tumbled vvith the tedious impression, and stormy remembrance of his a∣bominable deede. Thus saith Sir Thomas Moore. Plutark that vvickednes suf∣fiseth to make a man miserable. Ibidem.44. Whereby we may see that Plutark had greate reason to say, that wickednes is of it selfe sufficiēt to make a man miserable, & that wicked men the longer they liue the more miserable they are, and that the doleful & tragical ends vvhich most tirants haue, can not be so properly counted the temporal punishment due to their vvickednes in this life, as the consummation and end thereof. Therefore I conclude, that though there were no other punishment diuine, nor humane to be feared for wic∣kednes, nor any danger to follow thereof to a princes state, nei∣ther any hel or heauen after this life, yet this continual torment and anguish of mind, this hel and horrour of conscience, might suffise to make al princes detest & abhorre the abominable pre∣cepts of Macchiauel, who wold perswade princes to conserue their states by wickednes. 45. But perhaps the Macchiauillians wil say here in defence of their maisters doctrin,An obiection in fauour of mac∣chiauillians. that although it should not be amisse for those who come iustly, and lawfully to souuerainty (as by suc∣cession, or election) to procure the loue and good wil of al men by their vertuous, and iust gouuernment, yet a prince who com∣meth to his state by intrusion and iniustice, as by murders and mischeefes to the preiudice of the right heires, or owners there∣of, can not hope to conserue and maintaine him selfe therein by vertue and iustice, or by the loue of the people (whose hatred he hath alreddy incurred) but by force and feare, and by continu∣ance of wickednes & tiranny, which Cicero may seeme to haue in∣sinuated in Denis the tirant of Sicily,Cicero Tuscul. quest. lib. 5. of whome he saith that. Saluus esse non posset, si sanus esse caepisset. He could not haue bene saufe, if he had begunne to be sound, that is to say, he could not haue ben secure, if he had become iust and vertuous. The which also Solon the wise Athenian may seeme to haue signifyed of al tirants,Plutar. in Solon. for when he was mued by his frends to make him selfe tirant of Athens, with intention to gouern wel and iustly afterwards, he refused it saying, that Tiranny is like to a laborinth vvhich hath no issue. Meaning as it may seeme,Tiranny like a laborinth which hath no issue. that a tirant can not with his security returne from wickednes to vertue, but that he must proceede, and goe on in impiety, and tiranny, hauing, as it were, a woolfe by the
eares, whome if he lett goe, he setts vpon him selfe. Thus say the Macchiauillians, or at least may say, for I am content to plead their cause for them. 46. For the satisfaction hereof, it is to be considered,The maligne na∣ture, and mise∣rable estate of tyrants signified by Cicero and Solon. that Ci∣cero & Solon said this aboue mencioned, not because they thought that the way and passage from vice to vertue is not open as wel for tyrants, as for other men, but to signify the malignity of their natures, and their miserable state, for that tyrants are common∣ly of so vile, maligne, and beastly natures, that it is seeldome seene that any of theim come to embrace vertue, in which respect Ci∣cero thought tyrants to be most miserable; besids that Solon being most wise,Honour chan∣geth manners. and prudent was not ignorant that honours as the pro∣uerb saith changeth manners, and therefore he greately feared that if he should once geue way to ambition, & violate Iustice by the opression of the common welth, he should hardly repayre the wrack of his owne conscience euer after. For who soeuer shal loose, as I may terme it, the ancor of integrity, and suffer him selfe to be so farre caried away with the wind of ambition, that he runne the ship of conscience, against the rocks of tiranny, let him not maruel if he make an irreparable shipwrack,A tyrant con∣uerting his ty∣ranny to a royal and iust gouer∣ment, shal be much more secu∣re then by conti∣nuance of tyran∣ny. of al Iustice, and vertue. Neuerthelesse if a prince that hath gotte a croune or state vniustly, do hold such a vertuous course, that he conuert his tiranny into a regal and iust gouernment, it is eui∣dent, both by reason and experience, that though he hold not his il gotten state lawfully, yet he shal possesse it with farre lesse danger, and much more security. 47. And this is conforme not only to the opinion, and do∣ctrin of Aristotle, as I haue declared before in this chapter,num. 8. & 9. Plutar. in Dio. but also of Plato, who councelled the two tirants of Sicily called Denis (the father and the sonne) to chaunge their tirrannical course into a iust manner of gouernment, assuring them that they could not otherwaise long conserue and assure their estates: the truth whereof appeared sufficiently, as wel by the miserable life of the father (of whome I haue spoken lately before) as also by the ignominious banishment and vnfortunat end of the sonne,num. 4.2. whome Dion with very smale forces cast out of his kingdome,Plutar. in Dio. by reason that he was hated & forsaken of al his subiects, wher∣as diuers other tirants, as wel of Sicily as of other cuntryes, chan∣ging
their course of tyranny, to a iust and vertuous gouernment, liued and raigned no lesse gloriously then securely. Anaxilaus. Iustin. lib. 4. Examples of ty∣rāts vvhich as∣sured their esta∣te, by iustice and vertu.48. Such a one was Anaxilaus tirant of Sicily of whome Iustin writeth thus. Ex tyrannorum numero Anaxilaus &c. Anaxilaus vvho vvas one of the tyrants, did striue to surpasse the cruelty, and impiety of others, vvith his iustice and vertue, vvhich vvrought a vvonderful effect, for vvhen he died, and left his children very young in the tuition of Nicithus a slaue of his, vvhome loued dearely for his fidelity, such vvas the loue that al his subiects boare vnto the memory of him, that they chose rather to obaye his slaue, then to forsake his children, and al his nobility forgetting their dignity and the ma∣iestie of their kingdome, did offer themselues to be gouerned by a slaue. Thus saith Iustin. Plutark also testifyeth that Hieron and Gelon tirants of Sicily,Plutat. de sera. num. vindict. Hieron. Gelon. Pisistratus. and Pisistratus the sonne of Hippocrates hauing most wickdly possest them selues of their states, did neuerthelesse gouerne af∣terwards with such moderation, Iustice, and equity, that they became very popular princes; As also that LidiadesLidiades. the tirant re∣stored vnto his subiects, their old lawes, and priuiledges, and afterwards died gloriously in the field in defence of his cuntry. Dion in Au∣gusto. Augustus Caesar.49. In like manner Augustus Caesar after he had opprest his cō∣monwelth by force of armes, and vsed such cruelty for many yeres togeather, that he was hated of al men (in so much that he could neither eate, drink, nor sleepe in queit for feare of cons∣pyracies) changed his course by the councel of his frends, and gaue him selfe wholy to the exercise of vertue, piety, and iustice, whereby he was at length exceedingly beloued of al his subiects, and esteemed to be Pater Patriae, the father of his cuntry. And passed the rest of his life in no lesse security, then honour and felicity. Whereas very many of his successors, trusting partly to the strength of their gards, garrisons, and armies, and partly to their policies lost their honour, empire, & liues by the continuance of cruelty, and wickednes; whereby it appeareth that it is better according to the Latin prouerb. To be late vvise, then neuer, and that it is not only easy,Better late vvyse then neuer. but also most secure for a tyrannical prince to passe from cruelty to clemency, from vice to vertue, and from tyranny to iustice and piety. Another obie∣ction of Mac∣chiauillians.50. But do you (saith the Macchiauellian) count it wisdome for a prince, so to confyde in iustice, and vertue, that he trust those
whom he hath once iniured, or that hee think him selfe sure from them so long as they liue, seeing that as the Italian pro∣uerb saith. Chi offend non perdona mai, He vvhich offendeth, that is to say, he which doth thee iniury, neuer pardoneth, and much lesse he which receiueth it? 51. Hereto I answere, that I grant to the Macchiauillian,The ansvver to the obiection. that his tirant shal neuer repose so greate confidence in any recon∣ciled enemy,Chap. 3. nu. 10. that he shal put his life or state into his hands (to which purpose I haue shewed in the begining of this treatise how the VVisdome of the serpent,Matth. 10. is to be conioined with the simplicity of the doue, in pardoning yea, and louing our enemies, and yet in be∣ing wary and circumspect how we trust them) but that which I require of a tirant for his security is, that e ceasse to heape coa∣les vpon his owne head, by continuance & encrease of iniustice,Hovv a tyrant may make him self generally be∣loued. cruelty, and tiranny, and that he labour by al conuenient meanes to pacifye the exasperated minds of those whome he hath of∣fended, not only with woords, but also with deeds, recompen∣sing iniuries with benefits, and disgraces with fauours, cruelty, and seuerity with clemency, benignity and affability, doing iu∣stice to al men, and shewing him selfe to haue a particuler care of the commonwelth, to preferre the publik good before his owne priuat pleasure, or commodity, to be the patrone, and protector of vertue, the punisher of vice, a refuge to the poore and afflicted, and finally a common father to al, whereby he shal purchase to him selfe the general and vniuersal loue of al, and either extinguish he hatred of those whome he had wronged, and offended, or at least so temper and mittigat the same, that it shal be much lesse dangerous vnto him, when al men generally honour and loue him; 52. Moreouer I allow not only to a reformed tirant,VVherein the greatest security vvich can be had by humane meanes consi∣steth. but also to the most lawful and best prince liuing; al lawful meanes of defence, as strong gards, garrisons, armies, fortresses, the vigil∣lance of councellers and magistrats, the dilligence of spies and al other lawful policies; al which concuring with the vertu∣ous, and iust gouernment of a prince, and being fortified with the general loue of his geople (which vertue and iustice engen∣dreth) shal yeeld him the greatest assurance, & security that can be had by any humane meanes.
A Reply of the macchiauillians, inferring the necessity of mur∣ders sometymes for a princes se∣curity.53. But perhaps the Macchiauillians wil yet reply, and say, that for al this I make not the reformed tirant, no nor any other lawful prince secure; For although he shal be neuer so wel be∣loued generally, yet, as I haue already proued some one man of∣fended, may not with standing al his force and lawful policies, be reuenged of his person, and therfore the only remedy for the prince (say they) in that case, should be to cut off by some mea∣nes or other, al such as he may think likely to seeke reuenge, or to be any way dangerous to his estate; For as Theodosius said to Ptolomeus King of Egipt (when he councelled him to kil Pompey) Mortui non mordent;Plutar. in Pom∣peio. A macchiauil∣lian prouerb & principle confu∣ted. num. 41.42.43. & 44. Dead men byte not. Thus say they. 54. But what neede the dead to byte him, when not only his owne conscience shal byte and sting him (as I haue signified a little before) but also there shal be men enow left aliue to seeke the reuenge, as their children (if they haue any) or their kins∣folkes, seruants or frends; as for example. Frotho king of Den∣mark the 5. of that name, caused his owne brother to be murdred and after killed the murderer, lest he might reueale it, for the which he was smothred with smoke by his brothers children.Olaus mag. li. 8. ca. 36. Saxo gram. li. 7. Paul Diacon. lib. 15. Cassiodor. Chron. an. 454. c. & 455. Euagri. li. 2. 7. Paul. Iouius in Amutate. Valentinian the third emperour of that name, hauing vngratfully killed the famous captaine Aetius with his owne hand, was killed by two souldiars of Aetius in reuenge thereof. Also Amurates Emperour of the Turkes, the first of that name, was slaine with a dagger by a seruant of Lascarus, the Despota, or Lord of Seruia for reuenge of his Lord and maisters death, not with standing that Amurates was one of the most crafty and vigillant princes that the Turkes euer had, as Paulus Iouius reporteth. Idem. Ibidem.55. But amongst al those who haue sought to assure their estate by murders, none euer exceeded Andronicus Comnenus Em∣perour of Constantinople, who, as I haue declared before, vsed to condemne and extirpat whole families for the suspition which he had sometimes of some one man,Nicetas Choniat. in Andronico Comneno. lib. 2. thereby to free him selfe from al feare of reuenge; which neuerthelesse was reuenged in him most notoriously, not only by the frends and wel-willers of the dead, but also by al the people; such being the horrour of iniustice, and cruelty, that it doth not only offend those which are iniured, but also al other men, and therefore it hath bene often seene, that subiects haue, attempted against the state or
person of a prince, for the hatred of some murder,Iustin li. 37. Seleucus king of Siria forsaken of his subiects for a murder. or some one cruel act. Iustin writeth, that when Seleucus king of Siria began his gouerment with the murder of Berenice his stepmother, and of her sonne his owne brother, al the citties which were subiect to him in Asia, Exemplo crudelitatis territae, Being frighted with this ex∣ample of cruelty, suddenly reuolted from him, and yelded them selues to the obedience of Ptolomaeus king of Aegipt; Tantum illi odi∣um, saith Iustin, paricidiale scelus attulerat, so great was the hatred, which his wicked and parricidial act, caused in his subiects to∣wards him. But what neede I alledge old examples for this mat∣ter, seeing we haue one yet fresh in memory, whereof I haue had occasion to speake diuers times, to wit the lamentable ruine of Henry the 3. last King of France, who perswading him selfe,Henry the 3. k. of france. that dead men byte not, thought it most secure for him to kil the Cardinal, and Duke of Guyse, which was reuenged (as I haue sig∣nified before) not only in his state, by the greatest part of his subiects (who presently vpon the newes thereof tooke armes against him) but also in his person, by one, who was not any way dependant of the Guyses,Dangers not re∣medyed but in∣creased by cru∣elty. nor euer had receiued any iniury of him in his life; So vnsure and dangerous is the remedy of dangers by murder and cruelty, that the danger is many times en∣creased and redoobled thereby. 56. But now, the politike may aske me here,VVhether any princes state can be assured by iustice and mo∣ral vertu. whether I (who inculcat so oft the danger of wicked policye) can assure a prin∣ces state by vertue and iustice, in such sort that the same shal not be subiect to any danger or inconuenience. Whereto I answere, that although such is the natural infirmity of mans state, and condicion, and so infinit the hazards and inconueniences wher∣to he is subiect, and such also the malice of euil men, that no hu∣mane force or policy can warrant the best prince liuing from al perils incident to his person or state;Al the security vvhich a prince can haue by hu∣mane meanes is to be atteyned principaly by vertu. yet the assurance and se∣curity which any prince may possibly haue of the one or the o∣ther, by humane meanes, is to be attained principally by vertue, Iustice, and such policies as are grounded there on, & not by in∣iustice impiety & wicked policy; for whereas the iustest prince may haue some one, or a few enemies, who may endanger him, the wicked must needs haue many, and the more wicked and cruel he is, the more enemies he shal haue, and consequently
the greater shal be his danger; for if a prince can not be secure from one enemy or a few, he shal be much lesse secure from many, and least of al from the general hatred of al men, which infallibly groweth of such excessiue cruelty and wickednes as Macchiauel requireth in his prince. 57. Therefore, for as much as it is the part of al wise men, es∣pecially in matters of state, to choose the least of al dangers or in∣conueniences, which can not be remedied, and to seeke to pre∣uent and auoide the woorst (as I haue sufficiently declared in my rules for yong Statists)Chap. 32. num. 10.11.12. it is euident that as nothing is more dan∣gerous to princes and their states then iniustice and wickednes (which maketh them odious to al men) so nothing is more to be eschued, and auoided of them, then the same; and that the contrary meanes of iustice and vertue is to be embraced and pra∣ctised,The greatest se∣curity of princes consisteth in the loue of their sub∣iects, vvhich ver∣tue procureth. whereby they may purchase the general loue of their subiects, in the which consisteth the greatest security of princes, such being the force and effect of loue, that it causeth in the louers as greate a care of the beloued, as of them selues, in which respect Seneca saith. Vnum est inexpugnabile munimentum amor ciuium. The only inexpugnable fortresse of princes is the loue of their people. 58. And this is so manifest that Macchiauel him selfe acknow∣ledgeth it sufficiently, teaching that excellent vertue may con∣serue a princes state, though he absurdly attribut the like force and effect to wickednes, which truly may be wondred at, if we consider that he being wel read in histories (as it may seeme) could not but see,Macchiauel might haue no∣ted the miserable end of tyrants, in al historyes if he were not wilfully blind, that al such ti∣rants as haue bene noted to be excessiue in cruelty and wicked∣nes, haue perished miserably one way or other, which hath bene obserued in al ages, and therfore Cicero speaking of the violent death of a Tirant saith. Haud fere quisquam eorum similem interitum effugit. There is skantly any one tirant to be found, that esca∣peth the like destruction, and thereupon also the tragical Poët saith. Seneca.—Quota pars moritur tempore fati? Quos felices cinthia vidit? Vidit miseros abitura dies, Rarum est felix idemque senex. The sense is, that few of them liue out the course of nature, and
that it is a rare thing to see any of them old and happy, whereof also an other Poët saith thus. Ad generum cereris, sinecade & sanguine, pauci Descendunt reges, & sicca morte tiranni. That is to saye, few tirants dye their natural death, or without blood; Which Macchiauel might haue noted, if not in other histories, yet at least in Titus Liuius, vpon the which he made certaine discour∣ses, for of 7. kings of Rome from Romulus to Tarquinius Superbus,Tit. Liuius. Dec. 1. li. 1. 4. who got their estates, or at least gouerned them tirranni∣cally, were 3. of thē killed, & the fourth banished, as I haue ob∣serued before in Romulus, Lucius Tarquinius, Seruius Tullius,Supra. nu. 26. and Tar∣quinius superbus, whereas the other 3. to wit Numa Pompilius, Tullius Hostilius, and Ancus Martius who were lawfully elected by the Se∣nat and gouerned iustly, and vertuously, liued in security, and died beloued, and lamented of the people. And the like might be obserued in the Romā Emperours after Iulius Caesar, if it were needfull. 59.Macchiauel might haue no∣ted the miserable end of tyrants in Caesar Borgia. But that which seemeth to me most strange in Macchiauel is, that he could not see the experience thereof, at least in Caesar Borgia, whome as I haue often signified before, he proposeth to his prince for a mirrour of tirannical policy, not with standinge that the successe thereof, was such in him, that all princes may learne thereby to detest it,Guicciard. li. 6. seeing hee who in Macchiauels opi∣nion was most exact in the speculation and practise thereof, was vtterly ouerthowne therby,The miserable end of tirants can not be attributed to chance and vvhy. as wel as al other tirants of former times; which can not be attributed to chance, as the politikes wold haue it, but either to the iust iudgement of God vpon wic∣ked men (which is in deede the principal cause therof, as I wil declare in the next chapter) or at least to the next and immediat cause which for the most part is the hatred of men.The miserable end of yrts is very frequent & hath a knovve caus, and therefore is not casul. And ther∣fore seeing the miserable end of wicked tirants, not onely hath notorious and knowne causes, but also is so frequent, and com∣mon, that it hath bene alwaise held for a matter of common experience, it can not be referred to chance or fortune, which are vnderstood to be in such things only, as are rare,num. 6. & 7. It may be refrred to chane, if any notab e tirat come to a good end. and haue no knowne, and ordinary cause (as I haue declared in the 11. chapter) So that it may rather be counted casual, or a matter of chance, if any notable tirant doe come to a good end, for that
the same hath bene seeldome seene, and the cause therof secret, or at least vncertaine. Macchiauel eithr grosly ignorant, or extremly mali∣cious.60. Therefore I conclude that Macchiauel cannot be excused eyther of grosse ignorance, if he knew not that which common experience teacheth (to wit that wicked tirants doe commonly perish miserably,) or of extreme malice if he knew it, and yet laboured to induce princes to wickednes, and tyranny. The later wherof is now sufficiently acknowledged by some Florentines of no meane iudgement his owne cuntrymen,Hovv Macchia∣uels frends excuse him at this day. and frends, who in their ordinary discourses concerning his pollicies, doe not stick to confesse that he him selfe knew theym to be contrary to true reason of state,Macchiauels doctrin acknovv∣ledged by his frends to be pernicious to princes. and pernicious to princes, & that neuerthelesse desiring to ouerthrow those of the house of the Medices which opprest the commonwelth of Florence in his tyme, he published his pestilent doctrin, hoping that they wold embrace it & ruine theymselues by the practise therof, wherby the state of Florence might returne to the ould Democracy or popular gouerment wher¦in it had continued many yeres before. Macchiauels ma∣licious impiety.Thus say his frends; but how they befrend him therin excu∣sing him of folly, & excusing him of mallicious impietye, I leaue it to the iudgement of the discret reader. And this shall suffise for the examination of Macchiauillian pollicyes by only reason of state, wherto I will now ad the consideration of gods proui∣dence and iustice, and shew therby that not only such extremity of wickednes as Macchiauel admitteth in his prince, but also all sinfull pollicy whatsoeuer, is against reason of state; and further that all Macchiauillian wisdome is mere folly, wherwith I wil conclude this first part of my treatise, reseruing the more ample confutation of Macchia∣uels doctrin to the second part, where I shall also haue occasion to lay downe many po∣litical precepts for the further instruc∣tion of yong statists, and the better accomplishment of my pro∣mise in that behalf.
THE ARGVMENT OF THE LAST CHAPTER IS prosecuted, with the consideration of Gods iustice in punishing wicked princes, by the ministery of al his creatures. Also somewhat is said of the enormity of murders, and of Gods seuere punishment therof. CHAP 35. IN the last chapter I haue shewed the absurdity of Macchiauillian policies,VVhat the au∣thors intention is in this chapter. by onely reason of state, & now for the furder manifestation therof, I wil adde in this, the consideration of Gods pro∣uidence in the disposition of kingdomes, and of his iustice in punishing wickednes in al men,Chap. 17. per totum. and particulerly in princes, wherof I haue laied the foundatiō befor, hauing clearely proued that al states, and kingdomes, are very particulerly directed, gouerned, and disposed by the prouidence of God, which I haue made manifest, not only by the accomplis∣ment of Daniels prophesies,Ibid. num. 4.5.6. & 7. Dan. 2. concerning the translation of the empire of the world, from one nation to an other, but also by notorious examples of Gods Iustice in punishing whole common welths, kingdomes, and states, for the sinnes,Chap. 18. 19. 20. 21. & 22. sometimes of the people, some times of the princes, and sometimes of both;Chap. 28. And finally I haue declared, as wel by reason, and by the authority of the best learned, and most famous Philosophers, as also byIbid. num. 19 20.21. &c. & num. 35. & 36. Ibid. num. 17. examples, that al true wisdome and policy is of God, and that the wisest worldlings, and most politike gouernours, doe wit∣hout the same cōmit infinit errours, & goe, as it were groping in the dark, in matters concerninge as wel their priuat, as publike affaires. 2. Al this, I say, I haue shewed at large,Ibidem. VVhy Macchia∣uillian policyes. and therfore shall not neede to repeat it here, but doe draw there vpon this infal∣lible conclusion, mencioned also sometymes heretofore, that al Macchiauillian or wicked policies, are againste true reason of
state,ar against true reason of state. and most pernicious to princes, and their states; For if all states depend vpon the prouidence of God, and are at his dispo∣sition, if they be geuen, conserued, encreased, punished, transla∣ted or destroied, by his ordinance (as I haue clearely proued they are) and lastly if al true wisdome, and policy be of God, it must needs follow, that no act can be truly wise and politicall which is offensiue to God, neither yet any thing good for state, or conforme to true reason of state, which may prouoke the wrath and punishment of God, on whose wil al states depend; wherupon it also followeth, that not so much as a venial sinne (I meane the least that may be committed) and much lesse such horrible crimes as Macchiauel alloweth in his prince, can be accor∣ding to true reason of state although they may some waye be∣nefit the state by Gods permission,Chap. 36. nu. 26. & 27. wherof I wil say somewhat after a while. 3. in the meane tyme I wil here prosecute the former argu∣ment a little furder, with the consideration of Gods iustice, wherby it wilbe more cleare then the sunne, that wicked policy can not assure, but vtterly destroy the states of princes, and for as much as I treated of this point in the last chapter, examining Macchiauels doctrin by onely reason of state, where I ascribed the ouerthrow of wicked princes to the hate of men, for the most part (for that the same is in deede one of the most ordinary causes thereof): therfore I wish it here to be vnderstood that neither hatred, nor contempt, nor ambition, nor any passion of man, nor any other humane meanes whatsoeuer (wherby wic∣ked princes may be ouerthrowne) are any other then secon∣dary,Gods iustice is the first and principal cause of the ouer∣throvv of vvicked princes. and inferiour causes therof, for that the first and principal cause is the Iustice of God; who for the punishement of the sinnes of men, doth serue him selfe, not only of men, but also of Angels, and spirits, good, and bad, of all liuing and sensi∣ble creatures, and of the elements and al elemental things, as it is signifyed in Ecclesiasticus where we read that,Eccle. c. 39. Ibid. Sunt spiritus ad vindictam creati There are spirits created for reuenge, or punishment of sinne,All creatures are instruments of Gods iusti e for the punishment of sinne. and againe. Ignis, grando, fames &c. Fire, haile, famin, and death, al these things are created for mans punishment, the teeth of beasts, and scorpions, and serpents, and the reuenging swoord prepared for the vtter extermination of the wicked. Thus far the preacher concerning the
ministery of al creatures in the punishment of the wicked, wher∣of also the wise man saith. Creatura tibi factori deseruiens &c.Sap. 16. Thy creatures, O Lord, seruing thee their Creator, are kindled vvith fury for the tor∣ment of the vniust. 4. This is so euident by the experience of al ages, that it shal∣be needeles for me to lay doune any particular examples therof, and therfore I omit to speake of the general deluge in the tyme of Noe, of the burning of Sodoma,Genes. 7. and Ghomorra with fyre from heauen, of the plagues of Egipt by frogs flees, and locusts,Exod. 7.8.9. t 10. and of infinit innundations, exustions, tempests, pestilences, famins, and earth quakes, wherby whole citties prouinces, and cuntries haue ben destroied for sinne, God vsing the ministery of his crea∣tures of al sorts for the punishment therof, al which I say I omit as needeles, and wil declare how diuersely God vseth the mini∣stery of man for the punishmēt of sinne, wherof I wil first speake in general, and afterwards exemplify it particulerly in wicked princes. 5. The ordinary ministers of Gods iustice, vpon euil men,Princes the or∣dinary ministers of Gods iustice. Rom. 13. are kings and princes, or such others as punish malefactors by their authority, in which respect the Apostle saith, that the prince. Non sine causa gladium portat. Doth not carry his svvord in vaine, or with∣out cause, Dei enim minister est vindex in iram ei qui malum agit. For he is the minister of God to punish in vvrath him that doth euil;Hovv priuate∣men are the mi∣nisters of Gods iustice. Nume. 25. Neuerthelesse priuat men are sometymes also the ministers of Gods iustice pon other men, either moued therto with the zeale of Gods glory, (as Phinees who killed the Israelit which committed fornication with the Madianit) or els by mere accident, and chance, as it ap∣peareth in Exodus, where the law of God ordayned,Erod. 21. Some men ar the ministers of Gods iustice by chan∣ce, or against their vvils. that he who should commit wilful murder, should be punished with death, but he that should by chance, or against his wil kil a man (whom God of his secret iudgements should geue into his hands, for so doth the scripture geue to vnderstand) such a one, I say, should haue a sanctuary for his refuge; wherby we may see that God maketh some the ministers of his iustice casually,Men execute Gods iustice som∣tymes vnvvit∣tingly. Num. 7. Isay. 10. and against their wills; As sometymes alsoe some are his instruments vn∣wittingly in doing their owne busines, or following their owne affayres, not meaning to do God any seruice therin, as I haue no∣ted in the the 17. chapter of Sennacherib king of the Assirians, whom
God cauled in the Prophet, the rod of his vvrath, and compared him to an axe, or a saw, which men vse for their seruice, because he meant to punish the Iewes by him, though he had no imagina∣tion therof, as I haue also noted the like, in the same place of Nabuchodonosor King of Babilon,Ezechiel. ca. 29. who executed Gods iustice vpon the people of Tyrus, when he tooke and destroied their citty, either for reuenge of some iniury, or to encrease his domi∣nions. The secret ope∣ration of God in mouing men to the execution of his iustice. Isay. 7.6. Wherein it is to be noted by the way, that God doth not ordinarily vse to stirre and moue princes or other men to execut his iustice by reuelations, manifest inspirations, or by the voice of some prophet, but by such a secret operation that it doth not appeare to be his woork; which is signifyed by Isayas who pro∣phesying of the inuasion of Hierusalem by the kinges of Assiria & Aegipt, saith, Sibilabit dominus musca &c. Our Lord vvil hisse, or vvhistle to the flie in the vttermost part of the riuers of Aegipt, and to the bee of As∣siria, geuing to vnderstand, that he wold secretly moue the kings of those cuntries to make warre against Hierusalem. Therfore the like may be saide of the innundations of barbarous people (as of the Goths, Vandales, Hunnes, and such like) which haue at diuers times ouerflowed christendome, who were no dout the ministers of Gods iustice for the punishment of sinne, in which respect Attila the Hunne,Baron. an. 451. Paul. Diac. li. 15. Naueler in Chron. anno. 1400. and the greate Tamorlan were called, the one Flagellum Dei, The scourge of God, and the other Ira Dei, The vvrath of God, though they had no other intention but to satisfy their owne ambition; And so it may also be said of al the warres a∣mongst princes whatsoeuer their quarrels are, wherby they ex∣ecut Gods Iustice in punishing the sinnes of the people,Hovv vvicked men ar the mi∣nisters of Gods iustice. though they intend no such matter. And the wickedst man that is, when he spoileth, robeth, ransacketh, & murdreth others, is also the instrument, and minister of Gods iustice, whose infinit wisdome, and prouidence hath ordained, that whiles euil men seeke to sa∣tisfy their vnbridled appetits, and desires, they shal exact the pe∣nalty o other mens sinnes, it being most consonant to equity, and iustice, that as one sinne is many times the paine, and puni∣shment of an other sinne,Hovv sinners execute Gods iu∣stice vpon them selues. so one sinner shal punish an other, yea and that sinners shal also execute Iustice vpon them selues, some times willingly (as we see in such as wilfully make away
them selues) and sometimes against their wills, either killing them selues by chance, or ouerthrowing them selues by their owne deuises, and policies, in al which Gods prouidence and Iustice notably appeareth, for, seeing that man, and al the parts of his body, and poures of his soule, were principally ordained for Gods seruice, therfore when he emploieth him selfe,God is glorified in the punish∣ment of vvicked men. his parts and habilities to the offence of God, it is most iust that God em∣ploye him and them to his punishment, which turneth also to the seruice of God, who by that meanes is serued, & glorified by his very enemies, though not in such manner as they should, yet alwayse in such sort, as to his deuine wisdome seemeth con∣uenient. 7. To which purpose I wish also to be obserued,VVicked men the instruments of Gods iustice, but not vvhen and hovv they vvil. Macch. in princ. that although wicked men, are the ministers and instruments of Gods Iustice vpon sinners, yet it is not either when, or where, or how they wil, but in such time, place, manner, and measure, as it shal ple∣ase God to permit them. Which I say the rather for that Macchi∣auel seemeth to imagin, that if Ihon Paul Baglione Tirant of Perugia had bene, as he termeth it, magnanimamente Scelerato, Courragiously vvicked, he wold or might haue killed Pope Giulio the 2. when vpon composition betwixt them the said Pope put him selfe into his hands, and came to Perugia without any forces, or sufficient gards of his owne,Macchiauel im∣piously ignorāt. wherin Macchiauel showeth him selfe no lesse absurd, then impiously ignorant of the course, and power of Gods prouidence, and of the infirmity of man,Mans impossibi∣lity to execute his ovvne desyn∣ments vvithout Gods permission. or rather his im∣possibility to execute his owne dessignments furder, then God doth permit him, which it pleaseth almighty God to show some∣times most euidently, to the end we may acknowledge the same in al other occasions; And this may be noted not only in the holly Scriptures (in the deliuery ofGenes. 37. Ioseph from his brethren, of1. Reg. 19 & 20. Dauid from Saule, ofHest. c 5. & 6. Mardocheus from Aman, ofDaniel. 13. Susanna from the Iudges, of theIbid. c. 3. 3. children from Nabucodonosor, and ofAct. 12. S. Peter from Herod) but also in profane histories, as it shal appeare by 2. or 3. examples. 8.Anastasius the Emperour. The Emperour Anastasius hauing discouered a conspiracy against his person, and state, not long before he died, caused di∣uers of the conspiratours to be apprehended, amongste whome were two principal men, cauled Iustinus and Iustinian, and hauing
commanded them with diuers others to be executed, there p∣peared vnto him in the night in his sleepe a terrible old an commanding him to spare them both,onar. Annal. To. 3. for that they were e daye to doe God seruice, whereupon he pardoned and released them,The emperour Iustine had ben a Svvin∣heard. Idem. Ibidem. and after his death Iustinus was his next successor in the empire, chosen by the souldiars (though he was very basely borne, and had bene a drouier, or as some write, a swineheard) and next after him succeeded Iustinian; So that it was euident, first by the apparition, and after by the effect, that God deliuered them from the hands of Anastasius, because he had designed them to be Emperours. The strange es∣cape of Mi∣chael Balbus. Leo Armenius Emperour.9. The like may be said of Michael Balbus emperour of Constan∣tinople, who most strangely escaped the hands of the emperour Leo Armenius, and succeeded him in the empire. The story is thus. Michael Balbus being of great autority in the time of Leo con∣spired against him, and the conspiracy being detected, he was taken, examined, conuicted, condemned to be burnt, the fire made, he ledde to his execution, and Leo him selfe followed to see it performed, either because he trusted not his officers, or to satisfy his vindicatiue mind,Zonara. Annal. To. 3, in Michael Balbo. with the sight of the miserable end and torment of his enemy. But so it fel out that this being donne vpon Christmas Eue, the empresse his wife came to him, as he was going, and chid him bitterly for hauing no more respect to the olemnity of the feast, requiring of him only suspention of the execution for one day, vntil the morrow after the feast, which he granted at length so much against his wil, that he said vnto her, he feared that she, and her children wold repent it, his owne hart foretelling him, as it seemed, the danger which hanged ouer him and the rather for that he had bene long before aduertised, either by some prophetical, or magical prediction, that he should be killed vpon a Christmas day. And therfore to make him selfe sure of Michael Balbus, whome he most feared, he wold not commit him to any prison, but deliuered him to one Papias, whome he best trusted, and caused him to be fettred with certaine huge bolts of iron, locked with a key which he kept him selfe, and for more surety he went him selfe in person the same night to visit the house of Papias where Michael was lodged. 10. But see here the disposition of Gods prouidence for the
deliuery of Michael and the punishment of Leo; This Papias,The vvonderful disposition of Gods prouidence for the conser∣uation of Mi∣chael Balbus and the punish∣ment of Leo. was on of Michaels confederats in his conspiracy, and therfore ha∣uig now both of them this oportunity to consult together, they resolued to procure the Emperours death without further delay, and to that purpose, sent presently to the other cospira∣tours, who were not discouered, and threatned to discouer them if they wold not attempt to kil the emperour out of hand, re∣presenting vnto them the facility to doe it the next morning before daye, when he should be in the church at matins, which they allowed and executed; And Michael was the very same daye, proclaimed, and crowned Emperour in the same church where Leo was killed. 11.The vvisest man liuing playeth the foole some vvay or other vvhen he atte∣mpteth any thing agaynst the vvil of god. But now wil the Macchiauillians say that the emperour plaied the foole, in sparing him at his wiues request, which I grant to bee true, and such a foole should Macchiauel him selfe, or any man els haue bene, if he had attempted to doe any thing contrary to the wil of God, as Leo did in this case; which I saye, not only because the strange effect shewed it, but also because it appeareth sufficiently otherwaise, that God had determined that Michael Balbus should be emperour. For many yeres before, when Leo and he were both of them priuat men, and seruants to the Duke, or greate Captaine Bardanes, it chanced that their Lord,Zonar. Annal. To. 3. in leo Ar∣menio. & maister aspiring to the empire wēt to a holy man (who was estee∣med to haue the spirit of prophesy) & demanded of him whether he should not in time be emperour; the holly man tould him, that if he attempted it he should loose both his labor & his eyes, and afterwards seeing Leo, & Michael Balbus bring him his horse at his departure, he tooke him aside, and told him that God wold not geue him the empire, but that those two, who brought him his horse, should be emperours the one after the other. 12. Bardanes contemning his prediction, attempted to make him selfe emperour, and failing of his purpose, had his eyes put out, and was spoiled of al that he had, and some yeres after,Zonar. Ibid. Leo being aduanced to the seruice of the emperour Michael Rangabe, and general vnder him of a greate part of his army against the Thracians, found meanes to make the emperour so hateful, and him selfe soe greateful to the souldiars, that he easely made him selfe emperour with the helpe of Michael Balbus, who was a
Coronel at the same time vnder him, & in great credit with the souldiars, so that there wanted no more for the accomplish∣ment of the prophesy, but that Michael Balbus should succeede Leo, which he also did, as I haue declared. Dyuers things to be noted in the example of Mi∣chael Balbus and Leo The infirmity of mans vvit. The Iustice of God in the pu∣nishment of ty∣ranny.13. Therfore in this example diuers notable things may be obserued, besids that which I principally intended. The first is, the infirmity of mans wit, who when he thinketh many times to take the surest way, doth soonest ouerthrow him selfe, as Leo did, in making choise of Papias to be the geoler of Michael Balbus, whereby he saued Michaels life, and lost his owne. 14. The second is, the notable Iustice of God in the punish∣ment of the tiranny of Leo, who hauing vniustly, and tiranni∣cally got & gouerned the empire, lost it againe with his life and al by the like meanes. The course of Gods prouidence in the execution of his iudgemēts.15. The third is the course of Gods prouidence in the exe∣cution of his iust iudgements, turning the endeuors of wicked men to his owne seruice, and glory, and to their punishment, seruing him selfe not only of their best frends (as he did here of the empresse, for the ouerthrow of her husband, though a∣gainst her wil) but also of them selues, and of their owne wits, and policies. Wherin Gods iustice notably appeareth, for as the Psalmist saith.Psal. 9. Cognoscetur Dominus iudicia faciens. Our Lord shal be knowne by doing his iudgements, and then declaring how, & wher∣in he addeth In operibus mannum suarum conprehensus est peccator; The sinner is ouertaken in the woorks of his owne hands, geuing to vnderstād, that the iustice of God appeareth in nothing more, then in that he ouer-reacheth wicked men in their owne woorkes, and in∣uentions,Chap. 3. num. 1.4. & 13. & Chap. 31. num. 5.6. &c. Hovv vayn it is to striue against the vvil of God. tripping them, as a man may say, and ouer-turning them in their owne play, as I haue diuers times noted before. 16. Whereupon followeth also the fourth consideration, to wit, how vainely men striue against the wil of God, which when they seeke to hinder, they helpe many times to effectuat, as Leo did; for whereas God had determined to geue the empire to Michael Balbus, Leo in labouring to preuent it by the death of Mi∣chael, not only furdered it, but also wrought his owne destru∣ction, and of this obseruation I shal haue occasion to saye more in the next chapter.Chap. 36. num. 5.9.10.11. &c. 17. The fifth and last consideration shal be, that which I
principally intended to show by this example, that is to saye,No man hath absolute povver ouer an other man. that no man hath such absolut power ouer any other man, that he can execute his desynments, and wil vpon him at his owne pleasure, but only when God geueth him leaue, as it appeareth in Leo, for who could be more in an other mans power, and lesse in his own, then Michael Balbus when he was in the hands of Leo, being condemned to be burnt, going to the fire, yea and Leo following him to see the execution, replenished with anger and hatred against him, inexorable, & resolut to be reuenged; when neuerthelesse God so disposed, that a few brawling woords of his owne wife, wrested from him so much respite for the pri∣sonner, as suffised to saue his life, and gaine him the Empire, and so it alwaise falleth out by one meanes or other, when God wil frustrat the desynments of wicked men, or punish them. 18. And though these examples might suffise for this matter, yet I can not omit an other no lesse notable in our owne cuntry, to wit,The notable es∣cape of Henry Earle of Rich∣mōd from king Edvvard the fourth and Ri∣chard the third. Polidor. hist. Angliae. li. 24. of the deliuery of Henry Earle of Richmond (who was after king of England from the hands of King Edvvard the 4. and of Richard the tirant; For wheras King Edward, after the death of King Henry the 6. and his sonne, had no feare of any, but of Henry earle of Richmond (who then liued a banished life in the court of Francis duke of Britany) he sent embassadours to the duke, pretending to desire a marriage betwixt his eldest daugh∣ter, and Henry the earle, and for that purpose requested to aue him sent ouer vnto him, which the embassadours obtained by corruption of the dukes councellours, and conuayed him to the sea side to Saint Malo, where he was to be shipped present∣ly for England, being sick for sorrow and feare; But in the me∣ane time a noble man of Brittany, and a greate frend of his, being absent from the dukes court, and hearing what had passed con∣cerning him, presently repaired to the duke, & represented vnto him, the fraude of King Edvvard in his pretence of the marriage, and consequently the earles danger, if he suffred him to be tran∣sported into England, wherupon the duke sent one of his coun∣cel in al hast, to ouertake the embassadours of King Edvvard, and to find some good pretence to hinder the earles passage, which he did, entertaining them with some plausible matters, whiles the earle tooke sanctuary in a church, claiming the priuiledge of
the holly place, which the duke wold not suffer to be violated, and so the embassadours returned without the earle, and he escaped the hands of King Edvvard.Idem li. 25. And againe afterwards in the time of King Richard the tirant, brother, and successor to Ed∣vvard the fourth, the earle being also in Brittany was in no smale danger by the practise of the tirant with a councellour of the dukes (who wholy gouerned him) of whome the tirant had ob∣tained for money, that the earle should be presently taken, and either sent ouer into England, or at least kept prisoner there, which practise was discouered to the earle before it could be executed, wherby he had time to saue him selfe by flight; and with in a while after procured some smale assistance of Charles King of France, and passing ouer into England, became the mini∣ster of Gods iustice vpon the tirant, whome he slew at Bosvvoorth field,Idem li. 24. and succeeded him in the kingdome; which was prophe∣sied many yeres before, by the holly King Henry the 6, who see∣ing him when he was but 10. yeres of age, said to some of his nobility, that he should be the man, who should in the end de∣cide the quarrel, betwixt the houses of Lancaster, and York, and be king of England. 19. By al this it appeareth, that although wicked men may extend their malicious wills, and desires infinitly to al mischiefe, yet they haue no power, or possibility to execut any iote therof furder then God doth geue them leaue for the accomplishment of his wil,The vvicked man lyke a ma∣stif dog in a chaine & vvhy. in which respect the wickedst man in the world, be he neuer so potent, is but like a fierce mastife dogge tied in a chaine; for though he barke at euery stranger, and haue a wil to byte him, yet he can come no nearer him, then the chaine doth permit him;The malice of the deuil and euil men like the bloody thyrst of the horse leech and vvhy. And therfore the malice not only of wicked men, but also of the deuil him selfe, may be compared to the bloody thirst of the horse-leech, or blood-sucker, which the wise phisition vseth, to draw blood in such time, and quantity, as he thinketh conuenient, for the cure of his pacient, and so doth almighty God by his omnipotent wisdome, vse the malice of the deuil, and wicked men so farre forth, as he seeth it neces∣sary for the execution of his secret Iudgements, either in the exercise of his seruants for their greater merit, or in the punish∣ment of sinners for his owne glory.
20. For otherwaise if the deuil, and his instruments might doe what they wold, they wold quickly destroy al the good men in the world; And this is the true cause why the bad desinments of euil men doe sometimes take effect, and are sometimes fru∣strat, yea and turne many times not only to their owne destru∣ction (as it appeareth by many examples, which I haue alledged in sundry partes of this discourse) but also to the greater bene∣fit of those whome they seeke to destroy,Chap. 3.4.5.1. & chap. 31. num. 5.6.7. * & Chap. 35. num. 15. nu. 18. Plutar. li. de vtilitate capiēd ab inimicis. Genes. 37. & 41. as I haue declared in the 24. chapter, by the example of one who thinking to kil an other with his sword, lanced an inward impostume in his body, which otherwaise wold haue had no cure. And the like I also noted of Iosephs brethren who selling him for a slaue procured his aduancement; wherto I may ad Andronicus Comnenus the em∣perour,Nicetas Choniat. hist de Andron. Comne. li. 2. Chap. 34. nu. 19.20. & sequen. who meaning to kil Isacius Angelus for the assurance of his state, caused his election to the Imperial dignity which he neuer expected. The story is notable to this purpose, as it may bee seene in the last chapter, where I haue related it at large. Therfore I conclude that neither Macchiauels prince (be he ne∣uer so courragiously wicked) can put in execution his desynmēts for the benefit of his state, neither yet priuat men can execut their malice against princes, furder then God doth particularly permit. 21. This was wel considered, as it seemeth, by Philip the 2. last King of Spaine, who being aduised by some about him (by occasion of the slaughter of the last King of France) to goe better garded then he commonly did, answered notably,A notable A∣pophthegme of Philip the 2. k. of Spain. bien guardado esta, a quien Dios guarda, He is wel garded vvhome God gardeth, geuing to vnderstand that how potent and powerful soeuer any prince is in gards, and armies, his cheefe security consisteth in Gods protection;Gods merciful prouidence in the protection of the kings maie¦sty our souerain. Hope of future blessings by the vnion of the 3. Crounes of En∣gland, Scotland, and Ireland. wherof most notable experience hath bene seene in this our age, not only in the King of France, who raigneth at this present, but also in our most dread soueraigne, whom al∣mighty God hath deliuered from sundry dangerous conspiracies in such wonderful manner, that his deuine protection, and mercy towards him hath bene most manifest therin, and may geue vs his subiects greate hope of those future blessings, which the first frutes of his happy raigne (I meane the vnion of the 3. crounes of England Scotland and Ireland) doe already promise vs,
to the euerlasting honour, and benefit of al the three nations, and the eternizing of his maiesties glorious memory. 22. Now then to proceede; wheras almighty God serueth him selfe diuersly of men, as wel as of al other his creatures for the chastisement of al sorts of sinners, he vseth greater seuerity in the punishment of tirants,God punisheth vvicked princes more seuerely then priuat men, and vvhy. and wicked princes then of any other, for three reasons. The first is for that their offenses are farre greater then other mens, both because they commonly concerne weighty, and publik matters, and also for that they corrupt many with their bad example, as I haue signified els where.Chap. 31. nu. 22. The second reason is, because they are more vngratful to God then other men, for that they receiue greater temporal benefits at his hāds then any other, for the which they are bound to serue him with greater loue, care and duty then other. The third reason is, for that they being aboue their owne lawes, and not subiect to the penalties therof,Princes the Lieu∣tenants and mi∣nisters of God. their faults doe properly be∣long to the tribunal of almighty God, whose lieutenāts & mini∣sters they are, and to whome they are therfore to yeeld a strayt, and exact account of their ministery. 23. This is expressely taught in the booke of wisdome wher almighty God saith to Kings & princes thus. Audite reges & in∣telligite &c.Sap. 6. Harken O Kings, and vnderstand, learne you who are Iudges of the bounds of the earth, in respect that povver is geuen vnto you from a∣boue, and strength from the highest, who vvil examine your vvoorks, and search your thoughts, and because vvhen you vvere ministers in his king∣dome, you did not Iudge rightly, nor keepe the lavv of iustice, nor vvalke in the vvay of God, he vvil appeare vnto you quickly, and horribly, for most rigorous Iudgement is donne vnto them that gouerne; vvith the poore and meane man mercy is vsed,Mighty men shal suffer tor¦ments mightely. Iob. 12. but mighty men shal suffer torments mightily. Thus saith the wise man, which Iob confirmeth saying. That God looseth the girdle of Kings, and girdeth their reynes vvith a rope, and povvreth con∣tempt vpon princes, and maketh them stagger like dronken men, And ther∣fore the roial prophet saith,Psal. 75. that almighty God is, terribilis apud reges terrae, terrible to the Kings of the earth, which may appeare by the strange,The examplar punishment of vvicked princes vvithout the mi∣nistery of man. and exemplar punishment which God hath laied vpon wicked princes at diuers times, without the ministery of man, in so euident manner, that it could not be denied to pro∣ceede from his hand, wherof we haue notable examples, not
only in the holly scriptures but also in prophane histories. 24.Exod. 14. Dan. c. 4. Pharao was drowned in the red sea pursuing Moyses and the children of Israel; Nabuchodonosor was cast doune from his princely throane, and made companion with beasts.Paralip. ca. 26. & 21. Ozias and Ioram were strooken by almighty God, the first with a filthy leper, and the later with an incurable fluxe in his belly, wherby he voided his bowels by little and little, & died (as the scirpture saith) Infirmitate pessima, with a most vile dissease; Also the wicked Iesabel was eaten with doggs; Antiochus the tirant rotte aliue,4. Reg. ca. 9.2. Mach. c. . in such sort that wormes issued abundantly out of his body, & nei∣ther he nor any man els could endure the stink of him. Herodes who killed saint Iames, & persecuted the rest of the Apostles was strooken by an angel,act. 12. and consumed with wormes whiles he liued. 25. And to come to later histories,Isidor. Victor vticen de persecut. Vand. Carton Chron. par. 2. an mun. 4122. Polidor. li 1. Hist. prodigiosa. 1 p. c. 3. Zonar Annal. To. 3. Hunnericus King of the Vandals in Afrik, and an Arrian heretik, was also consumed with woormes, wherewith his body became so rotten, that when he died it fel in pieces, and could not be buried whole; Mempricius king of Britany being most vicious, and tirannical with al, was wurried with wolues; Popielus king of Polonia, and his wife were killed with rats, and mice, which issued out of the tombes of his children, and neuewes whome he had caused to be murdred; The heretical and cruel Emperour Anastasius being admonished in a dreame that 14.Bonifacius ep. ad Ethelbald a∣pud Baron. an. 745. yeres of his life should be cutte of for his heresy, was killed with a thunder bolt. Celred one of the Saxon kings in England before the conquest, was for his wicked life pos∣sest, and killed by the deuil as he was banketing with his no∣bility. 26. Gunderik an Arrian king of the Vandals, died also possest,Victor vticen. de persec. Vand. Paul. diac. li. 23. Zonar Annal. To. 3. Egnatius, in Epi and miserably vexed by the deuil; Leo the fourth Emperour of that name, hauing sacrilegiously taken a golden croune from the church, and altar of Saint Sophia in Constantinople, for the couetousnes of a precious stone wherwith it was adorned, and hauing worne it on his head in tryumphant manner through out the cittie,Baron an. 10. 79. ex longino. Dubrauius Hi∣stor. Bohemiae. li. 8. was stroken by almighty God with an impostume in his head cauled a carbuncle, and so tormented therwith that he dyed. Boleslaus king of Polonia who killed the holy bishop Sta∣nislaus with his owne hand, was cast out of his kingdome by his
owne subiects, after fel madde, and ranne vp and doune the woods,Idem hist. Bohem. li. 5. and was found in the end eaten with doggs. Drahomira wife to Vratislaus duke of Bohemia procured the death first of the holy woman Ludimilla her mother in law, and after of many priests, and as she passed in her coche ouer the place where the priests were murdred, shee was swallowed vp by the earth, which opened,Ibidem. in respect wherof the place is held as accursed, and shunned by al such as passe that way to Praga as Dubrauius re∣porteth in history of Bohemia.Petrus Cluniacē. li. 2. mirac. c. 1. Finally Petrus Cluniacensis a most graue author affirmeth, that a count of Mascon in Burgundy hauing committed many sacrileges, and being one day at his owne Pal∣lace in Mascon, accompanied with many noble men, and souldi∣ars, was forced by a stranger, who came to him on horse back, to light vpon a spare horse, which he had there ready for him, and so was carried away in the ayre, in the sight of al the citty, and neuer seen, nor heard of after. 27. To these many more examples may be added of emperours kings and princes, which for their wickednes were notoriously punished by the hand of God,Hovv God pu∣nisheth princes by the ministery of man. with out the ministery, or helpe of men, who neuertheles are the ordynary instruments of Gods Iustice, though many tymes they are principally moued ther to eyther by hatred, or by feare, or by ambition, or by some other passion, wherof almighty God serueth him selfe, for the execu∣tion of his secret Iudgements, as I haue already showed in the punishment of sinners in general, and wil now show also parti∣culerly in wicked kings and princes 28. Sennacherib king of Assiria making warre vpon the Ievves, and most contemptuously blaspheming the holy name of God,4. Reg. 9. Iosephus Anti∣quiti. li. 10. was condemned by the deuine Iustice to be killed at his returne to Nintuc. Reuertetur, saith almighty God, in terram suam, & deijciam eum gladio in terra sua, He shal returne into his ovvne cuntry, and I vvil ouerthrovv him there vvith the svvord, neuertheles this sentence of al∣mighty God was executed by Sennacheribs children, who killed him in Niniue, as he was sacrifysing in the temple of his God Nesrac;Daniel. ca. 5. Also Baltazar king of Babilon receiued sentence of death, and of the translation of his kingdome by the mouth of Daniel the prophet, because he profaned the holy vessels of Hierusalem, and for his other impiety, for the execution of which sentence
God vsed the ambition of Cirus, and Darius, who beseeging Babilon,3. Reg. 15 & 6. tooke it and killed Baltazar. The like also appeareth euidently in the scriptures in Nadab, Helam, and many other schismatical kings of Israel, on whom God executed his iust Iudgements by the ministery of most wicked men, who killed them for the am∣bitious desire they had of their kingdomes. 29. I haue thought good to alledge these examples out of the holy scriptures, where in it hath pleased God to discouer the course of his prouidence in the execution of his secret Iudge∣ments vpon these kings, to the end we may also obserue the same in like occasions and acknowledge his Iustice in the mise∣rable end of wicked princes, by what meanes soeuer the same hapneth vnto them, to which purpose I wil also alleadge an ex∣ample, or two, out of later histories. 30. Mauritius the emperourMauritius the Emperour. who was slayne by Phocas drea∣med a little before, that tan Image of Christ which was ouer the brazen gate of his pallace, cauled him and charged him with his sinnes, and in the end demanded of him, whether he wold receiue the punishment therof in this lyfe, or in the next, and that when he answered in the next,Zonaras Annal. To. 3. in Mauri∣in tio. Paul. diac. li. 16. in fine. Blondus De. li. 8. Sabellic. ennead. 8. li. 5. an. 603. Covvards are cruel. the Image commanded that he shuld be geuen with his wife, and children into the hands of Phocas. wherupon Mauritius awaking in greate feare, sent for Phi∣lippieus his sonne in law, and asked him whether he knew any souldiar in the armye cauled Phocas, who answered that there was a commissary so cauled, a yong man, temerarious, but timo∣rous, and cowardly, if he be a coward saith Mauritius, he is cruel, and bloody. And with in a whyle after, it so fel out, that Mauri∣tius grew to be soe hateful to his souldiars for his couetousnes, & their bad payments, that they were easely corrupted by Pho∣cas, and induced to proclayme him emperour, by whome Mauri∣tius was taken as he fled with his wife, and 5. of his children, and his children killed first, and he him selfe afterwards, who consi∣dering his owne deserts, & the Iustice of God, repeated oft these woords. Iustus es Domine, & rectum Iudicium tuum, Thou art Iust ó lord,Psal. 118. and thy Iudgement is right. Here in we may note, how the hatred of the souldiars, & the ambition of Phocas were the meanes wherby God did execut his Iustice vpon Mauritius. 31. The like may be also obserued in the conquest of Naples
by Charles the 8.The conquest of Naples. king of France, wherof I related the history be∣fore at large in the 22. chapter where I made it euident, that it proceeded of Gods iust Iudgement for the punishment of the kings therof,Philip. Comi. Chron. du Roy Charles. 8. c. 17. which appeared not only by the strangenes of the successe almost incredible for the speede in the conquest, and the smale, or rather no resistance on the be haulfe of the kings, and their subiects, but also by the tormented conscience of king Alphonso so terrifyed with the remembrance, and representation of his former tyranny, that al things seemed to him to denounce Gods iust Iudgement against him,Guicciardin li. 1. and to cry France, France; be∣sids the testimony of the soule of king Ferdinand his father newly deceassed, who appearing to his phisician, notifed vnto him the sentence and decree of almighty God, the losse of their king∣dome for their sinnes, which neuertheles was executed vpon theim by the ordinary meanes wherby most states are ouer∣thrown, to wit by the ambition of some, and the hatred of others. 32. So that wee see how almighty God, who as I haue amply declared before, disposeth al things sweetely and wold not suf∣fer any euil in the world, but to the end to draw good therof, (who by the malice of the deuil and the most execrable sinne of Iudas, wrought the redemption of man,) we see, I say, how for the execution of his holly wil, and Iustice vpon wicked princes, he serueth him selfe as wel of the euil wills,God serueth him selfe of the euil vvils of men for the execution of his holly vvil. and wicked desires of wicked men, as of al other causes, and effects what soeuer, be they natural, moral, or accidental, wherby it appeareth, that the miserable end of tyrants, wherof the world hath common expe∣rience, is principally to be attributed to the Iustice of God, as to the first, and principal cause therof, though the secondary, and inferiour causes are, or may be as many, and diuers, as there are many and dyuers passions, or affections in men yea and crea∣tures in the world; the ministery, and seruice wherof their om∣nipotent creatour vseth as it pleaseth him for the execution of his wil.Macchiauel held for the Arch∣statist of the vvorld, did not see or obserue common expe∣rience. 33. Therfore it may greatly be wondred how Macchiauel (who would seeme to be wiser then al other men, and is held by his followers for the Arch-statist of the world) either did not see the common experience which the world hath euer obserued
of Gods punishment of wicked princes for sinne, or if he saw it, how he could imagin, that extremity of wickednes, yea or any sinful policy can assure a princes state.The miserable end of tyrants, obserued dili∣genly by al hi∣storiographers and referred to Gods iustice. Wherin he or his follo∣wers might be the more excused if this experience, wherof I speake, were only to be obserued in the histories of our scrip∣tures or ecclesiastical, and Christian writers, and were not also most manifest in prophane authors, and pagan historiographers, al which (I meane those of any note) doe inculcat nothing more, then the seuerity of Gods Iudgements vpon wicked men, and especially vpon wicked princes, and tirants. 34. Let any man that list read the histories of Herodotus Thuci∣dides, Dionisius, Valerius Maximus, Maximus, Plutark, Dion, Liui, Iustin, or of any other ancient historiographer of the gentils, and he shal see nothing more frequent, and ordinary in them, then the curious obseruation of the miserable end of wicked tirants, and their owne iudgements often interposed by the way, referring the same to the Iustice of God. 35. To this purpose I wil lay doune what may be noted in this kind, only in one of the aboue named historiographers, to wit Iustin, the abridger of the general history of Trogus Pompeyus; In whome we may see the violent, or vnfortunat end of these tirants following.Iustin. li. 1. Astiages King of the Medians,Idem. Ibidem. Cambises,Ibidem. Oro∣pastes andIdem li. 10. Ochus Kings of Persia,Idem li. 2. Hippias, andIdem. li. 5. 40. other tirants of Athens,li. 5. Philip, andli. 12. Alexander the greate his sonne,li. 14. Olimpias mother to Alexander,li. 16. Antipater the sonne of Cassander,li. 17. Lisima∣chus,li. 24. Ptolomeus, andli. 33. & 34. Perseus, al Kings of Macedonyli. 16. Clearchus tirant of Heraclia,li. 18. Machaeus, andli. 21. Hanno of Carthage,li. 20. Dioniosius, andli. 22. & 25. Agathocles tirants of Sicily,li. 31. Nabis a tirant of greece,li. 26. Aristotimus tirant of Epyrus, two Kings calledli. 27. & 3. Seleucus,li. 27. Antiochus;li. 35. Deme∣trius,Ibidem. Alexander,li. 36. and Tripho al Kings of Siria,lib. 37. Attalus a king in Assia,Ibidem. Laodice Quene of Cappadocia,li. 9. Cleopatra wife of Ptolome K. of Aegipt,li. 42. Mithridates sonne to Artabanus, andIbidem. Horodes K. of Parthia, & lastlyli 43. Iustin li. 1. Amulius vncle to Romulus, and Remes & killed by them. 36. These and diuers others whome I omit for breuities sake are noted by Iustin, to haue either gotte their estats or gouerned them tirannically, by periury, murders and cruelty, and to haue perished miserably, and in diuers of them he obserueth seriously the iust Iudgement of God; Of Cambyses King of Persia, who
killed his owne brother, and spoiled the temple of Iupiter Ham∣mon,Idem li. 2. he saith thus. Being greeuously wounded in the thygh vvith his ovvne svvord vvhich fel out of his scabbard of it selfe he died, and paied the penalty, as vvel of his parricid, as of his sacrilege. Of Hippias tirant of Athens,Idem li. 24. he saith thus. In that battaile Hippias the tirant, the author, and mouer of that vvarre vvas slaine, the Gods taking reuenge of him; Of Ptolome king of Macedony he saith; The vvickednes of Ptolome vvas not long vupunished, for being spoiled of his kingdome by the Gaules, and after taken, he lost his life by the svvord as he deserued, the Gods punishing so many periuries, and blooddy parricids of his. Idem li. 27.37. Of Seleucus king of Siria, who killed both his brother, and his mother in law, he saith, Seleucus hauing prepared a greate nauy to make vvarre vpon the Citties vvhich rebelled against him, lost the same by tempest, vvhereby the Gods punished his parricid; and a litle after, spea∣king of him, and his brother Antiochus king of Asia (who be∣ing banished out of his kingdome was murdred by theeues) he saith, Seuleucus being at the same time also driuen out of his kingdome, fel head long from his horse,Idem li. 27. and so died, so that the tvvo breethren being both banished vvith like misfortune, after the losse of their kingdomes, receiued the punishment of their vvickednes. Thus saith he, who obserueth also the like Iustice,lib. 32. li. 18. & 28. & 35. li. 39. and punishment of God in the ouerthrow of the Messenians for the murder of Philopaemen, and in the vnfortunat ends of Machaeus the Carthagenian, Alexander king of Siria, al the progeny of Cassander King of Macedony,li. 25. the children of Ptolomaeus, Euergetes King of Aegipt, Brennus Captaine of the Gaules with al his sacrilegious army, and Milo of Epirus who was one of those that killed Laodomia, of whose murder, and Gods Iudgement vpon the murderers,Idem. li. 28. he saith thus. Quod facinus dij immortales &c. The vvhich horrible act the immortal Gods did punish vvith the destruction of almost al the people, vvho vvere vvel nere vvholy consumed vvith dearth, famin, and as vvel ciuil as external vvare; And Milo vvho vvas the princi∣pal actor in the murder of Laodomia falling madde and tearing out his ovvne bovvels vvith his teeth, dyed vvith in tvvelue dayes after her. 38. This I haue thought good to note out of the breefe hi∣story of Iustin, to geeue to the reader some tast of the Iudgement of pagan historiographers, concerning the Iustice of God, in punishing the tiranny, and wickednes of princes, which as I said before, is so seriously, and religiously obserued of al the best
writers of al ages, and times (as wel greekes, as latins, and pa∣gans, as wel as Christians) that no man who hath reade them can bee ignorant what the opinion, iudgement, and experience of the world hath alwaise bene concerning the same, and ther∣fore it may wel be said that Macchiauel was either wilfully blind,Macchiauel eyther vvilfully blynd, or more then madde. if he saw it not, or more then mad, if he saw it, and neglected it, presuming to teach a doctrin, not only repugnant to al lawes, humane, and deuine, but also proued to be pernicious by the experience of the whole world. 39. But perhaps some polityke,An obiection of the politikes. or Macchiauillian wil say in defence of his maisters doctrin, that although very many tirants, or perhaps the most, haue miserably perished, yet there hath bene many others, who either got, or conserued their states by tiranny and wickednes, & neuertheles died their natural deaths; yea, and left florishing Empires, kingdomes, or states vnto their children, wherby any man may be incouraged to follow their example, with no smal hope, of like good successe; such were3. Reg. 15. & 16. Baasa and4. Reg. 15. Manahen Kings of Israel; the elderCicero Tus∣cul. q. li. 5. Denis tirant of Sicily, twoIustin. li. 38. & 41. Ptolomes. the one cauled Philopater and the otherIdem li. 30. E∣uergetes, the second king of AegiptIdem. li. 38. Cassander, King of MacedonyIdem. li. 15. Constantinus the 4. andZonar. Annal. to 3. Haraclius Emperours of Constantinople,Idem. Mahomet the second Emperour of the turkes,Paul. Iouius in comment. Edvvard the 4. King of England,Polidor. li. 24. Haldan King of Denmark, andSaxo. li. 2. Naucler in chron. an. 140. Iohn Galliace Duke of Millan, al which hauing either attained to souerainty, or laboured to conserue them selues therin, by murders of their parents, breethren, nephwes, or kinsfolkes, or by other wic∣ked, and tyrannical meanes, dyed according to the course of na∣ture, and left their states, to their children and posterity. 40. To answere hereto, I say first, that though this be true yet it is greate folly to draw any consequence therof,The ansvvere to the obiection precepts are to be deduced of things most fre∣quent. or to ground theron any doctrin, or precepts to teach others to follow their example; For precepts are to be deduced of things that are most frequent, and ordinary (which breede an experience) and not of things more rare or, seeldome seene, which are com∣monly casual, and to be referred to chance, for what man that hath any wit wold perswade his frend to goe to sea in a storme, in some little old rotten boat, because he hath perhaps seene some escape, or saile prosperously, in like manner? and euen soe
wee can not thinke to be wise, who contemning common expe∣rience (which teacheth the miserable end of tirants) to per∣swade men to tiranny by the example of a few who haue esca∣ped, or perhaps bene prosperous by the secret disposition of Gods prouidence, for causes knowne to his deuine maiesty, as I haue partly signified already in the 26. chapter (where I trea∣ted of the prosperity of wicked men) & wil declare furder after a while. Cicero ad Atti∣cum.41. Therfore Caesar said, that for as much as he neuer knew any man but Silla, who could conserue his state long by cruelty he meant not to folly his example,One svvallovv makes no sum∣mer. for as the prouerb saith; One, swallow makes no summer, neither ought a few examples to ouer∣throw a greater number, and much lesse common experience. In which respect, it may wel be said to the Macchiauillians, as one said to a priest of Neptune,Cicero de natura deor. who showed him certaine painted ta∣bles hanged vp in Neptunes temple, containing the histories of some whome Neptune had, as they thought, deliuered from drowning, but can you tel me (quoth he) how many haue bene drowned, for these few which haue escaped? and so I say to the Macchiauillians, that for a few tirants which haue liued, and died prosperously, through Gods secret Iudgements, they may find an infinit number of others, who haue bene by his iustice, rui∣ned, and destroyed. 42. But to satisfy this obiection more fully, I am to desire thee, good reader, to caule to mind that which I haue treated before,Chap. 26. concerning the prosperity of wicked men in this life, wherein amongst many other things very considerable for this matter,Psal. 144. I haue declared that almighty God (whose mercy is aboue al his woorks,) doth sometymes extend the same towards the most wicked, for such causes, as I haue there signifyed, yet in such sort,The children of tyrants puni∣shed for their fathers tyran∣ny. Chap. 26. Per totum Chap. 27. num. 13. & sequent Iob. 21. that although he doth mercifully remit vnto theim the tem∣poral punishment due to their wickednes, or some part therof, yet he iustly exacteth it afterwards of their children and poste∣rity, wherof I haue alledged many reasons, and examples nee∣deles to repeate in this place, because they may be seene at large in the 26. and 27. chapters; wherby it appeareth how true it is, which Iob. saith, Deus seruabit filijs impij dolorem patris. God wil re∣serue the sorrow of the vvicked father for his children, and that as the Poët saith.
— Crimina sepe luunt nati scelerata parentum.Eurprid. The children doe oft pay the penalty of their fathers wickednes. And this being most euidently true in al sorts of wicked men may be most generally obserued in such tyrants as possesse theim selues of states, or seeke to conserue theim by murders, as shal appeare euen in those who are mentioned in the obiection, of whome I wil treate in the same order that there they are set downe. 43. Baasa got the kingdome of Israel,Baasa, king of Israel. by the murder of king Nadab, and though he him selfe dyed his natural death, yet his sonne Ela was killed by his seruant Zambri,3. Reg. 15. who as the scripture saith, Percussit omnem domum Baasa &c. destroyed al the house of Baasa, & filij eius propter vniuersa peccata Baasa, and of his sonne Ela for al the sinnes of Baasa. 44.Manahen king of Israel. Manahen depriued Sellum as wel of his life as of the king∣dome of Israel, and died neuertheles in his bed. But Phaceia his sonne, was murdred by Phacee, and so payed the penalty of his fa∣thers offenses.4. Reg. 15. 45. As for Denis the first tyrant of Sicily of that name, the hi∣storiographers doe not agree cōcerning his death,Denis tyrant of Sicily. for although most doe affirme that he raygned 38. yeres, and died naturally, leauing his kingdome to Denis his sonne, yet Iustin following Tro∣gus Pompeyus whose history he abridgeth, saith that he was slayne;Iustin li. 20. in fine. but howso euer it was, two things are euident in him greately to be noted; the one, that his life was most miserable, by reason of the continual feares, suspitions, and torment of mind wherin he liued, as I haue declared at large in the last chapter;num. 42. and the o∣ther is, the punishment of God vpon his sonne, who was driuen out of his kingdome by Dyon, and forced to liue at Corinth in most base manner, and to gett his liuing by teaching children. Wherin Valerius Maximus a pagan writer, obserueth notably the Iustice of God extended vpon him for his fathers tiranny,Valer. li. 2. c. 1. saying of his fa∣ther, that although in his life tyme, he suffred not the punish∣ment due to his wickednes, yet being dead he payed for it in the shamful calamity of his sonne; wherto Valerius also addeth this golden sentence. Lento enim gradu procedit diuina ira,Idem. Ibidem. tarditatemque suplicij grauitate compensat. The vvrath of God proceedeth vvith a slow pace to take reue nge of offenses comitted against him, and recompenseth the delay
of the punsihment, vvith the greeueousnes therof. Ptolome Phi∣lopator king of Egipt.46. Ptolome who was cauled in mockery Philopater (that is to say a louer or frend of his father, because he killed both his father, and his mother,) died his natural death, leauing his kingdome to his sonne Ptolome Epiphanes, who also died peacibly for ought I find to the contrary, wherin I confesse it pleased God to inter∣rupt the ordinary course of his Iustice in punishing tyrannical murders with murder, or other violent death, eyther in the fa∣ther, or in the sonne, which is to be attributed to some iust though secret cause, knowne only to his infinit wisdome, wher∣of wee see the very like in the holly scriptures in Iehu King of Israel,4. Reg. 10. & 15. and his posterity, for although the ordinary course of Gods Iustice was not to permit the posterity of any of the schis∣matical Kings of Israel, to enioye that kingdome furder then the 2. generation, (so that their lynes and races were euer cut of, eyther in the father or in the sonne,) he exempted Iehu, and his posterity from that punishment, granting them a particular pri∣uiledge, to succeede one an other, vntil the 4. generation after Iehu, for the notable seruice which Iehu did him in destroying the house of Achab, as I haue declared in the 26. chapter, treating of the prosperity of wicked men.num. 21. 47. And if it may be lawful to coniecture the cause why God exempted Ptolome Philopator, and his sonne Epiphanes from the pu∣nishment of violent death due to the wickednes of Philopator, it may be probably said, (for of Gods secret Iudgements, I dare certaynely affirme nothing,) that it may be ascribed to the mer∣cy of God extended towards theim, for the seruice which Ptolo∣meus Philadelphus grand father to Philopator did him,Iustin li. 39. as wel in rele∣asing the Ievves which were captiues in Aegipt, to the number of a hundreth,Iosephus. de antiq. li. 12. ca. 2. and twenty thousand, as also in sending rich gifts and presents to the temple of Hierusalem, besids that he caused the law of Moyses to be translated in to the Greeke tongue by 70. learned Iewes, commonly cauled the Septuaginta Interpreters, to the end that the same might be reserued in his liberary. In al which, it may be thought, he did such grateful seruice to al∣mighty God, that the reward therof redounded to his posterity to the 4. generation, as it fel out in the posterity of Iehu: and that therfore, nether Philopator who was grande-child to Philadelphus,
nor Epiphanes sonne to Philopator, nor Philometor sonne to Epiphanes dyed violently, though the murders, as wel of Philometor, who killed his owne mother, as of Philopator (of whome I principally speake here) might haue deserued it. 48. And as the priuiledge granted to the posterity of Iehu ceassed in the 4. successor (for Zacharias who was the 4.4 Reg 15. either left no children, or if he did, they succeeded not) so also the exemption from violent death, granted as it may be thought to the posterity of Philadelphus, ceassed in the 4. descent; for Philo∣metor, who was the 4. successor died his natural death, but his sonne was depriued, both of his kingdome, and his life, by his vncle Euergetes, of whome I am to speake next; And this I haue thought good to note by the way, as not vnprobable,Iustin. 38. not pre∣suming to assure any thing concerning Gods secret Iudgements; But that which I take vpon me to affirme here is, that for as much as there is no rule so general, but that it hath an exception, therfore neither this example of Philopator, nor a few other such like, proceeding of Gods secret Iudgements (which are euer most iust) can preiudice the generality of the rule obserued in the ordinary course of his Iustice towards most men; Thus much concerning Philopator. 49. Now then to come to Ptolome Euergetes the 2. (who was sonne to Epiphanes,Ptolome Euer∣getes king of Aegipt. and brother to Philometor (he was a most barba∣rous, and cruel tirant, for he killed not only his neuew, sonne to Philometor (as I haue saide) but also a sonne of his owne, which he had by Cleopatra his owne sister;Iustin. li. 38. besids his horrible cruelty in murdring many principal Citizens of Alexandria which although it was not punished in him by violent death; (perhaps because he was also within the compasse of the 4. generation,Iustin li. 39. being brother to Philometor aforesaid) yet it drew the vengeance of almighty God vpon his children; for his sinne Ptolome Phiscon was expelled out of his kingdome by his owne mother Cleopatra, and by Alex∣ander his younger brother, which Alexander poisoned his mother, & hauing possest him selfe of the kingdom, was driuē out againe by the people. And in like māner the two daughters of Euergetes,Idem. Ibidem. Cleopatra & Griphina being maried to two breethren Ciricenus, and Griphus (who contended for the kingdome of Siria) caused the destruction of one an other; for Griphna procured Cleopatra to be
murdred in the very Temple of the Gods where she had taken sainctuary, whose death was afterwards reuenged by her husbād Ciricenus, who hauing ouerthrown his brother Griphus, husband to Griphina, slew her in reuenge of his wiues death. 50. Cassander King of MacedonyCassander king of Macedony, was not only consenting to the poisoning of Alexander the greate, but also destroied al his children, and family, and yet died no violent death; But his 3. sonnes Antipater, Alexander, and Philip, were slaine, & his daugh∣ter Euridice was kept in continual prison;Iustin. li. 16. Atque ita, saith Iustin vniuersa Cassandri domus &c. and so al the family of Cassander paied for the murder, as wel of Alexander, as of his children, partly with their deaths, and partly with their punishment. 51. Constantine the 4. Emperour of that name, first cutte of the nose, and eares of his two breethren, and after killed them, and for as much as he became afterwards a good man, it see∣meth that God translated the temporal punishment therof from him, to his sonne Iustinian the Emperour, whome Leoncius the tirant depriued as wel of his nose, and eares, as of his empire, banishing him into Pontus; and Leoncius being ouerthrowne, and taken in a battaile by Tiberius,Zonar Annal. To. 3. lost both his nose, and his liberty. Afterwards Iustinian recouering his empire tooke Tiberius pri∣soner, and hauing commanded both his nose, and his eares to be cutte of, caused him and Leoncius whome he found in prison to be executed together, wherwith neuertheles the tragedy en∣ded not, vntil at length both Iustinian, and his sonne Tiberius were slaine by Philippicus, who succeeded him in the Empire. Heraclius the Emperour.52. Heraclius the Emperour succeeding Phocas whome hee slew, left two sonnes, Constantin the 5. and Heracleona, of which two, Constantine was poisoned by his stepmother Martina, to ad∣uance Heracleona her sonne to the Empire,Zonar. Annal. To 3. Paul. Diac. li. 18. who after awhile was depriued therof, and banished together with his mother, his nose being cutte of, and her tongue. Mahomet the second Emperour of the turkes. Paul. Iouius in com. rerum Turci.53. Mahomet the second Emperour of the Turkes of that name, who ouerthrew the Empires of Constantinople, and Trabisonda, succeeded his brother Amurates, and for the assurance of his Empire, presently caused his owne brother to bee killed, the re∣uenge of whose blood, fel vpon his sonnes, Zizimus, and Baiazet the 2. of whome the first being forced by his brother to flee into
Christiandome, was poisoned in Italy, and the other to wit Ba∣iazet was expelled our of Constantinople, and poisoned by his owne sonne Selim. 54. Edvvard the 4. King of England,Edvvard the 4. king of Englād. Polidor li. 24. caused not only king Henry the 6. and the prince his sonne, but also his owne brother George duke of Clarence to be murdred, the penalty wherof was paied with the blood of both his sonnes Edvvard the 5. and his brother, murdred by their vncle king Richard in the tower. 55.Haldan k. of Denmark. Haldan king of Denmrk got the kingdome by the murder of his two brethren Roe, and Scato, and was afterwards so cruel a tirant al his life, that Saxo Grammaticus (an ancient historiogra∣pher of Denmark) saith of him thus.Saxo Gramma. Hist. Daniae. li. 2. His fortune vvas most admi∣rable in one thing, to vvit that although he neuer omitted any moment of time in the exercise of cruelty, yet; senectute vitam non ferro finiuit; He ended his life by old age, and not by sword. Thus saith Saxo, noting the common experience of the bloody and violent deaths, of cruel, and bloody tirants, in respect wherof he wondered at the natu∣ral, and quiet end of Haldan, which must be referred (as I haue noted of the rest) to the secret Iudgements of almighty God, transferring sometimes the fathers temporal punishment to the children, for iust, though secret causes knowne only to his in∣finit wisdome, as it may also be obserued in this case: for where∣as king Haldan left two sonnes, Roe, and Helgo, the first,Saxo. Ibidem. being in∣uaded, and ouerthrown in three battailes by the king of Sueth∣land, was also slaine by him, and the other following his fathers steps, as wel in cruelty, as al other wickednes, grew no lesse hateful to him selfe, then to al other men, and in the end killed him selfe with his owne sword. 56. To conclude, Iohn Galeas Viscont possessing the one haulfe of the state of Millan, and his brother Barnaba the other, killed his brother to haue the whole, and hauing obtained the title of Duke of VVenceslaus the emperour, subdued al Lumbardy,Iohn Galeas the fyrst duke of Millan. Naucler. in chron. an. 1400. & left the same with the title of a duchy to his sonne Iohn Maria Visconte, who was afterwards slaine by his owne subiects for his tiranny, and so receaued the punishment both of his fathers wickednes and his owne. 57. To these might be added other children of blooddy ti∣rants, who paied the penalty of their fathers wickednes with
their blood, and yet if you compare them in number with those whome God hath manifestly punished in this life for their owne tiranny, you shal find them to be few in respect of the other; But how soeuer it is, this I dare be bold to say, that there are very few,No notable ty∣rant vnpunished in his person, state or posterity. or skantly any one notable tirant to be found in al an∣tiquity, whose person, state, or posterity, hath not receiued some notorious punishment, euen in the very opinion and iud∣gement of the world, and most commonly by violent, & bloody death, it being most consonant, to the Iustice, and Iudgements of God,Blood euer re∣payed vvith blood. Matth ca. 26. Gen. 9. that the punishment be correspondent to the fault, that blood be repaied with blood, and that as our Sauiour saith, He vvhich striketh vvith the svvord, should perish vvith the svvord. 58. Therfore almighty God said to Noe. Quicunque effuderit bu∣manum sanguinem, fundetur sanguis illius. Whosoeuer shal spil mans blood, his blood shalbe spilt, which we see was verified for the example of others in Cain the protoparicid,Gen. 4. when he had killed his brother Abel, whose blood our lord said did cry to him for vengeance from the earth, and therfore he was accursed by al∣mighty God, and afterwards killed by Lamech; And Adonibezec hauing cruelly cut of the hands, and feete of seuenty Kings, and after killed them,Iud. 1. was taken by the tribe of Iuda, and handld in the same manner, acknowledging Gods Iustice in him selfe, saying. Sicut feci ita redidit mihi Dominus, As I haue donne to others so our lord hath rendred to me. 59. And in like manner when Achab had killed Naboth to the end to haue his vineyard, the prophet said vnto him. In hoc loco in quo linxerunt canes sanguinem Naboth,3. Reg. c. 22. lingent sanguinem tuum. Euen in this same place vvhere the doggs haue licked the blood of Naboth, they shal lick thyne, which was after fulfilled. And the like seuerity of Gods Iustice may be noted in Dauid, and his children for the murder of Vrias, and not only in Amon sonne to Manasses; but also in al the people, and cuntry of Iuda, which was miserably spoyled, and wasted by the incursions of the Sirians, Moabits,4. Reg. 24. bid. and Amonits, in the tyme of Ioachin grand-child to Manasses, Propter, sanguinem in∣noxium quem effudit, &c. For the innocent blood which Manasses shed; Et ob hanc rem noluit Deus propitiari, And for this cause God vvold not be merciful vnto them. Thus saith the scripture; wherby we may see that,Psal. 5. as the roial prophet saith; Virum sanguinū & dolosum
abominatur dominus; Our Lord abhorreth the bloody, & deceitful man. 60. To which purpose,Gods vvonder∣ful prouidence & Iustice in the strange disco∣uery of murders. I cannot omit vpon this occasion to note here by the way the wonderful prouidence, and Iustice of almighty God, daily showed in the strange discouery of murders amongst priuat men, be they neuer so secretly committed. For whence can it proceede but from Gods special prouidence, and Iustice, that the wounds of the dead body of him that is mur∣dred, doe bleed a fresh if the murderer come where it is?The vvounds of a dead body bleede if the murderer come vvhere it is. which not only graue authors doe testify, but also common experience proueth to be true, by the meanes wherof many murders haue bene discoured. And what is there more generally obserued in the experience of men, then that murder can not be hidden, but that it is discouered, and punished sooner, or later? which hath bene also an old obseruation,A strange story of the discouery of a murder. as it may appeare by a strange story which Plutark reporteth of the murder of one Ibicus, though he tel it to an other purpose. The story is thus. 91. Ibicus being taken by certaine enemies of his,Ibicus murdred. and caried to a secret place where they meant to kil him, perswaded them to desist from their enterprise, assuring them that his death wold be discouered, and reuenged by some meanes or other;Plutark in his treatise of much talking. and when they laughed at him, and asked him who should dis∣couer it, he showed them certaine cranes, which flew ouer their heads, saying that although there should be no humane testi∣mony to conuince them, yet those cranes should be witnesses against them, and helpe to reuenge his death; neuerthelesse they slew him, and when he had bene missed some yeres, and greate enquiry made for him by is frends, it chanced one day, that as the murderers sate togeather in the Theater, beholding a publike spectacle, there flew ouer their heads certaine cranes, which one of them seeing, showed them to his fellowes, and laughed saying, behold the witnesses and reuengers of the death of Ibicus, this was ouer-heard by some that knew him, who signi∣fied it to the magistrats, whereupon they were taken, and exa∣mined, and confessing the murder were executed. 62. The same author recounteth an other notable history,An other strāge story of a mur∣der discouered. which I haue alledged before vpon an other occasion to wit, that one who had killed his owne father, and was not discoue∣red
of many yeres,Plutark de sera numin. vin∣dicta. bewraied him selfe by pulling doune a swal∣lows nest, and stamping the yong swallowes vnder his feete in a greate rage, telling them who asked him the cause, that the swal∣lowes said, he had killed his father; wherupon he was suspected, examined, and vpon his confession condemned, and executed, as I haue declared more at large in the 26.num. 10. Cedren apud Zonar. Annal. To. 3. in Constan∣tino Pogonato. chapter. 63 To these I wil ad only one other example out of Cedrenus. A theefe hauing robbed, & killed a poore man who had a dogge with him, left the dead body not far from the high way, and the dogg lying by it; with in a while after a passenger seeing the dead body, buried it; which being donne, the dogge fauned vpon him, and followed him home; This man was an Inne-keeper,A murdrer dis∣couered by a dogge. and wheras the dogg did vse to faune vpon al the guests that came to his house, it chaunced one day, that he barked at one, who came to drinke there, and sett vpon him with such vi∣olence, that the Inne-keeper, and others, noting the same, were moued (saith the author) by deuine instinct, to conceiue that he was the man who had killed the doggs former maister, & vpon suspicion therof, caused him to be apprehended, and examined, and so its fel out that he being the murderer, confessed it, and re∣ceiued the punishment which he deserued. 64. I forbeare to alledge modern examples of this matter, for that no man can be ignorant of the strange accidents which hap dayly in one place or other, for the discouery, and punish∣ment of murderers; and therfore I conclude, that the common obseruation therof, being deriued from the experience as wel of former ages, as of the present time, is a notable argument, not only of the enormity and horrr of homicid, but also of Gods greate prouidence, and seuere iustice in punishing the same. 65. Seeing then almighty God hath ordayned this miraculous discouery of murders, to the end no murderer amongst priuat men shal escape the punishment of humane lawes, it is no mer∣uel, if he seuerely punish murder in princes, who ought to punish it in others, wherby it may also be iudged what assurance, or be∣nefit a prince may procure to his state by such horrible murders, as Macchiauel seemeth to allow in his prince; wherby he shal ex∣pose him selfe not only to the hatred of men, but also to the wrath, and vengeance of almighty God, against whome he hath
no defence. For be he neuer so strong, and potent, God wil put (as the Prophet said of Sennacherib) Circulam in naribus eius &c.Isay. 37. 4. Reg. 1. A ring in his nose, and a bridle in his mouth, where with he wil wring him, wind him, and turne him which way he list, yea & perhaps make some little mouse, louse, or woorme ouerthrow him, and tryumph ouer al his power, pompe, and pride, as it may appeare by the strange and miserable ends of dyuers kings and princes, of whome I haue spoken before in this chapter.num. 11. & 1. IT IS FVRDER DEBATED VVHETHER AL sinful policy be against reason of state, by occasion vvhere of, some things are obserued concerning the course of Gods proui∣dence, in the conseruation, and destruction of states: and by the vvaye some vvhat is sayde of sorcery, and hovv dangerous the practise therof is to princes, and finally it is concluded that al vvicked policy is pernicious to state, and that the vvisdome of Politykes and Machiauillians is mere folly. CHAP. 36 BVT now perhaps the politike wil saie,An obiection of the polities. that al∣though he should grant that the continuance of wickednes might make a prince hateful both to God, and man, and consequently procure his ruine, neuerthelesse it wold not follow that euery policy which may be sinful,VVhether euery sinful policy be against reason of state. and offensiue to God, is aginst reason of state, seeing experience teacheth that such policyes are many times beneficial, and profitable to state, and what soeuer doth benefit the state, the same may be iustly saide to be according to reason of state, and be practised of statists with out imputation of folly, especially in cases or ex∣tremity, when a prince seeth him selfe brought to such an exi∣gent, that he hath no hope of helpe by any lawful meanes, and yet may perswade him selfe that some act, which may be coun∣ted a sinne or offence to God, may procure him some remedy, as
some fraudulent dealing, periury, murder, or such like? For al∣though, say the politikes, that in cases where there is freedome of election of good or bad policies, it may perhaps be conueni∣ent to vse the good, and eschew the euil, yet when the case see∣meth to be desperat, and no choise left but either to practise some wicked policy, or to suffer the state to perish, then at least, say they, reason of state requireth that the state be conserued by what meanes soeuer. The ansvvere to the obiection.2. For the satisfaction of this difficulty, it is to be considered that euery thing which succeedeth wel in matter of state, can not be said to be according to reason of state, or to be wel and wisely donne,Euery thing vvhich succee∣deth vvel in matter of state is not according to reason of state and vvhy. for that the successe not only of very bad, but also of very foolish designments is many times very good, by chance, as we commonly say, or rather by the permission, or secret disposition of almighty God, who (as I haue often signi∣fied) disposeth of the affaires of men, not acccording to their wills or wishes but according to his owne holly wil, and secret Iudgements, drawing alwaise good out of euil, and turning the woorst intentions, and actions of the wickedest men in the world, to the good of others, and his owne glory one way or other. VVhat a prince reduced to any extremity is to consider.3. Therfore a prince who seeth him selfe reduced to any such extremity, that he may think it needeful to vse some wicked policy, is to consider that the calamity which he either suffreth, or feareth, can not hap vnto him without Gods special proui∣dence, but rather by his iust ordinance, either for his trial, and exercise, or for the iust punishment of his sinnes, or of the sinnes of his parents or predecessors,Chap 17. nu. 24 25. & 26. or perhaps of the people, as I haue sufficiently proued before. 4. If it be only for his trial, that it is to saye, to proue and try his faith, & hope in God, and to exercise his pacience (for which causes God suffred Iob,Iob. 1.2.3.42. To. i. 12. and Tobias to be tempted, and permitteth his best beloued seruants to faule into difficulties) what other effect can wicked policy woork, then that the affliction which God laied vpon him for his benefit and special good, shal turne by Gods iust Iudgement to his vtter ruine both of body & soule? 5. And if the affliction be a punishment of sinne in any sort, he can not with any reason conceiue that the same may be re∣medied
by sinful, and wicked meanes, wherby the cause of his affliction shal be encreased, and Gods indignation, and wrath furder kindled against him and his state; and much lesse may he hope, either to force, or frustrat the wil of God by policies,Extreme folly to seee to force or frustrat the vvil of God. and deuises, as we read that diuers wicked princes haue laboured to doe, and gained nothing els in the end, but either a note of ex∣treme folly and impiety, or els vtter ruine to them selues and their states, and as the tragical Poët saith. —Ad fatum venêre suum dum fata timent.Seneca in Odip. They came to their fatal end, whiles they feared, or sought to auoide their fate; that is to saye, them selues the instruments of Gods wil and Iustice, to execute the same vpon them selues. 6. And although I haue proued this already by many exam∣ples of princes, who haue perished by their owne wicked po∣licies, yet I wil ad here a few more examples, of such as hauing had some light, and vnderstanding of Gods wil concerning them selues or their states, haue sought by some impious policies to elude, or auert it. 7. To which purpose I wish it first to be noted by the way,God reuealeth sometymes his se∣cret iudgements to vvicked spi∣rits, and how. Ioan. 11. Aug. de Genesi ad litteram. ca. 17. that almighty God doth sometymes (for secret causes knowne only to his infinit wisdome) reueale his owne hidden and secret councels, not only to wicked men, as he did to Caiphas, but also to wicked spirits, by the ministery of his Angels, as S. Augustin witnesseth, by which meanes the deuils did truly fore-tel to the paynims many things which depended only vpon the wil of God, wherof there hath ben also and stil is, sufficient expe∣rience amongst Christians in the detestable practise of nigro∣mancy, and sorcery. 8. For although the deuil (who is Mendax & pater eius; Alyer,Ioan. 8. and the father of lyes,) doth commonly lye, and delude those that deale with him, yet he doth other whyles truly fore-tel things to come, either by chance, or by coniecture,VVhat things the deuil can foretel. or els such things as doe proceede of natural causes, (wherof he hath an exact knowledge,) or agayne such other things as depend vpon his owne power and wil by the permission of God, or lastly such things, as it pleaseth almighty God to reueale vnto him, for the execution of his secret iudgements. 9. Therfore now to come to the examples which I promi∣sed,
Alexander King of Epyrus hauing vnderstood by an oracle of Iupiter,Alexander king of Epirus. Iustin. li. 12. that he should die neare to the riuer Acherusia, and the citty Pandosia, (of which names there was a citty and riuer in his owne kingdome of Epyrus,) thought to auoyde te same by lea∣uing his cuntry, and making warre abroade in Italy; where he was slayne with in a whyle, neare to a riuer and cit y so cauled, as before is mencioned.Idem. Ibid. Non prius, saith Iustin, fatalis loi cognito no∣mine quam occideret. Not knowing the name of that fatl place before he dyed there. Chap. 25. nu 8. Anastasius the emperour. Zonar Annal. To. 3. edren.10. Also the wicked Emperour Anastasius (of whome I haue spoken before in the last chapter,) being fore warned that he should be killed with a thunderbolt, built a maruelus strong house cauled Tholotum, and besids many strange labyrinths, and places of retrait for his saftie, he made a deepe cistern in the bottome of al the house, whyther hee meant to retire him selfe when he should see cause; neuerthelesse he was killed shortly after with a thunderbolt, as he was running in a tyme of greate thunder, from one chamber to an other to gett doune to his ci∣sterne; to whome it might haue ben said, as a poët saith of Ence∣ladus the greate giant, who flying away from Iupiter was strooken with a thunderbolt as the Poëts faigne, and cast vnder mount Aetna. —Quo fugis Encelade? quascunque accesseris oras Sub Ioue semper eris. VVhither flyest thou Encelade? what coast soeuer thou com'st vnto thou shalt euer be vnder Iupiter, that is to say, vnder the hand of God:sal. 138. which the psalmist teacheth notably saying. Quo ibo a spiritu tuo. &c. VVhither shal I goe, o lord, from thy spirit? or whither shal I flie from thy face? if I goe vp to heauen thou art there; if I goe doune to hel, thou art also there, yf I take wings early in the morning, and dwel in the furdest part of the sea, there also thy right hand vvil lay hould on me, Thus saith the psalmist, to show the vanity and folly of wicked men, which think to escape the hand of God. Valens the Emperour.11. No lesse vaine, and much more impious was the ende∣uour of the emperour Valens to euacuat the ordinance of God. For hauing consulted with nigromancers concerning the name of his successor, and being told that it shold beginne with Theod. he caused very many to be made awaye,Pn. Dic li. 12 of whome some were
cauled Theodosius, and some Theodotus, and some Theodulus, and some Theodorus, and amongst the rest he most vngratefully mur∣dred the valiant captaine Theodosius when he had recouered Afrik from his enemies, and gaue order also to kil Theodosius his sonne,Oros. li. 7. Ammian li. 29. Ambros in fin oratio. in fun. Theodos. whome neuerthelesse almighty God deliuered from that danger, and after made him Emperour, wherin the prediction was ful∣filled. 12.Nicet choniat. Annal. li 3. de Ando com. Andronicus Comnenus empe∣rour. Nu. 33 & 34. In like manner the Emperour Andronicus Comnenus gues∣sing by the letters I. S. (which were showed him by a Nigroman∣cer in a basen of water) that his successors name should be Isacius, thought to kil Isacius Angelus, whome he made by that meanes Emperour, and wrought his owne destruction, as I haue signi∣fied in the 34. chapter. 13. To these I wil ad only one more out of our owne cuntry,Edvvard the 4. king of England. to wit Edward the 4. King of England, who hauing vnderstood by some prophesy, as it is supposed, that one whose name should begin with a G. should procure the destruction of his children after his death,Polidor li. 24. caused his brother George Duke of Clarence to be murdred in the tower, not suspecting any thing of his brother the Duke of Gloster, who fulfilled the prophesy, if it was a pro∣phesy, I meane if it was the prediction of any man inspired by the holy Ghost, and not some deuise of the deuil (which I think more likely) to induce King Edvvard to the murder of his bro∣ther, wherupon the destruction also of his owne children (which hee sought to preuent therby) might very wel follow through the seuerity of Gods iudgements, who many times punisheth sinners by that which they most feare, & seeke by wicked mea∣nes to auoide, and therfore Salomon saith.Prouerb. ca. 10. Quod timet impius ve∣niet super eum. That which the wicked man feareth shal fal vpon him. 14. But leauing this to Gods secret iudgements,Dangerous for a prince to be cu∣rious to knovv Gods secret coun∣cels. Sorcery most ha∣teful to God and dangerous to princes. I wish it to be noted by the way in these examples, how dangerous a thing it is in a prince, to be curious to know Gods secret councels and decrees, concerning him selfe, & his state, wherby many princes haue bene drawne to vse the helpe of nigromancers and sorce∣rers, to the greate offence of God, & consequently to their owne destruction, there being no sinne, which God hateth, and puni∣sheth more, as we may perceiue, both by the expresse prohibi∣tion therof in many places of the holy scriptures, as also by the
seuere Iudgements of God vpon the Babilonians,Leuit 19. & 20. Deuter. 18. Isay. 47. Aomrhaeans, Phere∣zeans, Chananaeans, Heuaeans, Iebusaeans & diuers other people in the land of promise, with their Kings to the number of 31. destroied as the scripture testifieth principally for their witch-crafts,Deuter. ca. 18. enchantments and nigromancy, and therfore Moyses warned the children of Israel before they came into the land of promise, that they should not imitat those infidels in those sinnes, con∣cluding;Ibid. Omnia enim haec abominatur Dominus & propter istius modi scelera delebit eos in introitu tuo. For our Lord doth abhorre al these, and for these kind of sinnes he wil vtterly destroy them at thy entrance. The collusion of the deuil in sor∣cery.15. And if it be also considered, what collusion the deuil vseth in sorcery, and how little truth may be knowne therby, it wil euidently appeare how vaine, and friuolous is the practise ther∣of. For wheras he seemeth to be subiect to the sorcerer, or ma∣gician, as either forced by enchantments, or bound by couenant, it is but mere fraude, and deceite on his part; for that he can neither be forced by man,The deuil can not be forced by man by any na∣tural meanes. by any natural meanes (being of na∣ture, and power, superiour to the nature and power of man) neither be furder bound by couenant then he him selfe listeth, which is neuer longer then he may hope to doe man some nota∣ble mischeefe therby; besids that neither doe deuils know such things as doe meerly depend vpon the wil of God or man (as I haue already declared) neither wil they for the malice & enuy to man tel him the truth of such things as they know,Supra. nu. 8. but to the end to doe him some hurt and mischeefe one way or other; which also God of his iustice permitteth many times, reuealing vnto them his owne secret iudgements, for the iust punishment and greater confusion of those who confide in them, to whome they vse to signify the same in such ridles, and with such ambi∣guitye, that although they denounce vnto them, Gods sentence geuen against them for their destruction, yet they feede them with false hope of prosperous successe, to make them runne head-long to their owne ruin; wherof many notable examples might be alledged out of the ancient histories of painims,Examples of princes abused by sorcerers. which for breuities sake I omit, and content my selfe to relate 2. or 3. out of later histories. Ferrand Count of Flanders.16. When Ferrand the Count of Flanders assisted by the empe∣rour Otho the 4. (or as some caule him the 5. of that name) was
to geue battaile to Phillip King of France cauled Augustus, he was greatly encouraged therto by his mother vpon the prediction of certaine magicians with whome she had consulted, who assured her that the king of France should be ouerthrowne in the bat∣taile, troden vnder the horse feete, and not buried,Gaguin. Annal France. lii. 6. and that the Count her sonne should be receiued by the Parisians with greate ioye; al which fel out to be true, though in other manner then she expected; For although the King of France was soe prest by his enemies, that he was thrown doune from his horse, and tro∣den vnder the horse feete, yet he was rescued by his soldiars, and after wonne the battaile, and tooke the count of Flanders, & sent him prisoner to Paris, wher at the Parisians reioysed greatly, And soe vvee see (saith the story) how the Count trusting to sorcerers,Idem. Ibid. insteede of a croune vvhich he expected, purchased a prison. 17. Wee read also of the like cosenage, and illusion of the deuil in the assurance which a sorceresse gaue to Machabe king of Scotland,Machabe king of Scotland. to wit that no man borne of a woman should be able to kil him, wherby he was animated to vse al cruelty towards his subiects, and in the end was slaine by Makdust earle of Fife, who was not borne of his mother, but cut out of her belly.Hector Boethius li. 12. This is reported by Hector Boethius in his history of Scotlād; out of whome I wil also ad one other example of Gods iust Iudgements vpon such as consult with sorcerers, and of the deuils malicious sub∣tilty in procuring their destruction. 18.Nathalocus K. of Scotland. Nathalocus king of Scotland sent a greate fauorit of his to en∣quire of a famous witch, what should be the successe of a warre which he had in hand, and other things concerning his person, and state, to whome shee answered,Hector Boethi. li. 6. that Nathalocus should not liue long, and that he should be killed by some of his owne ser∣uants; and being furder vrged to tel by whome, shee said that the messenger him selfe shuld kil him,A crafty ans∣vver of the deuil to cause a mur∣der. who though he departed from her with greate disdaine, and reuiled her, protesting that he wold suffer ten thousand deaths rather then he wold doe it, yet thinking better vpon the matter in his returne, and ymagi∣ning by the deuils suggestion that the King might come to know of the witches answere, by one meanes or other, and hold him euer after suspected, or perhaps make him awaie, resolued to kil him, which he presently after performed; wherin we may
see the craft, and malice of the deuil, who thirsting after mans blood and perdition, framed such an answere to this messenger, as he thought most likely to moue him to the murder of Natha∣locus who sent him, which also God of his Iustice permitted for the iust punishment of the sinful, and wicked curiosity of Na∣thalocus, in seeking to know his secret Iudgements, by such vn∣lawful meanes. 19 Wel then I conclude this point, with the councel of the Preacher in the holly scripture, who saith. Altiora te ne quaesieris &c.ccli. 3. A good admo∣nition of the pre∣acher against curiosity in se∣arching into Gods secrets. Search not after things hygher then thy selfe, but alvvaise think of those things vvhich God hath commanded thee, neither bee thou curious in many of his vvoorks, for it is not necessary for thee to see those things vvhich ar hid. Thus saith the Preacher, notably correcting the curiosity of men, in searching into the secrets of God, & this I haue thought good to touch here by the waie, though breefely, because I wold not digresse to farr from my principal matter, referring the furder, and more substancial discourse of this point, as also the predictions of Astrologers, to the second part of this treatise, where I shal purposely speake of religion, wherto the conside∣ration therof doth more properly belong. 20. But now to returne to the matter which I had in hand, it appeareth sufficiently by this which I haue saide, not only how dangerous it is for men to be curious to know Gods iudge∣ments by vnlawful meanes, but also how vaine, and friuolous ar mans inuentions when he seeketh to crosse,Gods vvil not superable by force, nor euita∣ble by policy, but flexible to praier. or frustrat the wil of God, which is not superable by force, nor euitable by policy, but only exorable, and flexible to praier and repentance, by which meanes Gods mercy hath bene often, and no dout is daily moued to reuerse the rigorous sentences of his Iustice geuen a∣gainst sinners:Ionae. 3. wherof we haue examples in the Niniuits whome God determined to destroy, and yet spared for their repentance; and in Achab King of Israel,3. Reg 21. who hauing receiued sentence of the dectruction of his whole family by the mouth of the pro∣phet, obtained the dilation therof by humility and penance, in respect wherof God said to Elias. Quia humiliatus est mei causa &c. Be∣cause he hath humbled him selfe for my cause,Ibid. I wil not inflict the punishment of his sinne vpon his house in his daies,4. Reg. 20. but in the daies of his sonne. Also Eze∣chias being sick, and admonished by the prophet from almighty
God, that he should dye of that dissease, obtained by prayer and teares, not only present recouery, but also prolongation of life for 15. yeres, as I haue signified before in the 15. and 24 chapters,Nu. 2 6.7.10.13.14.23.25. & 28. nu. 8 & 9. where I haue by many examples showed the admirable effects of prayer and spiritual meanes, for the remedy of al the necessi∣ties of princes; and therfore I forbeare to speake furder therof in this place. 21. Yea but saith the politike,An obiection of the politiks how many haue prayed when they haue ben brought to extremities, and haue had no helpe, when some others by some periury, murder, or other mischeef haue conserued their states? 22. Wherto I answere, that the question is not here, as I haue insinuated before, of the euent,The ansvver and successe of mens acti∣ons (which is only in the hand of God, and disposed by him ac∣cording to his secret Iudgements) but of the likelyhood, and probability of remedy in extremities, by the one meanes, or by the other; for I could also with much more reason demand, how many haue perished by wicked policies, wheras infinit o∣thers haue conserued them selues, and their states by recourse to God, and godly meanes; of both which sort I haue alledged many notable examples through out this whole discourse. 23.Obseruations concerning the cours of Gods prouidence in the conseruation and destruction of states. Ierem. 15. 4. Reg. 10. But that which I wish to be obserued for the better ex∣plication of this matter is, that God doth sometymes absolutly determine to destroy a prince or state (as when he said of the people of Iuda that although Moyses, and Samuel should pray for them he would not spare them); and sometimes agayne he ab∣solutly determineth to conserue a state for a time; as when he promised to Iehu that his posterity should sit in his seat vntil the 4. generation. In the first case although neither good, nor bad policy,VVhat maie be the effect of good, or bad po∣licy, vvhen God doth absolutly determine to destroy a state. nor yet prayer can conserue the state (I meane when God doth absolutly determine to destroy it) yet it is to be vnder∣stood that wicked policy may through the seuerity of Gods iu∣stice accelerat, & agrauate the calamity threatned, wheras good policy ioyned with cōfidence in God, & pure deuotiō may moue his deuine maiesty to execute his Iudgements with much more mercy, and to turne al the temporal affliction of the prince to his eternal good, which in that case were the greatest benefite that could be desired, as I wil declare furder after awhile.Infra. nu. 31.32. & 33.
Hovv & vvhen vvicked policy may be a meanes to conserue a state.24. In the second case (I meane when God doth absolutly determine to conserue a state) it is not to be douted but that wicked policy may be a meanes therof by Gods permission, and for the execution of his secret Iudgements, though neuertheles the prince that should practise the same should commit noto∣rious folly, for that he might in that case maintaine his state by lawful, and good policy, with lesse danger, and much more be∣nefit to him selfe. And this I saye, because God vseth many times the wicked policies of men for the conseruation of states (when his absolute wil is to maintayne them) which neuertheles he wold conserue by the meanes of their lawful and good policies, if the fault were not in them selues. To which purpose it is to be vnderstood that almighty God, hauing geuen freedome of wil to man (for such causes as I haue declared in the 24.Nu. 4.5.6.7. &c. chap;) doth not necessitat, or force mans wil, but vseth it such as it is, (as I haue diuers times signified) mouing it alwayse to good, and yet seruing him selfe of it be it good or bad, for his owne glory, and the accomplishment of his wil. God vvould cō∣serue the state of a prince much rather by his good policy, then by his bad, if the prince him selfe vvould.25. Therfore I saye, that when soeuer he conserueth the states of princes by meanes of their euil wils, and wicked poli∣cies, he wold much rather woorke the same effect by their good wills, and lawful endeuours (if they them selues wold) yea and yeeld them with al, not only temporal but also eternal reward for the same; wheras on the other side though he suffer their wicked policies to haue good successe for a time (so long I me∣ane, as he meaneth to conserue their states, during which times they can not by any errours or foly of theirs ouerthrow them) yet he doth commonly punish them for it in the end,Though God suf∣fer vvicked poli∣cies to prosper, yet he punisheth the princes vvhich practise them. Chap. 35. nu. 35.36.37. &c. not only eternally (if they repent not) but also temporally, either in their persons, or states, or at least in their children, and posterity, as it is euident in the wicked tirants mencioned in the last chapter; who though they prospered for awhile, yet at length perished miserably through Gods Iustice, and those few of them which escaped temporal punishment in their owne persons, left their children engaged to pay their debt in that behalfe with their vtter ruine.Ibid. nu. 42.43. & se∣quen. 26. Besides that it is to be considered, that a wicked policy may some waye through Gods permission (as I haue said) benefit
the state, and helpe to vphold it for a time,Hovv vvicked policy may both benefit and hurt the state at one time. VViced policy like to vnhol¦some mats. An example of th kingdome & kings of Israel. and yet draw Gods wrath, and vengeance vpon it some otherwaie, wherby it shal not only perish in the end, but also be miserably afflicted in the meane while: like as the vse of vnholsome meats doth geue the body strength, and nourish it for the time, and yet doth so cor∣rupt it, that it perisheth much the sooner, and is in the meane time replenished with disseases. 27. This was manifest in the kingdome, and Kings of Israel. For wheras they al continued the wicked policy of Ieroboam their first predecessor for the conseruation of their state, to wit their Idolatry,3. Reg. 12. and schisme (which was first begunne by Ieroboam for reason of state) it is not to bee douted, but that almighty God, hauing determined to maintaine that kingdome for some time, permitted that wicked policy to haue the effect for the which it was deuised (that is to say) to diuert the people from going to the temple in Hierusalem,Ibid. and consequently from returning to the obedience of the kings of Iuda) and yet neuertheles he pu∣nished the same seuerely sometimes in the princes, and some∣times in the state, as it is euident in the holy scriptures, where it appeareth that not only Ieroboam him selfe was strooken by the hand of God, and al his children destroied for the same,2 Paral. ca. 13.3. Reg. 15. but also al the Kings his successors died violent deaths, either the father or the sonne, excepting the children,4. Reg. 10. & 15. 4. Reg. 13. & 14. and posterity of Iehu who were priuiledged (as before I haue said) for 4. descents; wherin it is also to be noted, that during the time of the pri∣uiledge granted to their persons, their states were miserably afflicted for the continuance of that wicked policy, though not ouerthrowne, in respect of the couenant which God had made with Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, for the which; Noluit (saith the scripture) disperdere eos, neque proijcere penitus vsque in presens tempus.4. Reg. 13. God wold not destroy them, nor vtterly cast them of as yet, though at lenght he gaue the kings their successors, and al the people into the hands of the kings of Assiria,4. Reg 24. & to perpetual captiuity for the continual practise of the same sinful policy. 28. Thus then we see, how wicked policy may by Gods per∣mission some way helpe to the conseruation of state (so long as God hath ordayned that the state shal stand) and yet may in the meane time through Gods Iustice procure the calamity of
the prince, and state some other way, and the destruction of both in the end. Gods vvil to cō∣serue or destroy states not al∣vvaise absolute.29. But now it is to be considered, that the wil and determi∣nation of almighty God, to destroy, or conserue states, is not alwayse so absolute, but that he may be moued by the merits or demerits of men to vphold the state, which he meant to destroy, and to destroy that which he meant to vphold. He determined as I said before,Ionae. 3. 3. Reg 21. to destroy the Niniuits, and al the family of Achab for their sinnes, and denounced his wil vnto them by his pro∣phets, and yet he conserued the one, and differred the execution of the other for some time, in respect of their humility, and re∣pentance.Psal. 131. On the other side, God promised to Dauid that the kingdome of Iuda should remaine for euer in his posterity, if they serued him,2 Reg. 7. 3. Reg. 11. Paral. 21. and kept his commandements; and although in respect of his promise, and for Dauids sake he conserued it in his line for many generations,4. Reg. 20. and diuers times defended it from for∣rain enemies, yet at length he destroied it vtterly for the sinnes of the kings, and people therof. So that wee see in both these cases that good policy assisted with praier, and spiritual helpe, may be especial meanes, to vphold and maintaine the state, and wic∣ked policy, as also al kind of sinne, a principal or rather the only meanes to ouerthrow it. VVhat princes shou d doe in dangers and ex∣tremities.30. Therfore for as much as the Iudgements of God are secret, and not ordinarily knowne but by the effects (his infinit wis∣dome hauing so ordained, to the end we may the rather know therby, and acknowledge our dependance on his wil) it beho∣ueth princes,An example of K Dauid. 1. Reg. 15. yea, & al other men in al dangers, and extremities to imitate the holy, & prudent King Dauid; For when his sonne Absolon rose against him, and he him selfe, with those few that wold follow him, was forced to flye out of Hierusalem bare hea∣ded, bare footed, and weeping, he acknowledged it to be a iust punishment of God for his sinnes, and as on the one side, he vsed al humane dilligence to defend him selfe,Ibid. and to discouer and dissipat the desinments of his enemies, so also on the other, side, he sought to moue almighty God to mercy by praier, paci∣ence,Ibid. and resignation of his wil to Gods wil, saying to Sadoc the priest; If I find fauour in the sight of God he wil restore me, but if he saye vnto me,Ibid. thou dost not like, or content me; Praesto sum, faciat mihi quod
bonum est coram se; I am ready to obaye him, lett him doe with me what soeuer it shal please him; Furdermore he not only auoided al vnlaw∣ful policies that might offend God, but also forbore to take a iust reuenge of the iniury donne him by Semei,Ibid. ca. 16. whose reproch∣ful speeches and maledictions he paciently suffred, as iustly per∣mitted by almighty God for his punishment, saying to Abisai who wold haue killed Semei; Lett him raile vpon me, for perhaps our Lord may behold my affliction, and render me good this day for this male∣diction. Such was the religious humility, of the wise, and vali∣ant King in this his great affliction, which was so grateful to almighty God, that he gaue him a notable victory, and restored him to his former tranquility, and dignity. 31. The like humility, pacience,An other exam∣ple of the humi∣lity and paci∣ence of king Da∣uid. and resignation of wil he showed also in other occasions, euen when he found not the mercy and fauour at Gods hands which he expected. When the prophet Nathan had signified vnto him the wil of God for the death of his child in the cradle, in punishment of his adultery and homicid, he neuer ceassed to craue his mercy for the life of his sonne with continual prayer, teares, and fasting,2. Reg. 1. shut vp in his chamber, and prostrat vpon the ground for some dayes after his sonne fel sicke, not omitting any other lawful meanes for his recouery, vntil he vnderstood by his seruants that he was dead, and then seeing by the effect what was the wil of God, he most humbly contented him selfe there with, washed, and anointed him selfe, changed his apparel, went to the house of God to pray, refreshed him selfe with meate, and was so com∣fortable, that he comforted Bersabe his wife, and al his family, saying vnto them, when they asked him why he was so sorrow∣ful whyles the child was aliue, and so comfortable when he was dead; I fasted, saith he, and wept vvhyles he liued,Ibidem. because I knevv not vvhether God vvold grant me his life, or no, but novv that he is dead, vvhy should I afflict my selfe any longer;? as who wold say, now that I see what is the wil of God, what should I els doe, but accomo∣dat my selfe therto, and reioyce in the accomplishment therof? 32. Thus said, and did, this holy King, and prophet, and so should al Kings and princes say, and doe in like case, imploring the fauour, and mercy of God whyles they may haue any hope, (yea and saying with Iob. Etiam si me occiderit sperabo in eo; Although
he kil me I vvil hope in him) not omitting any lawful policy,Iob. 13. or dili∣genice which may be vsed to procure remedy, and contenting them selues with Gods wil in the successe, what soeuer it be, acknowledging his Iustice therin; wherof I haue alledged also before a notable example in Mauritius the Emperour, who ha∣uing vnderstood Gods wil concerning the losse of his life,Chap. 25. nu. 30. and Empire, by the meanes of Phocas, for the punishment, and satis∣faction of his sinnes in this life, laboured neuertheles by conti∣nual prayer, and al kind of deuotion to pacify the wrath of God, vsing with al,Zonar. Annal To. 3. in Mauritius. al lawful diligence, and policy, to preuent the danger, and to defend himselfe against Phocas, and in the end when nothing could preuaile, and that he saw him selfe in the hands of his enemy, and his children killed before his face, he humbly acknowledged the Iustice of God, often repeating these woords of the Psalme;Paul. diaco. li. 17. Psal. 118. Iustus es Domine, & rectum iudicium tuum. Thou art Iust o lord, and thy Iudgements are right. 33. We read also the like of the holy, and pyous, though most most vnfortunat King Henry the sixt,Henry the 6. king of Englād. who hauing ioyned al law∣ful policy with prayer, and other spiritual meanes for the con∣seruation of his state, and finding no remedy therby, attributed al his calamity,Polid. li. 23. as Polidore witnesseth to the iust punishment of God for his sinnes, and the sinnes of his ancesters, though his owne vertue, or rather innocency was such, that if God had not (as it may be presumed) irreuocably decreed, to lay the temporal penalty of some sinnes of his ancesters vpon him, it might haue obtayned Gods fauour towards him, as wel tem∣porally for the conseruation of his state, as it did spiritually for his eternal glory, testified by so many notable miracles, that king Henry,Idem. Ibid. The notable effect of praier and humility, vvhen God doth absolutly deter∣mine to destroy a prince. the 7. demanded his canonization of Pope Iulio the 2. and had obtayned it if he had liued: wherby it appeareth how admirable is the effect of prayer, humility, and resignation of wil to the wil of God, when he doth absolutly determine to destroy a prince, whose temporal losse of a transitory state sub∣iect to al misery, is therby recompensed with an incomparable gaine of eternal felicity; wheras by wicked policy he can ney∣ther conserue the one, nor gaine the other, but shal passe from one misery to an other incomparably greater, that is to say, from a temporal calamity, to inspeakable and euerlasting torments.
34. Now then, to draw to an end of this part of my treatise I wil inferre certaine conclusions vpon al the precedent dis∣course. The first is,The first conclu∣sion inferring that vvicked po∣licy cannot stād vvith reason of state. that seeing almighty God gouerneth al states by his prouidence, and disposeth of them, as it pleaseth him (which I haue amply proued) it must needs follow that although he doe sometimes of his secret Iudgements (as I haue oft said) permit wicked policies to prosper, yet for as much as no man can with reason presume therof (considering the seuerity of his Iustice in punishing princes and their states for sinne, yea and sometimes for very smale sinnes in the opinion of men, as I haue showed in my rules for young statists) therfore I say,Chap. 13. nu. 4. no wicked policy can stand with true reason of state,No man can be truly counted vvise vvho ad∣uentureth vpon Gods indigna∣tion. the danger of Gods indignation being so greate, that no man can be truly counted wise, who wil aduenture theron; no more then any one might be said to doe wisely, who for his particuler benefit should vse to robbe & steale in a wel gouerned commonwelth, where he should incurre the danger of the law as oft as he should doe it, though perhaps he should escape the same many times; wher∣in neuertheles this difference is to be noted, that wheras men doe sometimes auoide the penalties of lawes, no man can escape the hand of God, if he offend him, but that he paieth the penalty of his sinne some way or other, sooner, or later, and soe much more greeuously by how much longer it is diferred, and most of al, if the whole punishment therof be wholly reserued to the next life, which neuerthelesse is seeldome seene in tirants and wicked princes, as it may appeare by the two last chapters. 35. The second conclusion shalbe, that seeing I haue also euidently proued through out this whole discourse, that man is of his owne nature so infirme and weake of wit, and power, that he neither knoweth many times what is conuenient for him selfe (and much lesse for others) neither yet can warrant the successe of his owne desinments, and wisest policies,The 2. conclusion inferring the ne∣cessity of Gods grace to perfe∣ction of policy. by rea∣son of the infinit accidents, crosses, and trauerses wherto mans life, and al humane affaires are subiect, besids that I haue also made it manifest by reason, and examples, not only that al poli∣tical science, is of it selfe insufficient for the perfect gouernmen;t of state, but also that al true wisdome, and policy is of God? therfore it cannot be denied but that the assistance of Gods
grace, and protection, is most necessary for the good gouern∣ment,The necessity of true religion in common vvelth and assurance of al princes states, wherupon also follo∣weth the necessity of true religion for the conseruation of state, seeing God doth by the meanes therof most amply communicat his grace and fauour, as wel to whole common welths, as to particuler men, wherof I leaue the furder discourse, and proofe to the 2 part of this treatise, where I am purposely to handle that matter, and to show as wel the dignity and necessity of true religion in common welth, as also that the Catholike religion, is most conuenient for state. The 3. and last conclusion that al vvisdome, or policy grounded on vvickednes is meere folly.36. The third, and last conclusion shalbe, that al wisdome or policy grounded on sinne and wickednes, is meere foly, which may appeare by that which I haue taught, and proued, as wel concerning the punishment of God vpon princes and their states for sinne, as also touching true wisdome and policy, wherof I haue particularly, and amply treated in the 28. chapter, and proued clearely that it consisteth principally in the feare, loue,Chap. 28. nu. 7.8.9 10. &c. Ibid. nu. 17.18.19.20. &c. and seruice of God, and that no man can possibly attaine to any perfection of wisdome, with out the light of Gods grace, (wherby mans natural habilities are encreased, and perfited, and his defects supplied) and that according to the doctrine of the best philosophers, as wel as our deuines, true prudence and vertue cannot be seperated, and that it is most requisit to euery prudent action, not only that the end therof, and the meanes to atchieue the end,Ibid. nu. 12.13. & 14. Ibid. nu. 15. be good and vertuous, but also that euery good thing be esteemed in the degree it deserueth, & the cheefe good of al (which is God, and his seruice) preferred before al other things what soeuer. And finally that it is the special office of a wise man, most to esteeme and seeke that which most im∣porteth him, to wit the saluation of his soule, and his eternal good,Ibid. nu. 32. The vvise man is vvise for his soule for that Sapiens (as the scripture saith) est anima suae sapiens, the wise man is wise for his soule; wherupon it followeth that he who preferreth things transitory, before things stable and permanent, and looseth, or ventureth his soule for any worldly commodity, or pleasure what soeuer, is no wiser then Esau, who sold his primogeniture,Genes ca. 15. VVicked men compared to Esops cock. or birth-right for a messe of pottage; or Esops cock that esteemed a barly corne, more then a precious stone; or the foole, who (as the prouerb saith) wil not geue his
bable for the tower of London; And therfore such as valew ho∣nour, and riches, or other worldly commodities aboue vertue are worthily compared by Aristotle to children that esteeme their babies and puppies more then gold,Seneca ep. 96. VVicked men more foolish then children. and Seneca accounteth them more foolish then children, for that children, saith he, play the fooles in triffles, and matters of smale moment, and no danger, wheras these other are seriously foolish, or rather madd in mat∣ters no lesse weightie then dangerous, as wel to them selues, as to others, and therfore, saith he, Verius, carius que insaniunt.Ibidem. They are more truly, and costly madd. Thus saith he, and most truly, for it costeth them many times their reputation, and honour, their states, their liues, bodies, and soules. 37. So that they may say as Lisimachus said,Plutark in Apophtheg. r∣gū & principum. when being be∣seeged, and vexed with thirst, he yelded him selfe prisoner, and gaue his kingdome for a draught of water, exclaiming when he had dronke, O for how smale and short a pleasure haue I lost a kingdome. Thus may they saie with more reason,VVicked men compared to Lisimachus that gaue his king∣dome for a∣draught of vva∣ter. for that they change not one fraile, and earthly thing for an other as he did, but heauenly things for earthly, deuine for humane, eternal for transitory, which admit no comparison; besids that they show them selues to be no better, nor wiser then brute beasts which are lead by only sence, and vehemently moued by present obiects, with∣out discourse and consideration of future things or of the end which is specially to be considered of men,VVicked men no vvyser then brute beasts. to whome nature hath geuen reason to discourse and iudge, not only of things pre∣sent, or past, but also of things to come, and especially of the last end of al humane actions wherin consisteth the eternal feli∣city, or misery of man, and therfore Moyses partly lamenting,The end of euery thing is cheefely to be considered of men. and partly reprehending the absurd folly of such kind of men saith. Gens absque consilio est, & sine prudentia, vtinam saperent, ac in∣telligerent, & nouissima prouiderent.Deut. 3. These are a people with out councel, and prudence, I wold to God they wold be wise, and vnderstand, and foresee or prouide for their last end. 38. Furdermore how can these be counted truly wise, whose wisdome consisteth in peruerting the whole course and order of nature, and contradicting the principles,The vvisdome of politikes con∣sisteth in per∣uerting the course and orde of nature, and in contradicting the principels of reaon. and ground of rea∣son; For what is more conforme to nature, or more euident in reason, then that as the soule excelleth the body, and heauen
the earth, so also the goods, and gifts of the mind, ought to be preferred before the gifts, and goods of the body, heauenly things before earthly, reason before sensuality, the publik good before any mans particular, eternal felicity, before temporal pleasure or commodity, and the seruice, and glory of God be∣fore al things els what soeuer; Al which nature ordaineth, rea∣son perswadeth, Philosophy, and al learning teacheth, the con∣sent of the world confirmeth, and mans owne conscience with∣in him selfe proclaimeth it to be true. Neuertheles the politikes, and Machiauillians haue found out a kind of wisdome, and policy (which they cal reason of state) contradicting al this, prefer∣ring the body before the soule, earth before heauen, humane things before deuine, sensuality before reason, and the particu∣lar pleasure of the prince, before the general good of the com∣monwelth, temporal commodities before eternal felicity; and lastly whatsoeuer seemeth to their corrupt iudgements, to be according to reason of state, the same they preferre before con∣science, religion, and the seruice of God, as though there were eyther no God to caule them to account, or that he had nothing to doe with them, or with the affaires of men. So that to make their wisdome true wisdome, their policy good policy, their reason of state good reason,To make poli¦tikes vvyse men vve must haue a nevv nature and an other God, or no God. and them wise men, the whole course, and order of nature must be changed, and al things tur∣ned vpside doune, the soule must bee made subiect to the body, heauen to earth, reason to sensuality, commonwelth to priuat welth, and temporal goods must excel the eternal, yea and lastly we must haue a new nature, and either an other God, or no God, or at least such a one as shal haue no prouidence in the affaires of men 39. What maruel is it then that this kind of wisdome and policy ouerthroweth princes, subuerteth their states, and filleth the world with misery and calamities? In which respect the scripture calleth it.1. Cor. 1. Rom. 1. Psal. 52. & 91. & 93. Matth. 25. Stultam huius mundi sapiētiam. The foolish vvisdome of this vvorld, and the professrs therof Fooles, as I haue sufficiently showed in the 23. chapter, where I conuinced Atheistes of igno∣rance and foly, wherto I wil ad here for the conclusion of this point,Chap. 23. nu. 19. & 20. and of this whole discourse, what the Holy Ghost testifi∣eth in the booke of wisdome, concerning as wel the misery, as
the foly of these kind of wise worldlings, as that, when they shal see at the daye of Iudgement them selues condemned to eternal torments, and the seruants of God rewarded with euer∣lasting glory, they shal say one to an other. 40. Nos insensati &c. We madde men (or men with out sence,Sap. 5. The folly of vvicked men and theyr mise∣rable state nota∣bly signified in the scriptures. and vnderstanding) esteemed the life of these (that is to say of the Iust) to be madnes, and their end without honour, and be∣hold how they are now reckoned amongst the children of God, and their lot is amongst the saints. Therfore wee haue erred from the way of truth, & the light of his Iustice hath not shined vnto vs, neyther hath the sunne of vnderstanding risen vnto vs, we haue wearied our selues in the way of iniquitie, and perdi∣tion, and haue walked difficult wayes, and haue not knowne the way of our Lord; what hath our pride proffited vs? or what hath the ostentation of our riches benefited vs? al which is now past away like a shadow, and like one that runneth post, or like a ship that saileth, or like a bird that flieth, or like an arrow shot at a marke, of the passage wherof there remaineth no signe; And euen so we were borne and presently ceassed to be, and haue not left behind vs any signe of vertue, but are cōsumed, and spent in our owne malignity and wickednes; Thus doth the Holy Ghost describe the miserable & lamentable state of the worldly wise, and al other wicked men at the day of Iudgement, which I wish euery man wold consider betyme, lest he repent to late amongst those, who shal make this pittiful complaint without hope or possibility of remedy. 41. This shal suffise for the first part of my treatise concer∣ning policy and religion, wherin if thou find any thing, good Reader, that may content thee, I beseeche thee to geue the prayse, and honour therof to almighty God (from whom,Iac. 2. Est omne donum optimum, & datum perfectum, is euery good and perfect gift) and if ther be any thing therin, which may iustly dislike thee, I am content to owne it my selfe, and doe desire thee to beare with it, and to let it passe for an example of the infirmity of mans wit, which I haue showed by so many other examples of the errours of very wise and learned men, that I can not pre∣sume to warrant my owne doings or writings, from al errour and ouersight; Only this I wil assure thee, that I haue not erred
in any thing maliciously, but haue had through out this whol discourse a charitable desire of thy good, and as I hope, a true zeale to Gods glory, which al men ought to make the principal scope, and end of their actions. yf I find that this be grateful vnto thee, I wil second it with the other part for thy furder satisfa∣ction, with such speede, as the regard of my decaied health, and my other affaires wil permit. DEO Soli HONOR & Gloria. Deo soli honor & gloria. Th Crrctor to th Reader. GENTLE Reader crae y patienc and curtesie to pardon some faultes escaped in the prininge, the author him selfe being very far absent, with whome I could not consult vpon euery dont, and many other impediments occuring to my selfe, the which are needlesse here to vtter: those that are of most importance, and doe alter the nature of any worde, I haue, I hope, a∣mended; the rest, which are sometimes in mistaking one letter for an other, presuming on thy patience I make bould to let passe. THE faultes escaped are thus to be founde. The letter. p. signifieth the page, the letter. n. the number. and the letter. l. the line. P. 8. n. 13. l. 6. for that suernatural, rea the supernatural. p. 18. n. 14. l. 7. for vnderstan∣ding, reade vnderstandinges. p. 19. n. 17. l. 3. for, sustance, reade sustenance. p. 43. n. 11. l. 15. for, by the vvay, rde by the vvay. p. 50 n. 2. l. 15. or, contended, reade contented. p. 50. n. 3. l. vlt. for, that ambition, reade the ambition. p. 54. n. 13. l. 7. for, had, read & had. p. 59. n. 22. l. 4. for, and those, reade are those. Cap. 8. n. 19. l. 18. for, as thinge, reade a a thinge: Cap. 8. n. 28. l. vlt. for, lavves Licinia, reade lavves of Licinia. p. 79. n. 11. l. 3. for, iavv, reade lavv. p. 116, n. 18. l. 2. for, their, reade the. p. 119. n. 5. l. 1. for, poofe, reade, proofe. Cap. 14. n. 14. l. 7. for he, reade the. p. 130. n. 10. l. 4. these vvordes, cap. 12. should be set in the marge. p. 1 1. 21. l. 19. these vvordes, cap. 15. number 28. should also be set in the marge. p. 143. n. 2.  7. for, Idolatours, reade Idolatrous  p. 147. n. 11. l. 10. for Cosaroes, reade Cosdroes. p. 148. n. 13. l. 4. for, ouerslovve, reade ouerflovve. p. 153. n. 26. l. 6. for there, reade three p. 171. n. 18. l. 10.  godnes reade goodnes. p. 182. n. 3. l. 3. for, hu, read but. p. 195. n. 1. l. 2. for, embassadours  of. p. 203. n. 4. l. 5. for, nor. reade not. p. 206. n. 10. l 17 for, hatt, reade that. p. 207. n. 12. . 12. for, the the, reade the. p. 212. n. 11. l. 11. for, Henery firt sonne, reade Henery the first, sonne. p. 220. n. 9. l. 1. for tragilical, read tragical. Ibid. l 3. for, vvere, reade vvhere. p. 226. n. 11. l 6. for, he, reade the. p. 228. n. 16 l. 1. for, disant Roman reade di. S. Romano. p. 238. n. 14. l. 1. for, God, read good. p. 275. n. 3. l. 9. for, impu  the nd, reade impugneth and. p. 278. n. 9. l. vlt. for, bare, reade beare. p. 411. n. 59. l. vlt. in the marge, these vvordes are left out, tirant come to a good end. p. 429: n. 30. l. 6. for, in the next, reade in this. p. 434. n. 40. l. 1. for, thinke to be, reade thinke them o b p. Ibi n. 41: l. 3. for, folly, reade follovve, p, 448, n, 14. l. 1. for, Aomhaeans, read Amochhaeans. p. 457, n, 13, in the marge for, Cap, 13. reade Cap, . FINIS.
