11470.5 99842472 7128
A myr∣rour or glasse for them that be syke & in payne. ¶Translated out of Dutche in English. Mathei. xi. ¶Come vnto me all ye that laboure, & are ladē and I wyll ease you. 1, 5.36.
The translatour vnto the Chri∣stian reader. CHrist oure sauioure in the .xxv. chapter of Ma∣thew whan he had warned vs to watche, conty∣nētly after setteth forth a parable of a ryche mā∣which (beyenge purposed to go from home for a season) delyuered his goodes vnto his seruauntes, sa∣yenge: Occupe tyll I come agayne▪ Now as I dyd con∣ferre this parable with the .iiii. chap. of the epistle to the Ephesians, I perceaued that Christ ment this by him∣self: For after that he hadde fulfylled his course or tyme that he shulde be here in earth, he is mounted or ascēded vp in to heauen, (as it is written in the .lxv, Psalme) & ledde captyue captiuite, and hath geuen gyftes vnto mē, These giftes doth Paui in {pro}cesse declare what they be. And agayne in the .xiiii chapter, of the fyrst epistle to the Corinthians speakynge of the gyfte of tunges sayeth: Whan ye come together eueryone hath a psalme, hath doctrine, hath a tunge, hath an interpretation. Let al be done to the edyfyenge, Now whan I consydered these aforesayde places of scripture, knowenge hys ryghtu∣ous requyringe agayne of his proper gyftes, beynge but lent vnto me for a space: I haue endeuoured me self to delyuere yt to the exchaungers, to the intent that whan my Lorde shall come he may receaue yt with vauntage. And that he may so do, yt shalbe in thy good Christian reader. And let yt not moue thy that they be laye men that be the speakers in thys treatyse, for so doynge ye myght be cōpared vnto Christes contremen Marc. vi. whiche hearynge his heauenly wysedome, and seynge his excellent myrakles, sayde skornfullye: Where hath he this wysdome? and what wysdome is thys that is geuen hym? is not thys the carpenter? the sonne of Io∣seph. &c. Do not thou I saye lykwyse, in estemynge the matter of lesse value, but wysshe rather that such a worl¦de myght be, wherin the prophecy of Ieremy in the .xxxi chap, be fulfylled where as he sayeth: I wyll be theyr God, and they shalbe my people. And from thence forth
shall noman teache his neghbure, or his brother, & saye: Knowe the Lorde But they shall al knowe me from the lowest vnte the hyghest, sayeth the Lorde. Wolde God thys worlde were come, for than shall the lambe go fe∣dynge wyth the wolfe, that is the cruell with the inno∣cent than shall all the goodnesse of the holy cyte of Hye∣rusalem come vpon vs, than shall it be a golden worlde, than shal it be a tyme of peace in what tyme Christ wol¦de be borne, Seynge then that so much goodnesse doth folowe the word of God, let vs with one accorde praye the father of heauen sayenge. Bowe downe thy heade Lorde, and beholde the case that we are in, marke how great nede we haue of thy mercy, se how farre we are gone astraye leauynge the ye wel of lyfe, and drynkynge the modde of our pouddels. Geue such mynde vnto our princes (whose hartes be in thy hande) that the supersti∣tiousnes of Baal be roted out by them, and thy fotestep¦pes made easyer to be folowed Paul sayeth: What cō∣pany haue Christ and Belial? Morouer where Christ wyll raygne there wyl he be alone. He sayeth he wyl not geue his glory vnto another, he wyl haue no partyfe∣lous. Wherfore good Christen reader, that thou mayest fulfyll Gods wyll the better in geuynge hym the glory prayse & worshippe, I haue takē in hāde to trāslate out of dutch in englishe thys lytell boke: whose worthynes∣se can not be estymed, For in yt shalt thou learne to fixe thy mynde vnto God only, geuynge hym his dewe honour, worshippe, and prayse all other super∣stitions auoyded: and vnto thy neghbure loue and charite declared with out∣ward dedes of the same, Doyn∣ge this ye shal haue here quiet¦nes of cōsciēce in God, & here after fruiti∣on of glory with hym: the which graunte vs he that is kynge euerlastynge. Amē.
¶Timothe commynge from hys vicare which refused to come to the poore sikman Lazarus sayeth on this wyse. Timothe. O CHRIST IESV very trewe heardmā and bishope of our soull, how few heardmen be ther founde whiche bestowe their soules for their hearde, as thou hast done earnestly: euē to ye en∣de. Oure heardmen do not now watche thy shepe: They couet not to entre in to the shepfolde by the dore: but rather run∣ne awaye, as very hyrelinges whā they se the wolfe come. Yee they themselfs hel∣pe to inuade them. Ah they be not lyke vnto thyne wych thou sandest as shepe amōge the wolues: seynge they be beco∣me as wolues amōge shepe. Is not this greatly to be lamented. Tobias. What is the cause neghbure of youre sorow, of youre syghtes, and of youre cō¦playntes by the strete? Timothe. It pityeth me that we pooremen se so
few ensamples of loue, and that of them which be our heardmen, and gwydes. Tobias. Why so good brother, what is the mat∣ter? Timotheus Yee knowe that oure neyghbure Laza∣rus is very syke, whose grefe hath endu∣red longe. Insomuche that his impaci∣ence greueth me. Tobias. It is trewe, I tolde his wife, I wolde co¦me and visite him to morowe, and teache him some good thynge of dyenge, for he myght dye ear longe. But what wyll ye tell me of hym? Thimotheus. I desyred euen now oure new vicare for Christes passion to come and visite oure poore Lazarus once, and to teache hym some good thynge of pacience, wich he ought to haue in his paynes, But alas yt was songe to a defe man. Tobias. Is yt so? what dyd he laye for hymself? Timotheus. Yow maye thynke it welynough: what were they wonte to laye for them as they
were moued to such a good dede? He sai∣de, I must saye fyrst my matins, & then saye masse: Veryly I am not now at lea∣sure, but as soone as I am, I wyll come. Tobias. What is yt that I do heare? I hadde went he hadde ben a man accordinge to the gospell: for he behaueth hymself so in the pulpet, that it is maruayl to me. But I se wellynough he is but a dissemblin∣ge hypocrite: For he was wont to saye in the pulpit, that noman shulde spare him yee he wolde ryse yf yt were at myd∣night. Timothe. I reken the same, but it shalbe for to my∣nistre the sacrament, or anoylynge, and to gayne therby sōme mony. Els wyll he remeue not one fote. Tobias Yt is a maruelous case surly, for the mā doth reason somtyme of the gospell as yf he were an angell. Timotheus. He doth as many one doth besydes, he beareth the gospell in his sleue, and vte∣reth it with his mouth, but nother in his
hart, nor his handes. Tobias. It is to be lamented verely that we be so redy to vse the lybertyes of meates, clo∣thinges, places, & tymes, whiche the gos∣pel enyoieth. But we endeuer not thys liberty to the mortifyenge of our carnall desyres, nor to the seruyce of oure bro∣ther. But shal I tell you what you ought to haue done? Timothe. I praye you what? Tobias. You shulde haue strenghted the deuociō of oure vicar with a groat, so might you haue optayned him best. Timothe. It is sure so. And that appeared wel last daye by the aldermannes wedowe whe∣are as it was no nede to bid hym come whan she laye syke, for wyth her was he dayly, yee vnbydden, waytinge for the soull as a carmeraunte doth for the cari∣en: and all was to optayne somwhat by testament, Be these feders? be these pas∣tores. Tobias.
No but rather wolues, wherof Ezechiel speketh saynge: They haue eatē the myl¦ke of their floke, and with the woll they be clothed, but they kepe them not from the wolues. My thynketh they be dissem¦blynge Hypocrites, and paynted gra∣ues, which wyth longe bablinge, or ser∣uyce saynge deuoure wedows housen: wherfore they shall receaue the greater damnation. I thynke also these be the falfe prophetes semynge outwardly she∣pe. But inwardly they be rauenous wol¦ues. Timothe. Yf these prestes (and as they call thēfelf) religiousmen knewe what a christen de∣deyt is to comfort the sorowfull to visite the syke, to helpe the poore. They shuld preferre the helpynge of them before all other workes. For God shall esteme yt which is done to ye least of his as tough it were done to hymselfe. But prestes do not regarde yt: for they saye they haue ben longe ynough wyth the syke, whan they haue ministred the sacramentes. Tobias.
Yf they yett ministred the supper of oure Lorde to the syke dewly, teachynge the Christians what Christ hath optay∣ned for vs: than myght the pacient geue thankes to God of the victory, wherin he hath ouercome death to the beleuyn∣ge. For that is the saynge of Christ, whā he sayth: As oft as ye do ytt, ye shall do ytt in the remembraunce of me, which is acordynge to Pauls saynge. Whan the death of oure Lorde is shewed. But alas they do nought now but onely rehearse ye xii. artikles of the fayth sleghtly to the syke. And so mynister the sacrament wy∣thout farther instrucciō of yt, thynkynge all thynges to be very well dispached. I praye God they haue not of tymes more mynde on the yewel which lyeth percha∣unce in the syght, than on the necessite of the poore. Or that they mynde not more a good testament. Tobyas. They must be very blynde seynge, they make lesse conscience of leauynge the breade of the poore (that is Gods worke) onbroken: than of leauynge theyr masse matins, and other seruyce onsaye, seyn∣ge
it is hongred so soore for. The Chri∣stēman which is the lyuinge tempel of God must stonde by, and abyde tyll the prest hath dispached his matyns, or vysi¦ted the dead mens graues, hath he neuer so great nede. Yf Christ had the yonge∣man which wolde be his disciple to luf∣fre the dead bury the dead, and yt he shul∣de not leaue Goddes worde ondeclared for burieng: what shal he saye thē thinke yow to them which excuse them selfs with theyr rummelynge, and mumme∣lynge of matyns, euensonge, and such lyke popyshenesse that they visyte not the syke, or shewe the kyngdome of God where troubell and anguyshe is? Tobyas. Yt hath not auayleth the yonge man su∣rely that he wolde haue buried yt dead: & much lesse shal it auayle thē yt be marked with the beastes marke to leaue theyr neghboure onserued, and onregarded, Yee Chryst hymself, and that with the dedes of charyte, which must be prefer¦red before all the works of the lawe, and promes, acordynge as Chryst sayth that
he is Lorde of the Sabbath. We also shalbe iudged after the declarynge of the dedes of charyte towarde oure negh∣boure. Tymotheus. Yt is well sayde surely, and accordynge to the gospel. Christ also rebuked the scri¦bes iustly for theyr opinion of ceremoni∣es, commaundynge them to go, and lear¦ne what that saynge of God is: I wyll mercy and not sacrifyce. Tobyas. How vnderstonde you that saynge? will God haue no sacrifice then which he him self commaunded so earnestly to de ob∣serued? here semeth Christ to be contra∣ry to the wyll of hys father. Tymotheus. I wyll tel yow. All sacryfices and burnt offerynges of the lawe were ordeyned, and institute vnto the Iewes for none o∣ther intent, saue onely for theyr sygnify∣cacions. They dyd sygnifie the trew offe¦rynge of Christ to come: which out of ve¦ry pury heate of loue, dyd offer hymself vnto death, by sheddynge of hys owne
bloude, for vs poore synners, and thus is he become oure trewe and euerlastin∣ge prest. Seynge then we haue Christ, al other offerynges ceasse: and now we are come to the lyght all other shadowes va¦nishe. For Christ is the ende and fulfillin¦ge of the lawe, wherfore we nede nomor the lawe with hyr ceremonies, and rygh¦twesnes as a teacher leadynge vs to Christ: yee he onely commeth to the fa∣ther which hath herd him, and is taught of hym. For so much then as the Phari∣ses dyd regarde, and had confydence more in sacrifyces, and workes of ye lawe than they hadde respecte to hym yt was sygnyfyed therby, whose dedes of chari∣te also they counted lesse then the rygh∣twysnes of the lawe: therfore warneth Christ them to learne, that God wyll ha∣ue mercy and no sacrifyce, which he dyd lothe as Esay doth clearly expresse. Tobyas. You haue declared that very well. But what saye ye to this worde of Christ. The¦se ought to haue bene done, and not lea∣ue the other vndone? for oure prestes and
lawers vnderstonde hereby, that they may rather leaue the workes of mercy vndone, than to leaue their mattens, pat¦tens, masses, diriges, and such other mū∣blinges vnsayde. Tymotheus. With this saynge rebuked Christ the Scribes, and Pharises which at that tyme estymed theyr sacryfices, feastes, tythes, and offeringes, as hygly: as oure Papistes counte masses, saynge of serui∣ce, worshippinge of sayntes for the moost acceptable workes. The tythes were ly∣mited vnto the prestes of the olde lawe and graunted of God in the lawe: but seynge they sought theyr deuty so narow¦ly not wyllynge to transgresse the lawe in the same tythinge of mynt, comin, and anyse, they declared theyr couetousnes, and fayned loue of the lawe. For in that parte of the lawe (wherin theyr auaun∣tage dyd consiste) they wolde haue no breache, but in other chefe pointes of the lawe, namely where they were comman̄∣ded by the lawe to offer them selues to the seruyce of theyr neghboure, they we∣re
as negligent as though it had not per¦tayned to them. Therfore sayeth Chryst: Wo vnto yow Scrybes, and Pharises, ye ypocrytes, which tyth mynte, anyse and comyn, and leaue the wayghtyer matters of the law behynde: namely iud¦gment, mercy, and fayth. These ought to haue bene done, and not to leaue the other behynde, that is, So longe as the lawe hath her course (as yet she hath) so longe ye maye receaue your dewty of ye tythes, yee of anyse, mynte, and comyn: but the dedes of fayth, loue, and mercy which ye lawe requyreth of you as chefest maye you not leaue vndone, but rather do them afore all other. Beholde now we ther thys rebuke (which oure spyritualty applyeth to theyr excusation) doth aptly serue to warne and to rebuke them: Se∣ynge they be cursed with the aforesade ypocrytes curse. For they curse and yau¦le more vpon them in theyr pulpet, that withdraw them theyr offerynge dayes, or prouent dewtyes (which notwithston¦dynge God hath not graunted them in ye new testament, as he dyd in ye olde wyth
the tythes:) than they curse those that transgresse Gods commaundement in aduoutry, in dronknesse, and onmercy∣fulnesse. So that they maye well be ly∣kened vnto the oxe in the prophet which go in the pastures of Samaria, and ea∣te vp the poore. These be the prophetes which deceaue the people▪ shewynge pea¦ce, and bytynge with theyr teth, in who∣se mouth yf ye cast not a pece of meate they rayse an holy warre agaynst yow, that is. They saye ye be a cursed herety∣ke, and that ye ought to be persecuted, and to be condemned. As though such warre and controuersye were acceptable vnto God. Therfore (sayeth the prophet Micheas) your vision shalbe turned to nyght▪ & your prophecienge to darknesse the sonne that go vnder ouer these prophe¦tes. But thy people of God  saue you forgeue you your synnes, & saye ye pros∣per ryght well, they deceaue you: for the∣re is no saluacion in man. These ye  deuoure medowes houses which in their  mawes rgest al that cometh to them, golde, many▪ house gardens
londe, sonde, rentes, grauntes, pardons These be they that iustify the vngodly for gyftes denuncynge peace, and all is for theyr belys pleasure. Tobyas. Soft brother Tymothe, conceaue not such rācour agaynst the wicked, seynge theyr iudgment doth not tary: let them go. They be blinde and leaders of ye blin¦de. We maye endeuoure vs to exhorte thē to come to the knowledge of God, & to the loue of theyr neghboure, yf perad¦uenture they wolde geue eare to vs, and knowledge theyr synnes. Tymotheus. I praye the how wilt thou exhorte them? seynge they saye to the seinge, se not: & to the vnderstōdinge, perceaue not: yf they knoledged theyr blyndnesse, they shulde haue no synne (as Christ saieth). But now they saye, we se: wherfore theyr syn∣ne remayneth with them. As namely whan we laymen begynne to exhorte the¦se anoynted: laynge scripture afore them then will they heare by no meanes, ta∣kynge great scourne to be admonished
of vs. Tobyas. Surely I beleue yt be euell ynough, whearfore me semeth it best for vs to walke hensforth in the waye of the Lor∣de discretely. Tymotheus. Yow saye south, Yf we can do better than oure curates do, seynge they be slak in theyr dewty shall we not do the same? For a seruaunt that knoweth hys may∣sters wyll, and doth yt not, shal be bea∣ten much. What is then your aduyse, that we shall do? Tobyas. Verely, that oure eye be not so sore fyxed vpon another mans faulte, but ende∣uoured to folowe the Lorde, wherunto he calleth vs by a lyuely sterynge of our hart wt hys sprete. Now yf oure guydes of the churche do not rule wel the flocke (as ye do saye), yet wyll not we leaue them, and forsake them as though they were not pertaynynge vnto vs. For God hath charged euery man with hys negh¦boure as scrypture testyfyeth. Therfore let vs ayde oure neghboure comforte hym, counsell hym, as we se hys moost
nede. Thynke ye not thys to be the best brother. Tymothe? Tymotheus. Ye verely. And to this doth the parable of the gospell featly agre, where the Sa¦maritan (which is an abiecte in the sight of the Iewes) is praysed of Chryst aboue the Leuyte or Prest, because he shewed mercy vpon the poore mamed: which also was therfore the Samaritans negh¦boure, because he chesfly had nede of him Although we laymen be reputed amon∣ge the anoynted, and Leuytes as vyle as the Samarytans: yet ought we ne∣uerthelesse take cure of the poore, and shew all the seruyce necessary, whan all Leuytes, Prestes, Monkes, Freres, do forsake, and despyse them. The dedes of charyte ought we to charge none other mā withal accordynge to youre sayenge. Tobyas. Now is the tyme that we ought to dys∣perse the grace which god hath geuen, vs, and poure yt out vpon oure negh∣boure in helpinge, comfortynge, and unselynge hym. As Christ hath geuen
hymself for vs, he beynge in fourme of God, and equall with God. Yt is now tyme to bestowe oure talent which God hath geuē vs to the intent that we shuld brynge it agayne with increace, and not to hyde yt in the grounde. He that is ry∣che ought to make the poore ryche also, for to that intent hath he receaued his chesse. He that is wyse ought to teache the folysshe, and to brynge hym to vnder¦stondynge, for to such intente hath he re∣ceaued hys wysdome. He that is great of abylite ought to ayde hym▪ that is vn¦abell, as the wedowe, fatherlesse and mo¦therlesse, boninfances, for to that intent hath God geuen hym superiote. Lo in such lyke cases ought we the one to be an helper, comforter, sauioure, to ye other as oure fayth is that Christ is oure sa∣uioure, comforte, and health. Therfore also doth Christ commaunde that we shall so shewe the lyght of oure fayth be∣fore men, that they seinge oure good wor¦kes, maye prayse and glorifye the fa∣ther which hath geuen such mynde▪ and godli purpose in our hartes, through his
holy goost: that is that we be gladde to serue oure neyghboure not for thankes, nor for prayse, but of very loue. For who so euer seyth hys brother in necessite, and withdraweth hys hart from hym, how can the loue of God remayne in hym. Tymotheus. He that loueth not his brother beynge present in hys syght: how can he loue God whom he seyth not. We Christen men haue none other declaracion or boa¦stinge that we be trew Christians, but onely loue. Christ sayeth: In that shall men knowe that ye be my disciples yf ye loue one another. Wherfore the lyfe of a Christian is not a lyfe of pleasure, of∣fleshe, of wylthynesse, or of sensuall ap, petyte. Nor it is no lyfe of ceremonies: church goynges, or lyke supersticions but it is a lyfe of the sprete, of treuth, of loue and mercy, yt is a lyfe of mortifyed lustes, and peace of the sprete in God onely. Tobyas. That is the eternall Sabbath, and ho∣ly daye, which is left to goddes people,
which also they must kepe perpetually by the layenge down of theyr owne lu∣stes, and sensualyte, but all the trouble, labour, carefulnesse, and bodely seruyce, outwardly done with wordes, or dede ought to be redressed to nothinge els but to ye glory of God and to the profyte of oure neghboure: for els is not God oure kynge, and we do not seke the welth of oure neghboure then, but oure owne, which is agaynst the nature of the trewe & onfayned loue which Paul teacheth. Tymotheus. Ye saye treuth, for though we haue the name of Christ, and though we be bap∣tysed ī the same, though we go to church and receaue the sacramētes, yet are not all thynges dyspached wythout fayth, by workinge in vs with charite: For they all that say Lorde, Lorde, shall not pos∣sesse the kyngdome of heauen, but onely they that fulfill the wyll of the father shall go in to the kyngdome of heauen. Tobyas. The one membre ought thus to helpe the other, orels are not we one body ga∣thered,
wherof Christ is the heade. Let vs therfor beare echother in declarynge brotherly loue that we be incorporate one body in Christ, aydinge the vylest, & least before all other. For that which we do to the least, of oure brethren yt haue we done to Christ. Christ is euen now suffe∣ringe honger, thyrst, he is naked, in pre∣sone, he is harbourlesse, he is like and dy¦seased, let vs go to hym to serue hym, to comforte hym, to receaue hym, that we maye heare herafter: Come ye blessed of my father to possesse the kingdom which is prepared for you sence the begynnyn∣ge of the worlde. And treuly ryght wel∣beloued Tymothe seynge we be called gospellyshe or Euangelycall, therfore ought we to be the more diligent in do∣ynge Euangelicall workes, lest Gods worde be blamed trough oure vnruly be haue our of thē yt be vngodly. ¶Tymo. Ye saye treuth: wherfore I wolde that in euery towne, cyte, village, yee in euery cō¦gregaciō or church there were a comune huche or cheste wherin shulde be sepera∣te such goods as be geuē to the nedy acor¦dynge
as saynte Paul teacheth in the i. Corinth. xvi. which now (alas for py∣te) is rather myspent in foundacions of chappels, churches, & religyous houses as they call them, in syngers, in coapes, belles, and ymages. I wyll not speake now of the greate prouentes, and rētes, of vycaries, and such other foundacions which mount to an innumerable sum∣me yearly. With these goodes, and such lyke that oure forefathers haue founded to the sustayninge of the poore maye eue¦ry towne, cyte, vyllage, or paryshe ease∣ly sustayne theyr owne poore people: so that ther shulde not one begger or va∣gabounde nede to go by the stretes. And thus shulde gods commaundemēt Deu¦teronomy .xv. chapter be accomplysshed Morouer to this excellent dede shulde be chosen certayn honest men, fearynge God, which lyke trew deacons shulde dispense, and dystribute these goodes accordyng the nede and conscience. Out of this aforesayed cheste also shuld scou¦les be founded, wherin youth might be taught both Christ & other good learnīg
For such we comūly do sauoure as was putt in oure fresshe vessels. Out of this cheste also shulde all bonynfans, or fa∣therlesse and motherlesse chyldren be brought vp, vntyll they be abell to learn an occupatiō or craft. Out of this cheste shulde honeste youthe be maryed, lest through pouerty they com to some mys∣use. For to brynge all this to effecte the afore sayde goodes be sufficient yf they were iustly and treuly gathered toge∣ther. The bagge and staffe, is an occasy∣on that there is so much ydelnesse, whor¦dome, dronknesse, thefte, yee of all mys∣chefe, and euell maners it is the mother, whiche the aforesayde congregations myght easely auoyde yf the loue of ho∣nesty, and mercy were fyred in theyr hartes. Tobyas. Youre mynde welbeloued brother is good, yf it were so accepted, and fulfyl∣led, than wolde I also prayse yt wyth yow: But these strōge, & valiaunt wallet knyghtes wyl neuer admitte yt, for theyr religion is founded vpon thesame, & the
sorowlesse breade sauoureth to well in their mouthes. They loue much better to reape the haruest that they haue not sowē, that to get theyr owne foode, with the sweate of their browes. Timotheus. We haue now cōplayned ynough, wher¦fore I wyll straghtly go to oure poore Lazarus, & teache hym some good thyn∣ge of sufferynge paciently for he hath greate nede of it. And from thence wyll I go to the hospitall, to bringe thether yt which I haue superfluous of my yester∣dayes laboure: For I am sure they shall nede it there. Tobias. I praye you brother let yt be so, and let yt not greue you to viset ye syke, for the∣reby shall ye be strenghted in the fayth accordinge to the scripture. But differ youre goinge to Lazarus a lytell whyle, yf perchaunce oure vicar come there, he shall not leaue it for very shame. Timothe. No no I knowe him to well, he wolde ra¦ther neuer come at hym, than to lese one peny of his other auauntage, which of
thys poore mā he can not haue. He spea¦keth much of the cure of soules, but it se¦meth that hys mynde is of the purses soules: he besemeth all the reste. Wher∣fore I wyll thether warde, wyl ye cōmaū¦de me ought? Tobias. Yee tell Lazarus that I wyll come to vyset hym tomorowe afore noone, and teache hym somwhat of dyenge, as I ha¦ue promysed hys wyfe. Timothe. I wyll do yt wyth a good wyll, & God graunte vs hys mercy. A declaration and exhortacion to suffer all troubell paciently & fayth fully, wether yt be anguishe, or syknesse, which doubtlesse be sent vs of oure mer∣cifull father. ¶Timothe vysitinge ye poore mā Laza¦r{us} lyenge syke in his bedde, sayeth thus to him. Timothe. Peace be in thys house. Lazarus. Who commeth in there?
Timothe. Yt is I Timothe youre neighbure, how is it with you? is all thynges well? Lazarus. Alas no it is not well, for I lye here and can nether moue nor wrēche my self, my yointes be so full of syknesse and payne. Timothe. I beleue yt ryght well, for you haue had a greate tyme: but how cā ye quiete your self therin? Lazarus. How shulde I quiete my self? I wolde I were deade such payne. I am in, Amy Timothe, I praye you neyghbure vexe not your∣self so much with this syknesse, for treuly yt is not Christenly. Lazarus. It is easy for you to speake of yt. For no∣man halteth of another bodies grefe. Yf you dyd lye in such paynes as I do, you wolde saye otherwyse. Timothe. Ye be farre wyde from Lazarus sufferi∣re so farre as I can se, whose name you haue, whiche toke his grefe paciently,
and without grudginge agaynst God yt he myght not optayne the crommes frō the rychmans tabell, & that he was fay∣ne to lye vnder the broade open skye, his body beynge full of sores and payn, and fynally to dye for very honger, for which thynge also he was brought in Abrahās bosome by the angels. But you haue an house to dwell in, ye haue yet God be thanked meate & drynke: you haue good neghbours yt wold fayne cōforte you, & helpe to beare youre grefe which Laza∣rus hadde not, Neuerthelesse he was al∣waye content, and so ought ye to be also. Lazarus. Because I am none such as he was, ther¦fore shall not I also be set vpon altars, & haue an holy daye kepte for my as is done for hym. Timothe. Alas brother Lazare you be yet farre frō the kyngdom of heauen, seynge ye suffer youre grefe wt so euell a wyll you ought to remember that it is the good wyll of God that ye thus suffre: is it not al good that commeth of hym? be content therfo∣re wyth his godly will, and youre bur∣then
shall fall the lichter for you. Lazarus. I must nedes be content the rewith for I can not remedy yt, nor yet auoyde it. Timothe. Although you coulde remedy it agaynst gods wyll wolde ye do it? I thynke not: for you wolde not wrestle with the wyll of God. Lazarus I shall tell you the very treuth, yf I coul¦de be red of this payne, I wold not kepe it one houre longer. Timothe. Wolde ye then rather be an enemy of God, than to suffre a lytle for hys sake? Lazarus. I can tell you nothinge els but that I wolde fayne be ryd of this passion, for yt is to heuy for me. Timothe. So longe as ye suffre of compulsion & not wyllingly, than do ye lese youre re∣warde of sufferinge: & ye stryue agaynst God lyke a rebellious childe that diso∣bayeth his louynge father. Lazarus. I must suffre be yt wyllingly or not wyl∣lyngly. Timothe.
Ye suffre grefe and payne but without deseruynge for yt, and therfore the more one a flyer: for ye suffer onwyllingly & vn∣faithfully, ye suffer of cōpulsion euē as a seruaunt stondeth in awe of hys mays∣ter by yt reason of his rod or wande that he castiseth hym withall, A seruaunt re∣mayneth not is his maysters house, but must voyde Ihon in the .viii. Chapter: But ye sonne remayneth as a trew eyre. Yf ye now therfore were a sonne of ye hea∣uenly father: ye wolde receaue this cor∣rection of his wyllingly, and with trewe loue in a sure fayth, and vnderstonde yt to be his loue towarde yow: seynge he cā sende to his chyldrē nothinge but ye best, nor {pro}cure ought els for thē but good. Lazarus. This soundeth very straunge in myne ears, that God punisheth me thus gre∣uely of very loue, & sendeth me this for ye best gifte that he can geue me, I wolde rather thynke yt to be a horsly loue. Timothe. Alas brother how fearcely do you runne agaynst the stone that is Christ? How
straunge be Gods worde and workes for you to heare and vnderstonde? mans wyt can not attayne yt that is spoken of God, The worde of God is as it were an hāmer that bruseth the stones: Therfore must ye submitte and captiue youre wyt and mans wysdome wholy, tyll yt be cle∣ne presoned and subdued to the wyll of Christ and pacifie yt self in hym: afore ye can perceaue how great good & mer∣cy ye inwarde mā receaueth in depressin∣ge & mortifynge ye outwarde carcase. Lazarus. O Timothe youre wordes be to hyghe & pythie for myn vnderstōdīg, my memory & wyt is greatly swaged wt this syknesse of myn: wherfore you must ordre you o∣therwyse yf I shall learne ought of you. Timothe. Yf ye hūger Gods worde & can satle you so yt ye may heare yt, I wyll so shewe yt yow yt ye shall easely perceaue yt of me. Lazarus. Yee verely and that gladly, reache my another cussyne and laye yt to my backe for gods sake, that I maye syt easlyer to
heare, and answere you. Timothe. Are ye well so? or wyll ye syt hygher? Lazarus. No, I syt now easly & I can not wel suf∣fre much tossinge and wrenchinge, My tonge is the wholest and lythyest of all my membres: beginne whan ye please. Timothe. That I may shewe you ye better ye mea∣nynge of myne aforesaide wordes I wil rote out youre infidelite, and shew you it afore youre eyes, that ye maye se how farre a man is separate frō God trough hys infidelite: out of the which all other synnes do sprynge as braunches and twigges out of an euel roote. For infide∣lite is ye chefe synne wherof ye holy goost shall iudge the worlde, as Christ sayeth Ihō. xvi. Therfore is thys now my que∣stion wether ye do vse to rede youre pa∣ter noster. Lazarus. What a question is that? thynke you I be a Turke shulde not I rede my pater noster? Timothe. How rede you yt in latin, or engly she?
Lazarus. I rede yt as I haue learnt yt of my fa∣ther: pater noster qui es. Timothe. Ye ought to rede it in englyshe that ye maye vnderstonde it the better, seynge ye can no latin. Tell my then that I shall axe of you yf ye please: Beleue ye wel ye fyrst worde Pater, that is father? Lazarus. Shulde I not beleue that? Christ hym∣self hath taught vs so to praye. Timothe. If ye beleue God to be youre father, thā must you beleue youre self also to be his sonne and eyre, els ye dissemble praynge contrary to youre harte and not iustly. Seynge then ye call hym youre father, (with which louely name you admonish hym to heare you his sonne) and you ha∣ue not such a lyuely perceauynge of hym as a good chylde ought for to haue: than saye you youre Pater noster wythout fayth. Lazarus. Without fayth? how so? what is fayth? Timothe.
Fayth is a gyft of God, which is not ge¦uen to euery man, without which Romā is acceptable to God. Lazarus. Haue not all Christen men fayth then? Timothe. There is two sortes of Christē mē, lyke as there is two sortes of chyldren of Is∣rael: some be Israelites after the fleshe, some by promesse: euen so be some Chri∣stē mē by name, some by ye dede by reason they be gyfted with the beleuynge sprete of Christ. These christians haue al faith. Lazarus. What is ye faith than, wherby we Chri∣sten men be called beleuynge? Tymothe. Fayth is a sure and lyuely felynge in ou∣re hart that we be acceptable vnto the father, and that he is mercyfull vnto vs thorowe his sōne Iesu Christ, in al what soeuer can betyde vs, or that we do, we∣ther it be in lyfe or death. This fayth is better perceaued inwardly of them that beleue treuly than it can wel be expressed outwardly.
Lazarus. Is it a hydde mystery? can not I per∣ceaue inwardly by no token whether I haue fayth or not? Timothe, Yes verely I shal declare that vnto you by a symilitude or ensample: A chylde hath no perceauynge inwarde, nor she∣weth outwardly ony behaueoure wether he haue a sure confidence towarde his fa¦ther or not, vnto the tyme he is assayd in thys hyd fayth: But whā this chylde is ether beatē or misdealt of a straūger, thā lyfteth he is voyce in hys anguysshe, preassinge to his father through the myd¦des of his enemyes with a sure fayth & cōfidence to be delyuered and saued. Yee in his flyght & hastynge for rescue which he shall surely optayne there, his mynde is certified that he shall be rescued, and this is a greate quietnesse of conscience, and a speciall ease at hys hart that hys enymyes shall nomore reioyce ouer him. After thys maner also is the matter wyth the chyldren of God: Oure hea∣uenly Father hath geuen vs power to
be yu children of God, & that through be∣leuynge in his name, which by the fa∣thers commaundement is become man for vs, and hath chosen vs to be eyres wt him. Now we belyuinge this and kno∣leginge yt through the sprete of trueth we wayte for all ayde, comforte, and sub¦sidie of oure heauēly father, in what so euer temtacion can assault vs. So that yt is sure token and specialte that we be in the fauoure of God yf we abyde sted∣fast in praysinge the name of God, and reioyce inwardly whā we be in troubel or anguishe, though God seme to haue vt∣terly forsaken vs. Here lo must the Chri∣sten faith fyrst apeare. The sauegarde & quietnes of conscience which we haue in¦wardly in the myddes of troubell, is a frute of the holy goost, sustaynynge vs lest we fall into mysbeleue or blasphe∣minge of God, ye which oure punishmēt myght cause ryghtwell. Wherfore we nede not to shrēke or to drede our Lorde God whan he stryketh vs, as a seruaunt doth feare & auoyde his master. For God nother cā be, nor is a scourger or tyrant
vnto his children. It is oure dewty to re¦yoice in him, and to prayse hym in al his godly workes, knowenge that he is oure sauegarde in the daye of troubell. Paul wrytinge to the Romanes in the .viii. chap. sayeth: We haue not now recea∣ued the sprete of bondage to feare ony more: but we haue receaued the sprete of adoption, wherby we call Abba, deare fa¦ther wt a lusty corage & a sure faith. For ye sprete of God which worketh such faith in vs geueth wytnesse vnto oure sprete that we be the children of God. Seynge then we be the childrē of God, oure mer∣cyfull father hath such a delyte in vs as in his welbeloued children. So yt where the moost feare and yeopardy is, there is he moost nearest present. It is surely the nature of a good father to be more feruē¦ter in loue towarde hys children, where the moost nede is. Now whan ye consy∣dre this diligently, with a hartyfull lust towarde God the father: than maye you beleue, and say truely that God is youre heauēly father, yf not, you say your Pa∣ter noster faynedly, as al other ypocrites
do, whose hart is farre from their mouth although ye sayde youre Pater noster a thousande tymes. Lazarus. Is this the sayenge of Pater noster, thā dyd I neuer saye yt dewly in all my lyfe. I haue oft sayde the .xii. artikles of oure fayth after the prest in the pulpet: But I coulde neuer heare so much concerninge the pyth of them as I haue done now. Timothe. Such hystoricall fayth as ye be taught in the pulpet haue ye deuels also, for they beleue that God is almyghty, that ye son¦ne of God is become man, that he is cru∣cified and rysen agayn, but they beleue not that he is ordeyneth to their saluaci∣on. The deuell beleueth and trembleth: but a Christen man beleueth and reio∣ceth in it. The fayth or knoleginge of the deuyls which they haue of God causeth them to feare and tremble: but oure fayth causeth vs to reioyce and be glad∣de in God, whom we knoledge euer to be oure father. Lazarus.
If he be our father why sendeth he such greueous paynes to vs then? Timothe. Youre aforesayde fayth must be tryed trough sufferynge, syknesse, and aduer∣site, as yt is written: That we shall not maruayll nether be moued that we be tryed trough the fyre of sufferynge, for yt is done to proue vs. The lorde proueth al the electes after this maner, that their fayth may be founde ore precious than the golde that is tried through the fyre. And the ende of oure fayth whiche is not anulled, is the health of our soul. Wher¦fore as ye beleue that God is youre mer∣cifull father: euen so must ye beleue also. and by fayth be assured, that all that be tydeth you, is hys fatherly wil and plea∣sure. Thynke not that hys eyen be wythdrawen from vs, for so greatly are we accepted before him that he sayeth. Whoso toucheth you, toucheth the very appell of myn eye. Yee we be so earnest¦ly and tenderly, cared for and kepte of God oure heauenly father, that there is not the least her of our heade but yt ys
tolde: no a sparowe doth not fall on the groūde without the consent of oure hea∣uenly father. How much lesse can thys syknesse come vpon you without the con¦sent of the heauenly father, which hath sanctified all troubell and sufferinges: By the crosse and humblinge dyd yt ple∣ase God to exalte and glorify his owne sonne. He yt dyd take care & thought for you before ye were borne: shall lykwyse prouyde for you beynge here: seynge he wolde you to be here. Wherfore all those that suffre accordinge the wyll of God, ought to cōmitte the charge of their sou∣les vnto the good creator of all creatu∣res: in whose handes we are, as the claye is in the potters hande. Praye therfore vnto the father with youre whole hart, that his name maye be halowed in you, lyke as it is halowed and glorified tho∣row ye death and depression of his sonne But as for oure name it is full of disho∣nesty, shame & dānacion. Lazarus. By the meaninge of youre wordes I per¦ceaue yt not nedefull for me to desyre
these paynes of myne to be auoyded: and to be healed other in soule, or bo∣dy. Timothe. I coulde shewe you welinough that this praynge doth come nother of the sprete of God, nor yet out of fayth, but of pro∣per loue, which seketh rather hir owne ease and profite, than the glory of God: But I feare lest it wolde be to tedious for you, & also I reken ye can not wel suf¦fre many more wordes. Lazarus. No hardly, it shall not be tedious vnto me, for euen now haue I a great desy∣re to it, wherfore shewe me why I may not pray so? Timothe. A trew fayth wyll not cause you to praye so, for it is certified alwaye of the good will of God what so euer doth chaun∣che: All that is not of fayth is synne (sayth Paule). Searche the grounde of youre harte, and ye shall perceaue that ye desyre to be healed for none other cau∣se, but only to be at ease. Therfore, seyng
that through this wyked nature ye set more pryce by youre self than by God: ye had leuer youre sensualyte and wyll we∣re accomplysshed in optayning of health than that God in this syknesse shulde do in you, and with you accordinge to hys pleasure. Wherfore I praye you what els do ye but rebelle agaynst God, & cor¦reke him in his iudgmēt, because he wor¦keth not accordynge your ymaginacion Where is youre pater noster? do not ye praye and saye: Father thy wyll be ful∣fylled in earth as it is in heauen, that is in the earthy bodye, as it is in the soule which is an heauenly body. How lytell doye rest hetherto in the workes of God? Heare how fully the kyngly prophet Da¦uid was mortifyed entyerly, and near in excesse of mynde, vpon all yt which God wolde sende hym, he beynge dryuen out of his kyngdome by his owne beloued sone Absalon dyd saye: Yf I shal fynde grace before the Lorde, he shall fetch me agayne, and let my se it againe (meanyn¦ge the arke) and the house of it. But yf he saye thus: I haue no pleasure in the
beholde, here am I let hym do with me as yt pleaseth hym. Here was a mortify∣ed sprete, which kept the trew Sabbath, that is the euerlastynge restynge daye, from this be ye farre wyde for all youre prayenge, and flatterynge. Lazarus. What good can I optayne by this wre∣chednesse, wherfore I shulde not desyre to be ryd of it. Tymothus. It is styll the olde trade, ye wyll not suf∣fre but for auauntage, ye wyll vse batte∣rynge with God. God wyll haue no mar¦chauntes, nor exchaungers in hys holy temple wherin he resteth, as ye shall hea∣re more herafter, yf we reason larger. As concerninge the good which we optayne by sufferinge, we must vnderstonde that God hatheth synne in that he sēdeth mer¦cy, and loue to hys chyldren, whych he doth chastyse. Whan ye praye God than to take awaye thys chastenynge from you than be not ye content, that he shall shewe thys hys ryghtwysnes in you: and herein ye declare, and vtter you to
be a frende of synne, and enemy to the ryghtuousnes of God. Be not you very blynde and peruerse harted, louynge thē that hate you, and hatynge those that lo¦ue you. To that intēt sendeth God payne anguysshe, yee and death vnto vs, that the body of synne and death shulde be ro¦ted out in sufferynge, and slayenge of the olde Adam with all hys carnall concu∣piscences and desyres. This worke wyll not ye to procede in you, which notwith∣stondinge must be accomplysshed yf we wyll be acceptable before God. Paule sayeth. Knowe ye not, that all we which are baptysed in to Christe Iesu, are bap¦tysed in to his death? The chyldren of Israel myght not optayne the londe of promes, excepte they fyrst hadde passed the reed see: Euen so we also must come to the hyghe Ierusalem through passin¦ge the reede see, that is troubell and syk∣nesse. For this cause we must cleue to the faythfull wordes of God as the Israe∣lytes dyd: which beynge opprest, before of the read see, and behynde of Pharaos army, so that death was at hande wither
soeuer they turned theyr syght. Wherfo∣re Moses comforted them biddynge not to doubte in Gods behestes saynge: Fea¦re you not, stond styll, and beholde what a saluacion the Lorde shall shewe vpon you this daye. Thus haue they wentu∣red it vpō Gods worde, & passed through the read see wythout blemysshe. Be ye al¦so a trew Israelyte goynge thorow thys sufferynge with a sure fayth, and ye shal surely be delyuered of i with a valiaunt power: For he is faythfull that hath so promysed you. Ceasse of your owne wyl, and despyse not that which commeth of God. Whan the waters of troubell so∣metyme be to greueous vpō you, so that thorow them ye begynne to waxe feble: than praye the heauenly father to geue you your daylye breade, strenghtynge you with hys holsome worde, wherby your soule must be sustayned. Lazarus. But brother this payne endureth to lon∣ge, for my thynketh it wyll neuer haue an ende. It hath so his recourse. Tymotheus.
Be not moued at that, for Christ hymself dyd suffre before he came in to hys glory Is than a disciple greater than hys may¦ster? is a seruaunt aboue hys Lorde? Yf ther hadde bene another way to come to the trew glory and lyfe, Christ wolde haue rather chosen it: but now hath he fyrst trodden and chosen thys waye of sufferynge hymself that we shulde folow hym in yt. Lo thys is to take vp the cros∣se of Christ, and to folowe hym, dayly to be mocked, despised, depressed, lyke as he hath boren his crosse with all despy∣syng, payne, and reuylinge. We be cruci¦fyed with Christ whan we mortifye oure pleasures and affections, which ought to be durynge oure lyfe. Now yf we be equall wyth Chryst in sufferynge, and dyenge: whe shall also be equall wyth hym in reioycynge, and rysinge to ye new lyfe. Certifyed, that oure olde man is cru¦cifyed with hym, to the intent the body of synne shulde be destroyed. Yf we then be dead with Christ, we beleue that we shall also lyue with hym. Paul sayeth Roman. vi.. For a grane of corne cast in
to the grounde can not brynge forth fru¦te hūdreth folde, without it be mortifyed fyrst, and auoyded his harde huske: euen so we also beynge here in earth must first dye and refuse the corrupcion of oure flesshe, yf we wyll lyue with Christ, and brynge forth frutes of lyfe. For this cau∣se is the lyfe of a Christian here in earth counted to be nothynge els (nor is none other) saue a continual crosse, death, and deynge as Paul doth specifie .ii. Cor. ix. saynge: That we which lyue are alway∣es delyuered vnto death for Iesus sake, that the lyfe also of Iesus myght appea¦re in oure mortall flesshe: for as longe as we lyue, we are delyuered vnto death for Iesus sake, that the lyfe of Chryst be de¦clared in oure mortall body. Dauyd al∣so sayeth: For thy sake we are kylled all the daye longe, and are counted as she∣pe appoynted to be slayne. Yf ye wyll saye thys trewly wyth Dauyd, then must you be content with your punys∣shement, yee vntyll the death as the she∣pe is, which openeth not his mouth in ye slaghting. I praye you how can ye desire
God to take from you this payne, yf ye beleue surely yt although your outwarde mā be corrupte and perysshe: yet your in∣warde man is renewed daye by day. Paule sayeth that this troubell, and suf∣ferynge (which lasteth but ye tuynklyng of an eye in comparyson of the glory for to come) prepareth maruaylously for vs the eternall glory: yf we haue not oure syght fyxed vpon yt which is visible, but vpon that which is inuysyble and euer∣lastynge: yee all that we can suffre here in this transytory worlde is not to be cō∣pared vnto the glory which shalbe decla¦red in vs. By thys ye perceaue that all those which suffre wt a sure fayth, ought also to reioyce in theyr troubell, euen as Paule and other electes haue done. Lazarus. Me thynketh ye preasse the meteyarde harde on: How can I reioyce in troubell which is nought but waylynge, and yay¦lynge. It is harde to laugh and to wepe Tymotheus. I shall enfourme you of it with a grosse ensample: ye lye here now sycke and dys∣seased,
ye wolde be fayne cured of some goode phisician, now maketh he a drinck for you which is very bitter and misplea¦saunt to receaue, neuerthelesse thorow his informacion and promesse of health therby ye ouercome the bytternesse of it drynkynge yt with shoueringe & chaūg∣ging of coūtenaūce: though ye tears rūne down wt drynkīge of y, yet endeuoure ye yourself to retayne a corage. Were it not a folyshe felowe yt wolde be displeased wt the phisician because he doth minister so bitter drinke vnto him, which he geueth you not for ony hatered or euell wyll, yt you shulde fele the bitternesse of yt: but that ye myght recouer. Who wolde be so madde to desyre the phisician to auoyde the bitter recepte, knowenge and stedfast¦ly belyuynge to optayne health by none other meanes? Lazarus. As for me surely I wolde rather thanke him, & drynke hys recepte, though it we∣re as bitter as regale yf I knewe to op∣tayne health therby. Timothe.
Lo then, nomore ye ought to despise the hyghest physiciō of your soule, nor to refu¦se hys medycines, though they be bytter and paynfull vnto your olde Adam. But ye must haue an eye to his promyses, & ouercome that which is payneful to you wherby neuerthelesse ye be saued. Thus haue martyrs ouercome in sufferynge, and death, for dyenge they sawe the trew lyfe, in syknesse and disease of the flesshe they sawe the power of God, which is for¦tyfied, and stabylysshed hereby. God of hys nature is merciful, but that he maye worke hys worke in vs, that is to heale, to make safe and sounde, he doth fyrst a thynge that is straunge to hys nature which semeth vnto vs a token of hate∣red, that is, he scourgeth and beateth vs with syknesses and grefe. Thus doth God a straunge worke (as sayeth Esaye in the .xxviii. chapter) that he maye wor∣ke hys natural worke. By this straunge worke of God that is the chastenynge or scourgynge of the father we lese oure co∣rage, goodes, bloude, health, welth, and lyuelode, and come euen in the myddes,
of the crosse, despysynge, and death. All thynges appeare here before our flesshly eyes as though we were enemies vnto God, and wholy despysed of God, and wote not to consyder how he shall dely∣uer vs. Yet do we perceaue the hande of God inwardly which doth so sustayn vs that we fall not in desayre, mystrusting or mumurynge agaynst God: wythout the hande of God it were impossible for vs to stonde the twinklinge of an eye In the ende of the worke do we fyrst percea¦ue the councell of God, than se we that he wyll mayntayne and fede his shepe in his lappe whom he wyll not haue to dye for hunger and dysease. He can temp¦te the ryghtuous, and also delyuer them agayne. By fayth may we be conque∣rers of all. Fayth is of thynges that be not apparent: now, where fayth shal ha¦ue a place, there must such thynges be be¦leued as be inuysyble. Thus is fayth of the lyfe to come chefely contayned, and declared in dyenge. Thus we be∣leue that God relyueth vs in kyllyn∣ge: that he saueth vs, and iustyfyeth
vs in synnynge: that he brengeth vs to heauē, whā he semeth to thrust vs down to hell in that he forsaketh vs: and that he healeth vs in oure soule whan the bo¦dy is vysyted with al maner of syknesses For he hedeth hys mercy vnder hys wrath. How wolde haue beleued that God wolde haue dealte so peteousli with hys good frende Iob, in takyng awaye all hys best beloued thynges: but onely because he was mynded to restore hym, all this agayne doubell? Let therfore youre eye of fayth preasse vnto saluaci∣on, and reioyce, though God shewe you not his foreparte that is a chearfull co∣untenaunce as he dyd vnto Peter beyn∣ge on the moūt Thabor: but hys hynder parte lyke as he appared vnto Moses. For whan this worke of his is past, thā appeare his fotesteppes. Whā this cha∣stesynge is past, than shall he smyle at you, and shew you his fatherly fauoure: though in this anger he seme to gerne, and loke grymly vpon you. Perceaue you this? Lazarus.
I can not perceaue perfectly so much at ones Neuerthelesse, I perceaue that in youre wordes there is a Godly vnder∣stōdynge, though I can not comprehend so much at once. Therfore I desyre you to declare me more earnestly, and sleght∣ly which waye oure synnes be mortyfy∣ed in vs by the crosse and sufferynge. Tymotheus. I wyll do yt gladly. Whatsoeuer a man loueth besyde God, that is hys Idoll, therfore is yt nedefull to declare what thynges we sett stoare by besyde God, that we myght endeuoure vs the better, to fulfyll the fyrst commaundement whe¦rin we are commaunded to loue God, with all oure harte, power, and vnder∣stondynge. Some leane to much to tem¦porall possessions, which be withdrawen from them (as a pelowe from vnder a mans heade) by extorcion, with the fyre, by warre, or by some other losse: that hys hart beatt the more lyberte to be turned wholy to God. Another hath hys carnal affeccion fyxed to sore vpon hys wyfe, chyldren, father, and mother, or frendes.
These false goddes be withdrawē from them whan they suffre, ether in theyr na¦me or fame, goodes or bloude: or whan they be taken from them by death, to ryd¦de a man of hys carnall affection, and to open to a man hys infydelyte, that God may possesse the harte wholy and alone, lyke a gelous louer. The thyrde is wan∣ton, and full of pleasure, he setteth great stoare by hymself by reason of hys bewty strength, honesty, wysdome, puyssaunce vnto such sendeth God troubell, anguys¦she, sykenesse, sores, onwholsōnesse, or fo¦lysshenesse, to the intent, yt he myght se how that all flesshe is nothynge but hey and all his glory as the grasse of the fel∣de: the grasse wythereth, and the flore faydeth. Lazarus. I can not perceaue yet that God recea∣ueth vs in scourginge, al we flye strokes Tymotheus. Your mysbeleue is the cause of flyenge, which Paul rebuketh in the .xii. to the Hebrews saynge: Bretheren haue ye for∣gotten the consolacion, which speaketh
vnto you as vnto chyldren saynge: My sonne, despyse not the chastenynge of the Lorde, nother faynte whan thou arte rebuked of hym: for whom the Lorde lo¦ueth hym he chasteneth, Yee he scour∣geth euery sonne that he receaueth. Yf ye suffre hys chastesynge, he offreth hym selfe vnto you, as vnto hys beloued son∣ne. What sonne is he whom hys father doth not chastyse? Yf ye be farre from the chastenynge, which is comune to all chyldren: then be ye no chyldren, but ba∣stardes. Also yf we haue hadde carnall fathers of whome we stode greatly ī awe which chastysed vs: how much more shal we be obedyent vnto the father of spre∣tes, and shall lyue by hym? Oure car∣nall fathers haue taught, and enfour∣med vs after theyr best mynde, and that for a lytle season: But thys father of ou∣res teacheth, and chastyseth vs for oure profyte, that he maye make vs parta∣kers of hys holynesse. All thys present chastysynge semeth to be nothynge yoy∣full but sorowfull: but herafter she ge∣ueth a quyete frute & reward vnto them,
which be proued therby. Are not these sayenges comfortable vnto them that be in payne? punyshment is dewe vnto syn¦ne, and wythout synne is noman lyuyn∣ge: wherfore good Lazarus receaue all that is sent vnto you, and suffre, though it be greueous. Be pacyent in youre de∣pressynge. For as golde and syluer be tried in the fyre: so is man tried in the for¦nace of temptacion: Therfore, scrypture exhorteth vs to estyme it aboue all other frutes. And there is no frute so trewe as yf we be proued by many folde temptaci∣ons, knowenge that temptacion in faith bryngeth forth the frutes of pacience. Beholde all the martyrs, and chyldren of God in theyr sufferynge, and let theyr constant fayth be an example vnto you, for as God hath delyuered them, euen so shall he delyuer you also. Lazarus. I maye not cōpare my sufferynge wyth theyr passyons. They dyd suffre for their innocency: but I suffre for my synnes. Timotheus. Thynke you the sayntes were no syn∣ners
also? before God is no fleshe founde ryghtuous. Saye not that ye suffre with the wyked murtherer whan ye suffre pa∣ciently, and whan faythfully ye knowled¦ge to haue well deserued such castygaci∣on: which the good murtherer dyd also. The knowledgynge of youre synne doth iustifye you, yf it be done faythfully, and trewly. Ther can no trew knowlegynge be, wythout the sprete of treuth, and you¦re punyshment is cause of iustifycacion, yf ye confesse to haue deserued yt well for youre synnes. The martyrdome of mar∣tyrs was not meritorious vnto them to to optayne the lyfe euerlastynge thereby for Paul sayth, that the paynes of thys worlde be not sufficient for ye glory which shalbe shewed vpon vs. For the transy∣tory and faydinge thynges can not op∣tayne durabell rewarde. But Christ hath suffred onely for his innocency, by the which innocent sufferinge he hath rydde vs from all oure wykednesse. Christes death hath deserued lyfe eternall for vs this haue the marters beleued cōstantly testyfyenge it vntyl ye death, conqueryng
by fayth: so that their fayth (wherby they were iustified before God) appeared ly∣uely in knoleginge the name of Iesus, from the which they dyd not shrynke euē at ye poynte of death. For this cause dyd all sayntes euer praye with the prophet. Not oure (Lorde) not oure, but vnto thy name be glory. Lazarus. You ouercome me which so many stron∣ge and euident scriptures, that I wote not what to answere. Neuerthelesse I wolde desyre God once to ceasse scour∣gynge, lyke as many sayntes haue done And I remēbre I haue herde preached that there was a kynge whose lyfe was prolonged fyftene yeares thorowe hys prayer. Timothe. We shall not folowe saintes so curiously in al their wordes, & dedes: for we be not sure how wel they haue ben accepted al∣way of, god. In yt they also haue ben mē, we may be deceaued in their fotesteppes Therfore in sayntes we ought only to be hold their strōge faith, & ye giftes yt God had geuē thē. But christ is set to be our sā¦ple & copie after whose lyf wordes & doc∣trīe
we maye lyue, & speake: for he could not erre, nor cause other to erre, whiche sayntes haue done ryghtwell. Paul sa∣yeth: Be ye ye folowers of my as I am a folower of Iesu Christ. Now shall ye he∣are how Christ is oure sampel in thys prayenge or wysshinge that ye speake of. Whan he prayed in his agony he sayde Father: yf this cuppe cā not be taken fro¦me but ye I drynke of yt, not my will, but thyne be fulfylled. Praye ye lykwyse wt Christ and ye shalbe strenghted also no doubte from heauen in youre battayll, And now to answere you vnto youre ex∣ample of Ezechias which (beynge dead syke) optayned by his prayer of God to be delyuered of his syknesse: you must vnderstande yt God doth punisshe vs di∣uersly with the rodde of correctiō in oure body, Somtyme he doth it to punisshe our synnes & wykednesses, yt our faith be strenghted therby, as Christ sayde to the sykemā yt had lyē .xxxviii. yeares syke at Ierusalē by ye slaughterhouse pole: Be∣hold thou art made whole, sinne nomore lest a worse thīge happē vnto ye. By these
wordes he dyd geue him knoledge, that for his synnes he suffered this longe and greuous syknesse: for the wich he shulde suffreyt more greueously yf he left not synninge. Sōtyme sendeth God syknes∣se and troubel to hys electe, whiche not withstondynge be in his fauours, that ye glory and honoure of God maye be decla¦red therby, as Christ sayeth Ioh. xi. that Lazarus syknesse was not vnto death, but for the glory of God, yt the sonne of God might be praysed therby. Christ say be also Ioh. ix. that the blynde was so borne, that the worke of God might be shewed vpon hym, Euen so daylye doth yet the glory & honoure of God appeare in many places, by sufferinge paciently, and dyenge gladly of many vertuous & honest men: whiche occasion other men to prayse and to thāke God, that sendeth such grace and mercy vnto men, so that they haue cause to reoiyce, yee euen in ye myddes of death, Somtymes God visi∣teth ye trespasses of the rulers, & parētes vnto the thirde, or fourth generatiō vpō their subiectes, and kynreddes: For whā
Dauid had nombred the people forme∣re vanite and misbeleue, there were fay∣ne to dye .lxx. thousande of his people wt in thre dayes .ii. Regū. xxiiii. Hely also, because he castised not his childrē, kno∣wynge them to do euell: God sware vn∣to the house of Hely that hys wykednes shulde not be put awaye foreuer by no maner of offerynge, and afterwarde was he punished by the death of his sonnes .i. Reg. ii All this is done accordynge iusti¦ce, and dewly, for the ryghtwose God cā do no wronge. Vvhan God suffreth such as is sayde afore to chaunce vnto vs, than semeth he and is sayde to be angry with vs, where as he neuerthelesse is im¦mutable. Now whan we rede of some ho¦ly mē, which in their sufferinge haue pra∣yed to be ridde of their crosse, & anguishe it is not to be thought that they haue do∣ne it of ony hatered that they hadde to yt, because yt is oneasy and paynfull: but yt they by this prayenge myght once come to ye perfecte punisshynge of synne, which they hated and persewed. And so prayed kynge Ezechias whan he was admonis∣shed
by the prophet Esaye the .xxxviii. chap. that he shulde dye sayenge. What shall I speake or saye, that he maye do thys? that I maye lyue out al my yeares yee in the bitternesse of my lyfe. (Lo the bitternesse that came of ye hatered of his synnes). Verely Lorde men must lyue in bitternesse, and all my lyfe must I passe ouer therin: for thou raysest me vp & wa∣kest me. But lo I wylbe cōtent with this bitternesse (marke that God by punis∣shinge of synne relyueth a mā: Marke ye fayth causeth Ezechie to haue peace, and to be at rest in the middes of his bitter sufferynge). Neuerthelesse my cōuersaci∣on hath so pleased the, that thou woldest not make an ende of my lyfe, but yt thou hast cast al my synnes behynde thy ba∣ke. Beholde, how royaly the good kynge setteth forth the mercy of God in his suf∣feraunce, that is that Esaye sayeth in his xxx. chapter: With styll syttinge and rest shall ye be healed, In quietnesse and ho∣pe shall youre strength be. That is in the silence & rest of youre owne wyl in Gods wil, and the hope of mercy of God, which
is promised you: yee in all sufferinge shal youre strenght be, so that ye shalbe able to suffre all grefe. Euen so is that petici∣on of our prayer to be vnderstōde, where we desyre not to be ledde in to temptaci∣on, not that we desyre to be rydde and fre of all temptacion, (which cā not be seyn∣ge, oure lyfe is a perpetuall battayll:) But the intent is that we be not ledde in to such temptacion which myght ouer∣come, and so discomfite vs that we ther∣by myght fall in misbeleue, despayre, or blasphemy of the name of God: Vvhich synnes be the greatest and moost pare∣lous, for they lye hydde in the entrayles of the harte. Vvherby we might synke to the botome of hell with Cayn, Iudas, & kyng Antioche, without ye sustaynynge & vnderproppīge of God. Therfore praye ye holy prophetes also: Lorde put not me to rebuke in thyne anger oh chastē my not in thy displeasure. In which prayer ye spret of god cōforteth vs, & causeth God to graūte vs yt he is ye health of al people Of what trouble so euer we call to hī he shal deliuer vs & be our god for euermore
Lazarus. Youre sayenge is confortable, and my thynketh I am refreshed at my hart, so yt I fele lesse grefe in my paines: Neuerthe¦lesse I must reasone sōwhat larglyer wt you seynge ye teache my so well. Vvese dayly with oure eyes, yt yf a chylde beyn∣ge chastiseth of his father do yelde hym∣self to his fathers wyl, axynge mercy, at the laste he wyll leaue of chastenynge I trust that he which is a father of mercye wyll also be mercyfull vnto my poore wrech: how thynke ye? Timothe. As concernynge which be the best waye to optayne mercy of God, therin doth youre similitude lyke me verely wel. For as a father that hateth the wikednesse of his chylde dewly, not withstōdinge loue, doth correcce hym wyth fatherly pytie, whan he seyeth him repyne at the chaste∣synge, he waxeth more furious and aug∣menteth the strokes. In lyke maner also God in scripture is sayde to be wrothful, whan we receaue not the chastigation of his hande wyth lowlynesse euen as we
rede in Esaye the .ix. Chapter. After all this the wrath of the Lorde shal not ceas∣se, but yet shall his hande be streched out styll, For the people turneeth not vnto hym that chastiseth them, nother do they seke the Lorde of hoostes. Therfore shall the Lorde rote out of Israel both heade and tayle, braunche & uigge in one daye By the which wordes the prophet afore∣sayde meaneth, that God stryketh vs to the intent we shuld so much sooner tur¦ne agayne to hym, and that he strykinge vs shulde occasion vs to seke ayde and helpe of hym. Now therfore, that we ma∣ye swage the wrath of the chastesynge fa¦ther, we shall yelde oureselfs lyke good chyldren vnto the strokes of oure father, knowleginge our faulte, styll pearsynge to hys fatherly bosome, endeuourynge to coll hym, yee to seke all meanes wher∣by we myght moue hym to pytye. For ye which lowly rendrynge of oure self God loueth vs more then he dyd before. For ye prophet Abacuk sayeth: Whan God is wroth than shal he remembre his mercy. Thus maye we thē praye wt the prophet
sayenge: All that thou hast done vnto vs O Lorde, that hast thou done of trewe iudgment: for we haue synned and diso∣beyed thy cōmaundementes. Lo such good wyl and yeldinge is of more effica∣cite, and acceptable in the syght of God to optayne forgeuenesse therby, than all pylgrimages, vowes, and other wayes, whyche a man can take vpon hym of his owne brayne, without ony groūde of euident scripture. ¶Lazarus. Good Lorde what haue I yet to demaū∣de whiche I rather ought to kepe close. Ye maye saye: One foole wyll demaūde more than al wyse mē can assoyle. Timothe. You cā not are to much at me brother for I trust I shal certifie you wel ynough in al thynges by the assistaunce of God. Lazarus. Ye cause me there to remēbre pelgrima∣ges: wherfore my questiō is wether they auayle ought to optayne health therby: For my frendes wil not ceasse without I make a vowe ether to faynt Leonart, or to our lady of walsyngā, or to some other
saynte after theyr affeccion. But as for me I haue no mynde more in this dede, for goyng of pelgrimage hath pilled my yf a good lyuelod in my dayes, & yet ha∣ue I foūde none amēdmēt. Yf wysdō had ben my frende I might haue spared that mony But I gaue to much eare vnto the¦se olde tothlesse mabes, & pilergnawers They were so earnest in whysperynge these thynges in myne eares, that I coul¦de neuer be rydde of them. But what saye ye of them Tymothe? yf they be Godly I wyll cause more to be gone for me. Timothe. Fyrst ye must well vnderstonde youre owne wordes where as ye speake of pyl∣grimages. A plgrime is he yt wandreth in a straunge country and from home, & pylgrimage is such a wandringe or way¦farīge. Now where fynde ye in ony scrip¦ture, that Goddes worde byddeth you to go & seke holynesse in a straunge coū∣try or place? (seynge you be Gods tēple yf ye beleue faythfully, and seynge Paul wyll haue men to lyft vp pure handes
in euery place:) Or where be ye cōmaun∣ded to chose out one place more than ano¦ther to offer prayer, sence the shadowe of ye lawe vanished? Yee how can you presu∣sume such praynge as is not agreynge with Gods worde? and all what is done without his cōmaundement is not ac∣ceptable vnto hym, Nother is it the glo∣ry and honour of God or his sayntes to set such stoare by youre mans wysdome and inuencion, though yt seme neuer so godly & fayre. But yf ye (sayeth Christ) that wylbe my disciples praye, you shall not pray lyke as the Heythen do: but go in to the chamber of youre hart, shut the dore vpon you, that is: shut all wordly troubell and cōbraūce out of youre hart, and praye vnto God in secrete, not in ye corners of the stretes, not in outchosen places, and youre father which seyeth in secrete, and the entrayles of the hart, shal rewarde you openly. Christ hath suffici∣ently forbidden the goynge of pylgrima∣ge in the .iiii. chapter of Iohn, where he teacheth vs that we shuld not go to pray in Salomons tēpel, nor vpō the renow∣med
hylles of the Patriarckes, but that we shall call vpon God in all places (not with waxe or flaxe, not wt syluer or golde not with corne or sede, no not with cryen¦ge and whyninge as the prestes of Baal and the Heithen do, which thynke to be herde for their cryenge and much bablin¦ge) but in sprete and treuth. For the fa∣ther which is a sprete wyl haue such wor¦shippers. The prophete Malachy also in his fyrst chapter sayeth: From the rysyn∣ge vp of the sonne vnto the goynge dow∣ne of thesame, my name is great amonge the gentyles: Yee in euery place shal the∣re sacrifices be done, and a clene meat of∣ferynge offred vp vnto my name: for my name is greate amonge the Heithen sa∣yeth the Lord of hoostes. What offringe doth he requyre of vs? wax or flax syluer or golde? No, but the mortifyenge of our carnall desyres, and sensuall appetite. wherunto Paul exhorteth vs wryttinge vnto the Romanes in the .xii. chapter. It is a greate blyndnesse that we seke ayde or comforte at ony saynte, whom oure ymagynacion is that we worshippe
& serue thē in their similitud here in earth wherin we trāgresse ye fyrst cōmaūdmēt of God, which forbyddth us all straunge Gods, & to make ony similitude or yma∣ge. Wyll ye knowe the cause & springe of the multitude of the Heythenishe God¦des? and why we Christen men ought to worshippe but one God? I shall shewe it you Lazarus. Yee I praye you, for I am desirous of it. Timothe Such men as were profitable to the co∣mune welth were counted Goddes of the Heythen, & worshipped after their death This hath occasioned the multitude of them. For health they called vpon Escu∣lapius, for he was a greate Phisician: Vpon Hercules they called for ryches: Vpon Mercury they called for luck of marchaundyse: Vpon Bacchus for wy∣ne: Vpon Seres for corne: Vpon Venus for lust of the body, yee the Egyptians God is become the storke, for he destro∣yed the serpentes: The Romaynes haue worshipped a Gouse, because yt at ye skre∣kinge of her, ye wachmē yt kepte the ca∣stel
at Rome called Capitoliū were awa¦ked, & so warned of their enemies: of like cōmodite & {pro}fyte be ye Sōne & Mone: wa¦ter & earth made goddes & worshipped. But we Christen mē knowe nor worship¦pe none other God, saue him only yt wor∣keth all in all thinges. It is written: ye shall serue youre lorde God & worshippe him only Whā we trust in nomā but him only makīge of him our sauegarde, re∣dēption, wysdō, ryghtwysnes, hope & wel¦fare: than do we worship hī only, whā we cast vs wholy down before him forsakīg & despysyng our holynesse, wysdō, abilite & natural strēgth reputīge our selues foo¦les, wiked, & feble, yt seke mercy at hī only thā praye we to him. Marke wether they yt turne thēselues frō the creator vnto the creatures do so, sekīge helpe wt their rū∣ninge gaddīge hyther & thyther a pelgri∣mage. I am thy God only, and without me is there is no redemer sayeth the Lorde God. To saue belongeth only to hym, but the gentyles and vngodly ma¦ke a mokage of yt, yestenge and sayenge as is wryttē Deutxonomy. xxxii. Where
are now theyr Goddes wherin they had∣de confidence, let them ryse now and hel∣pe you, let them succour you in youre ne∣de. But ye Lord maketh answere agayne sayenge: I am he, and without me there is no God, I wyl slaye and relyue agay∣ne: I wyl scourge & heale agayne: there is no mā yt can plucke ought out of my hādes. Vvhere shal these ydolatrers thā and pelgromes remayne: Vvhat God∣des shalbe able to defende them, whan God shall punishe theyr misbeleue and ydolatry (which they haue cōmitted with woode and stone) openly and before the whole world: Although he be now quiet and longe sufferinge ¶Lazarus Vvil ye take it in worth yt I shal aske of you, & I wil shew you ye reasons, whiche myn hypocritishe coūcelers were wōte to lay to me, whā they entysed me to ye pel∣grimages vnto saintes: Vvhō I (God forgeue me) haue shewed to much ho∣nour in myn ydolatry. ¶Timothe. Aske what ye please, so yt I be not to te∣dious vnto you, it wold not greue me to syt thus an whole day wt you treatynge
of the scrypture. Lazarus. How fortuneth it then that sayntes wyl be worshypped, and sought more in one place than in another, to heale such disea¦ses as they be patrones of? Tymotheus. Christ saieth in the .xiiii. chapter of Ihon I am the waye, the treuth, and lyfe. Yf ye wyl not go astraye and erre, than with drawe you from sayntes. Which haue re¦ceaued all theyr holynesse of hym, that ye name of God myght be gloryfyed in thē. Walke (I saye) in Christ for he is the waye, who so foloweth hym shall walke in no darknesse. Yf ye wyll not be decea∣ued with ony lye or falshed, than holde you by Christ, abyde by Christes worde, styke by yt, for it is the treuth. Yf ye wyll not dye in synne nor peryshe in youre owne wycked wayes: than stryue by the mortifyenge of the flesshe to lyue eterna∣ly with hym, for he is the lyfe. Paul sa∣yeth that oure lyfe is hydde with him vn¦to death. The waye of sufferynge is na∣rowe and strayght, but you must go tho∣rowe
it yf ye entende to come vnto yoie. The treuth must delyuer you of youre thraldome of synne, yf ye shalbe delyue∣red in dede▪ Why do ye then seke another odye, another lyfe, another saueour be∣syde the waye of treuth and lyfe? As con¦cernynge, that ye do saye that sayntes wylbe vysitted more in one place, than in another. I answer that yf sayntes wyl∣be worshypped, and discerne places of worshippe and honour, that they be ra∣ther deuyls than sayntes: for they desyre honour and worshippe, which belongeth onely to God, that is supreme heade of all thynges. Morouer sayntes, that be heauenly sayntes saye constantly: Not vnto vs o Lorde not vnto vs, but vnto thy name geue the glory. Now how will you honour, and geue vnto sayntes this glory, which they do refuse so earnestly? or thynke ye they shewe God this fayre face, and yet neuerthelesse robbe hym of hys honour. Wherfore yf yt be sayde vn¦to you Christ is here, there is pardon of all synnes, there is a soule delyuered out of purgatory, here is an ymage of myra¦cles,
there be many reliquyes of sayntes here is this or that saynt worshipped, go not thyther: seke the kyngdome of God wythin you: seke the kynge of glory in youre harte, which all sayntes haue do∣ne. The kyngdom which God hath in oure hartes is not deckt with wax nor flax, golde nor syluer. The dekynge of it consysteth in thynges spirituall, and in∣wardly as in mekenesse, pacience peace, yoie, fayth, and loue: where such gyftes and ornamētes be perceaued, their maye you saie boldly that Christ is kynge, and that because in such ornamentes he is founde. Thus is it euydent to be put vayne yanglynge that they saye: Sayn∣tes wyll be worshypped more in one pla∣ce than in other, for it is without ground or staye of ye treuth of scrypture. Yee it is a more blasphemy to assygne vnto eue¦ry syknesse a peculiar patrone & saueour as ye pestylēce vnto saynt Roke, ye pockes vnto Iob, saynte Appolony for ye totha∣che. &c. Do these hypocrites thīke God to deuyde his kingdō to princes and lordes as mortall men do? No, for God sayeth.
I wyll geue myn honour, and glory to none other. Yf oure God were such one as hadde nede of rulers vnder hym than dyd not scrypture ryght in callynge hym God onely, and kynge of all kynges, Lorde of all lordes. Now yf he nede no helpe with hym, why do ye assigne then vnto the one saynte the pestylence, vnto another the fallynge syknesse, & so forth to euery syknesse a seuerall patrone, yt is come so farre (God amende it) that the¦re is scarce a vyllage of .viii. or .ix houses but there is ether one Idoll or other. Wherto is Christendom come? what do ye make of the blessed company of elec∣tes? which be planted and gathered in ye loue of God with all faythfull and bele∣uynge, which were pacient here in theyr troubel, and haue receaued a louely spre¦te of God, despysynge all honour, prayse goodes, & worldly preemynence, be they (I saye) now so vnpacient, wykedly dys∣posed, and couetous of honour that they must be appeased and reconcyled againe with gaddynge a pelgrymage, with offe¦rynge, of candels, or egges? Is the sal∣uation
of sayntes become now a house of plages wherout all mysery floweth? All the diseases wherof ye make you son¦dery patrons are naturall, and were in the worlde before youre saintes were bor¦ne. Oure mysbeleue and great infydelite is the cause that we haue fayned vs so many Idols. Because we haue not knowne the onely eternal, and trewe god but be enclyned to blynde ceremonies, though we shulde worshippe a calfe ther with, as the chyldren of Israel dyd: ther∣fore is it come to pas, that we haue oure purpose in that we haue done worshippe vnto the calfskynne the popyshe bulles stickynge candels to it. O Lorde loke vpon the afflyction and punyshment of the doughter Syon: and haue pytie vpō the destruccion of Iosephs heretage. Lazarus. Frō hensforth wyll I set vp not one lytel candell to ony ymage what so euer it be I haue hetherto lyghted thre candels to saynte Anne euery tewsdaye, and on the thyrsdaye haue I worshypped the holy sacrament with half a pounde of waxe:
but I am now so enfourmed of you, that hensforth. I wyll do it nomore: but ra∣ther geue it to the poore and lyghten so the lyuynge temple of god, wherin he dwelleth no doubte with hys mercy. Is not that beste brother Tymothe? Tymotheus. Yee it is a thousande tymes better, for Christes saynge is: Loke what ye haue done vnto the least of mine, that haue ye done vnto me. He sayeth not what ye ha¦ue done vnto my picture or ymage, or vn¦to the picture of my sayntes which I ha∣ue forbidden to make or to honoure. Wherfore, whan these sayntes spechmē come to persuade you to your olde super¦stition, than answer you them: Is it not a great blyndnesse of you to seke the sayn¦tes in woode and stone contrary to the fyrst commaundement? Is it not a great foly to lyght the Sonne at brode day with a candell? The sayntes wyll say to this: Lorde in thy lyght shall we beholde the lyght. The lyght of the Godly vysa∣ge lyghteth the electes alwaye: how wyl ye then lyghten them with your lyght
that is made for the solace of darknesse? Thynke ye they be in darknesse that are lyghtened of the sonne of ryghtwysnesse? Yf ye wyll nedes set candels before them than geue them eyes also that they maye se them: than maye ye optayne thākes of them, els do ye but lese your laboure, and cost. Baruch also ye prophete doth great∣ly rebuke this vngodly honoure, & wor∣shippe of ymages. Now whan ye haue thus rebuked them of this Idolatry, thā shew them where they ought to bestowe theyr candels, offeringes, & other almes that they be acceptable vnto God. Also yf they wyl go on pelgrimage, thē shewe them a nearer way which they maye go with lesse cost, & say Seynge you be myn¦ded to visyte the sayntes, it is no nede to runne to Rome, or to Ierusalē, or to sayn¦te Iannes in Spayne, for that were losse both of expences, and tyme. Seke Chryst in the graue of scrypture: seke hym in the chamber, of youre har∣te, there shall ye be moost surest of hym: Seke the sprete of Peter, and Paul in theyr wrytynges, and Epystles.
Seke Iames in his stronge fayth that he continued in vntyll hys death. Moro¦uer God is no bodely thynge, and therfo¦re wyll not he be worshipped with bode∣ly thynges: he is a sprete, and regardeth no persone, place, candell, or such good workes: But his desyre is onely that we put awaye the wycked thoughtes, from oure harte as namely mysbeleue, despay¦re, vnclennesse, hate, enuye, couetousnes∣se, and pryde. For they that haue a clene harte from these, and a lowely sprete shal se God, and be called the children of God where as all these holynesse sekers shall remayne wythout: For God which is a sprete wyll not be worshypped but in the sprete and treuth, where as these hypo∣crytes seke hym in outchosen places, in seuerall dayes, with certayne oyntment boxes, to declare theyr good intent to∣warde hym in bodely workes: but they shall not touche hym, for he is rysen, and lyfted aboue all that is outwarde, and in mans syght. Lazarus. I shall kepe well youre declarynge, and
as I can. But I knowe what shall be theyr answere here vnto. Timotheus. What I praye you? Lazarus. Why than do they myracles more in one place than in another? but onely that they wylbe worshypped and sought there. Tymotheus. To that shall ye answere: where a sure fayth is, there nede no tokens but onely the token of Ionas the prophet? In the which token the lyfe and death of Christ and also the death and resurrecciō of eue¦ry Christen man is featly fygured. For with Ionas and Christ must we descen∣de in to the whal fyshe, & see of tribulaci∣on and death before we can ryse agayne in to the lyfe euerlastynge. Lyke as Io∣nas dyd not remayn in the see, nor Christ in the graue, but were relyued agayne: euen so shall not God suffre vs to be ouer¦come with no grefe, nor death, but shall rayse vs out of this mysery vnto the re∣surreccion of lyfe. Therfore ought we to voyde oure mynde of all myracles, all
patrons, and beholde this token of Io∣nas onely, settynge oure confydence vpō yt onely, sayenge with the prophet Psal. lxi. My soule wayteth onely vpon God, for of hym commeth my help. He onely is my strength, my saluation, my defen∣ce, so that I shall not greatly fall. Lo, to thys Ionas shall ye sende all these myra¦kel gasers, as Christ hath sent thē awaye which of curiosyte desyred to se tokens from heauen. As for the myracles, which sayntes be sayde to shewe by theyr yma∣ges, they be but a mockage and gabbyn∣ge of the dyuell. There can no myrakles be done of God agaynst hys holy worde Treuth it is that Moses hath comfyr∣med the then commaundementes, and lawe, and hath made them autenticall with wonders and tokens: It is treuth also that the Apostles after the passion, and ascendynge of Chryst to heauen, ha¦ue comfyrmed theyr wordes, and prea∣chynges with some myrakles in the na∣me of Iesu: (for that name beynge des∣pysed as a malefactor and condemned, had great nede of these). But these my∣racles
of sayntes or ymages can not con¦fyrme the worde of God nor they hap∣pen not to that intent, but rather to a fal∣se Gods seruyce. They cause nothynge els saue a decyuerynge of Gods worde, Idolatry: which beynge vsed and had in pryce amonge the Christians hath preso¦ned theyr blyndnesse and mysbelefe. For by the occasyon of myrakles, men rūne to the Idols r ymages as though they were myndlesse: to the intent they myght be healed of such syknesses, and dyseases and be sent them for theyr a∣mendment. Now where such fayth, and confydence is geuen vnto ymages, and theyr myracles, there can it not well be beleued that thys bytter cha∣lyce of sufferynge be geuen vs of the fa∣ther as an acceptable thynge, and wor∣thy to be receaued wyth a good wyll. Neuerthelesse that Chryste wyll haue yt so to be receaued, is euydent by the wordes that he spake vnto Peter, what tyme as he wolde defende Chrystes cau∣se wyth the materiall swearde sayenge:
wylt not thou that. I shal drinke the cha¦lice which my father hath sent me? as though he wolde saye: Ye ought to seke no meanes nor counsell, nor not once to saye agaynst ye drynkynge of this chalice or cuppe which my heauenly father hath sent me. Hereby is geuen vs to wyte that all oure trouble is sent vs also of oure heauenly father, to accepte it wyllyngly, and with a good wyll to drynke it. How much lesse than shall we runne a straye here or there to seke thys helpe or that, this counsell or that, to be redemed, and made fre of oure burthen. Moses war∣nynge vs not to be moued at ony myra∣kle sayeth Deut. xiii. yf there ryse vp a prophet or dreamar amonge you, and geue the a token or wonder, and that to∣ken or wonder which he spake of come to passe, and than saye: Let vs go after other Goddes (whom thou knowest not) and let vs serue them: Thou shalt not herken vnto the voyce of such a prophe∣te or dreamer. For youre Lorde youre God proueth you, to wete wether ye lo∣ue hym with all youre hart, and with all
youre soule. For ye shall walke after the Lorde youre God, and feare hym, and ke¦pe his commaundementes, and herken vnto his voyce, and serue hym, and cleue vnto hym. These wordes do playnly de∣spise the seruynge or worshippynge of straunge Goddes or ymages: They cast awaye all myracles and tokens that cha¦unce by Gods sufferinge to proue vs we¦ther oure trust, a confydence be onely in God. They shewe vs to God of whom we must hope al goodnesse. Wherfore re¦garde not these pelgrymage goers, and myrakell gasers, for yf ye folowe theyr councels, ye testifie you not to be a trewe beleuer. It is a trew prouerbe that is co¦munly vsed: wo to that londe where ma∣ny myracles do chaunce, for that is a to∣ken that great vnbeleue is there. And where as ye thynke sayntes to choppe, and chaunge so with myracles, that is not so. For the deuell can also chaunge hymselfe into an angel of light as saieth Paul. This is euydent in the fyrst boke of the kynges in the .xxviii. chapter whe∣re Samuel the good prophete beynge
dead was conyured of the soythsayen∣ge woman at Sauls instaunce at the whych charmynge the deuyll appeared in the lyknesse of Samuel. Therfore al∣so doth Paul warne vs sayenge, to the Collossians the .ii. chapter. Let noman make you to shute at a wronge marke, whych after his owne chousynge wal∣keth in humblynesse, and spyritualyte of angels, thynges which he neuer sawe. Wherin we are warned of all holynes∣se of men for theryn maye we lyghtely be deceaued. Morouer it happeneth som∣tyme that God taketh his worde out of hys trew preachers and prophets mouth and geueth it vnto lyenge spretes, which lyes the people doth lyghtely accepte by reason of theyr erroure: as we rede .iii. Reg. xxii. God sayde vnto the lienge spre¦te that he shulde deceaue kynge Achab Go thy waye thou shalt deceaue them, (sayde he) and be able. Thys example teacheth vs not to rest nor trust in ony mans holynes, wysdome, or worthynes∣se. These and such lyke deceates chaun∣ge vnto vs by the ryght wysnesse of God
because we turne so lyghtely to straunge Goddes, to sayntes, to false tokens, and myracles, whych be set vp by the occasy∣on of some lyenge dreame of a false pro∣phete, or as comunly they be by ye wyly∣nesse of the dyuell. Wherfore loke where Chryst, and hys worde be shewed, and the fayth accepted, though Christ be but newe come in Egypte and yōge: there de¦caye incontinently such auaūtages, and yearly rētes of pilgrimage goinges, and myracles, which is dayly to be sene. For gods worde is a fyre: and therfore consu∣meth it all such workes as be nothynge but stouble, strawe, and hey, and it selfe endureth for euer. Yf such mokage of mi¦racles & pylgrimages were agryenge wt the worde of God, than shulde they re∣mayne doubtlesse: but seinge they be not, therfore must al plātacions which ye hea¦uēly father hath not plāted be roted out. Lazarus. Yt is treuth, for ther is not so much resor¦te to the bloude of Hayles, oure lady of Walsy mgā, to this or that sainte as ther hath bene: By reason the myrakles haue
not now so much fayth geuen vnto them But how happeneth it that the soules, and spretes of the dead desyre of tymes such going on pelgrimages? in so much that bokes also be made of it? Tymotheus. Brynge ye forth now youre spretes, and dreames? Beleue not euery sprete, but rye them wyther they be of God. Such spretes as wyll drawe you awaye from Christ, vnto your owne workes or holy∣nesse, flye them as venyme. We must a∣byde in Christ that is his wordes, and doctryne yf we shalbe his disciples, We muste discerne, and herken to his voyce onely, yf we shalbe hys shepe. All that which is not conteyned, and founded in the scrypture shall not ye beleue. All bo∣dely exercyse which as ye saye is requy∣red of you profyteth lytell, but Christen vertuousnes, and godlynesses is profy∣table to all thynges. The father poyntyn¦ge vs to hys sonne in whom he delyteth sayeth, that we shall heare hym, and not the spretes: for the apparitions of spretes are wholy agaynst the scrypture, wher∣fore
they can be nothynge but illusyōs, of the dyuels that be in the ayre We rede in the gospell of the ryche glutton, that he desyred hys fyue brethren in earth, to be warned of the daungers, and payne that he was in: but what answere was made hym agayne? euen such as is ma∣de to euery man, that is now lyuynge, Let them heare Moses, and the prophe∣tes. He sayde no et them heare the spre¦tes. Yt foloweth: yf they wyll not heare them, then wyll not they also beleue yf ony dead rose agayne and appeared: we haue Moses, and the prophetes, these wyll God haue vs geue ear vnto, and al curiouse searchynge of spretes with their answers vtterly to be despysed. A pure fayth trusteth onely in Gods wordes co∣uetynge none other visyons or appariti∣on to the strenghtynge of hym, saue only the othe, which was made to Abra∣ham, and hys sede in hym, what tyme as God was mynded to geue hymself vnto vs, which through fayth in God are beco¦me chyldren of Abraham and heyres of God. Thys inwarde or goostly syght of
a pure harte passeth all other certi∣fyenges eyther of spretes, angels, or de∣uels. For so much as God is faythfull in his promyse aboue all other creatures. This illusion of spretes doth God also rebuke by Esay ye prophet in ye .viii. chap¦ter sayenge: And therfore yf they saye vn¦to you: Aske coūcel at ye soythsayers, wit∣ches, charmers, and cōiurers, then make thē this answere: Is there a people ony where that axeth not councel at his God wether it be concerninge the dead, or the lyuinge? Yf ony mā want lyght let him loke vpon ye law & the testimony, wether they speake not after thys meanynge. Therfore let vs not regarde dreames & fantasies, nor yet care for no spretes, nor seke ony certifyenge of trewth through their apparitions for it is forbidden in scripture. Let vs turne rather to the law and his wytnesse, for in it is no deceate. But alas for pytie infidelite is roted so depe in mens hartes by the reason of ig∣noraunce of Gods worde that they bele∣ue rather the visions of Tundall, the ta∣les of legenda aurea, or such fantasies &
dreames in dede: than that whiche God will haue learned of vs as namely right wysnes and iudgment in crucifyenge of oure synfull apetites, mercy in declarin∣ge seruyce to oure poore neghbure. In which two poyntes be cōtayned the law and prophetes. Lazarus. Seynge I haue begonne to aske, I will laye to you all that I reken may be ob∣iected vnto me in this matter. Tell me thā good Timothe how chaunceth it yt many religious and holy men be cano∣nisate for their myrakles and approbate to be sayntes. Timothe. The canonisation of sayntes which Po∣pes & Cardinals do vse is a slecht & vn∣godly thynge, wherin is manteyned gre∣ate deceate and couetousnes. Trust not in ye canosation of men, not in ye worthy∣nesse, holynesse or wysdome, of those yt be canonisate, for you shal be deceaued ther¦in. For the popes kyngdome whiche is groūded in al welthynesse, glory, ryches, and pussaunce cā geue no trew iudgmēt in godly thynges, or concerninge Gods
kyngdom. But seynge it is an outwarde kyngdome whiich doth cōsist in myters, crosyers, coapes, albes, crosses, banners, shauynge, anoyntynge, syngynge, rea∣dynge, ryngynge, yanglynge, yee in hor∣ses and moyles, and other baggage, yt can not be iudge but in outwarde thyn∣ges, after whiche iudgement spirituall thīges ought not to be iudged. The dis∣cretion or iudgment betwene holy & vn∣holy belongeth only to the sonne of God which doth iudge not after the syght of the eyen, nor after the hearynge of ye ears but accordynge to the treuth: thys treuth can not the worlde comprehende, becau∣se she is ful of lyes, and (as Iohn sayeth) ye treuth is not in the lye. Thys is ye cau∣se why Christ warneth vs to beware of the leuen of the Pharises, that is, for the hypocrysy, dissemblinge, and doctrine of the Pharises: for they deceaue the symple hartes, and seduce them with their lyen∣ge which they do craftly vtter. They se∣ke not youre saluation in the canonisyn∣ge of sayntes, nor the honour and hygh reputation of them: for their sayntes be
not one heare the holyer for yt, nor we the nearer saluatiō, seynge it belongeth only to God to saue. But they seke in thys de∣de ether theyr owne auauntage, or theyr carnal glory: for by canonisynge they get much mony. Nor there is none canonisa∣te without it be procured by a singula∣rite or parcialte, yee a folyshe gloriation wether it be of one towne, cyte, or ony o∣ther cōmunaltye. Yt is to be doubted the¦re be some whose bodyes be canonisate and worshipped here in earth, and theyr soules buryed in hell. Sence the Pope hath vsed to make sayntes, the saynte of all sayntes is set bakwarde: for as it is sayde that a new brome swepeth clene, euen so be the newe sayntes the beste in the opinion of the comune people. Ther∣fore maye Ieremy complayne ryghtwell vpon this, sayenge in the .vi. chapter. For amonge my people are founde wyked personnes, that preuely laye sares and wayte for mē, to take them, and destroye them. And lyke as a net is full of byrdes, so are theyr houses ful of that, which they haue gotten with falsede and deceate.
Herof cōmeth their great substaunce & ryches, herof are they fat and welthy, & are runne awaye fro me with shamfull blasphemyes. (it foloweth continently) The prophetes teach falsly, and the pre∣stes folowe them, & my people hath plea∣sure therin. What wyll come therof at the last. Wyll ye nedes knowe wether there by ony sayntes canonisate? I wyl shewe you Of Dauid sayeth the Lorde: I haue founde a man accordynge to my harte. Of Paul, sayeth that he was a chosen and elect wessel. Of Peter that he was blessed. Of Simeon the old prest wytnesseth the holy goost that it was a iust man full of the feare of god, playne, & one that abode the delyueraūce of Is∣rael. Of Steuē that he was ful of grace, and that he sawe Iesu stondynge at the ryght hande of God. Lo in the canonisa∣tion of these, and such lyke sayntes are not ye deceaued: to the profe of ye se cano¦nisatiōs ye haue no nede of Popishe bul¦les, ye rede of their myrakles sufficiently in ye boke of trewth, Of theyr trewth bea¦reth god hymself recorde. In these sain∣tes
shal ye prayse the Lorde as sayeth ye prophet, Prayse and thanke God in hys sayntes. Lazarus If ye Popes matter be not better stayed by the scripture thā I haue herde of you I maruayll that it coulde endure so lon∣ge. Neuerthelesse yf some had herde you they wolde haue called youre reasons new learnynge, & that they folowe theyr fathers. Timothe. No vse or custome can derogate the wor¦de of God, els myght it be sayde, Maho∣metes lawe hath ben so many hundreth yeares, and approbate by so many lear∣ned men, and of so many nacions I wyll rather abyde by that lawe than by thys newe learnynge. Yf ye wyll continue by an erroure because it hath continued so longe, than abyde by the originall synne, which remaneth yet sence oure fyrst parē¦tes in euery one that cōmeth in to thys world, If you wil nedes abyde wt the ol∣de & saye ye olde is best thā shyft not your worne garmentes, eat nought but stale
and rotten egges what blynde answers do these blynde bytels brynge forth? Be∣holde sayeth the Lorde Esaye. lxv. I shal make a new heauen and a newe earth. And the prophet prayeth sayenge: Ma∣ke a clene hart (o God) and renew a right spirite within me. Paul also sayeth: Be ye renewed in ye sprete of youre mynde. Wherfore wyll you be bounde thus to yt olde? Do not ye knowe that ye must be borne agayne before ye shall come in the kyngdom of God. The sonne must rede∣me you from the olde deuyll, from his de¦ceates, from his olde death before ye be redemed in dede: Euen as Christ sayde vnto the Pharises, which gloried and re¦yoiced in their olde father Abraham af∣ter the fleshe: Yf ye sonne delyuer you frō the thraldome of synne than be ye dely∣uered in dede, Yt is no new learnynge whan ye be taught to trust in God, to be redy to serue youre neghbure, to suffre your aduersite paciētly, to despise ye false Gods seruice: for that also haue all ye pro¦phetes, al euāgelistes, al apostles taught more thā thousande yeres agone. They
be new doctrines which the Popets dis∣ciples & sworne seruaūtes haue brought vp within these thre or foure hundreth yeares. That which Paul preached to ye Athenians was also counted for newe learnige, for they sayde: Lo here cōmeth he the preacher of new deuels. There is nother old, nor new God, but there is an euerstige God which is, which was, & shalbe. There is no newe nor olde lear∣nynge of God, Gods worde endureth for euer. Iesu Christ is yesterdaye & to daye he endureth for euer. Stycke fast to hys worde and ye shall not be deceaued, for hys worde is trewth. He hath the wor∣des of lyfe, suffre no doctour, no apostle, no angell of heauen to drawe you from hym. Buylde your house sure vpō ye rock Christ, that ye maye with stonde all tem∣pestes and assaultes. Be not lyghtely tur¦ned from the good learnynge, whiche ye be taught in the fayth accordynge to the scripture: what so euer ye be taught be∣syde it let that be accursed. What can we tell what oure forefathers haue beleued or not? What cā we tell whiche workes
he hath imputed thē for synne or not? are we sworne to their fayth? are we christe¦ned in ye name of our fathers? why wil we then abyde by their fayth so earnestly which is vncertayne to vs? Is not faith a gyfte of God? Perchaunce god hath poured yt also in them we not knowenge whan, or who, forsomuch as yt is a gyft of God? He that beleueth in my (sayeth Christ) though he dye, he shall lyue. Her is not promysed yf he abyde by the fayth of hys forefathers. Who is so preuy of Gods iudgmētes that he knoweth why God suffred the worlde thus longe to cō∣tinue in this great darknesse? It hath chaunced of tymes in the olde testament amonge the Iewes that the trewe Gods seruice, and the knoledge of ye lawe was forgotten for a great season: so that no man knewe of the lawe, nor cremonyes. As for the causes hereof or iudgement we wyll referre them to God, thankyn∣ge hym for hys benefete in restorynge vnto as agayne the pure gospell, shall we not brother? Lazarus.
Yee verely brother with all oure hartes. I am now (thāked be God) so wel eased in consciencie that I fele no heuynesse nor troubell more at my harte. Before was I neuer quiete, now wolde I do thys, than that, nowe wolde I haue thys pylgrymage gone for me, than that can∣dell offred, which I haue not made you preuy of hethertho. I haue also caused oftymes golden masses be sayde for me to optayne health: I feare me I haue of∣fended also therin. I must make a play∣ne confession to you. Timothe. What be these golden masses? Lazarus. They be seperate masses that profyte greatly sayde agaynst pestilence, derth and such lyke plages, dyseases, and vr∣gēt grefes. They be sayde or songe for ye cōmunalty and thereby they optayne golde of them that they be sayde for. They haue cost my large sixe pounde sēce my disase begāne, though they haue profyted my lytell. Timothe.
I perceaue well ynough ye haue ben a vessell full of superstition: ye haue so bē laden with these pylergnawers & sayn∣tes minions as saynt Iames with hys moskelshelles. I praye you tell me were ye neuer in the brotherheade of oure la∣dyes psalter? Were ye neuer written in the brotherheade of Caims kynne, that is ye foure orders of the popes souldyers? Lazarus. I haue not named thē al yet: yet I was mynded to haue ben buryed in a graye freres cote, to haue ben releast of ye thirde parte of my synnes. But now I byd this brablynge fare wel. I loth the hearynge of them. Shewe me youre mynde of the masles wether a man may cause them to be sayde for hym whan he is in yeopar∣dy? seynge Christ hymself hath institute them. Timothe. I am not aduised that euer I dyd once reade the name of mase in the whole scripture of God, I reade of the supper o the lorde, which Christ wt his apostles and the apostles with other beleuynge
haue kepte and vsed. Whan I entende to cōpare the masse and ye supper of our Lorde together, I can not perceaue it to be one thynge. But seynge yt will be to longe to shewe the difference betwene thē I wyll deferre that vntyll oure nexte me∣tynge. As for to answere vnto your que∣stion, I shall leaue the worde masse vn∣touched, and answere you scripturely wt wordes of the scripture. You haue ared of the masse and I shall answere you wt the supper of our lorde. The vse of ye sup∣per hath Christ institute for none other intent saue only that the breade of oure Lord shulde be distributed, and the cha∣lice of Christes bloude shulde be mini∣stred to euery man, in a remembraunce of hym, which hath offred hys body vnto death, and shed hys bloude for vs, for a forgeuenesse of synnes: As he sayeth him¦self: As oft as ye shall do thys, (na∣mely that whyche I do here to youre ensample) do yt in the remembraunce of me (that is) that we shall shewe the death of oure Lorde as Paul sayeth. Than do we declare the death of oure
Lorde, whā we preache and shewe vnto the comunalty or cōgregation how christ hath offred hys body vnto death for vs, and that because we shulde not remay∣ne in the euerlastynge death, and so is he become a death vnto death, that we shul¦de be taken from death vnto lyfe. Yf ye now cause the supper of oure Lorde to be vsed for you to such intent as (Christ hath ordeyned yt: than are you admo∣nished to despyse thys bodely death, whiche ye must abyde after youre syk∣nesse, and to thyrst the lyfe tocome. Now yf ye vse yt to optayne health therby, and to abyde longer in thys synfull lyfe: than do ye turne the vse of yt and compell Christ to daunse after youre mynstrelsy, ye make a game of Christes passion and glorious death, whose frute & operation ye spurne from you, sekynge therin to fulfyll youre sensualite, Thynke ye it be not a greate foly and dyshonorynge of God, that you wyll haue the passyon of Christ called vpon and remembred for you to optayne bodely health therby or prosperite: Is it not a grosse blynd∣nesse
and folyshnesse to requyre ye health of your synfull body of ye death of christ? ye ought rather to consyder the slayenge of youre carnall appetite in thys present sufferynge through the crosse, that now ye beare wyth Christ, because yt through thys sufferynge, and deynge wyllyngly ye maye lyue eternaly with christ. Ye seke ease and longe lyfe in Christes crosse, ye ought rather to seke pacient sufferynge, and victory of death. What dede is this that ye hyer prestes for golde or syluer to saye preuy masses for you? ye seke the kyngdome of God with marchaundyse which is spirituall & inwarde, and it cō∣meth in vs without ony cōuention or cō∣tracte precedīg yt. Knowe ye not that ye byers and sellers are chased of God? Or wyll ye haue christ to come vpon earth agayne to bringe lyfe to you by a newe waye and maner and not thorowe death & the crosse. We lyue & dye in God, what maketh it matter than wether ye lyue or dye in body? The father hath geuen christ all power, both in heauen, & earth: than hath he also power ouer death, hel,
and all deuels. If ye seke ease another waye, other thys or that, more than of Christ, which is a trew phisicion of oure soull, than shall ye be lykened vnto the woman that hadde ben syke so longe, and spent al hir substaunce in phisyke to optayne health, and yet hadde no ease, whiche she optayned moost surest in Christ. It is a great plage and an horri∣ble worke of Gods iudgmentes, that he suffreth vs to walke thus blyndfylde in oure owne inuented wayes, wherin we haue more cōbraunce of conscience than reste or yoie. The cause no doubte is that we wyll not herken to Gods worde, but stoppe oure eares whan we be admoni∣sheth therof, estimīg it as lyes. Wherfore god sayeth psal. lxxx. My people wolde not heare my voyce, and Israel wolde not obey my. So I gaue them vp vnto their owne hartes lustes, & let thē folowe their ymaginatiōs. Lest we come to this let vs praye earnestly wt the prophet sa∣yenge: Ordene me wayes in thy presence my lord my god. Whā ye seke delyueraū¦ce & release wt masss, & pilgrimag, than
be not youre wayes redrest in Gods pre∣sēce: For these wayes hath not he shewed nor gone them hymselfe. We repyne at hys wayes of the crosse, of dyenge, of hū∣blynge, we shoue them from vs wyth hande and fote. Oure wayes be easy to go they please vs beste, all were well yf we coulde optayne release therby, ye though the deuyll shulde helpe to it. Wherto is oure Christendome become? Lazarus. I haue hadde now a ful answer of al: I am sory I am gone so farre wyde from God My pardon letters, my reliquyes, my folysshe treatises of meditation, my beedes, and all such superstitions, whe∣rein I haue hadde a false confydence wyll I cause to be brent wythout delaye in wytnesse that I counte it abominaci∣on which hetherto I haue done wyth thē I yelde my self to my Lorde God, In him wyll I lyue, in hym wyll I dye, he is the tower of my strength, noman shal drawe me out of hys handes hensforth. Oh Lor¦de remembre not the mysdedes of my youth, and ignoraunce. O Tymothe yf
I were now whole, yf I coulde go, and stonde what lust shulde I haue to serue God: how shulde I runne to them that lye bedryd, there to dystrybute myn al∣mes: which now I can not do, seynge I am Gods presoner. Tymotheus. Lo, ye come forth agayne with youre sen¦sualyte, you begynne to dispute agayne with God, you wyll checke hym in hys iudgment, knoweth he not how you maye serue him best, in siknes or health? And yf he knewe it not, shall ye teache it hym? It is hys wyll at this tyme that ye serue hym wyth sufferynge mekely, and that ye receaue both thys, and other ad∣uersyte that he shall sende you wythout grudgynge. These be the purest and moost acceptable workes, of all that can be done without oure addinge therunto, For all that is added to this of men that is vncleane and synne. Where we onely do suffre, god workynge wythout hynde¦raunce there is the moost principall ver¦tue, and the beste worke. For as it is writ¦ten: The obedience of the lawe, and the
wyll of God is better than al offerynges. and to be at hys commaundement is bet¦ter than to offer all fat sacryfyce. Be ther¦fore ydle, stonde styll, assaye, and se how good the Lorde is. Yf ye dyd consydre the botome of youre harte a lytel whyle, you shuld perceaue what a false, and wylye felowe were hydde there cloked: you shul¦de fynde that in that ye saye: yf I were whole. I wolde serue God and my negh∣boure, ye entende not the same: but your owne loue, which causeth you to wysh so for youre owne ease of this payne, and that ye myght lyue somwhat longer. It is now tyme to praye, and not onely in ye tyme of health. He yt nedeth is occasio¦ned to praye. The hypocrytes do praye wythout nede, for they be full, and satis∣fyed, they be holy in theyr sight. Ye praye dewly, whan ye offre youre wyllynge sprete vnto God, and are redy to beare all that he pleaseth to lade you wyth∣all. Thys doth also the worde deuotion sounde for Deuotion is a yeldynge or geuynge ouer of hymself to an other thynge: Happy is he that hath a trew
deuotion or yeldynge of hymself to God Such a man hath hys wyll alwaye: for hys wyll is fulfylled in all that can re∣tyde hym, by the reason hys wyll is who¦ly yeldeth to God. For yt cause is he euer so wel cōtent, he wolde not starte though he sawe the deuyll, no though he must descende the hell. He that hath such deuo¦tion prayeth wythout ceassynge, wether he wake, slepe, go, stonde, reste, laboure, although hys lyppes moue not, though he knocke not his breste, though he alye not wt God wyth hys fysry stykes, which all is but an hypocrytisshe game. It is great skyll to praye, and to saye much: To geue ouer the harte vnto God, and to make much rummelynge wyth the mouth dyffer much. Paul hadde leuer fy¦ue wordes spokē in ye vnderstōdinge: thā fyue thousande wordes spoken wyth the breth of the mouth. God is a sprete, and in sprete and treuth wyll he be worshyp¦ped. The almes dedes that you wolde ge¦ue yf ye where whole, doth not God es∣teme for theyr multitude, but he regar∣deth the lust, and wyll that ye haue to
them. A cuppe of colde water shall not God forgette, not for cause of the water, but for the good wyll of the geuer, which perchaunce is of no greater abylite. He that geueth one drawght of water vnto a prophet, in the name of a prophet, shall receaue the rewarde of a prophete. And why? For God regardeth the harte, and mynde, but man regardeth the outwar∣de worke. Thys testyfyeth the wedowe in the gospell, that caste onely cone far∣thynge in the Gods cheste: which neuer∣thelesse hadde geuen more than they that gaue great summes. Paul also sayeth: Yf there be a wilinge mynde, it is accep¦ted accordynge to that a man hath, not accordynge to that he hath not. The poo¦rest creature liuinge male geue as much almes as the rychest. Almes is a greke worde and signifyeth a mercyfulnesse, or declaringe of a pytyful harte. Can not thynke ye the poore haue a mercifull, and compassionable harte towarde the, that be in pouerte, & anguysshe, though theyr power can not extende to declare it? Yf theyr harte be thus moued to a ly∣uely
compassion, than haue they done almes ynough before God. Al that ye ge¦ue wythout such a redynesse of harte is not counted for an almes before the Lor∣de. Of this redynesse of harte (which lo∣ue doth cause) commeth outward geuyn¦ge of almes. Whom I loue not, vpon hym haue I no compassion, nor I do no more succoure hym than though hys po¦uerte, and grefe were not pertayninge to me. Wherfore Paul sayeth though I ga¦ue all my goodes to fede the poore, and yet haue no loue, it profyteth me nothyn∣ge. Thus be they not externall almesses, that make a man Christian: But by ge∣uynge almes he declareth hym to haue the loue of his neghboure and that he is a Christian. Be content to be thus preso∣ned in body acordinge the wyll of God▪ praye to God in spirite, geue almes, visy¦te ye poore wt your hart, seynge ye can not do it with the body, and God shall so ac∣cepte it as though, ye had done it wt ye dede. For he regardeth the harte. Lazarus. Wold God I myght do it so well as I
wolde fayne. This flesshe is so slothfull. I can not bringe it to the crosse, & dyen∣ge, which greueth me. Oh where tarieth he that shal redeme me? Oh whan I thyn¦ke thys, how narowe is the gate, & how strayght is the passage vnto death? Tymotheus. Be not discoraged in this assault, and battayll, but rather cōforte you wt the ex∣ample of Christ sayenge: I must be bap∣tysed wt another baptyme, but Oh how tedious am I before I can fulfyl it? This tedious baptyme beginneth now to wor worke in you, that you beynge clensed of your olde sinfulnes might become a new creature in god. As ye bodely byrth of our mother in this worlde is paynful: euē so ye goynge of it out agayne vnto the lyfe euerlastyng is on easy. But it is a cōforte agayne, yt like as a womā by brynging a new creature in to this worlde, is delyue¦red of hir burthē & payn: euē so are we de¦liuered of this body by death, which is knitte wt sinne, & causeth vs alwaie to go astraie frō goe Morouer thīke (as it is in dede) yt ye do not suffre this grefe alone,
but that the Lorde doth assist those that haue a contryte harte, and thē that be of a lowly spyrite shall he release. The in∣warde man (that is your sprete) doth suc¦cure your sufferynge. Heare what is con¦tayned in the Psal. xc. Because he hath set hys loue vpon me. I shall delyuer hym. I shall defende hym, for he hath knowen my name. Whan he calleth vpō me, I shall heare hym: Yee I am wyth hym in hys troubell, wherout I wyll de¦lyuer hym, and brynge hym to honour. Satle youre mynde, God is faythful of hys promyses: He shall not suffre you to be tempted aboue that ye maye beare. God sendeth euery man temptaciō with measure, and not aboue hys power. Therfore sayeth the prophet Dauid: you shall fede vs with the bread of teares, and geue vs teares to drynke with mea∣sure. Considre the sayenge of the prophet Esaye in hys .iiii. chapter. A lytell wyle haue I forsaken the, but wyth great mer¦cyfulnes shall I take the vp vnto me. Thys knowleged very well the prophet whan he sayde: Accordynge to the multi∣tude
of my woundes, haue the multitude of thy consolations bene yoyfull vnto my soule. Whan ye be prayenge to the fa¦ther fayth at your nede, how can ye father geue hys sonne a stone? and yf you desy∣red a fysshe how can he geue you a ser∣pent? Seynge he hath promysed to geue a good sprete vnto thē that requyre hym Luc. xi. As the eyen of a handmayden be continualy fyxed vpon hyr maystres hā¦de, so let oures also be vpon the Lorde oure God, vntyll he haue mercy vpō vs: Yt is sufficient that youre inwarde man cōsenteth vnto the lawe of God, that it is good, which correcketh you in your syn∣nes, and causeth you thus to syght. Paul also myght not do ye good which he wol∣de, but the euyll which he wolde not. Lazarus. Where sayeth Paul the same I praye you? for I fele it in me. Timotheus. In the .vii. chapter to the Romanes. Lazarus. I wyll cause the same chapter be red to me at leasure I praye you shew my byen
samples how some are become stronger in fayth by temptacion, sufferynge, syk∣nesse, and death: and agayne some offen∣ded & weaker: for examples teache best. Tymotheus I wyll do it gladly at your instaunce. It was promysed vnto Abraham by God, that in hys sede all kinreds of the worlde shulde be blessed, & yt he wolde multiplie hys sede as the starres of heauen. Abra∣ham lyke a father of the faythful hath ac¦cepted these promyses wt a sure faith, tru∣stynge, it shulde so come to pas as God sayde: though it was straunge, because he was olde and his wyfe baren▪ Now be¦cause Abraham beleued thys, contrary to the hope of nature (for who wyll loke for frute of a womā of .xc. yeares) in that hope of the trew promyses of God, was he counted ryghtuous, But wherfore is this wrytten of hym? Not onely for Abra¦ham, but also for vs as sayeth Paul in the .iiii. to the Romanes. For it shalbe re¦kened vnto vs also for a iustyfycatyon, yf we beleue in hym, which raysed oure Lorde God Iesu Chryst, which was be¦trayed
for oure mysdedes, and is raysed from the dead for oure iustyfycation. Thys fayth was perfectly good befo∣re god, but it must be proued and assay∣ed for oure instruccion, by the temptaci∣on folowenge. It is wrytten Genes. xxii. God hath tempted or proued Abraham, sayenge: Take thyne onely sonne Isaak whom thou louest, and thou shalt  hym vpon an hyll, that I shall shewe thy Whan thys commaundement or temp∣tacion was declared to hym, he myght haue repyned, and reasoned, sayenge: that God were not trew in hys promyse: seynge he commaunded hym now to slaye that sede, wherin he promysed hym that all the sedes of the worlde shuld be blessed. But he dyd not so, hys fayth re¦mayned trew, and sure in God, wente on streght wyth a sure confydence vpon Gods worde to offre vp hys sonne, and to fulfyll Gods commaundement the∣ryn. For he was sure that God wol∣de rather rayse hym vp a sonne agayne of the very sacrifice asshes, than that he shuld be founde a lyar. After thys
maner also was Iobs fayth tried, which had a wytnesse of God, that he was a iust and symple man, fearynge God. Now whan thys goodman was stryken of Sathan in hys chyldren, goodes, and body, he fell to the grounde, and worship¦ped god sayenge: Blessed be the name of god: We haue receaued good of the han∣de of god, why shulde not we than also receaue the euyll? As it hath pleased god so is it happened: hys name be blessed. Lo folowe the pacience of thys man Iob in your sufferynge, and ye shall not syn∣ne wyth youre mouth. Morouer good Tobias was not moued at hys blynd∣nesse, but abode stedfast in the feare of God all dayes of hys lyfe, sayenge God be thāked. For he perceaued welynough that temptacion was a sure token that he shulde be counted in the nombre of the ryghtwyse. The which Raphael the an¦gell declared openly sayenge: And becau¦se thou wast accepte and beloued of God yt was necessary that temptation shulde trye the. Thus haue they that pleased God euer den proued for eure comforte
that we also shulde not despayre, whan ony troubell is sent to vs of oure welbe∣loued fathers hande. The carnall wyt can not perceaue nor comprehende, that trouble is profytable, and a tryall of our fayth: but as sone as they get ony trou∣bell, they be offended with the workes of god, sayenge to all the ryghteous that suffre, as Iobs wyfe dyd: Do ye yet conti¦nue in your perfectnesse? Curse god & dye As though they wolde laye: It is playn now that he is no god that thus scour∣geth you, and vtterly forsaketh: why do ye trust hym yet? Saye much good of hī that bryngeth death vpon you, for he is as worthy of youre blessynge as a wyl∣full murthurer to be saued. Shrenk frō hym, denye hym, and remembre ye be mortall, and that with thys lyfe ye passe all yeopardyes, trust ye yet to optayne good thynges of youre Lorde? These and such lyke wordes enspyreth oure wy¦fe sensualite into oure myndes, whan we be assaulted of troubel. For as than doth not the flesshe knowe nor fele that god vnder correction, and vnder the shyne of
hys wrath hath hydde louely countena∣unce, and couereth ye trew lyfe in death, The frendes of the afore sayde Iob also were offended through hys great my∣sery sayenge: Whan dyd euer the inno∣cent perysshe? whan were the ryghtwyse destroyed? Call, loke wether ther be ony body now to geue you an answer, of the hope that ye had in the Lorde? Turne ye to ony of the sayntes, and beholde wy∣ther such lyke dyd happen vnto them? Now se ye how the vngodly frendes, which take parte with oure flesshe, iudge oure acceptabelnes to God, by these worldly prosperytes. Beholde how car∣nall wyt estemeth that for a curse, which fayth receaueth as a godly reioycynge. The frendes that loued Toby after the flesshe, dyd also mock the good man he beynge blynde, euen as those that vnder¦stonde nor the worke of pacyence, and the glory of the crosse, sayenge: Where is thy hope, for the which thou hast done almes, and buryed the dead? this is the rewarde that ye haue for doenge good. But herken how Tobyas rebuked them
sayenge: Saye not so, for we are the chyldren of holy men, and loke for the lyfe which God shall geue vnto them, that neuer turne theyr beleue from hym. Beholde thys stronge fayth of Tobyas: wyth such an answer shall ye shoue, and auoyde the wycked in speracion of Sa∣than, that alwaye entyseth you sayen∣ge: Are ye wytlesse that ye loke for remis∣syon of synnes by the bloude, of Chry∣ste? and loke for the lyfe by death? Ye shalbe deceaued, for who is rysen from death? Do not ye se how the fayth of youre Chryst is denyed? Yf he loued you as ye thynke, wolde not he do you good? Yf he were a trewe sauyoure, and trew god, he wolde not suffre you to lye here thus, he wolde not ordre you thus. I counsell you to let thys Chryst go, what haue ye to wyth hym seynge he doth you no good, he doth onely fraye you, wyth hell, and lyfe tocome, herewyth wolde he fayne lede you as wyth a lyne. It is not as he maketh you beleue. Eate drink and be mery, satle youre harte vpon a swete grounde, as yt was yesterdaye,
so shall it also be now. Lette vs eate, and drynke for what shall we haue more, to∣morowe must we dye. Be not abashed with the folysshe fayth of Christ, I can accōlyshe al youre desyre here on earth Do not ye se how my sorte is exalted in the worlde, and lyue at ease? they be wel∣thy of ryches, they haue many frendes theyr houses be wythout care, and they be not scourged, theyr cattell encrease, theyr flocke multiplyeth, theyr chyldren playe, and be mery, they play on instru∣mentes. What do ye gayne vnder the banner of the poore, wreched, naked, dis∣fygured, and crucyfyed Chryst, saue onely pouerty, anguysshe, and cōtinuall crosse? Lo, How hys discyples go by the stretes wyth sore hyles, the be fooles, and nygardes, they be not able to geue a mouse a meales meate, and whan they haue lōge ynough serued theyr ma¦ster obeyenge hys commaundementes, at the last they be hewē, & chopped, stykt, burnt, drowned, or come to such lyke shamfull ende, what victory hath he thē gotten? Where do ye se him rise agayne?
where se you the swearde shrenke from hym? The fyre consumeth hym, and wa∣ter ouerwhelmeth hym, where abydeth hys God, that shall not forsake him in ye poynt of death? Lazarus. Ah brother how shalbe able to escape these snares of the suttel fynde? Verely such temptations haue of tymes made me so doubtfull and perplexe of harte yt I wyste not wyther to shifte me self. Yf God hadde not sustayned me I myght haue ben fallen into despayre, and ben choked in myn vnbleue. I haue bē oft dis¦pleased with God seynge all thynges prospered so well with them: and I, with them that be lyke me stroue agaynst the moone and seuē starres, labourynge and toylinge, cōmynge out of the one crosse into another My thought yf I were god I wolde haue ordered the game other wyse. Timothe. Verely brother the deuyll wyth his flesh∣ly pleasures (which he layeth before mē to entyce them) hath a pleasaunt begyn∣nynge as a bye charged with hony: but
in ye ende is there a stynge. Yf ye behold ye lustes of the fleshe before with the heithē, than be they very pleasaunt in the eye, as a fayre woman trymly deckte: but yf hyr bake be turned, than is it all horri∣ble what ye se. Thys is the brode lusty waye wherof Christ speaketh, sayenge that many walke it yt, but she bringeth to eternal dānation. The chyldrē of thys worlde yt lyue so welthy, passe theyr ty∣me in yoie, it is trew: but what foloweth? sodēly they go downe to hell sayeth Iob. xxi. dauid psal. lxxii. sayeth yt he also was nye ouercome with beholdīge of ye world¦ly men and was nye ouercome of the tēp¦tacion of welth, as we all be somtyme sa∣yenge? My fete (that be the thoughtes where with the hart moueth) were al∣moost gone, my steppes were neare sle∣ded. And why? I was greued at the wy∣ked, to se the vngodly in such prospyte. For they are in no parell of death, but stonde fast as a palace. They come in no mysfortune lyke other men, nother are they plaged lyke other folke. &c. Wher∣fore brother I exhorte you not to be mo∣ued
at such inspirynges of the deuell, & be not greued not offended with ye vn∣godly: for ye shall se theyr ende, how that they shall wyther lyke hey, and decaye as flores in the felde. Be renewed in the Lorde, and he shal accomplishe the desy∣res of youre harte. Say alwaye with the prophet It is good for me to continue by God, and to set my hope & confidēce vpon my Lorde my god. The chyldren of god though they seme here in ye sight of the ignoraunte to dye: yet is theyr por¦cion and herytage endurynge foreuer. Thys shall the wyked fynde trew heraf∣ter, and complayne whan yt shalbe to late, and wan they shalke counted amō∣ge sayntes, whom they somtyme haue taken here for mad men as the boke of Sap. ye .v. chapter doth playnly expres∣se. O Lazare yf it shulde be after your mynde, yt shulde not be well. If ye shulde rule the wagen one daye, yet one oure, heauē & earth shulde runne on an heape, lyke as poetes do fayn that Phaeton dyd. Entre not to depe in gods iudgmentes, Let hym rule, he shall
ordre it better than we can deuise. Lazarus. Ye saye trewth, We wyll haue a sayenge in the matter, and wolde fayne by God∣des also: But yf we perceaued what yt meaneth, we shulde let god alone hardly Neuerthelesse I cā skant trust him to be my lorde my god my father: for he semeth somtyme so vtterly to haue forsaken me as though I were none of hys. Timothe. It is no straūge thynge yt God semeth somtyme to haue forsakē you. Christ him self hath felt it in hym, and suffred temp∣tation wyllyngly to oure ensample and comforte, whā he hangynge on the cros∣se for very great strayghtnesse of payne & sufferynge sayde: My Lorde my God wherfore hast thou forsaken my? Not yt he was euer forsaken or destitute of the godheade: but thys dysease hath he takē vpon hym wyllyngly, that we (as he ge∣ueth vs here a sample) shulde call to the father in oure anguishe, which doubtles∣se shall hear vs, yee hath herde vs alrea∣dy in Christ before we call vpō him. For
it is written in the prophetes that he shal heare vs before we call vpon hym, and before oure prayer be finished shal he ha∣ue herde vs. It is not possible a father cā leaue his chyldren in their moost necessi∣te, Though a mother maye forgette the chylde, that is borne of hyr body: yet shal not I forget you sayeth the Lorde God. That wytnesseth the prophete sayenge: The Lorde hath not wythdrawen hys visage fro me, and whan I called vpon hym he herde me. Marke in the psalter how pyteously Christ cōplayneth to hys father hys nede, whan he was come in ye depeste of the see of tribulation. Beholde how Dauid complayneth hys necessite before God. I haue sayde in the excesse of my mynde, I am cast awaye Lorde. Therfore hast thou herde the voyce of my prayer whan I called vpon the. Se∣ynge youre temptacion and payne is co∣mune with Christ and all other sayntes. Therfore render thē to god: for he is mo∣re that is in vs, than he that is in ye worl∣de. Therfore maye he also comforte, hel∣pe, and ayde more than health, ryches,
or frendes. Whā ye fele youre fayth wax feble and slacke, than drawe to christ wt the apostles hauynge a harty desyre and saye: Lorde augment my fayth, and all youre syknesse shall not be imputed you for synne. Lazarus. I thanke you now brother Timothe of youre vertuous and louely exhortation, which ye haue shewed my very brotherly Praye God instantly for me wreched syn¦ner that he wyll helpe myne vnbeleue, & geue my pacience in all my sufferynge: that I may set my harte at reste in hym only, whiche is parte of myne herytage and passion, which shal also geue me me∣ne heretage agayne, though by synne it is once taken awaye. Timothe. I wyll do it gladly and with all my hart good brother, Pardon me for I haue bē ouer longe with you. Lazarus No verely ye haue not: Come agayne soone or to morowe to enforme me more larglyer of the masse.
Timothe. I wyll do yt. Oure neghbure Tobias wylbe with you to morowe, to teache you somwhat of dyenge. Lazaarus Let be yt so, I praye you let that honest man come. Timothe. He cometh euen nowe, God be wyth you Lazarus. Feare well good brother Timothe.
¶A dyaloge betwene Tobias & Lazarus, wherin Tobias teacheth the syke Lazarus, that death is to be desyred wyth a sure fayth of the lyfe for to∣come. Tobias cōmynge before Lazarus bedde sayeth. Peace be in thys house. How is it wyth you Lazare? Lazarus. Ye be welcome brother: for I dyd longe for you: Take a stoole and syt by my yf ye please. Tobias. I wyll. How is it wyth you? Is it all after one? Lazarus. No no brother, It is well amended God be thanked of yt. Tobias. I am gladde of yt surely: I trust it wyll amende once For the lorde is mercyfull, he forgeueth synne in tyme of trybulati∣on, and is a defence to all them that call vpon hym wyth trewe desyre. Whan ye father hath occupied ye rod ynough, than casteth he her in to the fyre. Whan God hath stryken, than healen he agayne.
Do ye perceaue ony ease? your face plea∣seth not me best. Lazarus. I beleue ryght well that ye carcase doth rather fayde, yee I yelde it, for death is dew vnto it: but ye spirite & fayth be sure (thanked be God) and augment dayly, so that the longer I am syke the lesse gre¦fe I fele: My thynke I begynne euen to saye with the prophet: Thy rodde & thy wande haue comforted me. Tobias. Good Lorde how fayne do I heare such wytnesse of fayth: Now speake ye as a Christen man: I wolde not haue bele∣ued that I shulde haue founde you so vertuously disposed. I se well the hande of the lorde is not shortened. He can day∣ly cause men to speake with newe tun∣ges as he dyd hys disciples on the wyt∣sondaye. As I was last with you I de∣parted sorowfull, because I herde no∣thynge of you but blasphemyes & mur∣murynges agaynst God, ye were so vn∣pacient. But God hath now so endued you with hys mercy, yt ye maye synge a
Christenly prayse vnto his name. Lazarus. Treuly brother, that as than I was so wyde from God, caused myne vnbeleue and the disquiete conscience of myne, for so much as I was presoned and capty∣ue with mans constitutions, and wor∣kes of myne owne chosynge: But now is the snare destroyed, and I am rydde of them: God hath geuen encrease vn∣to the worde that oure brother Timothe hath ministred vnto me. Tobias. God graunte you hys full knoledge, yt he maye be glorious in you foreuer. God hath geuen oure brother Timothe a sin∣gular grace in expoundynge scripture. I am sure he hath geuē you many good exhortations of Christen pacience, and of mortifyenge of the olde Adam. Lazarus That hath he done earnestly, and hath rebuked my conscience of hyr hypocrisy, and loosed her by the workinge of God. I se now the blyndnesse and errore that I haue ben seduced wythall hetherto. I
defye them in myn harte. Wyll ye know what I dyd yet yesterdaye at euen. Tobias. What? I praye you brother? Lazarus. I shall tell: As soone as Timothe was gone out of my house, I coulde not kepe ye ioye of ye worde lōger close in my hart: But I caused al my housholde be called together, and rehearsed before them all that I herde of Timothe, insomuch th they were stered therwyth, thankynge God for hys workynge it in vs. After that caused I be burnt all my pardon letters, my folyshe treatyses of deuotion. my beedes with all ye reliques and goost¦ly gyftes that freers and nōnes sent me, now one than another. These caused I be burnt in the presence of al my hou∣sholde, because that they whyche we∣re offende by me in them, shulde se the wytnesse of my fayth, to theyr strengh∣tynge. Ought I not to haue done so? Tobias. In that haue ye done accordynge to
the gospell This was a trew shryft, & a trewe satisfaction for youre synnes, I doubte not but ye haue receaued a trewe absolution of hym that only can forgeue synnes, that is God. Lazarus. Now is my desyre of you good Toby, that ye also wyll teache me some good thynge out of the holy scripture to despy¦se death, and to receaue it wyllyngly by fayth: For I haue receaued the sentence of death. Fulfyll that which ye promysed my by Timothe, and I wyll praye God entterly to geue me eares to heare, which hytherto haue ben stopped wt the flesshe, the whiche I feare not but he wyl do yt. Tobias Seynge ye hunger so ye worde of God. I wyll breake it vnto you in the name of God, so farre forth as he shall sende me sprete & vtteraūce. Syt ye eassy ynough, or shall I rayse you som what hygher▪ ye ye maye syt a more ease. Lazarus No I praye you, for I was shyrted euen now. Begynne in the name of God must
ye wyll. Tobias. The philosophers haue had diuerse opi∣nions of death, But in this the moost parte agreeth, that death is a partynge of the body and soule. In thys naturall departynge shall not we Christen men sixe oure philosophical eyen, nor iudge wt a hethenishe iudgmēt in this behalf. For as longe as we esouie our selues with such consyderation of  sight of death trayeth vs, so that we begnne to hate death therby, because  taketh a∣waye the body which we loue, and so cau¦seth vs to hate death naturally. Of which euell wil to ye natural death  lefe the cause, which wyl  that naturaly death semeth to take awaye, as shalbe more euident herafter  con¦sydre the death in suc ig  it were a passage frō death to  consyderation or beholdyng  in vs, and that we sha not  in death, but shalb rather  Euen as Christ sayeth  and trusteth in the  shall lyue, For ,
is counted lyfe to the beleuynge: but vn∣to the vngodly is it death euerlastynge. By this is appeareth vnto euery Chri∣stē mā to be a lyenge word yt the Phyloso¦phers do saye, namely: That death is ye moost horrible thynge of all horriblenes∣ses. The cause why they sayde so, was, that in their opinion by death man is de¦preued of the moost pleasaunt thinge for euermore, which is not trewe. For a Chri¦sten man hath no greater charge, heuyer burthen, nor more enmy than the body of synne as ye shall heare more herafter. As su{per}stition hath houghly fashioned ye deuell to refrayn synninge euē so hath yt figured death also fearful, as ye rewarde of synne Accordīge to ye desyre of ye lyfe to come ī vs, is death acceptable vnto vs & pleasaūt. Put awaye ye opinion of death frō your hart, & you shal not feare death. The siknesses & the febelnesses, which be tedious for our fleshe to beare, & make ye fleshe euer weaker agaynst the assault of death, they be not death: But the figure of death, that pearseth in to vs before death by reasons of vnbelefe, that is the
moost greueous and haynous death. So that we cause death vnto oure sel∣ues, as we cause other grefes also in our hartes. The very sufferynge and depar∣tynge of the soule from the body is not in the poynte of death: but that we by consyderynge of death we are drawen, compelled to leaue the body, that we set se great stoare by, and thys causeth death to be so bytter. Whrby ye maye perceaue yt the death, of synners is the worst, & moost bytter: seynge they mu forgo the best beloued thinge, that is the sels. Now is the Chrysten fayth which we as chyldren of sayntes haue confes∣sed in baptyme) of such nature, that it promyseth, and sheweth a sure fayth of the lyfe euerlastynge through Chryst death. Which faith and hope  in vs all, that we sa great pryce by  kepte dylygently afore tyme, let it myght be taken from vs by death. This goodly ye well oure body, that we ma∣de so great of are we wyllynge  to forgo by reason of ye oue that we haue gottē to ye heauēly
hath swalowed vp all worldy thynges: So that we do estyme it a great vaun∣tage to be delyuered from this wreched body, that caused vs to wander and be absent from God. The sure waytinge for the glory tocome in vs despiseth, ouerco∣meth, and refuseth all paynfull grefes, wherof ye vnfaythful (which feare death) be astonyed, and al the wayes possible they withstonde death. Wherfore it is a trew sayenge he dyeth well, that dyeth¦yer he dye. As much fayth as a Christen man hath of the lyfe tocome, so much de∣spiseth he this tēporal death. And agayn As much vnbeleue as a Christian hath towarde God and loue to hymselfe so much doth he feare & flye bodely death. Lo thys is the summe brefely touched of all, that can be shewed you of dyen∣ge. By this shall ye also perceaue wely∣nough that death is not to be feared, in so much as she is rydde of hyr styn∣ge and venym: yt is swalowed vp in the victory of Christ, which hath ouercome hym that had power of death (that is the deuyll) to ye health of all faythfull which
shall optayne heauen accordynge to the abylite of theyr fayth. Lazarus. Alas brother ye haue geuen me so much atonce to eate, that I can not swalowe it all: ye must geue it me by peces, as Ty∣mothe hath done, that I maye come to the playne vnderstondynge. Tobyas. That I may do it comely I must begyn¦ne where Timothe hath left. I tolde you that he dyeth well which dyeth before he dye. Thys fyrst dyenge is in the mor∣tifyenge or slayenge of the olde Adam that is oure sensuall appetytes. The sen, sual appetytes that liue in you, and must be slayen in you are loue of thy self, lust to ydelnesse, pryde and boastynge, appe∣tyte to vengeaunce, prouokynge to an∣ger, inordinate loue to your wyfe, chyl∣dren and frendes desyre of bodely health wysshynge of temporall fortune, loue of thyself, and bodely or goostly worke. In these thynges doth oure olde man couet to lyue longer and longer. These desy∣res are mortyfyed, and slayē in vs by the
spryte of God, in the new byrth of the in∣warde man, which resteth in God, and is at once with God what that euer bety∣deth him wether it be in body, in goodes, in lyfe or death, in frendes, in name or fa¦me: Yee though hys body were grounde all to poulder, yet wolde not he gayn∣saye it, nor departe from God therfore, which causeth hym to assaye inwardly, thorowe the spyrite of fayth, howe swete and good the Lorde is. To thys dyenge exhorteth vs scrypture. To thys rest and Sabath draweth vs the spyrite of God. So much as ye be crucyfyed in the afo∣resayed sensuall appetyte, so much goost¦ly increase gett you in the inwarde man, which doth not shrenke for all that, nor suffre the crosse to ouercome hym, but a∣procheth rather nearer, pearsynge vnto death, wherhy his trust is to gayne lyfe, which fayth, and hope shall not be gayn sayd as sayeth Paul in the .ii. to the R▪ Thys vnderstondynge or diuynyte that ye haue herde here is declared vnto you, in the scryptures folowenge▪ Namiy: Go forth with Chryst Iesu youre bryde∣grmoe
wythout the tentes of your sen∣sualyte, and beare the lowlynes of youre brydegrome with you in youre body vn¦to death: For yf we dye with Chryst, we shall also lyue wyth hym: yf we suffre wt hym we shal raygne wt hym. Ye thanke the father yt he by thys sufferynge hath made you apte to enyoie one parte wyth all sayntes, that he hath redemed you from all power of darknesse, and set you in the kyngdome of hys beloued son∣ne, thorowe whose bloude we haue ob∣tayned forgeuynge, and redemption, of synnes. Seynge then ye e become a party membre of Chryst, fulfyll therfo∣re in you that, which is wantynge of the passyons of Chryst that the power of God maye abyde in you Lazarus▪ How shall I vnderstonde that hath not Chryste suffred ynough? what  I fulfyll that is lackynge in his passions seynge there is no parte of  ounde, from the toppe of the  o the oe of the
Yt is Paul that sayeth so, namely, that he dyd fulfyll in hys body that, which was lackynge of Chrystes afflyction, yee he durst saye also that he dyd beare the mar¦kes of Chryst in hys body: Which be not the .v. woundes that Francis dreamed to haue receaued in hys handes, and fe∣te: But they were the markes that he hadde receaued of the scourgynge, wee∣rynesse laboure, and the crosse that he was fayne to beare paciently for the gos∣pell. In which pacience he was sayde to beare Chrystes passion, and to receaue hys woundes: for Chryst had fyrst boren such payne, persecutiō, markes, and cros¦se, In so much yt he was drawen out, and emptyed wt sufferynge, As sayeth Esaye. liii. Whan we loke vpon hym there shal be no fayrnesse, we shall haue no lust vn∣to hym. He shalbe the moost symple, and despysed of all, which yet hath good ex∣perience of sorowes, and infirmites. We shall reken hym so symple and so vyle, that we shall hyde oure faces from hym. How be it (of a treuth) he onely taketh awaye oure infyrmyte, & beareth awaye
oure payne. So that he myght wel aske wether there were ony payne lyke vnto hys payn? For he semed a worme and no man. Seynge Chryst the head of ye who∣le congregation of Chrysten men toke vpon hym to suffre, yt was nedefull than that he shulde ascende the hyghest degre to the which greate loue hath dryuē him that he shulde sanctifye hys congregati∣on beynge pure, and wasshed with the fountayne of water in the worde that he shulde gloryfye it hauynge no spot, nor wrenkle, nor ony such blemysshe but that it shuld be holy and wythout blame The head Chryst suffreth yet dayly in hys membres. Thys passion shall he be fayne to suffre, till the tyme that he shall haue cast all his enemies vnder his fete. That is: whan he shall delyuer vp hys kyngdome vnto his father .ii. Corin. xv. Who soeuer therfore is crucified with Chryst (that is) who soeuer slayeth, and kylleth his carnall appetites, and per∣sueth them hatefully, as oure synnes be hatefully persued in Chryst vntill death he doth supple in his body that which is
lackynge of Chrystes passyon. For Chryst is sayde to suffre that, which hys membres do suffre, or shall suffre. Euen as Chryst sayde to the commune persecu¦tor of the Chrystiās: Saul, Saul, I am that Iesus whom thou persecutest. How coulde he persecute Iesu, which sat at the ryght hande of hys father saue onely in hys membres. Lazarus. I haue vnderstonde that very well now that it is a passyon which fyrst Christ as head, and so all other trewe Chrysten men as membres haue suffered, or shall suffer: For whan the head is syke, than mourne all the membres, and whan the membres be dyseased, the heade is not well nother. Tobyas. You haue vnderstonde me well, wherfo∣re let it be for you consolation that you be not forsaken alone, but that Chryst hymself as head, and all Chrystians as members are sufferynge with you. In Chrystes communalty is no stryfe, nor parcialyte, but a communion or felow∣shyppe
of al that is good or badde, swete or sowre, the one membre careth for ano¦ther. Whan the one suffreth, al do suffre, whan the one is glorifyed than be they all glorifyed. So great a thynge is the communion of sayntes, that we maye glory and reioyce the one in the good∣nesse of the other, as though they were oure owne. By the glory of Chryst shall oure dishonesty be glorifyed. And by his fulnes shal we be losed of our pouert, his merytes shal put awaye oure mysdedes. Who is he now yt is in paine yt wold not be mery, seynge man beareth not his syn¦nes, or yf he beareth thē he bearethē not alone, for he hath Chryst hīself to helpe hī, & so many chyldren of God. Paul sa∣yeth .i. Corinth. x. One breade, and one body are we many. Thys all commeth vpon vs out of the spyrytuall marya∣ge, which God oure father hath made wyth hys onely beloued sonne, and vs. For thereby are we made one wyth God as man and wyfe are twain in body, and all other thynges are commune. A chyl∣de is borne vnto vs, and a sonne is geuē
vs Esaye .ix. Wherfore he is oure owne Christes victory: is oure victory: Chri∣stes rysynge is oure rysynge. Morouer yt which we are, we are not of our selues for we haue yeldeth to Christ oure fayth al∣ready. Paul sayeth .i. Corin. vi. Knowe ye not that your body is the temple of ye holy goost? Whome you haue of God, & are not your owne. For ye are dearly bought. Prayse ye God therfore in your body and in your sprete, which are Gods We be deliuered ouer in writinge vnto the lawe of God, and hys promises, and he is agayne delyuered in wrytinge vn∣to vs to saluation and welfare. The bon¦de of matrymony must be knowen on both partyes orels is it of none effecte. Thus is it resonable yt we beare Chryst in oure body, euen as he beareth vs, and maketh vs partakers of all hys goodes So that the Chrystenly bryde may say. My loue is myn, and I am hys. Lazarus. That same is very comfortable, that Christ hath accepted vs, and geuen hym self vnto vs. Wherby we haue receaued
hys lyfe for oure death, his strength for oure weaknesse, hys ryghtwysnesse for oure synnes. But whan beare we Christ in oure body? Tobias Where we be contrary to Christ and fo∣lowe not hys learnynge, ensample, and spirite, ther do not we beare Christ. Ther be we ryd of Christ▪ Paul sayeth .ii. Cor. xiii. Knowe ye not your selues, that Ie∣sus Christ is in you? Except ye be casta∣wayes. Those than that through the spi∣rite of God be obeyenge in all pacience, redy to obey Gods cōmaundements, in redringe and delyuerynge thēself to the wyll of God, compelled and made lusty harted, They maye saye wt Paul: I lyue now, not I, but christ liueth in me: Paul had also crucified hys fleshe with his cō¦cupiscences, so that the worlde became hym a crosse, and he a crosse vnto the worlde agayne. He was sayde to beare Christ in his body, for his body was day¦ly destroyed through the crosse, lyke as the body of Christ was slayne by the crosse and sufferynge. To such lyke mor∣tifyenge
exhorteth vs Paul Rom. xii. sayenge: I beseke you brethren by the mercyfulnesse of God, that ye geue ouer your bodyes for a sacrifyce that is quyck holy, and acceptable vnto God which is youre resonable seruynge of God. Thys is an acceptable sacrifyce which is con¦sumed of the brande of sufferynge (which we do beare wyllingly with Chryst) lyke a trew burnt offeringe. For in the daye of trybulation we offer vnto God a trew sacryfyce of prayse (that is) the frute of oure lyppes in knoledgynge hys name. That we (as the payne of oure body cō∣meth plentuous vpon vs) knoledge the name of Chryst, that is a token, that we be Chrystes disciples & guyded by hys sprete by the which he hath bene obe∣dient to hys fathers wyll vnto the death of the crosse. Orels shulde we be lyke them that beleue so longe as all thyn∣ges prosper, but in tyme of temptacion than do they shrynke. The spyryte of fayth teacheth, and assureth vs that Chryst in oure sufferynge is oure com∣forte, and in oure dyenge oure lyfe. The
sacrifyce of prayse shall worshyppe me (sayeth the Lorde) and there is the waye wheryn I shall shewe my saluation. A dead, and mortifyed harte is a sacrifyce very acceptable before God. He that hath mortifyed hys naturall body here in earth, he that is dead in hys harte▪ he that beareth Chryst in hys body, becau∣se he wyll go wyth Chryst wythout the tentes of hys harte, wythout the gate, bearynge the rebukes of hys sauyour wyth hym on hys shulder: he shall not fear death, he shall not estymed death hys enmy, nor flye yt: For she taketh not it, which he wolde rather kepe but she ge∣ueth hym that, which he wolde kepe wyth all hys harte. The lyfe temporall is swete vnto the flesshe, but oure lyfe yt we shall lede with Chryst is sweter. Lazarus. Treuth it is, and therfore is death vnto vs passage to lyfe. Wherfore we ought to praye hartely that he let not vs fall in such temptacion that myght ouercom vs: but that he wyll delyuer: in vs that euell daye, from all euell that myght
drawe vs from the fayth. For it is the myghty worke of God to beleue that we be hys, yee euen in the poynte of death, the which as yet I do not fele in me. For I fele yet another lawe in me which is contrary to the inspyracion of the holy goost. I loke aboute for the flesshe pot∣tes of Egypte, whervpon I was wont to sytte. Whan the fygure of death offe∣reth it self from afore, than do I searche wether, I can not escape behynde out of thys wreched lyfe. Seynge I am so bo∣unde with synne. I ought to be obedient at Gods callynge and wythout lokynge aboute departe: but I beseme the wyfe of Loth. I can not leaue the lokynge a∣boute, though my neke laye theron. My wyfe the flesshe wherwith I am laden, is yet very feble to withstonde such tempta∣cion. Alas brother I can not awaye with thys wyfe. Tobyas. Feare not good brother feare not, for such totynge and lokynge backwarde, such battayll, and febelnesse dyd also Paul fele, whan he beholdynge hys wre¦chednesse
sayde in the .vii. to the Roma. O wreched man that I am, who shall de¦lyuer me from the body of thys death. It is necessary such assaultes come vpō vs. Victory commeth by fyghtynge a∣gaynst synne, and of victory commeth tryumphe, but noman shalbe crouned saue he that fyghte deuly. Yf ye wyll tri¦umphe with Chryst ouer synne, & death wythout battayl, that can not be: for such waye hath not Chryst shewed you. Fight lyke a trew souldyer of Chryst. That we feare death, and shrenck at it is naturall weaknesse the cause, Which is not dam∣nable: for she is not imputed to vs for sin¦ne. Yee Chryst hyemself hath taken such weaknesse vpon hym for vs, whan he be¦ganne to shouer, to tremble, and to be he¦uy for the death tocome, sayēge: My sou¦le is heuy vntyll death. Mat. xxvi. Why dyd he so? seynge he knew death coulde not hurt hym. He knewe well he shulde se no corrupcion. Why was he afrayed? He knewe hys death shulde brynge lyfe vnto vs all, and ouercome death, why dyd not he rather reioyce in that death,
wherof shulde come so much goodnesse? what shulde it greue hym than to dye? wold he rather haue had delaie of it? dyd not he wysshe vs such mercy and welfare seyng he semed to couet to be loose of this sufferynge. Alas no, that be farre. But seynge he toke vpon hym bare man hea∣de, yt pleased hym to assaye the weaknes∣se of manhode, because we shulde not faynte yf lyke temptacion arose agaynst vs: Wherof no man lyuynge (be he ne∣uer so holy) is fre. For how sore the inwar¦de man is lyghtened of the spyryte, yet doth the olde Adam, the wyfe of Loth not forsake hyr kynde in fyghtynge, and desyrynge agaynst the spyryte. Which battayll and desyres we ouercome, and haue ouercome by fayth, that assureth vs to haue a trew bysshoppe by God the father, namely Iesu Chryst, which hath bene tempted in all poyntes, that he myght knowe how to helpe them that be proued. The Lorde is trew, for he can proue, and delyuer the good Christians out of temptations agayn. Christ which knewe no synne, is become synne for vs,
that we shulde be the iustyfycacion, or ryghtwysnesse of God in hym. Chryst hath damned synfulnesse of synne in hys flesshe. Synne is dāned, and put awaye in Chryst: she can not damne vs she must be auaylynge vnto ryghtwesnesse, so far¦re is she come. Chryst iustyfyeth vs, and who can blame vs? Chryst dischargeth vs of all synne, what deuell, or what fles∣she is it than that can laye ony synne or fault to vs, The syknesses and weaknes∣ses that ye haue after ye be Chrystened, haue ye commune with al sayntes, them shall ye fele other more or lesse, vntyl the body of death be whole, and clene put awaye. Be not moued at the small Ba∣bylonyans, that is the worldly though∣tes or hys pleasures: but knocke them agaynst the trew corner stone Chryst, wherby ye shalbe saued. What do we lo∣ke for after thys lyfe? What pleasaunt thynge perceaue ye in it, that myght cause you to desyre a longe lyfe? What is thys lyfe, saue a contynuall battayll and crosse, a deadly enemyte, and con∣tinuall hatred? What is it but a preson
of synne? For the euell that we hate, that we do: and the good that loue, that we do not. The grace and mercy through Ie∣su Chryst must delyuer vs, orels shall we styck fast by the fete. We haue here no abydynge cyte, but seke and longe for a∣nother that is commynge. For we know (yf at the least we be beleuynge) that yf the earthy dwellynge place of oure bo¦dy be corrupte, and destroyed we haue a buyldynge ordeyned of God, an house not made with handes: but euerlastynge in heauen. ii. Corinth. v. That we now therfore sygh and grone, lokynge about before we can be ryd of this body, that is because we wolde faynese, and couet to be clothed with the heauenly duellynge place wythout puttynge of, and auoy∣dynge of thys earthy cloth and dwellyn∣ge place. We wolde fayne retayne thys fylthy sack, because of the company that we haue had wyth it, so that it which is mortall myght be swaloued vp of the ly∣fe immortall, wythout assayēge of death. But that can not be: Seynge it is orde∣ned for man once for to dye. And that we
shulde leaue herein earth by partynge of the soule that, which we haue receaued of the earth. And well is vs, that God seynge oure mysery hath pytyeth vs, ma¦kynge our death safe through his death: For he is become a death vnto death, so that death hath no fearfulnesse in her, sa¦ue onely hyr vysure to fray them that be chyldysshe in fayth, and vnderstondynge But vnto the faythful and them that ha¦ue vnderstondynge, is she depryued of hyr stynge, and venyme. Yf ye auoyde youre mynde of the grymnesse and vtter appearaunce of her, than shall ye fynde no death more in her. Go boldli to death, breake open hys yawes, loke what is in hym. Yow shall fynde no lyfe, no power or strength in hym to byte you. Prouoke hym boldely to mete you in the fyghtyn∣ge place, and he shall flye from you. De∣fye death with all them that can holde wyth hym, for they can not harme you, they can not mynysshe one heer of you. Saye hardely wyth the prophet Ose. O death where is thy stynge? O hell where is thy gloriation or reioycenge
The death is swalowed vp in Christes victory. And therfore is death called in scripture a slepynge more thā death. Of this haue you a goodly fygure, The bra¦sen serpent that Moses made Numeri. xxi. semed afarre of to haue ben a serpēt in dede, but yf ye dyd aproche vnto yt, than might ye perceaue welynough that it was a dead serpent, and that it had no venym, that it coulde nother byte nor stynge. Euen so is it wt death, outwarde it hath a fearfull visage, but the power of it is take awaye by Christ: For he hath ouercome him yt had power of death, ye deuyll, as ye shall heare more herafter. Lazaarus Youre declaration that ye haue shewed here is very spirituall, I beleue it be all as ye saye: yee & I am well pleased there with. Yet do I perceaue that goodmen, which haue such felynge and knoledge in themselues (that is to wete that the death of Christ is death vnto ye natural death) as well as the euell and bad, do shrenke & wrenche at ye poynt of death as though death had yet power vpō them.
Tobias Treuth it is that the waye which bryn∣geth vs to lyfe is strayght, & the porte of death narowe. Wherfore we cā not passe vnto death by sufferinge wtout strayght∣nesse & pearsynge: but what is yt vnto the lyfe & health: The body must fulfyll hys naturall course, it ought not nor can do otherwyse, it cā but wrenche, pinche, sho¦uer & kyke. Let ye asse beare ye trushe har∣dely, it maketh no matter, yet for all this wyl not we feare death. Yf death can do nought more, what awayleth much re∣pinynge & wrenchynge: it is light to be ouercome, thys wrēchinge may be per∣mitted him welinough, al is for one euell houre, Let ye fleshe {per}ceaue in it self ye testa¦mēt of Adā vnto ye last houre. We haue nought now to walke in saue hope: this hope & abydīg of ye life tocome, shal cause vs rightwel to ouercome ye sorow & wo of death, & haystely to forget it. It is but yt bytīge of a fle, yt hurteth not ye soul. The death is better for vs thā we can thynke: she loseth vs of al misery, she ioyneth vs to god, & sendeth vs forth to euerlastynge
lyfe Let Heythē and Turkes feare death which haue no fayth of the lyfe tocome: But oure conuersacion and thoughtes are in heauen, for from thence do we a∣byde our Lorde Iesu Christ, which shall restore oure castawaye body agayne, ma¦kynge it cōformable vnto his glorifyed body. Yf we hadde not this hope of the partynge of the body, trustinge no len∣ger in Christ than durynge thys lyfe: than ware we as sayeth Paul. i. Corint. xv. the moost abiecte and refuse of al mē: But now is Christ dead & rysen agayne, yt we shuld also ryse again in hī in a new life Death is oure last enmy yt holdeth vs frō the lyfe, thys must once be ouercome me in vs also. Christ dyed for nought yf he hath not anulled the power & lawe of death. Christ is not rysen from death yf we must abyde in death. Yf Christ be not rysen, than is oure fayth vayne, than a∣byde we damned in oure synnes, than is scripture a lye, than be the apostles also and ye prophetes false wytnesses of God, That be farre. For Christ dyed and is rysen agayne, that he shulde haue domi∣nion
ouer quycke and dead. Wherfore, as we all dye in Adam, so shal we be rely¦ued agayne in Christ, of which relyuyng agayne Christ hath made a profe in him selfe, Therfore sayeth Paul: If the sprete that hath raysed vp Chryst from the dead dwell in you, thā shal ye same sprete relyue youre mortall body, by the spirite that dwelleth therin. Lazarus. Than wyll not I be moued, though the fleshe do somtyme sygh and mone becau¦se of death, and the fayntnesse of payne, but wyll abyde alwaye the redemption tocome with a lyfted vp heade that is wt a mery spirite. For yf I shulde consydre all thynges, what els is in this valley of teares saue payne and anguishe, synne and wyckednesse. Tobias. The poetes and Phylosophers estymed death to be a good thynge, because yt is the ende of all wrechednesse, and a rest of all euell. Many Heythen haue bē lesse abassed for the death than we are. So∣crates dyd drinke his death laughynge.
He tought yt death is not to be feared, yt which he dyd fortify with the dede. Yf the fleshly affection, and hye mynde of Socrates to fortyfy and to strength hys doctrine, myght not ouercome the natu∣rall feare of death: What shall than do ye certaynte of oure fayth that be Christen men, (that is) they that knowe they can not dye? Ought not than the hope of the lyfe tocome take from vs the beholdinge of death? Though the iust and faythfull seme to dye in the syght of ye ignoraūte, whā they be burned, drouned, beheaded, yet do not they once se death: I wyll not saye assaye ye death, for they dye in peace· They were dead afore in God by geuīge themselues ouer to God, and he yt dyeth in God, lyueth eternally. Happy are they that dye in the Lorde, for their dyenge is chaunged in to lyuynge. That is it that Christ sayeth: He that kepeth my worde, shall not dye foreuer. Lazarus They haue alwaye made hell so whote nto vs and the deuell so blake, that we ste not whether to turne oure selues.
They made vs so afrayde of death, and chefely in that they sayde that the deuell appeareth vnto vs very horrible com∣mynge to tempte vs of thys or that euell wherby euery mā feared death. But whe¦re was the worde of God thā which pro∣myseth: That we that beleue in Christ shal neuer assaye, nor se death. Haue the∣se false teachers, and blynde leaders ne∣uer sene such euangelicall scripture, nor red, nor herde thē. Tobias. Though they haue sene, herde, and red it, yet haue not they beleued it: For the prince of this worlde hath blynded their mysbeleuyng hartes. Where is no faith there is a perpetuall disquietnes of con∣science, there is a hell, a fearfulnesse, yee a see full of all fearfulnesse, remorse, and mysbelefe. There is hell whote, and the deuell blake, there is a perpetual rackin¦ge place of a synfull conscience. In the waye of the synners is greate trauayll & laboure, as wytnesse they thēselues sayē∣ge: We be weryed in ye waye of wycked∣nesse, we haue trauayled many wayes, and the waye of trueth hath not ouer∣shadoweth
vs. That is it that the wyse man sayeth: The harte of the wyked mā is lyke a see tossed with the waues. And because these hypocrytes and workholy∣ons seke peace where as they fynde no peace, but greate disquietnesse and trou∣bell, for the vngodly haue no peace sa∣yeth the lorde God: therfore thynke they it be so with euery man as it is with thē. They thynke euery man be so doubtfull and vnstedfast harted as they be, yee be∣cause they estyme them selues more ho∣lyer and better than other, therfore thin∣ke they other must fele whoter fyre than they themselues, and that other must fele the gnawenge worme more in theyr con∣sciences than they. Wherfore they aug∣ment and make the lawe, the deuell, and death more haynous before mens eyen. They that be the moost fearfullest (as these be) vnto them wyll they be more horrible and dredefull with wordes and other thynges: wherby they be become nothynge but rackers of the simple. I be¦leue their worme neuer rest, & their fyre be neuer quenched. I beleue right well
they go astraye, fyndyng no reste wyth ye manslayer Cayn. I beleue they runne faythlesse with Iudas to the prestes and freers to be shryuen, for cōfort and reste, but they abyde styll desperate. I beleue right well they be ready to do satisfactiō for theyr synnes with Antiochus, and of mistrust geue mony to praye for thē: But al theyr fastynge, prayenge, goynge wol¦warde and barefote, all their mulynge and bablynge shall not helpe thē. Whe∣ther soeuer they turne them selues, they fynde alwaye synne present, they mete al waye the deuyll and death in the tethe. Howe can these teache otherwyse than they finde? How shuld they preache ye gos¦pell of peace yt neuer taysted peace? How shulde they instructe another in Gods behalfe of his atonement, of his rest and victory of death, and his assuraunce frō hell, whiche haue no fayth therof? Let none of these deuel martyrs make you thus folyshe, or wytlesse. If ye haue the worde of God, yt sheweth you peace & for¦geuenesse, you haue God. Where rest is there is God, there is an euerlastynge cō∣uenaunt.
There is roted out the feare of death, ye deuell, & hell. For feare is not in loue, but she excludeth feare. Paul sa∣yeth: We that be iustifyed by fayth haue peace by God. He that is iustified thys∣wyse by the trew fayth of Christ, though he sawe the deuell, death, & hel with hys eyen, yet wolde not he be abashed, yee he wolde rather fyght agaynst them & ouer come them, than he wolde flye one fote, And why? for the gates of hell, that is ye power of thesame, can not optayne the victory of Peters fayth. Sayntes haue ouercome kyngdomes by faith, wrought ryghtwesnesse, and optayned the Godly promyses. The prophet sayeth: Though a battayll a rose agaynste me in that wyl I hope. Though I must go through the myddest of death, yet shall not I feare, for thou art with me lorde. Thou hast prepared a tabel before me against myne enmyes. Be of good cymforte (sayeth Christ) for I haue ouercome the worlde. That is ye victory yt ouercōmeth ye world euē your faith sayeth Iohn. ¶Lazarus you haue declared me that so clearly
that! I euen reioyce therin and feare death lesse than afore. Let here come. whan it shal please God. I knowe by ex∣periēce welynough, what fearfull cōsci∣ence I haue had in myn vnbelefe, & ī my moost vertuous workes, ye nede not to make farther declaration in this behalf. Neuerthelesse this I require yet of you, yt ye wil shew me how I shall behaue my self beste henceforth, whā the tēptaciō of syn, death, or hell shal assault me. Tobyas In ye .iiii. of mat. is it eyudēt how ye ou∣ght to behaue yourselfe agaynst tēptaciō of the deuell, or of synful desyres, which also be one kīde of deuels. Lo how christ suffered himself to be tēpted of glutony, of presumptiō, of couetuosnesse, to proue yt we be dayly tēpted of the same deuel or rather worse, & to an exāple & cōfort yt such tēptaciō can not harme vs no more thā they haue ouercome Christ. Marke how Christ hath ouercome & chased the same deuell wt al hys tēptacions, to an exāple that we must kepe thesame sure grounde, yf we entende also to ouer∣come
the deuell, and to chace hym from vs wythshame. Christ hath ouercome wt none other weapons saue only Gods worde, all those that dyd withstande him other hell, death, or the deuell, for all the∣se haue ben enmyes to God as you maye rede in the .xvii. psalme. The sorowes of death haue compassed me, and the bro∣kes of vngodlynesse made me afrayed. The paynes of hell came about me, ye sna¦res of death toke holde vpon me. But what foloweth. Yet in my troubell I cal¦led vpon the Lorde, and complayned vn¦to my God. So he herde my voyce out of hys holy temple. Learne to take your flyght to the Lorde with Christ, whiche beynge man, and proued in all thinges that he myght succour them that be tēp∣ted, hath done so before. Learne to defen¦de youre selues with the weapons of Gods worde: for as Christ hath ouerco∣me the deuell, so maye you ouercome hym also with all hys suttel wyles. To this exhorteth you Paul sayenge to the Ephesiās. the .vi. Put on the armoure of God, that ye maye stōde stedfast agaynst
the crafty assaultes of the deuell. For we wrestle not agaynst fleshe & bloude, but agaynst rule, agaynst power, namely, agaynst ye rulers of the world, of ye darck¦nesses of this worlde, agaynst the sprite of wykednes vnder heauē. For this cau∣se take ye ye armour of God that ye maye be able to resyst in the euel daye, & stonde {per}fecte in all thynges. As these enmyes are spirttuall and inuisible, euen so haue we no nede of fleshly weapons, but the weapons of the spirite, which be myghty in God, to destroye al strōge fenses and holdes of the deuell, pearsynge vnto the partynge of body and soule. Wherfore put on the shylde of fayth, wherwith ye shall quēche the fyrie dartes of the wyc∣ked enmy, and take ye helmet of saluati∣on, and the swearde of the spyrite whiche is the worde of God. And praye vnto the Lorde, callynge alwaye vpon hys name in the spyrite, that ye maye ouercome Sathan the tempter and enmy: whiche seketh all aboute euen as a roarynge lyō whou he maye deuoure, but you must withstonde hym manly in fayth.
Lazarus. You haue opened now the case, and she∣wed me the weapons therwith I maye ouercome myn a foresayed enmyes. But seyng I am an vnexpert souldyer, yt hath not ben vsed greatly to hādell such wea∣pon: I praye you to seperate my the dar∣tes and arowes of Goddes worde, that I may shute euery enmy seuerally, na∣mely synne, death & hell. And fyrst shewe my howe to defende my selfe, whan my synfull lyfe cōmeth to my remēbraunce. Tobias. I wyll do it gladly, but I feare lest I be to tedious for you. The sicke ought not to be ouerlonge taried withall. I wil ra¦ther returne agayne another tyme, and procede in thys matter. Lazarus. No good Toby, it is not to tedious for me, me thinketh ye be come but now. Ti¦mothe was .iiii. houres with me yester∣day & yet semed it me not to be one houre. Tobias. In the name of God. Neuerthelesse yf I be ouerlōge with you, warne me harde∣ly.
Or yf ye desyre ought I wyll reache it you. Lazarus. No no, go on with youre matter where ye lefte, for ye can do me no greater pleasure. Tobias. As concernynge the fyrst assault that ye shalbe assayed with, namely youre fore∣past synnes, which shall procure to brin∣ge you in despayre: Agaynst them arme you with such scriptures that shewe you how the innocency and rightwysnes of Christ hath put awaye al youre vnright¦wesnesse and wyckednesse. Euen as God sayeth Esay. liii. of his sonne Christ tho∣rowe out the whole chap. Cast ye multi∣tude of youre synnes vpon the lambe of God, which putteth awaye ye synnes of ye worlde. Remēbre yt God hath closed all vnder vnbeleue, that he myght haue mercy on all. Take holde vpon the good Samaritane, whiche taketh cure of the soule. Take your flyght wt the prodigall sōne vnto your merciful farther, though ye be naked, seabby, & ragged: for he shal receaue you fatherly, wt spred out armes,
and put on you the garment of innocēty Though you be lost by reason of synne, the Lorde hym selfe seketh after you. Though ye go astraye with ye straynge shepe, yt doth the good shepehearde ta∣ke you vpon hys shulder and bringeth you to ye shepetolde. Herkē how swetely and louengly God calleth you vnto him sayenge Math. xi. Come to me al ye that laboure and are laden, and I shall ease you of your synnes. Remember ye Christ is become oure wysdome, ryghtwysnes, redemption, and sanctification .i. Cor. i. Remember that he is a trew phisicion of oure soules. Yf ye were no synner, what were Christ nedefull to you? yf ye were not wounded, ye shulde nede no surgeon A phisicion or surgeō is praysed because he doth an excellent cure. The kynde & naturall worke of Christ is to saue hys people, and heale thē of al their synnes, for that is his profession: yee & he doth yt in dede, so yt our vnrightwysnes maketh gods right wysnes be praysed, as wytnes¦seth paul Ro. v. Neuerthelesse wher abū¦daūce of syn was, there was yet more plē¦teousnes
of grace. In that hath god de∣clared hys loue, that we, whan we were synners Chryst dyed for vs. We shalbe so much the more accepted before God, in that we be clensed by hys bloude, and iustified. Happy is that man, not he that hath no synne, for he that sayeth he hath no synne, deceaueth hymselfe, and the treuth is not in hym: But he is happy to whom synne is rekened no synne. The lawe, that is the knowledge of oure syn∣ne is geuen by Moses: but grace and trewe Saluation by Iesus Chryst. For he hath anulled the handwrytinge that was contrary to vs, and fastened it vpō the crosse, wherby he hath taken awaye all power of the princes of darknesse. Co¦loss. ii. and hath triumphed ouer them in hys own personne. The hye prest of the olde lawe myght not offre ony offerynge for the peoples synne wythout he had first offred an offeringe for hymselfe, and wythout bloudsheddynge was no forge¦uenesse, But Chryst oure trewe bysshop∣pe (which hath an euerlastyng presthode after the ordynaunce of Melchysedech)
had no nede to offer for hys synnes, (for he neuer synned) nor he hath not procu∣red forgeuenesse of synnes by the father, by ony straunge bloude, of orē or calues, but with hys owne bloude. Thus was he vnspotted that hath clensed vs from all vnclennes. And seynge we haue thys Iesu that passed the heauens, let vs hol¦de oure profession, and go boldely vnto the seate of hys grace, that we maye re∣ceaue mercy, and fynde grace to helpe in the tyme of nede. Hebr. v Al the waies of the Lorde are mercy and treuth. He pro∣myseth it mercyfully, that which he shall geue vs treuly. Of thys mercy hath God left and geuen vs the worde of atonemēt Iesu Chryst. Yf ye knowe the same pro∣myser, and geuer of mercy treuly, then maye ye trust welynough that ye shall optayne forgeuenge, and remyssion of synnes. Which forgeuenesse you shal al∣so optayne, that he be founde trew in his wordes of promyse, and that he maye o∣uercome your synne, whan he is iudged of the vngodly to be no Saueour. The manheade of Chryst shal couer your mys¦dedes,
so that the deuel your accuser shal fynd nothīg in you blameable. Forget wt Paul that which is behinde you, & couet to that which is before, namely, to the to¦ken of this victory of synne & death toco∣me. To this do ye great ensāples of mer∣cy shewed to peter, to mary magdalene to ye murtherer serue, I wil leaue of dauid, of paul, & many more Submitte your sel¦ues & rendre you to god confessynge you to suffre worthely and iustly for your syn¦nes, & that Christ died vniustly. Beleue yt in ye despising of Christ is hidde ye godly glory, & in ye death is hidde ye kyngdō of Christ, which ye aforesayd murtherer did & it shalbe sayde vnto you: To daye shall ye be wt me in paradise. Cōsidre your wyc¦kednesse & Christes goodnesse. Cōsidre ye damnacion that ye haue deserued, and agayn the loue of Christ, which hath re∣cōcyled you by the father. This doynge you shal heare wt Mary magdalene: Ma¦ny synnes are forgeuē you, for ye loued many, your faith made you safe: Peter re¦mēbred ye wordes of christ bi his lokyng vpō hī, & at ye coks croēg bewayled he his
synnes. The Lorde almyghty doth now beholde you with this presente syknes, and by sendynge of death, and percha∣unce letteth the soūde of the worde come in youre harte. Knoledge your synnes, knoledge the trew iudgment of God, that he letteth passe vpon youre mysde∣des in your sufferynge, and he shall not forsake you in youre callynge and mour¦nynge: But shall appeare vnto you with a comfortable worde of hys resurreccion which shall make youre conscience lu∣sty, and to reioyce in hope of the lyfe to∣come, as he hath done with Peter. Hap∣py are they that wepe with Peter (bea∣rynge of very loue the yocke, and po∣wer of synne in theyr bodyes with greue¦ousnesse) for they shalbe conforted. Thys is the promyse of God yt cā not lye vnto you nor yet wyll do. Loke vpon thys, tru¦stynge to it, you shall rightwell subdue youre enmy synne. Lazarus. O Lorde geue me thy godly grace, that I maye beleue thy holsome worde, by ye which my harte may be purifyed of all
synfull desyres, which are innumerable in me. Tobyas. Amen. God graunte you thesame. Lazarus. Instructe me now farther good brother, how I maye behaue myselfe in ye death tocome whan I begynne to mystrust, wether death shall than wholy swalowe my vp? Tobyas. The nature of the mysbeleuynge is such that they can not beleue there be a rysyn¦ge agayne of the flesshe: by reason thys bodely death semeth to consume a man wholy and all. Wherfore they saye wyth mouth and harte as it is wrytten in the boke of wysedom: The tyme of oure lyfe is but short and tedious, and whan a mā is once gone, he hath no more ioye nor pleasure, nother know we ony man that turneth agayne from death: for we are borne of naught, and we shalbe herafter as though we neuer had bene (and so forth). Ouer these men that be of such fayth commeth damnation worthely: for
as they lyue and their opinion is so doth it chaunce also vnto them. The gospell is yet wholy hydde vnto them, for the God of this worlde hath blynded theyr hartes so, that the lyght of the gospell, & the glory of Christes rysynge can not shy¦ne in theyr hartes. Such men were they of Athē that sayde of Paul that he was a declarer of new deuels. Act. xvii. whā he declared them Iesu, and shewed them of hys resurreccion. Of lyke natural blynd¦nesse dyd it come that they of Athen axed at Paul sayenge: Maye not we knowe what new doctryne this is that thou tea¦chest? For thou bryngest straunge tydyn¦ges, in to oure eares: We wolde knowe therfore what thys meaneth? Vpō which questyon. Paul made a goodly sermon, cōcernynge the fayth in Chryst, and hys rysynge agayne. The mystery of the re∣surrecciō of Chryst, is the chefe, and prin¦cypall poynt of our fayth. For what shul¦de it haue had auayled vs that Chryst dyed, and suffred for vs, yf he hadde not bene rysen agayn. This resurreccion of the flesshe that we also abyde in Chryst
maye not be rekened a dreame because we se it not: For yf we sawe it with oure eyen than were it no fayth: for fayth is of thynges inuisible and not apparaunt Wherfore, though all men seme to be∣gynne the lyfe, and fynishe it agayne in thys present worlde: yet are we assured and beleue that we all shall ryse agayne from death in the daye of dome, euen as Chryst is rysen first. This assuraunce of trew fayth passeth all sureties that can be persuaded by ony sutelty of mās yma¦ginacion. By this fayth (Not by the out¦ward opinion) speake we of the resurrec∣cion of flesshe: euen as the prophet saieth Psal▪ v. I beleued and therfore haue I spoken. Paul taketh vp this worde spea¦ke sayenge .ii. Corin, iiii. Seynge we ha∣ue the same sprite of faith (accordinge as it is written: I beleued and therfore ha∣ue I spoken) we also beleue, and therfo∣re we speake, for we knowe yt he, which raysed vp the Lorde Iesus, shall rayse vs vp also, by ye meanes of Iesus & shall set vs with you, (it foloweth) For ye thin¦ges which are sene, are temporall: but
the thynges which are not sene, are eter∣nall. Wherfore al that we beleue of god, all that we speake of the resurreccion, & the lyfe tocome semeth not to be so. Euen as God hymself, and hys honour, & wor∣shyppe, be also inuysyble, and not appa∣taunte to be trew vnto such carnall wy∣semen that haue not receaued the same spryte of the prophete and Paul. By the afore sayed sprite of fayth speaketh Paul of the resurreccion saienge: The body is sowen here in corrupcion, and shall ryse in vncorrupcion: Yt is sowen in dysho∣noure: and it shall ryse agayne in glory: Yt is sowē in weaknesse, and shal ryse in poure: Yt is sowen a naturall body, and shall ryse a spirituall body. For flesshe, & bloude shall not possesse the kyngdom of God, and that which is transytory, can not possesse eternal heretage. Thus must the grane of the flesshy body, that is sowen here in eath fyrst dye in the groūd before it can brynge forth new frute into lyfe euerlastyng: which lyfe we do abyde certaynly by fayth in the resurreccion of the flesshe though it appeare impossible
vnto vs. For because Chryst is rysen, therfore shall we ryse also, and not abyde in death: For God is no God of the dead, but of the lyuenge Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob. Lazarus. I wyll graunte it ryght wel that we shal all ryse agayne at the daye of dome, nor in that am not I tempted: but I am mo∣re afrayed of the seconde, and eternall death. Instructe my agaynst that I pray you, that I may perceaue that I feare, and drede the seconde death by the rea∣son of my great mysbelefe. Tobias. Wherto thynke ye the resurreccion of Chryst be stabylisshed with so many to∣kens and wonders, but onely that we shulde stedfastly beleue therin? To bele∣ue in the resurreccion of Christ, is to be∣leue that he raygneth, and is a kynge, and that in his rysynge, death, and syn∣ne be subdued vnto hym. Death is the wages of synne. Seinge than we be clen¦sed by the sheddynge of the bloude of christ, we are also assured of death, which
els shulde haue folowed death. Therfo∣re all those that be yet mysbeleuynge, sad, and heuy harted, and walke before God in bytternesse, they be yet in synne. And because they beleue not the resurrec¦cion of Chryst, therfore can not they re∣ioyce in Chryst, nor come to ony hope of the lyfe tocome. Herken how royally the resurreccion of Chryst is set forth vnto vs in scripture. Paul sayeth in the .x. chap. to the Romanes. Yf thou knowle∣gest Iesu with thy mouth that he is the Lorde, and beleuest in thyne harte that God hath raysed hym vp from the dead thou shalt be saued. Yf ye dye in Chryst ye shall also ryse in him and lyue foreuer lyke as he now lyueth eternally. For God hath begotten vs agayne vnto a ly¦uely, hope, by the resurrection of Iesus Chryst from the dead .i. Petri. i. Whā that which is mortall in you shall haue put on all immortalyte by the departyn∣ge of death, than shal death be swalowed vp in the victory. For Chryst hath ouer∣come hym by his death which had the lordshyppe in this worlde by the disobe∣dience
of Adam, as Chryst sayeth hym∣selfe: The prynce of this worlde is come, but in me hath he nought. For so much than as Christ beynge ye trew sede of Eua hath destroyed and brused the serpentes heade, that is death, wherby the serpent raygned myghtely vpon all mankynde: then maie ye now hardely triūphe inwar¦dely sayeng: Death, where is the stynge? o hel where is thy glory? praysed be god which hath geuen vs victory by Iesu Christe. Lyke as it was impossible, that Christ not shulde please god in his rygh¦twesnes: euē so is it impossible we shulde not please God by fayth in Christ. Thys confirmeth Christ sayenge. The father loueth you, for you loued me. Of this mi¦sery of the resurreccion, & hyd lyfe coulde I brynge you forth manye scripturely reasons and ensamples, but I fear lest it wyl be to tedious for you beynge syke. Lazarus. No brother, fear not. I loue so well to hear ye ensamples of scrypture, whych teache vs how lyfe is hyd in death.
Tobias. We haue many figures & ensāples in ye scripture, which teach and declare vnto vs, that lyfe is fyrst declared in dyenge. Whan the lorde God had fyrst created Adam our father, he caused hym to slepe, that out of the slepers syde he might ma∣ke a lyuynge creature, namly Heua, to be a helpe vnto man (Gene. ii.) the whiche also he dyd. Lo how straunge seme the workes of God to be in oure ymagina∣tion? Adam slepeth, and is in the figure of death: for slepe is very well compared vnto death, and of him cōmeth the lyfe vnto Eua, lykwyse also in oure dyenge appeareth oure lyfe fyrst wyth Christ. Death of ye Christians is called in scrip∣ture a slepe or a peaceable rest. Lazarus rested in the bosome of Abraham. Ste∣uen the fyrst martyr dyd slepe in the Lor∣de, whan he was stoned. Is it not cōfor∣table that the holy goost doth call oure dyenge here but a slepe or a rest? Steuen dyd slepe in the Lorde, (that is) he is de∣parted hence with a suete rest and ease at the harte, wherin he felt no paynfulnesse
at the harte as a mā yt slepeth a naturall slepe, slepeth without ony passion or fe∣lynge of ye same. That death is not payn¦full to the beleuenge, cōmeth of Christes death. The soul of a Christian beynge full of the lyuynge worde of God, feleth not death, nor regardeth it more than though she were paynted on the wall, which appeared by the apostles yt wente meryly from the iudgmēt seates, becau∣se they were founde worthy to suffre for the name of Iesu. Act. v. Another ensam¦ple is this: What tyme as God had cō∣maūded Abraham to offre hys only sōne Isaac, he wente thre dayes iourney vpō the word of God, leauenge his owne vn¦derstondynge and wyt, yeldynge himself wholy in the handes of God, so that in ye meane season was Isaac dead and for∣gotten: For Abraham was fully deter∣myned to offre hys sonne vpon the hyll, which he sawe afar of on the thyrde daye But finally whan Isaac was nearest vnto death, and Abrahā drew the swear∣de to smyte hym, thā was the sonne who¦ly in ye harte of hys father, and fully de∣lyuered
vnto death. Where Abraham now sawe the death of his sonne in lyf∣tynge vp ye swearde, there appeared vn∣to him the life of his sonne: for the swear∣de was stayed by the angel, of the which he was not ware dat it shulde happē, Af∣ter this ensāple also was Christ rekened dead of the whole worlde, what tyme as he laye in the graue: But on the thyrde daye he rose agayne, shewenge hymselfe alyue. This wyse shall it be wyth vs. Death semeth to take vs wholy and put vs out of mans remembraunce: but thā shall fyrst oure lyfe appeare, accordinge as Paul sayeth: Youre lyfe is hyd wyth Christ in God. Farthermore you rede that Moses was cōmaunded Nume. xxi (whan a greate multitude of the people was slayne with the venymous serpen∣tes, because of their murmuringe agayn¦ste God) to set vp a brasen serpent in a to¦ken, that whose behelde it, shulbe reco∣uer and lyue, whiche also chaunched. What is the meanynge of thys? Christ Iesu is signifyed by this brasen serpent, which beynge lyfted from the earth and
hāged vpō ye crosse as a treue tokē of for∣geuenesse, that whose beholdynge hym with the eyen of fayth, and sure confidē∣ce and hope to optayne health, maye be healed and relyue agayne in the soule, be he neuer so sore wounded and bytten with the venyme of synne. Thys is yt that Christ also sayde Iohn. iii. And lyke as Moses lyft vp the serpent in the wyl∣dernesse, euen so must the sonne of man be lyft vp, that whosoeuer beleueth in him shulde not perishe, but haue euer∣lastynge lyfe. Take this figure to youre doctrine good brother. You lye here bit∣ten of the serpentes your synnes, whiche haue kylled with bytynge oure forefa∣thers with all their progeny: For by the enuy and venym of the deuyll is death come in the whole worlde. Wherfore be∣holde now your saueoure on ye crosse: Be¦holde the lyō of the kynred of Iuda that hath ouercome all. Beholde this serpent as a sure tokē of the good wil of God to you warde, & ye nede not to feare death, for it geueth you lyfe. Ionas the prophet was rekened for dead, what tyme as
he laye thre dayes in the whals belly dead drouned: But afterwarde was he alyue againe shewed ye Niniuytes, for he was sustaineth from death by god which relyued hym agayne. By this Ionas is Chryst also fygured, wytnessynge it hys owne selfe in the gospel to assure vs that we shall also ryse with him agayne, yf we abyde stedfastly beleuynge vnto the en∣de. What more assuraunce can ye haue of God, than that he hath not spared hys owne sonne: but hath geuen hym ouer vnto death for vs, to ouercome death, & to opē agayne the gates of lyfe. Fynal∣beholde how Chryst declareth hys lyfe in dyenge, to stabylishe oure fayth, that we shulde not doubte in the lyfe tocome no not in the myddes of death. For Chryst hangynge on the crosse, geuen∣ge vp hys spryte vnto hys father, testy∣fyenge with the bowenge downe of hys heade that he was euen dead: he shewed yet some tokens of lyfe that were hyd in hym, whan hys blessed syde was opened wherout cā runnynge water and bloude Wherfore doubt not in ye lyfe tocome: for
ye haue receaued a pledge of this lyfe by the loue of Chryst, which is poured in you by the knoledge of God. Chryst dyed and is crucifyed for oure weaknes∣se, but he lyueth by the power of God. We are also weake with hym, and dye by reason of weaknesse, but we shal lyue afterwarde with Chryst by ye same power of God. Searche and proue yourselfe whether ye haue also thys hope, & fayth in the Lorde, and in hys promises, which shall geue you hys ryghtwesnesse for you¦re synnes, and lyfe for death. Lazarus. Now as concernynge hell what shall I saye of it? Yt is a commune saienge: it we good dyenge, yf man knewe where to be¦come. Thus must also come of a mysbe∣leuynge harte that we be thus abasshed for hell. Tobyas. Yt is sure so, greate mysbeleue causeth vs to fear hell. But knowe ye what is hell? Hell is nothynge els saue feare, and drede of death, and a tremblinge against the iudgment and ryghtwysnesse of God
The vngodly, and damned can neuer es¦cape thys death and hell, for they haue no lust nor loue to God, whom they be∣holde as a fearfull iudge, and feare hys ryghtwysnesse. He is sayde to be in hell, that perceaueth wythin hymself how wycked and wreched he is, wherby he is enfourmed, and persuaded the fear of death, and damnation. So that the moost damnation, and payne of hell, is the despysynge, and blasphemynge of God. For so longe as we haue no lyuely wytnesse inwardly of the spryte of God, that we be the chyldren of God: so longe do we hate him, and can not beholde his ryghtwysnes, so doth oure haynous con¦science of synne dryue vs. By these afore sayde wordes is it playne vnto you, that the hell of the vnryghtwyse begynneth here in earth, seynge the worme of theyr wicked consciencie dyeth not, and the fy∣re of theyr wrath is not quenched. Wher¦fore, as the kyngdom of God is iustifica∣tion, peace, rest, and godly corage: euen so is hel, synne, troubell, and raygne. In this hell was Caym, whan he fled here
earth no man persuynge hym. In this hel also was Iudas ye traytour, & abode therin to his damnation. Pether sayeth Act. ii. that God hath raysed vp Chryst, loosed the sorowes of death: for so much as it was impossible that he shulde be¦holden of her (that is) Christ hath rede∣med vs and made vs sawe from all oure enmyes. The deuell is a pussaunte Lor∣de, and well weapened with all hys tray¦nes, erroures, and fearfulnesses. Math. xii. But the sonne of God was a mygh∣tyer Lorde, which hath torne the powers of hell, for all thynges were geuen hym, in hys hande as Chryst sayeth. Math. xxviii. Vnto me is geuen all power, in heauē & in earth. Yf al thinge be geuē vn¦to hym, thā is also ye ouercōmynge of hell geuē him. Christ descēded down to hel be¦fore, & hath troubled the kīgdō of ye deuel he hath also brought glad tydīges vnto thē yt were p̄soned ī hel: The gates of hell cā not withstōd ye faith of Peter: this was Paul sure of which caused hī to saye to ye Ro. viii. I am sure the nother death, nor lyfe, nor angell, nor rule, nor power, nor
thynges present, nor thynges tocome, nor heyght, nor, depth, nor ony other creature shalbe able to seperate vs from the loue of God, which is in Christ Iesu our lord. Christ sayeth in ye boke of psal∣mes. Lorde, out of hell hast thou drawen my soule. This redemynge & delyueryn∣ge of Christ, is happened to oure profete For as Christ was a conquerer of al: euē so shal we also be ouercomers & winners through him, for so much as we be in cor¦porate in hym: Before we were sundered but now are come neare by the bloude of Christ: For he is become our peace he hath made vs cytesens with the sayntes, & of the housholde of God. Seynge we are gathered in ye house of God, we haue here altogether a kyngdō, an heretage a victory, and all saluation. To this ser∣ueth the prayer of Christ, which he made to the heauēly father Iohn. xvii. I praye not only for thē. (meanyng his apostles) but also for them whiche shall beleue by theyr preachynge, yt they all maye be one lyke vs thou father art in my, and I in the, that they also maye be one in vs.
Thynke ye thys prayer is spoken for nought? Thynke ye God the father hath not herde his beloued sonne in the houre of hys sufferynge? A good father despy∣seth not the peticions of his chyldren, Be of good cheare (sayeth Christ) I haue ouercome the worlde. In Christ shal we conquere suenge that which is promysed vs in the prophet psal. xc. Thou shalt go vpon the lyon and adder, the yonge lyon and draggō shalt thou treade vnder thy fete. that is all power of the deuels and also hell. Lazarus. I trust I shall mynde and remēbre your exhortacions very well, so farre as God doth not depriue me of my fyue wyttes. Tobias. Yf it come so farre that you be depryued of youre fyue wyttes by reason of the fer∣uentnesse of youre siknesse, be not moued therat, Let God worke hys worke vn∣tyl the ende. Suffre God to accomplishe hys wil, for he dyeth not euell that dyeth in God. Yt is no force vnto the beleuyn∣ge wether he dye onwares or wares, for
they abyde the Lordes cōmynge alwaye which shal come sodenly vpon the mys∣beleuynge as a thefe in the night. How bitter is the remembraunce of death vn∣to him that hath ease and rest in hys sub∣staunce and goodes? Lazarus. How happeneth it that it is comunely sayde: lyfe is happy: for so farre as I per¦ceaue death is more happy? Tobias. The cōmune by worde is not to be vn∣derstonde of the bodely lyfe, which we ne¦uer can lede without synne, but you must vnderstonde it of such a lyfe, as we lede in God, wherin we shall lyue for euer though we wandered in death, Wherfo∣re yf ye require a longe temporall lyfe of God, than desyre you to synne longer, & to moue god to more wrath. But that life which we lede in God by fayth wherby the ryghtwous lyueth, that is happy. Lazarus Now do I knowe nothyng in myne opy¦nion that can kepe my back frō dyenge willīgly, saue only my wyfe & children,
which yet haue nede both of my helpe & counsell. Tobias. Cōmitte your wyfe & chyldren vnto the Lorde almyghty, which hath geuē or lēt you vnto thē to care for thē, so longe as it shall be his Godly wil to suffre you to be a carer or prouyder for thē. But now doth death discharge you of this office & sorowfulnesse. Rendre god ye charge ioy∣fully. Go you forth now wt Abraham in straūge coūtryes, leauynge youre kynne & fathers house, & come in ye londe ye God shall shew you, Obey gods callinge. He yt loueth more father, mother, wyfe, chyl∣drē, lōdes or possessions than my, is not worthy of my, saieth Christ. As longe as ye were able you haue shewed loue and good wyll vnto your housholde: Of this maye be boaste right wel, & that because ye wolde passe ye bondes of your cōmissi∣on of loue. But what mysbelefe is yt, that ye do not trust god wt the kepenge of his owne chyldren? What was youre helpe care, and kepynge wythout hys ouer∣syght? yf the Lorde do not buylde the cy∣te: they laboure in vayne that buylde it.
Put ye your confydence in God that he shall helpe you? and trust ye him not the kepynge of your children? Though it se∣me that your children departe from you, in dyenge, and ye of them, yet do they ke¦pe theyr heauenly father, which taketh more care for them than euer you coulde This will I tell you, your fayth may be such, that God wyll rayse ten fathers or weldoers in steade of you of whom wt partynge of death, they be depryued. Da¦uid sayeth I neuer sawe a ryghteous mā forsaken, nor hys sede seke breade. Auoy¦de now all sensualyte out of your mynde Commytte youre wyf, thylderen, and all that ye loue, vnto God, who onely shall kepe them best. The mystrust & murmu∣rynge of parentes, is of tymes correcte, and punyshed in the chylderen, as name¦ly whā they myspēde ye goodes in ryot, or suffre losses, and domages in them, the which theyr frendes busyed to leaue thē great plenty of, and to prouide them sub¦stancialy of them. Lazarus. Let it be so, God graunte that I maye
yelde both me and mine willyngly in the hondes of God. My thynketh my tyme doth aproche. Oh I longe so sore to be embraced of my brydegrome Chryst. Cantic. ii. His left hande is vnder my heade, and hys ryght hande shall clespe my necke. I desyre with Paul to be low∣sed, and to be with Chryst. Heale my Lor¦de and I shalbe healed. Tobias. That is well & Chrystenly prayed, God sende you hys stronge spryte, which shal strength you in all sufferynge, yee and also in death. But now brother yf I per∣chaunce shall se you nomore in this ly∣fe: Haue ye ony quarell with ony man? or haue ye ony thynge that greueth your mynde shewe on? Lazarus. What occasioneth you to aske the same? haue ye herd ought therof? Tobyas. The cause of my questyon is, that yf ye haue ony variaunce, or ony skyll wyth your brother: before all other thinges ye ought to dispach thesame and to be re∣cōcyled
agayne wt hym. In thre thinges (sayeth Sydrac) haue I pleasure which also be alowed before God and mē: The vnite of brethren, the loue of neghbours, and man and wyfe agreynge well toge∣ther. And that ye maye forther and sett forth such loue and vnite, ye ought to be ware lest ony variaunce come after your departyng by reason of the goodes amō∣ge youre frendes, and kynred. Lazarus. I haue dispached and prepared all this lōge before so neare as I might. I trust there shall ryse no stryfe betwen my fren¦des or chyldren. I was mynded to haue geuen vnto the church or temple, to the iiii. orders of stronge valeaunt beggers, and vnto our vicare and parisheprest of such as shulde haue ben ouerplus: But that mynde is altered, for God hath ge∣uen me a better mynde. I thanke hym hyghly therof. Tobias.. All testamentes that be made to the for∣theraunce of the loue of oure neghbure are good. There be of tymes churches
founded, masses, & great doles to Gods great dishonoure: For God is not honou∣red with such thynges, but only with yt he hath cōmaunded himself. Some thin¦ke to do an hygh pleasure vnto God yf they disheret their chylderen, frendes, & kynred amonge whom afterwarde ther aryseth a great strife. They bequiet their goodes to founde holydayes, trentals, masses of requiem, wherwyth they fede the spiritualty. They thynke to please God with such foundations and make an atonement with such goodes as they haue skrapen and raked together by wronge, falsede, gyle, vsury, and such ly∣ke wayes spared them. Where as God hateth in hys offerynge al such robbery. They founded also altares, and monu∣mentes and costly graues, to haue theyr names in estymation amonge the peo∣ple and to lyue longe in their mouthes & be praysed for these dedes. To thys en∣tent be tabels and such memorials han∣ged vp in euery churche as a byrders net is spred. O tabel of exchaungers cast out of ye tēpel by Christ. O yeartyde. O
Corbam corbam how dewly arte thou practysed yet dayly of oure scribes & pha¦rises, which lyke paynted graues decea∣ue the onwyse and symple: For they saye it is offered vnto Gods honour & seruice that which is withdrawē from the poore chyldren and heires. Now brother, is it not tyme for me to departe? my thynketh I haue ben longe ynough here. I must also go yet to the poore house or hospital, for so haue I promysed. Lazarus. I thanke you hartely good brother for youre kynde vysitinge of me, and louely teachyng me. Come agayne to se how it is with me at your leasure. Tobias. I wyll do so. And now I cōmitte you to God, which I praye to be youre guyde vnto the lyfe euerlastynge. Yf ye haue ne¦de of me, sende for me, and I wil be glad to come vnto you. Lazarus. The Lorde be blessed and thanked ouer all foreuer. Tobias. Feare well good brother.
Lazarus. Fare well good Toby, God kepe vs all and be oure guyde, and counceler vnto lyfe eternall. Tobyas. Amen. The ende of thys treatyse. ¶The summe, and intente of this treatyse: NOw hast thou sene good rea∣der the maruelous worke of God in hys two electes, nam¦ly, Tymothe & Toby: which to theyr power haue planted and watered the sede of Gods worde in theyr neghboure Lazarus, beynge at sco¦le, wherin is the wyll of god taught, that is adfliction, syknesse, and subieccion of the flesshe vnto the sprite. They now beynge occasyoned by knoledgyng their deuty, to theyr neghboure endeuour to make hym to dye in the Lorde and make hym apte vnto the ioye euerlastinge af∣ter his troubell. Wherin I praye the to marke the ordre and waye: Fyrst Tymothe commynge the one
daye & instructynge him to take his trou¦belous syknesse paciently, in the which admonitiō he doth treuly, and pythfully declare the seuen petitions of the Pater noster, reprouynge by the waie his impa¦ciency, mysbeleue, and superstitiousnesse wherin he was so drowned, that it semed to haue bene impossible he shulde euer bene come out of. But the Lorde, which kylleth & relyueth again, ledeth to hel, & bringeth vp again, hath also shewed his maruaylous power wt this sykmā, whō he hath called to hym by repētaūce, as he wyll also do the moost synner, and mys∣doer of vs, yf he repente treuly. Secondarly Tobias commynge the secōde daye as hys promyse was instruc¦teth hym how to take his death paciētly. And in the meane season expoundeth cer¦tayne of the artikles of oure fayth, name¦ly, the power of God in creatynge al thyn¦ges, ye frute of Christes sufferynge, death, resurrecciō, ascensyon, of the holy goost, which be the treu churche, of communiō of sayntes, of remyssion of synne, of rysyn¦ge agayne of the flesshe, and of the lyfe
eternall or euerlastynge. And fynally he sheweth what be oure enemyes death, synne, and hell, and how we maye best withstonde them. This with other super¦stitions and abuses doth he so featly, and scripturly declare and teacheth to eschue as in myne opynion no rabby, magister noster, or puffet vp doctor coulde do, though he had spent the beste parte of hys lyfe ī searchyng Chryst at Paris. Ta¦ke therfore this treatyse oft in thyne han∣des, loke diligently vpon it, and vse it as it is offered vnto thy. I wyl not busy my selfe greatly in praysynge of it, for the commune prouerbe is veryfied in it, that is: good wyne nedeth no garlande: for yf thou rede it diligently, and folowe it so neare as God wil lēde ye grace, thā shalt thou receaue the profyte that is sought both in dytynge and translatynge of it, namly, ye health of youre soul and herafter lyfe euerlastyn¦ge, which graūte you god the father, & sonne, & ho¦ly goost. Amen.
¶Prynted in Southwarke, By My Iames Nicolson, for Ian Gough Cum Priuilegio Regali.
