14426.7 23817137 26876
A new song to the great comfort and reioycing of all true English harts, at our most Gracious King IAMES his Proclamation, vpon the 24. of March last past in the Cittie of London. To the tune of Englands pride is gone. IR SWeet England Reioyce and sing, Louingly: louingly: God hath sent vs now a King, Praised be him. Of King HENRIES Linage is he Princely borne by degrée. A brauer Prince cannot be, then is Noble King Iames. ¶Quéene Elizabeth she is gone, Gloriously: Gloriously: Vp to an Angells Throne, euer to dwell. So prudent was her minde, So carefull and so kinde: All her State she hath assignd, to our Noble King Iames. ¶Long ruled she this Land, Vertuously: Vertuously: King Iames now takes in hand, all the like care. He is our Royall King, And our Countrey will defend. A peacefull Raigne Swéet Iesus send▪ to our Noble King Iames. The Nobles of this our Land, faithfully: faithfully: Haue set to their willing hands, All in deare loue. Giuing him his lawfull right, Swéet Englands Crowne so bright, Which makes our Hearts delight, to say God saue King Iames, ¶Ring out your Bels a pace, merily: merily, Make Bone-fiers in euery place, signes of true-loue. For England doth now possesse, A King of true Noblenesse: Oh, let vs loue expresse, to our Noble King Iames. ¶Fower Kingdomes now are knowne, rightfully: rightfully: To be King Iames his owne, peacefully still. Then what Prince or Potentate, With him dare make debate, Or enuie at the state, of our noble King Iames. Other Landes will stand in feare dreadfully, dreadfully, When they his name shall heare all the world ouer. All Countries wel may sing England hath now a King Whose name doth honour win that's noble King Iames. ¶Englandes faire Roses bud gallantly: gallantly: Long may his Princely bloode, Raigne in this Land Then Popery comes not heare, Hated of Prince and Péere All England loues thée déere, Noble King Iames. ¶Gods gospell thou dost maintaine, Zealously: zelously: And all vntruthes wilt disdaine vertuously still: Florish faire England then And all true Englishmen: Ioyes are now come agen with noble King Iames. Gallant King, come apace, speedely: spéedely: Thy Subiects would sée thy Face shining in Court: Thy Nobles heare shalt thou finde Faithfull and true of minde And all thy Commons kinde noble King Iames. ¶England now liues in peace, thankefully, thankefully, Good Lorde the same increase euermore still. Loue we our King and Quéene, Then shall our daies be séene Euer to flourish gréene vnder King Iames. ¶Pray wée for his Counsell graue Zealously, zealously. That they may true knowledg haue. Concord and loue. So shall our Countrey be, Graced with Victorie: Thus loue we Loyally, Noble King Iames. Finis. Printed by Robert Walde-graue.
