14945 99836905 1200
VIVAT SERENIS∣sima Regina. TO THE MOST MIGHTIE, IMPERIAL, AND Vertuous Princesse, The Lordes Anointed, Queene Elizabeth, by the grace of God of Englande, Fraunce, and Irelande, Queene, Defendresse of the faith, &c. ⁂ SEing that your Royall seate and Scepter (most mightie and Imperi∣all Princesse) is clothed with Sa∣lomons heauenly giftes, and doeth holde vp the golden rodde of wise∣dome, which leadeth to the euerla∣s ting kingdome. I hope therefore (by the goodnesse of God) that it shall please your Highnesse to ad∣mit this Garlande of mans glorification to come into your sweete gracious handes: prefixed with the bright beames of your Maiesties princely glorious Name, vnder the high precious Cedar, and sweete Libanus of your heauenly good∣ne sse
of mercie and pardon: That though I be troubled inheart with eare of your supers plendent perso∣nage, (being a mightie princes of power) to dedicate this Pamphlet to your most excellent Maiestie: yet the singu∣lar clearenesse of your spirituall treasures of goodnesse, doth preuaile ouer my dutifull minde and faithfull allegeance in such sort, as if the precious pearle of your vertues did shine into my heart, not forbidding this litle Pamphlet to come vnto your Highnes: trusting that the purenes of the mat∣ter will increase your MAIESTIES deare soule, to an exceeding consolation touching your bodie to bee glori∣fied. In consideration whereof, when I did beholde the goodly order of the bright glistering starres, which the omnipotent Creator hath placed in the firmament of the heauens: (there seeing the resplendent starre, Corona luci∣da) I was stirred vp with the ioyfull remembrance of your Maiesties incomparable personage, being the Lordes Anointed: knowing that your Highnesse, being vertu∣ous, meeke, and mercifull, is equall with the good Kinges of Iuda, (with Asa, Ezechias, Iehos aphat, and Iosias,) in imbracing all godly vertues to the aduauncing of the ho∣nour & glorie of God: that as your Maiestie in all points doe holde your scepter linked to the Scepter of Iuda, (be∣ing an vnfeigned friend to the holy one of Israel) so your highnes subiectes in great consolation of heart, do pray sin∣cerely (in all humblenesse of duety) vnto God for the pre∣seruation of your Maiestie lōg to reigne ouer vs: And that at the appearance of Christ you may be a glorious Saint in the kingdome of God. And now considering howe much Israel reioyced of Salomon, & how greatly it lamented after his departure: Am perswaded how much all true Prote∣stants do pray that the Lord may be your shield as he was to Abraham and that your blessed personage (may by the great mercie and s ingular goodnesse of God) gouerne this Realme as happily and as many yeeres (and more) as good king Asa king of Iuda
did, to the glorie of God, and salua∣tionof soules. Wherefore (most Mightie and Renowned Sove∣raigne) when I, (an inferiour, vnworthie to touch the groūd that your Maiestie doe walke on) had finished this Beauti∣full garland of mans glorification, expressing the mysterie of new Ierusalem, with her golden crownes and diademes I thought it so much to represent the heauenly ioyes and happinesse of our euerlasting glorie: as that it was a matter meete to be dedicated to your most excellent Maie∣stie, shewing howe your Highnesse, being an Anointed and blessed Princesse of power vnder God, vpon the earth, shal meete (at the great day of resurrection) the King of al kings comming in his triumphant progresse from heauen, with the glorious companie of his holy Angels: when your pure personage shall beholde that incomprehensible Scepter of the euerlasting kingdome of Dauid: That as your Maie∣stie in your progresse vpon the earth, hath highly preferred your faithfull subiectes in Christ to honour and dignitie: so nowe that glorious King of eternitie and euerlasting glo∣rie will fashion your bodie to be like his owne glorious body: for that, your blessed power hath set foorth the true Religion, worshippe, and honour of God, to a liuely hope among your Highnesse subiectes to obteine the eternall garlande of glorie. Thus humbly committing this litle Pamphlet of mans glorification vnto your Princely magnificence, and godly wisedome, doe beseech your Highnesse in your ten∣der minde of mercie, to receiue it vnder your sweete gra∣cious mans ion of goodnesse: among your spirituall trea∣sures of heauenly solace and ioye: thereby daily remem∣bring how your God and Sauiour Iesus Christ, shall clothe your Maiestie with an euerlasting garment of glorie, shi∣ning vpon you with the light of his owne coūtenance, there sitting with Christ in his owne seate of heauenlinesse, ta∣sting the vnspeakeable ioyes of eternall blessednesse, where you shall glister as the shining of heauen worlde without end, beholding the beauty
of God for euer, in new Ierusalē.Thus hoping that your Maiesties mercie will be as a vayle to my boldenesse, doe trust that as your Highnesse hath truely touched the hemme of Christes garment, whereby you haue partaken the heauenly sparkes of the vertues of Christ: that it would please your goodnesse to admit one sparke towards the acceptation of this glorious garlande: And so I pray God with all instance, that it may please him of his aboundant mercie, to preserue you our Sweete beloued Queene, and true branch of Christ, long to reigne ouer vs in tranquillitie and peace, to the setting foorth of Gods honour, and spreading abroade of his glorie, that your MAIESTIE may ioyfully appeare before Christ, and be crowned with the Crownes and Diademes of euer∣lasting glorification: which (O Lord) so let it be. Your Maiesties most humble Subiect, & faithfull Orator, FRANCIS KETT.
THE GLORIOVS and beautifull garland of mans glorification. CAP. 1. How Christ was ordained, before the world was made, to our glorie; and promised of God, in his holy Scriptures, to come in the humanitie and humilitie of flesh, to tast of death for all men: whereby is iustified the righteousnes of God, to the confirma∣tion of our beliefe, touching our election and glorification. SEing that our glorification and heauenly mansion (wherwith we desire to be clothed, and which we hope after this life to inioy) doth come by Iesus Christ, sealed with the holy spirit of Gods true promise, wée ought then to stablish our hartes in the consolation of good hope and faith, to obtaine the glory that thus cometh, by Christ, by considering the faithfulnes of God, who performeth all that he hath pro∣mised, and is able to doe excéeding aboundantly aboue all that we can aske or think, who so loued the world that he spared not his owne sonne, but gaue him a reconciliation for our sinnes: The mysterie of whom was hid, since the world began, and since the beginning of generations, but now is opened, and declared openly, to haue brought to vs life and immortalitie, through his Gospell: to the iustify∣ing of the righteousnes of Gods true promise: to be the glorious riches of our eternall glorie, by the shedding of his bloud vpon the Crosse. That whereas through the sinnes, and disobedience of one man, sinne reigned vnto death: So by the obedience of one mā Christ, might grace reigne through righteousnes vnto eternall life: That all that beleeue in him (walking after the spirite and
not af∣terthe fleshe) might be pertakers of his heauenly king∣dome, and made the sonnes of God. For which cause to the better confirmation of our faith and hope of saluation: It is requisite to shewe the orde∣nance and promyse of God from the beginning touching our iustification in his sonne Iesus Christ: that thereby wée may be stirred vp (by the great goodnes of god) for to séeke by Christe,Cor. 1.2. the riches of his glorious inheritance vpon the Sainctes,Ephe. 11. hée béeing ordained thereto of God before the beginninge of the worlde was made vnto our glory. Touching whome, (in this Booke of mans glori∣fication) wée must especially looke vnto Christes two cō∣mings séeing that hée is the Author and finisher of our re∣demption and hath adopted vs to be the sonnes of glory: by appearing once in the fleshe to put sinne to flight, by the offering vp of him self to death, whome the Father raysed vp to lyfe, and is entred into heauen, to appeare now in the sight of God for vs, and shall come againe to chaunge our vile bodyes,Phil. 3. to be facyoned lyke to his glori∣ous body. Wherfore in that wée haue such an high Ad∣uocate in heauen, by whome wée haue an incorruptible crowne of blessednes propounded and set before vs: Let vs walke woorthy and laudable vnto God, according to the grace giuen vs in Iesus Christe, that wée may ob∣teine the rewarde thereof. And now to consider the purpose of the heauenly Fa∣ther, how hée hath blessed vs in all manner of heauenly thinges by Chris te: (according as hée hath chosen vs that wée should be Saints through the beloued Iesus) It fol∣loweth, that wée kéepe alwayes a ioyfull remembrance that as the glory of the last house or teastament of God, was greater then the first: so is it, in the manner, of the two commings of Christ: for first hée came in the humili∣tie of the fleshe, to be to vs a sauing health: béeing borne of the
Virgin Mary by the woorking of the holy Ghoste,very man and mortall and yet the same very GOD and immortall, who béeing in the shape of God and equall with God,Collos s. . Phil. 2. in whome dwelleth all the fulnes of the God∣head bodyly: yet did he neuerthelesse make him self of no reputation, takeing vpon him the shape of a seruant, and became lyke vnto man, and was founde in his apparell as a man, humbling him self to all obedience: for though hé e were Gods sonne yet learned hée obedyence,Heb. 5. by those things which hée suffered, and was made perfect,Ihon. 1. and the cau se of eternall saluation vnto al that obey him, accor∣ding to Iohn. In the beginning was the woord, and the woord was with God, and the woord was God, and this woorde was made fleshe, beeing the lyfe and light of men, giuing power to all that beléeue in him to be the sonnes of God: for it pleased the father to send his sonne in the sin∣full fleshe (béeing without sinne) and by sinne dampned sinne in the flesh, and loused the woorkes of the deuill.Rom. . Whome he maketh heire of all things, béeing the bright∣nes of him self, bearing vp all thinges with the woord of his power, for so it was the will of the Father that in him should all fulnes dwell,Heb. 1. and that in him all thinges should haue their béeing, that hée might be all in all. Thus the Almighty Creator hath performed his blessed promyse,Collossians. . when hée sayde that the séede of the Woman shall breake the Serpents head: and when long after, he sayd vnto Abraham, vnto thy séede will I giue this land,Gen. 3. for one that come out of thine owne body shall be thyne heire, and thy seede shall bee as the starres in number: And Abraham beléeued the Lord and it was imputed to him for righteousnes:Gen. 15. And also the Lord sayde againe to Abraham, when he was 89, yeare olde: I will make my couenant betwéen mée & thée, and will multiply thé e excée∣dingly, for behold my testamēt is with thée yt thou shalt be a father of many nations, & my bond betwéen mée & thée & thy séed after thée shalbe an euerlasting testament,Gen. 17. & I wil be good to thē, &
giue thē the land wherin thou art a stran∣ger, euen all the lande of Canaan for an euerlasting pos∣session, and wil be their God: for Saa shall beare a sonne, and thou shalt call his Name Isac, and she bare Abraham a sonne euen the same season, which the Lord had appoin∣ted. Thus it pleased the Almightie God to choose vs, and not we him, shewing foorth hereby the abundancie of his loue, and mercie, in that he hath mercie vpon thē which are not yet in the worlde, and in that he declareth his great goodnes, in multiplying his louing kindnesse to∣warde those that are present, and to them that are past, and to them that are to come: for after that Adam tho∣rough sinne, brought in the corruption of nature, that the euill seede of wickednesse was sowen in all mens hearts, whereby death raigned by meanes of sinne: then this darnell and cockle of vice and iniquitie did grow ripe in the first generations of Adam, that they walked after their owne stubborne and fleshly will neglecting Gods goodnes: That the Lord was thereby prouoked, to bring his water floud vpon the world and destroy all mankind, except Noye and his houshold. And then after that the of∣spring of Noye was againe multiplied to a great people by processe of time: they waxed also vngodly and wicked: but the Lord had giuen his raine bowe for a couenant, that he would neuer destroy the world with watermore. And then the most highest did choose him a man from a∣mong them, whose name was Abraham, whom he loued, and to him onely God shewed his wil, and made an euer∣lasting couenant with him, promising him (as is afore¦said) that he will neuer forsake his seede, and so in his old age gaue him Isaac, the first testimonie of Gods promise, and couenant begun, & so faithfully performed in Christ Iesus, to the ioy and comfort of man, in that we see eui∣dently that God is righteous and true and hath giuen vs an assured hope of our election, that by that onely seede of Abraham, we shal enioy the euerlasting possession of that new blessed land
of Canaan the first lande of promise.Therefore this record we must beare in our selues that God is true, and that what hee do or say can no man change & what he promiseth he can not but perfourme: And nowe the more to confirme this ioye, faith, & hope: which Abraham (our first father of beliefe) had to God in respect of the birth of Isac and prosperitie of his seede) The Lorde to our example tryed whether righteous A∣braham would beare an immutable minde towardes his God, to loue him aboue all the dearest thinges which he had, yea aboue his sweete sonne Isac, whome he loued as his owne life, notwithstanding faithfully did Abraham preferre the loue of his almightie God and maker, aboue the life of Isac, offering him in sacrifice to the Lorde: for which cause the eternall creatour to make his promise more certainely to sticke fast in Abraham and in all his posteritie, sware by him selfe, shewing that there was no God but him selfe, saying in Genesis,Gen. 22. Because thou hast not spared thy only son Isaac to offer him a sacrifice to me, I will blesse thee and multiplie thy seede as the starres of heauen, and as the sande vpon the sea side, and in thy seede shall all the nations of the earth bee blessed, because thou hast obeyed my voyce. And thus ye most merciful god, although he cast Adam for his transgression out of Para∣dise, and also destroyed the worlde for sinne: yet he shew∣eth againe the voyce and promise of comfort, (that hee hath not cast vs off) but hath giuen his gratious goodnes to the worlde, that all nations through the seede of Abra∣ham should be blessed: (according to that of the prophet) Them I haue created, facioned,Esay. 43. and made for mine ho∣nour. And nowe the more to iustifie his true promise, it is apparent that hee establisheth the foresaide testa∣ment to Is aac, the first figure of Christ,Gen. 6. by whome all na∣tions are sanctified: Saying to Isac, I will be with thee, and blesse thee,The promise. for vnto thee and to thy seede will I giue all these countries, and through thy seede
shall all nationsof the earth bee blessed: becaus e that Abraham harkened to my voice, and kept my ordinances, commandements, statutes and lawes: wherein we are to learne, how al our blessednes came of God, the father of al goodnes, to whom we ought alwaies to be thankefull, framing our selues through his grace to be like Abraham in beleeuing, and equall with him in obedience, and ioyned with him in righteousnes, that we may receiue the like praise and ho∣nour, as God maketh mention of him to Isaac, therby to obtaine as Paule promiseth the eternall ioye, the praise honour and immortalitie that is due to them that continue in good doing and seeke eternall life.Rom. 2. And finally God to seale vp the fulnes of his couenant the more and more, to helpe and strengthen our weake harts of beliefe, and to allure the children of promise to a fixed hope of his grace and goodnes,The promise to Iacob. doth reiterate his testament to Ia∣cob, that he being the seede of Abraham and Isaac, that he shall be the well of liuing waters, and that out of his loynes shall come the fountaine of all heauenly blessed∣nes, and the water of life, grace & goodnes (saying.) The land which thou sleepest vpon,Gen. 26. will I giue thee & thy seed, and thy seede shall be as the du st of the earth, & thou shalt spread abroad, west, east, north, and south and through thee and thy seede shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed, according to Esay.E say. 43. I will bring thy seede from the east, and gather them togeather from the west, I will say to the north let goe, and to the south keepe not backe, but bringe me my sonnes from farre, and my daughters from the ends of the world, for all nations shall came in one and bee ga∣thered in one people,Gen. 35. for the Lorde saide againe vnto Iacob, thou shalt be called Israell, grow and multiplie, for people and a multitude of people shall spring of thee yea and kings s hall come out of thy loynes, and the land which I gaue Abraham and Isaac, will I giue vnto thee, and vnto thy seede after thee.
Thus the almightie God of our fathers Abraham I∣saac and Iacob, did seale the earnest of the inheritance of his euerlasting blessednes and kingdome in Christ, with his holy spirite of promise made to our first fathers, that he should come of the seede of Abraham according to the flesh, by whom we should receaue redemption and salua∣tion, therby to be made partakers of Gods glorie. And now furthermore, after the proceedins of time, that the seede of Iacob called Israell, was increased to a great kindred of people, and holden in bondage in the land of Egypt. The Lord most mercifull and mindfull of his promise made to our forefathers Abraham Isaac and Ia∣cob, that he would be good vnto their seede: raised vp a∣mong them Moyses a captaine and prophet, that should deliuer, and lead his people Israel out of Egypt, into the land of Canaan, which before he had giuen to Abraham and his seed for an euerlasting possession: and this through Gods mightie hand, who made a waye in the sea, and a foote path in the mightie waters, which brought forth the chariots and horses, the host and power, and drowned thē in the red sea. And then brought his people vnto mount Synay, in the wildernes, where he gaue them the lawe figured in s tones, shewing forth his wonderfull power, that they did all tremble for feare and coulde not a∣bide it, for the people stood vnder the hill, and the hill burnt with fire euen vnto the middes of heauen, and there was the sound of a troump, voyce of words, tempest,Deu. 4. dark∣nes, cloudes and mist, and the Lord spake out of fire and declared his couenant and ordinance,Exod. 19. and so terrible was the sight that appeared, that Moyses said I feare & quake. And thus the law was giuen with great feare,Exod. 34; and with great glorie, for the children of Israell could not behould the face of Moyses for the glorie of his countenance, with out a vayle, which in Christ is put awaye, for if the ministration of the lawe
which is to condemnation beeglorious,Cor. 2.3.much more doth the ministration of the spirite of promise vnto righteousnes exceede in glory: And thus the law which began many hundred yeares after the pro∣mis e, was added because of transgression as a schoolemai∣ster to teach what sinne ment: and not that it could giue life,Gal. 3. or disanull the promise made to Abraham, for the promise by faith in Iesus doth bring the inheritance, and not the law which doth conclude all things vnder sinne: for by the déedes of the law shall no man be iustified be∣fore God,Rom. 3. but are iustified fréely by grace through the re∣demption that is in Christ Iesus, who is the iustifier of them that beleeue in him, after the example of righteous Abraham. Wherefore the Lord to discouer our filthy nakednes and corruption brought by the sinnes of Adam, did giue vs the law, that therby we should come to the knowledge of our infirmities, vices, & wretchednes, which raigneth in our earthly members, thereby knowing our state by the first Adam to be miserable, and falne into the daunge∣rous house and prison of al vncleannes: being most wret∣ched without hope, vnlesse God of his mercie had made his promise to Abraham that we should be bles sed in his seede, through a redeemer. Whereupon the Lord to shew the imperfection of the law touching the giuing of life and saluation:The imperfec∣tion of the law and per∣fection of pro¦mise.And the more to declare the perfection and power of his promise in Christ, yt in it consisteth the gift of power to obtaine the inheritance of euerlasting life and blessednes, doth confirme (many yeares after the law gi∣uen) his foresaid testament, vnto Moyses, saying: Deu. 18. The promise made to Moises.I will raise them vp a prophet from among their brethren like vnto thee, and I will put my words in his mouth, and hee shall speake vnto them all that I shall commaund him, and whosoeuer will not hearken vnto the words which he shal speake in my name, I will require it of him: according to Iohn, he that heareth my words saith Christ, and
belée∣uethIohn 5.on him that sent me, hath euerlasting life, Luk and who soeuer stumbleth at that s tone shall be broken, for saith Christ, Iohn 10.I am the good s hepheard, that gaue his life for the sheepe, and my sheepe heare my voyce. And moreouer after a long distinction of time the Lord not vnmindfull of his testament, raised vp his faithfull seruant Dauid to be king ouer Israel, being of the loynes of Abraham, of whose seede he promised that a branch of righteousnes should arise and sit in his seate, The promise to Dauid.s aying to Dauid by the prophet Nathan, Kings 2.7Thy house and thy king∣dome shall endure without end, after thee: and thy seate shall be stablished for euer, according to Esay, Esay 9.vnto vs a childe shall be borne & a sonne giuen, vpon whose shoul∣der the kingdome s hall lye, and he shall sit vpon the seate of Dauid: Esay. 11.for, there shall come a rod forth of the kindred of Iesse, and a blossome out of his roote, the spirite of the Lord shall light on it, he shall smite the world with the sword of his mouth, & with the breth of his lips shall slay the wicked: Righteousnes shall bee the girdle of his loynes, truth and faithfulnes the girding of his reynes: Ezech. 17.for I will take s aith the Lord, a braunch from an high Cedar tree, and wil set it, and take the vppermost twigg, and yet is but tender, and plant it vpon an high hill, that it may bring forth twigges and be a great Cedar tree, so that all maner of foules may abide in it, and make their nests vnder the shadow of his braunches. And out of this branch came the virgine Marie springing out of the Ce∣dar tree which is the tribe of Iuda, & the vttermost twigg is Christ, who vpon the hil of Sion did bring forth twigs, his twelue apostles, and disciples, which became a great Cedar tree that is a mightie congregation of the faithful church of Christ, ye al maner of foules which is that there should be of all sortes of people ye should abide in Christs doctrine, and build their nest of saluation on him, accor∣ding to
Esay, Kings ond Princes shall arise, and worshipthe holy one of Israell, who is a pledge for the people, and helpe vp the earth againe, and chalenge the scattered he∣ritage, and shall say to them that are in darknes come in∣to the light, and to the prisoners go forth, and shall gather to his kingdome all nations be they neuer so farre: wher∣by doth appeare that such is the gift of the promise, that all nations shall be blessed thereby, & that such is Christes calling that the people of all lands where soeuer, shall partake of the faith of the Gospell, so that it is apparant that euery inhabited corner of the world shall receiue the doctrine of the faith, before the end of the world, according to Mathew,Math. 24. this glad tidings of the kingdome shall bee preached in all the world for a witnes vnto all nations, and then shal the end come, for saith Esay the people that dwell in darknes shall see a great light, and vpon them that dwell in the land of the shadow of death shall it shine, that the knowledge of the Lord shall bee full vpon the earth, as the water of the sea floweth ouer the earth: for the Gentiles shall inquire after the roote of Iesse, and the Lord shall gather together the dispersed of Israel, and the outcastes of Iuda, and then shall men reioyce before God as men make mery in haruest. for saith hee, I will stretch out my hand to the Gentiles and set vp my token to the people, for Kinges shall be thy nurcing fathers and Queenes thy nurcing mothers,Esay. 9. and all they that thinke a scorne of him shall be confounded, for behold he bringeth his treasure with him, and his works goeth before him, hee shall feede his flocke like and heardman,Esay, 49. he shall gather the lambs together with his arme and carry them in his bosom and kindly intreate them that beare young, wherein the prophet foretelleth the power, vertue and excellencie of Christ, that though he came in the humilitie of the flesh, yet such was his miracles, his works and his treasures of goodnes, as would allure, animate, and inflame al men to∣ward him: and besides that so precious was his
conuer∣sation,so pure his demenure, so louing his humanitie, so excellent his disposition, so good in his doings, and so flo∣wing in holesome doctrine, as that he is a most amiable and precious Adamant to draw men to his kingdom, yea and in manner to constraine them to loue him which ne∣uer knew him: yea such is his gentle intreating, like a lo∣uing father to his sonne, like a carefull shephard ouer his sheepe, like a good henne that gathereth her chickens vn∣der her wings, so he is tender ouer man. And therefore beware that we shew not our selues vnthankfull. For when the children of Israel, were cleane gone astray frō God, as shéepe without a shepheard, then the Lord mind∣full of his promise to Iacob, said: Esay. 27.I will root Iacob againe, and Israel shall be greene and beare flowers, and fill the whole world with her fruit, Esay 35.then shall the desert and wil∣dernes reioyce, and the wast groundes florish like a lilie: Esay. 44.And I will power waters vpon the drie ground, and riuers vpon the thirstie, and shall giue waters in the wildernes and streames in the desert, that I may giue drinke to my people whom I haue chosen to praise me. By this wee see des cribed (as in a metaphor) how farre the spirituall water of Christes doctrine shal extend it selfe, in al boun∣tifulnes ouer all the world, that the wildernes, desertes, and drie groundes, being the barbarous, rude and sauage people of all places, shall haue offered vnto them the wa∣ter of the streames of the fountaine of Iacob, the gospell of Christ to wash away there vncleannes and wicked∣nes, so that it is manifest, that the Church of Christ is tyed to no particular place or kingdome, but is freely dis∣persed throughout the whole world, wherby it appeareth that the Papists do worke against the streames of Ia∣cob, to stop the riuers from the thirstie. And now againe, the Lord saith: Esay. 43, 44I will power (O Iacob) my spirite vpon thy seede, and mine increase vpon thy stocke, they shall growe together like as the grasse, for there shall
spring out of thema captaine, & prince which the Lord shall chalenge to him selfe,Iere. 30. Eay, 6. Iere. 33. Es ay. 49. who shall open the prison to them that are bound, and he is the glad tydings to the poore, who shall bring re∣demption to the captiue, and res tore Israel, and set vp his honour in Iuda, and in Dauids stoole, that all nations shall honour him: yea kings and princes shall arise and worship this holy one of Ifraell. By which the prophets conclude, that although we know all the law of Moyses, and bee carefull in keeping it, yet wee are in prison and bondage to death, without we imbrace Christ, and preferre him a∣boue the law, and aboue all workes, as the onely doore to enter into Gods rest: for he doth open the prison, wherein we were tyed to damnation by the fetters of Adams cor∣ruption, who hath the keyes of hell and death, according to Esay: vnto Sion shal come a redeemer, yea the Lord said I will lay a stone in Sion a costly corner stone,Esay. 59. Esay. 28. Zach. Dan. 2. a sure foun∣dation, that who so put his trust in hem shall not bee con∣founded. And saith he, behold I will hew him out, and take away the sinne of the land in one day. As saith Daniel: there was hewen a stone without handes, that smote the image, and became a great mountaine, which fulfilleth the whole earth: so that it is vnpossible to obtaine glorificati∣on, vnlesse we imbrace this precious stone of Sion: nei∣ther is it possible for the great Image of the first or laste monarchy of Babylon to withstand or hold back the po∣wer of this stone of Sion, by whose force the pompe of the Image of Rome shall be broken like an earthen pot that flyeth in many peeces, although it please the Lord to suf∣fer that romish beast still to beare a sway among those children, which be as Esaw, that make light of the birth-right of the eternall kingdome giuen onely by Christes gospell: and not by the traditions and fancies of men: And therefore that last Image of Babilon must bee shaken a sunder, that promiseth other meanes, and more waies
to winne euerlasting life, then onely by this cornerstone. Wherefore as pure gold is tryed from counterfect, by the touch, so all ye that feare damnation, trye the tra∣ditions of that Image of Rome by reading the pure gos∣pell, with feare and reuerence to God, and with care of your soules health: and you shall finde that the gospell which is the true touch of truth will bring thee home a∣gaine from the darke dales of Rome, to the bright moun∣taine of Sion: of whom the Lord said by Ieremie, I will set vp the righteous braunch of Dauid, that shall set vp e∣quitie in the earth, that Iuda shall be saued,Iere. 23. and Israel dwell without feare, and they shall call him the Lord our righte∣ous maker, for saith the Lord: I wil giue you an heardman,Iere. 3. after my owne minde, which shall feede you with wise∣dome, that Ierusalem shall be called the Lords seate:Esay. 2. for the law shall come out of Syon and the word of God from Ie∣salem. And therefore we must desire onely to be fed with the wisedome that proceede from this our heauenly heard∣man, imbracing no other word of doctrine but that which he gaue vs from Ierusalem, being his pure gospell, buil∣ded vpon the Apostles and prophets, for saith Paule, the holy Scripture is able to make the wise to saluation through the faith which is in Christ Iesus.Timoth. .. And ther∣fore beware least you be spoyled through Philosophy and deceitfull vanitie, and through the traditions of men,Col. 2. and ordinances, after the world and not after Christ: for the Lord said by Ieremie. I will make a new couenant with the house of Israell, that is,Iere. 31. I will plant my lawes in their in∣ward parts, euen in their hartes, and will be their God, and from thence forth shall no man teach his brother or neigh∣bour saying, know God, for they shall all know me, from the lowest to the highest, according to Ioel:Ioel. 2. I will power out my spirite vpon all flesh, and your sonnes and daugh∣ters shall prophesie, your olde men shall dreame dreames, and your young men shall
see vis ions yea vpon those daiesI will powre out my spreit vppon s eruants and Maides. Whereby wée may gather, that such is the power of the Gospell of Christ, and promise of our redemption and sal¦uation, that neither the contrary powers of Sathan, nor the obstinat malicious or barbarous tyranie of men hath powre to withholde it, (at the tyme appointed) from the people of God: for the Lorde hath spoken it, that it shall spread ouer the world, and that his spyrit shall enter into all fleshe:It is against the prophesie of Ioel to hold the Scripture in an vnknow on language. So that it is great repugnauce to the ordenāce of God to holde back the frute & swéet taste of the Gospell from the people by concealing it vnder a cloke of an vn∣knowen language & strange tounge, which is a vaile that hydes the face and brightnes of the glory of the Gospell of our saluation, from the people that desyre to knowe it, & sée it, and ought to come vnto it: as the vayle did hang be¦fore Moyses face, because the childrē could not behold the glory of his countenance which God gaue, by geuing the law: but now we are able through the gift of the spreit of Christ, who hath takē away ye vaile from Moyses, & giuē an opē fountaine of cléernes to behold ye trueth of his gos∣pell of saluatiō in yt it is ye Lords bountifull blessing yt all flesh should fele the operation of ye holy spreit: & to come to to his waters & buy his milke & wine witout mony and mony worth (which is his gospell yt féedeth and nuris heth like milke, & gladdeth & cheareth ye hart like wine: so that héerby is cléerly condēned & cast to the ground the traditi∣ons of papistrie, yt lock vp ye word of God in an vnknowen language, yt none can come to Gods holy water without mony or mony worth: such is ye darnel & cockel of their tra¦ditiōs, as to worrow Chris tes shéep & to wrap thē in blind¦nes, whē notwtstanding it ought to be yt the gospel should be opened plain, manifest & and vnclocked, yt the saying of ye prophet may be fulfilled both sōnes & daughters, maids & seruants to prophesie, which is with vnders tanding to offer vnto God by Christ the sacrifice of lande, the frute
of those lippes which confesse his name. Wherfore it is apparent, that it is the duety and part of princes and gouernours, to follow herein the example of Iehosaphat, causting the word of god plainly to be taught among their subiects in the mother language (as Moyses law was to the children of Israell. And it is the duetie and charge of the pastors and ministers to imploy al their diligence to manifest the holy will of God according to the scriptures, by teaching and instructing that euerye where the scripture may be fulfilled according to the pro∣phecie of Ioel and Ieremie, that sonnes and daughters can prophesie, and the law written in their hartes: so that it standeth you vpon to haue care of your soules,Coloss. 2. Mich. 3. that no man make you shoote at a wrong marke. Wherefore Micheas thus prophecieth of the dewe of the gospell of Christ, saying: In the latter daies the hill of the Lords house, shall be set vp higher then anye moun∣taines, and the people shall prease vnto it, & the multitude of gentils hast to it, for the law shal come out of Syon and the word of God from Ierusalem and reforme the people of farre countries,Nath. . for out of Bethlem shal come the captain which shall be the gouernar in Israel, whose out going hath beene from the beginning and frō euerlasting, he shal stand fast & giue food in the strength of the Lord, & in the victorie of the name of the Lord his god, & when they bee conuerted, he shal be magnified, to the farthest parts of the world. Wherby it is declared that in spite of all the ad∣uersaries, ye tread downe the holy sanctuarie of true righ∣teousnes, (will they nill they) ye promise which God gaue to Abraham yt all nations should bee blessed in his s eede, shal by Christs passion extend to all parts of the world, to the praising & glorifying of god. And likewise Esoras doth plainely foretell the ioyfulnesse of Christes comming in his humanitie, saying: O ye heathen,Esdr. 4. looke for your shep∣heard, he shal giue you euerlasting reste, for hee is nighe at hande, that shall come in
the ende of the worlde,be readie to the reward of thy kingdom, for the euerlasting light shall shine vpon you for euermore. Flye the shadowe of this world, receiue the ioyfulnes of your glorie, I testifie my sauiour openly, O receiue the gift that is giuen you, and be glad, giuing thanks vnto him that hath called you to the heauenly kingdome. In this he sheweth how much he is inflamed with the glad foresight of the sauiour that shuld come, kindlyng the hartes of the Gentiles to the expecta∣tion of heauenly rewards. Wherein he is able to rauish all mens hartes with exceeding ioy, in pronouncing the glad tidinges of such a blessed sauiour comming, that bringeth the rewardes of glorie and euerlasting life to al that will receiue and imbrace his gospell: And seing the comming of Christ in the flesh was ioyfull, and filled the world with the oyle of gladnes, and treasures of grace and goodnes: how much more, (we now looking for him to come in the end of the world in the glorie of his father in all power, to giue the rewardes of glorification and e∣ternall life,) ought to awake and arise vp, from all world∣ly and fleshly vanities, and prepare our hartes to holines, and righteousnes, that with the aboundant ioy of a pure faith, and a cleere and a stedfast hope, we may meete our sauiour comming in the cloudes. And touching Christes comming in his humanitie, it pleased God that he should appeare in the flesh, in all meeknes,Zach. 9. Iohn 12. Luke 9. Math. 21. Mark. 11. lowlines, and humblenes of obedience to teach vs the will of his father in all truth of righteousnes, ac∣cording to Zacharie: Reioyce O Syon, and bee glad O daughter Ierusalem, for loe thy king commeth vnto thee, euen the righteous and sauiour, lowly and simple is he, hee rydeth vpon an Asse, he will giue doctrine of peace vnto the heathen, and his dominion shall be from the floudes to the end of the world, and shall be a sauing health to all na∣tions: by this consider ye men vpon the earth, how wor∣thy
Chris t is, and how precious a pearle he is in all mensharts, and yet to shewe the contempte of this transitorie world and the vanitie thereof, and to teache vs the true path steppes of vertue and holynes: dooth hé ere make him self to the eyes of all Ierusalem a looking glasse of all low lines and humblenes of hart, ryding into the Cittie in all plaines and simplenes sitting vppon an asse, as one of no reputation and nothing estéemed, but like an inferiour, and yet an eternall king, a captaine, an heauenly Father and sauiour of the world: by whōe we are to note that the true path to vertue and holynes, is humilitie, obedience, and lowlynes: for among the conferences of men, it is a most accepted thing to common rea son, to haue our go∣uernour, our captaine, our maister, or teacher, of whome we are to be gouerned, guided or instructed, to be gentle, humble, mé ek, louing, tractable, curteous and mercifull-by that meanes, winning & drawing our harts volūtarily, to loue him, follow him & imbrace his will: then how much more are we boūd to god, (yt all the world sleping in their sin, & wallowing in their wickednes) that it pleased him not to cōe vnto vs wt the sharpe rod, or with the naked or scored sword to the s laughter: but to sende his déere sonne Christ in ye humilitie of ye fleshe to be like vnto vs: being such a true & gentle captaine & guide: so louing and boun∣tifull a redemer: so humble & lowly a tearher, so pure of demenor & conuersation, as yt he is the only & true lodestōe of loue, to drawe all men (which are of them selues stub∣burn, froward, disdainfull and wilfull) to ye louing & imbra¦cing of him, therby the redier to followe his doctrine of e∣ternall peace & saluatiō to vs ward: And therfore beholde ye abundāt loue & mercy of god, (who thus after so excellēt a meanes) seketh to draw vs frō our earthly corroptiō and frō the bdōage of death to his heuinly grace & eternall king¦dome) we being of our selues a froward generation touch¦ing goodnes, in ye sin did dwell in vs as a common rotto all mankinde if the God of mercies had not sent this our
redée¦merto clense and wash away our filth and foulenes: and therefore let no man boaste of him selfe any thing, for wee haue nothing which wée haue not receiued of Christ, nei¦ther according to the saying of Ieremie. Let not the wise man reioyce in his wisdome, nor the strong in his strength:Ieremie. 9.nor the rich man in his riches, but who will reioyce let him reioyce in Christe, who is our on¦ly saluation: Wherfore o ye souereigne Kings & Quéenes yée swéet Lordes and Ladies: yee loouing Fathers and mo¦thers, yée wise Maisters & mistresses, yee obedient sonnes and daughters, yée diligent and dutiefull seruants and maides? reioyce and be glad and behold your king and pre¦cious Sauiour Christe ryding into Ierusalem lowly and humbly? and now aryse and lyft vp your eyes of repen∣tance, to heauen: and reioyce and beholde how hée is rea∣dy to come in all glory and maiestie with all the powers of heauen, to crowne you with glorious and heauenly glorification. Therfore cast of from your hartes the euill mantell of pryde, disdaine, arrogancie, haughtines, vnmercifulnes, frowardnes, sinne and vnrighteousnes: and put on the mantel of Christes humblenes, lowlynes, mercifullnes, goodnes, holynes and righteousnes, that you may mé ete Christe with ioy and receiue the incorruptible crowne of eternall glorie: for thus saithe the Lord: I will set his do∣minion in the sea, and his right hand in the floodes, he shall call mee:Psalme. 89. thou art my Father, my God and my strong sal∣uation, and I will make him my first borne, higher then the Kings of the earth,Esay. 55. my mercy will I keepe for him for euermore, and my couenance shall stand fast with him, his seede also will I make to indure for euer, and his throne as the dayes of heauen: of whome hée sayeth, My seruaunt whome I will giue for a witnesse,Esay 52. prince and captaine to the people will I keepe to my selfe, hee is myne elect, in whome my soule is
pacified: I will giue him my spirit, that hee may shewe foorth iudgement and equitie among the Gentiles: hee shall not be an outcryer, nor high mynded, his voice shall not bee heard in the streates, a brused eede shall hee not breake, and the s moking flackes shall hee not quench, but faithfully and truely shall hee giue iudgement, hee shall neither bee ouer seene nor hastie, that hee may re∣store righteousnes to the earth, for I the Lord hath called the in righteousnes and do lead the by thee hand: therfore will I also defend and giue thee for a couenāt of the people and to be the light of the Gentiles, that thou mayest open the eyes of the blynde, let out the prisoders, and them that fit in darknes out of the doungeon house. In this the Prophet foretelling that Christe shoulde come in the fleshe death shewe that by his meanes only wée shall bee brought to an attonment and peace with GOD the Father: expressing the perfectionn of looue and pleasure which GOD the Father hath in his sonne Christe, béeing one selfe same nature in another: accor¦ding to Mathew.Math. 3.17. This is that belooued Sonne in whome is my delight: and according to the saying of the Prophet Dauid in the second Psalme: Thou art my sonne this day haue I be∣gotten thée: and héerin wé e learne that if Christe is so bée∣loued of God, béeing God, according to the fortie nine Psalme, the Father of heauen saith to his sonne: God: Thy seat shall be for euer and euer: then how muche are wée bound to looue, so beloued a God and Sauiour to vs, giuing him all the praise, honor and thankes, euermore lyfting vp pure hands: for so great treasures of vertue and goodnes, for his cléernes of trouth and iudgement, for the light and brightnes of his moste holy and blessed doctrine for his aboundant swéetnes of his excéeding and bountiful loone toward vs moste miserable sinners, in that hée of
his meere mercie and goodnes hath broughte vnto vsredemption and delyuerance out of the bondage of sathan, sinne and death, calling vs to holynesse of lyfe thereby by imitating him, to be made by righteousnesse the sonnes of God, and pertakers of the euerlasting kingdome: And further, the Lord saith, My seruant shall deale wis ely ther∣fore shall he be magnified, exalted and greatly honored, like as the multitude shall meruaile at him, because his coūtenāce shalbe so deformed and hard fauoured aboue the sonnes of men: yea, he shall haue neither beautie nor fauour, whē we look vpō him, there shalbe no fairnes in him, we shall haue no lust vnto him, hee shall be the most simple and dispised of all, (which yet hath good experience in sorrowes and in firmities) but wee shall reckon him so vile and base that we shall not regard him: how be it of a trueth hee only takes a∣way our infirmitees. Whervpon consider according to Paule that Christ dooth make him self of no reputation and taketh vpon him the shape of a seruant, and became lyke vnto man and was found in his apparell as a man: and that he abasing him self (in respect of all worldly wisdome) was of the wis e ac¦cording to the wisdome of this world dispised, scoffed and s corned at hée béeing him self verry wisdome it self and the fountaine therof: and he being beautie it self and the Au∣thor of all beautie and fairnes, woulde shewe him selfe without beautie and fauour: to condemne the vanitie of fleshly beautfe, and extoll the excellencie and woorthines of the spirituall and heauenly beautie of the soule: wher∣fore O yée Children and Daughters of men, yee are be∣come so nyce, so arogant and coy because of your faces and so proude of your beauties: Come from your vaine looking glasses:The contempt of fleshly beau¦tie. and beholde, héer, I offer vnto you the bright shy¦ning glasse of all excellencie, euin Christe your King and Sauiour the Author and Giuer of all beauties and godlynesse: to beholde him, béeing without fauoure and fairnesse, beeing lowely, mé eke,
and most humble,being simple and not gorgeous: how hee condemned and dispised your vaine fleshly pleasure and gaynes: euen in the cleere example of his owne person, giuing you him∣selfe, for a rule: that you reioice not in apparell, nor vainely conceaue of your vaine flesh, and outward comli∣nes of nature, but onely in the beautie of your soules, by adorning and decking your inward man with all spiritu∣all rayments of holines and precious ornaments of righ∣teousnes, which will neuer decay: whereas the flesh and all that pertaine to his furniture, is (as S. Peter saith) as grasse, and all the glorie of man is as the flower of grasse:Pet. 1.1. the grasse therof withereth, and the flower fadeth away, but the word of God endureth for euer. Moreouer the prophet saith, that we shall dispise him, and yet he beareth our paine,Esay. 53. and we shall so contemtuous∣ly thinke of him, as that we shall iudge him, as though he were plagned and cast downe of God, wheras he notwith∣s tanding shal be wounded for our offences, and smitten for our wickednes, for the paine of our punishment, shall bee laid vpon him, and with his stripes shall we be healed, hee shall be pained and troubled and shall not open his mouth he shall be led as a sheepe to be slaine,The prophesie of Christes death.yet shall he be as stil as a lambe, before the shearers and not open his mouth, he s hall be had away, his cause not heard, and without anye iudgement, whose generation yet no man may number, when he shall be cutt off from the ground of the liuing, which punishment shall go vpon him for the transgressi∣on of my people, his graue shal be giuen with the condem∣ned, and his crucifying with the theeues, whereas hee did neuer violence nor vnright, neither hath there beene anye deceitfulnes in his mouth, yet hath it pleased the Lord to smite him, with infirmity, that when he had made his soule an offering for sinne, he might see long lasting seede, and my righteous seruant saith the Lord: shall with his wise∣dome, iustify and deliuer the multitude, for he shall beare
away their sinnes, therefore will I giue him the multitude for his part, and hee shall diuide the strong spoile, because he shal giue ouer his soule vnto death, and shal be reckoned among the transgressors, which neuerthelesse shall take a∣way the sinnes of the multitude and make intercession for the misdoers: here it is plaine and manifest to be seene, of all Iewes, and Gentiles, Heathen, and Turkes, how e∣uidently Christ was prophesied of, by Esay: that all men may well know (that hath desire of eternall life) that hee it is in all tokens whom the Iewes haue put to death (be∣ing the first promised seed to Abraham) for the prophet de∣clareth the order of his iudgement, the maner of his deth, euen to be crucified with theeues: in al points as his per∣secutors and Iewes did handle and intreate him moste barbarously and hardly, being an innocent lambe. Wherfore touching the contemtuous disdainfull and reprochfull handling of Christ vnto death,Of Christes death. they came to apprehend him in the garden (like furious enimies) with clubs and staues: they rent and teared his clothes, he was tossed among the high priests and scornfull pharasies,Math. 26. then hasted away to the iudge, there beset with false accusers, hudling vp false witnes against him:Luk. 23. then posted ouer to king Herod, there dispited in most abiect maner of him & his soldiours:Mark. 15. then brought again before Pilate, & heuily reuiled, & oppressed with the spite and hatred of ye Iewes, crying: crucefige, crucefige, then (like barbarous ty∣rants, and sauage beasts) void of all mercie and humani∣tie, spitted on his face, & buffeted him with fistes, with rai∣ling, raging, mocking and disdaining him wt scoffes, gri∣ping him with bonds: scurging him with many stripes, crowning him with sharpe thornes,Iohn 9.putting a reed for a scorne in his hand: thus compa ssing him about with al re∣proch, then hasting him to his deth, making him to beare his crosse, nailed his tender flesh, wounded &
pearced him and crucified him betweene two theeues, wagging theirheads at him in mo st dispiteful maner. And thus was the king of glory crucified, being obedient to ye crosse, and hū∣ble vnto death, and pacient to indure the hard speakinges of sinners against him, and yet praying to god for them, & thus was he a pure vndefiled lambe, wounded for our of∣fences, his precious bloud shed for our sins, by which hee tooke away the curse of the law from vs, and made vs at an attonement with God, and brought redemption to the world. Wherfore al ye people of the earth, I cal you here to the presence of Christes death, to behold what he hath suffered for you vpon his great loue. Therefore let your eies gush out wt teares, and let your harts make inwarde sorrow and lamentation for your sins, repenting, for his kingdome againe is readie at hand: therfore examine thy hart, where, and what is, and ought to bee thy loue again to Christt, hat hath thus bought thee with his tender blood and prepared for thee euerlasting life: so that looke into thy selfe, how faithfull, thankfull, and louing thou oughtest to be for such his goodnes toward thée: for scarse will any dye for a good man, but Christ dyed for thée,Rom. 5. be∣ing both vngodly, a sinner and an enimie: to purchase to thee euerlasting life: (O) what aboundant loue is this? And wilt thou be therefore vnthankfull? Then wo be to thee that art (more) then vnnaturall, more then vnkinde, and more thē hard harted. Alas where art thou, thou fro∣ward Iewe? that vpon obstinate enuie, wilfull blindnes, and of an vnmercifull mind, diddest dispise ye king of glo∣rie? And will not you, now, (ye people) from age to age, take example to beware how you seale your hartes with the hard ware of a Iewes wilfulnes, hardnes and blind∣nes againe? Now then, that this day you heare his voice, (the very voice of your good shepheard that gaue his life for his sheepe) harden not your harts (as your fathers did in ye wildernes) & so could not enter ye land of rest and pro∣mise: no more shal you enter Christes
kingdom, vnles yereceiue his gospell with true loue and faith toward him. Wherefore do not crucifie Christ againe in thy hart by obstinate sinne, by wilfull blindnes, and carelessenes: like a Iew and Turke, despising the humanity of Christ that was so humble: by being malicious and vnkind to him that is so good: by being cruell and froward to him that is so mercifull: by enuying and persecuting him that is a pure innocent, when as (in mans wisedome) it is wicked∣nes to scorne the good, cruelty to deale hardly with the simple and innocent: foolishnes to iest with holy thinges: madnes to hate him that loueth: lewdnes to refuse good doctrine: and wicked furiousnes to reiect and make light of s aluation: therefore awake, and beate downe thy chur∣lish hart, thy pernicious nature, and stiffe conceit, and put on louing kindnes and mercy, faith and hope, and be quick in will and mind to receiue Christ, and be constant in re∣taining him: and so let thy loue be sure and stable toward him,Reu. 5. for no treasure is of so great certaintie as the perfect and immouable loue of Christ, who standeth at the dore of thy hart and knocketh, and if thou wilt heare his voice and open thy hart to receiue his wordes, he will come in and sup with thee, and thou shalt for so entertaining him and his righteous doctrine, sup with him at his heauenly table of euerlasting benediction and blessednes. Thus perswade thy selfe, that no man loueth thee more intirely, nor regardeth thy saluation more tender∣ly then Christ doth, and seing we confesse by nature, that loue is allured by nothing so much as by loue,The loue of Christ passeth all things. then O thou earthly man and vnthankfull hart, loue Christ a∣gaine (for thy soules health) that so aboundantlye loueth thee. So that let neither the pompe of this worlde, nor pleasure of fleshly delightes, nor kindred, nor countries, or nations, nor profession, nor condition of liuing, nor causes diminish thy loue from Christ, and from thy brother or neighbour
for Christes sake: Seing there is one father ofall whome wee are tauht of Christe, to call father dayly, which will acknowledge thee to bee his chyld, if thou like wise acknowledge all his children to be thy brethren. Therfore learne looue, pacience and mercy by Christe, that in whatsoeuer estate you be, to bee therewith conten¦ted, holding fast the faith and patience of Christe,Phil. 4. béeing assuredlye perswaded that the ready and compendious way to come vnto Gods fauour, is to looue and imbrace Christe and his woord with a pure and faithfull hart, and to loue one an other, for if we loue one an other sayeth Iohn: God dwelleth in vs and his looue is perfect in vs,Iohn. 14. for he that loueth God mu st loue his brother also, though he be an enemie: for sayeth Christe, looue your enemies, blysse them that cursse you, doo good to thē that hate you.Math. 5. and in so dooing, we shall follow the example of our saui∣our Christe and be Gods Children in conuersation of ho∣lynes and goodnes. And thus Christe the Author and fini∣sher of our redemption, hauing performed his Fathers will by preaching first him selfe the Commaundements of his Father, and by diuers signes, wounders and mira∣clrs done according to his will to confirme the power of his Father,Heb. 5. did in his fleshe offer vp prayers and supplica∣tions with strong crying and teares, vnto him that was able to saue him from death, and was also heard because of his godlynes, and now vpon the Crosse yéelded vp his soule into the hands of his Father, who reysed him from death, and he is ascended vp to heauen, and is set on the right hand of the Maiestie of the Father, according to the saying of the Prophet. The Lord sayd vnto my Lord, sit on my right hand till I make thy enemies thy footestoole: Wherby conceiue how Christe béeing promysed afore by God and his holy Pro∣phets in the holy Scriptures to come of the seede of Abra∣ham as perteining to the fleshe,Psalme. 19. and declared to be ye sonne of God with power of
the holy Ghoste that sanctifieth,was borne of the Virgin Mary by the imbracing of the ho¦ly Ghos te, (the holy Virgin being eternally appointed to this great mistery to be the Mother of Iesus: for the inui¦sible power of the Godhed did ouer s hadowe the whole bo¦dy and mynde of the most holy Virgin without any hurt or detriment of her chastitie) so that the worke of his con∣ception, was not of man but of the holy Ghoste) by the in comprihensble power of insperation, for saieth the Lord by Esay:Esay. 7 Beholde a Virgin shalbe with chylde, and shall bring foorth a sonne, and they shall call his name Emanuel God with vs: and so the Angell sayd to Ioseph, that which is conceiued in her, is of the holy Ghoste, shee shall bring foorth a sonne and thou shalt call his name Iesus,Math. 1. for hee shall saue his people from their sinnes, hee shall be great & called the sonne of the highest, and sonne of God, and the Lord shall giue vnto him the seat of his father Dauid, and hee shall reigne ouer the house of Iacob for euer and of his kingdome shall be no end,Luk. 1. euen as hee promised to our fa∣thers Abraham and his seede for euer. So that wée haue such an Aduocate with the Father, (Iesus Christe the mercifull) as hath put down through his death and passion the deuill that hath the Lordship o∣uer death, and hath s poyled rule and power and triumphs ouer them in his owne person, and hath nayled the cursse of the law to his crosse and hath caryed captiuitie captiue vp to heauen beeing their set down on the right hand of God,Colloss. 2. being able to saue them that come to God by him, séeing he euer lyueth to make intercessiō for vs,Heb. 7. who with one offering made perfect for euer thē that are sanctified: Heb. 10.Wherfore wee may clearely as by the light of the Sun beames sée & conceiue that they doe lay another foundati∣on (then the Apostle Paul dooth héere lay) that teache the people to vse any other Aduocat or intercessor then Chist, or to vse intercessors to Christe, which euermore is him self an intercessor for vs: whōe we know apparently by e∣uident
scriptures, that he liueth and is with God in glory their making intercession for vs, & able to doe it by power of his victory, and because he euer liueth and was orday∣ned to that eternall misterie, for it is written, that ye whole kingdome doe lye on his shoulders, the paines of our sins rest vpon his woundes and stripes, and our whole redemp¦tiō is only by him, so that it repugneth against Christes glory, (who is crowned with glory and honour for suffe∣ring death for vs) to offer intercession and meditation to Saincts, to pray to Ladies and Churrh-roodes and to wā¦der a pilgrimage to offer to picturde images of Sainctes, which is strong delusion and horrible abhomination, and verry stubble and straws of a strauge foundation of erro∣nious doctrin, perniciously sowen amōg the people which the Lord in one day shall consume with fire. And besides séeing wée are made perfect with one only offering made by Christe him selfe through the spirit that sanctifieth,Heb. 10. then consider from what foundatiō those vain erronious masses doe come and be not deceiued with thē: for Christe hath once offered him selfe a sufficient sacrifice for vs the iust, for the vniust, for to bring vs to God whose blood clenseth vs from all sinne, for Christe hath deliuered vs from the cursse of the law, and was made accursed for vs, that the blessing of Abraham might come vppon the Gentles:Gal.. Therfore let vs be thankfull and pray only vnto God by Christe and vse no other intercessors of our owne conceites imagined:Pet. 13. but let vs consider how much God set¦teth out vnto vs his aboundant looue that while wée were enemies & sinners, his only begotten sonne Iesus should dye for vs, being killed as perteining to the fleshe & quick∣ned in the spirit, who thus suffered for vs (to reconcile vs to God) and yet did no sinne, neither was there guyle found in his mouth, who when hée was reuiled,Pet . reuiled not againe, when hée suffered, hée threatned not, but patiently
cōmitted and delyuered the only cause vnto himthat iudgeth righteously, and thus his owne self bare our sinnes in his body on the trée▪ yt wée should bee delyuered from s inne and lyue in righteousnes,Esay. 53. for whosoeuer dooth truely and purely looue Christe and imbrace the faithe of his Gos pell can not but doo the woorkes of righteousnes, and obedyence (lyke to righteous Abraham) otherwise perswade thy conscience and be not deceiued in thy conceit but that thy looue to Christe is colde, faint and brickle, if thou hast imbraced the knowledge and faith of the Gos∣pell and yet doost not the woorkes of righteousnes and ho∣lynes: for then thou art yet carnall and not spirituall, ha∣uing not yet crucified the olde Adam: wherfore consider that by grace wée are made safe, through faith, and that not of our selues, for it is the gift of God and commeth not of woorkes,Ephe. 2. least any should boa st him self, for we are his woormanship created in Christ Iesus vnto good woorks that wee shoulde walke in them, so that none can looue Christe in purenes of hart, but that of verry force hée will walke in good woorks as thinges that are vnpossible to bée seperated from him that is sanctified with the spirit of a∣doption and grace, for as Christ is the fountaine of all ho∣lynes and righteousnes, and of all grace and goodnes: so it must needes followe that whome Christe hath sancti∣fied with his Spirit, that they must of necessitie doo the woorkes of grace and righteousnes: so long as they labour and indeuour to be renued and confirmed in the spirit of grace, which wée receiuing and takeing of Christe, must of force confesse, that without it wée haue no power to cru¦cifie our fleshe and to resist sinne: and therfore by it, wée haue power to mortifie our earthly members and to doo the woorkes of righteousnes: whereby it is moste euident and plaine, that by the grace giuen by Christe through faith, wée may assuredly and boldely perswade our s elues that wee are only iustified and saued.
Therefore saith Peter,Pet. 1.1. blessed be God the father of our Lord Iesus, which through his aboundant mercie, begat vs againe, to a liuely hope, by the resurrection of Christe from death, to inioy an inheritance immortall and vnde∣filed, reserued in heauen for vs, after which the prophets inquired and searched, prophesying of the grace that shuld come vnto vs, by the spirite of of Christ which testified before, of the passions that should come vnto him and the glorie that should follow after, for by Christ we are made spirituall and not carnall, whose spirite doth certifie our spirite, that we are the sonnes of God, and heires annex∣ed with him, who was ordained before the worlde was made that by him our faith and hope might be in God, so that our iustification come not by the deedes of the law, but by the faith of Iesus Christ according to Paule,Thess. God hath from the beginning chosen you to saluation through sanctifying of the spirite, and through the beleeuing of the truth, whereunto he called you by the gospell, for Christe is the end of the law, to iustifie all that beleeue,Rom. 8 Gal. 6.walking not after the flesh, but after the spirite, for what soeuer a man soweth that shall he reape: if he sow in the flesh, hee shall of the flesh reape corruption: but if he sow in the spi∣rite, he shall of the spirite reape life euerlasting: for they that are Christes,Gal. 5. haue crucified the flesh with the appe∣tites and lustes thereof, for Christ hath called vs to holy∣nes, and not to vncleannes, and hath called vs out of bondage into libertie: from ye curse of the law vnto grace: from darknes to light: from death to life, from the spirite of feare to a liuely hope: from a earthly mansion to an he∣uenly kingdome, from transitorie glorie, to euerlasting glorification: therefore stand grounded and established in faith, not moued away from the gospell, but stand fa st in the liuely hope to obtaine the glorie that commeth by Christ,Rom. 8. being vnfainedly pers waded that there is no dam∣nation to
them that are in Christ Iesus, walking afterthe spirite, and hauing their conseruation in heauen. For Christ our sauiour sitting now in the right hand of God in his maiestie,Ephe. 1. was before the world was, by whom wee are predestinated heires, according to the purpose of him that worketh all things, after the purpose of his owne will, that through his gospell, should be brought life and immortalitie, to all that do beleeue in his sonne Iesus Christ the seede of promise to Abraham, who now is de∣clared openly: whom we looke for to come shortly in the glorie of his Father and all holy Aungels with him, in all power and maiestie. And that all eies shall see him, and they also that pearsed him so that al kindreds of the earth shall mourne when they behold Christ comming in the cloudes,Reu. 1. to reward euery man according to his deedes: therfore it behoueth vs to watch and pray, and to become new creatures, thereby making our election sure, by hol∣ding fast his gospell in a stedfast faith by walking after righteousnes, that we may ouercome and be found faith∣full at the appearance of Christ comming in glorie, that we also may be crowned with glorie ioyfully, saying: Bles∣sed is the kingdome that commeth in the name of him,Mark. 11. that is Lord of our Father Da∣uid, Hosanna, in the highest.
Ephe. 1.BLessed be God the Father of our Lorde Iesus Christ which hath blessed vs, with all maner of spirituall blessings in heauenly things by Christ, (ac∣cording as he had chosen vs, before the foundation of the world was laid, that we shoulde bee Saintes through loue, who ordained vs before through Christ, to be heires vnto him selfe, according to the good pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glorie of his grace, wherewith hee hath made vs accepted through the beloued Iesus, by whom wee haue re∣demption through his bloud euen the forgiuenes of sinnes, according to the riches of his grace. Therefore to him be all honor and glorie world without end, Amen.
THE GLORIOVS and beautifull garland of mans glorification. CAP. 2. How man shall bee chaunged at the sounde of the laste troump, from mortalitie to immortalitie, and from an erthly nature to an euerlasting nature: and appeare before the iudgement seat of Chris t, to be rewarded accor∣ding to his deedes, eyther with eternall reproufe: or, els with euerlasting glorification. SVch is the eternall ordenance of the Almightie God touching our saluation, in his Sonne Iesus Christe: that all men ought too knowe that as by a man came death, so by a man come the resur¦rectiō of the dead: for as by Adam all dye, so by Christe shall all bee made alyue: according to Iohn.Iohn. 5. The houre shall come in ye, which all yt are in their graues shall heare Christes voice, and shall come foorth, they that haue done good to the resurrection of lyfe, and they yt haue done euill to the resurrection of dampnation:Esdras. 22. as the Lord sayd by the Prophet: Those that be dead will I rayse vp againe from their places,Daniell. 12.& bring them out of their graues and they that sleepe in the dust of the earth shall awake some to euerlasting lyfe,Acts. 17. some to perpetuall shame and re∣proufe: as it is in the Acts, that the Lord hath appointed a day, in the which hée will iudge the world according to righteousnes, by that man Christe, whome hee hath ap∣pointed and hath offered faith to all men, after that rey∣sed him from death: to whome (saieth Iohn) the Father hath
cōmitted all iudgement, because that all men shouldhonor the sonne euen as they honor the Father, that who soeuer heareth Christes wodes and beléeue on him that sent him,Ihon. 5. hath euerlasting lyfe, and shall not come to dam∣nation, but is scaped from death vnto lyfe, for he only hath the keyes of hell and death and shall iudge the quick,Reue. 1. and the dead at the appearing of his kingdome, were all shall be brought before the iudgement seat of Christe,Tim. 2.4. and eue∣rie one giue accountes of him self to God: for the time is come that iudgement must begin at the house of the Lord consider therefore, what kynde of people we ought to bée in conuersatiō of lyfe,Pet. 14. séeing the righteous iudgement of God, shall be opened, which will reward euery man with prayse, honor and immortalitie, that hath cūtinued in good dooing:Rom. 2. and vnto them which hath béen sinfull, disobeying the trenth & following iniquitie, shall come indignation, and wrath, tribulation and anguish, vpon the soule of eue¦rie man yt doe euill: for there is no parcialitie with God, but dooth iudge without respect of persons according to e∣uerie mans woorkes as shall appeir at ye great day of the Lord when God shall iudge the secretes of men by Iesus Christe according to the Gospell: when we must appeir e before his glorious and shining maiestie, that euery man may reape according as he hath sowen:Heb. 4.whereuppon wée are moste carefully to looke into our owne selues, know∣ing that our soules shall be wayes vpon the ballance, by that moste true and righteous Iudge, whose eyes are as a flame of fire, that sercheth out the ground of our hartes, and knoweth the seceret mouings of our myndes, & iudg∣eth all the thoughts and intentes of man, to whome all things are naked & bare, neither is there any creature in∣uisible in the sight of him▪ who will not fayle to to re∣compence euery man according to his wayes and accor∣ding to the frutes of his counsels and imaginations: Now then that this generall cytation of our infallible apperāce
before that Court regall, which God will holde with allfleshe is so apparent, wée should perswade yt the knowe∣ledge héerof, is moste forcible, to strike into our hartes a trembling feare and dread of our Lord God: who is a con¦suming fire to all that doe continue in wickednes: so that it behoueth vs, not to make lighte accompte of so great and fearfull a matter and it standeth vs vppon, not to bee necligente and carelesse of the order and maner of our liues, séeing it toucheth our Soules so neare the quicke, as that by the conuersation of lyfe in this world (the marke and garland is so set before vs) that if wee run the race of this life,Math. 2.5. like to the fiue good Virgines ha∣uing prepared in our selues (in ye grace of Christ) yt lamps of righteousnes, sanctifying the Lord God in our harts by good conuersation in Christe: then wee shall accompanye Christe or bridegroome in the great day of his comming & shall go in, with him to the wedding, and to the inioying of our new heauenly Ierusalem which is to cōe down frō God from heauen, preparhd as a Bryde for her husband,Roue. 19.béeing rayes with the goodly raines of the righteousnes, of Saincts for the mariage of the vndefiled Lamb, and for the glorious companie of the holy elect, who then are hap∣pie that they are called vnto the lambes supper, ther crow¦ned wt the garland of glorification: Otherwise if wee run the race of this lyfe, like the fiue foolish Virgines not res∣pecting the rule of righteousnes, nor imbracing the Oyle of gladnes brought to vs by Christes Gospell, but wallow¦ing in wickednes and so seek after our fleshly lusts & warld¦ly vanities, then we must be shut out from this heuinlie wedding and throwen down from ye face of God, & from his Sanctes, into that dreadfull darcknes where all are wrapt in sorrow & wot made ye dampned children of cur∣sed shā:Phil. 2.for which cause we ought to watch & pray know¦ing not what day or hours the sonne of man shall come: & therfore we ought to watch & pray: woorking out our sal∣ es t yt our misdéeds
seperate vs from our Godand our sinnes hide his face (for er) from vs. Wherfore ye Prachers, cry out the voice of heauines & the lamenting cryes of dolefulnes, which shall come vnto the wicked ly∣uers vnlesse they repent: and yée Preachers, sound out the voice of ioy, of mirth and gladnes that shall come vnto the godly people: and thou hart faint not, and thou hand slack not to vtter foorth and wri, how the gates of heauen stād open, night and day for penitent sinners, for the faithfull, godly and righteous people to receiue them into blessednes and shewe thy self a watchman to awake with this voice all the people round about out of the sléeping bed of sinne, blowing into the eares of deafe sinners, wretched world∣lings, fleshly lyuers, vicious walkers and wicked dooers: how hell gates doe gape very wide n moste dreadfull ma¦ner, to swallowe vp vngodly and wicked men:Num. 16. (O how did the Isralites tremble and quake when they did se the earth open and s wallow vp Corath,Leui. 10. Dathan and Abyron with all that they had, that they went down quick to hel: O how did the Isralites tremble and shake when a consu∣ming fire came out from the Lord and cons umed Nadab, and Abihu the sonnes of Aaron:Num. 11. then come hither yée In∣habiters of the earth and behold with gushing teares with sorrow and terrour, with sobbes and sighes the day of ven¦geance, with much more terrour of the gates of hell: ga∣ping and gas ping in most hydious, monsterous and horri∣ble manner, to swallow by diffent : and again con sider how the Isralites did saor are when re of the Lord did burne among them and consumed the vtter mo ste of the hoast:Exo. 19. Deut. 4. and how againe they shaked for dread when the Lord came down vpon mount Sinay with tem¦pest & sound of ye trump speaking out of fire: bannow come hither all ye people of ye Lord & beholde the day of ye Lord, for he cōmeth to take vengeance & reward: yea he cōmeth him self lyke a goldsmiths are ye heauens shall perish the elemēts melt, ye earth & all the
withe: according to Paule who saith that,Thess. 2.. Hee shall come with his mightie Aungels, in flaming fire, rendring ven∣geance vnto them that know not God, and to them that obey not the gospell of our Lord Iesus Christ, which shall be punished with euerlasting damnation from the pre∣sence of the Lord and from the glorie of his power, when he shall come to be glorified in his saintes and made mar∣uelous in all them that beleeue: therefore harken vnto this voice, with sorrow of thy sinnes, and remember this day with trembling and repenting: knowing how miserable those sinners were, that continued in wickednes, and droue off from day to day, till the floud came vnawares vpon them, and ouer whelmed, & gulled into their throts:Gen. 7. and how lamentable the Sodomites were, that abode in sinne, and wallowed in the lustes of the flesh, and plea∣sure of the world, and in the lusts of eating and drinking, and vicious life, euen till the fire and brimstone came downe from heauen and consumed and burnt them vp, mo st ufully and heauily: but now behold,Gen. 19. there is com∣ming a thousand fold more, of fire and brimstone, of flames of wee, of flouds of sorrow, and burning plagues of paine, at this daye when all the frame of this world shall flye on a fire, and the Lord shall say, depart ye cursed into euerla∣sting woe, the before turne vnto me (saith the Lord) and I will turne vnto you, and hast to come away (yee people) from slumbring in sinne,Zach. 1. and tarry no longer in your car∣nall lustes, and worldly desires, walking with old Adam in filthy and vaine conuersation: but awake, and rise vp to Christ in holines of life, knowing that you are redee∣med with his precious bloud (as of a lambe vndefiled and without spot) that you may be found vnto laud honour and glorie at the appearing of Iesus Christ:Pet. 1.1. when ye shal giue accoumptes to him who shall come with all power,Pet. 1.4. to iudge the aicke and dead: for which cause ye ought to awake out of sinne, and sit downe vpon the lap of repen∣tance,
there making you readie dayly and hourely, with the garments of righteousnes, the breast plate of faith and loue: and putting on the golden helmet of hope, the preci∣ous badge of your saluation, thereby making your calling and election sure, that when his glorie appeareth, you may be merry and glad, and not ashamed. Wherfore consider this dreadfull day: in which, behold how wofull, how trembling and fearefull it shall be: to see all the borders of the heauens, and earth, in a raging blang and consuming fire: that wee shall crye vnto the hilles and rockes to fall on vs, and how pitifull shall this day be, in which all the kindreds of the earth shall mourn with greeuous lamentings and weepings: therefore let this consideration enter into the eares of thy heart, as the sounde of a terrible trumpet uddering and shaking thy fleshly man; with the remembrance of the groning cryes of the wes in hell: and amating thy inward man with the ioyfull voices of blessednes in heauen, conside∣ring that such is the glorie, that the gospell propound, of the one side: and such is the dreadfull damnation which it threateneth of the other sie: as that the one, is an eter∣nall kingdome of glorie, prepared for the good and godly people, the ioy whereof surpasseth the other is a place of horror and a furnace of vnquencheable paines, ordained for the wicked: into the which they shall be damned, and cast from the face of their G, there remaining, swallo∣wed vp, into the dreadfull and arke gulphes of hell, for e∣uer and euer: and there shall continue tormented with fire and brimstone for euer: where euerie place and cor∣ner is filled with curses and woes, and with most heauy lamentations and bewaylinges: where (alas) the heapes of woes, the stormes of punishments, the raging of spi∣rites, the horror of Sathan, and the crying of soules, may pearce your hartes with the woundes of sorrow, to think of the griefes that shalbe accompanied with ye
lamētabledamnation of departing from god, & from his kingdom of heauen: whereby it shall make that day of sentence and iudgement of death, giuē by Christ, to be most trembling, dreadfull and fearefull. Notwithstanding, there is no cause why any man shuld feare himselfe, so that he perseuere in the christian faith, & good life, as a sure refuge and anker:He that belee∣ueth neede not feare. although great shal be the feare of ye dreadfull day of dome, when Christ shall shew himselfe sodenly & vnlooked for, from an high, after ye maner of a flash of lightening: dreadful to ye wicked, who shall be cast into euerlasting fire: & uost amiable & louely to ye godly persons which shal be called to the feloship of ye heauenly kingdome: for the Lord will let none of his cho∣sen be away, but be shrowded vnder the protection of his Angels, for it is written,Psal. 34. the angel of the Lord tarrieth a∣bout them that feare him, & deliuereth them, yea hee will comfort them, euen when that sodaine and sore perplexity of mind and earnest des peration, shall go as a quauie and wind ouer all nations, yt the people of the earth shall con∣sume and pine away as peple of an other world, for feare of beholding the terrible stroke of God: the powers of he∣uen to moue contrarie to their creation, & the earth shake and reele: & the sea boyle and swel with most dreadful ro∣ring noise, to the dismaing of al mens hartes to behold the whole vniuersall world and al the nature of things ready to be shaken in sunder like an earthen pot, when ye bright shining s un being the fountaine of the light of the earth & heauens, shal with sodain darknes couer his face, imbrai∣ding the vngodly with their blindnes, because they would not see, follow, & imbrace ye euerlasting s on & lanterne of ye world Iesus Christ: & the moone shal giue no light, and ye stars fall, which hath bene so many hundred yeares faste∣ned to the firmament: Then ye glorie of ye Lord shal come, & his face burne that no man can abide it,Esay. 3. and shall set vp the power of
his voyce, an angrie countenaunce with a consuming fire: then the kinges shall vani sh as the scums of the water and shall say to the mountaines co∣uer vs, Ose. 9. and to the hilles fal on vs: fearing the fire of Gods indignation now kindled ouer the whole world, doubting to be girded in the flame thereof: whereat all the nations of the world shal strike their breastes, beholding the signe of the sonne of man: which being sne a vniuersall trepi∣dation shall come vnto all mens hartes, when the Iewes shall see whom they haue offended, and the Gentiles s hal see the maiestie of the crosse which they laughed to scorne for they shall see the sonne of man whom they dispised, comming on high in the cloudes of the ayre with a great armie of Aungels: Esay. 26.who commeth out of his place to visite the wickednes of them that dwell vpon the earth, and who shall abide it: for then shall the axe be put to the roote of the trees, so that euery tree that hath not brought foorth good fruit, shall be hewen downe and cast into the fire: when fire and brimstone, storme & tempest, shall be their portion to drinke: which obstinate sinners haue heaped to them selues, despising the goodnes, patience and long suf∣fering of God, which meanes he vsed in their life time to call them continually to repentance: but then shall it bee to late to knocke, when the dore shall be shut, and to late to crye for mercie, when it is the time of iustice: for hee shall thus come (according to MathewMath. 25.) in his glorie and all the holy Aungels with him, and then sit vpon his seat of iudgement, and all nations gathered before him, sepe∣rating the one from the other, (as a shepheard diuideth the sheepe from the gotes) and shall set the sheepe on the right hand, and the gotes on the left: and then shall hee ioyfully say to them on the right hand▪ Come yee blessed children of my father, inherite the kingdome, prepared for you, from the beginning of the world. And then hee shall say to them of the left hand, depart from me ye cursed, in∣to euerlasting fire which is prepared for the diuels and
his angels: wherin the Apostle setting before our eyes the glorious maiestie of Christes comming, and the effecte of his comming may séeme to pricke all mens harts euen to bléed for sorrow of their sinnes, to think vpon this fearfull sentence of Christ who thus commeth as saith Iohn Bap¦tist, with the fanne in his hand,Matth. 5. and will purge his floure and gather the wheat into his barne, béeing the righteous and the chaffe which are the wicked, he will burne with vnquechable fire: by which wée plainly sée the seperation of the good from the ill: with the deserts and rewardes of bothe parties,Ephe. . and with the whole manner of the latter iudgement which no people high or low shall escape: for all things in heauen and in earth, (according to Paul to ye Ephesians) shall bee gathered togither in Christe: and Christe as a iust iudge shall deuide them into two parties and will showe vnto bothe a iust cause of his iudgement:Math. 25. that the iust may knowe with what well dooinges, they haue attained so great felicitie and ioye: and the ill may know with what offences they haue deserued euerlasting punishment: for Christe shall say with a mylde and mery cheare, to them which hath doone the déedes of righteous∣nes and mercy, for his name sake. Come yee blessed of the Lord inherit the kingdome, and be clothed with your heauinly mansion. Wherfore stirre vp your hartes to imbrace this ioyfull voyce of voyces, which hath powre to kendle and inflame all humble harts to run after godlines, with all looue pow¦er and might of the soule, (without wearynes) to obtaine the ioy of Christes kingdome: for which cause, stoppe not your eares, harden not your harts, follow not your lusts,EPhes. 1. hunt not after worldlynes, but thrist after righteousnes, and walke in the narrow way: and guyde the féete of thy conscience in the holy path that leadeth and conducteth to this eternall saluation and moste blessed Cittie, the ioye
wherof is so superabundant, the glory so triumphant: the blessednes so heauenly: the pleasure so swéet, the treasure so excéeding,Cor 1.2.the place so incomparable: that the eye hath not séene, nor the eare euer heard, nor the hart could e∣uer thinke the ioye which is prepared in heauen for vs: for suche is the inheritance as to bee made the glorious Sonnes of GOD, crowned with glorie and immortali∣tie for euer:Cor. 2.5. where death is chaunged to euelasting lyfe: nakednes clothed with Gods brightnes, sorrowes turned to perpetuall ioy and all our infirmities are chaunged in∣to to eternall and incorruptible happines. In respect wher¦of séeing wée knowe of a certaintie, that if our earthlye mansion or corporall presence, wherein wee now dwell were destroyed, that wee haue a building or Cittie or∣dained of GOD, beeing an habitation not made with handes, but eternall in heauen: the verry kingdome of Christe and re st of GOD, for which wée should sigthe and grone, desiring to bee clothed with our mansiō which is from heauen: but yet wée must bee héere clothed, and not naked as men without good lyfe, for as long as wee are in this tabernacle and world, wee shoulde sigth with the s obbes of true repentance and grone with the gréefe of godly sorrow, abhorring sinne and wickednes: in that wee would not be found vnclothed, but would be clothed vpon with the garment of righteousnes, that mortalitie might bee swallowed vp of lyfe:Reue. 3. To the obtayning wher∣of Christe counsell vs to buye of him golde tryed in the fyre, that wee may bee riche, and to buye of him white rayment that wee may be clothed (which is treuth and righteousnes) that our filthie nakednes doo not appeare, as if wee were sotted in the corruption and lustes of the olde Adam: thereby indaungering our selues because we neither seeke for the garments of Godlynes with pure di∣ligence and looue: nor knock with the hand of stedfast & vnfeigned faith: nor aske with deuotiō of sincere
prayers,the giftes of his grace to bee found at the great mariage, of the Kings sonne, without our wedding garments, and so s ubiect to the Ministers of Gods wrath, who shall bee commaunded and charged to bynde vs hand and foote, and to cast vs moste dreadfully into vtter darknes. Wheruppon print and establishe this for euermore in thy hart, how greeuous and lamentable it shall bee, a∣booue all greefes and s orrowes, when Christe shall say to his Reapers, or ministring Angels. Take those cur∣sed, bynde them lyke tares in sheaues, to be brent: And al so print it in thy hart and mynde (as in a remembring Booke) or looking glass e how heauie and lamentable a case it shall bee to beholde the looke of Christe,Math. 1. when his lippes shall wagge with furie and indignation, and his toung sparkle out, the fierie streames of a wasting and consuming fire when hee turneth to them that stande on the left hand with dyrefull and terrible voice, saying, Goe away from mee you cursed and execrable of my Fa∣ther, which are woorkers of iniquitie and regarded not righteousnes, departe you to fire which neuer shall bee quenched,Math. 25. which is prepared for the deuill and his An∣gells. (Oh) consider how sorrowfull and heauie shall this departure bee, into all heauines from whence, you shall neuer bee redéemed, nor pittied, how bitter and gréeuous shall that sentence bee, how lamentable shall those cursed soules bee, whiche shall neuer againe be comforted: that must forsake the presence and sight of Christe for euer: that must bee depriued from heauen from ioy, from all pleasure for euer: that hath loste the glorious and renowned inheritance of new Ierusalem for euer, yt hath lost ye hapines which others inioy for euer-and now are departed into bitter torments greeuouslye to bee vexed for euer, what a losse is that (O wretched people) & what
a paine is this, you may faint to think it.And therefore awake vp ye drunkards and wéepe: mourn and howle all yée gluttons and wine sippers: least you go with Esau, from your byrthright, and s up the pottage, & wine dregges of hell fire: & ye vncleane persones come to the waters of lyfe and washe you cleane, and cleanse your corrupted harts, by washing away your euill thoughtes, wicked lusts and sinfull déedes in the blood of Christe, by true repentance and newnes of lyfe, least you be cast hed∣long from the inheritance of heauinly pleasure, into the filthie lake of perpetuall sorrowe and miserie: and all yée Inhabiters of the earth striue against sinne, and cast from you the fellowship of Ipocrisie, enuy, pryde, couetousnes, with all other sinnes, and cut of from your hartes the cloi∣sters of euill thoughtes and the braunches of wicked ima∣ginations, that you may bee found woorthie at the great day of the LORD, to bee translated into the kingdome of glorie. Wherefore consider the terrour of the day of iudgment and beholde how all kyndreds dooth stand shaking and be wailing before the highe Iudge: that it may inforce vs to teares, for to thinke on that daye, when shall bee séene that moste great, lamentable and euerlasting seperation & departing of the elect from the dampned: and this depar∣ting shall be such, as that the one parte shall be cast into hel,Mark. 9. into the fire that neuer shalbe quenched, out of which no wéeping teares can restore vs, where (sayth Mark) that the worme dyeth not, and the fire neuer goeth out: when shall be fulfilled that heauie voice. Wo be to you that are riche,Luke. 6. for you haue therein your consolation: woe bee to you that are full, for you shall hunger: woe bee to you that now laugthe,Math. 11. for yee shall waile and weepe: and thē shall bee heard that voyce of terrour and wretchednesse, saying: Woe bee vnto thee Chrasin, Woe bee to thee Bethsaida, whiche so little regarded and estée∣med the
Myracles and the Doctryne doone in thee,which if they had bene done in Tyre and Sydon, they would haue repented in sackcloth and ashes. Therefore I say to thee, it shall be easier for Tyre and Sydon at the day of iudgement, then for you. And wo be to thee Caper∣naum, which art lift vp euen to heauen, (being so proud) thou shalt be brought downe into hell, for if the miracles and doctrine done in thee, had bene done in Zodome they had remained vndestroyed till this day: therefore it shall be easier for the land of Zodome in the day of iudgement then for thee: wherefore beware ye carelesse people howe you refuse the doctrine of Christ, least you heape to your selues an hard iudgement at the day of the Lord: make ye readie that you may go vp to the house of the Lord,Esay. 2. and to the house of the God of Iacob, and walke in his pathes for Christ hath told signes, wonders, and tokens of his comming. And he hath sent you many a Ionas, to recall you to repentance, and to teach you his doctrine of salua∣tion therefore turne to God, least that Nyniuie rise in iudgement against you, and the woe of Bethsaida ouer∣take you for as it happened in the time of Noye, so shall the comming of the sonne of man be, they eate, they drank they married wiues and were married,Luk. 17. euen vnto the same day that the floud came and destroyed them all: like wise also as it chanced in the daies of Lot, they eate they dranke, they bought they sold, they planted, they bilt, and euen the same day, that Lot went out of Zodome, it ray∣ned fire and brimstone from heauen and destroyed them all: And after these examples, shall it be in the day. when the sonne of man eppeareth, and then two shall be in bed, the one receiued, the other forsaken, two grinding at the mill, the one receiued, the other forsaken. Therefore har∣ken, O earth, and ye indwellers of the earth, to this terri∣ble day of the Lord, yea cast off your mantle of securitie, and slacknes, and open your blunt hartes, and dull eares, giuing a carefull eare to the sentence, which the Apostles
doe giue,Matth. 19. Matth. 25. (that shall sit with Christ in iudgement) saying, take & cast the vnprofitable seruant into vtter darknesse. And Iohn & Paul saith, That all vncleane persons that worke abominations,Reuel. 21. 1. Cor. 6. and lyes, the fearefull vnbeleeuing murtherers, whoremongers, sorcerers, Idolaters, coue∣tous, drunkardes, extortioners, theeues, weakelens, cursed speakers, & enuious persons, continuing to death without repentance from the bottome of the heart shal haue their part in the lake, which burneth with fire and brimstone, which is the second death, for as the trée falleth, so doeth it lie: whereupon beware ye wicked worldlings & sinners, ye delay and hold off frō time to time, & driue off frō true re∣pentance & amendment of life: least your sinnes lie heauie vpon you, and your heart grow hard in these sinnes, & can not repēt, and so heape to your selues ye treasure of wrath against the day of vengeāce, according to the prophesie of Enoch,Saint Iude. saying, behold the Lord shall come, with thousands of saints, to giue iudgement against all mē, & to rebuke all that are vngodly among them, of all their vngodly deedes which they haue committed, & of all the cruell speakings which vngodly sinners haue spoken against him: Thē shal the Lord cry wt a loud voice,Reuel. 14. (like a lion that roareth) vn∣to his angels, to thrust in the sharpe sicle, and gather the clusters of ye earth, and to cut downe ye grapes of ye earth, (the wicked and sinfull people) and cast thē into the great winefat of his wrath, and ye winefat is troden wtout the citie of new Ierusalē, yea it is trodē in ye place of extreme darknes, in ye hideous dungen of hel in al horror of bloody sorrowes: for the reward of sinne is death and hell, where it stincke with brimstone that cannot be abodden, where behold with piteous eyes how the soules of the dampned bewayle in woe, where all mirth and ioye are turned to woes, where all songes and musicke are wooes, where feasting and banketting be woes, where daunsing
and loue toyes be wooes, playes and pastimes be woes, andwhere golde and siluer and all gay things of this worlde are chaunged into wretchednesse and woes. And of all o∣ther this is the most dreadfull woe,Etrense which is the depri∣uation of hope from comming out of those wooes. And thus the miserable dampned soules, are euermore, tor∣mented with fire and brimstone, and the smoke of their tormentes ascendeth vp for euer and euer. And neuer haue rest day and night, and they crye piteously to the Lorde, and hee heareth not, and though they neuer cease from teares, yet the Lorde regardeth them not: And then they knowe (when it is too late,) that all worldly thinges are vanities and miseries, and they woulde re∣pent and it helpeth not: and thus they weepe and wayls in dolourouse tormentes, and gnawe their tongues in most rigorous paine. And so in great burning they drink of the cup of Gods intollerable wrath and heauie displea∣sure and indignation: and they still burne and neuer are burned, they seeke death, and death flieth from them, and yet are they still in death and shall be for euer and e∣uer: and thus they still die and neuer giue ouer vnto death, therefore (thou sinner) amende thy wayes and be obedient vnto God, considering these dreadfull tormentes to be the rewarde of sinners, for which cause lye downe vpon the bed of weeping and waling, wrapping thee in the cleane and newe ayred sheetes of true and pure re∣pentance, and couer thée with the faire couerlet of true amendement of life: considering that all the afflictions and miseries of this worlde are nothing in comparison to the least that they shall feele in hell, for which cause wee ought to tremble from the toppe to the toe, saying Woe vnto vs, because of offences and sinne, if wee repent not, and amende our liues: therefore let vs turne vnto the Lorde our God without any tarrying, being sore afraide of the shrill sound of the trumpet, that soundeth out the fearefull Alaran. of the wooes
of hell, And beeingterrified with the sound of the la st trump that shal make all thinges sodainly to fall downe as the walles of Ierico and shall make mens hearts to fayle them forfeare: kno∣wing what Saint Peter saith) that if the righteous shall scarsely be saued,Pet. .4. where then shall the vngodly and sin∣ners appeare: for if God, spared not the Aungels that sin∣ned, but cast them downe into hell, and deliuered them, into chaines of darkenes to be kept vnto iudgement, then must we looke for the wrath of God, with swift dānati∣on to be shewed vpon al the vnrighteous and vnpenitent: which thing, doth cal vs home, to examine our conscience (seing we cannot halt with God, though wee dissemble to the world) taking that for a faire lesson,Iere. 8. of remembring our duetie to God,Esay. 1▪ which he saith by Ieremie, that the storke knoweth his appointed time, but my people will not know the time of the punishment of their Lord. And againe in Esay he saith: that the asse will know his mai∣sters stall, but my people wil not know their duetie to me their God, which examples do condemne vs of vnkindnes and disobedience to our Lord, and shal be witnes against vs of our want of duetie, and colde loue, as Diues dogge licking Lazarus sores, was a witnes against his masters vnkindnes and want of mercie. And now let vs turne to the Lord seing we cannot scape the iudgement of God, who will come as a theefe in the night, when men shall say, peace and no daunger, then commeth on them sodaine des truction: yea hee shall come sodainely as the lightning shineth out of the east in to the west, so shall the comming of the sonne of man be, yea he s hall treade vpon the high mountaines, thinges shall melt vnder him,Math. 24. and all and who can abide it? yea he shall come as a goldsmithes fire to clense the siluer frō the drosse,Mich. 1. and who can endure it? Therefore all harde hartes,Zach. 3. froward s tomackes, proude lookes, stubborn wils and hye mindes: shall
then weepe and mourn when they sée the signe of the sonne man: and all loftie, glorious rich or high shall be brought lowe and fall down: according to the Prophet. The day of the Lord commeth that shal go ouer all pryde and presumption and bring them all down who casteth down the highe lookes of the presumptuous persons and bringeth low the pryde of man.Esay. 2. and all glori∣ous thinges shall be brought down that day. Oh therfore where wilt thou be? to get into any rocke, or to hyde thee in the ground from the sight of the fearful Iudge and from the glorie of his Maiestie will not serue, when beholde the day dooth come in which all shall burn wherat thou shalt wring thy hands, with an heauy looke and quake and shake like an aspen leafe: and wéepe and waile like a sillie wretch, and smyte thy breast with piti∣ous grones and watery ché ekes to see the dreadfull day, of dread and the fearfull Iudge of Iudges: Wherfore O yée couetous men, ye vsurers, extortioners, and vnmer∣cifull people, heare the voice of your watchman: what are yée as blocks, that heare not? are yée as stones yt féele not? are yée as moules that see not? or are yée as Images that feare not? beholde the fearfull day of vengeaunce? what doost thou say tush? where and where is it? beholde it commeth as a théefe: yea it cūmeth lyke a swift cloude when you shall say peace and no danger, then is ye iudge at the doore: and then of force because yée would not heare in prosperitie (sayeth Ieremie) you shall wéepe in aduer∣sitie: whereat,Ierem. 22. (Oh how) is your countenance chaunged which did looke so stout: puffing against your sillie poore neighbour and brother, but lo the day is? and I see how bitterly you doo wéepe, but why wéepe yée? what for your goodly houses and gay garments, for your groundes, your goodes, your euidences, your golde and your siluer? Alas it is turned to fire: for beholde sayeth Péeter, Iames and Esay, you are inforced now to leaue them, for they burn and are turned to fire to eate and consume you, for now
your case is pleaded before all the Angels in the presence of the high Iudge, how you haue made you fréends of the wicked mammon, where it standeth vpon most manifest euidence,Luke. 16. and plain confession guiltie or not guiltie of an vnpenitent conscience: where if you be found gultie of ill lyfe you are turned of the ladder of heauen, and shall fall into the seconde death of euerlasting fire, swallowed into hel, as the earth swallowed vp Corth, Dthan and A∣byron. And yee proud and laciuious, yee gluttons, yée belly and back pleasers and ye dlcious children of wantonnes, who counted it pleasure to liue diliciously for a season what is the world chaunged? that I sée you so forlorne and naked, hanging down your lippes & eyes with such full lookes, what, doo you want your musicall pleas ures your bankets and chamberings? alas, they are woormewood and gall: for your mirth is turned into heauines, and why? because the day is come that the powers of heauen dooth mooue, the frame therof is crackt, and the  wat∣ters make an vntollerable noyse  of all plagues are ready to be  the day of fearfulnes) in which, see and beholde, how your chambers of pleasure, your soft and swéet beds of lust, your tables of bankets, your gardens of delight, your gorgious appa¦rell, with all your wanton delights: are turned to fire and brimstone, yea, they are gargld and fupped vp into the hollow throte and gulfe of hell, with Lucifer the father of pryde, gluttonie, vanitie, concupisence and se. Besides, yée Antechrist, ye sorcerers, witches, Idola∣ters, falfe teachers and Ipocrites, wher is your goodnes? where is your skill and boast? that yee looke so fearefully vp to heauen: what is the day come vpon you vnawares? that the sun looke black, the mo hath lo st ight, the starres of heauen did fall and the oor the your spirits, ring but your men and come oorth you Astrologers and cast
your figures, looke to the housesof heauens tother the detriments and degrées of the pla¦nets and starres▪ what are you now confounded? (then be¦holde saith the Prophet) the Lord will destroy the tokēs of witches, and make the southsayers go wrong,Esay. 44. & make the cunning of the wise foolishnes & bring the councell of ye Magitioners to nought, for sayeth the Lord, I will destroy the wisdome of their wife and the vnderstanding of their lerned shall perish: so yt now ye fall to the ground quaking to se the signe of the sonne of man appearing, to se the day of fire, that is come to trye euery mans woork: whereat, O how yee lament and cry: but what for your spirits and familiars? which made you to bee counted cunning men, whiche promised you dreames and shewed you vi sions which serued your pleasure to vex men and to bewitche with▪ O beholde sayeth Christ many shall say vnto me in that day, Lord, Lord,Math 7. haue we not in thy name prophisied and in thy name haue cast out deuils & in thy name haue done many myracles but sayeth the Lord, I will knowe∣ledge to them yt I neuer knew thē: depart from me ye wor¦kers of iniquitie. And now yée Idolaters, false woorshpers and Apocrites sée how you doe nothing but wé epe? & what for your pictures, your cerimonies, your offerings, your golden Ladies, your wooden saincts, & for wante of your masses to eas e you, or of bulles, frome Roome to pardon & preserue you this day? beholde saieth Esay, they are the strawe and you are the fire, you shall burne and neuer be quenched:Esay. 33. yea all yt you haue thus conceiued is stubble & strawe, and your spirit shalbe the fire that it shall consume you and shalbe burnt like lime & thornes, for now confoū∣ded shalbe all woork maisters of errors, and shalbe turned to fire and smoke and shall burne for euer with that great beast and false prophet which shalbe cast into a ponde of burning brimstone.Esay. 45. Esay. 65. Therfore let s uddain fearfulnes run through you to consider the terror and vengeance of
this heauie and ferefull day of bitter wrath and indignation:and who shall be able to indure it, wherfore away with all vanities and so runne your race of lyfe that you may finde mercy at the great day of the Lord, so that cleanse your consciences from sinne & filthines and buy ye milke of heauenly nurishment, the wine of heauenly gladnes & hope, and the garments of righteousnes, that you may be filled and clothed with all godly lyfe and conuersation, that you may be bolde and and not affeard at the appea∣ring of the Lord in the dreadfull day of iudgement. Moreouer yée enuious men, reuenger, théefe, murthe∣rer, blasphemer, lyar, quariler and deceiuer, why dooest thou now shake for feare? that wunt to be so lusty a thret¦ner so feirce and stout a reuenger, against thy poore neigh¦bour or enemie:Deut. 32. what art thou become a lump of feare? and is the day come that hath shaken a sunder thy ioynts and hart stringes that thou so wretchedly doost wéepe?Rom. 12. or why wéepest thou? because thou canst haue no more thy mynde to hurt and sting thy neighbour and enemie, and so backbyte him? alas wretch the direfull day is come, that the Lord sayeth vengeaunce is mine and I will re∣uenge, yea the time is come ye hée will spend all his arro∣wes vpon thee and will reward thy enuious & reuenging hart, euen into thy bosome, except thou hast imbraced re∣pentance in time, for beholde God sayeth, ye fire is kindled in his wrath and shall burne vnto the bottome of hel,Zache, 5. for the flying booke of cursse which was entred into the hou∣ses of theues, swearers, murtherers, lyers, reuengers, quarrellers and malicious sinners, is brought foorth, that they may bée iudged, and thereby consumed: being ad∣iudged to be s ectered with chaines of fire, and led through the gates of hel to be brent in the pit of burning brimstōe for euer. Wherfore awake quickly out of your s lumbring e of sin, & turne vnto ye Lord your God for he is gracio{us} and mercifull and redy to pardon wickednes: so that you cuse your hart& become creatures in holines and
purenesworking out your saluation with earnest deuotion: for consider the dreadefull voyce which the watchemen soun∣deth of the day of the Lord saying that it shall come as a snare to all them, that sit on the face of the earth: wher∣by ye ought to take heede to your selues, lest your hearts be ouercome with surfetting and drunkennes, with luses and cares of the worlde: and so haue your heartes (as it were) giued to sinne: Therefore repent, for the kingdom of God is at hande:Matth. 13. which (as the Apostle saith) is like to a net cast into the sea, that gathereth of all kinde of fishes, which when it is full men do draw to land, and sit and ga∣ther the good into vessels, and cast the bad away: and so shal it be at the end of the world, the sonne of mā shal send foorth his angels, and they shall seuer the good from the bad, and gather out of his kingdome all that offende and doeth iniquitie, and shall cast them into a furnace of fire, there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth: and then shal the iust man shine as bright as the Sonne in the kingdome of the Father: wherein ye are warned carefully to watch and abide in Christ, least you be founde cursed children, forsaking ye right way: for which cause arme your selues with goodnesse of life,Matth. 2.. that when he shall s ende his angels with great voyce of trumpet, to gather together, his cho∣sen from the foure windes, and from the one ende of the worlde to the other, you may be found profitable seruāts and well doing:Peter. 2.3. For it is written that the heauens shall perish with fire, and the elements consume with hearte, and the earth burne with all that is therein. And seeing that all these things shall thus vndoubtedly perish, what maner of persons ought we to be in conuersation & godlinesse, in righteousnesse and holinesse, looking for the comming of that day, in which the whole worlde shalbe vtterly burnt vp and consumed: no doubt, seeing that such thinges are most assuredly to be looked for: we ought to be diligent, so to liue as to be founde true
children of the light: sprink∣ledin our heartes with the blood of Christ,Heb. 10. from an euill conscience: knowing that euery that bringeth not foorth good fruite shall be ewen downe and cas t into the fire:Matth. 7. for Chri st saith, That not all that say to me, Lorde, Lorde, shall enter into the kingdome of heauen, but hee that dooth my Fathers will which is in heauen: whereup∣on take warning (O all ye people of the Lords) and con∣sider, that narrowe is the way that leadeth to saluation, and broade the way that leadeth to destruction, for which cause be vigilant in all good conuersation and wel doing, that you may keepe your selues in the narrowe path of Christ, that you may find grace & mercie in time of néede, that when his glorie appeareth you may be merry and glad: touching the which, remember among many ex∣amples, the forcible example of Des, who being puffed vp with all wealthy prouision of lands and goodes, liuing in the pleasure and securitie of this worlde,Luke 16. regarded not goodnesse, righteousnesse, and mercie, but contemned the poore: & so liued according to his owne froward thoughts and eites; shewing no pitie and that to poore La∣zarus ning to his gate for , who had a true and patient heart to  and miserie of life in this world. And  how this poore wretches to God, was ca∣ryed into Abraham riche man for his wicked life & heart, is adiudged to hell torments, and that he being in the bur∣ning of tortures and , and beholding Laza∣rus as ioy d neuer after so much as one drop of scalding in the breaking take hees to your selile, ye wealthy citizens, ye rich gluttons, voluptuous liuers, couetous worldlings, vncharitable hearts, stiffs stomackes, and vnmercifull people, knowing that after that day, repentance is
too late: so that be mind∣fullto lay vp treasures in heauen where neither theeues breake in, nor mothes corrupt,Matth. 6. that when the day of the Lord commeth, thou maist find fauour to be in the bosome of Abraham with Lazarus in the euerlasting habitatiōs: and scape the danger of Diues torments, where it is vn∣possible euer to come out againe, or euer to be released frō the horrour of woes: therefore deceiue not thy selfe with the of a counterfet, faint and cold repentance, but put on true, sineers & faithfull repentance with a stedfast amendment of life: making no longer delay, least the ar∣rowes of death, or the sudden comming of the day of the Lord, doth come vpon thee vnawares, and so be found vn∣prouided, like an vnprofitable seruant, deseruing to be cast into darknes: to whom the Lord shall say in his wrath,Esay 3.1 it is ye ye haue burnt vp my vineyard, & therefore depart frō me ye wicked: whereby be ye mooued and stirred vp in∣wardly in your hearts, knowing that it is a terrible thing to fall into the hands of the liuing God to sup the cuppe of his indignation, when he shall say, woe be to their soules, which shalbe heauily rewarded.Esay 31. For the Lorde commeth saith Esay with e & his charet shalbe like a whirle wind, that he may recōpence his vengeance in his wrath, and his indignation in the flame of fire,Esay 66. for the Lord shall iudge all flesh with the fire and with his sword, for the hande of the Lorde shalbe knowen among his seruants, and his indigna∣tion among his enemies: and I wil (saith the Lord) gather all people and tongues with their workes and imaginati∣ons, and they shall sée my glorie, for the Lord will hold his court regall with all flesh, and then it shalbe said, Happie are the godly for they shal enioy the fruits of their works, and labours, but woe to the vngodly, for they shall be re∣compens es after their euill deedes:Oseas 7. and then at that day the Lorde shal say (as in Oseas) woe be do them for they haue forsaken mee, they haue sowen winds, therefore they shall reape a storme, they must be destroyed for they haue set me at naught, they haue plowed wickednesse,
and therefore shall reape the fruite of sinne, which at that day of iudgement is the bitter paines of hell and damna∣tion. wherefore crucifie your earthly and fleshly mem∣bers, and s eeke for grace to replenish your heartes with heauenly thoughtes and deedes, saying with Saint Iohn,Reuel. 1. He commeth, and all eyes shall see him, and they that pearced him and then all kindreds shall wayle.Reuel. 6.And heauen shall vanish away like a scroule, when it olled together, and all mountaines and Isles shall be mooued out of their places, and the Kinges of the earth and the great men, and the mightie men, and the rich men, and the captaines, and euery bonde man and euery free man, shall hide them selues in dennes and rockes of the hilles, and say to the rockes and the hilles fall on vs, and hide vs from the presence of him that sitteth in the seat, and from the wrath of the Lambe, for the great day of his wrath is come and who can endure it.Esay. 2.For then saith Esay, shall men creepe into the holes of stoue, and into the caues of the earth from the sight of the fearefull Iudge, and from the glorie of his Maiestie, when he shall make him vp to shake the earth: Nowe sée what a dreadfull day of trembling this is, and howe feare shall ouertake all men high and lowe euen with vtter lamentation and despaire, when the Lorde at that day (which is at hande) shall according to Micheas,Mich. 1. come downe and treade vpon the high thinges of the earth, and cleaue the heauens asunder, that the mountaines shall consume vnder him,Thess. 1.4. and the valleyes rent in pieces, according to Paul, The Lorde shall discende from heauen with a shoute and the voyce of the Archaungel & trumpe of God and the dead in Christ shall rise first, and then shal wee which remaine be caught vp with them also in the cloudes,Cor. 1.15. to meete the Lord in the aire, for the trumpet shall blowe, and the dead shall rise incorruptible, and we shalbe chaunged in a moment and in the twinckeling of an eye, at the sounde of the last trumpet,
for this corruptibilitiemust put on corruptibiltie and this mortalitie, must put on immortalitie & then death shalbe cōsumed into victory for now the time is, ye though you be scattered to dust and ashes, or in the waues of the sea, and wrapt in the cor∣ners of the earth & dennes of hell, yet can you not escape frō God, for euery place shall giue vp all their dead at the voice of Christ the iudger of the quicke and the dead:Reue. 0. and then shall the bookes bee opuned and the dead iudged of those thinges which are written in the bookes according to their deedes. When according to the Scripture, shall the names of the righteous be manifest, and also the names of the vn∣godly with their woorks be declared: wherfore put on the garmnets of God, that yée may bee found to prayse and honor (when Christe our high king of kinges, commeth to iudgement) when all knées shall bowe & giue accōptes to God:Iohn. 5. for which cause it néerly behooueth vs to walk in the way of godlines and to follow Christe, setting our a∣ffection in heauen, that according to Paule, when Christ which is our lyfe shall shewe him self that wée also may appeare with him in glory, therfore saieth Iames:Coloss. 3. be yée patient vnto the comming of the Lord: and settle your harts in goodnes,Ieames. 5. for the comming of the Lord draweth nigh, when wée shall see him as hee is, and bee lyke him. made by him the sonnes of God, who shall chaunge our vile bodies to be facioned lyke to his glorious body: yt wée shal enioy the fruition of his euerlasting tabernacle & hea¦uenly Ierusalem: at his apperance againe to s aluation: wherunto, hee called vs by the Gospell to obtaine the glo¦rie that commeth of our Lord Iesus Christe, for Christe dyed for vs that wee should be partakers of his kingdome and haue our names in the booke of lyfe: as s ayeth the A∣postle, wée shall be deliuered from this bondage of corrup¦tion, into the glorious libertie of the sonnes of God,Rom. 8. accor¦ding to Christ s aying, I am the
resurrectiō and life, he thatIohn. 12.beleeueth in mee, yea though hee were dead, yet shall hee lyue, and whoso euer lyueth, and beleeueth in mee shall not dye for euer. according to Luke, Luke. 20.They which be made woorthy to inioy the kingdome of the world to come, and the resurrection from death, can dye no more, for they are equall to the Angells and are the sonnes of God: for saith Christe, Reue. 2, 3.He that ouercommeth and is faithfull to the end, I will giue him to eate of the tree of lyfe whiche is in the midst of the Paradice of God: and he shall haue a crowne of lyfe and shall not be hurt of the second death, but haue his name in the booke of lyfe, and be a piller in the temple of my God, and shall sit with me in my seate: and this is the victorie that ouercōmeth the world, euen our stedfast and vnfeigned faith in Iesus Christe, by whome GOD hath giuen vnto vs eternall lyfe, and to bee glorified by him, at the day of his appearance, when the misterie of Gods will shall be opened in his sonne Iesus Christe, at his comming at the end of the world: at which time shall be performed, that all that haue done well shall go into e∣uerlasting lyfe, and all that hath done euill into euerla∣sting dampnation: Therfore let vs fight the good fight of faith, and walk as children of the day, waiting with sted∣fast hope for the adoption and fruition of ye heauenly king∣dome, that wée may méete him ioyfully comming in the cloudes, and receiue the garland of glorification, & crown of eternall lyfe: Iohn. 1.5.and so be clothed with our heauenly man∣sion and translated into his kingdome, there receiuing the glorious garments of immortalitie and the blessednes of our new Ierusalē, where beholde, & loe wée shall shine as bright as the sunne beames, béeing in all glorie, in ye pre∣sence of the brightnes of our omnipotent and resplendant GOD. To the obtaining of the high rewarde whereof, watch and pray that your conuersation may be according to the Gospell, and therefore let this be your watchman, while you heare do lyue, to think  Saint
Ierome: that whether you eate or drink, or what so euer elles you dooe, that moste dreadfull Troumpet soundeth in your eares: Aryse you dead, and come vnto Iudgement: (:)
O Lord God almightie, which art and wast, and art to come, who art Alpha and Omega, to thee be all prayse,Reue. 7. honor and glorie, and all power and dignitie be ascribed to the almightie maker sit¦ting vpon the seate, and vnto the Lamb for euer∣more: for now all thy people are gathered togither in thy sonne Iesus Christe, that the misterie of thy holy will may be declared:Ephe. 1. beeing called by the troump of the Arch-angell to come vnto the moūt Siō, and to the citie of the liuing God, the celestial Ierusalem and to an innumerable sight of Angels,Heb. 12. and vnto the congrogation of the first borne sōnes, which are written in heauen, and to God the iudge of all, and to the spirits of iust and perfect men, & to Iesus the mediator of the new Testament,Phil. 3. who dooth change our vile bodies to be facioned like to his glorious body: therfore to thee be prayse, ho∣nour and power, world with out end. AMEN.
THE GLORIOVS AND BEAVTIFVL GAR∣lande of mans glorification. CAP. 3. The mysterie of the glorious comming of Christ at the end of the worlde, and howe he shall sit in his glittering seate of Maiestie in all brightnesse of glorie, power, and domi∣nion. And where, and howe all thinges both in heauen and earth shall be gathered toge∣ther in Christ, and see his glorie and in him our glorification. EXcellent was the cōming of God, when in his glorie like shining fire he came downe vpon mount Si∣nai: where Moyses brought the people out of the tentes to meete the Lorde, so marueilously descen∣ding downe vpon the hill: which burnt with fire euē vnto the mid∣des of heauen,Exod. 19. and the Lorde spake vnto them with his mightie thundring voyce out of fire,Deut. 4. that it was excee∣ding fearefull, and also so wonderfull glorious, that whē Moyses had talked with God, the people were not able to beholde the glistering beautie and brightnesse of Moy∣ses face:Exod. 34. But nowe howe shall his glorie bee exalted in the highest, what time he shall make him vp, to shake the earth in the ende of the worlde, when the appearance of his comming shall exceede in all greatnesse of power and might, according to Micheas,Micheas . The Lorde
shall comeout of his holy place,Micheas 1. and come downe, and eade vpon the high things of the earth, that the mountaines shall con∣sume vnder him and the valleyes cleaue asunder. And then the Sune and Moone shall be ashamed at his glorious face of incomparable clearenesse & brightnes, from which all the beautie, glorie and pompe of this world shall flée a∣way into rebuke & dishonour, not able to endure the per∣fection of his beautie and incomprehensible pureness e: be∣fore whome it consumeth to nought & perish and vanish away for euer and th (O how Christ) shall glister in the magnificence of his omnipotent kingly maiestie: & in the preheminence noe of dignitie aboue dignities, that all the glorie of kings & kingdomes shall giue place and vanish at his mightie appearance, not worthy to endure the glorie of his cōming, before which they waste and fall into emp∣tines: and he shall shew him selfe from the top of the high heauens, with such triumphant power of vnspeakeable glorie, dominion, and might that from his presence shall away erth & heauens, and their place no more soūd: for he shall shake ye earth againe, & remooue ne away those things which haue ended their course, whē ye powres of heauen & the vniuers al frame of this world shal rent in pieces▪ & me in a consuming . Now the truth here∣of i so & laine, that there need no great circum∣stance to prooue with many witnesses out of the holy scrip∣tures, any so ignorant as to doubt hereof: although saith Micheas,Micheas 1. the rebellious people hope that it shall not be so ill,Peter. 2.3. & saith Peter, in the latter dayes shall come mockers, that will say h, where is the promise of his comming? But now that you may behold as in a looking glasse, the glorious cōming of Christ as from a farre, & yet use wtin the compasse of our hearts,Iohn 11. as Christ saide to Martha. If thou beléeuest, thou shalt sée the glorie of God: I wil place therefore your soule in the spirit of heauenly meditation, fixing your féete in the path of
righteousnes, and standingimmoueable at the indow of Gods promises, beholding in the glae of tneth (with the stedfast eies of faith, Iesus the King of glorie, comming in a wonderfull, glorious, and magnificall progresse from heauen, to visite the king∣domes and Lordshippes of the earth, and the inhabiters thereof with power of mercie and iudgement: touching the which; the messengers of this glad tidings haue flow∣ thorowe the middest of heauen, and gone through all the worlde with the ioyfull sounde of trumpet, signifying the ioy of redemption to be come, and the day of glorie to beie at hand, & the kingdome of euerlasting rest to draw néere▪ therefore lift vp your heades,Matth. 16. and be ready to the reward of your kingdome & make haste to meete the king of glorie, comming in the glorie of his Father with al his holy angels: set his glorious throne of all maiestie, there shining in his euerlasting clearnes: glittering in his eternall brightnesse▪ appearing in his preciousnes: excée∣ding in his righteousnes: exalted in his highnes: magnifi∣ed in his worthines; sanctified in his holines▪ triumphing in his gloriousnes▪ when the puisance, strength, & power of his omnipotent maiestie, shall lighten into all the secrete places of world, and his voice imperial shall pearce tho∣row ye vnspeakable borders of all places, to raise frō death to life all humane creatures that euer had being, whereso∣euer▪ and to gather them together before his eternall ex∣cellencie, where, all thinges, in heauen and earth shall stand before his presence and all knees shall bowe, and all tongues & knowledge to the glorie of God:Rom. 14. and then shall take perfourmed that Christ sayd to the high priests (that were offended at him when hee was come in his owle humanitie) saying,Matth. 26. You shall see the Sonne of man sitting on the right hand of power and comming in the cloudes of the skie whereof the two Angels testified to the Disciples at the ascension of our Sauiour Christ,Actes 1. say∣ing, Ye men of Galilee, why stande
yee gasing vp in∣toheauen, This sae Iesus which is taken vp from you into heauen, is returned to the Father whence he came, as he hath tolde you before and shall se againe euen as you haue s eene him god into heauen: and that (accor∣ding to Matthewe) accompanied with all the godly An∣gels,Matth. 25. Iude. and saith och, with thousandes of blessed Saintes with him▪ and according ( Iohn) In a white cloude sit∣ting in his feare of dominion and dignitie,Reuel. 14. and in his glo∣rious throne of wonderfull gnes se, (which is according to Daniel) as the flame,Daniel 7. and his wheeles as the bur∣ning fire, & there went out frō him a fierie streame:as glo∣rious sparkes of eternall heauenlinesse, like glisterings of perpetuall beames of , proceeding frō the glory of his Godhead, and  out him, and yet euer in him shewing the  treasure of his grace and goodnesse, he d prehensible out of his right cleare Maiestie: the infinite and vnsearcheable ver∣tues and giftes of glorie, which issues eternally from his deuine Godhead and nipotent power: And thus hee shall appeare most maruellous and all eyes sée him, and all nations gathered before him,Daniel. 7. (as saith Daniel) A thousand times a thousand serued him, a thous and times ten thousande stoode before him. And theerfore, Blessed be the kingdome that commeth in the Name of him, that i Lorde of our Father Dauid,Marke 11. Hos anna: Praising him in his holines, praising him in the rmament of his pow∣er, praising him in his  Actes, praising him according to his excellent greatnesse. For nowe is the full time, whē the mysterie of the will of the Father shall bee opened in his Sonne Iesus Christ, comming in the glorie of the fa∣ther, when shall be opened the endlesse clearenesse of diui∣nitie: the incomprehensible our of Gods Maiestie: the glorious riches of euerlasting glorie: the incompara∣ble profoundnesse of Gods wis edome, the flowing foun∣taines of Gods goodnesse: the shining
light of all trueth,the glorious kingdome wherto wée are called: and the tre∣sures of rewardes to men with glorie and dishonour: and then the brightnes and sight of all things shalbe apparent, and all things past shall be as one thing present, according to Mathew, there is nothing so close that shall not be ope∣ned & nothing so hyd that shall not be knowen,Math. 1 such s halbe the omnipotent, potentiall and in comprhenssble clearnes of God, that before him all that were in power in spirit, in act in thought, in intent in heauen, in earth or in hell, from the beginning: shall there shew it selfe present, ap∣parent, cleare and manifest by the endlesse brightnes of God: that all the nature of sathan and the power of hell, shalbe made manifest for euer: and the nature of man as it was and now is and shalbe in glorie or dishonour, shall be expressed for euer: and all the great woorkes of GOD and beautie of Angells, Cherubins and Seraphins, shall there be knowen for euer, and all the goodly mansions of God shall then be reuealed mo ste euident, and the eternall shyne of Gods maiestie shall then bee vniuersall transpa∣rent: for sayeth Paul,Ephe. 1. The whole misterie of the will of the Father, shall then be declared, according to the pur∣pose of his owne will: therefore moste blessed shall you be, that shalbe found watching and waiting for his comming looking vp to heauen with pure eyes of faith, and lyfting vp cleane hands of righteousnes, well washed at the foun¦taine of penance, that you may be found at his appearāce to laude, glory and honour, pertaking with the treasures of the heauenly misterie of the will of the father ordained in Christe Iesus: who béeing the Author of our glorie. whereunto hee hath called vs by his Gospell: by shedding of his owne moste precious blood, to bring vs to GOD, and to make vs heires of his kingdōe: Did not omit ye least godly meanes of all to drawe vs and quicken vs by his spi¦rit diligently and with all our indeuours to seek after his kingdome.
And therfore to annymate vs in spirit, hée confirmed the assured certaintie of his glorie and our glorie, and of his glorious comming in the end of the world, when he sayde to his Apostles that some there were among them that should not taste of death till they saw the sonne of man,Math. 17. come in his kingdome: and so in a visiō or spiritual dream by transfiguring him self vpon mount Tabor (before Pée∣ter, Iames and Iohn) he shewed the vision of his owne glorie and of our glorification by Moyses and Helyas ap∣pearing also with garments of immortalitie. And thus he presented to their spirituall sight the excellen¦cie of his comming again at the latter day, when his face did shine as the sunne and his clothes as white as ye light and so pure in all whitnes, as no Fuller can make vppon the earth. Peter. 2.1.Wherfore Péeter the chéef beholder thereof dooth testi¦fie, saying: With our eyes wee saw his maiestie, euen then verely when hee receiued of God the Father honour and glorie, and when there came such a voice to him from the excellent glorie:Iohn. 1. This is my deare beloued sonne in whōe I delight: And Iohn witnesseth also the s ame: That hee saw the glorie of him, as the glorie, of the onlye begotten sonne of the Father: and the great shyne of his glorie ap∣peared vnto Paule after his assention,Acts. 9.26. aboue the bright∣nes of the sun, by which hee stirreth vs to expect his glori∣ous comming in the end of the world and inflame vs with the desire of glorifying: that wee might walke as Chil∣dren of the light and sonnes of God in all righteousnes of conuersation according to his Gospell: that wee may bee heires of his glorious kingdome of eternall ioy: when he shall appeare to saluation, to chaunge our vile and cor∣rupt earthly bodies to bee facioned and made lyke to his glorious bodie,Phil. 13. Moreouer our blessed Sauiour doth giue vs great con∣solation
and hope by such Reuelations of heauenly expe∣ctationof blessednes to come: when hée presented to Iohn, the vision of his moste wunderfull brightnes and precious¦nes of glorie (beeing entred into heauen and set down on the right hand of the maiestie on high) by shyning & shew¦ing foorth the spirituall semblance of his pre-excellent beu¦tie, power and glorie, in which he is Alpha and Omega. the first and the last, and was dead and is alyue for euer∣more, and shall come againe quickly and will not tarrie, any longer then till his Father hath made his enemies his foote-stoole:Cor. 1.15. And now hee appeared in the prehemi∣nence of exceeding and incomparable glorie and power, in as much as hée hath by inheritance obtained a more ex∣cellent name then the Angells and creatures,Heb. 10. seeing by him all thinges were created, thinges that are in heauen,Colloss. 1 and thinges that are in earth, thinges visible and thinges inuisi∣sible, whether they be maiestie, lordship, rule or power, all thinges hath their creation and being by him and in him and that hee is the first begotten of all Creatures, the head of the congregation and first beginning and begoten of the dead, that in all thinges hee mihght haue the preheminēce beeing the only begotten sonne of GOD. So that according to his moste excellent worthines of preheminence, hée being the cheife lyuing corner stone of the whole buylding, and the eternall head of the Temple of his Father, did appeare to Iohn, sitting according to his hye diguitie, in the cheif and moste royall seate of the Temple: in the midst of the seauen Candlestickes:Esdras. 4.. accor∣ding to the vision of Esoras: Hée was in the midst of the multitude vppon mount Sion, beeing a condigne place for him hauing the goulden and heauenly censour to offer vp the swette cense and odoures of the prayers and petitions of the whole Saincts and congregation (wherof he is the head) through his owne handes vppe before the glorious presence of the heauenly Father vp vpon the golden Alter of GOD.Reue 8,
beeing clothed with a linning garment down to the feete as whyte as snow:Daniel. 10. (arcocding to the said vision to Daniell answering héerto) being his robes of the eternall puritie and of his euerlasting and royall préesthood for euer: accor¦ding to the order of Melchesedech, representing the sancti¦fying of his precious and eternall holynes and godlynes, in prays ing the omnipotent Father of glorie for euer in his holy Ierusalem or Temple of glorified Saincts: and hee was girded about the breast or paps with a golden girdell, reprsenting the pure and approoued confirmation of eter∣nall veritie, vndfiled chastitie and sinceritie, perfect obedi¦ence and eternall wisdome, righteousnes and treuth to be conioyned to his glorious body: and his head and his heare were most amiable white lyke pure wooll or snowe: shew∣ing thereby a setled grauitie of all true godlynes, a modest reuerence of all true honor, a confirmed experience of all deuine patience and the only coullor of purenes and clear∣nes of mynde without chaunge for euer: and on his head a golden Crowne, shewing that hée was the glorious king of kings:Heb. 4. and his eyes as cleare lamps and cleare flames of fire: shewing yt all things were naked to his fight, and that hée was the only light of all things: and his armes and feete like fine polished brasse, burning bright in the furnace, or lyke pillers of fire: shewing that he had a sure strength & stedfastnes in all his waies, bé eing tryed faithfull in doing the will of his Father and in performing all his promises, and so tryed pure therin as brasse in the furnace: and his body was lyke a Crisolite: transparent with the beautifull sintillation of golde & fire, shewing foorth the absolute mir¦rour of his glorious beautie, in all soundnes, of one selfe same in him self eternall clearenes of glorie and maiestie, and his voice as the voice of a multitude or sound of many waters: shewing yt he was ye head & chéeif of the multitude of his people, that all voyces and languages weare as one voyce and
as one language vnto him, and in his, andthat they should do all things by the direction of his voice, for they that be his doe heare his voyce.Iohn 10. And now he shall leade the glorified saints vnto fountaines of liuing water: And on his right hand seuen starres, shewing that as hee doing his Fathers will doth sit on the right hand of ye Fa∣ther in heauen, so his starres, which are the ministers of his worde (being conteined vnder the figure 7. the Sab∣both day number, of perpetuall rest and holinesse, feeding his sheepe, setting foorth his glorie, and doing by him and in him the will of his father) shall sit with him in his seat, euen on his right hand, as he hath done with his Father, according to Daniel, They that haue taught other, shall shine as the starres, and glister like the shining of heauē,Daniel. 12. And out of his mouth proceedeth a sharpe two edged sword, shewing that all power, Maiestie imperiall, and iudgement was giuen him of his father, according to that of the Reuel out of his mouth went a sharpe sword, that with it he should smite the heathen, which was his word, which (according to Paul) is sharper then a two edged sworde, being quicke and mightie in operation,Heb. 4. & entreth thorowe to the deuiding of the soule and spirit, and of the ioynts and the marow, and iudgeth the thoughtes and in∣tentes of the heart: and the Raine bowe about his head, shewing the vndoubted signe of his true couenāt and pro∣mise, in all things to be perfourmed according as hee had promised touching saluation: euen as the Rainbow was a true signe and witnes of Gods iust worde, neuer to de∣stroy the world by water againe: And his face did shine as the sunne in his strength, and hath the keyes of hell and death, shewing the shining light of the incomprehensible brightnes of his glorious maiestie, and his triumphant power ouer all his enemies, and ouer al powers of hel and death, hauing the keyes of the kingdome, euen the keyes of Dauid, which openeth & no man shutteth, which shut∣teth and no
man openeth, and thus to the Prophetes andApostles Chri st did shewe a consembable vision of his glorious maiestie, and glorious mirrour of comming a∣gaine at the latter day: therein expressing the selfe same Symbolicall glorie to be to vs, if we be founde worthy at his appearance to be heyres of his Kingdome, thorough righteous life: according as the Angell shewed the vision of Christ vpon mount Sion howe there stoode before him a great people that coulde not be nombred,Esdras 4.2. praysing the Lorde with songes and thankesgiuing, and he in the middest of them, being of an high ste most goodly, most glorious, and most excellent aboue them all, appea∣ring alwayes higher and higher, more glorious and glo∣rious, in the incomprehensible shining, and vnmeasura∣rable riches of all brightnesse, clearenesse, beautie, gifes, treasures, and noblenesse, and in the infinite and endelesse power, might, and omnipotencie of his diuine Maiestie, and Godheade: setting crownes vpon their heades, there crowning them with the golden Diademes of eternall glorie, and palmes of euerlasting ioye, for that they had truely walked in his wayes, and knowledged efect faith his holy Name▪ euen to the death: There∣fore seeing by Christ we haue there arrest of our saluati∣on, and the promise to be made partakers of his godly na∣ture, and the power by his Gospel to be made the sonnes of God: let vs vse all diligence towarde good life, to make our calling to mount Sion, to be to our ioy, that when we there appeare before our eternall king of glorie, we maye be foūd to be of that holy multitude, that Christ with his heauenly and vnspeakeable sweete hand may set the vn∣speakeable crowne of glorie vpon our heades: for which cause let vs now stirre vp our hearts with the quicke eye of faith and behold him as if he were present: whom short∣ly we shall sée with our outward and inward eyes face to face, in his Godhead and glorious humanitie: as before he was séene in his lowlinesse of
his humane nature: Andthen we shal behold him in his excellencie and in all mar∣ueilousnesse, being exalted and aduanced in the high glory of his Father, and beautified with all the euerlasting or∣naments of wisedome, beautie, goodnes, and glorie: And then (O how ioyfully shall we sée him, how intyrely shall we loue him) howe with burning flames of excéeding de∣sire shall we couet him, and what wonderfull zeale & affe∣ction shall we haue to imbrace him so most amiable a god and sauiour: when we shall thus looke vpon him, how in steade of his crowne of thornes, he is extolled to the endles mirror of Maiestie, triumphing in all ye great shining dig∣nitie of God, and in the Royall power ouer all powers, King of kings, to whome all kings and powers shall yeeld vp their glorie & power, ashamed of so mightie maiestie: and in s teade of a Reede, he hath nowe the bright euerla∣sting Scepter of the kingdome, and the omnipotent and e∣ternall sentence of iudgement: and in steade of rebukes and reproches, he is magnifies with all goodly and glori∣ous names of God, with all the wordes, voyces, and songs of praise, laud, honour, and glorie for euer: and in stead of his crosse & nayles, he is exalted in the wonderful, bright, and glorious shining throne and seate of power and do∣mination: and in steade of his simple garments, and rent clothes, and purple gowne, with which they clothed and mocked him: hee is nowe arayed with the euerlasting heauenly Robes of glorie and honour, of Iustice and Kingly dignitie for euer: And where his enemies did boast ouer him, and mocked him, nowe he hath reigned till his enemies be made his footestoole, and hath triumphed o∣uer death the last enemie,Oseas 13.that the saying of the Prophet may be fulfilled, O death I will be thy death, O hel I wil be thy sting. And thus our Sauiour Christ hath perfour∣med the euerlasting tryumphe ouer all his enemies, they nowe bowing their knees, attributing all honour & glo∣rie vnto him, and with moste dreadfull feare
falling flat an their faces before his shining face and high power: And because he yeelded him selfe to death, he hath nowe the victorie ouer death and hell for euermore. And in this sorte he commeth in the most magnifical glorie of his Fa∣ther, prepared to the marriage of newe Ierusalem, which commeth downe also from heauen from God, garnis hed with the reines of the righteousnesse of Saintes: prepa∣red as a bride mos t beautifull and glorious, fitte and con∣uenient for a precious and glorious husbande, and wor∣thie to receiue and welcome all the excellent guestes that are called to this marriage: where the ioye of the godlye shall be made perfect and complete. receiuing the marri∣age gifte, the palmes of immortalitie and honour, and the garland of euerlasting glorification. Wherefore to consi∣der of this our heauenly hope, and ioyfull expectation of blessednesse, let vs be faithfull vnto death and ouercome, and Chri st hath promised to giue vs this crowne of life, at his comming,Thess. 1.4. which shall be with Imperiall might and greatnesse, (according to Paul) with a shout and the voyce of the Archangel and troumpe of God, that the heauens and earth, and all powers shall quake withall, and accor∣ding to Iohn, Hee shall come downe from the high hea∣uens, clothed with a cleare white splendent cloude: and the Raine bowe vpon his head, the signe of Iustice, promise, mercie, and iudgement, and his face as it were the sunne, and his feete as it were pillars of fire, glistering in the most endlesse purenesse of the glorie of his father, like shi∣ning fire,Thes s. 1.4. most incomparable: And then lift vp your heads to sée his superexcellent gloriousnesse, (when you shall immediately be changed to immortalitie) and méete him in the ayre,Actes 1. when he shal according to the first of the Actes come againe downe vpon mount Oliuet:Zacharie 14. and according to Zacharie, Hee shall stande vpon mount Oliuet, (the mount of the eternall light) that lieth vpon the East side of Ierusalem,Place
of Iudgement. And the mount Oliuete shall cleaue intwo, eastward and wes tward, so that there shall be a great valley, and the half mount shall remoue toward the north, and the other toward the south: and thither wee shall flye into the valley of the Lords hilles, where the Lord shalbe and all his Saincts with him, and this is the valley of Iosa∣phat, which Ioel speaketh of, saying: Let the people ryse, and get them to the valley of Iosaphat,Ioel. 3.for there will I set (sayth the Lord) and iudge all heathen round about, and there shall bee many people in that day of the Lord in the same valley appointed, when the Lord shall roare out of Sion. and cry out of Ierusalem, that the heauens and earth shall quake withall: and the sun and moone shalbe darke∣ned and the starres withdrawe their light, and then shall we knowe that the Lord our God dwelleth vppon the holy mount Sion and that Ierusalem is holy inhabited for euer more. And thus sayth Esay, the sunne and moone shall bee a∣shamed,Esay. 24. when the Lord of hoastes shall come with his hie heauenly hoast from abooue, to rule the people at Ierusa∣lem vppon mount Syon. And now beholde how Iesus our eternall king & iudge, béeing thus come downe from the toppe of all heauens, with an heauenly company of beautifull bright Angells, and goodly creatures triumphing with the glorie of all ce¦lestiall pompe:Reue. 20. Is sitting (according to Iohn) in the great white seat, from whose face flyeth away bothe the earth and heauen & their place no more found: And there bothe great and small stand before GOD, ready to be rewarded with his glorious and euerlasting kingdome, saying blessing, honour, glorie and power, bee vnto him that sitteth on the seate and to the Lamb for euermore. And thus our omnipotent and glorious King our mer∣cifull Sauiour and Iudge, hath stretched foorth his glori¦ous and omnipotent throne and seate of maiestie vpon the valley of Iosaphat, the blessed valley of
GOD, where allthinges in heauen and in earth are gathered before him to iudgement: where hée openly sheweth foorth his woorthi∣nes and pretiousnes glittering lyke to a Iasper or Sar∣dine stone, (which stones are moste cleare and of a moste florishing purenes without corruption) being of proper∣tie and nature of so excellent a vertue,Reue. 4. as to kindle ye harts and myndes of the beholders to ioy and also to animat and stirre vp their spirits to delight, mirth and gladnes: and so in superabundant measure of vnspeakablenes doothe Christe appeare vnto vs moste graciously: sitting vppon his tribunall seate (houlding his court regall with all fleshe) there glistering so with incōparable endlesse bright¦nes and purenes of glorie, as to kendle all harts exceding∣ly and abooue all that may be thought, to the praysing, lauding and magnifying his moste excellent and renow∣ned maiestie. And there was about his seat thousand thousands, saying with a lowde voice, worthie is the Lamb that was killed. to receiue power and riches, and wisdome and strength, and honour, and glory and blessing: And this seat was bor¦dred about with a goodly and heauinly Raine-bow lyke a Smaradge, as with a moste precious ring: representing ye riches of Gods promises to be performed, and the blessed∣nes of his promises touching election, and his iudgements touching distruction to be like, (as the raine-bow is roūd and with out end) so them to be without end for euer, and as the Smaradge is durable,Esdras. 4.5. so the promises and iudge∣ment of God shall indure for euer: according to Esdras, God lykneth his iudgement to a ring. And now ahout the seat are twentie and fower seates and vpon the seate twenty and fower Elders, sitting clothed in amiable white Gar∣ments: being the raines of righteousnes, and robes of ius∣s tice, hauing on their heades crouwnes of golde, beeing made kings & royall préestes vnto God, and Iudges of the trybes,
béeing the Patriarches and twelue Apostles, ac∣cordingto Daniell, I loked till the seates were prepared till the olde aged set them down: & according to Mathew,Mathew. 1. Christ sayd vnto his Apostles, yée shall sit vppon twelue seates, and iudge the twelue trybes of Israell: whereby wée see the great glorie, power and dignitie with whiche the Lord dooth adorne his messengers and Apostles with∣all, that they shall accompanie our eternall God and king Iesus Christe vpon his maiesticall throne of Iudgement, to manifest the excellencie of Gods treuth in open iudge∣ment, iudgeing the enemies of Christe: Whereby wee may well perceiue the woorthines of our glorie to be great if wee so liue that we may be found acceptable in the sight of God, thereby to be made the sonnes of God, glorified wt glorious bodies like the Apostles, euermore accompaning with Christe him selfe in his new Cittie of Ierusalem, his moste blessed kingdome: And now out of the seat pro∣ceeded lightnings and thundrings and voyces: the first bée¦ing the glistering and lightning streames of Gods mercy towards the godly the second beeing the dreadfull & thun∣dering fearefull s ound of Gods iudgement toward ye wick¦ed: and the third beeing the heauenly voyces of the An∣gells and Saincts praysing, lawding & magnifying God in his omnipotent goodnes and glorie, (as at the byrthe of Christe) the Angells and multitude of heauenly souldiers stood before Christe (in vision to the Shéep-heards) accor¦ding to Luke, lawding God and saying:Luke. 2. Glory be to God on high, and peace on the earth, and with men reioycing. And the glorious Throne of GOD is full of all power, glorie and honour: according to the saying of Ieremie, Whose Throne is moste glorious, excellent and of moste antiquitie, which dwellest in the place of our moste holy and blessed rest. And according to the saying of the Prophet Da∣nyell. His
Throne was lyke vnto the fierie flame,and his wheales as the burning fire, and there drewe forth a fierie streame and went out from him: béeing the mighty and eternall blases of Gods goodnes,Daniell. 7. mercy and iudgmēt, to the great ioy and gladnes of the righteous to beholde: and to the wunderfull terrour, feare and dread of ye wick∣ed to see, abyde and indure: and thus replenished with all excellēncie and gloriousnes, is this seat of iudgement: That there are seuen shyning Lamps of fire burning before the seat: béeing the seuen spirits of God, shewing a goodly faire and cleare light and a pure cleare expressing of the clearnes of almightie GOD, béeing the heauenly wit¦nes of the euerlasting treuth of God, and béeing for euer present before his Throne, there giuing heauenly honour and prayse to our omnipotent God sitting in his glorious throne of maiestie: and before the seat is a sea of glasse like throwgh shyning christall, being ye appointed place for all the new chaunged creatures frō corruption to immortali∣tie, to stand vpon: before the glory of God: & it is so tran∣slucident as yt it semeth that the eternall power of Gods e¦ternall remēbrance & omnipotent might, hath fixed it wt the vertue of such a meruelous cōprehension, ye lyke as a a glass e expresseth ye vision of a mans face & shape: so this expresseth ye apperance of euery mans déeds, woords, thou∣ghts and imaginations, in shewing ye verry face of euerie mans conscience, euen in the very circute he stands vpon so yt the powre of God, shall make all things yt were since ye beginning to be as present, in most manife st maner shew∣ing ye treuth of all things before his Angels & saincts: ther∣fore ought we to be careful to kéep a good cōscience,Reue. 4. seing no¦thing is so hid yt shall not be reuealed: and in the midst of the seat & round about the seat are fower beastes: being the fower goodly cherubins of God, ful of eyes before & behind represēting the state of our new Ierusalē & of all the elect of God: the first beast being like a Lion: signifiing glory to those which béen valiant to fight with stout faith &
coragein the defence of the Lambe and his Gospel: The seconde was like a calfe, which prefigured a crowne of glorie to them which liued a sincere life, and offred them selues to the sacrifice of martirdome & death for the Lambes sake. The third had the face of a man, shewing the token of glo∣rie to all them which openly with voyce and tongue, by preaching, teaching, and writing had perfourmed the will of God to his praise and glorie. The fourth beast was like an Eagle, which euer setteth her face to the Sunne, and hath pure eyes to beholde the brightnes thereof: and this represented an assured signe of bles sed life to all them that haue liued in true penance of heart, lifting vp ye pure eyes of faith to God, and placing their conscience in true righ∣teousnesse and purenes of heart euermore towarde Iesus Chri st: and thus the good people (are at that dreadful ap∣pearance to iudgement) comforted in hope and gladnesse by beholding these Cherubims, representing the signes of happinesse, Reuel 4.And these beautifull beastes had no rest day & night, saying, Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lorde God Al∣mightie: And when those beastes (or goodly Cherubims) gaue honour, glorie, and thankes to him that sate on the seate: which liueth for euer and euer) the twentie and foure Elders, (that sit in iudgement with Christ,) fel down before him that sate in the throne, worshipping him that liueth for euermore, and cast their crownes before the throne: yeelding to him all honour to whome it is due, knowing that they haue nothing but that they haue re∣ceiued, Saying, Thou art worthy Lord to receiue glorie, and honour, and power, for thou hast created all thinges, and for thy willes sake they are and were created. And about the throne was the voyce of many angels, praising & magnifying the Lord with most heauenly melodie, in all excellencie and sweetenesse. Reu. 4.And the twentie and foure Elders fell vpon their faces, and worshipped him that li∣ueth for
euermore: shewing thereby that when the Lordes hineth foorth the excéeding highnes and greatnesse of his glorious face and maiestie, that all his goodly creatures do cast downe them selues, as not able to abide the bright∣nes thereof. And thus consisteth the mysterie of the royal maiestie of Iesus Christ comming to iudgement at the latter day, and of his most glorious sitting in his puisance, power, and glorie in his seate regall, hauing all thinges (according to the wil of the Father) gathered before him: The similitude of whose glorie appeared to Ezechiel,Ezech. 1. & 10.ap∣pearing in a great cloude full of fire, which with his gli∣stering lightened rounde about, and in the middes of the fire all cleare: And nowe after that the Lord hath opened the whole mysterie of the will of the heauenly father, & set the elect vpon his right hande, & the wicked and cursed on his left, hauing sealed vp the whole nomber of his chosen, then (according to Iohn,Reuel. 7.) the foure Angels which he saw stande on the foure corners of the earth, holding the foure windes, shall blowe and consume this vniuersall worlde with consuming fire, (which then was disfigured at the comming of Christ) that there shall be no more of the first heauen,Reuel. 21.earth, and sea: and then at that blast shall the cursed fall with the Deuill and his Angels into hell: (the Lord saying) depart ye cursed: and on the other side shall be a newe heauen, and a newe earth, euen newe Ierusa∣lem, the glorious kingdome of God, prepared for the elect before the beginning of the world, (come down from God) when he shall say, Come ye blessed, inherite the kingdom prepared for you of my father. O howe ioyfull shall then the s aints be with Christ in Sion, to whome paradise is thus opened, plenteousnesse of heauenly benediction made readie, the trée of life graunted, the ioy of immortalitie im∣braced, and the Garlandes of glorification enioyed, when the Lord shall so louingly say to his righteous people (that haue runne the race in this life in the path of godlinesse, saying, Come ye blessed, be ye
clothed with your heauen∣lymansion: come take the fréedome of your newe eternal citie, your glorious habitation: And beholde for euermore your God of glorie, and partake the incomprehensible shi∣ning of his euerlasting beautie and brightnesse: and now take the freedome of all inestimable ioyes, with the vn∣speakeable aboundance of all sweete reioycing for euer. Therefore let this animate thée to heauenly conuersation of life, that thou maist make thy election sure, whereby thou mayest be crowned with this glorious gar∣lande of euerlasting felicitie, ioye and blessednesse, worlde without ende, AMEN.
Ephesians 1. ALlaude and praise be vnto the God of our Lorde Iesus Christ, the father of glorie, who hath giuen vnto vs the spirit of wisedome, and hath lightened the eyes of our mindes that we may knowe what the hope is whereunto he hath called vs, and how rich the glorie is of his inheritance vpon the Saintes, and what is the exceeding greatnesse of his power to vs warde, which beleeue according to the working of that his mightie power which he wrought in Christ, when hee raysed him from the dead, and set him on his right hande in heauenly things, aboue all rule, and power, and might, and dominion, and aboue euery name that is named, not in this worlde onely, but also in the worlde to come, and hath put all things vnder his feete, and hath made him aboue all things the heade of the con∣gregation, which is his body, & the fulnes of him selfe that filleth all in all things, to whom be all ho∣nor & glorie, Amen.
THE GLORIOVS AND BEAVTIFVL GAR∣lande of mans glorification. CAP. 4. Of the euerlasting ioy of our glorification giuen vs by the inheritance of Christ his Kingdome: And the excel∣lent misterie of our eternall Mansion, and new glorious Ierusalem in which wee shall dwell the Sonnes and Saincts of GOD for euer. (:) THE tyme beeing come that the Lord, euen the most mighte God, dooth dissend from the hye toppe of the heauens,Psalme. 50. to call the worlde togither, not mynding to kéep, si∣lence: then shall go before him a consuming fire, and a mightie tem¦pest shalbe stirred vp round about him: when hée thus shall come to call the heauens from aboue, & the earth that he may iudge his people: at which tyme shall God appeare out of Sion in perfect beautie in the high glorie of his Godhed. And then shall be performed that all thinges in heauen and earth shall be gathered togither in Christe,Ephe.. and the misterie of the will of the Father declared: that Christe our triumphant King and Iudge, hauing reigned vntill his enemies be put vnder his féete, and hauing put down all rule, authoritie and power, that death the last enemy is consumed
into victorie: shall delyuer vp the kingdome to GOD the Father, and become him selfe, subiecte to God that putteth all thinges vnder his feet:Cor. 1.15. that God may bee in all thinges: and then the holy Cittie new Ierusalē, commeth down from God out of heauen, prepared as a Bryde garnished for her husband, that the Tabernacle of God, is now with his elect, and hée him selfe dooth dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God him felf shall be with them and shalbe their God: for Christe the king of kings, will suffer none of his chosen to be away, but gather all his Saincts together, and so enter with triumphing Ioy into new Ierusalem: Therfore lyft vp your heads O yée gates and be lyft vp ye euerlasting dores that the king of glorie may come in with his holie people: hauing the palmes of victorie, crownes of lyfe and Gar∣lands of glorie in their hands. Math. 21.And thus, in stead of his humble ryding vppon an asse, he with all gloriousnes is accompaned into new Ierusalē, with the eternall Crowne and Scepter of heauenly ma∣iestie takeing possession of Abrahams new land of promise the euerlasting kingdome and inheritance of Gods rest: saying to his righteous people; come taste the cup of your saluation: and imbrace the ioyes, the happines, the bessed¦nes and vnspeakable glorie which the Father of heauen hath (of his great loue) here prepared for you, in his pal∣lace: where now you are fully and absolutely come to the new land of Canaan the euerlasting inheritance, and to holy mount Sion and to the Cittie of the liuing GOD, the celestiall Ierusalem, and to the enumerable fighte of Angels, and vnto the congregation of the first borne sōnes which are written in heauen,Cor. 1, 3.and to God the Iudge of all and to Iesus the mediator of the new Testament, and to a kingdōe immoueable for euer: where they are clothed with their heauenly mansion, replenished with the glory ioy and blessednes which neither tung can vtter, eye hath séene, or hart hath thought: and thus
Christe hath madethem the glorifyed sonnes of God, and holy and peculiar people, a congregation triumphant, a kingly préesthoode and a perfect communion of Sainctes, assembled togither in all purenes and precious nes with God, before the pre∣sence of the almightie & eternall Father: who now shew∣eth foorth to you the light of his countenace that you shall beholde with ioy vnspeakable his moste glorious godhead, his moste resplendent countenance and incomprehensible maiestie: synging to him with an heauenly voice and ble∣ssed harmony, (in all abundancie of ioy) the songs of pray¦sing God for euer: for that hée hath geuin vs the crowne of euerlasting lyfe: and ye fréedome of his etrenall kingdōe of glorie: where now wée hunger no more, nor feele infir∣mities: neither dooth the sunne and moone giue lighte to vs any more: for our pretious Lamb dooth dwell with vs,Reu. 7. and feede vs, and lead vs vnto fountaines of liuing water: and our God wypeth all teares from our eyes: clothing vs with the plentious ioy of our heauenly mansion, new Ie∣rusalem, beeing full of mellifluous pleasures, where all things are so heuenly that nothing can be better, for there dwelleth euerlasting lyfe, there groweth the trée of ioy, there runneth the waters of helth, there is the hidden mā∣na of heauenly consolation, the white stone of gladnes, & the new names of happines, and there is the beautie of ye Godhed glory of saincts & incōparable blessednes for euer. So that the GOD of all treuth hath performed that which hee spake by Esay the Prophet beeing moste fauourable and gracious vnto Sion, saying. There shall thyne eyes see new Ierusalem, that glori∣ous Habitation the Tabernacle that neuer shall remooue, whose nayles shall neuer bee taken out worlde without end and her cordes shall neuer corrupte,Esay. 33.for the eternall ma∣iestie of the Lord shall there bee present among vs, and he shall be our Captaine and king, that wee shall walke vp∣on fayre and
beautifull Ryuers, and pleasaunt Streamesof lyfe where neither gallies rowe nor great shippes saile, neither any man there lyeth that sayth I am sick, but all e∣uill is taken away from vs: who therfore desireth not to dwell in the house of the Lord, and to beholde the fair beau¦tie of God and to visit his Temple, and to be in his citie: in which sayeth Zacharie, The waters of lyfe run out of Ierusalem, and the Lord him self s halbe king ouer all the earth,Zacha. 14. and there shalbe but one Lorde onlye and his name shalbe but one: for then shall he set vp him self aboue the heauens and his glorie shall be aboue all: when hée shall make a new heauen and a new earth, that men shall goe about the earth as about a golden Paradice or plesant florishing féeld: For now Ierusalē shall be saifly inhabited which was forsaken: and is made according to the saying of Esay: The Cittie of the Lord, moste glorious through all posterities,Esay. 60. beeing inhabited without any wall, yea the Lord him self is to her a wall of fire round about, and will be honored euermore in her. Where all thinges are full of the shyne of the Lords glo¦rie, so that O beholde this phenicall CittieIerusalem, how shee shall reioyce in hir Children, and hir Children shall bee full glad of her: whose gates are buylt with Sa∣phire and Smaradge, and all the walles with precious stones,Toble. 13. and in all her streates shall Aleluia be sung, where Gods kngdome shall bee vpon her world without end. Therfore O children of men so do that you may be Citi∣zens in this citie of incōparable blessednes: for ye obtaining wherof,Ephes. 6. it behoueth you to walke as the children of ye day light, striuing to ouercome all the lustes of the fleshe, the world and the deuil, as might hinder you from entring in to so heauenly a Cittie: And therfore gird vp the loynes of your mindes with veritie, & put on the brest plate of righ∣teousnes, & be shod with the shooes of peace, & take to you ye sheild of faith, arming your selues wt the woord of
God, that you may be pertakers of his vnsearchable treasuresof happines, there tasting the abundant sweetenesse of the tree of ioy and life: which shall be to vs a sweete smelling oyntment for euer: for then we shall be called the hea∣uenly citizens of newe Ierusalem, the holy housholde of God, and glorified sonnes of the Father: being according to Paul, an holy body in Christ, made a glorious congre∣gation without spotte or wrinckle: placed in his owne kingdome, and sabboth of euerlasting rest, (like shining lightes) in the presence of God world without end. There∣fore consider what happinesse is this, to enioy the ineffa∣ble brightnesse and vnsearcheable plenteousnesse of Gods goodne sse, with the ioyful presence of God his owne selfe: whereat the zeale of gods house should eate vs vp, and ra∣uish our hearts with flaming feruencie to Godward: de∣siring to be clothed with our heauenly mansion from hea∣uen, by waiting with a liuely hope in the way of righte∣ousnesse, to be deliuered from this body and fleshly fellow∣ship, that we may goe to haue the pure heauenly compa∣nie of God our maker: the precious fountaine of all hea∣uenlinesse, ioy and happinesse: there with him to remaine in his owne kingdome, where all things shalbe to vs plea∣sant, and full of contentation for euer: where perpetuall ioy and gladnesse shall abide for euer:Esay 54. for saith God, Be∣holde, O Ierusalem, I will make thy walles of precious stones, and thy foundation of saphyrs: thy windowes of Christall, thy gates of fine cleare stone, and thy borders of pleasant stones:Es ay 62. for I will (saith God) marrie my selfe to thy sonnes, and as a bridegrome glad of his bride, so I the Lorde shall reioyce ouer thee: So that praise the Lorde O Ierusalem, praise thy God O Sion: for he hath made fast the heauenly barres of thy gates & hath blessed thy childrē within thee, that we shall dwell in thy pallaces, made the elect Saintes and sonnes of God, in all plenteousnesse of ioy and peace: reioysing in his holy sanctuary of euerla∣stingnesse,
where we shall walke in the court and pallaceof our God, ascribing praise and honour to him in his pla∣ces of eternitie: and there we shall sing merily vnto our God, lauding and worshipping him in the beautie of his holinesse: for the spirit of ioy shall there be triumphing a∣mong vs in his glorious chariot of heauenlinesse, in that we shall beholde the face of God, whose Maiestie endu∣reth visibly with vs for euer: shewing vpon vs the light of his countenance, and filling vs rounde about with the incomprehensible sweetenesse, goodnesse, ioyfulnesse and excellentnesse of his owne selfe: shining, flowing, and streaming foorth to vs the beames of beautie, the bright∣nesse of glorie, the fountaines of ioy, the riuers of life, the paradise of pleasure, the fréedome of delightes, the orna∣ments of honour, the plenteousnes of reliefe, the pleasant∣nes of all heauenly sauours, the sweete smelles of all redo∣lent odours: and thus he shall reioice his glorified Saints eternally, who shall be rauished with endlesse mirth and gladnes to behold with their eyes the infinite & inexpressi∣ble excellencie and splendencie of the beautie of their ma∣ker, and to heare the great power, might, and maiestie of his omnipotent voyce: And thus the chosen of God, being indued with the ornaments of immortalitie, garlandes of glorie, crownes of life, and palmes of ioy and victorie, are in their heauenly clothing in new Ierusalem, in the sight of the glorious throne of the most highest, being consem∣bable to God in purenes and clearnes, enioying the frée∣dome of eternall blessednes: therefore (O swé ete people) repent, for this kingdome is at hande, and come to the wa∣ters of life, and stirre vp your mindes to holinesse that you may enioy this blessed Cittie. For Christe after his as∣cension, to stirre vp & winne a feruent desire to our hearts (towards the séeking after this his kingdome) doeth shew a glistering vision of newe Ierusalem, to the spiritual eies of Iohn, that he being vpon an high mountaine, did sée in Ghostly comprehension the cons emblance
of this holy Ie∣rusalem:descending out of heauen from God, hauing the brightnesse of God: shining like to a stone most precious,Reuel. 21.euen a Iasper, cleare as Christall: being thereby a most flourishing Citie, translucident in all heauenly pleasant∣nesse, most plentifull with all goodnesse, most beautifull to beholde, and most glorious to enioye: and this Citie is more precious then pearles, an habitation so amiable, so louely, so deare and desirefull, that it includeth in it selfe the vnmeasurable and endlesse fulnesse of heauenly ri∣ches, eternall felicitie and happinesse, vnspeakeable plea∣sures, ioyes, and gladnesse, ordeined eternally vnto the elect and glorified people: That who woulde not (O Lord) loue the habitation of this thy house, and the place where thine honour dwelleth: which thou hast made a moste sure and safe Citie, impugnable for euer, being bordered and compassed rounde about with the walles of eternitie, great, high, and strong, which stande fast for euer: And her walles (sayeth Esay) shall be called health:Esay 60. Zacha. 2. And the Lorde (sayeth Zacharie) will be vnto her a wall of shining fire rounde about: And yet the entrance into this Citie, shall bee by twelue gates, kept by the goodly Porters and Angelles, the twelue tribes of Israel, that the gates of newe Ierusalem (according to the saying of the Prophet Esay) shall be called the praise of God:Esay 60. be∣ing agréeable in euery part, in, with, and to it selfe: in perfect nomber of equalitie and sympathie, concording euery side together in one conclusion in the whole: As Al¦pha and Omega is the first and the last, as one perfect nomber of eternitie in many:The liuely description of newe Ierusalem▪ and the same many con∣cluded in, of, and by that one: And thus consymbolicall in deuine mysterie, hath Ierusalē a quadrate & equilateral forme, with three gates on the North side: three on the East: three on the South: & three on the West side: foūded with twelue foundations, euen (the holy Apostles) of whom the
walles conflict: euen the great high nomber of the elect. And thus there beeing in newe Ierusalem many gates and many heauenly openings to goe in at to praise the Lord: yet are they one in many, and many in one co∣hering in the same: like a radicall roote, out of which springeth a radicall nomber: and yet that nomber so ri∣sing out of his roote to an high and great nomber, as that it hath a true and perfect coniunction of vnitie,The mys te∣rie of a Ra∣dicall roote and radicall nomber to Christ and his elect. simpathie, and concordance, of, with, and in his radicall roote: where∣by it is one of it selfe: and of that same one, rising out ma∣ny, and (that many) still abiding inseparably, in one con∣cordance, of, with, and in that one: as a thing vnpossible, that, that great radical nomber should consist, or be found without his roote radicall: neither also is it possible to be thought, a roote radicall to be: but that in his owne na∣ture and power, (of force) are many nombers radicall, in∣clusiuely conteined in this his roote, as in a priuie seale of most heauenly comprehension: so that the nomber of twelue is a radicall nomber, which by vertue and power of it selfe, multiplied in it selfe, doeth of it selfe produce a greater nomber, as an hundred fourtie and foure: and so the heauenly harmonie increaseth by consent and agree∣ment of radicall production: & yet this high nomber doth concord, vnite, and knit it selfe in, of, and with this radical nomber of twelue: So that the twelue apostles being the twelue foundations, (raised out of one corner stone) wher∣of the walles of Ierusalem do stand: are the radicall roote, whereof the great nomber of the elect, in one symbolicall conformitie, and concordance of vnitie, doth agrée in per∣fect harmonie of coniuction, as euer abiding in, of, & with his foundation or radical roote: and so by vertue & power (of perfect production, coniunction, concordance and har∣monie) is one in many, and many in one, conteined in perfection of heauenly mysterie. Whereby this Radicall foundation and roote (twelue, Apostles)
springing out of that only roote of Iesse: dooth conteine his measure of Ie∣rusalem, so vnder the vertue figuratiue of twelfe, as the number of the whole elect & of the twelue trybes: that the heigh, length breadth is equalll, and the measure of the walles is a perfect radicall number, of the radicall root of twelf multiplyed in him self, which in his owne strength and power produceth and hūdreth fortie and fower, a figu∣ratiue signe of the vnitie and consent of the misticall num¦ber of the whole congregation of the elect number of the Sainctes: for as twelue augmented in it selfe dooth ther∣of concurre a certaine true perfect radicall number, con∣semblably agréeing to, in and with the roote twelf wherof it ryseth: so in lyke consent, vnity, harmony, perfect num∣ber and true increase of production and concordance, is ye vniuersall Church triumphant to the radicall roote of the twelue Apostles, and their doctryne: so knyt all in one roote of Iesse inseperably: as one in many & many in one, in ghostly harmony euermore abyding. And thus in lyke manner, is this euerlasting habitati∣on or new Ierusalem, so absolute in all true perfection & iust proportion of heauenly consent, as nothing can be bet¦ter, nothing purer, nothing excellenter, and nothing more woorthyer to the euerlasting reioysing of the elect sainctes of God: cohering in one self same perfection of one consēt, peace and vnitie for euer. And now the vision of this glorious Cittie, wherin the glorified people shall dwel, did glister in the spirituall eies of Iohn in such transparent maner, as may animate all harts to the earnest looue and desire of inioying so beau∣tifull an habitation,Reue. 4. and so precious a Cittie of blessednes For the buylding of the walles was of Iasper and the Cittie of pure golde, lyke to the cleare glasse, and the foundation of the walles were garnished with all manner of pretious stones: as of Iasper, Saphir, Calcydon, Smaradge, Sar∣donix, Sardeos, Crisolitie,
Byrrall, Topas, Crisoprassos Iacynt and Amatist: wherby appeare the abundant rich∣es of all vertues the innumerable treasures of all heauen∣lynes, the exceeding ioyes of all ioyfulnes, the vnspeakable swéetnes of all blessednes, the moste precious felicitie of all happynes: to bee alwaies there conteyned to the perpe∣tuall gladding and reioysing of the hartes of the elect of GOD: for the Cittie in euerie parte with the whole, and of the whole with euerie parte, is without spotte and dymnes, without blemish and wryncle for euer: being in euerie parte the selfe perfection for euer: that in her cō∣passe, euer, is the excelleecie of all excellentnes, that no∣thing can be added. Otherfore that the power, glorie and mightines of this kingdome of Ierusalem might bee knowen to all men whose glorie is euerlasting, and her dominion indureth through all ages: for shée hath her gates wrought without hands: and yet grauē by high ministerie, beeing of twelue beauties like incomparable pearles, and yet by heauenly vertue,Reue. 4. they shine as many, yet still in one: And the streat of the Cittie was moste goodly, conssisting of pure golde, as a through shyning glasse. Shewing that it is most riche with all fulnes of riches, the mightiest King∣dome of all incomparable treasures:Reue. 12. the phenicall Cittie of all inestimable heauenlie merchandize: beeing moste delectable abooue all delightes, moste beautifull abooue all fairnes: most cleare aboue all clearnes, & most of all resplē∣ding, yt the night is as cleare as the day, and the darknes and light bothe a lyke abooue all brightnes: in which wee shall reigne with the Father of all brightnes, greatnes, beautie and glorie: who euermore holdeth the Sainctes and Citizens there, in perpetuall blyss e and ioy, touch∣ing such an heauenlie mansion, wherwith they are clo∣thed: For that the Lord God almightie and the Lamb are the Temple of it, and the brightnes of God doo lighten it and the
Lamb is the light of it, that there is neuer night,neuer need of sunne or moone, neither shall the gates euer be shut, for the seate of God and the Lamb shall be there,Reue. 22. and they shall see his face, and his names shall bee vppon their Foreheades. And then they are a moste blessed People hauing the Lord for their God, that insomuch it is a thing beyond all measure, a place of ioy beyond all thoughtes, where wee shall haue the fréedome of Angells, the paradice of ghost∣ly delightes, the incomprehensible brightnes of Gods con̄∣tenance satisfied with the pleasures of his house and king¦dome, in the aboundant and bountifull refreshinges of all sweet and delectable gladnes: by beholding our GOD in his greatnes, béeing the Creator of all creatures, the giuer of all blessednes and Author of all heauenlines, the omnipotent maker of kingdomes, powers and dignitie, that all thinges shall yeeld vp their glorie to this Cittie of his Saincts, bothe kinges and powers, and whatsoeuer hath béen created shall yéelde vp his honour and vertue to this Cittie: bothe waters and stones frutes and leaues.Reue. 2. For out of the seat of God and of the Lamb procedeth pure Riuers of water of lyfe: hauing on eueerie side woode of eternall life, and frutes and leaues of euerlasting helth, (according to the saying of the Prophet Esay) There lyeth no man that sayeth (I am sicke) for all euill is clearely taken away from the holy and blessed Citizens that dwell and inhabit there. And thus the glorified and blessed People of GOD, shall continue and euer remain in the glorious presence of Gods moste excellent maiestie: in the euerlasting and e∣ternall state of vnspeakable ioyes and hapines, euermore walkeing in the puritie of the shyning and moste cleare light and brightnes of GOD. Therfore ascribe power vnto our Lord and reioyce in him, who is so wunderfull in his holy places, where he will deck his people with his owne beauty, & crown them wt the glory of an
euerlastingkingly préesthood extolling and prays ing God eternally in the highest, according to his woorthynes: and thus they taste perpetually of the infallable swéetnes, of all flowing goodnes incessantly procéeding from God his owne selfe: there making mery in all heauenlynes of mirth, and re∣ioysing continually before God, by imbracing the excellēt shyne and blessed beames of the moste splendent and glo∣rious brightnes of the omnipotent Father: O therfore come hether (all good people) that you may taste the swéet¦nes of the Lord, for the which lift vp your harts to hea∣uen and so run your race, as that you may be receiued in to that heauenly habitation with God and his Saincts. And besides touching ye heauenly misterie of this our eter¦nall Ierusalem and blessed mansion discending downe, from God: the vision of the glorie of the Lord appearing to Ezechiell,Ezeche. 1. and 10. doth in ghostly cōprehension (as in a cleare glasse) represent the figuratiue misterie therof, vnder the semblance of the goodly Cherubins: for our holy & euerla∣ sting Citie shall euermore appeare full of the glistering of Gods maiestie, lightning round about: wherby ye twelue trybes or vniuersall number of the elect, possessing Ierusa¦lem: according to a quadrate or equilaterall triplicitie of euery side of the Cittie, conteyning thrée gates, hauing the names of the trybes in order of heauenly deuision: which sides represent the fower goodly beastes vnder the quadrat fourme of this Cittie, containing, The mysterye of the fower beastes 4. and wheeles which Ezechiell saw.as vnder fower faces of beautifull beastes or wheeles: the whole congregation of ye elect, as vnder the face of thrée gates on euerie side, make∣ing the radicall number of twelue trybes or twelue Apo∣stels multiplyed in the vertue of it selfe, to a perfect num∣ber radicall the harmony of the elect: and thus these good∣ly faces of the fower beastes, being each side of the Cittie with his blessed saincts, shall shine as burning Cressets, ge∣uing a cōtinuall glister as it were a lightning, for out of their bodies
shall proceed the flaming zeale of praysingand magnifying the God of glorie for euer: and thus on the foure sides rounde about, (the similitude of new Ieru∣salem, shall be as a glassie sea mingled with fire shining with the superexcellent glistering of heauenly beautie, like the shining of precious stones) carued out without hande, by the omnipotencie of God: that the twelue tribes, or whole congregation of the elect, being euermore in the ci∣tie: that howsoeuer the blessed Lambe and glorious hoste of Saintes mooue vpwarde or downeward, to the magni∣fying of the Maiestie of God, or falling vpon their faces at the high glistring of the most incomprehensible bright∣nesse of God: the tabernacle or heauenly Ierusalem doth the same also: as an heauenly clothing immoueable from them, but still conformed in all godly perfection to euery harmonie of consent of the glorious Saintes: that if the holy Saintes doe mooue or goe, by the guiding of the spi∣rite or Lambe, the blessed Citie or tabernacle goeth also: for the spirite of life is in the Citie: So that the elect are so clothed with their heauenly habitation, that neither can they any way be separated from it, nor that from them, as a kingdome of glorie, ins eparable and immoue∣able from a glorious bodie: And this eternall Citie is framed with foure equilaterall sides, (like the fourme of the Quier and altar of the Temple of old Ierusalem) and that in most true perfection of iust harmonie and absolute proportion, hauing to looke vpon euery side mos t excel∣lently cohering and according: as if one were in another: that when one side of the glorified saintes went forward, they went all foure and turned them not about: accor∣ding to the dignitie of true perfection: for such is the con∣cording of euery part with the whole, and of the whole ci∣tie with euery parte, that if any part mooued, all mooued: and that, with such a motion, as the spirite of life did giue, which was in the whole Citie or tabernacle, and in euery parte of the tabernacle a like and the selfe s
ame: So thatthis motion was euer, as the swéete voyce of Gods owne mouth did breath, being the perfect motion of Gods holy will: (accordingly as the children of Israel did neuer mooue foorth in passing the wildernesse, but by the mouth of God, as the cloudie pillar did mooue or stande still be∣fore the tabernacle:) So in most heauenly maner shall it be in our glorified tabernacle or citie, that God shall be our Captaine and King, leading vs to fountaines of wa∣ter of life:Ezech. 1. And the streetes and winges of this our Citie, are so framed without hande, by mightie power, that one neuer touch another, and yet when they moue they turne them not about, but eche goe straight forwarde: shewing that it conteineth one onely way and motion of most per∣fect trueth and perfection with all harmonicall concor∣dance of heauenly agré ement. And these goodly beastes doe represent the Godly liuers which are accepted before the goodnesse of God: and now the maner of their dwel∣ling within their newe Ierusalē, is prefigured by the face of a man and Lion,Ezech. 1.appearing on ye right side of the squa∣red Citie: and the face of an oxe and an Eagle on the left side: signifying a consimilar expectation, that those godly people, which like a lyon haue bene vigilant, stout, strong, and bolde in faith, to fight and warre in defence of the Lambe: and the face of a man sheweth that those which truely and faithfully by confession, teaching, and prea∣ching, haue set foorth the glorie of the Lambe, shall pos∣sesse the right side of Ierusalem: And tho se which like an oxe to sacrifice, haue yeelded them selues to martirdome, to death, or torments for the Lambes sake: and those which like an Eagle haue turned their hearts to God, as the Eagle doeth alwayes turne her selfe to the Sonne, to beholde it, shall posses se the left side of newe heauenly Ie∣rusalem being nowe glorified: whose feete shineth like glistering scoured metall, full of beautie, euermore con∣tinuing in one
selfe same ioy and glorie: And nowe thewinges and borders are spredde out most beautifully, (ac∣cording to Esay) the cordes are so laide abroade as that they can not be better,Esay 33. and the ma st set vp of such a fashi∣on that no banner or sayle hangeth thereon.Esay 40. As also Esay saith, The Lorde sitteth vpon the Circle of the worlde, and spreadeth out the heauens as a couering, and stretcheth them out as a tent to dwell in: For nowe euery parte in the whole, and the whole with euery parte doeth euer∣more agree in the selfe same, so knit in vnitie and euer∣lasting peace, in one consent of melodie, that for euer one parte and euery parte doeth the selfe same thing: as the Spirite and Lambe doeth leade them,Coloss. 1. hauing the pre∣heminence: so that for euermore they remaine glorified with euerlas ting life, peace, vnitie, and puritie of all perfection and brightnesse in the sight of the Almightie: for all thinges with them are Symbolicall to Gods Ma∣iestie: That as Iesus Christ our Lorde and Redéemer is the Sonne of God, begotten of God, God of God, and God in God: that their insearchable nature is such, that they are both one in it selfe: And the Holy Ghost from them proceeding, beeing the euerlasting Spirite of the euerlasting Father and Sonne, being of inseparable na∣ture all together in it selfe: so that being three persons in Trinitie, yet is it one euerlasting vnitie: for in them is one Communion of Godhead, that the fulnesse of the Godhead dwelleth in the three persons Almightie, both bodely and Substantially: And nowe as this euerla∣sting power and Godhead is coadvnited a perfect Tri∣nitie in Vnitie, and Vnitie in Trinitie: So we of God, to God, and in God, are adopted Saintes of holinesse by Iesus Christ our Sauiour, the eternall worde & sonne of God: by whome we are made in most excellent & true resemblance of Godly nature, partakers of Gods glorie and purenesse:Phil. 3. being ordeined of God to bee fashioned like the Sonne of God:Ephe.
1. That what perfect coniunctionof Godhead, is betweene the trinitie and the vnitie. The like heauenly harmonie by adoption shall be for euer, of the Saintes of newe Ierusalem, adopted true sonnes of God by the Sonne of God, so fashioned like to his glori∣ous bodie.Phil. 3. So that as the euerlasting seate of Gods maie∣stie, his eternal and incomprehensible place of power, doth euer remaine with the Godhead, as an eternall brightnes of the most holyest seate of all holinesse: that where the Godhead is, there is the s hining of his incomprehensible seate of brightnesse, as a place eternall and incomprehen∣sible, agréeing to an Almightie and incomprehensible god: and so an Almightie God with an incomprehensible place of glorie, as one in a seate euerlasting, vnsearcheable and vnmeasurable of all omnipotent Maiestie: being an eter∣nall creator and maker of a vniuersal seate of glorie, neuer departing from the same, as an immutable God, in an im∣mutable, vniuersall, and incomprehensible seate of honour and power: So the Saintes and blessed elect haue a new mansion and glorious Citie descended from god, in which they abide a kingly Priesthoode for euer: And they shall neuer goe out of it, but shall sit therein with Christ the Sonne of God, being his seate of glorie giuen of the Fa∣ther,Reuel. 3. where the elect shall s it with the Sonne of God in his kingdome, as the Sonne did sit in his fathers seate of incomprehensible Maiestie: And nowe such is the hea∣uenly s ympathie and consembable resemblance of our heauenly mansion or newe Ierus alem, answering to the incomprehensible seate of the glorie of the eternall maie∣stie: That as the incomprehensible seate of glorie is euer with God, so our new Ierusalem is euer with the saints: being an euerlasting and heauenly clothing,Cor. 2.5.with which the elect are euermore clothed: That where the first be∣gotten Sonne of God, and by him the adopted sonnes of God doe go, mooue, or alleuate them selues towarde the omnipotent
God: in like sort doeth the eternal tabernacleor seat, as a glorious clothing or euerlasting garmēt with a glorified body continuing inseperably for euer: And thus wée are conioyned as one harmonie and perfect consent of many, vnited in one cōmunion wt Gods holines so glorified in the Author and Father of glorie, & clothed with the substanciall pertakeing of his goodly seat of glory (according to Esay) I will make a new Ierusalem (saith the Lord) that shall be glorious through all posterities:Esay. 4.. Peace shall be the ruler, and Righteousnes the officer: the walles shalbe called helth and the gates the prayse of God, and God shall bee thy euerlasting light, and thy God shall bee thy glorie: And she shall be a crowne in the hand of the Lord, and a glorious garland in the hand of her God: and shall be called a new name, the pleasure of God in her, and God loueth her and god shall marry him self to her sonnes. and as a brydegrome glad of his bryde, so god of her. Wherby appeare the infinit loue of God to his saincts and of them to God: the inseperable coniunction of ye glo∣rie of God to new Ierusalem and to her sonnes: and the reciprocate coniunction and euerlasting confirmation of them to him in substantiall glorification: so that wee shall be (in misterie) as one pure vnspotted people, sanctified in the participiation of the holynes of God: being a mul∣titude and yet one heauenly body vnited to one only holy and omnipotent God: and thus the Saincts shall be ioyful with glorie behoulding the moste resplendent beautie of God ouer their heads, lifting to him with one consent of heauenly melodie all prayse and honor euerlastingly, Otherfore yée heauenly Congregation of sainctes sing prayses night and day to your God of glorie that you may dwell before God for euer. And thus it is infinit to expresse and moste ioyfull to beholde the admirable treasures and riches layd vp for vs in Christ to come, and it is excéeding gladsome to thinke what a plenteous, costly, pleas ant and glorious feast the Lord hath prepared by Christe for vs:
And let it reioyce you to the ground of your harts, to consider how the Lord shall deck you lyke Bridegromes, with the garments of heauenly helth, and high blessednes and let your soules leap within you and daunce for ioy, to think how you shall be decked with the garmēts of Gods beautie, and be you mery in righteousnes and run cheer∣fully to, godlynes of life, that you may pertake with this euerlasting happines of new Ierusalem, the glorie wher∣of is so excéeding, that the high amplitude thereof cannot be expressed, vnto which the spirit of God sayeth to thée come, and your bryde her selfe (euen Ierusalē) saith come Therfore so run the race of your lyfe that thou maiest go into her, and taste her water of lyfe, there beholding the maiestie of GOD, with all abundant ioyfulnes: and so re∣maining in euerlasting glo∣rification with Christ for euer and euer. {inverted ⁂}
ALleluia, saluation and glory and ho∣nour and power and might:Reu. 19. bee as |crybed to the Lord our God: for true and righteous are his iudgementes, therefore prayse the Lord God all yee that are his seruants, and ye that feare him both small and great: for the Lord our God omnipo¦tent reigneth: so that let vs reioyce and be glad and giue honour to him for the ma∣riage of the Lamb is come, and his wife made her self ready, and to her was graū¦ted that shee should be arrayed with pure and goodly raynes: (and the raines be the righteousnes of Saincts, and now happie are they which are called vnto the supper of the Lambes mariage, for they shall dwell with him in his euerlasting Taber∣nacle and Temple, and God will dwell a∣mong them,Reu. 22. and they shall see Gods face and his name shalbe in their forheads and God him self shall bee their light, and shall reigne for e∣uermore: therfore to him sing prayses world with out end, AMEN.
Esdras 4.2.Take thy number (O Sion) and shut vp thy purified, for the number of thy Children whome thou lōgedst for is ful∣filled, and sealed in the feast of the Lamb receiuing glorious garments of the Lord, therfore O glorious mother Ierusa∣lem imbrace thy glorified Children with all tryumphing gladnes.
THE GLORIOVS AND BEAVTIFVL GAR∣lande of mans glorification. CAP. 5. Of the pure Christall and glassie Sea, on which the Elect shall stand before Christ: and in this glassie sea, true godlines and righteousnes giue the crownes of glory: according to whō euery man must be directed, that desire to stād ioyful∣ly before Christ to be crowned with the Garlande of glorification. {inverted ⁂} THE Lorde God Almightie who went before his people thorough the wildernes, that ye earth shooke, and the heauens dropped at his presence:Psal. 68. who se glorie Moyses might not beholde: neither any earthly and corruptible eye can sée his face, and liue:Exod. 33. hath promi sed of his great goodnesse and loue, that he will haue the righteous in euerlasting remembrance: and will be to them a ioyfull crowne and glorious Gar∣lande. Therefore reioyce in the Lorde and be glad,Es ay 28. that he may put vpon you the garments of health, and couer you with the mantell of righteousnesse: ho saith that he wil decke you like a bridegrome, and as a bride that hath her apparell
vpon her, so he will clothe you with the shiningrobes of glorification. For which cause ye ought to shewe your selues excellent in righteousnesse, a planting of the Lorde, for him to reioyce in: euermore walking in pure∣nesse of conuersation, and so holding out to the ende: ther∣by to winne the glorious palme of victorie,Esay. 62.and eternall kingdome of blessednesse:Tim. 2 2. for be it, that a man striue for a maisterie, yet he is not crowned with the victorie, ex∣cept he striue lawfully & so ouerrommeth. And also they that prooue maisteries to obtaine a corruptible crowne,Cor. 1, 9. abstaine from all things that shoulde hurte them, and hinder them in their enterprise: but nowe to you an in∣corruptible crowne is propounded, the ioy of euerlasting life and blessednesse: for which cause you ought so much the rather to abstaine from all things that shoulde let you thereto: And so runne, that you may obtaine the garland of victorie and palmes of glorie, for Christ hath not called you vnto vncleannesse of life, but vnto holines, accordingly as it is written,Pet. 1.1. be ye holy, because I am holy: wherein it is the will of God, that you shoulde increase more & more in all righteousnes of conuersation according to his Gos∣pel. For pure deuotion before God, is to keepe your selues vnspotted of the world, and to clense your selues from all filthines of the flesh, and growe vp to full holinesse in the feare of God: for great is the mysterie of godlines: wher∣unto you ought to stirre vp the gift of God which is in you, to perfection of righteousnesse, walking as obedient children ought to doe, to the pleasing of God. Wherefore to bring thee into the right way that leadeth to this pure glassie sea of righteousnes, thereby to enioy the treasure of eternall life, you must walke in the path that leadeth to the house of Iacob, in whose seede all the kinreds of the earth are blessed:Iohn 10. and there, by the holy one of Israel, who is the doore, you may goe in, and be guyded in the right pathe to the heauenly Citie newe Ierusalem, in a cleare
waye of godly conuersation, accompanyed with true Christianitie: Golden stayrand at your comming to this doore, you shall beholde with the eye of faith foure golden stairs decked with many goodly precious stones of vertue, be∣ing very faire gryces to goe vpon, one higher then ano∣ther: and when you are at the fourth stayre, you are come fully into this pure glassie Sea of holinesse, godli∣nesse and righteousnesse: and besides when you are come to the ende of the fourth stayre, you shall beholde the fift golden stayre more goodly then all the rest, most beauti∣full, transfulgent, and glorious, which bringeth you pre∣sently into the Chrystall Sea of glorie, to stande ioyfully in the sight of Christ, with a palme of victorie and a gar∣lande of glorie in your hande: Whereof the first golden stayre of Christianitie, is To beleeue the holy Scriptures and Gospell of God, simply, syncerely, and truely: And this is the first steppe of Christian wisedome: The s e∣cond staire is, to reuerence the worde of God, with a pure hart in all obedience & diligence to taste how swéete the Lord is: and this is the grice of true Religion: The third staire is, to goe forward by the woord of God, vnto the me∣ditation of heauenly life, hauing your conuersatiō in hea∣uen, frō whence you look for a sauiour to deck and beutifie you with glorie: And this is true holines and godlines: The fourth goodly stayre is to continue and perseuer in ye woord of God and treuth of the Gospell in all stedfastnes, of faith, loue hope and patience immoueable vnto the end And this is perfect constancie to obtein ye victorie, and thē the fift transfulgent and high s tayre of beautie to enter in∣to the Christall sea of glorie, (to stand in the number of the elect that hath got ye victorie of the beast, of his image, of his mark and of the number of his name) hauing the Harppes of God, and singing the song of Moyses the seruant of GOD and the song of the Lamb, who hath made vs meete for his moste glorious and euerlasting kingdome: Is, by grace in Christe, to ouercome and van∣quishe the worlde
and lustes of the fleshe and spirituallpowers by the faith of the Gospel and armour of God, and so to depart with the victorie. 1. The light of the Gospel and trueth.And now at the entring vp vpon this golden grite of Christianitie, there standeth a faire virgine, of a very pure and cleare countenance, clo∣thed with garmēts of shining light endewed with vnsear∣cheable vertues: and she speaketh nothing to them, that would come vp, but as the holy one of Israel hath taught her, (because vpon his shoulders the whole kingdome doth lye.)Esay 9. And she is crowned with a crowne, beset with the pearles of doctrine, trueth, knowledge, discipline, prophe∣cying, and preaching: And she is called the light of the Gospell:Iohn 1. And she is alwayes pronouncing a sweete and heauenly exhortation, desiring euery man to heare the trueth of the Gospell. and the way to their saluation, say∣ing, Ye men and brethren, girde you with the girdle of Gods veritie: for through his abūdant mercie he hath begot∣ten you again,Peter. 1.1. not with golde & siluer, but with the precious blood of his owne deare Sonne Iesus Chris t, as of a Lambe vndefiled and without spot: that ye should enioy an inhe∣ritance immortal and glorious, prepared in heauen for you. Therefore trust perfectly to the grace that is brought by Iesus Christ, walking after the spirit, abstaining frō fleshly lustes and fighting against the workes of darkenesse: that your conuersation may be holy in the grace of Christ, whereto hee hath called you through faith to saluation: thus she neuer ceaseth, making such godly perswasions to allure men to winne the glorie of Christes kingdome. 2. True Reli∣gion.And then preasing forwarde to come to the seconde staire, after the veritie of the trueth receiued, there stoode ano∣ther beautifull Ladie, arayed with all the shining gar∣ments that the first ladie conteined in her treasure house of trueth:Reuel. 12. for she was clothes with the brightnesse of the Sonne, the cleare worde of God, and the moone vnder her feete, the righteous life of the true congregation and Church
of Christ, was her foote-stoole: and the glorie oftwelue starres ouer her head, the doctryne of the Apostles and the righteousnes of their lyfe was her glorie: where∣with shée decked and that came vp to her vpon this staire, for shée was the nurcing mother of Christes little Chil∣dren, her name was true Religion,Iohn 6. whome the righteous branch of Dauid, did holde faste by the hand, and lynked her with a chaine of golde of vnseperable loue, vnto the first virgin her sister called the light of the Gospell: that whosoeuer came to imbrace the first Lady, with true sin∣cere loue: mu st also by the golden chaine of feruent loue, come vp higher vnto this swéet virgin of true Religion,Heb.. to imbrace her giftes of grace, hope and peace to professe stedfastly the true profession of Christe with all humble∣nes, reuerence and obediynce vnto God: then these being not all the stayres that confirmed a verteous man, in the way to euerlasting life. 4. Godlynes and perfect Righ∣teousnes.These Ladies pointed him to looke vp to the third golden stayre, and there was a trym méek virgin very demure and humble (euen as white and as méek as a dooue) being rayed & clothed with pure & goodly raines of silke the garments of righteousnes down to the ground, and she stood vppon the corner stone of Sion, and shée was rich and had no end of her treasures,Reue. 22. Pet. 1.1. & she was fast linked with the golden chaine of vnseperable looue to the other two virgins her sisters: that who so came vp to them, she (for her goodly raines and treasures sake) stirred them vp with feruent spirit to come vp higher, to s tandde with her and walke vpon the corner stone of Sion, wher she by name, being true godlines, did set vp righteousnes, in the ballance and filled all commers to her with ye frute therof: for she was as the shining light & her beautie as the burning lamp, & did giue them the rich garments of righ¦teousnes which the two first Ladies had made ready for them to weare: which notwithstanding without this vir¦gins asistance did shew in them naked and bare: for shée being by
name true and pure Godlynes, did deck all menthat had receiued the light of the Gospel, and the profe∣ssion of true Religion,with the garments of health, and precious armour of God,Ephe. 6. putting vppon them the breast plate of righteous nes, the sandalles of peace, the shéeld of faith, the helmet of saluation, the bond of looue, & swoorde of the spirit, saying: Now walke yee as Children of the light,Thess. 1.5. and Children of the day, for they that are Christes, haue crucified the flesh with the appetites and lusts therof:Gal. 5. and so walke in the spirit and doe the frutes therof, and be not weary of well dooing but tread down the lustes of the fleshe which woorketh contrarie to the spirit to kéepe you back from this golden staire vnto whiche you are come, wherin shine as lights in the world,Iohn. 1 5. holding fast the word of life, and then aske any thing at Gods hand, according to his will and he heareth your petitions:Phil. 2. thus she reioy¦ced all commers with the aboundant swéetnes of heauen∣ly conuersation: 4. Constancie & perseuerance in righteous∣nes to the endAnd now preasting vp to the mark appoin¦ted, the high calling in Christe, these Virgins appointed a righteous man to go vp to the fourth golden stayr, wher was a pure, modest and méek Virgin, clothed with a gar¦ment dipt in blood, setting her feet very fast vpon the preci∣ous corner stone of Sion, being lynked with the vnsepera¦ble and inuincible golden chaine of perfect loue, stedfastnes of faith,Reue. 19 impugnable patience vnto the other thrée Ladies her Sisters, and her name was called Constancie & per∣seuerance in the trouth vnto the end. And then you might see many come running feircely out of the house of Esaw,Pet. 1 1. Iames. 1.4. to make sharpe battels and ass aultes against this virgin, shooting many arrowes of persecutions, afflictions, temp∣tations and tribulations to beate her of that golden stair, and to kill her, and there you might see that shée was sore wounded that her garments were blooddie for the Lambs sake,pe. 3. Rom 8. Heb. 12. Cor. 2.1.52. and shée did holde fast the treuth and her, faith did cō¦tinue vnshaken of all the darts of persecutions: and shée had a great Adamant in her hand, and
vppon it was writ¦ten the wordes which the Lamb of glorie spake to Iohn from heauen, to draw thereby all them that were come by grace in Christe to the other thrée stayres to come vp to her,Reue. 23 to walke with constant faith and patience vp∣on the glaciall sea of perseruerance to the end: and then shée sayd to them that were belowe come vp hether bolde∣ly and feare none of those thinges which you shall suffer for beholde the holy one of Israell that set vppon Dauids stoole, byddeth you be of good cheare for I am with you sai∣eth hée, to the end of the world, and hée saieth vnto Iohn, Feare not, I am the first and the last,Reu. 1. and am aliue and was dead, and beholde I am a liue for euermore, and haue the keyes of hell and death: Holde therfore fast the patience of my woordes to the end and thou shalt be safe,Reu. 2. for whosoe∣uer ouercommeth and is faithfull to mée vnto death, I wil giue him a crowne of lyfe and will make him a glorious piller in the Temple of my God,Reu. 3. and shall sit for euer with me in my seat in new Ierusalem: and thus this goodlie Ladie did comfort all commers with such heauenly conso∣ation of Christes owne wordes, who is faithfull and true that it would moue any hart willingly to die for ye Lambs sake and to suffer all afflictions rather then declyne from the companie of these heauenly Ladies, which leadeth to eternall saluation: Then these virgins pointed a righte∣ous man farther to the top of Sion, and there hée might sée and come to the company of them that were got vp to this fourth golden staire in Iacobs house walking boldely in perfect stablenes of all righteousnes vpon the pure gla∣ciall sea of perseuerance, patience long suffering and im∣mutablenes: as men s hewing them selues able to stand (by the grace which was now giuen them) and to abyde the batell to the end, obteining ye victory: then were they redy ioyfully to enter to ye high goldē stair, there to stand with the elect before Christ, hauing garlands & palmes of victory in their hands: for a
moste beautifull and glorious5. Victory by fayth. and bright Queene did sit vpon that transfulgent stayre, thrusting out her heauenly hand (being godly victory) ac∣companed with eternall gladnes drawing them vp that had perseuered to the end into the glaciall sea of glorie be∣fore the Lamb: Saying now come sée with Esay, GOD sitting in his glorious seat and also Esdras vision perfor∣med:Esay. 6. When Esdras saw vpon the mount Sion, a great People whome hée coulde not number and they praysed the Lord with songs of thanksgeuing, and in the mid st of them,Esdras. 4.2. there was a young man of an high stature more ex¦cellent then all they, and vpon euerie one of their heades, hée set a crown, and was euer higher and higher, and the Angell sayd to Esdras that they were those that haue put of the mortall clothing and haue testified and knowledged the name of God vnto death, & therfore are now crowned and receiue the reward of immortalitie: & he which crow∣neth them and giueth them the palmes in their handes is the sonne of God, whome they haue knowledged in the world, and therfore they receiue glorious garments of ye Lord, which now beholde how Christe dooth performe it, saying to you all that hath ouercum and béene faithfull vnto death in his name,Reue. 3. come take you the crown of lyfe, and sit with me in my seat of glorie. And thus these Princes of Righteousnes dooth perswad euerie man by godly conuersation of lyfe, to preace for∣ward to obteine the mark appointed, the high calling in Christe euen the very beautifull rewarde of eternall glo∣rification. For which cause that goodly Virgin and vndefiled Lady called the light of the Gospell, came foorth in her golden Charriot to passe thorow out all the world, saying I must go gather all Nations be they neuer so farre vnto Christe And then shée sayd, Ary se ye Kings and Princes, and wor∣ship the holy one of Israell, who biddeth you that bee in darknes to cōe into ye light, yt you may se
glorious Ierusalēthe Tabernacle that neuer shall remoue, for the glori∣ous maiestie shall there bee present among vs. There∣fore vp and come to the hill of the Lorde,Esay 35. and to the house of the God of Iacob, that you may walke in the light of the Lorde: And then she passed through the middes of hea∣uen with an euerlas ting testament, preaching to all the inhabiters of the earth, saying, Seeke the Lorde, all yee meeke hearted,Sophon. 1. ye that worke after his iudgoment seeke righteousnesse, s eeke lowlines that ye may be defended in the wrathfull day of the Lorde:Esay 66. for the hande of the Lord shall be knowrn among his seruants, and his indignation among his enemies. For which cause walke as it becom∣meth you, according to the Gospel of Christ, in true holi∣nesse and purenes of conuersation, that you may be found to laude, honour, and glorie, at the great day of resurrecti∣on. And then she did set vp righteousnesse in the balance, and iudgement in the weightes, saying, Thus standeth it betweene the righteous people, and the vngodly as fol∣loweth, and therefore be carefull to make your election sure. Esay 3. THe righteous shall enioye the fruites of their labours and studyes: but wooe be to the vngodly and vnrigh∣teous for they shall bee heauily rewarded after their workes. Psalme 1. Blessed is the righteous man, whose delight and exer∣cise is in the Lawe of the Lorde, for he is like a trée plan∣ted by the water side, whose leafe shall neuer wither, for the Lorde dwelleth among them that are righteous: But as for the vngodly they are as chaffe that shall not
be a∣bleto stande in the iudgement, neither the sinners in the Congregation of the righteous, for the way of the vngod∣ly shall perih. Psalme 11. The Lorde loueth the righteous, and his countenance beholdeth the Iust: but the vngodly and him that de∣lighteth in wickednesse, doeth his soule abhorre: yea, vpon the vngodly and the vnrighteous persons he will raine fire and brimstone, storme and tempest, this shall be their portion to drinke. Psalme 34. The eyes of the Lorde are ouer the righteous, and his eares are open vnto their prayers, and though great be the troubles of the righteous, yet the Lorde deliuereth them out of all: But the countenance of the Lorde is a∣gainst the wicked, and hee will destroy the vngodly and vnrighteous man. Psalme 37. The Lorde knoweth the dayes of the righteous and their inheritance shall endure for euer, but as for the vn∣godly, they shall perishe, for the armes and power of the vngodly shall be broken: but the Lorde vpholdeth the righteous. Psalme 37. The Lorde loueth the thing that is right, and ne∣uer forsaketh
the godly, but will haue them kept andpreserued for euermore: but the vnrighteous shall be pu∣nished, and the seede of the vngodly shall be rooted out. Galathians 6. The Righteous doeth walke after the spirite, and therefore shall reape life euerlasting: but the wicked doe fulfill the lustes of the flesh, and sowe carnally, and there∣fore shall reape destruction. Psalme 112. The Righteous shall be had in euerlasting remem∣brance, he shall not be afraide for any euill tidinges, his heart standeth fast, and beleeueth in the Lord: but the wicked shall consume away, and the des ire of the vngod∣ly shall perish. Esay 28. The Lorde of hostes shall be a ioyfull crowne and glorious Garlande to the remnant of his righteous peo∣ple:Esay 14. but he shall make the generation of the wicked to be without honour for euer. Malachie 4 The daye commeth that shall burne as an Ouen, and all that doe wickednesse shall be as the strawe: but vnto them that feare God, and seeke righteousnesse shall be health and saluation, and they shall be preserued vn∣der the winges of the Sonne of righteousnesse.
Reuel. 22. Blessed are the righteous, for they shall taste of the wood of life, and enter the gates of the holy Citie of newe glorious Ierusalem: but the wicked and euill dooers shal be shut out, and not suffered to come to the holy Citie. Matthewe 25. Vnto the Righteous the Lorde shall say. Come ye bles∣sed of my Father, inherite the kingdome, prepared for you from the beginning of the worlde: But vnto the vngodly he shall say, Depart from me ye cursed, into euerlasting fire, which is prepared for the Diuell and his Angels. And nowe seeing it is so betweene the righteous and the vngodly, it behooueth euery man to set his affection vpon righteousnesse, and so seeke the Lorde in the single∣nesse of heart: knowing that he is full gratious and mer∣cifull to all that put their trust in him, but to the wicked he is a consuming fire: and therefore prease forwarde with all diligence to get vp to the golden stayres of victo∣rie, that you may receiue at the appearing of Christ, the ende of your faith, euen the saluation of your soules, and so be translated into Christes kingdome of glorie, where you shall dwell, accompanied with the blessed Saintes in all heauenly ioyes euerlastingly. Moreouer this godly virgin (called the light of the Gospell) pronounced the sweete sentence of Christ,Matth. 11. s aying, Come vnto me all yee that are laden, and I will refresh you: for if you desire to be Christes sheepe,Iohn 10. you will heare my voyce. And therefore all ye Incommers into this worlde, both litle laddes and prettie virgines Come hither, and I will shewe you two great houses and buildinges of much admiration,
whichyou must knowe because they yt walk in the narrow way, which leadeth to euerlasting life: or that go ye brode way vn¦to distructiō do walk by one of these houses:Math. 7betwéen which there is great discord, contrarietie and disagréement, that no man can liue in this worlde but that he is in continu∣all battel by reason of these two hous es which were neuer fréendes since the beginning. And beholde do you not sée vpon the right hand a goodly hil very plesant and beau∣tifull to looke vppon: (that is mount Sion,Esay. .) a most faire place and the ioy of the whole earth where GOD is well knowen in her Pallaces and honoured in her Temples, (as a sure refuge) therfore come one and walke about Si∣on and goe round about her, and tell the Towers therof,Psalme. 48. mark wel her bulwarkes and consider the riches and trea¦sures with in her, for there hath God chosen an heritage for vs euen the woorship of Iacob. The HABITATION of Iacobs house of Righteousnes, and frutes of the Spirit containing the nar∣row way to saluation. CHRIST is the Dore. Light of the Gospel. Treuth. Veritie. Grace. Peace. Loue. Ioy. True professi Knowledge. godly desire. spiritual thrist good will godly sorrow. Repentance. Diligence. comfort. consolation. satisfactin. Godlynes. Goodnes, holynes. Righteousnes, Vertue. Temperance, Faithfulnes Humblenes. Meeknes. Gentlenes. good woorkes kyndnes. Constancie. Perseuerance feruent loue liuely hope. Pacience. Perfectnes. instant praers long suffering forbearing. forgiuing. blessing. charitie mercie. Thankfullnes Graciousnes. Tendernes Purenes. good thought. rendrīg good ferill. verteous mind Faith. Victorie Q.
All those that are borne into the world that wil purchase heauen must enter into Iacobs house and walke according to those vertues and frutes of the Spirit, which that house conteines, euermore resisting and fighting against ye house of Esau, which is an aduersary and leadeth to distruction, whose great and huge house standeth on the contrary hill vppon mount Seir,Gen. 36. and hath many wyde gates and open windowes to go in at: and is full of vnrighteousnes, sinne and wickednes, that hée that walketh in this house and is a fréend héerto, is an enemy to God, and goeth the way to perdition.Abdy. 1. Esaus house, the frutes of the flesh, and olde ADAM. The brode way. Flesh. World. Deuil. Sin. wickednes. Lust. worldly loue. Ʋanities. mischeif. malice. il-thought. il-deeds. adulterie. fornication. hatred. variance. disobedience: ambiion. arrogancie. sloth. flatterie. Ipocrisie. Idolatrie. Ielosie. wrath. sorcerie. witch-craft, murther. theft. disceit. treason. strife. vsury. couetousnes. extortion. vnpurenes. drunkennes. fleshlines. vncleannes. Idlenes. wantonnes. frowardnes. vnkindnes. sturdines feircenes. cruelnes. rashnes. slacknes. heresies. erors. sects. sedition. filthie talke. brawlings. rebukes. grudgings. mockings. iestings. floutings. peruerse. proude. high-minded vnnaturall. concupisence. vnbeleef. vnconstant. ignorance. vngodlines. backbiting. blaspheming. swearing. bosting. vncharitable impenitent. obstinate. il-mindes & inuentions frutes of dark∣nes.
And now whosoeuer walketh in Esaus house according to his frutes, is in the broade way to distruction: So that hée which walketh according to Iacobs house is spiritually minded, which is life and peace:Rom. 8 and hée that followeth the frutes of Esau is fleshly mynded and that is death. Therfore if you will liue with Christe crucifie the woorkes of Esau, by wrestling against fleshe and blood, worldly vanities and spirituall wickednes, that you may ouercome the world and inioy the crowne of victory. Then after that the light of the Gospell had thus shew∣ed the difference betwéen the righteous and vngodly, and had declared the waies of Iacob, and the wayes of Esau,and what is the end of him that soweth spiritually, and of him that soweth fleshly: then did that pure Virgin Con∣stancie and perseuerance to the end, say that the bare know¦ledge héereof was not sufficient but that it was required at all mens hands to holde fast the treuth and not be remoo∣ved away from the Gospell.Ieames. . and s o to be doers and not on¦ly hearers, wheruppon shée pronounced a swéet exhortati∣on to all people that desire to come to the supper of the ble∣ssed Lamb. saying: O yee humble Sheepe of god follow your Leader, goe on with your guyde, beholde it is your LORD and Sauiour Christ, who is the sweet Sauiour of lyfe, vnto lyfe, the Au∣thor and finisher of your saluatiō: be willing to follow him, and walke in his pathes and you shall finde all the grices, steppes and staires wherby to clime vp to vs in heauenly Ie¦rusalem. Therfore stretch and prease forward to obteine the mark appointed the rewarde of the high calling of god in Christe: which to obteine you must striue to ouercome in this worlde many great battels, wilde beastes & strange locustes which will come vpon you: but faint not, for be∣holde he sitteth in heauen & holdeth the garlands of glorie in his hand to deck you with the Diadems of glorificatiō, if you stand stedfast.
for that cause abyde all sorrowes and persecutions with boldenes of faith and immoueable patience sé eing it pre∣pare such an excéeding and eternall weighte of glorie for you: But what? (O yée men) you séeme to be perfect in ye profession of the Gospell,Cor. 1.10. then beware you that séme to stand that you fall not, for beholde the great day of tribu∣lation is yonder comming, what are you now affraid? do∣es t thou shrink? doest thou goe backward from the professi¦on of the pure Gospell of Christe? feare not saith Christe, him that killeth the body, but feare him that destroyeth soule and body into hell fire: yea holde fast sayeth hée the pa¦tience of my name,Math. 10. and thou shalt haue a crowne of euer∣lasting life: for he that confesseth the treuth of mée before men,Reu. 3. I will confesse his name before God and the holy An¦gels, and hee that denyeth the treuth of me I will denye him. O therfore beware, and bee not féeble mynded and dismaid at yonder tempest of persecution, for why, hath not Christe moste louingly tolde thée that such extreame dangers shall come to passe, and sayeth to the feare none of thos e thinges, but holde out to the end, and thou shalt be saued and crowned with eternall glorie: why then? wilt y• yéeld? wilt thou now be shaken down like a figge, from his figge trée: O man remember thy self, consider whereto, thou dooest fall, what? art thou so nyce of thy fleshe, so ten¦der of thy skyn,Be not remo∣ued from the Gospel. so feruent to Wife and Children, so ge∣uen to worldly riches and delights, so bent to promotions, so hastie to please men, so adict to this Worlde, so foolishe and madde to run with the multitude, so ready to yéelde to the persecutors, as to forget the day of the Lord, when thou shalt altogither tremble and quake and giue an ac¦count of thy dooings: what? I say to thée with heauie gréef, wilt thou abide no perrils no torments, no imprison¦ment, no affliction, no hunger nor shame, no wearines, no losse of goodes, no departing from fré ends, no losse of life for Christes Gospell? then thou maist say,
wo is my vn∣trutefulnes.Wherefore pray with all instance that God may streng∣then thy faith, and that thou maist be endued with pati∣ence against all tribulations: and that you may be pre∣serued from dogges, from Locustes, and vnreasonable men: And nowe while the doore of the Gos pell is open, stablishe your heartes in the euerlasting consolation of faith, hope, loue, and patience in Christ:Dan. 12. And suffer ad∣uersitie with him and with his Gospell, through the pow∣er of God, who hath giuen you the gift of grace: For it is written, that the dayes shall come, in which you shall bée purifyed, cleansed and tryed, as golde in the fire: Wher∣fore holde fast the patience of his name in all stormes of persecutions by looking vp ioyfully to heauen, when thou art in the handes of the persecuters,Reu. 6. and fettered to the stake of torments: then to beholde the golden altar, and see there the soules of them vnder the hande of Christ, which hath suffred before you in the testimonie of Iesus Christ: whether (now) thy soule skipping ioyfully out of thy body (as one loosed out of bondage and prison) do goe, accompanied with Gods holy angel to those blessed soules there meeting together, with praising and magnifying God vnder the golden altar: for blessed are those that suf∣fer for righteousnes sake.An acceptable sacrfice to GOD And therefore consider what an acceptable sacrifice thou shalt be to God, when thou shalt breath forth the swéete odours of prayers through the fla∣ming fire, or tortures of death, vp before the face of God, by yéelding thy life for his cause: so that bee assured that thy inward ioy shall quench & eat vp the outward paines and torments of death: for it is written the Angel of the Lord tarrieth round about them that feare God,Psalme. 3. and deli∣uereth thē, therefore feare not death for the gospels sake, but suffer with christ that you may be glorified with him, and so be of the nomber of them to whō he shal s ay, Come ye blessed, inherite the kingdom, and be crowned with the glorious garland of your glorification: and so to conclude,Luke.  Reioyce that your names are written in heauen.
TO THE Reader. LIft vp your heades, Christ is at hande, Hosanna in the highest. Receiue the gifte, the kingdome come, from heauen which is most purest: The Lord doth com him selfe from heauen: who is the king of kinges. Arise you dead and put you on. your newe immortall winges: At Sion he will shewe him selfe, prepare you to be there. Where crownes of life and palmes of ioy, the chosen then shall weare: Arise therefore receiue the gifte, of Gods eternall light. Imbrace the ioyes, beholde the face of God in open sight: The holye Citie, gloriously in brightnesse which excel. Descendeth downe from God aboue, wherein the Saintes shall dwell. The wicked then shall stande without. an heauie wooe to see: The Lord shall say, Depart ye hence▪ you shall not be with me. Arise therefore, as true right heires Of that most blessed lande: Sing out Hosanna in the highest, Christes kingdome is at hande. F. K.
A PRAYER OF THANKESGIVING TO GOD, THAT IT MAY PLEASE HIM TO sanctifie vs with his holy grace that we may dwell in Newe Ierusalem: with a petition for our Soueraigne Queene, that it may please God that she may reigne ouer vs ma∣ny yeeres, and after this life be crowned with the heauen∣ly clothing of glorification. WE most heartily thanke thée, (O Lorde God our heauenly Father) for thy manifolde and inestimable benefits which thou hast giuen vn∣to vs, both for our soules & bodies, and that fréely of thine owne good∣nesse without our desertes: wee thāke thée, that it hath pleased thée of thy great mercie, to create and make vs to thine owne Image and Likenesse: and being lost through ye sinne of our first father Adam, thou vouch∣safedst of thy endlesse pitie to s aue vs and redeeme vs a∣gaine, by the death and passion of thy welbeloued Sonne Iesus Christ, our sweete Mediatour and Aduocate: whom we looke for to come againe at the day of iudgement, as a most louing Lord and Sauiour, to carry vs with him in∣to euerlasting glorie, there to remaine with him worlde without end. Therefore graunt vs, sweete Lord God, the riches of thy grace, that we may haue the fruition of thy ioyes in thy heauenly kingdome of euerlasting blessednes. And we beseech thée O Lord Iesus Christ, which art the health of al mē liuing, & the euerlasting life to thē that die in thy faith, to preserue  thy seruant our Queene & Gouernes, & so wt thy blessed hand to fé ede spéede , lead , & kéepe vnder thy holy wings,
that she may euermore faste the sweetenesse of thy riche mercie and great loue to the praise of thy holy Name, and glorie of the Gospel: and also to his glorification in the e∣ternall kingdome of glorie: And we thy seruantes and children by grace, being ordeined by thee, to be her faith∣full subiectes, doe beseech thée of thy great goodnes, so to increase her with thy blessings, that we may enioye him swéete gouernee to reigne ouer this Realme manye yeeres more in peace and tranquillitie: and after this life to partake the euerlasting glorie of Christ, to whome be all glorie, ho∣nour, and praise worlde without ende, Amen. GOD SAVE the
