17367 20240895 23895
Markhams FAITHFVLL FARRIER. Wherein the depth of his Skill is layd open in all those prin∣cipall and approued Secrets of Horsemanship, which the Author neuer published, but hath kept in his Brest, and hath beene the Glory of his Practise. Printed at London, by T. C. for Michael Sparke, dwelling in Greene Arbor, and are to be sold by RICH: ROYSTON, at his shop in Iuie Lane: 160.
To the Reader or Buyer of this Booke. IT is a true saying, Tempus omnia terminat. So I, Gentle Reader, hauing gained experience all my life to these present dayes where∣in I am ready to creepe into the earth, willing now at the important request of my best Friends, haue yeelded my∣selfe
to lay the Glorie of my Skill in Horsemanship open to the World: And hauing kept secret in the Cabinet of my Brest, these Secrets, by which I haue gained from many a Noble person many a fayre pound, I now bestow it vpon thee for the value of Foure Pence. It may bee some will account mee a Foole in print for disclosing my Secrets, but I euer regarded the life of a worthy Horse, before the Word of a Foole. For bee thou Noble, or what else, this here I doe is for thy Good. If you take pleasure either in an Horse to Hunt, or for the
Warre, or for the Race, or for to Draw, or a Hackney, come hither, buy, see, and welcome. Take my opinion, and thou shalt finde in this my honest Faithfull Farryer, a Shoppe of Skill for thee to view: Let this bee thy Doctor, and thy Druggist: Let this be thy In∣structer and Director. I hope that no good minded Far∣ryer will be greeued with me because I giue insight to the Master of the Horse: For if thy House were on fire, why shouldest thou run to fetch thy Neighbours Water to quench it, when thine owne is neerer at hand? So if the
Horses Owner know by this Booke how to saue the life of his Horse, why should he either ride or run to the Far∣ryer? But it may bee euerie Owner of an Horse will not buy a Booke. It matters not if but euery Farryer haue one, and but that one in a Towne, I doubt not, but with ma∣king vse of that one, many a Man shall saue the life of his Beast. Come therefore and reade these Secrets, which cost me Paines, Studie, Practise, and Labour; All which hath cost mee Trouble for thy Ease. This shall bee thy Pleasure which hath beene my Toyle.
It shall bee thy Profit which hath beene my Trouble: And this shall bee thy Faithfull Farryer and Inctructer. For what Creature canst thou name more necessarie than the Horse, and what more helpefull at a time of need? For were wee without Horse, in what a strait should wee bee in, hee being our best Seruant both in Warre and Peace, and of that inestimable value, that hee makes a Man proud of his seruice. Now if an Horse be such a profitable Seruant for Man, let vs then respect the meanes
that God hath giuen vs for his Cure: For here is a Schoole of Skill for thy knowledge. First, How to make choyse of a good Horse: Secondly, what Countrey Horse is the most fit for thy vse: Either for seruice in Martiall or War∣like imployment, or for Swift∣nesse, or for Long trauell, or for Draught, or for Coach, or for Cart, or for Packe, or any other Burthen. This shalt thou find here, in as ample manner, as if thou wert an old Master in Smithfield. And this shall bee my Glorie euen as long as I liue, that I haue liued to leaue this my last and best
Worke to the World, and to them which will not liue to see it buried in Obliuion. But mee thinkes I here some Momus say, That the old Captaine was vnaduised to put this in print, which hee euer kept as a rare Secret, and it is true, Veritas odium parit. But I reply, Tempus omnia ter∣minat. And though I had pro∣mised to my selfe, neuer to haue published this worke, yet being so continually im∣portuned to print it, I was forced to yeeld, though I had promised the contrarie. And let this excuse mee to those Noble persons whose bountie
I haue felt, that for them I was the willinger to publish it in print while I liued, fearing that after my death, my then Fatherlesse Child might get a new name. But now I leaue this, being begot in my old age, to all Noble, & Worthy Gentlemen, and when they looke not after him to the Faithfull Farryer to be cherish∣ed and to be knowne by the name of Captaine GERVAS MARKHAMS last and best Labours.
The Contents of this BOOKE. OBseruations in the electing of Horses. and what Countrey Horse is for what vse. Folio 1 The occasions of inward Sicknesses, and Accidents, which happen vpon those occasions. 4 The signes of inward Sicknesses. 7 The curing of any Heart sicknesse, or Head sicknesse, or any ordinarie in∣ward sicknesse. 21 To cure any violent Sicknesse, if the Horse be at the very poynt and doore of death. 41 The preuenting of all inward Sicknes∣ses. 50 Two sorts of Bals to cure any violent Cold, or Glaunders, to preuent Heart sicknesse, to purge away all molten Grease, to recouer a lost Stomacke, and to keepe the Heart from fainting with exercise, and to make a leane Horse fat suddenly. 55
Another way how to fatten an Horse suddainly. 60 How to keepe an Horse, or Iade from ty∣ring. 62 Another Receipt against tyring, or for any sore or dangerous Cold. 64 Another Receipt for any extraordinary Cold, dry Cough, or Pursicknesse in an Horse, which the weake Farriers call, Broken-winded. 66 An excellent Scowring after any sore Heate, or for any fat Horse after his exercise. 74 For any dangerous Bots, Mawwormes, or poysoned Red Wormes. 78 For Gourded, or foule sweld Legges, or other parts, by reason of melting the Grease, or other Accident. 80 To hoale or dry vp any old Vlcer, or cankerous Sore. 84 To cure the running Frush, or any Im∣postumation in the soale of the Foot, to dry vp Scratches, Paines, and the like cankerous Sores. 86
For any sore Eye of Horse, or Beast. 88 For a Backe-sinew strayne, or any other Strayne. 90 For any old Strayne, or lamenesse in loynts, Synewes, &c. 91 For any griefe, payne, numbnesse, weak∣nesse, or swelling in loynts, and com∣meth of a cold cause. 92 For any desperate and incurable straine in the Shoulder, or other hidden parts, for any Fistula, Polle-euill, or other Impostumation or swelling. 93 For Foundering, Frettizing, or any Imperfection in the Feet, or Hoofes of an Horse. 96 For hurts vpon the Crownets of the Hoofes, as Ouerreach, Stub, or Pricqe, &c. 99 How to helpe Surbating, or sorenesse in the Feet. 101 For any Bony excression arysing vpon any member of an Horse; as Splint, Spanen, Curbe, Ringbone, &c. 102 Obseruations in giuing of Fire, or vsing
of Corosines, which heale all sorts of Farcies, Cankers, Fislulas, Lepro∣sies, Maungees, Scabs, &c. 103 How to defend a horse from flyes. 104 How to make a white Starre, or white Spot in an Horses face, or in any o∣ther part. 105 How to keepe your weollen Horse∣clothes, Brest clothes, Rubbers, and the like from Moathes. 109
THE Faithfull Farier, OR A Catalogue of all those prin∣cipall and approued Secrets in Horsmanship, which the Au∣thor neuer published, but hath kept Secret in his owne Brest, and which haue beene the Glory of all his practise. Obseruations in the electing of Horses, and what Countrie Horse is for what vse. THE first and principall thing which giueth the noblest Character to a good horseman, is the well electing of horses for that vse and purpose for which you intend
to imploy them: And in this choise there is no better or readier a way then the knowledge of Races and Straynes from whence horses de∣scend; for it is certaine, that the Clymate, Heat, and Cold, are three excellent Elements, in an horses Composition. Touching the election of horses by their Shapes and proportions, by their Colours and Complexti∣on, and by their Markes and other outward Semblances; I haue writ∣ten sufficiently in my former books, and intend to reiterate nothing: for nothing shall fall from my pen in this Treatise, but the very secrets of mine hart, things certaine and approued, things secret and vnpub∣lished. To come then to the election of horses, according to their Races, Breedes, and Clymates: f you will elect an horse for seruice, or a Mar∣tiall or warlike imployment, then
these are best, The Neapolitan. The Sardinian, &c. The Almaine. The French. Or any of these Bastardized in themselues, or with a faire well shaped and well mettalled English Mare. If you will elect for swiftnesse and seruice, then, The Arabian. The Barbarie. The Spanish. The Grecian. Or any of these Bastardized in themselues, or with our best Eng∣lish Mares. If you will chuse for long trauell and seruice, then, The English. The Hungarian. The Sweathland.
The Poland. The Irish. If you will chuse for draught and for seruice, then; The Flanders. The Freisland. Or any of the Netherlands, either Bastardized in themselues, or with our English Races, and these are excellent for Coatch, for Cart; for Packe, or any burthen. The occasions of inward Sicknesses, and Accidents, which happen vpon those occasions. SIcknesses are of diuers kindes, and proceede from diuers cau∣ses, haue their diuers Signes, and their diuers Remedies, as I haue shewed in my bookes: But to come neerest to the marke of curing, let me perswade you to call to account
these few obseruations. First, to remember that all sicke∣nesses in horses come either, by Heares, in ouer violent exercise; and then is the Grease melted, the heart ouer strained, the vitall blood expelled outward, and the large Pores and Oryfices of the heart, so stopped, that the spirits cannot returne back to their proper places, but confound and mortifie. Or else by Colds, in indiscreet keeping either before or after ex∣ercise, and then is the Head per∣plexed, the Eyes pained, the rootes of the Tongue swelled, the Lungs tickled and offended with rheuma∣ticke moysture, occasioning cough∣ing, and the nostrils still pouring out filthy and corrupt matter. Or else by Surfeit of Food, in ei∣ther eating too much, or too little of that which is good; or in giuing any thing at all of that which is vn∣wholesome. The first kils the sto∣macke,
macke, oppresseth the heart, and sends vp those euill fumes into the head, by which is ingendred the Staggers, Frenzie, and other mor∣tall diseases. The second putrefies the blood, and turnes all nourish∣ment into corrupion, from whence proceedes the Yellowes, and other such like pestilent diseases, which suffocating the heart, spreads it selfe vniuersally ouer the whole body, and confounds euery faculty and member. Or lastly, by Accidents, as when a horse receiueth some grleuous and deepe wound, either in his bo∣dy, or else in some other vitall and dangerous part, by which, nature is so offended, that instantly a generall sickenesse seazeth vpon the horse, and (if not preuented) death sud∣denly followeth; and these sicknes∣ses, are called Accidentall-Feauers; for if you obserue it, you shall finde the horse sometimes trembling,
sometimes sweating, sometimes cold, and sometimes burning. Thus you see there are foure oc∣casions of sickenesses in horses, as Heates, Colds, Surfeits, and Acci∣dent. The signes of inward Sicknesses. NOw to know the signes of these sicknesses; if it proceed from the first occasion, which is Heates; then the signes are these. First, heauinesse of countenance, swelling of the limbes, scowring or loosenesse of body in the beginning of the sicknesse, and drinesse or co∣stiuenesse, in the latter end; short breath and hot, and a loathing or forsaking of his meate. It it proceed from the second occasion, which is Colds: then the signes are, heauinesse of counte∣nance,
and either dull or else closed up eyes, hard boyle or big pustules, betweene the Choppes and the roots of the tongue, and sometimes an hard swelling vp from the chops to the roots of the eares: A rotten and moyst cough, the horse euer chawing some loose, filthy, flegma∣tique matter in his mouth after his coughing: which in one respect is no euill signe, because it sheweth a rotten cold that is newly gotten, and soone to be clensed: whereas to cough cleare and hollow, and not to chaw after it, shewes a drie cold that is of long continuance, sore festred, and hard to be recoue∣red: Lastly, his body will fall away, and when hee drinketh, the water will issue forth at his nostrilles; and his eyes will bee euer mattery and running, and his haire rough and staring. If it proceed from the third oc∣casion, which is Surfeit of Meats
and Drinkes, either naturall or vn∣naturall, then the signs are these; First, heauinesse of head and coun∣tenance, in such a violent manner, that the horse can hardly lift his head from the maunger; a dull and dead eye, a staggering and reling pace, and (if the disease bee farre growne) a franticke and mad be∣hauiour, as biting the Racke and Maunger, and at such as shall come about him, sometimes biting at himselfe, and beating his head a∣gainst the wals, boards, or ground, and other franticke passions: But if the disease bee lesse contagious in the braine, but more inwardly set∣led at the heart, then the signes are, yellowes in the whites of the eyes, and in the inside of both the vpper and nether lippes; and (if the di∣sease be farre gone) then a yellowes ouer all the skin, a continuall faint sweat, and a desire rather to lye downe, then to stand, besides a ge∣nerall
loathing and forsaking of his meat, which is the common signe of all sicknesses. Lastly, if it proceed from the forth occasion, which is Accident, then the signes are a perplexed and troubled body, sometimes swea∣ting at the rootes of the eares, in the flanke, and behinde the foure∣shoulders against the heart, some∣times trembling ouer all the body, and somtimes glowing and bur∣ning in the vital parts, and on the Temples of the head, against the heart, on the inside of the fore-legs next of all to the body, and on the inside of the hinder thighes close to the body; also his mouth will be hot and dry, and his tongue subiect to furring and to a white scalded complection; lastly a generall loa∣thing of his meate, but a great thirstinesse & desire of cold drinke, and when he can drinke no more, yet a desire still to hold his mouth
in the water. Thus you haue the foure occasi∣ons of sicknesses, and the signes by which to know those occasions. Now for as much as sicknesses come many times suddenly and vn∣lookt for, and that not any man (how skilful so euer) but may some∣times bee ouertaken with the sud∣den sickenesse of his horse: And though hee can after vpon conside∣ration, giue an account for such sicknesse when it is apparant, yet till nature haue thrust it forth, the disease was obscure to his know∣ledge; therefore I will here shew those generall and most vsuall signes which doe attend and waite vpon euery sicknesse, by which you may bee enabled to know the ap∣proach or beginning of sicknesse before it take fast hold on the vitall parts, and so vse preuention; or if it haue taken some small hold, then how to fortifie nature against it,
and so to kill the Contagion, ere it come to any great height of dan∣ger; or being at the highest, how to qualifie the extremitie, and to bring euery vitall part and spirit to its first moderate state and temper. Now that you may effect this the better, it is requisite that you ac∣quaint your knowledge well with the complections, qualities, cu∣stomes, and conditions of horses; for whensoeuer you shall finde any alteration in any of these, bee sure there will follow alteration of health, as thus. First, in the complections of hor∣ses, which I draw from their co∣lours and countenances: If your horse be a faire bright daplegray or a fleabitten, a white, a white-gray or the like; if any of these colours, being naturally cleare and bright, shall grow duskish or cloudy, or the white hayres shall turne sandy and reddish, it is a signe of some vnnat u∣rall
distemperature in the horse, and that hee is euill affected, and either entreth into a consumption, or into some other inward disease of body. If the horse bee of a pure blacke colour, a bright bay, a browne bay, or a red sorrell without flexen Maine, or flexen Taile, a cleare chessenut or a mouse-dun; if thse haires shall grow discoloured and contrary to their proper natures, that is to say, of a weaker and worse complection; as if the black turne dunnish or yellow, the bright bay, cloudy, pale, & sandy; the browne bay like the mouse-dunne; the red∣sorrell, corrall or like the yellow∣dunne; the chessenut, hoarie and grey; and the mouse-dunne, of a more blacke and pale blue then is naturall, all these are signes of in∣ward sickenesses. And as of these colours, so of any other colour whatsoeuer, if they shall alter from
their proper and true natures, to a worse and more vncomely com∣plection, that is to say, to a com∣plection that is vnuaturall and vn∣proper for an horse, they are most pregnant signes of some inward sicknesse, which either lingereth vpon the horse, or else is sodainly in breaking forth; and therefore by all meanes remember, that the al∣teration of colours bee vnnaturall. For you must vnderstand, that if the daple-grey, in processe of time, do turne to white; the darke Iron∣grey, to a bright grey; the blacke, to an Iron grey, and such like; that then this is a naturall, and no vnna∣turall alteration, and so no signe of sicknesse; and therefore not to bee deceiued, or to stand doubtfull at all, acquaint your selfe well with the true colour and complection of your horse, which you shall best di∣scerne when hee is in the pride and height of lust, when hee is wanton,
full of flesh and smooth, sleeke, and shining: and when you shal see this complection alter, in part, or all; then euer expect some sicknesse, As you thus acquaint your selfe with the complection of your horse, which I include in his co∣lour; so you must also haue a set∣tled knowledge in his countenance and gestures; and to that end you shall be carefull to marke and note his countenance and behauiour in all his actions and motions, as well within doores as without, as well in his play, s in his rest, at his times of feeding, & at his times of exercise; you shall note the cheerefulnesse of his eye, the cariage of his head and necke; which be his angry Chara∣cters, and which bee his pleasant, when he biteth for wantonnesse or for offence; and these you shall best finde out, in his feeding, in his exer∣cise and playing, and in his dressing; and if at any time you finde any of
these Characters of fayle on the sudden, and that is gesture is more lumpish heauy; then call your selfe to account what you haue done, ey∣ther in exercise, feeding, ayring, or ordering: For there is no doubt but there is distemperature, and sicknesse is approaching, if it be not preuented. As you thus acquaint your selfe with the complection and counte∣nance of your horse; so you must also not be ignorant, but obserue diuerse other outward and inward quallities, for they are the greatest lights that can bee, both to health and sicknesse; and to this end you shall especially marke his filling & his emptying, that is, his manner of feeding, and the manner of dischar∣ging his body. In his feeding, whether he eateth with a good appetite, or a weake stomacke; the first is healthfull, the latter vnwholesome. If he eate with
a good Appetite, he will Neigh and call for his meate before it come, when either he seeth his Keeper, or a preparation for feeding, as sifting of his Oates, chipping of his Bread, and the like; hee will receiue it cheerefully, and greedyly, shaking his Head, and shewing other signes of alacritie and reioycing, which quallities after he hath vsed, if on the suddaine he refraine and so re∣ceiue his meate dully and vnplea∣santly, it is a great signe of sick∣nesse. As his feeding, so you shall marke his quallities in emptying, as the Time, the Place, the Substance: the Time, as whether he emptieth in the Night-time better then in the Day; the Place, as whether he emp∣tieth better in the House or abroad, whether in the Hand or when you are mounted, whether before you begin exercise, or else after some gentle motion or stirrings, whether
at the Stable doore or at some vsu∣all places by the way, or in th Ground where you giue him hi Exercise; lastly, for the Substance whether it be much or little, if i be much, you must forbeare exer∣cise and make him emptie the oft∣ner; if it be little, then you may fall to labour at pleasure, then whe∣ther it be good or bad, and tha commonly falleth out according to the Food he eateth; if it be cleere, firme, and pale, with white graines, and in complection like sweet sope, then it is wholsome; if it be blacke it shewes heat in the body, if grea∣sie then it shewes foulnesse, if red and hard, it shewes costiuenesse, if pale and loose, then inward cold∣nesse. And as thus you obserue his Ordure, so you must also obserue his Vrine: Of both which I haue written sufficiently in my former Bookes. As these quallities of feeding
and emptying, so you shall note his quallities in Rest and Watching, that is, in his lying down and stand∣ing vp, what howres and time hee obserueth for either, and how long he perseuereth in them, and if at any time you find any suddaine or grosse alteration, then be assured of some sicknesse approaching. And thus of any other particular qualli∣tie in your Horse (which you shall obserue in his health) for it is im∣possible to nominate all, if you find them suddainly to surprise, it is doubtlesse that there is some sick∣nesse following. As you thus obserue the Com∣plection & quallities of the Horse, so you must obserue his naturall customes and conditions, and how in his liuelihood and best health he standeth affected, for to name them I cannot, because they proceed most from hidden inclinations, or else ac∣cidentall apprehensions, which by
continuance of time grow to natu∣rall habits. And any of these when they shall surcease or faile, are true progoastications of distemperature and sicknesse. Many other signes of sicknesse there are, as the not casting of the Coate in due time, Hyde-bound, continuall dislike and leannesse, where there is good feeding, beside many other: But they are so vulgar and commonly knowne, that I need not rehearse them; and these signes already written, are sufficient for knowledge.
The curing of any heart sicknesse, or head sicknesse, or any ordinarie inward sicknesse. I Will now descend to the cure of these inward sicknesses; and al∣though euery seuerall sicknesse haue a seuerall cure, as I haue shewed at large in my Bookes, yet I will draw all here, into one hidden, but cer∣taine and most infallible approued Method, which I haue neuer found prosperous and fortunate. Whensoeuer, either by the signes before rehearsed, or other accident or knowledge you shall find your Horse grieuously payned with in∣ward sicknesse, the first thing you doe you shall open his Neck-veine and receiue some of the first blood into a Pewter porrenger, which if you set it in cold water it will pre∣sently discouer the foulnesse and putrefaction; so then you shall let
the Horse bleed well till the blood change, neither must you be nice or tender in this action, because you must vnderstand, that all inward sicknesses in Horses, draw their ef∣fects from the putrefaction of the blood only: And this is the reason. It is certaine that the Horse (of all other Creatures) hath no Gall or naturall Vessell into which to re∣ceiue the skummy and putrefied matter which ariseth fom the corrupt and collericke blood, but it is either auoyded in excrements, humours, or moderate exercise and sweates, or else by immoderate ex∣ercise and violent labour. By too much repletion and fulnesse, by vnwholsome food and euill dyet, or by some other naturall defect, this chollericke corruption increasing and ouerflowing, it presently and in an instant ouer-spreads the whole body, hauing its course through euerie veine, and so discoloureth
the skin, and makes all the outward partes yellow, especially the Eyes, and inside of the Lips; also mixing with the better blood, and confoun∣ding the strength and vertue there∣of, it brings a generall faintnesse ouer all the body, and in the end suf∣focating the heart, of force there must follow sodaine and certaine mortallitie, and hence proceedeth those sodaine deathes of Horses for which our weake Farriers can giue but an idle and foolish account. But to returne to my purpose, af∣ter you haue taken away good store of blood, and (as you imagine) all, or at least most part of that which is corrupt, you shall then set him vp in the Stable, tying his head to the emptic Racke gently and at lyberty, neither so high that he shall be compelled to rest his Head vpon the Bridle, nor yet so low that hee may thrust his Head into the Maunger, and thus ye shall let him
and at least two howres. Now if the sicknesse be not very contagious, and dangerous, you shall not administer any potion vnto him that day, because the veine being opened, and all the humors, powers and faculties of the body disturbed, it will bee a double vexation to the spirits to haue the working of the Potion also; therefore in this case, the sicknesse not being violent, you may forbeare further administrati∣on, and onely after the Horse hath fasted, as before said, you shall giue him such food as he will eate, whe∣ther it bee Hay, Bread or Corne, and alwayes prouided, that it be strong sauorie, sweet, dry, and cleane drest: as for the quantitie, it matters not, for a small pittance will maintaine life; and humor is now to the Horse as food, besides, emptines is no great displeasure. At high Noone you shall giue him a sweete Mash of Malt and
Water made in this manner. Take halfe a pecke of good Malt well ground, and put it into a payle by it selfe, then take a gallon of faire, cleere Water, and set it on the fire, then when it is come to the heighth that it is ready to boyle, put as much of it to the Malt as will moyst and couer the Malt all ouer, and stirre them exceedingly well together, crushing the Malt with a flat Rudder as much as you can, euer and anon tasting it with your finger, till it bee as sweet as any Honey, and then couer it ouer with Cloathes as close as you can, and so let it stand and stoone for two or three howres at the least; then the howre being come in which the Horse is to receiue it, vncouer the Mash, and stirre it well about, but finding it too hot, then put to it some cleere cold Water that may temper and allay it, but in any wife not so much as may take away any
part of the sweetnesse, and in this tempering, with your hand crush and squeeze the Malt as much as you can, then (the Mash being luke warme) giue it the Horse to drink, and if he will eat of the Malt, let him take thereof at his pleasure. This is the best manner of making an ordinarie Mash, or Horse-Cau∣dle, for of that nature and quallitie it is, and to that purpose that a Cau∣dle is administred to a Man, is this giuen to a Horse, for you must vn∣derstand, that in these contagious diseases nothing is more pesilent than cold Water, and especially when exercise cannot be vsed. The ruder Farriers and Horse-Groomes doe make the Mash ano∣ther way, putting the Malt to the Water at the first, and so boyling them both together, but this is vn∣wholsome and naught, and that eue∣rie good House-wife can witnesse, for this long boyling ouer-scaldes
the Malt, takes away the strength and sweetnesse, and giues an harsh and vnsauorie taste, which is offen∣siue to the Horses nature. If your Horse be coy and refuse to take the Mash, as many are, part∣ly for want of vse and custome, and partly through weaknesse of sto∣macke, then you shall straine the Water from the Malt exceeding hard, and so giue it him with an Horne to drinke, then take the Graines which you haue so strained and put them in the Manger before the Horse, on which whether he feed or no it matters not, for if he but smell and snuffell his nose vpon them, it is sufficient, and the fume thereof is wonderous wholsome for his head. After you haue thus giuen him his Mash, you shall see that he be very warmely cloathed, as namely, a good woollen Body-Cloath to come round about his heart, a large
Cloath or two to come ouer it, and to be well wispt round about, with soft, thicke, and large wispes; for the little, hard, and neat wispes, though they are comly to the eye, yet are they vnwholsome for the body, for their hardnesse and smalnesse makes an impression into the Horses sides, and causeth him forbeare to lye downe when Nature and rest requi∣reth it. The Horse being thus warmely cloathed as aforesaid, and with a very warme Brest-cloath before his breast, for that is an especiall part to keepe warme, you shall then cause one or two to rub all his foure Legs from his Knees & Cambrels down∣ward with very hard wispes, and to rub them so hard as may be, and whilst his limbes are thus in rub∣bing, you shall take a course rubber or two made of new harden or hempen Cloth, and warming one after another ouer a pan of Coales,
with them rub the Horse exceeding much in the nape of the Necke, or the Polle iust betweene his Eares, and on the Temples of the Head; for there is nothing more whole∣some than these frictions and cha∣fings, for they dissolue humours, re∣uiue all naturall heat, bring a cheer∣full nimblenesse into the limbes, and purge the head of all grosse, cold, and tough matter, cleansing and purifying the Brayne, by which the members and other faculties are fortified, and the whole Body reduced backe to its first strength and abillitie. As soone as you haue ended this action of rubbing, you may then let the Horse take his rest for two or three howres, and onely leaue a locke or two of sweete Hay in his Racke, and no more, for the least quantitie of any things too much soone cloyeth a sicke Horse. In the Euening you shall come
to the Horse againe, and hauing rubbed all his limbes and head, as was before shewed, you shall then perfume his head in this manner. Take of the best and purest Oli∣anum an ounce, then as much Sto∣rax, and as much Beniamin, and bruise all them together, I doe not meane bruise them to small pow∣der, but onely breake them into small lumpes, and mixe them well together, so that taking them vp be∣tweene your fingers, you may not take vp one ingredient alone, but some of all. Then take a Chafing∣dish, and if it be possible, a Chafing∣dish after the manner of the perfu∣ming Chafingdish, which is wide below where the fire is, and narrow at the top where the smoake auoy∣deth, and in this Chafingdish put well kindled Wood cole, or small Charcoale; then take some of the aforesad perfume, and lay it vpon the Coales, but in any wise so as it
may not flame but smoake, then hold the Chafingdish vnder the Horses nose, and let the smoake goe vp into his Nostrils, and thus perfume him well for the space of a quarter of an howre, or halfe an howre at the most. Now it may be the Horse may seeme coy to receiue this at the first, because it is strange vnto him, but doe you continue the action, and cherish him, for be you well assured, after he hath once re∣ceiued the smell into the head, hee will be as greedy to haue it, as you are willing to giue it, for there is nothing that delighteth an Horse more, or more reioyceth his spirits, than sweet sauors, and odoriferous smells, of which this perfume is one of the cheefest. The effect which this perfume worketh, is, that it purgeth the Brayne of all filthy and corrupt matter, and (as you shall find by experience in the working) it dis∣solues
tough matter into water, and brings it away in such abundance, that it is sometimes ready to extin∣guish the fire as it falleth. It is the greatest comforter of the Braine that can be, and from thence sen∣deth such cheerefullnesse to the heart, that it reioyceth the whole body. There are diuers other perfumes which weake Farriers vse in this case, as namely, wet Hay, or rotten Litter, and putting a burning Coale therein, giue the smoake to the Horse: But this is a stinking sauor and no perfume, and although it make the Horse snoare and neese, and so you may imagin it auoydeth fowle matter, yet it is nothing so, but it offendeth both his Brayne and stomacke, and by the noysome∣nesse of the smell dulleth and weakeneth the spirits, and rather ingendereth infection, than any way abateth infirmitie; for from rotten∣nesse
there can but rottennesse pro∣ceed. Next there is the Perfume of Brimstone, either simple of it selfe and put vpon the fire; or else com∣pound with another body, as Butter, Oyle, or the like, and so thrust vp in∣to the Horses nostrils. This I must needes confesse is a sharpe Perfume, and euacuateth much foule matter, and dissolueth the thickest matter into thin water: But yet you must know, that there is in this Sulphure, or Brimstone a certaine earthy and poysonous quallity, which not one∣ly doth offend the vitall parts, but is also most malignant and iniurious both to the eyes of Man and Beast, so that like Margery Goodcowe, if it haue one vertue, yet two vices at∣tend it. Then there are the Perfumes of the Stalkes of Onions, Garlicke, Leekes, Mustard-seed, and the like, or the Perfume of the Fruits them∣selues
either burnt or boyld; Bu these are also great enemies to the eyes of an Horse, so that I can by no meanes allow them, especially fo this reason, becase that generally all these inward sicknesses in Horse doe most of all afflict the head an eyes, to which these things are ene∣mies. Also there is the Perfume o Wheat, Peniroyall, & Sage, boyld til the Wheat burst, and so put it into a Bagge fastened about the Horse nose. This I must confesse is the best of many, yet it is much to weake for a strong infirmitie, and the Peniryall hath a bitternesse that is offensiue. As these, so I could nominate di∣uerse others, but none so excellent as the first of all prescribed, and therefore to it I referre you. After your Horse hath been wel perfumed, as beforesaid, you shall let him rest for a quarter of an
howre, and then giue him such food as he wil eat, either Bread or Oates, of which how little soeuer he ea∣teth it skils not, for it is to be inten∣ded that his stomacke is now at the weakest. After he is fed you shall tosse vp his Litter, for you must know that he must stand vpon Litter Night and Day, and then (if need be) giue him more Litter, and but a locke or handfull of Hay, that you may be sure to haue him very fasting the next Morning, and so let him rest all the Night without disturbance. The next Morning early, you shall take halfe an ounce of the powder of Diapente, as the Greekes call it, because of the number Fiue, which Diapente is thus made & compoun∣ded. Take of round Aristoloch, of Gentian, of the best Mirrhe, of By∣berries, and of the purest shauings of Iuory, of each one ounce, beat all
but the Myrrhe together in a Mor∣ter in a fine pouder, and earse it through a fine Searse, then likewise beate the Myrre by it selfe, and fearce it also, and then mixe all well together in a Morter, and so keepe the pouder in a closse Gally-pot. When you haue taken halfe an ounce of this powder, you shall put it into a pint of the best Mus∣kadine that you can get, and brew them very well together in two pots, tossing it well too and fro, be∣cause otherwise the Myrrhe will clotter and lumpe together: when it is well brewed (after you haue made cleane your Stable, and righ∣ted your Horses Cloathes) you shall with an& Horne giue him this Potion to drinke. Then if he haue any small strength, you shall mount his backe, and walke vp and downe in some warme or sunnie place for an hower, or thereabout; then set him vp in the Stable warme and
well littered, and tying him to the Racke in his Bridle, let him so stand and fast for another houre, or more, then offer him a little sweete Hay, or any other meat that he will eat, and so let him stand till betwixt twelue and one of the Clocke in the afternoone, at which time you shall first rub his Head and Legges well, as was formerly declared for the day before. Then you shall per∣fume him, as was beforesaid, and both those workes finished, you shall giue him a sweet Mash, as was also shewed before, and so let him rest till the Euening, at which time you shall offer him either Oates or Bread, but in little quantitie, as handfull by handfull and be sure it be sweet & cleane drest, sifted and dusted, and so let him rest till eight of the clocke at Night, at which time you shal againe perfume him. Then put sweet Hay in his Racke, tosse vp his Litter, and right his
Cloathes, but in any wise bare not his body: then hauing made the Stable cleane, you may leaue him to his rest for that night. The next day being the third day▪ you shall doe all things as you did the second day, already rehearsed. As first, you shall giue him his Poti∣on of Diapente and sweete wine, then ayre him, at Noone his Mash, at Euening and Night his perfume, with all other obseruations that were before declared. The next day, which is the fourth day, there is no doubt (with the helpe of God) but you shall finde alteration and health approaching, which you shall know by his sto∣macke, by his more cheerefull coun∣tenance, and by other outward ge∣stures, and finding that health is comming, you may then forbeare to giue him any more Potions, and onely attend him with good Food, good dressing, and moderate exer∣cise,
neither shall you giue him any more Mashes, for although they be wholsome in the extreamitie of sicknesse, yet being any thing too much vsed, they take away the Horses stomacke, and brings him to a loathing of other meat, and there∣fore in steade thereof, you shall in the Morning after your Horse is well rubd and drest, take a pottle of faire Water, and heat it scalding hot, then put it into a gallon, or two of cleere cold Water, that it may take away the extreame coldnesse thereof, and then being scarcely lukewarme, giue it the Horse to drinke: You may, if you please, throw an handfull of Bran, or an handfull of Wheat-Meale into the Water, for it is good, and not hurt∣full. As soone as the Horse hath drunke, take his backe, and ride him forth gently for an howre, or two. At Noone perfume him, at Eue∣ning
water him as you did in the Morning, and ride him in like man∣ner. Feed him at vsuall howres as i time of health, and thus doe for three or foure dayes more, then finding his strength increasing, you may be degrees abate his Cloathes, you may water him abroad at some cleare Riuer, or Spring, gallop him after his watering, and draw euerie thing to the same custome as you did in best health. Thus you see the manner how to cure an Horse that is sicke, but not violently sicke, and as it were at the very poynt and doore of death, which Cure is this which followeth.
To cure any violent Sicknesse, if the Horse be at the very pynt and doore of death. IF you shall haue an Horse in this extreamitie, and desperate case then the first thing you doe, you shall open his Necke veine, and let him bleed very well: Then two howres after his bleeding, take two Ounces of the Powder of Dipente, before rehearsed, and beat it in a Morter with as much clarified, pure life Hony, as will bring it to a substantiall Treackle, for this is an excellent Treackle, and of the Italians called Horse. Methridate, and is the same which our Physitians call Thiaca Diates∣saron.
When this Confection is made, you shall take a full halfe ounce thereof, or more, and dissolue it in a pint and an halfe of Muskadine, and so giue it the Horse to drinke with an Horne: Then if he haue so much abilitie of Body, walke him vp and downe for halfe an howre, or an howre, either in some sunny place, or some close Barne, or emptie House, then set him vp, and let him fast full another howre. At Noone giue him, if you can get it, a gallon, or neere there about of the first running of the strongest Ale, before it be put to Barme, and when it is cleere, strong, and carry∣eth a Royall on the top: But where this is not to be had, then giue him a sweet Mash, perfume him, rb him, cloathe him, dyet, and order him in all respects as was shewed you in the former Cure, and thus you shall doe for three dayes toge∣ther without all fayle, and then no
doubt but you shall see health ap∣proaching. At the end of three dayes you shall forbeare all sorts of Mashes of both kindes, and follow all the pre∣scriptions before declared. Now if during the Cure, either through the violence of the Medi∣cine, or the foulnesse of the Horses Body, you shall finde any hard Pu∣stules or Swellings to ryse vp be∣tweene the Horses Chaps, and at the Root of the Tongue, then you shall first clip away the hayre as close as may be; then you shall take a Waxe Candle, and therewith burne the swelling, till you may scarifie the Skinne, then take a peece of Leather, somewhat larger then the swelling, and hauing prickt it all ouer with the point of your Knife, spread thereupon in some thicke manner your blacke Shoo∣makers-Waxe, that is well seasoned and new; then warming it ouer a
few Coles, lay it vpon the swelling and remoue it not, till it either fall off by it selfe, or els the sore breake, then renew the Plaster, and with it onely heale vp the Sore. This Plaster for the cheapnesse, and meannesse will hardly win credite with those which are curious: But I dare assure you (that are a louer of Truth) that there is not a more exellent or soueraigne Plaster which belongs to an Horse, for it ripeneth and breaketh any Impo∣stumation whatsoeuer, it asswageth any hard swelling or tumor, whe∣ther in Ioynts, or other Fleshy parts, and it healeth what it brea∣keth or ripeneth, and with its heat it dissolues all manner of humours that are knit together, and occasion paine or swelling. There is another accident which attendeth the sicknesse of Horses, and that is Costiuenesse, or Belly∣binding, which maketh an Horse
that he cannot Dung, or auoyd his Ordure. This accident when at any time it hapneth, it shall be good for you first to rake him, that is, you shall annoynt your hand all ouer with sweet Butter, or clarified Hogges grease: Some vse Oyle of Bays, but it is too sharpe, and too hot, and many times (if the action be vsed too roughly, or vnaduised∣ly) it breedeth exulceration and sorenesse in the Tuell, and inward parts. Therefore, as before I said, take either Butter, or Hogs grease, and your hand being all besmeared therewith, thrust it vp into his Tuell till you feele his Ordure, and then drawing out as much thereof (if it be blacke and hard) as conueniently you can, without doing iniury to the Horse, or striuing with your hand to goe too farre: And if you finde it to be very sore baked with∣in, then after you haue raked & got what you can, you shall take a great
Candle or Percher of three or foure in the pound at the most, and cutting off an inch or two of the vpper or smaller end, with your hand annoint as before, thrusting the great end forward, put it vp into his Tuell so farre as you can get it, then suddenly drawing out your hand, and leauing the Candle behind you, clap downe his Tayle close to his Tuell, and drawing it vp betweene his Legges, hold it with both your hands hard and constantly for the space of an houre, or more, in which time the Candle will dissolue in the Horse body, and so separate and breake his Ordure, that vpon the letting loose of your hands, he will present∣ly dung. This you may doe in euery case of extremity, but not otherwise: and beleeue it, you will finde this the most excellentest Suppositorie of all other, and that there is no Glyster which can worke with
greater efficacie, or more whole∣somnesse. There is another accident which attendeth the sicknesse of Horses, and that is quite contrarie to this before rehearsed, and is called Lax, atiuenesse or Loosenesse of Body, which is expressed by a vehement and violent scowring: This, if at any time it shall happen, you shall at first note the violence therof, and the continuance thereof. The violence is knowne by the thinnesse, the sharpnesse, and the oft and speedy auoyding of the Excr∣ments. The continuance is knowne by the vnchangeablenesse of the Infir∣mitie, and by the processe and long continuance of time, contrarie to all naturall and wholsome custome, for you are to obserue that an horse may haue a scowring for a day, or two, or a little more, and this is not vnwholsome, but natural and good,
and if after it stay of it selfe, then it worketh no euill effect, but if it continue longer, and bring the Horse into any extraordinarie weakenesse of Body, then you shal seeke to stop it in this manner. Take a quart of new Milke, and putting thereunto a good spoonfull or two of fine Beane flower, and as much Bolearmoniacke finely beate to powder, boyle all together til the Milke thicken, and then being made lukewarme, giue it the Horse with an horne, and doing thus morning or two; no doubt but it will binde the horse; which if it do not, then you shall take a quart o Red-Wine, and put thereunto handfull of the Hearbe called Shepheards Purse, and halfe so much of Tanners Barke, and boyl all very well together till the Hearb and the Barke be soft, then strain it, and put thereunto two spoonfull of the powder of Cinamon, and
being made lukewarme, giue it the Horse to drinke with an Horne, and this doe one morning, or two, or three if need require. For mine own part, I neuer found but it wrought good effect, and so I hope all men shall find that approue it. Now whereas in all my Cures heretofore in this Booke for Sick∣nesses of what extremitie soeuer, I make you onely rely vpon Diapente, or Horse Methridate, which is a kind of Diatessaron. And for as much as at any times, & in many places, these thinges cannot be had, then in such extremitie, and the Horse be∣ing at the poynt of death, in stead of the Powder of Methdate aforesaid, you shall take halfe a pint of Dragon water, and dissolue into it, a good spoonfull or more of the best Trea∣kle vpon a soft fire of embers, then being lukewarme, giue it the Horse to drinke with an Horne, aad thus doe for a morning, two, or three, till
you see alteration and health ap∣proaching. This expelleth all infection and euill from the heart, comforts the spirits, and restores nature to its first best strength. And thus you haue the vttermost secrets of my heart concerning the curing and discerning of all manner of inward sicknesses in Horses, how desperate, mortall, or contagious soeuer. The preuenting of all inward Sicknesses. THE preuenting of inward sick∣nesses, consisteth in two speciall obseruations and considerations. The first, is to preuent it before come, so that it may not offend at all. The second, is to take it at the rst appearance, and so preuent it
that it arise not to any great danger or hazard. To preuent sickness that it offend not your Horse at all, it is an excel∣lent course when you put your Horse to grasse, euer three or four dayes before you turne him out, to take Blood from his Necke veine; then the next day after to giue him a pint and an halfe of Muskadine, and halfe an ounce of the Powder, of Diapente, or three quarters of an ounce of the Horse Mithridate, or Treakle, before rehearsed; and then by degree to abate his Cloathes, if he haue been vsed to any, and to make his body familiar with cold. Also you shall obserue when you let your Horse blood, to proportion the quantitie which you take from him, according to the goodnesse or badnesse of the blood when you be∣hold it, for the losse of good blood is vnholsome, and doth hurt, and to preserue ill blood, is both dange∣rous
and noysom. Also if you ob∣serue, when you take blood from your Horse, to rcceiue it into a ves∣sell, and by stirring it about conti∣nually as the Horse bleedeth, to keepe it from clotting, then hauing bled, to take the blood, aud to be∣smeere it all ouer the Horses backe and body, you shall find it wonder∣full wholsome, for it comforteth the body, cleareth the skin, and breedeth a reioycing in all the Hor∣ses vitall parts. Now if you haue no determina∣tion to put your horse to grasse, and yet you wold preuent inward sick∣nesse, then you shall obserue, once in two or three moneths, when you haue the best leasure to rest your Horse after it, not to fayle to giue your Horse Muskadine & Diapente, or Muskadine & horse Methridate, as was before shewed, and not to let blood at all, for this verie Potion is the greatest purger and purifier of
the blood that can be, and auoideth all that yellow cholericke matter, and other euill and vndigested hu∣mors whrch corrupt the blood. Now you are to obserue here, that although I only prescribe Mus∣kadine wherein you shall dissolue your Powder, or Methridate, yet know that when you cannot get Muskadine, or other sweet Wine, that then you may take strong Ale, or Beere, but in greater quantitie, for as you take but a pint & an halfe of Wine, you shall take of Beere or Ale a full Ale quart; as for the pou∣der or Methridate you shal keep the first quantitie already prescribed, and if you warme your Beere or Ale a little on the fire, it will not be amisse, but better, yet that I referre to your owne discretion. Now to take sicknesse at the first approach, and to preuent it, that it arise not to any great danger, you shall by all meanes obserue to looke
well into the occasions of sicknesses which are already shewed, and into the signes of those occasions, and if you finde your selfe guilty of any of those occasions, or that the Horse discouereth any of the former signs, then presently let the Horse blood, and three seuerall mornings after giue him the Drinke or Potion be∣fore prescribed, and vndoubtedly it will preuent all the force of sicknes, and restore the Horse to his former strength, and good estate of Body. And thus much of all inward sicknesses, and their preuenon.
Two sorts of Bals to re any violent Cold, or Glaunders, to preuent Heart∣sicknesse, to purge away all molten Grease, to recouer a lost Stomacke, and to keepe the Heart from fainting with exercise, and to make a leane Horse fat suddenly. TAke of Aniseeds, of Comin∣seeds, of Fenegreekeseedes, of Canthamus seeds, of the Powder of Elicampane roots, of each 2. ounces, beate them, and earse them to a ve∣ry fine Powder, then adde to them one ounce of the flower of Bim∣stone, then take an ounce of the best Iuice of Licoras, and dissolue it in halfe a pint of White wine, which done, take an ounce of the Oyle of Aniseeds, and as much of the Sur∣rup of Coltsfoot, then of Sallet oile and of fine Life Hony, of each halfe
a pint, then mixe all this with the former Powders, and with as much fine Wheat flower as will binde & knit them altogether, then worke them into a stiffe Paste, and make thereof Bals somewhat bigger then French walnuts, and so keepe them in a close Gally por, for they will last all the yeere: & when you haue occasion to vse them, take one, and anoynt it al ouer with sweet Butter, and so giue the Horse euerie mor∣ning one in the manner of a Pil, and ryde him a little after it, if you please, otherwise you may chuse; then feed and water him, abroad or at home, according to your vsuall custome, and thus doe (if it bee to preuent sicknsse) for three or foure mornings together, but if it bee to take away infirmity, then vse it at least a weeke, or more; if it be to take away molten Grease, or foul∣nesse, then instantly after his heate, and in his heat onely; but if it bee to
fatten a Horse, then vse it at least a fortnight or more. Now if you find any difficulty in the giuing of it as Pils, you may then at your pleasure dissolue one of these Bals, either in∣to sweete Wine, Beere, or Ale, and so giue it the Horse to drinke with an Horne. But if it be to fatten, and to take away infirmity, as the run∣ning Glanders, or such like; then be∣sides these Bals, you shall make you these second Bals. Take of Wheat flowre six pound or more, as shall suffice to make stiffe the Paste, then take of Aniseeds, of Cominseeds, of Canthumus, of Fe∣negreeke, of ordinary Brimstone, of each two ounces, of Salet Oyle a pint, of Honey a pound and a halfe, of White wine a pottel; beat the hard simples to a fine powder, and earse them, then with the rest make them into a stiffe Past. Then of this Paste take a Ball as bigge as a Mans fist and dissolue it in two or three gal∣lons
of cleere cold running water, by washing and lauing the Paste therein, and so giue it the Horse to drinke at his ordinary watring times, or at any other time when he is disposed to drinke, for he can∣not drinke too much of this water, then ride and warme him a little after it. Then when the water is spent, doe not cast away the bot∣tome, but filling the Vessell vp a∣gaine with new fresh water, dis∣solue another Ball therein, and thus do foureteene dayes together at the least, and you shall see wonderfull effects arise thereof. This Water scowreth, cleanseth, and feedeth in admirable manner. And the other lesser Bals, first spo∣ken of, purge the stomacke and in∣trayles of all foulnesse, auoydeth molten Grease, and fortifieth Na∣ture so powerfully, that it leaues no euill in the Body. And this small Ball (if it were
for my life) would I giue to an Horse immediately vpon his draw∣ing forth, if hee went either to run, to hunt, or vse any violent or extreme labour.
Annther way how to fatten a Horse suddainly. THere is another way to fatten an Horse suddainly, but not better then that before shewed, yet this I haue found both good and certaine, and therefore I refere it to your owne discretion. Take of Elicampane, of Comim∣seeds, of Turmericke, of Aniseeds, of each two ounces, of Groundsell an handfull, boyle all these verie well with three Heads of Garleeke clean∣sed and stamped, in a gallon of strong Ale, then strayne it well, and giue the Horse a quart to drinke lukewarme in the morning fasting, then ride him till he be warme, then et him vp warme, and thus doe for foure or fiue mornings, and then turne the Horse to grasse (if the time of the yeere be sutable there∣fore)
and he will feed wonderfully and suddainly. But if the time of the yeere serue not for Grasse, then you shall keepe him in the House, and ouer and be∣sides the drinke before shewed, you shall take the fine Powder of Eli∣campane, & the fine Powder of Co∣minseeds, of each a like quantitie, mixe them well together, then eue∣rie time you giue your Horse Pro∣uender, which would be at least thrice a day, as morning, noone, and night: Take halfe an ounce of this Powder, and sprinkle it by little and little into his prouender, for feare of offence, till all be eaten vp. And thus doe for fourteene dayes together at the least, and you shall see the Horse prosper in won∣derfull and strange manner.
How to keepe a Horse, or Iade from tyring. IF you ride on a tyring Iade, o feare the perplexed crueltie of tyred Iadc, then be sure to carrie about you the fine searse powder of Elicampane, and when others bayt their Horses▪ or that you come to the place of Bayte for your Horse the first thing you doe, set vp you Horse warme, and doe not walke him. After he hath been well rub∣bed, take a quart of strong Ale, and put thereto halfe an ounce of th Powder of Elicampane, and brew i altogether, then giue it the Horse with an Horne, which done, tye hi head to the Racke, for you need no care for Prouendar till night, a which time Prouendar him well and in the morning giue him Oate or Bread, or both, in plentifull man∣ner,
and being ready to backe him, giue him the former quantitie of Ale, and the powder aforesaid, and doubtlesse you shall find him to tra∣uell with great courage and spirit. Also if you take a bunch of pen∣niroyall, and tye it to the mouth of your Bit, or Snaffell, you shall find it verie comfortable, & it will cause your Horse to trauell lustily. Now if your Horse, notwithstan∣ding all this, do happen to tire, then you shall take off the Saddle, and with the Hearbe called Arsesmart, rub his back all ouer verie hard; thē laying Arsesmart also vnder the Saddle, so ride him, and if there be any life in him, it wil make him go. For this is a notable torment, and the smart is almost vnsufferable, and therefore I would haue you vse it with great discretion, and but seldome, or when extre∣mity requireth it.
Another Receit against tyring, or for anysore or dangerous Cold. TAke of the best Indian Necotian (which we call Tobacco) and be sure it be not sophisticated, or by any other accidentall meanes adul∣terated. Dry this in the Sunne in a Glsse close lutd, then pound it ve∣rie small, and mixe it with an equall quantitie of the Powder of Cockel∣shels, then with the Oyle of Dill, and the Oyle of Cloues, make the Pow∣der into a Paste, or solid body; then make prettie round Bals thereof, as bigge as Walnuts, and dry them in the shadow, in the Canicular dayes, otherwise called the Dogge dayes, then keepe them close in a sweet Gally Pot, and giue them as Pils in the time of necessitie, that is to say, a Ball at a time whensoeuer your
Horse shall faynt in trauell, or if your Horse haue taken any sore cold, or surfeit, then giue him the Ball in the morning fasting, and let him haue a little exercise after it, then cloathe warme, rub well, & be sure not to lay any cold water to the Horses heart, without mode∣rate exercise after it, for of all dangers that is the greatest.
Another Receipt for any extraordina∣ry Cold, dry Cough, or pursicknesse in an Horse, which the weake Farriers call, Broken winded. BEcause the former Receipt i curious in the making, and as¦keth the obseruation of times, an Seasons, neither can be effected a all times and howres, therefore will set you downe here, the secret of my knowlege, and those ready easie, and approued Receipts, whic I neuer found to fayl, but to work that goodnesse which I haue eue desired. Therefore whensoeuer you find your Horse taken with any extream old Cold, dry Cough, or Pursickne (which ignorance Farriers call Broken winded) you shall take three quarters of an ounce of the Con∣serue
of Elicampane, and dissolue it in a pint and a halfe of the best Sac̄k and so giue it to the Horse with an Horne, in the morning fasting, and ryde him alittle after it. And this you shall doe diuers mornings to∣gether, till you see the infirmitie decrease, and wast away. Now because there is some curi∣ositie in the making of this cōserue of Elicampane, and that diuers men doe compound according to their diuerse opinions, I will here shew you the seuerall compositions, their seuerall vses, and their seuerall ver∣tues, together with mine owne opi∣nion of the goodnes, as I haue found it in my practise, & so to leaue it to your owne iudgement. The conserue of Elicampane, is of two kindes, the one is Simple, the other is Compound. The Simple Conserue is made in this manner: Take of the purest Rootes of Eli∣campane,
that are preserued in swee Surrup, and beat those Roots an the Surrup together in a Morter till you haue brought it to an entit thin Substance, then with the fine refined Sugar that can be got, thick∣en it vp, and bring it to the perfect body of a Conserue, then put it in Gally pot, and keepe it close, an vse it in time of necessitie, as wa before shewed. This Simple Conscrue is of ex¦cellent vse, and taketh away any or¦dinary Cold, or stopping; it com¦forteth the Lungs, inlargeth th Wind, purgeth the Head of all filthy matter, and dissolueth man other obstructions; yet is not th the best Conserue, neither worket the best effect, if the infirmitie b old and dangerous, or if there b any attainture in the Lungs or L¦uer, therefore in that case you sha flye to the Compound Conseru which is made in this maner.
Take the best candied Roots of Elicampane that can be gotten, and beat them in a Morter with the Sir∣rup of Coltsfoot till it be brought to a very thin substance, then with the finest refined Suger thicken it, as before shewed, till it be brought to the true body of a Conserue; then keepe it close in a Gally pot, and vse it with Sacke, as was before de∣clared. This is the true Conserue, and hath the greatest vertue; for I haue knowne it in the continuance of a small time, and by the daily vse thereof, to take away diuers dry (and supposed incurable) Coughes, it hath taken away the heauing of the body, and so inlarged the wind that albeit the motion was before swift, like the broken winded, yet it hath come to a moderare and low temper, and the dry Cough which did accompanie it, hath been quite put awae.
Now whereas I prescribe vnto you the taking of the candie Roots of Elicampane, I thinke it no amisse because the Apothicarie is not euer at your elbow, to shew yo how you shall candye them you selfe: As thus, Take of the finest refined Sugar, or the best white Sugar Candy, an dissolue it in Rose water, then boil it to an heighth, and when the Sir∣rup is cold, put in your Roots, be∣ing cleare and well clensed, and let them rest in the Sirrup a pretti space, then take them out, and boil the Sirrup ouer againe, and as be∣fore put in your Roots, then boyle the Sirrup ouer againe the third time to an hardnesse, putting i more Sugar, but no Rose water then put in all your Roots, the Sir¦rup being cold, and so let the stand till they candy. And in this wise you may candy all manner o Roots, Flowers, or any thing else.
Now if you find any difficultie either in the making, or the procu∣ring of these Midicines before shewed, or that the Infirmitie not being great, or dangerous, you thinke a Medicine of lesse force, and easier to compasse, will accom∣plish it: Then you shall take of the Sir∣rup of Coltsfoot an ounce, of the fine Powder of Elicampane, of Aniseeds, and of Licoras, of each halfe an ounce, of browne Sugar Candy an ounce, deuided into two parts, then with as much sweet Butter as will suffice, worke all the former Pow∣ders, and one part, or halfe of the Sugar Candy, and all the Sirrup, in∣to a stiffe Paste, then diuide it into two or three Bals, and role them into a round forme, or the fashion of an Egge, and after role them all ouer in the other halfe, or part of the Sugar Candy, and then giue this whole quantitie at one time to
the Horse in the manner of a Pill, and giue them in the morning fa∣sting, then ride the Horse halfe an houre after the giuing, and let him fast two howres at the least after he commeth in, and let him be warme cloathed, and stopt, and his Limbes, and Body well rubbed, especially his Head: Let him by no meanes drinke any cold Water, but so, as he may haue exercise after it, and let his exercise be moderate and not violent: let his Hay be a little sprinkled with Water, & his Oates with Beere or Ale; as for bread, it is of it selfe moyst enough; and let all his meat generally be well du∣sted, sifted, or chipped, for nothing is more offenciue then foulenesse, and drynesse, nor more comfortable then cleannesse, prouided that your Corne be not greene and vnsweet in the Mow or Reeke, your Bread new, nor your Hay vnsweete or rotten.
Thus you shall doe, not for one morning, or two, but for diuerse, till you find amendment; neither shall you spare any trauell or occasion; but haue medicine about you, vse it in your iournying, for this doth not take away anything to weaken Nature, but addes to the force thereof, and makes the Body a great deale more able.
An excellent Scowring after any sore Heate, or for any Horse after his exercise. TAke a quart of good Sacke, and set it on the fire in a Bason, or open Skillet, and when it is warme, take an ounce of the clearest Rosen and bruise it exceeding small, then by degrees little after a little put it into the Sacke, and stirre it fast about for feare of clotting, and when the Sacke and it is incorpora∣ted, then take it from the fire, and put thereto halfe a pint of the best Sallet Oyle, and in the cooling stirr them all well together, then lastly take an ounce of the browne Sugar Candy beaten to Powder, and put it in also, and being lukewarme giue it to the Horse in the height of his heat, as soone as you come home from exercise, then rub hard, cloath
warme, and let him fast at least two howres after, but yet depart not your selfe, or some deputie for you out of the Stable, but stay and keepe the Horse stirring, and wa∣king, partly by extraordinarie noyse and clamour, and partly by action about him, or making him moue vp and downe as he standeth, for there is nothing more hurtfull to the Horse, or the working of the Medi∣cine, then sleepe, stilnesse and rest; and nothing better or more auaila∣ble to the working of the Medicine then action or motion: for they make the spirits worke, and stirre vp those humours which should be remoued, when rest keepes the spi∣rits dull, and the humours so inclo∣sed and reserued, that Nature hath nothing to worke vpon. Whensoeuer you giue any scow∣ring, be sure that day to giue no cold water after it, for it is binding, and knitteth, and detayneth that
foulnes which the Scowring should take away. Thus you see how to giue a Scowring in the proper and due time: But if now either through Errour, Ignorance or Imagination that your Horse is so cleane that he needeth no Scowring (as I know many of opinion, that Scowrings are idle vnnecessarie things, and not to be vsed at all) yet your Horse, hauing his Grease molten, and no course taken for the auoyding ther∣of, you find he droopeth, and lan∣guisheth, as of force the horse must doe, and experience daily shewes it vs. For the opinion that Scowrings are vnprofitable, is fri∣uolous and idle. In this case, vpon the first apprehension of the euill, you shall giue the Horse a sweet Mash in the Euening, which is in the same nature, and of the same quallitie that a Preparatiue is be∣fore a Purgation: Then the next
morning very early mount his back, and n some conuenient peece of ground giue your Horse a gentle heat: I doe not meane that you shal run him furiously, or violently, but to gallop him gently; neither to heat him through the extremitie of sudden and sharpe labour, but to warme him kindly through the continuance of moderate exercise. Nor would I haue you, to melt his Grease anew, but only to loosen and stirre vp that which was before molten Your exercise being finished, doe not alight from his back suddenly, but rub him as you sit on his backe and so bring him home; then pre∣sently hauing the Scowring ready, as soone as you are alighted, giue it him lukewarme, then rub him dry, cloathe and stop him very warme, and then in all other things do as hath beene before declared.
For any dangerous Bots, Maw wormes, or poysoned Red Wormes. TAke as much precipitate (which is Mercury Calsoynd) as will gently lye vpon a Siluer Twopence and lay it in a peece of sweete But∣ter almost as big as an Hens Egge, in the manner of a Pill, and then in the morning fasting, the Horse ha∣uing stood all night on the Mussell, or at the emptie Rack, if it be pos∣sible, or otherwise (if the extremity of the disease compell you) at any other time, draw forth the Horses Tongue, and make him swallow downe the Pill, then chafe him a little vp and downe, and after set him vp warme, making him fast, full two howres after, and it will kill all manner of Wormes whatsoeuer: Yet in the administration hereof, you must be wondrous circumspect
and carefull, for in the Precipitate there is a strong poysonous quality, so that by no meanes there must be taken more then is prescribed, ex∣cept with good caution. Againe, if you mixe the Precipi∣tate with a little sweet Butter, as much as an Hazell Nut, before you lap it vp in the great lumpe of But∣ter, it well not be worse but better, and it will allay much of the euill qualitie. But this I leaue to your owne discretion, assuring you that there is not any thing comparable to this, for this infirmitie.
For Gourded, or foule sweld Legges, or other parts, by reason of melting the Grease, or other Accident. FIrst with a Fleame pricke the parts that are swelled, then take a pint of Wine lees, an ounce of Cominseeds, & an handfull of Wheat flower, and boyle them together till they be thicke, then apply this Pultus very hot to the sweld part, renewing it but once in foure and twentie howres, and if this in two or three dayes drawes it to an head, then launce it, and heale it either with a plaster of Shoomakers wax, or else with the yealke of an Egge, Wheat flowre and Honey beatn together to a Salue. But if it doe not draw to any head, and yet the swelling continue, then take of Pitch a quarter of a
pounds, and much Virgin Wax, of Rozen halfe a pound, of the Iuice of Isop halfe an ounce, of Galbanum halfe an ounce, of Myrrh secondary halfe a pound, of Bdelium Arabi∣cum halfe an ounce, of Deeres Suet halfe a pound, of Populeon halfe an ounce, of the drops of Storax halfe an ounce: boyle all these together in an Earthen pot, and after it is cold, take of Bitumen halfe a pound, of Armoniacke an ounce and a halfe, and of Costus as much; beate these into fine powder, and then incorpo∣rate them with the other, and boyle them all ouer againe very well, which done, poure the whole mix∣ture into cold water, and then rolle it into seuen bigge Rolles plaister∣wise, after spread this Plaister vpon a peece of Leather, and fould it about the sweld member, or lay it vpon the sweld part, & if any thing, then this will asswage it, and giue much strength to the Sinewes.
You shall by no meanes remoue this Plaister, so long as it will sticke on. This Plaster I must confesse, is costly and curious to make, but it is wonderfull soueraine, and of singu∣lar vse. For the Horse that is conti∣nually kept with it; I meane that hath it applyed to his Limbes euer when he commeth from trauell, he shall neuer be troubled with sweld Legges, nor yet euer put out Wind gals. Now if you will neither goe to this cost, nor endure this trouble, yet would haue youre Horse cured of this Infirmitie, then assuredly know not any thing better or more approued, then continually both before and after trauell, and in the House, nany times in the day to laue and wash your Horses limbes, or other sweld parts, with the cold∣est and clearest Fountain Water that you can get, and sometimes let
the Horse stand in some cold cleare Riuer for the space of a quarter of an howre or more, vp to the knees, and cambrels, but no further. This Medicine, how poore soener it looke, is of infinite vertue, and though I write of cold Water, yet is the operation hot and fierie; only this you must take to your remem∣brance, that this applycation ap∣pertaines not to Impostumations, but to Straines, and Swellings, which are without much anguish.
To heale or dry vp any old Vlcer, or cankerous Sore. TAke Masticke, Frankensence, Cloes, greene Copperas, and Brimstone, of each a like quantitie, of Myrrhe double so much as of any one of the other. Beate all to a fine Powder, then burne it on a cha∣fingdish and Coales, but let it not flame. Then as the smoake ary seth take a good handfull of fine Lint, or Towe, and hold it ouer the smoake so that it may receiue all the per∣fume thereof into it. Then when i is thorowly well perfumed, put the Lint into a very close Boxe, and s keepe it. Then when you haue occasion to vse it, first wash the Sore with Vrine, then dry it, and lastly lay o
some of this Lint, or Towe; and thus doe twice a day, and it is a speedy Cure. As this is soueraine for an Horse, so it is as soueraine for any man also.
To cure the running Frush, or any Im∣postumation in the soale of the Foot, to dry vp Scratches, Paines, and the like cankerous Sores. TAke old Vrine, and boyle it with good stoore of Allome, and keepe it in a close Vessell by it selfe; then take a good handfull or two of greene Nettles, strong and keene, and spread them on some Plate, or other vessell, and dry them either before the fire, or in an Ouen (after the houshold bread is drawn) then crush and bruse them into a very fine Powder, then looke what quantity of Powder there is, and take the like quantity of Pepper beaten to as fine a Powder, & mixe both very well together, then keepe this Powder in a close Bladder.
Now when you haue occasion to vse it, first wash the sore place with the Vrine and Allome, made verie warme, and the sores thoroughly scowred; after dry them with a fine Lawne, or Linnen ragge, and lastly strow or pounce of the Powder, so as it may couer all the sore: and thus doe euer after trauell, or once a day in the time of rest.
For any sore Eye of Horse, or Beast. TAke the shls of seuen or eight Egges, and cleanse away the inner slyme from them so cleane as may be; then lay those shels be∣tweene two cleane Tyles, and so lay them in hot glowing Embers, and couer thē all ouer, & on enery side and so let them lye a good space, till the shels be all dryed, then take them vp, and beat the shels to a ve∣rie fine searst Powder; then with a Goose quill blow this Powder into the▪ Horses eye that is offended with Pinne, Webbe, Filme, or any thicknesse, or fulnesse, and it is a certaine Cure: And thus doe Mor∣ning, Noone, and Night. But if it be for any watery or inflamed Eye, for any Bruse, Stripe, or descending
humor, then take a spoonfull and an halfe of the fine searst Powder of white Sugar Candy, and being mixt together with as much May▪ Butter (if you can get it, or for want there∣of, the best sweet Butter) work both these Powders into a gentle Salue, and therewith annoint the Horses Eye Morning, Noone, and Night, for it cleanseth, purgeth, comforteth, and cooleth.
For a backe-sinew straine, or any other Straine. TAke an ounce of Turpentine, and two or three spoonfuls of Aquauitae, and beate them together in a Bladder, or other Vessell, till they come to a perfect Salue; then annoint the Straine very wel there∣with, and heat it in, either with an hot Bricke, or else a Barre of Iron: and thus doing three or foure times, it will take away the Strayne.
For any old Strayne, or lamenesse in Ioynts, Synewes, &c. TAke Boares Grease, Bolearmo∣niacke, blacke Sope, and Nerue Oyle, of each a like quantity, boyle them well together, and then apply it hot to the griefe, rubbing and chasing it in exceedingly, and also heating it in very well, either with an hot Brickbat, or hot Fire shouell, or an hot Barre of Iron; and thus doe once a day vntill the paine doe depart away.
For any griefe, payne, nambnesse, weak∣nesse, or swelling in Ioynts, that commeth of a cold cause. TAke Aquauitae, and heat it on the fire, and therewith bathe the grieued part or member verie well, and holding an hot Barre of Iron before it, make the Medicine to sinke in; then take a Linnen cloth and wet it well in the same Aqua∣uitae; lastly take Pepper beaten and searst to a fine dust, and there with couer the wet Cloath all ouer verie thicke, and so fold it about the grie∣ued part; then take a dry Rouller and roule it about the wet, and so let the Horse rest: And thus doe once a day at the last, till you finde amend∣ment.
For any desperate and incureable straine in the Shoulder, or other hid∣den parts, for any Fistula, pole∣euill or other Impostu∣mation or Swel∣ling. TAke a large earthen Vessell of a gallon, two, or three, & almost fill it with the Hearbe Arsesmart, and Brookelime, equall in quantity and equally mixt; then put to them as much of the oldest and strongest Vrine that can be got, as will couer the Hearbes all ouer, and fill the Vessell full, then couer the pot close with a stone, board, or such like thing, and so let it stand, for this can neuer be too old. Now when you haue occasion to vse it for any griefe afore-said, you shall take an earthen Pipkin, and
put there into both of the Vrine and the Hearbes so much as shall be conuenient for the greefe, and you shall boyle it well vpon the fire. Then if it be for a shoulder straine, you shall take an old Boot, and cut off the Foot, so that you may draw it ouer the Horses foot, and aboute his knee, almost to the elbow of his shoulder, keeping the neather part of the Boote as close and strayte about his Legge as may be, but the vpper part (which couereth all the shoulders) must be wide and spaci∣ous: Into this Boote thrust all your mixture as hot as the Horse can suffer it, and lay it fast and close about the shoulders, especially be∣fore and behinde; then drawing vp the vpper part of the Boot, so fasten it to the Mayne of the Horse, that it may by no meanes slip down, but keepe constant and firme. And thus you must doe once or twice a day till the greefe depart.
As for the effect thereof, you shall find it, for this is the violentest of all Midcines, so that if there be any foule matter that must come forth, this will in an instant bring it to an head, ripen, breake, and heale it: if there be no such thing, then in as short a time, it will driue away the offending humors, take away the swelling, and giue present ease. Yet would I haue you to vse this but in extremitie, because for the time, the torment is almost insuffe. rable, and indeed, for nothing but an Horse to endure. Now if it be for a Fistula, or any such like Impostumation, or Swel∣ling, then you may spare the Boote, and only lay on the Medicine in the maner of a Pultus, and it will be altogether sufficient.
For Foundering, Frettizing, or any Imperfection in the Feet, or Hoofes of an Horse. FIrst pare thinne, open the heeles wide, and Shoo large, strong and hollow; then take a good quantitie of Cowes Dung, halfe so much Grease, or Kiching-fee, a like quan∣titie of Tarre, and a like quantitie of Soot; boyle all these verie well together, and then boyling-hot as may be, see you stop your Horses Feet therewith dayly, and it will not only take away all anguish, but al∣so strengthen the Hoofes, aud make them to endure any labour. But when you Iourney or trauell the Horse (as exercise auayleth much for this Cure) then put in the afore∣said Stopping cold, the first night after his labour, & adde vnto it the white of an Egge or two, for that
will take away the heat and beating of the former dayes labour, and will keepe the Fush strong and dry. But in time of rest, let it be boyling hot as aforesaid. Now if the Hoofe be naturally brickle or by accident broken, or by the former infirmitie dryed vp and straytned; Then to inlarge it, to make it tough, and to make it to grow swiftly, take of Pigges grease or of Hogges grease, of Turpentine and of Mastick, of each a like quan∣titie, and halfe so much Lard as of all the rest; melt all but the Turpen∣tine on the fire, and being melted take it from the fire, and then put in the Turpentine, stirring it about, in∣corporate all very well together, then put it into a Gally-pot, and when it is cold, be sure you couer it close. With th Salue, twice or thrice a day annoynt the crownets of the
Horses Hoofes, close by the Hayre at the setting on of the Hoofe, and it will make it shoot fast, and grow tough and large.
For hurts vpon the Crownets of the Hoofes, as Ouerreach, Stub, or prickes, &c. FIrst take of Sope and Salt, of each a like quantitie, and mixe them together like a Paste; Then hauing cut out the ouerreach, or hurt, and layd it playne, first wash it with Vrine and Salt, or Beere and Salt, and with a Cloath dry it; then bind on the mixt Sope and Salt, not renewing it in 24 houres, and thus doe (if the wound be great) for three or foure dayes together: then hauing drawne out all the venome as this Salue will quickly doe) then take a spoonfull or two of Traine-Oyle, and as much Ceruse (which we call white Lead) and mixe it to∣gether to a thicke Salue, then spred that vpon the Sore morning and
Euening till it be whole, which will be effected suddenly; for nothing doth dry vp sooner, nor is more kindly and naturall for the bree∣ding of a new Hoofe then this, as you shall find by experience.
Ho to helpe Surbating, or renesse in the Feet. WHen you finde your Horse to be surbated, presently clap into each of his fore-feet two new layd Egges, and crush them therein, thn vpon the top of them lay good store of Cow-dung, thus stop him, and in foure howres he will recouer.
For any Bony excression arysing vpon any member of an Horse; as Splint, Spauen, Curbe, Ringbone, &c. TAke the Root of Elicampane well cleansed, and lap it in a pa∣per, and rost it as you would rost a Warden in hot embers, then as hot as the Horse can suffer it (for you must not scald) after you haue rubd and chaft the excression, clap this thereunto and bind it on hard, and in once or twice dressing it wil con∣sume the excression. Also if morning and euening you rub the excression with the Oyle of Origanum, it will consume away the hardnesse.
Obseruations in giuing of Fire, or v∣sing of Corosiues, which heale all sorts of Farcies, Cankers, Fistulays, Leprosies, Maungees, Scabs, &c. THere are two wayes to giue Fire; the one Actuall, and the other Potentiall: the first is done by Instrument or hot iron, the other by medicine, either Corosiue, Pu∣trefactiue, or Causticke. The Actuall fire, stoppeth cor∣ruption of members, and stanheth blood, prouided the Sinews, Cords and Ligaments be not toucht. The best Instruments to cauterize or seare with, are of Gold or Siluer; the second best are of Copper, and the worst, but most vsuall are of Iron. The Potentiall fires are medecins
Corosiue, Putrfactiue, or Caustick. Corosiues are simple or compound; the simple Corosiues are Roch-Al∣lome, burnt or vnburnt, Red Coral, Mercury sublimed, &c. The com∣pound are Vnguentum Apostolo∣rum, Vnguentum Aegyptiacum, and Vnguentum Coraceum, with o∣thers. Medecines Putrefactiue are your Arsenicke, Resalgar, Chrysocollo, and Aconitum. Medecines which are Causticke are strong Lye, Lime, Vitriol, Aqa fortis, and the like. Corosiues ore weaker then Pu∣trefactiues, and Putrefactiues are weaker then Causticks. Corosiues worke in the soft flesh, Puttefactiues in the hard, and Cau∣sticks breake the sound Skin. Thus you see the vse of these things, you may apply them at your pleasure, for these cure all sorts of
Farcies, Cankers, Fistulaes, Lepro∣sies, Maungees, Scabbes, and suc like poysonous Infections.
How to defend a Hore from Flyes. THis is a noysome offence in the Summer time, therefore when you find the trouble thereof, take Arsesmart and streep it in running water, & make it exceeding strong of the Hearbe, and therewith sprin∣kell and wash the Horse all ouer, and no Fly will touch him a second time. The Iuy, or Rue, or Hearbe of Grace will doe the like.
How to make a white Starre, or white Spot in an Horses face, or in any other part. TAke two or three Apples, the sowrest you can get, and rost them at a quicke fire, then being in the heighth of their heat, take one of them in a Cloath, or other de∣fence, and hauing cut off the Skin, clap the hot Apple to the Horses Forehead, and hold it hard thereto till the heat be asswaged; then try if the Hayre will come off, which if it will not, then take another hot Ap∣ple, and doe as before: then when the Hayre is come off as broad as you would haue it, take another hot Apple, and clap it to the scalded skin, holding it hard to, till all the skin blister, and come off as well as
the Hayre, then anoynt the sore place twice or thrice a day with Honey, and the next Hayre which commeth will be white.
How to keepe your woollen Horse∣Cloathes, Brest▪ Cloathes, Rubbers, and the like from Moath. WHen you turne your horse or Horses to Grasse, take al your Woollen Cloathes of what kind soeuer, and first wash them cleane, and dry them; then hang them in the Sunne, dust them, and brush them; then lay them on some Fleakes or other open things, a pre∣tie distance from the ground, and spread all open; then take the hoofs of Horse or Cattle, and chopping them in peeces, burne them vnder the Woollen things, so as the smoke may come to them in euerie part, then being thorowly smoked, fold them vp handsomly, and betweene euerie fold strow the powder of
Wallnut-tree Laues well dryed, and so lay them vp in a Chest, and you shall neuer care for the offence of Moathes, which is veri vnhol∣some for the Horse, and breeds in him a dislike. Others vse to rub their Cloathes on the wrong sides all ouer with the tops and tender parts of Worme∣wood, and it hath the like effect. Thus you may also preserue any Arras, Tapistree, or other hangings, and any Linnen or Woollen Gar∣ments whatsoeuer. FINIS.
