17835 99856697 22311
WITS COMMON WEALTH. THE SECOND PART. A Treasurie of Diuine, mo∣rall, and Phylosophicall similies, and sentences, generally vsefull. But more particularly published, for the vse of Schooles. By F. M. Master of Arts of both Vni∣uersities. LONDON, Printed by William Stansby, and are to be sold by Richard Royston, at his Shop in Iuie Lane. 1634.
To the Reader. TRiasunt omnia, is as old a father Time. All morall Phylosophie is diuided in∣to three parts; Ethicall, Oeconomicall and Politicall. All Law is reduced to three heads; to the Law of Nature, to ancient custome, and to the ordinances of men. And to insist in our wne state: All our Parliaments consist of three sorts of people, Nobi∣litie, Cleargie, and Comminaltie. And all our tryals and iudgements are de∣termined after three formes and man∣ners, by Parliament, by Battell, and by the great Assise: So all the force of wit may flow within three chanels, and bee contriued into three heads; into a Sentence, a Similitude, & an Example. Carolus said, that warres were main∣tained with victuals, money and Soul∣diours: so Wit is nourished with
Sentences▪ Similitudes, and Examples. And therefore as three things are necessarie for a Scholler; a Will, a Wit and a Booke: so I hold that Sen∣tences, Similitudes, and Examples, are as necessarie to vphold a Wit. Iulius Caesar vsed to carry three things about with him, when he followed the wars; his pen to write the whole course of the Romanes successe in their warres; his Bookes to find himselfe occupied, and his Launce to repulse his enemies: so he that would write or speake pithily, perspicuously, and persuasiuely must vse to haue at hand in readinesse, three kind of ornments and effectuall mo∣tiues, Sentences, Similitudes, and Examples. Wherefore as Pythagoras wished three things for himselfe; Health, Beautie and Riches: so I con∣sidering the necessitie and excellency of these three heads, haue long wished the accomishment & publication of them. And in truth what can I desire more, then to see the naked Truth arrayed in Sentences, fitting the tast of Phylo∣sophers; inuested in Similitudes, loued of Oratours; and approued by Exam∣ples,
the rule and leuell of the vnstayed and raging multitude? Saint▪ Augustine desired to see three things, Paulus Ae∣milius triumphing; Saint Paul Preach∣ing; and Christ vpon the Crosse; in the first, hee desired to see the glory of the earth; in the second the glorie of the Gospell▪ and in the third, the glorie of Heauen: so haue I long desired to see three things; Truthes soundnesse in Senences, her elegancie in Similituds, and approbation by examples. And now I haue my wished desire. Where∣fore I may reioyce for three things, as Philip King of Macedonia reioyced. Hee ioyed; that hee had wonne the Games at Olympus by the running of his Chariots; that his Captaine Par∣menio had ouerthrowne the Dardari∣ans; and that his wife Olympia had borne him a Sonne, called Alexander: So I exceedingly reioyce, and am glad at my heart, that the first part of Wits Common-wealth, contayning Sentences, hath like a braue Champion gloriously marched and got such renowned fame by swift running, equiualent with Philips Chariots, that thrice within
one yeare it hath runne thorow the Presse. If this second part of mine, called Wits Common-wealth contayning Si∣militudes, being a stalke of the same stemme, shall haue the like footman∣ship, and find the same successe, then with Parmenio I shall be the second in Philips ioy. And then Philips ioy will eft-soones be full, for his Alexander, whom not Olympia, but a worthy Scholler is conceiuing, who wil fill the third part of Wits Common-wealth with moe glorious Examples, then great A∣lexander did the world with valiant & heroicall exploits. Lampedo is iudged happy for euer, as Pliny writeth, for three causes; for that she was a Kings Daughter, a Kings Wife, and a Kings Mother. Thales to one that asked him, who was happy, said; Quicorpore sanus est, fortuna diues, animo eruditus: So I iudge him of an happy Wit, who is profound and substantiall in Sentences; eloquence and ingenious in Similituds; and rich and copious in Examples. The first part being published some yeares agoe, hath had the worlds fa∣uour and furtherance, which hath made
him so cranke, young and fresh, that thrice in one yeare hee hath renued his age, a spring more then is in fruitfull Saba. If this second part may find as much fauour and countenance with you gentle Reader, as Antimachus the Poet found with Plato, it shall bee instar¦omnium to me, and therewith conten∣ted, I shall willingly send this second with the first, to take what fortune Wit will send him. Which I hope and wish may bee as kindly accepted, as I doe heartily offer them. Which if I shall perceiue, neuer was Aristotle more gratefull to Alexander, nor Enuius to Scipio, nor Virgill to Au∣gustus, nor Horace to Mecaenas, nor Pliny to Vespasian, nor Plutarch to Traian, then I shall bee to you gentle Reader; whom I beseech the Highest to blesse with increase of vertuous qua∣lities in the mind, with augmentation of dignitie in the world, and with perpetuitie of eerlasting felicitie in Heauen. FRANCIS MERES▪
The Authours both sa∣cred and profane, out of which these similitude are for the most part gathered. A AEsopus▪ Agapetus Diaoconus. Albertus Nouicampianus. Ambrosius: Angelus Politianus. Anthonius. Appianus. Arnobius. Aristoteles. Athanasius. Athenagoras: Auicen. Augustinus. Authour actionis contra. Mariam Scotorum Reginam.
B Biblia sacra▪ Basilius. Beda. Bernardus Claruallensi. Benardus Iustinianus. Bernardus Scardaeonius, Bion. C Caelius Rodiginus. Caesarius Arclatensis. Chronicles of England. Chrysostomus. Cicero. Clemens Alexandrinus. Clemens Romanus. Climacus. Columella. Conradus Lycosthenes Rubeaquensis. Conradus Gesnerus. Cyprianus. Cyrillus Alexandrinus. Cyrillus Hierosolymitanus. D Damasenus. Demsthenes.
Dyctis Cretensis. Diadochus. Diogenes Laertius. Dion Chrysostomus. Dion Nicaeus. Dioscorides. Doctor Playere. Dorotheus Archimandrita. Dugo Philonius. E Elus Calentius: Epictetus. Epiphanius. Erasmus. Esayas Abbas. Eugubinus. Euripedes. Eusebius Emissenus. F Franciscus Patritius: Fulgentius. Fulgosus. G Geminianus: Gregorius Nazianzenus.
Gregorius Nyssenus: Gregorius Papa. Guerricus abbas. Gulielmus Peraldus. H Hermas seu pastor, nuntius penitentiae Hector Pitus. Heliodorus. Henricus de Hassia: Herodotus. Hesiodus. Hieronimus: Hilarius. Hippocrates. Homerus. Horatius▪ Hugh Broughto, I Iacobus de Valentia. Idiotae contemplationes: Ignatius. M. Iohn Fox. M. Iohn Lilly. M. Iohn Harington. Iohn Capgraue.
Iohannes Stobaeus. Iouianus Pontanus. Irenaeus. Isaac presbyter. Isidorus Clarius. Iustinus Phylosophus martyr. Iuuenalis. L Lanctantius. Laurentius Iustinianus. Leon Baptista Alberto. Lodouicus Granatensis. Lodouicus Viues. Lord de la Nouue. M Macarius. Mantuanus. Marcus heremita. Martialis. Mximus monachus. Mrcurius Trismegistus. Munster. N Nilus abbas.
Nilus monachus. O Olympiodorus. Optatus Mileuitanus. Origenes. Ouidius. P Palladius. Petrus Chysologus. Petrus Ramus. Pettie. Philipus Boroaldus: Philo Iudaus. Picus Mirandula. Pindarus. Plato. Plinius: Plutarchus. Polanchus. Pomponius Mela. Polybius. Procopius Gazeus. Propertius. Ptolomaeus. Pythagoras▪
Q Quinilianus: R Rabbi Moyses: M. Richard Hackluyt: Richardus Victorinus. Robert Greene. Rupertus. S Salonius. Saluianus. Sansonius. Saxo Grammaticus: Seneca. Sir Phillip Sidney. Sidonius Apollinaris. Solinus: Stella: Strabo. Synaesius. T Thalassiu Theodoretus Cyraeensis. Theodoricus.
Theodorus Studithus. Theophilus Alexandrinus. Theophilus Antiochenus. Theophrastus Philosophus. Tyrius Platonicus. V Valerius Maximus▪ Virgilius. W William Warner. X Xenophon.
WITS COMMON WEALTH. The second part. Of GOD. And of his vnity, simplicitie and perfection. AS it was a lesse hurt for some not to see at all, then to see ill, as Hercules did, who seeing his children slew them for enemies: so it is a lesser harme, and a lighter sinne, not to beleeue that there is a God at all, then to beleeue that hee is hurtfull. Plutrchus in Mo∣ralibus.
As they thinke worse of man, that say hee is wrathfull, and dangerous, than they that deny he liueth: so they thinke lesse amisse of God, who deny him to bee, than they that say he is bitter, hurt∣full, wrathfull, &c. Ibidem. As of the Hircanian fishes neither good nor euill is expected: so the Epi∣cures would haue vs neither to be trou∣bled with the feare of God, nor de∣lighted with his bounty. Ibidem. As an husbandman doth not cut the Thorne, before it hath budded; and as the men of Libia doe not tread vpon the branches, before they haue gathered the frankincense: so God doth not cut off the pestilent race of Kings, before some fruite may arise thereof, idem de vindicta diuina. A Schoole-masters and Philosophers are said (after the common manner of speaking) to descend to the capacitie of their schollers and hearers, which is not to bee vnderstood of any corporall des∣cending: so when God in the holy Scripture is said to descend, it is to be vnderstood after the common custome of speaking. Origenes lib. 3. contra Celsum.
As a Physition cureth many diseases, which hee is not partaker of: so God purgeth many sinfull soules, the staine of which hee is not any way touched with Ibidem. As in an army if there be many Gene∣rals there growes confusion, but when one doth rule, the battell being vnited becomes the stronger: so except there should bee but one God to order▪ this vniuerse, all would come to ruine and dissolution. Lactantius lib. 1. 3. & lib. dera. cap. 2, As there is but one Sunne that inligh∣teneth the day (whereupon Cicero saith, that it is called the Sun, because it ha∣ting obscured all the starres, appeareth one and alone:) so there is but one God, that illuminateth the world. Ibidem. lib. 2. 10. As nothing maketh to the perfection of vnitie, which is the beginning of umber (for when it was not the begin∣ing of number, it was perfect, and be∣ng made the beginning of number it is ot encreased:) so also God before the Creation was perfect, and after the Creation was not augmented, Iustinius
Martyrin responsionibus ad Orthodoxos, responsione ad quaest. 113. As the Sunne toucheth all things a∣like with his force and influence, yet all things doe not receiue it alike: so al∣though God (according to his essence) be present euery where with euery one yet hee is not alike present to others, as he is in his owne temple. Idem derecta Confession▪ siue de Sancta & coessentiah Trinitate. The Sun and the Moone cary a type of a great mystery. For the Sun after a cer∣taine manner representeth God, and the Moone man. As the Sunne by many degrees excelleth the Moone in power and glory: so God excelleth man. As the Sunne is alwayes perfectly seene, neither is at any time diminished: so God doth alwayes continue perfect, full of power, wisedome immortalitie, and all other good things. The Moone changeth euery moneth, and her power dyeth, shewing the condition of man; and af∣terwards is renewed and encreased, de∣signing the future resurrection of man∣kind. Theopilus Antiochenus, Libro 2. and Antolycum.
As God is more then all humane rea∣son: so it seemeth more then reason vnto me, that I know that all things are done of God. Saluianus lib. 3. de iudicio. As God is vnknowne vnto vs ac∣cording to his essence: so is he immeasu∣rable according to his Maiesty. Thalas∣sius ad Paulinum Presbyterum. As by the excellent structure of an house, wee gather that there hath beene an architect: so by the glorious frame of this World we conclude that there is a God. Philo Indaeus lib. 2. legis al∣legiarum. As the Sunne entreth into the dennes of Lyons, and into the cauernes of creep∣ing wormes without harme or polluti∣on: so God entreth into the dwellings of man without hurt, and penetrateth to the habitation of death without corrup∣tion. Macarius. hom. 11. That which the Sun is vnto the senses, that is God vnto the vnderstanding. The Sunne illuminateth the visible World; God the inuisible: the Sun illustrateth the corporall sight, God maketh glori∣ous intellectuall natures. And as the Sun is profitable both to the seers, and to
things seene, to the seers that they may see, to the other that they may be seene, and is the most beautifull among visible cretues: so God doth helpe both the vnderstanding, and things vnderstood; this, that it may vnderstand, the other that they may bee vnderstood, and he is the highest among intelligible things, Greg. Nazian, oratione funebri in A∣than. As Moses Serpent did eate vp the Ser∣pents of the Inchanters: so Gods power deuours and swallowes vp all the power and strength of man. As the Painter, who guideth the pen∣cill in the hand of his scholler, and so maketh a perfect picture, deserueth most prayse than his scholler: so to God, who worketh all good in vs, and effecteth euery good worke, belongeth greater honour and glory, than to man, Lodo∣uicus Granatensis lib. 1. Ducis Pecca∣torum. As a Wife chast and beautifull, who deserueth to bee loued alone, thinketh an inury to bee done vnto her, if shee bee loued together with others: so also doth God. Idem lib. de denotione.
God is inuisible and incompre∣hensible. AS there is nothing shriller than a voyce; nothing stronger than the winde; nothing more violent than a sa∣uour, and yet these being caried through the ayre vnto our senses, are not seene with our eyes, but are perceiued by o∣ther parts of our body: so God is not to bee comprehended of vs by sight, or by any other fraile sense, but is to be looked vpon with the eyes of our minde, wher wee see his wonderfull and excellent workes. Lactantius. lib. 7. cap. 1. As no man is able to measure the length or the breadth of Heauen, or to sound the depth of the Sea: so no man is capable of the incomprehensible Ma∣iesty of God. Epiphanius haeresi. 70. con∣tra Audianos. As wee are not able to know the es∣sence of any Starre: so wee are not able to reach to the knowledge of Gods es∣sence. Philo Iudaeus lib. 1. de Monar∣chia. As hee that endeuoureth to saile ouer the maine Ocean, and cannot, inforced
to turne backe the same way he went: so the ancient Phylosophers and Orators enquiring of the nature of God, failed in wit, and faultered in tongue, confes∣sing at the last that they could find none other thing, but that God was incom∣prehensible, and vnmeasurable. Chryso∣stomus hom. 28. operis imperfecti. As no man can measure the winde, or weigh the fire: so no man can attaine vn∣to the vnsearchable iudgements of the Lord. Euen as one standing vpon the shoare doth see the Sea, and yet doth not see the breadth and depth of it: so the Angels, and all the other elect, which bee in Heauen doe see God really, yet they cannot comprehend either the depth of his greatnesse, or the altitude of his et∣nitie. Lodouicus Granatensis lib. 1. Ducs peccatorum. Euen as there can be found nothing more bright and visible then the Sunne, yet nothing is lesse seene then it, by reason of the excellency of his bright∣nesse, and the weakenesse of our sight: so there is nothing in it selfe more intel∣ligible then God, yet there is nothing
in this life lesse vnderstood then he, for the same reasons. Ibidem. As the Painter, when he depainted the funeral solemnity of a certaine Kings Daughter, pourtrayed her kinsfolks with heauy countenances, and her Mo∣ther more sorrowfull then the rest, but when he came to delineate the Father, he did couer his face with an artificiall shadow, signifying thereby that his Art did here faile him: so when we speake of God, and the deepe mysteries of his di∣nitie, vnder awe of admiration, wee are to lay our hands on our mouthes, and to adore him with ineffable and chast silence. Ibidem. God is not the Authour of sinne. AS the Sunne, which is made to il∣lustrate, and enlighten things, can∣not obscure and darken them: so God who is righteousnesse it selfe, cannot doe vniusily. Origines lib. 3. contra Celsum: As the wicked doe naughtily entreate the goodnesse of God: so God doth vse to good ends the euill workes of the vn∣godly.
Eusebius Emissenus, hom. 4. de Epiphania. As the Smith is not the cause, why the iron rusteth, nor the progenitour of a liuely body, is the cause of the filth and blemishes it afterwards gathereth: so neither God; although he make and or∣der all things, is the cause of any sin and wickednesse in them. Mercurius Tris∣megistus in Pymandro. As it belongeth vnto God, being only good, to bee the cause of euery good worke: so it is vnmeete and incongruous, that hee should be supposed the authour of any euill. Fulgentius. lib. 1. As a Master that would try his ser∣ant, whether he be good or bad, setteth in place where hee may come to, sweet meats, & money, now if this seruant dee take any, his Master compelled him not to ill, but laid open his bad disposition, so also God giuing vnto men occasion to sin, if they will sinne, he doth not make them to sin, but manifesteth the malici∣ousnesse of their hearts. Chrisostomus homil. 46. operis imperfecti. As the Sun is not hurtfull, although it seemeth so vnto weake and bleare eyes;
and as hony is not bitter to the tast, al∣beit sicke folke deeme it so: so God s not euill nor carelesse of mens actionsi, albeit wicked and reprobate men thinke him so. Chrisost. hom. 7. in Ioan. As it is no wonderfull thing to make a golden Bracelet of gold, but it is ad∣mirable to make pure gold of base lead; so to make good of good is a thing of no such wonder, but to extract vertue out of vice, this is diuine. God out of the wic∣kednesse of the vngodly done against the righteous doth extract their profit, yea, out of our owne faultes hee doth produce our welfare, for by it he work∣eth in vs contrition, and by his fauour wee bring forth the fruits of repentance. Pintus in Eze. cap. 38. The patience and long animi∣ty of God. AS God patiently suffered Ionas to bee swallowed of the Whale, not that he should perish, but that he being cast vp againe, might more submit him∣selfe vnder the mighty hand of God, and more glorifie him; so God from the be∣ginning
hath beene patient in suffering man to bee swallowed vp of that great Whale, who was the authour of pre∣uarication, not that hee should finally perish, but that he might prepare him to seeke for that saluation of which Ionas was a signe. Irenaeus lib. 3. contra haereses cap. 22. An houshoulder doth not suddainly cast forth a faithfull seruant but desireth him to stay: so the Lord long suffereth, if any one hath beene faithfull vnto him. August. sermone 146. in Lucam. As Cities and Common-wealths doe nourish hangmen and executioners of iustice, by whom hey may exceute of∣fenders and malefactors, not praysing the office of the hangman, but tolerating his ministry for necessary vses: so God the great magistrate and justicer of this world doth suffer tyrants and oppres∣sors, as certaine hangmen, that by them he may take vengeance of vngodly men; and afterwards deliuereth the tyrants vnto torment; so God punished the Children of Israell by the Assyrians. Theodoretus ser. 6. de Gracarum af∣fectionum curation.
Gods Prouidence. AS a King when he would keepe any man safe from danger, placeth him in his palace, that not onely the wals of the King, but also the eyes of the King may defend him from his enemies, then the which guard none can be saser: so the heauenly King by the same prouidence doth defend his. Lodouicus Granatensis lib. 1. Ducis Peccatorum. As the Sun doth not onely illuminate Heauen, the Sea and the Earth, but shineth also thorow a window or a little reuice, and doth cast light into the in∣most place of the house: so the diuine prouidence doth not only preserue great things, but also respecteth the very least, that are in the Earth. Clemens Alexan∣dmus lib. 7. stromatum. As wee know that there are men in a Ship that directly sayles into an hauen, although we  none of them, by reason of the right guidance of it: so we know that God is the gouernour of all things by his prouidence, albeit we cannot see him with our carnall eyes. Theophilus Antiotheus lib. 1. ad Antolycum.
As an house decayeth without an in∣habiter; as a Ship perisheth without a Pylot; and as the body dyeth being for∣saken of the soule: so all things goe to wracke and ruine without the diuine prouidence. Lactantius lib. 3. cap. 20. As a Wagoner directeth his chariot▪ and a Pylot his Ship: so God guideth all his creatures. Philo. lib. de Sommijs. As we know that there is a soule in a mans body, by the motion of the body, albeit the soule be inuisible: so God by his prouidence and ordering of all things is apprehended; although by no eye hee can be discerned. Theophilus Antioche∣nus lib. 1. ad Antolycum. As an Eagle caryeth her young ones vpon her wings; and as a mother carieth her child in her armes: so God suppor∣teth his, Deuteron. cap. 1. & cap. 32. As God respecteth a little bird of the Sea called Alcyon, that in the midst of winter he sendeth a calme for fourteene dayes, (which the Mariners call Alcyo dayes) till she hath hatched and fledged her young ones, that the waues of the Sea may not trouble her, nor destroy her brood: so the diuine prouidence re∣gardeth
men in all their actions, who are made according to his Image; but especially hee defendeth his children, That they shall not be afraid for any ter∣rour by night, nor for the arrow that flyeth by day; for the Pestilence that walketh in the darkenesse, nor for the sickenesse that destroyeth in the nooe day, Isidorus Clarius orat. 50. tomi primi. As a skilfull Architect prouideth all things necessary for his building: so doth God for his creatures. Lactantius de opificio dei. cap 6. Mariners, when they see a storme ap∣proching, first call vpon God, that they may ariue safely in their wished hauen, then they take in their sailes, and prouid all things that are needfull: so we must trust to the diuine helpe and prouidence, yet so, that we adde also our owne in∣dustry, Plutarchus. The mercy and loue of God. AS a Father, that hath a lunatike and franticke Sonne, doth lament and greiue when hee heareth his Son to
talke wisely with him; and presently seeth him fall out of his wits and runne mad: so also our heauenly Father doth grieue and lament (if so it could be) when he seeth the corruption of our nature to bee so great, that in that very time, we are talking wisely with him in prayer, forthwith wee run here and there, and vage and wander throrow a thousand cogitations, Lodouicus Granatensis, lib de Deuotione. As when a young bird doth fall out of the nest, the damme flyeth after, and if a Serpent catch it to deuoure it, the dam flittereth about, and lamenteth her losse: so God doth seeke the workemanship of his hands, when it is lost, and doth bring it home: when it is wounded, he cureth it, and if it bee fallen, he lifteth it vp a∣gaine, Clemens Alexandrinus oratione ad gentes. As the rod of Moses, turned into a Serpent before Pharaoh, deuoured all the Magitians rods turned into Serpents: so the loue of God as a fire deuoureth the loue of all worldly things, Bernar∣dus sermo de Ascensione. As Kings set before the eyes of race.
riders and contenders, garlandes, pre∣ious garments and rich rewards, to the nd they should not faint: so doth God, y the words of his Prophets, as by the ands of many, set before his warriours, rownes of unmortality, that they with ourage may contend for them, Chrysost. om. 55. in Mathum. As the visible light is the Hench-man of the Suns brightnesse: so are the be∣efits of God, Heralds of the diuine ounty, Laurentius Iustinianus de spi∣itual animae resurrectione. As a sparke of fire falling into the vast Ocean is nothing in stay or appearance: our sinnes are as nothing, yea much esse then nothing, if they fall into the bottomelesse gulfe of the diuine mercy; for the Sea, although it be great, hath a limitation, but the clemency and mercy of God hath none, Chrysost. hom. 3. de nitentia. As bodyes well cured, are not onely restored to good health, but to a good habit: so God doth not onely purge our ules from vices, but indues them with ertues, Chrysost. hom. 22. ad Hbraeos. As a louing Father punishing him that
slew his Son, doth also breake the sword wherewith his Son was slaine: so God plaguing the Diuell for the downfall or Adam, inflicted also punishment vpon the Serpent, whom the Diuell vsed as the sword of his malice, Idem hom. God being desirous to signifie his loue vnto vs, doth liken it to the loue o Hens, to the care of Fathers, and to the pittie of Mothers. Chrysost. in Psal. 24. As a drop of water, is nothing com∣pared to the Sea, and as a candle light is nothing to the brightness of the Sun▪ so neither are our misdeeds to the Di∣uine clemency and bountie. Chrysostom, hom. 13. The iustice of God. AS by the quantity and greatnesse of one arme, we gather the quan∣titie and greatnesse of the other: so by the greatnesse of the arme of the diuine mercy, wee measure also the quantitie of the diuine justice, seeing that there is one and the same measure of them both. Lodouicus Granatensis, lib. 1. ducis pec∣catorum.
As dust is scattered before a storme, as sand is wracked togither by a tempest, as the morning dew vanisheth at the Sunnes heate: so doe the wicked before the presence of the diuine iustice. Nazi∣azenus oratione 2. contra Iulianum. As a master of a family will not suffer himsefe to bee derided and contemned of his seruants, but punisheth their misdemeanours: so God, whose house this whole world is, and whose ser∣uants all men are, will not suffer him∣selfe to be blasphemed and reuiled, but will take vengeance on the offenders, Lactantius de ra Dei. cap. 27. As a Iudge inflicteth punishment vp∣on malefactours, least others dreaming of impunitie should grow to the same liberty: so dealeth God with finners, that others may be terrifyed and amend. Origenes Homil. 9. in Ieremiam. As Physitions meete with some disea∣ses before they appeare; so God punish∣eth certaine offences before they bee effected. Plutarch. in Moralib. As some riuers doe suddainely hid themselues vder the Earth, yet are car∣ried thither, whither they tend: so the
wrath of God although hid and se∣cret, bringeth at the last offenders into extreame calamities, ibidem. As wee both loue and feare a Prince, as angry with the wicked, but pleased with the godly; so also wee loue and feare God. ibidem. As God is angry with them that imi∣tate him in his thundring and lightning, and casts them into Hell, as he did sa∣mneus: so also is hee angry with the lofty and proud, who imitate his great∣nesse, but doe not expresse his good∣nesse. ibidem. As the paine of Child-birth taketh a Woman wheresoeuer it finds her, neither can shee flie from it: so the ene∣mies of the Church doe tast of the diuine vengeance, wheresoeuer it seemeth good to God, neither can they auoide it. Fulgentius in Psalmum. 48. As it is a fearefull sight to see a Ship fraughted with Marchandize tos∣sed with a tempest in the middest of the Sea, so that the waues doe couer it, and beate by violence the sides in sunder, whereby the Marriners cry out, and are at their wits end: so it is much more
horrible, if it could bee seene with humane eyes, when as God doth plague a guiltie conscience in the middest of vanitie and ambition. Fulgentius in Psalmum 48. CHRIST. AS Christ was gentle and milde in his first comming: so will hee bee hard and inexorable in his second. Lo∣douicus Granat. lib. 1. Ducis peccatorum. In Dodona the Well of Iupiter be∣ing cold, doth put out lights put in∣to it; but being extinguished, if thou puttest them in, they are lighted: so Christ, if hee touch one burning with concupiscences, doth coole and asswage his heate, but if he touch one cast downe and broken in heart, he rayseth him vp, and maketh him stand. Prior pars si∣militudinis ex libro 2. Plinii cap. 106. As the herbe Panacea, called of A∣pothecaries Oppopaax, hath a remedy for all diseases: so the death of Christ is powerfull against all hurtfull affecti∣ons, and dangerous desires. Prior pars simil. ex lib. 25. Plin. cap. 4.
As Christs coate was without wem: so his life was without crime. As without the Sunne, there should be continuall night: so without Christ there should bee euerlasting destructi∣on. Clemens Alexandrinus ad Gentes. As an Husband-man doth cast his seede not in this corner and in that cor∣ner of his land, but casteth it euery where throughout his whole land: to Christ commendeth the doctrine of piety to rich and poore, learned and ignorant, to the strong and weake, albeit hee knoweth what successe it shall haue. Chrysostom Hom. 45. in Matthew. As the soule is the life of the bodie: so Christ is the life of the soule. Petrus Chrysologus sermone 19. As at the comming of the Diuell all Nations mourned: so at the comming of the Lord Iesus all people reioyced. Arnobius in Psal. 46. As an aduocate pleading for an of∣fender, taketh vpon himselfe the cause and faults of him, whom hee patroni∣zeth, as if they were his owne, when notwithstanding hee is guiltlesse: so
Christ being without sinne, tooke vp∣n him our transgressions, and suffered r them, as if they had beene his owne. Chrysostome Sermone aduersus haereti∣s. tom. 5. As in a red hote sword there are ctions and perfections of two natures, e yron cuts, and the fire burnes: so Christ there is two Natures his Di∣nity and Humanitie, and both haue eir actions and perfections. Damas∣ lib. 3. cap. 15. de fide. As the Vnicorne by touching poy∣ned water with his Horne maketh wholesome, whereupon Naturalists y, that before hee drinkes, he put∣eth his Horne into the water: so Christ y his Humanitie hath made the poy∣ned waters wholesome, and hath urified our soules from infection. Ia∣obus de Valentia in Psalmum. 42. As Gold and a Pearle make one Ring: God and man make one Christ. Themistocles hauing offended Philip he King of Macedonia, and could no ay appease his anger, meeting his oung Sonne Alexander, tooke him in is armes, and met Philip in the face.
Philip seeing the smyling countenaun of the childe, was well pleased wit Themistocles: euen so, if through th manifold sinnes and heynous▪ offences thou prouoke the heauy displeasure thy God, insomuch as thou shalt tremb for horrour, take his only begotten an wel beloued Sonne Iesus in thine armes and then hee neither can, nor willi angry with thee. It is written, that the blood of Lambe doth appease the cruell rage a fierce Lyon: so the blood of the in maculate Lambe Christ doth pacifie th wrath of God. When the Brethren of Ioseph, h sold him to the Ismaelites, to pacifie the Father Iacob, they brought his Coate to bee bloudyed: so if wee will appea God our Father, wee must bring v him the bloody Garment of his Son The Adamant though it be so ha that nothing can bruse it, yet if t warme blood of a Goate be powred vp on it, it bursteth: so although the hea of the Atheis and vnbeleeuer bee hard, that neither reward nor reueng can mollifie it, so stoute that no persw∣sion
can breake it, yet if the grace of God purchased by the blood of Christ, doe but once touch it, it renteth in sunder, and is conforced to a acknoledge an omni∣potent and euerlasting Iehouah. Astrologers say that the Sun passeth through these three signes, Leo, Virgo, and Libra: so the Sonne of righteous∣nesse, Christ Iesus in the Law came as a Lyon, threatning and destroying; in the time of grace hee came into the lap of a Virgine in great humilitie, and at the day of iudgemene he will come in Libra to giue to euery one according as hee hath deserued. As Theseus being giuded by Ariad∣nes threed, which shee tyed at the en∣trance into Dedalus Labyrinth, es∣caped all the danger and errour of it: e∣uen so wee must make Christ the doore, by which wee must enter into the La∣byrinth of all our affaires, and tye Ra∣abs threed at this entrance, and fol∣low it all the way, that so we may bee safe, and goe in, and out, and find pasture. As the life of Christ is the life of life: so the death of Christ is the death death.
It is reported that the Lybard vseth a strange kind of policie to the Ape. He ly∣eth down vpon the ground as though he were starke dead, which the Apes seeing come altogether, and in despight skip vpon him. This the Libard beareth pa∣tiently till he thinks they haue wearied themselues with their sporting. Then sodainly he likewise leapes vp & catckes one in his mouth, and in each foote one, which immediately he killeth and de∣noureth: so Christ being laid in the dust, the Diuell insulted ouer him and tram∣pled vpon him, but hee like a liuely, Libard, started vp on Easter day, asto∣nished the Souldiours set to keepe him which were the Diuels Apes, and made them lyelike dead men. As blind Sampson by his death killed the Phlistins, when they were playing the Apes in mocking and mowing at him: so Christ by his death destroyed the Diuell. Scaliger writeth, that the Chamelion when hee espies a Serpent taking shade vnder a tree, climes vp into that tree, and lets downe a thread, breathed out of his mouth as small as a Spiders threed, at
the end whereof there is a little drop as leare as any pearle, which falling vpon he Srpents head kils him: so Christ liming vp into the tree of his Crosse, ets downe a threed of blood issuing out f his side, like Rahabs red threed hang∣g out of her window, the least drop hereof being so pretious and so peere∣sse, falling vpon the Serpent head kils im. The wild Bull of all things cannot ide any red colour, therefore the hun∣r for the nonce standing before a Tree, uts on a red garment, whom when the ull sees, hee runnes hard at him, as ard as he can driue, but the Hunter ipping aside, the Buls hornes sticke st in the Tree, as when Dauid slipped side, Sauls speare stucke fast in the wal Christ standing before the Tree of his rosse, puts on a red garment dipt and yed in his own blood, as one that com∣eth with red garments from Bozr, erefore the Diuell and his Angels, like ild Bulles of Bazan runne at him, but ee shifting for himselfe, their Hornes cke fast in his Crosse, as Abraham am by his Hornes strucke fast in the
briers; thus is the Diuell caught and killed. A Dragon indeed kils an Elephant, yet so as the Elephant falling downe kils the Dragon with him; an Elephant kils Eliazar, yet so as Eliazar falling down, kils the Elephant with him: so the Deuil killing Christ was killed of him. When Mahomet the second of that name, besieged Belgrade in Sruia, one of his Captaines at length got vp vpō the wall of the Citie with Banner displaied. A noble Bohemian espying this, ran to the Captaine, and clasping him fal about the middle, asked one Capifran standing beneath, whether it would be any danger of damnation to his soule▪ if he should cast himselfe downe head long with the Dog (so he tearmed t the Turke) to be slaine with him. Cap∣stranus answering that it was no dange at all to his soule, the Bohemian forth with tumbled himselfe downe with th Turke in his armes, and so by his own death only, saued the life of all the Citi so the Deuill like the great Turke, b siging not onely one Citie, but euen mankind, Christ alone like this nob
Bohemian encountred with him. And seeing the case was so, that this Dog the Deuill, could not be killed starke dead, except Christ dyed also, therefore he made no reckoning nor account of his life, but gaue himselfe to death for vs, that hee onely dying for all the people, by his death our deadly enemie might for euer be destroyed. As it was bootlesse for Golias to bran∣dish his speare against Dauid; so it little aailed the Deuill to shake his speare likewise in the hand of the Souldiour a∣gainst the heart of Christ. As Dauid hauing heard Golias prate and talke his pleasure, when they came to the point, at the first stroke ouerthrew him: so Christ with that very selfe same speare, which gaue him a little venny in comparison, or (if it be lawfull for mee to speak) but a phillip on the side, which was soone after recured, gaue the Deuil a deadly wound in the forehead, which with all his pawes he shall neuer be able to claw off. As Dauid onely with his sling slew Golias: so Christ onely by his death, and by the power of his Crosse, which
is the sling of Dauid, did conquer and subdue the Deuill. The Palme tree, though it haue many waights at the top, and many snakes at the roote, yet still it sayes, I am neither oppressed with the waights, nor di∣stressed with the snakes; Penny royall be∣ing hung vp in the larder house, buds his flowers, and Noahs Oliue tree being drowned vnder the water, yet keeps her greene branch; and Aarons rod being clung and dry, yet brings forth rie Almonds, and Moses bramble bush being set on fire, yet shines and is not consumed: so Christ the true Palm tree, though all the iudgements of God, and all the sinnes of the world, like vn∣supportable waights were laid vpon him, yea though the cursed Iewes stood beneath like venemous snaks hissing and biting at him, yet hee was neither so op∣pressed with them, nor so distressed with these, but that euen vpon his Crosse hee did most flourish, when he was most afflicted. The Phenix though fitting in his neast among the hote spices of Arabia he bee burnt to ashes, yet still he saies, I die not,
but old age dyeth in mee: so Christ the true Phenix, though lying in his graue among the hot spices, wherewith Nicho∣demus embalmed him, he was neuer like to rise from death to life againe, yet hee dyed not, but mortalitie dyed in him, and immortality so liued in him that e∣uen in his Sepulchre he did most liue, when he seemed most to be dead. Epaminondes being sore wounded in fight, demanded of his souldiours stan∣ding by, whether his enemies were o∣uerthrowne or no. They answered yea. Then whether his buckler were whole or no. They answered also I. Nay then (sayes he) all is well. This is not the end of my life, but the beginning of my glo∣ry. For now your deere Epaminondes dying thus gloriously shall rather bee borne againe then buried: so Christ was sore wounded, but his enemies, death and the Deuill were ouerthrowne and spoyled: His Buckler, which was his Godhead, was whole and vntonched. Therefore there was no harme done. His death was no death, but an exaltation vnto greater glory. As snow couereth the ground when
it is ragged and deformed: so Christ with his coat without seame, couereth our sinnes, and though they were as ctim∣son, yet he maketh them white as snow. As Gedeons sleece when it was moist, the earth was dry but when it was dry the earth was moist: so when Christs fleece was moist as a greene Tree, then were all we drie like rotten stickes, but when his fleece was drie, all the blod and water being wrong out of his per∣cious side, then were we moistned with his grace. As Iacob trauiling towards Haram, when hee had laide an heape of stones vnder his head, and taken a nap by the way, was much reuiued with it after his redious iourney: so Christ trauailing towards Heauen, when he had slept a little in that stony Sepulchre, which was hewen out of a Rocke, liued then most Princely after his painefull passion. As Iona was in the Whales belly three dayes and three nights: so & so was the Son of man in the bowels of the earth, yet he had no more hurt then Ionas had. As Daniell was not hurt of the hungry Lyons: so Christ was not hurt either of
the terrours of death, or of the horrours of Hell. As Adam and Eue both in one day were expelled out of Paradice about noone when the winde blew: so Christ and the theefe both in one day were re∣ceiued into Paradice, yea both in one houre of the day, about the sixt houre, that is about twelue a clocke in the day time. As Peters shadow gaue health to the sicke: so Christs shadow giueth life to the dead. As Elizeus being dead, raised vp one from the dead: so Christ being dead, was a Physition to the dead. Ply reporteth, that there was a dyall set in Campus Martius, to note the sha∣dowes of the Sun, which agreeing very well at the first, afterwards for thirty yeares together did not agree with the Sun: so all the time of those thirty, yea three and thirty yeares that Christ liued in his humiliation heere vpon earth, you might haue seene such a dyall, in which time the shadow of the dyall did not agree with the shining of the Sun, but thanks be to God all the better for vs.
As the Sunne went backward ten de∣grees in the dyall, when Ezechas went forward fifteene degrees in his life, hee liued fifteene yeares longer: so the going of this Sun Iesus Christ tenne degrees backward, hath healed all our sicknesse, and set vs a thousand degrees forward▪ and infinitely aduanced vs by his death to euerlasting life. As Rachel dyed her selfe in child birth to bring forth her Son Beniamin aliue: so Christ dyed to bring vs into euerlast∣ing life. As when many birds are caught in net, if a Pellican, or any other great bird that is among them get out, all the res that are little ones follow after: so Christ as a great Bird hauing broken through the net of death, all wee escape with him. As far as the Tree of life excelleth the Tree of Knowledge of good and euill: so far the crosse of Christ excelleth the Tree of life. As hony being found in a dead Lyon, the death of the Lyon was the sufte∣nance of Sampson: Christs gall is our hony, and the bitter death of Christ by
reason of his righteousnesse is the sweete life of man. As Hammons face was couered when he was condemned to dye: so the Suns face was couered, when Christ was condemned to dye. As Dauid rent his garment when he heard of Ionathans death: so the Temple rent his vaile when it heard of Christs death. As the King of Niiuy threw vp dust vpon his head when he and his subiects were appointed to dye: so the Graues o∣pened and threw vp dust vpon their Heads when Christ was appointed to dye. As Iob cut his haire when he heard of his Childrens death: so the stones were cutt in peeces and cloue asunder, when they heard of Christs death. As there were foure riuers in the ter∣restriall Paradise, which watered the whole earth: so in Christ, who is our Paradice, there are found foure foun∣tains. The first fountaine is mercy to wash away our sinnes with the water of remission. The second is of wisdomc to asswage our thirst with the water
of discretion. The third of grace to water the plants of good works with the dew of deuotion. And the fourth fouutaine is to season our affections with the waters of emulation. Bernar dus sermone prima de natiuitate Christi. As the Sunne exceedeth all celestiall lights in quantity, brightnesse, dignity and power: so Christ excelleth all the Saints in goodnesse, wisedome, honour, and might. F. Ioannes à S. Geminio lib. 1. de clo & elemntis. cap. 91. Olimpus a mountaine of Macedonia is so hye, that the clouds are said to be vn∣der it, for it is of such an altitude, that neuer any wind toucheth the top of it, neither any grosnesse of ayre ascendeth to it, which the Phylosophers ascend∣ing, that they might view the courses and motions of the stars, could not liue there, vnlesse they caried with them spunges full of water, that so, by the at∣raction of water they might draw grosserayre, as it is reported in history: so Christ hath so farre exceeded all the Saints in excellencie of life, all the whirle-winds of passions and tribula∣tions in the altitude of patience, and all
men in the height of wisedome, so that the Phylosophers could not reach vnto the height of his diuinity, but by spunges, that is, by creatures full of the water of celestiall wisdome. Ibidem. As the hearbe Dracontea hath the si∣militude of a Serpent, but is without venim, yea it is most contrary to Ser∣pents, and especially to vipers: so Christ had the shape of sinfull flesh, but he was altogether without sin, yea he is most opposit to it, and especially to the Deuill. Idem. lib: 3. de vegetabilibus & plantis cap. 85. As the flower is the Medium be∣tweene the branch and the fruit: so Christ is the mediatour betweene man and God. Ibidem. As a Hen doth gather her chickens vnder her wings, doth defend them a∣gainst the Kite, and doth feed them with the meate shee findeth: so Christ doth gather his elect vnder the wings of his protection in one faith and vnity of the Church, doth defend them against the raging of the world, and doth feed them not onely with materiall bread, but with the spirituall food of his heauenly
Doctrine. Idem. lib. 4. de natalibus & volatilibus, cap. 98. The Holy GHOST. AS Iron cast into the fire doth parti∣cipate of the nature of fire; his owne substance still remayning: so man by the working of the holy Ghost, is transformed into God, yet still remain∣ing man, being a partaker of the diuine purity and noblenesse, as he was a par∣taker, who said: I doe not now liue, but Christ liueth in me. Ludov. Granat. lib▪ I. duc. peecat. As oyle among all liquid substances is the fittest too preserue light, and to cure wounds: so the diuine vnction of the holy Ghost doth cure the wounds of our will, and doth illuminate the dark∣nesse of our vnderstanding. Ibidem. As hee that is ouercome with much wine looseth the vse of his fences, neither differeth much from a dead man, by reason of the strength of the wine: so when any one is full of the heauenly wine of the holy Ghost, he dyeth to the world and hath all his sences with al
their desires shackled and fettred. ibid: As water set ouer a fire, when it doth wax hot, as if it had forgot the own pro∣per nature, swelleth aloft, imitating the nature and lightnesse of the fire: so also the soule being inflamed with the hea∣uenly fire of the holy Ghost, is exalted aboue it selfe, and caried vp to heauen, whence that fire is sent. ibidem. As the Sun shineth of his owne ac∣cord; the day is enlightned; a fountaine streameth; and a showre falleth: so the heauenly Spirit infuseth it selfe. Cyprian▪ As the soule infused into the body, is sufficient to make all the members li∣uing, and to moue and direct them vnto their senerall offices and functions, which are many and diuers: so the grace of the holy Ghost which is a forme su∣pernaturall and diuine when it once hath ented into the soule, is sufficient to moue and direct it to the acting and exe∣cuting of all the duties of a spirituall life. Lod. Gran. in lib. de. deuotione. As it is not possible that the earth should fructifie onely by raine, except the wind doth blow vpon it: so it is not possible that onely doctrine should
correct a man, except the holy Ghost worke together in his heart. Chrysost▪ hom. 20. oper. imperf. As the figures of things are not seene in a blemished glasse: so a man cannot receiue illumination from the holy Ghost, except he cast away sin and the lusts of the flesh. Basilius de spiritu sanct▪ As fire is not diminished, albeit many candels be lighted at it; and as Science is not impaired, although it maketh many men skilfull: so the holy Ghost is neuer a whit impouerished, although they b innumerable that participate of his graces. Philo Iudaeus lib. de gigantibus. As one and the same showre discend∣ing vpon the world, appeareth white vpon thornes, red vpon roses, purple vp∣on the hyacinth, and of other colours falling vpon diuers and sundry coloured things: so the holy Ghost being one, and not any way diuisible, doth diuide his grace to euery one as he pleaseth, i in one he is wisdome an other sanctifi∣cation, in an other prophecy &c. and yet the same Spirit. Cyrillus Ierosoly. rt. catechesi 16. As the body of the flesh is none other
thing but flesh: so the gift of holy Ghost none other thing but the holy Ghost. ug. lib. 15. de trinitate cap. 19. As the soule doth giue life to all the arts and members of mans body, aking the eye to see, the eare to heare, nd so in the rest: so the holy Ghost oth giue life to the members of Christs ody, which is his Church, Idem. lib. de ratia noui testamenti. As heate commeth from fire: so the oly Spirit proceedeth from the Father. aschasius de Spiritu sancto. As Aaron is called Christ, and Dauid nd Saule, and others also, and yet ere is but one true Christ: so an Angell called a Spirit, and our soule is called Spirit, and the wind is called a Spirit, nd there is an vncleane Spirit, and yet here is peculiarly, but one holy Spirit, Cyrillus Ierosolymit. catechesi. 16. The holy Ghost is campared to fire, o a Doue; to a cloude; and to a winde. To fire, because he doth enlighten our nderstanding, and exalteth it form the arth to Heauen. To a Doue, because he aketh vs simple, gentle, peaceable, and riends to all. To a Cloud, because hee
doth refresh and coolevs, and defend from the heat of the flesh, and do asswage and moderate the madnesse an fury of our passions. And to a veheme and strong wind, because hee moue and inclineth our will to good. Lodo cus Granatensis lib. 1. ducis peccatoru▪ HEAVEN. EVen as King Assuerus in his impe∣riall City of Susan shewed to hi Princes all his Maiesty, cost, and royal magnificence: so the great King of King in his imperiall and royall City o Heauen doth shew to his elect the vn mesurablenesse of his riches, wisdome liberality and goodnesse, and the glory and excellency of his Maiesty. Lod nicus Granatensis lib. 1. Ducis pecca∣torum. As no man entred into the pallace o King Assuerus cloathed in sacke clothe it is lawfull for no man to enter into th pallace of God with a seruile garment but he must be cloathed with a wedding garment, that is, adorned and beautifi with true loue & charity▪ idem in eodl lib▪
As a Captaine when he goeth forth to ight, or when he begirdeth any defenced astle, deuiseth many kind of stratagems for the obtaining of it, rayseth fortresses, maketh bulwarks, and vseth many in∣entions to assault and batter it, that at he length he may conquor it: so by all eanes we must labour and endeuour, hat wee may get vnto our selues that most excellent place and chiefest good: for it is written; The Kingdome of hea∣uen suffereth violence, and the violent ake it by force. Lodouicus Granatensis n lib. de deuotione. As the Patriarch Iacob thought his eauen yeares seruice short in respect of he great loue he bare to Rachell: so we should thinke all the tribulations of this world short in respect of the great loue wee should beare to Heauen, which is more beautifull than any Rachell. Idem n suis Meditationibus. As a traueller goes far from his coun∣ry and family, yet is desirous to returne hither againe: euen so we as banished from this world, should long for our eturue to Heauen, our true borne coun∣ry Stella de contemptu mundi.
As the' pretious pearles called Vnion: albeit they be bred in the Sea, yee hau more assinitie with Heauen, the sem∣blance of which they doe represent: so a godly and a generous mind doth more depend of Heauen whence he fetcheth his originall, than of the earth, in whic be liueth. As a house excelleth a few ashes, as Citie exeelleth a house, a prouince a Citie, the Romane Empire, a prouince, and all the earth the Romane Empire, and the whole circumference the poin of a circle: so farre incomparabl Heauen extendeth and excelleth th comparison and proportion of all other things. Cyrillus Ierosolymitanus c techesi. 6. As there is extreame darknesse i hell: so there is glorious light in Hea∣uen. Basilius lib. hexa. As a sphericall figure is most capable containe things: so Heauen being of th same figure is most capable of all ioy and blessednesse. As there are ten commandements i Moses Tables: so according to mo∣derne Astrologers, there are ten sphere
Heauen. Luna, Mercurius, Venus, Sol, Mars, Iupiter, Saturnus, Caelum stella∣m, Caelum cristaellinum, siue aqueum, nd Primum mobile. ANGELS. EVen as the elder brethren doe carry their younger brethren, when they ee but little ones, in their armes, and doe keepe them with great care and prouidence: after the same manner the Angels, which are as our elder brethren do tende and keepe vs, who are as their younger brethren, and little ones, and doe beare vs in their hands. Ludouicus Granatens. lib de deuotione. As Angels are pure Spirits: so also pure worship and spirituall seruice is required of them. ibidem. As caelum crystallinum siue aqueum is not seene of vs: so Angels in their owne nature are not visible vnto vs. F. Ioannes a S. Geminiano libro. 1. de caelo & Ele∣mentis. cap. 5. As the fire is of a more subtile sub∣stance than any other element: so Angels are of a more immateriall sub∣stance,
than any other creature. ibidem. As the fire is moued of Sol and Mars, as saith Rabbi Moyses: so Angels are moued of God, who alwayes attend his will. ibidem. As the fire cannot be touched by rea∣son of the heate: so Angels cannot bee touched by reason of their immateri∣alitie. ibidem. As the fire is a powerfull element for deuastation: so are Angels in executing the wrath of God. As a Physition leaueth his patient when hee is past cure: so the Angels leae vs, when we fall into desperation. Origenes hom. 2. in Hieremiam. As there are powers vnder earthly Kings for ordering of state matters: so there are principalities vnder the hea∣uenly King for executing of his will, and setting forth his prayse. Epiphanius haeresi. 4. As our friends lament for vs, when as by reason of sicknesse and weaknesse, we can receiue no meate: so holy Angels doe mourne for their soules, that are not fed with celestiall and spirituall foode. Macarius hom, prima.
As smoke banisheth Bees, and silthy auours driue away Doues: so the cor∣upted stinch of sinne driueth away the ngell, that is the keeper of our life. asilius in Palme. 33. As in martiall affaires some Souldiers re appointed to administer and bestow onours, and some to execute vengeance nd punishment: so holy Angels are ent to the good and preseruation of an, but Deuils are sent to punish the icked and rebellious. Chrisostom. hom. de patientia Iob. As after death there is no repentance uailable vnto man: so after the fall of ngels there was no place of repen∣nce left vnto them. Damascen lib. 2. fide cap. The Word of God. AS the same Manna was whole∣some food vnto some, and corrup∣on and wormes vnto others: so the me Word of God is saluation vnto me, and destruction vnto others. Orig. om. 3. in numeros. Wine much comforteth those that be
sound, and as the Scripture saith, i maketh merry the heart of man, but i e drinke it that hath a feuer, it bringeth danger and destruction vnto him: so the Word of God bringeth life vnto some, aud death vnto others. Idem. homil. 5. in Iudic. As a Lanthern doth lighten our steps: so the word of God doth illuminate on vnderstandings. Hilarius in Psal. 118. A Tree by continuall moysture doth grow to a great height: so a soule that i coutinually watered with the diuine Word, commeth to the perfection o Vertue. Chrisostomus hom. de Anno & Samuelis educatione. As to be hungry is a signe of bodily health: so to hunger and thurst after the Word of God is a token of spirituall health. Idem hom. 15. in Genesin. As a sword doth cut off the flesh: so the diuine Word doth cut off carnall concupisences. Ibidem Homil. 8. operi imperfecti. Raine that fals vpon a stone, makes it moist without, but it continues dri within because the moisture doth no penetrate into it: so the Word of God
falling vpon a worldly man, doth make a sound in his eares, but doth not peirce his heart. idem. hom. 31. As euery member receiueth nourish∣ment from the stomacke, and doth con∣uert it, according to the nae of the member, as that which the liuer recei∣ueth, becomes bloud, that which the gall receiueth, becomes choler, that which the lungs receiue, becomes phlegme, and that which passeth into the paps becomes milke: so all receiue the Word of God vttered by his Mi∣nister and Preacher, but euery one doth conuert it according to the disposition of his heart, they that haue good hearts, conuert it into life, peruerse hearts turne it into anger and choler, others into milke, that is, into sweet loue, others into hatred, as into hurtfull phlegme, which is to be spued. v idem hom. 3. As Iron doth mollifie the hard earth: so the Word of God doth mollifie the hardnesse of mans heart. idem hom. 40. Wholesome medicines and antidotes being taken without the direction of a Physitian, oftentimes become deadly and dangerous, so the Word of God
being taken without the magistery of Gods Preacher, without direction of his Minister, & beyond the analogy of faith, becomes mortall and deadly vnto the hearer, reader, or receiuer. Petrus Chrysologus sermone 156. de Epiphania. As the body is nourished by earthly food: so is the soule by the food of the heauenly Word: Caesarius Arelatensis Hom. 22. Swine doe tread Roses vnder their feete, and seeke for dirt, they refuse partriges and delicats, and doe greedily hunt after Acornes and other swash: so franticke worldlings haue no taste of the word of God, but most greedily gape after the vncertaine riches of this World. Hector Pintus in cap. 3. Ezehiel. As hee that would set vpon his ene∣mies, or defend himselfe from them, doth need a sword, by handling of which hee may smite them: so hee that would tryumph ouer the World, the flesh and the Deuill, the terrible enemies of his soule, must carry in his hands, that is, in his workes, the Word of God. Ibidem. There is a water in Macedonia, that being drunke of Sheepe doth make
them white: so the doctrine of Christ being receiued into the soules of be∣leeuers doth make them cleane and pure F. Ioannes a S. Geminiano libro. 1. de cael & elementis cap. 23. As raine doth purifie the Are: so the doctrine of the Word of God doth mundifie the heart of man. ibidem. As the light doth shew vnto vs the formes and shapes of things: so the Word of God doth manifest vnto vs the formes aud fashiones of vices and vertues. Idem. libro. 1. de caelo & Ele∣mentis. cap. 82. As sore eyes cannot abide the light; so wicked persons cannot abide the Word of God. ibidem. As seed doth draw vnto it the moi∣sture of the earth, so the Word of God doth draw vnto it the affection of the soule. Idem, lib. 3. de. vegetabilibus & plantis, cap. 79. As an arrow doth pierce the body, so the word of God doth pierce and pene∣trate the soule. idem, lib. 9. de artificibus, & rebus artificialibus, cap. 79. As a medicine doth purge, water was, and raine make fruitfull, so the
Word of God doth purge the soule from corrupt affections, doth wash it cleane from filthy sinnes, and maketh it fruit∣full in good workes, Ibidem. As the want of meate doth famish the body; so the want of Gods Word doth pine the soule, idem, lib. 1. de actibus & moribus humanis, cap. 82. The precious stone Draconites can neither bee polished, nor admitteth any Art, being otherwise of it selfe elegant, faire, and translucent, so the holy word of God, hath his splendour of himselfe, neither doth admit the affected Art of Phisosophy or Rhetoricke. The Ceder and Iuniper being annoin∣ted with oyle, doe neither feele wormes, nor are subject to rottennesse: so that soule that is once endued with the iuyce of the diuine Word, doth feele no cor∣ruption of this World. The leaues of the Tree Rhododendre are poyson vnto beasts, but medicine for men against Serpents: so the Word of God is wholesome nourishment vnto wise, sober & discreet men, but to fooles and wicked men it ministreth an occasi∣on of heresie and impiety.
As it was foolish to leaue the foun∣taines, and follow theriuers: so is it foo∣lish to leaue the Holy Scriptures, and follow Quodlibetaries, and the quirks of Sophisters. As Alexander the great commanded, that none should paint him but Apelles, none should cast him in any metall but Lysippus, or engraue his picture in any lewell, but Pyrgoteles, being excellent Artificers; so it is not meete that the Word of God should be preached of e∣uery one, nor that vertue should bee praysed of euery lewd aud idle headed felow. Wedoe not neglect the gold, though it lie in the durty earth; nor the pure coyne, for that it commeth out of the homely presse; nor the precious stone Aetites, which is found in the filthy neasts of the Eagle; nor the precious Gemme Draconites, though it be euer taken out of the head of the poysoned Dragon: so wee must not lesse estimate or reuerence of the Word of God, though it be vttered of a sinfull man, or pronounced out of an earthen vessell. As Iron gathers rust if it be not vsed,
so the soule gathers corruption, if it be not conuersant in reading the Holy Scriptures, Augustin. qust. 120. ex v∣troque testamento. As Frankensence doth not smell, ex∣cept it be put into the fire; and as must∣ard seed doth not bite, except it bee ground to mustard: so no sentence of the Holy Scripture doth shew his force, except it bee boyled and concocted in the heart, Idem in speculo paceatorum. As God is closed in the Heauens: so is hee hid in the Scriptures. And as all men see this corporall Heauen, but doe not see God dwelling in it; so all men read the diuine Scriptures, but all men vnderstand not the God of truth laid downe in the Scriptures, vnlesse he be so baptized, that hee receiue the Holy Ghost. Christstom. hom. 4. oper. imperf. As Iacob stroue with the Angell in whom God was, who confessed him∣selfe to bee ouercome: so the louer of the Word of God must striue with the Scripture in which God is, and which is of God, neither let it passe from him vntill he hath sucked from it health and comfort for his soule. Rupertus lib. 6.
As in a glsse we see both our beautie and deformity: so in the Scripture wee behold what is good in vs and what is naught. F. Ioannes a S. Geminiano li. 9. de artificibus, & rebus artificialibusch. 66. The CHVRCH. AS the naturall heate of our bodies is helped of the exteriour heat of Heauen; and as nature, although most carefull to preserue it selfe, doth receiue much helpe of externall medicines, created to that end of God: so also the light and inward helpe of grace is much helped by the light and doctrine of the Church. Lodouicus Granatensi libro. 2. Ducis Peccatorum. As men are caried ouer the Sea in a ship to the Court of any Prince: so men are caryed to God in the ship of the Church, whose Pilot Christ is. Clemens Rom. epist. 1. Iacobum. As they that are wronged at one Hauen, doe ariue at another: so they that haue beene misled by the false Church, let them hast to the true. Cypri∣anus li. 3. epist. 13.
As a branch is nourished by the sap of the roote: so are Christians nourish∣ed by the milke of the Church. Cypria∣nus de simplicitate pralatorum. As God is our Father; so the Church is our Mother Cyprianus. As a fountaine hath many riuers; so the Church hath many members. Cypri∣anus. As a man trauelling to a far Coun∣try commendeth his Wife to his deare friend, whom hee choisly keepeth, that her chastitie may not bee corrup∣ted: so Christ going to his Father com∣mended and committed his Church to Preachers and Ministers, his faithfull Seruants, which they must keepe till his comming incorrupt and inuiolate: Cyprianus ex sententiis Episcoporum concilij Carthaginensis. As Musicke doth not delight the hea∣rer except there bee concord: so God is not delighted in the Church except there bee vnitie and consent. Origenes tractatu 6. in Math. As many cornes make one loafe; so many faithfull people one Church. Eu∣sebius Emissenus hom. 5. de pascha.
As in a Common-wealth some rule and some obey, so in thē Church some are pastours and some are sheepe. Gre∣gorius Nazianz. de modestia in disputa∣tionibus. As a Wife is not put from her Hus∣band, but onely for fornication: so the Church is not put from Christ, but only for transgression. Chrisost. hom. 32. oper is imperfecti. As a Woman is not knowne whether she will stand chast, till she hath beene solicited of vicious men, and then shee is discerned: so the faith of the Church is not well knowne, except Antichrists come vnto it. Chrysost. Homil. 2 in epist. Rom. PREACHERS. AS Trees, which make large in∣crease for themselues before they eare, become much more fruitfull af∣wards vnto their owners: so Preachers he more learned they are, and the more time they haue well spent in the deepe mysteries of Diuinitie, the more profita∣le they are vnto their hearers, for
according to the qualitie of their fruits, such shall bee the profit of their audi∣tours. Lodouicus Granat. lib. de De∣notione. As that Gould is not baser, which is found among coales, than that which is found among precious stones; and as that imedicine is not of lesser vertue, which is drunke out of a vessell of claie, than that which is drunke out of a vessell of Alablaster: so the Word of God preached by a wicked man is not debased, nor made better by a good man, but of it selfe is foreible, neither needeth the authority of ma to grace it. Ibidem. As the prayer of Moses rather pro∣cured the victory against Amelech, then all the swords that were drawne: so al∣so wee must suppose and beleeue, that in the conuersion of a sinner, the pray∣ers, sighes, and grones of a true Prea∣cher haue no lesser part, than all the other voyces and words, albeit they bee ingenious, acute, and eloquent. Ibidem. As water is conueied into Orchards and Gardens by conduit pipes; so by
Preachers the water of wisdome is con∣ueied into the Church. ibidem. As a sower casteth some seeds into barren land: so Preachers cast some of the heauenly seed in barren eares and sterill hearts. Clemens Rom. lib. 3. re∣cognitionum. As the Priest when he sacrificed, was to looke, that there was no spot nor ble∣mish in the beast: so he that preacheth the Gospell, to looke that there be no errour in his preachiug, nor fault in his doctrine. Orignes libro 10. in Epist. ad Rom. cap. 16. As the Priests of the old Testament caried Vrim and Thummim vpon their breasts; so the Preachers of the new Te∣stament should bee vnto their auditors both an instruction of verity, and an example of sanctity. As men that are giuen to wine and banketing, doe enquire after feasts and ryotous persons: so men studious of their saluation should seeke after learned Preachers, and zealous Diuines. Chrys. rateone 2. aduersus Iudaeos. As a fountaine doth flow, albeit few or none doe drinke of it: so a Preacher
should not desist from his function, al∣beit few or none doe heare him, idem concione 1. de Lazaro. As a Merchaunt doth not leaue off his trafficke for a few losses: so a Preacher should not leaue his preaching for the ingratitude of a few lost cast-awayes Ibidem. As a Hammer, an Anuile, and a paire of Tongs, are a Smiths instruments, by which he effecteth what he intendeth; so the bookes of the Prophets and A∣postles, and all the Holy Scriptures are instruments of Preachers, by which they worke mens soules either vnto re∣formation of a new life, or vnto confir∣mation in vprightnesse. Chrysost. conci∣ne 3. de Lazaro. As laborious husband-men by tillage reape earthly gaines of the earth: so painfull Pastors by their Doctrinereape spirituall gaines, which neither can perish, nor be corrupted. Idem hom. 1. in Isaiam super illis verbis, vide domi∣num sedentem. As good Parents giue vnto their Children, not only those things that doe delight, but those things that also bene∣fite;
so faithfull Preachers and iust dis∣pensers of Gods mysteries doe not preach pleasing things, and sow pil∣lowes vnder their auditors elbows, but doe tell them what is best for their be∣hoofe, ibidem. As Mothers beare with their way∣ward Children; so should Preachers beare with their vntoward hearers, and seeke by all meanes to winne them, for greater is the affection of the Spirit, than of nature. idem hom. 1. in eadem verba. As Saylers haue hauens and Ilands to rest themselues in: so Preachers should haue their times and oportunities of recreation and repast. idem sermoue in Oziam. As a husbandman there soweth his feed plentifully, where hee seeth the ground fruitfull & purged from weeds: so a Preacher hauing got a spirituall field fruitfull and cleane, doth aboun∣daintly with great a lacritie disseminate the diuine seede idem. hom. 2 in Genesin. As Physitions first minister corasiues, than cordials; and as Fathers seeing their Children disordred, doe first cor∣rect
them with words, and after doe admonish and comfort them: so a Preacher after increpation and rebuk∣ing, doth adde comfort and consalati∣tion, and after the killing letter of the Law doth Preach the quicking Spirit of the Gospel. ibidem. hom. 7. in Genrsin. As husbandmen do make ready their sithes, prepare their barnes, & feed their oxen, that they may the better inne their haruest: so a Preacher must make his best preparation for the winning of soules. ibid. As no man lameth a Physition, that hath well done his duty: so no man should rebuke a Preacher, that hath well executed his function. idem. hom. 13. in Genesin. As a School-master bestowing his paines on a scholler, grieueth at his non proficiencie: so a Preacher bestowing his paines on an auditorie, taketh it in ill part, if they doe not profit by him. ibidem. Physitions doe beare with the sicke kicking them with their heeles, and re∣uiling them with slanders & reproches, they seeke for nothing else, but the
health of their patients; and although their patients rent their clothes in their distemperature, yet they leaue not their cure: so a Preacher although he bee ill intreated of his auditours, should not cease his preaching, because he seeketh them and not theirs, ibidem. As children would bee ashamed to returne without profit from theschoole, if their parents should euery day exa∣mine what they learned: so would au∣ditours be ashamed so often to returne from sermons without profit, if the Preachers examined what they had profited. idem. om. 32: As Painters now layeth on these co∣lours, now on those, for the better pourtraying of a beautifull picture: so a Preacher sometimes speaketh of Hea∣uen and sometimes of Hell to reclaime men from vice vnto vertue. ibidem. As Physitions doe not vse one kind of cure, but when they see that the di∣sease can not bee ouerthrowne by one medicine, they excogitate an other: so the Physition of our soules doth vse many kinds of cure in his spiritual bu∣sinesse. ibidem.
As it is the manner of Physitions, al∣beit they see the diseases of their pati∣ent to bee greater then their art can cure, yet they do not omit their duty, but set abroach all their skill, to see if they may either recure his malady, or pro∣long his dayes; and if they profit no∣thing, yet they haue the greater ex∣cuse: So a Preacher should pretermit nothing that belongs vnto his duty and function. idem. hom. 43. As one schoole-master is sufficient to teach an hundred Boyes: so one Prea∣cher like vnto Paul is enough to in∣struct many auditours. idem. 10. in. 1. Timoth. As they that cast nets into the Sea, doe not know what fishes they shall take, but those that God sends enter in: so when a Preacher doth cast ouer the people the net of the diuiue word, hee knoweth not who will come vnto God; but whosoeuer God stirreth vp, they cleaue vnto his Doctrine, idem hom. 7. operis imperfects. When an horse seeth an open plaine field, hee is stirred vp to the race: so when a Preacher seeth the Church full,
teacheth with delight. idem hom. 9. ris imperfecti. As a King rioyeth when he seeth imselfe encompassed with the strong and of a valiant and populous armie▪ a Preacher reioyceth, when hee is compassed with a venerable and po∣lus auditorie. idem hom. 21. As a plentifull haruest is a token of igent husbandmen: so a full Church a note of a painfull pastor. idem. m. 36. As Dyers often dippe their clothes at they may take the deeper tincture: Preachers should often dippe the ules of their hearers in the die of the uine Word, that they may be washed m their old corruption, and be dyed ith the tincture of a new beautie. idem m. de fide, & lege naturae. As buyers and sellers exchange one ing for another: so preachers for their irituall gifts, doe reape of their hea∣rs temporall goodnesse. idem hom. 15. Philippen. As Bees haue both hony and a sting: preachers must teach both Law and ospell. idem serm. 83.
As the Apostles were not frustra of their reward, whether the people ceied them or no: so neither shall pr∣chers. Aug. lib. 1. contra. Crescori cap. 5. As a Cocke croweth in the darke∣nesse of the night: so a Preacher crowe in the darknesse of this World. Greg 30. Moral. cap. 5. As a Cocke clappeth the wings be fore hee crowes: so a Preacher shoul prouide and prepare himselfe before preacheth. Ibidem. An Aethiopian entreth blacke into th bath, and commeth out blacke againe yet notwithstanding hee that keepe the bath receiueth his mony: so doth Preacher receiue his reward, albe his auditors profit nothing at all. ide Epi. 101. If Birds flie before they bee fledge they worke their owne ruine: so Schollers preach before they be fit able, they worke both their owne, an their auditours ouerthrow. idem. parte past or alis. cap. 26. Vnripe Apples, that are blow downe with the wind, haue neithe
eetenesse, neither doe they profite the macke, but those that are ripe are eete and toothsome: so they that are thers and teachers before their time, ue neither spirituall sweetnesse, nei∣er doe they bring any profite to les; but they that bee ripened by the ly Scriptures, and seasoned in their es, are honourable in Gods house, dable, sweete and wholesome vnto ir hearers. Pintus in Ezechiel. . 32. The Priests of Diana had three seue∣l seasons appointed vnto them, one, which they should learne wisedome d vertue; another, in which they ould exercise it, and a third ne, in which they should instruct ers; and as by the Law of ua Pompilius, the Vestall virgins, ich for thirty yeares were vowed to Vesta, had their ordering diuided o three seasons; the first tenne they ould learne the Religion of their oddesse; the second tenne they should rifice to her, and the third ten they ould teach others newly chosen her es: so a Minister of the Gospell,
should much more haue his three se rall seasons, a time to be furnished knowledge, a time to be beautified laudable conuersation, & a time to and preach vnto others, ibidem. As one candle cannot light anoth if it bee put out: so a preacher ca inflame others with diuine loue, if himselfe bee destitute of it ibidem. As a master sometimes by a wic seruant bestowed a good almes: so G by the ministery of a wicked man draw men from their wickedness ibidem. As the Tongs and Snuffers, t snuffed the lamps and lights in Temple of Salomon were of most p Gold: so they should be most pure w are bound to purge others of their cleannesse. ibidem. SERMONS. AS women doe smell well, wh smell of nothing; and in som neglected habit doth very well plea so in a diuine Sermon the orname more beautifull, if affected exornati be neglected.
As good meats doe feed the body: so ine Sermons doe nourish the soule. rysoft hom. 43. in Genes. As good stomackes make better ac∣t of wholesome fare, then of danty es: so good hearers should make ter account of pithy Sermons, then a pleasing oration. Ibid. hom. 45. As fire falling vpon dry wood, doth uert into a flame: so the diuine seed ing into a good heart doth make it ctifie. Idem hom 47. in Mat. As wee can easily and with pleasure out long playes: so for the benefit of soules wee should at the least be as ling to sit out long Sermous. Idem . 50. in Ioannem. As we are ready to run to Musicke merriments: so wee should bee as ne and inclined to flocke vnto ser∣ns. ibidem. As some returning from a Garden bring flowers with them; some out an orchard doe bring apples; and e comming from great-banets doe ng some of the fragments to their ildren: so thou returing from a mon, bring from it vnto thy wife,
children and friends some good counse and wholsome admonitions. idem b 6. ad pop. Antioch. As Sea-fish, although they liue salt water, yet haue need of seasoning so many continually heare Sermons and yet are neuer the better for the Clemens Alexandrinus lib. 1. St matum. As those schollers learne better the others, that learne with awe: so the heare sermons more profitably, th heare with feare and reuerence. Basil. principium Prou. As hee that eateth meate doth fi masticate it with his teeth, and th letteth it downe into his stomacke: when wee heare a sermon, we shou meditate vpon it, and consider wh was spoken, whereupon it was spoke and to what end. Chrysost. hom. 4. op imperfect. As it nothing profiteth to haue ea meate, if thou presently vomit it for againe: so it nothing profiteth to h heard a sermon, if thou forth with f get it. ibidem.
A CHRISTIAN. AS a Father that bringeth vp his Sonne to dedicate him to God in e Ministery of his Word, doth ac∣ustome him from his yong yeares to lesiasticall matters, and directeth e whole course of this life to the pur∣osed end: so God after he hath elected y man to the participation of his lory, he directeth him by his Fatherly are to the way of Christianity and ighteousnesse, which leadeth to that ory and faithfully continueth him it, vntill he come to his wished end. od. Gra. li. 1. Ducis peccatorum. As wee admire the happy estate of a Prince that is borne heire of a temporal Kingdome: so much more ought we to dmire and wonder at the most blessed state of a Christian, who is borne not a temporall kingdome, but to a King∣ome euerlasting, to raigne in Heauen with God himselfe, and with his blessed aints for euer and euer. ibid. As a traueller that euery day goeth orward a little, if he perseuer and con∣nue in his progresse, soone commeth
to the end of his iourney, but if he faile and saint in it, and a little after be∣ginne his voyage a new, consume all his life in it, neither euer comme to the end of his iourney: so it is with Christian, he must still walke for ward, for when hee saith that it is sufficient, then he plaies the deficient. idem in l de deuotione. Euen as he that Iyeth in the midst a swift riuer, if hee doth not labour t take fast footing, and raise vp his body hee is in danger to be borne downe and swallowed vp of the water: so in th Christian and spiritual life, which like a deepe and dangerous riuer, h liueth in many ieopardies of falling, who with tooth and naile doth not la∣bour to profit and goe forward in it idem. in lib. de dnot. As a Harper that itendeth to pla vpon his harpe all the day, ought haue his strings well tuned all th time; And as a hunter or a falcone that is disposed to hunt and hauke al the day, ought all that time to haue hi Hauks and Hounds in a readinesse an at hand: so the life of a perfect Chri∣stian
being none other thing, then a continuall hunting of God and his grace, and a continuall harmony of the inward Spirit, which is made by prayer, it is meete and requisite, that he that will attend vpon this exercise, that his Spirit and body be alwayes dispoed and apt vnto it. idem in lib. de deuot. As the chiefest commendation of a Pilot consisteth not in the guidance of his ship in a calme, but in a tempest: so the chiefest commendation of a Chri∣stian, consisteth not in his seruice to God in prosperitie but in aduersitie. Ibidem. As it is a thing most honourable for any Knight or Souldiour, to beare the armes of his King and Captaine: euen as honorable is it to a true Christian man, to suffer trauell and persecution, as his foreguide and leader Iesus Christ did. Stella de contemtu mundi. A Rocke although beat with the illows and waues of the Sea, conti∣ueth firme, neither is remoued out of his place: so a true Christian albeit rushed with the persecutions and tri∣ulations of the World, persisteth sted∣fat,
neither letteth his hope in Christ faint. Lodiuicus Granatensis, lib. 1. Ducis peccatorum. MAN. AS a Painter in delineating and poutraying a picture, hath it in his power to make it of what fashion hee list: so hath God the framing and disposition of man. Lodouicus Granat. lib. 1. Ducis peccatorum. As hee that from an high Tower hangeth by a small threed which ano∣ther holdeth in his hand, is at the dis∣pose of him either for life or death: so is man at Gods. ibidem. As a stone alwayes of his owne na∣ture falleth downward, neither can it lift it selfe vpwards, without externall helpe: so man by reason of the corrupti∣on of sinne doth alwayes tend downe∣wards; that is, hee doth alwayes slide to the loue and desire of earthly things, but if hee bee to bee lifted vp aboue, that is to the loue of heauenly things, he hath neede of the right hand of th highest, ibidem.
Euen as Iuie naturally seeketh for some post or tree, which it may leane vnto or some wall, by which it may be supported, and creepe aloft, it being not able to sustaine and hold it selfe; and as a woman naturally seeketh for the supportation & shadow of man, for she is an vnperfect creature, knoweth that the aide and helpe of man is ne∣cessary for her: so mans nature being weak, seeketh supportation of God, and being needy and wanting many things, doth seeke for the shadow and refuge of God. ibidem. As it is preposterous that the Mi∣stresse should waite vpon the maide: so is it intolerable that the flesh should gouerne the Spirit, and the appetite the reason. Ibidem. Euen as a Gloue is made for the vse of the hand; and a scabberd, that sword may be sheathed in it: so also the heart of man is created for the vse of God, neither without him can any rest be found. Euen as the body of man is created for the soule: so it shall bee punished with the soule.
As water receiued into diuerse vessels, doth put on diuerse figures and shapes, according to the disposition and nature of the vessels: so doth grace infused in∣to men; hence commeth the varieti of gifts, and yet the same Spirit that infu∣seth them. As snow beginneth and endeth in water: so man, how bigly soeuer hee braue it, began in earth, and shall end where he began. As the flower may be knowne by the smell: so a man by his words. As they that are tenants at will, eae themselues very euen & vpright: so they that vnderstand that the house of the body is lent them of Nature for a shor time, doe liue more temperatly, and die more willingly. Seneca. As an euill ree cannot bring forth any good fruit; as rotten and worm eaten seed cannot ingender any thing but like it selfe; and as from a poysone and infected vessell wee cannot dra one drop of good wine: so since o lapse wee are not able of our selues produce any good worke, but wha soeuer springeth from vs, sauo
reth of corruption and pollution. As waxe cannot indure before the fire: so mans righteousnesse cannot stand perfect before God. As Merchants alwayes prayse, and esteeme their wares and Marchandise more then they are wroth: so man doth his vertues, but when they are examined and prised by those which know them, as by the Spirit of God and his Pro∣phets, they are altogether iudged as old ragges torne, tied together and patched vp againe, and as old images new gilded ouer, which outwardly haue glistering shew, but within are nothing but dust and durt, or as counterfeit money, which is of ill metall how goodly a print soeuer it haue. Some dreame when they are asleepe, that they haue found great treasure, and haue a great ioy in it, but after their wakning, they see that all is vanished like smoke, whereupon they vexe and grieue themselues: so when man think∣eth that hee is righteous, this is a dreame, which passeth through his Spirits, and vanisheth as soone as hee s awake and deliuered from the dark∣nesse
of ignorance, wherein hee was a∣sleepe and buried. The arke of the couenant was but a cubite and a halfe high; the wheeles of the Cauldron were but a cubite and a halfe high, now we know that a cubite and a halfe is an vnperfect measure: so there is no man in this life perfectly perfect, seeing that the very highest is as the Arke in Moses Tabernacle, or as the wheeles in Salomons Temple, but a cubite and a halfe high, perfectly vn∣perfect, when he beginneth, vnperfectly perfect, when hee endeth. Euen as the silkeworme keeps her body spare and empty, and vseth to fast two or three dayes together, that see may stretch out her selfe the better, and spin her threed the finer: so man must endeuour to bring vnder his body, and as I may say, to dyet it for the nonce, that hee may no longer weau the spiders web, but with the silk worme spin a new threed. As the Viper perceiuing her old ski to bee so stiffe that shee cannot easily stretch out her selfe in it, strips it quit off: so wee which are by nature
generation of Vipers, must strip off our old skinne, and perceiuing wee cannot well doe our endeauour and stir our selues in the armour of Saul, we must with Dauid put it off, and put on the armout of light. As Fletchers to make their shafts flie steadily, peece them with Sugarchest, or Holly, o such like heauy wood: so we must adioyne, to that Aspe or Ser∣uice tree, or such other light matter, which we are all made of, the sweete Sugarchest of the Holy Ghost, that we may not bevnsteady as arrowes of Aspe, nor yet slothfull in seruice but fer∣uent in Spirit, seruing the Lord. Saint Amrose reporteth that the Bee being to flie home to her hiue, and fea∣ring least if shee should be taken by the way with the wind, she might perhaps be blowne about in the ayre, coun∣terpeises her selfe with a little stone, and so flyes straight home: sowe must build our selues pon the chiefe corner stone, and be grounded vpon the rocke, and established with grace, that how∣soeuer the raine fall, or the floods a∣rise, or the winds blow, or what times
soeuer come, yet we may stand fast in the faith of Christ. As Eu deceiued Adam: so the flesh deceiueth man. Lodouicus Granatensis lib. 1. Ducis peccatorum. The Moone being in the wane, is a∣gaine renued: so is man after his death at the last resurrection. The Sunne appeareth againe after it setteth: so doth man at the sound of the Arch-angell. The Sunne, the Moone, the Starres, the Sea, the Earth, Trees, Herbs, Beasts, and among these, Bees, and Shell fishes doe forefeele and fore∣see a tempest: so should man forefeele and foresee his owne danger. Plinius libro 8. cap. vl. As things, that are bred vpon the earth, are for the vse and commodity of man: so one man should bee for a∣nother. As a vessell is knowne by the sound, whether it bee whole or broken: so are men proued by their speach whether they be wise or foolish.
Good MEN. AS the Laurell tree is not subiect to lightning, nor hurt with the fiers violence: so the iust man in the fire of tribulation is neither hurt nor impai∣red, but alwayes continueth fresh and greene. Stella de contemptu mundi. As in the winter a fruitfull tree can∣not bee knowne from one that is vn∣fruitfull: so in this World a good man can scarcely be discerned from an euill man Vermas sua Past. ockell and darnall springeth vp ong good corne: so euill men grow vp with good men, and righteous peo∣ple with vngodly folke. Cyprianus con∣tra Demetrianum. As a Bird soone getteth out of a snare: so good men, if the fall, soone rise againe Origenes hom. 5. in Psal. 36. As the light of a candle is dimmed by the brightnes of the Sun: so al the works of good men are obscured by the perfe∣ction of Christ. Orig. hom 9. in Ezech. As wrestlers for a prize sustaine heat, sweat, dust & labour: so good men for a crown must beare many things patient∣ly. Chrysost. hom. 1. d resurrectione.
As we say that that is a good body, that can indure heate and cold, hunger and thirst: so wee say that he is a good man, that can generously and valiantly beare all the inuasions of sorrow and griefe. ibidem hom. 5. de patientia Iob. As a rich subiect compared to a wealthy King, seemeth poore: so the best men compared to holy Angels are found sinners. Idem hom. 4. in 1. Timoth. As the vnderstanding of a sinner is more and more darkened: so the mind of a good man is more and more en∣lightened. Idem hom. 18. operis im∣perfecti. In the vineyards of Engaddi there is a Tree, that when it is pricked, ointment commeth out of it, but if it be not pier∣ced, it smelleth not so fragrantly: so it is with a good man. Ambrosius in Psal. beati immaculatiserm. 1. As a house built vpon a Rocke stands firme against all tempests: so a righteous man building himselfe vpon the Rocke Christ stands strong against all the stormes of Sathan the World and the Flesh. As a tree that is planted by the water
side, spreadeth out the roote vnto moist∣nesse, neither can the heate harme it when it commeth, but his leafe conti∣nueth greene: so a good man that is planted by the waters of Gods grace, spreadeth out himselfe vnto euery good worke, neither doth the parching heate of persecution hurt him, nor the pinch∣ing cold of aduersitie benumme him, but he alwayes remaineth fruitfull. The gifts of Men are di∣uerse. AS not euery Painter is skilfull i euery part of his Art, but one ex∣celleth in mixture of colours, an other in drawing of lines, an other in due proportion: so among them that pro∣sesse learning, one excelleth in Rheto∣ricke, an other in Logicke, an other in the Mathematickes, and others in other gifts. So many Men, so many minds. ASTygers are driuen into madnesse by the sound of a Tymbrell or a
Drum, insomuch that they teare them∣selues in peeces: so that which quiets good and ciuill minds, driueth barba∣rous minds to furie and rage. Plut. As among so many thousand men, there are no faces alike in euery re∣spect: so euery man hath his seuerall humour, and a cranke in his braine that another hath not. Erasmus. As the hearbe Sagapene is a food ve∣ry acceptable vnto Asses, but present poyson to all other liuing creatures: so oftentimes that which offendeth one, is a pleasure vnto another. Plinius libro 24. Cap. 1. As diuers glasses make one thing to appeare diuersly, according to the di∣uersitie of the glasses: so diuerse men doe interprete one deed diuersly, ac∣cording to the diuersity of minds; that which seemeth great to one, seemeth small to an other, one man esteemes it beautifull, an other deformed. Some see better the thing that is neare them, some see better a far off: so some look better to other mens matters, then to their owne, & some neglect all mens businesses, & solely intend their owne.
The continually burning Mountaine of Chimera is more nkindled with water, but abated with hay: so some the more you desire them, the more in∣exorable they are, and the more you disswade them, the for warder they are. Plin. lib. 2. cap. 106. As the Agath stone is fired with wa∣er, but quenched with oyle: so some he more you intreate them, the colder ey are: but if you neglect them, of heir owne accord they will doe it. Plinius libr 36. Cap. 19. Wicked and vngodly▪ Men. IF a Mother should lay in a corner of her house, ratsbane or some other oyson to kill Rats and Mice, and it should bee found of her Children, and eaten; would not that be the destructi∣on and ruine of her house, which shee purposed should haue beene a benefit? After the same manner wicked men doe euent all good and wholsome Do∣ctrines, abusing them for themselues, which are deliuered for others, al∣wayes
very studiously end euouring to defend the loosenesse and dissolutenesse of their life. Lodouicus Granat. lib. de deuotione. As one rotten sheepe infecteth, be it neuer so great a flocke: so one wicked and vicious man impoisoneth, be it ne∣uer so many fulke. As a Toade sucketh poyson from the Earth: so the wicked sucke corruption from vices. As the salt oud quickly swels vp, and as quickly sinkes down againe and turnes to nothing euen so and such is the prosperity of the wicked. As the smoke vanisheth, and as the wax melteth before the fire: so shall the wicked perish at the presence of God. As vnder a good tree all beasts may rest, but no creatures can rest vnder thornes, but onely Serpents: so by an honest man, both good men and euill men may haue peace, but by a wicked men none can bee quiet, but Serpents, that is, Diuels, who haue their lodgings in the breasts of wicked men. Chrysost. hom. 19. operis imperf.
As good meates are vnwelcome to sicke persons: so are good counsels vn∣to wicked men. Idem. hom. 4. in 1. Cor. As mad men cannot abide the cure of the Physitian: so wicked men can∣not abide the reproofe of a Preacher. Theodor sermo. 1. de curandis grae. affectibus. As sore eyes cannot away with the brightnesse of the Sun: so wicked and vngodly men cannot away with the splendour of the truth. Petrus Chryso∣logus serm. 87. A wheele tilts vp behind, and shoots downe before: so the wicked are for∣ward to all badnesse, but backward to all goodnesse. As a dry thistle flower is blowne a∣way with the wind; as a thinne scumme is scattered abroad with a storme; and as smoake is dispersed here and there: so is the hope of the wicked. A foole builds his house vpon the sand: so an vngodly man grounds his hopes vpon the vanities of the world. As the raging Sea cannot rest: so a wicked man is neuer of a quiet and peaciable mind.
The heath, that groweth in the wildernesse, is good for nothing but the fire: so the wicked are good for no∣thing but fuell to make the fire of Hell flame. WOMEN. AS Pigeons are taken with beanes, and Children intised with Balls: so women are wonne withtoyes. As the beast Chimer hath a Lyons face, but a Dragons tayle: so many women haue continent words, but vn∣chast works. As the brood-hen, that all the day long bestowes her paines in all the dust she meetes with, sleeps at night hungry and vnsatisfied: so doth that woman that bestowes her loue vpon many suers. A dumbe Grasse-hopper is a wonder, because the whole kind of them is garrulous; and yet they say, that there are some such about Rhegium in Italy: so more admirable is con∣stancie and silence in women, because their sex is mutable and loquacious, and
yet they say, that there are somesuch women in the Kingdome of Vtopia. As no man knowes where his shooe wings him, but hee that hath it on: so no man knownes the disposition of a woman, but he that hath maried a wise, lutarchus. As a Loadstone by a secret in nature draweth Iron vnto it: so a woman by a Secret in nature draweth man vnto er. As fire being touched doth burne: so a women being touched doth kindle ust: Hieronimus. lib. 1. contra Ioui∣anum. As those hearbs doe flourish that are planted by the riuer side: so those seeds of lust doe sprowte rankly that are nourished in the society and familiarity of women. Nilus orat. 2. aduersus vitia. The Temples of the Egyptians were builded of very faire stone, and beau∣tified with Gold, Siluer, and Iuory, but if you searched into them, you should finde nothing but a Cat, a Crocodile, or a Serpent: so many women are very beautifully adorned without, but if you looke into them, you shall find
nothing, but enormous and adulterous minds. Clemens Alexandrinus lib. 2. paedagog. cap. 2. As stigmaticall brands are notes of a fugitiue: so counterfeit colours are tokens of an whore. Ibidem. As a golden Ring is in the nose of a Swine: so is beauty in an vnchast wo∣man. Salonius in parabolas Salomonis. As the stone of Sicilia, the more it is beaten, the harder it is: so women the more they are made of, the coyer they grow. As a child is won with a Nut, and lost with an apple: so is a woman. Hee that toucheth the Nettle tender∣ly is soonest stong: the Fly that playeth in the fire is singed in the flame: so hee that dallieth with women is drawen to his woe. The soft droppes of raine doe pierce the hard Marble; many strokes ouer∣throw the tallest Oake: so a silly wo∣man in time may make such a breach into a mans heart, as her teares may enter without resistance. A Rose is sweeter in the budde then full blowne; yong twigs are soone
bent then old Trees; white Snow sooner melted then hard Ice: so a Woman, the yonger she is, the sooner shee is to bee wooed, and the fairer shee is, the like∣lier to be wonne. There is no sword made of steele, but hath yron; no fire made of wood but hath smoke, no wine made of graps, but hath lees: so there is no women created of flesh but hath faults. Chyrurgions affirme, that a white veine being striken, if at the first there spring out blood, it argueth a good con∣stitution of body: so if a faire woman hauing heard the sute of a louer, if shee blush at the first brunt, and shew her blood in her face, it sheweth a well dis∣posed minde. As a Doue seemeth angry, as though shee had a gall, yet yeeldeth at the last to delight: so women pretend a great skirmish at the first, yet are boorded willingly at the last. As castles that come to parle: so wo∣men that delight in courting, are wil∣ling to yeeld. As Fish caught with medicines: so women gotten with witch-craft, are neuer wholesome.
As all Fish are not caught with flies: so all women are not allured with per∣sonage. Lyons fawne when they are clawed, Tygers stoope when they are tickled, Bucephalus lyeth downe when hee is curried: so women yeeld when they are courted. Arelius (whose Art was onely to draw Women) painted Venus Cnidia, catching at the Ball with her hand, which she seemed to spurne at with her foote; the Myrre tree being hewen, gathereth in his sappe, but not moued poureth it forth like sirupe: so Women are neuer more coy then when they are beloued, yet in their minds neuer lesse constant, seeming to tye themselues to the mast of the ship with Vlisses when they are wooed, with a strong cable, which being well discerned, is a twind thred, throwing a stone at the head of him, vnto whom immediatly they cast forth an Apple. Young is the the Goose that will eate no Oates, and a very ill Cocke that will not crow before hee bee old, and no right Lyon that will not feed on hard
meate before he tast sweete milke: so a ender Virgin God knowes it must bee, that measureth her affections by her age, when as naturally they are incli∣ned to play the Brides before they bee able to dresse their heads. Instruments sound sweetest, when they bee touched softest: so women are wisest when they be vsed mildest. The horse striueth, when he is hardly rained, but hauing the bridle, neuer stirreth: so women are starke madde if they bee ruled by might, but with a gentle raine they will beare a white mouth. As fire is hot as well in the coldest re∣gion of the North, as in the furthest Southerne paralell: and as grasse is of the same colour in Egypt as it is in Iewry: so women wheresoeuer they be bred, bee Mala necessaria. Robert Greene. As the Diamonds in India be more hard then the Cornish stones in Eng∣land: and as the Margarits of the west are more Orient then the Pearles of the South: so womens affections are af∣fected after the disposition of the clime
wherein they are borne: although Auicen in his Aphorismes sets downe this conclusion, that thornes no where grow without pricks, nor nettles with∣out stings. ibidm. As the people Hyperborei, spurne liquorice with their feete, and yet se∣cretly slake their hunger with the iuice thereof, so coy wantons seeming to contemne their suters motions, stand in deadly feare, least they should leaue of their amourous passions, As pumice stones are light and full of holes: so are those women that haue as many louers, as their hearts haue entrances for loue. As the earth yeelds weeds as well in the lowest valleyes, as in the highest mountaines: so women are vniuersally Mala necesseria, wheresoeuer they be either bred or brought vp. Greene. As the Lapwing runneth away with the shell on her head, as soone as she is hatched: so many girles no sooner out of the Cradell, but they looke for hus∣bands, as soone as they touch the teenes they thinke themselues naui∣gable.
As when Nilus ouerfloweth before his time, Egypt is plagued with a dearth: as the Tree that blossome in February, are nipped with the frosts in May: and as vntimely fruits haue neuer good fortune: so those women that are wooed and wonne ere they bee wise, sorrow and repent before they be old. As the Diamonds are tryed by cut∣ting of glasse; the Topace by biding the force of the anuile; the Sethin wood by the hardnesse: so womens excellencie is discouered in their constancie. As the Harts in Calabria knowing Dictamnum to be deadly, yet browse on it with greedinesse; and as the fish Mugra seeing the hooke bare, yet swalloweth it with delight: so women foresee, yet doe not preuent, knowing what is profitable, yet not eschewing the preiudice. As the eye of the Basiliske pearceth with preiudice; the iuyce of Celidony is sweete, but it fretteth deadly; and as Circes cups were to strong for all Antidotes: so womens flatteries are too forceable to resist at voluntary.
The tallest Ash is cut downe for Fuel, because it bearth no good fruite; the cow that giues no milke, is brought to the slaughter, the Drone that gathereth no Hony is contemned: so the women that maketh her selfe barren by not marrying, is accounted among the Grecian Ladies worse then a carrion, as Homer reporteth. As the loue betweene man and man proceedeth of the similitude of man∣nets: so the loue betweene man and woman issueth of the sincerity of the heart. The Physitian saith, it is dangerous to minister Physicke vnto the Patient, that hath a cold stomacke and a hot liuer, least in giuing warmth to the one, he inflame the other: so veriely it is hard to deale with a woman whose words seeme feruent, whose heart is con∣gealed into hard Ice least trusting their outward talke, hee be betrayed with inward trechery. As it is the eye of the Master, that fatteth the horse: so it is the loue of the woman that maketh the man. The sweete songs of Calipso, were
subtill snares to entice Vlisses; the Crab then cateheth the Oyster when the Sun shineth; Hiena when she speaketh like a man deuiseth most mischiefe: so wanton women when they bee most pleasant, pretend most mischiefe. As thou learnest of Alexander conti∣nencie in not viewing the beautie of Darius Wife; temperance of Cirus, in not beholding the heauenly hew of Panthea; abstinence of Romulus in not drinking wine, be it neuer so delicate; plainnesse and simplicitie of Agesilaus in despising costly apparrell, be it neuer so curious: so learne of Diogenes to to detest women bee they neuer so comely. As the sore eye infecteth the sound: so society with women breedeth securi∣tie in the soule, and maketh all the sences, sencelesse. The tree Siluacenda beareth no fruit in Pharo: he Persian tree in Rhodes doth only wax greene, but neuer bring forth apples: Amonius and Nardus will onely grow in India: Balsanum onely in Syria: in Rhodes no Egle will build her nest: no Owle liue in Creete
so no wit will spring in the will of wo∣men. Iohn Lily. As Socrates, Plato and Aristotle affirmed that women were icle and in∣constant: Pindarus, Homer Hesiod, Ennius and Virgil auerred that they were framed of contraries. As Mantian doth rayle on women in his Eclogs: so Euripdes doth ex∣clame in his Tragedies. As Martiall hath taunted women: so Propertius hath quipped them. As some for inconstancy compare women to Chameleons, Polipes, and whether-cocks: so some for their al∣luring and inchanting cal them Sirens, for crafe Calipsoes, for subtilty Ser∣pents, and for cruelty Tigres. As Daphne for nicenesse was turned in to a tree: so Anaxarete for cruelty was transformed into a stone. As Horatia with daintinesse did hurt her selfe: so Phillis through too much loue did hang her selfe. As Cleopatra at the death of her Anthony did sting herselfe to death with Serpentes: so Hylonome did slay her selfe at the death of her Cyller.
As Alceste was content to loose her life to preserue her Admetus: so were the Mynian wiues to preserue their husbands. Vlisses though hee detested Calipso with her sugred voyce, yet hee embra∣braced Penelope with her rude distaffe: so though one abhorre the beauty of a whorish Curtesan, yet hee neede not abstaine from the company of a graue Maiden. Though the teares of the Hart bee salt, yet the teares of the Boore be sweet: so though the teares of some women be counterfeit to deceiue, yet the teares of many bee currant to try their loue. Some one Rose will bee blasted in the bud, some other neuer fall from the stalke; the Oake will bee soone eaten with the worme, the walnut tree neuer: so some women will bee easily enticed to folly, some other neuer allured to vanity. As the Mint-master is not grieued to see the coyner hanged, nor the true sub∣iect the false taytour aragned, nor the honest man thiefe the condemned: so honest women ought not to grieue to see
lewde women writ against, and whores and curtesans to be railed at. As hic Ignis is latine for fire in the Chimney; and hoc Ignis latine for fire on the table: so haec Ignis is latine for fire in the bed. As there hath beene an vnchast Helle in Greece: so there hath beene also a chast Penelope. As there hath beene a prodigious Pasiphae: so there hath beene a godly Theocrata. As some haue desired to be beloued, as Iupiter loued Alcmena: so some haue wished to bee embraced, as Phri∣gius embraced Pieria. As there hath raigned a wicked Ie∣zabel: so hath there ruled a deuout Dobora. The sowre crab hath the shew of an apple as well as the sweete Pippin, the blacke Rauen the shape of a Bird as well as the white Swan: so the lewde wight hath the name of a woman as well as the honest Matrone. There is great difference betweene the standing puddle and the running streame, yet both water; great oddes
betweene the Adamant and the Pom∣mice, yet both stones: a great distincti∣on to be put betweene Vittum and the Christall, yet both Glasse: so there is great contrariety betweene Lais and Lucretia, yet both women. One may loue the cleare conduit water though hee loath the muddy ditch, and weare the precious Diamond though he despise the ragged bricke: so one may also with safe conscience re∣erance the modest sex of honest Mai∣dens, though he forsweare the lewd sort of vnchast Minions. As Spiders conuert to poyson what∣soeuer they touch: so women infect with folly whomsoeuer they deale withall. The petite Pallace of Pettie his pleasure. As hee that toucheth Pitch, shalbe defiled therewith: so he that vseth wo∣mens company, shalbe beguiled there∣with. Greene. As Iupiter, Mars, and Hercules for their valiant acts accounted Gods of the Paynims, were ouercome and made slaues by the inchantment of women: so strong Sampson, holy Dauid and
wise Salomon were ouerthrowne by women. As Venus yeelded to her darling Adonis without any sute made on his part: so the Dutchesse of Sanoy went on pilgrimage to the Knight Mendoza. As Oenone pleaded her right with Paris: so Dido let Aeneas vnderstand how deeply she desired him. As Scilla made loue to King Minos: so did Medea to Iason. As Brysis besought the good will of Achilles: so Adalesia made loue to A∣lerane. As Portia the Danghter of Cato, hea∣ring of her Brutus death at Philip swallowed hot burning coales to fol∣low him, as Plutarke, Valerius Maxi∣mus, and Martiall doe write: so G∣nilda the Wife of Asmunda King of Danes, hearing that her husband was slaine in the warres, slew her selfe with a sword, to accompany him in death, whom she had dearely loued in life, as testifieth Saxo Grammaticus, in his first Booke of the Danish History. As trusty Thisbe did goare her gor∣geous body with the same sword,
wherwith princely Pyramus had prickt himselfe to the heart: so true harted Iulietta did vpon the corps of her dea∣rest Romeo. As a rusty Rapier is no trustly Ram∣pier to defend a man, though the Scab∣berd be of fine Veluet: so a women with foule conditions, is coursely to be ac∣counted of, though her face be faire, and body beautifull. The Petite Pallace of Petty his pleasure. As the yeare doth consist of foure seasons, the Spring, Summer, Autumne and Winter; And as mans body doth consist of foure complexions, Choler, Bloud, Flegme, and Melancholy: so the comely parts of a Woman doe con∣sist in foure points, that is to bee a Shrew in the Kitching, a Saint in the Church, an Angell at the bourd, and an Ape in the bead, as the Cronicle re∣ports by Mistresse Shoare Paramour to King Edward the fourth. As the kinde Spaniall the more he is beaten, the fonder he is: so the women of Russia the oftner their husbands beate them, the better they loue them. They will not bee porswaded that their
husbands loue them, except they beate them. Richard Hackluyt in his Booke of English Voyagers in the description of Russia. As Aetna is too hot, & Caucasus too cold: so it is naturally incident to wo∣men to enter into extremities, they are either too louing, or too loathing: too courteous or too coy: too willing, or too wilfull: too mercifull, or too mer∣cilesse: too forward, or too froward: too friendly, or too fiendly th meane they alwayes meanely account of: as it is reported of Maria Stuarta Queene of Scots, in Astione contra Mariam Scotorum Reginnam. The SOVLE. EVuen as in a bright and cleare glasse the Sunne beames doe make the greater spendour: so in a purified and cleare soule the beames of the diuine truth doe shine more clearely. Lodoui∣cus Granatensis in lib. de deuotione. As twice in a day wee refresh our bodies, that is, at Dinner, and at Supper: so also twice a day wee ought to giue
due nourishment vnto our soules. Ibid. As ordinary nourishment is necessa∣ry for the body, because the naturall heate doth alwayes consume and wast the substance, and therefore it is ne∣cessary, that it bee repaired on the one side, as it is decayed on the other: so the soule hath in it a pestilent-heat (which is the concupiscence and euil inclination of our appetites) consu∣ming and wasting all good, therefore it is needfull that that bee daily repaired by deuotion, which is wasted and de∣cayed by that hurtfull and pestilentiall heat. ibidem. As they that haue the charge and keeping of a clocke, are wont euery day twice to wind vp the plummets, for they of their owne proper motion doe by little and little descend, and draw towards the ground: so they that de∣sire to keepe their soules vpright, and well ordered, ought at the least twice a day to erect and lift vp her waights, seeing that our wretched nature is so. inclinable to things below, that it al∣wayes endeuoureth to sinke down∣wards. ibid.
As a precious stone is not inclosed in earth, but in Gold: so doth not God put his soueraine balme, but into a pure soule, cleane and free from filthy and enormous corruption. As a liuing body not onely feareth death, but also seuers, wounds, yea and the itch and scabs, albeit they be small: so a soule, that liueth in grace, not onely feareth and abhorreth grosse and hainous sinnes, but also those, that seeme of lesser moment, and doe make way and entrance to those that bee grosser. ibidem. As a still and calme water is fitter and more disposed to represent the images and shapes of things, no other∣wise then a glasse: so also in a quiet and calme soule all things are represented most clearely and perfectly. ibidem. As two seasons are necessarie for corne cast into the Earth, a cold season that it may be hardned, and rake deepe rooting, and a warme, that it may in∣crese and sproute aboue the earth: so are both seasons necessary for our soules, a warme season that they may increase in charity, and a cold
that they may bee rooted in humility. Ibidem. As ground well watered in the mor∣ning, by the coolenesse & temper doth all that day defend the hearbs plan∣ted in it from the heat of the Sun: so let the soule of the righteous be watered in due season, and by prayer bee well moistned in God, that it may alwayes haue in it selfe the continuall coole of deuotion, by which it may bee de∣fended from the loue of the World. ibidm. As the body is the instrument of the soule: so the soule is the instrument of God. Plutrachus. As a tame bird if shee belong nou∣rished in a cage, and be let goe, yet en∣deuoureth to returne thether againe: so our soule being long resident in this body, is not easily separated from it: but the soule a Child doth easily depart hence. Ibidem. As a torch put out if it be forth with put to the fire, by & by recouereth light: so a soule the lesser time it staieth in the body, it sooner becommeth like vnto it selfe. Idem.
They that are manumitted and set free, doe now those things of their own accord for themselues, which they were wont to doe for their Lords: so now the soule doth nourish the body with much labour, and many cares; but afterwards being free, it doth nou∣rish it selfe with the contemplation of the truth, neither can it bee sundred from it, Idem. As they that haue their feet vnder o∣ther mens Tables, and dwell in other mens houses, are vixed with many dis∣commodities, and doe alwayes com∣plaine of one thing or other: so the soule doth now complaine of the head, now of the feete, now of the stomacke, now of one thing, now of another, sig∣nifying that shee is not in her owne house, but that shee must goe hence very shortly. Seneca. The MINDE. AS an euen ballance is alike incli∣ned to either side, and swayed of it selfe to neither: so is a doubtfull mind. Plutarchus.
As they that pound Frankinsence, al∣beit they wash their hands, yet a good while after doe smell of that odour: so the minde being long conuersant in ho∣nest businesses, will long preserue a pleasant memory of it. idem. As those Beasts that haue their hoofes hardned in rough and sharp wayes, can easily abide any way, wheres the hoofes, of those beasts, are easily broken that are fed and fatted in rancke and fenny pestures: so the mind that is ac∣customed to brooke hardnesse, is not easily offended. Seneca. A flame can neither be held downe, neither can it rest: so an honest minde and well disposed, is by a naturall in∣clination caried vnto those things that bee honest. Seneca. Young trees are bended which way we will; heate doth vnwarp crooked bords, and that which is borne for some other vse is brought to our bent: so much more doth the mind receiue any forme, being more flexible and obse∣quious then any humour. Seneca. As a disease in the body is vnder∣stood before hand by heauinesse and
indisposition: so a weake mind by some disturbance doth foresee some euill that is comming vnto it. Seneca. As first the humour is to be purged, whence madnesse proceedeth, and af∣terwards the man is to be admonished; otherwise hee that admonisheth a mad man how hee ought to goe, and how to behaue himselfe abroad, is more mad then hee that is franticke: so first the minde is to befreed from false opinions, and then the precepts of Philosophy are to be instilled into it. Seneca. As when Children learne first to write, their hands are held and di∣rected, and afterwards they are com∣manded to follow their Coppy: so first the minde is to be led by rule, vntill it can rule it selfe. Seneca. If Iron be placed betweene an Ada∣mant and a load-stone, it is now carried this way, now that way: so a doubtfull and wauering mind is sometimes caried to that which is honest, and sometimes by headstrong affections it is haled to the contrary. As Venus had her mole in her cheeke which made her more amiable; Helen
her scare in her chinne, which Paris called Cos Amoris, the Whetstone of Loue, Aristippus his Wart, and Li∣curgus his Wen: so in the dispotion of the minde, either vertue is ouer∣shadowed with some vice, or vice ouer∣cast with some vertue. Iohn Lilly. The goods of the Minde. THe Sunne-beames although they tough the earth, yet they are there, whence they are sent: so the minde of a wise man although it bee conuersant here and there, yet it is with himselfe. Seneca: As the foolish vulgar people with great labour, and with great cost doe seeke for remdies & medicines which grow in the furthest Indies and in Ae∣thiopia, when that springeth in their gardens, which can better cure them: so with great endeuour wee seeke for abroad the furniture of a happy life, in Empire, in riches, and pleasures, when it is in our minds and soules, which doth make vs happy.
The diseases of the Minde. IF the ountaine be muddy and trou∣bled, whatsoeuer streames flow from thence cannot bee pure: so if mind be infected with euill affections, it doth vitiate all things that come from it; but the contrary hapneth, if it be pure and peaceble. Plut. As Xenophon admonisheth, wee should especially remember to honour God in prosperity, that if at any time need and necessity fall vpon vs, we may boldly goe vnto him, as being already our friend: so thoe sayings which may cure the diseases of the mind are long before to be prouided, that when wee haue need, they being familiar vnto vs, they may easily helpe vs. idem. As fierce and ell Dogges barke at euery noise, but are quieted onely with that voyce they know: so the di∣seases of the mind when they rage can∣not bee restrained, except the sayings and admonitions bee knowne and fa∣miliar, which may correct them being moued. idem. As a sicke body can neither endure
heate nor cold: so a sicke minde is alike offended in prosperity & aduersity. idem They that cast and vomit sailing vp∣on the Sea in a ship, doe thinke that they should bee better if they went out of that ship into a foist or gally; but it is to no purpose, they carrying about with them fearefulnesse and choler: so they in vaine doe change the course of their life, who doe beare about with them the diseases of them in. idem. To them that be sicke all things are tedious and troublesome, they loath their meate, they accuse their Physiti∣ons, and are angry with their friends but their health being restored all things are pleasant vnto them: so to a sicke minde euery kind of life is vn∣pleasant, but to a sound mind no kind of life is vnpleasaut. idem. One Cough doth not breed the con∣sumption of the lungs, but that which long continueth: so one errour doth not forthwith beget a disease of the mind. Seneca. As some doe alwayes carry about with them precious stones, against di∣seases, bewitchings, drunkennesse,
thunder and lightning, against ruines and such like euils: so it behooueth vs to haue alwayes at hand some precepts of Phylosophy against the diseases of the mind, as against lust, anger, ambi∣tion, couetousnesse and such like. The HEART. EVen as he that would  an harpe, or any other instrument of Musicke, ought before all things to haue his strings well tuned, that they may fitly and melodiously agree one with another: so it is necessary also that our heart (seeing it is the chiefe in∣strument of that heauenly Musicke) bee first well tuned and prepared, for there can bee no harmonious consort in a iarring and vntuned instrument. Lodo∣uicus Granat. lib. de deuotione. As milke, and many other meates are so delicate and daintie, that the very ayre doth taint them and make them vnsauoury; and the vntemperatenesse of the aire, as some affirme, doth put a Lute or a Harpe out of une: so great, or without doubt much greater is the
tendernesse and daintinesse of mens heart, and is troubled for lesser cause. ibidem. Enen as the sight of the eyes is hurt with a small thing; and the brightnesse of a glasse is stained and obscured with a little breath: so a much lesser chaunce, and a much lighter hurt is enough to dimme the brightnesse of our heart, to darken the eyes of our soule, and to disturbe together with our deuotion, all our affections, ibidem. As painters are wont first to mundi∣fie and whitelime the table, in which they paint: so also the table of our heart is first to be wiped and whited, in which te image of God shal be pictured and formed. ibidem. As an handmaid, that worketh in the presence of a Queene, standeth before her Lady with great grauitie, with pre∣sentnesse of mind, and orderly compo∣sition of body, making notwithstand∣ing neither losse nor delay in her worke: so the heart of man hath such aptnesse and promptnesse, that with due reuerence and attention it may bee lif∣ted vpto that Maiestie, which filleth
Heauen and Earth, not omitting nor neglecting any of those things it doth. ibidem. As there is nothing which doth more stirre vs vp vnto good, then the vigour and strength of the heart: so there is nothing, which doth more extinguish heat and feruour in vs, then the weake∣nesse and fainting of the same▪ ibidem. As that is the best way to driue danger from cattell, to keepe them from feeding in dangerous places: so also it is needful that wee doe, if wee will driue away the dangers of a scrupulou heart. ibidem. Euen as a stone is moued more swift∣ly, when it approcheth nearer his Center (as the Philosophers say) because it now beginneth to tast and feele the vertue and conueniencie of his naturall place: so also mans heart created of God, is more strongly moued, when it now beginneth to feele and tast some∣what of his Creator. ibidem. As a moorish and fenny lake doth send forth many grosse vapours, which doe so darken the aire, that scarce any thing can be seene clearely in it, till the
Sunne dissolueth them: so our heart doth cast forth such mists and foggs of cloudy cogitations, that nothing can be well discerned in it, vntill they bee dissipated and disseuered by the heate of deuotion. ibidem. As the heart is the beginning of all our workes: so according to the qua∣litie and affection of our heart, such al∣so is the qualitie and affection of our works proceeding from it: which thing also wee see in water flowing from a fountaine: if the foutaine be muddy and troubled: but if the fountaine bee cleare and bright, the water will bee so too. ibidem. Euen as a yong set or slip cannot be grafted into a tree, vnlesse first that branch bee cut off, into whose place it is to bee inserted: so the diuine will cannot be grafted into our heart, vnlesse first our owne will be lopped away; for these two willes are contrary the one to the other. ibidem. Euen as water of his owne naturall motion doth alwayes slide and drop downwards, and if any one desireth to hinder that passage, hee profiteth no∣thing,
for it will seeke for some corner or chink, which it may break through: so also our heart is alwayes ready bent to all kind of pleasure, so that if silence be imposed vpon it, and any one thing bee denied vnto it, forth with it swe∣leth and rageth, now winding this way, now that way, seeking for a vent, and neuer resteth till it hath sa∣tisfied the lust. ibidem. As working vessels are preserued from breaking by vent: so wofull hearts are deliuered from bursting by words. The stone Tirrhenus, so long as it is whole swimmeth, but being once broken sinketh: so the heart of man being once broken, it soone sinketh, and being diuersly distracted, it is easily ouerwhelmed. Almightie God concerning the East gate of the Temple saith thus; This gate shall be shut, and shall not be opened, and no man shall enter by it, because the Lord God of Israel hath entered by it: so although the heart of a Christian, which is the temple of the holy Ghost, may let many things enter into it at o∣ther gates, yet must keepe the East gate,
the most illuminate and highest power and part of it, continually shut against all men, yea against all the world, and open onely to one thing, that is, to God, who hath already entered into it, and enlightened it with his Spirit. As at the window of Noahs Arke, there entred in no mist, no water, no∣thing else but one thing onely, which is light: so at this East gate, no mist of humane errours, no water of worldly cares may enter in, but onely the light Heauen, and a santified desire to bee fast knit, and perfectly vnited, by faith and ue to God. As the Alter of perfume was place close to the Golden Censer, very neare the Mercy seate: so a Christian heart, which is a spirituall Alter of perfume, and a sweete sauour to God, must al∣wayes approch nearer and nearer vnto the Throne of Grace, and continually higher and higher aduance it selfe to him that is the highest and holiest of all. As in a Well, except there bee some water in it, we cannot easily see the bag∣gage that lyeth in the bottome: so in the depth of the heart without teares wee cannot see our sins.
CONSCIENCE. AS Hony is not onely sweete of it selfe, but also it maketh that sweet, which before was not sweete: so a good conscience is so merrie and so pleasant, that it maketh all the troubles and tribulations of this world seeme plea∣sant and delightfull. Lodo. Granat. lib. 1 Ducis peccatorum. As they that sit at a banket are made merrie by the variety of meates and daintie ctes, and by the presence of their friends, with whom they liue: so the righteous are made merrie by the testimonie of a good conscience, and by the sweete fauour of the diuine pre∣sence. ibidem. As the tast of delitious meate cannot sufficiently bee expressed nor discribed with words to him, who heretofore hath not tasted of it: so neither the ioy and comfort of a good conscience to him that neuer felt it. ibid. As the morning Sunne when it is scarcely risen, and is not yet seene, enlightned the World with the neare∣nesse of his brightnesse: so a good con∣science
although it bee not fully and plainely knowne, yet it reioyceth and gladdeth the soule by her good testi∣mony. ibid. As a shadow doth alwayes follow the body: so feare and desperation in all places and at all times doe waite vpon an ill conscience. As persecution procureth a death to the body: so a conscience despairing assureth death to the soule. As the herbe Nepenthes, so much commended of Homer, being put into Wine, driueth away all sadnesse at a banket: so a good conscience being placed in vs doth abolish all tedious∣nesse of life. As true loue towards a women doth not desire a witnesse, but hath a enough, if it enioy her alone; so is a wise man contented only by the the testimonie of a good conscience. Plut. As a beautifull face is gratefull and acceptable in the sight of man: so is a cleare conscience beautifull in the eyes of God. Chrisostomus hom. 6. operis imperfecti. If thou castest little a sparke into a
great deepe, it is soone quenched: so a good conscience doth easily mittigate all griefe. idem hom. 25. de via recta. As there is no raine without clouds: so there is no pleasing of God without a good conscience. Marcus Eremita, de his qui putant ex operibus iustificari. As a brazen walls is a good defence vnto a Citie: so a good conscience vnto a man Lodouicus Vines introductione sapientiam capitc vltimo. As gowtie diseases are full of feare: so are ill consciences, full of suspition. Plut in Apophth. 231. As the shadow followeth the body: so an euill conscience doth follow a sinner. Basilus, apud Antonium in Melissa, part. 1. sermon. 16. Doctors and Doctrine. EVen as a plaister is of no vse, if it be not applied to the wound, and to the diseased place: neither are precepts nor Doctrine auailable, if by education they be not applied to the life. Lodoui∣cus Granat. lib. 1. Ducis peccatorum.
If thou wilt put any good thing into Bottles and Bladders, thou must first put the wind and the aire out of them: so thou must put pride and disdaine out of his mind whom thou wouldest teach. Plutarchus. As the seed of a sallow tree cast a∣way before it bee ripe, doth not onely bring forth nothing, but is a medicine to procure sterilitie in women, that they may not conceiue: so the speeches of them that teach, before they be wise, do not only shew themselues to be fooles, but doe infect their auditors, and make them indocible. Plin. lib. 16. cap. 27. As a consort consists of diuerse voices: so erudition is a mixture of diuerse dis∣ciplines. Seneca. The meate that swimmeth in the stomacke, is no meate but a buhen; but the same being digested, doth passe into blood and strength: so those things, which thou readest, if they remaine vnconcocted in thy memorie, they doe thee small good; but if they be digested into thy disposition, then they make thee better learned. Seneca. The earth which bringeth forth sal,
bringeth forth none other thing: so wittes fruitfull in learning, are not of such validitie in other matters. Plin. lib. 31. cap. 7. Wine powred into vessels made of Yew, becomes deadly: so erudition o∣therwise wholesome, if it fall into a pestilent nature, becommeth dangerous by his manners. As a Lawrell alwayes continueth greene: so the fame of learning doth doth neuer waxe old nor whether. Plin. lib. 15. cap. 30. As they that are of a ranke smell, doe sauour more rammish, when they are annointed: so the rumour of naughti∣nesse is more filthy, when the cele∣britie of learning maketh it more con∣spicuous, and more common in the mouthes of men. As a precious stone is a little thing, and yet is preferred before great stones: so learning and doctrine is but little in shew and ostentation, but great in value and price.
Artes and disciplines. AS they that often frequent theaters and play houses, with their plea∣sure doe also reape some profit: so Artes and Disciplines besides their pleasure and dignitie, doe bring also profit and commoditie. Plut. A tree of her own nature doth bring forth but one only fruit, but by grafting it becomes loaden with fruits of diuerse kinds: so hee that followeth his owne nature, is alwayes the same; but hee that is guided by Art, is like him∣selfe, Plin. lib. 17. cap. 14. The Turbot, the Skate, the Ray, and the Puffen being most slow fishes, yet haue often found in their bellies the Mullet, being the swiftest of all fishes, which they take by cunning and po∣licie: so many by Art and skill doe farre excell those that bee mightier in riches and strength. Plin. lib. 9. cap. 42. Plutarch testifieth that hee saw in Africa dogges carrying stones into the water, till the water was risen so high that they might lappe of it, the like hee reporteth of a dogge casting little stones
into a pot of paage, till they rose so high that hee might eate them: so that which is wanting vnto vs in strenght, is to be supplied by Art. As great waights which can be lifted vp by no mens strength, are easily drawn aloft by engins & deuices: so that which thou canst not doe by force, thou maist easily atchieue by Art and reason. As in houses there are portals before the entrie; and as Cities haue suburbs by which they are gon into: so before vertue the liberall Arts are placed, for it is gon vnto by this way. Philo de congressu quarend eruditionis gratia. As the Gate is the entrance into an house: so learnings encyclopedarie is the entrie vnto Vertue. Idem. lib. de pro∣fugis. As the sight doth receiue light from the ayre: so the mind doth receiue light from liberall disciplines, that it may be made more sharpe and piercing for the mysteries of Phylosophie. Aristoteles Lartium, lib. 5. cap. 1. As those first letters, by which chil∣dren learne their elements, doe not teach the liberall Arts, but are as an
induction vnto them: so the liberall Arts doe not bring the minde vnto ver∣tue, but pepare it, and make it fit for vertue. Seneca. Epist. 89. As the diggers of Wels many times doe not find the water they seeke for: so they that seke for perfection and felicitie in Arts, doe misse of their end: Philo lib. de Plantatione Noe. EDVCATION. AS many vnprofitable weeds grow in a field which are naught them∣selues, but yet are the signes of a fertile and plentiful ground, if any man would till it: so many vnruly affections of the minde being bad of themselues, doe argue no badde wit, if education did rightly apply them. Plut. There is not almost any tree, but it waxeth wild and crooked, if it want culture: so there is no wit so happy, but it degenerateth without orderly edu∣cation. Idem. They that bring vp horses well, doe teach them to obey the bridle: so hee
that will in struct Children, must first make them at tentiue, idem. There is no horse that well brooketh his Rider, but he that is tamed by Arte and cunning: so there is no wit, but it is barbarous and , except it bee tamed by education, and trained to moderation by precepts▪ idem. There is no beast so wild, which is no tamed by skill: so there is no wit so rude and clownish, which by education groweth not milde. idem. As a husbandman vnderprops yong trees, that they may encrease and grow straight: so he that educateth yong wits, addeth precepts, and wholsome admo∣nitions, least they wander awry. idem. As Corke is in vaine tied to Nets, that they may swimme, if the Leade be so proportioned that it drawes them vnder water: so wee are instructed in vaine in the precepts of well liuing, if our wickednesse will not suffer vs to arise out of foolishnesse. idem. As a field vntilled, doth not only re∣maine vnfruitfull, but also doth bring forth many weeds: so youth capable of reason, except it be exercised in honest
precepts, doth not onely not become good but runneth into many vices idem▪ A Beare doth bring forth shapelesse whelps, & doth forme them by licking▪ so it is meete that a yong wit be po∣lished by long industry. Plin. li. 8. ca. 26 The yong Cuckow being a bastard deuoureth the legitimate birds, and the dam too: so many brought vp with great cockering, as Cockneys be, ouer∣throw their educators. Plin. li. 10. ca. 9▪ A tree vnfruitfull of it selfe, by grafting becommeth fruitfull: so a slender wit by good education may be brought to very good passe. Plin. lib. 17. cap. 14. A tree of the owne nature, doth beare but one fruit; but by grafting bringeth forth many kinds: so they that haue nothing but their own nature to direct them, doe alwayes pipe one tune, but they that by education grow artistes; haue many harmonious Diapasons: As there be certaine fountaines, that by drinking of them doe change the skinne and haires of man and beast into white and blacke: so in the counte∣naunce and forehead of a man doth shine, with what precepts hee hath
been endued, & from what authours he hath drawne the conditions of his life. As potters clay and morter, while they are moist and soft, are easily fashioned to any likenesse: so young rude minds are fit for any discipline. Plin. lib. 36. cap. 24. As the herbe Fenegreeke, the worse it is vsed, the better it prospereth: so some children the lesse they are cocke∣red, the better they are. Plin. lib. 16. cap. 16. Morter is presently to bee vsed, be∣cause it quickly hardeneth and drieth: so young yeares is forthwith to bee framed to learning and good manners, before it grow hard and will nor ad∣mit the hand of the fashioner. Plin. lib. 36. cap. 24. The Adamant is mollified by one thing, otherwise it yeeldeth not to the Smithes hammer: so there is no wit nor disposition so rusticall and sauage, but by onething it may be ordered and and tamed. Plinius lib. 37. cap. 4. An Ape doth almost kill her young ones by embracing them: so many Pa∣rents doe corrupt their Children by
immoderate loue and affection in the i bringing vp. Plin. lib. 9. cap. 54. In the tillage of ground, first it is meete that the ground be good, next that the tiller bee skilfull, and then that the seed be good: so in the tillage and culture of the minde, the nature and disposition of the Child doth resemble the Earth, the Scoole-master the tiller, and the wholesome instructions the seed. Plutarchus de liberis educandis. As cart wheeles bended by force, can neuer againe bee brought to their former rectitude: so some wits depraued by education, can neuer againe bee corrected. Idem in Moralibus. As ground the better it is, the more it is spoyled, if it bee not tilled: so wits the iper they are, the worse they be∣come, if they be not instructed. ibidem. As all grounds are not fruitfull, that are tilled: so all wits do not bring forth fuit, that are well educated. Cicero libro 2. Tusc. quaest. As an husbandman delighteth to see fruite of that tree hee planted; and a Shepheard to see encrease of those sheep hee keepeth: so doth a Schoole-master
and a Tutor reioyce, to see those wits thriue and prosper, which they haue vertuously and industriously taught and tutered. Seneca lib. 2. epist. 34. As branches of trees growne crooked of a long time, cannot bee brought to straightnesse, although they be often bended with the hand: so they that are scarce honestly borne, and scarce in∣geniously brought vp doe alwayes looke to the ground; that is, they loue base and vile things, neither euer are lifted vp vnto vertuous or valorous en∣deuours. Politianus in Lamia. As in a fat ground, which no tiller hath touched, grow thornes & bushes: so often in a generous minde, vnlesse ingenious education helpe, vices spring vp with vertues. Idem de ira. As husbandmen weed their fields of hurtfull plants: so parents and teachers should weede vices out of the minds of their children and Schollers. ibidem. An vntamed horse becommeth dangerous: so an vntaught sonne be∣commeth mischieuous. As a field long neglected groweth wild, and bringeth forth briers and
thornes: so youth neglected bringeth forth vices and vanities. Chrysost. hom. . in. Math. As we do not set a mad or a drunken eeper ouer our horses and Asses: so wee should not see an asse-headed-choole-master, or a vicious Tutor ur Children. Idem hom. 60. As a vessell doth keepe the tast of the first liquor, that it was seasoned with: o doe Children tast of their first educa∣ion. Horati. The Greeke history reporteth that Alexander, that most potent King nd conquerour of the world, could not leaue those vices, which he had in is tender yeares learned of his Master eonida: so whatsoeuer wee are in∣ected withall in youth, wee cannot elinquish in age. Hieronimus epist▪ ad Ltam, de institutione filiae. As water doth follow thy finger, guiding it whether thou pleasest: so nder age is flexible to any thing, and s easily drawne whether soeuer thou eadest it. Idem epist. ad Gaudentum de catulae educat.
PARENTS. AS a Scorpion is not then only sup∣posed to haue a sting, when hee smiteth, but is alwayes to be taken heed of: so they that are propagated of wicked parents, although they doe not presently runne into mischife, yet they haue poison. Plut. As fishes bred and nourished in the Sea, haue no tast of the saltnesse of the Sea: so some being bred and brought vp among Barbarians, are farre off from all Barbarousnesse. As the yonger Storkes doe sustaine and releeue their aged and decrepit dammes: so should Children prouide for, and succour their aged and de∣cayed parents. Philo. lib. de Decalogo. As the Eagle, (being the vnnatural∣list bird to her young ones, that flies in the aire,) casteth one of her two young ones out of the neast, and nourisheth the other: so many vnnaturall parents, especially the female sexe, maketh es∣pecially much of some one Child, and and neglecteth all the rest; the eldes hath all the lands, and the other be∣come
beggers. Basilius Homil. 8. Hexa∣meron. Birds that haue griping tallents doe beare there young ones, when they are fledged, and cast them out of their neastes: so many churlish and filthy minded parents, then especially shew their scuruines and vnnaturall dealing to their Children, when they grow to pregnancy and maturity. Isidorus Clarius orat. 57. tom. 1. The Crow is commended for the loue to her young birds, because shee waiteth vpon them when they begin first to flie, and seeketh food for them: so those parents are to be praised, who continue their kindnesse to their Chil∣dren, not onely in childhood, but also in further yeares. ibid. As the Emperour Octauianus taught his Sonne, feates of warre, and his Daughters the Art of cloathing, that they might get their liuing, if any ad∣uersitie happened: so should parents doe now adaies, and then so many gentle-mens Children should not come to the gallowes: Policrates libro. 6. Cap. 4▪
Ely the Priest brought the curse of God vpon himselfe, and vpon his chil∣dren, because he did not correct them: so doe many parents now adaies. Aulus punished his Son with death because hee held friendship with Ca∣tiline his enemy: so should Christian parents punish their Children for keeping ill company, although not so seuerly. Augustine. lib. 5. de ciui. Dei. Cap. 15. CHILDREN. AS Iron and steele doe excell other things in hardnesse, but are ex∣ceeded of the Adamant: so the loue to∣wards Children is a mighty and a powerfull thing, but the loue towards God doth excell it. As the sap ad moisture doth ascend from the roote to the plant, but the plant doth not returne it againe to the roote but to fruit and seed: so the loue of parents doth ascend from them to their Children, but it doth not returne againe from the Children to the Pa∣rents. Chysost. hom. 1. ex varijs in
Mathaeum locis & homil. 32. operis imperfecti. As Children resemble their ancestors in the shape of body, and disposition of mind, in habit, gesture, aduice, and action: so it is probable, that in the seed of Princes there is a certaine ha∣bility engendred beseeming a Prince. Philo, de legatione ad Caium. As it is the rule of nature, that euery man should be borne hauing two eyes and fiue fingers, yet somtimes that the workes of God might be manifested, some haue sixe fingers: so man seldome erreth beyond the Law of nature, that the Child is borne vnlike his parents. Chrysostom. Homil. 45. in Math: As a Scorpion is not only to be thought then to haue a sting, when he smiteth, but is alwaies to be taken heed of: so those Children that descend from wicked parents although they doe not offend yet they haue poyson. Plutarchus in Moral. As the soft waxe receiueth what∣soeuer print is in the seale, and sheweth no other impression: so the tender babe being sealed with his Fathers
guifts, representeth his image most liuely. Wheate throwne into a strange ground, turneth to a contrary graine▪ the vine translated into another soile changeth his kind; a slipe pulled from stalke withereth: so a young Child as it were slipped from the paps of his Mother, and put out to nursing, either changeth his nature; or altereth his disposition. A new vessell, will long time sauour of that liquour, that is first powred in∣to it: so the Infant will euer smell of the nurses manners hauing tasted of her milke. As the moisture and sap of the earth doth change the nature of the Tree or plant that it nourisheth: so the wit and and discretion of a Child is altered and changed by the milke of the Nurse. As the parts of a Child, as soone as it is borne, are framed and fashioned of the Midwife, that in all points it may bee straight and comely: so the manners of the Child at the first are to bee looked vnto, that nothing discom∣mend the mind, that no crooked be∣hauiour
or vndecent demeanor be found in the man. As the steele is imprinted in the soft waxe: so learning is ingrauen in the mind of a young impe. COCKERING. APes almost strangle their whelps with embracing: so many Pa∣rents by too much cockering their Children doe vtterly spoile them. Plin. lib. 5. cap. 54. The young Cuckow, although a bastard, yet it deuoureth the legitimate young ones, with their dam: so some Children brought vp with too much cockering and loue, doe subuert their Parents: Plinius libro 10. cap. 9. The herbe Fenegreeke, the worse it is handled, the better it prospereth: so some Children the hardlier they are dealt with, the better men they proue, and some againe the more they are made of, the worser they are. As vnbridled Colts doe cast their riders: so cockered Cockneys do subuert their Fathers houses, and consume their patrimonies.
YOVTH. EVen as out of a Vessell, first that commeth forth, which is the purest, but that which is troubled and muddie sinketh to the bottome: so in the age of life, that which is the best, is the first, Seneca Epist. 109. As it is an argument that that new wine, will not last long good, which at the first is too fine and cleere: so it is a signe of future debility, if the ioynts of the body bee too soone knit, and the limmes at the first appeare beautifull, Lodoi. Granat. in lib. de Deuotione. As that wine which pleaseth in the tunnell, will not well carry age, but that which is hard and smart at the first, afterwards contenteth very well: so youth soone ripe soone rotten, but that which is harder and of lesse preg∣nancy at the beginning, afterwards commeth to maturity and fruitfull ripe∣nesse. Seneca. As in a soft and gentle mold, any print or forme we like, may easily bee effected: euen so in the first estate of greene and delicate youth.
As a field vntilled, doth not only re∣maine vnfruitfull, but also doth bring forth many weeds: so youth capable of reason, except it be exercised in honest precepts, doth not onely become good, but runneth into many vices. Plut. As Countries and Cities leaue them that saile in the Sea: so Childhood first slippeth away, then youth, and then old age. Seneca epist. 109. As no man perceiueth the comming of Storkes, but that they are come; neither knoweth any man of their de∣parture, but when they are gone; because they doe both priuily in the night: so no man vnderstandeth that youth depart∣eth, but that it is departed, nor per∣ceiueth that old age is comming, but when it is come. Plin. libro 10. cap. 23. As the parting of waies doth but a little differ at the first, but the further that their parting extendes, the distance is more and more increased, so that their differences are very spatiously opposed: so in the youth a little progresse of yeares doth make a great difference. Syneius de prouidentia, lib. 1. Ezechias mourned and was disquie∣ted,
because he was to dye being young. For as vnripe apples are pulled from the tree by force, but being ripe and come to age, they fall of their owne ac∣cord: so young men are hardly per∣swaded to leaue this life, and dye as it were vnwillingly, but old men depart more quietly and peaceable. Hector Pintus in cap. 38. Esayae. As the finest buds are soonest nipt with frosts; and the sweetest flowers sorest eaten with Cankers: so the ripest and youngest wits are soonest ouer∣growne with follies. As the olde Fox is more subtile then the young Cub; the Bucke more skilful to choose his food then the young fawnes: so men of age feare, and fore∣see that which youth leapeth at with repentance. As the minerals of Aetna stooue fire; and as the leaues in Parthia burne with the Sunne: so young yeares are inci∣dent to the heate of loue, and affection will burst into amorous and youthfull parties. As the nettle will haue his sting: so youth will haue his swing.
As the Iuniper is sowre when it is a twig, and sweete when it is a Tree: so youth in time leaues his wanton waies, and directeth his dayes after a more moderate course. As a seale is easily imprinted in soft wax, but if it grow hard, it is don more difficultly: so the wits of youth and children easily receiue any discipline, but if they be hardned by age, the im∣pression is the harder. Plutarke. As they that haue beene kept in bonds, doe wander more licentiously, then they that neuer came in fetters: so doth youth, when it is freed and loo from the gouerment of a Master. Plut. in Moralibus. As morter and clay, while they are moist, doe follow the hand of the fashioner for any forme: so tender and young minds are fit to receiue any rudition and discipline. Erasmus in similibus. A young vine doth yeeld greater a∣boundance of wine, but that which is elder doth yeeld better wine: so young men speake moe things, but old men speake more profitable things, and more to the purpose. ibid.
YOVTH. EVen as out of a Vessell, first tha commeth forth, which is the pures but that which is troubled and mudd sinketh to the bottome: so in the age o life, that which is the best, is the first Seneca Epist. 109. As it is an argument that that nev wine, will not last long good, whic at the first is too fine and cleere: so it i a signe of future debility, if the ioynts o the body bee too soone knit, and th limmes at the first appeare beautiful Lodoui. Granat. in lib. de Deuotione. As that wine which pleaseth in th tunnell, will not well carry age, bu that which is hard and smart at th first, afterwards contenteth very well so youth soone ripe soone rotten, bu that which is harder and of lesse preg∣nancy at the beginning, afterward commeth to maturity and fruitfull ripe∣nesse. Seneca. As in a soft and gentle mold, any print or forme we like, may easily bee effected: euen so in the first estate of greene and delicate youth.
As a field vntilled, doth not only re∣maine vnfruitfull, but also doth bring orth many weeds: so youth capable of eason, except it be exercised in honest precepts, doth not onely become good, but runneth into many vices. Plut. As Countries and Cities leaue them that saile in the Sea: so Childhood first slippeth away, then youth, and then old age. Seneca epist. 109. As no man perceiueth the comming of Storkes, but that they are come▪ neither knoweth any man of their de∣parture, but when they are gone; because they doe both priuily in the night: so no man vnderstandeth that youth depart∣eth, but that it is departed, nor per∣ceiueth that old age is comming, but when it is come. Plin. libro 10. cap. 23. As the parting of waies doth but a litle differ at the first, but the further that their parting extendes, the distance is more and more increased, so that their differences are very spatiously opposed: so in the youth a little progresse of yeares doth make a great difference. Syne sius de prouidentia, lib. 1. Ezechias mourned and was disquie∣ted,
because he was to dye being young. For as vnripe apples are pulled from the tree by force, but being ripe and come to age, they fall of their owne ac∣cord: so young men are hardly per∣swaded to leaue this life, and dye as it were vnwillingly, but old men depart more quietly and peaceable. Hector Pintus in cap. 38. Esayae. As the finest buds are soonest nip with frosts; and the sweetest flowers sorest eaten with Cankers: so the ripest and youngest wits are soonest ouer∣growne with follies. As the olde Fox is more subtile then the young Cub; the Bucke more skilful to choose his food then the young fawnes: so men of age feare, and fore∣see that which youth leapeth at with repentance. As the minerals of Aetna stooue fire; and as the leaues in Parthia burne with the Sunne: so young yeares are inci∣dent to the heate of loue, and affection will burst into amorous and youthfull parties. As the nettle will haue his sting: so youth will haue his swing.
As the Iuniper is sowre when it is a twig, and sweete when it is a Tree: so youth in time leaues his wanton waies, and directeth his dayes after a more moderate course. As a seale is easily imprinted in soft wax, but if it grow hard, it is don more difficultly: so the wits of youth and children easily receiue any discipline, but if they be hardned by age, the im∣pression is the harder. Plutarke. As they that haue beene kept in bonds, doe wander more licentiously, then they that neuer came in fetters: so doth youth, when it is freed and loo from the gouerment of a Master. Plut. Moralibus. As morter and clay, while they are moist, doe follow the hand of the fashioner for any forme: so tender and young minds are fit to receiue any rudition and discipline. Erasmus in imilibus. A young vine doth yeeld greater a∣boundance of wine, but that which is elder doth yeeld better wine: so young men speake moe things, but old men speake more profitable things, and more to the purpose. ibid.
Peaches are dearely sold, becaus they doe not last aboue three dayes: s youth is to be highly prized, because i soone fadeth ibidem. There is a countrey in India call Pandorum, the people whereof in thei youth haue white heads, but in thei old age blacke: so some are very sobe and modest, when they are young, b growing further in yeares, doe wa childish, and wholly bequeath them selues to vanity and villany, accordin to that verse: Angelicus invenis senibus sataniz in annis. As the Estrich digesteth hard Iro to preserue his health; as the Souldio lyeth in his harnesse to atchieue con∣quest; and as the sicke patient swa∣loweth bitter Pilles to bee eased of h greefe: so youth should indure sharp stormes to find reliefe. As in the faire Summer wee repai all things necessary for the cold Win∣ter: so good manners in youth, an lawfull exercises, be as it were victua and nourishments for age. As the Cipres tree, the more it
watered the more it withereth, and the oftner it is lopped, the sooner it dyeth: so vnbridled youth, the more it is by graue aduise counsailed, or due cor∣ection controuled, the sooner it falleth to confusion, hating all reasons that would bring it from folly, as the tree doth all remidies that should make it fertile. Iohn Lilly. As a horse is not to carry his owne bridle: so youth is not to ruhe himselfe n his owne conceipts. VERTVE. AS in a Meddow full of odoriferous flowers, it is a difficult thing to gather the fairest and sweetest: so it is a ard thing to find out which of the ertues is most excellent, that the lme and victory may bee giuen vnto Greg. Nazianz. orat. de pperate enda. As the end of husbandry is the ga∣ering of fruit, the end of building is e inhabiting of the house, the end of yling is riches, and the end of con∣ding is a crowne: so the end of vertue
is, that thou maist be called the seruant of God, and be so in deed. Gregorius Nycen in Mystica Mosaycae vit enarratione. As pleasure is found in Tauernes, in Cookes shops, in Bathes, and amongst wicked men: so vertue is found in Tem∣ples, in Vniuersities, in studies, and a∣mong good men. Seneca de beata vita. As the goodnesse of an Horse doth not consist in Golden Bridles, in costly trapings, or in a veluet Saddle, but in the swiftnesse of his running, the strength of his legs, and the firmenesse of his pace: so the vertue of the minde doth not consist in riches, in the healt of the body, in humane estimation or in libertie, for these things may be taken away; but in a right knowledg of God, and an vpright liuing amon men. Chrysost. hom. quod nmo lditu nisi aseipso. As it happeneth in trees, if onetak away the fruit with the leaues, and off all the branches, the roote still re∣mayning sound, the tree eft-soone flourisheth with greater beautie: so i the roote of vertue remaine sound
although riches be taken away, and the body putrifie, yet all things returne with greater plenty, as wee may see in Iob. Idem hom. 4. ad popul. Antioch. If you tread a precious stone in the durt it sheweth the beauty more per∣spicuously: so the vertue of the Saints, whethersoeuer it bee throwne, it still appeareth more beautifull, whether it be in seruitude, in prison, or in prospe∣ritie. Idem hom. 63. in Genesin. As an odoriferous oyntment doth not keepe his fragrancie shut vp with∣in it selfe, but doth send it forth, and sweeten those places neare vnto it: so generous and excellent men doe not hide their vertues within themselues, but doe both helpe others, and make them better. Idem. hom. 2. in 1. ad Thes∣salonicenses. The barke of a tree is sowre and bitter, but the fruit is sweet and plea∣sant: so vertue is bitter, but it bringeth forth most sweete and delicate fruit. Idem hom. 30. in. 1. Timoth. As in a Lute melody is not made by the touch of one string, but all are to be fingered▪ so all vertues are to be obserued
and practised. Idem sermone de vitijs & vitutibus. As there is no victory without con∣cetation: so there is no vertue with∣out an enemy. Lactantius de opificio Dei cap. 20. As in vntilled fields, before we sow, we first clense them of thornes, bram∣bles, and briers: so vices are first to be purged out of our soules, before wee sow vertues in them, whence the fruits of immortality may spring. idem lib. acephalo. As chaines be linked one within ano∣ther: so be vertues; prayer depends of loue, loue of ioy, ioy of gentlenesse, gentlenesse of humility, humility of obedience, obedience of hope, hope of faith, faith of hearing, and hearing of simplicitie. And as vertues be chained together, so also be vices; hatred de∣pends of anger, anger of pride, pride of vaine-glory, vaine-glory of infidelity, infidelity of hardnesse of heart, hard∣nesse of heart of negligence, negeligence of slothfulnesse, slothfulnesse of idlenes, idlenesse of impatiency, and impatiency of pleasure. Macarius hm. 40.
As it is in wealth, he that hath much would haue more: so in vertue, he that hath gained one vertue, will labour to get moe, and he that hath done one vertuous deed, will goe forward to doe moe. Chrisost. orat. quarta aduersu Iudos. As a Pilot guides his ship by the sterne: so a wise man gouernes his actions by vertue. Idem hom. 26 in Genesin. As hee that sits vpon an high rocke, cares not for the waues of the Sea, which he seeth tossed aloft, and con∣uerted into froath: so he that hath seated his securitie and rest vpon vertue, is of a quiet and peaceable mind, and laugheth at the worlds urbulent estate. Ibidem. As the billowes of the Sea some∣times seeme to bee caried aloft, and sometimes to be deepely depressed downewards: so they that contemne vertue, and worke wickednesse, some∣times through pride doe floate aloft, and sometimes are throwne downe to Hell gates. ibidem. As fire doth burne the matter put in∣to
it, making light the aire adiacent: so vertue doth burne and consume vices, filling the soule full of light. Philo. lib. quis rerum diiarm hres. As after the death of a Musitian, or a Grammarian, their Musicke and Grammar doth perish with them, but the Idaea of these Arts doe endure with the World for euer, according to which the present age, and that to come are to be made Musitians and Gram∣marians: so if the wisdome, tempe∣rance, iustice, and fortitude of euery one particularly should be taken away, yet in the immortall nature of this V∣niuerse, immortall wisedome and in∣corruptible vertue is engrauen, accord∣ing to which both the vertuous men of this age, and of the future time shall be censured and approued. Idem in lib. quod Deus sit immutabilis. As a seale Ring remaineth vnhurt al∣though that which it sealed be spoiled and marred: so although all vertuous impressions and Characters bee abo∣lished out of the minde through a wicked life, yet vertue preserueth her estate incorruptible, being not subiect
to any fate: Idem in lib. quod deterius poitiori insidietur. As wee must not handle Musike rudely, nor Grammer vnlearnedly, nor any other Art peruersly: so we must not vse wisdome craftily, nor temperance beastly, nor fortitude rashly, nor pietie superstitiously, nor any other vertue illiberally. ibidem, As the rising Sunne doth gilde the whole Heauens with his lustre: so Ver∣tue with her beames doth illustrate the whole soule of man. Idem in lib. de plantatione Noe. They that goe on false ground doe often fall, but they that trauell on sound ground doe make sure footing: so they that suffer themselues to be led by the externall goods of their bodies, doe often fall, but they that goe vnto God by vertue, their voyage is firme and certaine▪ ibidem lib. de Abrahamo. As the first and chiefest part of a liuing Creature is his Head, the second his Breast, the third his Belly; and as in the Soule the first and chiefest part is the part rationall, the second irascible, and the third concupiscible: so the first
and chiefest of all vertues is Wisdome, which is conuersant about the Head, and the rationall part of the Soule; the second is fortitude, which is conuersant about the breast, and about wrath the second part of the soule; and the third is temperance, which is occupied about the belly; and the part concupiscible, which hath the third place in the soule. Idem. lib. 1. allegoriarum legis: As the enioying of health doth shew vs the inconueniences of sicknes: so vices doe declare vnto vs what good∣nesse vertue hath in it, and darknesse doth tell vs, what an incomparable good light is. Hieronyus epist. ad Rusticum. As the missing of one member doth deforme the body of man: so the neg∣lecting of one vertue doth snew the imperfection of the soule. Diadochus do perfect. spirit. cap. 24. As a cloud doth not make the Sun to lose his light: so neither doth disaster fortune dimme the beautie of Vertue. Tyrius Platonicus sermone 26. As a Lute doth profit others by the ound, but neither heareth nor vnder∣standeth
any thing it selfe: so they that speake of vertue doe profit others, but not liuing thereafter, doe no good vnto themselues. Diogenes apud Laert. lib. 6. As spices do make clouts and ragged apparell smell sweete, but silke doth stinke being greased and infected with sweate: so any kind of life is pleasant, if vertue be ioyned vnto it, but wicked∣nesse doth make the glorious and splen∣dent life irkesome and intollerable. Plut in Moralibus. As a swift horse doth runne of his owne accord: so hee that is inflamed with the loue of vertue, needeth not a onitour. ibidem. As all things are pleasing to a Louer in his loue: so in whom the loue vertue; wee delight to imitate his gesture. his gae, and looke. ibidem. As they that loue truely, doth loue in their beloueds their stuttering and palenesse, or whatsoeuer defect: so the Louer and embracer of vertue doth not abhorre the banishment of Aristides, nor the pouertie of Socrates, nor the condemnation of Phocion. ibidem. As of fire and earth, the world is
compounded, being necessary elements, as Plato saith, the earth yeelding soli∣dity, & the fire giuing heat and forme: so great empires are not obtained, ex∣cept vertue bee mingled wich fortune, and one bee an helpe vnto an other. Ibidem. As that is no true loue, which wants iealousie: so hee loueth not vertue en∣tirely that is not inflamed with the emulation of good deeds done of o∣thers. ibidem. As a Candle light is obscured by the light of the Sunne: so the estimation of all corporall matters is obscured by the splendour of vertue. Cicero lib. 2. Offi. As our bodily eyes are cleared and purged by certaine Medicines: so the eyes of our minde are enlightned by looking vpon vertue. Seneca. lib. ▪ Epist. 116. As great Obeliskes are not made without great labour, by reason of their hugenesse, but being once builded, they continue infinite ages: so it is a hard matter to attaine vertue, but being gotten, it neuer dieth. Plin. lib. 36. Cap. 29.
The tree Lotos, which the Latines call Faba Graeca, vel Syriaca, hath a most bitter rinde, but most sweete fruite: so the first endeuours vnto ver∣tue are most hard, but nothing is more sweete then the fruite. Idem lib. 24. cap. 2. & lib. 13. cap. 17. Saffron thriues the better, if it bee troden on, and therefore that springs vp the best, that is set by pathwayes: so vertue exercised in extremities, doth thriue the better. idem. lib. 21. cap. 6. & Theophr. lib. 6. cap. 6. The Palme tree, because it hath a plaine barke, is hard to be climed into, but it hath most sweete fruit: so vertue hath a difficult entrance, but most plea∣sant fruit. Erasmus in similibus. Bees flee to all flowers, yet doe hurt none: so Vertue and Learning are so taken from others, that hee is neuer the worse, that doth communicate them. Ibidem. As the Arts were not perfected, a soone as they were inuented: so neither is vertue absolute and perfect in vs the first day. Seldome or neuer a vaine of Gold
and Siluer is found alone, but there is another not farre off: so there is no vertue solitarie, but one is ioyned to an∣other. As lightning doth blast all trees be∣sides the Lawrell tree, as saith Plinie lib. 2. so a great calamitie doth take all things away, besides Vertue. For con∣stant Vertue is a faire beautifull Bay∣tree, alwayes greene, not to be bla∣sted by any lightning, nor to be de∣stroyed by any thunder claps. Hector Pintus in cap. 17. Ezechiel. As hee is not rich, that can speake of much wealth, but he that possesseth it: so he is not a iust man that can reason of vertue, or knoweth the definition of it, but he that is indued with it, and exer∣ciseth it. idem in cap. 20. As in the stone Opalum the semb∣lance of many precious stones is seene, as the fierinesse of the Carbuncle, the purple of the Amethist, and the green∣nesse of the Emerald, and all these shining together after an incredible mixture: so all vertues are contained in the holy Scripture, and doe shine ther after a wonderfull manner.
As there bee seauen Planets, Luna, Venus, Sol, Mercurius, Mars, Iupiter, and Saturne: so there are seauen prin∣cipall vertues, Faith, Hope, Charitie, Prudene, Iustice, Fortitude and Tem∣rance, which vertues Heluicus The∣tonicus particularly compares vnto the seauen Planets in his first booke de coelo & elementis. cap. 84. As there bee seauen principals met∣tals, Qick siluer, Brasse, Gold, Siluer Tin, Iron, and Lead: so there be seauen chiefe vertues, vt suprà, which the same Heluicus particularly compareth to these mettals, in his second Booke d metallis & lpidibus, cap. 40. As Garlicke hath seauen medici∣nable qualities in it: so haue the seauen principall vertues, which the same Authour setteth downe in his third Book de vegetabilus & plants. cap. 8. As there be fiue outward senses, the sight, hearing, smelling, tast, and touching: so there bee fiue inward ver∣tues, Faith, Obedience, Hope, Charitie, and Humilitie, which the same writer compareth together, in his sixt booke, de homine & eius membris. cap. 77.
As the bones are the strength of the body: so vertues are the strength of the Soule. F. Ioannes a S. Geminiano lib. 6. de homine & membris eius. cap. 77. As the bones are bond together by certaine ligaments: so all vertues are so combined and linked together, that one cannot bee had without another. ibid. As the bones are nourished by the in∣ward marrow: so vertues are nourished by diuine grace. As the best Wine is in the middest of the Barrell: so vertue doth consist in a meane. Idem lib. 9. de artificibus & re∣bus artisicialibus. cap. 82. It is to no purpose to light a lampe to burne, if oyle be not powred in: so it is to no purpose to teach that vertue is to be embraced, if the way and manner bee not deliuered how to attaine vnto it. Plutarch. Euen as a ditcher that by chaunce findeth a precious stone, doth little esteeme it, because hee knoweth not the price of it: so ignoraunt infidels, and prophane worldly men, make little reckoning of vertue and vertuous men, because they neither know the dignity
of vertue, nor the estimation of her followers. Lodouicus Granat. lib. 1. Ducis peccatorum. The Images called Sileni, were vn∣polished without, but curiously and with great Art wrought within: so ver∣tue out wardly seemeth rough, when in∣wardly it is full of beautie. ibidem. As blood releiueth a distressed heart: so vertue comforteth an afflicted soule. ibidem. Euen as God is a goodnesse so vni∣ersall, that in him alone are found all the perfections of all good: so after a certaine manner the same are found in Vertue. ibidem. Euen as of the conueniencie and proportion of the members and linea∣ments, and of the humours of the na∣turall body, a certaine beautie a riseth, which is acceptable to the eyes of men: so of the order and vertuous frame of the life, laudably led and formed, so great a beautie proceedeth, that not onely it is most acceptable to the eye of God and Angels, but it is also beloued of peruerse and froward men. ibidem. If a noble and beautifull Woman,
worthy of a Kings bed, should be mar∣ried to a foule Collier, it would moue all men to compassion, that beheld her: so much more effectually shall he bee moued, that seeth vertues, worthy of God, and diuine reward, to be made vassals to compasse the drosse and dung of this world. ibidem. He that selleth precious rich Gemmesought very well to them, that he be not deceiued in the price; and the ouerseer and gouernour of a Princes house ought to know the deserts of euery one in the house, that he may dispose of euery one according to his dignitie, for otherwise hee shall omit many errours, and offer great inequality: so a man that dealeth with the worth and value of vertues, is to knowe the price and dignitie of them, that comparing them betweene them∣selues, he may see which is to bee pre∣ferred before others, and render and tender to euery one her due honour▪ ibidem. Euen as wee make greater account of an heape of Gold, then of Siluer; and doe more esteeme an eye, then a
finger: so also it is meete and requisite that with greater endeauour and dili∣gence we should apply our selues to the worthier vertues, and with the lesser to the lesse worthy, lest we disturbe the spirituall businesse. Ibidem lib. 2. Ducis peccatorum. As in all things as well artificiall as naturall, there are found some true, and some seeming appearing so, but are not so in deed; and as there is both true Gold, and that which is false, law∣full money, and counterfeit coyne, true Gemmes and false Gemmes: so also among Vertues, some are true, and some that appeare to be so, but are not so in truth. ibidem. As the foule Toade hath a faire stone in his Head; the fine Gold is found in the filthy earth; the sweete Kernell lyeth in the hard shell: so Vertue is many time harboured in the heart of him, that most men esteemed mishapen. As the precious stone Sandastra hath nothing in outward appearance, but that which seemeth blacke, but be∣ing broken, powreth forth beames like the Sunne: so Vertue sheweth but bare
to the outward eye, but being pier∣ced with inward desire, shineth like Christall. FAITH: AS a Child that learneth his first e∣lements, ought to beleeue that his Master teacheth him, and not to aske the reason why this Letter is called A, and that B: so in the misteries of Faith, we must not aske the reason how this may be, and that may be, but we must giue credite to the Scriptures. Lodoi∣cus Granat. in lib. de deuotione. As he that hauing neuer seene glasse before, seeing a curious and an excel∣lent vessell made of it, and set before his eyes, can not be induced to beleeue that it was made of a certaine kind of straw, and sand, and that onely by the breath of man: so is it in matters of Faith being considered of by the light of reason. Ibidem. As we cannot imitate nor well vn∣derstand the Arte of Bees in making their Hony Combes, and tempering their Honie; nor the Arte of Spiders
in weauing their Wibbes; nor the Arte of Silke wormes in spinning their Silke: so much lesse can we imitate the diuine workes, or comprehend in our reaso∣nable vnderstanding the misteries of Faith. ibidem. If thou hast life, thou hast heate: so if thou hast a liuely Faith, thou hast good workes Nazianzene. As fire cannot be without heate, nor the Sunne without light: so a iustifying Faith cannot bee without iustifying workes. As a riuer commeth from a fountaine: so faith commeth from the Lord. As water maketh the earth fruitfull: so faith enricheth the soule with good workes. As the Carbuncle shineth in the night, and in darknesse casteth light vn∣to the eyes: so faith shineth in the dark∣nesse of herisie, and in the night of per∣secusion, neither can it be ouercome or extinguished of either. As there are twelue kinds of a Car∣buncles: so there are twelue Articles of our Faith. Isidorus. As a garment touched with the stone
Amiathon, doth resist fire, and if you hang it ouer the fire, it will not burne, but become brighter: so the soule be∣ing endued with Faith, doth resist the heate of persecution, and by it becomes more glorious. Iidorus. As Quick-siluer is the Element or matter of all mettals, according to the Phylosopher: so Faith is the foundation of all vertues. As the Almond tree flourisheth be∣fore any other tree: so Faith ought to flourish before any other vertue. As wee cannot liue without the ele∣ments: so we cannot attaine knowledge without Faith. Clemens Alexander lib. 2. Stromat. As nothing is delectable vnto me without light: so nothing is acceptable vnto God without Faith. Origenes lib. in Iob. As a light is not lightned of Oyle, but is nourished by Oyle: so Faith doth not grow of works, but is nourished by workes. Chrysostomus hom. 18. operis imperfecti.
HOPE. EVen as an Anchor fastened into the earth, keepeth the Ship safe, which stayeth in the midst of the waues, and maketh it that it feareth not the bil∣lowes of the raging Sea: so liuely Hope being firmely fixed vpon the heauenly promises, preserueth the minde of the fighteous vnremoued in the middest of the waues of this world, and maketh it that it contemneth and despiseth all the storme and tempest of the winds. Lod. Granat. lib. 1. Ducis peccat. Euen as a Sonne in all his troubles and necessities, which happen vnto him, trusteth and affianceth his repose in his Father (especially if he be rich and powerfull) that his helpe and fa∣therly prouidence will not at any time faile him: so should man haue this heart of a Sonne to God his Father, who both can and will helpe his children better then all the Fathers in the World. Idem lib. 2. Ducis peccatorum. As a Ship by the anchor is kept from the violence of the tempests: so the soule by Hope is kept from the
rage of temptations. F. Ioannes a S. Geminiano lib. 9. de Antificib. & reb. Artif. cap. 70. As a staffe doth support a man: so doth Hope ibidem. As the hsbandman soweth his land in Hope of fruit: so men performe the duties of Christianity in Hope of hea∣uen. Macar. hom. 14. As a Mearchant taketh paines to furrow the vast Ocean in hope of earth∣ly gaines: so a Christian strugleth through the waues and billowes of this life in hope of heauenly reward. Basil. in Psal. 1. As the hope of a Crowne and victo∣ry maketh the discommodities of war tollerable: so the hope of heauen maketh the griefes and turmoyles of this life portable. Chrysost. lib. 3. de prouiden∣tia Dei. As an helmit defendeth the Head: so hope defendeth the soule. idem homilia nona in priorem ad Thessalonicenses. As Pillers support and vphold earth∣ly buildings: so hope supporteth and vpholdeth spirituall buildings. Lauren∣tius Instinianus in ligno vit, c. 2. de spe.
As it did not hurt Rahab to dwell with the people of Iericho, but her faith kept her safe: so sin doth not hurt them that in Faith and Hope doe expect their redeemer. Macarius hom. 31. As without sustenance the body would sinke: so without hope the heart would burst. As Abraham begat Isaac: so Faith begets Hope. CHARITIE. AS the Physitian hateth the disease, yet loueth the person of the di∣seased: so wee must loue that in our neighbour, which is good, and made of God, and abhor that, which man and the Deuill haue made euil. Lod. Granat. lib. 1. Ducis Peccat. As the members of the same body, albeit hauing diuerse duties and functi∣ons, and differing also in forme, doe tenderly and mutually loue one ano∣ther, because they liue by one, and the selfe same reasonable soule: so much more ought faithfull Christians to loue one another, who are made a liue by
that diuine Spirit, who by how much he is more noble, by so much also hee is more powerfull to knit and vnite those together, in whom he dwelleth. ibid. In the Temple there was not any thing, which either was not Gold, or that was not couered with pure Gold: so it is not lawful that any thing should be in the liuely temple of our soule, which is not either charity, or ouer∣gilded and deaurated with charity. I∣dem. lib. 2. Ducis Peccatorum. Euen as all the life of the body pro∣ceedeth from the soule: so all the dignity and worth of externall vertues proceed from the internall, but especially from charity. Ibidem. As Gold excelleth all other mettals: so Charity excelleth all other vertues, whether theologicall or morall. Ge∣minianus lib. 2. de Meiallis & lapid. Cap. 40. As in a materiall building one stone is knit vnto another by lime and mor∣ter: so in the spirituall building one Christian is ioyned to another by cha∣rity. Chrysostom. hom. 7. operis im∣perfecti.
As death is the end of sinne: so is Charity, because hee that loueth God ceaseth to sinne. Ambrosius lib. de Isaac & anima. As Harts in swimming ouer a riuer, by holding vp one anothers head, doe helpe one another: so wee sailing ouer the Sea of this world by charity should helpe one angther. August. lib. 83. quaest. 8. As Ginger is medicinable against the cold causes of the breast and lungs: so charity is a medicine against the cold icenesse of niggardice and auarice. Geminianus lib. 3. de vegetabilib. & plant. cap. 5. As a roote is ingendred of moisture and celestiall heat: so charity groweth from the moisture of deuotion, and su∣pernall heate of the holy spirit. Idem. lib. 3. de veget. & plan. cap. 9. As the Cipers tree is very fragrant in sauour: so the odour of Charity is so sweete vnto God, that without it no∣thing smelleth well. Ibidem. As the same hand is diuided in diuers fingers: so the charity of many doth make them one, & yet they are seuered. Plut.
As fire in all shops is an instrument for all artisans and workemen: so no∣thing is well done without charity. As the Sunne is of an vniting vertue, for it vniteth the planets▪ in their ef∣fects: so charity doth spiritually vnite, and therefore it is called the bond of perfection, because it perfectly vniteth the soule to God, and bindeth the hearts of the faithfull together. F. Ioan∣nes a S. Geminiano libro. 1. de caelo & clementis cap. 13. As the Sun is of a reuiuing nature: so is charity, ad doth translate from death to life. ibidem. As the Sun is of an attractiue power, to draw vapours vpwards: so is charity for it healeth the heart, and draweth vp the affections to God. ibidem. As the Sunne and the fire are neuer without heat: so charity is neuer with∣out works and well doing. ibidem. As the Sunne and the fire are com∣municatiue of themselues: so also is charity. ibidem. As fire most actiue among the ele∣ments: so is charity most actiue among the vertues. ibidem.
As a light is not diminished by par∣ticipation: so charity is not lessened, by being deuided to many, but rather augmented. ibidem. As heate is the chiefe agent in gene∣ration: so is charity in producing the workes of vertue. ibidem. As heate mollifieth hard mettals: so charity softeneth hard hearts. ibidem. As vessels are made of clay: so by charity the heart of man is made a di∣uie vessel. ibidem. As clay mingled with vineger doth stay the bleeding at the nose: so charity tempered with the vineger of compun∣ction, doth restraine the fluxe of sinne. Ibidem. As the Sardian stone expelleth feare, procureth mirth, maketh bold, and sharpeneth the vnderstanding, as saith Dioscorides: so Charity bringeth ioy, ioy expelleth feare, and by conse∣quent it maketh bold and valiant, and whetteth the vnderstanding to contemplation of heauenly matters. Idem lib. 2. de Matallis & Lpd. cap. 5.
Prudence. AS in a liuing creature the first and chiefest part is the head, the se∣cond the breast, and the third the priuy members; and as in the oule the first and chiefest part is rationall, the second irascible, and the third concupiscible: so prudence is the first, and chiefest vertue, which is conuersant about the head, and the rationall part of the soule; the second is fortitude, which doth establish the heart, and is busied about anger; and the third is tempe∣rance, which is occupied about the priuy partes, and the faculty concupis∣cible, which hath the third place in the soule. Philo. Iud. lib. 1. legis allegoriarū. A Serpent when hee is within the danger of man, of all parts of his body, keepeth his head from blowes, which hee doth eiter by gathering his body into a circle, or hiding it in an hole, and suffereth his other parts to be beaten: so if any persecution happineth vnto vs, prudence teacheth vs to hide our head, which is Christ, that taking the blowes vpon vs, wee may afegard the faith
receiued of him by the losse, if need bee, of our bobies. Hilar. cano. 10. in Math. The prudence of the Serpent is seene in two things, in safegarding his head, with yeelding his body to strokes; and in his drinking, for when thirst op∣presses him, and he goeth to drinke, he doth not take his poyson with him, but leaueth it in his den: so our prudence should be, in time of persecution and temptation, rather to deliuer to the sword and fire all that we haue, then to hazard and end anger our head, that is, to deny Christ; and secondly, when we goe to the holy Church of God, or to prayers, or to receiue the holy miste∣ries, that we doe not cary with vs in our cogitations, maliciousnesse, vo∣luptuousnesse, or enmity. Epiphanius hresi. 37. As a Captaine guideth his army, a Pilot his ship, God the world, and the vnderstanding the soule: so prudence tempereth and gouerneth the felicity of this present life: Archytas apud Sto∣eum ser. 1. As a sar doth warne vs to take heed
of a wound: so prudence in the conside∣ration and memory of passed dangers doth make vs more wary and caute∣lous. Plut. in Moralibus. As the Beuers of Pontus doe bite off their preuy members, when they are hunted, because they know, that for them they are pursued: so it is the part of a prudent man sometimes to cast a∣way that thing, for which hee is en∣dangered. Eras. in similibus. Harts when they feele themselues wounded, do run to the herbe Dictam∣num, and presently the arrow falleth forth. Beares because their eyes often growe dimme, thrust their heads into the hiues of Bees, that being stung till the bloud follow, the grossenes of the humour may be purged. The Lisard be∣ing to fight with the Serpent, placeth himselfe not far from a certaine herbe, and as often as hee perceiueth himselfe wounded of the Serpent, so often hee runneth to that herbe, and presently re∣turneth to the cōbat as whole as a fish. The Fox cureth himselfe with iuyce of the Pine tree: The Torteise hauing eaten the flesh of a Viper, auoideth the
hut of poyson by eating wild Marge∣rom. The Serpent doth cure his eyes by feeding on Fennell. The hedge-hogge maketh two holes in his caue, one to∣wards the North, and the other to∣wards the South, when the North wind blustereth hee shtteth his Northen hole, and looketh to the South, and when the South wind bloweth, hee openeth his hole towards the North: so man being prudent and reasonable should see what is good for him, and foresee things to come. Isidorus Clarus orat. 56. tom. 1. As hee should not take a Lute in his hand, that is ignorant in Musicke: so he should not take rule and soueraignty vpon him, that is not endued with pru∣dence. Plutarchus. As the Cyclope hauing his eye thrust out, stretched out his hands hither and thether without any certaine aime: so a great King or mighty Potentate, who wants prudence, setteth vpon all his affaires with great hurly burly, but with no iudgement. Plutarchus & H∣merus lib. 9. Odys. As Tinne separateth brasse and lead
from Gold and Siluer: so prudence distinguisheth good from euill, and discerneth things profitable from hurt∣full. F. Ioannes a S. Geminiano libro 2. De metallis, & lapidibus. cap. 40. Tinne defendeth other mettals from the fire: so prudence defendeth the o∣ther vertues from perishing. Ibidem. As the smelling discerneth good sauours from ill smelles: so prudence discerneth good things from bad. Idem. lib. 6. de homine, & membris eius ca. 61: As Socrates by the Oracle of Apollo was held the wisest man among the Heathen: so Salomon by the testimony of God, was the wisest man vpon the earth, so that there hath not beene the like among the Kings, which were be∣fore him, neither after him came the like. . Chron. cap. 1. IVSTICE. AS sinne is sweete in the beginning, but bitter in the end: so Iustice on the contrary, it seemeth bitter in the beginning, but is sweeter then hony in the end. Origenes.
As a iudge would not ouercome any man, nor haue any aduersary, but pro∣nouncing his sentence determineth with the honester side: so iustice is a∣gainst no man, but giueth to euery man his owne. Philo lib. 1. legis allegoriarum. As fire cannot burne without fuell, by which it is nourished: so the meate and food of the soule is iustice, by which it liueth. Lactantius lib. 2. cap. 13. As he that sitteth in a strong house, when a storme ariseth, heareth the noyse of the tempest, ad how the trees are tossed of it, but he himselfe feeleth not the blast: so he that sitteth encirled with iustice, when the World is di∣sturbed, heareth the hurly burlies and tumults, but is not touched himselfe. Chrysost. Hom. 48 oper. imperf. As the mind of a sinner is more and more darkened and dimmed, and is fur∣ther and further remoued from the light of truth: so hee that exerciseth iustice, hath his mind more and more enlightened, and ascendeth to the knowledge of greater wisedome. Idem hom. 18. operis imperfesti. As Siluer is hard, but yet to bee
melted: so although iustice is seuere, yet it hath compassion, and not indigna∣tion. F. Ioannes a S. Geminiano lib. 2. de metallis & lapidibus cap. 4. As Aristides and Phocion were the iustest men amongst the Athenians; Bias among the Prienaeans; Aristopha∣nes among the Messenians; Timolion among the Corinthians; Glaucus a∣mong the Spartans; Prodicus among the Grecians; Chiron among the Cen∣taures; Maris among the Laodicians; Ripheus among the Troyans; and Her∣mes, Bochyris, and Mycerinus among the Egyptians: Frabricius, Camilus, Cato, Titus Manlius, Augustus, Alexander Seuerus, and Vrsus Nolans were accounted the iustest men among the Romaines. FORTITVDE. AS a stone cutter ought alwayes to haue his mallet in his hand, by reason of the hard matter which hee laboureth in: so he that will either be∣come good, or continue vertuous, must alwayes haue fortitude in a readi∣nesse,
as a spirituall mallet to tame and and ouercome the difficulties, which meete with him in the way of vertue. Lodou. Granat. lib. de deuotione. As Harts haue great hornes in vaine, because they want courage: so it is not inough to bee rich, except thou bee valiant. Plut. As they that walke stroutingly, and Shakerleyan like, are called proud and haughtie persons, whereas they are termed valiant and valorous, that aduance themselues in fight and com∣bat: so hee that reares and lifts vp his minde in aduersitie, is to bee accounted valiant and inuincible. Idem. As an ill chance at dice, is by art and cunning to be turned to the best aduan∣tage: so whatsoeuer happeneth in the life disasterously, fortitude and true valour turneth it to the best part, and maketh the be vsest of it. Idem. As Iron doth bruse all other metalls: so fortitude doth ouercome all kind of danger. F. loannes à S. Geminiano lib. 2. de metallis & lapidibus, cap. 40. If a waight be laid vpon the branches of the Palme tree, they doe not bend
downewards after the manner of other trees, but of their owne accord doe striue and mount aloft against the waight of the burthen: so the mind of a valiant man, by how much it is pressed and held downe by aduerse for∣tune, by so much it becommeth more vigorous and valorous. Plin. libro. 16. cap. 43. As those parts of trees are stronger, that are opposit to the North, then those that looke toward the South or west: so wee are more firme and valiant in those things, in which Fortune hath exercised our fortitude. The Crocodile is terrible against them that flye, but doth flye from them that follow him: so many, if thou eeldest vnto them, rage like Lyons, but if thou valiantly conte and withstandest them, they become as fearefull as Hares. Plinius. As a Lyon feareth nothing, but a Cocke: so a valiant heart, and a mag∣nanimous spirit feareth nothing, but reproach, slander, and disgrace. As a beard is a token of heate and naturall vigour: so fortitude to st
sinne is a signe of spirituall strength. F. Ioannes à S. Geminiano lib. 6. de. ho∣mine & membris eius, cap. 29. As three of the nine valiant worthies Hector, Alexander Magnus, and Iulius Caesar were Ethnickes; and other three Iewes, Iosua, Dauid, and Iudas Ma∣chabaeus: so the other three, Carolus Magnus, Godfrey of Bullen, and Ar∣thur of Britaine, were Christians. As Hercules was the strongest a∣mong the Heathen: so was Sampson among the Iewes. As Milo Crotoniata did carry at the games of Olympus a Bull a furlong, and when hee had done slew him with a blow of his fist, and eate him vp in one day: so Bithon was so strong, that as Pausanias, testifieth in Caelius, he caried a Bull on his shoulders, for which memorable and prodigious strength, he had his picture set vp at Argos. TEMPERANCE. AS Iustice commeth not by auarice and desire of gaine: so neither temperance is obtained by intemp∣rance,
nor Christian conuersation by delicates and dainties, Clemens Alex. lib. 2. paed. cap. 1. As intemperance threw Adam out of Paradice: so temperance is a good mean to cast sin out of the soule. Chry. hom. 10. in Math. As horses are curbed with bridles least they should proue resty iades: so the body is to bee moderated with temperance, least it proue an vnruly Seruant to the soule. Augustinus cap. 10. De salutaribus documentis. As it is impossible for a Serpent to put off his old skin, except he glide thorow a narrow place: so is it impos∣sible for vs to put off our old man with his corruptions, except wee enter thorow the straight gate of abstinence, fasting and temperance. Climacus de discretione, gradu. 26. As swine cannot wallow in hard dryed clay: so Diuels cannot tumble and keepe euell-route in abstemious and temperate soules ibidem. As the earth if it bee moderately watered doth aboundantly yeeld the seed it receiued, but if glutted with
showers it bringeth forth thornes and weeds: so our heart, if it be moderately maintained, it plentifully powreth forth graces receiued of the holy Spirit, but if it be glutted with wine and belly cheere, it bringeth forth thornie cogita∣tions, and corrupt weeds. ibid. Cap. 48. As a lampe is without oyle: so is ab∣stinence, fasting & temperance without charity. Cesarius Arelatensis hom. 32. As gluttony kindleth the concu∣piscence of Iuxury: so temperance ad abstinence mortifieth the lust of the bo∣dy. Isaac presbyter de mundi contemptu. As the stomacke being corrupted with the immderate eating of sweete meates, is purged by a bitter potion: they that haue liued riotously and luxuriously are neuer better cured then by a temperate and an austere kind of life, especially if there bee giuen vnto them to drinke the bitter wine of the Lords passion. Guerricus abbas sermone primo de Epiphania. As the Athenians did neuer consult of peace, but in mourning apparell, as Demades said: so moderate liuing doth neuer enter into our minds, except we
be driuen to it by sicknes and diseases, Plut. in Moral. As in a calme the ship is mad ready against a tempest: so by slender fare, and spare diet wee are made more fit to auoide surfet at a large banquet. ibidem. Men that are onely fat, tall and strong, are like vnto the Pillers of buildings, as Aristotle said. ibidem. As from ships whose pmpe is full, the burden and loade is to bee with∣drawne: so from surfet swolne churles, that carry slesh budgets about them, meate and drinke is to be withdrawne. Ibidem. As Marriners in faire weather doe spread their sailes, but when they feare a tempest they draw them in: so the body, when it is in sound health, may feed more largely, but fearing a disease, it must be dealt withal more warely. b. As the Planet Mercury is said to rule ouer the water: so temperance doth rule ouer the waters of concupiscence and the fluds of lust. F. Ioanne, à S. Ge∣miniano lib. 1. de caelo & elementis c. 77. As Mercury doth dispose the Child vnto wisdome that is borne vnder his
predominancy: so the moderation as well of meate, as of venery doth dispose vnto the atchiuement of prudence. ibid. As Mercury doth alwayes goe after the Sunne: so temperance maketh the flesh to yeeld obedience to reason. ibid. As Mercury (according to Ptolomy) swaieth rule in Gemini and Virgo, but not in Piscis: so temperance hath do∣minion ouer Gemini, that is, ouer the senses of the body, which are two fold, as ouer the two eyes, two eares, &c. and it raigneth in Virgo, because it preserueth virginity, but it faileth in Piscis, that is, in them that liue in the waters of delicacy ibidem. As Tinne (according to Aristotle) is compounded of good quicke-siluer, but of bad sulphur: so temperance is compounded of the moderation and strength of regular reason, and of the delight and will of the flesh. Idem lib. 2. de Metallis & Lapid. cap. 36. As Tinne cracketh all other metals, that is it mixed with: so temperance and abstinence doth pull downe pride, and bruseth all the rebellions of the body. ibidem.
As that Amethist is good, which is beautified with the mixture of two colours, purple and violet: so is that temperance profitable, that is adorned with two vertues, with charity and hu∣mility. Ibidem. As there are fiue kinds of the Ame∣thist, as saith Isidore: so there are fiue principall parts of temperance; absti∣nence, sobriety, charitie, shamefastnes, and modesty. ibidem. As the Amethist is powerfull against drunkennesse, as saith Dioscorides: so is temperance. ibidem. As the Amethist maketh men vigi∣lant: so doth temperance. Ibidem. As the Amethist is soft and easie to be engrauen: so doth temperance make a man capable of euery good and beau∣tifull sculpture, of all honest actions and vertuous demeanours: Ibidem. As Porcus among the Indians; Masinissa among the Numidians; E∣paminondas among the Thebanes; and Lycurgus among the Lacedemonians, were renowmed for sober and tempe∣rate men: so Socrates, Plato, and Pericles, were famous for temperance
among the Athenians and Iulius Caesar among the Romans: so that Cato was wont to say of him, that hee alone came sober to subuert the common wealth. ABSTINENCE. AS a sicke man commeth to phy∣sicke: so euery one should come to feed on dainties, that is, not seeking for pleasures in them, but releefe of ne∣necessity. Lodouicus. Granatensis. lib. de deuotione. Euen as a dead body is preserued by myrrhe which is bitter, otherwise it would putrifie and breed wormes: so also our flesh is corrupted through de∣licacy and effeminacy, and bringeth forth vices, which otherwise by tempe∣rance and abstinence is kept in the duty of vertue. ibidem. As that raine is the best, that mildly showreth vpon the earth, but a suddaine and a violentraine hurteth the medowes and destroyeth the corne: so that meate is the best for the body, that is taken temperately & with abstinence,
but gluttony destroyeth and enfeebleth it. Ibidem. As full furnished tables breed loth∣some surfets: so meane repasts make healthfull persons. As a fasting mans spetting, is poyson vnto a Serpent: euen so abstinence is the bane of all vices whatsoeuer. As they that offer secrifice, doe not tast of it: so certaine giue liberall entertainment to others, themselues notwithstanding being very abstinent. Plutarchus. As wormes in Childrens bellies are killed by sharpe and bitter medicines: so sinne dwelling in our inward parts is slaine and existinguished by absti∣nence and fasting. Basilius homil. 1. de ieiunio. As the stone which the Grecians call Amianton, cannot bee polluted: so an abstemious person can hardly bee cor∣rupted. ibidem. As hunger and thirst do make meate and drinke pleasant to the tast: so ab∣stinence and fasting doe reason and sweeten all meats and food whatsoeuer. Ibidem.
As oyle maketh the ioynts of a wrastler supple: so abstinence and fasting doth adde strength vnto him that exerciseth himselfe in pietie. Idem homil. 2. de ieiunio. As water allayeth heate: so abstinence and fasting allayeth lust. ibidem. As ingurgitation and gourmandising maketh the body heauie and vnweildy: so abstinence and fasting maketh it light and nimble. ibidem. As they that keepe horses for the race doe diet them before they runne: so he that will bee fit for the heauenly race, mst diet himselfe by abstinence and fasting. ibidem. As gluttony doth bring innumerable euils vnto mankind: so abstinence and fasting doth bring iunumerable good things doth to the soule and body. Chrysost. hom. de Iona propheta. As litle ships swiftly saile ouer the Sea, but those that are ouerloaden are drowned in the waters: so abstinence and fasting maketh the mind lighter, that it can easilier sayle ouer the Sea, of this life, and lightlier soare vp to Hea∣uen, and see that happinesse, which
God hath prouided for it. ibidem. As he that washeth himselfe and af∣terwards tumbleth in the durt, washeth himselfe in vaine: so hee that fasteth and abstaineth from sin, and yet walloweth in sinne, his abstinence and fasting is to no purpose, Idem. sermone 1. e ieiunio. As hee that recouereth a sicke man vnto health, commandeth him to ab∣staine from those things, that brought his disease: so the Lord after baptisme commended and commanded absti∣nence and fasting vnto vs against the sinne of gluttony; for the intemperance of the belly disparadic'd Adam. Iaem om. 10. 11. Math. As physicke is many times vnprofi∣table, through the vnskilfulnesse of him that vseth it: so is fasting and absti∣nence. idem. hom. tertia at pop. Antioc. As horses are to bee restrained with bit and bridle: so our bodies are to bee brought vnder and to be kept vnder by abstinence, fastings, watchings and prayers. Augustinus cap. 10. de aluta∣ribus documentis. As oyle maketh the raging Sea
calme: so fasting and abstinence extin∣guisheth the burning and boyling lusts of the body. ibidem. As a lampe is without oyle: so is ab∣stinence and fasting without charitie. Caesarius Arelat. hom. 32. As the body becommeth vnweildy by gourmandizing: so it becommeth weake and feeble by too much fasting and abstinence. Diadochus de perfectione ritali. cap. 45. As Christ by touching the waters of Iordan, sanctified all other waters: so by his fasting and abstinence he hath sanctfied our fastings, and abstinence. Lodiuicus Granatn. As Apollonius Tyaneus was counted very abstemious among the Heathen: so Emericus the Son of Stephen King of Pannonia is for his abstinence registred among the Christians. Prayer. EVen as a traueller after that he hath rested himselfe, and taketh meate, beginneth to feele ease, is refreshed, and recouereth strength to walke & trauell
further, although he hath no delight in his meate, nor contenteth his tast: so also Prayer, which is the spirituall meate of the soule, is the cause of a new fortitude and a new spirit to walke in the way of the Lord, albeit oftentimes it yeeldeth no spirituall tast. Lodo. Granat. lib. de deuotione. Euen as they that inhabit the north parts of the world, where the cold is vehement, doe keepe within doores, and in houses to defend themselues from the iniury and vntemperatenesse of the weather; but they that cannot doe this, come often to the fire, and being somewhat warmed doe returne againe to their labour: so also the seruant of God, liuing in this cold and miserable region of the World, where charity is waxen key cold, & iniquity doth rage & abound, must often repaire to the fire of prayer, that he may grow warme. ib. As Sampson was being without his haire: so is a man without prayer. ibid. Euen as there is no essentiall diffe∣rence betweene him that speaketh, and him that writeth the same thing: so al∣so prayer, which is a confession of the
diuine prayses, or (that I may speake more properly) a certaine petition to God for some necessary things: whe∣ther this petition be made with inward words, or with outward, which are the images of internall things, there can bee found no essentiall difference be∣tweene this and that ibidem. As the Smith knoweth that his Iron is first to bee heated, and to bee made soft, before he labour to make a stampe in it: so prayer is to be vsed to the soft∣ning of the heart, that thereby it may be made ready for the keeping of the di∣uine law. ibidem. As the hill is the way vnto the moun∣taine, and the meanes to ascend vnto it: so prayer is the way, and the ascending to mortification. ibidem. Euen as a diligent and carefull tra∣ueller that entreth into an Inne, to breake his fast, eateth, and withall is carefull to make an end of the voyage he hath taken in hand, so that although his body bee in the Inne, yet his heart and mind is about his iourney: so also the seruant of God, when he goeth to pray, let him on the one side enioy
celestiall sweetnesse, and on the other side let him purpose to beare troubles and molestations for his loue, of whom hee is so much made of, and who will not haue any one to eate his bread, but in the sweate of his face. ibidem. As the Children of this world besides their daily repast, haue their extraor∣dinarie feasts and bankets, in which they are wont to exceed the manner of other refections: so it is also behoueful, that the righteous besides their daily prayer, haue their feasts and spirituall bankets, in which their soules may feed, not measurably (as at other times) but may be filled and stuffed with the diuine sweetnesse, and with the plenty of Gods house. ibidem. As the body is dead, and waxeth quickly filthy without the soule: so the soule without prayer is dead, miserable, and very vnsauory. Chrysostomus. lib. de orando Deum. As a Citie, which is not compassed and fenced with walls, easily commeth into the subiection of enemies: so the Deuill easily bringeth that soule vnder his dominion, which is not fenced and
garded with prayer. idem lib. 2. de oratione. As trees that haue taken deepe roo∣ting, cannot be pulled vp: so the feruent prayers of the faithful cannot be beaten backe, till they haue ascended into the presence of the highest. Idem. hom. 5. de incomprehensibili natura Dei. As the roring of a Lyon affrighteth Beasts of the Forrest: so the prayer of the righteous profligateth the Deuils of of hell. Idem hom. 53. contra Apost. As the ioynts of the body are bound together by nerues and sinewes: so the soules of the righteous are established by prayer. Idem lib. 2. de orando Deum. As water is the life of a fish: so is prayer the life of a Christian. ibidem. As Gold, precious stones, and Mar∣ble doe make the houses of Kings: so prayer doth build the Temple of Christ, that he may dwell in our hearts. ibidem. When a King entereth into a Citie, his Nobles and traine follow after: so when prayer entreth into a soule, all other vertues follow after. ibidem. As perfume will confected doth de∣light
the smell of a man: so prayer of the righteous is sweete in the nostrills of the Lord. Idem hom. 13. operis imperfecti. As a Souldiour is no body without his armour, nor armour without a Souldior: so prayer is nothing without fasting, nor fasting without prayer. Ibidem. hom. 15. As there may bee something with∣out a smell, but there cannot be a smell without something: so a worke with∣out prayer is something, but prayer without a good worke is nothing; and if thou prayest, thou prayest not of Faith. Idem. hom. 18. As fire doth scowre off the rust from Iron: so prayer doth scowre our soules from the rust of sinne. Idem. hom. 42. ad pop. Antioch. As no medicine can cure a wound, if their on remaine within it: so no prayer profiteth his soule, who hath deadly hatred festring and rankling in it. Au∣gustinus de rectitudine Cathlicae con∣uersationis. Plato writeth, that the Lacedemoni∣ans were neuer heard to pray for any
thing, but that which was good and profitable: so a Christian should neuer pray for any thing, but that which is good in the eyes of God, and profitable for himselfe. Isidorus Claurius, orat. de fructu orandi, tom. 1. Almes deeds. AS the Princes of this world, de∣termining a voyage, doe send their furniture, treasure and prouision before them, and they themselues follow af∣ter: so wee are to deuide our goods amongst the poore, that they may prepare an entrance into life for vs. Stella de contemptu mundi. As water sprinkled vpon an hot glowing gad of iron, although it seeme to coole the hot burning iron, yet at the length it causeth it to burne the more vehemently: so the workes of mercy, albeit at a blush they seeme to make the soule lesse feruent, by reason of the sundry businesse, which happen in exercising them, yet they make it more earnest and vehement in the wayes of the Lord. Lodouicus Granatensis lib. de deuotione.
Euen as nothing is more naturall vn∣to God, then to doe well vnto all his creatures: so hee that participateth more of the spirit and goodnesse of God, he is more ready to doe good vn∣to others. ibidem. As in a treasurie, they vse to mingle no false money which outwardly hath a little gold, and seemes to be good, yet inwardly is a mixture of most base metals: euen so, and no otherwise are the works and almes deeds of Hypo∣crites, who outwardly appeare iust, as if they were no sinners, when inwardly they haue seared and foule deformed consciences. Stella de contemtu mundi. As water quencheth burning fire: so almes deeds resisteth sinnes. Clemens Alexand. lib. 3. paedagog. cap. As seed cast into the earth, bringeth forth profit to the sower: so bread cast into the lap of the poore, will in time to come yeeld great commodity. Basil. hom. in ditescentes. As corne kept in thy garner is de∣uoured of vermine, but being cast into thy land, is not onely preserued, but increased: so riches kept in thy Chest
vnder locke and key, doe wast and fade, but if thou disperse them into the bel∣lies of the hungry, they doe not onely not vanish, but rise to greater value. Chrysostomus homil. 7. de poenitentia. As an vnfruitfull Elme giueth moy∣sture to the Vine, that the Vine may bring forth fruit both for it selfe, and for the Elme: so let thy substance fur∣ther the relief of the poore in this world, that their sanctitie may further thee in the other. Chrys. hom. 12. operis imperfecti. As hee that writeth an Epistle to a friend, whilest he writeth, seeth in his heart the person of his friend, to whom hee writeth: so hee that giueth almes for Gods sake, seeth no man in his heart, but the person of God alone, for whom he giueth it. Idem, homil. 13. operis imperf. As worldly men by Vsury encrease their pelfe to their damnation: so spi∣rituall men by almes deeds encrease and multiplie the loue of God towards them, to their saluation. Chrysost. hom. 7 in Epist. ad Rom. As no man sorroweth to receiue a
Kingdome, grieueth to haue remission of his sinnes: so let no man sorrow to lay out his money▪ vpon maintenance for the poore, because he shall receiue great gaines by it. Idem Homil. 21 in Epist▪ ad Rom. As rich mens sonnes for an ornament doe weare Gold Chaines about their neckes, as a signe of their greatnesse and Nobility: so we ought alwayes to bee arrayed in the roabes of bounty, that we may shew our selues to be the Sons of him, who is mercifull, who cau∣seth his Sunne to arise both vpon the good and bad. Id hom. 1. ad Phi∣lippen. As in physicall confections one herbe is predominant: so in spirituall matters, almes deeds are in especiall account with God. idom. hom. 9. ad Hebraeos. As Iudges hauing receiued gifts doe not suddenly proceed to pronounce sentence, but endeuour to agree the parties: so the Lord dealeth with them, whose gifts are giuen to the poore. August. ser. 146. As we are not once to doe well, but alwayes: so wee are not once to giue
almes, but alwayes. Chrysoft. hom. 1. in Epist. ad Philippen. A lumpe of vnmolten Lead put into a vessell full of holes, doth rest in one side of the vessell, but if it be melted with fire, it filleth all the holes: so an heape of money being frozen with the cold of auarice, lieth in the chest pro∣fitable to no man, but if it be melted with the fire of diuine loue, and powred out, it floweth to all parts of the poore and relieuing the needy, it filleth all the holes and crannies of pouertie, Hector Pintusin cap. 5. Ezech. 37. As the Sea is fed by land Riuers, which hath no neede of them, when as the land is left dry: so many bestow their largesse of bountie vpon them that haue no need, and let the needle and distressed perish. idem in cap. 18. As sheepe and oxen are not eaten, except they bee dead and dressed: so many Churles giue no almes, but when they are dead and buried. idem in ca. 16 As mount Oliuet (according to Au∣gustine) was a mountaine of oyntment and vnction, of fatnesse and refection, of medicine and cure, by reason of the
abundance of oyle there growing: so a mercifull man may be fitly resembled to this mountaine, by reason of his almes, which are the oyle of mercy and pitie. As that seed is the best, which is white within: so are those almes deeds the best, which come from a pure in∣tent. F. Ioannes à S. Geminiano. lib. 3. de vegetabilibus, & Plant. cap. 20. As one Torch borne before doth giue more light, then soure borne behind: so one good deed done in life time is more acceptable vnto God, then fortie after death. Polancus in Methodo ad∣iuandi eos, qui moriuntur. Deuotion: HEe that would haue Iron alwayes to glow and shine redde hot, it is necessary that hee alwayes applie it to the fire, for if hee take in from the fire, forthwith it returneth to his naturall coldnesse: so the most noble affection of Deuotion so dependeth of that, that man bee continually vnited vnto God by actual loue and contemplation, that
if hee turne himselfe but a little from him, forthwith hee slideth backe to the bosome of his mother, that is, to the old disposition, which before hee had. Ladouic. Granat. lib. de deuotione. As a furnace, if it bee well heated in the morning, is kept hot all the day after with a little fire; but if it grow cold againe, it requires a great deale of fire, before it bee thorowly heated a∣gaine: so Deuotion being well heated by prayer preserues heate a long time, but through dissuetude of payer it growes cold, and requires much prayer to heate it throrowly againe. ibidem. As sweete water standing in an open vessell, hauing no couer, doth foh∣with lose the sweetnesse and grace of the sent: so the sweete and precious oyntment of Deuotion doth loose all the vertue and efficacy, when the mouth is loosed and dissolute, that is, when the tongue doth lauish and supers bound in too much talke and prattle, ibidem. As fire cannot be kindled not kept in wet and moist matter: so nether can Deuotion in the delights and pleasures of the body. ibidem.
As in a harpe we are to obserue, that the strings bee neither stretched too streight, nor loosened too slacke, for then they are either broken, or yeeld an vntuned and an vnpleasant sound: so in the celestiall exercise of deuotion, it is meet that the body by neither ma∣cerated by too much hunger, nor fatted by too much plentie, for both of them bring very much hurt to this exercise, Ibidem. Euen as fire, or any odoriferous or fragrant smell, the more it is couered and kept close, the more & longer it pre∣serueth the sent, and keepth the heat: so also the loue of God and deuotion. ibidem. As nature is not content with the deaw, that in the night time falleth vp∣on the earth, but also now and then it raineth, and that plentifully, not for a weeke, but oftentimes louger; for so it is necessary, that the heauens should be now and then more liberall towards the earth, and should so glut it, that neither the Sunne, nor the wind may make it dry: so also our soule besides the common and daily deaw, ought to haue
certaine peculiar times, in which our eyes may doe none other thing, then showre downe most plentifull teares of deuotion, by which our soule may bee so filled with the vertues of iuyce of the holy Ghost, that all the tribulati∣ons, and all the winds of this world may not dry it. ibidem. The feare of the Lord. EVen as a ship is not safe without ballace or lastage, for it is easily tossed with euery wind, now on this side, and now on that, to the great danger of the ship: so is the soule en∣dangered, which lacketh the burthen and ballace of the diuine feare, which poyseth the soule, that the winds of worldly-fauour, or of diuine graces, doe not tosse and puffe it vp, and so ouer∣throw it. Lodon. Granat. lib. 1. Ducis Peccatorum. As Fennell hath an opening vertue, as Plato saith: so the feare of God o∣peneth the way vnto loue. As the needle leadeth the threed: so feare introduceth loue. August.
As Serpents by the tast of Fennell put off old age: so the feare of God putteth away inueterate sinne. F. Ioannes à S. Geminiano lib. 3. de vegetabilib. & phnt. cap 77. As among the kinds of precious stones called Berylli, that is the best, which is the palest: so among men hee is the best, that feareth the Lord. Idem. lib. 2. de Metallis & lapid. cap. 37. As the precious stone Beryllus being opposed to the sunne beames, doth burne the hand of the holder: so the feare of the Lord being heated with the loue of Christ doth burue the hand of bearer, so that it maketh him to labour in his vocation very ardently. ibidem. As Princes haue Porters that keepe out vnruly pleople from their pallaces: so the soules of the righteous haue, the feare of the Lord, for their porter to keepe sinnes from them. Idem. lib. 10. de act ib. & Morib. Human. cap. As hee that hath his body fastned thorow with a naile, cannot easily doe any thing without griefe: so hee that hath his soule pierced thorow with the feare of God, cannot easily commit
any filthy offence. Basil. in principium Prouerb. As by a bridle a Horse is held from his rage: so by feare the soule is kept from sinne. Chrysost: de verbis Isayae, homil. 5. As an Oake deepely rooted is not ouerthrowne by force of the wind: so a soule deepely founded in the feare of the Lord is not ouerwhelmed by the winds of temptation. Idem Hom. quinquagesi∣matertia in Ioan. As a beame of Sunne entring into a house by a cranny, doth enlighten all things in the house: so if the feare of the Lord bee in the soule, it shew∣eth vnto it, all her sinnes, albeit they be very small. Climacus de discretione, gradu. 26. Perseuerance. AS it doth not profit to haue sailed succesfully and prosperously a long voyage, if at length wee make shipwracke in the Hauen: so it profi∣teth not to haue liued religiously with∣out finall perseuerance. Ldouicus
Granatensis lib. 2. Ducis Peccatorum. Euen as a student in the liberall sciences, if he daily make progresse in good letters, and diligently frequent the Schooles, in a very short time commeth to the perfection of the arts he studieth: so on the contrary part, he that often and much intermitteth and breaketh off his study, either very late, or neuer becommeth learned. idem lib. de deuot. As hee that hath a iourney to goe, must not sit downe in the midst of his way, and there leaue off: so hee that trauelleth to heauen, must not only be∣gin to liue honestly, but must continue so till death. Chrysost. hom. 4. ad Ephes. As a Rhetorician doth not onely be∣gin his oration, but also doth end it: so a Christian must begin in vertue, and end in vertue. Idem hom. 24. ad Hebraeos. As that physicke is vnprofitable, which doth not restore the sicke to health: so that life well lead is to no purpose, which doth not so continue to the end. Ibidem. As that debtour doth not satisfie his
reditour that payeth part, but hee hat payeth all: so hee doth not please God that giueth part of his life vnto him, but he that bequeathed all. Greg. ib. 22. Moral. cap. 6. As no man obtaineth victory, but he hat goeth thorow stitch: so no man ttaineth vnto the glory, but hee that ontinueth in vprightnesse vnto the nd. Ibidem. As that seed is sowne in vaine where∣of the reaper filleth not his hand in the ruest: so an honest life is ill begun, and to no purpose; except it perseuere vnto the end. Caesarius Arelatensis▪ hom. 25. As light is necessary for corporall eyes, that they may enioy their end and vse: so perseuerance i necessary for all them, that are predestinated and called to the Kingdome of Heauen. Laurentius Istinianus cap. 1. de perseuerantia. As the eye is opened in vaine with∣out the light: so hee runneth in vaine, that doth not preseuer to the end of his life. ibidem. Hard stones are pierced with soft drops, great Oakes hewne downe with
many blowes: so the stoniest heart is mollified by continuall perswasions, or true perseuerance. As no beast without a taile was of∣fered vnto the Lord: so wee cannot offer vp our selues vnto God without perseuerance. F. Ioannes à S. Gemi∣niano lib. 10. de actibus & moribus humanis, cap. 61. It is said a Pecocke hauing lost her taile, is ashamed to shew her selfe to a∣ny body: so without perseuerance no man shall dare to appeare before God in iudgement. ibidem. Pietie. IF you doe anoynt Cdar and Iuniper with oyle, they neither feele rotten∣nes, nor are subiect to worms: so a soul endued with piety from aboue, is not subiect to the corruption of this world. Plin. lib. 16. cap. 40. As the precious pearles called Vnions; although they are bred in the Sea, yet haue more affinity with Heauen, whose face they resemble: so a godly and generous spirit doth depend of
Heauen, whence he taketh his original, hen of the earth, vpon which he liueth, Pliu. lib. 9. cap. 35. As the Painter Apelles had wont to complaine, when any day passed him, n which he had not drawne a line: so godly Christian should grieue, if any day passeth, in which hee hath profi∣d in pietie. As Iron, and steele exceed other metals in hardnesse, but ae excelled of the Adamant: so the loue towards our Children is is powerfull, but our piety God doth farre exceed it: Goodnesse. AS Scarabees and Vultures are of∣fended at oyntmentes; and as the Scythian sware that hee had rather are the neighing of an horse, then a Musitian sweetly singing: so the best things do not please all men. Plut. As the Phoenix is neuer but one a∣one, which is scarcely credited of any man: so there is the greatest scarcity of he best things. As there is but one Phoenix bred in
fiue hundred yeares: so the increase of famous and excellent men is very rare. Seneca. As wormes engender sooner in sof and tender wood, then in that which is more hard and knottie; and as moathes doe breed sooner in the fine wooll, then in course flockes: so ambi∣tion sooner assaulteth an excellent and rare man in all kind of vertue, then another, who is not so vertuous. As Pindarus writeth that King The∣rons courses were such as would neuer be weary of going: so should we be neuer weary of well doing. Humility. AS the vallies are more aboundan and bring forth more fruit the the moutoines doe, by reason that be∣ing more low, they receiue more com∣modiously all the dew and fatness which falleth and descendeth from th high hils: euen so it behooueth that we bee low and humble in our owne eyes if wee will, that God replenish vs with his graces, the which can find no place
in vs, if wee presume any whit of our vertues. As the Heart doth kill all sensible venemous beasts: so humility doth kill all intellectuall venemous Serpents. Climacus de discretione, gradu. 26. As a Barrell except it bee close hooped, and haue no leakes, cannot hold wine: so the heart except it bee defended with humilty and chastity, and haue not any leakes for vices, it cannot bee the receptable of God. Sanctus Isayus abbas oratione. 12. de vino. As wine doth become naught, ex∣cept it bee kept in Vaultes and Cellars: so all the labours of youth are vaine, xcept they be preserued with humility. Ibidem. As we cannot drinke out of an earth∣ly fountaine, except wee bend downe our selues: so wee cannot drinke of the liuely fountaine Christ, except we hum∣ly bend downe our selues, for it is written, God resisteth the proud. Cae∣rius hom. 30. As spices smell sweetest when they re pound: so when the good things,
that man hath in him are, as it wer pouned by humility, they are more ac∣ceptable vnto God. Peroaldus in sum∣ma virtutum. As ignorance bringeth forth pre∣sumption, and presumption ruine: knowledge bringeth forth humilitie and humilitie grace; it encreaseth light perseuerance in goodnesse, blisfull ioy in hope, a desire to be perfect, a tas of wisdome, constancy in faith, loue in patience, ioyfulnesse of spirit, vpright∣nesse of minde, zeale of Iustice, and a thirsting desire of vertue. Laurentiu Iustinianus de institutione & regimin praelatorum. A bough of a tree the fuller of Apple it is, the heauier it is, and the mor loden with fruit it is, the more lowly i hangeth: so the wiser a man is, the more humble he is, and the more hee i loden with the fruits of wisdome, the more submisse and lowly he is; but a proud man like a barren branch moun∣teth aloft, not seeking the profit of his soule, but vanity. Hector Pintus in cap. 2 Ezech. As a raine floud is low in Summer,
and as it were creepeth on the ground, but in the Winter and Spring-time doth flow and abound: so also humility in prosperity is very small, but in ad∣uersitie is very great and strong. Ber∣ardus Iustinianus in vita Larentij Iustiniani. As Christ was humble and meeke: so must Christians bee. As Abell is commended for inno∣cency; Noah for righteousnesse; A∣braham for faith; Isaac for matrimo∣niall loue; and Iacob for simplicitie and painefull labour: so Moses is com∣mended for meekenesse, the Scripture saith of him in the twelfe of Numbers the third verse: Moses was a very meeke man, aboue all the men that were vpon the earth. As salt seasoneth all meates: so hu∣mility seasoneth all vertues. As a wilde Bull tyed to a figge tree becommeth tame: so a proud man keeping company with an humble man becommeth more lowly. F. Ioannes à S. Geminiano libro 3. de vegetabilibus & plantis cap. 29. As Serpents cannot abide the shadow
of an Ash tree: so the Diuels canno abide humility. ibidem. As the gumme of the Tree Bdelliu cureth both inward and outward impo∣stumes: so humilitie healeth both th sinnes of the heart, and the vices of th flesh. ibidem. As Cinnamon groweth in watry pla∣ces: so humility groweth in tho hearts, that are watered with true wise dome. ibidem. As Hysope boiled in wine with dr figs doth purge the lungs, and the bre of all diseases growing of cold causes so humilitie mingled with the Wine charity, and the sweete Figge of man suetude doth purge and cure the in¦flamations of wrath, and the swelling of pride. ibidem. As the herbe Dill expelleth win∣nesse: so humility banisheth pride. ibia Patience. AS much raine weares out th toughest Marble, and with continuance of strokes the hardest steele i pierced: euen so, the greatest patienc
by extremities may be peruerted, and the kindest heart made cruell by intol∣lerable torturing. As hee that hath an adam antine bo∣dy is not subiect to the wounds of darts: so he that is armed with patience taketh no harme by the wounds of re∣proches. Chrysostomus homil. 2. ad po∣pulam Antioch. As Ioseph left his coate in the hand of the harlot, but fled away with a better coate of Chastitie: so also cast thy coate vnto the hands of the calumnia∣tour, and flie away with the better co∣uering of righteousnesse, least whilest thou chalengest the vesture of thy bo∣dy, thou loosest the precious vestiment of thy soule. Idem Homil. 12. operis imperfecti. As arrowes shot forcibly against any hard substance, doe rebound backe a∣gaine, but being sent with a milder ight, enter and sticke fast: so we more exasperate euill speakers by repugning them, when as by patiently yeelding, wee easily appease them, and mitigate their fury. Idem. hom. 14. in Ioan. If a rich man bee called poore, hee
laugheth at it, because he knoweth it to bee false: so if wee with patience would smile at iniuries done vnto vs, it would be a great argument, that we are falsely reprehended. Idem. hom. 48. As Merchants sustaine the dangers of the Sea, for earthly lucre: so let vs with patience vndergoe all extremities and all hard measure, that the world offers vnto vs, for the kingdome of Heauen, and the presence of God. Idem. hom. 76. As water quenched fire: so patience extinguisheth anger. Idem. hom. 22. ad Hebraes. A dogge biteth the stone that is cast at him, neuer respecting him that cast it: so they that are impatient looke al∣wayes to the second meanes, and neuer to God, that sendeth tribulations. Dorotheus, de accusatione sui ipsius, doctrina. 7. As physicke repaireth health in bo∣dies: so tribulation begetteth patence in soules. Laurentius Iustinianus, in ligno vitae de patientia, cap. 3. As it is a cruell thing to deny water to him that is thirsty: so it is an euill
thing to passe ouer in silence the praises of the excellent vertue patience. Idem. cap. 21. As Dauid is commended for his holy zeale, and Cornelius for his almes deeds: so is Iob for his patience. As Gold is not diminished in the fire, but made brighter: so a patient man in aduersitie is not daunted, but made more glorious. F. Ioannes a S. Ge∣miniano libro 2. de metallis & lapidi∣bus, cap. 24. As the stone Chrysopassus hideth his brightnesse in the day, but sheweth it in the night: so patience appeareth not in prosperity, but in aduersitie. ibidem. Obedience. AS Clay doth follow the hand of the fashioner: so should man bee obedient to the will of God. Chrysost. lib. 1. de pronidentia, & Iustinus de recta confess. siue de S. & coessentia Tri∣nitatis. As it is meete that beasts should obey vs: so it requisite, that our reason should obey God. Procopius in Leuitic.
As Adam by disobedience became subiect to death: so our Sauiour by o∣bedience subdued death. Thalassius ad Paulinum presbyt. As the Sun, Moone, Starres, and the Sea obey God, so much more should man. Theodoret, sermone 3. graecarum. affect▪ curat. As victory is not expected without a captaine; and as there is no hope of arriuing at the hauen without a Pylot: so without obedience it is vnpossible, not to bee hazarded in the Sea of this life. Laurentius Iustinianus de ligno vitae, cap. 3. de obedientia. As the Iewes declared their obedience in the shadow: so ought Christians much more to performe theirs in the substance, seeing that the bright Sonne of righteousnesse hath appeared vnto them. Chrysost. hom. 60. in Genesin. He that bestoweth his study vpon Is∣chomachus, shall proue a husband-man; if vpon Lampides, a Pylot; if vpon Charidemus a Captaine; if vpon Simon, a skilfull rider; if vpon Perices, a auerner; if vpon Crobylus, a cunning cooke; if vpon Archilaus, a dauncer;
hee that studieth Homer shall proue a Poet; if Pyrrho, a contentious wrangler; if Demosthenes, an oratour, if Chrysip∣ps, a Logitian; and he that is con∣uersant in Plto and Aristotle, shall become a learned Philosopher: so he that obeyeth the Lord, and doth his will, and mediateth vpon his word, shall bee made according to the image of his Master, and shall resemble his sanctitie and integritie. Clemens Alex∣andrinus, lib. 7. Strom. As seruants obey their Masters, and Wiues their Husbands, and the Church her Lord, & the Disciples their Pastors: so all men ought to be subiect to the higher powers, not onely for feare but for conscience. Greg. Nazian. oratione ad subditos timore perculsos. As we all are worthily angry with Adam because hee rather obeyed his wise then God: so we should be angry with our selues, because wee rather study to obey and please our flesh and others creatures, then God. Bernardus sermone. 1. de omnibus sanctis. As the legs doe swiftly and willing∣ly, obey the motions of the soule in
running hither and thither: so man should bee ready to obey the will of God, in performing whatsoeuer hee commaudeth. F. Ioannes à S. Gemi∣niano lib. 6. de homine, & membris eius. cap. 46. Repentance. AS he is counted a mad foole, that hauing many waightie burthens to be caried, and many sufficient horses to carry them yet layeth all the bur∣thens vpon one of the weakest and worst horses, the other being sent empty way: so is hee to bee counted a foole much more mad, that imposeth the burthen of repentance to be carryed of old age, sparing youth and manly age, and letting them goe emptie, which are much stronger, and farre more fit to carry then old age; old age being scarce able to support her owne infirmities. Lodonicus Granat. lib. Ducis peccatorum. The repetance of wicked men fea∣ring death, is like that which sailers make, when they are in danger of
Shipracke, they promise to chaunge their liues, and to embrace vertue in their extremitie, but when the storme is ouerpast, they retune to their for∣mer vomit, and become worser then they were before, making no account of their vowes and protestations, yea reputing them as dreames and toyes. Idem lib. 2. Ducis peccat. As a thunderbolt lighting on a ve∣nemous Serpent, extinguisheth all the poyson, because it extinguisheth all the naturall moysture: so the vertue of re∣pentance extinguisheth wickednesse in sinners, and the poyson of sin F. Ioannes à S. Geminiano lib. 1. de coelo & elemen∣tis, cap. 60. As snow maketh the earth fat, by shutting the pores of the same: so re∣pentance, albeit it maketh the body leane, yet it fatneth the soule, by re∣straining the appetites of the flesh. ibid. As snow couereth many foule places: so repentance couereth much infamy: Ibidem. As the Sea prouoketh vomit: so re∣pentance procureth abhomination of sinne.
As the Sea bringeth headach: so re∣pentance bringeth remorse of consci∣ence. ibidem. As the Sand doth stay the violent rage of the Sea, that it cannot passe the bounds: so repentance doth restraine the violence of sinne, least man should transgresse the commandements of God. ibidem. As Aloes is bitter: so is repentance: Idem lib. 3. de vegtabilibus, & Plant. cap. 56. As Worme-wood driueth Mise and Wormes from bookes and clothes: so repentance driueth temptations from the soule, and bitings from the con∣science. ibidem. As Centorie is an herbe both bitter and sweete: so is repentance bitter in meditation of Gods iudgements, and sweete in embracing his mercies. ibid. Truth. AS a glasse doth make no represen∣tation of any picture, except it bee steeled, or else vnderlaid with Tinne, Brasse, Gold, or some such like solide
substance, which may stay the image from gliding thorow: so the image of truth doth not shine, but in solide and sound soules, that are founded in true vertue. As the wild beast is taken, after he hath beene long hunted: so the truth appeareth, after it hath beene discussed by reason, and sought with labour▪ Cle∣mens Alex. lib. 1. Strom. As a Gardiner knoweth how to gather a Rose without pricking his angers: so a contemplatour and seacher out of the truth, knoweth how to finde, it without gathering of falshood with it. Idom lib. 2. Strom. As all liuig creatures doe breath the same ayre, but after diuerse manners: so many come vnto the truth, but after diuerse wayes, Idem▪ lib. 6. There are many wayes that crosse the Kings high way, whereof some lead to headlong Rockes, other to swift Riuers, others to the deepe Sea, therefore hee that is wise will keepe the Kings troden path, which is freed from danger: so, when others speake this and that, we must not depart from the truth, but wee
must more exactly and diligently seeke out the knowledge of it idem. Hom. 7. If any man should see the Citie of Rome subuerted of enemies, and neg∣lecteth the defence of it, when hee might haue defended it, he doth seeme to haue betrayed it, because hee freed it not when hee might: so when thou seest the truth impugned & indangered of wicked men, and maist defend it, if thou dost not safegard it, thou betraiest it. Chrsost. hom. 25. operis imperfect. The beautie of Helen so inflamed the gallants of Greece, that for her they a long time ventured their liues at the siege of Troy, and at last sacked it: so the holy Martyrs of Christ Iesus haue most valianly, not onely ventred them∣selues at the siege of Sodome, but laid downe their liues for the Truth sake, which Truth of Christians is incom∣parably more beautifull, then the Helen of the Grecians. August. Epist. 9. As a Partridge is good meate, but it is not eaten raw, because no stromacke can digest it: so truth is a most excellent food, but is not rawly or sowrely to be propounded, but rosted, or boiled,
and seasoned with the salt of wisdome; for there is no stomacke that will re∣ceiue the raw and sowre truth. Hector Pintus in cap. 58. Esayae. As there is but one God: so there is but one truth, which is Christ. As the purest Emerald shineth brigh∣test when it hath no Oyle: so truth de∣lighteth, when it is apparelled worst. Concord. AS thou mayest easily breake speare by speare being seuered one by one, which thou canst not doe being ioyned together: so those that by vari∣ance are parted, are easily ouercome, when as those that hold together can∣not be subdued. Plut. Two or moe voyces sounding toge∣ther, doe make better harmonie: what∣soeuer is done in a family, let it bee done by the consent both of man and wife, but yet by the dispose and order of the husband, ibidem. As in a body the best constitution is made of the temperature of moisture, driues, heate and cold: so by the con∣cord
of brethren, the stock and progeny doth best florish. idem. The stone of Tuscia, albeit great, doth swimme aboue water, but being broken in peeces it sinketh to the bot∣tome: so by concord we are supported, but by discord wee goe down wards and come to naught. Plin. lib. 2. cap. 106. & Aristot. de Natura. cap. 12. As the stone of Scyros, being whole, doth flte aloft, but being parted doth settle to the bottome: so concord doth hold vs vp, but discord doth tumble vs downe. Plin. lib. 36. cap. 17. The Salamander doth not come forth but in great showers, in faire weather she sheweth not her selfe: so some only shew themselues in time of sedition and insurrection, when peace is disturbed, but in time of quiet and concord, doe lye as though they were dead. As the members of a naturall body by consent doth helpe one another: so the members of a politicke body by concord doe ayd one another. Macar. om. 3: As no building can long be supported, if ligaments bee taken away: so the
Church cannot grow to her perfection, except it bee bound with the bonds of peace, charitie and concord. Basil. orat. 1. de amore in dum: As one eye cannot bee turned about, without the other be also turned; but they are alwayes turned together one way: so the body and the soule, and the whole society of the righteous shall haue such concord and agreement in Heauen, that they shall will no con∣trarieties, but shall alwayes haue the same will. Lodouicus Granatensis i sis septem Meditationibus, Meditatione septima. Decency: AS one garment doth more become a wise man then any other, albeit hee hate none: so it is more seemely to liue in this place, then in that Seneca. The herbe Chamaeleon doth change the colour of the leaues according to the earth wherein it growes, therefore in one place it is black, in an other greene, in an other blew, and in an other yellow, and so in other places of other
colours: so it is meete that a man order the frame of his life according to the place, time, and persons, where, when and with whom he liueth. Hospitality. THe Serpents of Syria haue no poyson for the people that are bred in the countrie with them, nei∣ther doe they euer set vpon them, but strangers they sting to the death: so Ilanders are curteous inough to their owne countrimen, but cruell to strangers. As a Fishe asteth his net into the Sea, doth catch fishes, and sometimes doth draw vp Gold and precious Mar∣garites: so Lot catching men with his net, catched also Angels; not know∣ing of it. Which Saint Paul spoke to this mans prayses, saying; Be not for∣getfull to lodge strangers; for thereby some haue receiued Angels into their houses vnwares. Chrysostomus conci∣one 2. de Lazaro. Many godlesse and profane Actaeons haue enough meate and lodging for
their yelping hounds, and bawling curres: so thou professest godlinesse and religion, be at the least as liberall, to thy poore brother, who hath the image of God in him, as well as thou thy selfe hast, and for whom Christ died, as well as hee did for thee. Isidorus Clarius oratione vndecima tom. 1▪ As Crowes doe waite vpon, and conduct Storkes from one place to ano∣ther, and doe fight against their ene∣mies, which I gather, because when the Storkes, doe depart out of our Country, there is not any Crow seene with vs, and afterwards they returne wounded; an open signe of their helpefull ayde: so men being not only reasonable but religious creatures, let them at the least performe as much one to another. Bafilius Hom. 8. ex∣amero. As he is monstrously malicious, that dammeth vp a flowing fountaine, or forbiddeth the Sun-shining, or will not abide that another should light his candle at his, or that grudgeth to shew the high way to a traueller: so is hee exceeding inhumane, that
will not proit another, and may doe it without his owne discommoditie. Liberality. AS the stone Siphnius doth wax hard being heated in oyle, other∣wise it is very soft: so some are made worse by largesse and beneficence. Almost it alwayes happineth, that that which pleaseth the smelling, dis∣contenteth the tast, as the figge is of sweete tast, but of no smell, but the hearbe Cotonea is of very fragrant sa∣uour, but of a most bitter and sharpe sapour: so thou shalt hardly find in one man a faire tongue and a bounti∣full heart, an alluring word, and a li∣berall worke. As that drinke doth more moysten the belly, and asswage thirst, which is let downe by little and little, then that which is gulled and swilled downe altogether: so that bountie doth re∣straine the importunate crauer, which is giuen by little and little, then that which is bestowed all at once. The figge tree doth not flourish with
blossomes and slowers, when it beareth the sweetest fruit: so some are very bountifull, who make no large pro∣mises, Plin. lib. 1. cap. 26. As the Sunne doth glad and cheare all creatures: so liberalitie maketh all men merry. Isidorus Clarius oration 61. tom. primi. As all men hate a couetous man: so euery one loueth a liberall man. As vessels of a like bignesse, one of which being full and the other empty, being beate vpon doe yeeld an harmo∣nious sound: so a liberall rich man, and a needy poore man doe make a good consent. Erasmus in similibus. Silence. CRanes when they flye out of Ci∣licia, they carry litle stones in their mouthes and so they safely flie ouer the mountaine Taurus, which is full of Eagles, and this they doe in the night, that their noyse may not bewray them: so silence and taciturnitie is safe euery where. Plutarch. in moralib. Plin. lib. 0. cap. 23. Arist. de natu. lib. 9. cap. 10.
As a skilfull Archer presently aymes at his marke: so he is wise that spea∣keth few words, and those to the pur∣posed. Plut. As mysteries are beheld with silence: so some things are better commended by silence then by speech. Idem. When wee make triall of a vessell, wee powre in water before we commit wine vnto it: so sometimes some light matter is to bee committed to our friends, whereby wee may try the secrecy of their silence, that if they blab be it forth, it may not be greatly materiall. Idem. As they that are ouer burdened with wine, cannot keepe in their meate: so where wine a boundeth, there is neither secrecy nor silence. Seneca. It is a wonder to see a dumbe Gras∣hopper, because this kind of creature is full of clatter and noyse; and yet it is said, that there is some such in the field Rhegium: so wee doe wonder at constancy and silence in a woman, be∣cause this kind is wauering and talka∣tiue; and yet they say, that there is some women constant and silent, happy
is that man lights on such an one. Plin: lib. 11. cap. 27. The Thrush neuer singeth in the ompany of the Nightingale; Roscius was alwayes dumbe when hee-dined with Cato: so fooles should keepe si∣lence, when wise men talke. Mediocrity. A Ship in a little riuer, seemeth great, but in the Sea, it appeareth but little: so they that are but meane in one place, seeme great else where Seneca. Too much fruitfulnesse doth kill ometrees: so too high a gale of fortune doth spoile some. The flow of Nilus being either in defect or excesse, doth bring famine to the Egyptians, that is, if it flow aboue eighteene cubits, or be vnder twelue: so both too much, and too little wealth doth hinder a good mind; want doth pinch, and aboundance doth suffocate good purposes. Plin. lib. 18. cap. 18. As the Birds called Martinets, doe ither flye, or lye vpon the ground, be∣cause
they want feete: so some are too vehement in either part, either they are too busie, or too idle, they haue no meane. Plin. lib. 10. cap. 39. Nightingals doe kill themseles with singing: so doe many with immoderate study. Plin. lib. 10. cap. 29. Wine drunke moderately doth help and strengthen both the eyes & sinewes, but too much being taken hurteth both: so by moderate study the life is adorned and beautified, but too much labour doth weaken and destroy it. Iuie being drunke doth hurt the sinewes, which being outwardly ap∣plyed doth profit and comfort them: so if thou wholy giuest thy selfe vnto Phi∣lophy, it doth hinder and hurt thy re∣ligion, but if thou moderately drinkest of it, it furthereth much thine erudition Plin. lib. 24. cap. 10. Salt being sparingly sprinkled vpon meate, doth giue a grace vnto the tast: so if thou minglest a little antiquity, or mirth with thy speech, it becommeth more beautifull, but if more then enough, there is nothing more vn∣pleasant.
Gallus a riuer of Phrygia being mo∣deratly drunke of, doth cure the diseases of the body, but being immoderately tasted of, bringeth franticknesse of mind: so if thou moderately tastest of Philosophy, it much profiteth, but if thou wholy addictest thy selfe vnto that study, it taketh away the health of thy mind, and affecteth thee with a fury of vaine glory. Pin. lib. 31. cap. 2. Protogenes that excellent Painter is taxed, because he knew no time to take his hand from his table: so some writers doe offend in immoderate diligence, who thinke that they neuer haue mended a thing well enough. Plin. lib. 35. cap. 10. A vine except it be pruned doth wax barren through fruitfulnesse and fe∣cundity: so forward wits are to bee restrained from immoderate study, least they consume themselues. As a man is to keepe the way between fire & water, so that he neither burn, nor drowne himselfe: so we are neither to decline to the right hand nor to the left but to keepe a meane. August. Epist. 82.
Chastity. AS it is better to be in health, then to be sicke & discourse of health▪ so it is better to be chast and continent, then filthy and polluted to discourse and prate of Chastity and continency Clemen Alexaudinus lib. 3. stromat▪ Many among the Gentiles did ab∣staine from wickednesse, either because they could not obtaine their purpose, or because they feared men, or because they sought after greater pleasures, and so let the present slip: so in the Faith and among Christians, some are chast and continent either for the promise sake, or for the feare of God. Ibidem▪ lib. 7. As a valiant Champion is knowne by the good habit of his body: so a good Christian is discerned by the chastity and continency of his life. Basilius i regulis fusius dsputat: interrog. 17. As the images of Satyres doe moue laughter; and as sadder pictures doe procure soberer thoughs: so a Virgin the image of chastity, and the very shape of the vertue it selfe ought to conuert
our affections to the consideration of God. Idem. de vera virginitate. 27. As dogges feede themselues in but∣hers shambles: so Deuils feed them∣elues in vnchast and incontinent mens oules. Palladius in vita Mosis Ab∣tis. As the Bee is laborious, chast and ontinent: so ought Virgins to bee▪ Ambrosius lib. 1. de virginibus. As the Bee doth feed vpon the hony dew: so a Virgin doth feede vpon the diuine Word. Ibidem. As a flower doth soone perish by drought, and wither with the wind: so Chastitie in women is soone corrup∣ed, either through want of wedlocke authority, or through the procliuity of age to vice. Hieronimus epist. ad Salu∣um de viduitate seruanda. As it not safe to commit a litle whyrry to the Seas violence: so it is not safe to commit a virgins chastitie to utors importunity. Idem. Epist. ad Gaudentium de Pacatulae educatione. As a Ship desireth the hauen: so Chastity loueth solitarines. Nilus ra∣one secunda aduersus vitia.
As incontinency neither eateth, drin∣keth, resteth, sleepeth nor vseth vener pleasurably by reason of satiety and superfluous ingurgitation: so continen∣cy truly enioyeth these, and giueth th right vse and touch to all pleasures Xenophon. lib. 4. de dictis Socratis. As an oxe after hee is gelded en∣creaseth in strength, and is made mor∣tame and fit for labour, and of a softe∣pace: so by Chastitie a man is mad more capable of grace, more ripe vnt repentance, fitter for the labour of o∣bedience, and more graue and modest F. Ioannes à S. Geminiano lib. 5. de a∣nimalib. Terrest b. cap. 17. Isidore, Cicero, Iunenal, Physiologu and Pliny report that the beast called Beauer being pursued of hunters for hi testicles, which are profitable for me∣dicine, doth bite them out, and leau them for the hunters, and so escapet and saueth himselfe: so continent an chast persons doe not carnally, bu spiritually castrate themselues or th Kingdome of Heauen, least they shoul be taken by infernall hunters, that is of Deuils, by the lusts and pleasures the flesh. ibid.
As the low shrub Cinnamomum, the rind whereof is that spice we call Cin∣namon, groweth among briars and brambles, and among hard rockes, and therefore it is gathered with great dif∣ficulty: so the chastity and continency of the flesh doth not spring of the daintines of delicate life, both doe grow out of the sharpnesse of repentance, and out of the austeritie of abstinence. Idem lib. 3. de vigetabilib. & plant. cap. 11. As Cinnamon vnlesse it bee dryed yeeldeth no smell, as saith Plinie: so the flesh except it bee dryed by abstinence from the moisture of luxury, doth not yeeld to God the sweete odour of con∣tinency. Ibidem. As the Margarite is engendered of the heauenly dew: so continency is possessed by the gift of the heauenly grace. Idem. lib. 2. de Metallis & lapid. cap. 7. As Magarites are little in quantitie, but great in valour: so Virgins and continent persons are little in appea∣rance, by reason of humilitie, but great in esteeme, by reason of vertuous va∣lour, Ibidem.
As steele is of a pure substance then iron: so are continent persons of a purer mould then vnchast lollards. ibidem. As steele is more durable and lasting then iron: so a continent man is longer liued then an incontinent man. ibid. S. Martin visiting his dioces saw a meddow, part of which swine had mi∣serably rooted vp, and part stood vn∣touched, beautified with the florishing many faire flowers; said hee, the part rooted vp of filthy swine, resembles the bodies and soules of incontinent per∣sons, but that which stands vntouched, shewes the glory of Virginity, and and continency. Sulpit in vita S. Martini. Virginity. SNow, albeit cold, yet it is melted by the fire: so Virginitie doth fade and perish by familiarity and con∣ference with women. F. Ioanes a S. Geminiano lib. 1. de caelo & elemen∣tis aap. cap. 47. As muky whitnesse doth grace the celestiall circle Galaxia so the pure
whitnesse of wind doth beautifie Vir∣ginitie. Idem. lib. 1. de caelo & ele∣mentis. cap. 83. As the circle Galaxia doth not de∣part from one place of his orbe to an o∣ther loue, but is moued with the fixed Starres: so pure Virginity doth neuer depart from Christ, to follow any o∣ther, but is moued with fixed con∣stancy of euer-during resolution. ibid. As the stone Asterites hath light included in it: so Virginitie hath re∣splendent graces included in it. idem lib. 2. de Metallis & Lapid. cap. 39. As the Cedar is delighted in by man, for the pleasing greenesse: so Virgi∣nity is acceptable vnto God for the pre and flourishing vnspottednesse. idem. lib. 3. de vegetabilib. & Plant. cap. 80. As the odour of Cedar doth profligate Serpents, and recreate men: so the odour of Virginitie doth driue away Diuels, and dilight Angels, because Virginitie is of affinity with Angels, as Hierom saith. ibidem. As the gumme of the Cedar tree doth keepe books from wormes & moathes:
so Virginitie doth keepe lust from de∣uouring of the body, and concupiscence from feeding on the soule: ibidem. As the fruit of the Cedar tree is of three tasts, sweete in the rind, sowre neere the core, but in the midst of a medley tast betweene both: so holy Virgins must be sweete and milde in ex∣ternall conuersation, but inwardly sowre, that is, fearefull and carefull, but in the middest, that is, in their bo∣dy they must be somewhat temperate, that they bee neither weakened by the sowrenesse of too much austeritie, nor grow dissolute by the sweetenesse of too much delicacy. ibidem. As Roses by their vertue heale many languors: so virginity doth deliuer from many tribulations, which the maried doe suffer. ibidem. As Violets are cold, watry and odo∣riferous: so Virgins are cold in the concupiscence of the flesh, watred by the teares of deuotion, and odoriferous in the example of their honesty. ibid. As a violet by the swell doth mitigate the heate of the braine, doth comfort animall Spirit, and doth prouoke
sleepe: so Virginity by her smell doth coole the heate of the flesh, doth com∣fort and recreate the Spirit, and doth dispose and prepare vnto sleepe, that is, vnto the quiet of contemplation. ibid. As the Lilly is of a wonderfull beau∣ty: so Virginity is of a wonderful purity. Ibidem. As the Lilly being whole and vn∣touched, long continueth, and sweete∣ly smelleth, but being broken, foyled and rubbed strongly stinketh: so the flesh of man, whilest it continueth vn∣touched and whole by Virginity, it smelleth sweetly both to God and man, but when the seale of Virginity and chastity is broken, and when it is rub∣bed by the vice of luxury, then it yeeldeth both a carnall and spirituall ferour. Ibidem. As a Lilly is beautifull with seauen white leaues, and seauen golden grains growing within the leaues so holy Virgins haue seauen vertues of the soule which resemble the seauen leaues, to wit, iustice, temperance; fortitude, prudence, faith, hope, and charity, and seauen of the holy Ghost, which
resemble the seauen golden graines, to wit, wisedome, science, vnderstanding, counsell, courage, pietie, and feare. Ibidem. As a broken lampe is not repaired: so lost Virginity is not recouered. Idem lib. 9. de Artificib. & reb. Artif. cap. 81. As a lampe doth not cast light with∣out oyle: so Virginity and chastitie doe not please without grace and charitie. Ibidem. As wild Beasts haue fairer skins then tame Beasts: so solitary Virgins are more beautifull, then affable. ibid. As the thighes are made of great bones, because they sustaine great waight: so Virgins haue neede of great strength, because (as Saint Augustine saith) among all the combats of Chri∣stians, there is none more hard, then that of chastitie. Gird (saith Dauid Psal. 44.) thy sword vpon thy thigh: for hee is girded with a sword vpon his thigh, who doth alwayes warre against the temptations of the flesh. Idem. lib. 6. de homine & membris eius cap. 76. As Eue a Virgin, brought forth sinne into the World, which brought
destruction to mankind; as Hugh Broughton writeth in his Consent of Scripture: so Mary a Virgin brought forth Christ, who brought saluation to the world. Wisedome. AS by the lessening of our shadow, wee perceiue that we are more in the light: so by the diminishing of our foolishnesse, wee know that we haue profited in wisdome. Plut. As he that extreamly hungreth and thirsteth, can by no meanes be pulled from his victuals, till he hath satisfied his appetite: so all other things are to be neglected of him that thirsteth after wis∣dome. idem. Seed, although it bee little, yet being sowne in a fit place, commeth to great growth: so wisdome consisteth in few words, but encreaseth in the action. Seneca. Some cannot see things that are ve∣ry neere vnto them, but they can well discerne those things that are further off: so some men are more wise in other
mens matters, then in those things that appertaine vnto themselues. As great Obeliskes are squared by great labour, and placed by the ex∣ceeding strength and wit of man, but being once placed, they indure infinite ages: so it is a very hard thing to ob∣taine a fame of vertue and wisdome, but being once gotten, it neuer dieth. As the Wine called Maroneum, which Homer remembreth, being mixed with twentie times so much water, yet keepeth his owne strength: so true wis∣dome is not polluted by any filthy pleasures. Plin. lib. 24. cap. 4. If the Starres of Caftor and Pollux appeare seuerally the one from the o∣ther, it portendeth ill hap; but if they be seene ioyntly together, it prognosti∣cateth good lucke: so it is requisite that might bee not seered from wisdome, otherwise it is pestilent. As the Load-stone by a certaine se∣crete and vnknowne force doth draw Iron vnto it: so wisedome by a secret reason doth draw the minds of men vn∣to it. Plin. lib. 35. cap. 10. The Northen winde is vehement in
the beginning, but milder at the end, and contrarily, the South wind is milde in the beginning, but vehement at the end: so they that take matters in hand boy sterously, haue no good suc∣cesse, but they that with wisdome be∣gin, with good successe make an end. As the Sn the more direct it is ouer s, the lesser is our shadow; but the more indirect it is, by so much encrea∣seth the shadow of our bodies: so the more true wisdome a man hath gotten, the lesse gloriously hee thinks of him∣selfe, but the further he is from it, the more hee vaunteth of that hee would seeme to haue. The roote of a Reed being powdred and laid on the stemme of ferne, doth extract a stalke; and in the like manner so doth the roote of ferne being laid on the stemme of a reed: so wisdome doth roote out of the soule the loue of mony, and in like manner the loue of money doth roote out wisdome. As the Lord granted the office of baptizing to many, but kept the power and authoritie to remit sins in baptisme only to himselfe, whereupon Iohn saith▪
He it is that baptizeth with the holy Ghost: so also he giueth speech to many, but wisedome to a few, to whom hee will, and after what manner hee pleaseth. August. de scala Paradisi. As the sight is conuersant about all things visible, and the hearing about all things audible: so wisdome is con∣uersant about all kind of beings and essences. Pythagoras apud Stobaeum, ser. de virtute. As foolishnesse although it hath ob∣tained that it desired, yet thinketh that it hath neuer enough: so wisedome is alwayes content with that is present, neither euer repenteth it selfe. Cicero lib. 5. Tusculanar. As wee doe not approue the science of Physitians for the art sake, but for the health it bringeth: so wisdome, which is the Art of well liuing, would not bee desired, if it effected nothing, but now it is desired, becasue it is as it were the worke-mistresse of all ioy and delight. idem. lib. 1. de Finibus. As the Sunne is the eye and soule of nature, by which all things are dis∣cerned, begot; nourished, increased, and
cherished: so is wisdome in the rld. Politian. in Lamia. As Gold is the most precious among mettals: so is wisedome among the vertues. Lapidaries doe say that the stone Corneolum being hanged about the necke, or worne on the finger, doth helpe in disputation, doth mitigate wrath, and doth stay a slux of bloud: so wisdome doth profit in disputation to find out the truth, to represse anger, and to stay our readinesse to sin. F. Ioan∣ne à S. Geminiano, lib. 2. de metallis & Lapidibus cap. cap. 32. As the herbe Amomum is powerfull against the stings of Scorpions, doth re∣fresh the eyes, and asswage the paine of the entrails: so wisedome doth pro∣fligate the deceits of heretickes, doth comfort the eyes of the minde, and in griefe doth cheere the sad heart. Idem lib. 3. de vegetabilus & planti cap. 17. As the Box tree hath alwayes greene leaues: so wisdome hath alwayes grate∣full and amiable words. ibidem. As by ou tast we relish things be∣low here vpon the earth: so by wisdome
we tast those things that are about in Heauen, Idem, lib. 6. de homine & eins membris. cap. 65. A wise Man. AS the wisest Grammarian may be found a foole in blacke-smiths worke, and as the skilfullest Pylot may be found vnexpert in the Art of Medi∣cine: so he that is wise in those things that appertaine vnto God, may bee a a foole in those things, that concerne the world. Origenes lib. 10. in Epist. ad Rom. cap. 16. As sweete odours by their fragrancie doe sweeten all the places neare vnto them: so a wise man doth make all them the better that conuerse with him. Philo lib. de somniis. As the Mulbery tree doth first bring forth, fruit, and then Blossomes: so a wise man brings forth workes before words▪ Peraldus in summa virtutum: Phidias could not onely make Images of Iuorie, but also of Brasse, of Marble, or if thou haddest brought vnto him any baser matter, hee would haue made
the best of it that could be made: so a wise man, if it may bee, will shew his vertue in riches, if not in riches, in pouerty, if hee may he will shew it in his Countrey, if not in his Countrey, in banishment, whether hee be Cap∣taine or Souldier, sound or sicke, or in what estate soeuer he be in, hee will be∣haue himselfe commendably in it Se∣neca. Epist. 86. As an Adamant cannot be broken: so the minde of a wise man can not bee daunted nor enfeebled. Idem, lib. 2. de tranquillitate. As wee see the beautifull pictures, when the Gate of the Temple is open: so wee see excellent representations of vertue, when a wise man openeth his mouth. Socrates apud Stobaeum, ser. de virtute. As they that saile with successefull winds, haue instruments ready, where∣by they may arme themselues against a storme: so they that are wise in pro∣speritie, will prepare themselues to beare aduersitie. Idem apud Stobaeum, ser. 1. de prudentia. As Pylots obserue the winds, least
they bee crossed of them: so a wise man doth obserue the affections of his mind, least hee bee ouerwhelmed of them. Aristonymus apud Stobaeum, ser. 1. de prudentia. As true loue towards a woman doth not desire a witnesse, but hath enough, if it secretly and alone enioy her: so a wiseman is content with the testimony of his owne conscience. Plutarchus in Moralibus. As the Planet Mercurie departeth not from the Sunne, albeit it be other∣wayes a vaging and wandring Planet: so a wise man may by no meanes wander and stray from honesty. Plin. lib. 2. cap. 17. As the world is euery way round and sphericall: so a wise man seeketh for nothing without himselfe, but is content with himselfe. Idem. lib. 2. cap. 2. As the Birds Halcyones in the midst of winter doe make the Sea calme, not∣onely for themselues, but also for o∣thers: so a wise man in the most turbu∣lent times doth onely preserue vnto himselfe the tranquillitie of mind, but also maketh others quiet and peaceable. Idem. lib. 10▪ cap. 23▪
As nature sheweth her selfe to lesse admirable in making a Gnat, then in forming an Elephant: so a wise man both in great and little matters sheweth himselfe excellent. idem lib. vndecimo, cap. 2. As snailes go slowly, neither do they touch anything, nor moue themselues any way, but first they assay it with their hornes: so it is meete that a wise man be consideratiue and discoursiue, and by leisure and aduice take matters in hand, a tast of them being first had. idem. lib. 9. cap. 32. As certaine beasts doe teare and rent off those parts of their bodies, for which they know themselues endangered, as the Beuer doth, named also of some Castor: so it is the part of a wise man sometimes to cast away his riches, that he may saue his life. Idem lib. 8. cap. 30. & lib. 36. cap. 16. As God is the wisest and of greatest vnderstanding, and yet speaketh the least: so a wise man will speake nothing but that which is necessary. Erasmus in imilibus. The ancient Physiologers said that
the Sunne was fed with salt water, and the Moone with fresh: so wise men seeke for bitter things, so they bee profitable; but fooles follow those things that are pleasant and delectable. ibidem. As vnwise men doe not foresee a tempest, but too late, when they re∣ceiue harme by it; but contrarily wise husbandmen do foresee and take heed: so the common sort of vnprouident men doe learne by woefull experience; but a wise man doth auoide the euill fore∣seene. As Democritus admonished his brother, reaping his corne in a verie hot gleame, that he should let the rest of his corne stand, and carry that into his barne hee had cut downe, because on a suddaine hee perceiued that it would raine exceeding abndantly. ibid. As the Starres goe a contrary course vnto the world: so a wise man goeth a∣gainst the opinion of all. Seneca. As neither the world increaseth, not the Sun, nor the Moone, nor the Sea: so all wisemen be alike. Seneca. As haile maketh a great noyse vpon a tiled house, but doth it no harme: so
insultings of fortune cannot hurt a wise man. Seneca. As a good workeman, is not onely a workeman in one matter alone: so a wise man doth carry himselfe well in either fortune. Seneca. As a dwarfe is a dwarfe, although set on the top of a mountaine, but a Colossus is loftie, albeit placed in a val∣ley: so a wise man is great in what fortune soeuer, but a foole is base in the height of prosperity. Seneca. As a good workeman maketh a picture of any matter: so a wise man well guideth himselfe in any fortune. Seneca. As lightning forthwith killeth any creature besides man: so the stormes of ortune forthwith ouerthroweth vn∣learned and brutish people, but stirreth not a wise man. The leaues of the shrub Rhododendros is poyson vnto cattell, goates and sheepe, but to man they are a remedy against the venim of Serpents: so that which bringeth destruction vnto fooles, as aduersitie or erudition, that a wise man turneth to his good & wel∣fare: Plin. lib. 16. c. 21.
Friendship. AS milke doth run together, and is coagulated by the rennet: so men are combined together, and made one by friendship. Plut. As fire is the sweetest of all condi∣ments, as saith Eunus: so friendship doth sweeten euery part of the life, if it be mingled with it. Idem. As they that haue a good stomacke, and are sound and healthfull creatures, doe digest and concoct stones, Iron, Serpents, and Scorpions, and doe turne them into nourishment; but contrarily those that bee weake and vnhealthfull are offended with Bread and Wine: so Fooles doe loose friendship, but wise Men well know how to vse emnities aright. Idem. As bruit Beasts if they be compelled by force to mingle themselues in gene∣ration with a diuerse kinde, doe not ioy in it, but hang downe their heads: so friendship doth welfare and vnite a∣mong those that be like. Idem. As our eyes, tongues and hands are to be made much of, because we cannot
liue without them: so are friends, be∣cause no life is vitall without them. Di∣on de regno or at. 3. Muske though it bee sweete in the smell, is sowre in the smacke; the leafe of the Cedar Tree, though it be faire to bee seene, yet the sirrup depriueth sight: so friendship though it bee plighted by shaking the hand, yet many times it is shaken off by fraud of the heart. Iohn Lily. A pinte of the wine called Maroneum which Homer so much commendeth, being mingled with fiue quarts of wa∣ter, yet, keepeth his old strength and vertue, not to be qualified by any mix∣ture: where salt groweth nothing else can breed: so where friendship is built, no offence can harbour. The friendship of many. AS an vnchast, and vnshamefast woman mingling her selfe with many, hath no certaine louer: so is hee that hunteth after the friendship of ma∣ny. Plut. in Moralibus. As a Maide gathering one flower
after another in a medow, is still pos∣sessed with a fresh desire to gather those that are fresher and newer, and doth neglect those shee gathered before: so are those that seke after the friendship of many, being cloied with the friend∣ship of one, they presently seeke for another. Ibidem. As the first matter is varied after di∣uers formes, when it hath not the pro∣per forme: so is the minde that search∣eth for the friendship of many. bidem. The friendship of a few. AS Briareu feeding fiftie bellies with a hundred hands, was no happier then wee, that feede one with two hands: so thou shalt reape as much commoditie by the friendship of a few, as by the the friendship of many; for the discommoditie is recompenced, if a few doe minister vnto thee, thou hast to minister but vnto a few. Plutarch. As it is absurd for a lane man, or a blind man to feare, least he should be∣come Briareus with an hundred hands, or Argus with an hundred eyes: so
some doe absurdly feare, least they should haue too many friends, when they haue not as yet one true friend. Idem. Friendship neglected. EVery Tree cannot bee brought to good fruit, nor euery wild beast to beamed, therefore we are to conuert them to as good vse as we may: so they that cannot bee brought vnto friend∣ship, let vs vse their hatred vnto our owne commoditie. Plutarch. The Storke albeit she goe away, yet shee alwayes returneth to the same neast: so it is meete that wee should not forget our friends although they be seuered in place from vs, but we ought alwyes to carry their memory about with vs. Plin. lib. 10. cap. 23. Friendship broken off. AS a Diamond if it chance to bee broken with a hammer, doth fall into such small peeces, that they can hardly be discerned with the eyes: so
the nearest and dearest friendship, if it chace to be broken off, is turned into the greatest grudge and displeasure: and of the firmest leagues, if once they bee broken, doe spring the deadliest discords. For lenity being required with vnkindnesse doth rage aboue Plin. lib. 37. cap. 4. As peeces of Christall can by no meanes be ioyned together againe: so it is a most hard thing to reconcile those, who are falled from firme friendship into mortall hatred. Plin. libro 17. cap. 3. & libro. 37. cap. 2. As those things, which are wont to bee glued, if they bee dissolued, are easily glued together againe; but if the body bee broken, it is hardly set toge∣ther againe: so among some if friend∣ship be a little wronged, it is easily knit againe, but if it bee broken be∣tweene brethren, it neuer knitteth a∣gaine, or if it knit, it is with a scarre. Plutarch. There is nothing so fast knit as glasse, yet once broken, it can neuer bee ioyned; nothing fuller of metall then steele, yet ouerheated it will neuer bee
ardned: so friendship is the best pearle, ut by disdaine throwne into vineger, bursteth rather in peeces, then it will ow to any softnesse. It is salt fish that water cannot make resh, sweete hony that is not made itter with gall, hard Gold that is not mollified with fire: so hee is a miracu∣ous friend that is not made an enemy with contempt. Friendship reconciled. THe Fir tree doth so sticke together with glew, that first the foundest part of the tree will breake, then that which was glewed: so after returning into fauour againe the friendship ought to be the firmer, and they should more fimely cleaue together, whom the glew or mutuall beneuolence hath coupled together, then those whom nature hath ioyned. Plin. lib. 16. cap. 2. As Tin doth soulder together brasse being broken in peeces, by reason of the ffinitie it hath with it: so a friend ought o reconcile friendship broken off by ome vnkindnes, by applying himselfe vnto his friend. Plut.
The choyse and tryall of Friends. AS thou doest try money, whether it be counterfeit, before thou has neede to vse it: so thy friend is to bee tryed before thou hast neede of him. Plutarchus in Moralibus. As he is a foole, that buying an hose doth not looke vpon him, but vpon his furniture: so hee is a very foole, that choosing a friend doth estimate him by his apparell and wealth. Seneca. As Zeuxis did leasurely pait that, which should long endure: so that friend is to be had long in triall, that is long to continue. Plin. lib. 35. cap. 9. & 10. As that ship is strongly to be built, which in tempests is to be a refuge vn∣to vs: so that friend is diligently to be tried, whom we are to vse to all assayes. Plutarchus in Moralibus. Ixion louing Iuno, fell into a cloud: so some whilest they seeke for true friendship, doe embrace that which is counterfit and false. ibidem. As they that by tasting of deadly
poyson doe cast themselues into de∣struction: so hee that admitteth of a friend, before he know him, learneth to his owne harme, what he is. ibidem. As swallowes doe build their nests vnder the roofes of mens houses, and yet are not conuersant with men, nor doe trust them: so some haue alwayes their friends in suspition and iealousie, espe∣cially Ilanders. Plin. lib. 10. cap. 24. As carefull husbandmen doe first discerne by certaine markes, whether the ground be fruitfull, and doe trie it, before they commit their best seed vnto it: so a friend is to bee tryed before thou committest thy secrets vnto him. As first wee make tryall of a vessell by water, and afterwards powre in wine: so first wee must commit some trifling thing vnto our friends, that we may trie the faithfulnesse of their si∣lence, which albeit they cattle abroad, there is no danger in it. Plutrch. As the Pyrit stone doth not display his iery nature, except thou rubbest it, and then it burneth thy fingers: so the maliciousnesse of certaine, who professe themselues friends is not knowne, till
thou hast made sufficient triall of them. The Camell first troubleth the water before he drinkes, the Frankensence is burned before it smell: so friends are to bee tried before they bee trusted, least shining like the Carbuncle as though they had fire, they bee found being touched, to bee without fire. A true Friend. AS that is not good ground, which bringeth forth no fruit, except it bee continually watered, but that is good ground, which during both heate ad cold, preserueth, nourisheth, and cheisheth that was committed vnto it: so is hee not to bee called a friend, who no longer staieth with thee, then thy prosperity laseth, but he is a true friend, that at all assayes standeth with thee, and in all fortunes standeth by thee. As that wife is more worthy of com∣mendations, which keepeth her fidelity to her husband, being far remoued from him, then she is, that doth the same,
being in her husbands sight: so is it among friends. As a Physitian if the matter require it, doth sometimes cast into his con∣fections saffron and spiknard, and causeth his patient to tast of toothsome meates: so also a friend doth vse as the times requires kind blandishments, and comfortable conference. Plutarke. As that sound is more pleasant, which consisteth of many voyces and those different, then that which is one onely voyce: so that friend it more pleasing, who is agreeing, that sometimes hee doth disagree, then hee that by at∣tering with his friend in all things. As Painters for a time lay by their workes, that comming to reuiew them againe, they may the better. iudge of them; for assiduity is the cause, why they discerne the lesse: so if wee would rightly iudge of our friends, let vs sometimes haue them from vs, for then wee shall iudge of them the better; te reason, why we cannot iudge a right of our selues is, because wee are alwayes present with our selues. lazeworme shineth most
bright in the darke; the pure Fran∣kinsence smelleth most sweete when it is in the fire; the Damaske rose is sweeter in the still, then on in the stalke: so a true friend is better discerned in the stormes of duersity, then in the Sun∣shine of prosperity. As it is not the colour that commen∣deth the good Painter, but a good countenance; nor the cutting that valueth the Diamond but the vertue: so it is not the glose of the tonge that trieth a friend, but the faith. As the flowers that are in one Nose∣gy, are not of one nature, nor all rings that are worne vpon one hand, are not of one fashion: so all friends that associate at bed and bord, are not of one disposition. Scipio must haue a noble mind, Laelius an humble spirit: Titus must lust after Sempronia, Gysip∣pus must leane her: Damon must goe take order for his lands, Pythias must arry behind, as a pledge for his life. A cunning archer is not knowne by his arrow, but by his aime: so a friend∣ly affection is not knowne by the tongue, but by the faith.
A liuing creature hath his chiefest strength within him: so a true friend without ostentation, doth then most helpe, when he concealeth it. As a Physitian doth cure his parient; he not feeling it: so one true friend doth helpe another without telling it. Plut. There is so great concord in musicke, that it seemeth to be but one sound, and one voyce: so true friends are but one minde. Certaine apples are bitter-sweete, and in old wine the very smartnesse and artnesse is delightsome: so the memory of dead friends doth bite the mind, but not without pleasure. Seneca. As hony doth pierce and purge xulcerated wounds, otherwise it is sweete and delectable so the liberty of a friend doth not bite, but that which is vicious and corrigible. Plut. The Phisitions Cucurbitae, drawing all the infection in the body into one place, doe purge all the diseases: so the rres of friends, reaping vp all the hidden malices or suspitions, or follies that lie lurking in the mind, maketh the knot more durable.
Water is praysed, for that it sauore h of nothing, fir for that it yeeldeth to nothing: so such should be the nature of a true friend, that it should no sauor of any rigor, and such the effect, that it may not bee conquered with any offence. Methridate must be taken inward∣ly, not spread in plasters; purgations must be vsed like drink not like bathes: so the counsel of a friend must be fastned to the mind, not the eare: followed, not praysed, imployed in good liuing, not talked of in good meaning. A fained Friend. AS ruptures and cramps doe then pinch, when the body is molested with any disease: so false harted friends doe fawne vpon prosperity, but doe afflict them that be in aduersity, and insult ouer their misfortune. Plut. The swallow in summer flyeth vnto vs, but in the winter flieth from vs: so an vnfaithfull friend is present in pro∣sperity, but altogether absent in aduer∣sity. Plin. lib. 10. cap. 24.
The birds Seleucides are neuer seene of the inhabitants of the Caspian moun∣taines, but when they haue neede of their aide, against the Locusts deuou∣ring the fruit, neither doe they know whence they come, or whither they goe: so certaine doe neuer appeae but when they hue neede of our helpe, nei∣ther doe they visit their friends, but when some necessity doth vrge them. Plin. lib. 10. cap. 27. As thou canst not retaine hurtfull meate without offence, nor cast it vp with griefe: so if thou retainest an euill friend, hee hurteth, neither canst thou cast him off without enmity and tu∣mult, as if thou shouldst cast forth choler. Plut: As Creon did nothing helpe his daughter, but embracing her did perish with her in the fire: so many not enioy∣ing happy friends, do perish with those that are infortunate. ibidem. As those that be vnskilfull in swim∣ming, whilst they would helpe them that are in danger of drowning, doe drowne together with them, and doe hurt more, then they profit: so doe
those friends that in aduersitie doe onely lament and sorrow with their friends. Idem. As flies doe not remaine in those vitling houses, where there is no sauors nor smels: so the vulgar and popular friends of rich men doe arry no longer then profit continueth. Idem. Mice doe gnaw the meate, and doe liue vnder the same roofe with men, yet they doe not conuerse with them: so ome friends sarse current, neither doe forsake by reason of commodity, nei∣ther doe loue or repose affiance. As the fish Scolopidus in the floud Araris, at the waxing of the moone is as white as the driuen snow, and at the waning as blacke as a burnt coale: so a fained friend in prosperity is very louing, but in aduersity exceeding lowring. As all coynes are not good that haue the image of Caesar, nor all good that is coyned, with the Kings stampe: so all is not truth that beareth the shew of godlinesse, nor all friends that beare a faire face. As the Rauen which Noah sent forth
of the Arke, made no longer reckoning of him, who had saued her from death, and maintained her in the Arke one hundred and fifte dayes, then shee stood in need of him: so many friends doe now esteeme, delight, prayse, and often visite thee, because they would supply some of their present necessities by thee, which being compassed, they are no longer for thee. As a fruitfull tree is so long cared for, s it brings forth store of fruit, but when it failes to bring the wonted en∣crease, no man cares for it: so and no otherwise stands the case with th, while thou hast riches, credit, and art in prosperity, thou shalt bee sure to be beloued, honoured and visited, but if thy state impaire, and need catch thee by the back, then the world no longer smiles vpon thee, farewell poore for∣saken man, no more fruit, no more friends. As there is great conformitie and vion between Gold and Quicksiluer, yea such and so much, as when the Gold is purified in the furnace, the Quickslue (being conuerted into
smoke) is sought of the Gold in what part soeuer of the fire it be, to vnite it selfe therewith yet notwithstanding all this affection and friendship, whenso∣euer the Gold is taken forth of the fire, it forsakes and leaues the Quicksiluer there behind, conuerted into smoke, and there ends the kindnesse: so at what time thou shalt enter into the fire of tribulation, the friendship thou hadst with many will be turned into smoake, and so shalt thou bee left in the furnace of affliction. As there are many current riuers, which in winter time are full of water, when as there is no necessitie of water, yet in summer following are dried vp, when euery one standeth most in need of water, which dried vp riuers helpe not the thirsty traueller, but when hee comes to drinke, and finds none, re∣turneth thence deceiued: like to such riuers are fained & counterfeit friends, who in time of prosperity, and when no neede is, promise much, but when time of aduersitie commeth, and that there is manifest necessity to be seene, performance commeth short, all friend∣ship
is dried vp, and not a drop to bee found. As the Marigold opens early in the morning, being fresh and faire, but at night shuts vp againe, as halfe dryed and withered: euen so the worlds friendship soone fayles and withereth, the Sunnes heate perisheth the flower, and afflictions triall putteth downe all loue and friendship. As Ixion prosecuting Iuno, fell into a cloud: so many doe runne into coun∣terfeit and fained friendship. Plut. As Choak-weede is an enemy to Ciches and Orobos, as Cockle is hurt∣full vnto Wheate, as wild Otes is noy∣some vnto Barley, as Henbane is mor∣tall vnto Lentilles, and all these doe kill by embracing: so the friendship of some is more pestilent, then their enmi∣tie. Plin. lib. 18. cap. 45. The swallow which in Summer creepeth vnder the eues of euery house, in winter leaueth nothing but durt be∣hind her; the Humble Bee hauing sucked Honie out of the faire flower doth leaue it, and loath it: so a fained friend hauing got what com∣modity
hee can, eaueth his friend in the suds. The comparison of a friend and a flatterer. AS Patroclus going to the battaile, tooke all Achilles armour, be∣ides his speare, which hee touched not, by reason of the waight and bignesse: so a flatterer doth take vpon him all the signes and tokens of a true friend, besids the libertie of admonishing. Plutarchus. As a Physitian doth his endeuour to maintaine and encrease health: so also doth a friend; but a flatterer dealeth superficially, and suggesteth that, which onely delighteth. Ide: A flatterer is like that Schoolmaster▪ that chideth his Scholler for his stile and paper and neuer blameth the bar∣barises and solaecismes he committeth. Idem. He is like also to an ill oratour, an∣swering nothing to the arguments, but arping at the voyce, and the bookes negligently written. idem▪
As if a man seeming a Physitian, should cut the haires and nailes of a man diseased with blaines, botches and fistulaes: so a flatterer vseth libertie in those things, in which there is no need. Idem. As a sweete odour smelleth well, and so also doth a medicine; but that is profitable for nothing, but to delight▪ this besids the odour hath also greater profit: so also a flatterer is onely plea∣sant, but a friend is profitable and ne∣cessarie. Idem. As a picture hath pleasant colours, and Medicines haue also acceptable co∣lours: so a friend doth therefore delight, that hee may helpe; but a flatterer onely delight. Idem. Where the body is swelled and puf∣fed vp with corrupt and vicious hu∣mours, there arise botches and im∣postumes: so what a friend is angri with, loueth or hateth, that the fla∣terer inuerteth to a crosse end. idem. A Medicine applyed to a wrong place, doth afflict without fruit: so doth admonition being vsed out of due time. And the same doth a friend with griefe,
which the flatterer doth with pleasure, for both of them doe hurt. idem. Mariage. AS Chaines and Fetters take strength by being linked toge∣ther: so doth the stare of the family by the consent and agreement of man and wise. Plut. in Moral. As the body can doe nothing with∣out the soule, nether can the soule bee in quiet, except the body be in health: so betweene husband and wife all things are in common. ibidem. They that baite their fish-hookes with poyson, doe easily both kill and catch the fish, but corrupted & naught: so they that compasse their husbands, or wiues by sorcerie, amorous potions, or poysons of loue, shall haue them stupid, dull and vnprofitable. ibidem. As Circe did not enioy them, whom shee had turned into Swine and Lyons, but beyond all had most comfort and loue of Vlysses, being in his right forme and shape: so those women that get themselues husbands by Magicke and
Witchcraft, doe leade an vnpleasant life with them, by reason they are wood and out of their right minds. ibidem. Those women that had rather raigne and dominere ouer foolish and sottish husbands, then obey those that are wise and discreete; doe as they, that in a voyage make choyse rather to lead a blind man, then to follow him that seeth, and is skilfull in his way ibid. As Pasiphae being the wife of Minos, chose rather the company of a Bull, then of her husband: so certaine lasci∣uious women being marryed to tempe∣rate and continent men, doe diuert their minds to the lust of incontent and intemperate lechers. ibidem. As they that cannot mount vpon an horse by reason of weakenesse, doe teach him to bend his knees: so some hauing maried generous and high spirited wiues, endeuour not to make then better, but to bring them vnder ibidem: According to the greatnesse of the horse wee sqnare his furniture: accor∣ding to the dignity of the wife the go∣ernment is to be moderated. ibidem.
As moysture doth mingle it selfe in euery part: so betweene the marryed there ought to bee a generall commu∣nity. ibidem. As it is called wine, although the greater part of it bee water mixed with the house and possessions of the hus∣band, albeit the wife brought the greater part. ibidem. As Christ was borne of a Virgine, that he might shew that light was risen to the world from a Virgine: so hee wrought his first miracle at a marriage at Cana in Galile, that he might both honour Virginity by his birth, and marriage by his diuine miracles, by which he turned water into wine. Epi∣phanius haeresi. 67. contra Hieracitas. As the Sea ouerswelling his bankes: so is man or woman transgressing the bonds of marriage. Chrysostom. Homil. 1. operis imperfecti. When thou seest a man continually haunting the houses of Physitians and and Chirurgians, thou mayest well coniecture, that that man is not well: so when thou seest a man or woman, seeking for a diuorce, or to separate
themselues, know for certaintie, that he is a lasciuious man, and the women an incontinent harlot. Idem hom. 23. operis imperf. As partners doe not thriue well, ex∣cept they liue peaceably together: so neither doth man nor wife, except they louingly liue together. Idem Homil. 26. in 1. Cor. A righteous man although he desi∣reth to bee dissolued, and to bee with Christ, yet hee taketh nourishment, not for a desire to liue, but in the dutie of prouidence, because it is necessarie that he liue for the good of others: so it was needfull, not lustfull, that holy men did linke themselues in marriage with woman, for that that meate is vnto man that is marriage vnto mankind. Augustinus de bono coniugali, cap. 16. As the merite of patience in Peter, who suffered is not greater then in Iohn, who suffered not: so the merite of continencie in Iohn, who was neuer maried, is not greater, then in Abraham, who begat children. For this mariage, and the others virginity in their seuerall times both serued Christ. ibidem cap. 24
As a husbandman, after the hath com∣mitted his seed to the ground, expecteth haruest, neither doth cast in more seed: so the meane and moderation of our concupiscence is limitted in the pro∣creation of Children. Athenagoras de resurrectione mortuorum. When we buy houses, horses, and Seruants, we looke that they be strong, sound and aithfull: so when we mary a wife, we should regard that shee bee religious, chast, and modest. Chrysost. orat. de pulchritudine & vxore tomo 5. As he that saith mariage is naught, dispraiseth virginity: so hee that saith virginity is naught, disprayseth ma∣riage, because in comparison, meliority taketh increase and augmentation from his positiue good. Idem. lib. de virgi∣nitate. As they that will not suffer their seruants to eate and drinke openly, doe force them to gourmandize priuely: so they that will not communicate, their mirth, sportings & playings with their wiues, cause them to make substitutes vnto their husbands, who may ad∣minster these things vnto them. Ber∣nardus
Scardaeonius, de pudicitia matri∣monij, cap. 18. As chaffe is soone set on fire, and soone quenched, except some firmer matter bee put vnto it, to nourish it: so the loue of married folkes kindled only by eauty, doth soone vanish, except it bee supported by good conditions, and nourished with wisedome. Rhodi∣ginus. lib. 28. cap. 21. Geometricians say, that lines and superficies are not moued of themselues, but together with their substances: so it is meete that a Wife haue no affection proper to her selfe, but that her studies, cares, laughter and whatsoeuer else be common with her husband. ididem. Kings that bee wrastlers cause their subiects to exercise that feate; Princes that are Musitians incite their people to vse instruments: so husbands that are chast and godly, canse also their wiues to imitate their goodnesse, as we com∣monly say, a good iacke, makes a good gill, and this holds è diuersò. As the paine in the left side procures griefe in the right side: so it behoueth a husband to be moued with the com∣modities
or discommodities of his wife, and so must the wife. Vessels when they are new glued are dissolued by euery occasion, but when their ioynts are well knit together, they are scarcely sundred with fire or sword: so the first fellowship of married couples is broken by light trifles, but if it bee well knit it is farre more firme. As feuers arising of hidden causes, and growing by little and little, are more fearefull and grieuous, then those that spring from manifest and vrgent causes: so hinden and concealed enmi∣ties doe more violate the amity of those that bee married, then those that are exposulated and explained. As gall was cast out from the sacrifice of Iuno: so the mariage bed should bee without bitternesse. A wife. AS an Oratour doth more moue his audience by vrging the matter to the purpose, then by his affected ex∣ornations: o a chast Wife doth more please her honest husband and by her
vertuous demeanour, and religious conuersation, then by garish attire, or finicall ornaments. Plutarchus in Moralibus. As a Pipers melody is by anothers sound: so a woman should take and answere by her husband. Ibidem. The Moone when it is ioyned with the Sunne, is obscured and hid, but when it is farre from the Sunne, then it shineth: so a froward and peeuish wife, pouteth and puleth in the presence of her husband, but in his absence is as merry as a Cricket, or Pope Iohn. As Philosophers honouring a Prince, doe make themselues more noble, not the Prince: so wiues submitting them∣selues to their husbands, obtaine praise, but endeuouring to ouer rule them, they heareill. Plut. in Moral. As accidents are not moued of them∣selues, but are moued with their sub∣iects and substances, as wee say in Logicke: so a wife must apply her selfe vnto her husband both in earnest and play, in mirth and mourning, ibidem. When the blustring wind striues to carry away our cloakes or garments,
we hold them the faster; but if the Sun cast his hot beames vpon vs, wee put off both cloake and coate: so if a wife endeuour to reclaime her husband from any enormitie by railing and curst speeches, shee more prouoketh him; but if shee intreate him with milde words, and vse her pleasingeft parts, she workes a great deale more effectu∣ally. ibidem. He that commeth neare Elephants, must not haue a bright shining garment hee that comes neare Buls, must not weare red nor purpule, hee that trauels by Tygres, must not sound Tymbrels nor bels, for with these things, these beasts are madded: so a wife must ab∣staine from those things, which shee knoweth will anger her husband. ibid. As there is no profit of looking glasses set with Gold & precious stones, except they represent right formes: so there is no fruit of a rich wife, except shee will dispose her life according to her husbands, and liue in vnity and concord with him. Apud Stob. serm. 70. As she is a foole, that dare not wash her face, because she would not haue her
husband thinke she paints it: so shee is a nigget, that dare not laugh, least her husband should thinke shee is lasci∣uious. Plut. in Moralibus. As wine is so sharpe, that the same is notwithstanding profitable and plea∣sant, not bitter, as aloes: so ought the huswife of a family to be. ibidem. They that feare their Vines will make too sharpe Wine, must not cut the armes, but graft next to them Man∣drake, which canseth the grape to bee more pleasant: so they that feae to haue curst wiues, must not with rigour seeme to reclaime them, but speake gentle words in euery place by them, which makes them more quiet. As a Diamond is not brused by the hammer, but by blood: so a wife is not wonne by force, but by faire meanes. As a worme perisheth wood: so a wicked wife destroyeth her husband. Prouerb. 5. As it is irkesome liuing in the wildernesse: so it is tedious liuing with a wrathfull wife. ibidem. As it is dangerous to dwell with a
Dragon and Lyon: so it is perillous to remaine with a malitious wife▪ Eccle. 25. As it is wearisome for an old man, to climbe vp a sandie hill: so it is irkesome for a quiet man to abide with a brawling wife. Eccles. cap. 21. As stormes and whirld winds ouer∣whelme old ruinous ships: so the wic∣ked endeuours of wiues doe drowne the brittle soules of their husbands. Basilius hom. de diuite. As no man knowes, where the shooe wrings, but hee that weares it: so no man knows the disposition of a woman but hee that hath maried a wife▪ Plut. in Moralibus. As hee is vnwise, that forsakes the hony because hee is stunge of the Bees: so that wife is not very wise, that for∣sakes her husband, because he angreth her. Ibidem. As the Aspe doth borrow poyson of the Viper: so one wicked gossip doth borrow venim of an other, to spit at their husbands. Diogenes apud Maxi∣mum sermone. 39. As birds doe treade onely for pro∣creation:
so should man and wife lye together for procreation of issue. F. Ioannes à S. Geminiano lib. 4. de nata∣libus & volatilibus cap. 15. As both the male and female birde doe nourish their yong ones: so should man and wife ioyntly bring vp their children. Ibidem. The storke doth alwayes associate himselfe with his female so long as shee liueth: so the husband ought to sticke to his wife till death part them. ibidem. As storkes hate adulterous treadings: so should man and wife detest adulte∣rous copulation. Ibidem. As Cats wax wood being annointed: so some wiues are mad, if their hus∣bands vse oyntments, either because they suppose they are not healthfull, or else that they affect other women. Plutarchus. Matrimoniall Society. AS Christ loued the Church: so husbands must loue their wiues Ephis. 5. The Viper being the deadliest of all
Serpents, desireth to engender with the Sea Lamprey, and by hissing doth bring the Lamprey out of the vast ocean, and so the Lamprey engendereth with the poysonfull Viper: so a Wife must beare with her Husband, though he be rough and cruell, neither for any wrath or fury must shee breake the mariage bond. He doth strike thee, thou must beare him: he is thy Husband; hee is a drunkard, but he is ioyned by nature vnto thee. Hee is firce and implacable, but hee is thy member, and the most excellent of all thy members. But as the Viper doth vomite out his poyson for the reuerence of engendering: so a husband must put away all fiercenesse, roughnesse, cruelty, and bitternesse towards his wife for the reuerence of vnion. Basilius hom. 7. Exameron. If souldiers agree well together, all things succeed prosperously, but if they dissent, all runnes to ruine: so it is betweene man and wife. Chrisost. hom. 20. nd Ephes. If a Captaine ranke his souldiers well together, the enemy cannot make any inrods into his Campe: so if the
Husband, the wife, the children and seruants bend all one way, great is the vnity and concord of that house. ibid. As thou art thy wiues and she thine: so are thy goods hers, and hers thine. Ibidem. As when the gouernours of a Ship doe disagree, they that are in the Ship with them, doe feare shipwracke: so when the man and wife are at varience and debate, it is likely, that they that dwell with them, shall partake of their inconueniences. Idem. Hom. 56. in Genesin. Whatsoeuer a King heareth deuised against his Kingdome, hee presently thinketh it to be true, his mind is full of suspition because he loueth his King∣dome well, and is iealous ouer it: so if a husband loue his wife well and shee him, whatsoeuer ill they heare spoken one of the other, they are presently suspitious and iealous; and albeit it be not fit or worthy to be heard, yet the zeale and ardent loue, that they would haue nothing amisse in either of them, doth make the hearing of it, and the suspition and iealousie of it
tollerable and excusable. Idem. hom. 2. operis imperf. As no man curteth off his legs, be∣cause they are lame, not his feete, be∣cause they are distorted, nor his hand because it is withered, because no man hates his owne flesh, but dorh nourish it: so no man ought to dislike, hate, or detest his wife, nor a wife her hus∣band, saying he or she is such and such an one, because they both partake of one nature, and haue tyed themselues together with the indissoluble knot of marriage. Isidorus Clarius oratione tricesima quinta tomi primi. Loue. AS the roote, which the Physitians commonly call Rubarbe, doth by a certaine peculiar vertue purge choler, albeit by nature it bee cholericke: so many times it commeth to passe, that one loue doth driue out another, as one naile doth expell another, or anger putteth away anger, and griefe, griefe. As the fish Echencis, of some called Remora, albeit but little, yet stayeth a
Ship vnder saile: so now and then a a faire maide, although but of small strength, stayeth man hasting to study, or poting to warre, and detaineth him with her. As the brightnesse of the Sun doth heate and shine vpon the face of the be∣holder: so true loue doth heate the mind by desire, and shine in the face by ex∣ample. Iiota de contemplatione amoris diuini. Teares fall from the eyes vpon the brest: so true loue ariseth from the vn∣derstanding, and falleth into the heart. Ibidem. As enuie consumeth both body and soule: so doth loue. As fire laid by wax doth easily melt it: so the fire of loue doth easily dis∣solue arrogancie. Chrysostomus cap. 5. ad Galat. As fire is not felt without burning: so loue is not touched without piercing. Basil. de ver a virginitate. As poyson mixed with sweete wine at the first is pleasant to the drink or, but afterwards it deadly payneth: so they▪ that bestow their Loue vpon fare
and beautifull Harlots, at the first feele pleasure, but afterwards dolour, sorrow and bitternesse doe follow. Diogenes a∣pud Laertium. lib. 6. As the Sun hath many beames: so loue hath many passions. As the Snn-beames doe pierce deep∣ly: so loue doth pierce deadly. As the dropsie commeth of aboun∣dance of moysture: so loue springeth many times from aboundance of lust. As a lampe is maintained with oyle: so loue is nourished with idlenesse. As two boords are ioyned together with glew: so a man and woman are ioyntly combined and vnited together by loue. As a Ship doth perish without a Pylot; as a Citie is in danger without a Magistrate; as the world is full of darknesse without the Sun: so the life of mankind is not vitall without loue. Philippus Beroaldus oratio habita, in enarratione Propertij. As the Diamond is beautious to the sight, and yet deadly poyson to the stomacke; and as the Bacan leafe con∣taineth both the Antidote, and the
Aconite: so loue (vnlesse only grounded vpon vertue) breedeth more disparage∣ment to the credit, then content to the fancy. The eyes of many louers are like Sa∣lamander stones, that fire at the sight of euery flame; and their hearts are as queasie as the Minerals of Aetna, that burne at the heate of the Sunne, and are quencht with the puffe of euery wind. Greene. As fire without fewell: so is loue without lands. As the Cedar tree without fruit; or the corne sowne in the sands that wi∣thereth for want of moysture: so is loue without wealth. As the Chrysolite is proued in the fire; and the diamond by the Anuill: so loue is tryed, not by fauour of For∣tune, but by the aduersitie of Time. As the fairest blossomes, are soonest nipt with frost; and the best fruite soonest touched with Caterpillers: so the ripest wits are most apt to bee ouer∣throwne by loue. As the Heban blossomes open with the dew, and shut with the Sun: so
louers in presence of their mistres haue their tongues tied and their eyes open, pleading with the one, and being silent with the other. As men allure Doues by the beauty of the house; and reclaime Haukes by the fairenesse of the lute; so loue ioyned with vertue is able to recall the most stragling Aeneas to make sailes againe to Carthage. The ratling thunder bolt hath but his clap, the lightning but his flash: so hot loue begun in a moment, endeth in a minute. The drie touchwood is kindled with lime; the greatest mushrumpe groweth in one night, the fire quickly burneth the flax: so loue easily entereth into the sharpe wit without resistance, and is harboured there without repentance. In battailes there ought to be a doubt∣full fight, and a desperate end; in pleading, a difficult entrance; and a diffused determination: so in loue there is a life without hope, and a death with∣out feare. Fire cometh out of the hardest flint with the steele, oyle out of the driest
Ieate by the fire: so loue out the of stoniest heart by faith, by trust, by time. As the Hoppe, the poale being neuer so high, groweth the end; as the dry Beech kindled at the roote, neuer lea∣ueth vntill it come at the top, and one drop of poyson dispearseth it selfe into euery veine so affection hauing caught holde of the heart, and the sparkles of loue kindled in the liuer well suddainly though secretly, flame vp into the head, and spread it selfe into euery sinew. New loue worketh like new wine. Or water in a caudron, which when it feeleth the heate of the fire, it forth with∣boileth, swelleth, and is aried aloft. As the Hunter plieth his hounds, the Falkner his Hawkes, and the fisher his angle, forgetting the paine through de∣light of the pastime: so the louer pro∣secuteth his loue, esteeming all labours and troubles but trifles, in respect of the inning hope of his amorous haruest. As the sore called an Oncom or Fellon, beginning at the fingets end, and by sufferance falling into the ioynt doth hazard a Mahem, or at the least-wise a
Cure: so loue beginning at the eye, and by sufferance descending to the heart doth threaten life, or at the leastwise Reason: as the one therefore at the first is to bee scalded; so the other is presently to be suppressed, for without a timely violence, either malady is incurable. William Warner in his Pans Syrinx. As fire in what place soeuer it bee, euer worketh: so our will neuer stands idle, neither knowes how to liue with∣out louing. As an Apple being well knit together and mellowed, is more sweet and plea∣sing then when it is greene; yet that Apple being ouer-ripe and too much mellowed, becomes wrinkled, sapelesse, and wel-neere sauourlesse: euen such is the loue of men ouer yong and ouer old, the one sowre and sharpe, the o∣ther dry and sencelesse. As one onely light makes an entire and perfect shadow, whereas many lights being together, confounds and defaceth it: euen so from one onely Friend and loyall louer, true and per∣fect loue is to be expected.
As one knowes not a Musition, but either by his voyce or touching his in∣strument: euen so he cannot be reputed a perfect louer, except hee make it knowne by the testimony of the true signes belonging to loue. As without threed, a needle serues to no vse: so neither the pleasures of loue, without due prosecution; and though a needle haue two, three eyes or more, by reason whereof it carries as many threeds with it, yet it makes but one entrance, marry it makes the worke the faster: een so, he that delights to dally with many, binds himselfe thereby the more strictly to her loues in deed. Leon Baptista Alberto Florentino, in his Hecatonphila. As the most constant patience (being too farre pouoked) conuerteth into furie: so a wrathfull louer is more to be feared, than a sauage monster that hath no reason. As the best wine doth make the shar∣pest Viniger: so the deepest loue turneth to the deadliest hate. Bauen though it burne bright, is but a blase: scalding water if it stand a
while, turneth almost to Ice; Pepper though it bee hote in the mouth, is cold in the maw: so hote loue is soone cold, and that affection that frieth in words, commonly freezeth in workes. As Iupiter transformed himselfe in∣to the shape of Amphitrio, to embrace Alcmaena, into the forme of a Swan to enioy Laeda, into a Bull to beguile Io, into a showre of Gold to winne Danae: so Neptune changed himselfe into an Heyfer, a Ramme, a flood, a Dolphin, onely for the loue of those he lusted af∣ter. And Apollo conuerted himselfe in∣to a shephard, into a bird, into a Lyon, for the desire he had to heale his disease. As the first draught of wine doth comfort the stomacke, the second in∣flame the liuer, the third fume into the head▪ so the first sip of loue is pleasant, the second perillous, the pestilent. The least sparke if it be not quenched will burst into a flame; the least moath in time aeth the thickest cloath; and I haue read that a short space there was a Towne in Spaine vndermined with Conies, in Thessalia with Moules, with
Frogges in France, in Africa with Flies: so loue, which secretly creepeth in to the mind, (as the rust doth into the iron, and is not perceined) con∣sumeth the body, yea, and confounds the soule. Iohn Lilly. The little graine of Mustard-seed in time becommeth a tree, the slender twigge groweth to a stately greatnesse, and that which with the hand might easily haue beene pulled vp, will hardly with the axe be hewen downe: so loue at the first may bee easily era∣dicated, which being growne can hardly be razed. As a inew being cut, though it be healed, there will alwayes remaine a scarre, or as fine linnen stained with blacke ynke, though it be washed neuer so often, will haue an iron mowle: so the minde once mangled or maymed with loue, though it bee neuer so well cured with reason, or cooled by wis∣dome, yet there will appeare a scarre, by the which one may gesse the mind hath beene pierced, and a blemish, whereby one may iudge the heart hath beene stained:
As they that angle for the Tortois, hauing once caught him, are driuen in∣to such a lithernesse, that they loose all their spirits being benummed: so they that seeke to obtaine the good will of Ladies, hauing once a little hold of their loue, are driuen into such a traunce, that they let goe the hold of their liberty, bewitched like those that view the head of Medusa, or the Viper tied to the bough of the Beech tree, which keepeth him in a dead sleepe, though hee beginne with a sweete slumber. New Wine is more pleasant then wholsome, and Grapes gathered before they be ripe, may set the eyes on lust, but they make the teeth on edge: so loue desired in the bud, not knowing what the blossome will be, may delight the conceit of the head, but it will destroy the contemplatiue of the heart. Apelles was no good Painter the first∣day; he that will sell Lawne, must learne to folde it: so he that will make loue, must first learne to court it. As betweene the similitude of man∣ners, there is a friendship in euery
respect absolute: so the composition of the body, there is a certaine loue in∣gendred by ones lookes, where both the bodies resemble each other, as wouen both in one loome. Euery flower hath his blossome, his sauour, his sap: so euery desire should haue to feed the eye, to please the wit, to maintaine the estate. Poyson will disperse it selfe into e∣uery veine, before it pierce the heart: so loue maimeth euery part before it ill the liuer. As by Basill the Scorpion is in∣gendred and by the meanes of the same hearbe destroyed: so loue which by time and fancy is bred in an idle braine is by time and fancy banished from the heart. As the Salamander, which being a long space nourished in the fire, at the last quencheth it: so affection hauing taken hold of the fancie and liuing as it were in the minde of the louer, in tract of time altereth and changeth the heat, and turneth it to chilnesse. As the Almond Tree beareth most fruit when it is old: so loue hath
greatest faith when it groweth in age. The yong Vines bring the most wine, but the old the best: so tender loue maketh greatest shew of blossomes, but tryed loue bringeth forth sweetest iuyce. As the precious stone Anthracites, being throwne into the fire, looketh blacke and halfe dead, but being cast into the water, glistereth like the Sun beames: so the precious mind of man once put into the flame of loue, is as it were vgly and looseth her vertue, but springled with the water of wisdome, and detestation of such fond delights, it shineth like the glorious rayes of Phoebus. As the bst charme for a toothach is to pull out the tooth: so the best re∣medy for loue, is to weare it out. Fire is to be quenched in the sparke, weeds are to be rooted vp in the bud, follies in the blossome, greene sores are to be dressed roughly least they fester, tetters to be drawne in the beginning, least they spread, Ringwormes to be annointed when they first appeare, least they compasse the whole body: so the
assaults of loue are to be beaten backe at the first siege, least they vndermine at the second. Hearbs that are the worse for water∣ing, are to be rooted out, Trees that are lesse fruitfull for the lopping, are to be hewen downe, Hawkes that waxe haggard by manning, are to be cast off: so fond louers that increase in their fol∣lies when they be reiected, are to be despised. The Spaniell that fawneth when hee is beaten, will neuer forsake his Master: so the man that doteth when he is dis∣dained, will neuer forgoe his Mistresse. Theseus would not go into the Laby∣inth without a threed, that might shew him the way out: so neither any wise man will enter into the crooked corners of loue, vnlesse he know by what means he might get out. Hot fire is not onely quenched by the cleare fountaine: so neither is loue only satisfied by the faire face. He that hath sore eyes, must not be∣hold the Candle: so he that would leaue his loue, must not fall to remem∣bring of his Lady, the one causeth
the eye to smart, the other the heart to bleed. You shall neuer beate the flie from the Candle, though shee burne, nor the Quaile from the Hemlocke, though it bee poyson: so neither the louer from the company of his Lady, though it be perillous. As the hearbe Heliotropium, is al∣wayes inclined to that place where the Sunne shineth, and being depriued of the Sunne, dyeth; and as Lunaris hearbe, is long as the Moone waxeth, bringeth forth leaues, and in the way∣ning shaketh them off: so a louer whiles hee is in the companie of his Lady, where all ioyes encrease, vttereth many pleasant conceits, but banished from the sight of his Mistresse, where ll mirth decreaseth, either liueth in Melancholy, or dyeth with despe∣ration. As Andromache whensoeuer shee saw the Tombe of Hector, could not refraine from weeping, or as Laodamia could neuer behold the picture of Pro∣tesilaus in wax, but shee alwayes fain∣ted: so louers, whensoeuer they view
the image of their Ladies, though not the same substance, yet the similitude in shadow, they are so benummed in their ioynts, and so bereft of their wits, that they haue neither the power o moue their bodies to shew life, nor their tongues to make answere. There must in euery Triangle bee three lynes, the first beginneth, the second augmenteth, the third con∣cludeth it a figure: so in loue three vertues, affection, which draweth the heart, secrecie, which increaseth the hope, and constancie, which fi∣nisheth the worke, without any of these rules there can bee no triangle, without any of these vertues, no loue. There is no man that runneth with one legge, no bird that flieth with one wing: so no loue lasteth  one limme. As the earth wherein the mines of siluer and gold is hidden, is profitable for no other thing but metals: so the heart wherein loue is harboured, re∣ceiueth no other seed but affection. When the Hoppe groweth high, it must haue a pole, when the Iuie
spreadeth, it cleaueth to the flint, when the Vine riseth, it draweth about the Elme: so when Virgins wax in yeares, they follow that which belongeth to their appetites, loue, loue. As fire cannot be hidden in the flax without smoake, nor Muske in the bo∣some without smell: so neither can loue be hidden in the breast without suspi∣tion. As the straightest wands are to b bent when they be small: so the precifet Virgins are to be wonne when they young. As fire when it bursteth out, catcheth hold soonest of the driest woode: so loue when it is reuealed, fasteneth easiest vpon the affectionate will. As an English man cannot abide a stranger to be his equall, nor to be dared by any: so he cannot by any meanes suffer a partner in his loue. As there are foure kinds of warres; forraine, ciuill, combate, and in the conscience: so there are foure kinds of loue; spirituall, carnall, temporall, and common. F. Iohannes à S. Geminian lib. 1. de caelo & elementis, cap. 4.
As the Raine-bow hath foure prin∣cipall colours in it; red, iacinth co∣lour, azure, and greene: so loue espe∣cially worked foure passions in the soule; zeale, excesse, hatred, and languorment. Ibidem. As the Sun-beames pierce deepely: so doth loue. Ibidem. Loue is likened to the Figge Tree, whose fruits is sweete, whose Roote is more bitter, then the claw of a Bittor: to the Apple in Persia, whose blossome sauoureth like Honny, whose bud is more sowre then gall: and to a La∣byrinth which leadeth vs into worser paines, then Sisiphus suffereth, into moe torments then Tantalus abideth, and into greater griefe then Ixion beareth. As no man can be twice happy; as Saint Hierome writeth in an Epistle to Iulia, Chapter foure: so to be wise, and take to loue, is scarcely graunted to Ioue aboue. As Stars abound in Heauen, Hares in Athon, and Bees in Hybla: so loue is full of slights. The sting of a Serpent by continuance enuenometh the whole body, he that is
charmed of the Torpido by procrastina∣tion runneth mad: o the pricke of loue by delay is vncurable. As Anacreon, who spake by experi∣ence, and writ by proofe, calleth loue a tyrant, mischieuous, cruell, hardy, vnkind, foule, vngrious, cursed, wicked, the cause of all mischiefe, the forgetter of reason, the father of frenzie, the disturber of the minde, the enemy to health, the sinke of sorrow, the garden of griefe, and to conclude, a confused Chaos of miserie; so that if it might be seene with bodily eyes, or be an obiect to our exteriour sences, the Basiliske is not more feared, nor the Cockatrice more auoided then loathsome loue would be eschued and detested: so Miltiades the Athenian was wont to say, that of all the plagues, where∣with the gods did afflict mortall men, loue was the greatest, in that they sought that as an heauenly blisse, which at last they found their fatall bane. As Demophoon was false in loue to Phillis, Aeneas to Dido, Iason to Medaea, Paris to Oenone: so true loue was Charites to her husband Laepole∣nus,
Cornelia to Gracchus, Iulia to her Pompey, Artemisia to Mausolus, Panthea to Abradatus, Portia to Bru∣tu, Alceste to Admetus, Penelope to Vlisses, Sulpitia to Letulus, Hippar∣chia to the Philosopher Crates, and Macrina to her Torquatus. As Iupiter enforced Apollo to flie his Kingdome Paphos, and to liue exild in Thessalie: so loue there constrained him to keepe King Admetus sheepe. As Cupids dart caused Diana to loue the swaine Endimion, and Calisto to loue Ioue: so it caused Clitia to loue Phoebus, and Cloris Mercury. As swouning mortifieth euery mem∣ber, as pestilence infecteth euery part, s poyson pierceth euery vaine: so loue, if in time it bee not looked vnto, will bring body and minde to vtter con∣fusion. As the vertues of loue are many: so the inconueniences are infinite. There is no cloth so fine, but Moates will eate it; no Iron so hard, but rust will fret; no wood so sound, but wormes will putrifie it; no metall so course, but fire will purifie it: so there is neither
Man nor Woman so free but loue will bring them into thraldome and bon∣dage. As Lordship can brooke no mater∣ship: so neither can loue; according to chat verse. Dame Venus and Kingdomes can no riuality suffer. As the wisest man said, Canticles. 8. that loue is strong as death, and zeale is cruell as the graue, the coales thereof are fiery coales, and a vehement flame; Much water cannot quench loue, neither can the flouds drowne it: so all writers with one mouth haue confessed, that the godliest men, that euer were, the valiantest men, that euer were, haue beene brought by loue to most out∣ragions impietie, to most extreame folly, and most vile villanie. That there haue beene none so stoute, but loue hath made them stoupe, none so wise, but loue hath made them fooles, none so shamefast but loue hath made them bold. They haue recorded that loue is aboue Lord or Lawes, aboue Prince or priuiledge, aboue friend or faith. Where loue leadeth, no Master
is made account of, no King cared for, no friend forced of, no dutie respected, no honesty regarded, but all things done according to the passion, which preuaileth ouer vs; so that they haue thought that loue is some heauenly in∣fluence, and no earthly accident. Selfe-Loue. THere is no creature that more fer∣uently loueth her young ones, then an Asse and an Ape: so many vn∣learned idiots doe more esteeme their owne vanities, & scurrilous pamphlets, then any other mans graue and learned writings. As they that walke in a wrong path, the further they goe, the worse it is for them: so it is for them that goe for∣wards relying vpon selfe-loue. Not as Physitions doe cure choler by bitter things: so we must put away anger by anger. Plut. If one eye little letters too much they offend the eyes: so they that wathfully and of selfe-will, and selfe-loue,
loue, regard small matters, are en∣kendled to greater matters more ra∣gingly. Idem. As Mares seeing their owne shape in the water, are driuen into madnesse, as saith Columella: so some too much louing themselues, and admiring their owne doings, through insolency be∣come almost mad. The Emmot is an industrious crea∣ture, and laboureth for no body, but herselfe: so many mortall men do only care for themselues and regard their owne businesse. As euery mans disease seemeth most bitter vnto himselfe: so euery mans discommodity doth especially grieue himselfe. As the dropsie groweth through too much aboundance of matter and moi∣sture as Auicene writeth: so pride and contempt of God commeth through too much selfe-loue. F. Ioannes à S. Geminiano. lib. 6. de homine & membris ius, cap. 5.
Affections. AS that tempest is more dangerous, which suffereth not to arriue in the hauen, them that which forbiddeth to saile: so those motions of the mind are more great and grieuous which carry vs away headlong, then those that disturbe our reason, and hinder our quiet. Plut. in Moralibus. As by Circes cups men were sud∣dainly trasformed into wild beasts: so affections doe make a man suddainly to be another then he is. ibidem. As in a great storme a ship is not stayed, except the anchor be surely fastened: so in the great hurly burly of businesse, sound reason must season the minde, that it be not caryed away of affections. Ibidem. As the sayles are to be proportioned according to the greatnesse of the ship: so our desires are to be moderated ac∣cording to our abilities. Ibidem. As the shooe is wrested with the wringing of the the foote: so euery mans life is of that sort as the affections of his mind are. Ibidem.
As thou in vaine drawest pure water out of a muddy well: so thou canst not be pleasant to others or pliable to thy selfe, except thou purgest thy mind of euill affections. ibidem. As horses well ordered and manned, doe of their owne accord goe the right way, albeit the Coach-man doth not vse the Rames: so the affections being accustomed to reasons managing and moderating, doe not assay any filthy or dishonest thing, either in dreames, or in diseases, albeit reason be in an extasie. ibidem. As he that hath sowre and dead wine, can neither make wine nor vineger of it: so according to Zenoes opinion the first motions of the minde are neither good nor euill. ibidem. As an open mossy place doth expell nothing that falleth into it: so a minde endued with a vicious bashfulnesse is open vnto nothing, but to filthy af∣fections. ibidem. As they that cannot abide candle light, are much lesse able to abide Sunne-shine: so they that are trou∣bled with small matters, are much
more distracted with greater. ibidem. As those diseases of the body are more grieuous, which breake forth into wounds and swellings: so are those affections: more burdenous, which through griefe make the life tedious it is a disease of the mind to beleeue that all things are made of moates in the Sun, but yet it doth not plague the mind so much as couetousnesse doth. ibidem. As childish complaints doe easily vanish away: so toyish desires the matter being taken away doth soone fade. Ibidem. As the changing of the Moone, or a sharpe winde, or the ebbe of the Sea, or any such light change of things doth take life from a sicke and weake man: so euery small offence doth disturbe weake minds, corrupted by affections, when as they that are of a strong heart and a resolute minde, doe not feele any such matter. As no creature neither ame nor wilde doth yeeld to that reason which it wanteth: so neither any affection: Seneca. As many wild weeds springing vp
in a field, are euill and naught of them∣selues, and yet are signes of a fruitfull ground, if it were tilled: so the affecti∣ons of the mind being euill of them∣selues, doe argue no ill wit, if it were tilled with wholesome instructions. Plut. in Moral. As any dogges barke at euery noyse, but are quiet when they heare a voyce knowne and familiar vnto them: so the diseases of the minde when they rage they cannot be restrained, except the speaches be knowne and familiar vnto them which may correct them being moued. ibidem. As the body is not capable of plea∣sures, except it be well ordered: so the minde doth not participate of true pleasure, except it be free from feare and other affections. ibidem. As diseases although but small in the beginning doe still grow worse and worse, if they be letten alone: so if but once thou admit euill affections, al∣though they be but of small moment and validity, they will encrease and grow to greater head. Seneca. As a man hath alwayes remedy at
hand against the poyson of Serpents, to wit, his spittle, which they being touched withall, or a little hot water being cast vpon them they flye away, and if it enter into their mouthe they dye: so wee alwayes carry a present remedy about with vs against all pestilent desires, if wee know how to vse it. We must looke for it in our minds. As there are Serpents, that meete with vs in the woods, and some lye lurking at home in our houses: so some affections are mannaged by reason, and shew themselues reasonable, and some lye lurking in our workes, and shew themselues vnreasonable. Marus here∣mit a delege spiritual. As they are to bee freed from fetters, that haue a long iourney to goe: so they are to be withheld from immoderate affections, that directly would goe vnto God. Theodoretus de spirituali animae resrrectione. As the foure humours of the body (heate, coldnes, drinesse, and moisture) are the causes of all welfare and ill fare in the body: so the foure principall
affections of the mind, (loue, hatred, ioy and griefe) are the causes of all ioy and annoy in the mind. Richardus Victorius de statu interioris hominis, cap. 34. As they that kill the head of a Ser∣pents, kill the whole body also: so they that cut off the first motions of ill af∣fections, kill the whole rabble of them. Procopius in Exodum. As there is no fire so hot, but it is quenched with water: so there is no affection so stronge, but it is weakened with reason. He that hath beene burned, knoweth the force of the fire, he that hath beene stoung, remembreth the smart of the Scorpion: so he that hath endured the brunts of fancie, knoweth best how to eschew the broyles of affection. As thou art wary in thy trauell, that thou strick not thy foot against a stone or a pricke: so in thy life, be wary that no affection rule thee, that may offend: Epictetus, in Enchiridio, cap. 53. As saylers doe apply themselues to the changes of the winds: so doe wise men to the affections of the mind.
Aristonymus, apud Stobaeum sermone 1. Deprudentia. As Tarquine, when he walked in his Garden, did with a wande strike off the heads of Poppy: so we must especial∣ly resist the stronger and more powre∣full affections of our minds. Angelus Politianus de ira. As they that liuevnder a Tyrant, are in bondage and seruitude: so are they, that are ruled by head strong affections Philo. lib. quod omis probus sit liber. As they that are ruled by good lawes liue in peace: so they that are ruled by sound reason, and not by vnruly af∣fections, liue in rest and tranquility ibidem. As Noahs Arke did admit all kind of creatures, which Paradice did not: so mans body doth admit all vnruly and vntamed affections, but admitteth not vertues worthy of praise. Idem lib. de plantatione Noae. As a sparrow tied by the leg, assaying to flie, is puld downe by the string to the ground: so the mind being not freed of affections, endeuouring to flie to the knowledge of celestiall things, is held
downe by affections, and cast to the earth. Maximus lib. primo de charitate. If the eye betroubled, it cannot ex∣actly see his obiect: so if the heart bee disturbed with affections it cannot well behold the truth. Bsilius in Psal. 33. & Epistola. 1. As a foule polluted glasse cannot re∣ceiue the impressions of pictures pre∣sented before it: so a soule dimmed and darkned with carnall affections and worldly cares is not capable of spiritual illuminations. Idem. Epist. 64. As too much wine maketh drunke: so the affections of lust, sorrow, and wrath, hauing expelled reason, doe bring madnesse. Idem. in cap. 5. Esayae. Brethren. AS in a paire of scales, when one goes vp the other goes downe: so one brother ought to yeeld vnto ano∣ther aduanced to higher dignity. Plut: As in Arithmeticke figures of lesser value being added to greater doth multiply them, and in like manner are multiplyed themselues: so one brother
dignifying another, encreaseth the honour of him that is dignified, and adorneth the dignifier with the splen∣dour of his dignity. ibiem. As those fingers, that can neither write, nor play vpon an instrument, are moued with those that write and play: so one brother should be like affected to another ibidem. If thy weapons breake, or be taken from thee, thou maist repaire them a∣gaine, or get thee other, but thou canst not get thee another body: so thou maist find other friends, but not other bre∣thren. Ibidem. Of the same first matter, elementes a∣rise most repugnant and opposite be∣tweene themselues: so many times of the same parents brethren are bred of most contrarie dispositions. As Caine and Abell; Ismael and Isace; Esau and Iacob; Amphion and Zetis; Eteocles and Polynices; Titus and Dmitian. As ciuill seditions are better transpo∣sed to enemies, then bestowed on our owne countrymen: so it is better, and more equall, respectiuely, to enuy and
maligne others, own then our brethren, although it is good to enuy or maligne any body. Plut. Admonition. AS wee cast bridles vpon horses, not in the race, but before the runne: so those that are inclined to wrath or lust, are to be restrained by reasons and admonitions, before they come into danger. Plut. in Moralibus. As Nurses doe not chide nor punish their children that are fallen, but first runne and lift them vp, and after chide them: so a friend when he is afflicted, is to be helped and lifted vp, and after∣wards to be admonished and chidden, that by his owne fault he fell into that calamitie. ibidem. They that haue the toothach forth∣with runne vnto Physitions, and tell them of their griefe; they that haue agues send for him; but hee that is franticke, neither calleth him, nor admitteth him being called, by reason of the intollerable vehemency of his disease: so those that doe hide their
aultes, neither doe suffer any one to dmonish them, of these there is no ope ibidem. As a soare eye cannot abide light: so either doth an humorous mind admit of a seuere admonition, but if thou wilt re it, thou must mingle prayse with hine admonition. ibidem. As Telepus, because he wanted a riend, was constrained to seeke for re∣medy of his enemy for the cure of is wound: so they that haue not good riends to admonish them of their aults, doe oftentimes heare them of their enemies. ibidem. As medicines doe first bite and of∣end, and afterwards doe bring health and delight: so wholesome admonitions at the first are somewhat bitter, but af∣terwards are most pleasant and accep∣table to him that is admonished. ibid. As phlegme gathered by little and little, doth then especiall appeare and ouercome, when nature is ouercome: so certaine friends dare not admonish those that be mighty, vnlesse fortune begin to turne her wheele, and then be∣ing humbled, they begin to deale with them. ibidem.
A sound man beareth it, if thou vp∣braid him with his intemperancy, lust and ryot, but a crasie and an vnsound man will not: so a friend is to be ad∣monished, when he ceaseth to be an∣gry, or to loue. ibidem. As a blow foreseene, is more easily awarded: so a mischiefe fore-thought of, or warned of, doth lesse offend. Seneca. As Physitions forbid to minister re∣ceits when the disease is growing, or raging but when it somewhat abateth: so to those first motions and eager ex∣tremities of wrath and griefe, consola∣tion & admonition is not to be vsed, but when as in time they begin to be some∣what lighter. As Physitions forbid to giue Ellebo∣rum, albeit it be effectuall, to old men, or to Children, or to those that haue weake bodies: so our admonition is to be tempered that hee may suffer it, whom thou wouldest amend; neither only the vice is to be looked vnto, but the nature of him whom thou studiest to amend. Plin. lib. 25. cap. 5. in flne. As wholesome hearbes loose their
force of healing, by being customarily vsed: so if thine admonition be daily and of custome, it doth not amend him that is accustomed to it. As in the Contrey of Vmbria the earth is dryer by raine, and moyster by heate, whereupon. Cicro doth iestingly say, that there dust comes of a showre, and of drinesse durt: so admonition doth make some men the worse. Plin. lib. 31. cap. As some precious stones doe wax bright being steeped in Vineger, and some become cleare being boyled in honie: so bitter reprehension maketh some better, and other some milder amonition. Beautis. AS the hanging vp of a net directly aginst the Sunne, doth partly ob∣scure the brightnesse of his beames: so pensiuenesse somewhat diminisheth the featured regards of beautiful Paragons: As good wine lacketh no tasters: so faire women lacke no sutors. As with an easie price and an Iuie
bush bad wine is vttered: so beautie and tractablenesse doe get many bad wo∣men husbands. As the Glo-worme is bright in the hedge, but blacke in the hand: so are many beautious women, fairely made, but fowly mannered. As by the current of a streame, we come to the Fountane: so when we meete with any beautifull body we should follow the perfect regard there, of so farre till we are arriued at the espe∣ciall point and ground-worke, which is God himselfe, for from him all beau∣tie hath originall. As fire burneth those that either touch it, or stand too neare it: so beautie inflameth those that either stand neare it, or farre off. Xenophon apud Stobaeum. serm. 64. As the fairest Leopard hath his spots, the finest cloth his list, & the smoothest shooe his last: so the most blazing beautie hath some blemish. Where the wine is neate, there need∣eth no Iuy-bush, the right Corall needeth no coloring: so where is per∣fection, there needeth no painting.
As the Adamant draweth the heauie Iron, the harpe the fleete Dolphin: so beautie allureth the chast mind to loue, and the wisest wit to lust. The purple dye will neuer staine, the puer Ciuet will neuer loose his sauour, the greene Lawrell will neuer change his colour: so beauty can neuer be blot∣ted with discourtesie. As Milo that great wrastler began to weepe, when hesaw his armes brawn∣fallen and weake, saying, strength, strength, is but vaine: so Helen in her new glasse, viewing her old face, with smileing countenance, cryed, Beautie, where is thy blaze? As when the counterfeit of Ganimede was shewen at a Market, euery one would faine buie it, because Zexis had therein shewed his greatest cunning: so when a beautifull woman appeareth in a multitude, euery man is drawne to sue to her, for that God hath shewed such rare art in her. As a fresh colour doth easily dimme a quicke fight; as a sweet Rose doth soonest pierce a fine sent; as pleasant sirrups doe chiefliest infect a delicate
tast: so beautifull woman doe first of all allure them that haue the wantonnest eyes, and the whitest mouthes. Lilly. As the Eagle soares not so high in the ayre, but shee can espie a little fish in the Sea; as the Sunne in Cancer goes retrograde; as the coldest clime hath his Summer; and as Apollo was neuer so stoicall, but semel in anno he could let fall a smile: so the most seuere Pil∣grime or Palmer hath an eye as well as a heart, and a looke to lende to beau∣ty, as a thought to bend to Theology. Greene: As the Bauin is but a blaze: so beautie. As the gorgeous Cedar is onely for shew and nothing for profit; as the Apples of Tantalus are precious in the eye, and dust in the hand; and as the starre Artophylax is most bright, but fitteth not for any compasse: so those that stand vpon their outward por∣traiture, are commonly preiudiciall. As the fairestiroses haue pricks; the purest lawnes their moles; and the brightest Diamondes their crackes: so those that are beautifull haue many
times imperfect conditions, for nature hauing care to polish the body so farre, ouer weenes her selfe in her excellency, that shee leaues their minds vnperfect: As the Adamant draweth the iron, the Ieat the straw, and the sight of the Panther the Ermly: so doth beautie draw the eyes of youth. The Lapidarie thus chuseth a true Saphyre, when he seeth it to glister, he couereth it with Oyle, and then if it shine, he alloweth it, if not, he breaketh it: so if thou fall in loue with one that is beautifull, cast some kind of colour in her face, either as it were isliking her behauiour, or hearing of her lightnesse, and if then shee looke as faire as before, wooe her, winne her, and weare her. As it is rare to see the Sunne without light: so it is as rare to see a faire wo∣man without a louer. Those that are stung of the Scorpion, are healed of the Scorpion; the fire that burneth taketh away the heate of the burne; the Spider Phalangium that poysoneth, doth with her skin make a plaster for poyson; the speare that
wounded Telephus, must heale him: so he that is wounded and stung with beautie, must bee cured and healed with beautie. Siluer although it bee white, yet it draweth blacke lines: so Rodophe, Lais, and Phrine, although they had beautiful faces, yet they had foule deeds. The skinne of the Ermelin is desired, and the carkasse despised; the horne of the Vnicorne most preciously receiued, and his flesh reiected; the hoofe of the Leopard is the thing the hunter seekes, or else he is contemned: so the beauty and riches of a woman are highly re∣garded of most men, but her honesty and vertue are lightly esteemed. As the Deare with the sight of a faire Apple standeth at gaze: so men through beautie are driuen into a maze. As Beauty made Venus to loue Anchi∣ses: so it made Luna to like Endimion. As the Curtesan Lamia blinded King Demetrius with her beautie: so the re∣nowned Curtesan Flora fettered Cas∣sius, that worthy Romaine. As the Viper being tied to a Beech tree, falleth into a slumber: so diuers be∣holding
beautifull persons haue stood as though with Medusaes head they had been turned to a stone. As Pigmaleon for beautie loued his Image of Iuory: so the beautifull picture of Ganimede, greatly astonished the Ladies of Cypres. The wise Lapidaries say, that the prescious stone with the most glistering hew, hath alwayes the most secrete vertue, the pure Gold is chosen by the perfect colour; the best fruite, by the branest blossomes: so the best conditi∣ons are commonly discerned by the sweetest countenance. As the Dormouse cannot shut his eye, as long as he lyeth in the beame of the Sunne; and as the Deare cannot cease from braying, where the hearbe Moly groweth: so beautie causeth one to stare, so long as it is in presence. As the stone Topason is not more loued for the outward hue, then hated for the poyson, which secretly is hid within it; or as the herbe Nepenthes is not more liked for the pleasant shape, then loathed for the poisoned sap: so beautie cannot inflame the fancy so
much in a moneth, as ridiculous folly can quench it in a moment. Greene. As the Dolphin hath nothing to co∣uer his deformitie, but a few glistering scales; and as the clownish Poet Cheril∣lus had nothing to bee praysed in his verses, but the name of Alexander: so many haue nothing to shadow their folly, but a faire face, nor nothing to bee commended, but a little fading beautie. As a Ring of Gold is in a swines nout: so is beautie in a foole. As loue is thought to be some hea∣uenly influence, and no earthly acci∣dent: so according to Ouids opinion, Forma numen habet, beautie hath some Deitie or Godhead within it. As a Flower soone fadeth: so doth Beautie. In bodies of lesser stature and corpulency commonly there is greater valour and more wit, then those that be hger and vaster. THe Bee being a very little creature, is admirable in her labours, and
wittie in her gouernment: so in little bodies there is often the greatest wit, s in little Vlysses there was the wit of Mercurie, but in great Aiax the strength of a Bull. Therefore Palinge∣iu saith very well in his booke called Libra. Ingenio plerunque caret, qui robore praestat Rarò vtr un{que} Deus largitur, vtidem Sit sapiens, & sitrobusto corpore pol∣lens. The greater the creature is, the lesse ruitfull it is; but litle creatures are very umerous in their breeding, as the Lin∣net being a very little Birde doth bring forth twelue yong ones: so they that aue lesse in waight, doe recompence t by pluralitie in number. Vnfruitfull trees are stronger and of greater bulke then those that befruit∣full: so their bodies are stronger that re vnfruitfull in learning, then theirs that exhaust themselues by painefull abours, and consume themselues by cturnall lucubrations.
Time, Age. AS he that intends to passe a Riuer stayes on the banke till the rough stormes bee ouerblowne: so in the stearne tempests of time, we should await and not wilfully cast our selue into danger, considering that wha may not bee done to day, happily to morrow in better sort will be com∣passed. As sowre Wine and Apples doe wa milde and sweete through age: so th inslencie of age is mitigated by long vse of things. As hee is not praysed that hath sung much, pleaded much, or gouerne much, but hee that hath done the things well and wisely: so is he to be praised that hath liued well, not he that hath liued long. Plut. As to them that saile, countries an Cities doe slip away: so by the swi course of winged time, first childhoo slips away, then youth, then the be yeares of old age. Seneca. As the Apian wines and some othe at the first are sweete, but by yeares do
receiue sowrenesse: so some become through age more inhumane. As the Amaea wines are by age made the : so some in youth are more dissolute and ugh, but through age and experience become more mild and tractable. As the Cage must be shut, before the birds be flowne: s ide and time must be taken, while they may be had. Post∣hac occasio calua, Time is balde be∣hind, therefore must be taken by the forelocks. As the Cedar the elder it is, th straighter it growes; and  Nariss flowers, the higher they sping, th more glorious is their hew: so should men as they exceed in yeares, excell in tues. As the Tin repented too late, when: their Towne was spoyled, and as it is too late to shut the stabledooe when the steed is stole: so when the time is past, it is too late to recall it, for it is deae, and heare no man, neither knowes how to returne. It is too late to recall the stone al∣ready cast; to beate the bush, the
birds being flowne: to breake the bar∣gaine, the bands being sealed; it is too late to defend the wall, when the Citie is ouer come, to sound the traite, when the battaile is fought; to apply the salue, when the sore is in∣curable; it is too late to withhold the stroke already stroken; it is too late to dry the mault, the kill being on fire; to wish for rain▪ when the showre is past; it is too late to cry Caue, when thy Coyne is consumed, to beware, when thy wealth is wracked, to be charie when thou hast nothing whereof to take charge▪ th alme commeth out of time, when the ship already hat suffered shipwracke; it booteth not to stop the breach when the towne is ouer flowne; it is too late to dislodge loue out of ones breast when i hath infected euery part of the body; it too late to cast Anchor, when the ship is shaken to peeces against the rockes; it booteth not to send fo a Physition when the sicke partie is already de∣parted: so when time is once past, it can neuer be recalled againe.
Benefice
Prayers and adorations, that it should arise, but doth presently cast his light and brightnesse abroad, and is reioyd at of all men▪ so neither doe thn pe the vain applause and popula prayse of men, that thou shouldest, bestow benefits, but frankly and free∣ly bestow them, and thou halt e be∣oued as the Sunne Epictets Sto As I owe no money to him, that is▪ illing to lend me some▪ but hath not: so I am not bound to him, that would bestow a benefit vpon me, but doth not Seneca lib. 6. de Beef. cap. 11. As the figge tree flourisheth not with blossomes, when it hath the sweetest fruit: so some doe bestow benefits with∣out any promiss. Pl. lib. 1▪ cap. 26. As fire is by little and little exti∣guished, except it bee nourished with sme combustible matter: so the all loue of mortall men doth by little and little decay, if it ee not foster and cherished by mtuall benefits, and often duties of Iustinianus in sermone de Christi coro∣r sen de Eucharstia.
Beneuolence AS n Adamant of his owne nature infringible, but being steeped in warme Goats bloud is broken with a hammer: so some wits can be tamed by no force, but are onely mollified and made tractable by faire dealing. Plin: . 37. cap. . Some precious stones being okd in Vineger doe gliter, and many waxe bright being boyled in hony: so sharpe reprehension doth make some better, and some are trained to better fruit by ild admonitio. As t table play the chaunce of the to be dispose of by  and reason to the best purpose: so that which happeneth in life is to be turned to the vse, and to be construed after the ablest manner. Pli. lib. 37. cap. 10. cap. 1. As a riuer diuided into many streams doth runne slowly and faintly: so be∣neuolence being spred and distracted ong many, is infeebled and dimi∣nished. Plut. As those liuing creatures which bring
forth but one yong one, doe loue more vehemently: so the beneuolence and heartie good will, which is bon to one onely, is more ardent and Plutarcu. Businesse. AS he is sooner wearied, that know not how long his voyage is: so he effect a thing with lesser tediousnesse, who foreknowes the maner and reason of his businesse. As we ought not  into Laby∣inths without a thre whereby e may safely  againe: so we oght to take no business in hand, see some way to dispatch . As it is more painefull to cast emptie hand▪ there if it were poyd with soe , o some waight: so it is more troublesom bestow thy paines in atters of no moment, then to be industrious in se∣rious businesse. As they are more, wearyed walke in vneuen wayes, then they hat walke in equall path so it  more
labourious againe & againe to reiterate and repeate the same matters, then to be conuersant in diuersitie of businesses, and varietie of affayres. As many doe yawe, when they see others gaspe, and doe make water, be∣cause they see others doe so: so some are moued to take businesse in hand vpon no sound iudgement, but be∣cause they would imitate and resemble others. Exercise. AS Iron or Brasse doth wax bright by vsing: so the vigour of the mind doth gloriously appeare by exer∣cising, Plut. As iron doth rust, if thou dost not vse it: so doth the vigor of the mind, if thou doest not exercise it. idem. Welles, that haue water drawne out of them, doe yeeld the cleerer water, but those become putrified, of which none is partaker: so exercise both beget a wholesome habit both in the soule and body. Clement Alexander lib▪ 1. Somatum.
As exercise doth make souldiours ready in feats of armes: so also it doth make schollers perfit and prompt in deliuery of scholasticall points. Hierom. in vita Malchi. monachi. As drops of water make stones hollow: so by exercise the barrennest wit is brought to some reasonable passe. Plut. de liber is educandis. As Iron and Brasse are worne by the touch of the hands: so by exercise the hardnesse of wit is worne away. ibidem. As cart wheeles beded by forc, can neuer againe be brought to their former rectitude: so whatsoeuer we exercise our selues in, from that we can hardly be reclaimed. Ibidem. As there is no field so barren, but that tillage may doe good of: so there is no wit so sterill, but by exercise it may be bettered▪ ibidem. As trees neglected grow crooked and barren: so doe wits, ibidem. As the strength of the body decayeth by lazinesse: so the vigour of the mind decayeth without exercise. ibidem. Horses well broken and mannaged,
doe obey their riders: so wits well ex∣ercised doe goe thorow in their imploy∣ments. ibidem: Petvrbations EVen as wild beasts according to their nature are hurtfull vnto men, and yet when they are tamed, doe them good seruice: so when as the perturba∣tions of our soule are gouerned and moderated; they helpe vs in many ex∣ercises of vertue. Lodo. Granat. lib. 1. Ducispeccatorum. Euen as our fleshly eyes cannot be∣hold the stars, nor the beauty of hea∣uen; when it is cloudy and ouercast: so neither the eyes of our soules can con∣template the eternal light, when as they are obscured with the clouds, and pas∣sions of this life. ibidem. Euen as in cleare and pure water all obiects are seene, euen vnto the least sand, which is in the bottome, which cannot be seene in water troubled and polluted: so our soule doth cleerely know, what shee hath in her selfe, when shee is quiet and calme, but if the
stormes of passions doe obsevr and disturbe her, then shee neither seeth her selfe, no any other thing. Idem lib. de Deuotione. As the heat suppressed is more vio∣lent; and the streame stopt makes the greater deluge: so passions concealed, procure the deeper▪ sorrowes. As a City ruled by tyranny com∣meth to destruction: so doth a man ouer whom perturbations haue sway. Philo lib. quod omnis probu it liber. As Noahs Arke admitted all kind of creatures which Paradice did not: so man entertaineth all vnruly and vn∣tamed passions and perturbations, but admitteth not laudable vertues. Ide lib. de plantatione Noe. As a sparrow tyed by the legge, is by the string helde backe from flying: so a man tyed vnto affections and per∣turbations, is helde backe from the contemplation of celestiall matters. Maximu lib. primus de charitae. As a polluted glasse can reflect no perfect representation: so a soule oc∣cupied in secular disturbances, and dimmed with sensuall carnality is not
capable of the holy Spirits illuminati∣ons. Basil. Epist. 64. As wine causeth drunkennesse: so perturbations bring madnesse. Idem cap. 5. Esay. As indigestion bringeth diseases to the body: so perturbations raise in∣firmities in the minde. Chrysstmus sermon 1. De fato. As they that are sicke of a feuer doe loath all things: so disturbed minds are storme-blasted on euery side. Idem Homil. 35. in 1. Cor. Commodity. AS Merchants vpon the Sea, and husbandmen vpon the land spare no paines in hope of gaines: so Christi∣ans for a crowne that perisheth not should esteeme no troubles too hard, nor any afflictions too grieuous. As Soldiours sustaine wounds in hope of the spoile, and champions re∣ceiue blows in hope of the prize, which rewards are temporall: so Christians ought patiently to entertaine all in∣iures, and suffer all persecutions in
hope of that reward, which is eternall and euerlasting. As the Moone bestoweth vpon the world that light she hath receiueth of the Sun: so the gifts receiued of God, are to be imployed to the commodity of others. As he that is once stung of a Scorpi∣on, is neuer after stung with Waspes, Hornees or Bees: so there is no dis∣commodity, that hath not some com∣modity ioyned vnto it. Plinius libra 8. cap. 3. In Boaetia by the Riuer Orchomenon, where the god Trophoniu stands, there are two fountaines, one of which brings memory, the other forgetful∣nesse: so commonly when a great com∣modity is present with vs, a great dis∣commodity is not farre from vs. Achilles speare could as well hurt as heale: so the Scorpion as well stings, as hee stints the paine; the hearbe Neriu as well poysons the sheepe, as it is a remedy to man against poyson: so euery commodity hath his discommo∣dity, and euery pleasure his paine, ac∣cording to that prouerbiall verse.
Omnis commoditas sua fert incommo∣da secum. The earth bringeth forth Hemlocke to edanger the patient, as Endiue to delight the people, as well the nettle to ing, as the Rose to distill, as well the Spider to yeeld poyson, as the Bee to giue hony: so euery sweete hath his sowre, euery gaine his paine, and all myrth is mingled with some moane. Assiduity. AS he that addeth a little to a little, and doth it often, doth at length make a great heape: so assiduity much auaileth to atchieue a good and well disposed minde. Plutarch. As a drop of water by assiduity doth make a stone hollow; and as Iron by often touching is wasted: so assiduity doth ouer come the hardest things. Plu. There is a riuer in Phrigia cal∣led Gallus, of which if you drinke moderately, it cureth the maladies of the body, but if immoderately, it maketh the minde franticke: so if mo∣derately thou giuest thy selfe to the
study of Philosophy, it profiteth; but if wholy without intermission thou ap∣pliest that study, it taketh away the firmenesse of the mind, and head long carieth it about with a fury of vaine∣glory. Assiduity taketh away admi∣ration. AS he that entreth into a famous City or royal pallace the first day walketh wondering, by reason of the noueltie of things, that there heseh, but afterwards seeing those oftner, that wonderment is diminished: The same thing happeneth to them at the first, that enter into the new city of grace, by reason the nouelty of things, which by little and little are vncouered and laid open in it. Lodonicus Granat. lib. 1. Ducis Peccat. Adoption. Abdication. AS he doteth and plaieth the part of a franticke man, that reuerenceth and worshippeth the image and picture
of his brother, but smieth and beateth the body: so is it a foolish thing to loue the name of those adopted, and to dis∣inherit and hate the true brother. Plut. Emulation. AS that is not trueloue, that wan∣teth iealousie: so he doth not eartly affect vertue, except hee burneth with the emulation of famous deeds done by others Plutarch. As Alexander emulated Achillis, Iulius Caesar Alexander. Tlly Horten∣ius, and Demosthenes Isocrates: so the Thessalonians did emulate the Church of Macedonia and Ahaia in prouiding reliefe for the poore Sints. Exhortation. AS the wild Figge tree neuer bring∣eth forth any figges, but yet be∣getteth wormes, which flying to the true Figge tree, doe eate of the rinde of the figges, and so doe yeeld maturitie to them: so there be some that cannot doe any famous thing of themselues,
but yet by some meane or other they prouoke others to doe it. Endeuour. HE that hunteth the Hare with an Oxe, and shooteth with a plough, and goeth about to catch Harts with a fish net, if he doth not obtaine his purpose, he cannot accuse fortu, but his owne foolishnesse: so they that endeuour to compasse, what they can∣not effect, ought not to blame fortune, but their owne folly: Plut. Correction. AS they that pull downe houses neare vnto Temples, doe spar them, which are ioyned vnto the temples, least they should pull downe any part of the sanctuary: so some vices are warily to be corrected, which haue a neare alliance with vertue. Nurses oftentimes clensing the bo∣dies of their children from spots and blemishes, doe sometimes pull off skin and flesh together: so whilst we too
crupulously endeuour to amend some faults, we doe very much hurt; as the disciplinarians doe. As they that cannot abide the hand of the Chyrurgian, are cured by diet: so they that cannot beare rough re∣medies, are to be corrected by milder cutes. As cold water and hote water doth cure them that bee burnt and haue ybes: so some errours are to be taken away after a diuerse manner, both by seuerity and lenity, by taking away be∣nignity, and adding security. Hee that doth chide his friend for light trifles, and holdeth his peace in great matters, doth the same that the ouerseer of wrestlers doth, who suffe∣reth the wrastler to be a drunkard and a leacher, and one is seuere about a boxe of oyntment. Plut  Moralibus. As hard brawned flesh doth not easily receiue the prints of rods: so a inde accustomed to sinning is not moued with a light correction. idem. Hee that forthwith flyes from him hat admonisheth him, doeth as if he hat is launced should flye from his
Physition without binding vp of his wound, or receipt of cure. idem. Nurses when the Children wraule doe eftsoones giue them the breast: so a Scholler being daunted with correcti∣on, is to be raysed vp with prayse, that he faint not. Idem. As they are hardly cured that want sence of themselues in a disease, as those that be in a lethargie, or in a frensie; so they are very hardly brought into a right path, that doe not acknowledge their faults Idem. As a blemish that hath long growne is hardly taken away: so inueerate vi∣es are not easily corrected. idem. Medicines presently bite and offend, but afterwardes bring health and plea∣sure: so wholsome admonitions at the first are somwhat bitter, but afterwards the correction is most gratefull. Idem. As the feeling of the disease, is the be∣ginning of health: so the beginning of correcting the life, is acknowledgmen of the fault. Idem.
Chaunce. AS that Painter expressed by chance the foaming of a Horse, by put∣ting in his mouth a spunge full of diuers colours, which he could not delinate by Art▪ so chaunce bringeth no passe some things, which our prouidence and care could not effect. Plut. As chance made the Corinthian ves∣sels; and as by chaunce the Painter ex∣pressed the foming of a dog, when by Art he could not doe it: so many things happen by chaunc, which a duice and counsell cannot tell how to bring a∣bout. Ceremonies. AS the whole somnesse of the place is knowne by the colour of the inhabitan: so the  of a functi∣n is argued by the life of them, that are it; as they that are con∣sant in cmonie, being of a most wicked life, doe shew that they are no∣thing auaileable vnto piety. As Magitians being guilty vnto
themselues, that that is false and coun∣terfet, which they promise, doe by certaine prodigious prescripts, and po∣tentous ceremonies bewitch and infa∣tuate those that bee ignorant: so cer∣taine Priests when they are farre off from true piety, do infold and entangle the vnlearned in ceremonies, that the common sort may be lesse hurtfull and cumbersome vnto them. Comfort. AS Physitions in a great fluxe of flegme doe not presently admi∣nister inward confections, but first apply something outwardly, which in time may breake that glutinous hu∣mour, and then they cure it: so in a fresh griefe we must hold our peace, vntill the sorrow somewhat may admit consolation. Plut. As Physitions forbid to administer medicines, when the disease is eagerly growing, or seuerely raging, but when it some what stineth: so comfort is not to be applied to those first motions of anger and griefe, but when by time
they begin to be somewhat asswaged. Seneca. As a precious oyntment doth not onely delight the smelling, but also is a remedy against ill smels: so the me∣mory of good deeds doth comfort in distresse. Plut. Labour. AS there are moe that will wash, then will be annointed: so fewer aspire by labour to high and famous matters. Plut. in Moral. When the Marriners see a tempest ap∣proching, first they call vpon God, that they may arriue safely in the Ha∣uen, then they take in their sayles, and doe what is to be done: so we must rely vpon the diuine prouidence, but so, that wee also vse our owne labour and industry. ibidem. Hesiod command, husbandmen to sacrifice first to God, and then to follow their busines and a Souldiour cals first vpon God, and the he armes himselfe: so before all things wee must cast our care vpon God, and then lay to our helping hand. Ibidem.
Marriners and saylers from the la∣bour of sayling, doe filthily transpose themselues vnto pleasures, and from pleasures they returne vnto sayling: so ny made giddie with inconstancie doe passe from delights to labours, and from labours to delights. Ibidem. As hot Iron is consumed with many sleckings: so the body is corrupted with often change, that is, if it now in∣tend immoderate labours, and now e effeminated with immodest pleasures. ibidem. As the Rose being the accepablest of flowers doth grow on a thorne so most sweete fruit doth grow of hard and and sharpe labours. As some are wooing a long time a curst wie to their : some by long labour procure vnto themselues great losse. Seneca. As the hearbe Moly is hardly digged out of the ground, but is more effectuall for medicine then other  so those things that are  are not com∣passed, but by great study and pas. As nature hath  precious stones very deepe in the earth, but vile and
base things are euery where found: so things, that are the best, are knowne vnto very few, neither are atchieued, but by great labour. Plants are nourished by mderate watering, but choaked by too much moysture: so the minde is helped by moderate labours, but confounded by mmoderate toyle. Plutarch. Nightingals contend so much in singing that their life doth sooner saile hem, then their song: so many through mmoderate study doe ship wrack their health, and whilst in learning they would bee excelled of none, they perish n their endeuour. Plin. lib. 10. cap. 29. Continuall fecundity doth make arren a fruitfull field: so continuall bour doth dull the sharpenesse of wit. eneca detranquillitate vitae. The King of Egypt did foolishly onsume the money of the land, and the bour of the people, about the building the Pyramides, which were only for entation: so many take great pains vnfruitfull matters. As the little drops of raine pierce the marble; and the Iron with often
handling is worne to nothing: so vn∣tired labour doth ouercome all things▪ Imitation. AS many followers of Aristotle stammered in their speech like him, & many of Platoes familiars crou∣ched in the shoulders like him: so they that couet to expresse all things, doe vnwisely imitate many foolish things. Plutarchus. As a Son desireth to be like his Fa∣ther: so they that imitate Authours, do endeuour thēselues to be like them. Se▪ As many yawne, when they see o∣thers yawne; and make water, when they see others doe so: so many ar moued to take businesses in hand no by any certaine aduised iudgement, bu they imitate what they see in others. As the beast called a Buffe dot imitate in the colour of his haires, a trees, plants and places, which he lieth vnder or vpon: so it shall be more safe for vs, to imitate the rites and customes of whatsoeuer country we trauell to, or inhabit.
Mourning. COuetous peisants when they haue horded vp many things, doe not vse that is present, but deplore that is lost: so they that mourne and lament for the dead, doe not enioy the liuing. Plutarch. As euery tree hath her fruit: so there is not any other fruit of mourning but teares. idem. As a troublesome guest is sooner re∣ceiued into thy house, then thrust out of doores: so if thou giuest place vnto mourning, it is not so easily expelled. idem. As light is comfortable to heauy hearts: so are merry thoughts to mourners. ibidem. As a diseased Physition is not to bee praysed: so neither a comfortlesse mourner. The night followeth the day, and the day the night, summer followeth winter, and winter summer: so mour∣ning followeth mirth, and mirth mourning. Husbandmen doe not weepe when
they bury their corne in the ground▪ because expect a plentifull haruest: so wee should not immoderately mourne and lament, when we leaue our friends in the graue, because we looke for a ioyfull resurrection. Chrysost. hom. 41. in 1. Cor. As after great and vehement showers commeth a pure and cleare aire: so af∣ter a masse of mourning, and flouds of teares commeth the serenitie and tran∣quillitie of minde. Chrysost. hom. 6. in Mat. As by water and the spirit: so againe by teares and confession we are purged, so that wee doe it not for ostentation. ibidem. As raine doth moysten the earth: so teares doe water the soule. Idem. hom. 4. de poenit. As he that is condemned by secular iudgement, cares not for any faire sights, or theatricall shewes: so hee that mourneth truly, careth not for pampring his belly. Climacus de dis∣cretione, gradu. 26. When Roses are planted, nothing is seene but thornes, afterwards springeth
the faire and louely fruit: so they that sow in teares, shal reape in ioy. Isidorus Clarius oratione octaua tomi tertij. In Gallia there is a very cold foun∣taine, which as Fulgosus testifieth, with the water doth send forth flames of fire: so a true Christian with religi∣ous teares ought to streame forth the flames of diuine charitie. Hector Pintus in cap. 40. Ezech. Plinie writeth, that the teares of Vine-braunches doe cure the leprosie: so the teares of those Vine-branches which are grafted into the true Vine, doe cure the leprosie of sinne. Saint Augustine witnesseth, that the Eagle feeling his wings heauy, plungeth them in a fountaine, and so reneweth his strength: so a Christian feeling the heauie burthen of his sinnes, batheth himselfe in a fountaine of teares, and so washing off the old man, which is the body of sinne, is made young againe, and lusty as an Eagle. As Peters faith was so great, that he lept into a Sea of waters to come to Christ: so his repentance was so great, that he lept into a sea of teares when he went from Christ.
As the Oliue tree is most aboundant in fruit when it distilleth: so a Christian is most plentifull and powerfull in prayer, when he weepeth. As Mustard-seede hath his name in Greeke, because it makes the eyes weepe: so he that in prayer hath faith, as a gaine of Mustard-seed, hath such a faith as makes his eyes weepe. As Elizaeus did cast salt into the wa∣ters of Iericho, to make them sweete: so must wee salt and season our prayers with teares, to make them sauourie and delightsome to God. Manners. HEe that with contrarie winds is tossed hither and thither, neither compasseth what he intended, he doth not saile much, but is tossed much: so he that hath long liued, and hath not liued well, he hath not long liued, but hath beene long: Seneca. As the litle Bee seasing vpon all flowers, bringeth that home which is profitable: so a vertuous man doth ex∣tract from euery place, that which may
make for the bettering of his life. Plut. As the Ieat draweth a straw vnto it, as the Load-stone draweth iron, and the Chrysocalla Gold: so euery man associateth that man vnto himselfe, who is of like conditions and manners. As Caeneus was made a man of a wo∣man: so some ill conditioned become better manered. Plut. Salt waters, that haue raine fall in∣to them, become sweeter then others: so they are wont to be better, whom the influence of the diuine grace doth change from a contrarie liuing, as Paul was. Nature. AS of the same Clay the shape of this beast, and that beast is formed, which being dissolued, is fit for some other figure: so Nature of the same matter doth produce one generation, which being extinct, she propagateth of it others and others. Plut. As Nilus bringeth forth wholsome fishes, and fruitfull plants, so it en∣gendreth the Crocodile and the Aspe:
so Nature as shee is fruitfull in good things, so shee bringeth forth some∣thing hurtfull: idem. An Oxe is fit for the plough, a horse for the saddle, and a dogge for hunting, as saith Pindarus: so euery man ought to apply himselfe to that manner of li∣uing, which nature hath disposed him vnto. idem. Moles haue their sight taken from them, but they haue their hearing well: so where Nature hath denied the valour of body, there she commonly bestoweth the vigor of minde. Plin. lib. 10. cap. 69. As he that makes a ship or an house, can easily vnmake them againe: so that Nature can best dissolue a man, that framed him. Cicero. de Senectute. As no honest man taketh it in ill part that a due debt is demanded of him, or a thing that was lest with him: so when Nature requireth againe what is her owne, wee ought not to spurne a∣gainst her, but willingly yeeld vnto necessitie. Philo, lib. de Abrahamo. It is naturall for the Vine to spread, the more you seeke by Art to alter it, the more in the end you shall augment
it; it is proper for the Palme tree to mount, the heauier you loade it, the higher it sprowteth; though Iron bee made soft with fire, it returneth to his hardnesse; though the Falcon bee re∣claimed to the first, shee returneth to her haggardnesse; the Whelpe of a Mastiffe will neuer be taught to retriue the Par∣tridge: so where the excellencie of Na∣ture doth beare sway, it is a very hard thing, or altogether impossible to alter it. The silly Mouse will by no manner of meanes bee tamed; the subtle Fox may bee well beaten, but neuer broken from stealing his pray; if you pownde spices, they smell the sweeter; season the wood neuer so well, the Wine will tast of the Caske; plant and translate the Crab tree, where, and whensoeuer it please you, and it will neuer beare sweete Apples: so where the force of Nature keepeth possession, it is hard to displace it. Lilly. As the stone Abeston being once made hot, will neuer be made cold, and as fire cannot be forced downward: so Nature will haue course after kind.
As the Aethiope cannot change his skin, nor the Leopard alter his hew▪ & as it is not possible to gather Grapes of Thornes, or Figges of Thistles: so it is to no purpose to force any thing to striue against Nature. As in tilling of the ground and hus∣bandrie, there is first chosen a firtile soile, then a cunning sower, then good seed: euen so we must compare Nature to the fat earth, the expert husbandman to the Schoolemaster, the faculties and sciences to the pure seeds. As the fertill soile if it be neuer tilled doth wax barren: so that which is most noble by nature, is made most vile by negligence. As the Torch turned downeward is extinguished with the selfe same waxe, which was the cause of his light: so Nature turned to vnkindnesse is quenched by those meanes it should bee kindled, leauing no branch of loue, where is found no roote of hu∣manitie.
Newes. AS Cookes wish for a plentifull breed of eattell, and fishers of fishes: so busie brained innouaters doe hunt after newes, and innouation in states. Plut. As wee set vp meate from cats and dogges: so we must take heed, what we speake before newes mongers, and in∣sinuating intelligencers. idem. As our bodies are more indangered by the Spring, & in Autume, by reason of change: so all noueltie doth offend and hurt the common-wealth. As change of meate, drinke and aire doth offend, albeit it be into like, or into better: so it is better still to re∣taine our old Princes and Magistrates, then to gape for new, because all in∣nuation is full of danger and distur∣bance. As Aion called Homer from the dead, for none other cause, but to know from what parentage he was descended: so many take great paines, and bestow much cost, onely to heare newes, and know nouelties. Plin. lib. 30. cap. 2.
Recreation. AS we see birds for procreation and profits sake make themselues nests, and afterwards being freed from their labours freely do flye abroad, and take their pleasure: so our minds being wearied with labour and businesse doe couet and delight to expatiate abroad being free from carke and care. Cicero lib. 2. de Oratore. As an ingrauer, that hath had his eyes long fastened vpon his worke, and wearied, doth againe refresh them, by withdrawing them from their for∣mer intensiuenesse: so we ought some∣times to recreate our minds, and with certaine delights to refresh them; but let thy delights bee such, as may bee wholesome and profitable vnto thee. Seneca lib. 2. epist. 59. As land although sowen but euery other yeare, doth recompence that intermission by fruitfulnesse: so wit re∣freshed with a little recreation, doth returne to studie with alacritie and vigour of Spirit, that it doth more in a shorter time, then before being dulled
it would haue done in a longer. Plin. lib. 18. cap. 16. As there is intercourses of sleepe and waking, of night and day, of faire weather and fowle, of warre and peace: so labours are to be eased by disportes and recreations. Plutarchus in Moralibus. As wee vnloose the strings of a harpe or a bow, that wee may the better stretch and bend them againe: so the minde is to bee recreated with leasure, that it may bee made more fit for la∣bours. Ibidem. A wagoner doth not alwaies hold streight his raines, but doth sometimes loose them: so Children are sometimes to be refreshed, fauoured and cherished. Ibidem. A bow that alwayes stands bended becomes the weaker: so a wit that is alwayes toyled becomes duller. As there is watching: so there is sleepe; As there is warre: so is there peace; As there is winter: so is there summer; As there bee many working dayes: so is there also many holy dayes.
Wee vnbend the bow, that wee may the better bend it; wee vnloose the harpe, that wee may the sooner tune it; the body is kept in health, as well with fasting as eating: so the minde is healed with ease, as well as with labour. Hippomanes ceased to run, when he had gotten the goale; Hercules to la∣bour when he had obtained the victo∣ry; Mercurie to pipe when he had cast Argus in a slumber: so euery action hath his end, and then wee leaue to sweat, when wee haue found the sweete. The Ant though she toyle in summer, yet in winter shee leaueth to trauaile; the Bee though she delight to sucke the faire flower, yet is shee at last cloyed with the honie; the Spider that weaueth the finest thread, ceaseth at the last, when shee hath finished her web: so after earnest study wee are to recreate our wearied minds.
Reprehension. AS he is to blame that blameth Ni∣lus for bringing forth the crocodile and the aspe, neuer remembring what fruitfulnesse it bringeth vnto Aegypt: so is he to be reprehended that repre∣hendeth nature for bringing forth some fruitfull things, neuer calling to mind the innumerable good things shee pro∣duceth. Plut. Fables tell vs, that the hagges called Lamiae were cleare sighted abroad, but when they came home they put their eyes in a box, and saw nothing: so some are verie cleare sighted to repre∣hend others, and are stone blind to espy any thing in themselues. Idem. As they that haue no quiet at home, haue all their pleasure to be abroad: so a mind that vnto it selfe is guilty of vil∣lanie, abhorring it selfe doth feed with the malicious reprehension of others. Idem. It is an easie matter to pull downe that another hath builded: but it is a very hard matter either to re-edifie the same againe, or to build a better: so it
is an easie matter to find fault with an∣other mans oration, but to speake after the same manner or better, it is not so easie. Idem. When in Summer it thundreth more, then it lightneth, it portendeth great store of wind, as Plinie saith: so when one vehemently declareth a∣gainst other mens vices, himselfe showing no integrity of liuing, it is a manifest signe of a mind more puffed vp with the wind of ambition, then en∣dued with true godlinesse. Sorrow. AS the Ouen dampt vp hath the greatest heate, fire supprest is most forcible; the streames stopt, either breake through or ouerflow: so sor∣rowes concealed as they are most pas∣sionate, so they are most peremptorie. As a wise pilot in a calme doth ex∣pect a tempest: so in tranquilitie the mind is to bee prepared for griefe and sorrow Plutarchus. As Physitions in a vehement flux of phlegme doe not forth with vse in ward
medicines, but first outwardly apply outward things, that may ripen the humour, and then they cure it: so in new griefe wee must bee silent, till it growing more mild it may admit com∣fort. Idem: We make those things sauourie by mixing sweete things with them, which by nature are bitter: so sad and sorrowfull things by reason are to bee allayed. Ideus. As flies doe rather choose to sit vpon rough places, then vpon glasse or smooth places: so some doe forget plea∣sant things and remember only heauie and maestiue matters. Idem. As the Rose, the fairest of all flowers, doth spring of thornes: so of sorowfull and sharpe laboures most pleasant fruit is gathered. As wine mixt with vineger hath not the same sweetnesse: so sadnesse and heauinesse annexed to the holy Spirit, hath not the same pure and cleane prayer. Hermas seu Past. As a boate is drowned by a tempest: so the minde is deiected by sorow. Chrysost. Hom. 10. de poenitentia.
As they that saile ouer the vast ocean Sea, cannot be without sicknese: so they that liue in this world, cannot be without sorow. Idem. Hom. 67. ad pop. Antioch. As a moath doth eate a garment: so sorrow doth feede on the heart of man. Idem. Epist. 8. ad Olympiam. As the tenderest wood is most a∣noyed of wormes: so the feeblest minds are most molested with sorrow. Basil. hom. de gratianum actione. As clouds doe take from vs the brightnesse of the Sunne: so sorrow doth take from vs the affability of speech. Chrysost. hom. 6. ad pop. An∣tioch. As certaine leauie apples haue a sowrish sweetnesse, and some old wines haue a sweetish sowernesse: so both our sorrow must be ioyfull, and our ioy must be sorrowfull. As there be two colours, red and blew in one raine-bow: so there must be two affections, ioy and sorrow in one heart.
Prayse. AS they that giue niggardly, seeme to haue but a little: so hee that sparingly or vnwillingly praiseth ano∣ther, seemeth to hunger and thirst after his owne prayse. Plut. If thy field could be made fertill with praysing, it were no lsse to be praysed, then plowed or manured: so if thy friend can bee made better with pray∣sing, it is expedient sometimes to prayse him: but if hee cannot, to what end is vnprofitable soothing? Idem. Wee ought not to tickle them, that are inclined to laughter: so we ought not to prayse them, that are greedy of glory. Idem. As euery crowne doth not become euery conquerour: so all prayse doth not fit euery man. Idem: A Peacocke doth not spread his taile except he be praysed: so many doe not shew what is within them, till they bee commended. Plin. lib. decimo cap. 20. As another mans tickle and touch doth more vehemently procure laugh∣ter, then our owne: so it is a better
decorum to be praysed by others, then by those that are of our owne affinitie and familiarity. Praysers of themselues. THey that would not be trouble∣some nor grieuous to sore and bleared eyes, doe shadow the bright∣nesse of the Sunne from them: so some among their owne commendations doe mingle a little disprayse, that they may auoyd enuy. Plutarchus. They that are hunger-starued for lacke of food eate their owne flesh: so some, thirsting after prayse and glory, when they want others to prayse them, commend themselues. Idem. As we are commanded either altoge∣ther to keepe out of a pestilent place, or if we be in it, to behaue our selues very circumspectly: so wee must not at all prayse ourselues, or if we doe, it must bee doue very warily and cautelously. Idem. The Cocke being conquerour, pre∣sently testifieth his victory by crow∣ing: so some doe boast of their owne
exploits, and become the ridiculous heralds of their owne prayses. Plinius lib. 8. cap. 33. The Tongue. AS it is hard to hinder and hold in an vnbroken and vnbridled Colt foming and chasing in the middest of his race: so it is much more difficult to restraine an vnruly and a malicious tongue. As the Northwind driueth away the Raine: so doth an angry countenance the slaundering tongue. For as Saint Hirome saith: An arrow shot from a bow sticketh not in the hard Rock, but with violence reboundeth backe a∣gaine, and hurteth him, that shot it. As hee doth ill that fireth an house; and he also, that when he may quenc it, doth not; and much more he, that comming to the flame, warmeth him∣selfe by it: so hee doth ill that speaketh ill of others; and he also, that doth not stay a slanderous tongue, when he may, but much more hee, that taketh an occasion by a detracters words to
spit forth more poyson of defanation. Euen as saylers are wont to haue all dangerous places noted and decyphe∣red in their Maps, by which their ships might bee endangered and hazarded; that they may auoyde them: so the seruant of God ought to haue all kind of corrupt speeches noted and set down, that he may not be endangered by them. As riuers haue bankes, that they may not ouerflow: so reason is to bee the stay of the tongue, that it may not runne counter. As vnlucky howling night-rauens doe enuy the rest of man, by disquiet∣ing him with their nightly ill-sounding moane: so a virulent and venemons tongue doth alwaies disperse something abroade, that may disturbe the con∣cord of men. Plin. lib. 11. cap. 25. As a bridle doth direct a horse: so reason should rule the tongue. As if a Romane should be iudge, he could not perceiue thy reasons except thou didst speake lattine: so Christ doeth neither heare nor attende thee, except thou speake in his tongue. Chrys. hom. 76. in Matth.
As one sparke doth make a great fire: so an ill tongue doeth procure great emnity. Idem. hom. 9. oper is imperfecti. An ill tongue is compared to a sharpe rasour; to a bow and arrowes; and to Serpents. To a sharpe rasor, which shaueth the haires, he not feeling that is shaued. To bow and arrowes, which are sent from farre, and wound the absent. To Serpents, which bite priui∣ly, and leaue poyson in the wound. As a Parrat is knowne by speaking like a man: so wee are knowne to bee Apostolicall, if we speake like the A∣postles, and Angelicall, if we speake like Angels. Chrysost. hom. 26. ad popu∣lum Antiocheum. Contraritie. AS lime is heated by water: so con∣trateties doe moue some. As heate is allayed by cold: so chol∣ler is allayed by phlegme. The precious stone Anthracites a kind of carbuncle, being cast into the fire, lookes as it were dead, but being drowned in the water, it shineth like
sparkes of fire: so contrarites doe some; if thou prickest them frowards they are the more backward; if thou diss wadest them, they are more enkind∣led; they become enimies to them that deserue well, and friends to them that merit ill. As wine doth make some dull, and some quick-spirited, some dumme, and others talkatiue according to the dis∣position of their bodies: so the same foolishnesse, and ignorance of the truth, doth stirre vp some to couetousnesse, and others vnto pleasures. As the Sunne doth harden clay, and soften wax: so the same speach spoken of the same man, doth worke remorse in one, and obstinacy in another. As a blacke gound doth best be∣seeme a white counterfet, and Venus according to the iudgement of Mars, was then most amiable when she sate close by Vulcane: so contraries being opposed one against another, doe mani∣fest themselues more euidently. As the Lawrell is greenest in the foulest winter: so the lime is hotest in the coldest water.
As the Glo-worme shineth brightest when the night is darkest: so the Swan singeth sweetest when his death is neerest. As out of one and the selfe-same roote, commeth as well the wilde Oliue, as the sweete; and as the Palme Persian Figge Tree bearth as Apples as Figges: so a Mother thrusteth sometimes into the world at one time, the blossoms of grauity and lightnesse. As the breath of the Lyon ingen∣dereth as well the Serpent as the Ant; and as the selfe same dew forceth the carth to yeeld both the Darnell and wheate; and as the Easterly winde maketh the blossomes to blast, and the buds to grow: so one wombe many times nourisheth contrary wits, and one milke diuers manners, as Amphion and Zetis; Titus and Domitian Bo∣lstus and Venceslaus, &c. As the Vine and the Cabbish, the Oake and the Oliue tree: so the Serpent and the Ash-tree, the Iron and Thea∣mides, can by no meanes agree to∣gether.
Counctation. THe whelpes of Beares are borne il fashoned, they moue themselues when they are two moneths old, but scarcely goe at six moneths: so those things that are to become excellent doe grow by leasure, and are perfected by little and little Choyse. THe water of the Sea is vnprofitable to drinke, but it nourisheth fishes, and is seruiceable for saylers: so wee must excerpe and extract whatsoeuer commodity is in any thing. Plut. As it is a goodly thing to haue sayled and trauelled by many Cities, but it is expedient to inhabite and dwell i one of the best: so many things are bee knowne, but the best things are to bee followed and kept. Idem. Glory. WHen the Sun-beames are per∣pendicular ouer a mans head
they either altogether take away his shadow, or make it very little: so ex∣ceeding great glory doth quite ex∣tinguish enuy. Plut. As a smoake, great at the first, doth soone vanish: so doth glory falsely gotten. Idem. As that fire doth make no smoake, that presently breaketh into a flame: so neither is that glory subiect to enuy, that presently shineth forth, but enuy atten ds them, that rise by degrees. idem. As a shadow waiteth vpon vs, whe∣ther we will or no: so glory followeth vertue, albeit she flye from it. Seneca. As they that are distempered by sicknesse, doe abhorre the pleasantest meates: so filthy fellowes neuer tasting of true glory, doe neuer seoke after it. Cicero Philip. pr. As it is leuity, to hunt after vaine∣glory: so it is foolishnesse to put from vs true and deserued glory. Idem in Pisonem. The shadow sometimes goeth be∣fore, and sometimes commeth behind: so sometimes glory commeth before, that wee may see it, and sometimes it
commeth after vs, but that is greater, which commeth after, and then, when enuy is husht; for whilst Democritus raged, Socrates could scarcely be heard of: Rome honoured not Cato, till she had lost him: Rutilius his innocency had beene diuulged, if he had not beene iniured. Seneca epist. 80. The ancient Sapients called glory a Crocodile. For as a Crocodile doeth follow a man flying him, and flyeth from him that followes him: so glory doth flye from them that desire it, and doth follow them, that flye it. Albertus Nouitampianus. As he that is cloathed with silke and purple, will not haue a durty cloake put on him: so holy men cloathed with excellent vertues, should not coue themselues with humane glory. Dor∣theus Dehumilitate, doctrina. 2. Vaine Glory. AS moathes doe ae out a garment: so vaine-glory hath eaten out ma∣ny mens possessions. Chrysostom. homil. 42. in Genesin.
As drunkennesse obscureth reason: so vaine-glory corrupteth discretion. Idem. hom. 2. in Ioan. As we despise earthly riches, when wee hope for heauenly possessions: so wee contemne the vaine-glory of this life, when wee perswade our selues of celestiall glory. idem hom. 28 in Ioan. As a profane woman doth set her selfe sale to euery body: so doe they that are giuen ouer vnto vaine-glory: Idem hom. 17. in epist. ad Rom. As nights succeed dayes, and winters Summers: so griefe and heauimes fol∣owes vaine-glory and pleasure, either n this world, or in the world to come. Maxi lib. . de charitat. As the Pismye ateh the ends of he corne shee hath gathered, that it may not sproute not grow: so vaine-glory nippeth all our good parts in the ead, Climacus de  fuga. As Iue embracing a cree withereth he roote: so vaine-glory corrupteth the oote of true vertue, if it spring vp by it. Nilus or ation. 7.  itia, & S. Isains abb as oratione 16 As the wind carieth away the print
of thy foote-step paced in sand or dust: so vaine-glory vtterly taketh away the vertue and reward of an almes deed. ibidem. As the flower flourisheth to day, and to morrow is withered: so doth humane glory. Isiodrus Clarits or atione 105. tomo secundo. As a shadow hath no footing: so neither hath vaine-glory. Henricus de Hass in Soliloquo animae. The tract of a ship is not discerned in the Sea: so neither the glory of man hath any biding in the world ibidem. As the wind puffes vp the waues: so vaine-glory puffes vp vaine men. As an Asse is not to be preferred be∣fore a horse, albeit he be decked with Golden trappings: so no man is to be vaine-glorious and proud for externall acontrements, & outward habiliments seeing that the Elephant excelleth him in hugenesse, the Lyon in courage, the Nightingale in singing, the Peacocke in beautie, Bees in cunning, the Spider in weauing, the Hare in swiftnesse, the Eagle in sight, th Asse in hearing, and the Dogge in sinelling. Isidor us
ratione de humilitate tom prio. As the little Worme Teredo, that eateth wood, in the night shineth, and maketh a crackeling, but in the day time is knowne to be a Worme, and putrifaction: so also Vaine-glory shineth & glistereth with great pompe in the night of this world to weake and dimme eyes, which cannot iudge but by outward appearances; but when that cleare and bright day of iudgement shall come, wherein God shall reueale the darkest and obscurest things of our soules, and shall manifest the secret counsels of ou , then those that seemed happy and glorious, shall bee knowne to bee ilthy and vile, and without any hope of saluation. Lodo∣uicus Granatesis in lib. de septm Me∣ditationibus, Meditatione quinta. Braggers. THey that are hungry, are more prouoked with appetite, if they see others eate: so braggers are more in∣flamed with glory, when they heare o∣thers extolled.
As many riuals snarle about one loue: so they iarre that affect glory and prayse by one thing. idem. As a Chamaleon is fed with none o∣ther nourishment, then with the ayre, and therefore shee is alwayes gaping: so popular applause doth nourish some, neither doe they gape after any other thing but vaine prayse and glory. As in times past Horostratus and Manlius Capitolinus did: and in our age Peter Shakrly of Pauls, Monarcho that liued about the Court. As th Moone is sometimes bigge, sometimes small, and sometimes is not seene at all, neuer continuing in one estate: so Braggers that place their prayse in  mouthes, are some∣imes extolled, as great personages, and sometimes depressed, as base peasants, and sometimes they are no body, and sometimes some body, as it pleaseth their slipperie tongue to make them. Beruardus srnone de Natin Ioan. Batistae.
Gratitude. AS wee doe not grudge to giue the pawns backe; when the goods are restored: so let vs not grudge to restore and repay thankes to God, for the be∣nefits that he bestowes vpon vs. Plut. in Moralibus. As wee repay Vsurers their money with gaine: so let vs repay both God and man. Seneca. As Beanes and Lupines doe not make the ground leane where they grow but doe fat it: so a gratefull man doth make his estate the better of whom hee hath receiued a benefit, and rendereth as good as hee receiued. Plin. lib. 18. cap. 14. & cap. 1. odem lib. A learned man is learned albeit hee hold his peace; a valiant man is valiant, albeit hee hold his hands; a good Pylot is skilfull, albeit he be on drie land, because they are men of perfect skill, and nothing is wanting vnto them, but opportunitie to shew it: so is he also a greatefull man, that is onely willing to requie and regraciate, albeit he hath none other witnesse of it, but his owne
kind and thankefull mind. Seneca de benefic. lib. 4. cap. 21. As our Ancestours haue left their learned writings vnto vs their posteri∣ty: so we should not onely be gratefull o one age. idem cap. 30. As glory doth rather follow them, that flie it: so the fruit of a benefite is more gratefully repayed vnto them, that doe not expect it. Idem. lib. 5. de benefi. As it is meete that we arden them-that vnwittingly haue offended: so they are not to be repayed thanks that haue benefited vs of necessitie. Cicero libro 1. de inuentione. As fertill fields doe render more, then they receyued: so should a grate∣full man in repaying of thankes Hesi∣dus, & Cicero lib. Offi. Ingratitude. AS Swine eating Acornes vnder an Oke, neuer looke vp that they may see from whence they come: so vngratefull men receiuing benefits from God, neuer cast vp their eyes to heauen
to giue him thanks. Lodouicus Grana∣tensis lib. 1. Ducis peccatorum. As he is exceeding vngacious, that hauing receiued large and ample gifts of a king, which then forth with muste∣red vp an armie, and setteth vpon the King: so is that man most vngratefull, that with those same benefits which God hath bestowed vpon him, moueth warre, and seeth himselfe against him. ibidem. As it is a wickednesse intollerable, if a married woman should giue all her ouches, tablets, rings, chaines, eare∣rings, and bracelets, which her hus∣band gaue her, that shee might bee beautified with them, and so please him, to an adulterer, that she may al∣lure him to her loue: so it is ingratitude vnsufferable, if man spend and con∣sume his fortitude, strength, health, and riches, which God hath giuen him to glorifie and honour him withall, vpon euill workes, and most filthy and dishonest actions. ibidem. As Iuy cleauing to the boughts of trees, is raysed alot through the helpe of another: so base peasants mounting
aloft through the countenance of mightie men, become a meanes to strangle them of whom they were pro∣moted. Plut. in Moralibus. The stone Siphnius being heated in oyle waxeth hard, otherwise it is very soft: so some are made worse by be∣efits. As hee is an ill Father that giues his daughter to a diuorced man; as he is an ill housholder that commits his goods to a spend-thriet; as he doates that leaues his Sonne to a couetous Gardian: so is hean ill benefactor, that bestowes his benefits vpon thankelesse persons. Seneca lib. quarto de ben. cap. 27. As that seruant is exceeding vngra∣cious, that hauing recieued kindnesse of his master for his ill deeds, if he repay ingratitude: so is that man exceeding faultie, that for all his misdeeds done against God, receiueth benefits, and yet remaineth thanklesse. Basilius in 2. ad Timoth. hom. 5. As a husband louing his wife tender∣ly (to make his affection knowne vnto her, bestowing vpon her many great presents of Gold and costly iewels) is
very heauie if shee dissemble the gifts which hee hath bestowed vpon her, and say shee hath purchased them by her owne money: so God can in no wise bee pleased with vs, if wee will con∣ceale, or else attribute to our selues, the graces which hath bestowed vpon vs, which he would haue to be testimonies, tokens and demonstrations of the in∣uiolable loue and fidelitie that hee beareth vnto vs. As Alexander Phrygius, who of Poets is commonly called Paris, was ingratefull to Menelaus, and to the King of Sydon, who had giuen him friendly entertainment, as Dictys Cre∣tensis writeth in his first Booke de Bello Troiao, in stealing away the ones wife, and treacherously killing the o∣ther: so M. and D. Brutus. C. Cassius, C. domitius, C. Trebonius, Q. Tul∣liu Cimber, they two Seruilij, Casca Hala, and many others, were very vnthankfull to Iulius Caesar, who slue him with three and twenty wounds in the Senate house, albeit he had laely pardoned them for their fighting a∣gainst him on Pompeys side, as sait
Appian in his second Boo of Romane ciuill warre. As the Romanes suffer. P. Scipio Aphricanus the first, wh defended them from so many perils, most mise∣rably to dye in Lynterum: so the se∣cond Scipio Aemilianus Aphricanus for all that he subdued Carthage, and Numantia, which refused to become tributaries to the Romans, found in Rome a murtherer, but not a reuenger. As the Athenians were ingratefull to Theses and Solon: so were the La∣edemonians vnto Lycurgus. As Synon was vnthankfull to the Troians: so was Zopyrus vnto the Ba∣bylonians. As the Romanes were ingratefull to F. Furius Camillus: so was Ptolomeus Dionisius King of Egypt vnto ompoy. As the Athenians were very vn∣thankfull to their famous Captaine Miltiades, in casting him into prison, and suffering him there to dye, who had freed them from the Persians in the expedition of Darius: so was Valenti∣as Caesar very ingratefull to that va∣liaunt Captaine Aecius, whom hee
commanded to be slaine, and Iustinia∣nus vnto that renowned Captaine Bel∣lisarius in commanding his eyes to bee pluckt out, in banishing him, and forcing him to beg his bread, who had deliuered the Romane Empire from the sauage cruelty of barbarous Nations, who ouercam Persians in the East, the Vandals  Aphrica, and the Goths in Italie. As M. T. Cicero was slaine of Pompi∣lius, whom he had saued from the gal∣lowes: so Leo the Emperour was de∣priued both of life and honour of Mi∣chael Thraulus, vpon whom he had bestowed many dignities. Pliny saith that the Colt of an Asse, when hee hath filled his belly, turneth his heeles against the Dmme, and kicketh her: so many ingratefull men hauing receiued blessings from God, and benefits from man, doe spurne a∣gainst the one and contemne the other. He that nourisheth a Serpent, nou∣risheth his owne bane: so he that be∣stoweth a benefit vpon an vnthankfull person, may perhaps arme an enemy against himselfe. plut▪ in Mralibus.
Hee that anointeth a dead carcasse with precious oyntment looseth it: so he that bestoweth a benefit vpon one in∣gratefull, casteth it a way, ibidem: As Dogges haue beene so mindfull of their masters benefits, that they haue dyed by their slaine bodies, and some of them haue detected the murderers, and brought them to execution: so men should much more be mindfull of good turnes, and require them with thank∣fulnesse and all possible recompence Basilus homil. 9. Exameron. Chiding. AS the wound of Telephus was healed with the same speare that made it: so the wound of chiding is to be healed of him, that made it. Plutarchus in Moralibus. As a good Physition had rather heale a disease by sleepe and diet, then by Scammony or Castoreum: so a friend, a father and a schoole-master doe more indeuour to correct by prayse, then by chiding, if so it may be. ibidem. As a salue not appyled to the right
place, doth grieue without fruit: so doth chiding being not vsed, as it ought. Ibidem. As sharpe medicins, but necessary, doe ease the sicke, but offend and infect the sound: so sharpe reprehension doth cure vice, but offend honest men, ibid. As a Physition when he hath made incision and cauterization, doth not presently leaue his patient, but ap∣plyeth vnto him lenitiues and gentle salues: so they that sharpely rebuked, ought by mild and gentle speeches, to mitigate the bitternesse of the former reprehension. ibidem. As an Image maker doth first with strokes cut his stone, and afterwards polish and smooth it: so a friend doth mitigate his chiding with gentle and pleasing speech. ibidem. Physitions in bitter medicines doe mingle some sweete things, that they may alure their patient to take them: so parents ought to asswage the sharpe∣nesse of reprehension with milder words. ibidem. Some precious stones being steeped in vineger doe wax bright, and some
being boiled in hony: so bitter repre∣hension doth better some, but milder admotion doth better fit others. If thou takest springly of the hearbe Elleborum, it doth more offend, because it doth sticke to the bowels, and infect the body, but if thou takest greater qautitie of it, it doth passe thorow thee more speedily, and so doth lesse harme thee: so thy friend is not to bee chidden, except with that vehemency, that may free his mind from vice; for a lighter expostulation doth grieue friendship to no purpose. Plinius lib. 25 cap. 5. in fin. Wholesome hearbes doe loose their vertue by often vsing them: so often ad∣monition doth not amend him, who is accustomed to daily chiding. As cold doth make and take away kibes and chilblaines: so the speach of a chiding friend doth cure that griefe it procured. Erasmus▪ As they that are forced to vse in∣cision, had rather cut with brasse, then with Iron, because by this meanes the wound is more curable: so he that is constrained to chide any man, ought so
to moderate his speech, that it may haue mingled with it some secret cure. As the Physitions by mingling bitter poysons with sweete lyquor, bringeth health to the body: so the Father with sharpe rebukes, seasoned with louing lookes, causeth a redresse and amend∣ment in the Child. The fairest Ienet is ruled as well with the wand, as with the spurre: so the wildest Child, is as soone corrected with a word▪ as with a weapon. Affliction. AS in one and the selfe same fire both the Gold is made bright and shining, and the wood is burnt and consumed: so by the fire of affliction the righteous is made more beautifull, as Gold; but the vnrighteous as dry and vnruitfull wood is turned into coales and ashes. Lodou. Granat. lib. 1. Ducis Peccatorum. Vnder the same faile, the huskes are diminished and broken, but the graine purged and purified: neither therefore is the mother or lees confounded with
the oyle, because they are pressed and troden vnder the same presse or planke: so one, and the same weight pressing the good and the bad, doth trie, purifie and purge the good; but doth damnifie, consume and wast the bad. ibidem As the sea cannot be without waues and billowes: so this life cannot bee without tribulation and temptation. As children, when they are feared or daunted, forthwith run to the bosome and lap of their fathers: so should wee haue recourse to God our Father in the time of tribulation Sella De contem mundi. As no man calleth a chirurgion to the house of a sound man, but to the house of him that is wounded: so God common∣ly sendeth not his spirit, who is called the comforter, to their houses, that en∣ioy vaine ioy and comfort, but to the houses of them, that bee desolate and afflicted for his loue. Ibidem. As the poorer sort haue more right and title, then rich men, to craue aide & releefe at places of hospitality and suc∣cour: so hee that is more afflicted and troubled, hath iuster cause to desire
aide and helpe at the bounty of the diuine mercy. Lodou. Graatensis lib. de Deuotione. As a good housholder giueth to his sicke seruant more dainty meates, the hee doth to the rest, not because hee is worthier then the rest, but because hee is weaker, and in greater need: so the gracious God of heauen dealeth with those, that bee afflicted and in need. ibidem: Euen as a purging medicine, although bitter, is no lesse profitable, then other meate although it bee pleasant: so af∣fliction, although sowre, is sometimes no lesse necessary, then fauour, al∣though it be sweee. ibidem. As it doth no lesse profit the sicke to eate with loathing and abhorring, then it doth the sound to feede with appetite and stomacke: so doth no lesse profit vs sometime to be fed with the bread of affliction, then it doth to bee cheared vp with the dainties of prosperity. ibidem. As a wise Pylot in a calme doth ex∣pect a storme: so in prosperity the mind is to be prepared for aduersity.
They that in a storme flye for succor vnder a Tree, when it is past going a∣way doe pull downe boughs: so in af∣fliction we vse the helpe of some, whom in prosperity we afflict by enuy. As in the midst of Winter the Birds Alcyones doe enioy great calmnes, whereby other are also benefited: so when fortune doth most rage, then the godly doe especially enioy tranquility of mind, which they also make others partakers of. Prosperitie. AS that stage-player is not the happier, that by representation seemeth a King or an Emperour: so that man is not the happier, by the gifts of fortune, that being esteemed as he i in himselfe, is no body. Seneca. As too much rankenesse breaketh the stalkes of corne: so too much prospe∣ritie vndoeth mens minds. Seneca. As health in the higest perfection, a saith Hippocrates, is dangerous: so in great prosperitie disasterous haps are to be feared. Rnt.
As he that is diseased with the drop∣sie, the more he drinkes, the more hee increaseth his disease: so a man the more he surfets in his prosperity, the more dangerous is his estate. Chrysost. conci∣e 3. de Lazaro. As the hand is one, whether it bee extended abroad, or contracted toge∣ther: so a man should be alwayes one, whether he be in prosperity or aduersi∣ty. August. sermone de prudentia ad Eremitas. As Hawkes are lost by soaring too high: so they that by prosperity are caried alost, doe most what loose themselues. Hector Pintus in cap. 17. Ezechiel. When the Sunne enlightneth one hemisphere▪ another hemisphere is full of darknesse: so when prosperity fawneth vpon one, aduersity frowneth vpon another. Idem in cap. 26. The voyce so long as it is vttering, because many things conurte o the articulating of it, as the teeth, the tongue, the throate, the pallate, and the lippes, seemeth to be a thing existing and solide, but being looked into, it
is nothing else but an emptie sound: so the great men of this world, liuing in prosperity, so long as they breath, be∣cause many things concurre, which seeme to dignifie them, as riches, power, and honour, they are deemed great and mighty potentates, but being intombed in a Sepulchre, then they are forth with knowne to bee nothing, but dust and ashes. ibidem. As the Moone doth suffer no eclipse, but when it is in the full: so then com∣monly the image of God is eclipsed in man, when he is full of riches and pro∣sperity. Idem in cap. 40. As the Moone, when it is in the full, is furthest from the Sun: so many that flow in riches, and are full of prosperi∣ty are furthest from God. Ibidem. Braunches too heauy laden, are broken; and too much ecundity com∣meth not vnto maturity: so too much prosperity destroyeth the possessour. Seneca epist. 39. As they that saile with a prosperous wind haue instruments, which they vse against a storme: so they that are wise in prosperity, should prepare themselues
against aduersity. Stobaeu. serm. 1. de Prudentia. As they that haue the falling sicke∣nesse, are taken with a cold and with a swimming of the braine: so if a little fortune lift vp n vnlearned man, hee presently sheweth himselfe, what he is▪ Plut. in Moralibus. As a good fire is a good ornament to a house in cold weather, as Homer said: so prosperity is much more plea∣sant, if it be beautified by the vertues of the mind. ibidem. As they that haue fierce horses, doe deliuer them vnto horse breakers, to make them more tame: so men being puffed vp with prosperity, are to bee taught how variable fortune is, and how weake the estate of humaine frailty, that may bee made more mo∣derate, and sober minded. Scipionis Maioris dicterium est apud Plutar∣chum. As Iuy kils Trees with embracing: so prosperous fortune doth destroy and strangle, whilst it flattereth and fawn∣eth. Plinius lib. 16. cap. 35. As Trees forthwith die, when they
are friutfull beyond their wont: so fortune being prosperous and fauouing beyond custome, doth often intimate that ruine is at hand. Erasmus in Similibu. As it often happeneth, that in very faire weather a storme doth arise: so in prosperity many times a suddaine disturbance of things doth grow. ibid. As beanes, breed windinesse in the belly, and raise fumes in the head: so temporall prosperity bringeth the windinesse of puffing pride, and breed∣eth the fume of vaine-glory. F. Ioannes à S. Geminiano lib. 3. de vegetabilib. & plant. cap. 64. Tribulation. AS raine falling vpon the Earth, doth fructifie the come: so tribu∣lation entring into the soule, doth stirre vp a desire vnto God. Chrysostom. ho. 14. ex varijin Math mlocis. As gold is not hurt in the furnace: so tribulation and aduersity doth not hurt a constant soule, but bringeth forth pa∣tience, & cutteth a way sloth fulnes. ibid.
As a flaile beateth the chaffe from the corne: so tribulation driueth sen∣suall and carnall delight from the soule. ibidem. As the gold-smith doth not take his gold out of the fire, till he see it purified from the drosse: so God doth not take vs out of the cloud of tribulation, till hee see vs mundified and cleansed from the drosse of our corruption. Idem hom. 4. ad pop. Antioch. As it is sometimes day and some∣times night, sometimes summer, and sometime winter: so sometimes we haue tribulation, sometimes consolation, sometimes heauinesse, sometimes hap∣pinesse. Idem. hom. 63. As fire maketh the Gold to shine, and the chaffe to smoake: so tribulation and aduersitie purifieth the good, but polluteth and damnifieth the wicked. August. lib. 1. de ciuita. Dei. cap. 8. As the Grape is not wine, nor the Oliue oyle before they bee pressed: so men doe not put off their carnall de∣sires, to bee made pure wine for the Lords drinking, nor sweete oyle for an incense vnto his nostrils, before they
bee broken in the presse of tribulation Idem in Psal. As spice when it is pounded, doth shew what smell it hath: so holy men in tri∣bulations doe shew what vertue they haue. Greg. lib. 1. moral. cap. 4. Fire kept downe by blowing, en∣creaseth: so doe good men increase in vertue and religion being held downe by tribulation. Idem epist. 27. The Physition letteth that sicke man haue what he will, of whose recouerie he despayreth; but he restraineth him, of whom hee hath hope, from many things: so God troubleth and afflicteth them whom hee loueth. Idiota cap. 11. contemplationum. Those medicines are commonly best, that are the bitterest: so tribulation al∣beit it bee bitter to the flesh, yet it is profitable and wholsome to the soule: ibidem, cap. 14. Griefe compelleth vs to seeke reme∣dy: so tribulation causeth vs to seeke comfort at the hands of God. Ibidem cap. 16. It is written that in the building of the temple all the stomes were hewed
with axes and hammers: so the liuely stones that are to build the celestiall Ierusalem must be polished with diuers strokes and beatings ibidem. cap. 19. As gold cast into water doth neither loose his colour, nor his price, but be∣ing cast into fire is made more splen∣dent and pure: so a righteous man doth not loose his vertue in the water of prosperity, but in the fire of calamity is made more glorious and shining, when as the wicked are like vnto clay, that is dissolued in water, and hard∣ned in fire. Hector Pintus in cap. 37. Ezechiel. As a showre falling into the Sea eemeth to adde nothing to it: so dis∣sterous fortune doth nothing hurt a wise man. Seneca de consolatione. ap. 16. As Peter walked vpon the waters by aith: so the boly Saints walke through he flouds of tribulations by faith. F. oannes à S. Geminiano lib. 1. de caelo & lementis cap. 94. As blacke leade is ofen found in the aines of the earth with Gold and Sil∣er: so grieuous tribulations are often
borne of the Saints with great ioy. idem lib. 2. de Metallis & lapidibus cap. 38. Debt. AS wee giue money to haue a hand or a foote cut off, if they be putri∣fied and corrupted: so house and hous∣hold are to be made away, that we may discharge our selues from debt, and so become free men. Plut. As a horse once broken to carry one rider, carieth one after another: so they that once fall into debt, still fall in further and further. ibidem. Cholericke men that doe not purge themselues in time, doe fall into grea∣ter inconueniences: so they that suffer their debts to encrease, afterwards abide the greater calamitie. ibidem. The fish Polypus, whatsoeuer he cat∣cheth in his clawes, he holdeth it fast: so many when they haue gotten other mens money into their hands, doe very hardly part from it. Plin. lib. 9. cap. 29.
Defence. THe Serpent Amphisbena hath a head at both ends, and doth vse both ends as a tayle; so some doe de∣fend themselues now this way, now that way; when they thinke it com∣modious they flye to the liberty of the Church, and when it makes for them, they shrowd themselues by the coun∣tenances of Princes. Custome. AS hee that driueth a naile into a post, fasteneth it at the first stroake that hee giueth with his mallet, but more firmely at the second, but so fast at the third, that it can hardly be pul∣led out againe, and the oftner that hee knocketh it, the faster it sticketh, and is pulled out againe with the greater difficulty: so custome in sinning doth so deepely driue vice into our soules, as it were with a great mallet, and there it sticketh so fast, that scarcely any thing may bee found, by which it may bee haled and pulled out. Lodouicus
Granatensis lib. 1. Ducis peccatorum. As he that in the morning is not able to passe ouer the foord, when as yet the water is low, shall bee much lesse able to passe ouer it at night, when the bankes are full, and the riuer swelleth like te flouds and tides of the Sea: so hee that in the beginning is not able to sway the rule of his peruerse af∣fections, shall much lesse bee able to came them, when they are accustomed in any violent proceeding. ibidem. As hee that is not able to pull vp a plant newly rooted, is lesse able to do it, when it hath taken deepe rooting: so he that is not able to pull vp the roote of vices lately planted, shall be much lesse able when they haue taken pro∣found rooting, and through custome sticke faster in the soule. Idem. lib. 2. Ducis peccatorum. As he that is indangered with a long and a pernicious desease, seldome so commeth to his former health, that not some relicks of the disease remaine in his body: so the custome and diturnity of sinne, is seldome healed and cured without some relicks remaining. ibidem.
Euen as it is very hard to withdraw a great riuer from his naturall course, which by many yeares it hath beene accustomed to, to another current: so also it were hard that a man should change his life, which many yeares he hath led, and should assume another. Lodo. Gran. lib de deuot. As the habit to thinke alwayes euill things, doth so bind a man, that hee can not thinke of good things: so on the other side the vse and custome of good things doth so change a man, that hee thinketh not on euill things. ibid. As Rachell when she went out of her Countrey, tooke away with her the Idols of her Fathers house: so they that haue accustomed themselues to any thing, albeit they leaue it, yet some reliques will remaine with them. Stella de contempt mundi. As a man speaketh that idiome and dialect of speach, which he hath al∣wayes vsed: so it is in the customarie frequentation of any other thing. ibid. As fire the more fewell it taketh hold of, burneth more extremely: so the nature of sin the longer it continueth,
the further it spreadeth, and becom∣meth more vntamed. Chrysost. contra Gentiles & hom. 22. ad pop. Antiochiae: As hee that is conuersant among sweete odors, doth a good while after smell of them: so a minde that hath beene accustomed to honesty, doth long after retaine some sparkes of it. Plut. They that haue long beene bound in fetters, when they are loosed, doe yet halt, neither can they on a suddaine goe perfectly: so they that haue beene long accustomed vnto vices, when they for∣sake them, doe retaine certaine reliques of them: idem. As a blemish that hath beene long growing, and taken deepe rooting, is hardly taken away: so inueterate vices are hardly corrected. idem. As a Booke diuers times blotted in one place is not easily made cleane: so the minde that often relapseth into the same vices. As hardened and brawned flesh careth not for the prints of rods: so the minde accustomed to sin is not mooued with a sleight correction. As Mithridates by customing him∣selfe
to take poyson, became incapable to bee poysoned: so the euils which thou accustomest thy selfe vnto doe not offend. As the entrance into a weele or bow-net is easie, but the getting forth againe very difficult: so the way vnto vice is easie, but the returne from the customarie frequentation of it is very hard. As they that are accustomed to dwell in corrupt and pestilent places, doe long indure in them: so they that ar accustomed to grieuances and discom∣modities, doe little care for them. Plin. lib. 18. cap. 6. As the sight of some men doth in∣hant: so there bee some, the whole custome of whose life doth infect good manners. As thicke skinne and brawned fles in time becomes almost senselesse: so the custome of sinne takes away the feeling of sinne. Plin. lib. 25. cap. 2. As an inueterate leprosie is not easily cured: so that sinne is not easily left which custome imposeth as a ne∣cessitie.
Conuersing and liuing together▪ AS they that walke in the Sunne, al∣though they came to no such end, become Sun-burnt; and as they that sit in an Apothecaries shop, doe smell of the fragrancie of that place: so they that conuerse with a wise man, although not to the end to become wise, yet are made bettrr by him. Seneca. As certaine small creatures, when they bite, are not felt, but the biting is discerned by a little pimple or red spot, but in the tumour no wound ap∣peareth: so thou shalt find that al∣though conuersing with good men doth not presently profit, yet that it hath profited. Seneca. As a disease by infection doth creepe vnto thy neighbour, when as health doth not the same vnto him that is sicke: so by keeping company with wicked men good men are easily cor∣rupted, when as the contrary doth not follow. As the fish Torpedo doth not hurt, vnlesse touched, but doth after a
strang manner transpose her poyson from the hooke to the line, and so to the Angle-rod, and then to the hand: so wicked and pestilent fellowes doe not hurt, if thou keepe thy selfe from their conuersation, but if thou conuer∣sest with them, then very contagiously they infuse their infection. Plin. lib. 23, cap. 1. As in husbandry it is not inough that thou shew thy selfe a good husband∣man, but it is also auaileable with what neighbour thou liuest: so in life, it is not inough that thou shew thy selfe a good man, but it also skilleth with whom thou hast conuersation. As the venemous hearbe Aconitum doth kill by contraction: so the con∣uersation of some doth slay by infecti∣on, Plin. lib. 29. cap. 2. As the Pyrit stone doth not discouer his firie nature, except thou dost rub it, and then it doth burne thy finger: so thou shalt not perceiue the malicious∣nesse of some, except thou hast some commerce with them. As not onely the Load-stone doth draw Iron vnto it, but also one Iron
doth draw and other being rubbed with the Load-stone: so by conuersing to∣gether, either the profit of vertue, or the poyson of vice doth passe from one to another. As they that take an Antidote be∣fore poyson, are not hurt of the poyson: so they that haue their minds strength∣ned and confirmed with wholsome o∣pinions, and good instructions, are not infected by the speech of impious persons, if they chance to fall among them. Wines doe not onely relish of the grounds they grow in, but also of the trees and plants they grow by: so wee doe not onely expresse their natures from whom wee descend, but also their manners with whom we liue. As they that are bitten of a mad dogge, doe not onely become mad, but also doe infect others with contagion: so they that are possessed with any pestilent opinion, doe also infect o∣thers with their speeches and confe∣rences. As a Hart doth draw venom out of holes by his breath, and doth purge
them: so some by their godly conuer∣sation doe draw others from sinne, and conuert them vnto God. Basiliu in Psalterium. As the plague doth infect: so doth euill company. Idem de spiritu sancto. As vineger doth corrupt wine: so wicked men doe infect the good, there∣fore let vs goe out of Babylon. Chryso. hom. 28. in Matth. As one Whore doth make many fornicators: so the wickednesse of a few doth pollute a great part of the people. Saluianus de vero iudicio & pro∣uidentia Dei, lib. 7. Feare. AS we doe not driue feare from ti∣merous horses by keeping them in the stable, but by leading them by the force of bit and spurre into those places, which they feare: so also a fearefull and timerous mind is to bee forced, that at length it may put off this vaine feare. Fr. Lodouicus Granat. lib. de deuotine. As the body is not capable of plea∣sures,
except it bee in good temper: so the mind doth not partake of true plea∣sure, except it be void of feare. Plut. As a flame raysed by the wind, is greater and more vehement, but lesse durable and constant: so a vehement desier ioyned with feare, hath vncer∣taine pleasure. Idem. The Crocodile is terrible to those that flye, but flyes those that follow: so if thou yeeldest or fearest some, they wax haughtie and cruell, but if thou boldly contemnest them, and va∣lorously withstandest them, their cho∣ler is presently ouer, and they put dagger in sheath. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 25. As a Chamaeleon because hee is a fearefull beast, doth often change co∣lour: so they that are timerous & want strength, do apply themselues vnto pol∣licies, & inuent dangerous stratagems: Plin. lib. 8. cap. 33. &. lib. 28. cap. 8. Olde age. AS they are glad, that haue fled from furious and cruell masters: so old men ought to reioyce, that by
the benefit of age they are freed from the infection of lust. Plut. As water mingled with wine doth make it moderate, and as the sober nymphes doe restraine the drunken god: so old men being mingled with youth in a common wealth, by their reuerence doe make their rashnesse and ambition more temperate. Idem. As an old singer doth not leaue his art, nor cast away his harpe, but maketh that musicke, which hath the least trouble and difficultie in it, and leaueth the shriller parts of singing vn∣to youth, who are more sit for them: so in olde age wee must not altogether leaue of the businesses of the common∣wealth, but chuse those affaires that are the quietest, which agree must vn∣to this age. Idem. As the diuersity of the sphericall mo∣tions, doth temper the motions of all things: so the cunctation of old age, doth moderate the festination of youth. As no man perceiueth when Storkes doe come, but that they are come, nor any one knoweth when they depart, but that they are departed, because they
doe both in the night very priuily: so man perceiueth youth departing, but that it is departed, neither doth any man vnderstand old age comming, but that it is come. Plin. lib. 10. cap. 25. A young vine doth yeeld greater plentie of wine, but an old vine doeth yeeld better wine: so young men speake moe words, but old men speake things more profitable. As of a running riuer thou hast so much as thou takest vp: so of yeares al∣wayes hasting away, thou receiuest no other thing, but that thou bestowest vp∣on perdurant matters. As fruit is not found vpon that Tree, vpon which first there was no blos∣somes: so wee cannot in age attaine to lawfull honour, if we in youth doe not labour in the exercise of some disci∣pline. Cyprianus de 12. abusionibus. A body that is molested with agues and sicknesse, although it be strong, yet it is afflicted, and weakened, but when the diseases are ouerpast, it recouereth strength againe: so the mind in youth doth abound with feuers, and the loue of glory & pleasures doth exceedingly
possesse it, but when old age commeth, it profligateth and chaseth away all these passions, some by satiety, and some by phylosophie. Chrysost. Hom. 7. ad Heb. As the hauen is quiet: so old age is peaceable and desireth rest. Idem, hom, cum presbyter esset designatus. As the canker sooner entreth into the white rose: so corruption, especially the corruption of couetousnesse, doth easily creepe into the white head. As he that is tossed this way and that by diuers tempests, neither commeth to that place he would, hath not sayled much, but hath beene tossed much: so hee that hath long liued, neither hath profited in good manners, hath not liued long, but hath long beene. Seneca de breuitate vitae. As a prodigall man soone wasteth a great deale of wealth: so a voluptuous intemperate man soone shortens his life, and neuer commeth vnto old age. ibidem. As a ship ful of leaks cannot long hold out: so an old man full of infirmities and diseases cannot long liue. Idem. lib. 2. epist. 30.
As our Mothers wombe doth hold vs nine moneths, and prepareth not vs for it selfe, but for that place, we are to goe forth into, being now fit to draw breath, and looke abroad: so through all this space from infancy to old age wee are preparing for another child-birth of nature. Idem. lib. 2. epist. 103. As not all wine doth sowre through age: so not all old age is crabbed. Cicero, in Catone Maiore, vel desenectnte. As we prayse a young man, in whom there is some grauity: so we commend an old man, in whom there is some relickes of an honest youth. Ibidem. As wantonnesse and lust is more proper vnto youth, then vnto old men, and yet not vnto all young men, that is, vnto those that are honest: so dotage and deliration is not proper vnto all old men, but vnto those that are weak∣headed and light brain'd. ibidem. As wise old men are delighted in youth of good towardnesse, and their age is more tollerable vnto them, that are embraced and reuerenced of youth: so young men delight in the preceps of old men, by which they are brought
vnto the study of vertue. Ibidem. As hee is not praysed that hath sung much, or pleaded much, or gouenued much, but he that hath done it well: so he hath not liued long, that hath lasted out many yeaes, but he that liued wel. Plutarchus in Moral. As wine soone sowreth: so our life soone endeth. Antiphanes, apud Sto∣baeum. sermone. 113. As to the stomacke quatted with dainties, all delicates seeme queasie; and as hee that surfetteth with wine, vseth afterward to allay it with water: so those old men, that haue ouer charged their gorges with fancie, accompt all honest recreation meere folly, and hauing taken a surfet of delight, seeme now to sanour it with despight. As old men are very suspicious to mistrust euery thing: so are they very credulous to beleeue any thing, the blind man doth eate many a flye. As the hearbe Moly hath a flower as white as snow, and a roote as blacke as incke: so many times age hath a white head, shewing pitty, but a blacke heart, swelling with mischife.
Olde mens Counsell. IT is reported that the Bird Ibis, the older she is, the more odoriferously and sweetly shee smelleth: so the glory of old men is more calme, and their councels more safe. Plut. Counsell. AS he that is sicke of his liuer, doth foolishly if onely he shew his soare nayles vnto the Physition: so doth hee foolishly that being troubled and disturbed with great euils and mis∣chiefes, doth aske counsell of his friend about trifles. Plut. There be some that cannot see things neare vnto them, but they can discerne things further off: so many are better aduised in other men matters, then in those things that pertaine vnto them∣selues. As the hagges called Lamiae are blind at home, but see all things a∣broad: so some are too cleare eyed in other me usinesse, but are hood-winked in their owne▪
If among birds one female tread ano∣ther, it begetteth an egge, but nothing is bred of it: so that counsell, which thou conceiuest in thy mind, if it bee not seasoned wit reason, it is friuolous and vnprofitable. Aristot. lib. 6. cap. 2. de nat. animal. & Plin. lib. 10. cap. 58. As Apion calling Homer from his graue, asked him none other thing, then from what parents he was sprung: so some, a Counsell of graue men being conuerted, doe consult of nothing but of toyes and trifles. Euill counsell is the worst vnto him that giueth it. AS Perillus, who gaue the brasen bull vnto Phalaris, perished by his owne inuention: so many times euill counsell doth fall vpon the head of the authour. Plin. lib. 34. cap. 8. As oftentimes the fish Polypus is taken and held, whilst hee deuoureth shell fishes: so now and then whilst we endeuour to hurt others, we bring our selues into danger. Plin. lib. 9. cap. 29
As Cybele,  saces Chamberlaine, and Bawde,  poysoned with the same poyson▪ that shee thought to haue dispatched Cariclia with: so Ache∣menes, Cybeles Son, being at the point to haue traiterously slaine Oroondales lieutenant of Aegypt, before hee had giuen him a deadly wound, was stroken thorow himselfe with an arrow of an Aethiopian. Heliodorus in the eight and nine Booke of his Aethiopian History. As Diomedes King of Thrace cast o∣thers as prouender to be eaten of horses: so he by Hercules was cast to the same horses, and deuoured of them. As Busiris King of Aegyt vsed to burne others in sacrifice before his gods: so he by Hercules was burnt in sacrifice vpon the same alter. As by that thing a man doth plant a man is oftentimes supplanted: as Noah in planting a vineyard, was sup∣planted by the wine, Gen. 9. so by that a man doeth inuent, he is often circum∣ented, as Hanian was hanged on the same gallowes, that hee had prepared for Mordeca. Ester, 7. As the Israelites blasphemed God
with their flery tongues: so God pu∣nished them with fiery Serpents. As Nadab and Abihu the Sonnes of Aaron offered strange fires before the Lord: so they were devoured with fire. Levit. 10. As the Princes of Iuda were cruell: so cruell beasts tore them in peeces. Ieremie. 5. As Pharaoh would needs drown the Children of Israel in the Water: Exod. 1. so God payed him again with the self-same coyne drowning him after∣ward in the red Sea. Exodus, 14. As the woman had eaten of the for∣bidden fruite: so her punishment was appointed by-fruite; That the fruit of her wombe should be brought forth in paine and heauinesse. Gen. 3. As man sinned eating: so God limited his penalty by eating, saying; Thou shalt eate thy bread in the sweate of hy browes. As Adoni-bezeke cut off the thumbs of the hands and of the feete of se∣uenty Kings: so Iudah cut off the thumbs of his hands, and of his feete. Iudges 1.
As Cresseida was inconstant to Troylus: so King Diomede proved constant to her. As Iohn Martin, of Brigueras, a mile from Ang ongue, vaunted every where that he would slit the Mini∣sters nose of Angrongue: so was he assaulted by a wolfe which bit off his nose, so that he died thereof mad— Fox in his booke of Acts and Monu∣ments. 2. tom. pag. 1088. Rash Counsell. AS the North wind is boysterous at the beginning, but milde at the ending; & contrariwise the south wind is milde at the beginning, but vehement at the ending: so they that rashly and head strongly enter∣prise any matter, do freese in the pursuite to their hurt and danger, but they that aduisedly take things in hand, are more and more encou∣raged in the progresse of their labour.
Fortune. AS in the game of chalenger contended wit what aduersarie soeuer came: so in the course of our life, wee must wstle against whatsoeuer fortune. Plutarchus in Mo∣ralibus. A blind man running against one, calleth him blind, that did not shun him: so we call that fortune blind, into which we fall through our owne blind∣nesse. ibidem. As the winds are succesfull to some, and aduerse to others: so fortune doth fauour one, and frowne vpon an other. Ibidem. As a pigmy, although set on a hill, is but a dwarfe, but a lossus placed in a valley, is great: so a wise man is great in whatsoeuer fortune, but a foole is base in the greatest prosperitie. Seneca. As haile pattering vpon an house, maketh a great noyse, but doth no hurt: so the insulting of fortune cannot doe any thing against a wise man. Idem. As sell fishes increase, when the
oone encreath, and decrease, when decreaseth: s a foole depending of fortune, is sometimes great, some∣times base, sometimes high, some∣times low, sometimes as proud, as a Peacocke, sometimes as suppliant, as a begger, as Rhamnusia pleaseth to ange herselfe. As an adamant neither yeeldeth to the fire, nor to the hammer: so the mind of a wise man is inuincible, not to bee conquered by any of fortunes vio∣lences. As a good workman maketh a picture of any matter: so a wise man carieth himselfe well in both fortunes, either prosperous, or aduerse. Nilus brinh a dearth vnto the Egiptians, if it either exceed in flowing, or reach not to the ordinary limit, that is, if it either flow lesse then twelue cubits, or more then eighteene: so either too much prosperity, or too much aduersitie doeth hurt and hinder a good mind, the one by vexing and tormenting it by need, the other by ling and seducing it from vertue and honestly by delights and delicacy.
A hedg-hog fore-seeing a tempest, hideth himselfe in the earth: so when a change of fortune happeneth, the mind is to be fortified with precepts of phy∣losophie. As an archer sometimes hitteth the white, and sometimes shooteth neare it: so fortune sometimes seaseth vpon our selues, and sometimes vpon our goods. Maximus, apud Stobaeum; sermone. 18. As a glasse sheweth, what the face is: so fortune sheweth what the man is. Euripid. s, apud Stob. 88. Grasse so long as it is greene, doth couer the monntaines, and adorne the edowes, and through the beauty doth delight and refresh he eyes of the beholders; but when the heate of the Sun, hath dryed vp the moysture and cōsumed it, then it is many times made e well for the fire: so as long as fortune mileth, and giueth health, riches, riends, honours and dignities, so long man florisheth, his acquaintance are delighted and refreshed by him, and all men, behold him with admiration; but when the heate of persecution hath
scorched his glory, or the frost of ad∣uersitie hath pinched his wealth, or the infirmity of sicknesse hath decayed his health, then he fadeth as a flower, and many times hee becommeth fewell for the fire of Hell. F. Ioan. à S Gem. lib. 3. de vegetab. & plan. cap. 26. The vse and abuse of a thing. PRometheus seeing a Satyre kisse the fire at the sight of it, admonished him, that if hee touched it, it would burne him, but if hee vsed it, as it should be vsed, it was profitable both for the heat and light: so the same thing, as thou vsest it, is either dangerous or profitable. Plut. If many be made drunke with wine, not therefore are the vines to be digged vp by the rootes, as Lycurgus caused them, but rather more water is to bee vsed to allay  ine: so if many abuse Poetry, it  ot forthwith to bee banished, bu aution is to be vsed, that it may be wisome. Idem. As in the nature of things, those that
are the most beautifull, doe soonest wither and decay, as Roses, Lilies, Violets, when as other last longer: so in the life of man, those things that are most florishing, are verie quickly abused, and diuerted into a contrarie vse. Plin. lib. 9. cap. 15. The fish Polypus otherwise a stupide creature, vseth great cunning in taking other fishes: so many men are very wise for their owne lucre and gaine, but in other things very blockish and brute beasts. Plin. lib. 9. cap. 29. As wines poured into vessels made of the Tree Taxus, become mortall and deadly: so wholsome erudition and instruction falling into a pestilent and bad nature; becommeth hurtfull and dangerous Plin. lib. 16. cap. 11. As the salt Sea water is vnwholsom to drinke, but yet carieth a ship better then the fresh riuer, which is whole∣some for drinke: so euery thing hath his vse, if it bee vsed in the right kind. As the Phylosopher that sent the tongues, sent the best and the worst meare: so riches are very good if they
be well vsed, but starke nought, if o∣therwise. Plut. Wine doth comfort those that are in health and liue moderately, and (as the Scripture saith) it maketh merry the heart of man; but if he drinke it that hath a feuer, it bringeth death and destruction vnto him: so it commeth to passe, that the same thing vsed diuerse∣ly, doth bring life to one, and death to another. Origenes in libro Iudic. homilia quinta. As the satiety of hony procureth vomit: so good things being not well vsed. become hurtfll. Greg. Nazian∣zenus lib. 1. de Theolo. Riches. ALthough it is necessary and need∣full to eate for the reliefe and sustentation of the body, yet superfluity of meate doth very much hurt. And although the life of man consisteth in the bloud, yet too much abundance of bloud, is the cause of death and often∣times killeth men: so riches although they be necessary for the maintenance
of life, yet superfluity of temporall goods is no lesse hurtfull to the soule, then too much meate to the body, or too much bloud to the life, Lod. Granat. lib. de Deuotione. A trauailer for his prouision in his voyage carieth his money in Gold, for so is he richer, and is troubled with lesse waight: so the Lrd doth lighten his Children, laying vpon them but yet sufficient, and that which may content them. ibidem. As those Kingdomes and Cities which the Diuell shewed to our Saui∣our Christ vpon the mountaine, were not true riches, but fantasticall and sightly in the eye: euen so all the riches, honours, and glory of this world, are no perfect good, but fained, dis∣sembled, and as Saint Iames saith, a va∣pour that appeares a while, and in a moment is dispersed. As the full gorged Faulcon will not know her Master and turne vnto him: so the rich man that is pampered with prosperity, doth forget God, and doth separate himselfe from him: Euen as the Children of Reuben and
Gad desired Moses that he would leaue them there in the Country of Iordan, where was good feeding for their cat∣tell, neuer caring to goe to the land of promise: in like manner, there are ma∣ny that refuse the Kingdome of hea∣uen, promised them in perpetuall posses∣sion, for the loue of riches and cor∣ruptible goods they enioy in this false world. Stella de contemptu mundi. As in good and sauory meates poy∣son is often receiued, and they that haue eaten thereof are forthwith ready for the graue: so sweete are the riches of this world to such as loue them, yet vnder them is death hidden, because they make a man proud and vicious, which bringeth him to eternall death▪ Ibidem, As the Children of Israels Manna would haue corrupted, and beene filled with vermine, if it had beene saued: so this worlds vaine riches, are no way sooner lost, then by too much sauing them. Ibidem. As smoake mounted on high, is quickly out of sight: euen such is pro∣sprity, it beares a shew for a while,
and at length comes to nothing. ibidem. As vpon the mountaine of Gilboa perished the noble and great men of Israel: so doth prosperitie lead men vp as it were to a mountaine, and sud∣denly thence tumbles them headlong downe. Ibidem. As the Gentiles vainely adored the Idoll Mercurie, each of them carrying a stone in the honour of their Idoll: euen so they that honour worldly pro∣sperity, steale the honour which is due to God, and bestow it on a base I∣doll. ibidem. As a wise man is not hurt of a Serpent, because he keepes him farre from him; but a foole taking him by the taile is bittn: so riches, being receiued of a wise man, doe not hurt him, because hee knowes how to vse them, but if a foole lay hold on them, they bite him, because he gripes them too hard. Cle∣mens Alex. lib. 3. paedag. cap. 6. As a land flood is soone vp, and soone downe: so are riches here to day, and gone to morrow; to day it is this mans ground, tomorrow his, and next day anothers. Basil. in Psal. 61.
Welles that are drawne, haue sweeter water, but being vntouched become putrified: so the rest of riches is vnpro∣fitable, but their motion and publike vsing is profitable and fruitfull. Idem: hom. in ditescentes, & Clemens Alex. lib. 1. Stromat. As that Earth which is a little re∣moued from the roote, is the nourish∣ment of the plant; but that which lyeth the neerest vnto it, doth depresse and burthen it: so if riches fall close vpon the soule of a man, they driue it downe to Hell, but if they be somewhat remoued, and distributed to the vse of the poore, then the possession of them is in the right kinde. Idem in cap. 5. Esayae. As Lyons Leopards, and Beares become wild and fierce, because they are brought vp in darkenesse: so riches being kept close and hoorded vp, are more fearefull then wilde Beasts, and roare more terribly then a Lyon; but being brought into the light, and bestowed on the poore, of Lyons they become lambes, and of dangerous Rockes, calme hauens. Chrysost. hom: 14. de auaritie.
As a ship too heauie loaden, doth drowne, but being moderately gaged, sayleth prosperously: so when thou burthenest thy selfe with more riches then is requisite, they easily drowne thee, but when thou layest vp what is meete for thy necessity, when a storme happeneth, thou mayst easily flote ouer the waues. ibidem. As we seeing a rich man and a poore man painted vpon a wall, doe neither enuie the one nor dispise the other, b∣cause they are not true things, but fained shadowes: so if we well knew the nature of riches and pouerty, of glory and reproach, and of all other things, whether ioyfull or sorrowfull, it would free vs from the perturbations they bring, because they are but false shadowes, and fained counterfeits of things to come. Idem concione 4. de Lazaro. As Children not knowing how to vse swords and kniues doe endanger them∣selues: so many men not knowing how to vse money, endamage their soules, by buying with it such a burden of vices, which depresse them to hell. Idem hom. 66. in Gen.
As shooes too big hinders a traueller; and too many cloathes a runner: so doth too much money him that trauels to heauen. Idem hom. 7. de poenitentia. As no wise man will build his mansi∣on house vpon the sand: so no wise man will build his happinesse vpon riches, which are brittle, fading, and soone vanish. ibidem. As if an earthly King should say, no rich man shall bee promoted in my Kingdome, would not all cast away their dishonoured riches? so when the heauenly King doth say, that it is hard for rich men to enter into his King∣dome, will not they much more cast away these impediments? Idem hom. 9. in Mat. As he is a foolish husband man, that takes his good graine, and casts it into a lake, leauing his fruitfull ground vn∣sowne: so is hee a greater foole, that hides his treasure in the earth, & leaues the fruitfull ground of the poore vn∣sowne. ibidem. As thornes doe pricke being touched so doe riches being griped, Idem hom. 23 in Ioan.
As Scorpions and Vipers doe lurke among bushes and thornes: so doe in∣ordinate thoughts couch themselues in the deceitfulnesse of riches. Therefore Christ calls the cares of this present life, and the frauds of riches, thornes, ibidem. As meate kept vndigested in one part of the body, doth doth neither profit it, nor nourish the rest, but being digesta∣bly communicated to all doth nourish all: so riches if thou keepest them a∣lone, thou shalt receiue no fruit by them, but if thou possessest them with others, then thou reapest the greatest commodity by them. idem. hom. 10. in 1. Cor: As a tree planted in fertill and good ground, doth euery yeare bring forth seasonable fruit: so money planted a∣mong the poore, and put into their hands, doth not onely euery yeare, but also euery day bring forth spirituall fruits, that is, confidence in God, de∣parting from sinne, a good conscience, spirituall ioy, comfortable hope, and other good things, which God hath prepared for them that loue him. ibid.
As they that honour thee for thy friends sake, saying that thou art worthy of no honour of thy selfe, but onely for him, doe mightily dishonour thee: so riches are the causes of reproach vnto vs, whilest they are more honou∣red, then the possessors of them. Idem hom. 7. ad Colossenses. As hee that saith, thou thy selfe art worthy of no honour, but I honor thee for thy Seruants sake, doth reproach thee: so doe they that honour rich men, for their riches. Ibidem. As a good Father seeing his Sonne doate vpon an Harlot, doth banish he his sight: so our heauenly Father seeing that his Children would doate vpo riches and leaue his loue, doth either not giue them, or else doth take them away. Idem. hom. 33. ad Hebraeos. As a whoorish countenance being filthy of it selfe, is painted to deceiue others, that they by reason of the vaile may not see the filthinesse: so rich carry a faire flourish of pleasure, th wee may not discerne the paine a plague, that they bring with them. Ia hom. quod nmo laeditur nisi aseipso.
As the Moath is bred of cloath, rust of Iron, & theeues of need: so couetous∣nesse is bred of riches, desire of gaine, and gaping for more, of much hauing Petrus Chrysologus, ser. 7. A flie comming a to barrell of hony, she touch it with her mouth, and take hat is necessarie, departeth safely, but f she cast her selfe into it, she drowneth and there perisheth: so a man, if hee ake what riches hee hath need of, that ee may honestly sustaine himselfe, hee may bee taken from them and flye to Heauen, but if he wholy drowne him∣elfe in them, there hee stickes, and rings himselfe to destruction: Pintus Ezeciel. cap. 16. As a banket hath no grace without guests: so riches haue no pleasure with∣ut vertue. Antistenes apud Stobaem, er. 1. de prudentia. As they that haue drunke of the ame Wine, some are drunke, some mad, nd some more mild: so they that are nriched alike, are not affected alike. Aristonimus apud Maximum, ser∣one 12. As Gold is tryed by the touch stone:
so riches doe shew what is in a man: Chilo apud Laertium. As thou wouldest not bee drowned sayling in a faire ship loaden with Gold: so thou oughtest not to desire tting in a large and sumptuous house, to be ouerwhelmed with the cares of worldly riches. Cleobulus apud Sto∣baem, ser. Temperantia. As thou seeing a Viper, an aspe, or a Scorpion, inclosed in Iuory, or in a Golden shrine, dost not loue them, or esteeme them for the excellencie of the matter, as happy creatures, but rather dost abhorre and detest them for their venemous and deadly nature: so thou seeing much mischiefe and wickednesse in riches, and in the pride of fortune, be not amazed at the splendor of the matter, but contemne the prauitie of the manners. Epictetus apud Stobum. serm. 3. As Gold put into a trembling hand, doth also tremble: so riches heaped vp together of a mind full of cares and feare, are shaken together with it, and and are affected after the same manner. Hypseus apud Stobaeum ser. 90. de Tem∣erati.
The ast of the Wine is altered with the caske. so riches doe vary according to the condition of the possessor. Socra∣tes apud Stobaeum serm. 92. As a horse if he want a bridle is vn∣ruly; and will not be managed of the rider: so also are riches, if they bee not gouerned by reason. Idem apud Sto∣baeum. ser. 3. de Temperantia. As they that are sicke of Feuers, are diuersly affected by diuers things, that is, by hot things, they wax cold, and by cold things they wax hot: so also riches bring trouble to fooles, and pouerty brings ioy to a wise man. Plut: in Moralibus. He that bestoweth riches and glory vpon a wicked man, giueth wine to him that hath an ague, honie to one distempered with choler, and daintie meates to one troubled with Morbus coeliacus, which do encrease the disease of his minde, that is, his foolishnesse. ibidem. As garments doe seeme to adde heae vnto a man, when as of themselues they are cold, but they doe not adde it, but do defend him, that is, in his body:
so riches seeme to giue a pleasant life, when as that proceedeth from the mind, and not fom externall things. ibidem. As fire is not to be blamed because it deuours Cities, corne fields, and vineyards, seeing that it is giuen for many good vses, as to dresse meate, to expell darkenesse, and to comfort life. so riches vnto a wise man are helps vnto vertue, but to a foole are the de∣struction of his life. Elisius Calentius in Epist ad Hier arcum. A bird held only by a feather, escapeth away with a little losse: so riches ought not to hinder vs from the study of wis∣dome, Seneca. A golden bridle doth not make a horse the better: so neither doe the or∣naments of fortune make a man the better. Seneca. As a Pylot is neuer a whit the better guide because he hath a great Ship: so is he neuer a whit the better man, that hath the greater ortune. Seneca. As instruments are of no vse vnto them that are ignorant of musicke: so are riches vnto them, that know not haw to vse them.
As the Phylosopher sending the tongue of a sacrificed beast, sent the best and the worst thing: so riches are very good, if rhou vsest them well, but very euill, if thou vsest them badly. As a nettle, if thou handlest it gin∣gerly, doth sting thee, but if thou gripest it hard, doth not paine thee: so money, if thou handlest it tenderly and louingly, it will infect thee, but if thou dealest with it contemptuously it will not hurt thee. As among the Egyptians, there was no man esteemed happy, that had not a beast full of spots: fo among vs in England there is none accounted wise, that hath not his purse full of Gold. As thornes do pricke: so doe riches pricke with labour in getting them, with feare in keeping them, and with griefe in losing them. F. Ioannes à S. Geminiano lib. 3. de vegetabilibus & plantis, cap. 18. As thornes doe choake the seed, that it cannot spring vp: so riches do choake with care the seed of the Diuine Word, that it cannot fructifie in the heart ibidem.
As haires are not only an ornament, but also an helpe vnto the body: so riches are an ornament in dignity, and an helpe in necessity. Idem lib. 6. de homine & membris eius, cap. 24. Rich men. AS many abroad seeme happy and merry, and yet a crabbed Wife at home marres all their myrth: so rich men outwardly seeme happy, when as inwardly with cares they are tormen∣ted night and day. Plut. As the fish Scombrus is in the water of a sulphur colour, but without the water like vnto other fishes: so rich men in their Kingdomes seeme like vn∣to Gods, and to bee farre more ex∣cellent then others, yet in death they nothing differ from others. Harts when they are constrained to cast away their hornes, doe hide them, especially  right horne, that it may not bee cinable vnto others: so many rien, albeit they cannot vse their ric  themselues, yet they will no  any her to haue part in
them. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 21. Aristotel. de Nat. lib. 9. cap. 5. Albeit the Asse bee most immusicall, yet the best pipes are made of his bones, as Aesope saith in Plutarch: so many rich men although vnlearned, yet doe support students wits by their wealth. As rich tapestry oftentimes couereth much filthinesse: so the riches of great personages doth hide many calamities. Plut. in Moralibus. As Bucephalus Great Alexanders horse without his furniture did easily admit any rider, but being adorned with his royall trappings would carry no man but Alexander himselfe: so men in low estate doe to lerate any thing, but being made rich, they snuffe and fume, and will carry no coales. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 24. As old bags of no worth, are esteemed according to the value of the money they haue in them: so rich men albeit but fooles and dolts, are prized after the rate of the goods they possesse. Bion pud Stobaenm sermone. 89. As many threeds bound together, cannot enter into the eye of a needle,
but being sundered may enter: so a rich man being clogged and tyed with his wealth cannot enter into the King∣dome of Heauen, but parting it among the poore he may get in. Pitus in Ez∣chiel. cap. 16. As the Elme doth support the vine: so rich men ought to sustaine the poore. Caesarius Arelatensis hom. 17. As a dogge waiteth vpon a Child to get his victuals from him: so the diuell attendeth vpon rich men to catch their soules. Chryso. hom. 7. in Epist. ad. Rom. As wee entring into a prison, grieue to see men clogged with chaines and fetters: so entring into the view of this world, wee haue much more cause of griefe, to see rich men so fettered with the chaines of their wealth. Chrysost. homil. 14. in Matth. As euery Artisan best knowes his owne trade: so a rich man should bee skilfull in his owne art, that is, how to diuide his riches aright among the poore. idem Homil. 50. in Matthe. As wee doe not say that he is well, that alwayes thirsteth, albeit he stand by many riuers of drinke: so wesay
that those rich men doe not enioy rosperity, who are alwayes griping or more. Chrysostomus concione 2. de Lazaro. As a camell cannot get thorow the eye of a needle by reason of the bunch on his backe: so rich men cannot enter into heauen by reason of their deformed couetousnesse, and enormous desires. Ambrosius sermone 4. As it is hard for a Periwinkle in the Sea to swim, or for the the snaile vpon the land to creepe, while they beare their houses vpon their backes: euen so it is hard for a rich man that trusteth in his riches, with all his bigge bunches of wealth vpon his backe, to goe through the needls eye, and to enter into the Kingdome of Heauen. As trees are watched and hedged a∣bout whilest fruit is vpon them, but when it is gone they are neglected and vnregarded: so whilst rich men a bound with wealth, they are visited and re∣uerenced, but when they become poore, they are despised and contemned. F. Ioannes a S. Geminiano lib. 3. de ve∣getabilibus & plantis, cap. 18.
Pouerty. THey that whip thy garments do not touch thy body: so they tha vpbraide thee either with thy birth, o thy pouerty, doe not properly touch thy selfe, but doe reproach that that i without thee. Plut. As the striking of a full vessell, and an empty vessell doth make an harmo∣ny in musicke called Diapason: so needy poore man and a bountefull rich doe well agree together. They that are in deepe dennes, ar not stroken of the thunderbolt: so the lowest fortune is the safest. As riches breed neglect of saluation: so pouerty, whilest it coueteth to bee satisfied, declineth from righteousnesse, Ambr. in epist. ad Rom. As the Physitions skill is knowne by curing the diseased: so now and then by pouerty the prouidence of Gods mercy is perceiued. Laurentius Iusti∣nianus lib. de contemptu mundi cap. 11. As a course garment doth not make the body lesse healthfull: so pouerty doth nothing hinder the free bold∣nesse,
off peach. Socrates apud Stobm sermone. 11. As they that are borne in Persia doe not desire to dwell in Graecia, and there to enioy prosperity: so poore men, who know the nature of riches, although they liue in great neede, yet they doe not endeuour to wax rich by ill meanes. Epictetus apud Stobaeum. serm. 11. It is safer to saile neare the shoare, then in the vast Ocean: so a poore mans life is not so subiect to dangers, as he is, that is rich. Aristonymus apud Sto∣bum serm. 95. By a disease of the body some doe receiue this commodity, that they are freed from those businesses, with which they were plunged; by which meanes they recouer greater strength and vali∣dity: so to some, banishment, pouertie and Shipwracke haue beene occasions to study Phylosophy. Plutarchus in Moralibus. The Firre tree is easily set on fire, because it hath n oylie moisture: so he that is poore in spirit is easily inflamed with the diuine loue, because he hath an oylie humidity, that is, a deuont
affection of minde. F. Ioannes a S. Ge∣miniano lib. 3. de vegetabilibus & plan∣tis cap. 51. As the wild Asse is the Lyons pray in the wildernesse: so are poore men the meate of the rich. Ecclesiasticus cap. 13. verse. 20. Those things are difficult which are excellent. AS the pricking Asparagus bring∣eth forth most pleasant fruit: so of hard beginnings proceedeth great pleasure. Plut. The more paines thou takest to en∣graue any thing in steele or marble, the longer it continueth: so that we learne with greater diligence, is more hardly forgotten. As the Rose being a flower acceptable beyond all others, growes of a thorne: so of the greatest and sorest labours comes the sweetest fruits. As the Palme tree is very hard to be climed, because of the plainnesse and slipperinesse of the barke, yet hath most sweete fruit: so learning and vertue
haue a difficult entrance, but very pleasant fruit. Plin. lib. 13. cap. 4. The Beares whelps are borne with∣out shape, they scarcely goe in six months, and doe not moue before they be two moneths old: so those things that are become excellent & egregious, are perfited by little and little. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 16. As the Phoenix is bred but euery fiue hundreth yeare: so the encrease of famous men is very rare. Plinius libro 10. cap. 2. Asses breed all their life long, but mankind hath a certaine time appoin∣ted: so the multiplication of base things is common and easie, but excellent things happen seldome. Plinius libro 8. cap. 43. & Seneca. As the hearbe Moly is hardly digged out of the earth, but beyond other hearbs is soueraigne and effectuall vnto medicine: so those things that are fa∣mous and excellent are not compassed ut by great labour. Plin. lib. 25. cap. 4. As excellent hearbs and flowers doe not grow, but by great tillage and culture, when as Onyons, Leekes, and
such like stuffe doe prosper without any great toile: so excellent and admirable things are not brought to passe with∣out great paines, when as baser matters are more obuious. Dignitie. THose that are called Agrippae, be∣cause they are preposterously borne, that is, with their feete for∣wards, are supposed to enter into life very vnluckely and ominously, and to the great hurt of mankind, as Marcus Agrippa, Nero, and Richard the third: so they that intrude themselues into Empire or ecclesiasticall promotion by violence, iniustice and simonie become very pestilent both to themselues, and to those they are set ouer. Among the Thessalians it was a ca∣pitall crime to killa Storke, for none other cause, but because shee killed Serpents; and in England Kites are spared by an act of parliament, because they purge Cities of garbage and en∣trals of beasts: so honour and dignity is to be bestowed vpon some, not that
they are worthy of it, but because their diligence is necessary for vs. Falling starres are suddainly extin∣guished: so those that fortune hath sud∣dainely aduanced, are in a trice cast downe. Plut. Meteors soone breed, soone vanish: so in honors and dignities, those that are soone vp, are soone downe. As that which falleth from an high loft, maketh a great noise, and is heard of all: so hee that falleth from an high estate, his ruine is euery where heard of. Chrysost. hom. 40. operis imperf. As hee that presumeth to vsurpe ho∣our not giuen him of God, is worthy of blame: so hee that putteth it from him being giuen vnto him is guilty of disobedience. Idem. 1. in 1. Timoth. As they that climbe vp a rotten adder, are in danger of falling: so all onour, power and glory, which is contrary to humilitie, doth endanger the possessour. Climacus de discretion gradu 26. As wise men doe not estimate the valour of horses by their trappings: so neither doe they value great personages
by their honours and dignities, but by their vertues. Isidorus de humilitate tomo primo: Honour. AS he that stands on a high Tower, if his foote but slip is in danger of a shrewd fall: so hee that sits in ho∣nours seat. As the Iuy winds about an old dry Tree to make it saplesse: so doth ho∣nour circle thee to leaue the accountles. As there is nothing that flies away more speedily then a shadow: so there is not any thing more vnconstant then . As the Viper being burnt to ashes, is good to heale the biting of a Viper: so if thou beest beaten with worldly ho∣nours and vanities, desiring likewise to be healed thereof, remember that thou must returne to ashes, the very cor∣ruptible matter whereof thou wast made. As the first Adam lost honor by pur∣suing and following euill: so the second Adam got honour by auoyding and schewing it.
As the Iron must first be well heated in the fire, ere it can bee wrought by the hammer, and driuen out on the anuile: so cannot thy fame and name be honourably enlarged till they haue first suffered the strokes of many temp∣tations, and through the fire of piercing trials. The purest wine gets soonest into the head, which makes a wise Lord or ruler of Seruants, when he sees any of his followers seeke to disorder them∣selues with drinking of the best wine, that they shall abate the strength there∣of with water: euen so is the will of God, when fauour of men and worldly regard doe trouble the sences, and ouer∣master our wits, that they should bee qualified with the water of more pro∣uident respect namely those blames and defects which depend vpon them. When Atiochus entred the Temple, hee tooke away the lights and the candlestickes: euen so worldly fauor no sooner enter into our thoughts, but it extingusheth all light of knowledge of our selues. As things caried aloft by the winde,
the wind no sooner ceaseth, but they fall to the ground: so it fares with them, who without desert, and by the fauor of men are highlie promoted, when fauor slacketh down-fals their dignity, in a miserable case is he that hath no better assurance. As the snowe in summer, and as raine in haruest are not meete: so is honor vnseemly for a foole. As euery crown doth not become e∣uery conqueror: so euery honour doth not become euery man Plut. As a great Collossus, and a huge statue ill poysed, are easily subuerted: so too much honour through enuy doth ouerthrew many. Plut. They that heape honours and glory vpon an euill man, doe giue wine to one sicke of a feuer, honey to one op∣pressed with choler, and meate to one troubled with morbus coeliacus, which encrease the disease of his mind, that is, his foolishnesse. Plut.
Nobilitie. AS faith is very rich, but without works quite dead: so nobility is good, but if not accompanied with ver∣tue, most base and infamous. Stella de contemptu mundi. As of one roote springeth both the Rose and the brier: so of one mother may descend both a bad Sonne and a good; for a man may be borne of a no∣ble birth, and yet himselfe become vile and dishonorable. ibidem. As in fertill earth growes the Hem∣locke, which is a venemous and deadly hearbe, and in the barren growes the pure Gold: so oftentimes out of hono∣rable house issues degenerate minds, and out of base Stockes proceeds valorous thoughts. ibidem. As he is a foole, who hauing at all no beauty in him, will neuerthelesse extoll his owne beauty and perfection: euen so as foolish is hee that beleeues himselfe to bee noble, not hauing any part of nobility in him. As of a bitter roote many times comes sweete and pleasant fruite: so from a
poore race may issue some to be famous and noble, by the vertuous behauour which afterward shall renowne them. Ibidem. As grosse clowds couer the Sunne, Moone and Starres, and robs men of their celestiall splendour: so the vices of them that are vertuously descended, ob∣scure the worthy actions of their fa∣mous forgers. ibidem. As brickes take their beginning from clay: so nobility tooke her beginning from obscure parentage. Gregorius Nyssenus apud Antonium monachum in Melissa. As it nothing profiteth a muddy uer to haue sprung from a pure foun∣taine: so it nothing helpeth vicious Children to haue descended from noble houses. Hector Pintus cap. 16. Ezechiel: As he that is borne a foole, is borne a slaue: so hee that is borne a wise man, is noble borne. And therefore An∣isthenes said very well, that nobility did soly and onely consist in vertue and wisdome, whereupon the Stoikes con∣cluded, that onely wise men were noble men.
As estimation many times springs from the foolish opinion of the people, and not from desert: so doth nobility. Lodo Viues in introductione ad Sapien∣tiam. cap. 3. As little Crab fishes doe hide them∣selues in great empty shels, that they may bee the more safe: so some distru∣sting their owne strength and vertue, doe protect themselues vnder the noble titles of their ancestors. Erasmus. As no bird can looke against the Sunne, but those that bee bred of the Eagle, neither any Hawke soare so high, as the brood of the Hobby: so for the most part none haue true sparks of heroicke maiestie, but those that are descended from noble races. As the wine that runneth on the lees is not therefore to be accompted neate, because it was drawne of the same peece; or as the water that springeth from the fountaines head, and floweth into the filthy channell, is not to bee called cleare, because it came of the same streame: so neither is hee that descendeth of noble parentage, if hee desist from noble deeds, to be esteemed
a Gentleman, in that hee issued from the loynes of a noble Syre, for that hee obscureth the parents hee came of, and discrediteth his owne estate. The pure Corall is chosen as well by his vertue, as his colour; a King is knowne better by his courage then his crowne: so a right Gentleman is sooner seene by the tryall of his vertue, then blasing of his armes. The Rose that is eaten with the Canker is not gathered, because it groweth on that stalke that the sweete doth; neither was Helen made a starre, because shee came of that Egge with Castor: so neither is he a true Gentle∣man, that hath nothing to com∣mend him, but the nobilitie of his an∣cestours. As it is a signe of true honour and nobility to reproue sinne: so to re∣nounce it is the part of honesty. As no Thersites could bee trans∣formed into Vlysses: so no Alexander could be couched in Damocles.
A good name. FIre once kindled is easily kept, but being extinct it is hardly rekindle so it is an easie thing to maintaine a good name, but being once lost, it is not so easily recouered. Plutarchus in Moralibus. Ships well repayred, doe endure many yeares: so wee must continually adde sometimes to the propagation of our good names, least time and age eate them out. ibidem. As a shadow sometimes goeth be∣fore, and sometimes commeth after: so some forthwith doe get good report, and some haue it not till after death, but the later that it commeth, it is wont to be the greater. Seneca. As the famous monuments called Obelisci were long time in making, and reared with much adoe, by reason of their hugenesse, and exceeding waight, but being once finished, they continued many ages: so it is a had thing to get a name of vertue and wisedome, but being once gotten, it is neuer extin∣guished.
As in very great Obeliskes almost as much is builded vnder the earth, as is aboue, that they may stand vnmoue∣able: so a firme and sound foundation is to bee laid for the continuance of a perpetuall name. As spices then doe smell more fra∣grantly, when they are either moued, broken or powned: so vertues fame is then largely dispersed, when it is exer∣cised in serious imployments and waightie affaires. As Physitions forbid to wash the teeth with the iuyce of the hearbe Alcakengy, although it bee good to fasten them, because the danger is greater, then the commodity, for at length it will bring madnesse: so those things are not to bee dealt in, that hurt the name, and encrease the wealth, nor that learning to be medled with, which polisheth the tongue, and in∣fecteth the meanes. As fire in a darke night is a farre off discerned, but in the Sun-shine is scarcely seene: so many a paultry rimer, and bawdy ballad-maker, seemes among base consorts of great
esteeme, but in the view of more glo∣rious and splendent spirits, they ap∣peare none other then dunghill birds, and alefied Groutnowls. Tyrius Pla∣tonicus sermone. 24. An ill Name. AS some by the deformities of their body haue got vnto them a sur∣name, as of crooked Legges, to bee called Vari, of flabberkin lips, Chilones, of great noses, Nasones, of red noses, Salamanders: so many by their mis∣deeds doe purchase infamous and ill names, as Nero for his beastlinesse to be termed the Beast of Rome; Tamber∣laine for his tyrannie, The wrath of God, and Attila for his crueltie, The scourge of God, &c. As it grieueth a Father to see his Sonne deadly sicke, or irrecuperably ouermatched in fight with his enemy: so it grieueth any good nature to heare himselfe ill spoken of, or to heare his wife and daughters termed dishonest. Iouianus Pontanus de fortitudine, lib. 2. cap. 5.
As many Christians abstaine from much mischiefe, least after this life, Hell should bee their inheritace: so Tiberius Caesar kept himselfe from many outrages and misdemeanors; after death an ill name should follow him. Erasmus in Epistola ante Suetoni∣um Tranquillum. Albeit thou powrest water vpon the hearbe Adyanton, or drownest it in the water, yet it continues dry: so in∣famy, slander, or an ill name will not cleaue to a good man, albeit one endeuour to defame him. A Courtly life. AS the Moone the neerer the Sun it is, the lesse light it hath: so more fruit and dignitie is in them, that are farre off from great Princes. There is a certaine hearbe in India of an especiall sauour, full of little Serpents, whose stings are present death: so the Courts of certaine Princes hath that which delighteth, but vnlesse thou bee wary, they harbour deadly poyson.
Ants doe gnaw that end of the corne which beginneth to sprout, least it be∣come vnprofitable vnto them: so great men that they may alwayes keepe their seruants in seruice and slauerie, doe hold them vnder, least looking vp after liberty, they should forsake the Court through the tediousnesse of seruitude. As it is a very rare thing to see the birds called Halciones; but when they appeare, they either bring or portend faire weather: so Bishops and Cleargie∣men, should seldome come to the Courts of Princes, but either to preach manners, or appease tumults. There is a kind of pulse called Cracca, which Culuers take such de∣light in, that hauing once tasted of it, they cannot afterwards be driuen from that place: so they that haue once tasted of the honey and honour of the Court, can neuer bee driuen from the Court. Plin. lib. 16. cap. 16. A Mule ingendered of an Horse and an Asse, is neither Horse nor Asse: so some whilest they would bee both Courtiers and Prelats, are neither. Strange it is, that the sound eye
viewing the sore, should not be dimme that he that handeth pitch should no be defiled: so is it strange that they tha continue in the Court, should not bee infected. Nylus breedeth the precious stone, and the poysoned Serpent, and as in all riuers there is some fish, and some frogs; and as in all gardens there bee some flowers, some weeds; and as in all trees, there some blossoms, some blasts: so the Court may as well nou∣rish vertuous Matrones, as the lewd Minion: Courtiers. AS the Star Artopylax is brightest, yet setteth soonest: so Courtiers gloris being most gorgeous, are dasht with sudden ouerthrowes. As the Camelion turneth himselfe into the likenesse of euery obiect: so Courtiers as Aristippus that fawnde vpon Dionysius, ayme their conceits at their Kings humor, if he smile, they are in their iolity, if frowne, their plumes fall like Peacockes feathers.
The Indian Torteises in a calme doe delight to floote aloft in the noone-Sunne with all their backe bare aboue water, vntill their shels (hauing forgot themselues) bee so parched with the heate of the Sunne, that they cannot get vnder water, and so they swimming aboue water, become a prey vnto fishes: so some allured with hope of great matters, doe thrust themselues into the Courts of Princes, and are so lulled a slepe with the pleasures of the Court, that they cannot forsake it when they would, and betake them∣selues to their wonted rest. Plin. lib. 9 cap. 10. As the hearbe Heliotropium is car∣ried about with the Sunne, and wither soeuer it moueth, thither the hearbe turneth his head: so Courtiers which way soeuer their King doth becke, thither they bend. Plin. 18. cap. 24. & 27. eodem lib. The Crocodile sometimes liueth vp∣on the land, and sometimes in the water; shee layeth her egges vpon the land, and seeketh her prey in the water: so some are both Courtiers Ecclesiasti∣call
persons, but in both places very pestilent fellowes. Conradus Lycost∣henes Rubeaquensis. As the Adament cannot draw Iron, if the Diamond lye by it: so vice can∣not allure the Courtier, if vertue bee retained. Kings. AS the Leopard by reason of his sweete sauour doth allure wilde beasts vnto him, and so doth destroy them: so the Courts of Princes I know not what inticing allurements they haue, that draw men into destruction. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 27. As the hearbe heliotropium doth alwayes looke toards the Sunne, and when it is hid doth gather in the flower: so many to the Kings becke bend their endeuours, and to what thing soeuer they see him inclined, to that they addresse themselues. Plin. lib. 18. cap. 27. As the crocking of frogs beyond their wont doeth prognosticate an imminent tempest: so when the speech of euill
men is of most force with Princes, and good men are silenced, then the con∣fusion of their estate is at hand. As the dogges of Malta are especi∣ally delighted in among the rich and delicate women of that Ile: so effemi∣nate Princes doe greatly set by flat∣terers, who both speake and doe all things according to their humours. Plin. lib. 3. cap. vltimo. That which oyle is vnto flyes, em∣mots, and to other insect and entailed creatures: that is flattery vnto foolish Princes. Those being annointed with oyle doe dye, these by flattery and assentation of lawbackes are drawne to destruction, and they draw their common-wealth into the same pre∣dicament. Plin. lib. 11. cap. 19. As a vine except thou prune it, doeth largely extend it selfe abroad, em∣bracing and enfolding all things in her armes: so an ambitious Prince is al∣wayes encroching vpon his neigh∣bours, except hee bee now and then curbed. As it is dangerous to call vp Deuils, because if there bee an errour in any
thing, it is committed with great ieo∣pardy; for they say that Tullus Hosti∣lius was troken with a thunderbolt, because hee endeuouring by Numa books to call downe Iupiter, had done some things vnskilfully: so it is dange∣rous to conuerse with Princes, or with estates of ouerthwart conditions, be∣cause they being offended at any small matter, doe vtterly ouerthrow a man. Plin. lib. 2. cap. 55. & lib. 28. cap. 2. As the counters of arithmeticians are, sometimes in account worth many thousands, and sometimes worth no∣thing: so the friends of Kings some∣times can doe any thing, and some∣times displeasure being taken they can doeiust nothing. Plut. As a temperate aire doth make the earth fruitfull, and an vngentle climate doth cause sterility; so the fauour and benignity of a Prince, doth stirre vp and reuiue honest studies, but auarice and currishnesse, doth extinguish and kill the Artes. Idem. As the load-stone doth draw vnto it all Iron, but the Aethiopian load-stone doeth draw another load-stone vnto it:
o the King carieth the people, whither e lifteth: but a great King draweth lso other kings vnto him. As other beasts leuell their lookes t the countenance of the Lyon, and irds make wing as the Eagle flyes: so Regis ad arbitrium totus componitur rbis. If Saul kill himselfe, his armour earer, will doe the like. Such beefe, such broth; such lips, uch lettice: so such Lords, such lay∣men. In Traians time all men studied ustice, in what he was iust. In Octaius dayes each one would be a Poet, be∣cause he delighted in Poesie. As a bridle mastereth an horse; and a sterne the ship: so a King be he good or bad, will after him leade all his people. If he serue God, the people will serue him also, if the King blaspheme, his subiects will doe the like. Cornelius feared God, so did all his houshould. Diues cruel, & so are all his houshould. A Kingdome. MAny in outward shew seeme glo∣rious all which glory a curst
wife at home turneth into sorrow: so a Kingdome seemeth to bring all content with it, yet it is well knowne that Crownes haue cares, and that a courtly life is a miserable splendour. Plutarchus. As Venus Court cannot brooke a iuall: so a Kingdome cannot abide a compeere; according to the english Hexameter; Dame Veus and King∣domes can no riuality suffer. As it is dangerous to transplant old : so innouation in a Kingdome, that hath long continued after one manner, is full of perill. Plut. The hand is not the weaker, because it is diuided into fingers, but fuller of agility to labour: so in a Kingdome the businesses are better done, which are imparted to many. Idem. They that willingly goe into a riuer, are nothing at all hurt, but they that fall in by chance, are greatly astoni∣shed: so they that aduisedly come to the gouernment of a Kingdome, doe moderatly sway their empire, but they that rashly intrude themselues into it, afterwards repent themselues. Idem.
Boyfterous winds doe most of all shake the highest towres; the higher the place is, the sooner and sorer is the fall; the tree is euer weakest towards the top; in greatest charge, are greatest cares; in largest Seas, are sorest tem∣pests; enuie shooteth at high markes: so a Kingdome is more easily got then kept. As Britaine would not containe Porrex and Ferrex; and as the same Kingdome could not hold Belinus and Brennus: so Thebes could not containe Eteocles and Polynices, nor Rome hold Romulus and Remus: As Iugurth could not tolerate his Brethren Hiempsal and Adherbal to haue part of his Kingdome: so Amulius would not suffer his Brother Numitor to haue any participation of gouern∣ment with him. Princes. AS they that neither eate nor wash, but by the prescription of the Phy∣sition, doe not enioy health: so they that referre all things to thoigement
of the Prince, they make him more Lordly, then the City is willing hee should bee, so that nothing can be done rightly except the Prince will it so. As the King of the World doth re∣gard great affaires, leauing small mat∣ters to fortune, as Euripedes saith: so a Prince should not bee exercised but in great and serious businesse. First it is necessary that the rule or square bee right and straight it selfe, and then it may direct other things that are applyed vnto it: so first it is necessary that a Prince wants faults himselfe, and then that hee prescribe lawes vnto others. Plut. If you put the hearbe Eruggium in∣to the mouth of a goate, when shee stayeth, then all the rest doe stay, vntill the Shepheard pull out the hearbe: so the manners and conditions of a Prince are disseminated among the people after a wonderful manner. Idem. The Cybind maketh such deadly warre with the eagle, that they fighting together, are oftentimes taken vp for a prey: so Princes making mortall warre betweene themselues, are now
and then subuerted of somethird one. As it is prodigious that many Suns should appeare: so also is it, that there should be many Monarches, Princes or Emperous. Plin. lib. 2. cap. 31. As the Sunne is not one to a poore man, and another to a rich man, but common alike to all: so a Prince ought not to respect the person, but the matter. As God when he seeth all things, yet is like to one that seeth nothing: so a Prince ought to bee ignorant in no∣thing, and yet to dissemble many things. As magitians doe promise prodigiou things, that they may allure the cre∣dulous people vnto them: so Princes doe present great hopes vnto their subiects, that they may make them more obedient vnto them. As a vine although it be the noblest of all trees, yet needeth the supportati∣on of reeds, props, and of other vn∣fruitfull trees: so princes, potentates, and great Scholers neede the helpe of inferiour persons. The Lyon is feared of all other beasts,
and yet feareth the crowning and combe of a cocke: so great princes are compelled sometimes to feare the slanders and reproaches of inferiour people. A prop if it be not strongly set in the ground, falleth downe, and ouer∣throweth whatsoeuer leaneth on it: so a Prince except he stedfastly sticke vn∣to his maker, soone bringeth both himselfe, and they that consent vnto him, to vtter ruine. Cypriamus lib. duo∣decem abusionum. As it is the part of the Sun to illumi∣nate the world with his beames so it is the part of a Prince to succour and com∣miserate them that be in distresse. A∣gapetus Diaconus de offico principis. As Dogges doe watch flockes of sheepe, not that they feare themselues, but the flocke: so a Prince or a King ought not to liue for himselfe, but for his people. Plut. in Moralibus. As hee is not onely worthy of one punishment alone, that infecteth with poyson a publicke fountaine, of which all doe drinke: so is hee most hurtfull that infecteth the Princes minde with
wicked opinions, whence so much harme redoundeth vnto men. Idem de institutione principis. A Prince is nothing else, but a Phy∣sition of the common-wealth. But it is not enough for a Physition that he haue skilfull ministers about him, vnlesse he himselfe be very skilfull and vigilant: so it is not enough for a Prince, if hee haue honest Magistrats, vnlesse he bee very honest himselfe, by whom they may bee both chosen and amended. ibidem. There is nothing higher then God: so it is meete that a Prince should bee exceeding farre remoued from the base cares of peasants, and from sordid and filthy affections. Ibidem. As the Sunne after the setting doth not presently hide the light: so a Prince endued with wisdome, yea after he de∣parteth out of life, doth leaue behind him peace and iustice, and good go∣uernment, which doth endure till ty∣rany ouerthrow it. Hector Pintus in cap. 27. Ezechil. He that would see whether a fish bee corrupted, doth looke vpon the head;
for this doth first putrifie: so the Prince being corrupted, the rest are easily peruerted. Wilt thou know the state of the common-wealth, behold the Prince. Idem in cap. pri. Esay. In the vpper region of the aire there are no clouds, stormes, and thunder are engendered more low: so a Prince ought to be of a setled and quiet minde, perturbations are more tollerable in men more obscure, but in Princes, they are altogether intollerable, Idem. in cap. 48. As a Physition doeth not vse one medicine for all diseases, no not in one disease, if so it doeth vary, but obser∣uing the intensions, remissions, reple∣tions, vacuations, and mutation of causes, doth vary many things for health, now experimenting this, now that: so a Prince ought to haue variety in his gouernment, he must be one in peace, and another in warre, he must beare himselfe one way to a few, and another way to a multitude. &c, Phil lib. de Ioseph. A Physition, nor a Pylot are chosen by chance, but for their skill: so neither
is a Prince or Ruler to bee chosen by hap-hazard, but for his wisedome, and therefore wise Moses doeth not re∣member in any place that rulers were chosen by lot, but hee had rather that they should bee brought in by voyces. Idem lib. de creatione principis. As a ship cannot be without a Pylot, nor an army without a Captaine: so a City cannot bee without a Prince or Ruler, least the mighty should deuour the meaner sort, and the strong the weake. Chrysost. hom 6. ad pop. An∣tioch. As the colour of Iacobs rods were, such was the colour of the Cattell, which were bred of the Sheepe con∣ceiuing in the sight of the rods: so as the actions of the Prince are, such are wont to bee the cogitations of the sub∣iects. Iacob is the Prince, his workes are the rod, his subiects the sheepe, co∣gitations the conceauings. Hecto Pint. in cap. 17. Ezechiel. As a man depriued of his eyes a bideth in darknesse: so a common-wealth be∣reaued of iust & wise Princes, continu∣eth in black pitchy horror. Idem in c. 38
As a Captaine is the eye of his Army: so a Prince is the eye of the common-wealth. For this cause Demas an excel∣lent oratour, when hee saw great A∣lexander dead, he compared the Army of the Macedonians to a Cyclope. Ibidem. A gouernour of a Ship doth seke for the best Mariners, and an Architect for the skilfullest builders: so a Prince ought to purchase vnto himselfe those, that are the fittest for gouernment. Plut in Moralibus. As vnskilfull Caruers doe thinke that the beautifullest picture, which is the greatest: so many Princes by their pride and disdaine doe thinke them∣selues great Potentats. ibidem. As the blnded Cyclop stretched out his hand euery way, but with no certaine aime: so a great Prince, that wanteth wisdome; taketh euery thing in hand with great hurly burley, but with no iudgement. Ibidem. Neither the greatnesse of the Ship, nor the price of the wares, nor the number of passengers, doeth make a good pylot euer the prouder, but the
more diligent: so a good Prince, the more that hee gouerneth, hee ought to be the more diligent, not the more insolent. The education of a Prince. AS hee is more grieuously to be pu∣nished that casts deadly poyson into a fountaine, whence all drinke, then he that onely casts it into a cup: so doe they more offend, that corrupt the disposition of a Prince, then they that corrupt a priuate man. Plut. As Cities were wont to honour sa∣crifices, because they craued of God a common good for all: so a good Master of a Prince is to bee honoured, who maketh the Prince such an one, that he may become profitable to all. Idem. As an Artisan doth more willingly make that harp, by which he knoweth Amphion is to builde the walles of Thebes, then that, by which Thales is to appease the commotion of Sparta: so a Phylosopher doth more willingly take paines to frame the wit of a Prince,
that may profit the whole World, then of a priuate man, that pockets vp knowledge for himselfe. Idem. A good Prince. AS God hath placed in Heauen the Sunne to bee a most noble and ex∣cellent patterne of his beautie: so hath hee placed in the common-wealth a wise, iust and liberall Prince, to bee a representer of his vertues, Plut. As a Physition, when he hath drawn out much corrupt bloud, doth minister vnto his patient wholesome meate: so a Prince when he hath taken away lewd and vngodly persons, doth make much of them that be good. idem. As a Musitian doth not presently cast away nor break his irring strings, but by extension and remission doth bring them vnto harmony: so a Prince ought to amend offenders, and not presently to take them out of the World. ibidem. As we owe more vnto that Neptune, that hath brought vs home most pre∣cious marchandize: so wee owe more
to that Prince, who bestoweth his paines for the publike good, and not for his owne pleasures. Seneca. If the planets of the world doe but a little stay or erre, it is done to the great hurt of all: so if a Prince goe astray, or bee slothfull, it is to the great danger of his state and common-wealth. Senea. Only the King of Bees hath no sting, or at the least vseth it not, besides hee is greater in body, and more beauti∣full in shew, but of lesser wings then the other Bees: so it is meete that a Prince be•e most gentle and curteous, and neuer to bee farre from his domini∣os. Plinius lib. 21. cap. 17. The King of Bees doth not labour himselfe, but walking and flying about others, doth as it were exhort them to labour: so a Prince not by labour, but aduice and commandement ought to profit his. ibidem. The Sun is most pleasant vnto them, that can behold it: so is the Prince to them, that loue iustice. As a Lyon doth sooner tyrannize o∣uer a man then a woman, but toucheth
not children, except famine constraine him, and spareth the suppliant and prostrate: so a Prince and those that be mighty ought to pardon inferiours, and to make tryall of their strength vpon them, whom it is prayse-worthy to o∣uercome. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 16. As a new seene Comet doth portend to mortall men either great good, or great harme: so a new Prince doth bring safety to his subiects, if he bee good, but ruine and destruction if he be euill. Plin. lib. 2. cap. 26. As the Sun with his heate cherisheth the Earth: so a good Prince with his bountie cherisheth Schollers and learning. An euill Prince. AS the lightning is first seene, be∣fore the sound of the thunder bee heard; and as the bloud is seene before the wound: so an euill Prince some∣times condemneth, before the party be aained. Plut. As one fault cannot amend another: o a foolish and a wicked Prince cannot amend his people. Ibidem.
As the dog-starre is pestilent to e∣uery body: so the power of an euill Prince doth hurt all. Harts when they set their cares, are of a very good hearing, but when they let them downe, then they are deafe: so euill Princes heare a farre off any thing that pleaseth them, but if it bee o∣therwise, they vnderstand not, albeit thou shoutest in their eares. When frogs croke aboue their wont, they presage a tempest approaching: so when the speech of euill men preuails most with Princes, then confusion is at hand. As an eclipse of the Sun doth bring great hurt to mankind: so an errour of the King, although it bee small, doth worke great disturbance in the publike state. Plinus lib. 2. cap. 10. A Vine except it bee puned, doth largely spread it selfe abroad, embra∣cing and infolding all things with her banches: so an ambitious Prince is al∣wayes encroaching vpon his neigh∣bours except he bee restrained.
Empire. AS hee ought not to meddle with a lute, that is vnskilfull in Musicke: so hee ought not to take Empire and rule vpon him, that is not endued with wisdome and prudence. As of fire and earth, the world is compounded, as of two necessary ele∣ments, according to Plato, the earth yeelding solidity, and the fire heate and forme: so great Empires are not com∣passed nor conquered, vnlesse prowesse bee mingled with successe and fortune, and one bee an helpe vnto other. Plutarchus: They that hunt beasts, do put on the case of a Hart, they that fowle, vse feathered cloathes; and euery one takes heed that hee doe not appeare vnto wild Buls in purple or red garments; or vnto an Elephant in white apparell, because by these colours they are pro∣uoked to wrath and rage: so hee that would tame a fierce and barbarous Nation, hee must for the time apply himselfe vnto them both in maners and apparell. idem.
As thou canst not tell, whether a vessell bee sound or no, vnlesse thou powrest water into it: so neither canst thou know a man, except thou com∣mittest Empire and rule vnto him. idem: Power. AS he that rideth a young Colt with a naughtie Bridle, is quickly set besides the saddle: so he that indeuou∣reth to subdue the common people, be∣ing not sufficiently furnished with power, is quickly cast from his do∣minion. Plut. As the Sun when it is at the highest neare vnto the Septentrionall pole, seemeth then least to moue: so the greater the power is, the more the rashnesse of the minde is to be restrai∣ned. Idem. As ill dreames doe somewhat for the time distract the minde, but doe no∣thing else: so euill men, but without power, doe little hurt. Idem. As the feathers in a Birds wing be∣ing cut, doe in time grow againe: so
doth power, except it bee continually curbed and repressed. If either Castor or Pollux appeare a∣lone, it presageth hurt, but if they shew themselues ioyntly together, it foretelleth good lucke: so it is meete that power should bee separated from wisdome, for if it bee, it is very pesti∣lent. As Saturne, who holdeth the highest place among the seauen Planets, is very slowly moued about in his spheare: so it is requisite that they that bee in great place, and haue great power bee not rash and timerous. Plin. lib. 2 cap. 6. As some lightning doth melt brasse and Iron, but doth not dissolue soft wax: so the diuine power, and Kingly might doth rage against withstanders, but doth spare them that yeeld and giue place. As raging thunderbolts doe vainely teare in peeces barren mountaines to no purpose: so foolish strength doth spend it selfe vpon those things which it need not. As neither Egypt by reason of the heate, nor Scythia by reason of the
cold, doe feele any lightnings, or thunderclaps: so either great power, or extreme pouerty doth make safe from reproaches. A Common-wealth. AS the temper of the world doth consist of contrary elements after a wonderfull harmony: so a Common-wealth doth stand-by the diuers ende∣uors of men. As a ship is ioyned together by many strokes, by many nayles and pinnes, and then doth stand a certaine time till the ioynts bee well setled to∣gether, and afterwards doth cut the Seas: so a Common-wealth is estab∣lished by much labour, but taking increase and growth in time, it yeeld∣eth a quiet and peaceable life vnto the inhabitants. Plut. A gouernour of a ship doth some∣thing with his owne hands, and some∣what by others: so in a Common-wealth, one ought not to haue all of∣fices ingrossed in his hands, but one ought to haue one, and another,
another, for things are done better which are done by the aduices and iudgements of many. Idem. There was a time appointed vnto the Vestalles, first, wherein they should learne; secondly, wherein they should exercise that they had learned; and thirdly, wherein they should teach others; The same thing Dianaes Priests at Ephesus did: so they are to doe, that are to take the gouernment of a com∣mon-wealth vpon them. idem. As Wine doth first serue and obey the drinker, but by little and little mixing it selfe with the bloud in the veines, doth rule ouer the drinker, and makes him a drunkerd: so hee that comes to the gouernment of a Cōmon-wealth, at the first applyeth himselfe to the humours of the people, but af∣terwards hee draweth them to his purpose, and makes them his subiects and vassals. ibidem. As they that haue nothing to doe at home walke idly abroad: so many moath-eaten Polititians, because they haue no priuate busines of their owne, they pry into and prate of Common-wealth matters. idem.
As Spring and Autumne doe en∣danger our bodies, by reason of change: so all innouations doe offend and hurt Common-wealth. When as brute creatures doe leaue their ordinarie course of nature, it por∣tends a tempest; that is, when Cor∣morants, and Gulles, doe forsake the Seas and Riuers, when Antes hide themselues, or cast out their egges, and when wormes craule out of the earth: so when the wicked are audaci∣ous, the religious mute, the people wise, the Princes dotards, and the Priests together by the cares of earthly matters, then it presageth the ruine of Commo-wealth. As the life of all the members pro∣ceedeth frō the heart: so from the Com∣mon-wealth proceedeth the common good of euery one, and of the safty of it dependeth the safety all. Geminianus, li. 6. de homine, &  membris. cap. 57. A Captaine. AS the purge Elleborum raiseth all within, and first goeth out it selfe:
so a valiant Captaine exhorting his Souldiours to be valorous, first issueth vpon the enemy himselfe, as Herophi∣lus saith in Plinie. As a Prince is the eye of a Common-wealth: so a Captaine is the eye of the armie. Hector Pintus in cap. 38. E∣zechiel. As a Pylot is chosen for his skill in nauigation: so a Captaine ought to bee made choyce of for his expertnesse in feates of armes. Warre. AS in admirable cunning, and cu∣rious workemanship, but vnpro∣fitable, there is great prayse giuen vn∣to the workman, by whose art it is made, then vnto the King by whose cost it is effected: so the greatest glory of war consisteth in the hired souldiour, by whose industry the battel is stroken, but the least part doth returne vnto the Kings, who also hire the souldiers with other mens money. As Herostratus, an obscure and base man, could easily burne the temple of
Ephesian Diana, which was two hun∣dred and twenty yeares a building of all Asia, at the costs of so many Kings and beautified with the labours and cunning of so many excellent worke∣men: so it is a most easie matter to ouerthrow and subuert famous and admired Cities, but very hard and difficult to re-edifie and raise them vp againe. As the wings of birds being clipt, in time doe grow out againe: so warlike forces doe continually gather head, ex∣cept thou often curbe them and keepe them vnder. Dragons sucking the bloud of E∣lephants, doe kill them, and they in like manner beig drunken with their bloud, are squeesed in peeces by the fall of the Elephant, ad so dye: so oftentimes in warre, both parts doe destroy, and are destroyed, and both sides doe endamage, & are endamaged. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 12. A Plough-man except he be crooked, and bending to his labour, hee doth neuer make cleane worke, nor furrow his land handsomly, as the people of the
old world were wont to say: to a Soul∣diour, except he can sweare, swagger, robbe, rauish maides, and defloure matrones, and play the villaine in graine, is scarcely counted a man at armes in these corrupt times. Aristotle writeth in his ninth booke de Historia animalium, that the Cybind and the Eagle doe so vehemently con∣tend and striue, that oftentimes clasping together in the aire, they fall downe vnto the earth, and are taken vp aliue of shepheards: so now and then it com∣meth to passe, that whilest princes pre∣uersly exercise mortall and deadly warres betweene themselues, an other inuader comes and subuerts them both. Victorie: A Lyon is easily taken, if a cloake or a garment bee cast before his eyes, otherwise hee is inexpugnable: so it is easie to get the victory ouer the strongest, if his disposition be knowne. As a Lyon doth more rage against a man, then against a women, but toucheth not Children, except hunger
constraine him, and spareth the sup∣pliant and prostrate: so the mightie ought to pardon the weake, and to trie their strength against them, whom it is glorious to ouercome. Lawes. AS that rule ought to be straight, by which other things are squared: so it is necessary that a Law-maker bee without vices himselfe, that hee may prescribe right Lawes vnto others. Plutarchus. As crowes breake thorow spiders webs, but flies are entangled: so Lawes doe vexe the comminaltie, but are broken without punishment of mighty and great persons. Anacharsis. As the best remedies and medicines proceed from the worst diseases: so good Lawes are made of euill manners. As in a Lute, harmonie is not made by the touch of one string, but all the strings are to bee stroken numerously and harmoniously: so in the vertue of our minds the obseruation of one Law is not enough for vs vnto saluation, but
all are to bee kept with great diligence. Chysostomus. hom. 36. de virtutibus & vitijs. As where there are many Physitions▪ there are many diseases: so where there are many Lawes, there are many vi∣ces. Arcesilaus apud Laertium lib. 4. cap. 6. As a strong wall doth defend a Ci∣tie: so doth good Lawes defend com∣mon-wealths. Dion orat. 74. De lege. Saylers that take notice of Land∣markes, doe safeliest come to a hauen: so they that liue according to Law, doe the safeliest passe ouer the course of their liues, and at the last finde a quiet and peaceable harbour. ibidem. As he is not a man, who wants rea∣son: so that will not long bee a City, which is not gouerned with Lawes▪ Idem orat. 36. Borysthenica. Where thou seest aboundance of Apothecaries, and affluence of drugs, there thou mayst deeme that there are many diseases: so where thou seest in∣numerable Lawes, there it is certaine, that there the men are exceeding wicked and irreligious. Aristot. apud Stobaeum.
As the body doth come to naught without the soule: so a Citie is subuer∣ted, that is gouerned by no Lawes. De∣mosthenes apud Maxim. serm. 58. As a perfect Grammarian hath no neede of precepts for his Art: so a per∣fect iust man hath no neede of any law. Philo. lib. 1. Allegoriarum legis. As the soule is the life of the body: so the Law is the life of a Citie. Stobeus sermone 41. As diseases were before remedies for them: so euill misdemeanours were be∣fore the constitution of good Lawes. Philippus Beroaldus, in oratione habita in enarratione Verrinarum. Lawyers. AS one Goasehauke is enough for one shire: so one Lawyer is e∣nough for a City; and therefore the City of Basil, maintaines but one only Lawyer, as Peter Ramus saith in his Basilia. As the Switzers and Logicke fight for euery body: so doe Lawyers.
As Sumners liue of the sinnes of the people: so doe Lawyers. As Arcesilaus said, that where there were many Physitions, there were many diseases: so Plato said, that Common-wealth was miserable, where the multitude of Lawers did abound. Therefore very well saith our English Satirest. Wo to the weale where many lawyers be, For sure there is much store of malady. Sheepe that goe for shelter to a bush, leaue their fleece behinde them, and re∣turne naked: so men that goe for re∣dresse of wrong to Lawyers, leaue their wealth behind them, and returne monilesse. As lecherous and luxurious persons doe spend themselues vpon whoores: so enuious and malicious people doe consume them selues vpon Lawyers. As a balance stoopeth to that side, whence it receiueth most, waight: so Lawyers fauour him most, that giueth most. As a Horse-leach is an exceeding waster of the humours of that body it
seaseth vpon: so Lawyers are exceeding consumers of that mans wealth they deale with; whereupon a Lawyer is called in Iuuenall, Hirudo forensis, ab Hirudine, a Horse-leach or bloud-sucker. Nomen habet à re. Conueniunt ebus nomina saepè suis. As our wickednes maketh a Lawyer necessary: so necessity maketh him ho∣norable; and therefore he is not in the deepest truth to stand in ranke either with the Diuine, Historian or Phylo∣opher. Sir Philip Sidney in his Apology for Poetry. Many Tauernes and Tphouses doe ourish intemperancy and incontinen∣y: so many Lawyers, and Pettifogger doe not only kindle, but also maintaine quarrels, discord and varience: A few great potentates in a state doe well, but a multitude of them are not o conuenient: so a few Lawyers are olerable, but the abundant rabble of hem are as intolerable, as the multi∣ude of Fryers were. Flies feede vpon vlcers: so Lawyers pon discord. Vultures prey vpon dead carion: so
Lawyers vpon dissensious and discor∣diours persons. A Iudge. AS hee that shooteth an arrow di∣recteth it vnto the marke, neithe doth he ayme it gone, short, or wide so a iust Iudge will doe, neither wil accept the person in iudgment. Basilu in principium prouerbiorum. As a iust paire of scales, is neith corrected by a true ballance, no iudged by a false: so a iust iudge i neither examined of the righteous, no rightly reprehended of the wicked Epictet. apud Maximum serm. 5. apud Stobaeum serm. 5. de iustitia. As a line drawne diameter wise in geometricall figure doth equally diuid one side from another: so a Iudge mu be partiall to neither side. As they that would see more sharp and certainly, doe shut one of their eye so a Iudge shall more directly vnderstand the truth, if hee hath no respe of persons. As the Sunne is not one to a poor
man, and other to a rich man, but a∣ike common to all: so a Iudge must not respect the person but the matter. Iudgement. AS expounders of the Scriptures, doe open the mysteries of them, as much as they can: so of hard and ab∣struse matters wee must iudge warely and circumspectly. Plut. Straight things being put in the water, seeme to be crooked and broken: so when wee iudge amisse of matters, the fault is in vs, not in the matter. Sene: As Tymanthes, who pourtrayed Iphigenia, expressed all the affections and passions of others, but couered with a vaile Agamemnons countenance: so some things are better left to euery ones iudgement and consideration, then ex∣pressed with words. Magistrates. AS Physitions prouide for the health of the body: so Ma∣gistrates proued for the health of the
City: Philo libro de Ioseph. As fire of his owne nature, retaines heate, and heats things moued vnto it: so a Magistrate ought not onely to be full of iustice himselfe, but also to administer it vnto others, Idem lib. de Iudice. As thunderbolts fall to the danger of few, but to the feare of all: so Ma∣gistrates ought more to errifie then to hurt. Seneca lib. 3. de ira Dei. Alexander caused Bucephalus being old to be caried of other Horses to the battaile, that being fresh and vntired▪ hee might the better serue his purpose in the warre: so we are to vse the diligence and industry of old and ancient Ma∣gistrats; we are to rid them of as much labour, as wee can, that they may be reserued for necessarie vses. Plut. in Moralibus. A stage-player doth so adde gesture vnto his part, that he doth not passe be∣yond his lynes: so hee that taketh Ma∣gistracie vpon him, must not passe the priscript of the Law, or of his King. Ibidem. As longing women doe greedily
deuoure hurtfull meates, and a little after doe cast them vp againe: so the common people, either through foo∣lishnesse or for want of better, doe elect any Maiestrates, and afterwards doe reiect them. ibidem. They that saile in the same ship, and they that warre in the same tents, ought to helpe one another: so ought they that beare office in a common wealth. ibidem: They that haue safely sayled by the Syrtes, and shipwracke themselues by the Hauen, performe no great matter: so they that laudably carry themselues in one or two offices, and afterwards faile in the chiefest, deserue small com∣mendations▪ As the Seas are such, as the winds are that tosse and turmoile them: so the multitude is such, as the magistrates are that rule them. As a Physition ought to seeke for the profit of his patient, and not for his owne: so ought a Magistrate, to seeke for the publike good, and not for his priuate gaine. Patrius Senensi lib. 2. tit. 1. de institutione regis.
A Painter doth not onely adorne with his pencell the eyes and face, but beautifieth with variety of colours the whole picture: so a good Magistrate doth not onely order one kinde of peo∣ple in his common-wealth, but bring∣eth happinesse to the whole state. ibid. He that learneth musicke, doth spoile his first instruments: so an ignorant and vnskilfull Magistrate doth great hurt to those he rules ouer. Erasmus in Similibus. As that medicine is better, that cureth the corrupted parts of the body, then that which rots them off: so that Magistrate is better that correcteth euil Citizens, then he that takes their liues from them. ibidem. Change of aire and dyet, doth of∣fende: so doth change of Princes and Magistrates, because all innouation bringeth disturbance. ibidem. Corrupt bodies pertaine to the Phy∣sitians cure: so corrupt conditions be∣long to the Magistrates office. De∣mosthenes, de legibus ac earum laudibus, Orat. 2. contra Aristogit.
Vengeance. AS some riuers doe suddainly hide themselues vnder the earth, which neuerthelesse are caried thither, whether they tend: so the vengeance of God although it bee hid, yet at the length it bringeth the offenders into great cala∣mities. Plut. As Physitions doe meete with some diseases before they appeare: so God doth punish some things, that they may not bee done. Idem. As Physitions doe scorch the great toe in the cure of the hyp-gout, and when it paineth in one place, they re∣moue the medicine to another place: so God sometimes casteth vengeance vp∣on the Children, that he may cure and recall the parents. Idem. As God is angry at him imitateth his thunder and lightning, and casteth him into hell, as hee did Salmoneus: so hee heapeth vengeance vpon the heads of the proude and arrogant, that aemulate his greatnesse, but doe not imitate his goodnesse. Idem. As a father seeing his child willing to cut a thing, doth take the knife and
cut it himselfe: so reason taking ven∣gance out of the hands of wrath, doth profitably chastice. idem. He that taught vs to shoote, did not forbid vs to dart, but forbad vs to ayme amisse: so punishment and vengance is not forbidden, but it is to bee done opportunely and in place. ibidem. Certaine remedies are more grieuous, then the disease it selfe, that it is easier to dye, then so to be cured, as to sucke out the bloud from the fresh bleeding wounds of dying sword-players: so it is sometimes safer to suffer an iniurie, then to reuenge it with a greater dis∣commoditie; it is better to haue peace, although it be not very iust and equall, then to bring vpon vs warre with a thousand calamities. Punishment. AS they that are pined away with a long consumption, doe not es∣cape death, but doe dye lingringly: so they that are not forthwith punished, doe not scape scot-free, but are tortured with a long punishment which is bred
through a feareful expectation of it. Plu. Slothfull saylers doe lye lazely snorting in the hauen in faire weather, and afterwards when the winds be aloft are constrained to saile with danger: so he that punisheth not when he is quiet in mind, somntimes is forced to punish when he is angry. idem. He that taught vs to shoote, did not forbid vs to dart, but did forbid vs to erre and wander from the marke: so punishment is not forbidden, but is conueniently to bee done in time and place. As the gall of the Hien and the spawne of a Sea-calfe, and other parts of hurtfull beasts are very effectuall in medicine against great diseases: so God vseth now and then the wickedest ty∣rants for the punishment of vices. Plut. As of a Viper, a Crocodile, and o∣ther poysonfull beasts, Physitions doe make remidies against poyson: so pu∣nishment doth either driue or recall many from vices. For the biting of an Aspe there is no remedy, but that the bitten part bee cut off: so some vices are onely
healed by the punishment of death. As a tree lophed of her branches, doth spring againe, but being plucked vp by the rootes, doth no more grow: so vice, if it bee altogether taken away by punishment, doth no more en∣crease. Plinius lib. 22. cap. 13: Storkes, when they flye into the field called Pythonis Come, a place of Asia, doe teare in peeces that commeth Storke that commeth last, that being thus punished, the rest are at quiet: so he vices and enormites of a multitude are to bee corrected and cured by a publike and solemne punishment of some few or one. As that Physicke is more to be ap∣proued, which doth heale the corrup∣ted parts of the body, then that which doth cut them off: so that Magistrate is better, which by some moderate pu∣nishment doth correct his Citizens, then he, that cuts them off. Banishment. THere bee many meates which are sowre in the mouth, and sharpe in
the Maw, but if thou ingle them with sweete sauces, they yeeld both a plea∣sant tast and wholesome nourishment; diuers colours offend the eyes, yet ha∣uing greene among them, whe the sight: so banishment guided with the rules of Phylosophy, becommeth more tolerable. He that is cold doth not couer him∣selfe with care but with cloathes; hee that is washed in raine dryeth himselfe by the fire, not by his faucy: so he that is banished, ought not with teares to bewaile his hap, but with wisedome to heale his hurt. As Socrates would neither call him∣selfe an Athenian neither a Graecian, but a Citizen of the world: so Plat would neuer accompt him banished, that had the Sun, fire, ayre, water, and earth, that hee had before, where hee felt the winters blast, and the summers blaze, where the same Sunne and the same Moone shined. As all the Athenians dwelt not in Collito, nor euery Corinthian in Grae∣cia, nor all the Lacedemonians in Pita∣nia: so euery man cannot sorgurne in his natiue soyle.
As he that hauing a faire Orchard, seeing one tree blasted, recoumpteth the discommodity of that, and passeth ouer in silence, the fruitfulnesse of the other: so hee that is banished doth al∣wayes lament the losse of his house, and the shame of his exile, not reioycing at the liberty, quietnesse and pleasure he enioyeth by that sweete punishment. The Kings of Persia were deemed happy in that they passed their winter in Babylon; in Media their Summer; and their spring in Susis: so certainely the exile in this may be as happy as any King in Persia, for he may at his le∣sure being at his owne pleasure, leade his winter in Athens, his summer in Naples, and his spring in Argos. The Pine Tree groweth as soone in Pharao as in Ida, the Nightingale singeth as sweetly in the desarts as in the woods of Creete: so a wise man liueth as well being exiled into a farre Country, as in his owne home. The Moone shineth as well at Co∣rinth as at Athens, and the Honny that the Bee gathereth at Mantua is as sweete, as that shee gathereth in Hybla:
so a contented Cosmopolite, though banished from his owne country, may liue as well in an other. As M. Furius Camillus was banished of the ingratefull Romanes: so Bellisa∣rius that valiaunt Captaine was both banished, and his eyes pulled out of Iustinianus. As Alcibiades being banished by the Athenians, became chiefe Captaine of the arme of the Lacedemonians: so Corolas was more beloned of the Volscians among whom hee liued in exile, then of the Romanes with whom he was a Citizen: As Cadmus the King of Thebes was driuen out of the selfe same Citie, which hee had bulded, and dyed old in exile among the Illirians: so Thesus whose famous acts are so blazed abroad through all the world, was driuen out of Athens by the selfe same Citizens, which hee himselfe had placed, and died an old baneshed man in Tyrus. As Solon, who gouerned his Citizens with most golden Lawes, was not∣withstanding exiled by them into Cy∣prus: so Lyurgus, for all his prudent
policie in gonerning the City Sparta, was constrained by the Lacedemonians to lead his life in exile. As Sarcus King of the Molossians, vanquished by Philip King of Macedo∣nia, ending his miserable dayes in exile: so Siphax the great King of Nu∣midia seeing his City taken, and his wife Soponisba in the armes of his mortall foe Masyissa, and that his miserie should bee a trumpet to sound out Scipioes tryumph, ended his life both exiled and imprisoned. Trauailing. AS the wandring stars are not hap∣pier then the fixed starres, because they wander: so a trauailer is not hap∣pier, then hee that strayeth at home, in that he doth trauell. Plut. in Moralibus. If Ants bee excluded their holes, and Bees their hiues, they stray farre abroad: so some if they once goe out of their country, thinke themselues ba∣nished. ibidem. As snailes alwayes carry their houses about with them: so some abhore
to trauell in strange countries: ibidem. As the hearbe Aspalacs liueth no where but in Boetia, where it is bred, but presently dieth if it bee elsewhere transplanted: so many cannot by any meanes liue in a forraine Country, be∣cause they are instructed in no art. E∣rasmus in imilibus. As the beast Tarandus imitateth in the colour of his haire, the colour of all trees, plants, and places hee lyeth vnder, or in: so he shall be more safe, that in trauell imitateth the customes and conditions of that country he tra∣uelleth to. ibidem. As in Africa the south wind is cleere and faire, and the North wind cloudy, against the nature of all other Coun∣tryes; so some with the region doe change their manners and conditions. ibidem. The herbe Empetron, called in Latine Calcifraga, in English Sampier, the nearer the Sea it is, the lesse salt it is, but the further off it is, the salter it is: so some in France resemble Germans, but being in Germany resemble Frenchmen, and the further they are
from a Countrey, the more they re∣semble it. A horse in a Mault-mill, is as farre in the morning as at night, when hee hath done his dayes worke: so many trauellers are as wise, when they goe forth, as when they come home. Many schoole-master are as rich, when they leaue teaching, as when they begin: so are many trauellers, whether you respect crownes in their purses, or knowledge in their minds. As the yong scholler in Athens went to heare Demosthenes eloquence at Co∣rinth, and was intangled with La beautie: so most of our trauailers which pretend to get a smacke of strange language to sharpen their wits, are infected with vaity in following their wills. The bird Acanthis being bred in the Thistles, will lye in the Thistles; the Grashopper being sprong of the grasse, will rather dye then depart from the grasse: so many are so farre from tra∣uelling, that they cannot abide to leaue the sight of the smoake of their owne chimnyes.
As the snaile that crept out of her shell, was turned eft-soones into a toad, and thereby was forced to make a stoole to sit on, disdaining her owne house: so the traueller that stragleth from his owne countrey, is in short time transformed into o monstrous a shape, that he is faine to alter his man∣sion with manners, and to liue where he can, not where he would. No Mosse will sticke to the stone of Sisphus, no grasse hang on the heeles of Mercurie: so no butter will cleaue on the bread of a traueller. As the Eagle at euery flight looseth a feather, which maketh her bald in her age: so the traueller in euery country looseth some fleece, which maketh him a begger in his youth, by buying that with a pound which hee cannot sell a∣gaine for a penny. Repentance. As wines made of good grapes are more wholsome being drawne from their Lees: so those which for a good cause depart their country, are as men of a singular and diuine qualitie to bee embraced of all sorts.
The World. AS a house made to dwell in doth perceiue nothing of it selfe, but is subiect to the lord that made it, and inhabiteth it: so the World perceiuing nothing of it selfe is subiect to God that made it, who made it for his owne vse. Lactantius lib. 2. cap. 6. As a Booke deciphers the minde of the auther: so the World, a written Booke doth witnesse and contestae the glory of God, and his royall maiesty. Basil. hom. 11. exameron. As milke is presently curded: so the World presently was. Iustinus, quaest. 3. earum qu as gentes ponebant Christianis. When wee see an excellent peece of workmanship, wee prayse both the worke and workman: so when we cast our eyes vpon the glorious fabricke of the World, wee should not onely be∣stow commendations vpon it, but also magnifie God, that made it. Theodore∣tus, serm. 3. de prouidentia. When wee heare an instrument of Musicke melodiously tuned, consisting of diuers sounds, of Meanes, Tenours,
Trebles, Countertenours, and Bases, wee know that there is one that doth thus harmoniously order it: so when wee see the concordious disposition of the World, where things inferiour doe not rise against superiour, nor low things against lofty, we are knowne, that it is onely God that doth thus mo∣derate them. Hector Pitus in cap. 1. Ezechiel. When we see in a Citie sundry sorts of people, noble and vulgar, rich and poore, young and old, to liue in loue and peace without iniurying one ano∣ther, we presently iudge that the ruler is iust, mighty and wise: so when wee view the huge masse of the World, and the great concord of so many different things, wee cannot but wonder at the iustice, omnipotence, and wisdome of the creatour & gouernour of them ibid. Although a tree bring forth many branches, yet there is but one roote of all those branches: so in the World, albeit one man doth propagate and produce another, yet there is but one father who hath created all. Chrysost. hom. 43. operis imperfecti.
As God is not to be accused of impo∣tencie, that hee made but one world, and not many: so he cannot be accused of imperfection, that he did not make the World, as soone as he was himselfe, but when he would. Iustinus, in Refu∣tatione responsionis Gentilis ad 3. quaest. Christianorum. An husbandman doth sow in one ground wheate, in another barly, in another, other seeds: so God hath planted immortality in heauen, altera∣tion and change vpon the earth, and in the whole world life, and motion. Tris∣megistus in Pymandro. The loue and vanity of the World. AS the fish Lepo, or Mole, doth sticke vnto Sea rockes: so many men cleaue vnto the World, an con∣temne immortality. Clemens Alexan∣drinus in exhortatione ad gentes. As the same eyes cannot at one time behold heauen and earth: so the loue of the world, and the loue of God can∣not dwell together in one heart. Cypri∣anus de 12. Ascenssonibus.
As Children doe more admire and loue a Baby of cloues, then a beauti∣full woman: so worldlings doe more esteeme the pelfe and trash of this world, then the pleasures & treasure of heauen. Chrysost. hom. 80. in Ioannem. It is in vaine to powre water into a sieue; to snatch at the flame of fire; and to beae the aire: so the loue of the world is vaine, and extreame vanitie. Idem hom. 77. in Matth. As pitch doth pollute; as lime doth detaine; as a snare doth enthrall: so doth the loue of the world pollute, de∣taine and inthrall. Dugo Philonius de scientiabene moriendi. As the beautie of a whore doth al∣lure: so the garishnesse of the world doth entice. Isaac presbytor de mundi contemptu, cap. 2. As the Sea doth one while cast shell fishes, crab fishes, and weeds vpon the shoare without water, and by and by doth sup them in againe, and carry them into the deepe: so the World doth sometimes banish vs, and sometimes receiue vs, and when wee thinke our selues safe on the shoare, then we per∣ceiue
our selues deceyued, and tossed with variety of calamities. Hector Pintus in cap. 3. Ezechiel. The contempt of the World. SWallowes, as saith Solinus, doe not build their nests in ruinous houses, or in ill-built edifices: so nei∣ther should men build their Mansions and Tabernacles in this ruinous and tottering world. Hector Pintus in cap. 10. Ezechiel. As they that liue in a ship, are nei∣ther fed, nor cloathed of it, but haue their maintenance from else where: so the soules of Christians liuing in this world take their celestiall food, and spirituall cloathing, not from this World, but from Heauen. Macarius, hom. 44. A Child when he is hungry, setteth naught by his costly iewels, and sump∣tuous apparell, but oely setteth his mind vpon his Mothers dug, whereby he may be refreshed and nourished: so a Christian ought to contemne all the
enticements of the world, and wholy repose himselfe vpon God. Idem hom. 45 Children in their non-age delight in trifles, but when they grow men, they contemne such vanities: so worldlings, being ignorant as Children, doe loue the vanities of this world, but wise men growing, to some ripenesse in Christianitie, doe contemne and despise them. Nilus in lib. ascetico. As saylers cast their preciousest iewels into the Sea to saue their liues: so wee must cast from  the pelfe and plea∣sures of this  saue a better life: Ibidem. A woman that is with child with a male, is lesse troubled both in the bearing and birth: so the Euangelicall Margarite is compassed with lesser dolour, then worldly substance, there∣fore let vs embrace the first, as worthy of our paines, and contemne the other with all the vaine gaines. Reason. AS a ship, that hath firme ancho∣rage, can make stay in any hauen:
so the minde, if it be ordered by right reason, can liue quietly in any place▪ Plutarchus in Moral. As a Grashopper and a Hauke doe not see alike; and as an Eagle and a Patridge doe not flye alike: so all, that are partakers of reason, are not of like force in the sharpnesse of disputation, and wittinesse of reasoning. Ibidem. As a monitor sitting by a boy doeth alwayes admonish him, that he offend not: so reason being alwayes present with the mind, doth not suffer it at any time to erre and offend. ibidem. It is not enough to haue a sound body but it is also requisite, that it bee of a good habit and strong: so the reason ought not onely to bee pure, and free from vices, but to be couragious and well fortified. ibidem. As a sterne and a bridle are not sufficient, vnlesse there be some present that can moderate and rule them: so eloquence is not sufficient to moderate and gouerne the people, vnlesse reason bee present also the moderator of the speech. ibidem. If there were no Sunne, we should
haue eternall night: so if wee had no reason, wee should nothing at all differ from brute beasts. ibidem. In a great storme a ship is not stayed, vnlesse a waighty anchor bee surely fixed in the bottome of the water: so in the great hurley burley of businesses, great reason ought to bridle the mind, least it bee caried away of affections. Ibidem. The seeds of a Cypres tree are so smal, that they can scarsly be discerned with the eyes, and a great and tall tree doeth spring from so small a seed: so reason is a very little thing and occult, but yet is very great, if it shew it selfe, and vn∣fonld his force. Plin. lib. 17. cap. 10. As great waights, that no mans strength can poyse, are easily hoysed aloft by engins and deuices: so that which we cannot doe by force, is easily brought to passe by art and reason. Idem. As horses, that are growne fierce and cruell, by reason of their often fighting in the warres, are deliuered vnto riders and tamers; that they may become more gentle and tractable: so
men that are proude and puffed vp through prosperity, are to be brought to reasons Schoole, that they may look into the imbecillitie of humaine af∣faires, and see the variety and mutabi∣bilitie of fortune and blind chaunce. Cicero lib. 1. Offi. As nature doth not bring forth her goodnesse except it be ripe and mature: so the good of man is not in man, except perfect reason be with it. Seneca lib. 2. epist. 125. As the whole body doth yeeld obe∣ence vnto the soule, for by the soules commaund we lye downe and rise vp: so the whole multitude is ruled by rea∣son, and bended by the awe of this commander. Ide, lib. 1. de Clementia, cap. 3. As that is not the best ship, that is the faireliest painted, but that which is best for saile; and as that is not the best sword, which hath a golden scab∣berd, but that which best cutteth, and is best for defence, and as that is not the best square, which is the beautiful∣lest, but that which is the straightest: so hee is ot the best man, that is the
mightiest, or wealthiest, but hee that is ordered and ruled by right reason, and soud iudgement. Idem. epist. 77. As a naughty boy doeth hate his school-master, or any one that wisheth him well, and corrects him for his saults: so hee that is in loue with his affections doth hate ight reason, which should gouerne him. Philo lib. de sacrific. Abelis. As it is absurde, that a good Master should be vnder subiection to a wicked seruant: so is it absurde, that the rea∣sonable and immortall soule should bee inseruitude to the brutish and corrup∣tible body. Thalassus ad Paulinm presbyterum. As nature hath giuen to diuers kinds of creatures diuers defences for the pre∣seruation of their liues and safties, as strength to Lions, swiftnesse to Hartes, swimming to Fishes, flying to Fowles, and cauerns in the earth to creeping things: so vnto man hath God giuen reason, by which he subdueth all other creatures. Tyrius Platonicus, ser∣mone. 10.
As a Ship in a tempest is easily drowned, vnlesse the Pylot mannage it by his industry: so affections doe draw a man from ill to worse, vnlesse they be gouerned by sound and solide reason▪ Antonius, ser. 76. parte 2. As a Ship, that wants a good Pylot is driuen in stormy weather against Rockes: so a man that wants reason in the mutiny and tumult of his affections is swollowed vp of his passions. Lauren∣tius Iustinianus de contemptu mundi, cap. 1. Schollers. AS one going to fetch fire at an o∣ther mans house, and finding a good fire there, doth sit him downe by it, and there doth stay: so some Scholers alwayes cleaue vnto the Masters, nei∣ther doe light their owne wits, that at home they may enioy their owne fire. Plutarch. As a Birde, whatsoeuer meate shee getteth, presently carieth it to her yong ones, and is neuer the better for it her selfe: so some doe therfore learne,
that they may presently teach others, becomming neuer the better them∣selues. Idem. As slothfull and greedy curres doe at home teare and bite the skins of wilde beasts, but in hunting doe not once touch them: so some preposterously studious doe deale onely with trifles, and neuer come to the touch of learning Idem. As many women doe not conceaue by some men, but being ioyned to o∣thers become fruitefull: so their bee some, that with some Masters are in∣docible, but doe profit with other teachers: because as betweene bodies, so betweene wits, there is a sympathy, and an Antipathy. As planters of trees by all meanes seeke their increase; so Schollers should by all meanes seeke their profit in lear∣ning. Philo Iudaeus lib. de Agricultura. The diuine Law pronounceth those beasts vncleane, that doe not chew their cud: so learning pronounceth those Schollers vnsufficient and non∣proficients, who doe not meditate, and ruminate on those things they
heare, Philo libro de agricultura. Hunting dogs follow the wild beast this way and that way: so good schol∣lers hunt after a thing not vnderstood this way and that way, vntill they at∣taine the vnderstanding of it. Cyrillus Alex. in Ioan. lib. 1. cap. 2. As husbandmen hedge in their trees: so should good schoole-masters with good manners hedge in the wit, and disposition of the scholler, whereby the blossomes of learning, may the sooner increase to a bud. As naughty women hauing trod a∣wry, conceale the names of the right Fathers of their Children: so many schollers stealing their learning from diuers authors doe conceale their names; which is palpable theft and no plaine dealing. Ingenni pudoris est (vt it Plinius) fateri per quos profeceri∣mus; & haec quasi merces authori iure optimo pensitanda est, ne fures esse vi∣de amur. Grati animi esse duco, (inquit Franciscus Patricius) eorum nomina profiteri, quos imitamur, & à quibus accepimus.
Studie. AS that which thou engrauest in steele and marble with great labour, endureth longest: so that wee learne with great study, wee neuer forget. As they that loue lightly, doe reioyce at the presence of a friend, but being ab∣sent doe easily forget him, but they that loue entirely and dearely, doe not suffer that to bee absent from them, which they loue: so some are easily pulled by businesses from the study of Phyloso∣phy, but they that truely loue her, neglect all things before they will bee drawne from her, neither can any thing without her bee pleasant vnto them. Plut. As beasts feed one, one where, and another, another where: so one man studieth diuinity, another law, another physicke another phylosophy, and ano∣ther followeth armes. As Hermophrodites called also An∣drogyni doe so resemble both sexes, that they are neither men nor women: so some, whilest they study to bee both
diuines, and rhetoricians, are acknow∣ledged of neither. As from the people called Seres there comes the softest silkes, and the hardest iron: so from some diuers studies and contrarious endeuours doe proceede. The Crocodile sometimes liueth in the water, and sometimes on the land, shee layeth her egges in the land, and getteth her prey in the water: so whilst some study to bee both Prelats and Courtiers, they become pestilent mem∣bers both in Church and Court. Wine moderately drunke doeth strengthen the sinewes, and corrobarate the sight, but taken immoderately doth hurt them both: so by moderate study the life is adorned, but immode∣rately applyed, it is much harmed. A vine except it bee now and then pruned, perished and becommeth barren through her owne fruitfulnesse: so a pregnant and fruitfull wit taking immedrate paines in study, is consu∣med by his owne labour. Protogenes, being otherwise an ex∣cellent Painter, is taxed, because hee knew no time to take his hand from the
table: so some students and writers are much to blame, because they neither know time to leaue of their study, nor know not when a thing is sufficiently amended. Nightingals doe so contend in sing∣ing, that they dye in the contention, their breath rather failing them then their song: so some by too much study extinguish their health, and whilest they would bee ouercome of none in study, they perish in their endeuours. Plin. lib. 10. cap. 29. Contemplation. AS their eyes are dimmed that come out of the cleare Sunne into a darke place: so also are the eyes of their mind that come from the con∣templation of diuine matters vnto hu∣mane. Seneca. As a saphyre is of the colour of a faire skie: so contemplatiue men are of a quiet and celestiall conuersation. F. Ioannes à S. Geminian lib. 2. de Metal∣lis & Lapid. cap. 6. As the Lazu stoe is better, the
more it doeth resemble a celestiall co∣lour: so contemplatiue men are the better the more they resemble celestiall Citizens. ibidem. As the Lazull stone being puluerizd doth cure the quartaine feuer: so the contemplation of celestiall things doth banish idlenesse. Ibidem. As the iuyce of Mandrake drunke with wine, doth make the body sensles of paine: so contemplation mingled with the wine of Diuine loue, and e∣ternall comfort doth make the soule forget worldly vanities. Ibidem. As the wild figge tree ripeneth the good figge tree: so the actiue life maketh the contemplatiue fruitfull. ibidem. As a wine cellar ought to be remoued from heate: so a contemplatiue life ought to be free from the heate of con∣cupiscence. Idem lib. 9. de Artificib. & Reb. Artif. cap. 1. Sophisters. AS iuglers, and they that play tricks of legierdemaine doe deceine vs, and that with a certaine pleasure: so to
e entangled in sophistications is redi∣ulous, not dangerous. Seneca. As meate ill sauouring, doth not eeme to sauour ill to them that haue aten it: so the intricate conclusions nd fallacies of Scotistes and Sophisters. lthough they doe greatly offend those hat are adorned with polite literature, et they offend them nothing at all, hat are drunke with such trifles, nay hey seeme vnto them beautifull and legant. As the Panther doth sauour well, nely to beasts, which he allureth vn∣to him, and not vnto men: so Scotus, Iauell, Faber, Buridanus, Borreus, Burleus, Clictouius, Dorbell, Iohannes de Celaia, Gilbertus, Crab, and other such crabbed and obscure Sophisters are more pleasant then any spice vnto beetle-headed plodders, but more loathsome then any vncleanesse to fine and fresh wits. As the hornes of the beast Bonasus are onely a burthen vnto him, and of no vse, they are so wound one within another: so sophisters haue logicke and reason, but it is so sophisticated, they
can winne no body by it. Plin. lib▪ 8 cap. 15. As whores doe deceiue young me by guilefull speeches: so sophisters do ensnare fooles in the deceitfull nets false syllogismes. Olympiodorus in E∣clesiasten, cap. 7. A lecherous eunuch would seeme doe much, but can doe iust nothing: a bragging sophister would seeme t proue much much, when hee prouet iust nothing. Dion Nycaenus do reg orat. 4. A wanton ill hunting dogge taking false sent, doth draw by his opening the other dogges after him: so an idle headed sophister doth by his quirks and quiddities draw the rude company of foolish people after him. Ibidem. As grashoppers are full of noyce: so sophisters are full of words. Clement Alex. lib. 1. storm. Memorie. AS bookes are consumed with wormes, that are neuer looked
pon: so memory perisheth except it be renued. Seneca. Little fishes slip through nets, but great fishes are taken: so small things lip out of memory, when as great matters stay still. Erasmus. As Pyes haue a wonderfull desire to mitate the voyce of man, so that hrough extreame endeuour they some∣times kill themselues: so it is maruel∣ous pleasant and delightsome to many to learne by heart poems, songs and sonnets, and to sing them, albeit they vnderstand them not. Conradus Lycost∣ees Rubeaquensis. As Lupus Ceruarius, a beast in∣gendered of a Hind, and a Wolfe, doth in the time of hunger and famine forget his food, if so he see any body: so from many that are presently lippeth out of memory, which they purposed to speake of when as they heare words spoken to an other effect: Plin. lib. 8. cap. 22. Cast any thing into a standing water, and circles will arise, which put out one another: so when one thing com∣meth into the memory, another thing
is thrust out, therefore the memory i alwayes to bee repaired, that as one matter passeth; another may be present. Gregor Nazianzenus orat, in funere patris. As Seneca was of such perfect me∣mory, that he could rehearse after one, by hearing two hundred verses: yea, a greater maruaile of memory, he could recite two thousand names of men, be∣ing repeated once before him, with as good a memory, as he that first named them: so Carmides of Greece was so famous for this facultie, that he neuer heard any reading, but hee could re∣peate it word by word without wri∣ting, were the writing or reading ne∣uer so long, hee would not misse a sllable. Learning. AS it maketh nothing to the dis∣patch of the iourney to haue knowne the way, except thou hast en∣deuour & strength to walke: so learning doth nothing profit, if thine owne ver∣tue be wanting. Lactantius lb. 6. cap. 5.
As the maturity of things haue their easons, flowers in the spring; corne in ummer, and apples in autumne: so he fruits of winter is learning. Basilius pistol. 172. As hunting dogges by the ent doe ollow wilde beasts a farre off: so the ouers of learning doe follow after ustice and other vertues being ena∣moured wih the sweete smell that comes from them. Philo lib. de somnijs. As wels, whence much water is drawne, are not onely not diminished, but made the sweeter: so learning and science by teaching and infusing it into others is not decreased, but encreased. Idem lib. de somnijs & lib. de gigan∣ibus. As a light lighting many lights, continueth of the same bignesse, and is not lessened: so science in men by im∣parting it, is not annihilated ibidem. As the images of our absent friends are gratefull vnto vs, because by a false solace they lighten the languorment of their absence: so much more must learning bee welcome vnto vs, which is the true foot step of an absent friend,
and a true note of his perfection. Senec epist. 10. The Crocodile otherwise a dange∣rous and an inuincible creature, yet s feareth the men of the ile Tentyr, that at their voyce shee is afrighted, so ty∣rants albeit they contemne all men, ye they feare the writings of the learned, as Tyberius did. Plinius lib. 8. cap▪ 25. As wals area defence vnto a City: so learning vnto the the mind. Demo∣cratus apud Antonium in Meliss part, 1. serm. 56. As husbandmen more willingly see the eares of corne hanging downe∣wards, then standing vp, because the one is fruitfull, the other fruitlesse: so learning and Phylosophie had rather see her Schollers submisse and humble, then lofty and swelling with glory, for the one becommeth profitable, the o∣ther vaine. Plut. in Moralibus. Nightingals are so delighted with singing, that they dye with contending, their wind sooner failes them, then their song: so some through an immo∣derate loue of learning doe shipwracke their he alth, anwhilest learning they
will of none be ouercome, the perish in their endeuours. Plinius lib. 10. cap. 26. Elephant although they cannot swim, yet they are wonderfully de∣lighted in riuers: so some although they are ignorant of learning, yet they de∣sire to be conuersant with learned men, idem. lib. cap. 5. Nector the drunke of the Gods, the more it was drunke, the more it would ouer-flow the brimme of the cup; the stone that groweth in the riuer of Ca∣ria, the more it is cut, the more it in∣creaseth: so learning the more it is ex∣ercised, the more it increaseth and the more it is published, the more it is pro∣pagated. The manner of Learning. AS before wee bee familiarly ac∣quainted, many things offend vs in a man which after acquaintance we like very well of: so in learning and Phylosophy, the first tediousnesse is to be tolerated, vntill through vse it be∣come easie a  leasant. Plut. Vessels doe t and incline themselues
to receiue that which is powred into them: so hee that learneth must apply himselfe, that none of those things run out, which are profitably taught. idem. The eares of putrified vessels, are ra∣ther filled with any thing then with that is necessary: so some forthwith doe learne foolish things. idem. An Oratour. AS a learned Physition is knowne by a depeate disease, and a good Pylot in a storme: so a cunning Ora∣tour is discerned in pleading and per∣swading difficult and serious matters. Sidonius, in Epistol▪ ad Rauricium suum. As a carefull Physition, before hee applyeth his medicine, doth not only search out the nature of the disease, but also the manner of the liuing of the diseased, and the nature of his body: so also an Orator, when hee taketh a doubtfull and waighty matter in hand, hee must by all possible meanes search out, what the Iudges thinke, what they expect, what they would, and by what
speech they will bee the soonest lead: Cicero lib. 2. de Oratore. As there is no matter so combustible, which taketh fire, except fire bee put vnto it: so there is no minde so ready to conceiue the force of an Orator, which can bee inflamed by his speech, vnlesse the Orator himselfe come in∣flamed and burning vnto it. Ibidem. As it was said of the Greeke Musi∣tians, that they become Pylots, that could not proue Harpers: so wee see many that when they cannot become Orators, proue Lawyers. Idem. orat. pro Murena. As certaine vessels of Clay are had in estimation, by reason of the Art, that is vsed in making them: so many times a matter of no moment, and of small consequence doth commend the wit of an Orator. If the grauing Iron bee hot, thou mayst easily engraue in precious stones, what thou listest: so an Orator shall more easily moue and perswade, if hee not onely plead vehemently, but fer∣uently, and affectionately loue that he prayseth, and detestably hath that he discommendeth.
As it is dangerous, if all incline and runne to one side of the ship, but then the ship is well peysed, when one bends one way, and an other an other: so dissention and discord among Ora∣tors, Rhetoricians, Lawyers, and Players, doe make the state of a City more safe. Plut. in Moral. As hee is ridiculous Musitian, that pricketh a graue matter with a Lydian note: so is he a ridiculous Orator, that speaking of the precepts of well liuing, doth lasciuiously and riotously super∣abound in Rhetoricall exornations, and figuratiue condiments. ibidem. Eloquence. AS it is not enough to haue a bridle, or the sterne of a ship, except there bee one that may guide and moderate them by skill: so eloquence is not sufficient to gouerne and rule the peo∣ple, except reason be present the mode∣rator of the speech. Plut. in Moral. As it is the prayse of water, if it sauour of nothing (for sauour is a signe of that which is putrified:)
although of all others wee require oquence, yet wee say, that a Diuine ught to bee without glosing and af∣ctation. As that is not the best picture, which y the matter testifieth the wealth of e owner, or the Art of the Painter, ut that which truely representeth the ing it personateth: so that is the best oquence, which maketh no ostentati∣n of the wit of the speaker, but very tly sheweth the matter. As silken garments are discommen∣ed, because the body appeares thorow em, whereas garments were inuented couer the body: so that eloquence is idiculous, which doth not declare the atter, but obscure and darken it, seeing at speech was giuen vs to lay open our inds and matters. Plin. lib. 11. cap. 22. As the Box tree is alwayes greene, ut of naughty sauour, and hath seed dious vnto all liuing creatures: ome esides the grace of speech, do bring othing but that, which is to bee a∣oyded. Idem. lib. 16. cap. 17. The tree Tilia hath a sweete barke, nd sweet leaues, yet no liuing creature
can abide to tast or touch the fruit of it so the speech of some is elegantly composed, and Rhetorically deliuere and yet there is no fruite of matter sentence in it. Ibidem cap. 15. & The phrastus lib. 1. cap. 10. As some Physitions are almost ski∣full in the cure of all diseases and laguors, and yet can render no true re∣son of them: so some very eloquent know all the points of Rhetoricke, and the grounds of their Art, yet are ver bare in the substance of argument, o soundnesse of matter. Philo in lib. qu deterius potiori insidetur. As infants cannot speake, but by hearing others talke: so none can be eloquent but by reading and hearing eocutions and exornations of speech August. lib. 4. de doct. Christ. cap. 3. As hee that hath a beautious body and deformed mind, is more lamente for, then if both parts were deformed so they that deliuer false things elo∣quently, are more to be pittied, the if they spake them rudely & clownish∣ly. ibidem. cap. 28. As wholesome meate retaineth hi
owne vertue, whether it bee deliuered out of an earthen vessell, or a siluer Platter: so truth is not impayred, whether it bee vttered politikely or plainely. Idem lib. 5. confessionum. cap. 6. As luxurious persons behold the comelinesse of the body, and not the beauty of the mind: so some onely marke the structure of Orations, and not frame of arguments. Theophilus Alexand. Epist. 2 Paschali. As Brasse is ingendred of Sulphur, and Quicksiluer: so eloquence is com∣pounded of two things, of interiour meditation, which resembleth sulphur, and of exteriour pronunciation, which resembleth Quicksiluer. As brasse being mingled with other mettals, changeth both colour and vertue, whereupon there comes three kinds, one white like siluer, another yellow like gold, and a third also like gold drawne into thinne plates, which Players make their crownes of: so eloquence is threefold, spirituall elo∣quence, which gaines soules; secular eloquence, which wins gaine; & poeti∣call eloquence, which moues delight.
As Brasse soone rusteth it it bee not oyled: so loquence soone becommeth offensiue, if it be not annointed with the oyle of charity. As barse is the fittest mettall to make bels and trumpets of, by reason of the sound: so eloquent men are best to make preachers of, because they will be heard. As brasse hath many vertues against many infirmities; for as Plin. and Diose, say, brasse being burnt and puluerized, doth purge hurtfull humors, heale wounds, expel darknesse from the eyes, and eateth away supeuous flesh: so diuine eloquence, and the tongue of a Preacher being burnt, that is, inflamed with the fire of the holy Spirit; and puluerized, that is, grounded on humi∣lity, hath vertue to dissolue the hard∣nesse of heart, to die the lust of the flesh, to purge the noysome affections of sinfull men, to heale the wounds of temptations, to banish the mists of errors, and to eate away the gluttony of intemperate persons. Through the Rose be sweete, yet be∣ing tied with the Violet, the smell is
more fragrant; though meate nourish, yet hauing good sauour it prouoketh ppetite; the fayrest nose-gay is made of many flowers; the finest picture of undry colours, and the wholesomest medicine of diuers hearbs: so though the naked truth bee welcome, yet it is more gratefull, if it come attired and dorned with fine figures, and choyce hrases. A good gouernor, that is also beau∣ifull, is more acceptable to the people: o is a Phylosopher, that is eloquent. eneca. A Diamond set in Gold is more ratefull: so is the truth adorned with loquence. Speech. AS neying is proper to a Horse, barking to a Dogge, bellowing to n Oxe, and roaring to a Lyon: so eech is proper vnto man. Philo lib. de mmijs. As a sicke man doth not seeke for a arned Physition, but for one skilfull cure him: so wee doe not expect a
flaunting speech of a Phylosopher. Se∣neca apud Erasmum. Musitians make the sweetest melody by the gentlest touch: so a gentle speech doth more moue the people, then crabbed. Plut. in Moral. As a horse is turned about with a bridle, and a ship by a sterne, so men are led by speech. ibidem. As houses without doores are vn∣profitable: so are men that haue no rule of their speech. Ibidem. As in calamitie our firmest and best friends are present with vs: so let our best speeches be also present. Ibidem. Some doe loue nothing in an apo∣thecaries shop, but the fragrancy of the smell, neglecting the goodnesse of pre∣seruatiues, and the vertue of purga∣tiues: so some doe looke for nothing in Plato and Demosthenes, but the puriti of the Atticke speech. Ibidem. Aras cloathes when they are wid opened, doe shew the pictures wrought in them, but being lapped vp, they conceale and hide the same: so a speech aptly composed and well pronounced, doth set before our eyes the order and
ourse of the matter, but being ended, he most of it slippeth out of our minds. dem in Graecorum apothegmatis. As women doe then smell well, when hey smell of nothing: so that speech ath the best ornament that wants af∣etation, Cicero ad Attic. lib. 2. As the Painter Protogenes knew Apelles by the draught of one line, lthough hee had neuer seene him be∣ore: so by one onely speech a man may e discerned, what wit and wisdome e hath. Eras. insimilibus. As the same sunne doth melt waxe, nd harden clay: so the same speech oth make some better, & some worse, ccording to the diuersity of dispo∣tions. As the load-stone doth not draw any hing vnto it but Iron, although other hings bee much lighter: so the speech of some doth not moue all, but onely hose that are inclined to that they erswade. As salt moderately sprinkled on meate doth season it, and addes a liking to our tast: so if thou minglest in thy peech some antiquity or pretty conceit,
it addes great bauty vnto thy talke but if it bee done too affectedly, ther is nothing more vnpleasant. In a Vine whatsoeuer is taken away by pruning from the matter, is added vnto the fruit: so the fewer the word be, the grauer are the sentences. As Timanthes is praysed in this, tha in all his workes, more alwayes wa vnderstood then was painted: so tha kinde of speech is the best, wherei many things are left vnto considerati∣on, and few discoursed of, and where∣in there is more sense then words. Plin. ib. 35. cap. 10. Nettles haue no pricks, yet they sting: so words haue no points, ye they pierce. As one mettell is to bee tempere with an other in fashioning a goo blad, least either being all of steele▪ it quickly breake, or all of Iron, neuer cut: so fareth it in speech▪ which if it be not seasoned as well wit wit to moue delight, as with Art to manifest cunning, there is no elo∣quence.
Pronunciation. FIshes doe so labour to imitate the words of man, that oftentimes they dye in the endeuour: so it is delightfull vnto some to learne by heart psalmes, prayers, and fine speeches, and after∣wards to pronounce them, they not vn∣derstanding them. Conradus Lycost∣hencs Rubeaquensis. The Birde Taurus being but little of bulke, doth imitate the bellowing of an Oxe: so some being base and meane of themselues, yet doe pronouce and vter great and high matters, and speake of Emperours and the mightie poten∣tates of the world. A good play sometimes is hissed off the stage, through the fault of the player, ill acting it: so a good speech displease, if it be it pronounced. As by the same breath, but sent forth after diuers manners, wee heate and coole things: so by the same speech being diuersly pronounced, we either stirre vp affections, or moue none. Hee that runneth with all his might and many, stayeth himselfe not where
he will, but is caried further then hee would: so too much celerity in pro∣nunciation is rashly caried, whether it would not. Seneca. Hearing. THe gates of the City are shut in vaine, if one be left open, by which the enemies may issue in: so it is not sufficient to bee temperate in the other sences, if the hearing be open to per∣nicious speeches. Plut. As the gate is more diligently to bee kept, which leadeth vnto the Kings Court: so the hearing is more warily to be kept, because it is very nearely ioyned to the rationall part of the oule, and by it that is admitted, which may either much helpe, or much hurt▪ Idem. As Hunters doe not suffer their dogs to smell after or to bite euery thing, but they keepe them fresh for the wild beast: so it is meete that the eares and eyes bee kept from wandring euery where, and bee onely reserued for ne∣cessary matters▪ ibidem.
Harts when they lift vp their eares, are of a very sharpe and cleare hearing▪ but when they let them downe they become deafe: so Princes if there bee any thing that pleaseth them, they heare it a farre off; but if otherwise, they will not vnderstand, albeit thou criest aloud vnto them. Sea-fishes liue in salt water, and yet are not the salter: so many heare the word of God, and are the neuer better: Clemens Alexand. lib. 1. stromatum. Hee that learneth to build, and ne∣uer buildeth, his learning is to no purpose: so he that heareth, and neuer bringeth that into action hee heareth, his hearing is in vaine. Macarius in rgulis fusus diut. interrogat. Great and often showers doe hurt the earth: so many intricate and deepe insoluble questions doe damnifie the hearers. Gregor. Nazianz. lib. 1. de Theologia. Men would sit from midnight till noone to see the games of Olympus: so should we to heare those matters, that doe not onely concerne this life, but that is to come. Chrysost. Oratione 2. ad∣ersus Iudaeos.
As those men that are giuen to wine and drinkings, as soone as they rise, do inquire where any bankets, suppers, omessations, or compotations are to kept: so wee, as soone as wee arise, should diligently enquire, where wee may heare any wholsome exhortation, doctrine, or sermon, that may bring vs vnto Christ. ibid. As a Physition prepareth his medi∣cine in vaine, except his patient will receiue it: so a Preacher shall not deale effectually, except his auditors obey him. Idem. hom. 2. in Genesin. An Auditour▪ and his Dutie. A Good guest doth not thinke that it onely belongs to him to be well entertained at anothers mans costs and charges, bnt he againe in like manner prouids to requite his curtesie: a deli∣gent auditour doth not idly heare a carefull speaker, but it is meete that he helpe and grace the speaker with his countenance, eyes, applause and fauour. Plutarch.
As in house-keeping both friends and enemies doe profit, as Xenophon saith: so a vigilant wise auditor not onely becomes better learned by the wise sayings, but also by the errors of o∣thers. idem. As wee come to an holy banket: so wee should come to heare, with a peaceable and a fauourable minde, tat wee may benignely approue good speeches; and if any thing bee said that is scarse cnrrent, we may secretly note it, both what was the cause of the errour, and the scope of the speakers mind. ibidem. As Tragedians at Theaters: so Phy∣losophers in Schooles are to be heard till they end. ibidem. As in those things that are sung vnto a pipe, many faults escape which te hearer taketh no notice of: so in an elegant and flaunting oration many foolish matters slip by the auditor, which he marketh not by reason of the colours and garnishing of Rhetoricke. Idm. As that vessell is not filled, which alwayes powreth forth, and neue
receiueth: so he doth not receiue wise∣dome, that alwayes speaketh and neuer heareth. idem. As hee that comes to a banket, feedeth on those things that are set be∣fore him, neither asketh for other things: so it is meete that the learner heare silently, vntll hee hath finished that speaketh, and then if hee please hee may propound any profitable question. idem. They that make garlands, seeke for things most beautifull, and not most profitable; but Bees settle vpon the bitterest thime, and sucke hony out of it: so it is requisite that an auditour doe not onely imbrace the elegancies of speech for pleasure sake, but that he also collect the force and profit of sen∣ences. Idem. As louers doe fauourably interprete some faults: so also ought auditors. dem. As in meates wee doe not alwayes seeeke after pleasure, but also after health and wholesomnesse: so also in ading and hearing authours. idem. As vafledged Birds hang alwayes
gaping at the mouth of their Dames: so some are so troublesome vnto their teachers, that all things must bee chewed before they can receiue it, nei∣ther will they at any time prouide for their owne feeding. idem. As at ball play it is the part of one to strike it, and of another to catch or stop it: so both the hearer and the speaker are to discharge their duties. Idem. As they that heare Comedians, doe not heare them for this end, that they may become Comedians, but for plea∣sure sake: so now adayes many doe heare learned sermons, and Preachers diuinely discoursing, not that they may be bettering by following them, but that they may bee elighted, and haue their eares tickled. Hee that goeth in ambassage with letters from a great Prince, of him∣selfe is many times both obscure and obscurely descended, yet they tht re∣ceiue them, not looking vnto his estate, receiue the letters with great eerence and silence, because of hi that sent them: so auditours ought not to looke
to the speaker, neither to his meane∣nesse, but because hee speaketh from God, therefore hee is attentiuely to bee heard. Chrysost. hom. 44. in Genesin. Hee that putteth bread into his mouth, or any other meate, first cheweth it with his teeth, and then letteth it downe into his stomacke: so when we heare the word of God, wee must first meditate vpon it, and see what it is that is spoken, and then whereupon it was spoken, and to what end. Idem. hom 41. oper imperf. As wee cannot well discerne the tast of the meate wee receiue, except wee first manducate it with our teeth: so we cannot vnderstand the vertue of the word wee heare, except wee meditate vpon it. ibidem. As the meate doth nothing profit vs wee haue eaten, if wee cast it vp a∣gaine: so the word doth nothing pro∣fit vs, wee haue heard, if wee forge it, ibidem. Those beasts among the Iewes were cleane, which chewed their cud: so he is a spiritual and holy man, that hearing the word of God, doth ruminate and
meditate on it, and when he hath vn∣derstood it, doth commit it to memory, that thence, as out of a store-house, he may take for his vse and need. ibidem. Breuiloquence. THe Celtiberians doe so temper and harden their Iron, that it being buried in the earth, that may be purged and taken away which is earthly: so the Laconique speech is made more piercing by taking away that which is superfluous. Plut. Disputation. AS Vlysses is derided of the wooers in Homer, because hee asked a peece of bread and not a sword and a target: so they are more to be derided, that in serious disputation obiect vaine and friuolous matters. Plut. in Moral. As by gimnasticall disportes the strength of the body becomes more firme: s by disputation the strength of the mind become, more fresh and liuely. Which kind of learned concer∣tion
the Poets intimated vnto vs by the weapons of Pallas, and the He∣brwes when they said, that Iron was the badge of wise men. Picus Miran∣dula, in Apologia propositionum su∣arum. As in wrestling the strength of the body is seene: so in disputation te force of the minde is discerned. Tyrus Platonicus sermone 5. Examples of life. AS they that combe and trime themselues, doe vse a glasse: so hee that taketh in hand any exploite setteth before himselfe the examples of laudable personages. Plut. If thou puttest the hearb Exngi into the mouth of a goae, when she stayeth all stay, vntill the gotherd take out the hearbe: so the examples of Princes and great estat do migh∣ly pruaie among the common people. . As a wart or a wrinkle doth more offend in the face, then great blemishes and skars in another place of the body;
o small faults, doe seeme great in a Prince, and are very hurtfull, be∣cause they are in view of all men, and the people are prone to follow them. idem. He that seemes good by being com∣pared with them that are bad: is as hee that admires his owne swiftnesse, when hee looketh vpon them that are lame. Seneca. As Zeuxis pourtraying Iuno, out of all the Agrigentine virgins chose fiue of the fairest, that hee might imitate, what was most excellent in them: so out of many, we are to propound the best vnto our selues for an example of life, neither are wee to imitate all things in them, but the best things. As the Sunne, Moone and Starres do differ from one another in light, and yet are all glorious creatures, and doe direct our courses in trauell, both by Sea and Land: so the Saints doe differ one from another in religious perfecti∣ons; and yet are all setters forth of Gods glory, and may serue for exam∣ples to guide and direct our liues in this World; as we must imitate Abraham
in faith; Ioseph in chastity; Moses i in meekenesse, and Iob in patience. O∣rigenes lib. 1. in Iob. As sweete odours, and vnsauery smels doe communicate themselues vn∣to many: so doe good and ill examples Eusebius Emissenus, hom. de quadrages. As Painters when they make one picture by another, doe respect very seriously their patterne and example: when we practise to grow to perfecti∣on wee should patterne our liues after the example of holy men, that we may grow as they did. Basil. epist. 1. As one done flying away, the rest doe follow: so are we drawne awy by example Chrysost. de continentia Iosep. As the victories and valiancy of o∣thers enkindleth valour in the breasts of Soldiours: so should the example of patience in others, beget Christian patience in vs. Idem serm. in beatos Iob Abraham.
Zeale: AS zeale must erect our discretion, that we runne not to slowly: so discretion must direct our zeale, that wee runne not too fast. As the woman in the 31. of the Pro∣uerbs, and 13. verse, laboured with her bands, and with the counsell of her hands: so in our labours we must haue both zeale and discretion. In the Leuiticall Law God forbid∣deth to bring vnto him any blind of∣fering: so all blind zeale, is a blind offering, which God will not accept. As Minerua is said to put a golden bridle vpon Pegasus, that hee should nor flie too fast: so our Minerua, that is our Christian discretion, must put a golden bridle vpon Pegasus, that is, our earnest zeale, least if our zeale be vnbrideled, it make vs runne too fast. Octauian the Emperour did beare in his Eschocheon, a Crabfish and a But∣terflie, with this mot. Soft pace, goes farre. A Crabfish creepes, thats soft pace. A Burterflie flies, that goes far. A Crabfish, a Butterfly, Soft pace, goes
farre. And Vespasian the Emperour did stampe in his coyne a Dolphin and an Anchor, with this Impresa, Soone enough, if well enough. A Dolphin out∣strips the ship. That soone enough. And Anchor stay the ship. Thats well enough. A Dolphin, an Anchor, soone enough, if well enough: so in all our actions wee must haue zeale to further our endeuour, and discretion to mo∣derate our course. Doctor Plfere. If the lower spheares in the Heauen should not be stayed with the contrarie course of the highest spheare in the fir∣mament, they would soone set the whole world on a light fire: so if our zeale be not tempered with discretion, and the inferiour affections of the mind, if they bee not stayed with the contrary course of reason, and with the middle motion of the spirit of God, they will soone ouer-heat vs, and ouer∣throw all wee goe about. The string of an instrument may be as well too high, as too low; if it bee too low it iarres, if it bee too high it breakes: so the minde of man may bee as well too intent, as too remisse; if it
bee too remisse, it runnes too slowly, if it be too intent, it runnes too fast. Wit. AS many wild weeds growing in a field, although naught of them∣selues, yet are the signes of a fertill and fruitefull ground, if it were tilled: so many affections of the minde being naught of themselues, doe argue no barren wit if it were rightly ordered. Plutarch. Mortar is to bee straightwaies vsed, because it quickly dryeth: so the wit of a child is to bee forthwith endued with literature and wholesome coun∣sell, least it growing tubborne and hard doe not admit the hand of a fashioner. Plinius lib. 36. cap. 24. As Vessels of a narrow mouth doe more difficultly receiue, but doe more surely retaine the liquour: so wits that doe more slowly conceiue for the most part doe more assuredly remember. Quintilianus. There is lesser force and vertue in the roots of wholesome hearbs, when the
seede waxeth ripe: so the edge of wit ad nature waxeth blunt and dull, when wee giue our selues to get Children. The Adament by one thing is soft∣ned for the stroake of the hammer, o∣therewaies it is impenetrable: so thee is no wit so fierce and barbarous, which may not bee tamed by one meanes or other. As some trees doe fairely flourish, but doe bring forth no fruit: so the cowardnesse of some Children doth promise great fruit of life, which as soone as it growes vp, being drowned in vaine pleasures, it deceiueth the ex∣pectation of all men. Plin. lib. 16. cap. 26. & 27. It is reported that in Albania there are men, that haue eyes of a fiery rednesse, like Owles, doe see better in the night, then in the day: so some are more witty in deuising mischieuous matters, then in inuenting things good and laudable. Plin. lib. 7. cap. 2. As those women that conceiue and bring footh too soone, doe soone waxe old, as the Indian Calingae doe, that
ing forth at fiue yeares of age, and e at eight: so those wits that are one ripe, are soone rotten. Plin. lib. cap. 2. Trees exceeding fruitfull, doe soone ax old: so excellent wits are sldome ng liued, and the best things among ortall men, doe soonest decay. The Sallow tree doth cast off her de, before it bee ripe, wherupon omer calleth it A spoyle fruit: so me wits to soone ripe, doe teach and rite before it bee meete. The Oliue tree is long a growing, t it bringeth forth excellent fruit; the llow tree presently shooteth vp, but is barren: so it is with wits too soone pe. Plin. lib. 16. cap. 26. in fin. & lib. d. cap. 27. A couragious horse is fitter for car∣age and burthens, then an idle iade, d yet no men layeth them on: so eat wits are fittest for the discharge great and waighty functions, but w employ them, being contented ith dizzards and cow-babies, whom ey may ouer-rule and controule at eir pleasure. Seneca.
The earth that bringeth forth sa bringeth forth none other thing: wits fruitfull in learning, are no forcible in other matters. The fish Trshus hath coiture wi it selfe, and doth conceiue of it seli so some through the happinesse of the wit doe infuse into themselues the se of learning, whom the Graecians Autodidactoi, teachers of themselues Plin. lib. 9. cap. 52. As small wines in time wax sowe so vulgar wits come to dotage in continuance, but those that be excellent and wits of proofe, doe hold out till last date of old deerepit age. As certaine grounds haue in the Merle, or white earth like Chalke, which they are manured and fatted; an honest wit hath that in it, which better it selfe. As fire skippeth to Bitumen, soone as it comes neare it, by reason the cognation it hath with it: so borne to learning, doe forthwith tal it. Plin. 2. cap. 108. As we perceiue the shadow of a dipassed, but perceiue it not passing; and
as it appeareth that a plant hath en∣creased, but wee discerne it not in∣creasing: so the going forward of wits, because it stands of small increasings, is perceiued afterwards a farre off. As in great Forrests mighty wild easts are bred: so in great wits, great vices are wont to spring vp. Plut. in Moralibus. The earth the more fruitfull it is by nature, the more it is corrupted, if it be neglected: so wits, the more pregnant they are, the more vices they bring forth, if they bee not rightly institu∣ted. ibidem. The fire the clearer it burneth, the soner it goeth forth: so wits the more illustrious and ripe they be, the shorter is their continuance amongst vs. Sene∣cade consolatione. cap. 23. As the sweetest Rose hath his prickle, the finest Veluet his bracke, the fairest flower his branne: so the sharpest wit hath his wanton will, and the holiest head his wicked way. Iohn Lilly. The reshest colours soonest fade, the keenest Rasour soonest turneth his edge, the finest cloath is soonest eaten
with the Moathes, and the Cambricke sooner stayned then the course Canuas: so the pregnantest wit is soonest per∣uerted. As the fleetest fish swalloweth the delicatest baite; the highest soaring Hawke trayneth to the lure: so the wittiest braine is inueigled with the suddaine view of alluring vanities. Hee that will carry a Bull with Milo, must vse to carry him a Calfe also; he that coueteth to haue a straight tree, must not bow him being a twigge: so hee that thinks to haue wisedome in age, must labour to get wit in youth, and hee that would be vpright in age, must not bow downe to vice in yout. The Potter fashioneth his Clay when it is soft; the Sparrow is taught to come when hee is young; the Iron being hot, receiueth any forme with the stroke of the Hammer, and keepe it being cold for euer: so the tender wit of a child, if with diligence it bee instructed in youth, will with industry vse those qualities in age. The fine Christall is sooner crazed then the hard Marble; the greenest
Beech burneth faster then the dryest Oake; the fairest silke is soonest soyled; the sweetest wine turneth to the sharpest vineger; the pestilence doth most rifest inect the clearest com∣plection, and the Caterpiller cleaueth vnto the ripest fruit: so the most deli∣cate wit is allured with smal inticement vnto vice, and most subiect to yeeld vn∣to vanitie. The Sunne shineth vpon the dung∣hill, and is not corrupted; the Diamond lyeth in the fire and is not consumed, the Christall toucheth the toad, and is not poysoned; the Bird Trochilus liueth by the mouth of the Crocodile, and is not spoyled: so a perfit wit is neuer bewitched with lewdnesse: neither en∣tised with lasciuiousnesse. As hee is a Cockescombe that pre∣ferreth the blossome before the fruit, the bud before the flower, and the greene blade before the ripe Eare of corne: so is he a foole that preferreth his owne wit before all mens wisdoms. As the Sea-crab, swimmeth alwayes against the streame: so wit alwayes striueth against wisdome.
As the Bee is oftentimes hurt with his owne hony: so is wit not seldome plagued with his owne conceit. The Vine watered with wine, is soone withered; the blossome in the fattest ground is quickly blasted; the Goat, the fatter shee is, the lesse fertile she is: so man, the more wittie hee is, the lesse happy he is. Fire (an Element so necessarie that without it man cannot liue) doth as well burne the house, as burne in the house, if it be abused; Treacle doth as well poyson as helpe, if it bee taken out of time; Wine if it bee immoderately taken doth kill the stomacke, enflame the liuer, and mischiefe the drunken; Physicke doth destroy, if it bee not well tempered; Law doth accuse, if it bee not rightly interpreted; Diuinity doth condemne, if it be not faithfully construed; poyson is taken out of the Hony-suckle by the Spider; venom out of the Rose by the canker; and dung out of the Maple tree by the Scorpion: euen so the greatest wicked∣nesse is drawne out of the greatest wit, if it bee abused by will, or intangled
with the world, or inueigled with women. The Rose, though a little be eaten with the Canker, yet being distilled, yeeldeth sweete water; the Iron though fretted with the rust, yet being burnt in the fire, shineth brighter: so wit, al∣though it hath beene eaten with the Canker of his owne conceit, and fretted with the rust of vaine loue, yet being purified in the Still of wisedome, and tryed in the fire of zeale, will shine bright, and smell sweete in the nost∣rilles of all young nouices. As an edge cannot bee any thing worth, if it haue nothing to cut, and as Miners cannot worke without met∣tals: so wit cannot thriue without wealth. As it nothing aualeth to be a cunning Lapinarie, and haue no stones; or a skilfull Pylot and haue no ship; or a thrifty man, and haue no money: so it is to little purpose to haue fine dex∣terity of wit, except there be wealth to maintaine it. He that hath a garden plot, doth as welsow the pothearb, as the Margerum
as well the Leeke as the Lilly, as well the wholesome Isop as the faire Car∣nation, the which hee doth to the in∣tent he may haue wholsome hearbs as well to nourish his inward parts, as sweete flowers to please his outward desire, aswell fruitfull plants to refresh his senses, as faire shewes to please his sight: euen so, whosoeuer that hath a sharp and capable wit, let him as well giue his mind to sacred know∣ledge of Diuinitie, as to the profound study of Philosophy, that by his wit hee may not onely reape pleasure, but profit, not onely contentation in mind, but quietnesse in conscience. He that thinketh to buy meate in the Market for honesty, without money, may haue a godly mind, but hee shal be sure to haue an empty belly: so hee that seeketh to get wealth by wit with∣out friends, may haue a wittie head, but hee shall bee sure to haue an empty purse. There is nothing more smooth, then Glasse, yet nothing more brittle; no∣thing more faire then snow, yet no∣thing lesse firme: so there is nothing
more fine then wit, yet nothing more fickle. As Polypus vpon what Rocke so euer he lighteth, turneth himselfe into the same likenesse; or as the bird Piralis sitting vpon a white cloth is white; vp∣on grene, greene, and changeth his colour with euery cloath; or as our changeable silke turned to the Sunne hath many colours, and turned backe, the contrary: so wit shapeth it selfe to euery conceit, being constant in no∣thing but in inconstancie. As the rude Poet Cherillus had no∣thing to be noted in his verses, but one∣ly the name of Alexander; nor that ru∣rall painter Daretus any thing to couer his deformed Ape, but a white cur∣taine: so many hauing nothing to shadow their shamelesse wickednesse, but onely a a shew of wit. Diuersitie of Wits. THose Cedars, that yeeld the fairest florish, bring forth no fruit, but those which doe not so fairely flourish, are fruitfull: so many times some haue
the fine grace of Rhetoricke, that lacke the soundnesse of wisedome; and some againe haue plentie of profitable mat∣ter, that want the exornations of e∣loquence. As some women doe not conceaue by some men, but being ioyned to o∣thers become fruitfull: so some wits are indocible of some masters, which be∣ing vnder others doe profit: because there is a simpathy and an antipathy or wits, as well as of bodies. As the adamant doth resist all force, and is mollified by the warme and fresh bloud of a goate: so some wits will not bee mannaged by any force, but are softned and moderated by faire meanes and gentle behauiour. As among so many thousand men, there are no faces alike in euery respect: so euery man hath his seuerall dispo∣tion and manner of liuing. Bookes. AS Gold is tryed by the touch: so good bookes by their worth. As in sweete oyles, ointment and
wines: so in bookes antiquity doth adde estimation and price. As those precious Sones are more to be esteemed, which not onely doe de∣light the eyes with variety of colours, and the nose with a sweete sent, but also are effectuall for medicine: so those bookes are most to be regarded, which haue not onely the exornations of speech, but also doe free the minde from vices by wholesome precepts. Bees abstaine from withered flowers: so we should abstaine from corrupt, vi∣cious and obscene bookes. Physitions forbid to vse the hearbe called Wintercherie although it bee good to fasten loose teeth, because the danger is great in bringing dotage and deliration: so wee must not vse those bookes, that polish the tongue, and corrupt the manners. As it is sae to lye vpon the hearbe Tryfoly, because Serpents cannot abide to come neare it: so we should be con∣versant in those bookes, in which no infection is to be feared. As to them that are dimme sighted, euery place is darke and obscure, be∣cause
they carry darknesse about with them in their eyes: so to the vnlearned euery booke, and euery stile is difficult and abstruse. In times past, they that made decrees for the people, had wont to write, Good Fortune, that they might seeme to haue added nothing of their owne: some doe write trifles in other mens bookes, which pertaine nothing to the matter. Plutarchus. As they that are wise, doe not forth∣with drinke of euery fountaine, be∣cause some bring health, some bring a seemely countenance, and others bring destruction: so it is not safe to read e∣uery booke, because as out of some thou maist sucke a good disposition of mind, so out of others, lust, out of o∣thers, ambition is drawne. As that worke is most laudable, wherein the arte commendeth the matter, the matter countennceth the arte: so that is the best booke, wherein the profitablenesse of the argu∣ment commendeth the eloquence, and the eloqence of the authour com∣endeth the argument.
As cheries bee fulsome when they bee through ripe, because they bee plenty: so bookes bee stale when they be printed in that they bee common. As I referre the readers to Conradus Gesers Bibliotheca for Latine, Greeke, and Hebrew authours: so for English writers I referre them to Andrew aunsels Catalogue of English bookes. Reading of bookes. AS in meates wee doe not onely looke for pleasantnesse, but for wholesomnesse: so in hearing and reading of authours. Plut. As wee see our selues in other mens eyes: so in other mens writings wee may see, what becommeth vs, and what becommeth vs not. Idem. As a field too much dunged, becom∣meth parched, but if it haue no com∣post, it waxeth barren: so by moderate reading the wit groweth and is brought to good liking; for the minde is no lesse fatted by reading, then the ground by manuring. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 23. As it is more profitable often to
manure the ground, then to manure it much: so daily reading bringeth more fruite, then plodding continually at it. Plin. ibidem in fine. As the sent of spices and flowers is more acceptable somewhat off, then close to the nose: so there are some∣things, that please, if they belightly passed ouer; which being exactly looked into, doe loose their grace; of which kind are the fables of Poets, and the Histories of gentiles. Those things that liue long, doe not soone spring vp: so that worke that thou wouldst haue alwayes to be read, ought to bee throughly laboured in, and seriously scanned. As curers of mens bodies doe extract wholesome medicines out of poysonous Serpents and venemous beasts, and reiect that which is hurtfull and dangerous: so in reading Poets, Histo∣rians, and Phylosophers, wee should leaue that which is naught, and take that which is good and profitable. Theodoricus Cyraenensisser. 1. de Grae. As trauellers haue many ostes, but ew friends: so they that cursorily read
all things hand ouer head, doe runne ouer much, and remember little. Seneca epistola secuuda. As beasts doe chew their cuds: so profiting wits doe ruminate, what they reade. Philo in lib. de Agricultura. As meate eaten greedily, hath nei∣ther profit nor pleasure: so authors read ouer too hastily. Polybius lib. 3. Histo∣riarum. As drunken men, thinke they see moe, when they see but one: so they that through vnskilfulnesse doe not see the truth in authours, doe bring in many and diuers constructions. A choyce is to be had in reading of bookes. AS Vlysses by stopping his ares with wax escaped the danger of the Syrens: so, if in reading of authours, wee meete with any obscene or erroni∣ous matter, wee are to passe it ouer with deafe eares and blindfolded eyes. Plutarch. As Bees doe not gather all things of one flower, but of one they gather
of another hony, and of another bee glew: so all things are not to looked for out of one authour, but wee must take that out of each one which is most profitable; Out of Poets and oratours eloquence and splendour of words; Out of Logitians sound and solide argu∣ments; Out of Phylosophers the know∣ledge of nature; and out of Diuines precepts of liuing. Plin. lib. 11. cap. 7. As Bees out of the bitterest flowers, and sharpest thornes, doe gather the sweetest hony: so out of obscene and wicked fables some profit may be ex∣tracted. Plutarchus. As some in feastings doe vse an A∣methist against drunkennesse: so in reading of Poets wee must vse the di∣rection of good rules, least they infect the minde. Plin lib. 37. cap. 9. As little Bees from euery place bring home that which is profitable: so a student doth except from euery authour that which his purpose. Plinius lib. 21. cap. 21. No man is so mad, that had rather drinke poyson out of Neres great rich boule, then wholesome wine out of a
Samian vessell: so he that is wise, had ather fetch wholesome precepts of iuing, set downe in what style soeuer, hen draw pestiferous opinions out of loquentest writer. We must not obey Poets and Phy∣osophers, as Schollers do their School∣masters: but as Cato being a boy obeyed his Shool master, commanding him to doe a thing, who asked him, for what cause hee so commanded? so credit and beliefe is to be yeelded vnto bookes and Authours, if they render sound reasons for their assertions. Plut. in Moral. As the Lord de la Nouue in the six discourse of his politike and military dicourses censureth of the Bookes of Amadis de Gaule, which he saith are no lesse hurtfull to youth, then workes of Machiauell to age: so these bookes are accordingly to bee censured of, whose names follow; Beuis of Hampton, Guy of Warwicke, Arthur of the round table, Huon of Burdeaux, Oliuer of th Castle, the foure Sonnes of Aymo Gargantua, Girelcon, the Honour of Chiualrie, Primaleon of Greece, Pal∣merin
de Oliua, the seauen Champions the Myrror of Knight-hood, Blancher∣dine, Meruin Howleglafse, the stories of Palladyne, and Palmendos the black Knight, the Maiden Knight, the history of Caelestina, the Castle of Fame, Gallia of France, Ornatus and Artesia. &c. The vse of reading of many Bookes. AS Physitians apply a medicine, fond out for one disease, to all them that are either like it, or haue any affinity with it: so we must apply sayings of authours vnto diuers vses Plutarch. Bees out of diuers flowers draw diuers iuices, but they temper and digest them by their owne verte, o∣therwise they would make no hony: so all authours are to be turned ouer, and what thou readest is to bee trans∣posed to thine owne vse. Sna. One tall tree is not wondered at, where the whole wood mounteth a∣loft: so one sentence is not marked,
where all the whole booke is full of hem. Seneca. Out of hearbs and plants the best hings are to bee extracted: so the best yings are to be gathered out of au∣hours. Philosophie. AS Anacharsis said that the Athe∣nians did vse money to none other end, but to number and count with∣all: so some doe vse the precepts of Phylosophie onely for ostentation: Plut. in Moral. The aire, which is in the eares, vn∣lesse it be quiet, and want the proper sound, and be free from tinckling and noyse, doth not exactly receiue those things, that are spoken: so that part, which is called phylosophie, doeth not rightly iudge of those things, that are outwardly receiued, if any thing doeth inwairdly disturbe and distract. ibid. Hee doeth not digge for puddles, that hath wels and fountaines of his owne, and knowes of them: so he doth not seeke for councell of others, who
himselfe hath learned Phylosophie. Ibidem. Strangers that are enfranchised, and made free denisons, doe condemne, and take in ill part many things done in the City, when as those, that are borne, and brought vp in it, doe allow and approue them: so doe they tha haue tasted of Phylosophy from their child-hood. Ibidem. As it is grieuous vnto passengers by Sea, when they leaue the country they know, and that appeareth not to which they faile: so to fresh men in Phyloso∣phie at the first it is troublesome to de∣part from accustomed pleasures, when as yet they do not see to what happines Phylosophy will bring them. Ibidem. Birds soare aloft in the aire, but Cattes liue by scratching and biting vpon the earth: so in the study of Phy∣losphy, some bestow themselues vpon contemplalion of high matters, others giue themselues to quiddities and so∣phistication. ibidem. As according to Philoxenus, that is the sweetest flesh, which is no flesh, and those the delicatest fishes, which
e no fishes: so that Phylosophie best elighteth, which is mixte with Poetry, nd that poetry best pleaseth which elisheth of Phylosophie. Ibidem. When vessels are filled full of liquor, en the aire is expelled: so they that aue profited in Phylosophy, are filled ith the truest riches, now doe lesse lory in bushy haire, and gay apparell, nd are lesse rigorous to others, but ore seuere against themselues. ibidem. As men are initiated with clamour nd tumulte, but afterwards when as he holy things are in hand, there is ilence, and harkening with reuerence: o the beginnings of Phylosophie are umultuous, but the mysteries full of ranquility Ibidem. As in a storme when the signe Gemini ppeares, the mariners conceiue hope of a calme: so after the first bruite and difficulty in Phylosophy, the light of ruth ariseth and driues away all dif∣fidence. Ibidem. Menedemus said, that many came to Athens, who first were wise men; afterwards became Phylosophers, that is, students in wisdome, then Rhetori∣cians,
and last of all idiots: so in Phy∣losophie the more thou shalt profit, the lesse thou shalt be puffed vp with pride and disdaine. ibidem. As a ballance cannot stand still but falleth to one side other: sn in Phyloso∣phie, hee that profiteth not vnto good∣nesse, proceedeth vnto naughtinesse. Ibidem. As they that expect a siege, doe ga∣ther vp their money, and prouide victuals, and prepare all things that are necessarie against the enemies com∣ming: so against the insultings of wrath and anger the minde is to bee furnished with the precepts of Phylosophie. Ibid. As the stone is to be applyed vnto the lyne, and not the lyne vnto the stone: so our life is to bee squared by the rules of Phylosophie, and not Phylosophie by the customes of our life. Ibidem. As they that saile in a large Sea, doe toniecture by the force of the wines, and by the compasse of their course, that they haue gone forwards; albeit the hauen doeth as yet appeare vnto them, yet they neuer rest till they haue attained vnto the hauen: so wee
must not rest in Phylosophy, vntill wee haue attained the perfect habit of a wise man. Ibidem. As in the cure of a disease ease is not elt, vnlesse a souund habite be recoue∣red: so Phylosophie is not profited in, vnlesse foolishnesse fall away by little and little, and a better habit of mind be assumed. Ibidem. As when children learne first to write, their hands are guided, and af∣terwards of themselues they imitate their copie: so the minde is first to bee directed by rule and prescript, vntill it beginne to Phylosophie of it selfe. Seneca. As first that choler is to be purged, whence madnesse growes, afterwards the man is to be counselled and aduised; otherwise hee that admonisheth a mad man how he should behaue himselfe at home and abroad, is more mad then the mad man: so the mind is first to bee freed from false opinions, after∣wards the precepts of Phylosophie are to bee deliuered. Seneca de consolatione cap. 24. Wooll doth forthwith drinke vp
some colours, but not others, excep it be often boyled and in them: so wi doe presently relish of other discipline the learning of Phylosophie, except be deeply rooted, and soundly seated doth not colour the mind. Seneca. As the soule is hid in the body whence euery part hath his vigour and motion; and the mysteries, which are the best part of the holy things doe not lye open, but to those that are initiated into them: so the precepts of Phyloso∣phie are knowne to euery body, but that which is the best in Phylosophie lyeth hid. Seneca. Seeds that are cast into good ground, thriue thereafter, but falling into a barren soyle, proue sterill, like vnto their earth: so also proue the precepts of Phylosophie, if they fall into a good or bad mind. Seneca. That fountaine in which Nitre is bred, neither breedeth nor nourisheth any other thing: so Phylosophie, that is, the studie of wisedome, doth wholy chalenge vnto her selfe the whole mind. As the water of the Sea is sweeter in the bottome, then at the toppe: so
the deeplier that thou penetratest into phylosophie, the lesse bitternesse it hath. Erasmus in Simil. As a precious stone is a very little thing, and yet it is preferred before large and great stones: so Phylosophie is a little thing in shew, but very pre∣cious in price. Bay beries are bitter, but yet whole∣some: so the precepts of Phylosopher are more wholesome, then delight∣some. Plin. lib. 16. cap. 30. As there is nothing more profitable for the strength of the body then wine, if it be well vsed; nor any thing more hurtfull, if it bee abused: so Phyloso∣phie is a very profitable thing, if it bee moderately vsed; but very pastilent, if thou beest so drunke with the study of it, that thou alienatest thy selfe from the common functions of life. As the hedge-hogge presaging a tempest, doth either wind himselfe as round as a foote-ball, or hideth him∣selfe in the sand: so against the frownes of fortune the minde is to be confirmed and strengthened with the precepts of Phylosophy. Erasmus in Simil.
Considia refusing all austere cure▪ Democrates the Physition ministred vnto her the milke of goates which he fed with masticke: so they that altoge∣ther abhorre the seuere precepts of Phy∣losophie, are to be instructed with mor pleasing ables, but those which relish of philosophie. Ibidem. As the hearbe Nasturtium doeth extingush lust and venery, but quicke∣neth the vigour of the mind: so the study of Phylosophie doth traduce and transpose the strength of the body the force of the mind, that a man by so is much more wise in eternall things, by how much he is duller in these earthly, grosse and corporall matters▪ Plin. lib. 20. cap. 13. As some cary euery where about with them certaine precious stone ∣gainst diseases, inchauntments, dn∣kennesse, lightning, and other ∣chaunces: so certaine rulers of Phylo∣sophy are euer to be kept with vs, and caried about of vs against the dises of the mind, lust, wrath, ambition, coutousnesse, and such like. As hony, which is most sweete
vnto others, is very bitter vnto them that haue the Iaundice: so the precepts of Phylosophy are pleasant vnto good men, but grieuous to the bad. As vineger is sowre to be tasted, but forcible against the stinging of Ser∣pents: so the precepts of Phylosophie are austere and seuere, but yet bring present remedy against, the pestilent concupiscences of the mind. Plin. lib. 23. cap. 1. Iuy being drunke doth hurt the sinewes, but being outwardly applied doth helpe them: so if thou altogether giuest thy selfe vnto Phylosophie, it hutteth piety and Religion, but if thou moderately tastest of it, it much profi∣teth vnto learning and erudition. Eras∣in Simil. If thou moderatly drinkest of Gal∣lus a riuer of Phrygia, it cureth the infir∣mities of the body, but if thou immo∣derately quafest, it bringeth frantick∣nesse: so if thou moderately studiest phylosophie, it much profiteth, but if thou wholy addictest thy, selfe vnto the study of it, it taketh away the soundnesse of minde, and filleth thee
full of vaine-glory. Ibidem. As the herbe Dictamnum draweth darts and arrowes out of the bodie; Harts shewed first the vse of it: so Phy∣losophie doth draw out of the minde the darts of fortune. Plin. lib. 25. cap. 8. Theophrast. lib. 6. cap. 16. As oyle doth asswage the aches of the body: so Phylosophie doth appease the commotions of the minde, and doth expell the mists of ignorance. Plin. lib. 2. cap. 106. As the stone Pyrites doth not dis∣couer his firy nature, except it be rubbed and fretted, and then it doth burne thy fingers: so the force of Phylosophie is not perceiued, except thou exer∣ciest it. As Physitions when they would giue vnto their loathing patients a me∣dicine of a sharpe and sowre tast, do mingle it with sweet liquor, and so paliate the wholesome bitternesse: so▪ and after the same manner ancient Phy∣losophy seazed vpon those ancient Bar∣barians, being couered in the vestments of fables, verses, and poems, and so allured them vnto instruction by
cloaking the tediousnesse of discipline. Tyrius Platonicus sermone. 29. As there is no vse of Physicke, except it banish diseases from the body: so neither of Phylosophy, except it expell vices from the soule. Pythagorai apud Stobaeum. ser. 82. As Gardiners doe first water their ground: so first let vs water our soules with that which may bee safely taken from the Phylosophie of the Heathen, that they may the better receiue the spirituall and heauenly seed. Clemens Alexand. lib. 1. stromat. As the Law taught the Hebrewes till the comming of Christ: so Phylo∣sophie after the manner of a Schoole∣master taught the Grecians. Ibidem. As Agar and Ismael should haue bin subiect to Sarab and Isaac: so phylo∣sophie and the Arts ought to be subiect to Diuinitie. Many are so idle and negligent, that they take no care for the vine, but pre∣sently plucke the grapes: so many thinke themselues so ingenious, that they neither regard Phylosophie, nor Logicke, nor the Physickes, but onely
require a bare and naked faith. Clem Alexand. lib. stromat. As the light of a Candle is nothing if be compared to the brightnesse of th sunne: so neither is humane Phyloso∣phie, if it bee compared to Christia Diuinitie. As Heauen, Earth, and the aire not to bee contemned, because som haue abused them, worshipping the for God: so neither is Phylosophie be reiected although many haue abuse it, but wee may lawfully, reape prof by it. Gregorius Nazianzeui orat, ∣nebri in laudem Basilii. Euen as when the wooers could no haue the company of Penelope, they to her handmaidens: so they that can∣not attaine to the knowledge of Phylo∣sophie, apply their minds to thing mo vile and contemptible. Bion the Phyl∣sopher. Phylosophers. As the people called Psylli in A∣frica, and the Marsi in Italie are not onely themselues not hurt
pents, but cure others being hurt touching them with their spittle: it is not enough for Phyloso∣ers, not to bee corrupted themselues ith vicious affections, but it is re∣isite that they free others from hurt∣ll desires by their speech and precepts. They say that the Bath-keepers of sia and Graecia, when they would iue the people from them, make a oake in them with Darnell and ockle, which causeth a swimming in e head: so Phylosophers as often as ey would remoue the vnlearned mul∣de from their bookes, they mingle their writings certaine Mathemati∣ll numbers and figures, which doe eed such a giddinesse and dizinesse their heads, that they cast away their ookes. Plin. lib. 18. cap. 17. As the highnes of moutaines doth lesse ppeare to those that behold them a far ff, but when you come nearer them, en-their height is better knowne: no man knoweth how high and lofty he mind of a Phylosopher is, and hat eminencie it hath ouer all humane hings, vnlesse you neare contemplate
it, and come vnto him by imitation. Seneca. As Tragaedians in Theaters: so a Phy∣losopher in Schooles is to be heard vn∣till the end. Plut. As a Physition more willingly cureth that eye, which seeth for many, and watcheth ouer many: so a Phyloso∣pher doth more willingly instruct the minde of a Prince, who is prouident and carefull for many. Idem. As many ignorant men are desirous to tast of the hony of Pontus, but when they haue tasted it, doe presently vo∣mit it forth again, by reason of the sweetnesse and bitternesse: so many curious fellowes desirous to make a tryall of the wit and learning of Phy∣losophers, and especially of Diogenes, being put downe of them, were con∣strayned forthwith to turne their backes. Diogenes in diatribis, & apud Stobaum sermone. 11. As an hunbandman cutteth vp by the rootes thornes and briers, and warily and circumspectly pruneth his vines and oliue trees, least hee cutting away that which is superfluous, cut
also a way that is sound and profitable: so a Phylosopher doth vtterly roote out of the minds of yong men lust, couet∣ousnesse, enuy and such like; but hee warily amendeth immoderate shame∣fastnesse, least he should quite eradicate and extirpe it. Plutar chus in Moral. Sepulchers without are beautifully garnished, but within are full of cor∣ruption and dead mens bones: so the opinions of Phylosophers, the super∣ficiall exornation of words being taken away, thou shalt find many vaine and absurd things, especially, when they discourse of the soule, now honouring it, now reproaching it, without meane or modestie. Chrysost. hom. 28. operi imperfect. Poetrie. AS in a Vine clusters of grapes are often hid vnder the broad and spacious leaues: so in deepe conceited, and well couched poems, figures and fables, many things, very profitable to bee knowne, doe passe by a young Scholler. Plut.
As according to Philoxenus, that flesh is most sweete which is no flesh; and those the delectablest fishes, which are no fishes: so poetrie doth most de∣light which is with Phylosophie; and that Phylosophie, which is mixt with Poetry. Plutarhus in Commentario, quomodo adolescens Poet as auàire debet. As a Bee gathereth the sweetest and mildest hony from the bitterest flowers, and sharpest thornes: so some profit may bee extracted out of obscene and and wonton Poems and fables. ibidem. Albeit many be drunke with wine, yet the Vines are not to be cut downe, as Lycurg did, but Wels and Foun∣taines are to bee digged neare vnto them: so although many abuse poetrie, yet it is not be banished, but discreti∣on is to bee vsed, that it may be made wholesome. Idem. As Mandrake growing neare Vines, doth make the wine more milde: so phylosophie bordering vpon poetry doth make the knowledge of it more moderate. Idem. As poyson mixt with meate is very deadly: so asciuiousnesse and petulancie
in poetry mixt with profitable and pleasing maters very pestilent. ibidem. As wee are delighted in deformed creatures artificially painted: so in poetry, which is a liuely adumbration of things, euill matters ingeniously contriued doe delight. As Physitions vse for medicine the feete & wings of the flies Cantharides, which flies are deadly poyson: so wee may gather out of the same poem, that that may quell the hurtfull venome of it; for Poets doe alwayes mingle some∣what in their Poems, whereby they condemne, what they declare. ibidem. As our breath doth make a shriller sound being sent through the narrow channell of a Trumpet, then if it bee diffused abroad into the open aire: so the well knit and succinct combination of a Poem, doth make our meaning better knowne and discerned, then if it were deliuered at randome in prose. Seneca. As hee that drinkes of the Well Cli∣torius, doth abhorre wine: so they that haue once tasted of poetry, cannot away with the studie of Phylosophie;
after the same manner holds the con∣trarie. As the Anabapists abhorre the libe∣rall artes and humane sciences: so puri∣tanes and precisians detest poetry and poems. As Eloquence hath found many preachers and orators worthy fauou∣rers of her in the English tongue: so her Sister poetrie hath found the like welcome and entertainement giuen her by our English poets, which makes our language so gorgeous and delecta∣ble among vs: As Rubarbe and Sugarcandy are pleasant and profitable: so in poetry there is sweetnesse and goodnesse. M. Iohn Haring in his Apologie for poetry before his tranlated Ariostot. Many cockney and wanton women are often sicke, but in faith they cannot tell where: so the name of poetry is o∣dious to some, but neither his cause, nor effects, neither the summe that containes him, nor the particularities descending from him, giue any fast handle to their carping dispraise. Sir Philip Sidney in his Apologie for poetry:
Poets. AS some doe vse an Amethist in compotations against drunkennes: so certaine precepts are to be vsed in hearing and reading of poets, least they infect the mind Plut. & Plin. lib. 37. cap. 9. As in those places where many wholesome hearbs doe grow, there also grows many poysonfull weeds: so in Poets there are many excellent things, and many pestilent matters. Plut. As Simonides said, that the Thessa∣lians were more blockish, then that they could bee deceiued of him: so the riper and pregnanter the wit is, the sooner it is corrupted of Poets. idem. As Cato when hee was a Scholler would not beleeue his master, except he rendered a reason of that he taught him: so we are not to beleeue Poets in all that they write or say, except they yeeld a reason Idem. As in the same pasture the Bee seaseth on the flower, the Goate grazeth on the shrub, the swine on the roote, and the Oxen, Kine and Horses on the grasse: so in Poets one seeketh for
History, and other for ornament of speech, and an other for proofe and an other for precepts of good life. idem. As they that come very suddenly out of a very darke place, are greatly troubled, except by little and little they be accustomed to the light: so in reading of Poets, the opinions of Phylosophers are to bee sowne in the minds of young Schollers, least many diuersities of Doctrines doe afterwarded distract their minds. Idem. As in the portraiture of murder or incest, wee prayse the Art of him that drew it, but we detest the thing it selfe: so in laciuious Poets let vs imitate their elocution, but execrate their wanton∣nesse. Idm. Some things that are not excellent of themselues, are good for some, be∣cause they are meete for them: so some things are commended in Poets, which are fit and correspondent for the per∣sons, they speake of, although in them∣selues they be filthy & not to be spoken: As lame Demonids wished, that the shoes that were stolne from him, might fit his feet that had stolne them. Idem.
As that Ship is endangered, where all leane to one side, but is in saftie, one leaning one way, and another another way: so the dissension of Poets among themselues, doth make them, that they lesse infect their readers. And for this purpose our Satyrists, Hall, the Author of Pigmalions Image, and cer∣taine Satyres, Rankins, and such others, are very profitable. As a Bee doth gather the iuice of hony from flowers, whereas others are onely delighted with the colour and smell: so a Phylosopher findeth that among Poets which is profitable for good life, when as others are tickled only with pleasure. Plut. As wee are delighted in the picture of a Viper or a spider artificially enclo∣sed within a precious iewell: so Poets delight vs in the learned and cunning depainting of vices. As some are delighted in counterfe wines confected of fruits, not that they refresh the heart, but that they make drunke: so some are delighted in Poets onely for their obscenity, neuer res∣pecting their eloquence good grace, or learning.
As Emperors, Kings and Princes haue in their hands authority to dignifie or disgrace their Nobles, Attendants, Subiects and vassals: so Poets haue the whole power in their hands to make men either immortally famous for their valiant exploites and vertuous exer∣cises, or perpetually infamous for their vicious liues. As God giueth life vnto man: so a Poet giueth ornament vnto it. As the Greeke and Latine Poets haue wonne immortall credit to their natiue speech, being encouraged and graced by liberall patrones and bountifull Be∣nefactors: so our famous and learned Lawreate Masters of England would entitle our English to farre greater admired excellency, if either the Em∣perour Augustus, or Octaua his Sister, or noble Mecaenas were aliue to reward and countenance them; or if our witty Comedians and stately Tra∣gedians (the glorious and goodly re∣presenters of all fine wit, glorified phrase and quaint action) be still sup∣ported and vpheld, by which meanes for lacke of Patrones, (Oh! ingratefull
and damned age) our Poets are soly or chiefly maintained, countenanced and patronized. In the infancy of Greece, they that handled in the audience of the people, graue & necessary matters, were called wise men or eloquent men, which they ment by Vates: so the rest, which sang of loue matters, or other lighter deuises alluring vnto pleasure and delight, were called Poetae or makers. As the holy Prophets and sanctified Apostles could neuer haue foretold nor spoken of such supernaturall matters, vnlesse they had beene inspired of God: so Cicero in his Tuscalane questions is of that mind, that a Poet cannot ex∣presse verses aboundantly, sufficientiy, and fully, neither his eloquence can flow pleasantly, or his words sound well and plenteously, without celestiall instinction; which Poets themselues doe very often and gladly witnesse of themselues, as namely. Ouid in 6. Fast. Est Des in nobis agitante calesci∣mus illo, &c. And our famous English Poet Spen∣ser, who in his Shepheards Calender.
lamenting the decay of Poetry at these dayes, saith most sweetly to the same. Thē make thee wings of thine aspiring wit And whence thou camest flye backe t Heauen apace. &c. As a long Gowne maketh not an Ad∣uocate, although a Gowne bee a fit or∣nament for him: so timing nor versing maketh a Poet, albeit the Senate of Poets hath chosen verse as their fittest rayment; but it is that faining notable images of vertues, vices, or what else, with that delightfull teaching, which must be the right describing note to know a Poet by. Sir Philip Sidney in his Aplogy for Poetry. A comparatiue discourse of our English Poets, with the Greeke, Latine, and Italian Poets. AS Greece had three Poets of grea antiquity, Orpheus, Linus and Musaeus; and Italy, other three anci∣nt Poets, Liius Andronicus, Ennius and Plautus: so hath England three ancient Poets, Chaucer, Gower and Lydgate.
As Homer is reputed the Prince of Greeke Poets; and Petrach of Italian Poets: so Chaucer is accounted the God of English Poets. As Homer was the first that adorned the Greeke tongue with true quantity: Piers Plowman was the first that ob∣serued the true quantity of verse with∣out the curiositie of Rime. Ouid writ a Chronicle from the be∣ginning of the World to his owne time, that is, to the raigne of Augustus the Emperour: so hath Harding the Cronicler (after his maner of old harsh timing) from Adam to his time, that is, to the raigne of King Edward the fourth. As Sotades Maronites the Iambicke Poet gaue himselfe wholy to write im∣pure and laciuious things: so Skelton (I know not for what great worthi∣nesse, surnamed the Poet Laureat) ap∣plyed his wit to scurriliies and ridicu∣lous matters, such among the Greekes were called Pantomimi, with vs Buffons. As Consaluo Periz that excellent learned man, and Secratary of King
Philip of Spayne, in translating the Vlysses of Homer out of Greeke into Spanish, hath by good iudgement auoided the faulte of Riming, although▪ not fully hit perfect and true versify∣ing: so hath Henrie Howard that true and noble Earle of Surrey in transla∣ting the fourth booke of Virgls, Ae∣neas, whom Michael Drayton in his Englands heroycall Epistles hath eter∣nized for an Epistle to his faire Ge∣raldine. As these Neoterickes Iouianus Pan∣tanus, Politianus, Marullus Tarchani∣ta, the two Strozao the father and the Sonne, Palingenius, Mantuanus, Phy∣llphus, Quintianus Stoa and Germanu Brixius haue obtained renowne and good place among the ancient Latine Poets: so also these English men being Latine Poets, Gualter Haddon, Nicho∣las Car, Gabriel Harney, Christopher Ocland, Thomas Newton with his Ley∣land, Thomas Watson, Thomas Cam∣pion, Brunswerd and Willey, haue at∣tained good report and honourable ad∣uancement in the Latine Empire; As the Greekes tongue is made
amous and eloquent by Homer, Hesiod euripedes, Aeschilus Sophocles, Pinda∣us, Phocylides and Aristophanes; and he Latine tongue by Virgill, Ouid, Horace, Silius Italicus, Lucanus, Lu∣cretius, Ausonius and Claudianus: so the English tongue is mightily en∣riched, and gorgeouly inuested in rare ornaments and resplendent habiliments by sir Philip Sidney, Spencer, Daniel Drayton, Warner, Shakespeare, Mar∣low and Chapma. As Xenophon, who imitate so excel∣lently, as to giue vs effigiem iusti impe∣rij, the portraiture of a iust Empire vn∣der the name of Cyrus (as Cicero saith of him) made therein an absolute heroi∣call Poem; and as Heliodorus writ in prose his sugred inuention of that picture of Loue in Theagines and Theagines and Cariclea, and yet both excellent admired Poets: so Sir Philip Sidney writ his immortall Poem, The Countesse of Pembrookes Arcadia, in prose, and yet our rarest Poet. As Sextus Propertius said; Nescio quid magis nascitur Iliade: so I say of Spencers Fairy Queene, I know not
what more excellent or exquisite Poem may bee written. As Achilles had the aduantage of Hector, because it was his fortune to be extolled and renowned by the heauen∣ly verse of Homer: so Spencers Elifa the Fairy Queene hath the aduantage of all the Queenes in the world, to bee eternized by so diuine a Poet. As Theocritus is famoused for his Idyllia in Greeke, and Virgill for his Eclogs in Latine: so Spencer their imi∣tatour in his Shepheards Calender, is renowned for the like argument, and honoured for fine Poeticall inuention, and most exquisit wit. As Parthenius Nicaeus excellently sung the prayses of his Arete: so Da∣niel hath diuinely sonetted the match∣lesse beauty of his Delia. As euery one mourneth, when hee heareth of the lamentable plangors of Thracian Orpheus for his dearest E∣ridice: so euery one passionateth, when he readeth the afflicted death of Da∣niels distressed Rosamond. As Lucan hath mournefully de∣painted the ciuill wars of Pompey and
Caesar: so hath Daniel the ciuell warres of Yorke and Lancaster; and Drayton the ciuell warres of Edward the second, and the Barons. As Virgil doth imitate Catullus in the like matter of Ariadne for his story of Queene Dido: so Michael Drayton doth imitate Ouid in his Eng∣lands Heroical Epistles. As Sophocles was called a Beefor the sweetnesse of his tongue: so in Charles Fitz-lefferies, Drake, Drayton is ter∣med Golden-mouth'd, for the purity and pretiousnesse of his style and phrase. As Accius, M. Attiliu and Mili∣thus were called Tragoediographi, be∣cause they writ Tragidies: so may wee truly terme Michael Drayton Tragoe∣diographus, for his passionate penning the downfals of valiant Robert of Nor∣mandy, chast Matilda, and great Ga∣ueston. As Ioan, Honterus in Latine verse write three Booke of Cosmography with Geographicall tables: so Michael Drayton is now penned in English verse a Poem called Polu-olbion Geo∣graphicall
and Hydrographicall of all the forests, woods, mountaines, foun∣taines, riuers, lakes, flouds, bathes and springs that be in England. As Aulus Persius Flaccus is repor∣ted among all writers to be of an honest life and vpright conuersation: so Mi∣chael Drayton (quem toties honoris & amoris causa nomino) among Schollers, Souldiours, Poets and all sorts of people, is held for a man of vertuous disposition, honest conuersation, and well gouerned cariage, which is almost miraculous among good wits in these declining and corrupt times, when there is nothing but rogery in villanous men, and when cheating and crafti∣nesse is counted the cleanest wit, and soundest wisdome. As Dicius Ausonius Gallus in Fastorum, penned the occurrences of the world from the first creation of it to his time, that is, to the raigne of the Emperour Gratian: so Warner in his absolute Albions England hath most admirably penned the Historie of his owne countrey from Noah to his time, that is, to the raigne of Queene
Elizabeth; I haue heard him termed of the best wits of both our Vniuersities, our English Homer. As Euripedes is the most sententious among the Greeke Poets: so is Warner among our English Poets. As the soule of Euphorbus was thought to liue in Pythagorus: so the sweete wittie soule of Ouid liues in mellifluous and hony-tongued Shake∣speare, witnesse his Venus and Adonis, his Lucrece, his sugred Sonnets among his priuate friends, &c. As Platus and Seneca are accounted the best for Comedy and Tragedy a∣mong the Latines: so Shakespeare a∣mong the English is the most excellent in both kinds for the stage; for Comedy, witnesse his Gentlemen of Verona, his Errors, his Loue labors lost, his Loue labours wonne, his Midsummers night dreame, and his Merchant of Venice: for Tragedy his Richard the second, Richard the third, Henry the fourth, King Iohn, Titus Andronicus and his Romeo and Iuliet. As Epius Stolo said, that the Muses would speake with Plantus tongue, if
they would speake Latine: so I say tha the Muses would speake with Shake∣speares fine filed phrase, if they would speake English. As Musaeus, who wrote the lou of Hero and Leander, had two excel∣lent Schollers, Thamaras and Hercul so hath hee in England two excellent Poets, imitators of him in the sam argument and subiect, Christoph Marlow, and George Chapman. As Ouids saith of his worke; Iam{que}, opus exegi, quod nec louisira, nec ignis, Nec poter it rrum,  edax abolere And as Horace saith of his; Exeg monumentum aere perennius; Regali{que} situ pyramidum altius; Quod non imber edax; Non Aquilo impotens possi diruere; aut innumer abilis annorum series & fuga temporum: so say I seue∣rally of Sir Philip Sidneys, Spence Daniels, Draytons, Shakespeares, and Warners workes. Non Iois ira: imbres: Mar: fer∣rum: flamma, senectus, Hoc opus vnda: lues: turbo: vene ruent. Et quanquam ad plucherrimum ho
opus uertendum tres illi Dij conspira∣bt, Cronus, Vulcanus, & pater ipse gentis; Non tamen annorum series, non flam∣ma, nec nsis, Aeternum potuit hoc abolere Decu. As Italy had Dante, Boccace, Pe∣tach, Tosso, Celiano and Ariosto: so England had Mathew Roydon, Tho∣mas Atchelow, Thomas Watson, Tho∣mas Kid, Robert Greene and George Pele. As there are eight famous and chiefe languages, Hebrew Greeke, Latine, Syracke, Arabicke, Italian, Spanish and French: so there are eight notable seuerall kinds of Poets, Heroick, Ly∣ricke, Tragicke, Comicke, Satiricke, Iambick Elegiacke and Pstoral. As Homer and Virgil among the Greekes and Latines are the chiefe Heroicke Poets: so Spencer and Warner be ou chiefe Heroicall Makers. As Pindarus, Anac on and Calli∣achus among the Greekes; and Ho∣race and Catullus among the Latines are the best yricke Poets: so in this faculty the best among our Poets are
Spencer (who excelleth in all kinds) Daniel, Drayton, Shakespeare, Brtton. As these Tragicke Poets flourished in Greece, Acschylus, Euripides, Soph∣eles, Alexander Aetolus, Achaeu Erithriaeus, Astydamas Atheniensit Apollodorus Tarsensis, Nicomachus Phrygius, Thespis Atticus, and Timon Apolloniates; and these among the Latines, Accius, M. Attilius, Pom∣ponius Secundus and Seneca: so these are our best for Tragedie, the Lord Buckhurst, Doctor Leg of Cambridge, Docter Edes of Oxford, master Edward Ferres, the Authour of the Mirrour for Magistrates, Marlow, Peele, Wat∣son, Kid, Shakespeare, Drayton, Chap∣man, Decker, and Beniamin Iohnson. As M. Anneus Lucanus writ two excellent Tragedies, one called Media, the other de incendio Troiae cum Priami calamitate: so Doctor Leg hath penned two famous tragedies, the one of Ri∣chard the third, the other of the de∣struction of Ierusalem. The best Poets for Comedy among the Greekes are these, Menander, A∣ristophanes, Epolis Atheniensis, Alexis
Terius, Nicostratus, Amipfias Athe∣iensis, Anaxandrides, Rhodius, Aristo∣ymus, Archippus, Athenienis and Callias Atheniensis; and among the Latines, Plautus, Terence, Naeuius Sext. Turpilius, Licinius Imbrex, and rgilis Romanus: so the best for Comedy amongst vs be, Edward Earle of Oxford, Doctor Gager of Oxford, Master Rowley once a rare Scholler of learned Pembrooke Hall in Cam∣bridge, Master Edwards one of her Maiesties Chappell, eloquent and wittie Iohn Lilly, Lodge, Gascoyne, Greene, Shakespeare, Thomas Nash, Thomas Heywood, Anthony Mundy our best plotter, Chapman, Porter, Wilson, Hathway, and Henry Chettle. As Horace, Lucilius, Iuenall, Per∣sius and Lucullus are the best for Sa∣tyre among the Latines: so with vs in the same faculty these are chiefe, Piers Plowman, Lodge Hall of Imanuall Col∣ledge in Cambridge; the Authours of Pigmaliones Image, and certaine Sa∣tyrs; the Author of Skialie thei. Among the Greekes I will name but two for Iambicks, Archilochus Pais,
and Hipponax Ephesius: so among vs name but two Iambicall Poets, Gabri Haruey, and Richard Stanyhurst, be∣cause I haue seene no moe in this kind. As these are famous among the Greeks for Elegie, Mlanthus Mym∣nerus Coloponius, Olympius Mysius, Parthenius Nicaeus. Philetas Cous, Theogenes Megarenis, and Pigres Ha∣licssaeus; and these among the La∣tines, Mecaenas, Ouid, Tibullus, Pro∣pertius, T. Valgius, Cassius Seueus and Clodius Sabinus: so these are the most passionate among vs to bewaile & be∣moane the perplexities of Loue, Henry Howard Earle of Surrey, sir Thomas Wyat the elder, sir Francis Brine, sir Philip Sedney, sir Walter Rayleigh, sir Edward Dyer, Spencer, Danel, Dray∣ton, Shakespeare, Whetstone, Gascyne, Samuell Page sometimes felow of Corpus Christi Colledge in Oxford, Churchyard Bretton. As Theocritus in Greeke, Virgil and Mantuan in Latine, Sanazar in Italian; the Authour of Amytae Gudi and Walfinghams Melibaeus are the best for pastorall: so amongst vs the best in
his kind are sir Philip Sidney, master Challener, Spencer, Stepen Gosson, Abraham Frauce and Bernefield. These and many other Epigramma∣ists the Latine tongue hath, Q. Catulus orcius Licinius, Quintus Cornificius, Martial, Cnes, Getulicus, and wittie Thoms More: o in English wee aue these, Heywood Drante, Kendal, Bastard auies. As noble Mecaenas that sprung from the Hetruscan Kings not only graced Poets by his bounty, but also by being Poet himselfe; and as Iames the sixth, in times past King of Scotlnd was not onely a fauorer of Poets, but a Poet, as my friend master Richard Berne∣fl hath in this Disticke passing well ecorded: The King of Scots (thenbeing) was a Poet Athis epnto, and his suries shw it so Elizabeth that Soueraigne and gra∣gracious Queene was not onely a li∣berall Pationesse vnto Poets, but an excellent Poet her selfe, whose learned and noble Muse surmounteth, bee it in Olde, Elegy, Epigram, or in any other kind of Poem Heroicke, or Lyricke.
Octania Sister vnto Augustus the Emperour was exceeding bountiful vnto Virgil, who gaue him for making 26. verses, 1137. pounds, to wit, tenn Sestertiaes for euery verse which a∣mount to aboue 43. pounds for euery verse: so learned Mary, the honorabl Countesse of Pembrooke, the noble Sister of immortall sir Philip Sidney, is very liberall vnto Poets; besides shee is a most delicate Poet, of whom I may say, as Antipater Sidonius writeth of Sappho: Dulcia Mnemosyne demirans car∣mina Sapphus, Quaesinit dicema Pieris unde foret. Among others in times past, Poes had these fauourers, Augustus, Mecae∣nas, Sophocles Germanicus, an Empe∣rour, a noble man, a Senatour, and a Captaine: so of later times Poets had these pratrones, Robert King of Sicil, the great King Frances of France, King Iames of Scotland, and Queene Eliza∣beth of England. As in former times two great Car∣dinals, Bembus and Biena, did counte∣nance Poets: so of late yeares two
Preachers haue giuen them their right hands in fellowship, Beza and Me∣lancthon. As the learned Phylosophers Fra∣castorius and Scaliger haue highly prized them: so haue the eloquent O∣rators Pontanus and Mretus very glo∣riously estimated them. As Georgius Buckananus Iephthe, amongst all moderne Tragedies is able to abide the touch of Aristotles pre∣cepts, and Euripdes examples: so is Bishop Watsons Absalon. As Terence for his translations out of Apollodorus and Menander, and A∣quilius for his translation out of Me∣nander, and C. Germanicus Augustus for his out of Aratus, and Ausonius for his translated Epigrams out of Greeke, and Doctor Iohnson for his Frogge-fight out of Homer, and Wat∣son for his Antigone out of Sophocles, haue got good commndations: so these versifiers for their learned translations are of good note among vs, Phaer for Aeneads, Golding for Ouids Meta∣morphosis, Harington for his Orlando Furioso, the translators of Senecaes
Tragedies, Barnabe Googe for n∣genius, Tueruile for Ouids Epistls and Mantuan, and Chapman for his inchoate Homer. As the Latines haue these Emble∣matists, Andreas Alciatus, Reusnerus, and Sambucus: so wee haue these, Gffrey Whitney, Anrew Wiet, and Thomas Combe. As Nonnus Panapolita writ the Gospell of Saint Iohn in Greeke Hexa∣metrs: Iernis Markam hath written Salomons Caticles in English verse. As C. Plnus writ the life of Pom∣ponius Secundus: so young Charles Fitz-Ieffey, that high towring Fal∣con, hath most gloriously pnned the honourable life and death of wothy sir Francis Drake. As Hesiod writ learnedly of husban∣dry in Greeke: so hath Tusser very wittily and experimentally written of it in English. As Antipater Sidonius was famous for extemporal verse in Greek, & Ouid for his Quicquid conabar dicere versus erat: to was our Trletn, of whom Doctour Case that learned Physition
thus speaketh in the seauenth Booke, and seuenteenth chapter of his Poli∣tickes; Aristoteles suum Theoderetum lauit quendam peritum Tragoedia∣rem actorem; Cicero suum Rosium: nos. Angli Tarletnum, in cis voce & vltu omnesiocosi affectus, in cuius cire∣bso capte lpidaefacetiae habitant. And now our wittie Wilson, who, for learning and extemporall wit in this ficulty, is without compare or com∣pee as to his great and eternall com∣mendations hee manifested in his cha∣ge at the Swanne on the Banke side. As Achillis tortured the dead bo∣dy of Heo, and as tonius, and his wife uluia tormented the liuelsse ps of iciro so Gbrell Harey hath the same inumanitie to Greene that lies full low in his graue. As Eupolis of Athens vsed great li∣bertie in taxing the vices of men: so doth Thomas Naso witnesse the brood of the Hrueys. As Actaeon was wooried of his owne hounds: so is Tom Nash of his e of Dogger. Dogges were the death of
Euripedes, but be not disconsolate gal∣lent young Inuenall, Linus, the sonne of Apollo dyed the same death. Yet God forbid that so braue a wit should so basely perish thine are but paper dogges, neither is thy banishment like Ouids, eternally to conuerse with the barbarous Getes. Therefore comfort thy selfe sweete Tom. with Ciceros glorious returne to Rome, and with the counsell of Aeneas giuen to his Sea∣beaten Souldiours lib. 1. Aeneid. Plucke vp thy heart, and driue from thence both feare and care away: To thinke on this may pleasure be per∣haps another day. Durat, & temet rebus seruat secundis. As Aacre died by the pot: so George Peele by the pox. As Arehesilans Prytanae perished by wine at a drunken feast, as Her∣mippus testifieth in Diogenes: so Robert Greene died of a surfet taken at Pickeld Herrings, and Rhenish wine, as wit∣nesseth Thomas Nash, who was at the fatall banquet. As Iodelle, a French tragicall Poet
being an Epicure, and an Atheist, made a pittifull end: so our tragicall Poet Marlow for his Epicurisme and A∣thiesme had a tragicall death; you may read of this Marlow more at large in the Theatre of Gods iudgments, in the 25. Chapter entreating of Epicures and Atheists. As the Poet Lycophron was shot to death by a certaine riuall of his: so Christopher Marlow was stabd to death by a bawdy Seruing-man, a ri∣uall of his in his lewde loue. Painters. A Pelles painted a Mare and a Dog so liuely, that Horses and Dogges passing by would neigh, and barke at them; he grew so famous for his ex∣cellent Art, that great Alexander came often to his shop to visit him, and commanded that none other should paint him; at his death he left Venus vn∣finished, neither was any euer found, that durst perfect, what he had begun. Zexes was so excellent in painting, that it was easier for any man to view
his pictures, then to imitate them, who to make an excellent Table, had fiue Agrigentine Virgins naked by him; he painted Grapes so liuely, that Buds did she to eate them. Parrus painted a Sheete so artificially, that Zeux it for a Sheete in deed, and cmmn∣ded it to bee taken away to see the picture, that he thought it had vayled; as leaned and skfull Gree excellently renowned so their lim∣ning: so England had these: Hd, Isaac Oliuer, and Iohn de Creete very famou  painting. As Ge moeouer had these Pain∣ts; Tim t, Phids, olignus, Peus, Burus, Euarus, Aristides Thebanus Nicopha∣nes, Prseus, Antipus, and Nicear∣s, so in England we haue also these; William and Frncis Segar brethren, Thomas and Iohn Bettes, Lockey, Lyne, Peak, Peter Cole, Arnold, Marcus, Iques de Bray Cornlius, Peter Gol∣bis, Heromo and Peter Vande Velde. As ysippus, Praxteles, and Pyr∣goteles, were excellent engraues: so
wee haue these engrauers, Rogers, Christoper Switzer, and Cure. Musicke. THe Load-stone draweth Iron vnto it, but the stone of Aethiopia called Theamedes driueth it away: so there is a kind of Musicke that doth assage and appease the affections, and a kind that doth kindle and prouoke the pas∣sions. As there is no Law that hath so∣ueraintie ouer loue: so there is no het that hath rule ouer Musicke, but Mu∣sicke subdues it. As one day takes from vs the credit of another: so one straine of Musicke tincts the pleasure of another. As the heart ruleth ouer all the mem∣bers: so Musicke ouercommeth the heart. As beauty is no beautie without ver∣: so Musicke is no Musicke without Art. As all things loue their likes: so the most curious eare the delicatest Mu∣sicke.
As too much speaking hurts; too much galling smarts: so too much Mu∣sicke gluts and distempereth. As Plato and Aristotle are counted Princes in Phylosophie and Logicke: Hippocrates and Galen in Physicke; Ptolomie in Astrologie, Euclide in Geometrie, and Cicero in eloquence: so Boetius is esteemed a Prince and Captaine in Musicke. As Priests where famous among the Egyptians; Magi among the Calde∣ans; and Gymnosophistes among the Indians: so Musitians flourished a∣mong the Grecians, and therefore E∣paminondas was accounted more vn∣learned then Themistocles, because hee had no skill in Musicke. As Mercurie by his eloquence re∣claymed men from their barbarous∣nesse and crueltie: so Orpheus by his Musicke subdued ierce beasts, and wild Birds. As Demosthenes, Isocrates, and Cicero excelled in Oratorie: so Or∣phes, Amphion, and Linus, surpassed in Musicke. As Greece had these excellent Mu∣sitians;
Arion Doceus, Timotheus Melesius, Chrysogonus, Terpander, Lesbius, Simon Magnesius, Philamon, Linus, Stratoncus Aristonus, Chiron, Achilles, Clinias, Emonius, Demodo∣thus, and Ruffinus: so England hath these; Master Cooper, Master Fair∣fax, Master Tallis, Master Tauerner, Master Blithman, Master Bird, Doctor Tie, Doctor Dallis, Doctor Bull, M. Thomas Mud, sometimes fellow of Pembrooke Hal in Cambridge, M. Edward Iohnson, Master Blankes, Ma∣ster Randall, Master Philips, Master Dwland, and Master Morley. Sinne. AS he runneth farre that neuer re∣turneth: so he sinneth deadly that neuer repenteth. Porters and Cariers when they are called to carry a burden on their shoulders, first they looke diligently vpon it, and then they peise and lift it vp, and trie whether they are able to vndergoe it, and whether they can cary it: so before we sinne, we should consider whether wee bee able
to carry the burthen of it, that is, the punishment, which is Hell fire. Ldo. Granant. lib. 1. Ducis . As the paate, that is corrupted and distempered by ill  cannot tast the seenesse of which is sweete seemeth bitte which is bitter sweee: so a rupted with the humors of inordinate affections, and to the flesh pots of Aegypt, cannot Mnna, nor the bread of Angels. Ibid. Euen as in a country, wheall are borne Aethiopians; it is ot an vgly thn to be blacke, and as where all ar drke, it is no ignominy no slaner to bee drunke: so the monstrous serui∣tude and slauee of sinne, because it is so familiar and common to the world, scarsly is knowne or noted in any man. Ibidm. . As swine are a certaine heard of beasts, that delight in myre and durte, and are nourished with the basest and most vncleane meates: so the filthy soules of sinners are delighted with no other thing, except with the most filthy dure and carnall pleasures. Ibidem.
As wine is mared by vineger; and uits are spoiled of wormes; and euery ontrary is corrupted of his contrarie: also all the powers of our soule are urbed and infected through sinne, ich is an especiall enimie, and most ontrarie to our soules. Idem. Euen as adultery is the most contra∣y thing to marriage: so that which is most contrary to a godly and vertuous ife is sinne. Ibidem. Euen as the rootes of trees being cut vp, the boughes and branches, which receiue life from the rootes, doe forthwith wther and perish: so those seauen capitall sinnes, which are wont to be termed the seauen deadly sinnes, which are the generall and vniuersall ootes of all other vices being hewen in under, and vtterly eradicated out of soules, suddaindly all the vices will die, which are deiued from them. Idem lib. 2. ducis peccat. As the comedies of Plautus and Terence, are at this day the very same Comedie, which they were a thousand yeares agoe, albeit the persons, that then acted them be changed; so the same
vices, which in times past were in th men of this and that condition, now also, although perhaps the name be somewhat changed. Ibidem. As deadly poyson speedily pearc the heart, killeth the Spirits, and bringth death: so sinne killeth the soule and speedily bringeth it to destructi∣on. Ibidem. It is said that thunder bruseth th tree, but breaketh not the barke, an pearceth the blade and neuer hurt the scabberd: euen so doth sinne woun the heart, but neuer hurt the eyes, an infect the soule, though outwardl it nothing afflict the body. As the Deuil is the father of sinne: sinne is the mother of death. As a man comes into a house by th gate: so death came into the world by sinne. As a fire goeth out, when all th ewell is spente, but burneth as long a that lasteth: so death dyeth when sinn ceaseth, but where sinne aboundeth there death rageth. As cursed Cham laughed to see Nab nakednesse▪ so the diuel loues a life to se vs sinne.
As pride is farre off from him that repenteth: so humility is farre off from him that sinneth. Marcus Heremita, de his, qui putant ex operibs iusti∣cari. A young man in a tauerne seeing Diogenes, fled through shame further into it, nay, sayes Diogenes, the fur∣ther thou flyest into it, the more thou art in the tauerne: so sinfull men, the more they hide themselues within themselues, the more they are that they are; but they must come out of them∣selues, if they desire to auoide them∣selues. Plut. in Moral. The fish Ephmera is bred without engendering of the putrifaction of the earth, and within three houres afte it is bred it dyeth: so sin is bred beyond the course and order of nature of the corruption of the appetite, and is ex∣tinguished by the three parts of repen∣ance, contrition, confession and satis∣faction. F. Ioannes à S. Geminiano lib. 4. de natalibus & volatil. cap. 62. Drinke doth kill a mouse, as Aristotle aith: so doth sin kill the soule. Idem, lib. 5. de animalibus terrestribus. c. 35.
As a mule is engendred against the course of nature: so is sinne engendeed not of nature, but it is a vce and an enormity of nature desiring that, which is not of the same order. Ibdem. cap. 93. Old age is full of misery, which bringeth a corporall deah: so sinne is full of misery, which bringeth eternall death. Idem lib 6. de homine et mem∣bris eius. cap. 52. As there bee seuen kinds of leprosie: so there are seuen capitall sinnes. 53. the best way to kill a material ser∣pent, is to kl him in the head: so the best way to kil the spiritual serpent is to kill him in the head, that is to kill sin in the beginning. Veerabilis Beda. Kill a cockatrice when he is an egge and he will not bite thee: so kill sinne in the beginning, and it will not hurt thee. As foxes are to bee killed when they are cub: so sinne is to be beaten downe, when it is growing. As the Babylonians children were to bee dashed against the stones: so sin is to be nipped in the bud. Psal. 137.
Pride. AS violent waters are prone to of∣ten eruptions, becomming sha∣lowest within their ordinary channels: so proud persons are euermore capable of higher dignities, though not well able, to exercise their present meane offices. As winds blow most fiercely, when they are about to cease: so men, when they are most proude, as Pope Iulius, and Cardinall Woolsey, then they are nearest to destruction. As God is angry at them, that imi∣tate the thunder and lightning, and doth cast them into hell, as hee cast Salmoneus: so hee doth disdaine the proud and loftie minded, who emulate his greatnesse, but doe not expresse his goodnesse. Plut. in Moral. If thou wilt put any good thing in∣to bladders, thou must first remoue the winde and aire out of them: so thou must take all pride and swelling out of his mind, whom thou meanest to teach. Ibidem. As the Cedar tree is vnfruitfull and
: so proude man is vnfruitfull and obstinate. Basilius in Psal. 28. As a blind man may be easily dis∣cerned of all: so may a proude man, that knowes not the Lord (for the be∣ginning of pride is the ignorance of God) bee easily knowne, as being de∣priued of his greatest light. Chrysost. hom. de Oia. As the Ship, that hath passed many waues, and escaped many tempest, a the length shipwraking in the very hauen, doth loose all the treasure con∣tained: so the proud Pharisie, after that hee had vndergone the labours of fasting, and had performed the exer∣cise of many notable vertues, though his pride and arrogancie made ship∣wracke of them all in the very hauen. Idem, hom. de profectu Euangelij. That body, which hath lost a good temperature is subiect to diseases: so that soule that hath lost humilitie is endan∣gered with pride, rashnesse weakenesse and foolishnesse, Idem serm. contra de∣speration & superbiam. As hee that is franticke knowes nei∣ther himselfe, nor those things that are
efore his feete: so a proud man nei∣her knowes himselfe, nor any man a∣out him. ibidem. As couetous men the more they re∣iue, the more they stand in neede of: a proud man the more he is honou∣ed, the more honour he desireth. Idem, . 1. insecundum ad Thessalonicenses. As they that are swelled, are not in od health: so they that are proude, not in their right wits. idem, hom. 17. in 1. Timoth. As in an heape of wheate, the chaffe higher then the wheate, not that it s worthier, but because it is lighter, nd being lighter it getteth the higher lace: so in this life a proude man is fted aboue an humble man, not for his erite and vertue, but for his vanity, nd false opinion of himselfe, and be∣g vaine of himselfe, he preferreth him∣fe before those, of whom he is ex∣led in vertue. Hector Pint. in ca. 15. Ezeach. As pride is the beginning of all vices: o it is the ruine of all vertues. Isidorus. They that are sicke of the dropsie, by ason of the grossenesse of the bodies,
seeme to bee in good estate, notwith∣standing they bee full of nothing b water and such euill humours, whi in the end are the cause of their death so they that are proud, by reason their ouer-eening conceus, seeme be in great reputation and credit, wh before God they are most abominab and detestable. Couetousnesse. AS fire, when there is more woo cast on, burneth more fiercely so couetousnesse the more wealth hath, the more it desireth. Lod. Gt lib. 2. ducis peccatrum. As drinke in a dropsie is the cause greater thirst: so riches in couetous me are the causes of greater auarice. Ibid. As the hollow spoute receiueth mu water, and yet retaineth nothing b aire: so the couetous man gathere much wealth, and yet possesseth n thing but cares. As the fish Polypus vseth great sk in taking of other fishes, being other wise a stupid and foolish creature:
many men are very wise for their owne cre and gaine, but in other things ve∣ry blockish and bruite beasts. As vultures doe smell three dayes before hand where any dead carkasses will fall, and doe flie thither: so greedy gapers after liuings, doe many yeares before hand long for the death of the possessors. Plin. lib. 10. cap. Couetousnesse is like the Serpent daspis, the more it sucks, the more it is a thirst eating men aliue as the Cro∣dile, and it is a vice of as dangerous urement, as the place, where the yrens sit and chaunt with their pre∣ditiall melody. There is a certaine thorne among the Indians, the iuice of which being rinkled into the eyes, doeth bring indnesse to all liuing creatures: so he dust of gold being cast into the eyes f men, doth make them starke blind. As Physitians y that cold doth the bones, the sinewes, and the : so Paul doeth say more briefly, cause he is the master of breuity, that ouetonsnesse is the roote of all euill. Chrysost. hom. 75. Matth.
As Bees fltocke vnto a hony deaw: so couetous men hunte after the smell of gaine. Plutarchus in Moralibus. Me∣minit eius etiam Maximus sermone. 12. As great fishes deuoure the small: so couetous cormorants eate vp the poore. Basilius hom. 7. exameron. As gluttons cannot spare any thing from their owne bellies: so a couetous man cannot spare anything from their owne purses. Idem hom. in ditescentes. As the Sea is neuer seene without waues: so the minds of couetous men are neuer without perturbations, cares, dangers, trembling and feare. Chryso. Hom. 36. in Matth. As a moath doth corrupt a garment: so doth couetousnesse eate and rust a wretched soule. Idem. hom. 48. As the man of Chios sold his best wine to others, and drunke the dead wine himselfe: so doe couetous men, they enioy the worst of their wealth, and keepe the best for wormes, moathe and rust. Plut. As an itchy scabby place standeth neede alwayes of friction and rubbing so the thirst of a couetous mind is neuer quenched idem.
As they that fall a sleepe through eauinesse, dreame of sorrowful things: o they that hunt after wealth, and are ouetous, doe dreame of vsury, extor∣on, enhaunsing of rents, and such ke dishonest gripings. Idem. As adulterours loue other mens iues, and contemne their owne: so me men are more delighted with rching after others mens goods, then ith enioying their owne. ibidem. As the roote of a reede being beaten all and laid vpon the roote of ferne, oth bring forth a stem; and also as he roote of ferne being beaten small nd laid vpon the roote of a reed doth tract a stalke: so in like manner the sire of money doth driue out of the ule the loue of wisdome, and wisdome oth driue out of the soule the loue of oney. As among the Myconians baldnesse no vnseemely thing, because all are rne bald there: so amongst Lon∣ers pride and vsury, and amongst awyers couetousnesse and bribery counted small faults, or rather e, because these vices are as a ge∣nerall
murraine among them. As an Adamant doth draw Iron from a Load-stone: so the loue of mony dot draw men from Christian pety, dot call them away from all goodnesse▪ neither doth suffer them to sticke vn Christ. In the Ile of Chios the face of Dien is placed aloft, whose countenanc seemeth heauy to those that enter in but chearefull to them that goe out: s certaine sordide lliberall pesauntes do with heauie countenances entertain their friends, fearing least they shoul put them to cost, and should aske an thing of them, but they are cheaefu at their departure. Plin. lib. 35. cap. 5. As the Emmots of India doe onel keep the gold digged out of the cauern of the earth, but doe not enioy it: so couetous rich man neither himselfe en∣ioyeth his riches, neither vouchsafe the vse of them to any other. Plin. lib▪ 11. cap. 31. & Herodot. lib. 3. Horse-leaches and crab-lice haue n place for voydance of their excrement and because they are insatiable, the swell with sucking of bloud and s
urst: so a couetous man is choaked with his owne store. As that earth, which hath vaines of gold and siluer, is in a manner barren of all other things: so they that thirst after gold and siluer, and haue concei∣ed these mettals in their minds, they commonly bring forth no fruit of any good thing. The Eagle is the most rauenous a∣mong birds, shee dyeth not by disease, nor by old age, but through hunger: so a couetous man, the more yeares that grow vpon him, the more his couetous∣nesse encreaseth, and the nearer he is to his graue, the more hungry he is af∣ter gaine, Plin. lib. 10. cap. 3. In quicksiluer all things doe swim but gold, for it draweth this alone into it: so nothing doth settle in the minde of a couetous man, but lucre and gaine, artes, learning, disciplines, and honesty doe floate aboue, neither haue power to descend into his breast. Plin. lib. 33. Cap. 6. Harts when they are constrained to ast off their hornes, doe hide them, especially their right horne, that for
medicine it may not be of vse to others so many worldly cormorant rich men when as they cannot vse their riche themselues, yet they will not suffer o∣thers to enioy them, Plin. lib. 8. cap. 32▪ Arist. lib. 6. de nat. cap. 5. As idolaters sacrifice oxen to thei idols: so couetous men sacrifice thei soules vnto their wealth, Chrysost. hom 64. in Matth. As he that is sicke of a feuer doth no quench his thirst by drinking, but dot more inflame it: so hee that is disease with couetousnesse, when he receiue money is not therewith satisfied, bu doth more kindle it. ibidem. As a drunkard is vexed with greate thirst, then he that vseth wine mode rately; and as fire is made greater by adding of fewell: so the desire of money is more encreased by the plenty of gold▪ idem hom 1. in Matth. As an eunuch doth lament, becaus hee cannot performe his desire with a vergin: so doe all couetous people tha gape for wealth. Idem hom. 74. As he that seeth a golden cup, preci∣ous stones, and costly apparell in
darkenesse, cannot discerne the worth of it: so a couetous man can by no meanes perceiue the beauty of the best things. Ibidem. As they that gathered more Manna, then was permitted, had more wormes and more corruption: so haue couetous men, that gather more wealth, then they should. idem. hom. 4. in 1. Cor. As Pharaoh compelled the Israelites to spend their time in gathering straw and stubble: so the Deuill constraineth couetous men to consume their time in gathering clay and durt; for what is gold and siluer but clay and durt? idem hom. 40. in Matth. As hell is neuer satisfied: so couetous men haue neuer enough. August epist. 3▪ ad Iohannem comitem. As the birds Sleucides are insatiable in the eating of locusts: so are couetous men in gathering of riches. Isidorus Clarius oratione 36. contra aaros. As a shadow doth hinder the light of the Sunne: so couetousnesse doth hinder the light of grace. F. Iohannes à S. Geminiano lib. 1. de Coelo & Elemen∣tis cap. 8.
As the shadow of the earth doth cause an eclipse of the Moone, when the earth commeth betweene the Sun and the Moone: so the desire of earthly things doth cause the eclipse of the soule, when it is put betweene the soule and God. Ibidem. As a shadow doth either represse or altogether extinguish heate: so couet∣ousnesse doth either diminish or extin∣guish the heate of charety. Ibidem. As a shadow is an induction to ste∣rility, for not any thing encreaseth, where there is continuall shade: so the seed of the diuine word cannot take en∣crease, and bring forth fruite, where there is couetousnesse and care for riches. ibidem. As the shadow is a friend vnto Ser∣pents, and a nourisher of Snakes: so couetousnesse is most acceptable vnto infernall Serpents, that is, vnto Deuils, because by it they most of all entangle and ensnare soules. Ibidem. As a shadow hindereth the ripening of fruits: so couetousnesse hindereth the frutes of repentance. ibidem. As a shadow bringeth darkenesse,
and darkenesse feare: so doth couetous∣nesse, least it loose that it hath gotten. Ibidem. As a shadow prouoketh sleepe, and that by reason of the coolnesse: so couetousnesse induceth sleepe, that is, profoundnesse, and vnmoueablenesse in sinne. ibidem. As certaine cauerns in the moun∣taine Aetna doe alwayes burne, by reason of the aboundance of sulphur: so is couetousnesse alwayes on a light fire, by reason of the greedinesse of gaine▪ idem in eod. lib. cap. 58. The Arabian Onix stone is of a blacke colour with white streakes: so couetous men although they be painted with honours, yet they haue blacke and filthy minds. Idem lib. 2. de Me∣llis & lapid. cap. 3: Dioscorides saith that the Onix stone either worne about the necke, or caried in the hand, bringeth sadnesse, multi∣plieth feare, and moueth the mind to strife and contention: so also doth couetousnesse; it bringeth sadnesse, when it hath not what it desireth; and feare, to loose that it hath; and strife,
because Meum and Tuum, as Senec saith, are the causes of all strife. Ibid. As the Onix stone cannot hurt in th presence of the Sardyan stone: so couet∣ousnesse cannot infect him, in whom the loue of God is, for where the loue of God is, there the loue of this world hath no place. Ibidem. As an Onyon is of a cold and glut∣tinous nature as saith Dioscorides: so couetousnesse doth coole the soule, by excluding the heate of charity, and doeth hold it fast, by reason of the vicious lyme of wealth. Idem lib. 3. de vegetabilib▪ & Plant. cap. 6. An Onyon as saith Dioscorid doth yeeld little nourishment vnto the body: so couetousnesse doth yeeld little nou∣rishment to the body, but none at all to the soule. ibidem▪ Onyons doe prouoke choler: so doth couetousnesse prouoke anger. ibidem. As Henbane bringeth death to the body by bodily sleepe: so couetousnesse bringeth death to the soule by spirituall sleepe. Ibidem. As rauenous birds doe loue to liue alone, as saith Aristotle: so do couetous
men. Idem lib. 4. de Natatilib. & vo∣lat. cap. 9: Rauenous Birds do driue their yong ones from them, so soone as they can flie: so doe couetous people put out their children, as soone as they can shift, and casseir their seruants, as soone as they haue serued their turnes. ibidem. As Griphons keepe Mountaines, wherein are precious stones, but neither vse them themselues, nor suffer others to enioy them: so doe couetous men deale in keeping their wealth. ibidem ex Isidoro. As a Hogge seeketh for his meate in durt and myre: so a couetous wretch seeketh for felicitie in Siluer and Gold. ibidem. As a horse-leach hath a triangular mouth, and a trunke in it, with which she doth drinke blood, and when shee hath drunke enough, shee vomiteth it out againe, that shee may sucke more, as Isidore saith: so couetousnesse hath a triangular mouth, that is, three wayes of ill getting, to wit, by rapine, theft, and vsury, whose trunke is vnsatiable desire, with which it sucketh out the blood
of the poore, as it manifestly appeareth in vsuries, by which when it hath filled the purse, then it vomiteth it forth a∣gaine, that is, it putteth that gaine out againe to vsury, that it may gaine more. Idem lib. 5. de Animalib. Terrestrib. cap. 10. As a dogge lying vpon hay, eateth none himselfe, nor suffereth others to eate: so doth a couetous man. ibidem. As certaine Serpents keepe Bal∣samum, but haue no vse of it, nor suffer others to vse it: so doe couetous men their riches. ibidem. As Bees gather hony of flowers, and die in the dregges: so doe couetous men ibidem. As a spider in a short time maket her webbe, which the wind as soone breaketh: so a couetous man soone gathereth a great deale of wealth to∣gether, which misfortune soone scat∣tereth. ibidem. As an Ape huggeth her young ones: so a couetous miser huggeth his wealth. Ibidem. As the leaprosie corrupteth all the members: so couetousnesse infecteth all
the affections. Idem lib. 6. de homine & mbris eius. cap. 10. As a leaper hath diuers spots: so a couetous man hath diuers vices. ibidem. As the ancient Greeke and Latine Poets made Tantalus a mirrour of couetousnesse, who was tormented with hunger and thirst, notwithstan∣ding he stood in a riuer vp to the chin, and had goodly Apples hanging ouer his nose continually: so our English moderne Poets, note aboue all others Iustice Randall of London to be infected with the same vice, a man passing im∣potent in body, but much more in minde, that dying worth many thou∣sands, and leauing behind him a thou∣sand pounds of gold in a chest full of old bootes and shooes, yet was so mi∣serable, that at my Lord Maiors dinner he would put vp a Widgen for his sup∣per, and many a good meale did he take of his franke neighbour the widow Penne. As pride is the soules impanie, and anger the soules phrensie: so couetous∣nesse is the soules dropsie.
Luxurie. AS wood preserueth fire: so the thought preserueth and nourisheth desires and concupiscences. Like as fire worketh wood altoge∣ther into fire: so lust wholy alienateth man into lasciuiousnesse. As smoake driueth away Bees: so luxurie driueth away spirituall graces: Basilius hom. 1. de ieiunio. As fire changeth hard and cold iron, and maketh it as fire: so lust tameth iron and hardy minds. F. Iohanns à S. Geminino lib. 1. de caelo & elementis. cap. 47. As out of two flints smitten toge∣ther, there comes out fire: so out of the vnchast touch of man and women there comes out the fire of concupis∣cence and luxurie. ibidem. As  wall, although not burnt of a candle, yet it is blacked: so if women cohabitate with men, the Diuels Bird-lime shall not be wanting. Hieronymus. As wee may easily fall into a pit, but not so soone get out againe: so wee may easily fall into the sinne of luxurie,
by reason of our naturall corruption, but wee can hardly get from it. As sulphur is hot, and therefore soone fired: so is luxurie. As God hath giuen eyes vnto vs, not to looke for our pleasure, but for things necessarie for our life: so hath he giuen vnto vs genitors, for none other cause, but to encrease the world, as the name of them may teach vs. Lactantius, lib. 7. cap. 25. As drunkards doe spue forth lewd speeches: so luxurious persons doe vt∣ter lasciuious and obscene words. Chry∣sostomus oratione 5. aduersus Iudoeos: As a Pylot maketh shipwracke in the hauen, obtaineth no pardon: so pollu∣tion of wedlocke-state in marryed per∣sons hath no defence either with God or man. Idem, hom. 3. de Ozia. As hee that was possessed of the Di∣uell, liued among the graues, and cut himselfe with stones: so luxurious per∣sons liue among harlots, who are full of stinch and filthinesse, and cut them∣selues with vices, which are sharper then any stones. idem. hom. 29. As it is vniust, through couetousnesse
to encroach vpon any mans liuing: so is it vniust through lust to subuert the limits of good manners. Augustinus lib. 15. de ciuitate Dei. Fire is extinguished two wayes, ei∣ther by withdrawing the fewell, or by casting on water: so the fire of luxurie is quenched two wayes, either by withdrawing the fomentations of the flesh, or by casting vpon it the cold water of repentant teares. Hugo Victo∣rinus lib. de carnalibus nuptijs vitand. Enuie. AS a worme bred in wood consu∣meth it: so also is enuy bred in the heart, and the heart is the first thing that it excruciateth; and when it hath corrupted the heart, it also taketh away the naturall colour of the countenance. The Serpent Porphyriu hath poy∣son, but because hee is without teeth, he hath it onely for himselfe: so some do enuie, and malice, but they hurt none but themselues, because they want a∣bilitie. Take away the fewell, and the fire
goeth forth: so take away the occasion, and enuy ceaseth. Plut. Dogges barke at the vnknowne, but e gentler towards them they know, Heralitus said: so enuy doth most nnoy men newly aduanced, but is not o raging against those, whom it hath ene acquainted with. Idem. As venome doth deuoure Iron: so th enuy consume the possessours of it. . hom. de inuida. As Vipers are brought forth by ring in peeces their dammes belly: o enuy doth gnaw in sunder the soule f the conceiuer. Ibidem. Vultures and Flies flie ouer sweete Oyntments, and pleasant Medowes, d seaze on Carion and vlcers: so en∣ious persons doe passe ouer that which well done, and onely busie themselues ith errours, infirmities and imper∣ctions. Ibidem. As the Phoenix burneth herselfe: so oth an enuious man. August. sermone 18. ad fraters in Heremo. As that is venemous, which Ser∣ents liue in: so is that soule poysoned, which enuy dwelleth. Palladius in toriade Stephano lapso.
As a worme is not bred in Cedar: so enuy is not begotten in the heart of a wi man. Hector Pintus in cap. 19. Ezec. As the Flies Cantharides are bred i the soundest wheate, and in Roses mo flourishing: so enuie doth most op pose it selfe against good men, and pro∣ficients in vertue. Antonius in Melissa parte. 1. serm 62. As tooth-ach springeth from thre things, as saith Auicen, from the sub stance of the teeth, frō the nerue, which is in the roote of the teeth, & sometime from the gums: so enuie springeth from three things, from personall prosperitie from aduanced honor, and from mass wealth. F Ioannes a S. Geminiano lib 6. de homine & eius membris cap. 37. As there is no Larke without a cre so there is no wit without naturall bor enuie. Stobeus serm. 36. ex Plutarcho. Where there is no light, there is n shadow: so where there is no felicitie there is no enuie. Plut. Bains are knowne by the bands Lyons by their clawes, and Cockes by their combes: so enuions minds ar knowne by their maners.
Gluttonie. AS corporall fasting doth lift vp the spirit of God: so superfluitie of meate and drinke doth cast and sinke it downe. Lodouic. Granatensis, lib. de deuotione. As the spirit when it is full of deuo∣tion, doth inuite the heart to spirituall and diuine things: so the body being full of meate, doth draw and hale the same vnto corporall and vaine matters. Ibidem: As ships of lighter burthen doe swiftly saile through the Sea, but those that are ouer-loaden with many bur∣dens are drowned: so fasting maketh the soule light, that it lightly saileth ouer the Sea of this life, that it mounteth aloft, and beholdeth heauen and hea∣enly things, but being ouer burdened with too much meate and drinke, the spirit groweth sleepy and the body heauy, the soule is captiuated, and made subiect to a thousand miseres. ibid. As a Souldiour that is ouer-loaden can hardly mannage his weapen so that man can hardly watch at his
prayers, who is gluttonously filled with superfluitie of meates, Ibidem. As much water is the cause of moorish grounds, fens, myres, and muddy places, where nothing en∣gendreth but Toades, Frogs, Snakes, and such like foule vermine: euen so ex∣cesse of wine procureth brutish, wicked and beastly desires, many sensuall ap∣petites, and other sinnefull qualities. Ibidem. As Trees which are planted or cut in the full of the Moone, doe but in∣gender wormes, loose their owne ver∣tue, and perish: the like doeth excess of eating or drinking, for when the belly is full, it nothing but encreaseth the wormes of sinne in the soule, con∣sumeth the whole man, and cutting him off from God, makes him die and wi∣ther in wickednesse. Stella de contemp. mund. As the wals of Babylon were ouer∣throwne by Nabuchadnezer: euen so doth surfeting by meate or drinke de∣stroy all the vertues abiding in the soule. ibidem. As Mathematicians circumscribe al
things within a center and a circum∣ference: so many doe circumscribe all pleasure within their bellies. Plutarchn Moralibus. Aristotle saith that the fish whom the Grecians call  hoc est, Asinus, of all other liuing creatures hath the heart in the belly: so gluttons haue theirs. Clemens libro 2. paedag. cap. 1. As a cloude doth obscure the beames of the Sunne: so gluttony doth dimme the splendour of the mind. Nilus ora∣tione 1. aduersus vitia. As birds that haue waighty bodies are vnapt for flight: so gluttons with their fleshy panches are vnfit for con∣templation. F. Iohannes à S. Gemniano lib. 4. de natalibus & volatilibus, c. 35. Anger. AS a druken man cannot doe any thing wisely and with reason, and of which hee doth not afterwards re∣pent him, as we read of Alexander the great: so when as a man is disturbed and troubled with anger, and blinded with the smoake of this passion, he can∣not
rest, neither take aduisement, which to day although it seeme iust and rea∣sonable vnto him, yet to morrow, when the fury of his passion shall be ouer, he shall confesse that it was vniust and vn∣reasonable. As in a tumult wee doe not heare what is spoken vnto vs: so angry per∣sons doe not admit other mens counsel, vnlesse reason speake within, which ap∣peaseth the hurly burly of the mind. Plutarch. As a tumour ariseth by a blow of the flesh: so effeminate and weake persons doe most of all swell with anger; as women and old men. idem. The Barbarians doe infect their weapons with poyson, that they may doe double hurt: so angry folkes doe againe and againe poyson their tongues with venemous words idem. As the first messengers are not forth∣with beleeued, as Phocion of Athens hearing tell of Alexanders death, said, if he be dead to day, he will be dead to morrow and for euer: so wee must not presently beleeue anger, saying vnto vs, hee hath iniured mee, but wee must
rotract the time for many dayes, and make further inquiry. idem. As the body is shaken and corrupted ith a long cough: so the mind is ulcerated with often anger. idem. As a child through vnskilfulnesse doth often hurt himselfe, when hee would hurt another: so many times ger doth hurt it selfe, when it would ong others. idem. As wee doe not bridle horses in the ce, but before they runne: so they at are subiect to anger, are to be ad∣monished by reasons, before they fall to danger. Idem. If one fire be ioyned to another, the ame becommeth the greater: so anger y anger is not appeased, but is more ouoked. Chrysost. hom. 12. operis im∣fecti. As Asses bite & kicke: so angry peo∣e raile & fight. Idem hom. 3. in Ioann. As winter is full of stormes: so is an angry mind full of perturbations. idem m. 9. ad pop. Antioch. Vineger infecteth a vessell, if it long y in it: so anger corrupteth the heart, it make any aboad in it. Augustinus istola. 88.
A sald head is soone broken: so wome d a child are soone angry 1. de ir. As e water asswageth in gentle and mild ench anger. Anthoni par  none 53. As the Sunne for forty yeares neue eating: so it neuer saw Io the Anchorete angry. Idlenesse. AS the Milesian garment did n become Hercules, when he serue Omphale, after he had put off his Lyon spoiles: so neither doth it befit a ciui man, after his magistracy to giue him selfe vnto idlenesse and voluptuousne Plutarch. As the birds called Martinets are al wayes either flying, or lying still vpo the earth, because they want feete: s some are too vehement in both extremities, they are either too busie or too idl they keepe no meane. Plin. lib. 10. c. 39▪ As they that walke, and play crank vpon ropes, if they be but a little carlesse,
fall downe, and so perish: so they that walke in this life, if they giue themselues but to a little idlenesse, they are throwne headlong into folly. Chry∣sost. hom. 3. de Ozia. As rust doth putrifie iron: so idlenesse doth corrupt the wit and disposition of man. Ouid lib. 5. de tristibus elegia. 12 As water continually entring into hip by some secret leake, doth at the ast drowne it, through the carelesnesse of the Mariners: so by idlenesse and othfulnesse euill thoughts and concu∣cences are so long multiplyed, till the hip of the heart yeelding vnto them, be ndangered with sinne. Bernard. serm. S. Andrea. As in standing water, venemous ormes are engendered: so in an idle ule ill thoughts and hurtfull concu∣scences are bred. Laurentius Iustini∣us lib. de perfectionis gradibus, cap. 9. Birds that are couped vp, soone ow fat: so by lazinesse the body roweth corpulent, and the mind vn∣ for any good exercise. Seneca e∣ist. 122. As too much bending breaketh the
bow: so too much remission spoylet the mind. Seneca. Rust doth fret the hardest iron, if i be not vsed; the Moath doth eate the finest garment, if it bee not worne mosse doth grow on the smoothe stone, if it bee not stirred: so impiety doth infect the wisest wit, if it be giue to idlenesse. Standing water is sooner frozen, then the running streame; he that sitteth i more subiect to sleepe, then hee tha walketh: so the idle man is farre mor subiect to bee ouercome of vice, then h that is exercised. Vice. A Pylot that hath dashed his shi against a Rocke, will not onely afterwards bee wary of it, but of al other Rockes: so he that detesteth th vglinesse of one vice, will also waril flye from other vices. Plut. As he is miserable that serues a crue and dogged master, from whom he may slie: so is he much more miserabl that is a seruant and a slaue vnto vices
which hee cannot flye. Idem. As a spot or a blemish, that hath beene letten alone, is hardly taken way: so inueterate vices are hardly rrected. Idem. In warre a Court of guard, and atching is continually to be held: so e must neuer cease to striue against . Idem. As hee that despaireth euer to bee , maketh hauocke of that he hath, hee that is in good hope to bee althy, will make spare of little mat∣s: so hee that fully purposeth to bee good man, doth endeuour to correct amend the least vices, and neg∣eth not any thing, that may any yes further him to the attainement vertue. idem. They that through vnskilfulnesse not tell how to make a peece of ood straight, doe wrest and bend it the contrary part: so some in flying m one vice, doe fall into a greater. em. As those wounds of the body are re grieuous, which make an Vlcer: those vices of the mind are much
more grieuous which more vehement doe disturbe and distract. idem. The water called Lyncestis or , doth make drunke as well wine: so pouerty and lacke of knowledge doth make some vicious a wicked, for the same vices doe spri from diuers causes, as arrogan springeth both from knowledge a vnskilfulnesse. Plin. lib. 31. cap. 2. It is easie to slip into a weele-net but to come out is very difficult: so is easie to fall into vices, but to retur vnto vertue is not so easie. For the biting of an Aspe there is remedy, but the cutting of the infect parts: so some vices are onely cured death. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 23. Scorpions doe bring forth each , and doe kill each other, for it said that the Scorpion doth bring fort eleuen young ones, all which the da killeth sauing one, but that one kille his damme, and auengeth his brothe bloud, and this doth God, that th pestiferous brood should not too muc increase: so of one capitall vice, man vices are bred, as of couetousnesse a
gendred treachery, fraud, cousenage, riury, vnquietnesse, violence, and rdnesse of heart, but oftentimes one these daughters doth kill their mo∣er Auarice, vnquietnesse of minde oth many times so wearie the coue∣ous, that they striue by all meanes to st off the burden of this vice, and uite to leaue the world. And so it is other capitall vices. Geminianus lib. . de animalibus terrestribus cap. 120. As one poyson expelleth another, as e fatnesse of the snake preuaileth a∣ainst the biting of the Crocodile, and e head of a Viper healeth the wound f a Dragon: so one vice expelleth ano∣her, as couetousnesse restraineth glut∣ony, and ambition and vaine-glory ridleth luxury, for feare of infamy. ibi. Pleasure. WHere weeds are plucked vp, there corne thriueth: so where oncupisence is expelled there righte∣usnesse ariseth. Chrysost. hom. 8. oper. mperfecti. As they that saile in a sandy Sea, are
sometimes on ground vpon the dr sands, and sometimes flote aloft vpo the swift current: so he that follow after pleasure, sometimes is tormente through want of it, and sometime ouercloyed through abundance. Senec lib. de beata vita. As swine doe durty themselues i the myre: so voluptuous men doe b filth themselues with pleasure. Basili in Psalmum primum. As the Lord appeareth not to Abraham so long as he staied in his own country, but when hee came into th land showne vnto him, hee had gre promises made vnto him: so as long wee continue in the world and worldlpleasures, our minds are not enlightne with any diuine illumination, but whe we obey Gods commandements, Go manifeeth himselfe vnto euery one according to his capacity. Cyrillus Alex in dictis veteris testamenti. Hee that writeth in the water leaueth no characters behind him: pleasure lasteth no longer, then the ver act. Gregor. Nyssenus homilia 5. Ecclesiastin.
As the greater sorrow obscureth the lessor: so the pleasure of the mind ob∣scureth the delight of the body. Plut. If drunkards and banketters rush into an house of mourning, they doe not onely bring no mirth vnto the mourners, but they rather procure greater lamentation: so pleasures also doe offend an vnsound body. idem. Lysimachus when he was constrained to yeeld himselfe vnto the Scythiaus by reason of thirst, and when hee had drunke a little cold water, good God (quoth he) what a deale of felicity haue I giuen for a little pleasure: so wee are to thinke when wee fall into a long disease for a little Venery. idem. There are a kind of theeues, whom the Egyptians call Philistae, who im∣brace them they take, to the end to strangle them: so pleasures whilst they doe fltter, they kill. Senca. As he is as well dead, that is buried in odours, as he that is rent and torne in peeces of wild beasts: so they are alike vnhappy, that giue themselues to luxurious pleasures, as they that spend their dayes in hunting after the
vaine puffe of ambition. Seneca. They that drinke of the lake Clito∣rius, cannot abide wine: so they that surfet in worldly pleasures, doe abhor honest and true delights. As the wine which Homer cals Ma∣roneum being mingled with twenty times so much water, as the quantity of wine comes to, still keepeth his strength and vertue: so a vertuous vp∣right wise man is not subdued by any pleasures. Plin. lib. 14. cap. 4. The ancient naturall Phylosophers doe write, that the Sunne is nourished with Sea water and the Moone with fresh water: so wise and vertuous men doe seeke for sowre things, so they be profitable; and fooles hunt after those things onely that may delight. As the Planet Saturne is in effect cold, drie and heauy: so pleasure doth make cold, by extinguishing the heat of spirituall loue; dry, by consuming the moisture of deuotion; and heauy, by depressing the mind to inferiour things. F. Iohannes à S. Geminiano lib. 1. de caelo & elementis, cap. 90. As Saturne is called a nocturnall
planet: so the pleasure of the flesh doth seeke for the darknesse of the night. ibidem. They that are borne vnder Saturne, as saith Ptolomy, doe not abhorre impure and vncleane garments, and do loue other filthy things: so luxurious persons doe not abhorre the exteriour note of infamy, besides they loue filthy and pulluted actions. ibidem. Laban following Iacob ouertooke him vpon the mountaine Galaad, which mountaine is most delicate for pasture, fruits, and fountaines: so the Diuell persecuting man doth ouer-take him among the delights and pleasures of this world. ibidem. The Serpent Amphisbena hath two heads, at either end one: so hath plea∣sure two heads, that is, two capitall vices, Luxurie, and gluttony. idem lib. 5. de animalibus terrestribus, cap. 121. A snaile by leisure creepeth to the tops of Trees, and there eates the leaues, and wheresoeuer shee creepeth, shee leaueth a slime behind her: so the plea∣sure of the flesh by little and little in∣creaseth, and ascendeth to the top off
great trees, that is, it doth possesse and ouercome great men as gluttony ouercame Adam, aud luxury Dauid and Salomon; and eateth the leaues, that is, doth deustate the ornamentes of vertue in them, and wheresoeuer it creepeth, it leaueth impure slime be∣hind it, that is, infamous examples, and a corrupted memory. ibidem. Drunkennesse. LAsie cures are busie vnder the table, but idle in hunting: so it is ignoble and base, to bee free speeched in thy cups, and a coward in talke when thou rt sober. Plutarchus. As the caske is broken by the work∣ing of wine, and that commeth aloft hich lay in the bottome so drunken∣esse doth discouer the secrettest things of thy brest. Seneca. As they that are ouer-burdned with wine, cannot keepe their meate, but all goes out together: so death also the ecrets, when wine abounds. Seneca. As the fishes called Polypi doe not retch out their clawes, but for meate:
so some doe measure all their felicity by meate and drinke. Plut. & Plin. lib. 9. cap. 29. Lysimaus by reason of thirst was constr to yeeld himselfe vnto the Scythians, afterwards when hee had drunke cold water, good God (said he) for how short a pleasure haue I giuen away my happinesse: so also wee shall be constrained to say, if wee fall into a long disease, for a drunken feast or a little. Venery. Flies and such like creatures doe liue by sucking, and therefore in stead of a tongue they haue a trunke: so thou shalt see some drunkards, who liue onely by drinke, and carefor no meate. As frugality is an inducement to fasting, so is drunkennesse vnto lasci∣uiousnesse. Basilius hom. 1. de ieiunio. As ships taken with a violent tempest, are forced to cast their goods ouer boord: so drunkards ouertaken with wine are forced by vomit to disgorge themselues. Idem hom. de ebrie. & luxu. As brightnesse doth dimme the sight; and terrible sounds amaze the hearing: so drunkennesse doth dull the vnder∣standing,
and astonish the memorie. Ibidem. As valleys are full so long as the land-floud lasteth, but are drie and emptie, when it is gone: so drunkards being full of Wine doe spue and cast, but a little after are oppressed with thirst. Ibidem. As when a feuer is past, the weake∣nesse remaineth: so when drunkennesse is gone the effects continue, which tor∣ment both body and soule. Chrysost. hom. 58. in Matth. As Scylla and Hydra among the Poets are armed with many heads: so is drunkennesse; hence fornication, hence effeminacie, hence inordinate loues proceed. Idem hom. 71. As too much raine glutteth the earth, that it cannot bee tilled: so too much drinke so drowneth the soule, that i admitteth no spiritual culture. Augusti∣nus sermo. de ebrietate vitanda. As in fennes Serpents, and venemous worms are engendered: so in drunkards moist braynes are many vices bred. Idem.
Adultery. AS the Cookow layeth egges in other Birds neasts: so some men oe make other mens wiues, mothers: Plinius libro 10. cap. 9. A Pylot that maketh shipwracke in the Hauen is worthy of no pardon: so hee or shee that hath attained the Ha∣uen of marriage, and then shipwracke their chastitie, are worthy of no fauour, neither with God nor man. As couetousnesse encroacheth vpon other mens goods: so adultery entreth vpon other mens wiues. As rust defaceth the brightest Iron: so adultery corrupteth the purest paragon. In a honny combe there are two things, honny and waxe. In like manner in the face of a Harlot there are two things, beauty of countenance, and sweetenesse of speech. The waxe doth kindle the fire, and the honny doth yeeld sweetnesse: so the beauty of an Harot doth inflame the flesh with the fire of lust, and doth subuert the minde by the inticement of alluring speech.
The hony doth distill from the waxe, whilst the harlot doth sweeten her words. Hugo Victorinus lib. de carna∣libus nuptiis vitandis. The Panther is so greedy of the ex∣rements of a man, that if they bee hanged out of his reach, he killeth him∣selfe with reaching at them: so that which is the filthiest, is the sweetest vnto some men, that like horses neigh after their neighbours wiues. Plinius lib. 8. cap. 27. & cap. 17. eod. libro. As some through the stupour of their senses, and corrupt tasts, doe not tast the sweetnesse of meates: so adulterous and libidinous Epicures haue no tast of true glory. Cicero Philip. 3. As they are filthy creatures, that reioyce when they enioy their adulte∣rous pleasures: so are they wicked that desire them with a libidinous mind. Idem lib. 4. Tusc. quaest. As Ioseph lost his coate by his chasti∣tie: so leachers lose their good names by fornication and adulterie. As Goates and Swine are filthy crea∣tures: so are adulterous persons, which are rightly compared vnto them.
As chast men haue their conuersation in Heauen: so adulterous leachers haue theirs in Hell. As Tarquinius Superbus King of the Romanes was banished with his Sonne Tarquinius Sextus for the deflouring of Lucretia, a noble and honourable matrone: so Lodouicus Gonzaga for his adultery was beheaded of the Citizens of Mantua. As the Chrysolite being worne on the finger of an Adulteresse, so detesteth the crime, as it cracketh in peeces by meere instinct of nature: so the Vnicorn is such a foe to adulterie, and such a friend to chastitie, as he alwayes pre∣surueth the one, and killeth the other. Munster writeth in his second Booke fol. 45. that in some part of England and Scotland, there is great store of the best kind of Ieat stone. If any body drinke the powder of this stone in water, if the same partie bee conta∣minated with libidinous actes, the same body out of hand shall be enforced to make vrine, and shall haue no ability to keepe it backe, but if a virgine drinke of it, there is no power to make vrine
follow: so the iuyce of the Basco leas so abhorreth vnlawfull lust, as it will not by any meanes bee digested in the stomacke of a Strumpet. As Teundzillus King of Spaine, for committing violent adulterie with a Lady of a Noble house, was depriued both of life and Kingdome: so Galea∣tis Maria Duke of Millaine com∣mitting adulterie with a Citizens wife of the same, was by the same Citizen slaine, being at a Masse. As Anthonius Venerus Duke of Ve∣nice, caused his owne sonne to dye in prison, because hee had rauished a maide: so Hippomenes taking his daughter Limon in adulterie, caused her to be deuoured of an hungry horse. The Egyptians for adulterie, cut off the mans priuy members, and the wo∣mans nose: so the Armenians for the same act gelded the men, and after o∣pen whipping branded the women with a hot Iron. As God appointed stoning and burn∣ing for adultery: so the Arabians, Tar∣taians, Turks, Athenians, Tenedians, Crotoniates, old Saxons, Parthians,
ncient Britaines, as writeth Iohn Cap∣raue, and now the Geneuians punish t with death. As Opilius Macrinus Emperour of Rome ordained that adulterers should be punished with fire: so Iulius Caesar the Emperour made a Law, that a∣dulterours should be put to death with the sword. As among the Thracians this was the law, that such as were taken in whore∣dome, should be stript naked, and be bound to a post, and so with arrowes pearced and striken to death: so among the Indians such as bee taken in adul∣terie, are led vp to some high rocke, and cast downe headlong, that their neckes may be broken. As the Mitylenians strangled all such, as were taken in adulterie, without any mercy shewed: so the Mantuans beheaded the adulterers. As most of the Gentiles seuerely punished adulterie: so most of the Christians laugh at it. Munster writeth, that the Indians doe vse naturall coniunction together openly; and Sansonius in his Booke de
Regnis sayeth, that certaine franticke people in Fez, accustome to vse wo∣men forcibly in publique places, and in the presence of many: so the Spaniards in America rauished the women, both their owne bands, and the Indians be∣holding them; and at Insull a Towne in Flaunders, three of these Gallants entered a Citizens house wholy of their faction, where two of them held the husband, whilest the third rauished his wife in his presence; a fact that many bruite beasts deest and abhorre, as among foure footed beasts, the Elephant, who, as the same Munster sayeth, neuer couereth the female but in secrete, who, as Plinie and Soline write, neuer vseth any adulterie; and among fowles, the Storke, who neuer treadeth his female, but in her nest, which may teath men and women to vse wedlocke-worke with honesty and shame-fastnesse: and neuer treadeth any but his owne female, Aristotle saith, which may teach euery one to abhorre adulterous copulations.
Iealousie. AS an Egge, the more it is heated, it waxeth the harder: so iealous suspect the more it is credited, the worse it is for vs; and the lesse wee regard it, the greater is our quiet. As the Mole being in the deepe earths obscuritie, strayes about euery way, passing thorow the hardest molde she meetes withall, but so soone as she comes to the day light, all her force and strength immediately fayles her: euen such is the iealous opinion hid within the darke clowde of an afflicted minde, it neuer ceaseth to remoue fresh thoughts with infinite perturbations, but when truth doth discouer it, it is presently nothing. As there is no content to the sweet∣nesse of loue: so there is no despaire to the preiudice of ielousie. Inconstancie. AS the Chamaeleon is an vncleane creature, and forbidden in the law, because he changeth himselfe into
all colours, that are laid before him: so are all they vncleane, that are mutable and vnconstant, and are figured by this beast. Vuconstant people may fitly be re∣sembled to hunting dogges, who follow two Hares, and take neither; to a tree, that is often transplanted, and there∣fore hardly increaseth; to a wound that is slowlier healed because the medi∣cines are daily altered. As birds that doe both swimme and flie, in the holy Scriptures are counted vncleane: so are all vnconstant per∣sons, that halt betweene two opinions, that as Weather-cockes are turned to and fro with euery wauering blast of vnconstancie. Euen as the Sea swelleth, when the Moone encreaseth, and ebbeth, when it decreaseth: so doe they that are go∣uerned by the the flux and reflux of the uariety of occurrences. As waxe is plyable to working, and wiers to wresting: so are women to inconstancie. As the beast Hyaena, and the Rat of India called Icheumon, are sometimes
males and sometimes females: so many are vnlike themselues, now boasting valourously, now pulling tenderly; now being Phylosophers, now becom∣ming Ruffians; sometimes friends, sometimes foes. As weaker bodies doe more feele the fluxe and refluxe of the Sea, and the encrease and decrease of the Moone: so inconstant and wauering minds are more vehemently mooued, with con∣trarierie of things. As Pitchers are carried about by the eares: so many are haled too and fro with euery wind, and euery word. Plutarch. Among the Troglodytes there is a lake, that thrice in a day is salt and bitter, and thrice againe sweete and pleasant, and as oftentimes in the night, whereupon it is called, The madlake: so some inconstant people are sometimes moody, sometimes milde, sometimes liberal, sometimes niggards, sometimes louing, and sometimes loath∣ing. Plin. 31. cap. 2. & lib. 2. cap. 6. He∣rodotus lib. 4. Inconstant women are like the
winds that rise in the shoares of Le∣panthus, which in the Morning send forth gusts from the North, and in the Euening calmes from the West; their fancies are like Aprill showers, begun in a Sun-shine, and ended in a storme, their passions deepe Hell, their plea∣sures Chimeraes portraytures, suddaine ioyes that appearing like Iuno, are no∣thing when Ixion toucheth them but dutkie and fading clouds. As the breath of man vpon steele no sooner lighter on, but it leapeth off: so are inconstant persons in the beginning and ending of their loues. As Salt-peter fireth at the first, and yet proueth but a flash; and as deaw vpon Christall, no sooner lighteth on, but it leapeth off: such is the heart and thoughts of vnconstant people. The Riuer Hypanus being the chiese of the Sythian Riuers, of it selfe is pure and sweete, but about Callipolis it is infected with the bitter Fountaine cal∣led Exampeus, and so being vnlike it selfe, it runneth into the Sea: so some at the beginning are courteous and friendly, who afterwards are found to
be vnlike themselues. Plin. lib. 2. cap. 100 Solin. cap. 23. Strab. lib. 9. Pompon. Mel. lib. 2. As Euripus in Euboea, doeth ebb and flow seauen times in a day after a wonderfull swiftnesse, and againe three dayes in one moneth stand stone still, in the seauenth, eight, and ninth day of the Moones age: so many being vnlike to themselues, are either too hasty, or too slow, too extreame in either part. The Serpent Amphisena hath a head at both ends, and doth vse both ends as her taile: so some are so fugitiue and inconstant in their affections, that they cannot tell what to resolue vpon, nor what trade of life to bend themselues vnto. As bats neuer flie directly forwards, but flitter here and there: so doe in∣constant people. Basilius de constitnutione monastica, cap. 9. As the planet Mercurie is good be∣ing ioyned with a good planet, and bad with a bad: so is an inconstant person; he fits himselfe for the company. F. Iohannes a S. Gemini. lib. 1. de Coelo & Element is cap. 38.
As the aire is light in substance: so is an inconstant person of beliefe. ibid. As the aire is easily moued: so is an inconstant person, for hee neuer con∣tinues long in one minde. Ibidem. As the aire is very subiect to in∣fection and corruption: so is he or she, that is inconstant. Ibidem. Ambition. THey that lament, because they doe not excell in all things, albeit most different, doe as if one should take it in ill part, that a vine doth no bring forth figges, and that an oliue doth not bring forth clusters of grapes. He that studieth to be Plato in lear∣ning: to sleepe with a blessed Matron, as Ephorium: to drinke with Alexan∣der, as Medius: to be rich, as Ismenias: to be valiant, as Epaminond as: and doth grieue that one is not all these: he doth, as if one should sorrow that a Lyon of the wildernesse, is not the same that a little Melitan puppy is in the bosome of a rich Lady. Idem. The Poet Accius when as hee was
of a very low stature, yet in the house of the Muses he made himsefe a picture of a very great size: so many being in∣deed vile and base, by ambition and bragardisme doe stroute and stretch on themselues. Plin. lib. 34. cap. 5. The Chamelaeon because hee is fed with the aire, and not with solid meate, is alwayes open mouthed: so they that are nourished with glory and popular applause, doe alwayes catch at some thing, that may encrease their renow: As full egges doe sincke to the bot∣tome, but those that are emptie doe swimme alost: so those that aretruely vertuous and learned doe not so much boast as they that be otherwise. As the winds when they are about to cease doe blow most fiercely: so men when they doe most extoll and magnifie themselues, as Pope Iulius and Cardinall Woolsey, then they are wont to be nearest vnto destruction. The doue is swift in her flight, but when shee openeth her wings at large and houereth in the aire to please her selfe, then shee is seased vpon by the hauke lying in waite for her: so many
whilst they bragge of more strength then they vse, become a prey vnto their enemies. Plin. lib. 10. cap. 20. The Peacocke spreadeth not his hundred eyed taile, except he be pray∣sed: so many suppose that they haue not what they haue, except others ad∣mire them. Plin. lib. 10. cap. 21. The cocke being conquerour forth∣with blazeth abroad his victory by crowing: so many doe make boasts of their owne exploites, and become the ridiculous emblasoners of their owne prayses. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 33. As the Chameleon hath great lights, but nothing else within him: so many haue nothing else besides vaine boast∣ing, and windy ostentation Plinius lib: 11 cap. 32. The birde Taurus being very little, yet doeth intate the voyce of an Oxe: so many being base and ignoble, doe speake of nothing but of Emperours, Kings, and stae matters. Plin. lib. 9. cap. 42. & cap. 31. eodem lib. Littlecrab-fishes, that they may be the safer, doe hide themselues in the concauities of emptie shels, and when
as they grow greater, they goe into those that are more capacious: so many distrusting their owne prowesse and vertues, doe defend and countenance themselues with the titles of their an∣cestors. Flatterers and Parasites. AS a Physitian anatomising the body of a man, doth keepe a cer∣taine concinnity and dexteritie with his hand, but doth auoide an apish re∣presentation: so libertie doeth admit vrbanity, grauity being preserued, but a flatterer with laughing and seurrill iesting doth as it were sweeten liberty with an ill sauce. Plut. As an ill picture doth represent a thing, with ragged garments, wrinck∣led and deformed: so a flatterer doth imitate a friend with clamours and fri∣uolous endeuours, acting nothing sin∣cerely. idem. An ape when hee can neither keepe the house like a dogge, nor cary bur∣dens as a horse, nor plow as an Oxe, doth mocke and mow and moue laugh∣ter:
so a parasite when he knoweth not how to bee seruiceable in serious and weightie matters, becommeth a mi∣nister of delights and pleasures. Idem. One when he had very filthily pour∣trayed cocke-chickins, he commanded his boy, that he should let no liue cocke chickins come neare his table, least by the comparison he should be blamed: so a flatterer with all his maine and might doth driue away true friends, least by being compared with them he be found to be as he is idem. As pillowes doe seeme to withstand the couching of the head, but yet doo giue place and become very pliable: so the liberty of a flatterer seemeth to swell and carry it selfe aloft, but it easily receiueth whatsoeuer inclineth to it. Idem. As those beasts are very hardly found, that change colour according to the semblance of the place; so thou shalt hardly find those flatterers, that can apply themselus to euery humour, and to all courses of life. Idem. As counterfeit things doe onely imitate the brightnesse and splendor of
gold: so doth a flatterer imitate the grace, obsequiousnesse, and cheareful∣esse of a friend. Idem. As the fish Polipus doeth change olour according to the place he is in: o flatterers doe apply themselues to he obseruance of time, place and per∣ons. Idem. As Tragaedians haue neede of a Chorus, and theater to applaud them: o they that delight in parasites and latterers, doe nothing, except there be others that may applaud them. ibid. As according to Mathematians the uperficies and the lynes are neither ended, nor produced, nor moued of themselues, because they are meerely intelligible things, but are bended, engthened and moued together with their bodies: so a flatterer is not moued of his owne affection, but is angry with his angry friend, and doth laugh with him reioycing. As ey that pamper horses, doe not feed them with lentils and vitches, but with better graine: so flattery doth not annoy poore and base men, but it is the disease & ruine of great families & rich fortunes. idem.
As lice forsake a liuelesse body, be∣cause they want the bloud wherewith they were nourished: so flatterers are attendants to prosperity and perfer∣ments, but shrinckers backe in aduersity and disasterous fortune. Idem: As they that bring vp a beast to tame, doe first apply themselues to the dis∣position of the beast, and doe marke, with what things it is either offended or pleased, vntill such time as they haue made it tractable: so a flatterer doth apply himselfe to all the affections and studies of his friend. Idem. The best Cookes in their sauces doe mingle some tarte thing, whereby they may take away the fulsomnesse of that which is too sweete: so flatterers doe mingle a certaine kind of fained liberty and seuerity, that they may flatter more, when they seeme to childe and speake freely. Idem: As water doeth slip downe, where it findeth a hollow place or a downe∣fall: so a flatterer doth then most of all taxe and vrge his friend, when he seeth that he is downe and that he hath ouer∣throwne himselfe. Idem.
As limning and pourtraiture is a si∣lent poeie: so also a flatterer in silence doth commend by his countenance and gesture. Idem. As huntrs doe the more easily de∣ceiue wild beasts, when the assault them, as though they were doing some otherthing: so a flatterer doth most of all then claw and glauer when hee seemeth not o prayse. Idem. As the running streame of no cer∣taine colour, but alwayes resembleth the colour of the ground it glideth o∣uer: so a flateter is alwayes vnlike him∣selfe, fitting himselfe to the present oc∣casion. Idem. In a Comedy of Menander a false Hercules is brought in, bearing a bum∣bast and a counterfeit club without substance or solidity: so the liberty of a flatterer is hollow and vnsound. Idem. As a glasse doth imitate whatsoeuer obiect is opposed against it: so also doth a flatterer. Idem. As a shadow doth goe whither thou goest, and seemeth to doe what thou doest: so a flatterer doth follow thee whitherso uer thou turnest thy selfe. Idem.
As a Chamlion doth change him∣selfe into all colours, except it be into white: so a flatterer will imitate thee in all things, except it be in that which is honest. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 33. As vnskilfull Painters, when they cannot delineate those things that are beautifull, doe blaze their portraitures with warts and wrinckles: so a flatterer doth represent the intemperancy, and wrath of a friend. Idem. As there be meates and condimentes, which neither doe make bloud, nor be∣get spirit, neither doe strengthen the sinewes, nor encrease the marrow, but onely doe procure ust, maketh the belly flatuous, and doe swell the body: such also is the speach of a flatterer, it onely stirreth vp and prouoketh vnto vice and wickednesse, but barren to a∣ny good. Idem. As Painters by shadowes and ob∣scurities doe illustrate things that bee glorous and bright: so a flatterer pray∣ing diuers vices in others, that are ab∣sent, doth nourish and cherish them in his friend, that is present. Idem. As Oratours doe sometimes bring in
another person speaking, either that they may procure more credit, or that they may auoid enuie: so a flatterer re∣porteth what hee hath heard of others as concerning his friend, albeit he hath heard nothing at all. Idem. As wine being mingled with the iuyce of hemlocke, doth make the poy∣son vncurable, (which of it selfe is an antidote against this aconite) because the heart of the wine doeth presently carry the strength of the poyson vnto the heart: so a flatterer, vnderstanding that liberty of speach is a remedy a∣gainst flattery, doth mingle it with his adulation, that it may bee the more hurtfull. Idem. Glasse doeth wonderfully imitate Chrystall, a base thing that which is most precious: so doth flattery imitate friendship, a vile thing that which is most excellent. Plinius, lib. 9. cap. 29. & lib. 37. capite 2. As the libard through his sweete sa∣uour doth allure other wild beasts vn∣to him, & so doth kill them: so flatterers through their faire speaches doe allure men vnto them, & do destroy them. li. lib. 8. c. 17.
As the beast Hyaena counterfeiting mans voyce, and by harkening doth learne ones name, whom she calling forth deuoureth: so flatterers by fair speech, doe allure, till they haue drawn into destruction. Plin. lib. 7. cap. 2. As all fishes are not allured by one bait, but some with one; and some with another; whereupon skilfull fishers doe especially fish with that baife, which they are delighted with: so a flatterer finding the disposition of a man, what he delighted in, & what he abhorreth, with that thing hee tickleth and gul∣leth him, in which he taketh greatest pleasure: As the serpent Cerasts is not bred by the Cipres tree by reason of bitternese, nor by the Box tree by reason of hard∣nesse: so the plague of flattery doth flie from graue and seuere dispositions, but doth cease vpon effeminate and delicate natures. Plin. lib. 7. cap. 24. As Panthers haue a sweet smell, but a deuouring mind: so haue flatterers: Straight trees haue crooked roots, smooth baites, sharpe hooks, the fairer the stone is in the Toades head, the
more pestilent is her poyson in her bowels: so flatterers talke the more it is seasoned with fine phrases, the lesse it sauoreth of true meaning. Hypocrisie. Hypocrites. AS the Tyger when he hunteth for his prey, doth hide his clawes: so hypocrites for their commodity speake faire, when they meane ill. As the Pyrit stone is then most ho, when it looketh most cold: so when hypocites looke the most demure, they meane the most mishiefe. As Ianus was double faced: so hy∣pocrites are double hearted. As Sepulchers are beautious with∣out, but full of corruption within: so hypocrites seeme outwardly religious, but inwardly are replenisht with ini∣quitie. As hee that takes the muster of men doth diligently view their bodies and age, to see if they bee fit for the warre: so the Lord making choyce of soules for the spirituall warfare doeth search into their wils, and if hee finde any
hidden hypocrisie, he reiecteth man, as vnfit to bee entertained, but he find him worthy hee bestoweth his grace vpon him. Cyrillus Ierosoly catechei. 1. As the fish Polypus to catch his prey turneth himselfe into the colour of e∣uery stone hee meets with: so hypocrius to satisfie their wils, turne themselues into the condition of euery company; they are sober with the sober, vntem∣perate with the vntemperate, irreligi∣ous with the Atheist, and percise with the puritan. Basil. hom. 7. exameron. As foolish women, when they lacke naturally beauty, doe painte themselues: so wicked hypocrites when they want inward vertues, assume outward sem∣blances. Gregorius Nazianzenus cra▪ in funere patris. As the Chamleon assumeth all co∣lours, but white; that in the meane while I may speake nothing of Proteus the Aegyptian sophister: so an hypo∣crite is all things but a good Christian, simple hearted and honest, such an hy∣pocrite, was Iulianus Apostata. Idem orat. 1. in Iulinum.
A sepulcher seemeth beautifull, so long as it shut, but when it is open, it is stincking and horrible: so hipocrites, so long as they are not knowne seeme iolly fellows, but when they are laid open, they are abominable. Chrysost. hom. 45. operis imperfacti▪ As a stage player taketh vpon him another mans person, sometimes being a seruant, and sometime a Lord: so a hypocrite taketh vpon him the person of an honest man, when indeed he is a very knaue. idem. insermone de Ieiunio. As he that represents Agamemnon, is not Agamemnon: so an hypocrite seeming an honest man, is no honest man. Augustinus lib. 2. de sermone domini in monte. The Etrich seemeth as shee would flie, yet hath no vse of flying: so hypo∣crisie seemeth to haue the image of sanctity, but is ignorant of a sanctified life. Gregorius lib. 7. moral. cap. 15. Bull-rushes and sedge haue a shew of greennesse, but beare no fruit: so the life of hypocrites. Idem. lib. 8. cap. 27. As Symon Cyrenaeus caried Christs crosse of constraint and not willingly:
so hypocrites doe the worke of Christ vnwillingly, executing that openly, which they doe not loue inwardly. Bernardus sermone de benedict & Gre∣gor. 8. Morall. As a swan hath white feathers and blacke flesh: so an hypocrite hath faire words but foule workes. Hector Pis in cap. 40. Ezechiel. As merchants sell the skinnes of wilde beasts, but doe not meddle with the entrals so hypocrites onely meddle with outward things, but doe not deale with inward matters. Ibidem. As those rockes in the sea, are more dangerous, which are couered with a little water, then those, which are e∣minent and easily discerned, which mariners may auoide: so hypocrits pretending piety are more dangerous then notorious wicked persons, for these being knowne, wee may eschew them, when wee know not how to auoide the other. idem. in cap. 9. Esayae. Siluer albeit it be white, yet it maketh blacke lines as lead: so hypocrites shew otherwise then they are. As wine mingled with water doth
more prouoke vomit, then either pure water, or pure wine: so that wicked∣nesse is more intolerable, which is co∣lored with piety, then that wickednesse, which shewes to be so of it selfe. As Apothecaries gild ouer their me∣dicines, that they may sell them the better: so hypocrites glide their words, that they may the better compasse their purpose, nay many can tip their tongues with the gold of the Gospell, that they may the sooner entrap. The Carbuncle hath a shew like fire, and yet hath no fire in it: so hypocrits haue the shew of piety, but in truth are farre from it. Plin. lib. 36. cap. 5. The Indians doe so counterfeit the precious stone Opalum that it cannot be discerned, but onely in the Sunne: so some hypocrites are so cunning in their dissimulation, that it is hard for any to descry them, but the eyes of wisedome. Plin. lib. 37, cap. 6. As the beast Camelopardlis re∣sembleth a horse in his necke, an Oxe in his feete and legges, a cammell in his head, and a Tyger or Leopard in his spottes: so hypocrites, doe put on diuers
shapes of men, if thou beholdest their habits, they seeme holy▪ if their speach, thou wouldest thinke, a Champion spake, but if thou lookest into their liues, thou shalt find them knaues, if in∣to their writings, clownes and dotards. As the Cretian can lye, the Grecian shift, the Italian court it, and as A∣lexandar can carouse, Romulus ab∣staine, the Epicure eate, the Stoike fast, Endimion sleepe, and Chrysippus watch: so the hypocrite can fit all companies, play the ambodexter in all places, and be a pleasing parasite for all times, hee can bee precise with the puritant, in∣iunctiue with the protestant, and Pope∣holy with the Papist. As the Camelion though hee hath most guts, draweth least breath, and as the Elder-tree though hee be fullest of pitch is farthest from strength: so hy∣pocrites though outwardly they seeme full of pietie, yet inwardly they are swelled with vice. The bird Taurs hath a great voyce, but a small body; the thunder a great clap, yet but a little stone; the emptie vessell giueth a greater sound then the
full barrell: so hypoc haue plenty of words and promises, but scarsity of works, and performances. In painted pots are hidden the dead∣liest poyson; in the greenest grasse is the greatest Serpent; in the clearest water, the vgliest Toade, and in the most curious Sepulchre, are inclosed rotten bones: so hypocrites vnder their faire pretences doe shrowd soule in∣tendements. As the Estrich carieth faire feathers, but ranke flesh; and as the Cypers tree beareth a faire leafe, but no fruit: so hypocrits make faire shewes, but haue foule soules. When the Fox preacheth, the Geese perish; the Crocodile shrowdeth great∣est trason vnder most pitifull teares: so in a kissing mouth there lyeth a galling minde. In the coldest flint there is hot fire; the Bee that hath hony in her mouth, hath a sting in her taile, the tree that beareth the sweetest fruit, hath a sowre sap: so the words of hypocrites, though they seeme smooth as oyle, yet their hearts are as crooked as the stalke of Iuie.
The Spider in the finest web, doth hang the fairest flye: so an hypocrite with the fairest words doth betray the truest manner. As there needeth no more but one pin or prickle to pearce a bladder, and to make all the wind therein inclosed incontinently to come forth: euen so there needeth no more, but one very little temptation to pull the visard from hypocrites, and to discouer them to euery man, who shall know after that they shall be sifted, that there was no∣thing but a colour and an imagination of all the reputation of righteousnesse and vertue, which they had gotten a∣mong men. As the basest gold, though it be raied with some durt, is alwayes more pre∣cious then the brightest lead that a man can find: so the righteousnesse of a Christian man, though it be defiled through meny infirmities and imper∣fections, yet notwithstanding is more to bee esteemed then all the righteous∣nesse of hypocrites and infidels. As Barnacles are both fish and flesh; as the Israelites spake both Ashdod and
Hebrew; as Ianus saw both before and behind; as Balaam did both blesse and curse; and as the Sew-mew, or the Gull, liues both in the water, and vp∣on the earth: so hypocriets are neither flesh nor fish, they are holy with the holy, and prophane with the wicked, as Ehud, they are ambo-dexters with the Church of Laodicea, they are nei∣ther hot no cold, with Tullie, they are both for Caesar and Pompey, and with Tytides, they cannot determine, whether to ioyne with Achilles or Hector. Vserie. AS a fish deuoures the baite with the hooke, so an Vsurer deuoures the man with his mony. Basil. in Psa. 14 Vipers are borne by gnawing a∣sunder the bellies of their dams: so Vsurie is bred and nourished by con∣suming the houses and substance of debtors. ibidem. As Paederastie is vnlawfull, because it is against kind: so vsury and encrease by gold and siluer is vnlawfull, because
against nature; nature hath made them sterill and barren, and vsury make them procreate. As he tha  tung of an Aspe, falleth a sleepe  delight, and so dieth by the  of sleepe: so he that taketh vpon , for the time is delighted, as one that had receiued a benefit, and so by the sweetnesse of the benefit, hee perceiueth not how hee is made a cap∣tiue. Chrysost. hom. 12. oper is imperfect. As the poyson of an Aspe doth lurk∣ingly run thorow all the members, and so corrupteth them: so vsury doth run thorow all thy wealth, and doth con∣uert it into debt. Ibidem. As a little leauen sowreth the whole lumpe of dow, and turneth it into the same nature: so vsurie whose house soeuer it enters into, it drawes vnto it all substance, and conuerts it into debt. Ibidem. A Conie, together bringeth forth and nourisheth other young ones, and a∣gaine groweth great with yonug: so Vsuries take vsery vpon vsury, & gaine vpon gaine, they call for their lucre be∣fore it come to the birth. Plut. in Moral..
As fire growing to power doth con∣sume one thing after another: so doth vsury. Ibidem. Vultures kill nothing themselues, but seaze vpon it being killed of others: so Vsurers liue vpon the sweate of o∣ther mens browes, and enioy the fruit of other mens labours, against the ordinance of God and man. Erasmus in similibus. As he that tumbleth in the mire, be∣commeth more foule and filthy: so they become more and more indebted, that haue to doe with Vsurers. Plut. Cholericke men, that will not bee purged in time, daily increase their hu∣mour, till dangerously they be diseased: so they that suer vsury to increase and grow vpon them, and doe not dis∣charge themselues of it, doe run into irrecuperable danger and perill. Idem. Plato doth forbid to aske water of neighbours, vntill thou hast digged thine owne ground, to see if thou maist find a veine for thine owne vse: so wee should try all meanes to relieue and helpe our selues, before wee borrow mony vpon vsury. Idem.
As the fish Surgus doth alwayes fol∣low the fish Alutrius, that hee may feed on the mud that the Alutari raiseth: so vsurers doe intrude them∣selues into other mens businesse, that they may take the fruit and gaine of their labours. As Tigres are swift in catching their prey: so Vsurers are speedy in ga∣thering of wealth. F. Iohannes à S. Ge∣miniao, lib. 1. de coelo & elementis, c. 21 Plinie saith, that Eagles feathers be∣ing put among other feathers, doth de∣uoure and consume them: so an Vsurers filthy lucre being put among an other∣mans wealth, doth quite dououre and sume it. Idem, lib. 4. de natalibus, & vo∣latilibus. cap. 72. Pigmies are a cubite high (for so their name signifies among the Grecians) dwelling in the mountaines of India by the Ocean, as sayeth Augustine, at three yeares, they are of a perfect and mature age, they bring forth at fiue, and grow old when they are seauen. Therefore as Pigmies doe soone encrease, and soone decrease: so wealth got by Vsurie, doth soone encrease, and soone decrease; as it
soone gotten (being the trade of an Merchant, to tell out tenne and ake in eleuen) so is it speedily lost, and uddenly squandered; De male quaesitis on gadettertius haeres, Idem lib. 5. de nimalibus terrestribus. cap. 122. As excommunication doth not onely ind them, against whom it is denou∣ed, but also them, that partake with hem in cases not permitted: so vsurers hemselues are not onely odious and ursed, but they infect others dealing n the action with them, as Notaries nd Sriueners, that had wont to bee worne at the entring into their office, neuer to draw any writ for any case of Vsurie. Idem. lib, 8. de canonibus & degibus, cap. 76. As a vessell filled with water, sinketh to the bottome, and is there detained: so an vsurer loaden with the burthen of vnrighteous Mammon, is pressed down to the earth, and there violently held downe of the Diuell for euer aspiring to heauen, except the miraculous fa∣uour of God vnloose him. Idem, lib. 9. de atificibus & rebus artificialibus, c. 90. As an Oxe is sold to the butcher for
money: so an Vsurer doth sell his soule to the Deuill for lucre. Ibidem. Heresie, Heretikes. AS they that are bitten of a mad dogge, doe not onely runne mad themselues, but doe infect others with madnesse: so they that are infected with any pestilent and hereticall opinion, do infect others by their speech and con∣ference. As a Wolfe cloathed in a sheepes skinne doth the greater harme: so doth an heretike that hath his tongue tipped with the Scripture. Ignatius in Epist∣ad Heronem. As Circe changed men into beasts: so heresie turneth men into Diuels: Clemens Alexandrinus lib. 7. strom. As wicked scholers shut their masters out of doores: so heretiks driue the Prophets from their conuenticles, least they should reprehend them. Ibidem. As the Serpent deceiued Eue, pro∣mising that vnto her hee had not: so heretickes pretending great knowledge do bring death to their beleeuers. Irn. prologo in lib. 4.
As Pilte would haue seemed inno∣cent of Christs death by washing his hands: so Heretikes pretend truth and Scripture, when they are as deepe in iniuring Christ, as Pilate was. Atha∣asis orat. prim. As the serpent Dipsas doth poyson al the waters he drinkes of: so heretickes doe deadly poyson all the soules that beleeue them. Epiphanius Haeresi. 34. conra Macosios. As the Serpent Drynas, is like vnto the colour of an Oken leafe, whence he hath his name: so Heretikes seeme to bee like Christians, when indeed they are as ill as Iewes. Idem haeresi 65. con∣tra Palum Samosatensem. As an Ape is like vnto a man, and yet is no man: so Heretiks are like vn∣to a Christian Church, and yet are no Christian Church. Chrisostomus hom. 19. operis imperfect. As Serpents creepe vpon their bel∣lies, and feed vpon dust; so heretikes do all for their bellies, and for the vaine∣glory of their hearts, and doe feed vpon earth, that is, vpon earthly and carnall men. Idem. hom. 45. operis imperfect.
As a member cannot liue being cut from the body; nor a branch of a tree be greene, being hewen from the stock: so all heretickes being cut from the bo∣dy of one Church, neither can haue the life of Christ in them, neither the green∣nesse and viriditie of spirituall grace, but their Church is desolate and for∣saken. Idem, hom. 46. A sparke of fire at the first is scarcely seene, but if it get nourishment it con∣sumeth large Cities and great Coun∣tries: so heresie and peruerse doctrine beginning at the first of one, finding af∣terwards two or three auditours, and being let alone creepeth like a canker by little & little throughout the body. The heresie of Arius at the first was a little sparke in Alexandria, but be∣cause it was not forthwith smothered, it se a fire the whole world. Hieronimus lib. 3. comment▪ in Epist. ad Galat. cap. 5 As fowlers by craft catch birds: so heriticks by subtilty surprise men. Optatus Mileuitanus libro 6. ad finem contra Parmennianum. As the children of Moab and Am∣mon descended of Abraham. consangui∣itie,
and yet alwayes hated the kin∣red and stock of Abraham: so here∣cks say that they beleeue in Christ, nd they alwaies endeuour to subuert he catholicke faith of the christians: Rupertus lib. 2. in Sophoniam. As Dathan & Abyram conspired a∣ainst Moses: so doe heretickes against he Church. Eugubinus in cap. 11. Deut As Nabuzardan the Chiefetaine of abuchodonosor did destroy Ierusa∣m, and profane the vessels of the tem∣e: so the hereticks of our time, being e Chiefetaines of the Diuell, doe en∣euour to subuert the Church of Christ, nd to profane the holy vessels of the emple, that is the Sacraments or∣ined not of Salomon, but of Christ. ntus in Ezechielem. cap. 4. As the name of Nebuzardan signi∣th the speech and message of a strange ord, or of a strange iudgement: so retikes doe not sound the idiome and me of Iesus Christ our Lord, but of other Lord, that is, of the Deuill, hom Christ calleth the Prince of this orld, ibidem. As Ismael the Sonne of Nathaniah
did weepe with the friends of Godoliah whom he had slaine: so heretickes, an so do hypocrttes, weepe for that, whic they wish most harme vnto. F. Iohanne à S. Geminiano lib. 5. de aenimalibus t restribus capite 72. A Panther by the beauty of his skin and sweete smell of his breath doth allure other beasts vnto him, but by th fearefulnesse of his head he feareth the away, whereupon he hideth his head till hee hath laid hold on them, th come to see him: so heretikes and hypocrites outwardly pretending gresanctity, and by the fame of the doctrine, which they colour with deuotion and simplicity, hiding the malcious head of their corrupt intent, the draw many simple and ignorant audtours vnto him, and doe destroy the with their poysonous doctrine ibidem As young Lyons doe teare and ren the wombe of their Dams in bringin them forth: so heretikes doe rend an teare in peeces the vnity of the Churc their mother, who spiritually do bring them forth. Idem lib. 5. de anima terrest. capite 108.
When the time approacheth of the ipers bringing forth, her young ones oe not stay the operation of nature, ut gnaw her sides in sunder, and so ome forth with the destruction of heir damme: so heretikes being bred n the wombe of the Church their mother, not staying for, nor sustaining er correction, by rebellion doe depart rom her, and whilst they gnaw in under her vnity, as much as lyes in hem, they labour to bring her vnto destruction. Ibidem. Yong Panthers hating their dams, doe beate in peeces with their hooues he wombs of their dams, because they resist their egresse and deliuerance, whereupon a Panther bringeth not forth but once: so heretikes, with their nailes, that is, with their malignant doctrine doe teare in peeces the vnitie of the Church their mother, because she doeth resist their perfidy. ibidem. A Wolfe infecteth the wooll of that sheepe he woorieth, so that a garment made of it proueth lousie, as saith Isi∣dore: so an hereticke by his biting doth corrupt the simplicity of mans conuer∣sation,
and maketh it to abound with lice, that is, with corrupt workes. ibid. Death. AS he is to be called a skilfull Phy∣sitian, that can so temper his me∣dicine, that it bringeth health, which is the end of his Physicke: so is he to b termed truely wise, who hath so lear∣ned to lead his life, that a good death may follow. As the hearbe colloquintida is mos bitter: so is the memory of death to a rich couetous man. F. Iohannes a S Geminiano lib. 3. de vegetabilib. & plant. cap. 40. As Colloquintida doth stretch ou her branches a farre off: so death stretch out himselfe so farre that none can escape him. ibid. As that Coiloquintida is most poy∣sonous and deadly, which growes a∣lone: so is that death most fearefull, vpon which a pure conscience and true repentance doth not attend ibidem. As that Colloquintida is good, ac∣cording to Macrus, which is white:
so is that death which is religious. ibid. As by a serpent the death of man came: so by the death of man a serpent is ingendered, that is, of the marrow of his backe bone, as saith Hippocrates. The beast Hena hath the necke of a Viper, the backe of an Elephant, the greedinesse of a Wolfe, the mane of a horse, the voyce of a man, and is some∣times male and sometimes female: so death is likened to a Viper for his swift∣nesse, to an Elephant for his force and violence, to a Wolfe for his voracity, to a horse for his vnbridlednesse, to a man for his deceiptfulnesse, and to male and female, because it takes away both kinds. As the ashes of a Scorpion drunke in wine is remedy against the stinging of a Scorpion: so the meditation of death is a remedy against sinne, which is the cause of death. Gemin. lib. 5. de a∣nimal. Terrest. cap. 80. As in sleep there is no remembrance of labours: so the Saints by the sleepe of death doe rest from their labours: idem. lib. 6. de homine & Membr. cap. 45.
As a man whilest he sleepeth feareth the power of no aduersary: so the Saints by the sleepe of death are taken out of the hands of all aduersaries, and doe enioy the security of eternall safety. ibi. As a Waspe stinging a stone, doth not hurt the stone, but her selfe by loo∣sing her sting: so death lost his sting by running vpon life, which is Iesus Christ. Athanasius de passione domini. As water falling vpon the earth, is swallowed vp of it, so that it is no more seene: so a man by death falling into the earth, is so consumed and destroyed, that hee is neuer found againe in the condition of his mortall state. Idiota de contemplatione mortis, cap. 10. As all riuers runne into the Sea: so all they that come into this fluctuous life, must enter into the Sea of death. For death is the punishment of all, the tri∣bute of all, the prison of all, the con∣querour of all, and the receptable of all. Ibidem. cap. 13. As he that would conquer a Castle, at the first doth make way to the ruine with his greater shot, after hee doeth assault, lnuade and possesse it: so dealeth
death, who first sendeth his battering shot of great sicknesse and infirmity, which doth so vanquish and breake the naturall strength of the body, that the soule can no longer defend her castle, and then death seiseth vpon it. Ludo. Granat. lib. 1. ducis peccat. As for the biting of an aspe there is no remedy, vnlesse the parts infected be cut away: so certaine vices are healed onely by death. Aristot. As Pilgrims are cheerefully wel∣commed into Innes or lodgings, yet ere their departing some account of ex∣penses is made vnto them: so though wee haue a little shew of pleasant en∣tertinment in this world, yet at our deaths wee must render a seuere and strict account for the same. Stea de contempu mundi. As no man doth maruell▪ that that is molten, which might b melted  or burnt, which is combusibe: so to be dead is not to be marull at, because we are mortall Plt. As borrowed money is willingly to be paide againe: so our life, which God hath lent vs, is
to be rendered to him againe, when he cals for it idem. No man taketh it in ill part to haue a candle lighted, but euery one mis∣liketh to haue it put out: so we reioyce at a birth, but sorrow at death. Idem. He that beyond measure is giuen to wine doeth also sucke vp the dregs: so there are many that loue their liues so well, that they would not die, no not in old age. Seneca. As hee is more prosperous, whom a speedy wind bringeth into the hauen, then he that is in a calme wearied vp∣on the sea: so hee is more fortunate, whom speedy death taketh out of the miseries of his life. Seneca. As fire burneth fiercely, when it hath store of fewell, but dieth of his owne accord when it lacketh matter: so great is the difference betweene the death of young men and old men. Sene. A sword-player fearefull in all the fight, smiteth home and growes vali∣ant or rather desperate, when he seeth no way but death: so death is fearefull being farre off, but lesse dreaded being at hand. Seneca.
As Swans seeing what good is in death, doe end their liues with singing: so ought all good and honest men to do. Cicero, lib. 1. Tusc. quaest. Vnripe Apples are hardly pulled from the Tree, but being ripe, they fall of their owne accord: so force doth take life from young men, but maturity and ripenes from old men. Idem de senectute. They that speake euill of the dead are like vnto dogges, that bite at stones cast at them, but doe not touch them that hurt them. Aristoteles in Rhetoricis ait Platonem huius similitudinis au∣thorem esse. As Croesus with all his wealth: so Aristotle with all his wit, and all men with all their wisedome, haue and shall perish and turne to dust. As Aristippus searched how to por∣long his life: so Socrates sought how he might yeeld to death. As life is the gift of God: so death is the due of nature; and as we receiue the one as a benefit: so must we abide the other of necessity. As the bud is blasted, as soone as the blowne Rose; and as the wind shaketh
off the blossome as well as the fruit: so death neither spareth the golden lockes nor the hoarie head. As a Bee stinging a dead body takes no hurt, but stinging a liue body oft times looseth both sting & life together: so death, so long as it stung mortall men onely, which were dead in sinne, was neuer a whit the worse, but when it stung Christ once, who is life it selfe, by and by it lost both sting & strength. As the brasen Serpent was so farre from hurting the Israelits, that con∣trariwise it healed them: so death is now so farre from hurting any true Israelite, that on the other side, if af∣fliction, as a fierce Serpent, sting vs, or if any thing else hurt vs presently it is helped, and redressed by death. Those which will needs play the hobgoblins, or the night walking spi∣rits (as we call them) all the while they speake vnder a hollow vault, or leape forth with an vgly vizard vpon their faces, they are so terrible, that he which thinkes himselfe no small man, may perhaps be afrighted with them; But if some lusty fellow chance to step into
one of these and cudgell him well fa∣uouredly, and pull the vizard from his face, then euery boy laughes him to scorne: so death was a terrible bulbeg∣ger, and made euery man afraid of him a great while, but Christ dying, buck∣led with this bul-begger and coniured him (as I may say) out of hs hollow vault, when as the dead comming out of the graues were seene in Ierusalem, and puld the vizard from his face, when as hee himselfe riing, left the linnen cloathes which were the vizard of death behind him. Doctor Playfer. As that Asse called Cumanus Asinus, etting vp and downe in a Lyons skin, did for a time terrifie his master, but afterwards being descried did benefit him very much: so death stands now like a silly Asse, hauing his Lyons skin puld ouer his eares, and is so farre from terrifying any, that it benefits all true Christians, because by it they rest from their labours, and if they be oppressed with troubles or cares when they come to death they are discharged. All the while Adam did eate any other fruite which God gaue him leaue
to eate, hee was nourished by it, but when hee had tasted of the forbidden tree, hee perished: so death had free leaue to deuoure any other man, Christ onely excepted, but when it went a∣bout to destroy Christ, then it was de∣stroyed it selfe. Those barbarous people called Ca∣nibals, which feed onely vpon raw flesh, especially of men, if they happen to eate a peece of rosted meate, com∣monly they surfeit of it and die: so the right Caniball, the onely deuourer of all mankind, death I meane, taking of Christs flesh, and finding it not to bee raw (such as it was vsed to eate) but wholsome and heauenly meate indeed, presently tooke a surfet of it, and with∣in three dayes died. As when Iudas had receiued a sop at Christs hand, anon after his bowels gushed out: so death being so sawcie as to snatch a sop (as it were) of Christs flesh, and a little bit of his body was by and by like Iudas, choaked and strangled with it, and faine to yeeld it vp againe, when Christ on Easter day reuiued.
Sharpe frosts bite forward springs, Easterly winds blasteth towardly blos∣somes: so cruell death spareth not those, whom we our selues liuing can∣not spare, as it spared not King Edward the sixt, nor sir Philip Sidney, who could neuer haue liued too long. As madnesse and anger differ no∣thing but in continuance and length of time: so neither doe death and sleepe. The Deuill. AS the Lyon that killed the disobe∣dient Prophet returning from Be∣thel, did neither teare his dead body, nor hurt his Asse: after the same manner is the power of the Deuill, be∣ing a roaring Lyon restrained, and kept within limits, so that he can extend his furie no further, then God giueth him eaue. As they that would haue dogs come vnto them, allure them with bread or lesh: so the Diuell allureth soules vnto im with pleasures and riches. Clemens Alexand. lib. 2. storm. As a fish natching at the bait, not
seeing the hooke, is taken: so the Diuell hauing the power of death, greedily carrying Iesus vnto death, and not seeing the hooke of his diuinity in∣cluded in him, was caught and ouer∣throwne himselfe, Idem in Symb. Apost. As one night is sufficient to bring darknesse ouer the whole world: so the Prince of darknesse is sufficient to disturbe all mortall creatures. Maca∣rius. hom. 5. As Endiue is like vnto Lettice, yet the one is sweete, the other bitter: so the Diuell sometimes sheweth himselfe like an Angell of light, yet the one is glorious, the other vgly and deformed. Idem. hom. 7. As a man & a woman commits cor∣porall fornication: so the Diuell and the soule commits spiritual fornication. Idem. hom. 15. As Serieants waite for the arest of men indebted: so Diuels waite o are sinfull soules. Idem. hom. 43 As a strong stone wall resisteth a dart: so faith resisteth the Diuell. Greg. Nazian.  in Cyprianum.
As a dogge stayeth still vnder the Table, if he find any fallings, but de∣parteth if he finde none: so the Diuell doth continually gape vpon vs; if hee get any blasphemous word, he stayeth still, but if thou lettest no sins passe from thee; he will leaue thee. Chrysost. concione. 3. de Lazaro. As Pyrats set vpon rich loaden ships, but passe by them that be emptie: so the diuell assaileth them that bee stuffed with vertues, but he lets wicked world∣lings and mammonists liue in quiet. Iaem. hom. 4. de verbis Isayae. Vidi dominum. As a Pylot seeing one starre can direct his course to any Citie or pro∣nince: so the Diuell being the prince of the ayre, doth not onely see, but also know all the principalities, and digni∣ties of the world, and therefore hee could point out to our Sauiour the ho∣nour and state of euery kingdome. Idem hom. 5. operis imperfect.
Hell. IF wee bee so delicate and tender in this life, that we cannot suffer pati∣ently a feuer of three dayes: so much lesse shall wee in the life to come be a∣ble to suffer euerlasting fire. Lud. Gra∣nat. lib. 1. ducis peccat. If we be terrified when wee see any horrible punishment inflicted vpon a malefactour in this life: so much more shall we bee tormented at the sight of the dreadfull and intollerable punish∣ments in the other. Idem. As the wicked haue offended God with all their parts, powers and sences, and haue imployed them all, as in∣struments to serue sinne with: euen so shall Gods diuine iustice ordaine, that in all the selfe same parts, powers, and sences, they shall suffer sorrow and torment; that so that may be fulfilled, which is written. How much he glori∣fied himselfe, and was in delicacies, giue him so much torments and lamentaions, ibidem. As it happened to Sisera, who be∣fore he slept, drunke of the sweete milke
in Iaeels bottle, but shee awaked him after another manner by nailing his head downe fast to the ground: euen so doe men sup vp the sweete milke of this worlds vanities, till they are sud∣denly ouer-taken with death eternall, because they cannot awake from the drowsie sleepe wherein they are fast nailed downe by their owne negligent follies. Stella de contemptu mundi. As Egypt a figure of hell, was full of darknesse and a land of captiuity: so hell. Rupertus lib. 2. in Math. As in this world it is a kind of solace to haue others partakers of our miseries: so in hell it shall bee great vexation to the damned, to see others tormented as themselues. Chrysost. hom. 48. de Ira. As entrance into the house of Dedalus was open, but regresse was denied: so the way into hell is very wide and open, but the returne from it is altoge∣ther impossible. As Abeston a stone of Archadia be∣ing once set on fire, can neuer be ex∣stinguished neither by raine nor tem∣pest, as saith Isidore: so hell fire being once kindled can neuer be quenched.
As an old man said in the liues of the fathers: when a Nource would weane her child, she layeth some bitter thing vpon her dugge, which when the child feeleth, he abhorreth it: so oppose the bitternesse of Hell against the delights of the world, and thou shalt be with∣drawne from them. As the righteous shall reioyce in Heauen by reason of their great ioy & blessednesse: so one the contrarie part, sinners shall bee tormented with vn∣speakeable tortures in hell. Ldouicus Granat. in suis septem Meditationibus, Meditatione septima. As beautie, agilitie, fortitude, liber∣tie, health, pleasure, and eternitie is matter of reioycing vnto the righteous in Heauen: so the vglinesse of sinne, the burthen of it, imbecility, seruitude, infirmitie, anxietie, and euerlasting death shall with grieuous torments af∣flict sinners in hell. Ibidem. As the friends of God shall be secure, that they shall not loose their blessed∣nesse in heauen: so the enemies of God shall loose all hope to be deliuered from those torments, which they liue in, in hell, ibid,
As in this world we are all vnder one Sun, yet wee doe not feele the heate of it all alike, because one is more hot, and another lesse hot: so in hell in that fire, there is not one manner of bur∣ning, because here what the diuersity of bodies doth (for after one manner the fire doth burne chffe, after another wood, and after another iron) that there doth the diuersitie of sinnes, they haue the same fire, and yet it doth not burne them alike. ibidem. As the Saints in Heauen haue loue and perfect charitie: so the damned in hell doe burne against all with spite and haed. ibidem. As the Saints in Heauen doe reioyce at anothers good: so the damned in hell doe repine at it, neither is there any thing found at which they more grieue, then at the glory of the Saints, and therefore they wish that all might bee damned with them. ibid. As God made Heauen for good men: so hee made hell for wicked men. FINIS.
A Table of the Common places into which the Similitudes are digested. A ABdication, p. 360 Abstinence, p. 187 Abuse & vse of a thing. p. 436 Admonition, p. 324 Adocion, ibid. Aduersitie, vide Tribu∣lation. Adulterie, p. 308 Affections, p. 315 Affliction, p. 401 Age, p. 336 Almesdeeds, p. 197 Ambition, p. 313 Ancestors, vide Nobility Angels, p. 45 Anger, p. 669 Antiquitie vide speech, and bookes. Arts, p. 125 Assiduitie, p. 349 Assiduitie taketh away admiration, 350 Atticke tongue vide speech, Auditour and his duty, p. 526 Authours vide bookes. B Banishment, p. 516 Barbarians, vide anger Beautie, p. 327 Benefits, p. 339 Beneuolence, p. 341 Bishops vide courtly life, Bitternes, vide mariage, Bodies of little statute, wiser then those that be vaster. p. 334 Bookes. p. 584 Reading of bookes, p. 587 A choyce is to be had in reading books, p. 589 The vse of reading ma∣ny Bookes. p. 592 Braggers and boasters, p. 389 Brethren, p. 322 Breuiloquence, p. 567 Businesse, p. 342 C Calamitie vide Tribu∣lation, Captaine, p. 499 Ceremonies, ibid. Charitie, p. 167 Chastitie, p. 238
Chance, p. 355 Chidng, p. 398 Choyce and tryall of a friend, ibid. Choyce, p. 384 Children, p. 135 Christ, p. 21 Christian, p. 71 Christian discretion, vide zeale, Church, p. 55 Clergy, vide courtly life Cockering, p. 139 Comaedians, vide poets. Cōmēdition, vide praise Commenders of them selues, vide praysers of themselues. Commoditie, p. 47 Common wealth, p. 497 Comfort, p. 356 Concord, p. 227 Concupiscēce, vide lux∣ury, Conquest, vide victory, Conscience, p. 120 Continencie, p. 109 Contrarietie, p. 38 Conuersing and liuing together, p. 418 Conuersation, ibid. Contemplation, p. 539 Correction, p. 32 Counsell, p. 428 Euill councel is the vnto him that giuet it, p. 49 Rash counsell, p 432 Courtly life, p. 472 Court, ibid. Courtiers, p. 474 Couetousnesse, p. 68 Crosse, vide tribula, Cunctation, p. 84 Custome, p. 413 D Death, p. 726 Debt, p. 411 Decencie, p. 9 Defence, ibid. Deuotion, p. 202 Dignity, p. 460 Those things are difficult whch are excellent; p. 458 Disciplines p. 57 Discord vide Cncord & matrimonial Society Disputation, p. 567 Deuill, p. 736 Doctors & Doctrine, 122 Drunkennesse, p. 307 E Education. p. 127 Education of a Prince, p. 489 res vide Hearing, Eloquence, p. 550
Eloquent men, ibid. Eloquence threefold ibi. Empire, p. 494 Emperors vide Princes. Emulation, p. 351 Endeuour, p. 352 Enuie, p. 664 Erudition vide Doctours and Doctrine, Examples of life, p. 568 Exercise, p. 343 Exhortation, ibid. Exile, vide Banishment. Eyes, vide Hearing. F Fables, vide Poetry. Fame of learning vide Doctors. Fasting vide abstinence and temperance. Fathers vide Children. Faults vide Admonition Faith, p. 162 Feare, p. 421 Feare of the Lord, p. 205 Fooles vide Honour, Fornication vide Adul∣tery, Fortune, p. 43 Fortitude, p. 178 Flatterers, p. 629 Friendship, p. 258 Friendship of many, 259 Friendship of a few, 260 Friendship neglected, 261 Friendship broken off, ib. Friendship reconciled, p: 263 The choyce and tryall of Friends. p. 264 A true Friend, p. 266 A fained Friend, p. 270 The cōparison of a Friend and a flatterer, p. 276 G Gentry vide Nobility. Glory, p. 384 Vaine Glory, p. 386 Gluttony, p. 667 God, p. 1 Gods vnity, simplicity, & perfection, ibidem. God is inuisible and in∣comprehensible, p. 7 God is not the Author of sinne, p. 9 Gods patience and lon∣ganimity, p. 11 Gods prouidence, p. 13 Gods mercy & loue, p. 15 Gods iustice, p. 18 Godlinesse vide Piety. Gold vide Riches. Goodnesse, p. 211 Gouermnt vide Empire & Kingdome. Gratitude, p. 39 Griefe vide sorrow.
Vnlawfull gaine vide vsurie. H Harlots vide Adulterie. Heart, p. 114 Heauen, p. 42 Hearing, p. 560 Heresie, p. 720 Heretikes, ibid. Hell, p. 738 Histories of the gentiles, vide reading of bookes, Holy Ghost, p. 38 Hope, p. 165 Honour, p 462 Hospitalitie, p. 230 Humilitie, p. 212 Husbands vide mariage. Hypocrisie, p. 707 Hypocrites. ibid. I Idlenesse, p. 672 Iealousie, p. 691 Imitation, p. 360 Inconstancie, p. 692 Indulgence vide cockring Industrie vide labour. Infamie vide an ill name Ingratitude. p. 392 Inhumanity, vide Hospi∣talitie. Iniurie vide Vengence, Innouaters, vide Newes. Intelligences, ibid. Innouation, ibid. A Iudge, p. 508 Iudgement, p. 509 Iustice, p. 176 K King, p. 476 Kingdome, p. 478 Kingdoms cannot abide riualitie, ibid. L Labour, p. 357 Lamentation, vide Mour¦ning, Lawes, p. 503 Law-makers, ibid. Lawyers, p. 505 Learning, p. 544 The maner of Learning, p. 547 Liberalitie, p, 232 Filthy Lucre, Vide vsury, Loue, p. 92 Loue in olde men, ibid. Loue in young men, ibid. Selfe-loue, p. 313 Too much loue vide Coc∣kering. Luxurie, p. 662 Lust, ibid. M Magistrates, p. 509 Magistracie, ibid. Magnanimitie, vide for∣titue.
Man, p. 74 Manners, p. 364 Mariage, p. 278 Matrimoniall societie, p. 289 Medioritie, p. 235 Meditation, vide an Auditor and his du∣tie, Modesty, vide Tempe∣rance, Meeknesse vide Humi∣lity, Memory, p. 542 Good men, p. 81 Mens gifts are diuers, 83 So many men, so many minds. ibid. Wicked and vngodly men p. 85 Minde, p. 108 The goods of the minde, p. 111 The diseases of the mind, p. 112 Ministers vide Preachers Monarches vide Princes Money vide Riches, Mothers vide Children, Mourning, p 361 Musicke, p. 67 Musitians, ibid. N Nature, p. 365 Nation vide Empire, A good Name, p. 469 An ill Name, p. 471 Newes, p. 369 Nouelties, ibid. Nobilitie, p. 465 O Obedience, p. 219 Obiurgation vide chid∣ing. Officers and Offices vi∣de Magistrates, Of spring vide Children Old age, p. 422 Old men, ibid. Old mens counsell, p. 428 Oratour, p. 548 Oratory vide Eloquence P Parasites, p. 699 Parents, p. 134 Passions vide perturba∣tions, Patience, p. 216 Painters, p. 635 Perseuerance, p. 207 Perturbations, p. 345 Petifoggers vide lawiers Phylosophie, p. 593 Philosophers, p. 604 Piety. p. 210 Pleasure, p. 305 Poetry. p. 607
Poems, ibid. Poets, p. 611 A comparatiue discourse of our English Poets, with the Greeke, La∣tine, and Italian Poets p. 616 Politians vide Common-wealth. Potentates, p. 281 Pouerty, p. 456 Power, p. 495 Prayer, p. 191 Prayse, p. 277 Praysers of themselues, p. 378 Preachers, p. 57 Prelates vide courtly life, Princes, p. 481 A good Prince, p. 490 An euill Prince, p. 492 Prince of darknesse vide Deuill. Pride, p. 645 Proud men vide pride. Pronuntiation, p. 559 Prosperity, p. 40 Prudence, p. 172 Punishment, p. 514 R Reason, p. 529 eacion, p. 370 Repentance, p. 222 Reprehension, p. 3 Reuenge vide Vengeane Riches, p. 438 Rich men, p. 4 Rhetoricians, vide O∣rators, Rule vide Empire. S Sermons, p. 68 The holy Scriptures, vide the word of God, Silence, p. 233 Simoy vide dignity, Sinne, p. 639 Sinners, ibid. Science vide learning, Shamfastnesse vide Tem∣prance, Slaunder vide an ill name, Schollars, p. 534 Schoole-masters, ibid. Society vide conuersing, and liuing together, Sobriety vide abstinence and temperance, Sophisters, p. 540 Souldiers vide Warre, Sorrow, p. 379 Soule; p. 104 Speech, p. 555 Studie, p. 537 Strength vide power, Superfluity vide Riches,
T Taciturnity vide Silence. Teares vide Mourning, Temperance, p. 181 Tongue, p. 379 Thankfulnesse vide gra∣titude, Tragaedians vide Poets, Trauiling, p. 520 Trauellers, ibid. Tribulation, p. 408 Truth, p. 224 Time, p. 336 Tyrants vide punish∣ment and afflictions, Tyranny vide Princes, V Valour vide fortitude. Vengeance, p. 513 Vertue, p. 145 Victory, p. 502 Vice, p. 304 Virginitie, p. 242 Virgins, ibid. Vnstayed people vide in∣constancy. Vse and abuse of a thing p. 436 Vsurie p. 715 W Warre▪ p. 500 Wickednesse vide Vice and inne. Wine vide Drunken∣nesse, Wisdome, p. 247 A Wise man, p. 252 Wit, p. 573 Wittes soone ripe, soone rotten, ibid. Excellent Wits, seldome long liued. ibid. Diuersitie of Wits, 583 Women, p. 88 Word of God, p. 47 World, p. 524 The loue and vanitie of the World. p. 516 Contempt of the World. p. 528 Wrath, vide Anger, Wife, p. 28 Y Youth, p. 140 Z Zeale, p. 57 FINIS.
