19098 99849133 22760
AN ARROVV Against the Separation OF THE Brownists. Also an ADMONITION TOVCHING Talmudique & Rabbinical allegations. By IOHN PAGET. Printed at Amsterdam, By GEORGE VESELER, dwelling by the South-Church, at the signe of the HOPE. ANNO M.DC.XVIII.
To the Christian Reader. OF those that separate from the Church of God, there are many sorts: Though the Brownists assume vnto themselves the title of Separation, and call themselves the Ioh. Smyth, Differences, Title. Hen. Ainsvv. Defence against Mr. Sm. p. 1. Churches of the Separation, yet is not this title sufficient to distinguish them; Separation being common to so many. Of the Brownists also there are sundry sects: Some Christian plea, pa. 216. 217. separate from the Church of England for corruptions; and yet confesse both it & Roome also to be a true Church, as the followers of Mr. Iohnson: Some Iustific. p. 339. 340. 247. renounce the Church of England as a false Church; and yet allow Relig. com. p. 1, etc. private communion with the godly therein, as Mr. Robinson and his followers: Some Counter∣poy. pag. 197. renounce all Religious communion both publique and private with any member of that Church whosoever, as Mr. Ainsworth and such as hearken vnto him, being deepest and stiffest in their Schisme. The evil of this separation is great: First, the mindes of many are troubled and distracted hereby; even of such as do not separate, but have some liking thereof; especially if it be true which Mr. Robinson writes of them, to wit; that they Relig. comm. prefac. *iij. seing it not to be for their purposes, that the world should so esteem of them, do vndoub∣tedly streyn and wring the neck of their consciences and courses, to look the contrary way, &c. VVhat can be more miserable then to have the neckes of consciences thus broken by the doctrine of separation? Secondly, for those that separate but do not yet joyne vnto thē, or being joyned do with∣hold from actual communion, living alone and hearing the word of God in no Church, as some do; how great is their miserie also? Mr. Robinson him∣self Ibid. pag. 36.—39. shewes it at large, noting them to be Idol-members, such as break the commandement of Christ, loose the fruit of his ascension, and fayl their own edification and salvation many wayes, &c. Thirdly, for those that being joyned vnto them do also live with them, seing they have in effect excom∣municate themselves from all other Churches of Christ, and consequently from the fellowship of Christ Iesus himself and from the participation of his grace and glory so far as he reveales the same by dwelling in those Chur∣ches: It is therfore no wonder to heare Mr. Iohnson Treat. on Mat. 18. pre∣fac. A. 2. complayning of the evilles among them, as Emulation, debate and other sins which dayly arise & spread themselves to the great dishonour of God, &c. Fourthly, for fur∣ther and greater evilles into which they are given up; it is apparāt that three or four hundred of the Brownists have brought forth more Apostate Ana∣baptists and Arians sometimes in one yeare then ten thousand members of the Reformed Dutch Church in this citie, have done in ten yeares or more, though tempted and compassed about with seducers as much as any other. And this I may justly witnesse for the time of my abode in this
Amsterdā. place, where I have ordinarily bene present in the Classical assemblies, and seene the number of such as have fallen away, so far as is knowne vnto the mini∣sters hereof. And many other are the scandalles of this schisme, both to∣wards them without & against the Reformed Churches whose communion they disclayme. My purpose at this time is to defend the lawfull communiō of that particular congregation, whereof I am a minister: Reason and Re∣ligion 1. Thes. 4.11 Act. 20.28. 2 Pet. 5.2. require that we should first look vnto our owne estate, and to the flock that dependeth vpon vs. This controversie being first discussed, I doubt not but the lawfulnes of communion with the Church of England, will in great measure be manifested hereby, and a way prepared for them that are yet in errour to discerne the same. Mr. Ainsworth in his writings against me doth very often appeale vnto and call for the Iudgement of the Reader; herein I agree with him and do therfore also publish & present these things vnto the view of Christian Readers: and have devided his last writing into Sections, not leaving out (to my knowledge) any one of his words; for their help that would compare things together, and so judge the more perfectly. The God of all grace blesse these weak endevours to the praise of his holy name and comfort of his people. Amen. J. P.
AN ARROVV AGAINST THE Separation of the Brovvnistes. THe Occasion of this writing: whereas N. N. coming lately out of England into the Low countries, desired to receive the Lords supper with us: she was upon iust occasion wished, first to procure a testimony of her conversation out of England. And while she refused so to do, it was signified unto her, that she could not be admitted for a member of the Church with us. After this also falling into speech of mariage with one of the separation, she then began to leave our assemblie and went unto the meeting of the Brownistes, pretending scruple of con∣science about our use of the Lords prayer, as also about the truth of our Church & ministery: and requested me both by her self & others to deale with Mr. Ainsworth about these things. Here upon partly through her request, and partly through other provocations, I wrote unto Mr. Ainsworth, as followeth. Salutations in the Lord.
Mr. Ainsworth, I vnderstand by divers witnesses that I am often and odiously provoked to confer with you, & in special by M. Baker who boasteth much against me, that I wil not be brought to reason with you, that I dare not, that that day will never be seene, &c. but for your self I thinkyou have reason to iudge otherwise. This provocation is (as I heare) vehemētly againe renewed this week by the same Mr, B. & this upon occasion of a certaine mayde who pretendeth that she is troubled to ioyne with our Church because of the use of the Lords prayer among us; because of my calling vnto this Church, whereof I am a Minister, which calling he telles her is vnlawfull; & because there is no difference betwixt vs and the Church of England: concerning these particulars, not men∣tioning as yet any other vnto me she saith that she desires sa∣tisfaction by a conference betwixt you & me; If therefore you will take vpon you to prove that she hath iust cause to refuse the communion of our Church, either for any of these 3 causes or afterwardes for any other if these will not serve, I am ready by the grace of God to defend the cōtrary against you. And this I am content to do, not for any desire that I have to bring her into the communion of our Church, vnles I could heare better testimony of her, then as yet I have found; but to remoove offence, and to stop the mouthes of such as causelesly do in∣sult against me & against the Church of God. To this end, if either you require a more private conference and will take vnto you, two or three persons for witnesse, I am willing either to come vnto you at your owne house or to waite for you at mine, taking also as many witnesses vnto me. Or if you please to set downe in writing any arguments concerning these points above mentioned, I am willing by writing also to give you an answer. Or if you desire a more solemne and publique disputa∣tion touching these things, I will not refuse the same vpō equal conditions, viz. that the arguments & answers may be written; that some grave & iudicious men may be present, who may both be able to iudge of things spoken and by their authority may better keep in order the multitude that shalbe present; that this meeting may be in convenient time and place, &c. Iuly 12 N. st. 1617. IOHN PAGET.
Resalutations in the Lord. Mr. Paget, I know not of any such provocation to conference as you write of, neyther know I the Woman that would joyne unto you. Wherfore if any thing pass between you and me, your self shal unto me be the first provoker of it. And if you desire it, I wil not refuse: and it shalbe at your own choise, whether by word or writing, and what point or points you wil confer about. As I love not to begin controversie, so neyther wil I be wanting to doe any good I can, to you or any other: or to defend any point of trueth which God hath given me to see and witness, when I am duly called therunto. So rest I yours in all Christian dutie. The 12. of the 7. Moneth, 1617. Henr. Ainsworth. Peace & truth from the Prince of Peace.
Mr. Ains. besides the provocation of your people, which you hold not to be a sufficient cause of any thing passing between you and me, I take it that I am by your self also much provoked, & that divers wayes; not onely by your general doctrine of separation, which is in it self a cō∣mon provocation vnto all the Churches of Christe, and a be∣ginning of controversy, but in special by your particular men∣tioning of my name in your publique congregatiō & speaking against my calling, as formerly so also this last week againe as I heare: by speaking against the particular congregation whereof I am a Minister, & condemning communion therewith by na∣me: by causing such members of your Church as have heard a Sermon in ours, to make publique cōfession of their fault, & to repent openly for the same: and further even by this your largeoffer of conference either by word or writing, about what poynts I would, and this to do me good, though for the present we take it, you have done vs no good but much evill & wrong in the particulars above mentioned. Herevpon I am mooved to desire you, according to your offer to set downe in writing your reasons to prove that the vse of the Lords prayer among vs; that the vnlawfulness of my cal∣ling; that our agreement with England: & that the Temple where we meete for the worship of God are any iust causes of refusing communion with vs. Since my last writing vnto you, I heare that you alledged the place of our assembling togather as a bar of communion vnto that man, against whom you pre∣sently threaten your censure for coming vnto vs; And therfore I desire you to set downe your reasons concerning this 4th mat∣ter also, or any other of our wants which might keep you from communicating with vs. And having receyved your reasons I wil also endevor by mine answer to do you good, & if the Lord will to bring you vnto the comfortable communion with the Churches of Christ from all which you are yet a stranger: Then might you be in truth, mine in all Christian dueties, as you write, whereas now in many of the Ps. 55.13.14. Act. 2.1.46 &. 3.1. cheefest of them, you are not: Then should I also reioyce to be, in a greater measure then I am, your loving brother in the Lord Iuly 18. 1617. Iohn Paget. The high way of the upright, is to depart from evil: He that keepeth his way, preserveth his soule. Pro. 16.17.
I Have no reason, Mr. Paget, to hold that a sufficient provocation unto me, which never was: none have ever solicited me to contro∣vert with you, but now your self. By our general doctrine of separa∣tion, you may freely (I confesse) take occasion to deale, if you can dis∣proveit: but our doctrine & proofs are in publick: so you might have had reasons from thence, to reply upon as you saw good, you needed not have called upon me for moe. My particulier mentioning of your Church and you, was necessarie: being pleaded for by him that is now falling from us. If you think you have cause to be moved herewith, you cannot but think there was like cause offred us by you: whiles you de∣barr aged Mr. P. from the Lords supper, (the greatest censure that you can lay upon him,) because he, being no member of your particular congregation but of the church of England, cometh sometime to hear Gods word in our church. Yea more, whiles you keep that Religious yong man I. S. from your communion, as is sayd, because he holdeth it in his judgement that he may hear us: though he told you he had never doen it, neyther purposed to doe it: yet for not promising absolutely not to doe it, he is sayd to be repelled. I suppose a man shal scarcely finde such measure at the hands of any Bishop, minister or court in En∣gland. Wheras you take it I have doen you no good, but much evil and wrong: I have learned to bear such imputations with comfort, because they are unjust. It is the best good, if men would so accept it, to have their aberrations manifested. Your church continueth one with the church of England: for proof, (besides the publick doctrine among you, which proclaimeth us for schismatiks, & the dayly profession which your mēbers make), I report me to that charitable libell which C. Lawn, I. Fowler & others, with their penman, have printed amongst you. There, in the title, they professe to be returned into the bosome of the Church of England their true mother. Now they suck the brests of your church, and in the bosome therof they most of them rest, and some of them have stood in election to eare office among you: so there wilbe found an unitie between the Daughter and Mother. And if we may blame men for returning to the one, (as our publick wri∣tings yet unanswered doe prove:) then for the other, I assure my self they wil not be found innocent. And we in reproving the man who falling back unto you, professed to doe the like in the assemblies of England if he were there: have doen no wrong to you or them.
Wheras you desire me, according to my offer (as you say) to set downin writing my reasons, &c. I answer, such offer I made you none, that I would set downe my reasons eyther in word or writing. It is you that call me into this feild, and in reason you should therfore give the first onsett. You had your choise to doe it by word or writing, I being ready to defend by eyther. Now you choose writing; I accept it: if you had set down your reasons, I would have given you an aswer unto them. But whē we have published so many reasons, in that one book of our Apo∣logie (besides others) yet unanswered: it is strange that you call for more. You need not want matter to work upon, out of that litle book: and our other imploymēts, litle need to be called away, to write againe reasons unto particular persons, when we have set forth so many in pu∣blick. Yet now to satisfie your desire, I set you downe this. That separation which is onely from syn, and communion there∣with, is of God, & is al good mens dutie: But our separation is onely from syn, and communion with syn: wherin we were intangled in your mother church: Therfore our separation is of God, &c. The first proposition is proved by the ten Commandements, which for∣bid all syn, Exod 20. and by the Apostles doctrine, which forbiddeth all communion with syn: Eph. 5.11. 2. Cor. 6.14.15.16. The second is proved thus. The things which we have separated from, are; 1. An humane Leitourgie, translated out of the Popes masse-book, a read and dead service which we were constreyned to offer unto God, in sted of his spiritual worship: wherin also we were bound to observe many other Romish traditions: to keep holy dayes which God never sanctified: to have the signe of the crosse, gossips, &c. with Baptisme: to kneel before bread and wine: to hear vaine, lying and apocryphal Iewish fables, read in the church in stead of Gods word: with many other particular impieties. Against which Leitourgie, we have set downe many reasons in our Apologie pag. 64. Posit. 9. and proofes of the severall branches therof, by scripture.
2. The matter of that church; which was not taken of Saincts onely, (which every Christian Church ought to be, as is proved in our Apolog. p. 44. posit 3. & confirmed by reasons from the scriptures,) but was first gathered and still continueth of a mixed multitude andtheir seed: wherof the most part was Popish, profane and wicked: who with the rest, were by humane lawes forced to be members of that church: as the publick Acts and moniments shew: and is further proved and manifested to be synfull, in Iustific. of Separat. pag. 89. 90. 91. and 459. 460. 3. The form and order of that church, which is not the order set of God, (as we shew in our Apolog. pag. 60. Posit. 8. and the reasons annexed to the first branch therof,) but the order left by the Pope, in parishes, dioceses, provinces, and all conjoyned in a national church, with courts and governours according. Disproved in Iustif. of Se∣par. p. 195. 196. 197. 4. The ministerie of that church, both superiour or governing, with their courts and canons: and inferiour or servile: which is not the ministerie appointed by Christ in Rom. 12. 1. Cor. 12. Eph. 4. but a strange hierarchie and ministerie derived from Rome. Against which we have produced many scriptures and reasons yet unanswe∣red, in our Apol. Conf. art. 29. 30. 31. 32. and after in pag. 46. pos. 5. and proofes of the later branches of the same. Treat. of the Minist. against Mr. Hild. p. 98.—105. From these and the like evils in that church, have we separated: not from any trueth or good thing that is in the same. With these synns we were defiled, and could not but be defiled when we walked with that Church. Whereupon the conclusion followeth, that our sepa∣ration was necessarie, is of God, and the dutie of every one that would obey God. These things, Mr. Paget, have been long since by us published, and by none hitherto disproved: I allege them now as my proofs unto you to warrant our separation, and do exspect your answer to the particu∣lar reasons in the places cited, if you think good to controvert the cause with me, and would have me to reply upon you. It is needlesse to set down any other, or moe, til those be refuted. Now to your particulars. 1. You require my reasons, against the use of the Lords prayer among you.
I answer, I have not layd this as a cause of refusing communionwith you: so you have no reason to require this of me. We hold it good and holy, to use a right any of the Lords prayers, or any words of scrip∣ture, or those or any of those petitions taught us in Mat. 6. or Luke 11. in the words of eyther Evangelist, or other words, as the Spirit of God (which helpeth us to pray, Rom. 8.) leadeth us to any of them. If thus you doe, I blame you not. But if after prayer by the Spirit, you read that part of scripture for a prayer, or say it over by rote, as is the fashion of many: that I approve not, it being neyther the intende∣ment of Christ, nor practise of his Apostles, that I can finde: & I de∣sire your proofs from Gods word for so using it. What our reasons are against that abuse, are to be seen in our Apologie in Posit. 9. thither I referr you. The chiefest thing that I mislike in you about prayer, is: that wheras in December last, Mr. H. your fellow minister taught you and your Church the trueth openly, and condemned praying on books, as is reported: you received not the trueth, but opposed it, and doe yet oppose it unto some among you, that are troubled therabout. It had been your own dutie to have taught the people how to serve God aright: but to resist the trueth when God offreth it by your own bre∣thren, is an heavy syn. The discussing herof, will fall out upon your answer given to the reasons which before I referred you unto, in our Apologie, concerning prayer.
2. About the lawfulnes of your ministerie, that which I spake (as occasion then called me) was by way of inquirie: asking the man who is now declining unto you, whether you doe administer here, by vertue of that calling which you had of the Bishops of England or have re∣nounced it. And seing he could not tell, I pray your self to say, whe∣ther you stil have or approve of that ministerie which the Bishop gave you, and the oath or promise which you made to him, and do now administer wholly or in part by vertue therof: and upon your answer, I wil shew you in my next, what I mislike in your ministerie, and upon what ground. Secondly, the man supposing you had a new or∣dination here by the Eldership of an other Church: we asked him warrant for it from God, which he could not shew. If therfore it be so with you, I desire your defense therof by the book of God: for I am yet ignorant, what authoritie the Eldership of one Church hath tomake or ordeyn ministers in another: now that Apostels and all extra∣ordinarie functions are ceased. 3. For your agreement with England, I have before shewed from the work printed amōg your selves, that the bosome of your church & of the Church of England is one: so the reasons before noted, which war∣rant our separation from England are a sufficient ground to keep us from you, til you bring a difference, and shew how you separate also. 4. For the Temple wherin you worship, which is as I take it, the Nunnes chappel, built for the worship of their breaden God and other idols: my reasons against your use of it, I referr you to see in our Apo∣logie p. 75. Pos 12. and the grounds from scriptures there alleaged. Other things there are, wherin you know we differ from you: as your keeping of holy dayes besides the Lords dayes, and yet not half the holy dayes of the Church of England. Mariage a civil dutie, is performed by your ministerie in your Church. Your Eldership sitteth and judgeth matters apart from the congregation: and this your court I suppose wil finde no better allowance by the church or courts of England then doth our church, which you count schismatical. Of these things you may see your selves reproved and convicted in our Apologie aforesayd. Finally, you shape your Church according to the time and place wherin you live. In England your people use the communion Book, keep such holy dayes, have such ceremonies, officers, courts, &c. as the law there commandeth: here you are of an other seeming forme, and use not the things which your mother church requireth. Now I hold, that the constitution, worship, ministerie, goverment, holy dayes of the Church should be uniforme, and not variable in every coast. But to the things by you propounded, I have given answer, and directed you to our reasons, which you may reply upon if you see cause. And if so you doe: as my leisure serveth me, (who am for the present, imployed in other affaires, which I have undertaken with Gods help to performe with my most convenient speed,) I wil through Christes assistance mainteyn them against you. God guide you into the way of trueth and peace. The 25. of the 7. Moneth. 1617. Henr. Ainsworth.
Peace & truth from the Prince of Peace. FOr answer unto your preface, I pray you consider, that The provocation I spake of, was of your people to me, & not to your self: Their provocation of me, togather with the signification of my readines thereupon to maintaine the lawfulnes of our communion against you, I supposed to have bene a sufficient cause of some thing passing betweene you & me though you thought otherwise as appeareth in your first writing: so that you needed not now in this second writing to have excused your self by such a provocation & soliciting of you, as I never mentioned nor implyed in my writing. But yet if provocations made unto you, and earnest solicitations of you be sufficient cause and calling for you to controvert, then have you cause and calling enough, being as I heare, so earnestly & so publiquely by the people of your owne Church mooved, and solicited to defend your owne opinion and practise against Mr. Robinson who hath in print reproved and condemned the same.
VVheras you confesse that by your general doctrine of sepa∣ration we may freely take occasiō to deale, &c. you do therin al∣so confesse that you are the provoker and beginner of contro∣versie, which yet in your first writing you say you love not, and would still so faine remove the suspicion thereof from you. And if thus your general doctrine give such free occasion, how much more doth your speciall condemning of particular chur∣ches by name, occasion and provoke them to deale with you, though you think you had just reason so to do? I have not de∣nyed neither do I deny but that our not admitting of such for membres of our congregation as would have liberty to heare in your Church as wel as ours, might be some occasion also to moove & provoke you to desire to deale with us likewise here∣abouts; but yet so, that still you are to be held the first provo∣kers who have first censured your people for comming to us andby name openly condemned our Church and ministery, long before we refused Mr. P. & I. Sh. vpon this late occasion. As for I. Sh. that vnquiet & vnstable yong man he is not kept from our cōmunion, because he holdeth it in his judgemēt that he may hear you: his private judgement we would have allowed vnto him, so that he would have walked peaceably therein: but for his vnpeaceable walking & breach of promise he was refused by us: Besides conference with him for his con∣viction at divers times, there is also warrant and proofe of this our dealing with him, given unto him in writing and sent unto Mr. Brewer the speciall patrone of this halting practise & con∣versation, at whose vrgent and importunate provocation, the writing hereof was first granted, & since that time he hath also a reply unto the answer which he wrote: If eyther they or you which cry out so lowd against our dealing, can refute the same, you have occasion enough and liberty to do it. In the meame time I do onely ask this of you, whether you can with good conscience admit them for members of your Church, who do profess they wil hold their liberty to heare those whom they and you acknowledge to be in schisme, & vn∣justly separate from the Church of Christ whereof they were members: for so do both aged Mr. P. and I. Sh. judge of you. If you answer, no: Then how can you with any equity exclame against us for that thing wherein your self agree with us: as though such measure was offred by us as is scarcely to be found at the hands of any Bp. minister or court in England, when as yet the same measure is to be expected at your owne hand? If you an∣swer, yea: that you would admit such: I doubt not but that your owne writings may justly be brought against you for your reproofe, & conviction herein.
As for the commendation of your owne patience, as having learned to beare with comfort such imputations of wrong as we com∣plaine of; me thinkes you make too much hast vnto your owne praise: whether our patience in bearing with comfort your impu∣tations of false Church, ministery and vnlawfull commu∣niō,&c. or your patiēce in bearing with comfort our complaints of wrong herein, be greater: let him that readeth judge upon the issue of your writing, when it appeares how that best good of ma∣nifesting our aberrations vnto us is performed by you. For proofe that our Church continueth one with the church of England, you report your self to the charitable libel which C. La, I. Fowler and others with their penman have printed, &c. For an∣swer hereunto I would have you to vnderstād, 1.
Mr. Clif∣ton teacher in Mr. Iohns. his company. The principal penman or scribe of the separation that hath written most and purposely against the booke which you call a libel, hath long since acknowledged his fault for the same, & that vnder his hand in writing, acknowledging the great fruit, that comes by publi∣shing the personall sins of them that continue in errour: And thus by his repentance hath made some satisfaction for his offence, as in due time is further to be manifested. 2. As for the other penmen which in their writings here and there have snat∣ched at the same book: there is for them an answer in readines, to shew that they thē selves are extreemely guilty of that which they vnjustly impute unto others: and that the writings for their separation in respect of the manifold and horrible slan∣ders conteyned therein, may indeed justly be noted, as most vn∣charitable Libels. 3. That part of the title obiected by you, viz of returning into the bosome of the church of England their true Mo∣ther with the words going before, as also those that go immedia∣tely before their names, are an addition foysted into the title by some falsifyer with out their consent or knowledge: and thus your maine hint and ground of proving our Church to be one with England, and consequently your devise to turne away the question from the state of our congregatiō vnto the Church of England & so to derive and direct all your arguments thither∣ward is but a weak shift and stands upon a mere forgery and therfore not to be admitted: If any aske how you should know of this falsification: I answer, thus much was signifyed hereto∣fore unto you in that Declaration prefixed before the book writtē in defence of Mr. Brightmā against the vaine collections of Io. deCluse your Elder. Besides other falsifications there noted, they shew that the title of their Booke is doubly encreased by the publisher: & suppose it were doubtfull unto you, which part of the title was added, yet what godly wise man with out sinning against his cō∣science could build such a pernicious consequence tending to the overthrow of a Church upon so doubtfull a coniecture? 4. Suppose those words had bene their owne, yea suppose they had in plaine words affirmed that which you would infer from thence, viz. that our Church continueth one with the Church of England, and that there is an vnity betwixt us, yet doth not this hinder, but that our Church is a distinct body from the Church of England: we are one with them in the doctrine of faith and salvation, and the members of our Church do not renounce the communion thereof but communicate with them as occasion is given: And thus much is also done by other Reformed Churches who disallow your course of separation, & embrace the bosome of the church of England, by entertayning communion there with as fully as we do, when occasion is givē: though both of us do testify against the corruptions thereof. They refuse not to suck the breasts of the Church of England, but profess to do the like in the assemblies of England, as that man doth whom you reprove for declining to vs.
VVhereas you deny your offer of setting downe your reasons either in word or writing, &c: I have these reasons out of your first writing to make me think otherwise. 1. I having signifyed my willingnes to confer with you if you would set downe your rea∣sons, &c. the summe of your answer is. Nothing shall passe be∣twixt us except I be the first provoker, except I desire it, that then you would not refuse: In my second writing I desired it, and so perswaded my self you would have set downe your rea∣sons. 2ly., you wrote and promised at first also that you would not be wanting to do any good you could unto me: therfore seing the setting downe of reasons is a meanes of doing some good, I perswaded my self you would do it if you could, when I desired the same. 3ly. You professed at first, that you were mine in all Christian duetie: therfore seing it is one Christian duety to set downe our reasons for that which we hold the truth being desired of them whose we are, I did thence also perswade my self of this your kinde offer. You obiect now, it is I that called you into this field and should therfore in reason give the first on∣sett. I answer 1. It was I indeed that first desired the same, but being first provoked by your people and your self had just oc∣casion so to do, as is shewed before: 2ly. My calling you into the field was not absolute and indefinite, but conditionall and limited after this manner if you wil take upon you to prove, &c. If you please to set downe in writing any arguments, &c. upon your large offer I am mooved to desire, &c. Having receaved your reasons I will endevour by my answer, &c. Such a desire of conference as this is yeelds a quite contrary conclusion to that which you would draw from the same. You complaine yet further, and think it strange, that when you have published so many reasons in that one book of your Apologie (besi∣des others) yet unanswered, we should call for more, &c. Hereunto I answer: 1. A great number of the doctrines & reasons thereof conteyned in that book of your Apology are revoked by Mr. Iohnson himself the cheef Author thereof, as is by your self ac∣knowledged & by Profane Schis. of Bro. p. 79. 80. others recorded: & is it not thē a favour unto you to give you liberty & occasion to set downe your reasons againe more warily & circumspectly as you might see it expediēt, that you should not need to recant & refute them your self as the Author of this Apology hath done? For this I deserved rather thanks at your hands, then any blame. 2ly. many of those rea∣sons in this Apology are also set downe very breefely & obscurely, not shewing clearely wherein stands the force of your collection frō the Scriptures there alleged, so that in this respect also, I had cause sufficient to desire you to set them downe againe to avoyd mistaking and trouble afterwards in the examination thereof. 3ly. The reasons written in your Apology are directed against the Church of England and the ministery thereof: the reasons that I desired of you are such as you have for your separation
from our particular Church and the ministery thereof. And who sees not then that for this regard especially I had reason to ask you for new reasons. TO come now vnto your Syllogisme, I deny your 2d. propo∣sition, viz. that your separation is onely from sin, &c. For profe of this you do alledge 4 thinges that you separate from, viz. an humane leiturgie, translated out of the Popes Masse-booke, &c. a mixed multitude forced to be members, &c. a Popish order in Parishes, dioceses, &c. and a strange hierarchie, &c. Hereunto I answer; First, suppose you did justly in separating from these 4. thinges, yet is not your minor proved, viz that your separation is onely from sin, and communion with sin: you do not separate onely from these things, but as you separate from these Dutch and French reformed Churches, as appeares both by the Exam∣ple of Iohn de Cluse your Elder separating from the French Church, and by your doctrine in defence of him: Answ. to Th. wh. p. 59. 26. so also do you separate from our Congregation, & censure those of your people that come unto us: this separation is not onely from sin, & therfore not of God, nor the duety of any good man, though you affirme it. As you are bound by your owne promise & ex∣presse offer to deale with me about what poynt or poynts I will: So are you againe here bound by the cordes of your owne syllo∣gisme, to prove your minor, that you separate from sin onely. If therfore you will deale either honestly and truely in respect of your promise, or soundly and directly in respect of your argu∣ment, you must shew us those sins which are just causes of for∣saking our Church: For those 4. things above mentioned are not to be found in our Church. Secondly, it is manifested unto you by Mr. Robinson, Relig. Comm. from pa. 1. to pag. 17. that your separation is not onely frō evill: but also from many good things in that you separate from private communion with the godly in England: For this cause he doth justly rebuke & reprove you as wanting pag. 6. Christian discretion; For confusion of judgement. For pag. 12. une∣quall dealing to the godly; pag. 15. For
pag. 16. looking at them onely with the left eye: For ill-advisednes in throwing away all at a venture for someevilles: For destroying the vnity of the Spirit: For your debarring men from their Christian liberty: & in summe for a dissembling & hypocriticall course denying that indeed, which in word is profes∣sed by you: as if one should deeme their frend a very honest man, but yet would neither trust him, nor have otherwise to deale with him for a farthing. This separation is not onely from sin, & therfore not of God, nor the duety of any good men. Thus he shewes you how weake your second proposition is. For this he brings many arguments and refutes your reasons to the contrary. You pro∣fess in your first writing to me, that you will not be wanting to de∣fend any poynt of truth which God hath given you to see and wit∣nesse, &c. But what truth is in your profession? If you hold it for truth, why do you not labour to defend it being so justly called therevnto? If you see your errour why do not you ac∣knowledge it, & give satisfaction vnto Mr. Bernard against whom you have vvitnessed Counter∣poy. p. 197. this poynt of private separation? But it appeares, that as you have confessed and affirmed, if pri∣vate communion with the godly in England should be gran∣ted, the publicke would also follow, Nota. so you do yet still esteeme it the greatest pollicy that you can vse, to devoure and swallow vp the rebuke that Mr. Robinson hath layd vpon you, & to smo∣ther the matter, rather then by raking into it to rase the princi∣ples of your separation, and so to endanger your whole cause. But as your self do insult agaist Mr. Iohns. for his tergiversation in one poynt: so and much more justly may Mr. Robinson. triumph over you for your tergiversation in this matter, & say vnto you in your owne words: Animad∣vers. to Mr. Cl. ad∣vert. p. 60. you wink and will not see it, you are mute & will not defend it, but wind away to other things, &c.
Thirdly, as for your separation from the publique estate and Communion with the Church of England: because you do so often boast of your bookes and reasons vnanswered, even 4. or 5. times repeating it in this one leafe, I can not omit to tell you, and to bring to your remembrance, that your errour about this publique communion also hath bene by sundry men refuted & this in divers treatises both written and printed with yet re∣mainevnanswered: and as of old heretofore, so of later time, you may see, by the Second Manuduction for Mr. Robinson: by the vnreasonablenes of the separation: vvhere whiles Mr. Iohns. (whom it most concerneth) doth hold his peace, it lyes next vpon you who have so oft sent vs vnto the treatise refuted, and are by name called vpon to defend the same if you could. Also by A treatise written in defence of Communion with the Church of England, one part whereof was so imperfectly pub∣lished by Mr. B. and hath bene long in the hands of your Elder Mr. Th. These with sundry other both written and prin∣ted do remaine vnanswered. And by these it is manifested that your separation is not onely from sin, & communion ther∣with, and therfore not of God. AT length you come vnto the particulars, where I expected you should have begun at first: & first, concerning the vse of the L. Prayer among vs: you say you have not layd this as a cause of refusing communion with vs: that therfore I have no reason to require this of you, &c. I answer, that in my first wri∣ting I did not require your reason for this absolutely, but con∣ditionally, if you thought it a just cause of refusing our commu∣nion: and this also I did vpon occasion of the vvoman who professed that she was troubled about communion with vs even for this cause: when as in your answer to this first writing you took no exception against this particular more then the rest, signifying also that you were willing to deale with me about what poynt I would, when as I had nominated this be∣fore; I was there vpon mooved to desire your reasons about this poynt also: But if you now agree with vs herein, I am the more glad of it.
VVhereas you adde, if after prayer by the Spirit, you reade that part of Scripture for a prayer or say it over by rote, as is the fashiō of many: that you approve not, &c. First, I desire you to explane what you meane by saying it over by rote: if you meane, say∣ing of it without vnderstanding and feeling, this we also con∣demne as vvell as you: But if your meaning be according toH. Barow his slanderous & vngodly assertion, where speaking of concluding our prayers with the Lords prayer, he demādeth thus: Discov. pag. 73. What can be more grosse, Popish, Idolatrous, superstitious then this? Inquiry pag. 23. 30. 31. 85. Or if your meaning be the same with the erroneous answer to Mr. VVhite concerning this question where the vse of the Lords Prayer as a prayer is so often impugned by you: Then all the reasons alledged vnto that purpose in your Apology are insufficient. Our maner is as you cannot be ignorant ordinarily before or after every Sermon or both to conclude our prayers with the Lord prayer; after we have prayed by the help of the Spirit we perswade our selves that we also conclude by the help of the same Spirit in this vse of the Lord prayer: If you cal this, saying it by rote and hold it to be sin and a worship not to be communicated with all, I pray you tell me plainely, and then I will (godwilling) in my next writing give answer vnto those Pag. 69. 70. 9 reasons in your Apology wherevnto you refer me: for there is no soundnes or truth in any of them. Secondly, suppose we should say over the Lord prayer by rote even in that worst sense, with out vnderstanding and feeling, so as none can without injury imagine of vs: though this should be our greevous sin, so to vtter it, yet should it not be the sin of the people that joyne with vs & therfore no just cause of refu∣sing cōmunion with vs: about this poynt onely is our question, & what you say beside the same is here impertinent.
You adde yet further; The cheefest thing that I mislike about pra∣yer in you is: that whereas in December last, Mr. H. your fellow mi∣nister taught you and your Church the truth openly and condemned praying on books: as is reported; you receyved not the truth but oppo∣sed it, &c. Herevnto I answer: 1. The report you heard is vntrue in respect of the time of Mr. Hu. his preaching with vs; it was not in December last, but a whole twelve-moneth before. 2. VVhereas he spoke some things ambiguously in his Sermon touching set formes of prayer, being spoken vnto thereof by me before witnesses, he explaned himself thus, that he did not condemne publique set formes of prayer, but those onely that did content themselves therewith vsing no other prayer in private vnto God; he acknowledged that he had vsed the book of common prayer in England; and further that he had offred stil to read prayers out of the same book so that he might enjoy his liberty to preach: when he perceyved how some vnder∣stood his Sermon as hath bene reported to you he complayned that he vvas mistaken. 3. For the vse vvhich you draw from this false ground, I may justly apply it vnto your self in your owne vvords: It had bene your owne duety to have taught the people the doctrine of religious communion both publique and pri∣vate; But to resist the truth when God offreth it by your owne brethren partly by them of your owne congregation vvho have protested openly against your Separation and forsaken the same, partly by Mr. Robinson, vvho hath written against it, this is an heavy sin.
TOuching the second particular, the lawfullnes of my mi∣nistery: you tell me of the inquiry that you now made about it of the man declining vnto vs, and here also you come your self to enquire of me, whether I do administer here by ver∣tue of that calling which I had of the Bishops of Englād, or have renounced it. Herevnto I answer. 1. As it is a snare for a man to devoure that which is holy: and after the vowes to make inquirie. Prov. 20.25. So is it folly & sin in you first to condemne that which is lawfull, as it hath bene still reported, that you dealt with my calling and ministery from time to time, & now after so many censures and sentences of condemnation vvhich you have passed vpon your people that heard me, that you now at last come to make inquirie. 2. I answer you, that I do not at all administer, neither in whole nor part, by vertue of that cal∣ling which I had in England, though not of the Bishops: nei∣ther yet have I renounced the same. But as through out these Reformed Churches, he that is called from one congregation to an other doth administer by vertue of his nevv calling and his former calling ceasseth, though vvith out renunciation: So is it vvith me. And this my calling I may vvell avouch to bemuch more free and lavvfull, then that your entrance of old or creeping into this office vvhich you novv execute. Touching my ordination vvherein our Church vsed the help of the Dutch reformed Church of this City, you desire my defence thereof by the book of God, professing that you are yet ignorant what authority the Eldership of one Church hath to make or ordeyne ministers in another: now that Apostles & all extraordi∣nary functions are ceassed. I answer first, suppose that there had bene such an errour in my ordination, as you pretend, yet doth it not follovv that it is vnlavvfull for any to heare me: I require your proofes for such a separation: for concerning this separa∣tion is our maine controversy, and see that you vvinde not avvay from it. Secondly, if you be yet ignorant concerning this poynt, then I exhort you evē in respect of your ignorance to take heed how you alledge either this or any other the like doubtfull matters for a ground of separation from vs: least you and your people be found to be of their number that 2. Pet. 2.12. speak evill of the things which they do not vnderstand. Thirdly, to help your ignorance vvhich you confesse herein, I propound vnto you these reasons from the book of God. 1  her ordination is not simply necessary: or els the help of o Churches and Elderships may be sought for & lavvfully vsed therein: for othervvise Christ should not faithfully & suf∣ficiently provide for the necessities of his Churches, seing ma∣ny of them do vvant fit and able persons to performe that work of ordination vvhich consisteth Exo. 29.1 35. Levit. 8.1.2. &c. Nub. 27.18.19.23. Deut. 31.7 Act. 6.6. & 13.2.3. principally in publique pra∣yers and exhortations to be made both to officers and people touching their mutual duetyes, imposition of hands being but the outvvard signe of the charge imposed by exhortation, and of the blessing imposed by prayer▪ this for example may be seene in many Churches vvhich are in the Dorpes or villages here in these Netherlandes, vvhere though they be the true Churches of Ch. yet are there not fit and able persons thus to consecrate or ordeyne their ministers as by ample testimony
may be confirmed vnto you in sundry particulars. The wise∣dome and Heb. 3.2 Esa. 5.3,4. faithfullnes of Ch. in his Fathers house vvill not stand with so straite an order as you plead for. 2. If the Eldership of one congregation may help an other for the discerning and convincing of errours & heresies in cases of controversy, as is both manifest by the Act. 15.2 &c. Scriptures; and also by your owne practise & confession in Animad. pag. 107. 109. seeking and procuring the Eldership of that separate company at Leyden to come & help you in your controversy with Mr. Iohnson: then vvhy may not also one Church desire the help of th'Eldership in an other for the consecration of their minister, whiles they want fit persons for the solemne & publique performing of that work: seing both these actions are a like holy and religious workes, the service of God, & services of his Church one as well as the other? Is not this 1. Tim. 5.21. a partiality to prefer one commandement before an other without any warrant? 3. The Deacons and vvidowes of one Church are to performe service vnto an other, when neede requires in Rom. 16 1. 1. Cor. 16.3 & 2. Cor. 8.19.22.24. ministration vnto their outward wants and necessities: vvhy may not the pastours and teachers of one Church administer the word of ex∣hortation & doctrine in an other also, & as wel in the busines of ordination as of any other? or vvhy may any Church receyve help from the hand of a Deacon, rather then from the mouth of a teacher, that is in an other congregation? 4. If those that have the gift of Prophecy being out of office may interpret the Scriptures by occasion in divers Churches as your self do Confess. Art. 34. acknowledge from Act. 13.15. VVhy may not such men vpon occasion of ordination in the necessity of any Church apply their doctrines & exhortations to that purpose, & likewise call vpon the name of God at the same time for the sanctification of the person ordeyned vnto that work vvhere∣vnto he is called, & for a blessing of his ministery vnto that people. 5. If the members of one Church may lawfully receyve the Lords supper in an other vpon occasion, as by your owne prac∣tise
you do acknowledge: then vvhy may not the pastours and teachers of one Church administer he same also in an other vvhen need requireth, seing the Heb. 13.17. 1. Thes. 5.12. Act. 20.28 state of people and ministers doth consist in an equal relation one to an other, and their actions of receyving & administring are mutual betwixt them? And if the Lords supper may thus be administred some time by the help of neighbour-ministers, why not ordination also? 6. To conclude, for as much as particular Churches, though in respect of their particular covenants, they be distinct bodies, yet in respect of Tit. 1.4. 2. Pet. 1.1. their common faith are all members of the same Eph. 1.23 & 4.4. body, of the same Eph. 2.19. &. 3.15 city, and the same Eph. 2.19. &. 3.15 family and houshold of God: this generall bond directeth them to per∣forme al possible help to one an other in al the workes of Iude 20. &c. aedi∣fication, so far as they are not restrayned by some speciall com∣mandement of God. Now this act of ordeyning, consecrating or sanctifying a minister vnto his office being a vvork of edifi∣cation, and no restraint being shewed out of the Scriptures to hinder a neighbour-minister from performing the same; it fol∣lowes that the Churches vvhich want persons apt to teach, like the Cant. 8.8 9. litle sisters that have no breasts, may in this busines vse the help of the ministers in other Churches, who in like maner being entreated therevnto may performe the same in the name of the Church that desireth their help.
TOuching our agreement with England and your inference of separation from vs therevpon, I have before shewed you the vanity thereof, but because you repeate it againe: I do againe further answer you. 1. vve are a distinct and severall bo∣dy from the Church of England, and are no more vnder the authority and governement of the prelates, then any of the Dutch or French Churches in these Countries are. The bo∣some of the Church of England is embraced by these Chur∣ches, and their bosome againe is open to the members of the Church of England as vvell as ours; And therfore you cannot without great partiality, in this respect refuse our communion rather then theirs. 2. You have condemned the communion of our Church, before the forged addition in the title of that booke so misprinted (not among vs but in England,) was pub∣lished: And therfore your former injury cannot be iustifyed by that which is done afterward. 3. You would have vs shew how far vve separate: I answer, vve profess separation from knowne evilles, but not from the Churches of Ch. for evilles among them: and for our selves, our covenant hath bene from the first establishment of our Church vnto this present to serve the Lord in the Gospell of his Sonne, so far as is revealed vn∣to vs. TOuching the fourth particular, viz. our temple, vvhich you call the Nunnes Chappell built for the worship of their breaden God and other Idolles: I answer, first I cannot finde by enquiry that this is so as you take it: Those which keep the evidences & charter of the foundation of this building affirme the contrary. And it is probable, considering that the ordinary devotions performed in many Monasteries and Cloysters, were not the vvorship of the breaden God, but other songs and prayers, it being vnlawfull for those vvomen that lived alone to execute the Priests office in making a breaden God. Secondly, though it be vncertaine, vvhether this Chappel was built for the vvor∣ship of the breaden God, yet doubt I not but that much Idol-vvorship hath bene performed therein, & therfore I come to examine your reasons against the vse of such places, having now the true vvorship of God exercised in them. Your first reason against the place of our vvorship, is, Apol. pa. 76. because the reteyning thereof in such vse is a breach of the second commande∣ment. Exod. 20.4.5.6. with Deut. 12.2.3. As for Esay. 30.22. I suppose you alledge it for an other particular which is not our question.
Herevnto I answer: first, that commandement, Deut. 12. is as I take it a temporary ordinance, part of Moses Politie that is now abrogate and therfore not perpetuall not binding vs in these times: For howsoever the equity thereof continue, tea∣ching vs to detest Idolatry, yet doth it not binde vs in such ma∣nerand by such meanes to signify our detestation thereof, as it did them in Moses time? For example: as God here cōmands to abolish Idolatrous places, so in the next ch. Deut. 13.12.—15.16.17. God commands to abolish not onely their places of worship, but also all their goods, their cattel and all the spoyle of the Idolatrous apostates and to burne the same with fire. The equity of this commandement leads vs to a great detestation of Idolatry and apostasy: but who will say that it is to be decla∣red by the very same meanes and maner of judgement in de∣stroying such things as are of necessary vse? And yet according to your reasoning from this place: the goods, cattell & treasures of silver and Gold, even of thousand thousands of peoples at this day should be avoyded as execrable things, and neither by changing, buying, selling, borowing or any other dealing to be medled with all. Secondly, as God commands to destroy idolatrous places, so he commands to abolish their names, and not to reteyne them Deut. 12.3. This commandement appeares hereby to be temporary and ceremoniall, because now in the new Testament, we see that the names of divers Idolles have bene reteyned in the persons therevpon denominate: as the name of Mercurie, Ve∣nus, Phebe, Iupiter, Apollo, Fortuna, that were heathnish Idolles worshipped for Gods and Goddesses and yet their names not abolished in the Saints mentioned by the Apostle, Rom. 16.14. Phil. 2.25. Rom. 16.1. Tit. 3.13. 2 Cor. 16.17. Thirdly, this commandement for destroying Idolatrous pla∣ces as it is not perpetuall for time, so also not vniversal for the place, but expressely determined and restreyned to the Land of Canaan, to the Idolles of those nations which Israel should possess; from that place they were to be cut off, as is thrise noted, in 3. verses togather, Deu. 12.1.2.3. Even as God would have greater severity and detestation to be manifested towards the Idolatours themselves in Canaan, then to those of other countries a far off, Deut. 20.10.—15.16.17. Iosh. 9.6.7, &c.
Fourthly, seing meats sacrificed to Idolles were as much pol∣lutedas the places of their vvorship, & yet notwithstanding may now lawfully be reteyned for our necessary vse, Ps. 24.1. with 1. Cor. 10.25.26.27. &c. VVhy not the temples also, cont∣trary to the ceremony of old? Fiftly, as God commands to abolish the high places of Ca∣naan, so he doth as well command to abolish and consume his owne holy things, when the Religious vse of them ceased; for example he commands to burne the remainder of the Paschal Lamb which they could not eat the same night, Exod. 12.10. as also the flesh of the Ramme of consecration with the bread thereof that remayned to the morning, Exod. 29.34. And the like commandement was given for the flesh of the peace of∣fring, Levit. 7,15.19. The equity of these ordinances conti∣nueth for ever, teaching vs how to regard the holy things of God, not according to the common vse of other things, but with a more high and pretious estimation of them: but we may not according to the letter of the ceremony and according to your reasoning abolish them: for then the bread & wine that remaines over after the administration of the Lords supper should still be burnt, or otherwise abolished. Lastly, there is not the like reason to abolish the buildings abused vnto Idolatry now, as the high places of old, because God having then appoynted one onely place for sacrifice, Deut. 12.5.6, &c. Levit. 17.3.4. Those high places being for sa∣crifice were to be destroyed, though no Idolatry had bene committed in them: but being polluted with the service of Idolles, there was then double cause of their destruction, which is not now in these, while difference of place is taken away Ioh. 4 21 Thus you may see though. Deut. 12.2.3. be compared with Exod. 20.4.5.6. Yet is there no strength therein for the purpose intended. Your second reason is,
because so long as they are continued, An∣tichrist with his abhominations is not wholy banished out of the land: as the Lord hath appoynted and wil effect in his time. Rev. 17.16.& 18.11.12.13. &c. and 2 Thes. 2.8. with 2. Kin. 10.26.27.28. Ans. This argument is denyed: The three first allegations shew that Antichriste shalbe consumed, but they shew not that our temples are any of his abominations: the 4th. allega∣tion is taken from the policy of Moses that is now abrogate. Your third reason against the places, is: because the consecra∣ting of them peculiarly to the worship of God, now in the time of the Gospell, hath no warrant in the word of God. Ans. I grant this: but yet deny, that for the errour of their consecration in former time, they must therfore of necessity be abolished now. Vnto your fourth reason. I answer; though it was of old a part of Gods honour to be worshipped in the place that he chose and a part of his dishonour to destroy the same: though it be a part of popish devotion to hallow places for Gods wor∣ship, and to put Religion in them: yet doth it not follow that he now requires the plucking downe of the same, seing there is a change of the Law Heb. 7.12. The scriptures alledged do not prove the consequence; they are of like nature, and are already answered. Your fift reason is, because the godly Princes are commended in the scriptures for being carefull to abolish false worship and the mo∣numents thereof. 2. Chro. 17.6. 2 Kin. 18.4. and 23.12.13.14.15. Ans. Those Princes being vnder the policy of Moses are commended for their obedience and practise agreeing there∣with, but the Godly Princes of our times not being vnder the same rudiments, are not bound to imitate them herein, further then the equity beforementioned doth require. Your sixt reason for abolishing these places, is: Because this being done, the people are more easily perswaded and drawne to the true worship of God in Spirit and truth: whereas otherwise they are still nourished in superstition, and have meanes to be entised dayly to more corruption. Gen. 35.2.3.4. 2 Kin. 18.4. 2 Chron. 34. Chap. Act. 17.23. and 19.26.27. Levit. 13. and 14. Chap. with Iude, 23.
Answ. That which belonged vnto the temporary dispensa∣tion vnder Moses being set apart, the generall equity of these Scriptures leades vs no further then to abolish such monu∣ments of superstition & corruption as have no necessary vse, which may thus further appeare vnto vs. 1. If all monuments of superstition should be abolished like those Idolles and earerings that were in Iaakobs private houshold, Gen. 35.2. &c. Then an infinite number of private houses should have bene and still ought to be rased and demo∣lished, which yet we never read to have bene either comman∣ded of God or practised of the Godly. Among the Israelites, their private houses were polluted with Idolatry, and were nurseryes of superstition as well as their publique high places: Iosh. 24.23. Iudg. 17.4. Zeph. 1.5. with Deut. 27.15. The private houses of the Moschovites at this day, as those that have seene do testify, are full of images, and the maner of those that enter dayly into one an others houses, is first to worship and bow downe vnto those Idolles, before they may salute any man in the house. The private houses of Papists without number are dayly hallowed and consecrate after their maner for Idol-ser∣vice and private masses: And all these Idol-houses are memo∣alles of Idolatry, serving to nourish supestition, and meanes to entise therevnto, are they therfore all to be plucked downe? 2. As for the brasen serpent, 2 King. 18.4. It was of no neces∣sary vse, and therfore might wel be abolished. 3. The high places, the groves, altars, images destroyed by Iosias, 2 Chro. 34. were also of no necessary vse: It doth not ap∣peare that the high places were houses meet to be cōverted vnto Synagogues for the people to meet in: but were altars in high mountaines and hilles: And therfore not vnfitly is Bamah, an high place, expounded by Bomos, an Altar.
4. The Altar at Athens Act. 17. and the Silver temples of Diana made by Demetrius and his fellowes Act. 19. were like∣wise things of no necessary vse. But whiles I examine those places that you refer me vnto, I there finde that an Idolatrous place is converted by the Apostle vnto the service of God:Act. 19.9.10. The Schoole of Tyrannus being as the rest of the heathnish schooles, the nurseries of superstition, Idolatry, false worship, and pernicious opinions, concerning God, his wor∣ship, and the soveraigne happines of man, was yet after this vsed by Paul for a place of Gods worship, for a schoole of Religion to preach the Gospell of Christe in the same. In such schooles the Philosophers and Poëts, the Tit. 1.12 Prophets of the Heathens did teach their Religions, and cald vpon the names of their false Gods: The Ephesians in speciall were infamous for their cu∣rïous and magical arts taught among them, who now Act. 19.19. burnt their books being better instructed, and some of their Idola∣trous Asiar∣chai Beza An∣not. on Act 19.31. Priests (so deemed by some) became frendes vnto Paul: vvith such fruit and blessing of God was the Gospell prea∣ched dayly in this place for two yeares togather. 5. Your allegation of Levitic. 13. and 14. doth also lead me to remember the equity of of that Lavv of God, whereby he ordeyned that things polluted being of lesse price should be broken, but being of more worth were to be purged and so re∣teyned, Levit. 11.32.33. and 6.28. As the mercifull care of God for his people appeared herein even vnder the law: so much more vnder the Gospel, this type is fulfilled vnto vs, and the bountifulnes of God in Christe is now enlarged abundantly by granting vs the necessary vse both of things polluted with Idolatry, as also of such things as were otherwise ceremonially vncleane. 6. If you will have memorialles of superstition though of necessary vse to be abolished, as being per∣swasions and entisements to Idolatry, then how will you excuse your self that do not onely not abolish them, but erect them a new: and those also of no necessary vse: and not the mo∣numents of them onely, but the very Idoles themselves: and such Antichristian Idols also as have dishonoured God as much if not more then over any did? You will ask me what and where they be: I answer, in your Ani∣madvers. Pag.
61. book against Mr. Iohnson, where with your Pen as with a pencill you have paynted thatPopish Image of the Crosse, and set it vp for Religious vse foure times in one page, while you describe out of Bellarmine the maner of Popish Ordination, to teach men the evill there∣of. If now an ignorant Papist in reading and seing these Idolles in your booke shall come to blesse an Idoll in his heart: either to adore any one of those Idols that you have formed, or some other signe of the crosse which he remembreth vpon this oc∣casion; (for oft do such things come to passe, and men stumble at the Gospell it self, and through their corruption are hardned by errour by reading sound reasons against the same:) how could you now cleare your self in this case from the guiltimes of drawing men to Idolatry? when men stumble at the word of God or sound reason brought from the same, their sin is vpon their owne head onely: But if men stumble at those devised ndes of instruction which have no warrant from God, then comes their sin vpon the head of their instructours also. And thus is it with your kinde of instruction here; it hath no warrant from the Lord: VVhen he in his word cōdemnes the abhomina∣tions of Molech, Chemosh, Ashtaroth, Baal, &c. he doth not cause the Shapes and figures of these Idolles to be pourtrayed or painted before the eyes of men, as you have done with this Popish Idoll of the Crosse: And therfore here is no excuse left for you herein. Though some may have done this before you, yet will it help you litle, who neglecting the example of all the Churches of Christ in that which is good, do yet follow a few in that errour, which you, would seeme most to con∣demne. Your seventh reason is: Because the Lord hath promised a bles∣sing to them which do reiect & abolish them, and threatned a curse to the contrary: And so also hath performed indeed, Esa. 30.22.23, &c. Exod 20,5.6. 2 Chron. 17 Chap. and 31 20.21. with 2 Chron. 21.13.14, & 24.17-25. & 28. Chap. Answ. Suppose that every one of these Scriptures did speak more peremtorily then they do for the reiecting and rasing the houses polluted with Idolatry, yet seing they are all to be
vnderstood partly according to the state and condition of the old Testament, and partly according to the equity mentioned before with exception of necessary vse, they do not therfore re∣prove that vse of temples which we now have. THus far for answer vnto the reasons in your Apologie. Herevnto I have thought it meet to annex three or foure reasons taken from your owne practise, that you might be fur∣ther convinced and judged even of your owne selves: First, whereas the blinde and obstinate Iewes are at this day a false Church without Christe and without true God, and their worship false and blasphemous: yet have you not refused, after your division and rent from Mr. Iohnson to meete togather for the service of God in the Idol-temple of the Iewes, where they had exercised their Idol-service before you. How comes it to be lawfull for you to assemble where the Iewes have served their God, and not for vs where the Papists have bene before vs? Secondly, whereas you have reiected the ministery of Mr. Iohnsons company, as Animad∣vers. p. 38. a new establisht Hierarchy, and do els where condemne such ministers as Coun∣terpo. pag. 196. Idols: from hence it follo∣weth that the place where they meet togather to fullfill their ministery was an Idol-temple; And yet even in that same place where those Idol-ministers met, you are now content to come and assemble togather, they being dispossest. VVhy may not that place 2. Kin. 18.4. be now vrged against you, as well as against others by you? VVhy is not that Idol-house broken downe as well as the brasen Serpent, &c. Thirdly, in that you allow your people, the members of your Church to receyve the almes of the Dutch, which is a sacrifice Phil. 4.18. and this in the same place which you condemne as an Idol-temple; If you will also allow them, at the same time to blesse in the name of God those that distribute so mercifully vnto thē, according to the Phil. 4.19.20. 2 Tim. 1.16. 2 Cor. 9,12 13, duety of the godly poore: do ye not hereby allow the worship of God in Idol-temples as you call them?
The answers which you give vnto Mr. White concerning this matter are insufficient for 1. VVhere you would have vs to Inquiry, pag. 56. put difference betweene the ordinary publique worship of the Church in such places, and the occa∣sionall receyving of almes therein by the poore: This difference can∣not without manifest vntruth be affirmed or applyed vnto the matter in hand: for the distribution of this almes here spoken of is not occasionall, but an ordinary publique work of mercy per∣formed at certaine set times; and as is the distribution so is the receyving thereof. 2. You put difference between the benevolence of a Church to the ministers or Saincts of Christe (which is the sacrifice spoken of Phil. 4.18.) & the releef of a city given to the poore that dwell among them, be they of any Religion whatsoever, one or other. But neither will this distinction help you, for not onely the benevolence given to the ministers or Saincts of Christe, but that also which is givē to the poore of any Religion whatsoever, one or other is a ser∣vice and Heb. 13.16. Gal. 6.10. 2 Cor. 9.13. sacrifice of sweet odour pleasant and acceptable to God: and further this almes that we speak of, is not the releef of a City but cheefely the benevolence of a Church collected publiquely every Lords day in the congregation of the Saincts, with whom you communicate in their publique almes though not in publique prayers. 3. You put difference between the solemn appoynted worship of God by the Church so assembled togather, and the private dueties of thankfulnes, of salutation, or the like. But this distinction also cannot truely be applyed vnto this matter in hand, for the dueties of godly thankfullnes and blessing in the name of the Lord, which are and ought to be here performed, are not private dueties but publique even as is this almes that is alwayes publiquely administred in the presence of a great multitude as∣sembled togather.
4. This question is asked by you; doth he think we hold it not lawfull to walk vp & downe in the Idol temples, as they vse in Pawles at London, &c. I answer, that in in Idol-temples, where Idol-ser∣vice is still ordinarily performed, you cannot lawfully walk vp and downe, as men vse to do in Powles. Mat. 18.7. For woe is denounced to the man by whom scandalles do come. And I demand of you, whether you hold it lawfull for men so to have walked vp and downe in the house of Baal, and there to have receyved almes as your people do in these temples whereof we speak: Fourthly, your owne staggering and waverings about this matter are worthy to be observed: 1. The doubting of H. Barow, who had writtē so perēptorily here∣of, is recorded in that peece of paper which is pasted vpon the Discov. pag. 133. margēt of his book over against the place where he had main∣tayned such a vehement detestation of them. And that is there in part diminished touching the civil vse of them. 2. Mr. Iohnsons wavering is recorded in his book against Mr. White: His confession there noted by himself concerning the lawfull hearing in these temples, was that Inquiry. pag. 66. it should not trou∣ble himself and for others he would therein perswade them the best he could. And yet in the very same book both pag. 57. before and pag. 79. after he doth againe write against them: In the very same pag. 66. page be∣fore noted, he blames Mr. White for changing and rechanging his faith and profession as if he thought he might dally with Religion at his pleasure: with what honesty and modesty is this done, while the same book testifyes his owne changing, rechanging & chan∣ging againe ofter then he could impute to Mr. VVhite? And since that also;, he hath of late tolerated sundry of his people to heare in those places. 3. Mr. Robinson, though he have written in such high words against these tēples: that Iustific. pag. 443. they are by lawfull authority to be demo∣lished and overthrown: & in the meane while as execrable things to be avoyded by them which have none authority to deface or demolish them: though he plead against them, as being Pag. 444. Idolles, vncleane things not to be touched: the mark of the beast not to be receyved: & a Babylon to be gone out of, &c. Yet hath he for this long time tole∣rated Mr. Br. to heare the word of God in such places: and so ac∣cording to his owne writing suffred one of his people to go in to
Babylon, to cary the mark of the beast, and to be defiled with an Idol and an execrable thing, like an other Achan among them And not onely this, but now of late this last moneth as is wit∣nessed vnto me, he seeing (as it appeares) how rashly and vn∣soundly he hath written against Mr. Bernard in this poynt, be∣gins openly in the middes of his congregation to plead for the lawfull vse of these temples; and so to repaire and build them vp againe, which before he would so faine have had to bene plucked downe. 4. For your self and your owne congregation; do you not know, and is it not confessed vnto you, that there is of your owne people that sometimes heare the Dutch-ministers even in these temples which you do so much condemne? doth not VV. S. profess that he vvil continue also thus to doe? And if this practise be a breach of the 2d. commandement, & a trans∣gression of so many Scriptures as you alledg against it in your Apology: and if so heavy a curse be threatned against it as you there affirme, with what love of your brother or conscience of Christs ordinance, do you suffer that person to walke on in such an accursed course as you make it? or how can you with∣out partiality make this a ground of refusing communion with vs, and yet tolerate it among your selves? Is this that High-way of the vpright man which you poynt at with your finger in the Prov. 16.17. sentence which you prefix before this your writing? Is this to keep your way and so to preserve your soule and the soules of those that you take charge of? Besides this, there are of your people that have holpen to repaire our temple and to make it fit for our vse, by mending and making new seates for the peo∣ple and new pulpit for the minister in the same: and do they not hereby seeme to contradict your profession? I have here againe just cause to speak vnto you, as you did vnjustly vnto me vpon occasion of Mr. H. his Sermon: The cheefest thing that I mislike in you about this matter, is: that vvhereas Mr. Iohnson & Mr. Robinson your fellow ministers have openly witnessed the truth vnto you by their practise, yet you do not receive the same, but op∣pose
it still. It had bene your duety to have layd aside this errour of your self, but to resist the truth when God offreth it by your owne bre∣thren, is an heavy sin. After these 4. particulars, you say, Other things there are where in we know you differ from vs: as our keeping of holy dayes besides the Lords dayes, &c. Mariage a civil duety performed by our ministery in our Church: Our Eldership sitting and iudging matters apart from the congregations, &c. Herevnto I answer.
First, the question betwixt vs, is not about all things wherein you differ from vs, but onely about those differences which you hold to be just causes of renouncing our communion. Other great or greater differences then these, there are also be∣twixt vs: as that you allow not your people to mary with the members of the reformed Churches as we do, but make such Mariages to be a cause of excommunicating your people, as though the godly mēbers of these true Churches were like the abhominable Canaanites in your sight: That you allow ma∣riages made among your selves without consent and authority of the Magistrates: and this both in England and here also, where the lawes do hold the Children of such as are so maryed to be illegitimate: That you also allow divorces among your selves without the authority of the Magistrate: That you turne the Lords day into a session or Court-day, omitting and thru∣sting out in part sometimes the administration of the word & Sacraments, by spending so much time in controversies & con∣tentions: That you condemne the set maintenance of mini∣sters; with sundry other differences, which I know not whe∣ther you maintaine as causes of separation from vs. These are yet in Comparison your single errours, vvhereas your separa∣tion or schisme is a double iniquity and an errour of errours: If in defence hereof you can prove our Church and ministery to be false, as hath bene oft avouched by you: you may then lay the axe of your separation vnto the root of our Religion and hew vs downe at once: If you can shew our wor∣ship or place of worship to be vnlawfull, it would be some∣thingto the purpose: If you alledge other differences, and do not prove them to be causes of separation, you wander from the question. Secondly, we knovv also that there are differences among your selves, both about some of these same, and other greater matters: and not onely betwixt you and Mr. Robinson, but in your owne congregation also: as that some of your people vpon the holy dayes by you mentioned, shut vp their shops: others not, as is Inquiry. p. 59. 60. acknowledged by your selves vnto Mr. White: That some of you hold an enforced divorce, and that the Ibid. p. 32 33. par∣ties innocent either husband or wife which forgive one an other being guilty of adultery and live still togather are to be excommunicated; others holding the contrary: That some of your people are of your minde in denying private commu∣nion with the godly in England and yet some even of your owne congregation do allow such communion, holding rather with Mr. Robinson then with you, that refuse to answer him: So that if notwithstanding these and the like differences, you can yet hold communion among your selves, and with Mr. Robinson, it may seeme that these three last differences above noted by you, are not intended as causes of separation, and so belong not to our question.
Thirdly, our differing in those 3 poynts nominated by you, is duely to be weighed of you: 1, for keeping of holy dayes: vve hold all dayes (except the Lords day) to be alike holy: If our people at the Magistrates appoyntment do shut vp their shops without putting holynes in the day, it is confessed that your people do the same also: That ordinary day of the week which we have for a sermon is sometimes changed vnto one of those holy dayes (as they are called) and we preach on the same, to redeeme time for mens labour, and to win opportunity to preach the word vnto many in season or out of season; and this also, as I heare is done by you, and that by a memorable token at one time especially; the time of your rending from Mr. Iohnson being on a Christmas day so called, vnto which dayyou had changed the ordinary time of your assembling in the week. Thus far you agree with vs: & this being granted lawfull, the rest if it be any thing will follow. 2. For Mariages: we do not hold it as a thing of necessity, that they should be celebrated by ministers in the Church; we judge them lawfull mariages that are made by the Magistrates without ministers: but yet vve hold it lawfull, more convenient, and comfortable that they be accomplished in the Church by the Ministers, both for she∣wing the dueties of the persons maryed and for obteyning a speciall blessing by the prayers of the congregation. 3. For our Eldership sitting and judging matters, &c. though our Elder∣ship for the examination of parties and witnesses, and for their consultations thereabout do sit a part, as is meet; yet do we not exclude or debar any from hearing and seeing the conviction of any sin that is either publique of it self or persisted in, when they desire the same; yea we our selves have oft desired their presence to behold the convictions, admonitions and rebukes of offenders: and further, before any sentence be given for the cutting off of any offendour, we do first propound the matter vnto the whole Church, requiring their prayers, advise and con∣sent without which never yet any judgement of excommuni∣cation hath bene executed against any amongst vs: And this also is propounded vnto them by divers degrees, long and oft before any pronouncing of sentence, that so our brethren may have sufficient time, both to informe themselves of the matter and to deliberate ripely thereof. And even this sitting of our Eldership a part from the congregation, seemes to have bene allowed by your self, for as much as in a matter of controversy, you and your Elder Mr. Th. have not refused to come & ap∣peare before this our Eldership, and there to give what light & evidence you could vnto the matter in question; and thus also have others of your people at other times voluntarily come and appeared as witnesses before vs: and have so far communicated with our governement.
You say, you suppose that this our court shall finde no better allowanceby the Church or Courts of England then doth your Church which we counte schismaticall. A vaine supposition: for 1. though our elder∣ship should finde no favour nor allowance from the prelats or courts of England, yet have we comfort in Gods allowance: we depend on Christ and not vpon prelates. 2. The allowance of the reformed Churches which give vs the right hand of fellow∣ship, being layd in ballance with the disallowance of prelates is enough to countervaile the same: A comfort that you are far from. 3. Even the cheef defendours of the prelacy can not but give allowance vnto our eldership, confessing that this gover∣nement D. Dow∣nam, sermō at lambeth pag. 95. may be admitted, and that it is as silver, good; though they prefer their owne as Gold before the same. You adde further, that of these things we may see our selves re∣proved and convicted in your Apology aforesayd. But this is also a vaine speech: first, there is no such conviction to be seene in your Apology; but this we rather see, that Mr. Iohnson the Au∣thor of your Apology is in his conscience reproved & convicted of divers of these errours that he hath written: we see some of his people coming vnto our Sermons, even on those holy dayes you speak of: we see others of them willing and desirous to have their mariages celebrated in our congregation, even whiles they remaine with him still: we see his governement changed, but who knowes what it now is? we see him broken & confoun∣ded in his courses but without such true repentance, as should bring him plainely to confesse, to revoke & to refute his errours wherewith he hath bene a meanes to ensnare so many. And the sight of this confusion in him might be sufficient to serve for your iust reproofe also, if you consider it a right.
Secondly, suppose you had sufficiently convicted vs by your Apology in those differences betwixt vs, yet is not your refusall of our communion for the same iustifyed thereby; that is the question that remaines vnproved. VVhen I receyve any argu∣ments from you to that purpose, I will then godwilling give an∣swer both to those arguments for separation from vs, as also to so many reasons as I can finde in your Apology touching thosethree particulars them selves. In fine, you tel vs, that we shape our Church according to the time and place wherein we live, &c. Touching this imputation of variablenes, I answer for my self, that when I lived in En∣gland, I testifyed against the evilles which I conceyved to be in the order of that Chureh: and when I was called hither I reioy∣ced to finde those things that I had desired before and this with out variablenes. And the communion which we still vpon oc∣casion hold with the Church of England, can no more destroy the truth of our Church, then it doth other reformed Chur∣ches which practise in like maner. But if you come to speake of variablenes, and shaping a mans self to the time and place, you give vs occasion to remember your owne levity & scandall in this behalfe: But I spare you for this time. To conclude, seing that besides the common and generall motives which may binde vs to deale faithfully and consciona∣bly in all our wayes, we have at this present also the hand of God lying vpon the City where we live, and his destroying angell is come into our streets: so that many fall both on the right hand and on the left, through the noysome pestilence that walketh in the dark and wasteth at noone day: let vs therfore so write as if the arrowes of th'almighty did stick fast in vs: Let vs with all our might seek those things that may serve for the aedification of the Church of God, with his praise and our peace therein: even so as if ech of our writings were to be sealed with our pre∣sent dissolution. He vvhose name is counsellour & the mighty God guide vs herevnto: Farewell in the Lord. August. 21. 1617. Iohn Paget:
CHAP. I. Love the trueth, and peace. Zach. 8.19. Hen. Ains. I Like well of your counsel (Mr. Paget) in the conclusion of your writing, that we should so menage our causes, as may most tend to the edification of Gods Church, with his praise and our peace therin: and through his grace (which I humbly crave,) I shall inde∣devour my self hereunto. One meanes to further this, I take to be the abridging and if it may be, the quite cutting off of all lesse needfull matters, and holding to the mayn differences: an other, that we dis∣cusse things by the word of God, not of man. So first to end the strife about the provocation to this controversie: for as much as sundry works are published on your side and ours, I held them sufficient to shew vnto judicious Readers, that would examine the scriptures and reasons brought on eyther part, where the trueth lyeth, and purposed therfore to write no more this way, vnlesse further and more probable obiections were publickly brought against vs. And I turned the course of my studies an other way, as is openly to be seen. Neyther would I take occasion to meddle, though provoked by you and yours, more then by any other: as I shewed you in part, by instances of some that could not be admitted to the Lords supper with you, for that they heard the doctrine of our Church, or thought it lawfull onely (as was sayd,) though they never did it. This I yet think to be more severity on your part against vs, then any Bishop in England would shew: how justly you may doe it, remaineth to be judged, when the differences between vs are discussed. And as for the provocation of our people, wheron you insist: I know it not: the man whom you named, denyed it to me before witnesses, and sayd: some of yours were the be∣ginners of it, as he could prove. But now that you have taken such an occasion, and we are entred into these lists, let vs proceed.
For the order of our processe, wheras you beginning with me, would yet vrge me to set down my reasons, when as you saw them in print: I leav it vnto judgment, how meet this was. As you knew that the chief Author of our Apologie, had revoked some doctrines and reasons therin: so you might have knowen that I and others, interessed in that book, held to the things therin published. My large offer to yeild to any kinde of conference with you, at your request; was not intended, neyther should be streyned to any other then an orderly course. Yet I set you downe a mayn ground, as you desired, and that I am content to follow. But you except against my argument and reasons confirming it in our Apologie, that those reasons are directed against the Church of En∣gland and the ministerie therof: the reasons that you desired of me, were such as I had for our separation from your particular Church, and the ministerie therof. To which I answer: In that they are directed against the Church of England they are also against yours: for you were members of that Church, and guiltie of the synns reproved in my argument, as we our selves also were, whiles we continued among them. Now the remo∣ving of your dwelling into an other land, removeth not your synns from you, nor you from them: it is your repentance onely, and faith in Christ, that can purge away your synns, Luke 13.3.5. Mar. 1.15. Pa∣pists that dwell here, in England or other where, belong to the Church of Rome, til they break off themselves by repentance. Neyther doth the absteyning from the practise clear the synner: for the guilt of Cains murder, cleaved vnto him all his dayes, because he was not cleansed by repentance and faith; although he never killed man more, after Abel. So though you here practise not the idolatries doen in England yet in that you have practised them, and not repented, your guiltines is vpon you. How much more then doe your synns remaine, which oppose and speak evill of vs, privately, publickly and in print, for departing from the evils, wherein we sometimes walked among them. More∣over I manifested your vnion with the Church of England by the very title of that book published by your own proselytes, which sayth, they are returned into the bosome of the Church of England their true Mo∣ther. These words, with some other in the title, you disclaime, as being foisted in by some falsifier. Be it so, though I knew not of it: yet the thing it self you disclaime not: so it may be true, though they wrote not those words.
I pray you tel me in your next, in the name of your chur. whether you deny that you continew in the bo∣some of the church of England And Chr. Lawn, the first pretended Author of that book, is knowen to live in the bosome of that Church, according to the title. And what will you answer to other words conteined in the pam∣phlet: as in Pag. 1. Where they say, they sought to make a publick re∣nunciation of their vnchristian separation, which with vs they had vndertaken from all the Churches of Christ. Meant they not the Church of England here for one? Let the 3 Page testifie, where they say. These things being proved, their separation from England would herevpon appeare to be vnlawfull. Let the 7. p. speak, where one of the causes of their excommunication, is for charging vs to be Schisma∣ticks for our separation from tbe Church of England. And in their answer to this article, p. 8, they deny it not, but refer to their proofs in the copie of their charge. Finally, let vs see what they say in pag. 2. We did openly renounce our covenant and profession of separation, which at our first entrance among them, we had made with them: we renounced it as being a most abominable and profane thing. Will you say that all these words were also foisted in by some falsifier? If not, why seek you now to turn away the discussing of the reasons of our se∣paration from that Church of England, especially considering what profession we make in the preface to the Confession of our faith, (prin∣ted with our Apologie) of our agreeing with other Christian refor∣med Churches round about vs, (some of which we there name,) & of our separation onely from the Antichristian Church of England for the causes there manifested. The covenant and profession of separation which they made with vs at their first entrance, was from the Church of England whereof we had been; not from any of the Reformed chur∣ches whereof we had not been. Wherfore they returning vnto you, with this renunciation of their covenant: who would not now expect at your hands, a justification of the Church of England? But you desired reasons for our separation from your particular Church. Wheras we rather might desire the reasons of your separa∣tion from our particular Church. For, besides that some of your mem∣bers, were first members of vs: our Church is before yours, being through Gods mercie, seated and stablished here first: and you coming after gathered a people, and erected a ministerie in this Citie by vs; never communicating your purpose or procedings with vs; nor deman∣ding of vs the reasons of our separation; nor shewing wherein you
agreed with vs, or dissented from vs. If now one of vs must needs be counted separators from an other: I think indifferent men will judge, the separation must lye vpon your selves. An ansvver to Preface-matters. Peace and truth from the Prince of Peace. Ioh. Pag. Mr. Ainsworth, Had you observed your owne directions for performing the counsell which you so well liked of, then would you not have brought in such store of humane testimonies, and those of the worst sort, and them also in the worst maner, as you have done: then would you not have inserted so many lesse needfull matters, but have kept more closely vnto the maine differences. VVhen you speak of of ending the strife about the provocation to this controversie, you begin it a fresh by bringing such a reason of your silence, as serves for a strong provocation to deale against you: the sum∣me of it is: there was so much written on both sides, as you held sufficient to shew vnto judicious Readers where the truth lay, & therfore purposed to write no more this way, vnlesse more probable obiections were brought against you: as if you should have sayd in triumph: All is wonne: Separation hath gotten the victory: all of judgement may see it: there is nothing of weight or worth, nothing so probably written against vs, that deserves any more answer, therfore I will rest. VVho is it that sees the separation clapping her wings & crowing on this maner, boasting against all the Churches of Christ, and against all the godly & learned Ministers and members of the same, but they may justly be mooved by such a provocation as this? VVhereas you tell vs of turning the course of your studies an other way: & that it may openly be seen: vve see indeed that you are about a new translation of the Bible with annotations vpon the same, but it vvere much better for you to turne back the course of your studies, to stay this work a while, and in the feare of God first to examine your
separation more soundly then you have done, and so to free & cleare yourself of that errour and scandall which you have givē to the hurt and greefe of many a soule. Vnlesse you take this course, one of these two things will follow: Either you must make an vncleane work, or have an vncleane conscience: for if in your annotations you expound the scriptures all along as you go, according to that vvhich you have done in your other former writings for the maintenance of separation, then shall you give many vncleane notes, and defile the holy scriptures & lead vnto schisme: if in all your annotations for winning credit vnto them you do conceale your meaning, and hide your opi∣nion notwithstanding all opportunities given, what do you els but betray the supposed truth, when as in your account it is ge∣nerally and vnjustly oppugned, and pollute your owne con∣science with this vnfaithfull dealing? As for your provocation by vs, in that we admit not such for members of our Church as would have liberty to heare your Sermons, I gave you answer in my former writing, which here you take no knowledge of. This is no good way, to abridge less needfull matters, by repeating and renewing vnjust complaints of hard dealing and omitting the answers given already there∣vnto. You refer the matter vnto judgement of the Readers, and ten times you appeale vnto them in this writing: I agree with you herein, onely I entreat the Readers to see what is vvritten before, and still to compare our vvritings diligently togather that they may see what is answered, and vvhat is omitted & pas∣sed by: And therfore also have I caused these writings to be pub∣lished, that the reader might have them to judge by. As for the man by whom I vvas provoked; If he deny it novv, yet that impeacheth not the truth of my assertion, vvhiles I have sundry vvitnesses to confirme the same. And it skilles not so much, vvhat he novv saith of himself before vvitnes, as vvhat the for∣mer vvitnesses do testify of him and his speeches.
That I had cause enough to desire you to set downe your rea∣sons for separating frō vs notvvithstāding those reasons alreadyprinted in your Apologie, is plaine: for first, though I knew you and some of your people had not yet openly revoked them, yet seing Mr. Iohnson the cheefe Author thereof had begun to recall them and refute them also himself, it was no blame worthy matter in me herevpon to give you occasion to think more seriously of them, and to give you liberty of setting them downe more advisedly. My second reason noted also in my former writing, you touch not at all. You speak of streyning your offer beyond an orderly course, but you cannot affirme, much lesse prove that I have done so by you. Vnto my third defence of requiring your reasons for your separation from our particular Church and Ministery, because those in your Apolo∣gy are directed against the Church of England and the mini∣stery thereof & not against vs: you reply that because we have not repented for being members of the Church of England, therfore our sins remaine, and therfore the reasons directed against the Church of England, are against ours also. This want of repentance you do also alledge sundry times againe in the heart of your treatise, as your maine ground to prove the vnlawfullnes both of our Church & ministery & to maintaine your separation from the same: And there may you finde a full and large answer herevnto, chap. 4. and 6. to shew that you have cause to repent your self for such maner of reasoning against the Church of God. VVhen as to make way for the turning of your argument from vs to the Church of England, you alledged the title of a book published against your schisme and the proselytes there∣of, I shewed you that your allegation was a forgery, your excuse now is that you knew not of it: But I prevented this excuse be∣fore in my former writing and shewed you the insufficiency thereof, seing the matter was published vnto you that you might have knowne it, see before p. 8. & 9. Againe, you do here cite many places of that
Profane schisme of Brow. booke, to shew that the publishers thereof did renounce their separation from the Church of En∣gland, &c. But what an idle and lost labour is this to keep sucha doe for proofe of that which we all do so freely and dayly confess and professe before all, & I did also acknowledge in my former writing? Is this dealing agreeable to your pretence of abridging or quite cutting off all less needfull matters? what is less needfull then to be so large in proof of that which is not denyed? Nay yourself do here acknowledge for vs that we do not disclayme an vnion with the Church of England. Yet are you not content with this, but in the margent of your writing you pray me to tell you in the name of our Church whether we deny that we continue in the bosome of the Church of England. Though I told you plainely enough before in my
See be∣fore pag. 9. former wri∣ting, if you had had eares to heare, yet to satisfy your needless importunitie, I answer you againe in the behalf of our church, that if you meane by living in the bosome of the Church to live vnder the ecclesiastical censure and governement of the Church, then do we not live in the bosome of the Church of England; but are here in these low countries a distinct body and Church from them: if you meane a reteyning of Christian cō∣munion with them, in this sense we do remaine in the bosome of that Church of Christ, practising communion vpon all good occasion, and hold them guilty of schisme that refuse to do the like. But then you demand further herevpon, why do I now seek to turne away the discussing of the reasons of your separation from the Church of England? who would not now expect at my hands a justifi∣cation of the Church of England? I answer, 1. There is no reason to expect at my hands in this present controversie, a discussing of all that I hold & practise; so might I enter into an hundred controversies at once, touching all the artickles of my faith and profession. 2. For the defence of the Church of England, there are many learned men that have already written sundry treati∣ses and justifyed the lawfullnes of the communion therein against you, whereas there is none that hath written any book in defence of this particular Church whereof I am a minister: neither is any man so much bound herevnto as I am. 3. Even this question which I vndertake against you is not a turningaway, but a leading of you by degrees vnto communion with the Church of England: you know the plainest method of tea∣ching is to proceed a notioribus ad minus nota, & I doubt not but you being cōvinced of your etrour in separating from this par∣ticular congregatiō, will thereby be prepared and holpē to dis∣cerne the errour of separatiō from the Church of England also. Here you insert yet a new reason why I should rather discuss the reasons of your separation from England namely, conside∣ring what profession you make in the preface to the confession of your faith (printed with your Apologie) of your agreeing with other Chri∣stian reformed Churches round about vs (some of which you there name) and of your separation onely from the Antichristian Church of England, &c. But, oh Mr. Ainsworth, what truth is there in these wordes? This your profession here mentioned by you is a counterfaite profession and most vntrue; If you separate onely from the Antichristian Church of England, why do you even in this very writing maintaine the separation of your Elder De∣cluse from the French Church? why are not such of your people as vnderstand their language allowed to heare in their Chur∣ches? Yea why do you publish in print concerning the Dutch and French Churches in these countries, that for the members of your Church they cannot partake with rhem, no not in hea∣ring the word without declining and apostasy from the truth which you have receyved. Inquiry of Th. wh. Pag. 26. In the beginning of your writing you prefix the saying of the Prophet, Love the truth and peace: but by this dealing you seeme to love falshood & dissembling more then truth; And now for this deceitfull dealing there is so much the more reason to lay out your separation from other Churches as well as from England, that simple men may no more be be∣guiled by you. One other needfull and weighty matter you will yet have to be considered, before you come to your argument, namely, that you rather might have desired the reasons of our separation from your particular church, for besides that some of our mēbers were first mem∣bers of you, your Church is before ours, &c. & we coming after, gathe∣red.
a prople and erected a ministery in this citie by you never commu∣nicating our purpose or proceedings with you, nor demanding of you reasons of, &c Answ. 1. The reason why we consulted not with you at our first comming vnto this citie, was because you had already before my coming declared your selves to be open ad∣versaries of the truth by disclayming and renouncing the com∣munion of all the Churches of Christ, to the great offence of the godly in our own countrie, as also of the godly Magistrates Ministers and people in this citie, I saw by your writings what evill counsailours you were, and what perverse reasonings you vsed therein and how you contemned the advise of such as had dealt with you and therfore thought it not meete to commu∣nicate our proceedings with you. 2. Our purpose & proceedings were cōmunicated with many learned ministers English, Scot∣tish, Dutch & Frēch who gave vs counsaile & help in our ende∣vours, so that we needed not to communicate our affaires with you. The hand of God was with vs: the Reformed churches gave vs the right hand of fellowship: the hād of the Christian Magi∣strates was with vs through the mercy of God that gave vs fa∣vour in their eyes & put it into their hearts to further our en∣terprise, so that at my comming hither, there was then first esta∣blished in this citie a lawfull congregation of the English, and then divers which had before left your Church & gone vnto the Dutch did from thence come & joyne themselves to vs: & since that time many other of your people leaving your schis∣me have come vnto vs, the Lord still encreasing his blessing vpon our labours. 3. Suppose here had bene in this city a law∣full English church before our comming hither, & that we had offended in not communicating our proceedings with the same, yet had not this fault bene like vnto your separation; it is one thing to neglect the counsell of some godly men, an other to renounce communion of all true Churches. And yet see how you please and flatter yourself with opinion of other mens opinion touching you, in that you say;
If now one of vs, must needs be counted separatours from an other, you think, indifferētmen will judge, the separation must ly vpon vs. CHAP. II. Touching the Argument, of Separating from sin onely. Hen. Ains. NOw therfore I come to my argument which was this. That separation which is onely from syn and communion ther∣with, is of God, and is all good mens dutie. But our separation onely from syn and communion with syn, wherwith we were intangled in your mother Church. Therfore our separation is of God, &c. The first proposition confirmed by Exod. 20. Eph. 5.11. 2 Cor. 6.14.15.16. You except not against. The second I proved by shewing the four chief heads of synns, for and from which we separated: and referred you to the scriptures & reasons in our publick writings, for further manife∣station. You answer: First suppose we did justly in separating from these four things, yet is not our minor proved. Your reason is, 1. We sepa∣rate from the Dutch and French Churches. 2. We separate also from your congregation: & this separation (you say) is not onely from syn, & therfore not of God, &c. Herevpō you labour to binde me by the coards of mine own syllogisme (as you speak) to prove my Minor: and you vrge my promise, and presse me, If I wil deale honestly & truely, or soundly and directly, &c. as if you thought the very naming of these Churches would make me afrayd. But the Lord is with vs, and we will not fear what man can doe vnto vs.
First, consider I pray you, how soundly and directly yourself do ans∣wer vnto those 4. heads of transgressiō, which I named: whē you ney∣ther ingenuously grant them, nor take vpon you to convince them, but put a supposition onely: that if any inconvenience folow, you may here∣after turne the tenour of your speech, and say we did vnjustly in sepa∣rating. Thus you will walk at large, and I must be bound in coards: I must prove directly, you may answer indirectly. It was exspected not onely by me, but by some even of your owne flock, that you would try your strength to prove vs schismatiks from the church of England; butloe, how you withdraw at the first. Wel, seing you say no more, we will take your supposition for a certaine trueth: and let him that readeth, judge in discretion, whether of vs dealeth more soundly and di∣rectly. Secondly, to insnare our separation in syn, you bring no one word of the Law of God, wherby syn is to be Rō. 3.20 knowen; but allege the congregations of men. Which may, I grant, be a stombling block to the weak: but cannot perswade any wise conscience. It hath been the Pa∣pists common practise, when scriptures faile them, to dazel mens eyes with names of Church, councils, fathers, &c. But I would not have you to learn their wayes. To the Law and to the Testimonie, sayth the Lord: if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them, Esai. 8.20. Thirdly, you have no more reason, (if so much) to say that we have separated from the Dutch Churches, then that they have separated from vs. For we being called of God, whiles we dwelt in England entred into covenant there, and became his Church and people: and so had equal right in Christ, his Gospel and ordinances, with all other Churches in the world. For came the word of God to Dutch men onely came it not to the English also? We being thus established in Christ, Coūterp. p. 49. Ans∣wer to Th. VVhile. Pag. 25. acknowledged the reformed Churches, (vpon the sight of their Cōfes∣sions,) to be true Churches, & our brethrē in the Lord: & to their Vni∣versities we dedicate the Confession of our faith. And how doe they ac∣cept of vs? To let passe other things which I could mention, behold what your Disciples have published in their foresayd libell, pag. 21. thus. The testimonie of the Dutch Church concerning the Brownists. When as they sent their messengers with some questions vnto the Dutch Eldership, they received this answer from them: That they did not acknowledge their assemblie, to be an ecclesiastical assemblie, or a law∣full Church. And when Mr. Iohnson and others of them, were instant to hear reasons of this answer from them: it was further answered: They would doe it, if they saw it needfull, or if they found any thing that was worthy of answer.
Now let these things testifie before any equal judges, whether theseparation be most on vs, or on them. Fourthly, the instance of that one man that came vnto vs from the French Church, convinceth vs no more of synfull separation; then the Dutch Churches receiving sundry of such as had been our members, convinceth them. Fiftly, the cause why Mr. Cluse left the French Church, being their synns in their publik worship of God, & administration to the church; as praying out of humane prescribed Leitourgies, and preaching from humane apocryphal Catechismes: Baptising such as are not in the cove∣nant of Christ, and the like; which are condemned by Exod. 20.4.5. Deut. 12.32. Esa. 29.13 Mat. 15.9. Gen. 17. It followeth necessarily vpon my former mayn argument (which you have not yet infringed) that he left them lawfully: and so as yet, you have proved no syn in our separation. Sixtly, there is in him and vs no other blame to be found then in yow and yours: who professing (in your last writing) to separate from knowen evils: have gathered here an other Church, and doe receive such as separate from some evils in the Church of England. And why then condemne you vs, for receiving him that separated from knowen evils in the French Church? Your second exception is, that we separate also from your congrega∣tion, and censure those of our people that come vnto you. I answer: first it is you that have made the separation, by gathering a new Church apart from vs, who were here a Church before you, as while are I she∣wed. Secondly, we have just cause to censure such of ours as come vnto you, both for their schisme, in leaving the true Church wherof they were: and for their falling back into great evils, as the renoun∣cing of their holy covenant and profession of separation which at their first entrance amongst vs they made with vs: they renounce it as most abominable, as the Libellers amongst you (which somtime in profession were of vs) have printed in their infamous book afore∣sayd, p. 2. & 7. Vnlesse therfore you can disprove our Church, and se∣paration from the synns in the Church of England the censuring of them is just.
Your 3. exception is, that we separate also from the private com∣munionof the Godly in England. To convince vs of syn herein, you bring no one word of God, but would presse vs with the writings of men. How vnworthy this is, of a man professing to teach religion, let the godly judge. In sted of proving this to be syn vpon vs, you would vrge me to answer that book written for private communion: thus you indevour to set vs at variance amongst our selves, whiles you may look on for advantage. And why I pray you, might not I as well vrge you to answer the things written in that book against publick com∣munion, which you mainteine? or to answer D. Bilsons book of perpe∣tuall governement, bent directly against your presbyteries and Church governement, which hath been many moe yeres in publick then this which you mention to me. Or Mr. Hookers 8. books of ecclesiastical po∣litie, written to overthrow yours? Those last books haue turned many from your side to the Prelate: and where there is one of vs, there are a 1000. of you and moe, to make answer. As for me, if I would ans∣wer it, you and others take a course to hinder me, by such private con∣troversies as you begin and prosequute with me. And having in hand another necessary work (as is partly knowen in publick) besides my private writings to you and sundry others, you yet would lode me with more: shewing your self like an hard task-Maister, to lay so much work on me, and doe so litle your self.
But what need you vrge this, seing it is not to the matter in hand. For your former writings to me, were about Church communion▪ mine argument is also concerning the same. Now to ease your self, you come in with private communion: which the Author of the book you men∣tion, plainly distinguisheth from Church communion: which he dis∣proveth evidently in the same book, as you may see. And whereas you say I have affirmed, if private communion be granted, publick wil also folovv: you are mistaken if you apply it to the Church of En∣gland: This I hold, that publick communion of such persons vvith vs vvill folow: but not our publick communion vvith their Church where so many grosse evils are practised. You insult therfore in vaine, as if this (if it were granted) vvould rase the principles of our se∣paration, and as if I therfore refused to deale therwith. It is not possible that our principles of separation, vvhich is from syn onely, and communion therwith, as I have shewed you, should ever be shaken, so long as Gods word endureth. Now though I need say no more of this matter, seing you have sayd nothing from the scriptures against vs: yet I wil shew you what I judge of this doctrine. All private communion with the godly in En∣gland I deny not: such as are come to that measure of grace, as that they are worthy in Christ, to be received into the true visible Church, in that estate: with them I hold it lawful to have private communion, even before they be joyned to the Church. But such as for their Anti∣christian estate and walking, are by the rules of Gods word, debarred from admission into the Church of Christ til they repent & leave their syn: with them I hold it not lawfull to have private communion, though some good things appeare to be in them, which I wil labour to cherish. And this is that which I intend in my answer to M. Bernard, in that place of my Book which you cite, and I never held otherwise. If you can prove syn in this doctrine, I wil hear you, speaking frō the word of God: other authoritie I refuse to be pressed with. And when you have proved vs to syn herein, (if ever you be able:) then are you to begin a new with your Church estate, which will not at all be justified hereby. Answer. Io. Pa. THese things being thus dispatched, you com now to your argument & repeat it. I denyed your minor, which was, that you separated from sin onely, &c. I shewed the weaknes of your profe of it frō the insufficiēt enumeratiō of those things that you professed to separate frō: My first exception was, that as you separated from the Dutch & French Churches so from ours also: mētioning your separation frō the Dutch & French onely to illustrate your fact & your dealing with ours: This exception you devide into two, & reply many things with litle reason: And first, you pray me to cōsider how soundly & directly I answer vnto those 4. heads of transgression, which you named: when I neither ingenuously grant thē, nor take vpō me to convince them, &c. Herevnto I answer. First, my answer vnto your argument is sound and direct though I meddle not with those 4. transgressions at all: It is
enough to shew the falshood of any argument, if we shew any part of the first or second proposition to be false: and it is in the answerers choyse to deny what he will: But you, as if you regarded not the lawes of learning and the rules of right reaso∣ning, do grudge this liberty vnto me and expostulate with me as if the opponent might prescribe the answerer what to grant and what to deny. Doth not your argument of separating from sin onely fall manifestly vnto the ground, and the honour of it ly in the dust, when I give you some instances wherein you cannot prove that you separate from sin onely? why do you then trifle about surmises of I know not what inconveniences? Oh, but you complaine, that I will walk at liberty and you must be boūd in cords: you must prove directly, & I may answer indirectly. But you are herein a very vnjust murmurer: & you are herein like vnto a Nigardly person who desiring to seeme liberall makes proffer of some kindenes, where he thinkes it wil not be ac∣cepted: but seeing it accepted contrary to his expectation, then he repents and frets in himself and grumbles against the person that hath accepted his offer: did not you offer me to rea∣son with me of Fol. 2. a what poynt or poynts I would? vvhy do you now grudge to performe it? have not you framed and fashioned your argument your self? why do you with such an ill-wil pro∣sequute it in order? If it be a paine vnto you that you are bound: it is but in the cords of your owne offer and of your owne argu∣ment: you must blame your self for it. If I walk at liberty it is but in the plaine pathway of direct reasoning: let men of lear∣ning judge. And why do you trifle about the expectation of it may be two or three of our people (which yet I know not of) that supposed the question betwixt vs was otherwise then it is; as if I should alter the state of the question layd downe betwixt vs, vpon such a pretence? How vnjustly do you complaine that I with draw at the first? I withdraw not one inch from the que∣stion layd downe plainely of purpose by my self to avoyd such cavils as these: But loe, it is you which speaking of our Pag. 35. en∣tring into lists, which were described by me & approved by your
self do yet at the very first encounter start aside from these lists or bounds into an other field, and at one skip leap out of Ger∣many into England. Secondly, to salve or to mitigate a litle the paine of your dis∣contentment, if it may be, I doe plainely signify vnto you that my resolution and purpose is (the Lord assisting me with life & strength) to deale with you about your separation from the Church of England, and to manifest your errour and schisme therein also, vvhen once this controversy about our particular congregation shalbe finished and sufficiently discussed. In the meane time I think to hold vnto this, being so fit a preparation vnto the other. In the next place you reply further, that to ensnare your separa∣tion in sin, I bring no one word of the Law of God, whereby sin is to be knowne, but alledge the congregations of men. That this may be a stumbling block to the weak, &c. a common practise of the Papists to dazel mens eyes, &c. To the law and to the testimony, &c. I answer. First, it is a great wrong and an vrter perverting of my answer to say I alledge the congregations of men to ensnare you in sin, as though I drew an argument from the authority of men to convince your errour. I make no argument there at all, but give answer vnto you, and there againe onely in a matter of fact I declare the maner of your separation to be otherwise then you pretended in speaking of your separation from those 4. heads of transgression: there I shew that your separation is not onely from those 4. things, but also that as you separate from the Dutch and French, so do you from ours, thereby to give you occasion to make good your argument for the reiecting of our congregation, and so to come vnto the particulars concerning the same, in defence whereof I hope to manifest how much you have abused the scriptures.
Secondly, the blame vvhich you impute vnto me for the al∣legation of humane testimonies to dazel the eyes of men, &c. is justly to be returned vpon your owne head, who do so often cite them and call for them to be your witnesses, even all sortsof them, heathnish, Popish, Iewish Authors, yea the very wit∣ches themselves and the Spirits of divination. For example 1. For the allegations of heathens, see how needlesly you alledge them; when you shew vnto Mr. Iohnson the dispropor∣tion betwixt the common wealth and ministers in the church, you content not yourself with the scriptures, but you Animad. vers. p. 15. call for the testimony of Cato to reprove him. VVhen you tell him of aequivocating, and shew it to be a common practise of such as would deceive, you Ibid. pag. 35. call for the vvitnesse of Aristotle against him, &c. For allegation of Popish witnesses, you produce many of them in this writing, as Pope Sylvester, Helmoldus, Geroldus & Vn∣wannus, & other fabulous writers to reprove our opinion and practise; you that so litle regard Rev. 14.1.2. the harpers of mount Sion, the harmonious voyce of the reformed Churches that witness against you, do not yet refuse to alledge & bring against vs those Rev. 16.13. croaking frogs, and vncleane Spirits that come out of the mouth of the beast. 3. For Iewish writers, you produce them so often, both Animad∣vers. p. 16. 17. &c. against Mr. Iohnson and also in this your writing, that all men may see, you do not onely go to the law and to the testimony, but to the Talmud & to the Rabbines, to the Infidel Iewes: though the 1. Thes. 2 16. curse of God be come vpon them to the full, their Rom. 11.10. eyes being blinded, the Mat. 21.43. Kingdome of God taken from them, and they Mat. 8.12. cast into vtter darknes, yet would you light our candle at them that sit in the shadow of death: yea you follow and imi∣tate the vainest sort of them, the Cabalists in their curious specu∣lations as in your translation of the Psalmes, where you shew that Israel is a name of power and principalitie, you note further that Annota∣tions on Ps. 14.7. it may also be observed, how in this word ISRAEL are conteyned the first letters of the names of Abraham and of Sarah his wife; of Isaak and Rebekah his wife: of Iaakob and of both his Wives Leah and Rachel, &c. If this were a lawfull or tolerable observation, you might as well for the countēancing of your schisme, make the like observation vpon the name of
Separation, for in thisword, SEPARATION are also conteyned the first letters of the names of Abraham and of Sarah his VVife: of Isaak & Re∣bekah his vvife: of Iaakob and of Rachel his wife: you might like∣wise observe how in this word SEPARATION are also con∣teyned the initiall or first letters of the names of those Act. 5.6. 7. Saints Stephen, Philip, Prochorns, Nicanor, Timon, Parmenas, and Nicolas, that had the honour to be the first Deacons of the new planted Christian Church in Ierusalem: yea you might yet further ob∣serve that not onely the first letters of the names of those 3. ancient patriarkes Abraham, Isaak and Iaakob, but also the first letters of the names of the 4. later patriarkes of new Churches Mr. Iohnson, Mr. Smith, Mr. Ainsworth, Mr. Robinson are in like maner conteyned in this word SEPA∣RATION, with many other mysteries that by such kinde of collections might be drawne from the same. But Ier. 23.28. what is the chaffe to the wheate, saith the Lord? what is 1 Cor. 3.12. hay and stubble of such observations to the Gold, Silver and precious stones of faith∣full doctrine? And what have the sincere ministers of Christ to do with such vnsound, Iewish and Cabalistical observations & annotations? 4. For your allegation of the testimony of witches or Spirits of divination, your fault herein also appeares to be very great. 1. In that you Coūterp. Pag 47. Animad. vers. p. 95. alledge the Oracles of the Sibylles, women possessed and inspired by the Devil: herein you offend against your owne Esa. 8.20 allegation, to the law and to the testimony; and con∣sider the Ibid. 19. verse going before in the same chapter: Should not a people enquire at their God, should they go from the living to the dead? A man might as well and as lawfully 2 Kin. 1.2.3 4-16 with Ahaziah that wic∣ked King of Israel have sent to enquire at the Oracle of Baal∣zebub the God of Ekron, as have gone to the orackle of Baalah. Sibylla: whose testimony you bring vnto vs. Our Saviour in the dayes of his flesh on earth Luk 4.35 41. rebuked the wicked Spirits for their testimony of him, & cōmanded them to hold their peace: Paul also was
Act. 16.17.18. greeved at the testimony of the mayd that had the Spirit of divination: but you on the contrary require theSpirit of divination to speak vnto vs, and call vnto Sibyll that she may cry after vs with her testimony. 2. This allegation is so much the more vile, then the testimo∣ny of many other witches that wicked men seek vnto, in respect of the most filthy and abhominable maner whereby this wretched wight did both receive and vtter againe the inspira∣tion of the vncleane Spirit, namely not by her mouth onely, but her belly being swollen, and she sitting vpon the sacred stoole or Tripos, then came the stinking Oracle from vnder or out of the stoole below. This kinde of impure divination is noted both in the Ob, & O∣both. Lev. 19.31 & 20.27. title which the scripture gives, vnto these miscreants, which signifyeth a bottle or bladder in respect of that inspiratiō which makes their bellies as a blowne bladder: & by the Engastri∣muthoi. ventrilo∣qui. The 70 in∣tepreters in Levit. 19.31, &c. Bar-schu∣ma, the son of Swelling The Syriac translat. in Act. 13.6. See Iunius there, & Anal. on Deut. 18.11. titles which other writers give them to signify their speaking out of their bellies: And this monstrous impurity is more largely described by sundry other witnesses and by some that are printed togather with that booke, from whence you alledge those oracles of Sibylla. VVherfore then should such vncleane stuffe be brought vnto Christian eares: and why do you Mr. Ainsworth adorne your writings with such excre∣ments of vncleane and wicked Spirits? 3. It is sin to go vnto vvitches for any Silver or cattel or such like earthly goods when they are lost or stollen, but to go vnto a Spirit of divination to enquire for the truth of Religion when it is hidden, lost or obscured by the adversaries thereof, who do by their controversies as it were steale the same: this is yet a greater iniquitie, this is to make the father of lyes a guide vnto the truth, and to set Satan in Gods seate. 4. Ma∣ny in their necessities, dangers and temptations go vn∣to vvisardes: for as you tell Mr. Iohnson when he alledgeth the opinion of Mr. Iunius for his cause: Animad. vers. p. 98. What will not men do for help in time of need? Yet are not such excused thereby: for God is Gen. 17.1. al sufficient vnto his people. But how much more are they to blame that needlesly for wantonnes, pleasure or vaine osten∣tation do run vnto them, as you do vnto
Sibylla? what neededyou to run to the Spirit of divination to prove Animad. vers. p. 95. Antichriste to be Belial, as though the scriptures did not shew it sufficiently? How frivolous and idle à flourish do you make with the testi∣mony of Sibylla in the Counter∣poy. p. 47. other place to give some colour vnto such an exposition of scripture, as even your self in the next page do reiect as vncertaine if not false? How just is the Refutatiō of Giff. pag. 120. re∣proofe of H. Barow vpon you, when he inveigheth against those that fetch the ornaments of their stile and of their bookes from pro∣fane Writers though it were but to exemplify and illustrate that which the sayd? what would he have sayd think you, if he had seene you paint and varnish the margent of your bookes vvith such allegations as these? 5. Those vvritings, from whence you alledge the testimonies of Sibylla are even by the publisher of that book himself in his preface manifested to be forged and counterfait things for the most part: Now it is sin to ly of the Divel, why do you then alledge in the name of Sibylla, you know not what? How greedy are you of vaine allegations, that thus lick vp the crummes and fragments of Sibyll, & grasp after the shadow of a sorceresse? Though some ancient writers have heretofore vsed the testi∣mony of the Sibyls, against the pagans that worshipped the divel, to convince them by their owne oracles, which then were not so counterfait and forged as now they are, yet have not you the like excuse, that want the like occasion for the vse of them. These things I have thought good to note the more largely (though many other evils might further be observed in these your allegations) because your maner still is through out your writings to vpbrayd vs so much with that which your self are more guilty of. In the third place, you reply that we have no more reason (if so much to say that you have separated from the Dutch Churches, then that they have separated from you, &c. I answer. 1. This doth not diminish the truth of my former answer; if you have separated from the Dutch, then have you not sepa∣rated onely from those 4. heads, mentioned in your argument.
2. Neither doth this diminish your sin, but encrease the same: for if the Dutch have also separated from you, this might be an occasion of repentance vnto you by making you to consider your wayes more seriously, and so to finde out your scandal condemned by the word of God. And the Papists, Arians and Anabaptists may say as wel as you, that the Dutch Churches have separated from them as well as they have separated from the Dutch. And this serves for a further witnesse against them. 3. If the word of God came not to Dutch men onely, as you say: then are you for this cheefly to be humbled that have made à separation contrary to that word that came vnto you also. And though you acknowledged the Reformed Churches to be true Churches and did dedicate your Confession vnto their vniversities, yet when they saw your schisme published there∣in, namely that Confess. Art. 32. all that wilbe saved are bound by Gods Comman∣dement, with speed to come forth of their Antichristian estate in the Church of England, &c. VVhereby you condemned all the godly therein as being in a damnable estate, & excluded from salvation in that estate: when they saw many of your exceptiōs against the Church of England to be such as did also necessarily lead vnto separation from them, as well as from England, had they not reason to avoyd and beware of the new Disciples of such a separation, as being an vnlawfull assemblie established in Schisme and not in Christe. 4. For that which you alledge concerning their answering of your reasons: namely, that they would do it, if they saw it need∣full, or if they found any thing that was worthy of answer. Might they not have their reasons so to answer? did they not discerne your contentious disposition in other dealings before, as well as afterward, when the deputies both of Dutch and French chur∣ches dealing with your Eldership about the cause of Mr. Iohn Iohnson to have stayd your pastour from the excommunica∣tion of his Father if it might have bene, do yet Profane Schisme of Bro. p. 60. testify that they could not get a Catego∣ricum tespōsum.
plaine or direct answer from you? And if therewere nothing els, had they not some reason to ceasse reaso∣ning with them that would not answer plainely and directly? Lastly, as Mr. Iohnson himself writes that Preface to D. B. sect. 6. Before answer to Mr. Iacob. experience the mistresse of fooles teacheth many things, so might the Dutch El∣dership consider that the same schoole-mistresse might teach you that, which you would not learne of others; as they may also see it come to passe in Mr. Iohnson and the greatest part of your congregation who have now of themselves let fal many of those things for which they stood so eagerly against the Dutch heretofore. Your fourth reply is, that the instance of that one man that came vnto you from the French Church, convinceth you no more of sinfull Separation; then the Dutch Churches receyving sundry of such as had bene your members convinceth them. I answer, this instance was not alledged as an argument to convince the vnlawfulnes and sin of your separation, but as an answer for matter of fact vnto your argument, to illustrate your fact in separating from our congregation as you do from the French: & thus it shewes as much as it was brought for: namely, that you do not sepa∣rate onely from the 4. things mentioned by you. In your fift reply, you tel vs 3 of the causes for which Mr. Cluse your Elder left the French Church, viz. their vse of hu∣mane leitourgies, Cathechisme, & baptising such as are not in the cove∣nant of Christe, &c. That for these sins according to your maine ar∣gument he left them lawfully, &c. I answer. 1. This story of your Elders separation is imperfectly set downe: In the examination of his fact, it were expedient the Reader should know the circumstances thereof, & how it be∣gan in a most pregnant and remarkable discontment how it was concluded with shameful & false boasting: of these things I have ample testimonie from Mr. La vigne the ancient & re∣verend pastour of that French Church delivered vnto me in the presence of their Eldership which in due time is further to be manifested.
2. For the causes of his separation, he alledged also the setmaintenance of their ministers: their meeting in Idol-temples▪ their suffring of the innocent partie to forgive the offendant that had committed adultery, and to live togather againe: their maner of exercising their discipline, &c. Touching Idol-tēples, he may learne by this writing in defence of our particular con∣gregation that he had no cause to separate vpon such a pretēce: and as for the rest of the poynts suppose they were all sins as you would have them: yet doth it not follow according to your maine or meane argument, that therfore he should leave their Church: for he did not according to your argument sepa∣rate from sin onely, but from all that was good amongst them? and left their whole communion. That being true which fol∣loweth in the defence of our Church, Decluse may hereby per∣ceive that he hath cause to humble himself for his offence given vnto the French. Lastly, you reply, that there is in him & you, no other blame to be found then in me and ours, who professe to separate from knowne evilles, &c. I answer, that there be two maine differences be∣twixt vs, which do make our estates to differ as far as East is from the VVest: 1, he and you in justifying of him, will have such things to be knowne evilles, as are not evill at all: to wit, set maintenance of ministers: vse of our temples: the inno∣cent persons reteyning of the repentant adulterer, &c. These we maintaine to be lawfull. 2. he & you in justifying of him, for pretended corruptions do vtterly renounce communion, & quite leave a true Church as de hath done: but we on the contrary do not leave communion of true Churches for cor∣ruptions & sins, according to his example, but onely abstaine from the practise of evil in our owne persons, and witnesse against it in others, still holding communion with the Chur∣ches of Christe.
Vnto my second exception (as you call it; though it be my first answer onely illustrated with your separation from the French Church mentioned before) you reply two things. 1. You say, it is we that have made the separation by gathering anew Church apart from you, who were here a Church before vs. I an∣swer, though it be true that we renounce your schisme & com∣munion, yet doth not our gathering of a new Church apart from you, prove the same: for it may yet come to passe that there shalbe an other new English Church in this citie gathe∣red apart from vs, and yet no separation, but a loving commu∣nion occasionally miainteyned betwixt vs, though we be here a church before them By such a reason as this you might prove that Mr. Robinson and his company separated from you at his first comming into this land, because they gathered a new church apart from you in the same citie, you being here a Church before them. 2. you say, you have just cause to censure such of yours as come vnto vs both for their schisme in leaving you: & for their falling into great evilles, as the renouncing of their holy covenant and profession of separation, &c. I answer, 1. You cen∣sure your people sometimes not onely for separating from you: and for renouncing their covenant with you, but even for hearing one Sermon with vs, and cutt them off if they make not publique repentance: yea though they heare vs at such a time when you have no exercise: And this is a full proofe of that poynt wherevnto I brought it, namely to shew the lamenes of your argument, in that you did not separate onely from those 4. things noted by you: but this fault you will not see nor acknowledge, though it be most palpable. 2. That your people ought to renounce their covenant made among you with profession of separation from the Church of England, it is already shewed in those treatises which I have nominated vnto you, which if they were duely weighed, the abhomination of your schisme might well be discerned notwithstanding all the libelles which you have spread abroad against the Church of God.
To my third exception, as you reckon it, touching your se∣paration from the private communion of the godly in En∣gland, you reply many things in a heape: that to convince you of sin, I bring no one word of God, but would presse you with the wri∣tingsof men, &c. Herevnto I answer. First, touching your misreckoning: you deale with me as the Church of Rome in their Catechismes doth with the deca∣logue or 10, Commandements: when they leave out the se∣cond commandement which is against their Idolatry, yet to keep the number of ten, they divide the last commandement & make two of it: so when I gave you 3. answers to your argu∣ment, you leave out the last and omit it altogather, and yet keep the number by dividing the first and making two of it. Secondly, when I sent you here to the writings of Mr. Ro∣binson refuting your private schisme, do not I send you to the word of God and scriptures which he hath alledged, as is largely to be Relig. Com. from p. 7. to 17. seene? How often do you your self in your bookes send vs vnto the writings of H. Barow, and Mr. Iohnson, vpbrayding vs for not answering of them? yea and furthet to shew your blinde partialitie in this complaint, do not you your self in your former Pag. 4. writing send me vnto Mr. Robinsons booke to answer it: and why may not I as wel send you to the very same Author? Nay, not onely so, but you send me vnto such a booke of Mr. Robinson as himself doth begin to revoke publiquely as being vnsound in divers thinges, whereas I refer you vnto a later booke of his, made with riper deliberation, and in no part that I heare of, publiquely revoked. His booke which you send me vnto, being his Iustification of separation, is sick of King Chro. 21.15.18.19. Ieho∣rams incurable disease, the guttes of it fall out day by day, yea he openly pluckes out some of the bowelles thereof with his owne hands: vnto this rotten book you refer me, & yet blame me that refer you vnto that which is more sound. VVhat equi∣ty or honesty is there, in this dealing? Thirdly, for the setting of you at variance, it is your selves that have done it, yea the Lord in his judgement hath done it: I onely wish that you would not smother the matter, but search conscionably for the truth: and so I doubt not but it would redound to the
advantage of the truth, and of many poore soules insnared in your errour, yea and to your owne advantageat the last, by being made an occasion to finde out the evill of your schisme. Fourthly, for your now vrging of me to answer the things that concerne publique communion in this foresayd book, do you not consider that vpon the comming forth of this book, there was presently published a Manuduction for Mr. Robin∣son to lead him vnto publique communion, and this by the same person that had convinced his private separation to be vn∣lawfull? Those that do justly weigh those Manuductions may thereby discerne his doctrine about publique communion layd downe in that booke, to be already refuted. Fiftly, for your vrging of me to answer D. Bilsons and Mr. Hoo∣kers bookes, as wel as I vrge you to answer Mr. Robinson: I answer, there is not the like reason. 1. There is no minister or learned man to answer Mr. Robinson but onely you, Mr. Iohnson being against you also in this and no protestant mi∣nister in the world that holds such an vnchristian errour against private communion with the godly besides your self that I can heare of: whereas for the answer of D.B. and Mr. H. there are many more fit and meet then I am. 2. I were never provo∣ked to answer these men, as you have bene openly in your owne congregation by your owne people desired and vrged to answer Mr. Robinson. 3. The substance of that which is in those two mens bookes hath bene answered already in many writings: the substance of that which Mr. Robinson hath prin∣ted against your private Schisme, hath not bene refuted by any that I ever heard of. Sixtly, to that you say, there be for on of you, a 1000. of vs & moe, to make answer, &c. I answer, 1. Though vve be moe then you, yet seing you be such men of might, and we but grashoppers in your sight: seing your people do so often take into their mouthes that saying of Moses and apply it to themselves against vs: Deut. 32.30. one shall chase a thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight: according to this account your ex∣cellency is equivalent vnto our multitude. 2. If we be a 1000.
to one of you, yet it appeares that one of you have heretofore bene as ready to contend for the separation, as a 1000. of vs have bene to strive against it: one of you hath stird vp as much contention as a 1000. of vs. Heretofore when Mr. B. wrote a book against your schisme, ech of you strove to be on his back. Mr. Smith & Mr. Robinson pleaded that they had speciall right in the quarrel, and yet you prevented them both and rushed into the battel before them: Though then you three came against one, yet now when 3. of you are by name called vpon to defend the vnreasonablenes of your separation, in the In the preface: book so entitled: there is not one of you appeares: heretofore you were wont to snatch vp private letters, broken notes of Sermons and other writings & made several bookes against them, still complayning (as even in your former writing) that you were not answered: why do you now begin to make a con∣trary complaint against me? It is your self thay lay lode vpon your owne broad shoulders, by setting your hand with Gen. 16.12. Ismael against every man in every Church of Christe. Seventhly, though my writings to you were about Church communion, and your argument also concerne the same, yet if in this your argument you bring such a proposition, the falshood whereof may be manifested by consideration of your private communion, is there not just occasion to note the same? And howsoever you intended your speech touching the inference of publique communion from private, (if it were so as you now interpret your self) the discussing thereof betwixt you would vndoubtedly help to pluck downe the tower of your separation. As for your presumptuous affirmation, that it is not possible that the principles of your separation which is from sin onely and communion therewith should ever be shaken, so long as Gods word endureth, it is but a puffe of the flesh: and I would counsell you to beware of such vaine confidence, which might moove the Lord to Iam. 4.6. smite you with hardnes of heart: yea such presumption is not onely a mooving cause, but also a meanes whereby that judgement of obduration is executed:
for many times when corrupt flesh hath spoken or written vainely & cōfidently, there is a vayle of preiudice & frowardnes spread over the heart thereby: a greater vnwillingnes to retract errour is wrought in the heart thereby, & mē come to say as Pi∣late did in an other case, Ioh. 19.22. That which I have written, I have writ∣ten. The word of God is infallible & endureth for ever, but your knowledge of that word is fallible: Those two may not be compared togather: Your separation is built vpon the misvn∣derstanding of that word. VVhether you erre & pervert the word of God in making that to be sin which is not: and in ma∣king that to be separation from sin onely, which is also separa∣tion from good things, we are to consider by the examination of the particulars following for which you separate from vs. Lastly, when you profess to shew vs your judgement tou∣ching communion with the godly in England, you do wrap vp the matter so, that simple men may easily mistake you and be deceyved by you: you tell vs that you hold private communion with such as are come to that measure of grace, as that they are worthy in Christe, to be receyved into the true visible Church: but who be they, Mr. Ainsworth? is there any one person, man, vvoman, or Child, high or low, that is a member of the Church of En∣gland, and vses to heare the Sermons of the sincerest Minister of that Church whosoever, whom you judge to be worthy in Christe to be receyved into the true visible Church? name any one if you can: Nay I know you can not according to your profession name one; for according to the whole tenour of your vvritings, they are all and every one of them Antichri∣stians, yea grosse Idolatours, carying the marke of the beast, and therfore all of them by you debarred from the Church of Christe, vntill they renounce that Church and every Minister thereof, separating as you have done. But yet you say, you will labour to cherish the good things that appeare to be in them: Now vvhat is your cherishing of them? you allow them not to heare the faithfullest Minister of the Land, which might cherish them: your self deny all religious communion vnto them
even in private: you pronounce them all to be the Chil∣dren of wrath and of the curse: and teach throughout your vvritings that there is no promise of Christe in his Gospell, no hope of salvation that belongs vnto them in this their estate: This is your cherishing of them? This your private schisme is confuted by Mr. Robinson: he presseth you vvith the vvord of God, vvith the scriptures and vvith divine authoritie, though you vvould faine have the reader to imagine othervvise, by calling for the vvord of God, &c. Vntill you have answered the scriptures and the reasons alledged by him, it is needlesse for me to bring any more. In the meane time I wil endevour to maintaine our Church-estate against you. CHAP. III. Touching the vse of the Lords prayer. THE mayn argument for our Separation being thus established: I now come to the particulars. For the vse or abuse of the Lords prayer (so called) first I mentioned the reading of that part of scrip∣ture for a prayer: and with this you meddle not. Secondly I misliked the saying it over by rote, as is the fashion of many. To this you say, if I mean without vnderstanding and feeling, you condemne that also. I answer, I meane not that onely: for men may also read it, yea may read humane leitourgies with vnderstanding and feeling, and yet offend in so praying: other things are requisite to true prayer besides vnderstanding and feeling. I mean therfore by rote, after the com∣mon manner, without book: when men having committed it to me∣morie, say it over for their prayer, after they have prayed by the spirit; as God inabled them. Thirdly I granted a lawfull and holy use of that or any other part of scripture in our prayers, as the Spirit of God leadeth us to any of them. You say, your manner is ordinarily before or after every Sermon, to conclude your prayers with the Lords prayer: after you have prayed by the help of the Spirit, you persuade your selves that you also con∣clude by the help of the same Spirit.
This your practise and perswasion I approve not: being perswaded that our Lord intended not such an vse of that scripture. My reasons I will shew, when you have given answer to those things set downe in our Apologie, as you promise. For Mr. H. his doctrine among you, that it should be ambiguous, and his meaning to be against those onely that contented themselves with a set forme, and vsed no other in private, &c. I can goe no fur∣ther then by report: others that heard him, say otherwise then you doe. I hear also that he continueth like doctrine still where he teacheth, and privatly disswadeth from reading prayers in praying to God: and other reasons (which I spare now to mention) move me to think other∣wise then you write of him. And in speech with my self, about the same time, before two that came with him, he signified his dislike of reading prayers, without any such limitation as you allege. But if he taught as I heard it related, it was but the trueth: from which your contrary judgement swarveth. Which in one of the proofs of my for∣mer argument, if you had fallen into it, would have come to the trial. Answer. Your maine argument for separation from sin onely vvill then be established vvhen you have proved all those parti∣cular things vvhich you blame in vs, to be sin: and that you separate from them onely: vntill such time, you do here in vaine flatter your self that your
maine argument is established: The truth and force of that general reason depends vpon the particulars vvhich vve now come to examine. Touching our question about the vse or abuse of the Lords prayer, you ob∣serve in the first place, how you mentioned the reading of that part of scripture for a prayer: and therevpon you note, that with this I meddle not. I answer, 1. The reason why I spoke not of reading that prayer out of the booke, vvas because we do not in our Church so vse to read it on a booke, but vtter it vvithout a booke as vve do the other part of our prayers going before:Now the question layd downe before betwixt you and me at this time is touching the practise of our particular congrega∣tion: and therfore it is you rather that go beside the question in this your mentioning of it. 2. Seing the reading of it vpon a book and vttring of it for our prayer without a book are both of them actions of like nature: seing the reasons in your apolo∣gie against our vse of this prayer are expressely and indiffe∣rently directed as well against the reading of this prayer, as against the saying of it by rote, (as you call it:) and there is no thing that is there distinctly spoken more against the one then the other: when I then vndertooke to refute those reasons in your Apologie, did I not therein also vndertake to maintaine the reading of that prayer against you? who sees not now, that your first note in this place is but a trifeling observation. 3 I desire the readers to looke back into the former part of our writings touching this poynt, both mine and yours: to com∣pare them togather: and then to judge who it is that hath winked and passed by the evills obiected about this matter, and namely, beside other things the slanderous and vngodly asser∣tion of H. Barow touching our vse of the Lords prayer. In the second place, you explane your meaning of that phrase of saying by rote, contrary to the common acception of the word, of saying it not onely without vnderstanding and feeling, but of saying it after the common maner, without booke, &c. you grant that men may also reade it, yea and other humane leitourgies with vnderstanding and feeling, and yet offend in so praying: your reason is; other things are requisite to true prayer besides vnderstan∣ding and feeling. But what are those other things which cannot be reduced vnto these two? vnderstanding conteyneth vnder it the knowledge of God, his wisedome, power, love, truth and other attributes: his gracious covenant in Christe, his law, his workes, &c. Likewise the knowledge both of our neighbours estate and our owne, our sins, miseries, deliverances, &c. Vnder feeling joyned with knowledge, are comprehended the feeling of Gods mercy in Christe by a lively faith: the sense of his glo∣rious
comforts by a lively hope: the feeling of our neighbours estate by true love and compassion and joy for him: the fee∣ling of our owne sins, miseries, basenes, by true and godly sorow, humilitie, &c. Herevpon I do thus reason against you from your owne grant: That prayer which is vttred with know∣ledge, faith, hope, love, humility, &c. is acceptable unto God, & ought to be approved of Men. But the Lords prayer is by vs vttred with knowledge, faith, hope, love, humility, &c. Ther∣fore it is acceptable to God, and ought to be approved. The first proposition is manifest from the Ps. 25.1.2. Mark. 11.24.25. Ioh. 14.13. Heb. 11.4. Iam. 5.15. 1 Tim. 1.5. Ps. 145.18. scriptures, that do allow such vse of prayer: The second proposition is granted by your self, in that you yeeld the Lords prayer may be sayd of vs with vnderstanding and feeling, seing those two graces do compre∣hend vnder them the rest above named which are required for the acceptation of our prayers. In the third place, whereas speaking of the Lords prayer, you grant a lawfull and holy vse of that or of any other part of scripture in our prayers, as the spirit of God leadeth vs vnto any of them: you do here againe yeeld vs the whole question and as much as vve desire: for we require no other vse of the Lords prayer, then as the spirit of God leadeth vs vnto it. A Christian man ought to be Rom. 8.1 Gal. 5.16.—25. led by the Spirit of God in all his other actions and con∣versation, as well as in prayer: vve hold also that as a Chri∣stian man of weak memorie and vnable to read having but two or three psalmes without book, may yet dayly and or∣dinarily sing the same vnto God early and late, as his prayers, praises and thanksgivings & herein worship God in the Spirit: that even so the Lords prayer may also be dayly vsed for our prayer and vvorship of God in the Spirit: seing we are no otherwise taught to 1. Cor. 14 15. pray with the Spirit and with vnderstan∣ding, then as we are taught to sing with the Spirit & with vnder∣standing, which singing I think you will not deny but that it may be done in set words ordinarily. In the fourth place it is here to be observed that whereas in my former vvriting, I desired you to tell me plainely, whether
you held our vse of the Lord prayer to be sin and a worship to be communicated with all: to this you answer not. VVhereas againe I answered you distinctly in the Pag. 14. same place, that the saying of this prayer by rote even in the worst sense without feeling and vnderstanding could be no warrant for the people to separate from vs, though it should be our sin so to vse it: to this also you give no reply but pass by it as if it had not bene written, though I was instant with you, and shewed that about this poynt onely our question was, &c. further whereas in your fotmer Pag. 4. writing you confesse that for the vse of the Lords prayer among vs, you have not layd it downe as a cause of refu∣sing communion with vs, &c. If you be still of the same minde (as you have not yet declared the contrary though you have bene so earnestly mooved to declare your meaning herein) then may you plainely discerne your separation overthrowne hereby in respect of many of those causes that you do pretend for the same: for if our vse of the Lords prayers be vnlawful: if it be a transgression contrary to the word of God and to so many scriptures as you do alledge to impugne the same: then why do you not separate for it, as well as for other sin which you impute vnto vs? as you approve not other things among vs, so neither do you approve this; how can you without par∣tiality give your self a dispensation to hold communion with vs notwithstanding this sin, rather then others? as for example, when you do maintaine your Elder Iohn Decluse separating from the French Church for their baptising some Children which you hold ought not to be baptised, how could you have allowed him to have held communion with them vsing the Lords prayer in your judgement contrary to the scriptures as well as the former? so for other read prayers: for celebration of Mariages in the Church, and the like, how can you alledge them as causes of separation, rather then this saying of the Lords prayer by rote, as you speak? Suppose you hold th' other to be greater sins then this, yet vvill not that cleare you: for 1, a good conscience vvill take heed of being defiled Mat. 5.19 & 23.23. Ps.
119.6.128. vvith lesserknowne sins, and not vvith greater onely: if there be such an vnevitable pollution by communicating vvith that worship where any knowne sin is committed as your vvritings for sepa∣ration do perswade men: how comes it that this abuse of the Lords prayer doth not pollute as vvel as the rest? 2, seing the abuse of the more Exo. 20.7 Numb. 4.15. holy thing is the greater sin: if our vse of the Lords prayer be a sin, then must it needes in this regard be a greater sin, then the vse of other set formes of prayer written by men: in as much as it is a greater sin to abuse the vvords of Christ then the words of other men. 3, seing this abuse of the Lords prayer (as you account it) is far more frequent then that baptising, and celebration of mariages which you alledge as causes of refusing communion with the Reformed Chur∣ches, and seing that evilles Esa. 59.12. Hos. 12.1. often committed do the more pol∣lute: how can you but refuse communion for this abuse as vvel as for th' other? 4, seing in your maine argument layd downe before, you plead that separation to be of God, which is from sin onely and communion therewith, and yet will not separate for this sin of abusing the Lords prayer, had you not need to acquit your self vvisely herein, vnless you vvil have your maine foundation of separation to be shaken in peeces? As for my promise which you mention, namely to ansvver your 9. reasons in your Apologie, although my promise vvas made vpon such a condition as is not by you performed, yet because the ansvver therevnto may serve for further defence of our Church in the vse of the Lords prayer, I have not refu∣sed the labour to set dovvne a refutation thereof, as follo∣vveth. Apologie. Apol. p. 69. You plead that our vse of the Lord prayer is vnlavvful. 1. Because Christes doctrine there is, to teach vs to pray af∣ter this maner: Math. 6.9. & is not, for our prayer, to reade or say ever those wordes by rote, &c.
Answer. First, this reason is inconsequent: because, though the maner and forme of true prayer be there taught by Christe, that hinders not, but the same words may be our prayer also: One and the same patterne or forme of a thing doth often serve both for present vse in the work wherevnto it is inten∣ded, and for imitation to make the like: As a just weight or balance serves both for our present vse to weigh with all, and also for a patterne to make an other like the same by it. So the Lords prayer serves for a patterne of true prayer, & also for our present vse at any time to call vpon the name of the Lord with those words. Secondly, consider well your owne practise in singing of Psalmes, and you shall thereby discerne your errour in this kinde of reasoning here vsed by you: In the 8. the 100, the 117. Psalmes and other such like, the holy Ghost doth teach vs after what maner we are to praise and glorify God: In the do∣ctrine of them we have a patterne and forme of spirituall songs and Hymnes: and yet this hinders you not but that you vse to read or say over by rote (as you call it) the very same words for your owne spirituall songs in the worship of God. See you not now hereby, that the same words may serve both for a rule and patterne after what maner we are to worship, and also for our worship of God in the vse of the very same words without any change? Thirdly, seing the Mat. 6.9. Luk. 11.2. phrases vsed by our Saviour are such as serve sufficiently to expresse the mindes of fathers & Schoole-maisters, even then when they allow their Children and Schol∣lers to rehearse their lessons verbatim, either in some formes of salutation, petition or the like: what reason have you to deny the common and ordinary signification of the phrases, there being nothing either in these texts or any other to enforce a change of this sense and meaning wherein they are vsed? Apology.
2. Because both Mathew and Luke recording that forme of prayergiven by Christ, they have not the same words, nor the same number of words every where, &c. Answer. VVe do not contend that the same words and number of words in the Lords prayer are alwayes precisely and of necessity to be vsed, but we hold that it is lawfull to vse them as our prayer, either with or without such changes as are to be noted in the Evangelists recording them. If we precisely follow Ma∣thew, it is no offence to Luke: If we vse the words as they are in Luke, it is no offence against Mathew: If we vary in phrase from both of them, it may be without offence to either: our tenent is, that either the same words or to the same purpose may lawfully be vsed of vs. And therfore this reason is wholly beside the question. Apology. 3. Because all the circumstances in both the Evangelists do lead vs thus to vnderstand it. As namely, that Christ there sheweth the right maner how to vse prayer, like as he doth for the right vse of almes & fasting: how to avoyd ambition, hypocrisie, babling, and the like therein: how also to come to God in prayer, as Children do to their pa∣rents, asking bread, an egge, fish, or the like: that is, making requests vnto God according to our particular wants, in faith, hope, love, &c. Math. 6.1-18. Luk. 11.1-13. Answer. This argument is a mere assertion and most false, without any proofe. There is no circumstance in either of the Evan∣gelists that leads vs to think we may not vse the Lords prayer as a prayer. It can not be shewed that this vse of it, doth make vs guilty of ambition, hypocrisy or babling: or that in this vse we can not come vnto God with feeling of our particular wants as Children do to their parents: or that in this vse of it there can not be the practise of faith, hope, love, &c. All this remaines to be proved, vntill which time this argument might well for shame have hidden his head, and pluckt in these hornes of slander by which it pusheth at all the Saincts in the Reformed
Churches for their dayly publique & private vse of this prayer, shutting them vp vnder the condemnation of Ambitious per∣sons, hypocrites, Bablers; as being without feeling of their par∣ticular wants: without faith, hope and love in their vse of this prayer. Such arguments as this agree fitly with the slanders of H. Barow, but cannot become any modest Christians. Apology. 4. Because the Apostles (who both knew and carefully followed the true meaning of Christ herein) did neither bynd themselves to these words, but prayed still as they had severall occasions, according to this rule (Act. 1.24.25. & 4.24-30, &c. Answer. First, though the Apostles did not binde themselves to these words, yet doth not this prove, that they never vsed the same as their prayer: they might pray according to their seve∣rall occasions, according to this rule, and yet with the words of the rule. The ministers of Christ do here vse to pray accor∣ding to their severall occasions, and yet with the words of this prayer also. Secondly, though we read not in their writings, that they did in expresse words teach men to say over the Lords prayer, yet we reade that by their example in their writings they did as much in teaching men other set formes of prayer in their salu∣tations and valedictions: as appeares, Rom. 1.7. 1 Cor. 1.3. 2 Cor. 1.2. Gal. 1.3. Eph. 1.2. Phil. 1.2. Col. 1.2. 1 Thes. 1.1. 2 Thes. 1.2. Rom. 16.23. 1 Cor. 16.23. Phil. 4.23. 1 Thes. 5.28. 2 Thes. 3.18. At several times vvriting vpon divers occasions and vnto divers people, Paul yet (we see) vsed the same forme of prayer, & the same words: And this is al one as if he had so many times vsed the Lords prayer: for vvherfore should it be more vnlawfull to vse the Lords prayer often, then to vse these formes of words so often for his prayer. Thirdly, though the Apostles taught men according to their necessities and occasions to shew their requests vnto God in all maner prayer and supplication in the spirit with giving of
thanks, with watchfullnes and perseverance, yet this hinders not but that they might vse the Lords prayer & other like set formes of prayer also: for the vse of the Lords prayer as a prayer doth not destroy supplication in the Spirit, nor overthrow per∣severance in prayer. Think you not, that there are many ser∣vants of Christ vsing to conclude their prayers with the Lords prayer, that yet watch with all perseverance to shew their re∣quests vnto God in all maner prayer, as well as your self, or any of your separated people? Answer me plainely according to that light and feeling which is in your conscience. Apologie. 5. Els also how saith the Apostle (speaking of prayer in a strange tongue) when thou blessest, how shall he that occupieth the place of the vnlearned say Amen, at thy giving of thankes seing he knoweth not what thou speakest? 1 Cor. 14.16. For if they say over the words of this forme of prayer, might not some have answered: yes we know what he saith, it is the Pater noster, the Lords prayer which we know aforehand, and therfore we can say Amen vnto it, though it be spoken in a strange tongue. Answer. First, the Lords prayer might be vsed often as a prayer in the Church of Corinth, and yet the vnlearned among them not be able to say Amen vnto these that spake strange languages of whom the Apostle here speaketh: because these men were ex∣traordinary Prophets and did at some times by a speciall gift speak other tongues and strange languages. And therfore the Apostle might have replyed againe to any vnlearned that should have answered as you suppose and feigne: Nay, though the Lords prayer be vsed ordinarily among you, in your owne speech, yet you know not what these extraordinary Prophets say, which come with new revelations in a strange tongue vnto you and therfore you can not say Amen vnto their prayers: so that I have still just cause to speak against their prayers in a strange tongue.
Secondly, suppose the Corinthian Prophets had sometimes vsed the Lords prayer in a strange tongue, yet this might have bene so seldome and at such times that the vnlearned could not perceyve or vnderstand the same: This seldome and rare vse of it, though it might be a sufficient testimony how lawfull they held it to be for their prayer, yet could it not be sufficient to enable the vnlearned to say Amen vnto it. Thirdly, suppose these extraordinary Prophets had so often & ordinarily vsed the Lords prayer in a strange tongue, that all the vnlearned could have discerned when the Prophets repea∣ted the same yet doth it not follow that they could in lawfull maner have sayd Amen vnto it: Because the lawfull and right saying of Amen, whereof the Apostle speakes requires not onely a confused knowledge, that the Lords prayer is sayd over at such a time: but also a distinct vnderstanding of the severall words therein, that their hearts and affections might go along with him that vsed the same, and so at length in the conclusion signify and witnesse their consent by saying Amen vnto it. Fourthly, it is to be observed how H. Barow though vpon a most absurd pretence doth yet in a contrary extremity contra∣dict this your Apologie: whiles he affirmeth touching our vse of the Lords prayer, even in our mother-tongue: that it doth not edify the whole congregation, so that they may all minde one thing, or say Amen. Discov. p. 70.73. If it be true which he saith, that men vsing it in their vulgar tongue, can not yet say Amen vnto it: how can it be true which your Apologie saith, that they which occu∣py the place of the vnlearned may say Amen vnto it; evē when it is vsed in a strange tongue?
Fiftly, if the people can say Amen vnto the Lords prayer, when the words thereof are vsually sayd over, as your Apologie here affirmeth: do you not hereby overthrow your owne asser∣tion in denying our vse of it? for can we say Amen vnto an vn∣lawfull prayer, which is not supplication in the Spirit; which is not made with feeling of our wants, in faith, hope, &c? Or if it be lawfull for the people to follow vs with their consent, and with their Amen, in the vse of this prayer, is it not as lawfullfor vs to go before them in the vse thereof? Thus may you see how your owne reasonings returne vpon your owne head. Apology. 6. If Christ have commanded to vse those words in that number and order, then all such do sin as pray at any time and vse not those words, for he saith, when ye pray, say, &c. Luk. 11.2. And the words when ye pray shew that this commandement is to be observed at all times: And then the Apostles sinned which prayed and vsed not these words. Mat. 14.30. &c. Answer. This argument, which is so much and so often stood vpon in Discov. p. 70. 71. Inquir. pag. 85. Answer to M. Carp. pag. 24. Iustif. of Separ. p. 471. Answer to Mr. Hild. pag. 140. your writings, at least in six severall bookes, is also with the rest most weak and frivolous, for First, though Christes commandement of this prayer do in∣clude an allowāce of the vse of those very wordes & in the same number & order that either Mathew or Luke have recorded: yet doth it not follow, that we are therfore tyed to thē alone, & that all other prayers are excluded thereby. Common vse of speech teacheth vs to make an other construction of his wordes: for as a man that sends his Servant on a message, and commandes him when he comes vnto his friend to speak on this maner and to say, &c. doth thereby ordinarily warrant him either to de∣liver the same words verbatim, or els the same matter and sub∣stance of the message though with some change and variety of words and phrases. And as it were then a strange thing that he should be accounted a disobedient and vnfaithfull servant that should vse the very words of his maister without any change at all: so is it with the commandements of Christe. For example: Christ sending his Apostles and commanding them a forme of prayer for salutation, when they came into any house, to say, Luk. 10.5. Peace be to this house, doth thereby warrant them either to vse the same words verbatim, or the same in substance: And either way his commandement was fulfilled. The holy Ghost prescri∣bing a forme of praise to say alwayes,
Psa. 40.16. The Lord be praysed, doth allow vs either the very same vvords or such as are equivalentvnto them. And even so for the vse of the Lords prayer, our Saviour appoynts either the same words for our prayer, or such as tend to the same purpose: and both wayes is his comman∣dement fulfilled. Secondly, as for that partickle hótan, when, which you do so much vrge against vs; it is not in the vse thereof so generall, nor so absolutely and largely extended vnto all times, as you vvould perswade vs: for example, Christ saith Luk 11.24.25.26. when the vn∣cleane Spirit goes forth, &c. when he comes againe, he findes the house empty, &c. Luk 12,54. whē ye see a cloud rising out of the west, straight way ye say a showre cometh & so it is. Luk. 14,12.13. vvhen thou makest a feast call not thy frends, &c. But when thou makest a feast call the poore, the maimed, &c. Now sometimes the vn∣cleane Spirits were cast out and returned not: sometimes there are cloudes out of the vvest without raine: sometimes men may invite to feasts their frends, brethren and rich neighbours. And therfore though our Saviour had also sayd, when ye pray, vse these phrases and these very words for your prayers: &c. yet had he not thereby absolutely tyed vs vnto them alone, and exclu∣ded all other: for the word hótan doth oft note vnto vs as much as sometimes or for the most part as is evident in these instances & might also be shewed in many more such like. This answer may also suffice for that other part of your obie∣ction, touching the excluding of all prayer in the Spirit alone that is without words or distinct voyce. Apologie. 7. Because that forme of prayer doth plainely and fully direct & restraine our ignorant and inordinate desires, vnto certaine heads: in which whatsoever is needfull and lawfull to ask, &c. Answer. I may say of these your reasons and consequences as your self once Defenc. of Script. pag 92. wrote to Mr. Smith: The prayer of David seemes to have prevayled against you, for Ps. 58.7. when you shoote arrowes they are as broken: or like vnto strawes: so weak and vaine they are, for.
First though all things needfull or lawfull to be asked, beconteyned in the heads of this prayer: though thousands of petitions are and may be derived by the Children of God ac∣cording to their severall wants, times & occasions from ech of these heads: yet doth it not follow that the words of this prayer themselves may not be vsed by vs for our prayer: here is no proofe of this consequence. Secondly, whereas you say: The heads themselves are so gene∣rall as no man can well for himself or others vse them aright without some speciall relation or application to his or their particular estate or occasions: This is both false and inconsequent: 1. This is false, for even in a generall respect and love of Gods name, kingdom and will, we may well and lawfully vse the words of this prayer, though for the present our thoughts doe not light and settle vpon the consideration of the particular meanes and wayes, whereby his name is sanctifyed, his will accomplished, &c. Mat. 18.10 Dan. 7.10. As the elect Angelles do evermore behold the face of God & pre∣sent themselves before him, wayting with reverence and with a generall respect vnto his will before they receive any particular or speciall commandements or commissions from him: so do the godly in the vse of this prayer offer themselves to God: and so are they taught to do even by the words of this prayer it self, Mat. 6.10. againe we may well and comfortably vse the vvords of this prayer with a generall respect of our sins to be forgiven, and with a generall respect of temptations and afflictions that we desire to be delivered from, though for the instant we do not think vpon any of our particular sins temptations or affli∣ctions; where are the proofes that condemne vs for so doing? 2. This is inconsequent: for suppose it were vnlawfull to vse this prayer vvithout some speciall relation or application there¦of to our particular occasions, yet what hinders but that in the vse of the very words of this prayer, we may also sometimes vpon occasion have relation to our particular sins and temp∣tations, & to the particular meanes of glorifying God, though the words be generall which we vse.
Thirdly, whereas you say: Neither can any mans or Churchescase and vnderstanding reach vnto all things needful for all occasions, times and persons, as those heads do comprehend, this is also doubly inconsequent. 1. In respect of our estate and condition; for suppose no mans case reach vnto all things comprehended in this prayer: yet seing there is no word of this prayer but it doth evermore in a great measure and in the mayne alvvayes con∣cerne every Christian mans estate, what forbids vs to vse the same as our prayer? 2. In respect of our vnderstanding; though no man can reach vnto all the things comprehended in this prayer, yet is it most senseless to argue from hence against the lavvfull vse of this prayer: for by this kinde of reasoning vve might reiect almost all prayers, all blessings and all salutations: for example, we are taught to pray thus in our salutations, Luk 10.5. Ruth. 2.4. peace be vnto you: The Lord be with you: The Lord blesse thee: And who can reach vnto the things that are comprehended in these short sentences vvhile he vseth the same? The whole summe of Gods covenant with the innumerable fruits and benefits thereof are certainely comprised herein. Apologie. 8. Els why should not the ministers be as well bound at the end of their Sermons, and all Magistrates and people at their instructions & exhortations given vnto others, to say over the ten Commandements, because they do fully and shortly comprise all dueties. Answer. First, our question is about the lawfulnes, not about the ne∣cessity of vsing this prayer: we do not say that ministers are bound to say over the Lords prayer at the end of every Sermō: much lesse do we say that all Magistrates and people are bound to vse it at the end of their instructions and exhortations: and thus this argument fayleth in the ground of that comparison from whence it is taken.
Secondly, what law of God forbiddeth ministers to repeat the 10. Commandements at the end of their Sermons? For the Ministers of these Reformed Churches, there are divers of them vvhich do ordinarily vpon the Lords day before theirexercise of Catechizing, repeate the 10. Commandements, & what is their sin in this? If judges and Magistrates who are ap∣poynted to be keepers of the Decalogue should with the repe∣tition hereof, either begin or conclude their publique and so∣lemne charges and exhortations which at certaine times they give vnto people, vvho can condemne them for it? If Maisters of families should every day begin or conclude their family instructions with rehearsall of the 10. Commandements, should not this be a testimony of their obedience to Gods Deut. 6.7 8.9. law, rather then a transgression thereof? Thirdly, there is no equality nor just proportion in this com∣parison: The vvisedome of God in his word teacheth vs short formes of prayer for salutation in 2 or 3 words, because vve have every day and hovver occasion to vse them: And seing in like maner there is dayly and hovverly occasion of mutuall exhortation, though it were an absurd and vnreasonable thing contrary to the wisedome of God, to conclude ech salutation & exhortation with the Lords prayer and 10. Commandements, more then an 100. times in a week, yet doth it not follow that it is vnlawfull or inconvenient once or twise in a week so to begin or conclude a solemne exercise in the Church of God. Apology. 9. Seing it is a most perfect forme of prayer, wherein is no want or superfluity, if it were Christes meaning to enjoyne the saying over of those words for our prayer to God, then ought we to vse these one∣ly and no other. Because it should be but babling or presumption to joyne or put other prayers in stead of that which is so absolute and suf∣ficient. For the Lord will be worshipped with the best we have, and he is accursed that having a male for sacrifice, doth offer a corrupt thing to the Lord. Mal. 1.14. Answer. First, touching the type and ceremony wherein this argu∣ment is grounded: God doth not by Malachie denoūce the curse against those which refused to offer the best sacrifice which they had, but against those that offred corrupt contrary to the
law which required a sacrifice Lev. 1.3.10. & 3.1. & 4.3.23. without blemish: against those especially which were hypocrites and deceyvers, pretending love of God and yet brought corrupt things, Mal. 1.13 14. torne, lame and sick, &c. A man that had a Kow and 2 Sheep was not bound to offer his Kow, but might lawfully reteyne the same and enjoy the blessing Esa. 7.21 22. promised of God vnto his people. A poore man that had 10. Sheep, and some of them thrise so good as the rest, was not bound to offer the best: the law onely required he should offer that which was not corrupt. Yea in some kinde of services, as in tithes, God would not have the best to be chosen out for him, but Levit. 27.32.33. would have that which passed vnder the rod, the 10th as it came by tale, and this without change, the better might not be given to God in stead of the worse. Secondly, beside your errour in the story of this ceremony, consider also how you erre in the application of this type vnto the question in hand. If you will have it to serve your turne, you must prove that all prayers besides the Lords prayer are corrupt things, like the lame and torne sacrifices: for this place doth not prove that the excellency of one sacrifice did exclude an other which hath not the same degree and measure of good∣nes, but onely the corrupt and no other. Thirdly, marke the contradiction of this argument with the 3d. 4th. & 7th. reasons going before: here you wil have the Lords prayer being commanded to be without superfluity: & all others joyned with it to be but babling: before you complayned and pleaded against the vse of it, because no mans or Churches case and vnderstanding could reach vnto so many things as were comprised in it: And is not this to condemne it of superfluity? Here you argue that no other but it alone must be vsed, be∣cause it is so absolute and sufficient, having no want in it: before you pleaded against the vse of it because it did not serve to ex∣presse our particular wants and necessities: And is not this to condemne it for the defects thereof? Thus is it apparant, that these your reasons do neither agree with the truth, nor with themselves.
TOuching Mr. Hu. his doctrine among vs about the con∣demning of read prayer, having shewed you the errour of that report which you obiected vnto me, both for the time thereof, and the matter thereof: as also for the erroneous vse you collected thence: you omit to speak of the first and last of these poynts: and touching the matter thereof you reply divers things: 1, that you can go no further then report, &c. but you had done well not to have gone so far, as it seemes the false report hath done: That which I have written vnto you is vpon my owne knowledge that heard him: and likevvise vpon his owne explanation of himself vnto me before witnesses, as I shevved you before. 2. You now tell me of an other report, you heare also that he continueth like doctrine still where he tea∣cheth, &c. But where doth he teach? is it not in the Church of England? you do wisely not to name the place; the very na∣ming thereof might well have holpen to bring this report into suspicion of falshood. Behold your partiality herein also: In this very page, where you write this of Mr. H. you would collect against me that because I was a publique minister in one of their Parishes in England I did by their ordinary calling there administer by an other leitourgie then Christs Testament, even by their book of common prayer, imposed vpon all the Parishes. The errour of this collection I am to shew you, when I come vnto it. But in the meane time, I pray you tell me Mr. Ainsworth: Is not Mr. H. as publique a minister in one of the Parishes of England, as ever I was? was my publique ministery there a sufficient proofe that I vsed the book of common prayer, and is not his publique mi∣nistery there as sufficient a proofe that he allowes praying on bookes, even the book of common prayer? vvho sees not your corrupt and partiall reasoning against me? 3. You tell me fur∣ther of his speech with your self before two that came with him, how he signifyed his dislike of reading prayers without any such limitation, &c. But I answer, limitations are not alwayes ex∣pressed, but oftentimes to be vnderstood never the lesse. And if he had spoken any thing vnto you contrary to that which hedid to me, you might then lay some blame vpon him, but not on me that have sufficient witnesses to confirme that I say. 4. Suppose Mr. H. had openly and absolutely condemned all read prayer as sin, yet what would this avayle you? you tell me in your former writing that because I receyved not the truth from him but opposed it, Fol. 4. B.this is the cheefest thing that you mis∣like in me about prayer: May we not herein mark your disposi∣tion? howsoever you blame others for alledging the names of men and of Churches against you, yet when there is but a sha∣dow or half a testimony of one man that seemes to make for your cause, how greedily do you snatch at it, to make vse of it for your advantage and our reproofe, even to make it the cheefest thing that you mislike in me that I receive not such a testimony? How much more justly might I bring against you a cloud of witnesses and this vpon certaine knowledge and not vncertaine reports, & of true ministers in the Reformed churches, where∣as Mr. H. in your accoūt is a false minister, a hireling a deceyver, & make it a cheef matter of dislike in you that you despise the te∣stimony of them all? Here also we have just cause to complaine for want of sincere and vpright dealing in you allowing that vnto your self which most partially you condemne in others. CHAP. IIII. Of communion vvith such a minister as hath not re∣nounced his ministery in he Church of England.
TOuching the secōd matter of your ministerie: as I have not cō∣demned that which is lawful: so neyther is it folly or syn, to in∣quire further of particulars, in things knowen to be vnlawful. I condemne the Romish ministerie, & I hope you do so to: yet of some things about their calling and orders, I supppose we may without folly inquire. Moreover I think you are not ignorant, that questions may be asked, not onely to informe our selves, but to convince others by their own answers: which also was my purpose in my foresayd inquirie. For could the man have answered on your behalf, he had then heardfurther: and in that he could not, he shewed his own folly and syn, in leaving the trueth, and going to joyn himself he knew not to what. Wheras you professe that you have not renounced the calling which you had in England, you therein bewray the vnlawfulnes of your pre∣sent estate: for having been a publick minister there in one of their parishes, you did by the ordinarie calling there, administer by an other leitourgie then Christs Testament, even by their book of common prayer imposed on all the parishes. Which being forbidden by the 2. Com∣mandement, and largely disproved in some of the reasons wherto I referred you in my former argument, which you have let passe: you ought to repent of that, as of other synns wherin there you walked. God alloweth not such to declare his statutes, as continew in their ido∣latrie: no man can serve two maisters: the Temple of God, hath no agrement with idols: nor Gods true spiritual worship, with humane idolatrous leitourgies. 2 Cor. 6.16. That you had no calling to the work of your ministerie by the Bis∣shops in England is not easy for me to beleeve. It is knowen, that the publick ministers of the word and Sacraments there, are not admit∣ted to their places, vnlesse they have the Bisshops license vpon his or∣dination. If you had it not, I suppose the Church of England, which you account to be Christs, will esteem of you as a creeper into the office you executed: whereof you would entwite me. Answer. VVHereas I had shewed your folly and sin in rash condemning of that thing, which afterwards you begin at last to enquire of; for this you bring an excuse or two in vaine: First, you say, we condemne the Romish ministery, and yet of some things about their calling and or∣ders, you suppose we may lawfully enquire. But I answer if we rash∣ly condemne the Romish Ministery, in such particular poynts as are partly vntrue and partly lawfull: we do both sin against them, and cause the truth to be evill spoken of: and that so you have dealt with me, I hope the sequel will manifest. Againe,
you say, that questiōs may be asked not onely to informe our selves, but to convince others by their owne answers, which also was your pur∣pose, &c. But I answer, there is a further matter to be observed in your dealing, who make inquiry about such things as you are ignorant of both for matter of right and of the fact it self, and yet affirme so much concerning the same, as that you make your self guilty of great errour and slander, as appeares in the next Chapter where you plead against the maner of my ordi∣nation and do most fasly alledge the acts of Synods touching the same matter. The maine reason you bring to prove the vnlawfulnes of my present estate and of my ministery, is this, that having bene a publique minister in one of their Parishes in England, I did by the ordinary calling there, administer by an other leitourgie then Christs Testament, even by their book of common prayer, imposed on all the Parishes, &c. that I ought to repent of that, as of other sins wherein there I walked. God alloweth not such to declare his statutes, &c. I answer. First, your reason from my being a publique minister there, to shew my administration by the book of common prayer is insufficient: for there have bene many publique ministers in the Church of England that have not bene vrged to read the book of common prayer: though it be imposed on all the Pa∣rishes, yet hath it not heretofore bene imposed on all the Mi∣nisters in every parish. There be in many Parishes two Mini∣sters, and formerly it hath bene required no further, then that one of them should vse the same: And so was it in the parish from whence I came into these countries, where an other mi∣nister did ordinarily vse the same, so that it was not imposed on me. Though you may except that I was partaker of that worship, or did vpon occasion vse that booke, yet alwayes this shewes the vnsoundnes and vntruth of your collection tou∣ching my particular administration by the same.
Secondly, whereas you write here how I have let passe the reasons wherevnto you referred me in your former argument, disproo∣ving the administration by that leitourgie, &c. It is enough that I shew the falshood of your argument in that you separate from our congregation, and therfore not from sin onely as you pre∣tend in your argument: This I shew by manifesting the weak∣nes of your reasons touching those pretended corruptions and want of repentance which you impute vnto vs for a ground of your separation from vs. And therfore though you tell me ten times oftner of letting passe those reasons which you referd me vnto as a devise to draw me from the present question layd downe betwixt vs, yet shall you be disappoynted of your pur∣pose herein. Thirdly, suppose I had sinned either in the vse of the book of common prayer in my owne administration or by allowing it in others, yet so long as this sin is onely of ignorance, and I know it not to be sin: the want of particular repentance in this case doth not make my present ministery vnlawfull. By this reason of yours there should be no lawfull ministery vpon earth, seing there is no minister whosoever but he hath some sins which are vnknowne vnto him, even as Ps. 19.12 & 40.12. & 139.24. David, Ier. 17.9. Ieremy, 1 Cor. 4.4 Paul, with other Prophets and Apostles: If they knew them not, then could they not have particular repentance for them they could not bring a particular sacrifice for their particular trespasses till they were Lev. 4.14 23.28. knowne vnto them: Now by your reasoning they were all of them in an vnlawfull estate, and were not allowed of God to declare his statutes. If you tell me that my sin of vnlawfull ministerie in the Church of England is made knowne vnto me by your writings, that I deny: I may as well and better tell you of your sinfull schisme and slander of that Church made knowne vnto you by divers treatises which I named before vnto you.
Fourthly, suppose I had bene convicted of an vnlawfull ad∣ministration in England, and would not repent of the sin pro∣ved vnto me, though this would provoke the Lord against me, yet could not this be a sufficient warrant for you to disclaime our communion as vnlawfull and polluted. The holy scrip∣turesteach vs otherwise: though the Sonnes of Eli were wicked and 1 Sam. 3.12-25. vnrepentant Ministers of the tabernackle in Shiloh, yet were not the godly taught to refuse communion with them, but still Ibid. Chap. 1.3. & 3.1. frequented the place of publique worship where they administred. The Ministers of the temple in Christes time were Luk 7.30 Ioh 7.32. wicked persons refusing to repent of those sins whereof they were convinced by Christe, and yet he taught not his Ser∣vants to forsake or disclayme their communion but both Luk 17.14. Mat. 8.4. sent others and Luk 22 8 joh. 18.20 went himself to joyne in the publique worship of God with them. Fiftly, if the not renouncing of my former calling in En∣gland do make me a false and vnlawfull Minister here, then are the ministers of these Reformed Churches vnlawful Ministers also being accessary and partakers with me of that pretended sin which you impute vnto me, because themselves occasionally do communicate with the ministery of England when they travel thither, and allow of my present estate without any re∣nunciation thereof, giving me the right hand of fellowship herein. Now then seing those that Act. 22.20. consent vnto other mens sins, that Esa. 5.14. rejoyce with them, that ps. 50.18. see a theef and run with him, that judg. 20.12.13.14, &c. see adulterers and maintaine them, that josh. 22.16 17.18. see Idola∣tours and favour them, do hereby enwrap themselves in the same condemnation: how comes it that you do not vpon this ground also renounce and disclaime the communion of these vnrepentant Ministers of the Reformed Churches? If this ground of renunciation be good why do you not also vse it as a motive to stay such of your people as do from time to time leave you & come vnto them & vs? How can you approve them for true Ministers more then me, if thus they partake with me? I write not these things to justify my estate by theirs as you vse to deprave me, but to reprove & convince your partiall judge∣ment. Sixthly, by this reasoning you do yet further shew your nakednes vnto vs. If communion with vnrepentant Ministers is to be forsaken: then these Ministers of the Reformed Chur∣ches
being by you admonished of jnquir. of Th. white p. 78.79. eleven severall transgres∣sions wherein they continue without repentance, and in spe∣ciall in the vse of such read prayers as are in your account a hu∣mane Idolatrous leitourgie, ought by their people to be avoy∣ded for feare of polluting their soules with sin. If this be so, then you holding these people yet for your brethren, are bound by the law of God to warne them of this their vncleane communion. According to your owne doctrine you must be the onely pure and vnpolluted Angell in all the Churches of Christ, and of all the Angels of the Churches besides, not one that may be lawfully communicated withall: name, if you can, any one minister either pastour or teacher in the whole world with whom you dare communicate in the Lords supper, or heare a Sermon from them, and also can do it without trans∣gression of your owne doctrine. You being then such a rare and extraordinary Angel, doth it not become you, to Rev. 14.6. fly in the middes of Heaven, or to Rev. 19.17. stand in the Sun, and openly with a loud voice to cry vnto the Christians in every nation, and kinred and tongue and people that they beware and take heed of their polluted and vnlawfull ministers least they be defiled by them? There was a promise or a shew made some Catal. Francof. An̄o. 1608. Tractatus de com∣munione. Ambstero∣dami apud Cornelium Nicolai in 8. yeares since, that your book of the Communion of sainctes should have come forth in Latine at Franckfurdt Mart: but it was a false shew and a mockery of the world: it is not yet come forth: But had it then bene printed, your doctrine is couched therein so closely & ob∣scurely, that none who knew you not before, could have found out your meaning thereby. If you will keep a good conscience in the profession of that truth which you think is revealed vnto you, you are then Levit. 19.17. plainely to admonish your brethren: to Esa. 8.1. take a great rolle and write in it with a mans pen, make speed to separate, make hast to renounce all your ministers: you are to Hab. 2.2. write the visiō of your separation, and to make it plaine vpon tables, that he may run, that readeth it. At least wise, you ought to admonish these many members of the Dutch and French Churches herein the same city with you and to prove vnto
them plainely and clearely this maine poynt that they ought to refuse communion with their vnrepentant Ministers. VVe accuse the pope of great cruelty in that he professeth he hath power to deliver al the Soules out of Purgatory, if he would: and yet will not do it: And we accuse you likewise of great cruelty, as wanting bowelles of compassion and brotherly love in that you profess to see a holy & vndefiled path of Christian communion: and yet seeing so many thousands of your bre∣thren dayly before your eyes to walk in an vncleane path that pollutes their Soules, will not for all this shew them the good way and set vp markes vnto them that they may walk in it. As you found meanes to publish your confession both in Latine and Dutch, so if you had zeale and conscience of this doctrine that you professe, you could soone finde meanes to publish a few argumēts in Dutch & Latine also to call away the faithfull people in this city where you live from their vnlawfull Mini∣sters. Iudgement, mercy and fidelity are the Mat. 23.23. cheef matters of Gods law, which ought cheefly to be done: but either you want assurance of the truth in that you professe, or els you want Christian love and compassion, which will not shew the way of truth & peace vnto those that go astray: especially whē there is none to do it but your self: considering also that you can finde time to publish sundry other things, which in all reason should not so much touch your conscience. Think on these things in the feare of God.
Seventhly, this your doctrine of schisme leads vs to see more of your partiality: for if communion with vnrepentant mini∣sters is to be refused: then how could you hitherto allow your people to hold communion with Mr. Robinson who repents not of that sin which you impute vnto him. In your judgement he is a teacher of false doctrine, and a practiser of the same, hol∣ding private communion with Antichristian Idolatours, and members of a false Church as you esteeme them: he openly persisteth herein and drawes many with him to this practise; & this also when as he had once condemned this course he takesand written against the same, so that he is also an Apostate and a decliner from the truth formerly professed as you take it: and yet you have not renounced his communion. Behold then the balances of deceit and partiality in your hand: even the false balances that are an Prov. 11.1, &. 20,10 abhomination to the Lord: as a de∣ceitfull merchant you vse one weight and measure in dealing with him, an other when you have to do with vs even about the same matter; he though an vnrepentant minister is not dis∣claymed and reiected by you, as others are, Is this to walk with a right foote vnto the truth of the Gospell, or rather to halt downe right in the pathes of hypocrisie and dissimulation? Your separation is a sin great enough of it self, though it were maintayned of mere ignorance, but when such partialitie is ad∣ded vnto it, your sin becomes more sinfull, & the burden of it more greevous. Eightly, as in the former answers, your sins of false doctrine cruelty and partiality vvere manifested, so in this place you are for them to heae the sentence of condemnation belonging vnto your self with as much reason as you have pronounced it against others: It appeares by your dealing above noted, that you are not as Nathanel an Ioh. 1.47. Israelite indeed, in whom there is no guile: you are not a sincere and vpright professour even of your owne separation; but an open perverter of righteousnes; what then is the sentence? your ministery is vnlawfull and to be reiected vntill you repent: As you thought to do vnto others, so may you expect that others should do vnto you. This is the fruit of your owne arguing, God allowes not such to declare his statutes as continue in sin, & therfore your com∣munion is to be refused: Thus doth your foote slide into the pit that you digd for others. Ninthly, according to this your reasoning is the ministery of Iohn Decluse your elder to be avoyded also. His iniurious & false dealing in the
Shield of defence p. 6. and 7. printing of Mr. Brightmans booke is a publique scandall: so are his manifold erroneous collections which he printed in his owne book against Mr. Brightman whereofhe is also convinced in that book which was shortly after writ∣ten for the refutation and reproof of him: likewise his false boasting not onely vnto the Eldership of the French Church, but also vnto the Magistrates of this city touching a publique testification to be made by him in the body of the French con∣gregation, where at last his heart fayled him contrary to his word: Seing he hath not testifyed any due repentance for any of these open sins, therfore by your rule is his ministery vn∣lawfull not onely vnto himself, but vnto you and all that do communicate with him. And note here Mr. Ainsworth, that you cannot help your self in this straite by any distinction of sins that you can make. For when as Pag. 44. & Fol. 3. B. before to prove the first proposition of your maine argument, namely that the separation which is onely from sin and communion therewith is of God and all good mens duety: you there alledge all the the ten Commandements at once Exo. 20. Eph. 5.11. 2 Cor. 6.14.15.16. You do hereby cut of your self from any refuge or evasion by putting difference betwixt sin. For whether they be sins of constitution, or sins of publique worship, or administration, or whether they be other personall particular sins whatsoever, yet are they all forbidden in the 10. Commandements: they are all vnproffitable workes of darknes: they are all an vncleane thing not to be touched: and therfore making those places the ground of your separation from a Church or from the ministers thereof: you do alike without exception make any sin of what kinde soever, litle or great to be a warrant for separation when as it is openly knowne and tolerated without redresse. Consider what a large separation you do make hereby: even such a one as will lead you to separate from all Churches: such an one as you are never like to keep a good conscience in the profession thereof: such an one as leads all your people to separate both from you and your elder Decluse both in respect of the former sins here noted, and in respect of many more publique offences which I could manifest in you both.
Tenthly, you may hereby discerne what just cause there is to publish the personall sinnes of such as maintaine your do∣ctrines of schisme, seing one knowne sin of one particular per∣son among them not repented of is sufficient to overthrow their ministery and Church it self, and so enough to stay any person from joyning vnto such a separation. H. Barow writeth, that H. Barow discov. pag. 34. the knowne and suffered sin of any one member is contagious vnto all such as communicate with him in that estate & maketh them all which communicate in prayers and Sacraments with such an ob∣stinate offendour, as guilty in Gods sight, as he himself is. And againe the contrary doctrines of Mr. Calvine and others, that the open sinnes of vnrepentant offendours do hurt neither the Sacramēts nor the godly receyvers, &c. he calleth the jbid. P. 35.36.smoaky errours of Mr. Calvine and his disciples, he calleth them blasphemous hellish doctrine, which take away at once the whole Testament of Christe and word of God, or tolerate the open breach of them: which take away all Christian liberty, duty and communion. If these things be so as he writes and as you plead against me, to shew the vn∣lawfullnes of my ministery for want of repentance touching my calling in England, then is it a just thing to take this com∣pendious course for the manifesting of your vnlawfull estate, Church, Ministery and communion, as being contrary to the whole Testament of Christ and word of God, as being a blas∣phemous hellish profession, if any can declare and shew the knowne and suffred sin of any one member among you. If these things be so, then have you no cause to complaine and con∣demne the writings which beare witnesse of such sins among you, to be libelles, but rather to yeeld that they are wholesome and necessary warnings to keep every Christian man from such a contagious and polluted communion.
In the xi. place, it is not vnmeet to observe and remember here, that you who are so hard and vnrighteous a judge and cen∣surer of all true Churches and ministers, are yet further guilty of such sinnes as though they were repented of, yet do they ac∣cording to your owne profession leave so deep a blott & stainevpon you as that they make you vncapable of the ministery, & vnlawfull to be chosen by any people vnto so holy a work. For if the Church of England be such a false church, such a Babylon and Egipt as you vvould make it: if their worship be such grosse and abhominable Idolatry, as Counter∣poy. from pag. 127. to 152. you yourself do describe the same, then are you for your divers Apostasies and declininges vnto the same to be excluded and kept out of the ministery. They that Esa. 52.11 beare the vessels of the Lord ought to be cleane & holy in speciall maner: It is required that his ministers should be 1 Tim. 3.2. Tit. 1.5.7. and 2.15. 1 Tim. 4.12. vnreproveable as the stewards of God; that so they might the better speak, exhort and convince with all authoritie, and see that no man despise them. But as those that have bene blot∣ted with the shame of murder, adulteries, or Theftes after they have professed the Gospell, are vnmeet to be chosen ministers for the rebuking of lesser sins, when themselves are so scanda∣lously guilty of greater; so those Apostates & backsliders which after they have receyved the knowledge of the truth, and forsa∣ken the false Church do againe fall back vnto Idolatrie and this divers times, do in like maner deprive themselves of the ho∣nour of being called vnto the publique ministery of the Gospel. Now you being such an Apostata as according to your present profession have sundry times turned back vnto the Idolatrous false Church, as hath bene by divers persons witnessed, neither could Mr. Iohnson deny the same, when he Inquir. of Th. wh. p. 41.42. was most desirous to excuse you therein: though it was obiected that you had turned your coate as oft if not oftner then D. Perne: the vnlaw∣fulnes of your calling and ministery doth then appeare here∣by. Let it be well observed that you are thus noted to have turned your coate & changed your religion five severall times, namely, first being of our religion and a member of the church of England you forsook that Church and separated: Secondly, that being separated, you did againe in
London being in the hāds of authoritie yeeld to joyne with the worship and ministery of the Church of England: Thirdly, that after this you did againe slide back vnto the separation and renounce the Church ofEngland: Fourthly, that after this when you were in Ireland and in some danger of punishment for your scandal, you did againe returne vnto the communion renounced by you, whether fainedly or vnfainedly, I leave vnto your self to consider: Fiftly, after this you change your profession againe and fall back vnto separation, and stick now presently in this Schisme: and thus whiles by this often revolting you dishonour and disable your self and your ministery, you will yet exalt your self above all the Ministers of Christ in the world, and by your profession maintaine that your self onely may be joyned vnto, and that no other Minister may lawfully be heard: & if this be not so, I pray you name who and how many there be that you durst al∣low your people to communicate with all. Is it not a rare and an extraordinary thing that such a scandalous and vnstable apo∣stata should yet notwithstanding maintaine such a separation from all the faithfull Ministers of the Lord, and therein boast of your owne onely lawfull estate? Think not that I write these things in any hatred of your person which I love: but for your good, for your humbling and the warning of others: I think ve∣rily that it should be my sin if vpon so just occasion I should conceale this work of God vpon you in judging and puni∣shing your schisme by giving you vp vnto these offensive and strange revolts, when as himself would have such Iude. 13. wandring starres to be noted, observed and taken heed of. XII, not to insist vpon many other things that might ag∣gravate this your scandall, when as you were thus stayned with apostasy▪ when as at this same time it was the profession of your Church not to admit such apostates into office among you: when as others among you had for the like apostasy bene de∣barred from the inferiour offices of Elder and Deacon among you, and many reasons had bene written by Mr. Iohnson and others among you for the defence of this course, as I could shew at large by the copy of those reasons which I have by me: yet notwithstanding even then contrary to the profession of your Church, you creep in deceitfully into the office of your
teacher, your apostasy being hidden for the present from the eyes of your people that called you. As the deceitfull woman that hath playd the harlot before mariage and joyneth her self vnto a man that supposeth her to be a virgin, doth herein gree∣vously Deut. 22 20.21. offend by taking vpon her vnlawfully the estate of mariage whereof she was vncapable while her sin was kept close: even so you being polluted with spirituall whordome & fornication, with grosse Idolatry and apostasy as your Church esteemeth it, do yet take vpon you deceitfully such an estate, & such an office as by the present & publique profession of your Church you were not capable of; and shewed your self to be far from plaine and simple dealing. But further if that deceitfull and dishonest harlot being by her husband pardoned and her deserved punishment by the judges remitted: If after all this I say, this scandalous woman should boast her self against all other honest women, as if she alone were the onely lawfull wife with whom a godly husbād might safely live in coniugall society: might not this well be accounted a wonderfull and strange insolencie; and might we not justly say with the Pro∣phet concerning such an impudent person, that she had a Ier. 3.3. whores forehead, & that would not be ashamed? And yet this is your very case and want of humility who after such scandall & vnlawfull creeping into office, after that the signes and tokens of your virginitie were lost, do yet in like maner boast your self and professe such a separation, that according to it no mi∣nister in the world but your self alone may lawfully be heard & joyned vnto.
Touching my calling in the Church of England notwith∣standing the license and allowance which I had from the Bis∣shop, yet did the substance of my callling consist in the free & generall consent of the people who being publiquely assem∣bled togather, did then choose me to be a teacher vnto them: If some in the Church of England do judge otherwise concer∣ning the calling of Ministers, there are others againe even in the same Church that are of the same judgement vvith me andwith the Reformed Churches: But let the reader here observe that you who do so often vse to blame others for alledging the judgements of other Churches and persons even then when they do it not, are yet ready vpon the least occasion to do the same thing that you condemne, if with any colour you can. XIII. Besides this, you being deposed from the office of a teacher by Mr. Iohnson and his company for your schisme & rending from them, as they testify, having Advert. of R. Clift. pag. 58. a sinfull vsurpation of all the holy things of God vsed among you: and standing in this heavy estate, as he calleth it; it were now more meet you should look vnto your owne vsurped office, then to seek to seduce the people of God from their lawfull ministers wheresoever they are: For if Mr. Iohnson and his people were a true Church and their communion lawfull, during the time of your continuance among them: then were they so likewise at your departure from them. And suppose they erred in the change of their governement, and in some other matters which you impute vnto them, yet was that no sufficient warrant for you to sepa∣rate from a tiue Church. Godly men may keep their garments and Rev. 3.4. walk in white, even there where others continue in open sin. And therfore your separatiō from them being vnjust, your deposition by them is just vpon you, and your present estate & ministery vnlawfull. Lastly, as for the scriptures which you alledge to shew the vnlawfull estate of vnrepentāt ministers: viz, that God alloweth not such to declare his statutes, &c. that no man can serve two Mai∣sters: 2 Cor. 6.16. that the temple of God hath no agreement with Idolls, &c. I answer, that although these scriptures serve to condemne vn∣repentāt Ministers, yet do they not serve to condemne all such as communicate with them, which is the poynt in hand: our question being about separation, and the lawfulnes of commu∣nion with vnrepentant persons. The Iewish ministers were such as hated Mat. 21.45.46. to be reformed, & in that respect had no right to declare the statutes of the Lord: yet had others
Mat. 23.1.2.3. right to heare them. Against them did our Saviour apply that saying:No Luk. 16.13.14. man can serve two Maisters: and they skoffed at him. And yet in the next Chapter he Luk. 17.14. sends men to communicate with them. Of such as they were, the Prophet speakes when he denounceth wo vnto the Zach. 11 15 16.17 with Luk. 11.52. Idol shepheards: Though for their wickednes they had no right vnto the temple of God, yet did not our Saviour separate from that temple wherein these Idols ministred and remayned: others lost not their right vnto the temple of God, because of their vnrighteousnes in the same. CHAP. V. Touching ordination of Ministers. Hen. Ains. FOr your calling here, if there were that errour onely in your or∣dination which I intend, and no other fault to be found with you, in respect of your former estate in England before mentio∣ned, or otherwise: I grant that therfore it is not vnlawfull for any to hear you, yet ought this errour, as all other to be acknowledged & forsaken: and they are to be blamed, which leave the church and mi∣nistery erected according to God, to goe vnto corruptions. Wheras to help mine ignorance, you propound reasons from the book of God: had they been to the point in controversie, I would have thanked you for so doing: and the rather because in the former things, you pressed me with the names of churches. But your reasons doe not satisfie the question, which was about Authoritie of the Eldership of one Church, to make or ordeine ministers in another. As for mutuall advise, counsell, help and the like: I account them good and lawfull.
To your 1. reason therfore I answer, the help of other churches may be sought for and vsed, if there be need, for counsel, instruction, exhor∣tation, in all holy dueties. But not to doe those actions which are pe∣culiar for every Church to doe in it self: neither doe any of the scrip∣tures which you cite prove otherweise. Moses and the Apostles had extraordinarie callings of God, to doe things which ordinarie Mini∣sters may not doe. If Churches at their first gathering, want knowledge to do their dutie: let neighbour Churches direct them by the law of God, how to doe it: but not vsurp their power. Elders were to be or∣deyned in every Citie, if any were found fit for the charge, Tit. 1.5.6. otherwise it were better to stay the work, (as the Apostle stayed and did it not himself,) then to have it doen amysse. So if the Church be vnfit to doe the works therof, they should stay til they be better in∣formed: and not put it over to others, whom God hath not appointed therto. The Churches in the villages of Netherland, may not be vr∣ged for our patterne, vnlesse they cannot erre in their practise: but the Churches in Gods book, obeying him, are to 1 Thes. 1.6.7. be our example. The same things I answer to your second reason. To your third: It appeareth not by Rom. 16.1. that Phaebe the Dia∣concsse of the Church at Cenchrea, should execute her office in the Church at Rome: it followeth not because she had busines there, and needed their assistance, that therfore she went to doe the work of her ministerie there. Neyther because the Church at Corinth sent messengers to cary their liberalitie to Ierusalem. 1 Cor 16.3. doth it follow that their ordinary Deacons were their messengers: much lesse that they should doe their Deacons office in Ierusalem, to gather and distribute the benevolence. Who would not rather think that they de∣livered their gift to the Church or Officers, and left them to dispose of it? And the same answer serveth vnto 2 Cor. 8.19.22.24. which you alledge: it proveth not those messengers were Deacons of one Church, and did the Deacons office in an other. To your 4. I grant that the Prophets of one Church, may prophesie in an other, Act. 13.15 and may apply their doctrines, exhortations & prayers, to any actions of the Churches where they speak: but this onely by way of doctrine, &c. not to do the work which belongeth to the Church. It is holden by the Hebrewes, and I think rightly, that Thalmud in Nega∣ghnim, c. 2 any wise man might see the plague of leprosie, and advise the Preist to pronounce it vnclean or clean, or to shut vp: yet none but the Preist himself, might pronounce it vnclean or clean, Lev. 13.3.4. Deut. 24.8.
To your 5. I confesse, and it is our practise, that the members of one Church, may receive the Lords supper in another, coming thither oc∣casionally, yet will it not herevpon follow, that the ministers of one church should administer the Sacraments, or ordeine ministers by vertue of their office, in another Church. My reasons are: The Mini∣sters have a peculiar relation to their particular flocks onely, Act. 20.28. Heb. 13.17. 1 Pet. 5.1.2. Apostles, and all vniversall Ministers, are now ceassed. As an husband is no husband but to his own wife: a Father, to none but his own children, &c. so a sheepherd or minister, to none but his own flock. But for the seales of the covenant the case is otherwise. For a baptised person is baptised not to that particular Church onely, but to all churches: and in every particular Church where he cometh, he hath all the Privileges of a Baptised person, in respect of his Baptisme, and is so to be estemed of by them. Now all circumcised persons, had right therby Exod. 12.4.48. Deut. 16,1.2. to eat the Passover in any so∣cietie, in the place which God should choose to put his name there: so all baptised persons have right to the Lords supper, in every true church where God hath set his name. But the rulers of particular synagogues had not the same authoritie in all synagogues, nor pastors now in all, flocks. So when a Christian cometh to a flock where their Pastor feedeth them, he joyneth himself to them for that time and action, & is fed with them as one of Christs sheep. Shew you the like warrant for Elderships to doe the works peculiar to their office, in other Elder∣ships or Churches: shew that any eldership may ordeine ministers in their consistories, & send them as ministers to other churches: (though those churches, vpon trial of their gifts, be content to accept them for their ministers,) as I have heard the practise is of some consistories, vnto the Dorpes or Villages of Netherland, whose example you alle∣ged. To your 6 I answer, that the Ministers now, being over Rev. ch. 2. and 3. particu∣lar churches onely, which in respect of their particular covenants are distinct bodies, as you acknowledge: herein lyeth the restreynt of their ministerie, by the speciall ordinance of God, Act. 20.28. No man may take the honour of ministration of holy things, but he that is called Heb. 5.4. of God as Aaron: but God hath given them no office to administer in other churches. And if th'Apostles, who had a large ministerie over all, yet would not boast of things without their 2. Cor. 10 13.16.
measure, in an other mans line: much lesse may the ministers of particular churches. Al∣though in the general bōd of Christianitie, they may afford any help, not passing the bounds of their calling, as before I granted. But the ordi∣nation or making of ministers, is a work of power or authoritie, Mat. 28.18.19. Heb. 5.1.4. which power is not given to one Church or mi∣nister over an other: and therfore cannot, by vertue of the common faith, be by them performed. And wheras you intimate, as if your Church intreated the ministers of an other church, to performe it in their name, &c. I have cause to doubt that the thing was not so caried: both for that I have not heard that the ministers of the other church, (being also of an other language,) ever came into your publick con∣gregation, (according to the lawes in your first reason alleged, Exod. 29.4. Levit. 8.3.4.) to make publick prayers, and to give exhortations to your Officers and people touching their mutual duties, and so to or∣deyn your ministers: as also because it is not their manner to ordeyn ministers publickly in their own churches, it being by their Synod in Graven Haghe anno. 1586 art. 4. & Synod in Midle∣burgh. anno. 1581 art. 4. canons, to be doen in the classical assemblies or consistories. I have heard it also testified by some that have been long members both of the Dutch and French: that they never did see the ordination of the ministers, though sundry were taken into office in their time. Finally, in this your plea, how doe you disable your own church, and the 3. other Elders that with you were authorized to feed your flock: as if there were not one amongst you, which could performe this work of ordination, or shew the minister and people their mutuall duties. Answer.
Io. Pa. AS I observed in my former writing and in my first an∣swer touching this poynt, so you do here yeeld and grant, that it is not vnlawfull for any to heare me, namely in respect of the supposed errour of my ordination if that were all: yet you adde with all, that this errour as all other ought to be acknowledged and forsaken, &c. Now in this your grant, you yeeld me the cause and overthrow your self in the maine question betwixt vs touching the lawfulnes of communion with our Church and ministery: for whereas before & after againe you do obiect our want of repentance as the maine ground of your separation from vs, you do here notwithstanding confesse that this praetended errour of my ordination doth not destroy communion with vs, and yet you know we neither acknow∣ledge it nor forsake it, nor repent for it any more then for the rest of the errours which you impute vnto vs. Thus you do plainely yeeld against your self, that there may be publique corruptions and sins vnrepented of, and yet a lawfull com∣munion with such impenitent persons. You alledged for your separation from sin the 10. commandements, Exod. 20. If the errour of my ordination be a corruption to be acknowledged, & forsaken, thē must it needes be a transgressiō of some of the ten commandements: and how comes it then that this errour vnrepented of hath a priviledge not to be separated from, rather then other errours and corruptions? you alledged also Eph. 5.11. and 2 Cor. 6.14.15.16. for a proof of your separation from sin and communion therewith: if the maner of my ordination be an errour to be repented of as you say, then must it needes be a worke of darknes: and tell me then I pray you how this work of darkenes vnrepented of gets a dispensation not to be separated from rather then other workes of darkenes. Surely your separation is not vnlike the Pope in his dispensative, exemptive and transcendēt power that can give at pleasure such speciall indulgence for speciall sinnes, errours and works of darkenes vnrepented of. You affirme hereafter that this work of ordination executed and done by the Elders of an other con∣gregation is an vsurpation contrary to the scriptures Act. 20.28.
Mat. 28.18.19. Heb. 5.4. do you not herein then acknow∣ledge that it is lawfull to hold communiō with such as do sub∣mit vnto vsurpers, and do administer the word and Sacraments by vertue of an ordination received and derived from an vsur∣ped power? Mr. Ainsworth, I do earnestly desire and require both you and your people in the name of Christe that you wil consider of these things without preiudice and partialitie, and so doing I doubt not but vpon this your grant, you wilbe led forward to entertayne more Christian communion with vs:& that other supposed errours among vs shall not be a stum∣bling block vnto you any more then this is. The Lord give you eares to heare and a heart to vnderstand. Furthermore whereas I vrged you so earnestly in my former writing to hold vnto the matters of separation and you also professed to do the same: how comes it that you insist vpon this dispute about my ordination, and yet acknowledge that for this errour it is not vnlawfull for any to heare me? Had you con∣fessed so much, or had I knowne so much at the first. I would not have propounded any arguments concerning this poynt, but would have held onely to the pretended causes of your se∣paration from vs. VVhereas you complaine further that my reasons are not to the poynt in controversie, &c. I take it they touch the poynt sufficiently when as they both serve to justify the maner of my ordination, and to refute your contrary opi∣nion: when as I shew against you that the mutuall counsell & help of neighbour churches are not onely good and lawfull in generall, as you grant: but also in executing & performing this particular work of ordination one for another as need is, and as they are entreated therevnto. MY first argument to warrant the help of neighbour mini∣sters for performing the work of ordination in other Churches, was taken from the necessity of many churches that often want fit persons among themselves for the performance thereof, &c. In your answer herevnto there are many faults: 1. You pervert my allegation of scriptures from Moses and the Apostles, as if I had cited them to prove that ordinary mi∣nisters might imitate them or do as much as they in their ex∣traordinary power which I neither wrote nor thought: But as appeares by my former Pag. 16. writing togather with the note of re∣ference vnto the Margent, I alledged them onely to shew that the work of ordination did consist principally in such publique prayers and exhortations as that many Churches did want fit and able persons to performe the same. And so much the Exod. 29.1-35. Levt. 8.1.2. &c. Numb. 27.18.19.23. Deut. 31.7. Act. 6.6. & 13.2.3. scriptures therevnto applyed do prove vnto vs, neither can you justly deny the same.
2. VVhereas you say, that Elders were to be ordeyned in every citie, if any were found fit for the charge, Tit. 1.5.6. otherwise it were better to stay the work, &c. And then further infer by way of simi∣tude, that So if the Church be vnfit to do the works thereof, they should stay till they be better informed, &c. I answer, that your comparison herein is very vnequall: for of ministers and El∣ders God hath expressely and precisely required sundry speciall graces and endowments of his spirit, necessary for their pu∣blique administration, without which they may not be or∣deyned or chosen: It is reason their election should be stayd, vntill those graces that God requireth be in some measure dis∣cerned in them: But as for the other members of the Church, God never exacts of them such abilities of publique exhorting and praying in the congregation; It is sufficient for them if they have true faith and repentance, though in weak measure; And therfore there is no reason that they should be deprived of a minister so long, vntill themselves be able to preach vnto their preacher at his solemne ordination. 3. VVhereas I alledged, Heb. 3.2. and Esa. 5.3.4. to shew that the wisedome and faithfulnes of Christ in his Fathers house would not stand with so straite an order as you plead for. To these scriptures you answer never a word, but smoothly passe by them, and so avoyd the force of my argument comprised therein. Accor∣ding to your opinion it will follow that Israel of old were in better estate for obteyning of ministers in temple and synago∣gue by the order that Moses set downe, then we are in the new Testament by the order that Christ hath left vs: you will have that Christ cannot sing of his vineyard now as he did of old what could I have done more vnto my vineyard that I have not done vnto it? Of old there was away vnder Moses to call labourers into the vineyard, though the persons in severall synagogues, could not preach for their ordination: this way is now stopped vp by your doctrine. 4. Rather then all the churches be deprived of ministers by staying till some among themselves were able to preach at
their ordination according to your counsell, I would think it meet that ministers being lawfully chosen should proceed vnto their administration without any solemne confirmation at all, according to the distinction which I propounded in the beginning of this first argument, viz, Either ordination is not simply necessary: or els, &c. For where is there any proof from the scriptures for such a necessity of ordination that the worke of ministery is to be stayed for want thereof? 5. As for the Churches in the villages of these Netherlands I did not alledge their example for a rule of right that we are bound to imitate, as you would make the reader beleeve: and therfore you have needlesly alledged 1 Thess. 6.7. against me: but I onely alledged their necessitie and their want for an in∣stance of that which I had sayd before to shew what evil would follow vpon your doctrine, to the desolation of many Chur∣ches by with-holding ministers from them, till they were able to performe the great and weighty dueties of that solemne or∣dination whereof I spoke. 6. That which is here sayd concerning ordination may fur∣ther appeare if we consider an other worke of examination which is as 1 Tim. 3.10. & 5.22. requisite (if not more) in the calling of a mini∣ster, as is ordination: and doth also as much belong to the power of the Church, as ordination: yet experience shewes that many godly and simple Christians are not able to per∣forme this worke considering the subtilty of many deceitfull and learned heretiques which creep into churches. And therfore help to do the same from the Ministers of other chur∣ches is oft most necessary, and not onely to informe the chur∣ches herein but to performe this action for them. VNto my second reason which was taken from the like ne∣cessitie of help in discerning and convincing of errours & heresies, you say that you answer the same things, which you did vnto my former reason. Then will it follow herevpon 1. That vvhen your people sent vnto Mr. Robinson &
Animad. vers. p. 133. en∣treated him to come and help the Lord against the mighty, againstMr. Iohnson: according to your former answer vnto me, he ought also to have answered your people, and sayd: I will give you the best help, counsell and advise that I can, I will direct & enforme you how to convince Mr. Iohnson, but to do it my self I may not least I should vsurp the power of the Church. For the conviction of errour is an Ecclesiasticall action, & it is a work of power belonging to the church, and layd vpon the Church, as well as is the pronouncing of the censure and sen∣tence against sin convicted. But because he did not vse this answer, but came to do the thing it self, it will follow by your answer that therfore he was an vsurper herein, and you also guilty of his vsurpation in seeking the same. 2. It will follow hence also, that either some learned and subtile heretiques shall be tolerated in the Church: or els that they must be reiected without sufficient conviction going be∣fore: for dayly experience shewes that some heretiques are so learned, and the godly members of some congregations are so weak that they are not able sufficiently to convince such great deceivers. Neither is it in this case sufficient for neighbour mi∣nisters to help them with counsell and to informe them vvith arguments vnless they come and do the deed themselves, vnless they performe the work of conviction for them: even as it is not sufficient to put a sword into a Heb. 5.11.14. with judg. 8.20. Childes hand and to tell him how he shall vse it to overcome a strong and expert war∣riour. If Vorstius had bene minister in some of the weakest con∣gregations in this countrey, which yet I think you acknow∣ledge true churches, and should have seduced the wisest and greatest part of the Church to his manifold errours, what ap∣pearance is there that the rest could by their disputations have convinced him? If you would allow others in this case to come and vndertake the disputation for their help, then is the Eccle∣siasticall action of convicting a sinner to be performed and done by the help of other Churches. MY third reason was taken from a like duety of the Deacons and widowes of one church which are to performe service vnto
an other when need requires, &c. In your answer herevnto you pervert that I sayd, and touch not the poynt of my argument at all. As for Phaebe, I sayd not that she went to do the work of her ministerie at Rome, but the commendation that Paul gives of her Rom. 16.1. compared with the verse following proves as much as I sayd, and that divers wayes. 1, vpon that commen∣dation of Paul, if she had bene in need, the Deacons and vvi∣dowes of the Church of Rome. were bound to minister vnto her though none of their Church. 2, if being at Rome she had desired help of that Church for the poore in Corinth; the Deacons of the Romane Church, vpon that commendation of Paul were bound to have contributed and so by her to have performed service vnto the Corinthian Church. 3, by the commendation that Paul gives her it appeares that she had given hospitalitie vnto many, and consequently, that the vvi∣dowes of one Church were to performe service vnto an other in entertayning the strangers that came from them. Touching the messengers that were to cary the Corinthian almes vnto Ierusalem 1 Cor. 16,3. I sayd not that they were their ordinary Deacons as your answer imports: but seing Paul promiseth to send whomsoever they should allow by their letters, this shewes that if they had entrusted their Deacons vvith this bu∣sines, he would also have sent them: and so this proveth that the Deacons might lawfully have bene sent and consequently this shewes as much as I sayd: For .1. if the Deacons might have bene sent, then though they had neither made any gathering nor further distribution at Ierusalem, but onely delivered their present vnto the Officers there, as you say, yet this their labour in travelling so long & dangerous a journy even about a 1000. miles from Corinth to Ierusalem might be a sufficient testi∣monie, that the Deacons of one Church might performe ser∣vice to an other, yea happily more service and labour of love, then they should have done at home in a whole twelve month togather if they had not gone. 2, for as much as in the primi∣tive Church there were many Iude, 12. Act. 6.2. &
2.46. love Feasts and tables provi∣ded,where the godly and the poore did eat their meat together with gladnes and singlenes of heart, admit now that the Dea∣cons of the Corinthian Church having delivered some almes vnto the Officers of the Church at Ierusalem, should yet fur∣ther in the name of those that sent them have made a love feast vnto some afflicted members of that Church and girding them selves should have come forth and ministred chearefully and lovingly vnto them; what fault would you finde in this service and ministration performed vnto an other Church? 3, the afflictions, bands and imprisonment of the ministers & people in those dayes being great, admit that the Deacons of the Church of Corinth, should also by the appointment of the church have taken paynes to seek them out in their prisons, & stayd some time both to distribute some particular gifts vnto some by name and further also to minister vnto them for their comfort, as Philip. 2.25-30. Epaphroditus 2 Tim. 1.16.17.18., Onesiphorus & Philem. 11.13. Onesimus did vnto Paul, what blame could you impute vnto these Deacons that thus should performe service vnto an other Church? And this same reply serves also to take away your answer made vnto 2. Cor. 8.19.22.24. which I had alledged to the same purpose with the former place.
IN answer to my 4th argument, you yeeld me the cause: for while you grant that the Prophets of one Church, may pro∣phesie in an other and apply their doctrines, exhortations and prayers to any actions of the church where they speak; you do also grant that the act of ordination which consisteth in these things is then performed. VVhen you distinguish that he may thus pray and Prophesy, by way of doctrine, &c. but not to do the work which belongeth to the Church, you do herein contra∣dict your self: for when doctrine, exhortations and prayers are solemnely applyed to the person elected and to the church ele∣cting touching their mutual duety, &c. then is the act of ordina∣tion performed and done. If you had thought otherwise, you ought to have named the other particulars which are of neces∣sity further required: as for the ceremonie of imposition ofhands. 1, there is no commandement that bindes so strictly therevnto, that the act of ordination should be condemned for the want of it. 2, by your owne confession this hath bene heretofore the practise of your owne church, Animad-vers. p. 65. the outward signe being omitted at the ordination of the minister among you, when you had no Elders; and still you shew your opinion in the case spoken of that for the Ibid. p. 66. outward signe onely you would not contend. 3. If the Prophets of one congregation may approve the act of an other Church in their ordination, by word in doctrine and prayers, why may they not also by their hand de∣clare the same approbation? we see that the Act. 13.1.2.3. Prophets in the Church of Antioch, though they were no vniversall ministers, did yet lay hands on Paul and Barnabas for their confirmation in that work of ministerie which was to be exercised in other places. But for your help in this matter, you runne vnto the Thalmud and from thence you tell me, It is holden by the Hebrewes and you think rightly, that any wise man might see the plague of Leprosie & advise the Priest to pronounce it vnclean or clean, or to shut it vp▪ Herevnto I answer. First, you give too much honour vnto these authors alledged when you call them Hebrewes, whereas you should rather have called them Thalmudists, whose lāguage is Schind. pentaglot. tit. noted as a distincte speech from the Hebrew; their saying is, Aben Ezra in Ec∣cle. cap. 5. i leschon mikra lechod, le∣schon Thalmud lechod; their language through their dispersion being degenerate and changed, like vnto them Nehem. 13.24. that spake half in the speach of Ashdod: A man that vnderstood the Hebrew perfectly might yet be ignorant of this Thalmudicall barbarous speech. And these Thalmudists (as you your self do defenc. against. Mr. Sm. p. 73. to 76 acknow∣ledge concerning the Hellenists) could not say with the Apostle that they were 2 Cor. 11.22. Phil. 3.5. Ebrewes, or Ebrewes of Ebrues.
Secondly, what have we to do with the opinions of these fa∣bulous and blasphemous Thalmudists, whose dotages and blas∣phemies are innumerable? Cannot the controversie betwixt vs be decided by the word of God, and by the voyce of the holyscriptures, vnlesse the voyce of this vnholy Thalmud be also called for and admitted to speak betwixt vs? Thirdly, for this allegation in particular, your forgerie or mistaking herein is very notable; for in the place of the Thal∣mud quoted by you, there is no such thing to be found as you mention. There is no such generall mention of any wise man as you speak: There is not a word mentioned for the advising of the Priest to pronounce cleane or vncleane or to shut vp any. E∣quitie requires, that we corrupt not nor falsify the sayings of the worst men. He that depends vpon the Thalmud for his dire∣ction shalbe fed with the winde and follow after the east winde as Hos. 12.1 Ephraim did: But he that gives credit vnto your allegations of the Thalmud, being like vnto this, shalbe doubly de∣ceyved. Fourthly, when as I searched for your allegation in the Thal∣mud, in stead of that which you say, I finde in the same place such idle and vaine traditions of the Rabbines as might justly serve to discredit the testimonies of such witnesses: as namely, their appoynting of certaine Canonicall houres whē the plague of leprosy is to be seene: Thalmud in Negagh. c. 2. sec. 2. not in the morning, nor in the eve∣ning, nor yet at noone tide, &c. also their traditionall rule for the position both of the man and womans body when their lepry is to be seene, viz. Ibid. sec. 4. that the man must be seene as a man that holdes the plow or shakes the olives, meaning with the hands and feet spread forth, &c. that the woman must be seene as one that dresseth or giveth such to her childe, as one that weaves, &c. Fiftly, beside these and other vaine traditions, there be also such contradictions among them even in the same place, as may yet further shew what litle credit is to be given vnto the allegations brought from such disagreeing witnesses: as first vpon a Thalmudicall case propounded in the beginning of that
Ibid. sec. 1. Chapter, concerning a strong spot appearing as the german contract, and as the Ethiopian contract, Rabbi Ismael expoundes it of a middle colour neither white nor black but betwixt both;R. Akiba expoundes it of divers figures appearing about the spot both white and black, and of middle colour, &c. R. Iehudah hath yet an other exposition, and their chacamim an other dif∣ferent from them all. Againe in the same Sec. 2. place, touching the canonicall houres before mētioned, Rabbi Meir notes them to be the third, the fourth, the fift, the sixt, the seventh, the eight and the ninth houres; Rabbi Iuda notes them to be the fourth, the fift, the eight and the ninth; R. Schimeon in his glosse vpon the Thalmud in the same place notes the exposition of R. Iose different from the former, namely that these howres were the fourth, the fift, the ninth and the tenth: and divers others such like vanities & contradictions might be noted out of the same short chapter. Lastly, for the thing that you would teach vs out of the Thalmud, & first for any wise man seing the plague of leprosy, if you meane occasionally as he meetes a leper, or as it is she∣wed vnto him, I deny it not; but if you meane that any wise man had authoritie to require an other to shew him his spot or plague suspected, and to discover vnto him his nakednes wheresoever the spot was, especially with such a position of Body as the Thalmudists describe, that remaines to be proved; and 2, for the advising of the Priest vpon occasion to shut vp, or to pronounce clean or vnclean, I would easily have consen∣ted vnto you therein, though you had not called for witnesse vnto this Lying Thalmud. Now whereas you adde: yet none but the Priest himself might pronounce it vnclean or clean, Lev. 13.3.4. Deut. 24.8. I answer. First, this is not altogather true, for though the scriptures al∣ledged do shew that the Priests might do this thing and with more authoritie to be submitted vnto, then other men ordina∣rily could do: yet do not these places shew that the Priest alone might pronounce a leper cleane or vncleane. For what law of God bindes a man from declaring the truth and pronouncing that to be clean or vncleane, which he certainely knowes by the word of God to be so? The high Priest and other Priests are
commanded to do many things which yet others might do also. And if the Priests wrested the law, might not others de∣clare and pronounce and practise otherwise? either you must grant this or els you must in part destroy againe that Animad-vers. p. 19.20. propor∣tion which yourself have made betwixt the Priests & Ministers, Israel of old and the people of Christ now, for remooving the leper and putting away the wicked from among them. Secondly, for the application of this your assertion vnto the question in hand, you shew it not at all: for what though none but the Priest might pronounce cleane or vncleane? yourself confess and teach that the work of ordination may be perfor∣med by such as are no Ministers and so you practise: how then do you draw this argument from the special ministeriall power of the Priesthood vnto such an action as by your doctrine might be performed without either Priest or minister. MY fift reason was taken from the mutuall & equall re∣lation that is betweene ministers and their people toga∣ther with your confession that the members of one Church may lawfully vpon occasion receive the Lords supper in an other Church from the ministers thereof. This argument you deny. Your reasons are: The ministers have a peculiar relation to their particular flocks onely, Act. 20.28. Heb. 13.13 17. 1 Pet.
5.1 2. I answer, 1. The people have a peculiar relation to their parti∣cular ministers onely in like maner, and the places here alledged do shew a peculiar bond of submission whereby the people are in speciall maner tyed vnto their owne overseers that care for them and must give an account for their Soules more then for others. 2, as this peculiar relation of the people doth not hinder them from receyving the Lords supper at the hands of an other minister, so neither doth the peculiar re∣lation of a minister vnto his flock hinder him from admini∣string vnto others being vpon occasion entreated therevnto. You say; Apostles and all vniversall ministers are ceassed. I answer that also an vniversall people or members of an vniversall vi∣sible Church are ceassed; & yet as the combining of the peoplevnto their owne peculiar minister doth not quite cut off their communion with other ministers, so neither doth the restrey∣ning of a minister vnto his peculiar flock quite cut him off frō administring vpon occasion vnto an other people. Your simi∣litudes from a husband and a father are against your self: for as a husband notwithstanding his relation and bond vnto his owne wife, may yet become a Iob. 31.16.17.18. & 29.12.16. protectour and guide of the poore widow, that wants a husband to performe these dueties: & as a Father notwitstanding his relation vnto his owne Children & familie, may yet performe the work of a father vnto the poore and fatherlesse: so likewise a sheepheard or minister notwith∣standing the peculiar relation vnto his owne flock, may and ought vpon occasion to performe the work of a minister vnto an other neighbour flock that have lost their sheep∣heard. You say, all circumcised persons, had right thereby Exod. 12.4.48. Deut. 16.1.2. to eat the passeover in any societie, in the place which God should choose to put his name there: so all baptised persons have right to the Lords supper, in every true church where God hath set his name. I answer, 1. The scrip¦tures alledged by you shew that circumcised persons had right to eat the passeover, but shew not that they had right to eat the same in any societie: nay the place quoted by you shewes the cō∣trary, for seing the lamb was to be eatē of the same houshould, or if they were too few to eat it, the onely others were to be takē vnto them, and those also of their next neighbours, Exod. 12 4. and seing also that the passeover prepared was by order to be distributed 2 Chron. 35.11.12.13. according to the divisions of the families of the Chil∣dren of the people: therfore ech person was bound to keep him∣self vnto his owne familie, and could not without disturbance of this order intrude himself into any societie. 2. This your comparing of the societies where the passeover was eaten, with every true Church where the Lords supper is now administred, is very vnequall, and yet against your self in the poynt of our controversie: for these societies had not ech of them their di∣stinct and peculiar ministers or Priests to administer and pre∣pare
the paschal-lambe for them, as ech true Church hath now their owne distinct officers: any Priest might indifferently pre∣pare the passeover for many or any societies, as well for one as an other: if then this type is to be our direction in the poynt of our differēce, any minister may now administer the Lords sup∣per vnto baptized persons in any church. VVhereas you adde: But the rulers of particular synagogues, had not the same authoritie in all synagogues, nor pastors now in all flockes, &c. I answer, 1. Though pastours have not the same au∣thoritie in all flockes yet this hinders not but vpon occasion in time of need they being requested may help to performe some workes of a minister in an other congregation. 2, you make here an vnequal proportion betwixt rulers of the synagogues & pastours of the churches now: for many rulers of the synago∣gues had not povver of administring the passeover even to any of their owne synagogue, for as much as we do not read that all the rulers of the synagogues were Priests who onely might sprinckle the blood of the paschall-lamb according to the ma∣ner. 3, on th'other side some of the rulers of particular syna∣gogues being Priests to teach and governe the people therein, had power also to administer the Sacrament vnto them of other synagogues at the time and place apppoynted. 4, what know you but that the rulers of one synagogue had a hand in the governement of other synagogues also by the combination which was in that Church of the Iewes? How know you that either the Priests, Levites or other teachets were restreyned and bound to one synagogue and excluded from the governement of the rest? If you vvill dravv proportions and patternes for vs from the rulers of the synagogues, shevv vs from the scriptures if you can, vvhat calling, election and ordination they had, whereby they vvere so strictly tyed and restreyned vnto their severall synagogues. The vvarrant vvhich I have already brought to shevv that the Eldership of one Church may vpon occasion performe the vvork of ordination in an other, is not yet infringed by you: But vvhereas you require me to
shewthat any eldership may ordeine ministers in their consistories & send them as ministers to other churches, &c. You ask that vvhich is quite beside our question, and your grosse errour therein vvith your false allegations for proofe of the same is to be shevved straightvvay in that vvhich follovveth. VVnto my 6t argument taken from the common faith bin∣ding all churches, ministers & people to performe all pos∣sible help for their mutuall aedification so far as they are not re∣streyned by some speciall commandement of God: you give ansvver by shevving restreint from the speciall ordinance of God, Rev. ch. 2. and 3. with Act. 20.28. Heb. 5.4, &c. Here∣vnto I reply: 1. As for Rev. 2. and 3. with Act. 20.28. though the angels of the Churches be in speciall maner bound to take heed vnto their ovvne flockes and particular Churches, yet doth not that charge restreyne them from taking heed vnto others vpon oc∣casiō for a time of neede. The taking heed vnto their flocks vvhich Paul requires in this place doth comprehend vnder it not one∣ly, the administration of Sacraments, ordeyning of ministers & such like actions, but also the administration of the vvord and prayers, godly counsell in private, &c: if then this taking heed must be restreyned vnto their owne particular Churches onely you may from hence as wel conclude that it is vnlawfull for a minister to make a Sermon or to call vpon the name of God in any congregation save his owne: seing both these kinds of dueties are in like maner included in this exhortation of Paul. 2. For Heb. 5.4. This condemnes not those that are desired to help their neighbours in distresse, but those that intrude themselves without desiring: Those Churches that call or en∣treate a neighbour minister to help them vpon occasion for a time, they give the honour vnto him, he takes it not vnto himself. 3. For both these places togather, Act.
20. Heb. 5. The Apostle speakes in both of a ministeriall charge & of an office, which every minister is to take heed vnto, and not to vsurp thesame without a calling: But now yourself both by Animad∣vers. p. 51.52.53, &c. writing & practise do confesse that this act of ordination may be executed and performed by such as have no office or ministerie in the Church, how then do you reason for a restraint from these places that concerne Officers, as though men vsurped an office and took honour vnto themselves in performing such a work as you grant may be done without any office? 4. As for 2 Cor. 10.13.16. it shewes that men may not boast of things without their measure, &c. But, 1. it shewes not that those which performe the work of ordination in a neighbour church desired therevnto, are guilty of such boasting without their measure, in an other mans line, when as there is no other man in that congregation which is fit to performe the same, or willing to vndertake that worke. 2, this place doth rather re∣prove them as boasters of things without their measure which being private men and also wanting the gifts of publique do∣ctrine, exhortation & prayer do yet take the same vpon them, so as of necessitie they must do for the ordination of their mi∣nister or els have no minister at all ordeyned among them, whiles by your order you will not allow them to vse the help of any other neighbour-minister or learned man. 3, seing the Apostle doth further declare his meaning in the same place: namely, that such do stretch themselves beyond their measure, which boast 2 Cor. 10.15. of other mens labours, and Ibid. vers 16. of the things that are pre∣pared already: I wish you to consider that those which by their erroneous doctrine do seduce many simple people and draw them into their schisme from those that have bene the meanes of their conversion, if they be at all converted: those I say boast of things without their measure & enter into the line of other men: those are they that steale the Children out of the cradles, the Children for whose new birth they never travelled with paine: like vnto that 1 Kin. 3.19.20. wicked woman that having overlayd her owne, did steale away an other sonne from the bosome of the true and right mother. Think seriously with your self Mr. Ainsworth, whether this be not your sin.
5. VVhereas you plead from Mat 28.18.19. Heb. 5.1.4. that ordination is a work of power or authoritie, not given to one Church or minister over an other and therfore cannot by vertue of the common faith, be by them performed. This is not contrary to that which I hold, for I sayd not that ordination might be performed by vertue of the common faith alone, I noted it to be a work of power and authority in the end of this 6t. reason before, when as I sayd it was to be performed in the name of the Church that desi∣reth help. But a neighbour minister receyving povver and au∣thoritie from the desire of those that seek his help, is then fur∣ther bound by the common faith and generall bond of Chri∣stianitie to perfotme this service vnto those that need it. If you would have reasoned to the poynt, you should have shevved some reason why a Church cannot communicate this power vnto a minister or Prophet in an other congregation, as well as vnto a common member of their owne Church; especially when they want fit members among themselves to performe this worke. 6. As it was before in generall observed, so here againe it is more particularly to be noted, that although so many trans∣gressions be committed in the ordination of a minister: though he be ordeyned by such as are not appoynted therevnto of the Holy Ghost; though he be made a minister by such vsurpers as take this honour vnto themselves, when they are not called of God therevnto, as Aaron was: though he be ordeyned by them that want authority and power to do it; by them that boast of things without their measure, in an other mans line: yet do you notwithstanding this vnlavvfull ordination, (as you yourself reason against it) grant that it is not vnlawfull for any to heare such a minister so ordeyned. This being well consi∣dered vvill serve to overthrow many grounds of your separatiō. For as the Maimony comment. in Thal∣mud tract. Negag. cap. 1. sec. 2 & R. Mo∣ses Kot∣sens. in SMG. Asin.
234. Rabbines from Thorath Cohanim describing the 4. sorts or degrees of that leprosy, which is called Lebanah adamde∣meth, wherein the red colour is mixt with the vvhite, do note one to be greater then an other, comparing the first kinde toa Cup of milk wherein are 2. drops of blood: the second to a Cup of milk wherein are 4. drops of blood; the third to a Cup of milk, vvherein are 8. drops of blood; the fourth to a Cup of milk wherein are 16. drops of blood: and yet in the discerning of these do account them all as one, and Thalmud Ibid. sec. 3. give one judgement of them all, for the shutting vp, for the pronouncing of them vncleane, and for the purging of them: even so the vnlawfull ordination of ministers being in your account a sinfull trans∣gression of Gods commandement, & consequētly an vncleane leprosy; if you were not now more partial then the Rabbines themselves, you would judge that one kinde of vnlawfull ordi∣natiō in the cup of any church should be a cause of separatiō as vvell as an other, though differing in degree, some Churches having more spots in their ordination, then some others have: especially considering that large pretence of sin vnrepented, which you alledge for a ground of your separation from vs, as I noted before. But for the present I vvill insist no further, reser∣ving this observation vntill further occasion be given of ap∣plying it against your schisme & the grounds thereof.
AFter these reasonings against the right of ordination per∣formed by the ministers of an other congregation, you come to speak of the fact it self as it vvas performed among vs in my ordination: and here you tell vs of your surmises and suspicions, as though our Church did not entreat the ministers of an other Church to performe it in their name, as I had inti∣mated vnto you, &c. you say, you have cause to doubt that the thing was not so caryed: both for that you have not heard that the ministers of the other Church, (being also of an other language) ever came into our publique congregation, (according to the lawes in your first reason alleged Exod. 29.4. Lev. 8.3.4) to make publique prayers and to give exhortations, &c. But to deliver you (if it may be) from your vaine coniectures and doubts, I vvill shevv you a litle more plainely and expressely the maner of my ordination, vvhich vvas this: Being elected to be pastour of this congrega∣tion by the free and voluntary consent and choyse of the mem∣bersthereof that had vnited themselves and agreed togather in the Lord for his service and their owne aedification, some of them were then appoynted by the rest to go vnto the Dutch El∣dership in this citie and to desire both their counsell and help for my ordinaion. Herevpon, three reverend and learned mi∣nisters were deputed by the rest of their brethren to assist vs in this busines, namely Mr. Plancius Mr. Helmychius of blessed me∣morie who now resteth in the Lord, and Mr. Lamere, all which did also vnderstand the English tongue these three tooke vnto them also by our desire a minister of the church of Scotland, Mr. Dowglasse, who being more able to speak in our language then they, did publiquely preach concerning the mutuall due∣ties both of people and Pastour, and accordingly applyed his prayers vnto the action in hand. And herewithall did the mini∣sters of the Dutch reformed Church at the same time give vn∣to me their right hands of fellowship in the middes of our people, and in the body of our publique congregation then as∣sembled and prayed also for the blessing of God vpon this my calling. And this they did at that time of the first gathering & establishing of our church, not assuming authoritie vnto them∣selves over vs, but in our name and by our request: being now established when as of late an other minister was called vnto this our congregation, we vsed not their help herein as before, but his ordination was performed by our owne ministerie and Eldership without them. After this surmise, you bring a notorious vntruth, and pro∣ceed from evill to worse, from a vaine coniecture vnto mani∣fest falshood: when vnder colour of reason for your former guesse, you say, as also because it is not their maner to ordeyn mini∣sters publiquely in their owne Churches, it being by their Synod in Graven-Haghe An̄o 1586. Art. 4. and Synod in Midle∣burgh. An̄o 1581. Art. 4. canons to be doen in the Classicall assemblies or consistories. Answer. First, it is an evident and open vntruth which you affirme touching their maner of ordination: And dayly experience bea∣res witnesse against you: Their maner is to ordeyne ministers publiquely in their owne Churches.
Secondly, as for the canons of the two Synods which you suborne like tvvo false vvitnesses to prove your assertion, they are very iniuriously perverted and falsifyed by you. That 4th. article of the Synod holden in the Haghe Anno 1586 is directly against you, and in expresse words sheweth that the ordination of a minister lawfully called must be an opent∣lijcke bevestinghe voor der Ghemeynte /  that is to say: an open or publique confirmation of him before the Congregation: it shewes further how it is to be performed with convenient sti∣pulation, questions, exhortations, prayer, &c. and againe it shewes that this ordination must be done, naer het Formu∣lier daer van zijnde; that is, according to the forme which is prescribed for that purpose, which shewes more largely in what maner it is to be performed before the Church. In the end of that article, there is an exception touching the ministers which are to be sent out of their countrey into the enimies land, inde Kercken onder t'Crupce /  vnto the persequuted Churches, dispersed among the Papists in Colen, Antwerp, Brussels and such like places, where they have not such liberty for their so∣lemne assemblies: but this concernes not the Churches in their owne country. As for the Synod in Midleburgh, Anno 1581. art. 4. neither doth it impugne their maner of ordeyning ministers publiquely in their owne Churches, but onely leaves it free: the vvords of the artickle are, het zy in de Kercke opentlijck ofte nae dat het gheleghen is inden Kercken Raet ofte Classe / doch altijdt met openbaere ghebeden /  that is to say: either in the Church openly, or according as conveniency is, in the Consistory or Classis, but alwayes with pu∣blique prayer. Besides, this Synod at Midleburgh being holden five yeares before that of Gravenhaghe, as the date shewes, is to be determined according to the later Synod, and therfore doth in no sort deny the publique maner of ordeyning mini∣sters in the congregation. And further as appeares in the same book of their Synods, there was yet an other Synod holden at Midleburgh ten yeares after the former, agreeing vvith that ofthe Haghe also, wherein it is agreed that the Synod in Midle∣burgh. An̄o 1591. Art. 5. ministers after that they have bene propounded fourteene dayes vnto the con∣gregation without any speciall contradiction shall then publi∣quely be confirmed in their ministerie, and this naer her For∣mulier daer van zijnde /  which formulier, shewes the ma∣ner thereof more largely. And thus it may easily appeare how vnworthily you abuse the testimonies of Synods, by wresting them quite contrary to their meaning, and contrary to the truth. In the forefront of this your last Pag. 35. writing, you prefixe the saying of the Prophet Zacharie, Love the truth, &c. Zach. 8.19. Hereby, Truth seemes to be as it were engraven vpon the lintell or vpper-door-poste of your house, so that vnto those which passe by your porch, or draw neere to enter in, your building at the first sight seemes to be the House of truth; but vnto them that enter further to view what deceitfull work is in it, your building may then quickly be discerned to be the House of falshood and forgerie. Fie for shame, Mr. Answorth, that you will thus write either you cannot tell what, or you care not what. It is one of the foulest faults that we do justly com∣plaine of in Bellarmine & Baronius, the Popish champions, that they do vnconscionably and falsly alledge many testimonies & matters of fact, and so joyne falshood with their errour; why feare you not to follow their crooked steps? It is great sin for any to speak vntruth in their owne name; but to make others guilty of vntruth, by perverting their testimonie to evill, is double iniquitie.
Yet you insist still, and tell vs, that you have heard it also testi∣fyed, by some that have bene long members both of the Dutch and French: that they never did see the ordination of the ministers, though sundry were taken into office in their times. But 1. I pray you who be those apocryphal witnesses that have thus testifyed vnto you? If they be such as dwell in this citie or in the countrie ad∣joyning these may well bring vpon themselves the blame of being negligent and careless persons, who have no better ob∣served the practise of their owne Churches: especially conside∣ringthat before the ordination of their ministers, their names are alwayes propounded vnto the congregation two or three Lords dayes before, that so ech member of the Church may take knowledge of that which is done. 2. Do you but look into the end of many Dutch Bibles where their forme of pra∣yers and administration of the Sacraments is described, there may you finde the Forme van beve∣stinghe der Dienaren. forme of ordination according to the meaning of the Synods before mentioned▪ there may you see what their maner is, and that by the whole tenour of the words, as also by the titles or directions before them, the ordination of their ministers is performed in the middes of their whole congregation. How comes it that you who have lived more then 20. yeares as a neighbour vnto the Reformed Churches in these countries should yet be such a stranger vnto them and so ignorant of their estate and practise? 3. as for the French Churches here also, it is their maner likewise to ordeyne their ministers, Elders and Deacons in the publique congregation of the people: The deputies of their Churches were present at the generall Synod above mentioned holden in the Haghe Anno 1586, in the time of the earle of Leycester, by vvhose authoritye that Synod was also approved and confirmed: from thence they receyved the formalier of ordination before spoken of: and though they have not a forme printed with their Bibles as they Dutch have, yet do they keep it in writing and vse the same every yeare in the ordinatiō of their Elders and Deacons: and of their ministers when they choose them, as in particu∣lar of Monsieur Goulart, Morois, Bassecourt, all which have bene publiquely confirmed in their offices before the people. And if this be not enough, I can yet bring you more plentifull wit∣nesse, both to help & heale your incredulitie in respect of my estate, & to convince your false assertion, and false allegations in respect of the Reformed Churches.
Finally, for conclusion of this matter, you inferre against vs from this plea, and ask, how do you disable your owne church, & the the 3 other Elders that with you were authorized to feed your flock, asif there were not amongst you, which could performe this work of ordination, or shew the minister and people their mutual dueties? I answer. 1. Our Elders and people are not abased nor disabled, when they professe themselves vnmeet to performe that work which God hath in no place exacted or layd vpon them. The work of ordination performed with publique preaching and prayer in the solemne congregation (as it ought to be) requires a spe∣ciall gift of vnderstanding and vtterance, as well as any other ministeriall work that is to be executed in the Church of God. 2. Our Elders also and their gifts at that time were not so knowne and discerned, as since; they were not at that time cho∣sen into office, neither were they ordeyned or authorized with me, (as your answer imports) but a good while after. 3. It had bene better also for your people, if they had not exalted them∣selves so much as they have don, nor Ps. 131.1.2. exercised themselves in things that are too hard for them: for example, your ancien∣test and busiest Elder Iohn Decluse being once a member of the French church, affecting the office of the ministerie, comes vnto the Eldership of that Church, and earnestly desires to have his gifts tryed his desire therein is granted, he is heard divers times and allowed to make propositions in their consi∣story for tryall; but in fine after tryall, he is not allowed by them (though among you he is allowed to preach and Prophe∣sie) they judge him vnmeete for so holy a work and that in divers respects; herevpon, and not before his discontentment appeares: he begins now to quarrel with the Church, and so in fine falles into schisme, and renounces the communion of that Church and is receyved of you. How much better had it bene for him, to have kept himself within his measure, then thus to have bene disabled by the Church of God? Every man that exal∣teth himself, shalbe brought low. Luk. 18.14
CHAP. VI. Touching separation from such as hold commu∣nion with the Church of England. Hen. Ains. FOr your agreement with the Church of England I have shewed it to be more then you would pretend. Your members with you, disclaime separation from it: some of them have publickly re∣nounced as most abominable, the covenant which we have made, in separating from the synns of that Church, shewed in my former argu∣ment. As for your covenant which you mention, to separate from knowen evils, and to serve the Lord in the Gospel of his Son, so far as is revealed vnto you: they are but generals, such as Arians, Anabaptists Papists, (and who not that professe Christ?) will make also: that there can be no discerning, much lesse approbation of your Church hereby. We have in our Confession and Apologie, shewed the parti∣cular evils which we separate from, and order in the Gospel of Christ which we submit vnto: till you do the like, we have no reason to ap∣prove of your Church: especially knowing your opposition against vs, for the trueth which we professe. Neyther separate you from all knowen evils: for you have not repented of, and separated from the false worship by humane leitourgies, or communion with the vnlaw∣full ministerie and Church estate of the Parishes and Dioceses in En∣gland, though they have so many yeares been convinced to be evil, be∣fore your eyes. Yea you, in this your plea, disclaime not the authoritie and governement of the prelates as synfull simply, but in comparison, as doe the Dutch and French churches as if the arme of flesh could not fayl you, or be faultie in approving that which is to be condemned. Yet is your comparison vnfitt: for you were in your persons, members of that church, & vnder the prelates rule, frō which your abiding for the present in an other lād, freeth you not: seing all our synns remayn vpon vs, and we are tyed in their coards, til we break them off by Act. 20.21. and 26.18. repen∣tance and faith in Christ, vnto forgivenes, as I shewed before.
Answer. Io. Pa. I Expected here some arguments to confirme the third mayne cause alledged to prove our Church false and our communion vnlawfull▪ In stead thereof you still quarrel about the matter of fact how far we agree with the Church of England, but bring not one sound reason to conclude a separa∣tion from vs in respect of that agreement. And even about the matter of fact it self, you deale very evilly in divers regards. 1. VVhereas I gave you 3 distinct answers touching the same: one part thereof you do quite omit, namely my second answer, and say not a word vnto that wherein you were justly reproved: and the rest you do confusedly shuffle togather. 2. That your separation, and covenant therein should be disclaymed as a most abhominable thing, I have alwayes professed; and you have not (as you affirme) shewed our agreement with England, to be more then I would pretend: Therein you speak not truely 3. vvhereas you say of our profession to separate from knowne evilles, but not from the Churches of Christ for evilles among them, &c. that they are but generalls such as Arians, Anabaptists, (& who not that profess Christ?) will make also; you offend divers wayes: for on the one side both you in your schisme and many Anabaptists also will not make the like but the contrary pro∣fession: you professe that Apolog. pag. 45. comm. of Saincts, ch. 23. by communion with open wicked retey∣ned among them all are defiled: The Anabaptists hold the same, and being refuted by Mr. Calvine, are herein defended by Discov. p. 33.34. H. Barow. The like profession is made by Lemar the Arian, as is testifyed by divers: This being so, you did cunningly, but not honestly in the repetition of my words to leave out that part of them which might manifest this difference of our profession, viz. but not from the Churches of Christe for evilles among them▪ On the other side there are some kinde of Arians, Socinians, Fami∣lists, Anabaptists, Libertines, Church-Papists who do not pro∣fesse separation from knowne evilles, but are content to hold
communion with knowne evilles so deemed of them: so vn∣truely and inconsiderately you write in ech respect. 4, whereas you require vs to shew the particular evilles we separate from, as you have done in your confession and apology, &c. you do but trifle and hold off from the question; for know you not that we are one with the Dutch Church, that we are a member of their Classis kept in this city: that we hold the same fayth described in the Belgique confession printed long since: and that we submit vnto the same order of governement with them? Doth it not hereby appeare vnto you, what particular evilles we separate from? And what need we then to print any new confessions as you have done? If you obiect any diffe∣rence in matters of less moment, you know them to be such, as that you approve vs therein, rather then them. If you did not behold vs with a squint eye, these things would be plaine enough vnto you▪ but it is not without cause, which Mr. Ro∣binson in the refutation of your private schisme, writes of you, concerning your looking at others
Relig. com. p. 12. onely with the left eye. 5. That which you say of the worship, ministery and Church estate in England so many yeares convinced, &c is but a false boasting and flattring of your self in vaine: I have before no∣minated vnto you divers treatises wherein your errours about these matters are refuted. 6. You do notoriously pervert my words, when you speak of my disclayming but in comparison, as do the Dutch and French Churches: as if the arme of flesh could not fayle me, or be faultie in approving that which is to be condemned: vpon these your words the reader which had not seene what I wrote, might be made to beleeve, that I had alledged the exam∣ple of these Reformed Churches as an argument to justify our estate: but it is far otherwise▪ I shewed their practise to be the same with ours▪ onely to this end: that it might appeare how inexcusably partiall you are that condemne vs as a false church, for that very thing which those whom you do confesse to be true Churches, do hold as well as we. My words were plaine and I desire the reader to mark them, and with all to judge howwell you cleare your self of that partiality imputed: and whe∣ther my words have not bene vvrongfully vvrested by you. 7. VVhere you say, my comparison is vnfit, for that we were in our persons, members of that Church and vnder the Prelates rule, &c. I ansvvere, sundry people of our Church vvere never members of the Church of England, but came out of Scotland and from other places. Many members of the Dutch Church, have in their persons bene members of the Church of England and vnder the prelates rule: yea some of them have bene ministers vnto English congregations and vnder the prelates. Many yea and the greatest part of our Church at the first gathering vvere such as in their persons were then members of the Dutch Church, and were from them translated vnto vs with testi∣mony of their sound faith and godly conversation. Many that in their persons were never members of the church of England may be as much and more guilty in approving the corruptions of that Church, then such as have there lived vnder the rule of the prelates. How vaine then is that which you except against my comparison? In the last place, you bring some colour of an argument against the lawfulnes of our communion: but it is far too light to prove vs a false Church. You say, our abiding for the present in an other land, freeth vs not [from the sins committed in England] seing all our synns remayn vpon vs, and we are tyed in their cords, till we break them off Act. 20.21. & 26.18. by repentance and faith, &c. This is that which you obiected Pag. 36. before, to prove that the reasons directed against the Church of England, are against ours also: you say, vnto vs, The remooving of our dwelling into an other land, remooveth not your sins from you, nor you from them: it is your repentance onely and faith in Christe, that can purge away your sins, Luk 13.3.5. Mark. 1.15 Papists that dwell here, in Englād or other where belong to the church of Rome, till they break off themselves by repentance. Neither doth the absteyning from the practise cleare the sinner: for the guilt of Cayns Murder, cleaved vnto him all his dayes, because he was not cleansed by repentance and faith, although he never killed man more,
after Abel. So though you here practise not the idolatries doen in En∣gland, yet in that you have practised them & not repented, your guil∣tines is vpon you, &c. I ansvvere, 1. It is not our sin in communion with, but your sin in se∣parating from the church of England that is to be repented of. As you are refuted and called vnto repentance by Mr. Robinson, for one mayne part thereof, vvhile he hath convinced your more private schisme: so are you by sundry others for your pu∣blique schisme. VVhen your separation from our particular congregation hath bene vvell examined, I doubt not but your separation from England also vvill thereby appeare in a great measure to be vnvvarrantable: and then the vvay being so pre∣pared, my resolution is (the Lord assisting) if need be, to pro∣ceed further vvith you in shevving your schisme from nglād. In the meane time it vvould but draw vs from the present con∣troversie.
2. If our communion vvith the Church of England vvere a sin, yet is it not knowne so to vs; vve assure our selves of the contrary: all your obiections we judge to be vnsound. VVe repent vs of our knowne sins: our secret sinnes we know to be innumerable, and we endevour to be humbled for them: and beleeve that in Christ they are done away; So that if our com∣munion with England were a sin, yet are we not tyed in the cords thereof, as you teach. Nay your doctrine as it is applyed and maynteyned against vs, to the contrary, is a manifest and a maine heresie, overthrowing the Gospell, and the foundation of Christian Religion both concerning faith and repentance in vs, and concerning the Merit of Christes death & obedience. Vpon your reasoning it followeth; that no Repentance and faith is accepted vnto satvation vnless there be a particular ac∣knowledgment of all sins disputed against, as you have done against vs; that the Blood of Christe doth not cleanse vs from al sin: but that we are still tyed in the cordes thereof, vntil there be a particular discerning and acknowledging of the same. This is contrary to the whole tenour of the Gospell, declared in theholy Lev. 9.7. & 16.5-30 Iob 9.3. with ch. 33 27.28. Esa. 44.22. Ps. 103.3. Ioh. 1.29. & 8.12. 1 Ioh. 1.7. 2 Pet. 1.3. with 1. Cor. 13.9. & 3.1.2.3. Philip. 1.5.9. scriptures: all which do shew that through faith in Christ we get remission of al our sinnes, even of those which through the great corruption of the flesh remayning even in the most faithfull, we cannot discerne often times, though the Lord for his part have given sufficient meanes to reveale and manifest the same vnto vs. VVhat avayleth it to say, that Christ dyed for sinners: while you propound such a condition, and require such a repentance as no man can attayne vnto? God hath de∣creed to magnify the perfectiō of his grace in the imperfection of our faith and repentance: The infinite vertue and dignity of Christes divine nature appeares most gloriously, as in others so in this particular of giving merit vnto the suffrings of his manhood, to satisfy even for vnknovvne sins that are not par∣ticulerly and distinctly confessed & repented of. VVhat meane you then to maintaine such a fundamentall and pernicious er∣rour as darkens the glory both of Christs person and office, and defaceth the nevv testament? vvith vvhat conscience can you say that vve are tyed in the cords of our sins, and are conse∣quently to be reiected as a false Church, because vve repent not of an vnknovvne sin, vnknovvne to vs, and so controversall, that no minister of Chtiste on earth can discerne the same: you being the onely teacher that dare affirme such a thing? 3. Suppose vve vvere tyed in the cords of our sin, for vvant of this particular repentance, which you require: yet doth it not follovv that communion vvith vs is vnlavvfull: for the truth vvhich vve profess; for the true vvorship vvhich vve practise at this present; and at least for their sakes among vs, vvhich never vvere members of the Church of England, some favour and felllovvship should be yeelded vnto vs by you. Our Sa∣viour hath taught vs to hold communion vvith vvicked men, for the godly sake that vvere among them: yea vvith such as vvere tyed in the cords of their sin, vvith such as did manifestly
Ioh. 8.21 59. with Luk. 22.7.8. live and dy in their sinnes, vvithout repentance. VVhy do you then seek to lead men into the crooked path of schisme con∣trary to the example of Christe? As in the former ansvver theheight of your heresy was discovered so in this the depth of your schisme is manifestly discerned, in calling men to separate not onely from the practise of sin, but also from the true wor∣ship of God, vpon pretence of some vnrepentant persons, which might pollute you with their fellowship therein. As for the scriptures alledged by you, viz. Act. 20.21, and 26.18. Luk. 13.5. Mark. 1.15. They shew indeed that men ought to repent, but there is not a word or syllable in them, that sounds to call vs vnto separation from such as do not repent. These scriptures are all abused by you: and touch not the question. 4. Consider how by this maner of reasoning you contradict yourself: for whereas you acknowledge the Reformed Chur∣ches notwithstanding your separation from them, to be Counter∣po. p. 49. true Churches & your brethren in Christe, and yet by your profession hold them to be tyed in the cordes of their sin, because they do not repent of divers sins, which in your confession, dedicate vnto their vniversities, are cōvinced to be evill, as you imagine I would now know of you, why our want of repentance makes vs to be a false Church rather then them; especially, why more then the Dutch and French Churches of this city, whom you note to be tyed in many cords of sin, whiles you Ans. to Th. wh. p. 78.79. charge them with the transgression of so many lawes of God, for vvhich they do not repent. 5. Seing Mr. Robinson and his people do now (as divers of themselves confesse) receyve the members of the Church of England into their congregation, and this without any renun∣ciation of the Church of England, without any repentance for their Idolatries committed in the Church of England: how can you hold them to be a true Church and communion with them lawfull: seing that by your reasoning they are tyed in the cords of their sin, as well as we; their guiltines is vpon them, though they have remooved their dwelling, and though they practise their Idolatries no more? At every turne your partia∣lity appeares. Paul
1. Timo 5 21. charged Timothy before God, and the Lord Iesus Christe, and the elect Angelles, that he should donothing partially how litle do you regard this vehement obte∣station? How will you answer it before the Lord and his Angels in that great day? 6. This your reasoning serves to bring confusion and dissi∣pation vpon your owne particular Church: for it is manifest ac∣cording to your owne profession that there are many knowne sins among you vnrepented off and to omit a multitude of others which I could name, consider but these: It is well knowne that some of your people do heare sermons in Idol-temples as you call them, and though you plead against me, that this is a heynous sin, yet you do now suffer it practised among you. Your Elder Iohn Decluse alledged this among the rest for one cause of his separating from the french church, viz. because they suffred the party innocent to reteyne the offendant that had com∣mitted adultery & to live still togather: & heretofore (as you
Ans. to Th. wh. p. 32. con∣fesse) it was the practise of your Church to excommunicate the innocent parties that would forgive the offendour either husband or wife vpon their repentāce in such case: since that ti∣me you cōfesse also that your judgemēt is altered touching this matter, yet so that some of you are still perswaded that your former judgement and practise was just. Of those that are so minded I ask how they can (according to your reasoning against vs) hold communion where such scandalles and abhominations as in their perswasion deserve excommunication, are yet openly tolerated without repentance. As for your Elder Decluse in spe∣ciall, if he be one of them that have altered his judgement, why doth he not acknowledge his fault vnto the French Church for alledging vnto thē such an vniust & vnsound cause of his sepa∣ratiō from thē? If he have not chāged his judgemēt, how can he & the rest that are of his judgement reteyne fellowship, where judgement and and justice is openly perverted, where excom∣municable crimes are contrary to the word of God covered & maintayned? vve have here just cause to speak vnto you as Ba∣row doth to the ministers of England, even touching this very poynt, when he would show how ill they teach and keep theseventh commandement: he saith, H. Barow discov. p. 182. And that your gravest and best conscienced preachers think not themselves in this case without blame, let them examine their corrupt consciences, how many of their cheef hearers and devout proselytes they know both men and women, that know such crimes ech by others, and yet for filthy lucre or fleshly respects continue together. Are not their consciences rather most corrupt, that knowing such crimes by one an other, and hol∣ding them to be just causes of excommunication do hold with all that for crimes vnrepented & vnredressed men ought to se∣parate, and yet contrary to their profession do live in a polluted society? May I not say vnto these men evē in your owne words Mr. Ainsworth, that Animad∣vers. p. 125 if they which hold otherwise in judgement, shal yet let the true practise of the Gospell goe: posterity after them, being brought into bondage, may justly blame and curse them, that would not stand for the right, &c. Further when Mr. Iohnson in his publique doctrine had expounded Mat. 18.17. contrary to your practise, and by many disputes had publiquely main∣teyned his exposition, that he might quite subvert and change the forme of governement long practised among you: you tell vs that yet in end you offred vnto him before your parting, that Ibid. p. 123. notwithstanding your differences of judgement, you would continue together, if your former practise might be reteyned: how∣soever you cover the matter vnder the Phrase of difference of judgements, yet cannot you deny but that he openly taught false doctrine, and that in a matter of great weight: and that therfore he was tyed in the cordes of his sin, though he had ab∣steyned from the practise of his doctrine; and yet signify that you are content to reteyne communion with an vnrepentant teacher of false doctrine. Your first offer being refused, you tell vs that then
Ibid. p. 126. you desire of him, that you might have a praceable parting: and to be two distinct congregations, ech practising as they were perswaded, yet nourishing brotherly love and vnitie. If your desire had bene granted, yet could you not deny, but that Mr. Iohnson and his people had bene tyed in the cordes of their sin; that their guiltines had remayned vpon them, both for falsedoctrine, change of your former governement, and great scan∣dall which in your opinion followed therevpon, and yet with these vnrepentant Apostates, you professe to hold and nourish brotherly love and vnity: o extreme partialitie in you, that are so ready to smother scandalles among your selves without re∣pentance of the Authors thereof; and yet so far from nouri∣shing brotherly love and vnity with other churches of Christe, whom you cannot with any colour accuse to be so deep in sin, by forsaking the truth formerly professed. Either repent of these offers, or els think, that according to your owne plea against vs, your owne people cannot with good consciēce com∣municate with you, that mainteyne so great partialitie. CHAP. VII. Of temples: The first argument, examined. Section, 1. Hen. Ains. FOr the Nunnes Chappel, (the place where you assemble,) you need serch no records: I hope you think Christ instituted no such Nunnes, Nunries, or Chappels for them: but that they belong to Satans synagogue, in what yeare soever they were founded. And they being grosse idolaters, their chapel was an Idolie: (as the 1 Cor. 8.10. Apostle nameth it,) or Idol house. And though themselves sayd no masse, yet were they pertakers of the masse sayd by their Preists, and as is likely, within their own Cloyster, as was the custome in other Cloysters: and if not for that, yet for other false Gods it was erected. To our first reason against the reteyning of them to be places where∣in we should worship God, from Exod. 20.4 5.6. with Deut. 12.3. You answer six things. 1. That the commandement in Deut. 12. was a temporarie ordi∣nance, part of Moses politie now abrogate, &c. To prove this, you in∣stance an other like law in Deut. 13. for destroying an apostate citie, with all the spoiles thereof, &c. not now in force.
I answer, from our Saviours testimonie, that he came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfyl it, Mat. 5.17. so that such judicials as apper∣teynedto the moral law written on the Tables, and are of common equitie to all nations, are not by Christ abrogated, touching the sub∣stance of them. Such is this law, perteyning to the 2. Commandement, and it is of common equitie to all nations for to shun 1. Cor. 10.14. 1. Ioh. 5.21 Rev. 18. idolatrie: ther∣fore it is not abrogated by Christ. And I adde, touching the substance of them: because you insist vpon such manner and meanes as were then vsed. For there might be some manner and meanes then vsed, which I say not that Magistrates are now bound vnto: as that all such malefactors as were then to be stoned, must be stoned now, and may dye no other death. There were lawes in Israel, to cut off murderers, adulterers, and other flagitious: yet some things perteyning to murder and adulterie, were peculiar to that land and people, as cities of refuge, Num. 35. the expiation of murder when the Author was not knowen, Deut. 21. And so for the manner of punishing adulterie, by stoning, Ioh. 8.5. by burning, Lev. 21 9. or other wayes. Now I suppose you hold, that murderers and adulterers are by vertue of Gods law at this day to dye: & yet you wil not affirme that they must dye onely after that manner that was in Israel. Even so doe I hold touching Idolaters and Idol-temples. To your instance from Deut. 13 I answer, that it followeth not if an other law be all or any part of it abrogated, therfore this also in Deut. 12. is so likeweise: as the law for a murderer to dye, is not now aboli∣shed because of that law in Deut. 21. Secondly, you shew no reason why that law in Deut. 13. should not now stand in force: the incon∣venience which you object of thousād thousands of people at this day, vnder that iudgement, is but a supposition. I presume rather on the contrary, that you cannot name one citie at this day in the world, lya∣ble to that iudgement: but that manifest difference may be put in sundry things, from the plaine words of the law, & the common ex∣position of the Hebrewes concerning the same. Thirdly, if any ceasing of that law be at this day urged, it cannot in equitie be for the idola∣ters them selves, or any instruments of their idolatrie, but onely for their civil goods, wherof there is no question between you and me. And for particular idolaters which were to dye, as their goods were Deut. 17.2-7 not unlawfull: so the Hebrewes hold, that if any of those cautions
fayled which Moses expresseth in Deut. 13. The persons that synned, were to be stoned as particular persons, and Maimo∣ny treat. of Idolatrie, c. 4. their goods went to their heires, & so were not destroyed with them. Fourthly, if then judicial law against idols & idolaters be abrogated; then also against blasphemers, murderers, &c. Which is the opinion of the Anabaptists, who would take the sword from the Christian Magistrate, upon ihu erroneous opinion that the judicials of Moses are at an end. They have all a like authoritie; & the abolishing of one that is of perpetual equitie, overthroweth all. But th' Apostle telleth us Rom. 13. that the Magi∣strate hath the sword, & is Gods Minister: therfore he is to use his sword according to the will of God; & that will is not to be found, but in the iudgments given by Moses. How should the Magistrate punish malefactors lawfully, vnlesse he doe it of faith? for whatsoever is not of Rom. 14.23. faith is syn. And how should he do it of faith, vnlesse he haue the word Rom. 10.17. of God authorizing him? And where is the word that authorizeth him to kil murderers, adulterers, buggerers, blasphemers &c. but in the Iudicials of Moses? It is also the doctrine of the Church of England that the Christian Prince Apologie (By B. Ie∣wel) c. 11. divis. 2. hath the charge of both Ta∣bles of the Law, committed to him of God; & for his power to abolish poperie, it is by them alleged Ibidem divis. 3. how God by his Prophets often & ear∣nestly commanded the Kings to cut down the groves, &c. yet you wil not admit of the same reason now brought by us; but put it off as a temporary precept, and abrogated by Christ. Answer. Ioa. Pa. IN this your declaration of the Idolatrous vse of the place, wherein we meet for the true worship of God, we may ob∣serve: 1, the guiltines of your former writing; your pre∣sumption in affirming you knew not what; in saying our Chappel was built for the breaden God and other Idolles; your self do now seeme to stagger about it: you now come to speak of likelyhoods, & with ifs: if not for that, yet for other false Gods, &c. but
if not for that, then was your former assertion false. You say, I need serch no records: If I had that faculty of presuming tospeak of things vnknowne, as you do both touching true Churches; as before in the matter of ordinatiō; & touching the building of Popish Churches as here and afterwards againe, then would I not much stand vpon the testimony of any re∣cords; but love of truth and sobrietie teach men otherwise: 2, even in likelyhood, whereof you speak; this Chappel was not built for the worship of the breaden God in the Masse; for beside the testimony of those that keep the evidence of this building, whereof I spake before; there is this testimony in ge∣nerall touching Chappelles: Hospi∣nian. de orig. temp. lib. 3. cap. 2 Capellae ab initio, nihil altud quam oratoria sine missa: that at the first, they were nothing els but ora∣tories or places of prayer without the Masse: and if this were true touching other Chappels at the first building and erecting of them, much more in likelyhood for this, where their ordi∣nary devotions were to be performed, not by a Priest, but by the women themselves, that lived alone. 3, note the idlenes of that which you say, touching their Idol-worship: seing I gran∣ted so much before, and therevpon condescended to come vnto the answer of your reasons against such places of worship, after that the Idolatrous vse is remooved. As it is presumption to affirme that which you cannot prove, so is it vaine and idle, to insist vpon that which is at first yeelded vnto you. 4, though I think (as you hope) that Christ instituted no such Nunnes, Nunries or Chappelles for them, &c. yet let vs not make them worse then they are: It is sin to
Iob. 13.7.8, &c. accept the person of God: and therfore on the contrary also a sin to talk wickedly or deceitfully against the Idolatours themselves. Thus therfore I hold of them, that their principal evill, (so farre as they were Nunnes, and distinct from other Idolatrous people one with them in their common faith,) was their Separation: This Separation was double, in the worship of God, having their Chappels apart from others; and in single life, having their Cloysters apart from the com∣pany of men. And yet in both these respects, I hold that the new Monkes and Nunnes of your separation are more to be condemned, then these Nunnes, whose Chappel we do now vse.For first, these Nunnes, though they worshipped apart from those that were of the same faith with them, yet did they this without renunciation and condemning of others, but appro∣ved them as lawfull worshippers of God; you on the contrary in your Monastery separate with renunciation from those that are of the same faith with you, and leave their worship as a polluted thing in all Churches save your owne. Againe, for separation from mariage, this kinde of Nunnes, whose chappel we have, were not so bad as other sorts of them. This order of Nunnes, being called Bagines were not bound by vow vnto single life, as other orders of them were: Etymo∣log. Teuto∣nic. in vo∣cabulo. Beghijne. Beguinae sunt mulieres religiosae, nullo voto astrictae, in sacro mulierum contubernio viventes, quandiu illis gratum est. And besides this generall and publique evidence, touching this order, we have also more particular te∣stimonie touching the Nunnes of this place, for the confirma∣tion hereof: But on the contrary the Monkes and Nunnes of your separatiō have a greater necessity layd vpon thē, touching Mariage, and are not so free: your people are not allowed to mary with any godly person either in the Church of England, or yet in these reformed Churches: but you have excommuni∣cated divers of your people for marying with the members of the Dutch Church in this citie: These Baguines were free to mary when they would and to whom they would of their owne faith, But in your Cloyster of the separation there is far greater bondage: no permissiō to mary with those that are of the same faith, except they be of the same Order with you. TO come now vnto your first argument: my first answer was that the commandement Deut. 12. vvas a temporary ordi∣nance, &c. Your reply is, that Christ came not destroy the law but to fullfill it, Mat. 5.17. so that such iudicialles as apperteyned to the mo∣rall law written on the Tables and are of common equity to all nations are not by Christe abrogated touching the substance of them. Such is this law perteyning to the 2. Commandement, and it is of common equitie vnto all nations to shun 1 Cor. 10 14. 1. Ioh. 5.21. Rev.
18. idolatrie: therfore it is not abrogatedby Christe. Vnto this argument I answer. 1. Your marginall quotations of scripture, do not prove that the commandement of destroying Idolatrous places is of common equitie to all nations: though they teach vs to shun Idolarrie. Can not idolatrie be shunned, vnless the places be destroyed? This you ought to have proved: This is the poynt: this you leave as you found. You knew well enough before, that we grant Idolatrie is to be avoyded, but how do you thence conclude the destruction of the place? Your pretended com∣mon equitie being applyed vnto the places and buildings them∣selves is against common sense, and not a word to colour the same, in any of these allegations. 2. vvhereas you adde that the judicialles touching the substāce of thē are not abrogate: & yeeld vnto me that Magistrates are not now bound vnto the same maner and meanes, &c. you do herein yeeld me the question: and all your instances from Numb. 35. Deut. 21. Ioh. 8. Lev. 21.9 do serve for the further declaration hereof. For the maine equitie and substance of that comman∣dement Deut. 12. is to shun idolatrie: the ceremoniall maner and meanes were by destroying and abolishing the places and buildings: even as the substance of that law Numb. 35. for de∣fence of the innocent that killes an other against his vvill, is perpetuall, but the respect of the place, to be fled vnto at that time, doth now ceasse: And what is more peculiar vnto the maner and meanes of any action, then respect of the place: either places prohibited or places commanded? As the holines of places commanded by law, doth now ceasse: so the vnlawfulnes of places prohibited by the same lavv, doth in like maner ceasse.
3. VVhereas you graunt that Magistrates are not bound vnto the same maner and meanes, in their execution of judge∣ment, as by the same kinde of death, by burning, stoning, &c▪ & yet hold vvith all, that he cannot do any thing herein of faith, vvithout the vvord of God authorizing him: I vvould knovv of you vvhich be those places of scripture, that do novv autho∣rizea Magistrate to put a malefactour to death, by any other kinde of death, then those that are peculiarly noted in the law: vvhen you have nominated such places to allow a change of the punishments, you shall then finde that the very same pla∣ces will also give vs allowance to shun Idolatry, without destroying and abolishing the places according to the maner and meanes in Israel. Forget not to prove this which I say vnto you, as a speciall help to bring you to the sight of your errour. 4. Yet let me here warne you of your too much Annot. on Exod. 21.25. enclining to the Rabbines opinions, that allow the commutation or chang of corporall punishments for money, vsing great indul∣gence & giving dispensations therein, in any of those cases Exo. 21.24.25. excepting onely life for life, and this even vnder the law it self. About this poynt you seeme to erre doubly, both in ascribing a contrary opinion to the Sadduces, which you know not but it was as well the opinion of the Pharisees, considering Mat. 5.20. with 38. as also in preferring the worse opinion: though our Saviour require private men to forgive one an other yea for life it self taken away, yet this was no warrant for judges in publique to change corporall punishments for mo∣ney. VVhen you bring grounds out of the new testament for the change of punishments, seek better then such. For explanatiō of my former answer, I gave instance in a like example, Deut. 13. wherevnto your first reply is: that it followeth not, if an other law be all or any part of it abrogated, therfore this also in Deut. 12, &c. Herevnto I answer, 1. you might and ought to haue conceyved of that instance not as of a new argument by it self to prove the abrogation of that law in Deut. 12. but onely as of an illustration to make my answer more plaine and evi∣dent: considering the phrase I vsed in alledging it thus, for exam∣ple: As God, &c. 2. Seing there is the like reason and conse∣quence of things that are of like nature: though it followes not that the like law of killing the murdrer is disanulled, because the law of expiation in Deut.
21. is abolished: the one of theselawes being ceremoniall, th'other not: yet because the lawes in Deut. 12. and 13. are both of them ceremoniall, apperteyning vnto the meanes and maner of shunning Idolatrie, they are ther∣fore both of them by the like consequence to be held abroga∣ted, so far as concernes the destruction of places, buildings, &c. Your second reply vnto that instance in Deut. 13, is: that the inconvenience which I obiect of thousand thousands of people at this day, vnder that iudgement; is but a supposition: that you presume rather on the contrary, that I cannot name one citie this day in the world, lyable to that iudgement, &c. I answer. 1. You alter my words: I obiected not that thousand thou∣sands of people at this day were vnder that judgement, Deut. 13. whatsoever I might have done: but I sayd that the goods of so many persons should be avoyded as execrable things, &c. if that law were in force. This might be, though so many persons were not guilty of that sin, nor lyable vnto that judgement: seing the goods of one apostate citie being dispersed abroad into many cities might make their riches vncleane also, & vnlawful for vse, so that mē should not know how to traffique safely with them, either by buying, selling, &c. for feare that some of the execra∣ble goods might cleave vnto their hands. 2. I marvell that you who have so often stumbled vpon Roome when you should not, do now remoove it so far out of your sight: To omit other Christian cities which have degene∣rate from Christianisme to Turcisme and Heathenisme: that Idolatrous and apostate Roome is the citie which I name vnto you, as lyable vnto the judgement Deut. 13. if that law were stil in force. Shevv a difference from the plaine vvords of the lavv as you speak, if you can. As for the common exposition of the Hebrewes, whereof you also speak, they are contrary to the law of God and not worthy to be mentioned. Your third reply is, if any ceassing of that law be at this day vr∣ged, it cannot in equity be for the Idolaters themselves, or any instru∣ments of their Idolatry, but onely for their civill goods, &c. I answer.
1. If that law be ceassed for civill goods, then for the buil∣dings and temples likevvise which are the civill goods of men; even as the Chappel which we vse is a part of the Magistrates civil goods, and by them lent vnto vs. The vse which vve have of them in Gods vvorship hinders not but that they are our civil goods: even our Bibles though vve have a religious vse of them both in publique and in private worship of God, are yet a part of our civill goods also. Your meeting house serving for your religious exercises in publique, is it not a part of your civil goods? Vnless you did vse this plea before the Magistrates in your suites about the same, I think you vvould not long enioy the same. 2. If this law ceasse onely in respect of civill goods, then vvhat shall become of infants and other litle Children, the Ier. 7.18. instruments of Idolatry with their parents? Are the Ma∣gistrates bound to slay them with their apostate parents, as your Iew doctours would have it? 3. VVhereas you say that the goods of particular Idolaters which were to dy, were not vnlawfull: VVhat reason have you so to interpret that law, Deut. 17.7. vvhich maketh no mention of his goods at all? And if the particular Idolater did also seek to seduce others should not the equity and proportion of the former law in Deut. 13.17. be regarded? or should the greater sin have the lesser punishment? 4. VVhereas you runne for help to Maimony your fellow labourer, and alledge the opinion of the Hebrewes holding that if any of those cautions fayled vvhich Moses expresseth, &c. You do hereby incurre the blame which you do so often impute vnto others: you make flesh you arme, vvhich yet can not save you. For 1. The Cautions which the Iewish expositors do observe from Deut. 13. touching the apostate city to make it lyable vnto the judgement there specifyed, are most vaine and absurd, as may be seene in the commentarie of R. Solomon vpon that place▪ yet your
Misneh. tract. abo∣dah zarah, sive de Ido¦lolat. Cap. 4. Maimony goes far beyond him, even in the same chapter alledged by your self, where he writes that the apostatecity doth not come within compasse of that judgement: vnless the persons seducing the same were two or more then two: vnlesse the persons seducing were men and not women: vnlesse they were men and not Children: vnlesse the seducers were of the same citie and of the same tribe: vnlesse the persons seduced vvere an hundred or vpward: And a number of other absurdities might further be noted out of the same Chapter, vvhich you might vvell be ashamed to mention, for had you acquainted the readers therevvith, they might easily have discerned, that your vvitnesses vvere not vvorthy to be heard. 2. As the Ievvish expositions are vaine in themselves, so are they also contradi∣ctory vnto one an other: vvhere as Maimony requires a hundred persons to be seduced, for one condition of this apostasy: R. Iosias (as R Moses mikkotsi in SMG. praecept affirm. 15. recordeth) requires but ten & vpward: and many other cautions are there omitted also. 3. vvhat if the goods of these apostates vpon the want of any of these cau∣tions, did passe vnto their heires, as the Rabbines vvould have it? This helpes you nothing, nor yet hurts me at all, vvhiles I speak of the city apostate according to the conditions expressed by Moses. Your fourth reply is: if the iudiciall law against Idols and Ido∣laters be abrogated: then also against blasphemers, murderers, &c. which is the opinion of the Anabaptists, who would take the sword from the Christian Magistrates, &c. I ansvver. 1. In this supposition you seek to encroach vpon me, as though I had maynteyned that the judiciall lavv against Idola∣laters vvere abrogated: vvhich is not our question, but onely vvhether the places of Idol-vvorship, are of necessity to be abo∣lished: There may judgements of God be executed by Magi∣strates vpon Idolaters to the rooting out of false vvorship, though some of the places be converted vnto the vse and be∣nefit of the Church in the true vvorship of God. Here therfore you turne quite out of vvay. 2. If the judiciall lavv against Idolaters be not abrogated: then think seriously and consider vvhether you yourself for
your former Idolatries be not the Childe of death appoynted to dye by the hands of the Magistrate: I meane for your apo∣stasy (after separation) vnto the Idol-worship of the Church of England, which according to your profession and judgement declared in your writings, is a most horrible and heynous Ido∣latry: This judiciall law of Moses doth not allow any repen∣tance vnto the Idolatour, more then to the murderer, to save him from death of the body: and therfore you cannot plead that you are freed from the guiltines of death, thereby. If you can finde out any other distinction, excuse or plea for the saving if your owne life from the sword of Moses judiciall lavv: you shall then finde out and shew vs such distinctions, as will serve to frustrate & put away many of your owne obiections against vs in sundry poynts: see therfore that you do not sleightly passe over this matter. 3. VVhereas you say, touching the vse of the sword that the will of God, is not to be found, but in the judgements given by Moses: & againe aske vs, where is the word that authorizeth the Magi∣strate to kill murdrers, adulterers, buggerers, blasphemers, &c▪ but in the iudicialles of Moses? It is yourself that by these erroneous spee∣ches do exceedingly gratify the Anabaptists: for howsoever the law of Moses doth afford sufficient warrant to put these ma∣lefactours to death: yet the most pregnant and evident deter∣minations of the judiciall law, are those places of the new testa∣ment which do expressely and particularly shew some of them to be of perpetuall equitie: for example, touching ech of the malefactours here named by your self, there is speciall warrant in the Gospell to execute judgement vpon them: on Mat. 26.52. Rev. 13.10 & 18.20. murdrers on Rev. 11.8 & 9.21. adulterers, and buggerers: on Rev. 13.5.11. & 17.3.4.5. compa∣red with Rev. 14.14-20. & 17.1.16 & 18.6.7. & 19.17.18. blasphemers, and Idolaters: for vnto such the Lord threatneth vengeance, and calles the Magistrates to execute his will vpon them: And thus hath Christe declared his will vnto vs & hereby authorizeth the Iud∣ges and princes of the earth to root out evill from among men: they have not onely a general warrant to vse the sword, Rom. 13 as you alledge: but they have also these particular directions to
shew them the severall causes for which they are to draw their sword: And therfore while you deny these most sure warrants, & grounds of faith for the Magistrate to proceed by, sending him onely vnto the judicialles of Moses, you do hereby give great advantage vnto the Anabaptists, and take away from the Church of God the principall weapons whereby they should convince those heretiques and defend the authoritie of Chri∣stian Princes against them. 4. VVhereas you alledge the doctrine of the Church of Englād. I grant the same: that the Christian Prince hath charge of both tables of the law, and that Deut. 12. may be alledged for the abo∣lishing of popery: I shewed before that the equity of that cōman∣dement leads vs to the detestation of Idolatry; and conse∣quently of popery: yet doth it not follow that it bindes vs to the same maner and meanes of detestation, in ech ceremony & circumstance of place, time, &c. These ought to have bene distinguished by you. 5. Suppose that our temples were to be pulled downe by the Magistrate in the same maner that was observed vnder Mo∣ses policie; and that the Magistrates did offend in reteyning them: yet where is your warrant, for such an offence of the ru∣lers to separate from the worship of God in those temples? I call for your proofe herein: I pray you set it downe plainely & fully. This concernes the poynt of separation and ought to be insisted vpon more then many others. Section 2. Hen. Ains. YOur 2. exception is, that God commands to abolish their names also, Deut. 12.3. But we finde Idolatrous names retey∣ned vpon sundry persons: Rom. 16. Phil. 2. Tit 3, &c.
I answer: First then it seemeth you hold, that Magistrates are ney∣ther bound to abolish idols, nor the names of false Gods out of their do∣minion: seing the law in Deut. 12. which commandeth to destroy such, is in your judgement abrogated. Wherin you come short of theZele which is sayd to have heen in P. Silvester the first that he Polydore Virgil. l. 6. c. 4. ab∣horring the memorial of the vaine gentile Gods, decreed that the dayes of the week which had afore the names and titles of the Sun, Moon, Mars, Mercurie, &c. should be called the first, second, third, fourth ferie (or day of the week) in semblable maner as the Iewes (from Gods warrant Gen. 1.) counted their dayes from the Sabbath day. Contrary vnto you, I hold that law in Deut. 12. moral and perpetual, both for false Gods, and for their Name. For as the Church of old, Num. 32.38. changed the idolatrous names of Nebo, and Baal meon: so God pro∣mised, Hos. 2.17 to take away the names of Baalim out of his peoples mouth, that they should be no more remembred by their name. It is also prophesied of Christ (in Psal. 16.4.) that he should not take vp the names of such, into his lips. Moreover, all vncleannes should Eph. 5.3. not once be named among the saincts: and if not bodily vncleannes, neyther spiritual, which is idolatrie. Secondly, for the meaning of that law in Deut 12.3. I vnderstand it not to forbid absolutely all naming of false gods; seing Moses and the Prophets doe vsually and lawfully name Numb. 25 3 & 21.29 Iudg 2.13. and 11.24. Baal, peor, Chemosh, Ashtaroth & other idols: but such naming, or reteyning of their names, as tendeth any way to the vpholding of their superstition. Even as on the contrary, by the putting of the true Gods name in any place, Deut. 12.5. is meant the placing of his Re∣ligion and ordinances. And as Rabshakeh honoured not the true God, when he called him by his name Esai. 36.7 10. Iehovah: so neyther did the Prophets honour idols, or syn against the Law in Deut. 12 3. when they mentioned their names which were set vpon Deut. 3.29. places, Esai. 37.38. temples, and Dan. 3.26 & 4.8.9.19
persons of men. So then for your allegation of names mentioned by the Apostle; First how prove you that those names, were at first given them in any respect of honour to the idols of the heathens? If you say, the notation of their names sheweth it: that say I is insufficient. For why may not Hermes in Rom. 16.14. have his name of Hermes Trismegistus the Philosopher, as wel as of Hermes the God Mercurie? Or, without respect of eyther of them, of the notation of the name, an Interpreter? Why should Phaebe in Rom. 16.1. have reference to the heathen Goddesse, rather then to the Moon, or to the signification of the word, which is Chast, or Pure; and which might in that respect,be a common name to many women? We finde that Bel or Beel, was the name of an Esai. 46.1 Idol: and in Beel-zebub it is the name of a false God, 2. King. 1.2. But when David named his Son 1. Chron. 14.7. Beel-jada; wil you say he had reference to any idol: or rather simply to the common vse and signification of that word? So for our times, you will not I hope deney but the Papists syn against Exod. 20. and Deut. 12. whiles they make and mainteine images of S. Peter, S. Paul, S. Iames, &c. and erect temples to their honour, and name them S. Peters Church, and the like. Yet when men give their Children civil names, of Peter, Iames, &c. must they needs herein communicate with the Papists idolatrie? Or when a man is named George, must this name respect S. George the old idol of England and if we lived vnder Moses politie, would you say men synned against Deut. 12.3. in giving such names: yea that who∣soever calleth them by those names which their parents gave them, did break that law in Deut. 12? Wherfore it is yet for you to prove, that Paul in mentioning Phaebe, Hermes, and others by their common knowen names, did contrary to that commandement in Deut. 12.3. if it stand in force at this day. Againe, the offices and names of Pope, Abbot, Monck, Frier, &c. are Antichristian, and to be banished out of Christs Church, (as the name Zeph. 1.4 of the Chemarims,) so that none of his ministers may in respect of their offices, be named a Pope or an Ab∣bot, a monck or a frier: I hope you wil not deny this. How be it, such ministers as have their civil names Pope, or Monck, or Abbot or Frier; may lawfully reteine and be called by those names: yea though we were vnder Moses law, which you think is abrogated. But were it certaine, and so granted that those in Rom. 16, &c. had their denomination of heathen Gods: it followeth not, that the law in Deut. 12.3. forbiddeth to mention them by their names: for Daniel was named Belteshazzar, Dan. 4.8. according to the name of Nebuchadne∣zars God: yet the Prophet mentioneth this his own name, and the na∣mes of Dan. 2 49 & 3.16.23 & 4.19. Shadrach, Meshach & Abednego, which were likeweise idolatrous. So he speaketh to Nebuchadnezar, and to Belshazzar (named of their Gods
Esai. 46 1 Nebo and Bel,) and calleth them by those names, Dan. 2.28. & 3,16 & 5.18.22. Now Daniel who was so godly, as he would not break the ceremonial law of Moses in meat and drink,Dan. 1.8. would not have mentioned those idolatrous names, if that had been the meaning of the law in Deut. 12.3. which you would en∣force. So this your 2. reason doth not yet prove that law to be abro∣gated. Answer. Io. Pa. VNto my second answer touching the names of divers Idol∣les reteyned in the persons therevpon denominate in the new Testament, as the names of Mercury, Venus, Phaebe, Iupiter, Apollo, Fortuna, &c. your first reply is, that then it seemeth I hold, that Magistrates are neither bound to abolish Idols, nor the names of false gods out of their dominions, &c. I answer. 1. It is not altogather as it seemes vnto you: though I hold that law in Deut. 12. to be abrogate as touching the strict maner and meanes of abolishing Idolatry, yet hold I also that the equity of the same law teacheth Magistrates, to abolish both names and other monuments of Idolatry so far as they are not of necessary vse: my exception in this place was not of the Ma∣gistrates duety, but of the peoples reteyning of these names, op∣posite vnto your opinion, vvho teach that both Magistrates are still bound to destroy, and people also to forsake those things mentioned in Deut. 12. vvhereas on the contrary I shew that the saincts and faithfull brethren in the new Testament did not forsake but still reteyned and caryed the names of di∣vers Idolles. 2. VVhereas in this first reply you obiect the testimony of Polydore Virgil, and the example of Pope Sylvester, saying, that I come short of the zeale which, &c. You do here againe make flesh your arme, as before the flesh of the Infidel Ievves for your right arme, so here the flesh of blinde Papists for your left arme which you stretch out against me: but 1. as for Polydore know you not that he is a fabulous writer, full of falshood and for∣gery? read but those things that go a litle before, or follow after this allegation which you bring from him and you shall easily
discerne the same; besides other manifold instances that might be brought for proofe hereof: what meane you then to bring such notorious lyars for your witnesses? yea even in his story of this Pope in particular, he is taxed by Ioh. Bale Pageant of Popes, lib. 1 in Silvest. 1 better historians as a flatterer of this Sylvester, as the popes parasite, &c. 2. As for Sylvester himself, neither do I come short of his zeale, for though I hold that private Christians are not bound now to change their names, (no more then your Sylvester a member of your Church, though this his name have bene the title of sun∣dry Popes, that were great Idolles vniversally adored) yet do I hold that Magistrates should abolish Idol-names being of no vse. 3, you have no such cause to commend the zeale of this Sylvester, who though he be sayd to have changed some particu∣lar names of the dayes, yet is he therewithall noted to have tur∣ned them vnto an other Idolatrous name of ferie, which the heathens vsed to expresse their Idolatrous worship and feasts: feriae, a feriendo victimas: I could wish Christian Magistrates to go further then he, though in the meane time, I see no warrant for you and your people to change the names of dayes and Moneths in your speech and writings as you vse to doe: in such maner that many do not vnderstand you. 3. As for the promise of God Hos. 2.17. to take away the na∣mes of Baalim, &c. It was then performed for the substance of it: when Idol-worship was remooved from them; even as on the contrary, the name of God, is sayd Psal. 44.20. to be forgotten, when false worship is set vp. God might be true in accomplishing that promise, though the names of persons were not changed in such maner as in Numb 32.38. Therfore those two places should not be so strictly matched togather. Thus also is that Ps. 16.4. prophesie concerning Christe to be vnderstood: viz. that he would not take the names of the Idols into his mouth in any act of honour vnto them, or in any vnnecessary vse. And thus also is that exhortation of the Apostle Eph. 5.3. to be vn∣derstood of vs. In the second place you come to shew the meaning of that
law Deut. 12.3. & therein, 1. you do needlesly and superfluously alledge divers scriptures, to prove that all naming of false Gods is not absolutely forbidden; for that is no part of our question, nei∣ther have I in any place denyed the same. 2. Your interpre∣tation is insufficient when you do so generally and confusedly tell vs that such naming or reteyning of their names, as tendeth any way to the vpholding of their superstition, is forbidden; but do not tell vs by what reteyning of their names men do vphold their superstition: whereas in a just exposition you should distinctly and particularly have determined, whether the bearing of their names, as Phebe, Mercurie, Fortune, or the like be a meanes to vphold their superstition; or if not that, what other reteyning of their names. After these generall replyes, you come to speak of some of the Idolatrous names reteyned in the new Testament: & the∣rein, 1. You do idely and impertinently ask me, How I prove that those names, were at first given them in any respect of honour to the Idols of the heathens? For what though the names of vile Idols were not given to that intent vnto any person by his parents, at the first, could not thē the reteyning of such names in the time of the law be a transgression of that commandement Deut. 12 3 or doth this respect of the name-giver alter the law? herein you seeme to stumble at the stone which the Papists do so of∣ten fall vpon, namely in seeking to justify their actions by their good respects and intents. 2. To your question of Hermes in Rom. 16.14. I answer, sup∣pose he had his name either of Hermes Trismegistus, or of the no∣tation of the name, an Interpreter: yet doth it not therfore ceasse to be the name of an Idol: The name of Baal, though given to divers men: and though for the notation thereof it signify a Lord or an husband, and was Esa. 54.5 sometimes given vnto God, yet being also the name of an Idol, the Lord doth therfore forbid the reteyning thereof, commanding his people to Hos. 2.16 call him Ishi, and to call him no more Baali. 3. To your question concerning Phaebe, Rom.
16.1. I answer,1. You do in vaine distinguish between the heathen goddesse and the moone: seing the moone was that their goddesse wor∣shipped by them. 2, vvhether those that gave this name vnto Phaebe had reference to the Idol, or to the signification of the name, that skilles not much to the justifying of the action. Actions are to be judged of by the word of God, and not by the respects of men. If you should give vnto your Children the names of Mercurie, Iupiter, Venus, Diana: and excuse it thus, that you had no reference vnto the heathnish Idolles but onely to the signification of the names: could your conscience rest in this? 4 You say, we finde that Esa. 46.1 Bell or Beell was the name of an Idol, and in Beelzebub it is the name of a false God, 2. Kin. 1.2. But when David named his sonne 1. Chron, 14.7. Beel-jada, will you say he had reference to any Idol: or rather simply to the common vse and signification of that word? I answer, 1. you presume without warrant in saying that David named his Sonne Beel iada, we see that sonne hath an o∣ther name, to wit, Eliada, 2. Sam. 5.16. and 1. Chron. 3.8. how know you that Beel-jada, was the name that David chose? 2. The name of Bel and Beel are not properly Hebrew names to signify the Idol, but rather Babylonish or Syrian words; neither is it Beelzebub, as you write, but Baal-zebub in 2. Kin. 1.2. why should you think that David spoke in a strange dialect? 3. Suppose the name Beel-jada, had bene given to that sonne at the first, yet seing he hath an other name also, why might we not thē think, that this was given as a correction of the first, as the name of Ierubbaal was afterwards called 2 Sam. 11 21.
Ierubbesheth? 4. If Davids re∣ference to the common signification of the word might excuse him in giving the name of Baal vnto his children, as you plead, then by the like reason he might have given vnto other of his sonnes, the names of Dagon, Ashtaroth, Molech, Nebo, Chemosh & of other abhominable Idols and have maintayned his fact by his respect vnto the notation of these names. And if this respect and reference might thus warrant the giving of a name, why might it not warrant the reteyning of an Idols name, by chan∣gingthe respect? And then what needed the Children of Ruben to have changed the names Numb. 32 38. of Nebo and Baalmeon, while they might have sayd, we have no longer reference to the Idols, but to the common vse and signification of these words? 5. Having spoken of Popish superstition performed to Peter, Paul and Iames, you then ask: when men give their Chil∣dren civill names of Peter, Iames, &c, must they needs herein commu∣nicate with the Papists Idolatrie? I answer, 1. your note of di∣stinction and speech of civil names is vaine: for the names of these apostles and holy men may as well be called religious na∣mes, yea and ought to be vsed for religious ends, serving to ad∣monish vs both of the faith, obedience and holy examples of such men that we might imitate the same, as also of the dueties noted in the signification of the names: Col. 4.6. And seing all our speech and words which we name ought to have Religious vse and to serve for aedification: how much more that speciall name whereby we are called? 2. The names of Peter, Iames, Iohn and such like, as they are religious names, so are they also allowed of God and commended vnto vs in the scriptures for instruction and holy vse: and therfore though they be abused by some, yet may they more lawfully be given vnto Children, then other Idolatrous names which never receyved any such allowance from God. 3, as for other names of men turned into Idols, whereof you also speak, if they by the law of Moses without any sin, and without exception be given vnto children: then might the most abhominable Idols of the heathen be given and reteyned: seing the most of their false Gods and Idols, as Saturne, Iupiter, Neptune, Hercules, Isis & Osyris and the like are generally by the cheefest historians noted to have bene men and women, deifyed, canonized and turned into Gods by the people that worshipped them and erected temples vnto them. According to such expositions, the law of God might quickly have bene made of no effect.
6. VVhereas you say: it is yet for me to prove, that Paul in mentioning Phaebe, Hermes and others by their common knowne names did contrary to that commandement in Deut. 12.3. if it stand in force at this day. I answer, 1. you pervert the question, as though I had affirmed Paul to have done contrary to the commande∣ment, whereas I spake of the reteyning and not abolishing those Idol-names in the Saincts which Paul mentioneth: Is there no difference with you betwixt the men reteyning, or bearing an Idol name, for their title: and the mentioning of the same by others? Then Nebu-chadnezzar, & Belshazzar did as lawfully in bearing the names of the Idolles Nebo & Bel: as the Prophet mentioning their titles. 2, if the law in Deut. 12.3. standing in force did not forbid men the reteyning of the names Mercurie, Venus, Iupiter, Phebe, and the like wherein I instanced, then did it forbid the vse of no Idol-names, because none were more vile then these: nor scarce any maner of reteyning them for the out ward action, more vile then vpō the persons of the Saincts, the temples of the holy Ghost. 7. Againe you obiect that the Antichristian names of Pope, Abbot, Monke, frier, &c. though vnlawfull to be given vnto men in respect of their office, yet ministers might reteyne them as civill names, though they lived vnder Moses law, &c. Ans. 1, all that you here say, is a bare assertion and without proofe, not to be admit∣ted. 2, This distinction of civil names (if it be ought worth) reproves your practise, that do not reteyne the common and civil vse of the names, given to the dayes of the week, but chāge the same. And why do you commend the needlesse zeale of Pope Sylvester in changing those names, when as the civill vse of them without respect vnto religion, might have sufficed? 3. If turning Idolatrous names vnto civill vse, was a sufficient war∣rant not to abolish them even vnder the law, then what needed that losse 1 Deut. 12.2.3. 2. Chron. 14.3. & 17.6 & 31.1. & 34.3, &c. in burning & breaking downe tēples & groves? might not they have bene turned vnto other proffitable civil vses? Seing the names & the places were in like maner forbiddē, you may not vse more indulgence in sparing one above the other. 4. If the law in Deut. 12. do not condemne the civil vse of names & places abused vnto Idolatry, thē do you vniustly condēne our
vse of tēples, which is for a civil help vnto vs as wel as the seates & stooles that men fit vpon in the Church, and as well as the staves that old men leane vpon in comming to the worship of God. VVe esteeme all places a like in respect of holynes, vsing these onely for civil conveniencie and commoditie. 5. The speciall warrant for the Saincts reteyning those old Idolatrous names in the new Testament, is that great benefit purchased by the death of Christe, who hereby Act. 10.15. 1 Cor. 10.25.26. Tit. 1.15. Rō. 14.20 purifyed for our vse, those things which vnder the law were vncleane and vnlawfull for our vse; of which benefit more is to be spoken hereafter, when I come to answer your obiection touching the same: where yet vve are alwayes to remember this caution that the creatures & things abused vnto Idolatry, are to be forborne, save when there is a necessary vse of them: as in the names of Hermes, Phebe Fortunatus and the like, which being formerly given vnto pri∣vate men, could not be changed by them without manifold scandalles and discommodities, and therfore in that case of necessary vse were lawfully reteyned by them. But as for your plea, of reteyning Antichristian names, of Pope, Abbot, monke, &c. for civill vse: it is not to be admitted vnder the law any more thē the giving or reteyning the names of Baal-zebub, Baal-peor, Bel, Nebo & the like: no nor yet vnder the Gospel, whē the case of necessity doth not excuse them: what Christiā man can without scādall give such names as civill, without necessity vnto his childrē? Therfore howsoever you do vniustly separate frō the churches of God vpō pretence of their Idolatry; you do now by this plea proceed to a further countenācing of idolatry; then that any godly Christian may follow your steppes herein. Lastly, whereas you do againe alledge divers places out of
Daniel to prove that the law in Deut. 12.3. forbiddeth not to mē∣tion heathen Gods: you do but trifle, and turne from the que∣stion about reteyning or bearing the names of Idolles, vnto a question about mentioning their names, which I never impug∣ned. Could you have brought any sound matter against the question it self, you would not so often have slipped from it,even three times in this one section. As for the Idolatrous names givē vnto Daniel and his three frēds, though he might lawfully in his story mention them: yet the law of Charitie bindes vs to judge, that they bore and reteyned these names by constraint, being imposed vpon them against their willes, and that they protested against them: otherwise, how could they have bene innocent? Section. 3. Hen. Ains. YOur 3. exception is, that the commandement in Deut. 12. is not vniversal for the place; but expressely determined and restray∣ned to the land of Canaan, to the idols of those nations which Israel should possesse; from that place they were to be cut of Deut. 12.1.2.3 even as God would have greater severitie against the Canaanites, then other idolaters, Deut. 20.10.-15.16.17. Ios. 9.6.7. &c.
I answer, this your restraint to the idols of Canaan onely, as if God would not have other idols destroyed also, is not according to the intent of the law: for be mentioneth that place, because they were to possess it: not intending that if they had possessiō of an other place, they should have let the idols remayne, According to which equi∣tie, Magistrates now should destroy idols in their own dominions, and not thrust themselves into other peoples possessions to doe the like. And that this is the meaning, I manifest, first by an other like law in Lev. 18.3. where they were forbidden to doe after the manner of Egypt wherein they dwelt, and of Canaan whither they should come: these lands are mentioned by occasion of Israels dwelling in them: not that God permitted them to folow the customes of other heathens, but vnder these two, implied all. Secondly, I shew it by other like words in that very law, Deut. 12. as when he sayth in v. 2. all the places wherin the Nations which ye shall possess served their Gods: here the limitation is as wel in respect of the Nations as of the Land. But that God respected not the places of those heathens onely, appeareth by the execution of this law: when not onely the places wherin the Canaanites worshiped false Gods, but also the places wherein the Israelites falsly worshiped the true God, were destroyed:as Ieroboams temples & Altars, & other like, 2 Kin. 23,15.19. Thirdly because not the idols of Canaan onely, but of all other nations, are De∣vils, Deut. 32.17. 1 Cor. 10.20. and therfore alike abhorred of God, and to be destroyed as abominable to men. Fourthly, because long af∣ter the destruction of the idols of Canaan, God teacheth his people the like detestation and destruction of all Idols in general, Esa. 30.22. Ier. 10.11. and 51.17.18. Zach. 13.2. Ezek. 30.13. Fiftly, the Prophet speaking of the Egyptians, sayth not onely that God would break their images, but that he would also burne the houses of their gods with fyre, Ier. 43,13. wherfore the law extēdeth not to the Ido∣lies of Canaan onely, as you suppose. As for Gods greater severitie against the Canaanites and other peoples: there was cause of diffe∣rence, in respect of the persons: these being come to the Gen. 15.16. fulnes of their iniquitie above other nations; and being Children of the Gen. 9.25 curse, more then other. But betvveen idols and idols, Divils and Divils, there is no such difference, that God should root out some, & favour othersome: no not the idols of his ovvn people, as before is shevved; and so not the idols of Antichrist, which are Rev. 9.20 devils also. And the example of Egypt confirmeth this: for God sayd. Deut. 23.7. Thou shalt not abhorre an Egyptian; yet the idols and Temples of Egypt he would have burnt with fyre, Ier. 43.13. Answer. Io. Pa. IN setting downe my third answer: you do in the first place very deceitfully and vniustly repeat the same: for whereas I according to the question betwixt vs, noted that the cōmande∣ment for destroying idolatrous places vvas expressely determined and restreyned to the Land of Canaan, to the Idolles of those nations, &c. in stead of this, (the commandement in Deut. 12. being both against Idolatrous places, and the Idols themselves) first you omit and leave out that mention of Idolatrous places wherevpon I insisted in particular, you speak generally of the Commandement in Deut. 12. and afterwards turne it in some of your answers vnto the Idolles themselves, as if God would not
have other Idoles destroyed, contrary vnto my words and mea∣ning: as the reader may see in my Pag. 20. former writing. There is a great difference betwixt these two sentences: The commandemēt in Deut. 12. is restreyned to the destruction off the Idolles of those na∣tions, which I sayd not: and this, The commandement for destro∣ying Idolatrous places is restreyned to the Idolles of those nations, &c. which was my answer. In the next place you bring 5. reasons to prove that there was no such restreynt, &c. And first, you labour to manifest it, by an other like law in Levit. 18.3. where they were forbidden to do after the maner of Egypt wherein they dwelt, & of Canaan whither they should come, &c. I answer. 1. Though God have forbidden men to imitate the maner & workes of the Egyptians & other natiōs in their Idolatrous ser∣vices and other abhominable practises, as well as the Idolatries of Canaan: yet doth it not follow hence, that he hath condem∣ned the vse of the places in all alike. The law in Lev. 18.3. is not in this particular poynt of the place like vnto that in Deut. 12. This you should have manifested, if you could. 2. If vsing the place of false worshippers be a doing after their maner, then are you guilty of following the maner of the Iewes seing since your separation from Mr. Iohnson, you have some∣times had your ordinary publique meetings for the worship of God, in the same place where they have also ordinarily and publiquely exercised their abhominable Idolatries and false worship.
Your second reason is taken from other like words in that very law, Deut. 12.2. all the places wherein the Nations which ye shall possess, &c. and the execution of this law in destroying the places of Idolatrous Israelites, as Ieroboams temples, &c. Answ. Seing even by your owne confession and words, the limitation is as wel in respect of the Nations as of the Land; all reason requires, when any commandement is described in divers words, whereof some are more full and ample then others, that then the limitation should be vnderstood according to those phrases that are ofgreatest extent: and consequently the commandement for the Land of Canaan, conteyning not onely the particular places vvhere the Canaanitish nations, but also the places where the Idolatrous Israelites did worship their Idols, might serve for a warrant vnto Iosias to destroy Ieroboams temples being within the Land of Canaan, 2. Kin. 23. But what is this to vs that are without the, Land of Canaan? The fullest and amplest phrase in that commandement Deut. 12. doth not extend vnto the pla∣ces which we reteyne in the worship of God. Your third reason is, because not the idols of Canaan onely, but of all other nations are Divilles, Deut. 32.17. 1 Cor. 10.20. and ther∣fore alike abhorred of God and to be destroyed as abhominable to men. I answer. 1. Though Idolles be called Devilles, yet doth it not follow from thence, that the places where they have bene formerly served, may not be converted vnto the vse of Christians to worship God in the same: you bring scriptures to prove the antecedent of this reason, which you needed not: but for profe of the consequent you bring nothing, which you should have done: if you would have made your reason good. 2. VVe know that Devilles are of Mat. 17.21. & 12.45. sundry kindes and some wicked Spirits are worse then others: as also are the Idolles and the different services of them; and therfore we cannot say that they are alike abhorred of God; or that the places where they have bene served are in like manner to be destroyed of men. 3. Suppose that all Devilles, Idolles and the services of them were in themselves & in their owne nature equally evill; yet as the circumstance of the place doth often aggravate the sin, so God having taken and appropriated the Land of Canaan vnto himself to be Levit. 25.23.24. his Land in a peculiar manner, how can you say but that the pollution of this holy Land by Idolatrie, might in this regard deserve a greater detestation of all the monuments, instruments and meanes of such pollution? 4. VVe see in Mark. 16 9. Luk. 8.2.3
Mary Magdalene, that the very same breast which was first a real possession of wicked Spirits, a cage of vn∣cleanebirds, and an habitation of Devilles, was afterwards san∣ctifyed to be an holy temple and habitation of God by his spi∣rit: If the glorious and blessed God refuse not to be worshipped and dwell in such a Den of Devilles after it is once purged, why should we in this respect of former pollution (having no other speciall restraint) refuse to worship God in such an habitation of idolles, when as the Idolatrie is remooved, and the place pu∣rifyed from the former vncleannes of the Devill? 5. If the worship of Devilles make places so polluted that no cleansing will make them fit for the publique service of God, then is that place of your assembly vnlawful, where you have taught the doctrine of Devilles; seing Mat. 15.9 their doctrines are part of their worship, even as the doctrines of God are a part of Gods worship and service. In Ans. to Mr. Iacob. p. 135, 140 147. your writings against the Church of England, to prove that they are departers from the faith, no true Christians, holding fundamentall errours, teaching the doctrines of Devilles: you alledge that that Church forbiddeth ma∣riage, &c. namely, vnto fellowes of colledges, prentises, and to all men and women in Lent, Advent, Rogation week, &c. If this cor∣ruption dravv such a heavy Burden vpon the back of England, then vvill it bring as heavy a Doome vpon your ovvne heads, vvho teach the Doctrine of devilles by forbidding Mariage in a far vvorse maner then the Church of England doth, viz. by forbidding your people, all both men and vvomen, to mary vvith the godly members of the Reformed Churches, & this not for any terme of yeares, at any set time, but at all times: yea excommunicating such of your people as have so maryed with the members of the Dutch Church, setting downe this mariage as one cause of your giving them to Satan: And in the cordes of this sin you are still holden, wanting repentance for your evill: for this doctrine of Devilles, which is a part of their worship, according to your owne reasoning, the very place where you have so worshipped is to be destroyed, and can never be cleansed vnto a lawfull vse in the worship of God.
Your fourth reason is, because long after the destruction of theIdoles of Canaan, God teacheth his people the like detestation and de∣struction of all Idols in generall, Esa. 30.22. Ier. 10.11. & 51.17.18. Zach. 13.2. Ezek. 30.13. Answer. You do here run quite be∣side the question: from the Idolatrous places to the Idolles themselves. And of all the scriptures that you here produce, there is not one of them that speakes a word, touching the de∣struction of such places, as have bene abused to Idolatry but ei∣ther of the Idols themselves or of other vnnecessary appurte∣nances belonging vnto them. VVhen you shew by any just consequence of argument, how they speak for you: you shall then (godwilling) receyve further answer. Your fift reason is, that the Prophet speaking of Egyptians, sayth not onely that God would break their images, but that he also would burne the houses of their Gods with fyre, Ier 43.13. wherfore the law extendeth not to the Idolies of Canaan onely, &c. I answer. 1. Here indeed is speech, not onely of the images, but also of their houses destroyed: and this you note so plainely and di∣stinctly, that I wonder how you could not observe it, in your former reason, vnlesse you did willingly winke and purposely turne away frō the questiō. 2, there is yet in this speech no pre∣scription or rule to binde vs to deale in like maner with all other places abused to Idolatry: The destruction here noted is a judgement of God executed by Ier. 43.10 Nebuchadnezzar an Idolater himself, that had no conscience or regard of that commande∣ment, Deut. 12. vvho did also by the like judgement of God burne the Ier. 52.13. temple at Ierusalem, and not onely the house of the Lord, but also the Kings howse, and all the howses of Ierusalem: So that by such reasonings as this, from the judgements of God by heathens, you might as well conclude the destroying and abo∣lishing of private mens houses for their Idolatry: of palaces and judgements halles: and of Gods owne howse so oft as it was de∣filed by Idoles. That which I sayd for illustration of this poynt, in respect of greater severity shewed vnto the Idolatours of Canaan them∣selves, in their owne persons, as vvel as in their Idoll-places, is
so plaine, that in stead of refuting the same, you go about to confirme the same by bringing reasons thereof from the fullnes of their sin: and because they were the Children of the curse more then other. And yet there is a further and higher cause thereof, even the hid counsell of God, and the good pleasure of his will: for others also as the Iewes came to Mat. 23.32-36. with 1. Thess. 2.15.16. fullnes of sin, and became the Mat. 11.21.22. Children of curse, more then other for their contempt of the Gospell: yea more then the Canaanites themselves; for the Gen. 10.15. Sidonians were Canaanites: yet was there no warrant for any therevpon to shew so great severity against their persons. That which you repeat touching the difference betwixt idols and idols, devils and devils: as also touching the destruction of the temples of Egypt is already answered. Section 4. Hen. Ains. YOur 4. exception is, seing meats sacrificed to Idols were as much polluted as the places of their worship, and yet may now be retei∣ned for our necessarie vse, Psal. 24.1. with 1. Cor. 10.25.—27. why not the temples also, contrary to the ceremonie of old? I answer: The reason is because the absteyning from meats offred to idols, was a shadow among other shadowes, Col. 2.16.17.20.21. Heb. 9.10. Touch not, tast not handle not: but the commandement to destroy idolies, was not a cere∣monie or shadow to be abrogated by Christ, as before is shewed: but a moral precept and perpetual: and we are now plainly permitted to eat such sacrificed meat, 1 Cor. 10. and as plainly commanded still to keep our selves from idols, 1. Ioh. 5,21. And such are Antichrists tem∣ples, being consecrated by many popish inchantments, vnto the Pontifi∣cal. de be∣nedict. primi lap. pro eccle∣sia aedific. ho∣nour of creatures; to be kept through the interceding merits of all saints and by infusion of grace, to be purified from all pollution: and to be no other then the howse of God, and the gate of heaven, &c. Now how these abominable places, should be by the blood of Christ, or by the word & prayer sanctified to be places for Gods people to worship him in; appeareth not by Psal. 24. compared with
1 Cor. 10. but rather the contrary. For those meats offred to idols, which might be eaten sold inthe shambles, or at an infidels private table, might not be eaten in the idols temple: although such as did eat them there, knew that the idol was nothing, and thought it therfore in their Christian tibertie to sit at table there, 1. Cor. 8.4.10. and 10.19.—22. Neyther am I of your minde, that the meats offred to idols, are as much polluted as the idol or idol temple: for (if we may by the Apostles 1. Cor. 10.18. example, compare things with Israel after the flesh,) as the temple of God, was greater then the gold thereof, and the Altar greater then the gift offred ther∣on, being sanctified (as our saviour Mat. 23.16.—19. witnesseth,) by the temple and Altar: then by like reason, these idol-temples and altars in them, were worse then all the offrings, and did pollute the sacrifices, and not the sacrifices them. Moreover, in Deut. 12. which is the scripture in hand, you finde no such commandement to destroy meats or other things of∣fred to idols, as there is for the idols and idolies themselves: so where the law is silent, you should not speak. Finally, though it was lawfull to eat Gods good creatures which the gentiles had sacrificed to idols; yet was it not lawfull (by 1. Cor. 10.) to vse things for that where∣vnto idolaters had in speciall manner consecrated them: but you vse these Idoleies, for that whervnto idolaters Bellar∣min. de cultu sanct. l. 3. c. 4. consecrated them: viz. for prayer, and for the words & Sacraments. Answer. Io. Pa. IN your reply vnto my fourth answer, taken from the lawfull vse of things sacrificed to Idolles, though as much polluted as the places where the Idols were served, First, you do vniustly make one of these to be a shadow and ceremony rather then the other: And the places alledged by your self do serve for your refutation. For doth not the Apostle Col. 2.21. describe the ceremonies there spoken of, as well by those wordes of Touch not, handle not; as by the words of Tast not? And do not men in absteyning from vncleane places, observe the ceremony of
Touch not; as well as they do the cere∣mony of Tast not, by absteyning from vncleane meat? when God ordeyned and determined a ceremoniall vncleannes,vpon the Numb. 19.14. entring into the house of the dead, that men should be vncleane by touching the ground of that place with their feet, as well as by handling the dead body with their hands: this shewes that the ceremony of Touch not is to be observed & ac∣knowledged in absteyning from places, as well as in absteyning from meates. This appeareth further by the Levit. 13.46. & 12.4 Numb. 5.2.3. Exod. 3.5. & 19.12. commandement of keeping vncleane persons and that in divers degrees from entring or coming into holy places, and from Touching of them, vvhat aileth you then, that you cannot see a ceremony in absteyning frō the vncleane place of the dead idols, as wel as in absteyning from the vncleane meate of the dead Idols? And as for Heb. 9.10. doth not the Apostle as well mention carnall rites in generall, as abstinence from meates and drinks in particular? And why is not the ceremony of not touching an vncleane place, as well a carnall rite, as the not touching of an vncleane meate? Against this you bring nothing: That which you say, you shewed before, concerning the destroying of Idolies, is be∣fore answered also.
Secondly, whereas you alledge that we are still commanded to keep our selves from Idols 1. Ioh. 5.21. & would shew withall, that our temples are Idols, being consecrated by many popish inchant∣ments, vnto the honour of creatures, &c. I answer, 1. This kinde of vnlawfull consecration though it be a greevous sin, yet doth it not make our temples to be Idols: you do onely give vs your bare word, but bring no shew of scripture for proofe of this poynt. 2, vvhen you do bring any scripture to this end, you shall finde, that the same scriptures will as well prove meates sacrificed to Idoles, to be very Idols, as the places cōsecrate vnto them: and that they will as much condemne the Idololythes, as the Idolies; seing that the Idolothytes, or sacrificed meates are also consecrate by many heathnish and devilish rites vnto the honour of creatures, as well as the Idolies or temples. 3. If our temples be very Idols, as afterwards againe you speak, then with what conscience or warrant can you or any of yours fre∣quent the same for the worship of God, as your maner is bycoming vnto the library of the great church in this citie where I have divers times found you? vnder the worship or service of God, according to your owne description, is comprehended, Arrow against Idolatry. Chap. 1. sec. 11. all manner work, labour, industry of body or minde to help forward any Religious action; so that your study in the library must be acknowledged a worship of God, a gnabodah comprehending both dulia & latreia, as you note in the same place. Now as it is sayd of Moloch that there vvere many chambers in that huge Idol: so vve see that Nebuchadnezzars Idol erected in the plaine of Dura, being Dan. 3.1. threescore cubites high and six cubites broad in greatnes like vnto a stately and high tovver or steeple which might conteyne in it many celles, chambers & roomes (though not so great as this Idol which you haunt:) and now according to your present practise and profession, if there had bene a li∣brary in one of those roomes, & if you had lived in those times you would have made no scruple to have gone vp into the chambers of that monstrous Idol, even for the worship of God to have sitten in the celles and studyed in the library thereof. Though Ananias, Azarias and Mishael did choose rather to goe into Ibid. vers. 6.12.—23. a hote oven, then to do any honour vnto that beast; yet you without feare or suspicion of doing any honour vnto that fiēd, would willingly in the sight of all have gone in at the dore or mouth of that Image, couched in some hollow tooth, or sit in some great gutte of that Devill (for all Idols are De∣villes as you confesse) and there have studyed as in the oracle of Apollo. Yea and all this while, you would boldly have maintained your separation from all the churches of Christe, as being the one onely minister in the earth, free from a pollu∣ted communion: while all other are condemned by you as de∣filed with the filthines of Antichristian Idols. O Mr. Ains∣worth, ponder with your self what godly wisedome, modesty or sincerity can be in this your strange and contradictory pra∣ctise and profession. If our temples be Devilles and
Idolles, de∣vote vnto destruction, and this of God, as you write, how may any Servant of God imitate your example, in sitting so securely inthat place over which the judgement of God and the sword of his vengeance doth hang continually, none knowing when it shall fall? As the Lord of old passing through Egipt did soda∣inely Exo. 12.12. destroy their Idolles, so still he Esa. 19.1. & 46.1. threatens them: & their destruction is just that vvill tempt God and sit in the bosome of knowne Idolles: If a sodaine tumult by men, or a thunder bolt from heaven should come to dash out the braines of ab∣hominable Idolles, how could you thinke to escape sitting as it were in the middes of the braines, studying in the bookes of this library in the Idol-temple as you take it? Yea, if it were but for any civil busines, to do the work of any trade whatso∣ever, what conscionable man knowing the judgement of God against Idolles, that durst make his shop in the belly of such an execrable, anathematized or damned Image? Though you have written a booke, and called it, an Arrow against Idolatry, yet do you not feare, as is meete, the Arrows of God, which he hath made ready vpon the strings of his Bow against the face of every Idol. Thirdly, where you say it doth not appeare by ps. 24. compared with 1. Cor. 10. how these abhominable places should be by the blood of Christe, and by the word and prayer sanctifyed, &c. I answer, 1. David in ps. 24. prophesying of Christe, the king of Glory; of the eternall durance of his Church, signifyed by the everlasting dores: of his entrance into and of his administration of that spi∣rituall Kingdome, signifyed by the opening of the dores before him, and this according to your owne Annot. on ps. 24.7. exposition also; doth in the beginning of the psalme shew the largenes of his dominiō, over all creatures and places in Sea and land, he being made Heb. 1.2. heire of all things: If therfore Christe be a King vniversall & a Monarch then may he be worshipped in every place, els that place should be none of his rightfull dominion: If we also be
Rom. 8.17. heires with Christe of the earth, then may ech place of our in∣heritance serve vs for a place to worship the Lord in. This do∣nation of the earth for our vse being indefinite, is to be vnder∣stood in the largest sense for our comfort, while no restraint isadded. They that vnwarrantably restreyne this gift vnto a civil vse onely, they rob both Christe and his Servants of a great part of their inheritance. 2, vvhereas you insist, that these meates sacrificed to jdols might not be eaten in the Idols-temple: the Apostle speaks according to the present estate of those tem∣ples, while jdolatry vvas still exercised in them; vvhile those Idol-feasts were kept, vvhich vvere a part of their 1. Cor. 10.7 21 false vvor∣ship performed vnto the Idols: but vvhat is this to the Reli∣gious vse of these places purged from Idolatry and imployed in the true vvorship of God? Fourthly, vnto your comparative reason to prove Idol-tem∣ples vvorse then Idol-sacrifices, because they pollute the sacri∣fices and not the sacrifices them; as on the contrary the temple sanctifyed the gold, &c. I ansvver. 1, your comparison is vne∣quall and vnlike; for the sanctification of the oblations and sa∣crifices depended vpon one temple and Altar therein: there being no other place to sanctify their offrings: but the conse∣cration of these meates sacrificed to Idols did not depend vpon any one temple or Altar: Hos. 12.11. their altars vvere many I as heapes in the furrovves of the field: therfore a different povver for conse∣cration is to be observed. Neither is it true vvhich you say that the Idol-sacrifices did not pollute the places: though the holy sacrifices could not so much sanctify the altar of the Lord as the altar them Mat. 23. yet might the Idols sacrifice as much pollute, the Idol-places, as the places them: because in vncleane things there is often a Hag. 2.13.14. stronger working to pollute, then there is in holy things to sanctify. Yet further, that men be not deceyved in the misvnderstanding of Christs words, Mat. 23.17.19. it is also to be considered how God would that Levit. 16 20. Numb. 7.10.88. 1 Kin.
8.63. 2 Chron. 29.21.24. both altar and temple should be sanctifyed by the offrings, 2, suppose it were as you say, that Idol-places were worse thē the Idol-sacrifices: thē mark into what evilles you cast your self: Then the places where we worship are worse then the Idol-sacrifice of the Masse, worse then the sacrificing of a childe vnto Moloch: and communion in the true worship in one ofthese temples is worse then communion with the Masse or any of those abhominable sacrificers offred out of the Idol-temples appoynted therevnto: Then how is your apostasy aggravated hereby, when after your separation, you yeelded to worship God in one of these polluted places, committing a more vn∣cleane sin then if you had yeelded to heare the Masse, or to communicate in any heathenish Idolothyte out of the Idol-temple? Then how great is your sin still, which tolerate among you an Idolater, that dayly worshippeth God in one of these temples? by this kinde of reasoning, you might as well allow the members of your separate company to heare Masse, or to participate with other abhominable Idolatries: Thus do you dash your feet against the stones, which you cast in our way: & crush your self in peeces, with your owne reasons returning vpon your head. Fiftly, you say, that in Deut. 12. which is the scripture in hand, you finde no such Commandement to destroy meates or other things offred to Idols, &c. I answer, 1. If I finde it for you in other places of scripture, though not in that, yet have you no cause to accuse me, for speaking, where the law is silent. 2, even the analogie of that place Deut. 12. shewes their destruction: for if there can be no further vncleannes and pollution shewed in the places there appoynted to be destroyed, then there is in the Idol-sacrifices: then doth the equity of that law require that like things should be alike destroyed. 3, vve see more ex∣pressely in other places of scripture that things dedicate or givē to Idols were to be destroyed: as the 2 Kin. 23 11.
horses consecrate to the Sun which Iosias abolished: and the Charets of the Sunne, which he burnt with fire. 4, even your self in this section confesse abstinence from things offred to Idolles to be a shadow or ce∣remonie, &c. If they must be absteyned from and not eaten thē were they destroyed; whether burnt with fire, or given to the Dog, or othervvise destroyed, it skilleth not. How then do you forget yourself? 5, afterwards againe in the next chapter you plainely argue that heathnish temples were to be de∣stroyed,because they were part of their Religion and Idolatries: which you prove, because Cicero calles them holy and religious: Now I hope you will not deny but that Idolothytes or Idol-sa∣crifices were also a part of their religion and Idolatrie, that the heathens accounted these sacrifices holy and religious, as well as their temples: and therfore it followes most plainely by your owne reasoning, that they were to be destroyed as well as their temples. Thus you see there is no cause to complayne of me for speaking, where yourself are not silent. Finally, you adde, that it was not lawfull (by 1 Cor. 10.) to vse things for that wherevnto Idolaters had in speciall manner conse∣crated them, &c. Answ. 1. It is shewed before from ps. 24. with 1 Cor. 10. that we may have not onely a civill but also a religious vse of such things notwithstanding any such conse∣cration. 2, though Bellarmin say, that their temples were con∣secrated for prayer, for the word and Sacraments; yet doth it not follow that we vse them for the same things; because our prayers, preaching of the word & Sacraments are not the same with theirs; their prayers being Idolatrous invocations of creatures: their scriptures, apocryphal: their preachings, he∣retical; their Sacrament of Eucharist, an horrible Idol, &c. For these things they vvere consecrated some of them: but for these ends we vse them not. Section. 5. Hen. Ains. To your 5. exception, about the burning of the remnants of the sa∣crifices, &c. We doe all agree that those things with the ordinan∣ces about them, were shadowes, and are abolished by Christ: and ther∣fore no consequence can be gathered for the like outward practise now, but onely for the spiritual equitie. Answer.
Io. Pa. THough the holy things of God of old, as the remainder of the sacrifices, were to be abolished vvhen the religious vse ceassed, yet can there no just consequence be gathered for thelike practise now in abolishing the remainders of bread and wine in the Lords supper: Thus much you graunt; and thus far we agree. But whereas in my answer vnto you, I shewed fur∣ther, that God did in like manner command to abolish one as well as the other: the high places of Canaan, as the remainders of certaine sacrifices: to this you say nothing. It remaines ther∣fore for you to shew, why one of these commandements should still be in force rather then the other. If you thinke that one of these commandements is a ceremoniall shadow rather then the other: though the contrary hath bene already shewed before, yet it may further also appeare by this, because these things, viz. The abolishing of holy things after the religious vse: & the abolishing of Idolatrous places after the vncleane vse, are com∣mandements of like nature both for the action in themselves, and proportion vnto things signifyed: the one shadowing out vnto vs a speciall estimation of Gods ordinances, as the other shadowed out a speciall detestation of mens inventions. Section. 6. Hen. Ains. YOur last exception is, that God of old appointed one onely place for sacrifice, Deut. 12.5.6. Lev. 17.3.4. therfore those high places being for sacrifice, were to be destroyed, &c. but now difference of place is taken away, Ioh. 4.21. I answer: First the law speaketh of Deut. 12.2. all places wherein the natiōs served their Gods: so that though they were not for sacrifice, but for prayer, or other like vse, they were to be pulled downe. Secondly though there was to be but one place for sacrificing, yet foloweth it not that that was the cause (at least the onely cause) why heathenish idols and idoleies should be destroyed: but for that they were divils, and divils howses, and a part of their religion which God abhorreth, and men should detest, therfore were they to be demolished, as Moses sheweth in Deut. 7.25.26. and Exod. 23.24. And this appeareth by Iakobs practise, who Gen. 35.2.3.4. abolished idols and moniments of them, before any one place was chosen: and so did
Exo. 32.20. Moses destroy the idols in the wilder∣nes,before the Tabernacle was made. In other lands also, as Ier. 44.12.13. & 48.7.13. & 50 2. Ezek. 30 13. in Egypt, Moab, Babylon, &c. where no one place was chosen for sacrifice: yet God would destroy the Idols and idol temples, for detestation of them. Thirdly, If we look vpon the thing figured by that one place, it will lead vs from these idol temples now, rather then to them. For princi∣pally the Temple of old, figured Ioh. 2.19.21. Christ: secondarily the 2. Cor. 6.16. Church of Christians. In both respects we should avoyd to worship God vnder the shadow of the idols of Antichrist: for the Apostle sayth, 2 Cor. 6.15.16. what concord hath Christ with Belial? and (of the Church he sayth) what agreement hath the temple of God, with idols? So the type of one place, helpeth you nothing. No more will the taking away of the difference of place; which you last insist vpon. For our saviours words (in Ioh. 4) ought in reason to be expounded according to his Fathers law, not against it, even by his own doctrine, Mat. 5.17. So that when idols and idolies are destroyed as God commanded, and the typi∣call sanctitie of Ierusalem is ended: then are all places free to worship God in, in spirit and trueth. And seing Christ, to bring in the true spiritual worship, would not onely end, but even Dan. 9.26. destroy the citie & the Sanctuarie, which once were holy: how can we think, that he would have the idolie of the Samaritans stand vnderstroyed: or the abhominations that his enemie Antichrist should afterwards erect? And the text it self, if it be considered, teacheth not otherweise. For first, it sheweth that God shalbe worshiped, Ioh 4.21. neyther in the mount of Samaria (where they committed idolatrie) nor in Ierusalem, (where the typicall worship had bene for a time.) Whervpon it followeth, that Antichrist having erected temples for idols, in imitation of Ieru∣salems temple purposely in the parts and Shape, as the Bellarm. de cultu sanct. l. 3. c. 3. Papists ac∣knowledge: and conjured them with moe Pope-holy rites, and for moe irreligious vses, then there were holy rites and vses of Solomons tem∣ple, as is to be seen in the Pontifical: we are rather to conclude, that God is not to be worshiped in them. Secondly, Christ there teacheth all men to worship God
Ioh. 4.23.24. in spirit and trueth: which are opposed both to the figurative worship of the Iewes, and false worship of the gen∣tiles but Antichrists temples are a part of the false worship which he hath forged as the gentiles did of old (as shal anone be more fullymanifested:) therfore Christ by those words, rather calleth vs from them then vnto them, by his doctrine in Ioh. 4. Thirdly, we cannot in reason think, that there should be more indifferencie of place now, then there is indifferencie of other things, seing th'Apostle sayth Tit. 1.15 vnto the pure all things are pure: vvhervpon you may as wel conclude a lawfull vse of popish garments, images, and other things of his reli∣gion, as of his idol places. And so the minister may weare a cope, miter, surplice, &c. in his ministration (vvhich the Pope appointed in imi∣tation of the Levitical preistly garments) as vvel as minister in a popish sanctuarie; and all other his abominable rites, may be reteined of vs Christians in our Churches, by as good reason as the temples of his ahomination. Which is as contrary to Christs intendement in Ioh. 4. as darknes is to light. And thus Deut. 12.2.3. compared with Exod. 20.4.5 6. is of force to throw downe idols and idol temples, notwith∣standing all that you have sayd to vphold them. And according to your manner of pleading for idolies, the Corinthians, (vvhom Paul convinced of syn for eating in the idolie, 1. Cor. 10 18. by an argument of Israels practise) might aso have pleaded, that those things concerned Israel vvhich vvere a special people separated from all other, and they were bound to eat of the sacrifices before Gods sanctuarie onely, one peculiar place: but now, the earth is the Lords and the plentie therof, all places are alike, all idols are nothing, & were by them so knowen & estemed. And even as you plead against Deut. 12. vvhich is an explanation of the 2. Commandement: so Bellarm. de Imagin. l. 2. c. 7. some Papists have also pleaded against the 2. commandement it self, that it vvas a temporal precept, and that now vnder the nevv Testament images are lavvfull. Answer. Io. Pa. MY last answer to your first reason, was this, that there is not the like reasō to abolish the buildings abused vnto Idolatry now, as the high places of old, because God having then appoynted one onely place for sacrifice, Deut.
12.5.6, &c. Lev. 17.3.4. Those high places being for sacrifice vvere to be destroyed, though no Idolatry had bene committed in them; but being polluted vvith the service of Idols, there vvas then double cause of their destruction, vvhich is not novv in these, vvhile difference of place is taken avvay, Ioh. 4.21. Your first reply vnto this, is: that the lavv speaketh of all places vvherein the nations served their Gods: so that though they vvere not for sacrifice, but for prayer, or other like vse, they vvere to be pulled dovvne. I answer againe, 1. though Moses speak gene∣rally of serving their Gods, yet this shewes not that they had any place of solemne worship, wherein they did not sacrifice also: The high mountaines, hilles, and greene trees, whereof Moses speakes were the ordinary places, where they did sacrifice as appeares throughout the 2. Kin. 17.8.—11. & 1 Kin. 22.43. Esa. 57.5.6.7. Ier. 3.6. with 17.2.3. Ezek. 6.13. & 20.28. Hos. 4.13. scriptures: And the Israelites following the manners of the heathens herein also, did offer sacrifices in their owne private 2. Kin. 23.12. Ier. 19.13. Zeph. 1.5. houses vnto the hoste of heaven and vnto other false Gods. 2. Even you yourself have not brought any one instance or shew of proofe to manifest vnto vs, that these Idolatours had any set places of worship ei∣ther publique or private, wherein they did not sacrifice as well as they prayed or performed any other service. And what weight is there then in a meere coniecture and supposition, against a common and generall practise described vnto vs by the testimony of holy writte?
Your second reply is, that though there was to be but one place for sacrificing, yet foloweth it not that that was the cause, (at least the onely cause) why heathnish idols and idoleies should be destroyed, but for that they were divils and divils bouses, &c. I answer, 1. I sayd not, that the commandement for one place of sacrifice, was the onely cause why Idol-places should be destroyed; your denyall thereof is idle and beside the matter; and tends to deceive your reader, in making him to think that I had affirmed the same. 2, that the commandement of a peculiar set place of sacrifice was one cause it may appeare by the coherence of the text and by the opposition betwixt the actions specifyed in Deut. 12. for whereas the destruction of the Idolatrous places is commanded vers. 2.3.4. the vsing of one place alone which God should choose to put his name there, is also immediately taught & ap∣poyntedin the same place, and in the vers. 5. next following 3, as for their being devils houses, which you alledge as the cause of their destruction, that is without warrant, as hath bene shewed before: and may further appeare by this: because then every private Idolaters howse, yea and every obstinate sinners house should be destroyed, and be vnlawfull for vse, seing all such persons are called Ioh. 6.70. & 8.44. Act. 13.10. devilles and Children of the devill and therfore their howses, devilles howses. 4, those two places of scripture Exod. 23.24. Deut. 7.25.26. are in a double regard misalledged by you, for first they speak not a word for the abo∣lishing of Idolatrous places, which is the question: but onely of the Idols themselves; and secondly, if they did speak of abo∣lishing the places, yet doth it not thēce appeare, that it should be vpon this ground, because they are devilles howses, which is the poynt, that in this place remaines to be proved of you. 5, As for Iaakobs practise, Gen. 34.2.3.4. there is nothing sayd tou∣ching the destruction of any place defiled by Idolatrie, but of other things of lesse necessary vse, of which more is to be spokē hereafter, where that scripture is againe alledged by you. And what meane you to tell vs of Moses destroying the Idol, or golde Calfe Exo. 32.20. as though there were no difference betwixt an Idol and the place where it stood? How often do you turne away from the question of the place, to an other que∣stion touching images themselves? 6. As for the destruction of Idols and Idol-temples in other lands also as Egypt, Moab, Baby∣lon, &c. where no one place was chosen for sacrifice: touching that which was done in Egypt, Ier. 43.12.13, and Ezek. 30.13. you have bene answered already in the third section going before: And yet further you may observe this, that if the fact of Nebu∣chadnezzar in destroying Idolatrous countries and houses may thus be alledged as a rule to be followed of necessitie, you may as well plead that the houses of other sinners are to be destroyed and not to be dwelt in, because of his and other princes decrees to
Dan. 3.29 Ezra, 6.11. pluck downe and deface them for blasphemy, hindring the building of temple, &c. Then ought you not to have vsed thatplace which the blasphemous Iewes had once possessed and in∣habited before you. Touching Moab & Babylon, Ier. 48.7.13. & 50,2. The prophet sayth nothing there touching the places themselves, but onely for the Idols Chemosh, Bel, Merodach: of which our question is not. And in summe touching all these nations togather, though no one place was chosen in them for sacrifice; yet seing one place was chosen then in Ierusalem for all the godly in the world to sacrifice in, and no other allowed for sacrifice in any of these nations: even in this respect also the vse of such places, were double vnlawfull at that time, once for their sacrifices, and againe for their Idol-sacrifice. Your third reply is, that if we look vpon the thing figured by that one place, it will lead vs from these Idol-temples now, rather then to them, &c. But I answer, though Christ and his Church were fi∣gured by the temple of old: though Christ have no concord with Belial, nor his Church any agreement with Idols, as you alledge from 2 Cor. 6.15.16. yet what is this to the vse of those temples from whence Belial and the Idols are cast out? Though a Legion of devilles have dwelt in any living temple or other place, yet when they are cast out and dispossessed, cannot Christ enter in and dwell there, vnless he hold a concord and agree∣ment with them? That no agreement is to be had with Belial and Idols, we graunt willingly, but that the worship of God in the places whence they are cast out is an agreement with them, we deny: for proofe of this, which is the poynt, you have sayd nothing at all. In the next place you reply divers things also touching the difference of place which is now taken away Iohn. 4.21. You say, Seing Christ, to bring in the true spirituall worship, would not onely end, but even Dan. 9.26 destroy the citie and the sanctuarie, how can we think, that he would have the idolie of the Samaritans stand vndestroyed; or the abominations that his enimie Antichrist should afterwards erect? I answer, 1. For that place,
Dan. 9.26. though the An∣gel Gabriel there shew that the sanctuary should be destroyed, yet doth he not shew that it was vnlawfull for Christians after∣wardsto have met togather for the spirituall worship of God in the same place: And therfore that kinde of destruction is no∣thing to the purpose, being nothing like vnto that which you plead for, even to the remooving of the lawfull publique wor∣ship of God, for ever out of the place defiled by Idol-service. 2, as Gabriel foretels the destruction of the sanctuary, so in the very same verse he foretelles the slaughter of the Messias: both these were to be done by the providence of God, according to the determinate counsell of his will; neither of them according to his law by any warrant of his word, but both of them by the authoritie of the cruell and wicked Romanes, which both de∣stroyed the temple and slew Christe: Their fact in destroying the temple was abominable, even Dan. 9.27 with Mat. 24.15. & Luk. 21.20. the abomination of desolation: so that if you have no better arguments for throwing downe our temples, then this example; your destruction of them shall be but an abhominable desolation, without any warrant of Gods word. 3, The Angel in this place doth shew the vvill of God as well for the destruction of the citie it self as of the sanctuary: so that for ought in this place, you might as well have collected and concluded the destruction of Idolatrous cities and the private houses of Idolaters, as the destruction of the temples abused vnto Idolatrie.
But for the confirmation of your opinion, you plead fur∣ther from that text Ioh. 4.21. and say, First, it sheweth that God shalbe worshiped, neither in the mount of Samaria (where they committed Idolatry) nor in Ierusalem, (where the typical worship had bene for a time.) wherevpon it followeth, that Antichrist having erected temples for Idols, in imitation of Ierusalems temple purposely in the parts and shape as the Papists acknowledge, &c. we are rather to conclude that God is not to be worshiped in them. I answer, 1. The denyall of worship in the mount of Samaria and Ieru∣salem, is not absolute, but the meaning is that men should not be tyed to those places; and therfore Christ opposeth not any other locall place vnto those two, but onely opposeth the ma∣ner of worship in spirit and truth, which might be now in any 1 Tim. 2.8. places without exception. 2, Though our temples had bene made liker vnto the temple in Ierusalem then they are: yet doth it not folow that it is vnlawfull to worship God in them: for proofe of this consequence you bring nothing: And as for the consecration of them and your testimony of Bellarmine, they are to be examined in the next Chapter, where you re∣peate the same at large. Secondly, you plead from Ioh. 4.23.24. that Christ there tea∣cheth all men to worship God in spirit & truth: which are opposed both to figurative worship and false worship, &c. I answer, though Antichrists temples in his vse of them are a part of his false worship: yet doth not that pollute vs in our vse of our owne temples, being quite contrary vnto his. The Iewes temple wherein you worshipped God after them, was in their vse of it a part of their false worship, (as is anone more fully to be manifested,) was your vse of it therfore condemned by Ioh. 4? Thirdly, you plead, that we cannot in reason think, that there should be more indifferencie of place novv, then there is of other things, &c. I answer, that we are to distinguish betwixt things of necessary vse and other trifles: A place for the worship of God is of necessary vse: and those which we have are of great conveniency for vs, being civil helpes in the service of God: & therfore we vse them with good conscience, seing all things are pure vnto the pure, Tit. 1.15. But as for cope, mitre, surplice, and such like we do justly refuse and reiect them, being vaine in∣ventions that are of no necessary vse at all in the service of God. VVhereas you say further, that according to my manner of plea∣ding for Idolies, the Corinthians (vvhom Paul convinced of sin for ea∣ting in the idolie, by an argument of Israels practise) might also have pleaded, that those things concerned Israel vvhich vvere a special people, &c. I answer, that you compare things together very grosly: for Paul convinced the Corinthians of sin for eating in the Idol-house with the Idolaters, at that time and place when
they did instantly committ Idolatrie, those Idol-feasts being a part of their worship, as hath bene shewed before from 1 Cor. 10.7.21. but you in vaine seek to convince vs of sin for the lawfull worship of God in those places from whence the Idols and Idolatry are remooved: Now I pray you, what proportion or similitude is there betwixt these two things: viz. Com∣munion in the true worship of God with the faithfull in a place purged from Idolatrie; which is our case: & Communion in an Idol-feast an Idolatrous worship, this with heathnish Infidelles, even in the place where the Idolles stood, and were presently worshipped; which was the case of the Corinthians? Let him that readeth judge, whether the Corinthians could make the like plea for themselves that we do. Finally as for your comparing of our defence vnto the plea of some Papists in expounding the second commandement itself to be a temporall precept, which opinion of Catharinus even Bel∣larmine himself refuted in the place alledged by you: I answer, that any lew might as lawfully tell you the same, and say vnto you, even as you hold and plead for the abrogating of the sacrifices and ceremonies of the law: so some Papists have also pleaded against the second commandement itself, that it was a temporall precept: If his comparison should be vniust against you: so is yours against vs. CHAP. VIII. The Second reason concerning tem∣ples, examined. Hen. Ains. OVr 2. reason against them is, Because so long as they are conti∣nued, Antichrist with his abominations is not wholly abolished, as the Lord hath appointed, and will effect in his time, Rev. 17.16. and 18.11.12.13. 2. Thess. 2.8. 2 King. 10.26.27.28. This argument you deny: and say,
The 3. first allegations shew that Antichrist shalbe consumed: but they shew not that our Temples are any of his abomination. The 4. allegation is taken (you say) from the policie of Moses, that is now abrogate. I answer; if we had brought this reason against the Mass, or any other of Antichrists synns, you might even as wel have denyed our argument, and be a pleader for all poperie: seing the Masse it self is not named in any of those places, more then his temples. But if they shew that he (with his abominations) is to be abolished, as you deny not: it will soon appeare that your temples are a part of them. First therfore, the text Rev. 18.11 12. mentioneth the merchandize of the whore, which no man should buy: naming Gold, silver, precious stones, pearles, byss, purple, scarlet, &c. Vessels of wood, brass, yron, marble, &c. Here I hope you vnderstand not these things of merchan∣dise properly, but (as is throughout the Revelation) to be an allusion to the Prophets, and in this place to the merchandise of Ezek. 27. Tyre. For you that are so large for the popes idols and idoleies, if there may be any necessary vse of them; it is not to be thought that you wilbe so strayt as to forbid men to buy these civil wares of Papists, or merchants now to trade vvith Spaine or Italie. Secondly then, to prove that your temples are Antichrists Merchandise, and none of the meanest: I wil bring you into the Popes owne ware house, his Romane Pontifical, and other shops of his, vvhere you may see it vvith your eyes. And first by the decree of Pope Nicolas, De con∣secr. dist 1. c. Ecclesia. it is not lawfull for any man to build a Church or temple, vvithout Commandement or leave of the Pope and Apostolik See. Then, vnto the place where a temple is to be built, & vvhere a crosse is set to hallow it, cometh
Pontifi∣cal. de be∣ned. primi lapidis pro ecclesia aedific. a Bisshop vvith his Miter, and sprinkleth the place vvith holy vvater, and prayeth God to visit that place, through the interceding merits of the Virgin Marie, and St. N. (naming the hee saint or shee saint vnto vvhose honour and name the Church shalbe founded) and all other saints: and by infusion of his grace, to purifie it from all pollution, &c. Then they say, the stone vvhich the builders refused, that is become the head of the corner: Thou art Peter, and vpon this Rock I vvil build my Church: Glorie be to the Father, &c. Then sprinkling the stone vvith holy vvater, and graving the signe of the crosse vpon it: he prayeth God to blesse that creature of stone, that it may be a saving remedie to mankinde: andthat whosoever shal afford help with a pure minde to build vp that Church, may have both health of bodie, and cure of soule. Then pla∣cing that first stone on the foundation, with crossings in the name of the Father, &c; it becometh a place destinate for prayer: and they sing, How fearfull is this place! surely this is no other then the house of God, and the gate of heaven, &c. When the Church is builded, and is to be dedicated;
Pontifi∣cal. de ec∣cles. dedi∣cat. the Archdeacon is to signifie to clergie and people, that they fast before it be consecrated, and so must the Bishop do that consecrateth it. And the evening before, the Bishop prepareth the reliques which are to be inclosed in the Altar, putting them in a vessel, with three graines of frankincense, and a writing on parchment signifying whose reliques are there inclosed, and to whose honour and name, the Church and Altar is dedicated, &c. In the morning, they make ready holy chrisme, holy oile, two pound of frankincense, a censer, ashes, salt, wine, an hyssop sprinkle, five litle crosses for the Altar, two vessels of holy water: and they paint twelve crosses on the wall. The Bishop conjureth the salt, sprinkleth the holy water, and then they sing, Thou shalt sprinkle me with hyssope, and I shalbe clean, &c. The house of the Lord is founded on the top of the mountaines, and exalted above all hills, and all nations shal come vnto it, &c. The Bi∣shop with his pastoral staff, smites the Church dore, saying, Lift vp your gates ye Princes, and be ye lifted vp ye everlasting dores, and the King of Glorie shal come in: and a Deacon that is locked within, sayth, Who is this King of Glorie? The Bishop answereth. The Lord strong and mightie, the Lord mightie in warr. Then going about the outside of the Church, he cometh and knocketh the second time, with like words: and so againe the third time, & then he addeth, Open, Open, Open. Then the dore is opened, and he goeth in with his clerks, (ha∣ving first made the signe of the crosse to drive away all phantasmes) and he sayth, Peace be to this houses: the Deacon answereth, By thy coming in: and all say, Amen: and sing, Everlasting peace be to this house, &c. Then ashes are sprinkled on the Church floor, & the Bishop with his pastoral staff, writeth on the ashes, the Greek and Latine Alphabets. He blesseth water with salt, ashes and wine: conjuring first the salt, that it may drive away the Fiend, and may profit themthat take it, to health of soule and bodie: and conjureth, the water, to repell the Divil from the borders of the just, and that he be not in the shadow of that Church: he prayeth the Lord to powr out the holy Ghost into that his Church and Altar, that it may profit to health of Body & soule vnto them that worship him: to send an Angel from heaven, to blesse and sanctifie those ashes, that they may be an healthful remedie to all that implore his name: and that they which sprinkle themselves with it for redemption of synns, may perceive health of bodie and pro∣tection of soule. He blesseth the wine, and maketh a mixture of water and wine and salt & ashes for the consecrating of that Church and Altar: and prayeth God to send the Holy Ghost vpon that wine, to profit the consecration of that Church: to send a showre of grace vpon that house, to give all good, repell all evil, destroy the Devil: that to the visiters of that house, there may be peace: that he will blesse & keep that Habitation by the sprinkling of that water mixt with salt, wine and ashes: that he would repell darknes from it, infuse light, that it may be Gods own house, and the Fiend may have no leave to do hurt therein. Then they sing, this is Gods house, firmly builded, well founded on the firm rock: this is no other but the house of God, and gate of heaven. They pray God to infuse his grace on that house of prayer, that the help of his mercie may be felt of all that there call on his name: that his eyes may be open to that house day & night: that he would favourably admit every man that comes to adore him in that place: that there the Preists may offer sacrifices of praise, the people may pay their vowes: that in that house by the grace of Gods spirit, the sick may be healed, the blind cured, Lepers clensed, Divils cast out, and the bonds of all synns vnloosed. Then call they the saincts of God to enter into the citie of the Lord, for a new Church is builded for them, where the people ought to adore Gods Majestie. Then the Bishop makes a short Sermon to the people, of the vertue and privileges of the dedi∣cation of the church, of Tithes, and other ecclesiastical fruits to be payd &c. and so the founder and people promise to fulfyll the Bishops com∣mandements. Indulgences are granted to all faithfull Christians, for one yere: and in the yerely day of the consecration of that Church, 40. dayes indulgence to all that visit it. They pray that God would enterinto his house, and that that house which is made solemne by that de∣dication, may be made high by his habitation. And the Bishop sayth, this temple be hallowed and consecrated, in the name of the Father, & of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, to the honour of God, and of the glo∣rious virgin Marie, and all saints, and the memorie of S. N. Peace be vnto thee. Then consecrateth he all the clothes, garments, &c. for that Church: and prayeth God to illustrate by his habitation that Temple of his Majestie: to grant that all which shal come thither to pray, out of whatsoever tribulation they cry vnto him, may obteine the benefit of his consolation. These temples, whose adorning consi∣steth Bellar∣min. de cult. sanct. l. 3. c. 6. partly in the very frame or fabrik, partly in the images, crosses, vestments, &c. are builded Ibidem. c. 3. after the form of Solomons temple, with three parts, and the most holy towards the east, (differing therin from the Iewes temple, for a popish mysterie) and are erected Ibidem c. 4. for 4. ends: for sacrifice, called therfore Temples: for prayer, and therfore called Oratories: for to keep the relicks of martyrs, called thervpon Basiliks or Martyries: and for to feed the people with the word and Sacra∣ments, called therfore Churches. And to goe on Ibidem c. 8. pilgrimage to these and other like holy places, is pious and religious: and they are wor∣thily estemed Ibidem c. 5. holy and Venerable, & indued with a divine vertue. This place, to weet Durand. Rational. l. 7. c. de festo dedi∣cat. the material Church, is holy: for it is hallowed to this end, that there the Lord may hear mens prayers, & therfore praestat oranti∣bus sancti∣tatem. it giveth holynes to them that pray therin. Now let these things speak, whether your temples be not a notable part of Antichrists abo∣minations: & therfore by Gods word & spirit (according to 2. Thes. 2.8.) and by the Magistrates sword (according to Rev. 17.16.) to be abolished, & dealt with as was 2. King. 10. Baals house, which example is of perpetual moralitie for the substance of it, & not of Moses policie now abrogate, as before I shewed. If the Faith & ordinances of the gospel, be Christians merchandise, which we are called to buy, Esai. 55.1. Rev. 3.18. then are these popish ordinance & idolatries, Antichrists wares, which no man should buy, Rev. 18.11. If Solomons temple which he builded for 2 Chron. 2.6. & 6.2.20.29.
sacrifice and prayer & for God to dwel in, was a part of the Iewes religion, as all the scripture witnesseth: and the destroying of it by the heathens, was a synn against the true God andhis ordinances, as the 79. Psalme teacheth vs: if the temples also of the gentiles were a part of their religion and idolatrie; as we may learne by their own testimonie, calling their Temples Cicero Act. 6, in Verrem. holy and religious: by their practise, as when Antiochus appointed 1. Mac. cab. 1.47. Chappels of Idols (or Idolies) to be set vp; and by their profession, as the Town-clerk of Ephesus boasted of their devotion to their goddesse Diana, in that their citie was her Neoco∣ron. Act. 19. v. 35. Temple keeper or Sexton: and finally by the Apostles doctrine, who as he calleth their false Gods and images Idols, so their temples he calleth 1. Cor. 8.10. & 10.20.21. Idolies, and blameth the Christians for eating idolothytes in those places: then can it not be denyed, but these temples of yours, are Antichrists idolies, a part of his religion or abomnation rather, to be loathed of all good Christians, and ought (by evidence of the scriptures fore alledged) to be destroyed. And you that vse them for two of those 4. ends for which Antichrist conse∣crated them, namely for places of prayer, and of ministration of the word & Sacraments: do so far forth pertake with his abominations. And that the Pope traffiqueth with these temples, as with his other vvares, even for the maintenance of his Kitchin also: a Frier Bapt. Mantuan. a Poet of his, testifyeth saying, Venalia nobis Templa, Sacerdotes, Altaria, Sacra, Coronae. So that to him it should be sayd, as to Tyrus of old: Ezek 28.18. Thou hast de∣filed thy Sanctuaries, by the multitude of thine iniquities; by the iniquitie of thy traffique: therfore wil I bring forth a Fyre from the midst of thee, and I wil bring thee to ashes vpon the earth, in the sight of all them that behold thee. Answer.
Io. Pa. THe reason why I denyed our temples to be the abomi∣nations of Antichriste, was not because they are not named in your allegations, as you vvould make the rea∣der to beleeve: but because the scriptures alledged by you do not shew it at all; I know vvell that the scriptures do shew many things to be evill and abominable, which are not at all named in them. How vniust then is your inference from this pretext,viz. that I might as vvell have denyed such a reason against the masse, seing the Masse it self is not named in any of those places, more then his temples. But to prove that our temples are a part of his abominations, you do further vrge both the scriptures, and popish writings: And first you say, the text, Rev. 18.11.12. mentioneth the merchan∣dise of the vvhore, vvhich no man should buy; naming Gold, silver, precious stones, &c. And you hope I vnderstand not these things of merchandise properly, &c. I answer, 1. Suppose this merchan∣dise is not to be vnderstood properly, must our temples ther∣fore needs be a part thereof? you have not yet brought so much as a colour of any proofe for this, out of the scriptures al∣ledged. 2, That Gold and silver, and such like things even pro∣perly taken are the merchandise of Rome, as well as other spi∣rituall things, it appeareth evidently, by the infinite treasures & summes of money which that Church hath extorted from the nations of the earth, and divided the spoyles thereof among her merchants: even by your owne testimony out of Mantuan, the crownes and diademes of princes were sold at Rome vnto such as would buy. All stories shew, that even civill principa∣lities, Kingdomes, Empires were bought and sold at Roome: the pope setting on the Emperours crowne with his feete, and with his foote againe dashing it from the head. 3, vvhat though there be an allusion vnto the Prophets through out the reve∣lation, and in this place also to the merchandise of Tyre, as you al∣ledge? This hinders not but that many things in such allusions may be vnderstood properly. The Angel that proclaimes the destruction of Roome, Rev. 18.2. with Esa. 21.9. Ier.
51.8. alludes vnto the destruction of Baby∣lon: yet I hope you vvill not deny but that the destruction of the very citie of Rome it self taken properly, may be vnder∣stood thereby as vvell as the religion it self that is to be aboli∣shed; as in Babylon of old. 4, though I do not absolutely con∣demne all trade in civill wares vvith Spaine and Italy, whereof you speak also; yet this helps you not: for neither are all the merchandise mentioned in Rev. 18. counted for the abhomina∣tionsof Antichrist: neither are our temples any part of his merchandise. The Lord in his judging of Antichriste will have even Rev. 18.22.23. civil commodities of Roome to be abolished from that place, not as things vnlawfull for vse, but yet to be taken avvay from the vvhore for a punishment of other sins. In the next place, after streyning of the scriptures, you come vnto the popish vvritinges and promise to bring me vnto the Popes owne Ware-house, &c. I ansvver. First, though you take vpon you to be our guide to leade vs into the Romane Pontifical and other shops of the Pope, yet am I & other to take heed hovv vve follovv such a guide, vvhen before our eyes vve see you to stumble at the first step, and to break your shinnes even at the very threshold of th shop you enter into. VVhereas you say, First by the De con∣sec. dist. 1. part. 3. c. ecclesia. decree of Pope Nico∣colas, it is not lawfull for any man to build a Church or Temple, with∣out commandement or leave of the Pope and Apostolik sea: you do herein falsify the vvords of the decretal, vvhich doth not speak of building a Church without the Popes leave, but of instituting a church. And this appeares more plainely by the Popish Glosse vpon the next Chapter in the same distinction, which saith De conse∣crat. dist. 1. part. 4. c. Nemo. Hi∣therto is shewed by whose authoritie Churches are to be consecrated, but now by whose authoritie they are to be built. VVhereby it appea∣res that the Author of the Glosse interprets the decree of pope Nicolas not of building as you alledge, but of the institution of Churches, according to the words of the decree: These two things are plainely distinguished in that place. But as before you dealt vntruely with the Pag. 107. Thalmudique canons, and with the Pag. 117. canons of the Synods in the Reformed Churches, so do you here deale with the popish canons. VVhat vncleane fin∣gers have you thus to defile and corrupt the severall testimonies which you meddle withal?
Secondly, what weight or authoritie is there in the Popish records of these vncertaine and variable decrees? They were so often changed and altered, that vpon the credit of them, you cannot say of our temples, that they were consecrated by suchauthoritie as is therein appoynted. This vncertainety and va∣riablenes of the decrees, as it might be shewed by many other instāces, so doth it also appeare most plainely evē touching this poynt of consecrating churches & this also in the tractate alled∣ged by your self: for whereas the text of the decretal saith De con∣secrat. dist. 1. par. 3. Cap. De locorum. Church is to be consecrated without the authoritie of the pope: The Glosse vpon the same place saith concerning that decree, Hodie non tenet: This decree was then altered: And the explication of this matter is further described in the same place. And thus we see that the authoritie of the pope was not necessary, either for building or yet for consecrating of our temples. These things were in the power of the Bishop, as well as of the pope: and therfore it is also written in their law: Extrava∣gant. Iohan. 22. tit. 5. in Glossa. The Bishops can do as much as the Pope in those things which are of the efficacy of cōsecratiō. Thirdly, as there is this difference in the decrees touching the authority by whom, so much more in the divers rites and cu∣stomes vsed in the maner of consecration of temples: This di∣versity of rites is confessed by themselves: saying, Durand. rational. in praefat. It ought to be considered that in the divine service there is found a variety of mani∣fold rites: for almost every Church hath their peculiar observa∣tions, &c. Therfore let not the minde of the reader be moved: if hap∣pily he read in this work such things, as he doth not know to be obser∣ved in his owne Church: or if he do not finde, whatsoever is there ob∣served. In this regard you cannot say of our tēples with any as∣surance that those peculiar rites and customes mentioned by you in this place, were observed in the consecration of them. In ancient time, temples were consecrated Hospiniā de Templ. p. 105. onely by prayer; and being once cōsecrated in such manner, they were not to be con∣secrated againe with these rites, even by the testimony of the Popish De con∣secrat. dist. 1. part. 7. c. ecclesijs. decrees themselves. Therfore all that you have sayd touching these rites, is a mere vncertainty, especially touching such Oratories as this place is wherein our particular congrega∣tion doth meet togather for the worship of God: This diffe∣rence they shew betwixt oratories and other Churches, viz. that
Panor∣mitan. de consecrat. Eccl. C. p. Auctori∣tate. an Oratorie is not consecrated, neither hath a dowrie appoyn∣ted,neither is made principally that Masse should be celebrated therein, but for prayer, &c. Fourthly touching the frame and Fabrick of these temples builded (as you alledge out of Bellarmine) after the forme of Solo∣mons temple, with three parts and the most holy towards the east, dif∣fering therein from the Iewes temple for a mysterie, &c. Herein also there is great difference of temples; neither do you so faithfully relate the testimony of Bellarmine touching this matter as was meet: for he speakes not indefinitely of them as you do, but with such words as imply an exception: vvhen he saith of their 3. parts, Bellar∣min. de cult. sanct. lib. 3. c. 3. ferè omnes, almost all are so built: and of their looking to the east, he saith it is vt plurimum, for the most part implying that some are otherwise: And his fellow-cardinall acknowled∣geth, that some Churches, as Caes. Ba∣ron. An∣nal. Eccles. Tom. 5. p. 140. that of Gaza by Eudoxias meanes made in forme of a Crosse, were built otherwise: differing mai∣nely therein from the forme of Solomons temple. And for the temples of this city they are of divers shapes: no one fully like vnto an other: for our temple in particular, it hath not those 3. parts whereby it should resemble Solomons temple, wanting both porch, & chancel: so that your reasoning here against vs in respect of the forme and shape of temples (as you did also in the former Chapter) is as vaine as any things els. Fiftly, as for that which you speak of the holynes, mysteries, or mysticall significations ascribed vnto temples and vnto the rites of their consecration by Bellarmine, Durandus, and others: they are many of them more different and vncertaine then the rites themselves: Durandus himself in the Rational. divin. offic. in praefat. beginning of his book confesseth touching the popish rites, that there are divers senses or significations given vnto the same thing, and they passe from one meaning to an other: And the
Ioann Aloysius. ad Cardi∣nal. Tiras. popes auditour in an Epistle prin∣ted in the end of the same book affirmes that many priests, Bi∣shops, Arch-Bishops for innumerable yeares had consecrated, and observed their rites and ceremonyes being altogather ig∣norant what they did: And that now onely & not before they vn∣derstood the same by Durandus his explication of those myste∣ries.Hereby it appeareth that the mysticall significations of holynes ascribed vnto temples and other ceremonies were par∣ticular opinions invented at length by some speciall men, not knowne vnto many of the learnedest among the Papists, and therfore not observed generally as parts of their worship. Sixtly, suppose that our temples had bene consecrated ech of them, even in the manner above mentioned by you, yet doth it not follow that they are a part of Antichrists abhomina∣tions, as you would faine have the rites of their consecration to speak for you. Though in their Idolatrous vse of them for false worship, and with vaine confidence in them, they were vnto the Papists a part of their abhomination, yet not so vnto vs, that reiect those superstitions and vse them lawfully in the true worship of God: Even as Golias his sword though an instru∣ment of cruelty and murder serving for the maintenance of heathnish Idolatry in the hand of the Giant, was yet 1. Sam. 17.51. & cap. 21.9. lawfully vsed by David as an instrument of justice to the glory God: yea though happily that sword were consecrated with magicall en∣chantments, according to the maner of the heathen which vsed enchanted armour and weapons. When you conclude from the Christians merchandise Esai.
55.1. Rev. 3.18, that these po∣pish ordinances and Idolatries are Antichrists wares, you conclude beside the question: Those popish ordinances and Idolatries are in our assemblies dayly confuted, condemned and consu∣med by the word and spirit of Christe as 2 Thes. 2.8. and the authority of the Magistrate hath made the whore naked and de∣solate in taking away these temples from her and converting them to the true worship of God, according to Rev. 17.16. though they be not destroyed as Baals house was according to the policie of Moses which is now abrogate; That which you shewed before to the contrary is already answered. Though Solomons temple to the Iewes, and the heathnish temples vnto Cicero, Antiochus, the Ephesians, and other heathens in their vse of them were circumstances and instruments of their religion (for you do vnfitly call them parts of their reli∣gion) yet the proportion thereof reacheth no further, then to shew that popish temples were vnto the papists instrumēts of their religion in their vse of them: but that our temples in our vse of them are so, you cannot shew from hence. That which you alledge of the heathens sin from ps. 79. in destro∣ying the temple is Idle, for it was also a syn of the heathen to destroy the private houses of the Iewes. That which you say of the Corinthian Idol-houses hath bene answered before. The testimony of Mantuan for selling of temples at Roome, is against yourself, and shewes that our temples are not the Po∣pes merchandise, because he cannot for the maintenance of his kitchin sell the same according to the meaning of Mantuan: The pope should have but a leane kitchin, if he had no greater reve∣nues then the proffit which he now gets by the sale of our tem∣ples. That allegation of Ezek. 28.18. is abused by you, for the Prophet there speakes of the whole city & Kingdō of Tyrus to be destroyed for their sins: and you might from thence as well conclude the destruction of Kings palaces and the private houses of wicked Merchants for their false barganies, and frau∣dulent dealings as of Idol temples, for their superstition. Seventhly, if for the superstitious rites of consecration, our temples ought to be destroyed and abolished, then how comes it that the churchyardes are not lyable to the same judgements, seing they have bene also consecrated by Bishops in like maner with such abhominable rites and Idolatrious superstitions, as the temples were? How can you according to your maner com∣municate with the churchyard; in the buriall of the dead, and yet deny vs the church, when as the pollution of their consecra∣tion is alike for both? your owne
Pontifi∣cal. de cae∣miteríj be∣nedictione. Authors tell vs: that the day before the consecration of the churchyard, five wooden crosses are to be set vp in the churchyard; one higher then the rest in the mid∣dest, and other 4. according to the height of a man: one before the middle crosse in the vtmost part of the Churchyard: an other behinde the midle crosse in the vtmost part of the Churchyard: a third in the vtmost part on the right hand of the midle crosse: and a fourth inthe vtmost part on the left hand: After this before ech of the 5. crosses an other peece of wood is to be set, that may receive 3. candles on the top of it, ech of them of 3 ounces weight or thereabout: then a ladder is to be set for the Bishop to climbe vp to the top of the crosses: then a vessell full of water to be hallowed, and a vessel full of salt. In the morning the Bishop being dressed in the vestrie with his gar∣ments, the albe, girdle, stole, pluvial of white colour, single mitre and pastoral staffe comes with his ministers vnto this churchyard which is to be consecrate, where there is a faldistorie prepared for him be∣fore the midle crosse, then he makes a short Sermon touching the ho∣lines and liberty of the churchyard: this being done fifteene candles are lighted and fastned, 3 before ech crosse: then the Bishop coming before the midle crosse, layes aside his mitre, and prayes that God who is the keeper of the soules and bodies of the faithfull would look mer∣cifully vnto that duety of their service, and that he would at their coming thither purge, blesse, consecrate and sanctify that churchyard that the humane bodies resting there after the course of this life, might after the termes of this life deserve to obtaine the ioyes of everlasting life, &c. After this the Bishop goes to the other 4. crosses likewise, and before ech of them performes his devo∣tions, with prayer, crosses, holy water, songs and other ceremo∣nies too long to be repeated. And being thus consecrate this Churchyard Durand. Rational. lib. 1. de eccles. dedica∣tione. enioyes the same priviledges that the Church doth: for after it is blest, it becomes a holy place: and is reconciled by the Bi∣shop even as the Church by the sprincling of water solemnely with holy wine and ashes, &c. And furthermore it is then vsed for a place of Idolatrous and false worship, when as in the dayly bu∣rial of the dead, they pray before the graves for the dead and to the dead, &c. Your self also do acknowledge these
Arrow against Idolat. Chap. 5. sect. 18. holy church∣yards to be the abhominations of the whore: and do there also reckon them with the rest to be very Gillulim, the lothsome Idols & excrements of the Queen of Sodom, and the filthines of her forni∣cation. Tell vs now by what meanes you have purifyed these Churchyards for your vse in funeralles, and why the temples themselves may not as well be purifyed for our vse, seing bothhave bene alike defiled by their consecration. It will not be sufficient for you to say, that your vse of these Churchyards is onely a civill vse, otherwise then our vse of the temples: for that commandement in Deut. 12.1.2.3. doth as well condemne the reteyning of such places for civil vse, as otherwise. That commandement is so expounded by H. Barow, not onely for the times before Christe, but also for our time when he saith of our temples: Discov. p. 138. Againe the Idolatrous shape so cleaveth to every stone, as it by no meanes can be severed from them whiles there is a stone left stāding vpō a stone. So that neither they can be vsed to the worship of God, nor we have any civil use of them, seing they are execrable and devote to destruction: so that they that vse such execrable and vn∣cleane things, cannot be cleane, but must needes be defiled with the filthines of these Idols. By his verdict therfore you must needes be defiled even with the civil vse of these execrable things. And not onely Barow but your self also do condemne the reteyning of these places for civil vse: in that you hold they are to be throwne downe & demolished by the Magistrates sword: for if it were lawfull for the Magistrates to convert these places vnto civil vses, as vnto judgements halles, courts or the like, what needed they to be throwne downe or burnt with fire, as you teach in this place? Yea even in this Chapter you teach that they are to be dealt with as was Baals house, which was throwen downe by Iehu, and 2. Kin. 10 27. a jakes made of it. If these places in res∣pect of former abuse are still to be reputed so base and disho∣nourable, what meane you to deale so vnnaturally with the bodies of your frendes as to bury them in these Idol-places, places of so great dishonour: yea to execute vpon them the Lev. 26.30. curse that is denounced against such as the soule of the Lord abhorres, even to cast their carkeises vpon the bodies of these filthy Idols, as you call them? The calamity which you bring vpon your frends is (according to your owne profession) much like vnto that which Iosias inflicted vpon the Idolaters: he
2 Kin. 23 16. tooke their dead bones out of the graves and consumed them with fire vpon the Altars polluted with Idoltary: you take the deadbones of your frends and bring them to be consumed in those graves which are in the Temples and Churchyards pollu∣ted with Idolatry. The Papists sinned greevously against the martyrs of Christ, when they caused them to be buryed in dun∣ghils, as they Ioh. Fox. Acts & Mon. p. 1743. edit. an 1602. dealt with Iohn Careless; and the Ibidem. p. 1785. wife of Peter Martyr: and we count it a remarkable judgement of God vpon Ibid. p. 1915. Boner the persecuting Bishop, that his body was buryed in the place appoynted for buriall of theeves and murderers: but you (as it seemes) care not to sin against your frends, in causing them to ly vnder the judgement of God by burying their bo∣dies in places more vile & odious then common dung-hilles, yea then common privies even in those polluted places which are as you say, very Gillulim, the lothsome Idols and excrements of the Queen of Sodom, &c. Your writings condemne these tem∣ples and Churchyards to be thus abhominable in the sight of God and in your owne eyes, even for the present: but your hope and expectation further is that the next Christian Magi∣strate which riseth vp according to your minde, shall also actu∣ally reduce these places vnto the state of Baals house: that example if Iehu being (as you say) of perpetual morality for the substance of it, &c. Eighthly, if our temples formerly defiled with Idolatry, and superstitious rites of consecration are therfore of necessity to be abolished, forsaken and new ones to be sought: then will it also follow that popish baptisme being in like maner defiled with Idolatrous rites, ought by the like necessity to be aboli∣shed, forsaken and a new Baptisme to be sought. And while you reteyne among you the Baptisme administred in popery, you can not without partiality refuse our temples. For the de∣claration of this consequence, you may observe, 1. The pol∣lution of baptisme by so many superstitious ceremonies of crossing, exorcising or adiuration of Devilles, exsufflation, salt, spitle, oyle, &c. is as great as the pollutiō of temples by their cō∣secration: yea if there be any difference, rather baptisme is more polluted, as may appeare both by your
Animad. vers. p. 68.69.72.73. owne writings, andmight further be manifested out of the Romane pontifical, missal, decretales and other popish writings, if need were: 2. As Baptisme is necessary and ordeyned of God, so is an howse or place of worship for the faithful to assemble Esa. 4.5. 1 Cor. 5.4. in, necessary & appoynted of God. If therfore the generall commandement of Baptising do warrāt vs to reteyne even that same particular baptisme which was so superstitiously administred at the first, then likewise will the generall commandement of having a place to assemble in, warrant vs to reteyne even the same par∣ticular place that was so superstitiously consecrated at the first. 3, if the persons vnlawfully circumcised and baptised in Ido∣latrous and false Churches, might yet through faith and re∣pentance come to a lawfull & comfortable vse of their former circumcision and baptisme, as your self do Animad∣vers. p. 69. 70. acknowledge: then why can not our repentance and faith as well sanctify vnto vs the places superstitiously consecrated, while we do in like maner disclaime and renounce the superstitions of ech of these? 4. your doctrine touching the reteyning of baptisme doth con∣firme vnto vs that distinction, which serves for answer vnto your maine obiection against our reteyning of temples: H. Ba∣row sayth Discov. p. 119. Peradventure herevpon may be collected that such bap∣tisme as is delivered by an infidel, which never had knowledge of God in Christ, being afterward repented of and sorrowed, that their body hath bene guilty of such profanation, &c, the outward Baptisme may in like maner remaine, and not be repeted when they ioyne vnto the true Church. This may at no hand be brought to passe, neither indeed doth it herehence follow: for easy it is to put difference betwixt an Infidel which never knew God in Christ: and an Apostata which hath had knowledg of, and still outwardly (though corruptly) professeth God and Christ. The one sort know not what the Church, worship and Sacraments meane: the other (though corrupted in their knowledge) yet cary a shew of Church, worship, Sacraments, ministery; yea & hath them though corrupt and adulterate: so there is neither sequele nor comparison betwixt them. According to this distinction may we answer your reason from Deut. 12. and other like scriptures
touching the abolishing of temples defiled with Idolatry: viz. that it is easy to put difference betwixt heathnish Infidels such as the Cananites were that never knew God in Christ: and the Apostate Church of Rome, which still outwardly (though cor∣ruptly) professeth God and Christe, &c. And therfore there is no sequel nor comparison, that the temples erected by Papists should be abolished, because the heathnish temples of pagans and infidels were to be destroyed. Though in other places you will not admit of this distinction but cavill against it, yet this doctrine of Barow (which you Animad∣vers. p. 70. also send vs vnto) doth here plainely confirme the same. Ninthly, if the superstitious consecration of places vnto I∣dolatry do necessarily inferre the destruction of the same, then are private houses and many other implements also of Idola∣ters to be destroyed: because they also are often hallowed with many superstitious rites, &c. you labour here to prove that the temples of the gentiles were a part of their religion and Idolatrie, by the testimony of Cicero Act. 6. in verr. Cicero, which calleth their temples holy and religious: and herevpon inferre that such places ought to be destroyed. If this kinde of arguing be sound, then will it also follow by the testimony of the same oratour that private hou∣ses are in like maner to be destroyed, as being a part of the Idola∣ters religion: for he saith of private houses, Cic. Orat. pro domo suâ ad pontif. Quid est sanctius, quid omni religione munitius, quam domus vniuscuiusque civium? hîc arae sunt, hîc foci, hîc dij penates, hîc sacrae religionis ceremoniae continentur: hîc perfugium est ita sanctum omnibus, vt inde abripi neminem fas fit. This testimony ascribes as much holynes to private houses in respect of the houshold Gods, Altars, & Ceremo∣nies of worship there kept and observed, as the former testi∣mony gave vnto publique temples. To prove our temples to be the merchandise of Rome to be abolished, you alledge Mantuan, saying Venalia nobis Templa, sacerdotes, Altaria, sacra, coronae.And see you not here that ornaments &
crownes are by this Poët recko∣ned vp among the Popes wares, as well as temples and Altars?And what is it that the Pope sells without some consecra∣tion? The crownes which he gives are Pōtifical. de benedi∣ctione co∣ronarum. consecrate with prayers, crosses, holy water. The like also may be observed touching the consecration of Ibid. de benedi∣ctione ensis. swords for knights and souldiers. And not onely these, but a great multitude of other things are also con∣secrate with holy water in the Romish Church, as Sleidan. commen∣tar. lib. 21. herbes, flowers, fruits of trees and other vnreasonable creatures: But as 2. Sam. 12.30.David heretofore refused not that the crowne of the Idola∣trous King of Ammon should be set vpon his head; so neither are princes nor people bound at this day, to refuse either swords, crownes or houses either publique or private, in respect of any Idolatrous consecration wherewith they were once de∣filed in the Romish Church, while themselves do renounce & disclaime such superstition. Tenthly, if temples and houses defiled with superstitious consecrations are to be destroyed, as being the Popes merchan∣dise; then will it also follow that the living temples and per∣sons, as the infants in their popish baptisme, and popish mi∣nisters in their superstitious ordinations and popish princes in their coronations being as much defiled with Idolatrous rites, as our temples, are in like maner to be destroyed, and least of all to be vsed in the worship of God. As for the measure of pollution, it were easy to make as large a narration and story of superstitious ceremonies and divilish inchantments vsed in the hallowing of these infants, priests and Princes, as you have made touching the consecration of temples: but I take it to be needless: the matter is plaine out of the Pontifi∣cal. Authors alledged by your self, that you cannot deny the same. And as for the apt∣nes to receive guiltines by pollution; shall the dead and sen∣seless creatures and instruments of stone and woodden temples abused vnto Idolatry be subiect vnto destruction: and shall not much more the reasonable creatures, polluting those instru∣ments be subiect vnto the like judgement? shall Iosh. 7.24.25. Achans tent be burnt and not Achan himself? This is the rather to be mar∣ked, because Rev. 18,13. with 2 Pet. 2.3. the soules of men are expressely mentioned and rec∣koned
among the vvares and merchandise of Antichriste, so as the temples are not. You confesse Apol. p. 112. that some of yourselves have bene baptised in the times and places of popery; Such persons defiled with popish conjurations and exorcismes you do not refuse to communicate withall in the worship of God: vvhy then do you blame vs for communicating with temples once defiled, whiles we do as well disclaime the superstitious consecration of temples, as the members of your Church do disclayme the superstitious rites of their Baptisme wherewith they were once polluted? Look well vpon Iohn De Cluse your elder, once an Idolater a popish Idol, and defiled with many su∣perstitious ceremonies: when he stands vp to Prophecy among you, consider that he hath bene an Idol-temple, anoyled, greased, sprinckled, and conjured with many magicall ceremo∣nies: if you can lawfully ioyne with him in the publique wor∣ship of God, because he hath disclaymed his former supersti∣tion: then may we lawfully vse our temples in the worship of God, because we also have disclaymed their former superstitiō. If still you will be frovvard, yet remember this, that so often as you allow this man to rise vp in your assembly, and to go be∣fore you in any religious action, so often doth he rise vp as a witnesse for vs, and as a judge against yourselves to condemne you of partiality. I might presse you yet further and shew how your kinde of reasoning would lead you even to treason and to the destruction of lawfull princes in respect of the superstition vsed in their coronations, but I spare you herein.
Lastly to conclude, howsoever there are many abhomina∣tions and sinfull abuses of scripture in the popish maner of consecrating temples, yet this I hold for truth and hope to ma∣nifest the same, that your abuse of scripture perverted for the erecting and consecrating of your separated Church is as sinful as many of the popish wrestings of the same. You tell vs how the consecrating Bishop saith, Lift vp your gates ye Princes, and be ye lift vp ye everlasting dores and the King of Glory shall come in: how he knocks at the Church dore three times and then cryes,Open, Open, Open: yourself cry out against every true Church of God in the world this day, Come out of her my people: Touch no vncleane thing; what concord hath Christ with Belial: Making as it were a crosse vpon every Church dore, you cry Shut vp, Shut vp, Shut vp; because Antichriste the King of Babel is there still with sundry of his abhominations. You tell vs that in the po∣pish consecration they sing concerning the new founded church, surely this is no other then the howse of God, and the gate of heaven, &c. but touching your new founded Church, you sing in a higher streyne, and say in effect: surely there is no other house of God, where a lawfull communion may be had, but in this our church: there is no other gate of heaven then this, &c. All other Churches or temples are Devilles and Devilles houses, &c. The communion of the Reformed Churches is vnto you an Ans. to Th. white pag. 26. Apostasy: and therfore Iohn De Cluse separated from the French Church, not dating to enter into heaven by the gate of life opened in their Church, as though there were no other gate of heaven, or lawfull entrance into the Kingdome of God, but by your separation. You tell vs how the consecrating Bishop maketh crosses and coniureth salt and water to drive away Phantasmes, to drive away the fiend, to repell the Divel, &c. H. Barow speaking of the Discov. p. 144. 145. learned & best reformed preachers in the Church of England, saith they are the most per∣nitious deceavers: that Ibid. p. 164. the very light of that Church is darknes, & the very smoke of the bottomless pit: and that their preaching of the Gospel is of all other the most detestable and pernitious, even the stron∣gest snare and delusion of Satan, whereby he allureth, deceaveth, and holdeth captive the miserable world in the Chaines of transgression, errour, Idolatrie, abhomination and impenitencie, vnto judgement. Againe he saith:
Ibid. p. 154. As for the comfort receaved by their preaching yt having no promise of blessing in the word of God (your Church & whole ministery being accursed) is rather a fearfull signe of the effe∣ctuall working of their delusions, then any reason whereby you may as∣sure your selves or justify them in their vngodly proceedings, whom the word of God in all their works condemneth. This is the coniured salt of the separation to vnhallow the Church of God: this isyour holy water wherevvith you sprinckle the faitfull ministers and people of Christe. You tell vs that at the consecration of the popish temples; Indulgences are granted to all faithfull Chri∣stians, for one yeare: and in the yearely day of the consecration of that Church, 40. dayes indulgence to all that visit it. This their practise of giving Indulgence or pardons is very grosse: and yet your do∣ctrine and practise of giving Indulgence is as bad: To those that visit your Church and joyne vnto it you give Indulgence and pardon of all their sins: and pronounce blessednes vnto them, in their visible estate: but vnto the godliest and faithfullest ser∣vants of the Lord either ministers or people vvhosoever which are in the Church of England, you graunt no indulgence vnto them in their estate, but pronounce the curse of God vpon every one of them without exception. Your Elder Iohn de Cluse writes of that Church, that Advertis∣ment against Mr. Brightman p. 9. there is nothing to be expected from Christ, by any member thereof, but a powring out of his aeternal wrath vpon them. And againe exhorting all to leave that Church, in the same book he saith, Ibid. p. 11. what is there then to be done, even this that every soule who hath any care of salvation, and of escaping the eternall flames of everlasting damnation be carefull to come out with speed from Babylon, &c. Thus without any Indulgence, he leaves them all in the flames of hell: and this he learned from you, who say likewise, Confes∣siō of faith. art. 32. All that will be saved are bound by Gods Commandement with speed to come forth of this Antichristian estate, &c. As you tell vs that the consecrating Bishop, had his clerks to say Amen vnto his prayers: so have you Iohn de Cluse as your Clerk to say Amen vnto your separation. Into your secret let not my soule come. The Popish consecration, and this your separation are both to be abhorred.
CHAP. IX. The third reason concerning temples, examined: Hen. Ains. OVr 3. reason against them is, Because the consecrating of any garments, places, or the like, peculiarly to the worship of God now in the time of the Gospel, hath no warrant in the word of God. You grant this; but yet deny that for the errour of their consecra∣tion in former time they must therfore of necessitie be abolished now. Seing you grant this, then it foloweth, they are vaine and Idola∣trous, Mat. 15.9. Colos. 2.22.23. then are they a part of Antichrists abominations, and by your grant of our former reason, are to be con∣sumed with him: then are they to be shunned of Christians, 1. Ioh. 5.21. and not to be imployed by them, vnto that vse for which Anti∣christ consecrated them, but to be abolished Rom. 13.3.4. by the Magistrate. And by such a pretext as you now make, the Corinthians might have pleaded for their syn, who 1 Cor. 8. and 10. ch. did eat in the Idols temple, that the gentiles error in consecrating it before, could not hinder their libertie, who knew that the Idol was nothing, and the consecrating of the temple was of no force. Your answer also serveth as wel, for wearing a Miter, a cope, a cornerd cap, a Preists cloke, a surplice, &c. the errour in conse∣crating these, is no more then in the temples, if it be so much. But in deed you nourish the errour of their consecration, whiles you vse them for that vnto which they were consecrate, so occasioning the simple people, to esteme them holy places still: and you give Papists occasion to reproch, who boast how their Papists supplic. to the K. An̄o
1604. Art. 6. Religion builded all the Churches, &c. and that your religion could not without such their Churches, provi∣sion and ordinances, ever have caried the exterior shew it doeth. And so being a means to harden them in evil, your practise is an occa∣sion of offense, contrary to the Commandement of God, in 1. Cor. 10.32.33. And if they can get their temples out of your hands (as theyhave doen in some townes of these countries) you shall plainely see that the errour of their consecration continueth as a fretting Leprosie vpon the walls of these temples: and even now whiles they are in your hands, they are visited and prayed in by Papists, as holy consecrated places: yea even by thousands which are not professed Papists, as is to be seen throughout the Parishes of England. So great is the iniquitie of their inchanted consecration, which yet remaineth. Answer. Io. Pa. SEing no places now in the time of the Gospell are to be peculiarly consecrate vnto the worship of God, it followes therfore from hence, that those who do so cōsecrate them, and put holynes in them and teach others to do so, that such (I say) do offend against the Scriptures, Mat. 15.9. Col. 2.22.23. But that we also offend, which on the quite contrary do con∣demne such doctrines and precepts of men, and teach that all places are alike holy and lawfull for the service of God; this con∣sequence you will not prove in hast. VVhen you prove that those Tēples are properly Idolles in our vse of them, then I wil grant that all godly persons ought to shun them according to 1. Ioh. 5.21. and not to communicate with vs in them, and that the Magistrate also is bound to correct this errour, according to Rom. 13.3.4. But if there be any superstitious persons that put more holynes in them then they ought, though such in a large sense and metaphorically may be called Idolaters, and be sayd to make Idols of them, yet this sin of theirs is not enough to prove that they ought to be abolished: even as the covetous persons that put their trust in their riches, and labours and say vnto the wedge of Gold, Thow art my hope; may iustly be cal∣led Eph. 5.5. Col. 3.5. with Hab. 1.16. and Iob. 31.24 Idolaters, & their goods their Idols or gods, yet doth it not follow hence that these goods so trusted in are to be cast away or destroyed, but onely to be
Luk 16.9 & 19.8. vsed better and to be sanctifyed by the word of God. You do here also vniustly confound Ido∣latrous places with Idols them selves; contrary to some of yourselves who in that peece of paper which is printed in the margēt of H. Barow his Discov. p. 133. book for a correction of the same, do there plainely distinguish betwixt the Synagogs dedicated to Idolatry & defiled with Idols; and betwixt Idols which had a worship given vnto them; though that note have other errour amexed vnto it, yet for the distinctiō it self you are further from the truth which it acknowledgeth. That which you say of the Corinthians eating in the Idols temple, 1. Cor. 8. & 10. chap. that they by such a pretext as I make, might have pleaded for their sin, &c. is far otherwise: Had they vsed the Idol-temple onely to the lawfull worship of God, after all exercise of Idolatry had bene banished out of the same, then should not the gentiles errour in consecrating it before, have polluted them: And this is our plea, for our vse of temples at this time. But what could this excuse the Corinthians commu∣nicating with the Infidels & Idolatours, in the very act of their present false worship, in their Idol-feasts and sacrifices, while their Idolatrous exercises were still in full force with them? VVhat a huge distance is there betwixt these two cases? VVhat Spirit of discerning have you, that can not or will not put diffe∣rence betwixt communion with Papists, in the masse, in eating of their breaden God, in their Idol temple, which is like the practise of the Corinthes; and betwixt communion with true Christians, in true worship, in the place purged from Idols and false worship, which is our practise?
VVhereas you obiect further, that my answer serveth as well for wearing a miter, a cope, &c. And that I do indeed hereby nourish the errour of their consecrating, &c. I answer, 1. the miter, cope, surplice and such like never had nor can have a necessary vse in the service of God, nor be any civil helpes in the same, vnto such as have other clothes to put on their backes: but a place & house to meet in for the service of God is a necessary circum∣stance that cannot be missed as hath bene shewed before: so that there being such difference betwixt these two things, if simple people or Papists be offended at that, which is of suchvse, their offence is vpon their owne heads onely. 2, Con∣sider also that simple people by your vse of the Churchyards are occasioned to esteeme them holy places still: The Papists may with like reason that they vsed in their supplication to the King boast that their Religion hath given and consecrated the Churchyards as well as the Churches: And your practise of bu∣riall in these places, being that end wherevnto they were con∣secrated of Papists, is as much an occasion of offence, and re∣proch vnto them; doth as much harden them in their errour: and is as much against that Commandement 1 Cor. 10.32.33. as is our vse of the Churches or temples: and if you do not de∣fend your practise by the necessary vse which you have of them, you will ly vnder that guilt which you would so faine lay vpon vs: where necessity excuseth not, the guilt of offences and scan∣dalles doth come vpon men as wel by civil as religious actions. And further according to your obiection, consider that if the Papist can get their consecrated Churchyards, now vsed by you, into their hands againe (as they have already done in some townes of these countries) you shall plainely see that the er∣rour of their consecration continueth with them: and even now whiles you do bury your dead in them, they are visited and prayed in by Papists, as holy consecrated places, &c. And if any difference be, they are like to be offended rather at the buriall in the Churchyards and Churches, then at the worshipping in them, in as much as they are more superstitious about the bu∣riall then other services, holding it more lawfull to pray and serve God in other places, then to bury in other places. Thus you may see, that if there be any force in this your reasoning, it is all against yourself.
CHAP. X. The fourth reason concerning temples, examined: Hen. Ains. OVr 4th. reason you answer not, but alter it. We sayd, the wor∣shiping of God in the places, &c. hallowed by himself, was a part of his honour, Deut. 12.5.6. Lev. 17.3 4, & this you grant. So on the contrary, (say we) the worshiping of God now, in the places, &c. hallowed by Antichrist, is a part of popish devotion. You answer, Though it be a part of popish devotion, to hallow places for Gods worship, &c. yet God requires not the plucking down of them. Thus you shun the edge of our argument, who spake not here of their hallowing, but of the peoples worshiping in the places hal∣lowed which being popish devotion, & so farr forth an honour vn∣to Antichrist, it must needs be syn. So in altering the case, you tur∣ne your eyes from your own syn in worshiping, to the popes syn in hallowing. The Apostle to convince the Corinthians, sheweth that the Israelites by eating of the sacrifices were 1. Cor. 10.18. pertakers of the al∣tar: so they, by eating of the heathenish sacrifices, were pertakers of their altar. The same may be sayd of the Temple, that the Israelites coming thither to 1. King. 8.33. pray communicated with Gods honour therin: so they that goe to the heathens or Antichristians Temples to pray, communicate also with Antichrists honour; though men despise An∣tichrists idols in word now, as the Corinthians did the heathens idols then. When againe we compare things thus: As the destroying of Gods Temple tended to his dishonour. Psal. 79. & the building therof, to the establishing of his worship, Hag. 1. so the rasing of Antichrists Temples, would be to his dishonour; & the contrary is in vsing, buil∣ding & repayring them. To this you give no answer, but say: It doth not follow that God now requires the plucking down of the (temples)▪ seing there is a change of the Law, Heb. 7.12. Wheras if you considered the weight of our reason, it must needs folow: for God would have An∣tichrist to be dishonoured, and
2 Thes. 2 Rev. 13. & 18. chap not honoured or mainteyned in anypart of his cursed devotion: and such our argument sheweth the ra∣sing or repayring of his temples to be. The scripture which you cite, serveth nothing for your purpose. In Heb. 7.12. the Apostle speaketh of the preisthood, the Levitical ministerie: which being changed & abrogate, there must of necessitie be a change also of the Law: so their ministration ceaseth, & Christ our onely Preist, performeth the work of our reconciliation to God. But we speak of the Magistracie, whose office yet remaineth and is not abrogated by Christ, but by his doctrine established in Rom. 13. and elswhere. So that the Magistrate is Rom. 13.4. the Minister of God stil, (which the legal Preist is not,) and hath the sword to cut of all synns, wherof popish superstition is not the least: & with this sword and office, Christ Ioh. 18.36. medled not: therfore you cannot in this respect without errour say, there is a chāge of the Law. But the trueth is, seing the Magistrate continueth, ther is a continuance also of the Law: for how else shall he doe the work of a Minister of God, if he have no law of God to direct him? for the other scriptures in our reason alleged, Deut. 12. 2 King 10. & 14. & 23. You say they are already answered: and vnto your answers, I have also replied before. Answer.
Io. Pa. THe complaint which here you make of my not answering but altering and shunning the edge of your argument, &c. is vaine and vniust. Your argument is like vnto an o∣verworne knife, whose edge is so blunt, that a man cannot ea∣sily discerne the edge from the back of it, nor finde where the force of it lyes: so litle cause there is to shun the same for feare of cutting or wounding. You say that you spake not here of hallo∣wing, but of the peoples worshiping in the places hallowing: but do you not here still vtter a speech implying a contradiction in it? for what sense or colour of reason is there here against the peo∣ples worshiping except it be in respect of the places hallowed? do you not also in the beginning of this Chapter twise together make mention of hallowing when you repeat your argument, and tell vs that you sayd thus: The worshiping of God in the pla∣ces,&c. hallowed by himself was a part of his honour. So on the con∣trary, the worshiping of God now in the places, &c. hallowed by An∣tichrist, is a part of popish devotion? Againe, in my answer also I did not onely mention hallowing, but also which you omit, I mentioned, see before Pag. 22. putting of religion in places hallowed, & vnder that I comprehended such kind of vnlawfull worship as the Pa∣pists vse, & yet still denyed the consequence of your argument, against such vse as we have of them, when as I sayd, yet followes it not that God requires the plucking downe of such places. But let vs further examine, whether now vpon the second whetting, and putting of more strength to it, your blunt Axe have got a sharper edge to hew downe our temples. You alled∣ge the conviction of the Corinthians for eating of heathnish sacrifices from 1 Cor. 10.18. but that plea is already twise answe∣red: that place speakes of communion with 1 Cor. 10.17.21. Idolaters in false worship, and not of vsing the place onely, in a lawfull worship of God. You alledge 1. Kin. 10.33. to shew, that the Israelites coming to the temple to pray communicated with Gods honour there∣in, &c. But I answer, that Solomon there speakes of true wor∣ship in the temple: otherwise those that came to the temple to pray and worship with Idolaters, as in the dayes of 2. Kin. 21 4.5.7. Manasses, and Ezek. 8.3.16. Ier. 32.34. afterwards when the house of God was filled with Idols, did not communicate with Gods honour hereby, but with the honour of Devilles & so on the cōtrary to make the opposition just & equall, those that go to pray in the temples of Antichri∣stians, when as the Idolatry of Antichrist is purged out and re∣mooved thence, and do onely vse the worship appoynted of God, praying and fighting dayly against Antichrist with the sword of the spirit, such do not herein communicate with An∣tichrists honour, but with the honour of Christe. Againe, as if your comparison were an argument with two edges, you say that you also compare things thus; As the destro∣ying of Gods temple tended to his dishonour ps. 79, &c. so the rasing of Antichrists temples would be to his dishonour, &c. The sequele of this argument for the necessity of plucking downe our tem∣ples,
I denyed, because there is a change of the law, Heb. 7.12. This you call no answer, &c. I answer you againe more plai∣nely and fully, 1. Though God would have Antichriste to be dishonoured: and though the rasing of his temples would in some regard be a dishonour vnto him: yet are not we bound vnto all meanes, nor yet vnto this particular meanes and ma∣ner of dishonouring him by destruction of his temples: even as God would have Idolaters to be dishonoured, and the Deut. 13.15.16. de∣stroying of their goods and cartell, their city and their habita∣tion would be to their dishonour: yet doth it not follow, that we are now bound vnto this meanes and maner of dishonou∣ring them, as hath bene shevved before, because there is a change of the law. God would have blasphemers to be disho∣noured; and the Dan. 3.29. plucking downe of their houses, vvould be to their dishonour: yet doth it not follovv that vve are novv bound vnto this particular maner of dishonouring them. 2. VVhereas you do alledge three Chapters at randon and at large, viz. 2 Thes 2. Rev. 13. and 18. to shevv that God vvould have Antichrist dishonoured; and not honoured, &c. you do but beat the ayre in vaine, vnless you could have inferred thēce that our not honouring of him could not stand vvithout plucking dovvne his temples. 3. Touching the change of the lavv, Heb. 7.12. you say the Apostle speaketh of the Priesthood and leviticall ministerie, &c. but we speak of the Magistracie, whose office remai∣neth, &c. But if you did seriously consider what you say, you might easily discerne the truth that I shewed you. For though the office of Magistracie continueth according to Rom. 13. yet if the Priesthood and leviticall ministery be abrogate, then is a great part of the Magistrates charge abrogate also: seing the Magistrates before Christ were
Exo. 12.15. Lev. 17.4.14. Numb. 1.51. & 3.38. & 18.7. Deut. 17.12. with ps. 101.8. bound to see the Priesthood and ceremoniall ordinances belonging vnto the same, main∣teyned: and to execute judgements vpon the violatours there∣of: Those ceremoniall ordinances ceassing, the care and charge of the Magistrate about the same, ceasseth also. And so the commandement of destroying places abused vnto Idolatrie,being one of those ceremoniall ordinances, Touch not, handle not Col. 2 as is shewed before: though the office and authority of the Magistrates continueth for the maintenance of the deca∣gue or morall law: yet this ceremony concerning observation of places being changed, the authority of the Magistrate is therein changed also. 4. your allegation of Ioh. 18.36. to shew that Christ medled not with the sword and office of the Magi∣strate, &c. is both needless, if you alledge it to prove the conti∣nuance of the Magistrates office which is not denyed: and in∣sufficient also, for if he had medled with the sword of the Ma∣gistrate, would it therfore follow that the office of Magistracy had bene abrogate? Nothing less: no more then it followes that the office of ministery is abrogate, because Christ medled with that sword of the spirit, in preaching of the Gospel. As for Deut. 12. 2. Kin. 10, &c. where as you say that you have before replyed vnto my answers: so have I before answered you, and refuted your replyes. CHAP. XI. The fift argument, examined: Hen. Ains. VNto our 5t. reason, frō the examples of godly Princes, that abo∣lished false worship & the monimēts therof, 2 Chr. 17. 2 Kin. 18. & 23. you answer, that they being vnder Moses policie, are commended for their obedience and practise: but the godly Princes of our times, not being vnder the same rudiments, are not bound to imitate them herein, further then the equitie before mentioned doth require. Repl. And how farr equitie requireth, I have before shewed in my answers to your excepttons. But further I pray you tell vs, vnder what policie, touching Iudicials Princes are at this day. If you say, vn∣der Christs: that I deny, for Princes have their authoritie from Rom. 13. God, who is the
1. Cor. 11 3. head of Christ. If they had it from Christ, there could be no lawfull Magistrates but Christians: so Pauls doctrine, to be subject to Caesar, should be overthrowen. Christ hath neyther given powerto Magistrats, nor taken ought from them; but left them as they were authorized of his Father. Eyther then they are vnder Moses policie, (I mean, so as to execute the Iudgements taught of God by Moses) or else they are under none; but may judge and punish as they themselves think good, killing such as God by Moses law would not have to dye, and sparing such as he appointed to death. As for Christ, he hath given them no direction whom and how to punish, otherweise then he gave with God his Father at mount Sinai. And wheras first you say, vnder Moses policie, & after, speaking of our Princes, that they are not under the same Rudiments: you change the word amysse, to re∣streine Moses Policie vnto his Rudiments. For rudiments, were such legal ordinances as led vnto Christ, and are by him abolished, as the Colos. 2.20.21. Gal. 4.3. Apostle sheweth, & under them, neyther Magistrats nor people are: but Moses policie is more large. And that Gods judgements against idolatrie, are not such rudiments, but of perpetual right, is be∣fore manifested. For if the Decalogue given to Israel, remaineth still to us Christians, then the Iudgements due to the transgressions of the Decalogue, remayne also: they being alike vnchangeable, and common to all nations. As for Iewish rudiments, your temples are a synful reviving of them, after they were dead by Christ. The things appoin∣ted of God for his figuratiue worship, might not be imitated by men for any vse, as the Law in Exod. 30.32.33. teacheth vs: and the He∣brewes from thence rightly concluded, Maimony Beth hab∣chirah. c. 7. s. 10. It is vnlawful for a man to make an house after the patterne of the Temple. But these your Tem∣ples, are purposely made Bellarm. de cultu Sanct. l. 3. c. 3. after the forme of the Iewes Temple, as the cope is in imitation of Aarons Ephod, the Surplice like the preists lin∣nen coats, &c. Although Christ at his death ended all these rites. So you in using them as they were built by Antichrist, for places of diuine worship, are faultie for reuiuing rudiments which God hath ceased: but Magistrats in demolishing them, should perform a judgement of eternal equitie, which God hath commanded, Deut. 12.
Answer. Io. Pa. HOw far you have gone astray from equity in your rea∣soning about equity, I have also shewed before: And am now to proceed vnto those things which you add further. First, whereas you deny that Princes at this day are vnder Christ policie, touching Iudicialles: This your denyall appeares to be an errour; because God hath given vnto his sonne Christ not onely a special Kingdome of grace & dominion in his Church; but also a generall and large dominion over all persons & their actions whatsoever, even Mat. 28.18. all power in heaven and in earth; a Eph. 1.21 Phil. 2.9.10. name above every name that is named, whereat every knee should bow: he is made Heb. 1.2. heire of all, Act. 10.36. Lord of all, Rev. 19.16 King of Kings and Lord of Lords: how is all power given vnto him, if Princes touching their judicialles be not vnder Christs policie? vvhat authoritie should Christ have to judge and punish Prin∣ces for their wicked decrees and judiciall proceedings, to Ps. 2.9 & 110.5.6. break them with a rod of yron like potters vessels, if they were not vnder him touching judicialles? what needed Princes Ps. 2.12. to kisse the Sonne, to Rev. 21.24. bring their glory and honour vnto the Church for the service thereof, if touching judicialles they were not subiect vnto him? According to your doctrine Princes (though subiect in other things) yet might reserve one knee of Iudi∣ciall authoritie, which they need not bow vnto Christ. Secondly, whereas for a reason of your former denyall, you alledge that Princes have their authoritie from God, who is the head of Christ. This hinders not but that they may have it vn∣der Christ, who by his Fathers Mat. 11.27. Ioh. 3.35. graunt hath all things given into his hand; and therfore even by authority receyved from his Father might change and abrogate some of the judiciall lawes given by Moses.
Thirdly: when you say further touching the authority of Princes, If they had it from Christ, there could be no lawfull Magi∣strates,but Christians so Pauls doctrine to be subiect to Caesar, should be overthrowne: This is also vnsound: for though there be no Magistrates but Christians, which can lawfully reteyne and vse their authoritie; yet doth it not follow that subiection vnto all other Magistrates is vnlawfull: It is with Magistrates and their dominion and authority as it is with other men in all their pos∣sessions and heritages: whosoever is not in Christ is an vsurper and vnlawfull possessour of whatsoever he hath, notwithstan∣ding any right or title that they may have therevnto by the providence of God in respect of humane lawes: because Christ is Heb. 1.2 Rom. 8.17 Mat. 5.5. 1. Tim. 4.3 8. 1. cor. 3.21 22.23. heire of all things and in him the meek and faithfull onely are the right heires of the world: yet doth it not follow hence that men may take away their goods and inheritances from such. And even so every Magistrate that is not in Christ, is but an vsurper & an vnlawful possessour of whatsoever dominiō or authority he exerciseth, notwithstanding any right or calling that he hath therevnto in respect of men: yet is this no warrant vnto the subiects of such Infidel-Magistrates, to with draw thē∣selves from their subiection, or to deny obedience and tribute vnto them. Fourthly, to that you say, Christ hath neither given power to Magistrates, nor taken ought from them; but left them as they were authorized of his Father, &c. I answer, 1. for the kindes of offi∣ces them selves, that were authorized of God before Christ, it was Exod. 18 23.24. Numb. 11 16.17. 1. Sam. 8.6.7.22. vnlawfull to institute them heretofore without special al∣lowance from God: but now by consent of common wealths it is lawfull to ordaine their forme of civil governement, and to make new offices, being but the 1. Pet. 2.13. creations of men, for the forme of them. 2. For the causes of executing iudgement, Christ hath changed many of them, he hath taken from Magistrates the Mat. 5.31 32. and 19.8.9. power of permitting divorces & polygamie, according to the iudicialles of Moses: he hath given
1. Cor. 7.12. &c. power vnto the Ma∣gistrates to permit the mariage of beleevers and vnbeleevers without divorce contrary vnto the policy of Moses: he hath also taken from the Magistrate the power of executing the Iu∣diciall
lawes against the transgressers of ceremoniall ordinan∣ces, as was shewed before. 3, as for the maner of judgements and punishments themselves to be inflicted on evil doers, even by your owne confession before noted, the Magistrates now are not tyed vnto the Iudiciall law of Moses. 4, even for the time before Christ, the Iewes themselves were not absolutely bound vnto the Iudiciall law of Moses, save in their owne land, where∣vnto God had apropriated those lawes: for when Ester 10.3. & 8.2. Mordecai, Dan. 2.48 49. & 6.2. Daniel, and others were civil Magistrates in Persia and Babylon, they could not administer justice according to the policie of Moses, but according to the lawes of those Kingdomes where they lived. If the observation of the Iudiciall lawes of Moses had bene imposed on the Iewes, as strictly as the morall and ce∣remoniall lawes were, then could not Mordecai & Daniel have takē those offices and callings vpon them with good cōscience: so that hereby it may appeare that there is great difference be∣twixt these lawes, especially in these times. 5, yea even in the holy land it self, when as the Iudiciall lawes of the Neh. 10.3.7. Persians & Luk. 2.1.4 Ioh. 18.31 Romanes, were established among the Iewes, who were then subiect vnto these nations and vnto their officers, yet did the godly Iewes live vnder them and submit vnto their authority, which they could not have done in suffring them selves to be guided by their civil lawes, if the Iudicialls of Moses had bene imposed vpō them by the Lord, as precisely and straitly as were the morall and ceremoniall lawes. 6, it is yet a further pre∣sumption, when as you say, that Christ gave Magistrates no directiō whom and how to punish, otherwise then he gave with God his Father at Mount Sinai. For Christ with God his Father gave further di∣rection how to Num. 15 32.34. punish the Sabath-breaker, after that they had departed from Mount Sinai. And afterwards againe at the re∣petitiō of the law in the land of Moab, there was further directiō given touching
Deut. 13.12. &c. & 21.1.10.15 & 25.9. &c many particulars which were not described in Exodus and Leviticus at mount Sinai. 7, to conclude though some of Moses judicials be abrogate, yet doth it not follow that Magistrates may judge and punish as they themselves thinkgood, &c. as you would inferre against vs: The particular deter∣minations of Christ in the new Testament, abrogating some, & confirming other of the Iudiciall lawes, compared with the ge∣nerall equity of the decalogue and the policy of Moses togather now coincident with the doctrine of Christ, may and ought to be a rule of direction vnto Princes and Magistrates in their judgements. As for the vse of the words, policy, & rudiments, which I na∣med one after an other, you make a false collection from thence: though I name both, it followes not that I hold both to be of like extent: neither do I restreyne the policy of Moses vnto his rudiments: but my speech argues that some part of his po∣licy consists in ceremonies and rudiments; such as the aboli∣shing of places defiled with Idolatry in such maner as I have manifested before from Col. 2. against your perverting of the same. After this you labour to prove that our Temples are a synfull re∣viving of Iewish rudiments, after they were dead by Christ: your first allegation is, that the things appoynted of God for his figurative wor∣ship, might not be imitated by men for any vse, as the law in Exod 30.32.33. teacheth vs. Herevnto I answer, 1. this is a bold presump∣tion, to make the yoke of the legall ceremonies heavyer with∣out warrant: for though the holy oyntment and perfume might not be imitated by men for any vse, doth it follow hence that other things appoynted for the figurative worship were in like manner forbidden? for example, we reade of sundry kindes of meat offrings, and among the rest of some Levit. 2.4.5.7. &c. baked, some fryed, and some made in the caldron, and all for the figurative worship of God: how can you ever prove that these kindes of meates thus prepared, which might fitly serve for the ordinary vse of man, were forbidden to be imitated? 2, suppose that before Christ these kinde of meates had bene forbidden, yet are you far wide to apply such a prohibition vnto our time, and to deny vnto vs such preparations of meate as were then vsed in the figurative worship of God: yourself rather are herein
guilty of a synfull reviviving of Iewish rudiments by imposing vpon vs the ceremoniall prohibitions and ordinances, which are Gal. 4.3. Eph. 2.14.15. Rō. 7.1. &c dead by Christ. Yea you would make our burden heavyer then the Iewes, by laying such a yoke of ceremonies on our neckes, as you can not shew that God ever layd vpon them. 3, suppose, that the oyntments, perfumes, meates and temples appoynted for the figurative worship of God in old time, might not be imitated by men for any vse as you say, and sup∣pose that we offended also by imitating the forme of the Iewish temple, as you would have it: then are you and your people in∣excusably guilty of the same sin with vs, while you vse these our temples for divers vses; you for your study: divers of your people for receyving of almes in thē, &c. Thus are you caught and entangled in the snare which you layd for vs: for you are to remember that the holy oyntment whereof you speak, was Exod. 30.32.33. forbidden vnto men not onely in the worship of God (other∣wise then is there expressed,) but for any vse whatsoever: as yourself also confesse: And therfore that ceremonial precept if it be still in force, according to your vrging of the same, doth as well condemne your vse of these temples, as ours. Secondly, for the countenancing and confirming of your obiection, you content not yourself with holy scriptures, but you lead vs from Moses ben Amran vnto Moses ben Maimon, from faithfull Moses the servant of Christ vnto the Infidel Moses a professed adversary of Christ, and out of his scripture you tell vs, speaking of holy oyntment, that the Hebrewes from thence rightly concluded, It is vnlawfull for a man to make an house after the patterne of the temple. I answer, 1. The collections of those degenerate Hebrewes are most vaine, and as in other things, so touching this holy oyntment and patterne of the temple: R. Solomon Cōment. on Ex. 30.31. vpon those words, This shalbe an holy oynting oyle vnto me: throughout your generations; by a cabalisticall rule collects that there were
tvvelve logo or measures of this oyle: because the numerall letters of Zeh the word there vsed for this do yeeld the number of twelve: And further they note that thisanoynting oyle [then made] should continue vnto the world to come, according to those words, throughout your generations. Tou∣ching Beth-habchirah, the temple or house elect for the name of God, their traditions are R. Moses mikkots. Sepher mitsvoth haggadol precept. af∣fir. 164. Thalmud Ierusa. cap. haroeh. that it is not lawfull for men to as∣semble vnto the mountaine of that house, since the desolation thereof, having with them either staffe, scrip or shooes on their feete, or dust on their feete, &c. That in the city Ierusalem itself for the holynes thereof they might not give any place to stran∣gers or soiourners therein: that they might not make any house of buriall therein, except the burialls of the house of David, and the buriall of Huldah which had bene there from the dayes of the former Prophets; that they might not plant any gardens or orchyards in it; that they might not keep any cockes in it, &c. R. Saadias (as is recorded by cōmēt. on Exo. 31.1. Aben Ezra) giveth this reason why Bezaleel of the tribe of Iudah, & Aholiab of tribe of Dan were chosen to make the tabernacle: namely because Iu∣dah & Dan were compared vnto Lyons whelpes, the Gen. 49.9. one by Iaakob, the Deut. 33.22. other by Moses; & that so acccording to the forme of the Lyon broad before and narrow behinde, the tabernacle was also made in that forme: But Aben Ezra himself contradicts this collection in the same place, and sayth that the breadth of the tabernacle was equal, and that there was no cause why Be∣zaleel and Aholiab were called vnto this work, but because there were none like vnto them in Israel. And a number of such like collections vaine in themselves, and contradictory vnto one an other might further be brought, to shew how vnworthy a thing it is to allow any voyce vnto these Rabbines in the con∣troversies and questions of right among Christians. 2, there is yet more colour and excuse for the Rabbines in this their errour considering their estate, then there is for you: for they supposing that the leviticall and ceremoniall ordinances are still in force do more colourably hold that the holy things of God may not be applyed vnto or imitated in common vse, but you knowing the ceremonies to be abolished, have lesse reason so to vvrite as you have done.
3. The testimony of the Rabbines in this matter doth not serve to condemne our temples in respect of the forme thereof; for as they R. Solo∣mon & A∣ben Ezra cōment. on Exo. 30.32 write concerning the holy anoynting oyle, the composi∣tion made like vnto it was then vnlawfull, when it consisted both in number and quantity of the same kinde of spices, but if there were more or lesse in the composition it was lawfull: so in like manner if our temples differ both in many parts, and in the proportion and measure of them from Solomons Temple, by the same reason they are to be held lawful. 4. If our Temples be vnlawfull because they are made after the patterne of the Ie∣wish Temple, then doth this conclusion of the Rabbines as wel condemne you in the vse of these Temples as it doth vs, for that which you say the Hebrues have rightly concluded is spoken of any private civill houses whatsoever made for civil vse, such they hold to be vnlawfull for any vse being made after the for∣me of the Temple: And so al that you have sayd both from the Scripture & from Maimony is against your self, considering the divers vses which you have of these Tēples, as I shewed before. In the third place, whereas you do alledge the testimony of Bellarmine to shew that these our Temples are purposely made after the forme of the Iewes Temple, &c. I answer, 1. you do vnfaith∣fully alledge the writings of Bellarmine, which are directly con∣trary vnto that which you pretend and give forth in his name: for though he shew that some Temples in some part were like vnto Solomōs Temples, yet he Bellarm. de cultu sanct. lib. 3. c. 3. sec. vlt shewes, that whereas the holiest place in the Temple of Solomon was built towards the west, that ours on the quite contrary were built looking towards the east, and this purposely to signify and testify a difference & op∣position vnto the Iewes: Though this was done for a mystery also as some other observe, and you note before, that hinders not this purpose of being opposite vnto the Iewes, but may stand with the same. 2. As for our temple in speciall about which our question is, it is in no respect that you can alledge like vnto Solomons: & therfore no Iewish rudiment to cause any separa∣tion from vs in that regard.
CHAP. XII. The sixt argument concerning Temples examined. Section. 1. Hen. Ains. OVr 6t. reason hath 2. branches, I. That by the destruction of Idolies, men are more easily drawen to Gods true worship, &c. II. By reteining them, they are nourished in superstition, &c. Gen. 35. 2. King. 18. 2. Chron. 34. Act. 17. & 19. Lev. 13. & 14. with Iude 23. You answer; That which belonged to the temporary dispensation un∣der Moses being set apart; the generall equitie of these scriptures leads us no further, then to abolish such moniments of superstition and cor∣ruption as have no necessary use. Repl. To your exception about Moses temporarie dispensation, I have spoken before. This which you now adde, of no necessarie vse, may in some sense be granted: for in deed Christians haue no necessary vse of Antichrists idols or idol Temples, let them therfore perish with him; as they shal, er. 10.15 Rev. 18. in the time of their visitation. But if by Necessarie, you mean in respect of humane pleasure or profit, as the Lutherans may think they have a necessary vse of popish images (which they keep in their Churches) either to adorne their Temples, (which may also be pleaded for by Psal. 24.1. 1. Cor. 10 26. seing we may vse of the plēty of the earth euen for ornament also) or to remember the saints deceased, though they worship them not: or, as others think they haue a necessary vse of idol Temples, because they would spare their purses, and be at no charge to build other convenient places to worship God in: this I iudge to be but a carnal reason, and that it savoureth not of Gods spirit, which throughout the Scriptures condemneth Idols and Idoleies, in respect of their
Exo. 34.12.13.14.15. Deut. 7.25.26. Ezek. 23.14.16. &c. abomination before God, and snare that they are vnto men. And if this your exception should take place, we should haue very few idols destroyed. For they that are popishly affected, wil finde some necessarie vse for euery idol, to mainteine their superstition. The gentriemay weare the popes hallowed golden crucifixes and other sacred Iewels for broches on their hatts, & tablets about their necks, and his beads, for ornaments about their hands. The images of their Ladie, and other gods & goddesses, they may vse to bewtify their houses, yea to adorne the wals and corners of their Churches, as they stil continew in the Church win∣dowes. The altar may be vsed for a communion table, the hallowed font, for a vessel to baptise in, as is vsual in Engl. though these reformed Churches haue doen it away. The Bishops think they haue as necessary vse of their copes & other hallowed vestiments, as you of your Temples, which many of them by reason of their bignes and forme, are fitter a great deale to sing a masse in, then to preach the gospel. So it wil come to passe, that all the popes abominations shalbe reteined for some vse or other, and idolatrie nourished to the dishonour of God. If we should expound all the other commandments, as you interpret this concerning idolatrie: God might iustly condemne us as corrupters of his Law, and seducers of the people. But let us weigh your perticular exceptions. Answer. Io. Pa. FIrst, whereas by way of affirmation, you reply; in deed Christians have no necessary vse of Antichrists Idols or Idol-temples: I answer, 1. If no necessary vse: then is your vse of them for study therein and for other purposes, the more cō∣demnable, being idle and vnnecessary. 2. These temples have some necessary vse, because by reteyning of them, that cost and charges which should be employed in the building of others in their stead, may serve to supply the wāts of many godly poore: Such workes and considerations the holy Ghost judgeth to be Tit. 3.14.necessary vses. Secondly, whereas by way of imprecation & cursing, you pray against our temples, wishing for the destruction of An∣tichrist, & of them together, saying, let them therfore perish with him. I answer, 1. you do herein worse then Balaam, who was faine to say,
Num. 23.8. How shall I curse, where God hath not cursed? for the law of ceremonies being remooved, you can not shew by anywarrant of Scripture that God doth curse the places formerly abused vnto Idolatry, whē as the Idolatrous vse thereof is taken away: we see on the contrary by experience, and you might see that God blesseth our vse of such Temples in all the Reformed Churches, even with that Rom. 15.29. abundance of the blessing of the Gospell of Christ, which is there administred; And therfore we may truely say vnto the Lord concerning your curse, Ps. 109.28. though they curse, yet thou wilt blesse. 2. Do you not see how you curse yourself in praying for the destruction of these Temples which you and your people frequent so often for divers purposes? For what if God should heare your prayer, and while your self are sitting at your study in one of these Temples, should suddenly rayse a tempest and overthrow the temple? should not your blood be now vpon your owne head that had called for this iudgement? dare you enter into and continue in such a place, against which you pray dayly that God would destroy it? or are you content to perish your self, so that one of these Temples might perish with you? Thirdly, whereas by way of prophecy or prognosticatiō, you foretell the perishing of these Temples, & say; as they shall, in the time of their visitation. I answer, 1. that place
Ier. 10.15. which you alledge for confirmation of your prophecy, speaketh not of Temples but of Idols, and therfore concludeth nothing against the place vsed by vs. 2. If the destruction of the Ba∣bylonish and heathnish Temples had bene there prophecyed of and foretold, as is in other places the destruction even of the private houses of the Babylonians; yet doth not this shew that the like event shalbe vnto all places where Antichristian Idola∣try hath bene practised: for both in respect of equitie, there is great difference betwixt Babylonish Temples not purged from their Idolatrous vse; and our Temples that are converted to the lawfull worship of the true God; and againe in respect of the fact, suppose our Temples were as vncleane as the Babylonians, yet is not God bound to deale with all sins alike in this world by executing the same iudgements here vpon all things that are de∣filed.There is indeed a time of visitation when Ps. 102.26. Mat. 5.18. heaven and earth shall perish; and then our temples are like to perish also; but this perishing shewes them to be no more vnlawfull, then other creatures of God which are subiect to vanitie in like ma∣ner. 3. As for Rev. 18. which chapter you also alledge at large for proofe of your prediction in the ruine of our temples; why did you not nominate the verse and describe your collection from thence, that we might have considered the truth and evi∣dence thereof? 4. Do not you remember, how one of your owne fellowship and society hath of late time prophecyed and foretold an universall massacre to come vpon Christendome; & how he is deceyved, the time being past which he had nomina∣ted and limited for this event? Let his example warne you to take heed of being so rash in prophecying an vniuersal massacre of our temples. Fourthly, you say if by Necessarie, I meane in respect of humane pleasure or proffit: as the Lutheranes may thinke they have a necessary vse of images, which they keep in their Churches, &c. this you judge to be but a carnall reason and not to savour of Gods spirit, &c. Herevnto I answer, that by necessary vse, I do not meane such as you speak of in the Lutheranes: but I meane (that which it seemes you call sparing of the purse) such vse as serves to supply the neces∣sities of the faithfull, and to support the burden of such as are oppressed with poverty and want, whiles the church is not char∣ged with the cost and labour of such buildings: and with all I meane such a circumstance of place as is in generall of necessa∣ry vse for the assembling of people, in as much as the worship of God by his people can not be performed conveniently with∣out such helpes of a building. And that this regard of necessary vse is not a carnall reason, but savouring of Gods spirit: it may appeare both by the equity of Gods law even in the old Testa∣ment when as he would have
Hos. 6.6. 1. Sam. 21.4 5. &c. Mat. 12.1.7. ceremonies some times and in some cases to give place vnto workes of mercy performed for the necessities of his people: & much more after the death of Christ, when for the proffit of his people, that their outwardnecessities, wants & poverty might be the better susteyned and releeved, he wholly Act. 15.10 Col. 2.14. took away the burdē of his owne ceremo∣niall lawes. If God would have his statutes and commande∣ments once given concerning his owne holy place and temple to be changed for the necessary vse and proffit of his people: how much more the statutes once given touching other places and temples abused to Idolatry? Fiftly, to prove that the reteyning of our temples in respect of necessary vse is but a carnall reason, you alledge divers scrip∣tures, viz. Exo. 34.12.13.14.15. Deut. 7.25.26. Ezek 23.14.16, &c wherin as you say, the spirit of God condemneth idols and idoleies, in respect of their abomination before God and snare that they are vnto men. I answer; that God in his law condemned many things as an abhomination vnto himself and as a snare vnto men, which yet are not now of necessity to be abolished as in old time: your owne allegations may lead you to see the same. 1. In Exod. 34. God allowes no compact or covenant with the Idola∣ters there mentioned: and this commandement of God as ap∣peares by conference with other places of scripture was so strict that the Ezra. 10.10.11.12.19.—44. Neh. 13.3.23.30. covenants of mariage with such persons vvere to be dissolved and broken, even after Children borne vnto them in such mariage, that the infidels should not be a snare vnto the people of God. This law, notwithstanding the snare feared of old, is now changed and more liberty granted vnto Christians, as the 1. Cor. 7.12.13.14.16. Apostle shewes: but vnder Moses the vnbeleeving Ido∣latrous wife was not sanctifyed to the beleeving husband, nei∣ther the vnbeleeving heathnish husband sanctifyed to the be∣leeving Iewesse his wife: Pauls plea would not have served in Ezra his time, when they put away their strange vvives: A transgressour might not then justly have vsed Pauls vvords for reteyning either husband or vvife: they might not have sayd; what knowest thou, ô wife, whether thou shalt save thine husband? or what knowest thou, ô man, whether thou shalt save thy wife? Herein therfore vve see plainely that for the necessitie and benefit of families, God hath changed his lavv, and taken avvay that res∣pect
of a snare, vvhich he so severely commanded of old. 2. In Deut, 7.25.26. God allovves not his people to take the silver and gold abused vnto Idolatry: not so much as to turne it vn∣to their civil vse, by taking it to themselves, or bringing it into their houses; & this in respect of the snare and abomination you speak of: The transgression of this law was the Iosh. 7.1. &c. destruction of Achan and his familye, and a trouble vnto all Israel. But now this law is changed, and the respect of the snare and the abomination is taken away, as appeareth in the 1. Cor. 10 27. Idolothytes now permitted vnto our vse, which heretofore were vnlawfull, as well as the silver and gold mentioned in your allegation. 3, as for that place, Ezek. 23.14.16. It doth not appeare that the images there spoken of were religious images, but rather civill pictures, images of the Babylonians, such as was the Mat. 22.20. image of Caesar in his coyne: And therfore were not vnlawfull even in the time of the law, otherwise then by immoderate and inordi∣nate vse: and so even many other lawfull things became Ps. 69.22. a snare and a ruine vnto men. So that the snare condemned in your allegations is such, as that the strength and staine thereof depended either vpon a ceremoniall commandement from vvhich vve are freed; or vpon an vnlavvfull vse, which you can not justly impute vnto vs in the vse of our temples. Sixtly, vvhereas you say, that if this my exception should take place, we should have very few idols destroyed, for they that are Po∣pishly affected, will finde some necessary vse for every Idol, to main∣teine their superstition. The gentrie may weare the popes hallowed golden crucifixes, and other sacred Iewels, for broches in their hatts, &c. Herevnto I answer, 1. You ought to put difference be∣tvvixt Idols themselves, and the places vvhere they have bene vvorshipped, as the
Discov. p. 133. marginall note on Barow acknovvled∣geth: These you do vniustly confound togather at every turne in your reasoning; seing more detestation is to be shevved against the Idols, then against their houses. 2, As for Popish Idols, hallowed crucifixes, their ladies images, and such like things converted vnto ornaments of temples and of the gentry;they are not things of necessary vse in either of those respects that I noted before: they are neither necessary circumstances in the worship of God; neither doth this kinde of reteyning them help to supply the necessities of the faithfull: for if these gol∣den implements vvere broken quite in peeces and molten againe, the poore and other faithfull men might then after∣vvard have as much and more benefit and necessary vse of them then before; but vvith our temples it is quite contrary in both respects. 3, though vve may vse the plenty of the earth even for ornamēt also, as you alledge before frō Ps. 24.1. 1. Cor. 10.26. yet as the Apostle shevves in the same place, vve may also better forbeare the vse of such things whereof vve enioy a plenty; then of other things vvhereof we stand in great necessitie. As frō this that the earth is the Lords, the Apostle 1. Cor. 10 26. with vers. 28. proves vve may have a lavvfull vse of ech creature therein: so from the fulnes, plenty and variety of creatures, he shevves that in some cases vve should forbeare the vse of one rather then an other: and of what rather then of such vaine, and vnnecessary ornaments, as you speak of? 4. As for copes and other hallowed vestments, there is also a manifest difference betwixt them and our tem∣ples: for whatsoever others may think, that skilles not, while we see that an house is of necessary vse in the service of God, & that the surplice is but a surplus, a superfluous thing of no ne∣cessary vse: And hereby you may plainely discerne the diffe∣rence; because not onely that very same surplice which Papists vsed and defiled with their vse, is vnlawfull: but any other sur∣plice newly made for a ministeriall garment, yea though the forme in some part be altered, though it be not consecrated as the
Pontifical. par. 2. de benedictio∣ne sacerdo∣tal. indum. Popish vestments were, yet being of no necessary vse in the service of God, is still vnlawfull: neither do I think that you would willingly weare such an albe: but I hope you vvill not say so of all temples new made, as of the Zuyder Kerck in this city: And yet if you will argue against our temples as against a sur∣plice: then are we to have no temple at all, but to meet sub dio vnder the welkin; because vve are to have no surplice at all. If inyour annotations on the holy scriptures you should expound the other commandements of God on this manner, you would yet prove a greater corrupter of his law and seducer of his people. Section. 2. AGainst the example of Iakobs practise in Gen. 35.2. (which was before Moses policie) you obiect, how many private houses should then be rased: seing they have been polluted with idolatrie, and been nurseries of superstition, as well as their publik high places, Ios. 24.23. Iudg. 17.4. Zeph. 1.5. with Deut. 27.15. I answer; first you change the state of the question, which is of Idols and idolies: and not of houses or other things polluted with ido∣latrie. Secondly, there is no law of God to destroy such civil-houses, as there is to destroy idolies: (and where there is no Law, there is Rom. 4.15. no transgression:) but on the contrary, God gave Israel the Canaanites Deut. 6.10 11. Cities and howses to dwell in, when he Deut. 12.2.3. commanded their idolies to be demolished. Thirdly, you have no reason to compare civil hou∣ses polluted with idolatrie, with idols or idolies: seing even Gods own house was polluted with idolatrie, & yet was not counted an idolie, or destroyed, but 2. King. 23 4.6.11.12. cleansed: neyther can it without impietie, be matched with the high places of idols, or counted a nurserie of superstition, as wel as they. Neither are any civil dwelling houses, though idols have been worshiped in them, such moniments of idolatrie, or nurseries of superstition, as the temples of heathens or of Antichristians; which are merely and properly idolies yea very idols, as before I have manife∣sted from the Pontifical. And this we may learne of the heathen Act. 19.27 Demetrius, who complained how by the Apostles preaching, the temple of the great goddesse Diana should be despised, and her Ma∣iestie should be destroyed: which he would never have spoken of the dwelling houses of Ephesus, though her worshipers kept in them. The Papists also wil tell you, that the very
Bellarm. de cult. sanct. lib. 3. c. 4. vvalles of their Churches de∣dicated vnto God, doe move vnto pietie, as doe the Altars, crosses, images, &c. which incitements to devotion are not found other∣where. That God is after Ibidem. a peculiar manner in the temple, and hea∣reth mens prayers sooner there, by promise. That the temple is dedi∣cated to sacred actions, and is not a profane house but an holy: and Ibid. c. 5. to signify that, it is anoynted with oile. That the Divil Ibidem. is cast out of it and not suffred there to dwell, therfore the dore is knocked on, and the Divill is bidden goe away. So that there is no comparison between these consecrate places, and the common houses of men: and let our very enemies be the judges. Fourthly, the Hebrew doctors who are most precise in condemning outward moniments of idolatrie, and hold even a ceremoniall pollution by the very touching of an idol; yet say of such civil houses wherin Idols are set vp, that when the Maimony treat. of I∣dolatrie c. 8 s. 4. the Idol is taken out, the house is lawfull. And these things serve for an∣swer to the scriptures by you cited; and to the houses of the Musco∣vites and Papists, and the houses wherin we our selves meet, which you obiect vnto vs, and doe vntruly call one of them, the Iewes Idol-temple. Answer. VVHen you argued that our temples were to be destroyed because they serve to nourish superstition, I shewed the weaknes of this argument, because of the inconvenience that would follow; namely, that thē many private houses which both of ancienter and later times have bene defiled with Idols, should likewise be destroyed, being nurseries of superstition as well as other publike places: Touching this first, you say, I change the state of the question which is of Idols and Idolies, & not of houses or other things polluted with Idolatrie. I answer, 1. either you do not mark my reason, or els you do not vnderstand the lawes of right reasoning: for that which I sayde of the lawfull reteyning of private houses was not to rest therein, as in a con∣clusion of the question; but the mention thereof served onely as a medius terminus or as an argument to infer the conclusion, as if I had vsed this Syllogisme:
If all nurseries of superstitiō are to be vtterly destroyed, thenare private houses also to be destroyed for nourishing of superstition. But private houses are not to be destroyed for their nouri∣shing of superstition. Therfore, al nurseries of superstition are not to be destroyed. From hence you might have discerned the force of your reason, drawne from the nourishing of superstition, refuted. 2. If this kinde of reasoning in me may not be admitted, then may I in like maner tel you when you seek to infer inconveniencies vpō me, by the cope, mitre, surplice, & such like things; that you change the state of the question betwixt vs, vvhich is not about vestments and surplices, but about places and temples abused vnto Idolatry. 3. It is yourself vvho indeed seek to chang the state of the question, in that you say, our question is of Idols, which it is not, but onely of Idolies, or places abused vn∣to Idolatry, as may appeare by the questions propounded in my Fol. 2. a.first writings, accepted of by you: neither have you proved our Temples to be Idols, that so by that meanes you might bring in Idols within the compasse of the question. 4. You do here contradict your self, when you say, the question is of Idolies, and not of houses or other things polluted with Idolatrie: For, I pray you, what is an Idolie, but an house or place polluted with Idolatrie? As publique houses polluted with Idols, are publique Idolies; so are private houses polluted with Idolatrie, private Idolies: And therfore both in the Syriaque and Arabique translations of 1. Cor. 8.10. in stead of Idolie, they have the house of Idols: and in other places of Scripture, these Idolies are called Iudg. 17.4.5. houses of Idols, and houses of Gods.
Secondly, you say, there is no law of God to destroy such civill houses, as there is to destroy idolies, &c. I answer: seing God gave vnto Israel the cities and houses of the Canaanites to dwell in, when as he commanded the publique places of their Idolatry to be demolished, as you confesse: this confirmes that which I sayd, and shewes that the commandement of destroying pu∣blique idolies did not depend merely vpon the nourishing ofIdolatry, for then the private idolies should have bene destro∣yed also for their nourishing of Idolatry: because the like sins deserve and call for the like judgement. And this appeares yet further from your owne allegation compared with other scriptures: for vvhereas in Deut. 6.10.11. God allowes Israel to dwell in the cities and houses of the Canaanites, to enioy their welles, their vineyards and olive trees; yet at an other time ac∣cording to the pleasure of his owne will, he 2. Kin. 3 19.25. commands the cities and houses of Idolatrous Moabites to be destroyed; every faire tree to be felled; all their fountaines of water to be stopt; and every good field to be marred with stones; to shew his de∣testation of their sin, which yet he would not have to be she∣wed against the Canaanites by the same meanes, although the snare and danger of being nourished in Idolatry and other sin, was greater and more to be feared from the Canaanites then from the Moabites. If God tooke such a different course with Idolatrous and nourishers of superstition vnder the law; it ought not to seeme strange vnto vs that he declares his desta∣tion of Idolatry now vnder the Gospell by other meanes and maner then vnder the law, according to the counsell of his owne will. In the third place, you say, I have no reason to compare civill houses polluted with Idolatry, with Idols or Idolies: seing even Gods owne house was polluted with idolatrie, and yet was not counted an Idolie, or destroyed, &c. I answer, 1. Suppose I had no reason to compare civill houses with Idolies as you say; yet your reason from Gods house doth not warrant you so to say: for the tēple of God having many priviledges which civil houses had not, might be exempted from the judgement of present destructiō more then they: & therfore your plea is insufficient. 2, though Gods owne house, when it was polluted with Idolatry, vvas not to be destroyed, but cleansed as 2. Kin. 23. yet have you no warrant to say, that It was not counted an Idolie: but as it vvas sometimes denominate of other sins, and called Ier. 7 11. mat. 21.13 a Denne of Theeves, vvhen such vvickednes vvas maintayned: so vvhat
hinders but that it might likevvise be called a Denne of Idola∣ters, or an Idolie, during the time that it vvas full of Idols and not cleansed from Idolatrie? 3, it is also false vvhich you say of the temple, that it cannot without impietie be matched with the high places, or counted a nursery of superstition as well as they. For when as the temple, through the abhominable Idolatries
2. Kin. 21 4.5. &c. Ier. 2.10.11 & 3.11. Ezek. 16.46.47.51.52.57. & 23.11.39.40. &c. practised in it was become an vncleane stewes of spirituall whoredome, above many of the Idol-places, being also more famous for the place and persons polluting it and entising vnto Idolatry, exceeding Sodom and Samaria in their heathnish Idolatries: did not this notorious scandall given in the temple of God nourish superstition ten times more then the Idolatries committed in some obscure Idol temples of the heathen? And though God gave no law for destroying of this his temple when it became a nursery of superstition, yet this hinders not but that it did sometimes match and overmatch the high pla∣ces of the heathens in nourishing of Idolatry. The vvill of God vvas that some Idolies should be destroyed & some not. 4, for civil dwelling houses where Idols have bene worshiped, though they be not such moniments and nurseries of supersti∣tion, as some other publique Idolies, that impeacheth not my assertion: it is enough for me, that they have in some measure bene nurseries of superstition: Even among the publique Ido∣lies themselves, some temples of Antichrist are not such nurse∣ries of superstition as some other be, which are ten times more devoutly observed and waited on, then the rest. 5, how know you that that all the temples of the heathens had no ci∣vill dwellings in any part of them, & that they were (as you say) merely Idolies? how know you but that some of them might be inhabited, in such maner as your Idolie is, reserving the prin∣cipall place for their Idol service and devotion? your making of them mere Idolies in this sense, seemes to be a mere pre∣sumption and affirmation without proofe. 6, I may rather say on the contrary, that they were not merely Idolies because some part of them were put to civill vses as one of your owne Cranz. VVandal. li. 4. c. 23. Authors testifyeth for the Idolie that Geroldus destroyed: there being a meeting in the court thereof every munday for judgements by the King and the flamine: It is also noted of divers temples of Antichrist, that Magdeb. centur. 12. col. 870. 871. civil judgements, and other civil businesses were wont to be performed there: And that our temples are often put vnto divers civil vses also, dayly experience witnes∣seth. That which you say of manifesting them to be very Idols, out of the Pontifical is already answered. 7. vve cannot say but that some private Idolies, and civil dwelling houses, were equal in nourishing of superstition even vnto some publique Idolies: when as Zeph. 1.5 2. Kin. 23.12. Altars vvere made vpon the house tops, es∣pecially vpon Kings or Princes houses as vpon Ahaz his chamber: The resort vnto such places and the scandall by the Idol-worship there performed might nourish superstition more then the devotion performed in some other obscure Ido∣lies and groves of the heathens. 8, How frivolous is that which you write of the heathen Demetrius? how know you that he would never have spoken of the dwelling houses in Ephesus as he did of Dianaes temple, concerning her maiestie? seing that which he spoke was for his Act. 19.24.25. gaine: and seing his gaine consi∣sted in selling litle temples of Diana: it was sutable and fit for his purpose that men should think their private dwelling houses would be more holy if they had those litle temples or shrines of Diana in them, and therfore who can say but that he would vpon occasion complaine that the maiestie of Diana and of her great temple would be despised, if men did not shew their devotion in buying those litle temples for the hallowing of their houses and for the maintenance of her worship? And what if he would not so have complained? yet might their houses in Ephesus have bene Idolies, in respect of their
lares fa∣miliares, and other houshold Gods privately worshipped by them. 9. Vnto that which you alledge out of Bellarmine tou∣ching the Popish opinion of holynes in their temples, I an∣swer that they will also tell you he like touching their private dwelling houses, when as they are consecrated also accordingto their maner: namely, that the vvalles of their houses being hallowed with the signe of the crosse and holy vvater are more holy then other houses not blessed after that maner; that God is then after a peculiar maner present in such houses more thē in other houses; that the divell is driven avvay and expelled: for such vertue and efficacie of Bellarm. de imagin. sanc. lib. 2. cap. 29. Pontifical. driving avvay evill spirits, of communicating holynes, and stirring vp devotion they do eyery vvhere ascribe vnto the signe of the crosse: Their com∣mon saying is: Catechis. regin. Ma∣riae, Angl. per crucis signum fugiat hinc omne malignum, &c Having therfore that Idolatrous signe over the dores of their dvvelling houses vvithout; and on the vvalles vvithin, what holynes and vertue can be vvanting vnto them? And ther∣fore though our enimies are not to be admitted for Iudges; ex∣cept it be against themselves as Moses Deut. 32 31. alledgeth them: yet in this matter their testimony is against you. Fourthly, you plead from the Hebrevv doctours: & tel vs out of Maimony, what is sayd concerning civil houses, namely that, when the Idol is taken out, the house is lawfull: Herevnto I ansvver: 1. The testimony & authority of Maimony is of no vveight nor worth: think you that I feare the arme of Rambam, that you come so oft in his name against me? vvhat meane you to tell vs so of∣ten of hebrew doctours and Ievve doctours, vvhich are indeed neither Iewes nor doctours; but such as the holy Ghost speakes of, Rev. 2.9. which say they are Iewes and are not, but are the Synagogue of Satan: 1 Tim. 1.7 They would be doctours of the law and yet vnderstand not what they speak: They are 1. Tim. 6.4. Doters about questions: puft vp and know nothing: Ibid. vs. 5 Separate thy self from such: But you that separate your self from all the ministers of Christe, and in al this writing have not alledged one of the lights of the reformed Churches, do yet at every turne cal for Iewish, popish, heathnish writers to speak for you. You tell vs they are most precise in condemning outward moniments of Idolatry &c. But it is hard to say vvhether theri pre∣cisenes be more impious or absurd; impious, in condemning the vvorship of God in Christ Iesus to be Idolatry; absurd, in avoyding even the
Arba Tu∣rim, in lib. jore-dea. tract. cele haiajin. signo. 135. & tract. Pittim, sign. 112. civill instruments and vessels and meateof Christians, as the pollutions of Idolatry: and this yet vvith great contradiction among themselves. Their precisenes is much like to that of the Iewes in the Gospell, which Ioh. 18.28 would not go into the common hall lest they should be defiled: and yet in the meane time imbrued thēselves in the blood of Christ: And evē in the place alledged how vaine are the traditiōs which Maimony teacheth, touching the body of the Idolatrous oke or other tree, being lawful for vse but onely the Boughes, brāches & fruites vnlawful: Maimony in Abod. Zarah. c. 8. with divers such like. 2, you do also corrupt the testimony of Maimo∣ny in this place; for he speakes not of civil houses onely as you would make him to speak by your application of his words: his speech may be vnderstood of other houses also, as of Synago∣gues built for the worship and service of God: Neither is there any thing in that Chapter that should restrayne his indefinite speech of a house vnto civil houses: and therfore your owne Author is even in this testimony here produced by you, contra∣dictory vnto yourself, who in an other Counter∣poy. p 199. place do teach that though our Churches have not bene built by Antichrist, though the Idols be also taken out of them, that yet they are to be destroyed: being herein more vnreasonable then your precise and impious Maimony. 3. Suppose that Maimony here spake of civil houses as being lawfull for vse when the Idol is taken away, then doth he in this poynt agree with me who hold the same; and vvrote so much before, viz. that pag. 23. God ne∣ver commanded, nor the godly ever practised such a demoli∣shing of private houses: but he is here against you vvho would have the houses which have bene nurseries of Idolatry to be de∣stroyed; and consequently the houses of the Moschovites, Pa∣pists and even of your ovvne Idolies also, of vvhich more here∣after in their proper place.
Section. 3. Hen. Ains. AGainst the example of the brazen serpent destroyed, 2. King. 18.4 You say, it was of no necessary vse, and therfore might well be destroyed. I answer, there was as necessary vse of it stil, as there had been before: and therfore in that respect, no more cause to destroy it now, then in former times. Yea it being a moniment of Gods ancient mercie to his Church, and a figure Ioh. 3.14. of future grace: they might have pretended a much more necessary and profitable vse to reserve it, then you can for reserving the idolies of the Pope. But the scripture it self sheweth an other cause then you allege, namely for that the Israelits 2. King. 18.4. did burne incense vnto it, and not for that there was no necessary vse therof. And the same cause (besides other) lyeth against your idol temples: for to this day, many people burne incense vnto them, esteming and using them as sanctified places for the incense of their prayers, and other religious works. If you require a proof, you may see it in this citie, if not at other times, at least on Sacraments day, so called: when above other dayes, the papists visit their anciēt Temple solemnly, some of them barefooted: & if the dores be shut that they cannot goe in, yet they doe their devotion in procession about the idolie. And wherfore may we think, have the Nunnes a key of your chappel (as is reported) but for to doe honour to their Dianaes shrine: it is for no devotion to your worship therin, you may be sure, but rather that they may continue Temple keepers (or worshipers) of their former gods, as the Ephe∣sians Act. 19.35 were of their Diana. If you plead, that these burne not incense to the Temples, but to God in them: the same I answer for the Israelits, that they also burnt incense to God, before the brasen serpent, for they were not so sottish as to worship a peece of Brasse. But the scripture vseth to call the worshiping of God, by or before an idol, the worshiping of the idol it self: as in Act. 7.41. they are sayd to offer sacrifice vnto the idol, wheras in Exod. 32. it appeareth they sacrificed to the Lord, the God that had brought them out of Egypt. So they that worshiped in the idolatrous groves, are sayd to 2. Chron. 24.18. serve the groves: and sundry the like.
Answer. Ioh. Pag. VNto my ansvver touching the brazen serpent, your reply is: there was as necessary vse of it still, as there had bene be∣fore, &c. I ansvver; And therfore I graunt also, if in former times it had bene abused vnto Idolatry, in the time of the Iudges or of former Kings, there had bene cause to have abolished the same, vvhile there vvas no necessary vse thereof: And vvhat doth this help you? Secondly, vvhereas you proceed and adde that it being a mo∣niment of Gods ancient mercy and figure of future grace, they might have pretended a much more necessary vse, &c. I answer further, though it had bene a holy signe and type as Ioh. 3.14. yet this proves not so proffitable a vse thereof as we have of our tem∣ples: The Exo. 12.22. bunch of Hyssop where with they sprinckled their houses at the passeover, was a monimēt of Gods ancient mercy and a type Ps. 51.7. 1. Pet. 1.2. of future grace, yet after the sacred action of sprin∣kling ceassed, there was no such necessary vse either of it or of the brazen serpent, being now no necessary circumstances in the service of God, as a place or house to meet in still is, and the poore not able to receyve any such benefit by reteyning the hyssop or the serpent, as now they may by reteyning of these temples. As the holy mount after the law was delivered, and the sound of the Trumpet ended became Exod. 19.12.13. lawfull for common vse againe and the religious observation thereof ceassed: so was it vvith the brazen serpent, and the bunch of hyssop as tou∣ching the holynes thereof: but as for the civil help and be∣nefit we have by these temples, the continuance thereof is ap∣parant and manifest vnto all. Thirdly, whereas you say that the scripture it self alledgeth an other cause, namely for that the Israelites burned incense vnto it, &c. You know well enough that I presuppose that cause & grant the same, according to your allegation, from 2. King.
18.4. which I my self before noted; and the state of our controversy whichis concerning things abused vnto Idolatry, doth also manifeste vnto every one: yet that hinders not but we may also consider this as a concurring cause to be ioyned with the former, and this so much the rather touching the destruction of the brasen ser∣pent, because the originall thereof was not for Idol service. O∣therwise, if without regard of necessary vse ech temple abused vnto Idolatry must be destroyed, as the brasen serpent was for the abuse thereof; then not onely the temples built & dedicated by heathens & papists but also the temples newly built by the protestants for the true and lawfull worship of God, such as are the Zuyder-Kerck in this city and divers more in other places, (if the the papists should get them but one moneth or week in∣to their handes & sing one masse therein) should in like maner be rased and demolished. But you must yet streyne your wit to draw more subtile consequences before you can shew vs such temples in the belly of the brasen-serpent, which by your ar∣guing you would make to be such a devouring Dragō. In Israel beside the temple were Act. 15.21. Mat. 4.23. Ps. 74.4.8. Synagogues built for the service of God: And Historians record (as your self also Annot. on ps. 74.4. acknowledge) that in one city Ierusalem there were above foure hundred Sy∣nagogues: Now by your reasoning if an Idolatrous king had risen vp over al Israel; & raigned but one moneth as did 2. Kin. 15 13. Shal∣lum the sonne of Iabesh & during that time had converted all their Synagogues vnto the service of Idols, all those Synagogues throughout Israel must never more have bene employed vnto the service of the true God, but every one of thē plucked downe & destroyed: and this so often (if others were built againe) as any new pollution should come vpon them, though but for a moneth, or even for one houres abusing vnto false worship. This havock your Hammer and argument makes among the houses of God. As Nebuchadnezzar was once the
Ier. 50.23 Hammer of the world; so if there were strength in your arme and authority according to your minde, we should have you to be the Hāmer of Christendome, not onely to break the constitution of their spiritual societies every where, but also to overturne & rase theirmateriall buildings: No necessary vse vvould serve for any plea or excuse before such a severe judge. Fourthly, you say: the same cause lyeth against our Idol-temples: for to this day many people burne incense vnto them: and for proofe hereof, you alledge that in this city if not at other times, at least on Sacraments day, so called, we may see the papists visit their ancient temple solemnely; some of them barefooted, &c. Hereunto I answer. 1. This action of the Papists whereof you speak is not in any publique solemne meeting, as your words might make the rea∣der to imagine, and so deceive him thereby: but a thing done by stealth of some superstitious persons, who as I heare do now and then visit that temple as a holy place: The Magistrate of this city doth punish the Papists even for their secret meetings in private houses: and much less will they suffer publique and solemne assemblies for Idol-service. If such a visitation of tem∣ples as this is be a just cause of destroying them, then what tem∣ple shall be free from destruction, if the Papists may have li∣berty at any time to come neere it and to pollute it with their devotions? It is affirmed by many, (and it is agreeable to the Romish profession) that the Churchyard and Church newly built in this city, have in the night season bene visited by the Papists and consecrated by their priest or Bishop for the buriall of their dead, which are often buried there: And now by your reasoning, because the Papists have on this manner burned in∣cense vnto it, and hallowed it for their vse, and esteeme it a sanctifyed place, it should be destroyed as well as the brasen serpent was. 2, The superstitious devotions which by some stragling people are now and then performed at this temple whereof you speak, were in like maner practised by them, (as those that have seene do testify) even then when it was turned vnto a civill vse and made a pack house for wares: for vnto such vse it was by the Magistrates appoyntment heretofore em∣ployed, vntill of later time, the city encreasing, they found a ne∣cessary vse of it for the people to meet in, vnto the service of God. And this being so, that the reteyning of this place for
civill vse hath given liberty vnto Papists to burne incense vnto it (as you speak) as vvel as the religious vse thereof: then are you as deep in this sin as others whom you accuse for nourishing su∣perstition: for it hath bene and is the maner of your people to reteyne a civil vse of these hallowed places for the buriall of the dead. Though you have not power to destroy them, yet ought you to forbeare the vse of these hallowed places, if there be such a sinfull nourishing of superstition thereby. Yea if any difference be, it is the reteyning of these places for civill vse that gives the Papist more liberty and occasion to performe and continue their devotions still, because they think that our vse of their temples in the service of God doth more pollute them, and make them vnfit for their vse then turning of them to pack houses. 3, Suppose that there were offence given in retey∣ning this particular temple which you mention & which some Papists do more dote vpon, then vpon other places; in respect of some miraculous vertue and holynes which they have ima∣gined and beleeved to be in it through their popish delusions, yet this may not serve to condemne all other in like manner: And least of all can it serve to condemne the place of our wor∣ship, about which in particular this our present controversy is. The vvoman that occasioned this dispute & pretended scruple of joyning with our congregation in respect of our temple, need not to be offended at this place of ours, for the superstition that is practised in an other place. Fiftly, you ask wherfore the Nunnes have a key of our Chappel (as is reported) but for to do honour to their Dianaes shrine, &c. I an∣swer: 1. The report which you repeat is a false report and vn∣true: The Baguines or vvomen (whom you call Nunnes) have no key vvhereby they may come into our Chappell: neither have had these many yeares; And therfore directly contrary vnto that which the tovvne cleark of Ephesus sayd boasting, & vvhich you Act. 19.35. alledge for them; they may take vp a lamentation and say; vvho knovveth not, that vve are no longer temple-keepers nor vvorshipers in the Chapell, vvhich is taken from
vs: vve have lost possession and have no keyes of entrance, &c. Regard not such sleight reports: if you were vvise you vvould not mention them, vntil you had more vvarrant & assurance of the truth thereof. 2, your self are rather a Sexton or templ-keeper of an Idol-tēple, having obteyned to keep for your vse a key of the library in that temple which you resort vnto & yet would have it to be destroyed and rased: No Nunnes have any such dore in our temple to be opened by them at their pleasure as you have there: But I pray you tell vs, since you would not have these temples once abused by Antichrist to be exempted from ruine and destruction more then the rest: would you be content thus to have kept a key of some cel in Appollos Oracle at Delphos, or of Baal-zebubs tēple in Ekron where you might dayly have heard the divel speaking alowd in his owne person? If so, surely you do thē lesse hate Idol-tēples & devilles houses, then many of those vvhom you do so much accuse thereof. Sixtly, as for the distinction which you vvould preoccupate viz. of burning incense not to the temples but to God in them: though I condemne those that shall make such distinctions to defend their superstition withall: yet whereas you say further, that you answer the same thing for the Israelites, that they also burnt incense to God, before the brazen serpent, for they were not so sottish as to wor∣ship a peece of brasse: this your saying is vnwarrantable: for the folly & sottishnes of Idolaters leads thē to as great absurdities as the worshiping of a peece of brasse: Rom. 1.22.23.25. Ezec. 8.10.11.14. they being so infatuate as to worship the basest creatures: they become not onely Ier. 10.14 brutish as the beasts, but even Ps. 115.8 blockish like the senselesse stones which they serve: And thē what warrāt have you to limit their folly, as though they could not proceed thus far to worship a peece of brasse: especially considering the 2. Kin. 16 3. rage of Idolatry that was about this time of Ahaz whom Hezekias succeeded and then destroyed the brasen serpent? you are in this poynt more erro∣neous then the Idolatrous Iesuite himself
Bellarm. de imagin. lib. 2 c. 11 & 13. who confesseth this sottishnes of Idolaters, which you deny in the Israelites. And what though sometimes the scripture call the worshiping of God by an Idol, the worshiping of the Idol itself, as you shew from Exo. 32 with Act. 7.41? must it needes do so therfore at all times? or must it therfore do so at this place concerning the brasen ser∣pent? The sottishnes of Idolaters in worshiping very wood & stone for their Gods is shewed at large by Ioan. Rai∣nol. cēsur. Apocr. tom. 2. prae∣lec. 223. our writers who do therfore also justly reprove the slanders of Bellarmine who be∣cause Calvine collected from Exo. 32. that there and in such pla∣ces the true God was worshiped by an Idol after a false maner, did therfore slander him as though he had sayd the Iewes did worship the true God in all their Idols. But your allegation & application of that place Exo. 32. vnto the question in hand, is as vaine as that which was slanderously imputed vnto Calvine. Besides this, there is great difference betwixt worshipping God by or before an Idoll, and the worshipping in or at an Idol-temple; These two are not to be matched togather: As you al∣ledge that men are sayd to serve the groves, 2. Chron. 24.18. So by the like figurative speech men are sayd to serve the tabernacle or to do Num. 18 4.6 1. Chro. 9 13. & 28.13.21. the service of the tabernacle & of the house of God, because of their attendance vpon the same in their severall charges: yet this is not all one with kneeling downe before a brasen bowle, a fleshook, or an embroydered Cherub in a curtaine of the tabernacle and worshipping God thereby, as Idolaters vse to do in the Idols: such serving of the tabernacle I think you vvill not allow: And so on the contrary the service of the groves, being a large and generall speech is to be conside∣red of more distinctly, then you have yet propounded the same vnto vs. Section. 4. Hen. Ains. AGainst the example of Iosias, in 2. Chron. 34. you say, those things were also of no necessary vse. I answer, you fall againe into your former fallacie, putting that for the cause which was not. And besides the reasons which I fore-alledged, the text itself she∣weth otherweise, for he made
Vers. 4.7 dust of them. Could not the thingshave been put to some necessarie vse: and where they therfore turned to dust and powder? The godly zele of the King, compared with Gods law, perswadeth that his own profit or necessary vse, was not the thing that he respected. And what if the high places were not houses meet to be converted into synagogues; yet might they have served for other vses: and the houses of Dagon and Baal, and the temples which Israel builded Hos. 8.14 when they forgot their maker, were as fit for synago∣gues as Antichrists temples now. And if you will regard later examples: you may see many idol houses and moniments destroyed by Christian Princes, and by Bishops having leave from such: and this not because they could not have put them to necessary vses, but for zele and detestation of idolatrie. As Eusebius de vita Const. l. 3. c. 53. Constantine the Emperour rased down Venus temple, with all statues and moniments of it: & Socrates Hist. l. 1. c. 14. the Python in Cilicia, with his temple. Theodo∣ret hist. l. 5 c. 37. 20. 21. Sozom. l. 7 c. 20. 21 Theodosius commanded the temples of idols to be overthrowen. Augustin de civ. Dei. l. 18. c. 54. Gaudentius & Iovius rui∣nated such places in the reigne of Honorius. Cranz. l. 2 Saxon. c. 9. & 12. Carolus Magnus, when he had conquered Saxonie, did the like to the idolies of Maydenburgh and Mars mount. Theodor. hist. l. 3. c. 7 Marcus Bishop of Arethusa, performed the like service in Constantines dayes, and Sigonius l. 10. Impe∣rij occident Bishop Porphyrie shewed like zele at Gaza, and Cassiod. lib. 3. Hist. tripart. Bishop Abdas did the like among the Persi∣ans, vpon their Temples consecrated to the Fyre. Iohn Theodor. l. 5. 2. 29. Chrysostome sent men to doe the like work in Phaenicia. Helmol∣dus in Scla¦vorū Chrō. Bishop Geroldus burned to ashes, a grove which the Sclavi had in sacred reverence. Chron. Mersburg. l. 2. c. 6. VVig∣bertus Bishop of Mersburgh did likeweise, and Cranz. in Metrop. l. 4. c. 1. Vnwannus of Ham∣burgh, cut down all the idolatrous groves in his diocese. Cromer. l. 15. & Guagninus de Lituania. In Litua∣nia, the Temples and Altars of idols were demolished: and in sundry other places, as Historiographers doe record. And now of late the Christians in France (as at Rochel) ruinated the popish Temples there: all which doe bear witnes to the true meaning of Gods law, written in their harts, otherwise then in yours, who plead to have such places continued for to worship God in upon a pretense of necessary vse.
Answer. Ioh. Pag. THe reasons which you fore alledged against the consideration of necessary vse in things abused vnto Idolatry, are before answered: vnto that which you now labour to shew out of the text itself I answer further, 1. vvhereas you alledge that Iosias made dust of the Altars and groves, &c. and therevpon ask whether they could not have bene put to some necessary vse, &c. If you meane a necessary vse in any measure at all, I deny not the the same: for there is nothing so small or abiect but some vse may be made thereof: and even after these things were turned into dust, there might vse be made of that dust, as there vvas: but you pervert my words if you stand so ser∣villy vnto the letter thereof: vvhereas I spoke of the great prof∣fit that might redound vnto the maintenance of the Church: and namely such as might be proportionable vnto the worth of many temples, of ten thousand Churches happily in some one Kingdome: and vvhat is a basketfull of dust about which you trifle in comparison of this great commodity employed to supply the wants of the faithfull? 2. Touching Iosias his zeale compared with the law of God though I doubt not but that he respected the Glory of God and not his owne proffit: yet this hinders not but that vvith a godly zele and care of Gods people he might also have respect vnto the common benefit of them in reserving many Synagogues and houses of assembly built for the worship of God, and convert them to his service againe though they had bene polluted with Idolatry, contrary to your doctrine that requires the demolition of all such beside the temple alone. 3, as for the houses of Dagon, Baal and such like, though they were not mentioned in the 2. Chr. 34 Chapter alled∣ged by you to shew vs the example of Iosias, yet did I also in my former pag. 22. answer, shew the warrant for their destructiō, though they might have bene turned vnto necessary vse, viz. in respect of the tēporary dispensatiō vnder Moses, though now abrogate.
In the next place, leaving the Scriptures, you betake your self to an other help, and say in defence of your errour, that if, I will regard later examples, I may see many Idol houses and moniments destroyed by Christian Princes, and by Bishops having leave from such, &c. Herevnto I answer in generall, 1. VVe have here a notable spectacle of your great partiality; while you that do so often blame me for making flesh my arme, & for alledging the Examples of Reformed Churches against you even when I did it not, do yet yourself seek help of men, of Idolatrous men & fly for refuge vnto them, and to their examples to oppugne vs therewithall. VVhen Mr. Spr. propounded vnto your consi∣deration, the example and iudgement of Counter∣poy. pag. 15. all the pure Reformed Churches in the world, & of al the godly learned & most excellēt lights in the same, as Bucer, Martyr, Fagius, Alasto, Knoxe, Calvin, Beza, Bullinger, Gualter, Symler, Zanchius, Iunius, Rollocus, &c. You an∣swer as David did touching the armies of the heathēs & infidels and say, though be come against you with horsmen and Charets, yet you ps. 20.7. wil remember the name of the Lord, by whose word alone all doctrines must be tried, &c. How much more iustly might I now answer you in your owne words, and require you to lay aside carnall confidence and to remember the name of the Lord: I may justly complaine of you as Solomon doth of the great evill which he saw vnder the Sunne; He saw Eccles. 10.7. Servants on hor∣ses and Princes walking as Servants on the ground: In your exam∣ples alledged against me, you set Servants and Beggars on horsback, even the vassals & slaves of Antichrist, popish Priests & Prelates Geroldus, Wigbertus, Vnwannus & other Lituanians & Polonians, and will have their examples to be regarded of me; and yet make Princes to walk as servants on the ground, by ma∣king base account of the judgements & examples of the truest Churches & faithfullest Ministers, propounded vnto you by others: Let those that feare the Lord judge whether this be not shamefull and grosse partiality and far from a sincere course. 2. VVe may here observe not onely, your partiality but a further deceit; for whereas in the beginning of your Pag. 35. last
writing, your counsell is that we discusse things by the word of God, not of man: you are herein like vnto a deceitfull champion who being to combat with an other, would aforehand agree vpon the weapon and assistance to be vsed: but yet contrary to agreement brings with him into the feeld both other weapons and assistance then he pretended at the first: for so you making shew that you would vse the sword of the spirit onely, do yet bring with you other carnall weapons and a company of hyred Souldiers which you couch closely togather and lay them in ambush: and here of a sodaine they step forth, first a band of Emperours & Princes as of Constantine the great, Theodosius, Gau∣dentius, Iovius, Carolus magnus or Charles the great; and the mar∣ching of these horsmen and Charets makes a terrible noyse in the eares of many: after these you bring forth a second band of Popish prelates, as Geroldus, Wigbertus, Vnwannus, to come ru∣sling in their rochets against me: & besides these divers others. VVho would have expected such an onset, vnder your conduct, that made such shew of the contrary at the first? 3. As you have alledgedged the examples of these for breakin downe of temples, so might you as easily have alledged their examples for the maintenance of many notorious corruptions some of them for the superstitious vse of the signe of the crosse; some of them to allow primates and metropolitanes: some of them to allow even the masse itself and all the abomi∣nations of popery. VVhat weight is there in the example of such?
4. The temples which these Princes and Bishops destroyed were all of them heathnish and built by the Pagans for the worship of false Gods: other temples such as ours built for the service of Christ, they destroyed not, but built such them∣selves, as you would now have to be demolished. And suppose you could prove that the temples abused by Antichriste vvere to be destroyed as vvell as the Pagan-Idolies: yet at least by the testimony and judgement of these your witnesses it vvas other∣vvise: so that look what the force of these examples is, it is allagainst your self and not against vs. But to come more particularly vnto your examples: The first is, that Constantine the Emperour rased down Venus Temple, with all statues and moniments of it: I answer, 1. It is vncertaine whether this thing was done by Constantine or not: for Eusebius the author that records the same is R. P. de Politeria Ec¦cles. lib. 2. cap. 23. 24. 25. 26. Sca∣liger. Elēc. trihaeres. Serrar. c. 29 often taxed for many errours in matters of fact described by him. His testimo∣ny is therfore doubtfull and not free from suspicion. 2. That Temple is recorded by Eusebius to have bene an extra∣ordinary wicked place, not onely for heathnish Idolatry, but also for other monstrous and vnnaturall crimes committed in the same, which are also alledged as a cause why it was destro∣yed: Therfore the destruction thereof is no sufficient warrant for the subversion of our temples. 3, It is also noted by Eu∣sebius in the same Chapter which you cite, that this temple of Venus was situate in a dearne place on a top of mount Libanus, out of the way & remote from conversation of men: therfore could it not even by his relation be converted vnto such neces∣sary vses as our temples are. 4. That Idol temples were not destroyed by Constantine, it is confessed by an Theodo∣ret Hist. lib. 5. c. 20. other of your witnesses: Therfore though he forbade the Idolaters to vse them, yet do not your witnesses agree that his conscience required the destruction of them all together acccording to your doctrine. The second example alledged by you is of Constantine also, that he destroyed the Python in Cilicia with his temple. I answer, 1. The truth of this fact may also be justly called into questiō, considering how vncertaine or rather fabulous things are re∣corded by that Socrates your witnesse. In the Socrates Hist. lib. 1. cap. 13. former Chap∣ter next vnto this alledged by you there is recorded the finding out of the holy crosse by Helena the Mother of Constantine: the miraculous discerning of the same from the two other crosses of the theeves crucifyed with Christ, by the meanes of Maca∣rius, &c. 2. If the things there recorded by Socrates be true, then was the superstition of
Constantine very great; in taking apeece of that crosse vvhich his mother found and sent vnto him, and hiding it in his owne statue or image, beleeving per∣fectly that the city should be preserved safe, vvhere it was kept: in taking also the nayles which fastned the hands of Christ vn∣the crosse, and putting them in his horse bridles and in his hel∣met (as an Theodoret Hist. lib. 1. c. 18. other of your Authors sayth) to repell the darts of his enimies; and to accomplish the ancient Zach. 14.20. Prophecie, tou∣ching the holynes vpon the bridles of the horses. Such exam∣ples are of no great authority with vs. 3. These Authors wit∣nesse further that in Constantines time, they did Euseb. hist. lib. 20 cap. 3. consecrate Churches, and kept feasts of dedication: that he Socrates hist. lib. 1. c. 13. caused a tem∣ple to be built vvhere the temple of Venus had stood: and an other at the ibid. c. 14 oke of Mamre evē in the Idol-place vvhere heath∣nish sacrifices had bene offred. Do you think that such exam∣ples are to be regarded and follovved? For a third example you tell vs that Theodosius commanded the temples of Idols to be overthrowne: I answer, 1. Your historians witnessing this fact are so full of apparant fables that there is no great credit to be given vnto them. As for Theodoret to go no further then these chapters alledged by you: in the Theodoret Hist. lib. 5. .37. first of them he telles great wonders of Eunomius the Bishop that alone resisted an army when others fainted, &c. in the ibid. c. 20 second place, the story of Macedonius the divine eremite that was ig∣norant of the scriptures, is related: in the ibid. c. 21. third place is the story of the Divel that at first would not suffer the fire to burne the Idol-temple, but was after driven to run away by the vertue of holy vvater and the signe of the crosse, &c. And Sozomen in the Sozom. lib. 7. c. 21. Chapter next-following vnto that which you alledge telles a strange story of Iohn Baptists head which the mules would draw no further then to a certaine place supposed ther∣fore to be chosen of God for the keeping of that relique: and how Theodosius came thither either God or the Prophet moo∣ving him, &c. 2, Sozomen in the place cited by you shewes that at length many of the Idol-temples were overthrovvne by Theodosius: If he had thought them simply vnlavvfull according
to Deut. 12. Then is it like that not many but all of them should have bene destroyed by him. And besides he ibid. c. 1 shevves that the temple of Bacchus in Alexandria was converted vnto the vse of the Christians vnder Theodosius: That in the temple of Sera∣pis, there was heard to be sung Alleluia, by a strange voyce, no person being seene for a token that Christians should after∣wards sing psalmes for the worship of God in that place. 3, In the first place which you alledge out of Theodoret, there is also mention made of a certaine impudent monke or contempla∣tive person that brought the conscience of Theodosius into bon∣dage with a vaine excommunication, &c. And therfore not the consciences of such men but the word of God which is the perfect law of liberty must be our guide. In the fourth place you alledge, that Gaudentius and Iovius ruinated such places in the reigne of Honorius. Answ. 1. Though they did so in one city, in Carthage, yet this shewes not that they did so in other places, or that they thought all others bound to imitate their example: for oftentimes such works are done vpon occasion of particular respects and specialll provocations, which at other times and places they would not doe: as vvas also noted before in the practise of Constantine the great. 2. As for Augustine your Author, though he approve this fact in them; yet it appeares els vvhere, that at some other times and places he August. ad Publi∣colā Epist. 154. allowed the reteyning of them: and shewes reason for their converting to religious vses, even as sacrilegious and impious persons themselves are changed or converted vnto true reli∣gion: And his reason is not to be despised: seing living temples of the divel abused vnto Idolatry being more capable of the in∣fection of sin may be employed and turned vnto the service of God; why not other dead temples made of vvood and stone? 3. This your vvitnesse doth yet further condemne you, in that he Ibidem. allovves the converting of Idol-temples and groves vnto the vvorship of the true God, or vnto other common and pu∣blique vses, but not vnto other private vses and commodities: vvhereas on the contrary you that do deny such publique vse
of them in the service of God, are yet content to employ them to your ovvne private vse and benefit as by study in the li∣brary, &c. Your fift example is, that Carolus magnus when he had conque∣red Saxonie, did the like to the Idolies of Maydenburgh and Mars mount. I ansvver. 1. Cranzius the popish vvriter vvhom you alledge for these things is of such authority, that for many matters the golden legend of lyes deserves as much credit as he: He telles Cranzius VVandalia lib. 5. c. 41. of strange apparitious at noone day made vnto virgins for the receiving of Henricus the nevv Bishop: and of the great miracles that cap. 42. Evermodus the Bishop vvrought in loosing the chaynes of prisoners by the holy vvater that he sprinckled vpon them: and hovv in the open congregation he beat out the vnmercifull divel that vvould not forgive the murdrer. He records hovv Ibid lib 4 cap. 19. Vicelinus the Bishop after his death appeared vnto a certaine woman complaining that the almes vvhich vvere given for his soules health vvere not duely bestovved by Tolcardus the Priest to whom that busines was cō∣mitted, &c. And that he appeared vnto an other virgin, sending her to Eppo his old frend that lamēted his death, to comfort him and to signify vnto him, that he caryed his teares in his garment which was vpon him vvhite as snow: And he shewes also what a miracle he Ibid. c. 20 wrought vpon a blinde woman vnto whom he appeared in a dreame and restored her sight by printing the signe of the crosse vpon her eyes, &c. He Saxoniae lib. 2. c. 26. records how Carolus magnus having begun to build a Church at Elize, and that dying his Sonne Lodowick succeeded him, vvho riding a hun∣ting on a certaine day, & hearing Masse in the field, his chaplaine left the sacred relicks behind him, to wit, some of the milk of S. Mary, and of the haires of her head which he had hung vpon a tree: but being come back and missing the same, ran againe with hast vnto the tree vvhere he left them, but being come could by no meanes of any strength pluck them away from the tree. This they judged to be a signe that
Mary had chosen that place to dwell in and so they translated the Church begun atEltze vnto this place, &c. 2. In the place Ibid. c. 1 alledged by you, he shewes that this Charles the great when he had broken downe the temple of Venus at Maydenburgh, did erect an other even in the same place vnto the honour of St. Stephen: and so destroying one Idol-temple he set vp an other. Had I alledged against you such examples and such Authors, then had it bene time for you to have called me, Esa. 8. to the law & to the testimony. In the sixt place you come from Emperours and Princes vnto Bishops, destroying Idol-temples; and here you tell how Marcus Bishop of Arethusa performed the like service in Constan∣tines dayes. But (not to speak further of the authors vncertainty that records this fact) seing the destruction of Tēples is a worke of the civil Magistrate, and by them to be executed as your self confesse; how could Marcus performe this work without vsur∣pacion of the civil sword? If you say that leave and authority from the Prince did warrant him thus to do, then by the like grant and warrant from Princes you may allow Bishops to be high commissioners and civill Magistrates: And they may as well alledge these examples of Bishops for maintenance of their double authority, as you do for the destruction of temples. But more particularly touching this example when you come after∣wards to alledge it the second time. Your 7th. example is of Bishop Porphyrie that shewed the like zele at Gaza. I answer, 1. It appeares out of
Sigonius in the place you alledg, that Bishop Porphyrie, was stird vp vnto this fact by the iniuries that he received from the gentiles which pre∣vayled in Gaza: and therfore his zele against Idolies is not very evident. 2, The maner of dealing which this Bishop and the Bishop of Caesarea that joyned with him, did vse in Prophe∣cying vnto the empresse Eudoxia touching a Sonne to be borne vnto her, to win her assistance in this matter, makes their zele the more to be suspected. 3. Their Baptising of the Empe∣rours Childe with the signe of the crosse even at the same time when they got license to destroy the Idol-temples at Gaza, doth shew that you may as well alledge their examples for themaintenance of other superstitions, as for the countenancing of your opinion in this controversie. Your 8. example is of Bishop Abdas that did the like among the Persians, vpon their temples consecrated to the fire. I answer, That Cassiodorus who relates this fact (not in the 3. booke, as you cite the same, but in the 10. book and 3. Chapter of his tripartite history) doth also iustly reprove the same, both by the Act. 17.22 23. &c. exam∣ple of Paul who though he shewed the errour of the Athenians, yet did he not himself destroy their altars and idols; as this bis∣hop did without any lawful authority: as also by the woful evēt that followed, namely that vpon this fact all the Churches of the Christians were destroyed and overthrowne by the Persians; and not onely this; but here vpon also was raysed a most cruell and extreme persecution of the Christians which continued for the space of 30 yeares together. And if this example ought to be followed, then ought you and your people to come with your hammers to break our temples, but I need not to dehort you from such folly. Your 9. example is that Iohn Chrysostome sent men to do the like worke in Phaenicia. Answ. 1. The men whom he sent about this worke, were (as the author alledged by you Theodo∣ret. lib. 5. c. 29. shewes) monkes in∣flamed with divine zele: if you had alledged this testimony so in your authors owne wordes, the weaknes of such exāples would the better have appeared vnto the readers: for thereby they might have discerned your author commending monkes, and shewing the antiquity of monasticall life, as well as he shewes the ruine of Temples. 2. If the example of Chrysostome be of any worth in your eyes, we may then alledge the same against your oppugning of set formes of prayer, which he allowed in the worship of God, as appeares by the hymnes and antiphones which as an other of your witnesses Socrates hist. lib. 6. c. 8. recordeth) he made for the Christians to vse in their feasts of the Sabath and the Lords day at their nocturnal assemblies, &c.
Your 10th. example is that Bishop Geroldus burned to ashes, a grove which the Sclavi had in sacred reverence. Answer. As for Helmoldus, your author that records this story; 1. He was a po∣pishmasse priest; His name in the native speech signifies Etymolo∣gic. Teutō. in proprijs nominibus. Hell-mouth, a fit memorial to shew how you goe from the mouth of God to Hell mouth for testimony in this controversie; for as is his name, so is his book, replenished with many fables, lying visions and miracles wrought by the signe of the crosse, & some of them the same that I noted before out of Cranzius, & therfore his record is not much to be regarded; 2. He Helmod. epist. ad canonicos Lubic. confesseth that he was the scholler of this Geroldus, his venerable Mr. and that by his persuasion he was drawne to write this story: And ther∣fore being so fabulous in other parts of this writing, is yet more to be suspected of flattery in this which he saith touching his Maister. 3. He was also an ignorant historian, & erres grosly in the very lib. 1. c. 1. entrance into his booke where he writes that the Baltique sea is so called because by a long tract it is stretched out in manner of a girdle or belt through the Scythian regions even vnto Graecia, contrary vnto the testimony of all Cosmographers & of dayly experience: He is herein refuted even by VVanda∣liae lib. 2. c. 17. Cranzius him self your other witnesse. His skill in Geography seemes to be like vnto yours, when by a like though a greater errour, contra∣ry to the description of mappes, and contrary to the testimony of the Scriptures you do write cōcerning the limits of the tribe of Isachar, that Annot. on psal. 68.14. it had the Philistians at one end, and the Ammoni∣tes on the other, that vexed them: where as by Iosh. 13.10. & 15.45. &c. & 19.17. &c. conference of scriptures shewing the topography and situation of the tribes, that tribe of Isachar had neither the Philistins on the one side of their limits nor the Ammonites on the other, neither is there any colour of reason, why the tribe of Isachar in speciall should be sayd to couch downe in respect of any vexation by the Phili∣stins or Ammonites. Such is your ignorance of history, when speaking of Tarsus mentioned in Act. 21.34. you call it Annot. on psal. 48.8. the cheefe city of Cilicia in Syria; as if you should have sayd, London the cheefe city of Middlesex, in Scotland; or Amsterdam the cheefe city of Holland in France: you might as well have sayd that Sama∣ria was in Galile; or Iudea in Moab, as have sayd that Cilicia was in Syria: not onely Ptolo∣maeus. Geogr. lib. 5. cap. 7 Cosmographers but the holy
Act. 15.23 41. Gal. 1.21 Scriptureit self doth often distinguish those countries one frō an other. An other the like errour you commit in the same place, when speaking of that Tarsus in Cilicia, you say: from thence they went by shipping into farr countreyes, Africa, India, Ophir, &c. 1. Kin. 22.48. & 10.22. For those voyages mentioned in the booke of the Kings were not from Cilicia into Ophir by sayling through the Mediterranean Sea, as they needes must if they had gone from Tarsus: but 1. both a firme continent was in the way to hinder their passage, and the scripture it self 2. Chron. 20.36. shewes that the shippes intended for that voyage mentioned 1. Kin. 22. vvere made at Ezion geber, a city situate vpon the red-sea, from whence there was a convenient passage into India. These your errours in misplacing of countries are like vnto Mr. Smyths errour in misplacing of the brazen altar, and if your reasoning therevpō against Mr. Smyth be sound, then may I vpon the like occasion of Helmoldus, and of your errours observe against you in your owne words, and say: Defence against Mr. Sm. pag. 12 God would let the reader see how you are given over to blindnes of heart, in iudging spirituall things: by that blindnes which is in you in discerning carnall things, and which are set before all mens eyes. As for Geroldus the popish Bishop, whose example you object vnto me: 1. It doth not agree with that which you propounded to shew at the beginning viz. the examples of Christian Princes & of Bishops having leave from such: for where doth it appeare that he had such leave to do this thing? It doth rather appeare, to be a sodaine motion, and an occasional thing falling out in his iourney, when the story shewes that Helmold. Chron. Sla¦vor. lib. 1. c. 84. meeting with such a grove in his way he lept from his horse, and fell vpon that worke exhorting others to follow him. 2. The destruction of such a Grove is not to be matched with the destruction of our temples, in respect of the necessary vse wherevnto they may be employed in the service of God, so as those trees and hedges could not. 3, It is noted of this Geroldus, that he Cranzius VVandal. lib. 4. c.
21. went to Roome to be consecrated & made Bishop by the Pope; and though in the way the theeves met him and smote and wounded him in the forehead, yetwould not that Balam turne back or desist from his journey: that he Ibid. c. 26 Helmold. vbi supra. also consecrated a Church in Oldenburgh vnto the ho∣nour of St. Iohn Baptist, &c. Thus you see that your Cosin Mr. Iohn Ains. might have alledged the example of this Geroldus against yourself for the defence of all popery, even as you do against vs for the destruction of our temples. Your 11th example is that Wighertas Bishop of Mersburgh did likewise: If he did but likewise, then the like answer may serve for this, that was given vnto the former examples. Touching this popish Wigbert, it is Magdeb. centur. 11. cap. 10. col. 602. recorded indeed that he did destroy a certaine grove consecrate vnto the Idole Zuttiber, and redu∣ced it vnto a plaine: but it is withall recorded that he did in the same place build a Chappel vnto an other Idol, namely vnto St. Roman. And where he had remooved the heathnish Ido∣latry, even in the same place he set vp popish Idolatry. Are we to be guided by such examples? Your 12th. Example is that Vnwannus of Hāburgh cut downe all the idolatrous groves in his diocesse. I answer, 1. It is to be observed how you omit the title of this Vnwannus, being Archbishop of Hamburgh, as your author in the Cranz. metrop. l. 4 c. 1. place alledged by you doth acknowledge: So before you omitted the title of Chrysostome being Archbish. of Constantinople: Those that were but Bishops you give all them their titles: but not so to either of the Arch∣bishops. It seemes you thought that so long as any were cal∣led Bishops, the reader might conceave they were no vsurping Bishops: and so have regarded their examples the more, that name being given by the holy Ghost vnto his ministers: but if you had named Archbishops, the reader might have concea∣ved the weaknes of their examples, serving as well to stablish the primacy of Archbishops, as to destroy temples 2, It is further to be observed, that this Vnwannus was not onely an Archbishop but also a popish Archbishop, that Ibidem. received his pall of Pope Benedict the 8t. that he built chappels in honour of Saincts, as that of S. Vitus at Breme. The reader that considers this, might think that his example in destroying temples is of
less weight, when he gave so foule an example for building Idolatrous temples. 3, even that which Vnwannus did in cutting downe groves is against yourself: for of the groves he made Churches: Ibidem. ex lucis fecit ecclesias renovari, &c. This had bene vnlawfull in the time of the lavv: The groves of the Ca∣naanites might not be converted vnto such vse. If this example of the Archbishop may be imitated, then is the commande∣ment in Deut. 12. a ceremoniall and temporary ordinance, not binding vs in these times. Your 13th. Example is, that in Lituania, the temples & Altars of Idols were demolished. According to your owne authors the thing vvas done on this maner: Cromerus de orig. & rebusgestis polonorū lib. 14. Iagello an heathen King of Lituania seeking to obtaine Heduigis Queene of Poland for his wife, doth promise as a condition of the mariage, that his whole countrey shall become Christians. Herevpon lib. 15. his people being hardly drawne vnto it: he is Baptised and named Wladislaus: this honour is vouchsafed onely to him and to his nobles: because it vvas counted too great a labour to baptise the common people, therfore they standing by great troopes & companies together in stead of baptising were sprinckled vvith holy water: and but one name given to ech company as well of men as women: then by the Kings comandement they de∣stroy the Temple, Altar and oracle at vilna: the grove is cut downe and the living Serpents which they worshipped were killed: a new Church is built at Vilna, and is consecrated to the memory of S. Stanislaus by Bozentas Archbishop of Cracow: then Andreas vassil a polonian of the order of the Franciscanes is instituted Bishop at vilna: And the King sends an Ambassa∣dour vnto pope Vrban to promise obedience vnto him. Your other Alexand. Guagninus in Sarma∣tiae Euro∣ropeae des∣cript. Author addes further, that there were thirty thousand of the Lituanians Baptised in one day, & this of the polonian Priests which were ignorant of the Lituanian tongue: He In Polo∣norū regū descript. saith also: Heduigis was first betrothed vnto
Vilelmus Duke of Austria her father being alive: that these two were joyned in Mariage also by the nobles of Polād in the castle of Cracow: but immedia∣telyagaine so soone as the Lituanian Kings coming was knowne, they expell the Duke, violate the mariage and vrge the Queene against her minde to mary with the King. This is the worthy example that you propound vnto vs. From this barbarous adulterer and Idolaters conscience you will informe and illuminate the eyes and consciences of all faithfull mini∣sters and people at this day: from the rude and blinde practise of these whom by your owne profession you cannot esteeme to be otherwise then a false Church, you insult against all the Churches of Christe: And of these mungrilles, half heathens, and half Papists you say of them with the rest, that all these beare witnesse to the true meaning of Gods law written in their hearts other wise then in ours, &c. Your last example is, And now of late the Christians in France (as at Rochel) ruinated the popish temples there. I answer, 1. Had you noted any Chronicle or good writers where this act is particularly described, with the circumstances and occa∣sion hereof, the reader might thereby have had satisfactiō tou∣ching the same, which now your writing doth not afford. 2, As for ruinating some popish temples, it is that which hath also bene practised in divers other countries, and even in this city as that of the Minorites, &c. Yet this hinders not but that they have the true meaning of Gods law written in their hearts otherwise then in yours that require all such of necessity to be destroyed, and do also separate from the worship of God in all such places: As Israel was to destroy Iosh. 6. & 7. ch.
Iericho the first city of Canaan which they came vnto after they passed Iorden; and to keep others for their vse: so many Christians in the beginning of the reformation to shew their detestation of popery destro∣yed some popish temples, and yet reserved the rest for their necessary vse in the service of God. 3. As for them of Rochel in particular; the ancientest ministers of the French Church in this city, as they have testifyed vnto me, do not know, neither can learne by any enquiry of their people, some whereof have formerly bene members of that particular Church of Rochel,that ever the Christians there did make any question or scruple of worshipping God with the rest of their brethren in any po∣pish temples being once purged from their Idolatry. And therfore vntill you bring better evidence of that which you write, we have reason to hold the exāple of Rochel for our selves against you. 4. Vpon further enquiry, I am Anno 1618. Iun. 8. now of late ad∣vertised by letters from Monsieur Loumeau a reverend minister of the Church of Rochel; that the ruinating of some temples there vvas done not because they thought it vnlawfull to vse them, but least the Papists should have them; that some of them were broken downe in respect of civil necessitie, because they were of importance for fortification in their warres: that at the same time when they ruinated some, yet they reserved others for their vse in the worship of God; as namely, a litle temple of the Nonnes, wherein they preached long time after others were destroyed: and also that of the Convent of the Au∣gustines, wherein (as he testifyeth) they do still preach vnto this day. This being so, every one may plainely see how you abuse and pervert the examples of the Christians in the Reformed Churches as though they were witnesses for you and a bettours of your folly. If a feare of pollution in the vse of them had caused them to pluck them downe: then might their conscien∣ces have bene polluted with the vse of those two which they reserved, as well as with the rest. 5. The Acta Col∣loquij Mō∣pelgart. pag. 398. testimony of Beza is, that the overthrow of temples in France was done tumul∣tuously in the civil warres, not according to knowledge, that it was not approved by their confession and doctrine: That he himself could be a witnesse thereof, being present at the warres from the beginning to the end: That he and his fellow mi∣nisters did often admonish the Princes and captaines: and did labour to hinder those enterprises which fell out in that disor∣der, but could not. You might as vvell plead that private houses and palaces of Papists were to be destroyed, because the vnruly Souldiers in the heat of war, did sometimes destroy them also. Againe for the overthrow of them in some other
places, Beza Respōs. Theod. Be. ad acta col∣loq. Mōp. part. 2. thes. 1. avoucheth vpon his owne knowledge and the te∣stimony of the cities, that they were constreyned to do it for their safety against the violatours of publique peace, the situa∣tion of the temples necessarily requiring the same. And this is the same reason that Mr. Loumeau alledged before, as one cause of their practise in Rochel. And while they were guided by such civil respects, this argues no scruple of conscience in the vse of such temples. 6. Suppose that this one Church of Rochel did condemne our vse of temples, which you are not like to prove; yet th'other Churches in France, and that of Geneva also, (as many in this city vpon their ovvne knowledge do testify) do still keep the temples formerly abused vnto popery, for their necessary vse in the service of God. And Rochel being layd in the balance against the rest would be too light, & weak to abo∣lish the necessary vse which we have of our temples. Section. 5. Hen. Ains. VNto the Scriptures Act 17 & 19. by vs alledged: you say as before, that those things were of no necessary vse. Wherto I answer, that as ther is no necessary vse of this your reason, so were it stronger then it is, yet would it not break the force of our argument, which is in regard that they are nourishments of superstition, and therfore to be abolished. For wil you for your own proffit and vse, nourish super∣stition and Idolatrie? Have you no otherweise learned the Law of God? How vnlike are you herein to Marcus Bishop of Arethusia, Sozom. l. 5. Theodoret l. 3. who having at the Commandement of Constantine pulled down a temple of Idols, and being after accused by the Arethusians to Iulian for a traytor: he was miserably tortured, to inforce him eyther to build the temple againe, or to pay for the building: which he refusing, they pro∣mised to forgive him half. After that, denying but a small summ, he sayd, It is great wickednes to give a half peny in case of impietie, as if a man should bestow the whole. He for this is registred with ho∣nour in your own
Acts & Monumēts p. 89. edit. Ao. 1610. book of Martyrs. How much better then you, did the Emperour Theodosius, who when Constantine had shut vp certaine Idol temples, but destroyed them not: and after, Iulian ope∣ned and restored them: & others after him, shut them vp: and others againe opened them: Theodosius coming to the crown theodoret l. 5. c. 20. & 37. destroyed them vtterly, that no footsteps of the ancient errour might appeare to posteritie. And had you minded the scripture which we cite, you might see how th' Apostle calleth them their Devotions (Sebasmata) Act. 17.23. which word being vsed by him elswhere 2 thes. 2.4 in his Prophesie of the Pope should teach vs to abhorre his temples, Altars, images, &c. which are his Sebasmata or Devotions in like manner, & not onely vnnecessary, but hurtfull to the world. And could not the Chri∣stians which burned their books of curious arts, Act. 19.19 whose price was 50000. peices of Silver, have put them to some other necessary vse then for the fyre? Although there were many evil things in them, yet doe you not think there were some good things also? wherof (when the other were put out) much profit, and some good vse might have been made. Our generation is wiser, that can refine the Popes Mass book, and make therof a Communion book, not for civil vse onely, but for the highest spiritual vse, to worship God therby: and so having som what purged his temples, they put them to two of the 4. religious vses which Antichrist made them for: so greatly doe they esteme of his De∣votions. Answer. Ioh. Pa. HEre in the first place to shew that there is no proffit of this distinction of necessary vse, you aske whether we will for our owne proffit and vse, nourish superstition and Idolatry; whether we have no otherwise learned the law of God, &c. I answer, 1. VVe do not for our owne proffit breake the law of God; but God for our proffit hath changed his owne law: And they that do deny this, do deny the proffit which comes by the death of Christ, and dishonour his merit. The benefit of Christ vouch safed vs herein is exceeding great & vnspeakable: Through his death we come more fully to enioy the fullnes of the earth: The meates which before were Levit. 11. vncleane, are now 1. Tim. 4.4. sanctifyed
for our vse: and millions of treasure are gained yearely hereby: Againe, the cleane beasts & meates, which were of old in Numb. 28 1. Kin. 3.4 & 8.5. great abundance consumed in sacrifice, by thousands at once some time, are now given wholly vnto vs: and the benefit redoun∣ding hence every yeare is not to be reckoned: The vnspeakable cost of travelling from all places vnto the temple of the Lord is now Ioh. 4.21. taken away, &c. Yea besides this, the liberty of en∣joying things abused vnto idolatry and defiled by Idolaters is now granted vnto vs; as the Deut. 13. cities, houses, cattell and goods of Idolatrous apostates: the meates sacrificed vnto Idols: & con∣sequently in like maner the holy places and temples of Idola∣ters, which before were vnlawful are now grāted vnto vs: for he that hath now given vs his owne Sonne to dy for vs, Rō. 8.32. how shall he not with him give vs all things also: now 1. Cor. 3.21.22.23. all things are ours; & 1. Tim. 4 4. nothing to be denyed vs, or refused by vs. Those that with the Iewes do oppugne this truth and count it a carnall doctrine are such as vnder pretext of mainteyning the law, do pervert the Gospell in a speciall poynt thereof. Among all the snares and entisements drawing vnto superstition and Idolatry and nouri∣shing the same, there were none more strong and effectuall, then the Deut. 7.3.4. 1. Kin. 11.4. having of Idolatrous wives and husbands in so much that God commanded the Ezra. 10.3 putting away of such even after mariage: whereas now since the death of Christ, for the bene∣fit and commoditie of Christian families, God 1. Cor. 7.12.13. &c. doth not re∣quire such mariages to be dissolved being once made: And this is an evident proofe that God hath now otherwise determined and declared his meaning touching the occasions of supersti∣tion in case of necessary vse, then he had vnder the law. 2. Even your Maimony, whose expositions you do so often commend vnto vs, whom you note to be so precise in avoyding things polluted with Idolatry, is not yet so precise in denying this ex∣ception of necessary vse, as you yourself are. For he having first Maim. in Misn. in Abodah za∣rah cap. 11. sec. 1. shewed that it is vnlawfull to follow the heathens in wearing their kinde of apparel and in cutting the haire after their ma∣ner, doth yet thus interpret himself:
ibid. sec. 3 An Israelite that is acourtier and hath necessitie of sitting before the Kings of the gentiles; if it be a dishonour vnto him that he is not like vnto them: behold, it is then lawfull for him to put on their apparell, and to be shaved ac∣cording to the maner that they vse. Are not you more then Ie∣wishly ceremonious in this poynt, vvhich deny that liberty vnto Christians, which the Iewes permit? 3. But you do els∣where contradict yourselves herein, for vvhereas you grant it to be Inquiry of Th. wh. p. 56. 57. lawfull to pray and preach in Idol-temples, as there might be occasion, if they were made prisons and you committed thither: it follovves herevpon, that either you must confesse the comman∣dement in Deut. 12.2. as it is expounded by you against the worship of God in Idol-temples, to be a ceremoniall com∣mandement, in that you will have it give place vnto that neces∣sity which the prison brings with it, and so yeeld the praying, preaching and worshiping of God to be lavvfull in that place, vvhich othervvise you condemne; or els you must graunt that the morall lavv itself (if that commandement of abolishing Idol-temples be such) doth also give place vnto necessitie; and consequently that if you were in prison, it should also be law∣full for you in such a strait and necessitie to sweare, forsweare, lye, steale, kill and vse treachery, or break any other comman∣dement of the morall Law, as well as this of worshipping God in Idol-temples. Either therfore confesse your fault in de∣nying this commandement to be ceremoniall, or els shew vs your dispensation to break one commandement of the morall law rather then an other, when you come into prison. In the meane time we hold that he which for his commodity, or ne∣cessity Iam. 2.10. Mat. 5.19. breakes one of the least of the morall commandements and teacheth men so, is guilty of all, and shalbe called least in the Kingdome of heaven.
In the next place you alledge the example of Marcus Bishop of Arethusa who endured great torture rather then to give one half peny towards the building of an Idol-temple: who for this is registred with honour in our owne book of Martyrs; & you ask, how vnlike I am to him. I answer, 1. It is not recordedthat he refused to worship God in such a place purged from Idolatry; but that he would not help forward the building of such a place, when he knew it should be employed to the ser∣vice of Idols: neither am I herein vnlike vnto him, for I hold it to be the duety of a Christian man rather to dy then to give any thing for the furtherance of Idolatry, though it were but a half peny. 2, if the example of this one Martyr be worthy to be regarded, how much more the rest, which in so great a number like a cloude of witnesses or Martyrs, are registred in our book of Martyrs, al bearing witnesse against you touching the vse of temples formerly abused vnto Idolatry in England and other places? How vnlike are you vnto them all? do they not all con∣demne your schisming from the churches of Christ vpon such pretences? do they not all shew the meaning of Gods law to be written in their hearts otherwise then in yours? 3, for yourself in speciall, I may rather ask you and say: how vnlike are you vnto this constant and patient Martyr, he enduring so much for his religion, and you so often changing your religiō, and stayning your self so many times with apostasy, as hath bene pag. 91 shewed before. Yet you tell vs, Preface to confess. of faith edit. Ao. 1596. you trust, that God will one day rayse vp an other Iohn fox to gather and compile the Acts & monuments of his later martyrs, for the vew of posterity, &c. vvhen this your owne booke of martyrs shalbe compiled and publi∣shed, what place or memoriall can you expect therein (if things be faithfully registred) but such as D. Perne hath in our book of Martyrs for his often turning of his coate? Moreover, whereas you do againe repeate the example of Theodosius, wherevnto I have already given answer in the for∣mer section; I do yet further answer, that your allegation that he vtterly destroyed the Idol-temples, is contradicted and refu∣ted even by the other examples cited by your self: for if after this, the Idol temples at Gaza, at Carthage and in Phaenicia were destroyed vnder the reigne of Arcadius and Honorius which suc∣ceeded and followed Theodosius in the empire, then were they not vtterly destroyed by that Theodosius of whom Theodoret
speakes, in the places by you alledged. As it is a sure argument that all the high places were not vtterly destroyed in the dayes of Asa, because Iehosaphat, which came after him, destroyed 2. Chron. 17.6. some, that remayned vnto his time: even so it is a sure token that all the Idol temples were not vtterly destroyed in the dayes of Theodosius, whiles according to your owne example others were destroyed in the times succeeding by Iovius and Gaudentius, by Porphyrie and by Chrysostome with his monkes. Further, to prove our temples vnnecessary, you plead that the Apostle calleth them their devotions (Sebasmata) Act. 17.23. which word being elswhere vsed by him in his Prophesie of the Pope should teach vs to abhorre his temples, &c. Answer. 1, though Paul mention the Devotions or Sebasmata of the Athenians Act. 17. yet doth it not follow that he speakes of their temples, themselves, for he might see their devotions though he saw not their temples: the Ier. 11.13 maner of Idolaters being to have their Altars and images in streetes, and market places, and by the way-sides and this many times without any houses or temples built over them. If the open places where such devotions were pu∣bliquely performed, should be abolished as vnnecessary, then not onely houses and temples but streets and market places were in like manner also to be destroyed and made desolate, for as much as they also had bene places to nourish superstition 2, as for the word Sebasma vsed againe 2. Thes. 2.4. in a prophe∣sie of the Pope, that may well be expounded of the Maiesty and honourable estate of Kings and Emperours, above whom the Pope exalteth himself and thereby is knowne to be Antichrist; the Sebastos & Sebaste. Act. 25.21 25. &. 27.1 like words being elswhere againe vsed to express the same dignity: yet doth not the attributing of this word vnto Princes prove them to be of no necessary vse. If your reasoning were sound, the Anabaptists by the like argument might abolish & condemne the estate of emperours and Kings because of these titles given vnto them. Lastly, you reason thus; could not the Christians which burned their books of curious arts, whose Act. 19.19 price was
50000. pieces of silver,have put them to some other necessary vse then for the fire? Although there were many evill things in them, yet do you not think, that there were some good things also? whereof (when the other were put out) much proffit, and some good vse might have bene made, &c. Answer. 1, what you or I may think and coniecture touching some good things being in those bookes that were burned at Ephesus, it skilles not much: If you could prove that such good things were in them, your obiection or instance might then have had the greater colour to deceave a simple reader. 2, suppose there were some good things in them, whereof much proffit and some good vse might have bene made, then I say that the evill things being put out, (which you also admit by suppositiō) we are not absolutely bound at al times to abolish such bookes but may keep them for that good vse which may be reaped thereby: neither doth that example Act. 19.19 binde vs to the cōtrary; for if Bellarm. repēting of his Idolatrous studies, & you of your schismatical studies, should in a 2. Cor. 7.11. holy revēge & detesta∣tiō of your errours freely burne your deceitful bookes for a sa∣crifice vnto the Lord as 2. Sā. 23.16.17. David powred out the water vnto the Lord which he had longed for: yet this hinders not but that o∣thers might lawfuly reteine the same bookes of yours for the cō∣victiō of such as had not repēted of your errours. The bookes of
Bellarmine of Becanus, of Vorstius have bene of late justly burned by divers Christian Princes, and yet some bookes of the same kinde are justly reteyned by others for some good vse that may be made of them. 3, if Idolatrous bookes & such as are of curious arts may not be reteyned for some good vse of them, when the evill things are put out: then how guilty are you that reteyne such bookes and that for religious vse even whiles the evill things are not put out of them: This your vse of such bookes appeares in the manifold testimonies which you bring and alledge out of them. 4, by this your reteyning and rea∣ding of Idolatrous bookes you do plainely condemne and over∣throw yourself in this question of temples: for seing Idolatrous bookes are strong nourishments of Idolatry vnto many, yeafar more effectuall therevnto then are any shapes of Idola∣trous buildings; if you can still allow the keeping and vsing of such bookes, while the evill things are not put out, how partiall are you that will not allow the keeping of temples abused vnto Idolatry, even when the images, Altars and Idolatrous worship are put out of them? And you do yet further condemne yourself herein, because in expounding the decalogue you make Annot. on Exo. 20.5. the rea∣ding of Idolatrous bookes to be a breach of the second cōmandemēt as well as building of temples vnto Idols. Now the breach of the second commandement is simply a sin: and the building of a temple vnto Idols is an heynous sin though the reteyning of them when they are converted to the true worship of God be not so. Thus by your practise contrary to your doctrine, you streyne out a Gnat and swallow a Camel, in dispensing with the vse of Idolatrous bookes, while you condemne the vse of our temples. How can you blame the Magistrates for not vsing their power to abolish our temples; whiles yourself having power to abolish some Idolatrous bookes, do yet keep them for your vse and refuse to burne them? That which you say of a communion book is be side the present question: your vnreve∣rent speeches and blasphemies touching the same, notwithstan∣ding any faults therein, may be shewed in due time. Section. 6. Hen. Ains. BVt you find (you say) an idolatrous place converted vnto the ser∣vice of God, Act. 19.9.10. the schoole of Tyrannus, being as the rest of the hethenish schooles, the nurseries of superstition, &c. Wherto I answer: First you barely affirme and prove not that it was an hethenish schoole: for there might be a Iewes schoole in Ephesus, as well as there was a Iewes Act. 19.8. synagogue: and by the Hebrewes canons, they were Maimony in thalmud thorah. c. 2. bound to have schooles in every citie and in every coun∣trie, as wel as synagogues. Neyther doth the Schoolmaisters Greek name Tyrannus hinder, but he might be a Iew: for in Rom. 16. Iewes had names both Greek and Latine: yea Turnus or Turannus is a
name mentioned of the Hebrew doctors, as is the Greek name Schoole also. And Tyrannus might favour the trueth, (as did Crispus and Sosthenes Act. 18.8.17. rulers of the synagogue) when others blasphemed it. Se∣condly, if it were an hethenish schoole as you say, yet I deny that it was an Idolie, or place devote to destruction by the law in Deut. 12. or any other. For God never commanded that hethenish schooles, (wherein humane arts and Philosophie were taught, though idolatrie with them) should be destroyed, any more then other civil houses. And this is called the schoole of Tyrannus a man, and not the schoole of Iupiter, Apollo, or any hethen God or Goddesse, as the temples had their names Act. 19.27 of such. Daniel also and his brethren, (who strictly Dan. 1. vers. 8. kept Moses ordinances, refused not vers. 4. &c. the learning and tongue of the Chaldeans, among whom idolatrie was taught, as among other hethens Neyther was there any such conversion of this schoole to the service of God, as you mention: for Paul disputed dayly in the schoole, and tur∣ned it not from a schoole to a Christian synagogue, but it continued a schoole still. By which (if you apply it to an Idolie) you may conclude that Idol-temples may be vsed vnto the service of God, whiles the idol-service is continued also in them. Moreover it appeareth by the 10. verse that both Iewes and Greeks heard Paul there disputing as they Act. 18.4. had doen in the synagogues; but the Iewes hold it vnlawfull to come into an Idol temple, and they were vnder Moses politie (as while are you spake) vntill they were converted to Christ. Finally in ages folowing, Christians who altogither refused communion with the the hethens in their Idolies, and sacrifices: yet vsed sometimes the he∣thenish schooles: & were by Iulian the Emperour
Theodo∣ret. l. 3. c. 8. Sozom. l. 5. c. 18. forbidden both their schooles and their books: of malice, because he would not have them learned. As for Epimenides the Cretian Prophet, or any Philosopher, Poet or Preist, teaching with humanitie other curious arts or idolatie: it proveth not that eyther Idolies should be let stand, or that other should be pulled downe: neyther doth the equitie of Gods law extend so farr. For such houses, (though idol Preists dwelt in them, and taught their idolatrie everyday) were not nourishments of su∣perstition, but onely they that dwelt in them. Whereas these idol-temples of Antichrist, in themselves, and in all the parts & proportion  of them, are idolatrous, and causes of syn to many. Even as on the contrary, Gods temple in Israel was a nourishment of true religion: but the dwelling houses of the Preists and people, not so. And if Paul had holden it lawful to vse idol-temples, as you think you may: why took he not occasion to goe into Dianaes Act. 19.27 temple in Ephesus, as well as into Tyrannus schoole there? seing it was lawful for Christians to goe into such temples if they would, as some 1. Cor. 8.10. in Corinth did. It is not found that there or in any other citie where Paul or any other of the Apostles came, they ever went to preach in any such place: who yet took all occasions to preach to the gentiles, whersoever they might law∣fully. Vnto the Iewes, Paul became a Iew: that he might gaine them: and vsually therfore went into their temples and synagogues, to preach vnto them: vnto the gentiles also, which were without law, he became 1. Cor. 9.20.21. as without law, that he might gaine them: yet we never see him to preach in any of their temples or Idolies: though they were so common as it is recorded they had Prudent. l. 1. contr. Symma∣chum. as many temples of Gods in Rome, as there were sepulchres of noble men in the citie. Answer. Io. Pa. IN your first answer vnto that which I sayd touching the schoole of Tyrannus converted vnto the service of God, there are divers things to be considered: first, though-yow say I barely affirme and prove not that it was an hethenish schoole, yet it seemes the very recitall and naming of the words of the Scripture, viz. of the schoole of Tyrannus was more then a bare affirmation, even by your owne confession in this first answer, for what needed you to preoccupate the obiectiō that might arise from the greek names of Tyrannus & his Schoole, if there were not some appea∣rance of a probable argument to be taken from them? It is an idle thing to prevent obiections, where there is no danger of them.
Secondly, whereas you say that I affirme it was a hethenish schoole, this is also something more then you might iustly affir∣me: for suppose that I tooke it to be a Iewish schoole, yet mightI say as much as I did, viz. It being as the rest of the hethenish schoo∣les, &c. For both the Eph. 2.3. like phrase is vsed by the Scriptures, when speech is of the Iewes to compare them with the rest of the gentiles, and that the Iewish Schooles were nurseries of su∣perstition as well as the gentiles it may appeare by that which followeth hereafter. Thirdly, though there might be (as you object) a Iewish schoole in Ephesus, as there was a Iewes Synagogue, yet this hinders not, but Tyrannus his schoole might be a hethenish schoole; vnlesse you could shew that there was but one schoole in that city. Fourthly, you run for help vnto the great Eagle of the Iewes (as he is called) and fly vpon his winges, when you tell vs in the name of your doctour Maimony, that by the Hebrew canons they were bound to have schooles in every citie and in every country, as wel as synagogues. Herevnto I answer, 1. you honour these infidel Rabbines too much, when you give vnto their writings the title of Hebrew canons, which is a name more fit and agreeable to the canonicall scriptures of the old Testament, vnto Moses and the Prophets conteyning the Gal. 6.16. Phil. 3.16. canon or rule of our faith and obe∣dience, even as the greek canons may likewise denote the scrip∣tures of the new Testament. The name of the holy scriptures should not be given to superstitious writings, to Iewish fables, and to legends of lyes: And besides, these Thalmudicall canons are but carnal weapons; think not with such canons & ordināce to batter downe our temples. 2. These canons, are many of them the inventions of later Iewes long after Pauls times, and you can not shew that the Iewes in the apostles dayes were go∣verned by them, how then will you apply this canon alledged by you vnto the question of fact betwixt vs? 3. Maimony in the
In Thal∣mud tho∣rah, c. 2. place alledged recording the canon you speak of, saith that the city which had not a schoole Mr. in the same, should be anathematized, or cursed, and if they did not repent, that city should be destroyed and wasted: And therfore suppose this ca∣non had bene more ancient then the Apostles, yet could it nothave bene executed in Ephesus the city that we speak of: the cities of the gētiles that had some Iewes dwelling among them, yea or the cities of the Iewes in their owne land being vnder the dominion of the Romanes were not subiect vnto such canons: would the Romanes endure that the cities vnder their gover∣nement should be wasted and made desolate vpon such pre∣tences? 4, Touching these canons also the Rabbines do contradict one an other: for R. Iaakob in Lib. Iore degnah, tract. Thal∣mud tho∣rah. signo. 245. Arba Turim shewes that R. Asher differs from Maimony in such manner touching the number of schollers and schoolemaisters to be imployed about them in ech citie, that if we were as credulous as the Iewes in regarding these forged canons yet could we have no cer∣tainty therein. 5. Suppose there were such ancient canons binding the Iewes in Ephesus to have a schoole among them, yet that doth not hinder but that the schoole of Tyrannus might be a hethenish schoole also. 6. If you will have the testimo∣nies of men to be produced in these controversies, are we not much more to regard the writings of learned Christians, then of these impious Iewes, infamous as well for their fables, as for their infidelity & hatred of Christe? And the Magde∣burgenses, cent. 1. l. 2. cap. 7. de scholis. col. 516. Christian writers of the Ecclesiasticall history do expressely note this place to have bene an hethenish Schoole. Fiftly, whereas you say; Neither doth the School-maisters Greek name Tyrannus hinder, but he might be a Iew, &c. I answer, 1. Though I deny not but some Iewes had Greek names, as divers of the Apostles themselves besides sundry others: yet considering that ordinarily Iewes were called by Hebrew names & Greekes by Greek names, and so men of other nations like∣wise, if things be equally weighed [caeteris paribus,] when there is no other particular testimonie or determination touching any person to shew what nation he is of, as there is not here for Tyrannus: then in all reason the name of such a man should lead vs vnto such a nation where his name is most ordinarily vsed: as the name of Pharaoh vnto an Egyptian: the name of Agag to an Amalekite: and the name of Tyrannus to a Greek.
Yea thus the holy Ghost purposely vset to distinguish & poynt out vnto vs speciall countries, times, places & offices of men by vsing a word of different language in those bookes of holy scripture which were written in an other tongue: as for exam∣ple, Esay writing in Hebrew touching the ruine of Babel vseth a Madhe∣bah Esa. 14 4. Chaldaean word to signify the overthrow of the Chaldaean Monarchy; Ieremy in his Hebrew Prophecy against Babel vseth a Sheshach Ier. 25.26. & 51.41. Babylonian word to note the very time of their fall, as they should be in the middes of their feasting: The Apostle writing in Greek of the judgement hall where Christ was con∣demned vseth a Praetoriū Ioh. 18.28 Romane or latine word shewing the Romane authority that was exercised in that place: and so the Evange∣list in his Greek story vseth a Centuriō Mark. 15.39.44 45. Romane word for a Romane officer: And so the Syriaque Translatout in this place Act. 19.9 vse the Greek word for a Schoole, all the rest being Syriaque might hereby most fitly note vnto vs a Greek schoole of the gentiles: as the Greek name of Tyrannus to shew a Greek Schoolemaister: there being no other proofe to the contrary, to praeponderate this apparant reason. 2, it is also a great vncertainty and not proved of you by any instance, when as you affirme, that in Rom. 16. Iewes had names both Greek and La∣tine: As for Aquila the Iew, vers. 3. Drusius Praeteri∣torū lib. 5. in Act. 18.2 shewes you how his name comes plainely and directly from an vsuall Hebrew word: As for the kinsmen of Paul, mentioned vers. 7.11.21. it is vncertaine whether they were Iewes or proselytes, which might be his kinsmen though they were Romanes or Greekes: As for any other mētioned in that place you have lesse colour to affirme that they were Iewes having Greek and Latine names. 3, you say that Turnus or Tyrannus is a name mentioned of the Hebrew doctours: but you do not shew that he is mentio∣ned as a Iew: the Rabbines mention the names of sundry gen∣tiles in their writings: & Turnus Rophus or Rufus that is men∣tioned in the In Sanhe∣drin. c. 7. fol. 65. & in Babha ba∣thra, c. 1. fol. 10. Thalmud, is not sayd to be a Iew: Such kinde of their mentioning this name is against you, and leads vs to think Tyrannus should be a gentile rather then a Iew: but if an
other Tyrannus in any Rabbine be nominated for a Iew, yet this hinders not but this Tyrannus in Act. 19. should rather be taken for a gentile, there being no determination of his per∣son contrary to his name, ordinarily given to a Greek. 4, you alledge, that Tyrannus might favour the trueth as well as Crispus and Sosthenes rulers of the synagogue: but what meane you by this cō∣parison? whether Crispus and Sosthenes vvere Iewes or prose∣lytes it is vncertaine, that Tyrannus whether Iew or gētile might favour the truth, vve doubt not: but hovv this should confir∣me your opinion, it appeares not. In your second answer touching the schoole of Tyrannus, first you say, if it were an hethenish schoole, yet you deny that it was an Idolie, or place devote to destruction by the law in Deut. 12, &c. But herein you do first contradict yourself: for pag. 165. before in your reply vnto the sixt answer vvhich I gave vnto your first reason, you sayd and vrged this, that the Law speaketh of all places where in the nations served their gods: so that though they were not for sacrifice, but for prayer or other like vse they were to be pulled downe. Now, that the hethenish Gods were served in these Idolatrous schooles, by schoolemaisters it is manifest out of that Tertulliā. de Idololat. cap. 10. Author vvhom yourself sometime produce for a witnesse, vvho shewes that the Schoolemaisters did preach the Gods of the nations & declare their names, their genealogies, fables and other honourable ornaments and observe their feasts, &c. that the first schoole-hyre of the new scholler was consecrated to the name and honour of Minerva. That Idolothyte was called Minerval. This Idol-service of the heath∣nish schooles he shevves at large as by Catechizing touching Idolles, so by divers other services. And therfore the Gods of the nations being served there, it follovves by your former grant contrary to this later denyall that such schooles ought to be pulled dovvne as places devote vnto destruction. 2. You do here seeme to make an Idolie or place devote to destruction to be the same thing, but this errour is pag. 220. 221. before reproved: And vvhen you labour to shevv that hethenish schooles are not to be pulled dovvne; you confirme that vvhich I say in my
argument against you. Secondly, you say, this is called the schoole of Tyrannus a man & not the schoole of Iupiter, Apollo or any hethen God, &c. Answer. 1. It is Idol-service by your owne grant from Deut. 12. that makes a place subiect to destruction; and therfore the want of an Idol name could not in such case save or deliver the polluted place from destruction. 2, as Dan. 6.7. Act. 14.11. Rev. 13.4. Idolaters have bene ready to performe divine worship vnto living men many wayes: so also by this that they have built temples, altars, images to their honour: Thus, to omit many other examples that might be noted, one of your owne Authors whom yourself alledge for your vvitnesse Ioseph. Antiq. Iu∣daic. lib. 15. c. 12.13. doth testify of Herod, that he built not onely a citie, but a temple vnto Caesar, to the worship and honour of his name: And according to your reasoning, such Idolies might be thus excused, that these were called the temples of Caesar a man, and not the temple of Iupiter, Apollo, &c. Thirdly, you say, Daniel also and his brethren (who strictly kept Moses ordinances) refused not the learning and tongue of the Chal∣deans, among whom Idolatrie was taught, as among other hethens. I answer, 1. Daniel and his fellowes might be instructed in the learning and tongue of the Chaldeans though they did not fre∣quent the schooles or temples where Idolatry was publiquely taught: And seing Daniel was so carefull to keep himself from pollution with vncleane meate we are bound to judge that he wanted not care to preserve his soule from the vncleane foode of Idolatrous doctrines taught in their schooles: And the Dan. 1.9. great favour which he had vvith their overseers may perswade that he found favour in this poynt as vvell as in the former. 2, your R. Saa∣dias, & R. Abraham Abē Ezra, Cōment. on Dan. 1.4 Iew doctours interpret this learning of the Chaldeans vvhich Daniel refused not, to be the vvriting and language of the Chal∣deans: Now this might easily have bene learned by Daniel of some godly and faithfull Iewes, though he had nothing at all to do vvith Chaldeans themselves: there being ordinarily enough of one nation that can speak and vvrite in the language of an other nation. 3, though we grant that
Daniel might learneof the Chaldeans themselves, not onely, to speak, read and write their language, but also other lawfull and liberall sciences: yet this vvas to be done with caution of not learning their Idola∣tries and curious arts, which were Deut. 18.10.—14. vnlavvfull to be taught or learned: And this might the better be done, considering there were so many sects among the Chaldeans, of which some atten∣ded vnto more lavvfull studies and as Strabo geograph. lib. 16. historians vvrite, did condemne and reiect the curious arts of the rest. 4, See vvhat strange extremities you run into: You that condemne and forsake the true service of God in the Reformed Churches, in any temple formerly abused vnto Idolatry, do yet here allovv communion vvith Idolaters even in Idol-service by hearing & listning vnto Idolatrous doctrines taught in their heathnish schooles vvhich vvere publique Idol houses: yea you that con∣demne all religious communion both publique and private vvith the Godliest Christians in the Church of England, & hold it vnlavvfull to heare even a private lecture of divinity from any minister of that Church, though no errour at all should be taught in the same, are not yet afraid to iustify the hearing of a lecture of philosophy and Idolatry mixed togather, & this from the Chaldaean Ministers or Prophets even in Babylon it self. oh how is your conscience benummed? Fourthly, you say further, neither was there any such conversion of this schoole to the service of God as I mētion, &c. I Answer, 1. your reason to prove that it continued a schoole still is insufficient: for though it be sayd that Paul disputed dayly in the schoole of Tyrannus, this kinde of speech doth no more prove that it con∣tinued a schoole still, then the speech of the Apostle saying of Antichrist that he 2. Thes. 2 4. sits in the Temple of God, doth prove that the Church of Rome doth still cōtinue the Temple of God; do you not knovv that many places reteyne their old names, though the vse of them be changed, and they couverted vnto other ser∣vices? your bold affirmation that it continued a schoole still is very vnvvarrantable. 2. Though I affirmed not, that it ceased to be a schoole of humane learning, yet is it most probable that
it vvas no longer such a schoole: for hovv could it conveniently serve for both vses? It is sayd that Paul Act. 199 disputed there and that dayly: such kinde of disputes might often times require the grea∣test part of the day: and sometimes in Act. 28.23. other places such exerci∣ses continued from morning to night. It is sayd that Paul conti∣nued this exercise there Act. 19.10 by the space of two yeares so that all they which dwelt in Asia heard the word of the Lord Iesus, both Iewes & Grecians. This continuance in the place vvith such fame, could not but encrease his auditors, and his employment and conse∣quently decrease the opportunity of employing that place vnto an other vse. It is noted further what Ibid. vers. 11.12. &c great miracles God wrought by the hand of Paul during this time, and what conflu∣ence of people such miracles wrought, appeares in other places where vpon like occasion, Luk. 12.1 millions of people gathered together, & thronged to heare and see: vpon such occasion there were so Mark. 6.31.33. many commers and goers vnto Christe and his disciples, that they had no leasure to eat bread; And when he withdrew himself into the wildernes to rest a while, the people perceyving it, rā a foote thither out of all cities, and came thither and assembled vnto him, &c. And here being now the like occasion of concurse, what reason is there to think that there should be liberty & op∣portunity to keep an other schoole in this place, where in all ap∣pearāce the time did hardly suffice for the disciples which came to be enstructed of Paul in this schoole of Christianity? And this inconvenience for an other schoole in this place may fur∣ther be discerned of you, if according to your allegation before, the Thalmudique canons are to be applyed vnto the schooles in this time; for those canons require touching the Iewish schooles, that
Arba Tu∣rim, lib. Ior. dea, Tract. Thal¦mud tho∣rah, signo 245. Maymony in misneh, tract. Thal∣mud tho∣rah cap. 2. sect. 2. & 3. the schoole Mr. must sit and teach the children all the whole day & part of the night, so as he may enstruct & teach them day and night; that they cease not at all, except in the evenings of the Sabaths, & in the evenings of the good dayes, in the end of those dayes: that on the sabaths they may not begin a new lesson, but may cause the children to repeat that which they have learned before, &c. That the schoole Mr. which lets the children rest & goes forth or which doth another work with them, or which is idle, is altogether accursed for doing the work of the Lord negligently, &c. How could these ca∣nons possibly be observed, to teach children night and day, in that place, where Paul disputed dayly with such concourse of people? 3. Suppose that heathenish schooles being Idolies, and that this schoole being such an one, was still reteyned for a schoole, yet doth it not follow as you would inferre that Idol-Temples may be vsed vnto the service of God, whiles the Idol-service is continued also in them: For if we should grant vnto you that it still continued a schoole, yet then any reasonable man would grant vnto me withall, that it was reformed by Paul that the cu∣rious arts and Idolatrie were no more taught in the same, but onely such humane learning as was of lawfull and good vse; and thus the Idol-service being abolished both it & other such like places might then lawfully be vsed vnto the service of God. 4. VVhereas you plead further that both Iewes and Greeks heard Paul there disputing, &c. that the Iewes held it vnlawful to come into an Idol Temple, &c. This latter clawse is affirmed but not con∣firmed by you: how prove you that the Iewes being vnder Moses politie held it vnlawfull to come into an Idol Temple, when the Idolatry was remooved, especialy being out of Canaan, as this place in Ephesus was?
Fiftly you alledge, that in ages following, Christians who altogi∣ther refused communion with the hethens in their Idolies and sacri∣fices; yet vsed sometimes the hethenish schooles: and were by Iulian the Emperour forbidden both their schooles and bookes; of malice, be∣cause he would not have them learned. Herevnto I answer, 1. That hethenish schooles were sometimes lawfully vsed by Christians when as the hethenish Idolatry was no lōger taught in them, is the thing that I plead for; and this serves most evi∣dently to overthrow your errour that deny Christians the vse of other places abused vnto Idolatry, even after that Idolatry is no longer taught in them. 2. If Christians did sometimes vse the hethenish schooles even while their Idolatry was still taught in them, this example hath no warrant from Gods word:and we see that the Christians in those ages that you speak of, did sometimes pollute themselves with Idols, especially with their Tertul. de corona mi∣litis cap. 3. superstitious vse of the signe of the crosse, &c. Their example in vsing such places as were polluted with publique & ordinary Idol-service, doth not hinder but that those places are to be esteemed Idolies. 3, though Iulian of malice might forbid the hethenish schooles and bookes vnto Chri∣stians, yet might the Lord in mercy vse the malice of that Em∣perour as Hos. 2.6.7 a thorne to stop the way of his people and as a hedge to preserve them from the entisements of Idolaters, to whom all ages are too prone to hearken. whereas the Lord requires that children should be initiated or Prov. 22.6. consecrate betimes in a good way, how dangerous a thing was it to seek their consecration from Idolatrous schoole Mrs, & to suffer their children to com∣municate with them in their hethenish lore, where (as one cō∣plaines, and not without cause) Tertul. de Idololat. cap. 10. the first faith is edifyed vnto the divel from the beginnings of their learning; where (as others Euseb. Hist. lib. 9. c. 5. & 7. re∣cord) these hethenish schoolemaisters did sometimes teach their schollers blasphemous lessons cōposed of purpose against Christe Iesus. 4. Do not you yourself note it for a transgres∣sion of the second comandement, to Annot. on Exo 20.5. read the bookes of them that be teachers of Idolatry? And is there any case of reading such books more dangerous, then when children in their tender age shall read them, & this in hethenish schooles, among hethens, where Idolatrous schoolemaisters shall commend the Idols & Idol service vnto them? In these your different writings, you are like vnto the Iam. 3.11 fountaine that sends forth sweet and bitter. 5. You Annot. on Exo. 20.5. I tell vs out of Maimony, that Idolaters have made many bookes of their service, and of the works and rites of the same; that the holy blessed God hath commanded vs, that we should not at all read in those bookes. And I may againe tell you out of Maimony from his owne confession in an other place, that he himself did not observe this comandment, but doth often Maimo∣ny in Mo∣reh Nebu∣chim, chel.
3. per. 30. & 31. alledge the bookes of the Idol-Prophets, and repeats many fables out of the same, & notes their Idolatrous opinions, and sayth: The knowledge of those opinions and workes is a great Dore, through which may be drawne forth reasons and causes of the comandments; seing the foundation and piller of the whole law wherevpon it resteth is to blot out those opini∣ons from the hearts of men, &c. Thus in regard of necessary helpe which he alledgeth in this place he was content to reteyne the vse of such bookes which he did so peremptorily condemne be∣fore; And except you defend your self with the like regard of necessary vse, you wil also be found a transgressour of the second comandment, condēned even of your owne mouth for reading the most Idolatrous bookes, that are extant at this day, as ap∣peares by your manifold allegations of them. And then further, if you will reteyne the most Idolatrous bookes, in regard of necessary vse, how can you then condemne vs that for necessary vse do likewise reteyne our Temples though formerly abused vnto Idolatry? yea if we compare these two things together, it is most evident, that Idolatrous books are far stronger nourish∣ments of superstition and entisements vnto Idolatry, then are our temples: The shape of our Churches doth not deceive as do the subtill persuasions of false teachers in their writings, continuall experience witnesseth and proclaymeth the same vnto vs. And if your eares were not stopt with preiudice against the truth, this alone consideration might serve to convince your errour touching our Temples. Sixthly, as for Epimenides the Cretian Prophet or any other Philo∣sopher, Poët or Priest teaching with humanitie other curious arts or Idolatrie, &c. It is to be observed, 1. Seing the publique tea∣ching of Idolatrie and invocation of false Gods vsed by such Poets, Prophets or Priests are parts of Religious worship and service, seing your self confesse in this writing here before noted, as also in Counter∣poy. p. 199 other of your writings that all the places where such Idolaters, serued their Gods, were to be destroyed; if your doctrine were sound it would follow herevpon that all such hethenish schooles, were to be destroyed as well as any other Temples. 2. If your sixt argument were sound,
viz, that our temples are to be destroyed because they nourish superstition, as you say, thenwill it hence follow also, that the Schoole of Tyrannus, suppose it were a Iewish schoole, was yet to have bene destroyed in like maner because the Iewish schooles were Act. 23.3.4. with Act. 26.4.5. & phil. 3.5.6 nurseries of supersti∣tion, where vaine inventiōs and traditions of men were taught. And if after your example we might alledge the Thalmudique canons, and apply them as you do vnto the schoole in questiō, then would it be far more evident, that the Iewish Schooles were in a high degree nurseries of superstitiō; for the Rabbines shewing how Children are to be taught, have this rule of education among them, Thalmud, tractat. ce∣thuboth, c. 4. fol. 50. Bar schith, lemikra: Bar gnasar lemisch∣neh: Bar teresar, leragnanitha; that is: A childe of six yeares, to the scripture: a childe of ten, to the Thalmud: a childe of twelve, to fasting: And againe, in an other place: Thalmud tract. Kìd∣duschim, c. 1. fol. 30. R. Saphra, in the name of R. Ie∣hoshua the sonne of Hananiah saith: what is that which is written, Thou shalt rehearse them to thy Children? Read not, Schinnantem, thou shalt rehearse them, but Schillaschtem, thou shalt divide them into three parts: for ever shall a man divide his yeares into three parts: a third part, to the scripture: a third part to the Gemara, (which is one maine part of the Thalmud) a third part, to misch∣neh: which is the other maine part of the Thalmud: So that by these canons and testimonies of the Rabbines the Children in the Iewish schooles were fed with the milk of superstition, and loaden with traditions in learning the Thalmud, the grand forge of superstition: and twise so much paines they were to bestow therein, as they did in the scriptures: And therfore ac∣cording to your arguing these schooles were to be destroyed, for nourishing of superstition. Seventhly, where as you say of the Idolatrous schooles, that such houses (though Idol-Priests dwelt in them, and taught Idolatry every day) were not nourishments of superstition; but onely they that dwelt in them. Whereas these Idol-temples of Antichrist, in them∣selves, and in all the parts and proportion of them are Idolatrous and causes of sin to many, &c. I reply, 1. If this distinction be good, how will you prove that the Canaanitish Idol-temples were nourishments of superstition and to be destroyed in that
regard? How can you say that they were in their shape, propor∣tion and parts Idolatrous? The scripture shewes not the for∣me of them, nor yet any mysteries or sacred significations no∣ted therein. VVe have no testimony touching the superstitious frame and structure of the house of Dagon, of Baal, or of Ie∣roboams temples: And therfore according to your distinction in this place they were no nourishments of superstition, but onely those that dwelt or taught Idolatry in them so that if the Altars, images and false worship had bene remooved, they mought even vnder Moses have bene converted vnto the ser∣vice of the Lord. 2. I have shewed before that our temples, and especially that wherein we meet togather, and about which our question is, doth not consist of such a superstitious stru∣cture and fabrick as you pretend: yea it is manifest in experiēce and manifold instances might be given of sundry private hou∣ses which for the situation and three parts before noted by you, are liker vnto Solomons temple then ours is: and consequently to be rather destroyed as being idolatrous shrines. 3, if our temples in respect of their forme, proportion and parts be nou∣rishments of superstition, and therfore to be avoyded; then are you as guilty in comming vnto them as we: for whether you come for your study, or whether some of your people come for the almes distributed there: the visible shape and propor∣tion of these temples in the forme of their building doth as much present itself vnto your eyes coming thither to serve your selves: as vnto our eyes when we come thither to serve the Lord. The outward shape of the Church may as well affect & ensnare him that walketh vp and downe therein for his plea∣sure or proffit: as him that sitteth there to heare the word of God for his edification: so that if there be any weight in this pretence, it then lights vpon your owne head. 4, how know you also but that the heathnish schooles might have a super∣stitious structure as well as temples: and that some mysticall significations might be imputed or ascribed vnto some parts thereof? and what then shall become of your distinction, whereby you imagine and feigne such a difference betwixt our tem∣ples and those publique Schooles? 5. That which you speak by way of comparison with the temple touching the dwelling houses of the Preists and people, is both vnequally and vnfitly ap∣plyed vnto the controversie in this place, seing I spake here of the publique places and schooles where the heathnish prophets or Poets did ordinarily and openly teach idolatrie, and not of their private houses: and besides that, it is but a bare and false assertion which you vtter of their private houses: seing they also may justly receive a denomination of the workes perfor∣med in them whether good or evill. Lastly, you obiect, if Paul, had holden it lawfull to vse idol Tem∣ples as we think we may; why took he not occasion to go into Dianaes temple in Ephesus, as wel as into Tyrannus schoole there, &c. I an∣svver, 1. there is manifest reason for this, seing Dianaes temple vvas still reteyned for Idolatrous vse, as may be observed from ther text; but that it vvas so vvith Tyrannus his schoole, Act. 19.28.—35. the text shevveth not at all; but the contrary is playne by the dayly vse vvhich it vvas put vnto. 2. VVhere you say, it was lawfull for Christians to go into such temples, if they would, as some in Corinth did: though I deny not but that in some cases of necessitie this is lavvfull, yet doth not your allegatiō frō 1. Cor. 8.10. prove the same; for neither, may the vvord Idolie there vsed be restreyn∣ed vnto an Idols temple, though it be commonly so translated in that place: it signifyes a place of Idols, though there be no building over them, though they stand in opē places, in moun∣taines, or vallies, in streets and in market places, in bathes, &c. as oftentimes the Idols vvere Tertulliā. de specta∣culis. cap. 8 vvont to do. In such open places might a vveak Christian in Corinth see many sitting at an Idols table: yea he might also discerne & see some sitting in a temple vvithout entring into the same: & further, if Paul had shevved that some weake Christians in Corinth had entred into the very temples, yet is not a simple narration of such a fact, any iustifi∣cation thereof, to prove that it might lavvfully be done, as you seeme to plead. 3. VVhere you say also,
It is not found thatthere or in any other citie where Paul or any other of the Apostles came, they ever went to preach in any such place, &c. And againe, yet we never see him to preach in any of their temples or idolies, &c. This is a very vveak pretense, for vvhat though it be not found; and vvhat though vve never see it? vvill you reason thus nega∣tively from the scripture? It is not found in the scriptures, in vvhat cities, nor so much as in vvhat countries some of the A∣postles did preach, much lesse in vvhat temples. Also it is not found in the scriptures that ever Paul or any other of the Apostles did refuse to preach in such places purged from Ido∣latry. 4. It is very probable, that Paul did preach in the Ido∣lie or Idol-place at Athens: for seing as I noted before, it was the manner of the heathens, to make their streets and market places to be Idolies; seing Athens is Pausanias & Xeno∣phon, ci∣tante Beza in Act. 17.16. recorded to have far excee∣ded the other cities of Graecia in store of Idoles and Idolatrie: seing Luke Act. 17.16.17.18.23. records how Paul passing by did see their Altars & superstition: and being stirred in spirit, did therevpon in the market dayly dispute with whomsoever he met, as wel as in the Synagogue with the Iewes: we have therfore reason to think that Paul did preach Iesus in their Idolie or market place. It see∣mes also that the man of God which came out of Iudah did preach in the 1. Kin. 13.1. Idolie of Bethel, (whether it was a temple or an other open place it is vncertaine,) when as he denounced the wrath of God against Icroboams Idolatrie. Thus Ieremie also
Ier. 19.2. with Ier. 7.31. preached in the vallie of Benhinnom, the Idolie of Moloch. And thus vpon like occasion and like necessary vse, it may still be lawfull to preach in an Idol-temple in like manner, to protest against the Idolatry that is for the instant practised therein. 5. As for the testimony of Prudentius recording that they had as many temples of Gods in Rome, as there were sepulchres of noble men in this citie, this makes against your self: for if there were so many temples and Idolies in Roome now in Prudentius his time when he wrote this (for that which he saith, he affirmes for the time present) then this overthrowes your former allegation out of Theodoret concerning all the temples destroyed vnder TheodosiusThis record of Prudentius being given Magde∣burgens. cent. 4. c. 10. Col. 1179.1180. after the death of Theodosius. And againe if according to your plea, Paul might not preach in any of those places where the noble men had bene buryed in Rome, they being all defiled with Idolatry: then do you hereby againe incurre the danger of that consequence which brings with it the destruction of private Idolies or houses abused vnto Idolatrie, as well as of publique temples: for how know you that this multitude of noble mens sepulchres were all publique, and that some of them were not in their private houses? Section. 7. Hen. Ains. VNto our 5. allegation, from the leprous garments compared with the Apostles doctrine, Iude v. 23. warning us to hate even the garment spotted of the flesh, and consequently to hate the houses of Antichrist which are not onely defiled with idols, but are idols them selves: you say nothing hereto, but take occasion from an other place to speak againe of Gods indulgence for some things of necessary use, wher∣of there is ynough sayd before, and I shal leave it vnto iudgement. You here lay sore blame vpon me, for that in shewing out of the pontifical the popish manner of Ordination, I set it down with crosses, as it is printed in that book before. You say, I erect them a nevv, and set them up for religious use, &c. Wherto I answer, How∣soever you aggravate this thing, the most that you can truly say, is that I seek to pull them downe frō religious vse after an unlawful man∣ner, if so it be found: but let us weigh your reasons. The 1. is, that a Papist seing them, may come to blesse an idol in his hart, or adore one of them that he seeth. And so (say I) when he seeth or heareth the name of St. Peter, or any other St, or of a crosse or crucifix, he may haply come to blesse an idol in his hart, and with his mouth too: shal they not therfore be spoken of, or written? 2. Therfore you say, this divised kinde of instruction hath no warrant from God, and so the syn comes on the instructours head. Your reason is, for that God in his word cau∣seth not the shapes or figures of idols to be pourtrayed, whē he nameth
Chemosh, Moloch, &c. therfore there is no excuse left for me herein. I answer, neyther doth God in his word, set down any figure of his Tabernacle, Ark, Temple, or of any man, beast, or other creature, or mapp of any countrie: is it not therfore lawfull in private books to pourtray any of these? If it be, then your reason from a deuised kinde of instruction without warrant from God, wilbe litle worth in this case. But wheras you say, that I neglecting the examples of all the Churches of Christ in that which is good, doe folow a few in that errour which I would seem most to condemne: I wil therfore leave it to the iudgement of the Churches of God, and strive no more. For be it that I have offended herein, (as I confesse I syn many other wayes, and so may in this though I see it not) yet is there no help to your cause therby at all. For, to iustifie evil because an other man doeth the like, is but a sorie plea. Answer. Io. Pa. VNto your allegation of Levit. 13. & 14. Chap. with Iude 23 I sayd the lesse because I supposed you did not direct the same against our temples, but against the garments mentioned also in the same place of your Apologie: yet had you well regar∣ded mine answer, you might have found sufficient therein, to shew you that there is no consequence from the burning of an vnproffitable leprous garment, to the abolishing of our tem∣ples. I alledged divers Lev. 11.32.33. & 6 28. scriptures vnto you, teaching that God allowes the reteyning of such things as are of more proffitable vse, though they have bene formerly polluted: The Lev. 15.12 earthen vessell being polluted was to be broken; but the vessell of wood or brasse was to be rinsed and scowred onely, and then made lawful for vse againe. And is there not as much difference be twixt our temples and a rag: as there is betwixt an earthen and a woodden vessel? To these scriptures you say nothing. I she∣wed
Pag. 214 & 250.251 before that the goodnes and bountifullnes of the Lorde towards his people was to be discerned herein: but you despise the bountifullnes of the Lord and will have his benefit to be∣reiected.Your complaint against all you write against, is that they bring not scripture: but when it is brought, we see that you are willing enough to passe by it sometimes, as if it had not bene brought at all. You say that touching things of necessary vse, there is ynough sayd before: but touching this new reason from the scripture, nothing was sayd before: and that which you have sayd before for the rest is shewed to be insufficient. Your∣self do often alledge one and the same scripture six or seven times over: And must we so often give ansvver vnto your alle∣gations, vvhiles you give no ansvver at all vnto some of ours? But for the vveight thereof, I am content to leave them vnto the iudgement of the reader. Touching the grand Idol, erected by your self, pourtrayed & printed in your booke, these are the things which I commend vnto your consideration, 1. You do therfore deserve the sorer blame to be layd vpon you, for setting vp this Idol, because your self do so vniustly labour to bring the blame of so hainous Idolatry vpon all the Churches of God: and you should not complaine (as you do) that this thing is aggravated against you, because the sight of your errour herein may be a meanes to bring you vnto some feeling of your self and of your rash iud∣gement. 2. Your fault hath not bene so aggravated against you, but that it may yet be shewed to be far greater, for though it be great in ech of the respects which Pag. 24.25 before I shewed, because without any necessary vse, you do a new erect, not a monument onely, but a very Idol, and a principall Idoll of Antichriste, even the Idol of the crosse, though in your answer you have not bene able to deny any one of these respects: yet your offence in setting vp this Idol is by far the more haynous and notorious in respect of the place, where you have set it. The settle or shrine wherevpon you have placed this Idol, is the name of God, even of the most holy Trinitie, as appeares in your printed
Animad-vers. pag. 6. book, where you have affixed the idol-crosse vnto the name of ech person in the Trinity, even as it is done in the idolatrous pon∣tificall: And thus you do most vnworthily abuse the name ofGod, in making it a foote-stoole for a most filthy idol to stand on and tread vpon the same. VVhen the hethenish Idols or gods that could not cary them selves, were Esa. 46.1.2. caryed vpon the bunches of the camelles or vpon the backs of other beasts that bowed and fell downe vnder the burden, it was folly to be lau∣ghed at and sin to be condemned; but to set the most abomina∣ble idol vpon the back of the most holy and pure God; this is a sin of greater indignity, to be abhorred and trembled at. It is odious to see the pope that great beast caried vpō the shoulders of men; but that the popes Idol crosse should ride vpon the shoulders of the holy Trinitie, as in a chariot of Triumph, as in your book you have made it, this is far more odious and dete∣stable. The sin of Solomon was greater in respect of the place where he set vp Idols, even 1. Kin. 11 7. in the mountaine that is over against Ierusalem: The sin of Manasses was yet greater in respect of the place where he set vp Idols, even 2. Kin. 21 4.5.7. in the house of God: but if he had placed an Idol in the oracle, in the most holy place, even vpon the Mercy-seate over the ark, this had bene more horri∣ble: And if yet further he had placed there betvvixt the Cheru∣bims the most vile Idol, even Beelzebub the Prince of the devilles, this had bene out of measure sinfull and impious above the rest: And yet even this is the sin vvhich you ignorantly run into, vvhile yourself do confesse the image of the Crosse to be Arrow against Ido¦lat. cap. 5. sect. 13. Beelzebub Prince of the Devilles, & yet place it over the ark, even vpon the Glorious and fearful name of the Holy Trinitie: You that so rashly blame all the Churches of Christ for their vse of temples formerly polluted vvith Idolatrie, have not feared to make the name of God an Idol-temple, vvhere to this day the Idol-stands still: vvere your bookes as much vvorth as the Ephesians Act 19. you should do vvell to burne them all, that are yet in your hands, for a testimonie of your repentance. And for so much as you have condemned the Church of Rome, for imprinting the very same Idol of the crosse not onely in their Churches and houses, but also
Ibidem. in their bookes and writings; abo∣lish your ovvne book and vvriting vvherein you have causedit to be imprinted. 3, whereas you plead, the most that I can truely say, is that you seek to pull them downe from religious vse after an vnlawfull maner, &c. I am indeed willing to judge the best of you, and think that your entent and meaning was to doe God good service, (as I wrote before) in teaching men the evill of Ido∣latry. But the best that we can judge hereof is evill enough: we see many Authors of playes and comedies do set forth such enterludes with intent to pluck downe vice, but doing the same without any warrant of Gods word, & vsing such a kinde of in∣struction as God never appoynted: they do strengthen the vices & wickednes which they would reprove. And what is the maine breach of the second cōmandemēt but the serving of God after an vnlawful maner? Therfore when you see yourself cōvicted of this vnlawfull maner by setting vp an Idol, & making the name of God an Idolie for the same, your evill therein may be great enough though there be no more then that. 4, In setting downe your answer to my reason against your Idol, you deale deceitfully, and vse a fallacie ab iniquâ divisione, dividing that reason in to two, which was but one. The summe of it was: that such kinde of instruction as did occasion men to stumble, to blesse an Idol in their hearts, and to worship the same, and withall was a devised kinde of instruction without warrant of Gods word, that was vnlawfull. The latter part of this reason I set downe by way of preoccupacion, to prevent those vaine answers, which yet you have made vnto it: as may be seene in my Pag. 25. former writing, This reason being taken thus together, your answers do both vanish presently: for that which you an∣swer first of men being offended and brought to bless an Idol, by seing or hearing the name of a crosse or crucifix, is cut of by the second part of my reason: because there is warrant in the scrip∣ture to write or pronounce the name of an Idol, but not to pi∣cture them for religious vse, as you have done the crosse: That which you answer in the second place touching the tabernacle, ark, temple, and such like things described in mappes, is cut of by the first part of my reason: because these figures and descriptions
are not Idolatrous and scandalous as is the paynting of Idols & images for religious vse. That you may more plainely see how vnequally and vnreasonably you match these things together, which are so vnlike: do but consider, that in the description of carnall adultery & vncleannes, it would be a sinfull and scanda∣lous thing to picture many stories in such maner, as they are re∣corded to have bene done in the scriptures: as for example, to paynt Bathsheba as she was 2. Sam. 11 2.4. seene of David, & defiled of David, to pourtray the images of Gen. 38.18. Iudah & Thamar: of 2. Sam. 13.14. Amnon & Thamar, & of divers others as they are described in the word of God. You acknowledge, I doubt not but that their sin is great which make such offensive pictures, Ezek. 23.14.16. occasions of lust. And if the naked pictures of carnall adulteresses be vnlawfull, then are the pictures of spirituall whoredom in the case of offence vn∣lawfull also. And who sees not the great difference betwixt these vncleane scandalous pictures, and the mappes of countries or figures of the temple and such like things as you speake of? 5, of the 7. reasons which you bring against our vse of tem∣ples, though they be all insufficient against vs: yet there are 5. of them that do condemne this vnnecessary vse of the Idol-crosse erected in your booke; namely, the first, second, fift, sixt and seventh which serve to reprove the Idols and monuments of Idolatry, whereof there is no proffit to the Church of God. 6, whereas you seek to diminish your fault, by asking whether it be not lawfull in private books to pourtray any of, &c. You wāder far from the matter, and do ill apply this demand to the que∣stion in hand: for who sees not that your printed booke whe∣rein this Idol stands is a publique writing, published vnto the world, and to the eyes of all that can read? yea herein you re∣prove yourself, in that in your Pag. 3. former writing you do twise or thrise call your printed bookes your proofes in publique: reasons set forth in publique: how can you now make them to be private? And yet if your bookes were private onely for your owne house, yet to Deut. 27.15. set vp an Idol in them in secret, is not free: The Ibid. c. 13 6. secret entiser vnto Idolatry is subiect vnto judgement. 7. whe∣reas
you say concerning this Idol, that you will leave it to judge∣ment, & strive no more: and confesse also that you may sin in this matter though you see it not: you do hereby shew some doubting and vncertainty in this question. It is also some signe of re∣morse in you, in that here Pag. 175. before having as much or more colour to paynt crosses in shewing the maner of consecrating Churches out of the pontifical, then in shewing the maner of popish ordination, yet have you now (after admonition and warning) abstayned from making these Idols. But as yourself sayd before, The absteyning from the practise doth not clear the Syn∣ner; vnless you do further repent and renounce your sin: yea if Pag. 82. your reasoning against vs were sound, your ministery should be vnlawfull and not to be communicated withall vntill you had repented for making this Idol. If therfore you see not your sin herein, as you say, you ought not to rest, but rather to desire to heare more of this question in speciall, that your conscience might be settled and you come to some resolution. But as for your ceassing to strive vpon that pretence because I spake of some that had done this before you and of following a few herein, neglecting the examples of others, &c. this is very vaine: if vpon such pretences men should ceass to strive for the truth, you may see that many most necessary controversies would be cut of, and the truth not mainteyned as is meet. Lastly, I do not justify our evill by your doing the like, as you warne me not to plead: but I labour to condemne your evill, your ma∣king of an Idol without cause: if this were like vnto our tem∣ples I should condemne my self also: And I shew your fault herein to this end, that you seing your errour touching the nature of Idols and Idolatry, might learne to be more sober, & more swift to heare and slow to speak against the Church of God, and more slow to wrath in plucking downe our temples over our heads, vnless you could better shew the wrath of God against them.
CHAP. XIII. The seventh argument touching temples, examined. Hen. Ains. OVr 7. reason against idolies, &c. is from the blessing promi∣sed to them that abolish them, and curse threatned to the contrary, &c. Esai. 30.22.23, &c. Exod. 20.5.6. 2 Chron. 17. c. and 31.20.21. with 2. Chron. 21.13.14. and 24.17.—25. and c. 28. To this you say as before, that these scriptures are all to be vnder∣stood partly according to the state and condition of the old testament; and partly according to the equitie mentioned before with exception of necessary vse: and therfore they reprove not the vse of temples which you now have. But both these your answers I have before refuted: shewing idola∣trie and idols to be forbidden as wel in the new Testament as in the old, 1 Cor. 10. 1. Ioh. 5. Rev. 18. and that the destruction of Idols and idolies is a moral and perpetual precept, not figurative or temporarie. And your exception of necessarie vse, I have disproved: shewing that for detestation of idols, God commanded and his people performed the demolishing of them, Exod. 34. Deut. 7. Ezek. 23. Gen. 35. Both these are confirmed by the first scripture in our reason here alledged. For in Esai 30.22, the coverings and ornaments of idols are prophesied to be cast away with detestation: yet who knoweth not that of them there might be a necessarie vse to men? wherevpon a promise of blessing foloweth, v. 23, &c. And this prophesie respecteth the dayes of the Gospel, and so not the old Testament onely: for the rivers of waters vpon every mountaine v.
25. the increase of the light of the Sun se∣venfold, v. 26. the promises that they should weep no more, v. 19. nor want teachers v. 20. these and the like speeches shew the prophesie to perteine vnto the new Testament. So doth also the continuance of it, in Esai. 31. where againe he foretelleth in v. 7. the casting away of their idols: not because they could not have no necessary vse of them, but because they were their Syn: (which was the reason also, why Mo∣sesof old abolished Deut. 9.21 the Calf of Israel:) and thervpon God promiseth the ruine of their enemies, by the example of the Assyrians v. 8. & in ch. 32. he sheweth by whom this should be obteined, even by the King that should reigne in righteousnes, which is our Lord Iesus Christ. So your exceptions are but pretexts: and our reasons remaine in their force for the ruinating of all idolies, and so of Antichrists as bad as any. Answer. Io. Pa. VVHatsoever you have before obiected against both my answers, is againe answered; and for ech of those places which you againe repeat, viz 1. Cor. 10. 1. Ioh. 5. Rev. 18. Exo. 34. Deut. 7. Ezek. 23. Gen. 35. I have at large shewed how you have perverted every one of them, & have in vaine laboured to take away the distinction of temporary precepts; and the consideration of necessary vse. As for the scriptures alledged in this seventh argument, you leave them all without defence, one onely excepted: let vs exa∣mine your allegation thereof, and see whether that be not also perverted. You say, in Esai. 30 22. the coverings and ornaments of idols are prophesied to be cast away with detestation: yet who kno∣weth not, that of them there might be a necessarie vse to men, &c. I answer, 1. The casting away of the coverings there mentio∣ned is expressely noted and declared in the text, to be as the ca∣sting away of a stained garment, which was cast away, onely du∣ring the staine vpon it, but being washed with water might lawfully be vsed againe; neither did God ever command otherwise in his law: And so this place is against your self, she∣wing that our temples being purged may yet be reteyned. 2, what comparison is there betwixt the clothing and cove∣ring of an Idol and our temples, but even such as there is be∣twixt the
Lev. 11.33 & 15.12. earthen and the woodden vessel, whereof one was to be broken and cast away, the other to be washed and reteyned for the proffit of Gods people? 3. The covering and orna∣mentof an Idol is of no necessarie vse in the service of God, but the circumstance of place is necessarily required to meet in: and our temples serving conveniently for such purpose may ther∣fore be reteyned, rather then the ornamēts of Idols. 4. Though this prophesie do respect the dayes of the Gospell as you shew from Esa. 30.25.26, &c. Yet is it to be vnderstood and expoun∣ded according to the determination of Christ and his Apostles in the new Testament, which shew vs a lawfull vse of every creature of God for the necessary help of his people. Other∣wise without this caveat men might still reteyne the whole ce∣remoniall law: seing there are so many prophecies respecting the dayes of the Gospell, which yet tell vs of Esa. 19.19.21. Altars, of sacri∣fice and oblation, of Mal. 1.11 incense, of Zach. 14.16.17. going vp to Ierusalem to keep the feast of Tabernacles, of Ezek. 40. chap. &c. building a new temple with ceremoniall observations therein, &c. All these prophesies respect the new Testament, describing a spirituall worship vn∣der carnall rites and shadowes of the law: so that though Esay had spoken in this place more ceremonially in the description of our estate, then he had done: yet the determinations which I have before shewed cut of the new Testament, must be our rule and guide to expound the same: and being so expounded your cause is not holpen thereby. 5, as for Esay. 31.7. & Deut. 9.21. they speak not of places abused vnto Idolatry, but of Idols themselves, such as you cannot prove our temples to be: And besides this, even Gods owne ordinances in the abuse thereof are called Esa. 1.13 a syn or iniquitie: and therfore this phrase proves not an vtter abolition of things so called, being attributed and given vnto such things as after the purging thereof may and ought to be reteyned. Againe as for the destruction of the Calfe in Deut. 9. it was extraordinary, neither were men bound strictly to follow the same maner of shewing detestation against idols, no not vnder the law itself. Your boasting in conclusion, that our
exceptions are but pretexts, that your reasons remaine in their force for the ruinating of all idolies, &c. is like vnto a pleasant dreame, wherein you fancie and imagine that which you fainewould have: but you may not sit downe in the throne to judge of your owne dispute: stand vp at the bar and let others judge whether all your shot and ordinance have bene able to batter downe our temples: and whether your schisme rather be not neere vnto ruine, which for such pretexts of Idol-temples do separate from all true Christians. CHAP. XIV. Touching the Ievves Synagogue. Hen. Ains. HEre againe you come, with reasons from our owne practise: which were it such as you suppose, and that we walked not aright, yet helpeth it you nothing. For the trueth shal stand, though all men fall: and it is Gods word, not mens wayes, that must be our rule in Religion. For your 1. and 2. objections from the houses, wherin we meet: I have In the de∣fense of our 6. rea∣son. before proved, they are not, neyther ever were Idolies, nor by any law of God to be destroyed, though Iewes or any, have worshiped in them. Answer. Io. Pa. HEre, before you come vnto the particular answer you say something in generall by way of complaint, that I should reason against you from your owne practise: of this you affirme, that were it such as I suppose, &c. yet it helpeth vs nothing, &c. Herevnto I reply, 1. It helpeth much to set forth the glory of God, to confirme the comfort of the faithful, & to stop the mouth of iniquitie, when we do observe the con∣tradictory practise and doctrine of such as are enimies to the Church of God. And God himself hath taught vs to vrge such things against them that are maintainers of errour, to shew how he wil condemne the evil servāts Luk. 19.22 out of their owne mou∣thes, by their owne words and deeds: how he will Ezek. 16.43. bring their
owne wayes, vpon their heads: how they Ps. 7.15. fall into the pits which they dig for others; how he wil make them Rom. 2.1 inexcusable, when they do the same things which they condemne in others: how he 1. Cor. 3.19. catcheth the wise in their owne craftines. In these iud∣gemēts of God, his glory shineth brightly, & they take his name in vaine that do not duely cōsider of these his workes in & vpō you, as wel as vpon others. 2. How do you forget your self, who els where do cōfesse that Praeface to Annot. on Gen. pag. 6 the testimony of the aduersary against him self, doth help our faith? Your vse of the Iewes Idol tēple is a testi∣mony against your self, & yet here you say, were your practise such as we suppose that you walked not right, yet it would help vs nothing. VVe suppose you have no great conscience of your owne profession, and therfore can not so easily be drawne to receive your doctrines without further examination of them by the word of God: Herein we are much holpen and kept from ioyning rashly vnto you. Your owne endevour in your wri∣tings is to presse your adversaries with their owne practise, as Animadv p. 12. 59. 123. &c. Mr. Iohnson and Mr. Smith and others very often: And how partiall therfore are you, that allow that to your self, which you disallow in others? 3. Though the word of God & not mens wayes must be our rule in Religion, yet seing so many men pre∣fer their owne wayes before the word of God, is it not therfore meete to convince such men by their owne wayes, and to re∣prove them even by their owne wandrings? As truth destroyes errour, so doth one errour destroy another sometimes, and one practise refute an other and therfore though the holy scriptures onely can shew the truth of religion, yet erroneous and con∣tradictory practises are also a meanes to condemne falshood & stop the mouth of those that maintaine such errours. To this end and not further do we alledge your practise: far be it from vs, that we should make your wayes a rule of religion.
But now to come vnto the obiection itself, I seek your ans∣wer here in the proper place, but finde it not, as I expected: In stead hereof you send me back vnto the defense of your sixt rea∣son, and therein a corner you would hide your head from theforce of this reproofe, but you must be brought forth into the light againe: for 1, howsoever you say of this Iewes synagogue, which you vsed to assemble in, that you have before proved, that it is not, nor ever was an Idolie: that have I already reproved and refuted againe: That defense of your sixt reason being shewed to be vaine. 2. The obiection which I made against your sixt reason, did concerne private houses of Idolatours, as of Papists, Moschovites and such like: but this synagogue of the Iewes was not a private place, but a place of publique worship where many families of the Iewes did ordinarily meete together in a solemne congregation; & so also hath your separate com∣pany done as publiquely and solemnely after the Iewes had left it. And therfore those private houses and this publique synagogue are most vnequally and vniustly matched together, neither can the answer of that place be applyed vnto this. 3, you made exception for the private houses mentioned in the former place that they were civil houses, but the synagogue of the Iewes whereof I speak, being for the publique worship of God may be called a religious place as well as any other. And though some persons dwelt in some part of it, that hinders not but that it was to be esteemed a religious house or synagogue: you see the most of the temples in this citie, have divers per∣sons dwelling in severall parts of them, which yet you con∣demne as Idolies: If you were not partiall you would consider this: for the excuse of our temples, as well as of the Iewes. The Iewes Arba tu∣rim, lib. O∣rach chaim tractat. beth hac∣ceneseth, signo 153. accounting their Beth-midrasch to be an holy place and more holy then other synagogues, do yet confesse it may be part of such a building where men may have a dwelling place in some other parts of it; in that they Elias levita in Tischbi. in darasch. note it to be either an house or chamber or parlour
(cheder.) And if such an excuse as this which you make, might have saved Idol-temples from ruine in the time of the law: then those Idolaters which had once seene the overthrow of Baals houses, might according to this shift have taken some old palaces or halles and conver∣ted them to the service of Baal, for his ordinary and publiqueworship, suffring yet some persons to dwell still in some other parts thereof, and by this meanes all danger of ruine should be turned away from them. And if they had not old houses enough convenient for their purpose, they might make new, provided that they made some roomes above or belovv for their Priests and other persons to dvvell in, and then if any Iehu or Iosias came to pluck dovvne those Idolies of Chemosh, Baal or Dagon, they might plead against them that those places were civil houses, and dvvelling houses of men, though publique vvorship vvere ordinarily performed in them, and that ther∣fore such Kings had no authority to demolish them: and thus had they had some of your subtile shifts they might have coo∣sened the lavv, deluded the godly Kings and preserved their Idol-temples from destruction. MOreover vvhereas you sayd in the defense of your sixt rea∣son, touching the Ievves place of publique vvorship vvherein you succeeded them, that I do vntruely call it the Iewes Idol-temple; that it may appeare vnto the reader vvhether I spoke truely or not, I desire these fevv things may be considered tou∣ching the estate of the Ievves and their Idolatry according to your ovvne description of Idolatry. As before you led vs into the Popes vvare houses, the Pontificall and others shops of his: so here you must give me leave to bring you into the Ievves vvare-house, the Thalmud and other shops of theirs, that by comparing of them vvith the stuffe, that is found in some of your owne shops, I may thereby shew vnto you, that the Iewes Synagogue is an Idol-temple. First, as for the members of the Iewes Church, they are by your owne testimony all of them heynous and horrible Idols: for you vvrite that Counter∣poy. pag. 143. 144.
the bringing of Satans seed into the Church, vnto the Altar of God, may further be minded as a high degree of vio∣lating the second commandement, whereby all images, idols and simili∣tudes whatsoever, of the Divel or mens invention or forming are se∣verely forbidden to be brought into Gods house, or vsed in his worshipNow such images or Idols are these wicked persons. For as Children are the images of their parents, &c. So Satans Children (as wicked worldlings be called in the scripture,) are his lively images, having lost the first image of God wherein they were created, &c. As it is a syn, and so esteemed, to have images and representations of beasts, of fowles, of fishes, &c. brought into the Church and worship of God: so would & well might it be esteemed more horrible, if in any Christian congregation, there should be brought in pictures of the Divil, or other like hellish representations. Yet men wil not see the horror of this syn, that the living images and pictures of the serpent should be brought into the Church and worship of God, &c. Now it being manifest and vndenyable that the Iewes are vvicked persons, despisers of Christ, and his Gospell, and profane wordlings also, by your owne confession they must be Idols, and images, and consequently the place of their publique vvorship a recep∣tackle of Idols, and an Idol-temple. And yet even in the same place where such pictures of the Divil and hellish representa∣tions have bene brought into the vvorship of God, even there have you agreed to assemble together for the service of Christ: The horror of that place hath not deterred you from conver∣ting it vnto your holy place. Secondly, as for the ministers of the Iewish Church, accor∣ding to your doctrine they must also be esteemed Idolles: for vnlavvfull ministers you reckon vp in the catalogue or rolle of Idolles and say of them as of others idols; Arrow against Ido¦latry ch. 1. sec. 18. Nor is there lesse impietie in Idols of an other nature and esteem for when among men one is set vp as head of the Church, an other as Patriark, an other as primate, Arch-Bishop, Metropolitane, &c. & these without calling & appoyntment frō God: these be Idol-shepheards, not true pastours of the flock, &c. Now amōg the Ievves at this day, they have vnlavvful offices vvithout calling & appointment from God: Their prin∣cipall Doctour, to vvhom for honour sake they give the title of Gaon or excellence, is
Elias Le∣vita in Tisebbi, in Gaon. sayd to be so called, because he must be expert in the Thalmud & in the sixtie treatises thereof, vvhich by a Cabalisticall reckoning are found in the vvord Gaon,vvhich yeeldeth the number of sixtie. And according to his title, vvhich signifyeth pride as vvel as excellencie, so doth this Rabbine presume above the holy scripture, and out of the Thalmud preacheth vnto the Ievves a huge burden and loade of superstitious traditions: And thus his administration be∣comes Idolatrous. Thus do the inferiour Rabbines and Ievv-doctours also. Their vnlavvfull ministeries might further be observed in the 7. yearely offices vvhich they are Ioan. Buxt. in Synag. Iud. cap. 22. recorded to sell for money, by an open proclamation in their Synagogue, to vvhomsoever vvill give most money for them; as the office of lighting candles, vvhich they performe vvith many supersti∣tions; the office of distributing vvine on their Sabath and at other feasts: the office of Gelilah to open the rolle of the lavv and to vvrap it vp againe: the offices of hagbohab to cary about and elevate the book of the lavv, &c. the offices of Ets chaijm, to touch those peeces of vvood vnto vvhich the volume of the lavv is fastned: in the touching of this tree of life they put great confidence for attayning of vnderstanding, vertue and long life thereby: the office of Acheron for to propound something to be read out of the lavv; the office of schehia, to be a substitute, ready to supply the office of any of the rest vvhich through ne∣gligence should omit the same. And many other vvayes it might be shevved vvhat Idol-shepheards they have. Novv vvhere these Thalmudique doctours have administred, there come you the onely doctour on earth (in your ovvne and your peoples account) that may be lavvfully communicated vvith all; and you that refuse to vvorship in the places vvhere Christe Iesus is preached, have not refused to assemble ordi∣narily, vvhere Christ Iesus hath bene condemned and a false Messias preached. Thirdly for their prayers, they do therein commit Idolatry many vvayes. They turne God himself into an Idol (so much as in them lyes) vvhen they call vpon him, by denying the Tri∣nitie of persons and by calling vpon God vvithout Christ: and as yourself note from others, that by false vvorshippers God Animadv. pag. 73. is
trāsformed into an Idol, so may it be noted of the Ievves, in their misconceaving of God and vvorshipping him so misformed in their mindes. And if it be true vvhich is taught in your vvri∣tings, that in the Church of England, Christ is H.B. disc. p. 161. an Idol King & an Idol Christe, how much more evident is it, that the Iewes in their worship do set vp their Christe for an Idol? By your doctrine all set formes of prayer are Ibid. p. 64 detestable Idolles. Now that the Iewes have publique prescript and set formes of prayer, their Minhagim or bookes of their publique leiturgies do shew it abundantly. And your Maimon. in misneh, in Seder te∣philloth col hasscha nah. Maimony shewes vs at larg their order for set formes of prayer for appoynted seasons through∣out the whole yeare. And so according to your profession, if there were nothing els but this, their Synagogue should be an Idol-temple. Besides this they have many particular and severall prayers and blessings, vvherein they put vaine confidence and make Idols of them. Their Arba tu∣rim, lib. O∣rachchaijm tract tephil lah. sig. 58 & 70 &c. Krias shema, or Keriath shema (as they call it) hath a multitude of superstitious observations in the vse of it, and as many vaine promises annexed vnto the same. Their prayer which they cal Ibid. sig. 55 Kaddish, may not be sayd of less then ten persons; and those all the sonnes of nobles and great ones which have brought forth the 2. hayres: some contēd that there may be one Child or litle one with the other 9, if he have the pentateuch in his hand: others deny it: and these ten must be all in one place, & sheliac tsibbur or the minister of their sy∣nagogue with them, &c. But if there be a litle court broken fully into a great court; if there be 9 persons in the great court, and one in the litle one, they allow this prayer to be sayd there; but if there be 9 persons in the litle court and one in the great one, or 5 in one and 5 in an other, they allow it not, &c. An other prayer they have which they call jithgaddel according to the beginning thereof, or Kedushah and this they may not say, in the Hebrew tongue, but in the language of the Thargum, least (as they
Ibid. sig. 56. say) the Angels hearing the same should envy them for this excellent hymne, and therfore they say it in a lan∣guagewhich they do not vnderstand, for the Angels (as they affirme) know not the Aramites tongue. An orher famous prayer they have, which they call schemone Esre consisting of 18, parts: This they Thalm. Babylonic. in megil∣lah ch. 2. fol. 17. hold to have bene made by an hundted and twenty Elders and some of them Prophets. In giving a reason of this mysticall number, why it hath just 18 parts, wherevpon it is denominate; Iehoshua ben Levi, Thalmud Ierusalemy in Beracoth ch. 4. f. 7. and. 8. saith it is in reference vnto the 18 first psalmes, reaching vnto those words, the Lord heare thee in the day trouble, &c. R. Simon saith, it is respect of the 18. litle bones or ioynts which are in the back bone, be∣cause in the houre that a man stands and prayes this prayer, it is of necessity that he bow with them all: for which reason it is sayd, All my bones shall say, Lord who is like vnto thee. R. Levi saith it is in respect of the 18. memorialles (of the word Iehovah) which are found in the Psalme which begins thus, give vnto the Lord ye sonnes of the mighty, viz. ps. 29. R. Hanina in the name of R. Phinehas saith, it is in respect of the 18. times that the fa∣thers, Abraham, Isaak and Iaakob are mentioned in the law, &c. A number of other such like prayers they have, wherevnto they attribute miraculous power and vertue, as by the saying of their Kaddish before mentioned they hold that the soules of dead men are delivered out of their torment in hell or purga∣tory and translated into paradise: and therfore are Children bound to vse that prayer for their parents deceassed for the space of a yeare or thereabout. Vnto these prayers they joyne their Phylacteries and make Idols of them also: They say, Arba Tu∣tim, lib. or. cha. tractat Tephillin fig. 37. Great is the commandement of the Phylacteries: because every one that weares them shall prolong his dayes, as it is sayd, ô Lord by them men live: And Rabba saith every one that puts on the Phylacteries & vveares zizith or the fringes and reades Keriath shema, and prayes, let him be sure that he is a Childe of the world to come. And Abaii saith, I will be his surety that the fire of hell shall not have power over him. R. Papa saith, I will be his surety, that all his sinnes shalbe forgiven him, &c. The Thalmudique canons teach that those Phylacteries which
are written Thalmud Bab. in Me∣nachoth cap. 4 f. 42 Arba Tu∣rim, orach chaiim in Thephillin sig. 39. & in Gittin. c. 4. fol. 45 by a servant, by a woman, by a child, by a gentile, or an Israelite changed from them, are vnlawfull for vse, &c. that if they be written by an heretique, then they are to be burnt: if they be found in the hand of an heretique & it be not knowne whether they were vvritten by him or not, that then they are to be buryed, &c. with an hundred superstitions more about the making, vsing, keeping and vaine confidence in them. Againe they turne the ordinance of the priests lifting vp his hands in blessing the people, into great superstition; Orach chaiim in Tephillah sig. 128. comp with R. Moses Mikkots. in SMG. precep. af∣fir. 20. none of the priests may go vp vnto the staires, pulpit or scaffold from whence the blessing is pronounced, but he must first put of his shooes. All the priests that are present are bound to go vp vnto the scaffold (vvhē the Minister of the cōgregation comes to a certaine prayer, called ratsah, &c.) & they that do not, sin against three affirmative comandements, viz. Thus shall ye bless them: say vnto vnto them: put my name vpon them: vvhen they are gone vp they are to stand on the scaffold vvith their faces to∣wards the temple and their backes tovvards the people, having their fingers bowed into the middes of the palme of their han∣des, vntil the Minister have finished an other prayer
Modim, &c. VVhen they turne their faces towards the people to blesse, they do first blesse the Lord for that blessing, for sanctifying them with his sanctification of Aharon, &c. Then they lift vp their hands over against their shoulders in height, and open their fist and devide their fingers according to the midrasch, he shewes himself through the grates; because that Schecinah or the divine Maiestie is above vpon their heads and looketh through the grates of their fingers; and they direct or set them so, that they may make windooes for the Lord, betwixt ech two fingers one window; and betwixt a thumb and a finger; and betwixt thumb and thumb a window, (9 windowes in all) to establish or fulfill that saying, he shewes himself through the grates. (Cant. 2.9.) Then their Minister reads or prayes those words: The Lord blesse thee, &c. Num. 6.24.25.26. And they say after him word for word till he have finished the first verse; and then the congre∣gationanswers Amen, and so they do also after the second and againe after the third verse of that blessing. And they may not blesse but in the holy tongue: and standing, and with lifting vp of hands, and with a high voyce, &c. The Priest that is Orach Cha. in Te∣phillah sig. 128. zebalgan, .i. which lets his spitle fall vpon his beard, or is blinde of one eye, may not lift vp his handes in this blessing: but if the men of his citie be vsed vnto him and do all know that he is Zebalgan, and blinde, then he may lift vp his hands: If his hands be coloured with divers colours and skarlet, he may not lift vp his hands, least they should be offended at him: but if the multitude of the mē of the citie do vse such work, then he may lift vp his hands, then they will not be offended at him, &c If the priest Maimony in misn. in Tephil∣lah ch. 15. sec. 4. drink a quadrant of wine at one draught, then he may not lift vp his hands: but if he drink it at two draughts, or two times: or if he put a litle water into the middes of it, then it is lawfull for him: but if he drink more thē a quadrant, although it be mixt, and although he drink it at divers times, yet he may not lift vp his hands, vntill he put his wine from him, &c. And many other vaine observations they have about this particular. If Arba Tu∣rim, lib. Orach cha in Tephil∣lah. signo. 130. any man have seene a dreame, & knowes not what he hath seene, he is to come before the Priests in the houre that they go vp vnto the scaffold where they lift vp their hands to blesse: and to say thus, o Lord of the world, I am thine, & my dreames are thine: I have dreamed a dreame and I know not what it is: whether I have dreamed for my self, or whether others have dreamed for me, if they be good confirme and ratifie them, as the dreames of Ioseph: if they be evill, heale them, heale them, as the waters of Marah by the handes of Moses, and as the waters of Iericho by the hands of Elisha, as Miriam from her le∣prosy, and as Naaman from his leprosy, &c. Besides these prayers and blessings, they have also their solemne curses, wherein they curse Christians and even Christ Iesus himself, praying for the destruction of Christians, especially of those Iewes that are converted to Christianitie: wishing also that the name of Iesus may be blotted out, as is
Buxtorf. de abbrev. p. 87. noted frōtheir jimmach schemo, though they do it more covertly, accor∣ding to their Cabalisticall art. Yea, it appeares that they are more carefull of these curses, then of many other blessings: for their canon is, that Orach a chaiim, in Tephillah, sig. 126. if the minister of their congregation do erre in any one of all the blessings by omitting or skipping over the same: if when they admonish him, he know how to returne vnto the place, they do not remoove him: but if he skip over the curse of heretiques (vnder which they reckon those that do embrace Christianitie), they do forth with re∣moove him least he himself be an heretique, &c. Now while you plead against our temples that they are to be destroyed and avoyded as being Pag. 16 Devilles houses: if your plea be sound, then may it justly be vsed against yourself: for as the Devil is deno∣minate of slandering and accusing, so where cursing, and blas∣phemy are joyned with superstition and Idolatry, the house where these sins are ordinarily and publiquely practised, may well be called a Devilles house; and consequently that meeting house of the Iewes which you chose to be your house of prayer. Hereby you have condemned your self in that wherein you vvould blame vs. Fourthly, they make an Idol of the holy scriptures vvhich they vse in their synagogue: of the book of the lavv in speciall: and of the reading thereof. One superstition is, that they hold it Arba Tu∣rim, lib. Io∣reh degnah trac. Seph. thorah sig. 270. vnlavvfull for a man vvhich hath the booke of the lavv to sell the same, though he have many of them: yea that it is vn∣lawfull to sell an old one to buy a new one, even when a man hath nothing to eat: onely they allow a man in this case of ne∣cessitie to sell the same, viz. to pay for learning of the law, and for the taking of a wife, vvhen he hath no other meanes to pro∣cure the same, &c. An other superstition is, that they
Ibid. sig. 271. make it vnlawfull to write the booke of the law save vpon the parch∣ment which is made of the skin of a cleane creature: and not vpon the skin of a fish though it be cleane, but vpon the skin of a cleane beast, fowle or living creature which is cleane: also not vpon the skin of those creatures which are dead and torne.They hold it not lawfull to write the same vpon the parchmēt made of the skin of a cleane beast, vnlesse the skin be dressed purposely to that vse at the first, vnlesse it be made in that name and dedicate to such vse: R. Moses bar Maimon Maimony in misneh, tract. Te∣phillin c. 1. sec. 11 writes further, that if a gentile dresse them they are vnlawfull, though an Israe∣lite say vnto him, dresse these skins for a book of the law: but R. Baruch Iore deah, tract. Se∣pher tho∣rah. sig. 71 writes that if a gentile make them and an Israelite stand at his back and help him a litle, then they are lawfull. Also for the maner of dressing them, they Ibid. hold it vnlawfull to dresse these skinnes save with galles: though R. Tam allowes the lime which they have to that purpose. They make great que∣stion, vpon which side of the parchment the law is to be written and thereabout do Maimony and R. Ascher differ among them∣selves. Also they hold it is not to be written but with inke: but R. Tam saith it is not called inke, but they make it of cer∣taine kindes of knowne thornes which are sodden, and of that water they make it, but if it be inke made with galles, then it is vnlawfull for a book of the law, &c. further they Ior. deah. in Seph. thor. sig. 274. hold super∣stitiously, that the scribe which writes the book of the law, must of necessitie when he begins to write say thus; this booke I write that it may be a holy book of the law: and this sufficeth for every book, and if he do not thus, the book is vnlawfull. Also that he must have a book before him out of which he may copie it: that it is vnlawfull to write even one letter which is not out of the copie: (though he knew it never so perfectly without the same) Seven letters comprehended in the words, Schagnatnaz gats they do idolize after a speciall manner, Ibid. with Thalmud in mena∣choth, f. 29. writing over them 3 crownes, so often as they are repeated in the law, one crowne on the right side of the letter, an other on the left, an other above: These crownes are not to be found in any Hebrew Bi∣ble that is printed: Therfore the Iewes vse in their synagogue not a printed, but a written book of the law. Againe, al∣though the scribe in the beginning of his writing, do say he writes the same in the name of a holy book for the cōsecration thereof, yet it is further
Ior. dea. sig. 276. required as necessary, that so often ashe writes the name of God, he do every time think in himself that he writes that name for a holy vse, and if he do not so, the writing is vnlawfull. And if a King salute him, as he is writing that name, he may not answer him. And when he hath dipt his pen into the ynke to write the name of God, it is not law∣full for him immediately to begin with the name of God least there should bee too much ynke in the pen, but for a praepara∣tive he must first begin to write the word that comes before the name of God, with that new penfull of ynke. If he write any of the names of God in gold, it is vnlawful: And a number of other superstitious traditions they have about the measures of the booke, the forme of the letters, the sections open and shut, the distances betwixt book and book, section and section, line & line; about the correction of literal faults, and the toleration of them: about the ruling of the book, the sowing of the parch∣ments with the sinowes of cleane beasts, &c. But when it is made, then they Ior. dea. in Seph. th. sig.
282. give great honour vnto this book of the law: they are commanded to make a peculiar place for it, and to ho∣nour that place with great reverence: they may not spit before it, nor turne their backes toward it, nor cary it vpon their heads as if it were a burden: they that see it as it passes by are bound to stand still, vntill it be passed by and brought vnto his place, or vntill it be covered from their eyes. He that travelles from place to place and hath the book of the law with him, may not put it in a sack, nor lay it vpon the back of the asse whereon he rides, but he must put it in his bosome, over against his heart. They may not sit vpon that bed, where this booke is layd: They may not touch this book, but through a vayle, wherewith it must first be covered: They may not bring it into many places: And that house where it is, may not be vsed as before it was. VVhen it is worne out, or made vnmeet for vse, they must put it into an earthen vessell, and so bury it: and this, nere vnto one of their wise disciples or Rabbines. They distinguish be∣twixt this book of the law, and the pentateuch, or 5. bookes of Moses, in respect of this forme and maner of writing, thoughthe same words be conteyned in both: Though they may lay this book vpon the back of an other book of the law, and the pentateuch vpon the Prophets, and Psalmes, &c. yet they may not lay the Prophets and psalmes vpon the back of the penta∣teuch, nor the pentateuch vpon the back of this book of the law: such superstitious differences and degrees of holynes do they forge vnto themselves. The superstitions which they vse Orach. ch. tract. keri∣ath hattho rah. sig. 135 136. &c. in reading this book of the law in their synagogues, are also very many: concerning the time, the persons, the order to be observed herein; and too long it would be to rehearse the same in like manner also do they Idolize the booke of Ester, both in the writing and in the reading thereof, vsing many of the very same superstitions which they do about the book of the law, though not so precise herein: yet have they many peculiar tra∣ditions here also, as thalmud Ierusalemy in megil∣lah. ch. 3. fol. 74. with Orach cha. in me∣gil. sig. 690 691. Maimony in Megillah c. 2. that the names of the tē sonnes of Haman are to be written after the manner of a song, and yet not as common songes; that the names of the men are to be written in the beginning of the leafe or line, and that the particle, veeth that goes with ech of them is to be written in the end of the line: and that otherwise the writing is not lawfull: that in the reading of them also, they are all to be read with one breath: with a multitude of the like devises. Now if popish supersti∣tions have defiled our temples, and made them vnfit for our vse, how comes it that these absurd and manifold Iewish super∣stitions have not defiled their synagogue and made it vnfit for your vse? Fiftly, the Sacrament of Circumcision observed among the Iewes, is also set vp for an Idoll among them. As you note of the Popish Baptisme, that there are Animadv p. 72. two sorts of idols therein, some merely devised by men: as their crosses, exorcismes, grea∣sings, &c. some perverted by men from holy signes to idols, &c So may you see both these kindes of idols in the Iewish cir∣cumcision: for (not to speak of many other superstitions) their Arba tu∣rim, li. Ior. dea, in Mi∣lah, sig. 264 R. Moses mikk. in SMG. prae∣cep. affir. 28 priah, or tearing of the other skin with their nayles, (after the foreskin be cut away) is merely devised by themselves, a more
painefull and dangerous thing vnto the circumcised infant, thē is the cutting of the foreskin itself. And this priah or perignah, they hold to be so necessary, that they make circumcision with∣out it to be no circumcision: they say, he that circumciseth and vseth not this priah, is as if he had not circumcised. Herein their superstition is greater then the Papists, who do not main∣taine such a necessitie of their inventions and devises in the ad∣ministration of Baptisme. Againe, their Ioreh dea. tract. milah or of cir∣cumcision sig. 265. custome is to set a chaire or seat for Elias at their act of circumcising: and the ori∣ginall of this custome is noted by them to be this: when Elias complayned, I have bene very jelous for the Lord, because the house of Israel have forsaken thy coveranr (1 Kin. 19.15.) the Rabbines say that from that time the Lord made a promise vnto Elias that the Israelites should never performe that cove∣nant or work of circumcision, vntill Elias did see it with his eyes: and that from thence forward their wise men ordeyned to set a chaire for Elias, because he is called the Angell of the co∣venant. Herein they commit heynous Idolatrie, by ascribing vnto Elias a divine power and propertie as though he could be present in many places at once whersoever circumcision is ad∣ministred: As the Papists offend by mainteyning the body of Christ to be present in their masse whersoever it is celebrated; so do the Iewes by mainteyning the body of Elias to be present in their Idol circumcision vvhersoever it is administred by thē, honouring his presence also by setting a chaire or throne for him, &c. Againe they turne the ordinance of God into an Idol, by mainteyning an vse of it, vvhen as it is now abolished: and especially by putting so great confidence therein, as that they do thereby Gal. 5.2.3.4. abolish themselves from Christ and the sal∣vation purchased by him. They hold the commandement of circumcision to be greater then the rest of the commādements that are to be performed: they say Thalmud in Nedarim ch. 3. fol. 31 that there are thirteene co∣venants made concerning circumcision; because the word covenant is found to be 13. times repeated in Gen. 17. where circumcision was instituted: They Arba tu∣rim, l. Ior. dea. in mi∣lah, sig. 260 alledge out of their Bereshith rabbah that
Abraham our father sits at the gate of Hell and suffers not any that are circumcised to be gathered in thither. They affirme that by it men are delivered from the judgement of hell. The Chalde paraphrast expounding those words of Solomon, every one hath his sword vpon his thigh for the feare by night, Thargum on cant. 3.8 notes this sword vpon the thigh to be the seale of circumcision in the flesh, whe∣reby they prevayle and do not feare the divelles or the toads that walk abroad in the night. Yea such confidence they have in this ceremony, that they vse to Arba Tu∣rim, l. Ior. dea. treat. of buriall, sig. 353. & of circumcis. sig. 263. circumcise dead infants to obteyne and procure the more mercy for them at the resurre∣ction, though after an other manner, then other infants be commonly circumcised Now you that condemne our vse of temples, which have bene abused heretofore vnto the worship of Saints: vvhy were you not afraid to worship in that Syna∣gogue where Elias hath bene deifyed by the Iewes, and divine honour given vnto him being but one of the Saints? you that refuse to heare all the ministers of Christ sitting in Moses chaire, what meane you to go and sit in Elias his chaire, to teach and preach vnto your people in that very place where the Iewes have set that Idolatrous chaire for Elias? Sixthly, the feasts of the Iewes which they keep at this day cannot be denyed of you to be Idols, whiles you H.B. disc. p. 181. say as much of the Idol-feasts in the Church of England. A whole volume would not suffice to expresse the innumerable superstitions of the Iewes which they observe herein: They have a whole book in folio conteyning their preparation vnto one of their feasts, shewing onely what is to be done in the evening of their pas∣seover. I will onely note one or two of their impious pactises. At their feast of reconciliation, their manner in some places is to kill a cock for reconciliation. Arba tu∣rim lib. O∣rach cha. tract. jom haccippu∣rim, sig. 605. The minister of the congre∣gation vseth to take a cocke, and layes his hand vpon his head, and lifts him vp, and layes him vpon the head of him that is to be reconciled and saith;
This for this: This is changed for this: This is wounded for this. Then he turnes vnto him the second time and saith, They sit in darknes and in the shadow of death,being bound in miserie and yron: He bringeth them out of darknes & the shadow of death, and breaks their bands asunder: fooles by reason of their transgression and because of their iniquities are aflicted: Then they cry vnto the Lord in their trouble and he delivereth them out of their distresse he sends his word and healeth them, and deli∣vereth them from their graves: Let them confesse before the Lord his loving kindnes, and his wonders vnto the Sonnes of men. Life for life. And he doth according to this order three times. After this he layes his hand vpon the head of the cock after the manner of laying on of hands, and leaning vpon him killeth him pre∣sently: straight way after the imposition of hands is the slaugh∣ter of him. And they vse to give him vnto the poore that this may be a reconciliation for his life, &c. At their feast of Purim, their maner is in reading the book of Ester to say, Ibid. tract. megillah, sig. 690. Cur∣sed be Haman: Blessed be Mordecai: Cursed be Zeresh, Blessed be Ester: Cursed be all that serve Idolles (vnder these they compre∣hend all Christians:) Blessed be all Israel, &c. Yea in the sig. 695. & Talmud Bab. in Megill. c. 1. fol. 7. same place they say that they are commanded to make great cheare, and that it is necessary to be drunken, till they cannot discerne be∣twixt Arur Haman, and Baruch Mordecai, &c. till they know not Haman from Mordecai: blessing from cursing, &c. Of all the Idolatrous feasts that are kept either at Roome of the Papists or at Constantinople among the Turkes, I think you cannot name any more detestable then these, where Christ is so dishonoured and Christianity so directly blasphemed and cursed, and drun∣kennes so extolled for a vertue: yet are you become so partiall in yourself and a judge of such evill thoughts, that you blush not to condemne our vse of temples for the superstition of the former times, while your selves dare venture into this Iewish synagogue, a nest of superstition nothing inferiour vnto the Papists. Seventhly, as for the discipline and censures vsed among the Iewes you can not deny them to be Idolles, whiles you H. B. disc. p. 234 & 236. make the suspension vsed in true Churches of Christ to be
Idolatrous and an Idol-suspension; though nothing so absurd and vile as isthat suspension of the Iewes. The censures of the Iewes are many first they have a kinde of rebuke which they cal neziphah, this they Elias Levita in Tischbi in nazaph. refer to the initial letters of nezem zahab be—aph, &c. a Iewell of gold in a swines snout: Prov. 11.22. This they describe to be the Arba Tu∣rim in Io∣reh dea. tract. Nid∣dui. sig. 334. rebuke of a great man vpon an other: And the man∣ner is, that he which hath it vpon him must hide himself & sit in his house, and be ashamed and not see the face of him that hath rebuked him, nor stād before him with his head vncovered, and must diminish his mirth his talke his exercises, &c. But others need not to avoyd him, neither is he required to seek reconciliation with him that is offended, neither is any absolu∣tion required after this rebuke hath bene borne a certaine time. Againe, they have three sorts of excōmunication, niddui, cherem and shamatha, all which as they are now vsed by the Iewes, are Idolatrous and superstitious. For the first, which is a kinde of suspension, they May mo∣ny in mis∣neh, in Thalmud thorah, ch. 6. assigne foure and twenty causes for which it is to be inflicted: Among the rest, one cause is, for despising even one word of the scribes, &c. vvhich are most absurd and impious many times and ought to be despised: An other vn∣reasonable cause is, if a Iew sell any ground vnto a gentile that is an Idolater (such they account all to be that call vpon the name of Christ) they suspend him, vntill he will take vpon himself all the hurt which may come thereby from the gentile vnto an Israelite, &c. Him that is suspended they avoyd in eating and drinking with him and must sit 4. cubites from him: during the time of this reiection he may not shave himself, nor wash himself, &c. Thalmud Ierusalemy in moed katon ch. 3 f. 81. col. 4. He that is thus suspended or reiected by a Rab∣bine, is reiected of his scholler, but he that is reiected of the scholler is not reiected of the Rabbine. He that is reiected of the Father of the Iudgement house, is reiected of the wise man but he that is reiected of the wise, is not reiected of the Father of the judgement-house. Ior. dea. vbi supra. He that is reiected of the prince, is reiected of all Israel: but he that is reiected of all Israel is not reiected of the prince, &c. As for the absolution and loosing this band, the forme of words vsed is,
scherui lach, machol lach:Thou art loosed: thou art forgiven: and if the man to be absolved be absent, they say, scherui lo: He is loosed: Touching the per∣sons that may absolve, Misneh in Thalmud thor. 2. 7. Maimony saith, that three Idiots or pri∣vate men, or one alone that is approoved may absolve the sus∣pended person, and that a Thalmid or disciple of the Rabbines may loose either the anathema or the suspension even in the place of the Rabbie; If three have suspended a man and be gone away; if the suspended person repent, three others may absolve him, but Ex Arba Turim vbi supra. R. Abraham ben Dior writes that three other can not absolve him except they be as great as the three former: & that a third man may give authoritie vnto two to absolve, &c. That if a man be reiected by this censure of niddui and he know not who it is that hath reiected him, there is no other may absolve him but the Prince: but if he know who hath reiected him, then he that reiected, may absolve, though he be one of the people of the Land, or an other like him. They give speciall warning that whosoever will absolve or loose that which his neighbour hath bound must consider diligently whether he be equal vnto him whether he may be compared with him in wisedome, and that if he be not like vnto him in the feare of God and in greatnes that then the absolutiō be performed by two, &c. Many other are the superstitious devises about this matter, as touching those that are Ibidem, & Maimony in Thal. thor. vbi supra. reiected by an oth, touching those that are reiected by dreame, not to be absolved but by 10. persons, of such and such qualitie: touching the number of dayes both for neziphah and niddui; touching the stone to be left vpon the chest of him that dyes without absolution: touching cherem or anathema the second kinde of excommunication: to be Ioa Buxt. Epist. Heb. institut. c. 6 executed with candles lighted in the synagogue, and extinguished vpon the curse pronounced, to signify that the person so reiected is de∣prived of the light of heaven: touching their shamatha also, &c. In these censures of the Iewes there is as much superstition and impietie practised, as is by the Papists in their curses: and in this regard you had as much cause to have avoyded the Iewes syna∣gogue vsed by you, as we have to avoyd any place abused by the
Papists for their superstitious discipline. Lastly, the very place itself, the house of prayer or the syna∣gogue where the Iewes do assemble for their worship, is vnto them a holy place, and consequently according to your reaso∣ning pag. 178. before, is vnlawfull to be vsed, and to be avoyded as a very Idol, for the holynes that is put in the same. Their Thal∣mudicall canons require and enioyne them, Arba Tu∣rim, lib. O∣rachchaijm tract. beth haccene∣seth. sig. 151 R. Alphes in megillah c. 3. f. 356. not to laugh, jeast, or talk therein: not to cat or drink there; not to dresse themselves there: not to walk vp and downe there: not to go thither in the heat to avoyd the heat of the sunne: nor in time of rayne to avoyd a shewer: yet they hold it lawfull for the disciples of their Chacamim, their wise rabbines to eat and drink in that place: They hold it vnlawfull for a man to invent or devise any matter there except it be some work of almes, the redeeming of captives or the like. They allow not a man to mourne in that place, except it be for some great man of the citie, when as all the inhabitants of the citie be gathered to∣gether to lament him: They forbid men to meet one an other there for any necessary busines: but if they do meet there, they are required first to read a verse (of the Bible,) or to speak a word out of the Thalmud: but if they can neither read nor repeat any thing out of their traditionall bookes, then they are required to say vnto some childe, read me a verse, &c. that they may not seeme to have met there for any other necessary businesse. Their custome is to light candles there for honour, and to bring sweet herbes or flowres, &c. They esteeme their synagogue so holy, that they make it a dangerous matter to spit there: Thalmud Ierusalemy in Beracoth c. 3. fol. 6. col. 4. R Chalaphta ben Saul saith if a man neeze in prayer it is an evill signe to him. (R. Moses mikkotsi, saith if the spit be ready to arise it is to be swallowed, SMG. precepr. affir. 19.) R. Hanina telles how he saw a Rabbine coughing or neezing & laying his hand on his mouth but did not spit. R. Iochanan saith, he that spits in the synagogue, let him see that his coso. cup be cleane: or as R. Moses mikkotsi relates it, that his
ciso. bag or Chest be cleane: & this he expoundes of his body: How this may be done is she∣wed in the Thalmud by this rule that is there given: to spit be∣fore him is vnlawfull: to spit after him is lawfull: to spit on the right hand is vnlawfull: but on the left hand it is lawfull: R. Ie∣hoshuah ben Levi saith, he that spits in the house of the congre∣gation, is as if he did spit in the apple of his eye. R. Ionah saith, he that spits let him rubit out. R. Ieremie and R. Samuel say, he that prayes let him not spit till he goe 4 cubites from the place. R. Iose saith, he that spits let him not pray till he go 4. cubites from the place. These are the learned Iew doctours, and an∣cient Rabbines without whose help (as you say) we cannot well vnderstand the scriptures. To confirme and countenance the rule before mentioned, shewing at what side a man must spit in case of necessitie; it is alledged in the same place of the Thal∣mud, this is that which is written, a thousand shall fall at thy side. (ps. 90.) to wit, if this rule of spitting in right maner be duely observed. Thalmud Babylonic. in Schab∣bath. c. 2. fo. 32. R. Ismael the son of Eleazar saith, that for the wicked∣nes of two things or of two words the people of the earth do dy, because they call the holyark (aron) arna; and because they call the house of the congregation, the house of the folk or people; beth gnam: viz. because they do not in their speech ho∣nour the synagogue, with a holy title. Now these and many other the like superstitious observations do shew that the Iewes put as much and more holynes in their synagogue, then the papists do in their temples: for the Papists do not forbid men to walk vp and downe therein: they do not forbid men to fly thether to avoyd a shewer of rayne: they are not so scrupu∣lous about spitting there, &c. And therfore the blame that you would lay vpon vs for reteyning of such temples wherein super∣stitious persons have put holynes, doth redound vnto your owne reproofe and comes more heavily vpon your owne head for vsing the Iewes synagogue.
CHAP. XV. Touching the present meeting-house still reteyned by Mr. Ainsworth. Hen. Ains. FOr your 1. and 2. obiections from the houses wherin we meet: I have In the defense of our 6t. reason. before proved, they are not, neyther ever were Idolies, nor by any law of God to be destroyed, though Iewes or any, have worshiped in them. Answer. Io. Pa. AS you did formerly vse a Iewes synagogue for the place of your worship: so do you now presently vse the sy∣nagogue or meeting-house, where Mr. Iohnson and his people after your division and separation from them, did still vse to meete together for the publique service of God: And this meeting house according to your doctrine is an Idolie, or place of Idols, which by you ought to be avoyded as well as our temples. First, for the constitution of Mr. Iohnsons Church assembling in that place: by your testimonie and dealing therewith it must needes be false in as much as they did degenerate and prove ob∣stinate sinners, in your account: while you witnesse of them, that Animad. p. 48. their errour did eat out the very constitution of the church: that they Animadv. p. 129. departed from and spake evill of, and persecuted the truth and way of God, wherein they had once walked with you. You say that
Ibidem. p. 132. dayly in their publique doctrines and prayers they inveighed against the truth they formerly professed, wounded the consciences of the brethren & sought all occasions to draw men from the right way and practise of the Gospell. What should we doo, but shake of the dust of our feet against such authors of errours and peace breakers? Now such ob∣stinate & degenerate apostates, against whom men may shake of the dust of their feet, cannot by your owne confession be thetrue matter of a Church, nor yeeld a true constitution thereof: and being a false constitution set vp in stead of a true, you also the∣rein acknowleage it Counterp. p. 172. a very Idol. And as you thus make the body of their constitution in generall to be an Idol; so the se∣verall members in particular being according th your judge∣ment of them, wicked apostates, persisting in sin, they also by your writing are to be deemed Ibid. p. 144. Satans images, pictures of the divell and hellish representations, and consequently their meeting house an Idol-temple. Secondly, for the worship of that Church: you must needes confesse it to be Idolatrous also, vpō the former ground. For whereas you write that Coūterp. p. 142. 143. 144. 145. the bodies and soules of men are spiri∣tuall and living sacrifices, and the persons offred in the Church by the ministery of the Gospell, should be as the holy flock, as the flock of Ieru∣salem in the solemne feast, &c. The people of Mr. Iohnsons com∣pany being as you have accused them obstinate and degenerate apostates, persisting in wickednes, herevpon all that blame which you impute vnto the worship in the Church of England falles vpon their heads vpon your owne graunt; namely that they neither deserve to be layd on Gods Altar nor to be touched of any true Israelite in such respect, &c. that
the precious body and blood of Christ represented by bread and wine at his supper, is prostituted vnto the wicked and vnworthy receyvers in that church, &c. that baptisme is there given vnto the seed of the most vngodly, blasphemers & eni∣mies of Christ, vnto whom by no right it doth apperteyne: That there is a sacrilegious profanation of the holy mysteries, &c. That the brin∣ging of Satans seed into the Church, vnto the aliar of God may further be minded as a high degree of violating the second commandement, whereby all images, idols or similitudes whatsoever, of the Divils or mens invention or forming, are severely forbidden to be brought into Gods house, or vsed in his worship, &c. That they remayning in impenitency, &c. have no word or promise in scripture that Christ is the Priest or sacrificer of such worship or worshippers. And must not that place where all this false and Idolatrous worship hath bene performed, be acknowledged to be an Idol-temple? yet isit now your temple. Thirdly, for the ministers of Mr. Iohnsons company. I Pag. 26. shewed them before out of your owne writings to be Idolles: and you deny it not. And it may further appeare by that which you vvrite against their Animadv p. 59.—67. ministerie executed by such as have not rightly bene called by the Church whereof they stand ministers, &c. Fourthly for their governement; you call it a Ibid. p. 36 38. 42. prelacie: a new established hierarchie: a spirituall tyrannie: and such governours, you hold to be Arrow against Idol. p. 19. Idolles. Besides Mr. Iohnson vsing the censure of suspension which heretofore you held to be an H.B. disc. p. 234. & 236. Idol, his go∣vernement in that respect is idolatrous according to your pro∣fession. Novv there being so many Idolles in the constitution, ministery, vvorship and governement of that Church, the 4. maine heads of transgression imputed by you vnto the Church of England, hovv can you blame vs for our vse of temples, whē as yourselves even to this houre do still reteyne that meeting house, where all these Idols have bene discovered by you? If you will distinguish betwixt Idols, whereof some cause ruine to the temples, and others not: shew vs a cleare warrant from the scriptures for such distinction, & you shall then finde hovv many wayes it will returne vpon your owne heads. And besides you cannot help yourself with any such distinction, be∣cause you do already here affirme in expresse words, that these houses are not to be destroyed though Iewes or any have worship∣ped in them. So that though Indians had vvorshipped the divell in his ovvne person in your synagogue neither that nor any other of the grossest Idolatry should have hurt your priviledged place, though far lesse Idolatries might tumble dovvne our Churches. If you vvill send vs still vnto the defense of your 6t. reason; you may see it before refuted and besides, that vvhich you there sayd of private dvvelling houses, vvill not serve to excuse your plate of ordinary and publique assembly for the vvorship of God.
If you or any of yours should except, that this your synago∣guevvas not built by Antichrist, nor dedicate to Antichristian Idolatry: that vvill not help you: you cut of yourself from ha∣ving any excuse thereby, vvhiles in your reply vnto Mr. Ber. ma∣king such a like ansvver vnto you, you say in effect, that Counterp. p. 199. the law of God makes no inquiry, by vvhom such places have bene built, but vvhether Idolaters have set vp their Idolatry there and vvor∣shipped in such places. Yea if your arguing be sound, if the Church of God should build a nevv temple for his lavvfull service & vvorship, and if the Papists or other Idolaters should by violence take the same from them and vse it but one yeare or one moneth for their Idolatrous service: by your doctrine it could never be lawfully employed againe vnto the service of Christe by any true Christians. And therfore by the same reason is your meeting house to be abolished and destroyed, having bene defiled with so many Idolles. CHAP. XVI. Touching almes receyved publiquely in an Idol-Temple. Hen. Ains. FOr your 3. it is an obiection of a former adversrie, and here∣tofore publickly answered. But the answers, you say, are in suffi∣cient. For, the difference between the ordinary publick worship in such places, & the occasional receiving of almes therin by the poore, cannot (you say) without manifest untrueth be affirmed or applied to the matter in hand. Your reason is, the distribution of this almes, is not occasional, but an ordinary publik work of mercie, &c. I answer; The publik worship of the Church is Ecclesiastical, the almes here spoken of, is political and civil: to put no difference between these, is manifest errour and ignorance; and let all men of knowledge, be judges. Againe, peoples of all Religions or of no Religion, which never goe thither for religious exercise, yet upō occasion of the almes there given, goe thither to receive it in the winter, one working day in the week, from the hands of the Magistrates deputies: to say there is no difference be∣tween
these things, argueth want of iudgement. To the 2. difference which we put, between the benevolence of a Church to the saincts, (the sacrifice spoken of Phil. 4.18.) and the re∣leef of a citie, given to all poor people without respect of their religion: you answer, the benevolence given to the poore of any Religion, is Heb. 13.16. Gal. 6.10. 2. Cor. 9.13 a sacrifice, &c. And this almes is not the releef of a citie, but cheifly of a Church, collected publickly every Lords day, in the congregation of the Saints, &c. Repl. First, for the scriptures which you cite, they imply private benevolence also, and not publik onely: so upon this your doctrine, it see∣meth that if any of your people should for their necessitie receive pri∣vate almes of papists or other heretiks, they should not receive a ciuil benevolence but an Ecclesiastical, and so have a Religious communion with their sacrifices. If thus you think, I pray you tell me in your next. Secondly, you say not wel nor rightly, that this is not the releef of a citie, (as we oppose Citie or political estate, to Church or Ecclesiastical estate) For 1. the Magistrats of the citie, are not necessarily of the Church, but onely such as will. 2. This collection is not by the appointment of the Church (who have an ecclesiastical collection by their Deacons,) but by the appointmēt of the Magistrate. 3. They collect it not from the Church onely in their congregation, but from all the citie also, by every street and house, of all the inhabitants that wil give: of which not one among many, are members of the Church. 4. They collect it not for the Church, but for the citie: and so for the poore of the Church, not considered as members of the Church, but as members of the common wealth. 5. The distributors appointed by the Magistrates, are not necessarily members, much lesse Deacons of the Church. 6. And they to whom it is distributed, are the poore of all sorts, not in respect as they are members of any Church: but as they are poore and dwelt for a time in the citie. These things some of them my self know, the rest I have heard of such as are better acquain∣ted with the State, to be certainly true. Now let all that know what politicall and ecclesiastical meaneth, judge between you and vs, of what nature this benevolence is.
To our 3. difference, between the solemne appointed worship ofGod by the Church, & the private duties of thankfulnes, salutation, &c you say, the duties of godly thankfulnes and blessing in the name of the Lord are and ought to be here performed: and that they are not pri∣vate duties but publik, as is this almes, &c. I answer: By this your plea, you would seem to prove an ecclesiastical communion in publick prayer, which the dutch Church of this citie should have with all the poore in the towne; even the most irreligious, profane and heretical. And would you thus grace their communion to disgrace our poore? But indeed, you manifestly turne away from the matter in hand. For you deny not the difference which we put, neyther in trueth can you. And as for any publik blessing, it is knowen that the Magistrates de∣puties performe this busines without any publik prayer or blessing, eyther before or after. Neyther do they require of all or any of the people any prayer or blessing publick or private: neyther doe the people performe it otherweise then by thankfull obeysance of ech one that receiveth it: as is vsually doen at other times, and in other places of the citie, for like favours. Vnto the question made in that book, about the lawfulnes to walk vp and down in idol-temples, as they vse in Paules, &c. You answer: that in idol-temples where idolservice is stil ordinarily performed, we cannot lawfully walk vp and down, as men vse to doe in Pauls: for woe is denounced to men by whom Mat. 18.7 scandals doe come. Repl. Be∣hold how you who keep Idolies to worship God in (as Antichrist con∣secrated them to that end,) and have so pleaded before for those nurse∣ries of idolatrie: can now against others, denounce woe, as causing scandals, even for walking vp and down in them. But by this your answer it seemeth that eyther the temples in Rome and Spaine, where ordinarily Masse is sung, are in your judgment no idol-temples, nor their service idolatrie: or else, you think it vnlawfull to walk in those temples. If thus you hold, when you shall so signify, you shall hear what I wil further say vnto it: and to your question about Baals tem∣ple also.
Answer. Io. Pa. TO convince you of partialitie in condemning our vse of temples, I alledged your own vse of the same, while your poore do also publiquely worship God in the same temples, if they do but publiquely blesse them in the name of God, of whom they do publiquely receive those almes in such places. And here I See before pag. 27. refuted three distinctions which you vse to excuse your selves in this matter. I shewed the er∣rour of your first distinction, in that you made the receyving of the almes in this place to be occasional, and the worship of the Church to be ordinary, &c. Now you answer, that the pu∣blique worship of the Church is ecclesiastical, the almes here spoken of, is political & civil, &c. And herevnto I reply. 1. I do not herein so much blame your manifest errour & ignorance, your want of judgement in the distinction as you made it at first, as I do now blame your want of vpright and honest dealing in changing and altering the distinction, in putting political and civil in stead of occasional: As there is a plaine difference betwixt betwixt Ecclesiasticall and political, so is there also betvvixt po∣liticall & occasional: for many things are political which are not occasional, but ordinary: let all men of knowledge, be judges. 2, vvhereas you say that people of all religion or of no religion do receive this almes, this doth not excuse the fals hood of your first distinction in making the almes to be occasional: for even atheists or heretiques or schismatiques that never go thi∣ther to heare the word of God, may yet observe an ordinary & set time of the almes, and be willing to receive the same in a pu∣blique & solemne maner & not onely occasionally. 3. Though it were very grosse, if you should plainely affirme that this al∣mes here spoken of was occasional; yet to colour the matter a little you vse an absurd phrase which might insinuate as much vnto the simple, in saying of the poore that vpon occasion of the almes there given, they go thither to receive it, &c. for you might as wel say touching the publique ordinary worship of
the Church, that vpon occasion of the word preached the godly go to heare, &c. And where then is your difference betwixt occasionall and ordinary? 4, I will make even your self judge of the matter: for when you speak without preiudice & conten∣tion, then you do rightly interpret this word occasional, and do expound Annot. on Exo. 21.13. occasionally delivered to be offred by chance: an exam∣ple whereof is set downe in Deut. 19.5. And so according to your owne exposition of the word this almes cannot be occasionall, seing it is not an vnexpected thing that is by accident or chance received, but an ordinary, solemne thing purposely given and sought for at an appoynted time & place. In the refutation of your second distinction, the first thing which I See before pag. 27. noted in opposition therevnto was, that not onely the benevolence given to the ministers or Saints of Christe, but that also which is given to the poore of any religion whatsoever, one or other, is a service and Heb. 13.16 Gal. 6 10. 2. Cor. 9.13 sacrifice of sweet odour, &c. And what have you sayd herevnto? 1, in repeating my reply, you leave out those words not onely, which shewed the very poynt wherein I opposed your answer, and say nothing at all vnto it: but smoothly passe it over without any defence: I desire the reader to observe your cunning therein. 2, In stead of answering that which was plainely set downe, you make enquirie about a devised thing seeming so vnto you which is not set downe nor meant at all: you ask me whether I think that if any of our people for their necessitie should receive private almes of Pa∣pists or other heretiques they should not receive a civil bene∣volence but an ecclesiasticall, &c. VVherevnto I answer that I do not thinke they should receive an ecclesiasticall bene∣volence: yea further if our people should privately joyne with such in prayer vnto God, yet would I not account this an ecclesiasticall communion or action. And though the scrip∣tures I cited may be applyed to private benevolence also and not publique onely: yet doth not the citing of them imply that I think private benevolēce to be an ecclesiasticall matter. what meane you to runne away from question by such vaine shifts?
The other thing which I noted in opposition to your second distinction, was: that this almes we speak of is not the releefe of a citie, but cheefely the benevolence of a Church, &c. Herevnto you reply that I say not well nor rightly, &c. Your reasons are divers. First you say, the Magistrates of the citie are not necessarily of the Church, but onely such as will. I answer, 1. This hinders not but the almes spoken of may be cheefely the benevolence of a Church: even as other actions may be actions of the church, though the Magistrates be not of the Church. Shew I pray you, how this your proposition may be applyed against my as∣sertion vvhat if the Magistrates here were all necessarily of the Church should this make the almes to be then the be∣nevolence of the Church? should this either further or hinder the thing in question? your loose allegation can no way be applyed vnto this matter, either one way or other. Secondly you say, this collection is not by the appointment of the Church (who have an other ecclesiasticall collection by their deacons) but by the appointment of the Magistrate. I answer, that there be many ecclesiasticall actions, which are done by the appoyntmēt of the Magistrate, as the holding of an ecclesiasticall Synod: the observation of solemne and religious fasts not by the appoynt∣ment of the Church but of the Magistrate: yea the ordinary worship of God in preaching the word and other services here are and 2. Chro. 8.14. & 14.4. ought to be commanded by the Magistrates: And now according to your vnsound reasoning these and such like actiōs should not be ecclesiasticall. You ought to have considered that as in these so in the almes spoken of, because they are ad∣ministred publiquely of the Church and at the exhortation of the ministers going with the same, they may therfore be called the benevolence of a Church, though appoynted by the Ma∣gistrates. Thirdly you plead that they collect it not from the Church onely in their congregation, but from all the citie also, by every street and house, &c. I answer, 1. In that this almes is ordinarily and
publiquely gathered every Lords day in the congregation, and that the greatest part thereof is collected in this solemne maner in the Church, the other collection in the streets being but sel∣dome in comparison of this; this is enough to confirme as much as I affirme, namely that this almes is not the releefe of a citie but cheefely the benevolence of a Church, &c. All reason re∣quires that ech thing should receive denomination of that which is principall and cheef therein. 2, even that which the deacons distribute is by them collected for a great part the∣reof, of such as are no members of the Church: and this not onely in respect of the strangers which come into their con∣gregations, but also privately collected from such as dayly get some thing into the poore mans box vpon occasion of bargia∣nes with whosoever. And thus according to your reasoning that which the deacons distribute should be the releef of a citie, & not cheefely the benevolence of a Church, because they do not collect it from the church onely in their congregation, &c. 3, even that almes which is collected in your owne Church, is not from the members of your Church onely: but though an 100, strangers, infidelles in your account, come into your congregation and should publiquely contribute with the rest into your Church treasure, though it was heretofore Refut of Giff. p 147. condem∣ned by H. Barow) yet do you now accept and allow the same. If this almes thus receyved among you be ecclesiasticall, then have you no reason to deny this other almes we speak of, to be the benevolence of a Church, in respect of the persons from whom it is collected. Fourthly, you argue, that they collect it not for the Church, but for the citie: and so for the poore, &c. I answer, that it may be an Ecclesiastical almes if it be collected of the Church, though not for the Church. As those prayers which are publiquely made by the Church
Ezr. 6.10. Ier. 29.7. Mat. 5.44. 1. Tim. 2.1.2. for strangers, and for such as are no members of the Church, are to be accounted an Ecclesiasticall service, and a worship of the Church, though they be made not for the Church, but for the citie, for frendes or enimies without: evenso the almes collected of the Church in a solemne assembly on the Lords day, and given as a part of their publique service vnto God, are to be esteemed a benevolence of the Church or a Church-service, though they be collected for such as are in mi∣sery, though not of the Church; seing the Churches (as well as private persons) are Esa. 58.7. Neh. 5.5. Heb. 13.2.3 1 Thes. 4.12. bound to shew mercy vnto them with∣out. Fiftly, you argue that the distributors appoynted by the Magi∣strats, are not necessarily members, much lesse deacons of the Church. But where is the proofe of this consequence, that therfore this almes is not an Ecclesiasticall benevolence? If your Church should agree together publiquely to collect in your congrega∣tion and then to send the same almes vnto any in affliction, and not by any deacons or members of your Church but by some other honest and trusty persons without; should this almes now ceasse to be a Church service, or an Ecclesiasticall bevevo∣lence? VVhat colour of reason can you bring for this? Sixtly, you say, they to whom it is distributed, are the poore of all sorts, not in respect as they are members of any Church, but as they are poore and have dwelt for a time in the citie. Ans. This reason is the same in effect with the 4th that went before, and an idle re∣petition of the same, and is before answered. And now I do willingly agree with you in this that all who know what poli∣tical and ecclesiastical meaneth, judge betweene you and vs of what nature this benevolence is, and whether it be not as I sayd cheefly the benevolence of a Church, &c. But suppose I should grant you, that this almes were merely civill, and not the benevolence of a Church, yet this doth no∣thing weaken our maine obiection against you: for 1. VVhe∣ther it be ecclesiasticall or civill, if your people do publiquely in the name of God blesse those that so mercifully distribute vnto them in an Idol-temple as you account it; then must you nee∣des acknowledge, that there is a lawfull worshipping of God in an Idol-temple, which yet you condemne in all other churches of God. 2, you cannot deny but that this distribution of
almes which your people do receive in this temple, is a solemne publique action performed for the glory and service of God by them that administer: And do you then hold it more lawfull to communicate with such almoners as yourself note to be sometimes no mēbers of the Church, then to joyne in the ser∣vice of God with a true Church in the same place? If it were an ecclesiasticall action of the deacons of the reformed dutch Church, distributing out of their Church treasurie as they do vnto the members of their owne Church, would you then cō∣demne the members of your Church for receiving the same of them? 3. By your doctrine this temple where your poore receive this almes, ought to be ruinated, either burnt or other∣wise broken downe, and so in your judgement is vnlawfully reteyned even for this vse of distributing to the poore therein: Now if notwithstanding this vnlawfull reteyning hereof you can yet joyne with others in vsing this place to such purpose of distributing almes therein as it ought not to be employed vnto: why can you not as well joyne with others in the other vse of hearing Gods word therein? The Deut. 12.23. legal commandemēt of destroying Idol-temples, doth as wel abolish them from being almes houses as from being houses of prayer. And where then is your dispensation to vse them for receiving of almes, rather then for receyving of spirituall instructions there∣in? If you plead that your vse of them is onely a civil vse, so as meates sacrificed to Idols were to be reteyned: This cannot help you, because 1. Cor. 10.25. things sacrificed to Idols need not to be burnt and abolished, but by your doctrine our temples should be abolished, and destroyed, and so consequently made vnfit to meet or assemble in even for civil vses. A waken your con∣science Mr. Ainsworth, and examine yourself, whether you be not guilty of partialitie, in these your contrary doctrines and practises, which cannot agree one with an other. And thinke that God knockes at the dore of your conscience by these ad∣monitions: and despise not the counsell that is given vnto you in his name.
As for your third distinction, between the solemne appoynted worship of God by the Church, and the private dueties of thankfulnes salutation, &c. I shevved that
this distinction also could not truely be applyed vnto the matter in hād for the dueties of godly thankfulnes and blessing which are and ought to be here performed, are not private dueties but publique even as is this almes that is alwayes publiquely administred in the presence of a great multitude assembled together. Herevnto you ansvver againe that by this plea, I would seem to prove an Ecclesiasticall cōmunion in publique prayer, which the dutch Church of this citie should have with all the poore in the towne, even the most irreligious, profane and heretical, &c. But for reply vnto this. 1. I observe how you againe leaving that which is plai∣nely set downe, do faine matter for yourself to answer, and ima∣gine a semblance, a seeming vnto you, which can by no meanes be justly collected from my words. For though I sayd, the poore do blesse publiquely in the name of the Lord those that distri∣bute vnto them, yet doth not this prove a communion in pu∣blique prayer which the dutch church should have with all such. 2, though I had sayd much more: if I had sayd that the dutch Church had bene all present: that this almes had bene given by their deacons in their name: that there had bene solemne prayer conceived by the deacons at the delivery there∣of: that all the poore had sayd Amen vnto it and againe blessed them publiquely in the name of the Lord, yet would not this inferre such an ecclesiasticall communion of the dutch Church with the profane & heretical poore, as you accuse me for going about to prove. Are not many irreligious, idolatrous and pro∣fane people oftentimes present at your ecclesiastical assemblies hearing your sermons, and saying Amen vnto your prayers: & doth this prove an ecclesiasticall communion of your Church withall those profane persons that receive instruction from you? where then is your separation? But if all this do not prove that you hold communion with such persons: then much lesse doth that which I sayd prove such a communion of the Dutch Church with the profane, as you would draw from my words.3, neither do I mention this receyving of almes to disgrace your poore, as you mention it, but to reprove your partialitie, who seeking to disgrace and condemne all the Churches of Christ for the vse of their temples, do yet for your proffit allow your poore to vse the very same temples in receyving of almes. You say further, that I manifestly turne from the matter in hād: for I deny not the difference which you put, neither in truth can. But I pray you, is that to turne from the question, when I shewed that the difference or distinction which you brought could not be truely applyed to this matter in hand? And what though your difference alledged by you be true in itself: is it not reproofe & shame enough vnto you that it cannot be truely applyed vnto the present controversie? Is not the misapplication of a true distinction vnsound dealing, and an abusing of the reader? Though I deny not a difference betwixt solemne appoynted worship, and the private dueties of thankfulnes, salutation, &c. yet I deny that the blessing in the name of God whereof I spoke is any private thankfulnes or salutation: and what proffit can you then here make of this your distinction?
But you proceed and say, As for any publique blessing, it is knowne that the Magistrates deputies performe this busines, without any publick prayer or blessing, either before or after. I answer, 1, it is enough, for proofe of that I sayd, if the people receyving the almes do pray or blesse in the name of God, those that distri∣bute vnto them: if your poore do so much at the receit there∣of then do they openly and publiquely worship God in the place, which you account an Idol-temple. 2, as for the distributours of this almes, there is the lesse need for them to make any publique prayer, because they begin there distribu∣tion instantly and immediately after the sermon is ended, and after the publique prayers of the minister and the Church: which prayers being in the same place may also serve for the sanctification of the almes then distributed. And may not the consciences of your people be touched and smitten in them selves to consider how they stay out of the Church till all thespirituall almes of instruction for the soule be distributed and ended, and then to come into the same place immediately, just when the corporall almes is to be reached forth vnto them? 3. The publique collection and giving of almes even in your owne Church after your sermon, is performed without any publique prayer or blessing made by your deacons, as is testi∣fyed vnto me: doth it therfore ceass to be an ecclesiasticall and solemne part of Gods worship? You say moreover, that neither do they require of all or any of the people any prayer or blessing publique or private. And what though the almoners require it not? yet as I shewed you Pag. 26. be∣fore from divers Phil. 4.19.20. 2. Tim. 1.16. 2. Cor. 9.12.13. scriptures, God requireth this duety of publi∣que thanksgiving and blessing in his name vpon such occasion. But those testimonies you passe by and say nothing at all vnto them. Againe you adde: Neither do the people performe it otherwise then by thankfull obeysance of ech one that receyveth it, &c. But this you say, is not true for all that receyve it: for there are some which vpon the receit do straightway open their mouthes and pray for a blessing and reward vnto those that give this almes vnto them: And so ought your people to do according to those short formes of prayer vsed in the scripture, ps. 129.8. Ruth. 2.4. The blessing of the Lord be vpon you: or we blesse you in the name of the Lord: And besides, I propounded this obiection at first by way of suppositiō saying, if you will allow your people to blesse them in the name of the Lord, &c. And to this you answer nothing: Tell vs therfore at last: if your people should thus breefely call vpon the name of God for a blessing vpon those that minister publi∣quely vnto their wants at the same time, vvould you then be content? Touching your reply made vnto the answer vvhich I gave vnto your question about vvalking vp and dovvne in Idol-temples I do observe further.
1. You say nothing at all in refutation of it: but onely wish me to behold how I who keep Idolies to worship God in, &c. can nowagainst others, denounce woe, as causing scandalles, even for walking vp and downe in them: vvel, this I behold and hold to be most equall: considering that the temples I pleaded for, were such as are purged from Idolatry, and are not reteyned for that false worship wherevnto they were consecrated by Antichriste, but are become nurseries of true godlines: whereas the temples wherein the Idols and Idolatrous service are still reteyned and dayly practised, cannot lawfully be frequented nor walked in as men vnnecessarily vse to do in Pawles, &c. For those that should see you enter into such an Idol-temple, might easily conceive that you went to heare a masse therein, and so they be confirmed in errour, & you thereby incurie the Mat. 18.7 woe denoun∣ced by Christe against Scandalles. 2. I may here justly admonish you to behold how you that cō∣dēne our vse of tēples purged frō Idolatry, do yet in a cōtrary ex¦treme allow your people a vse of tēples, which by your professiō are still polluted with the practise of dayly Idolatrie: evē the tē∣ples of this citie are in your accoūt Idol-tēples, & the read prayr vsed therin, is in your eyes a detestable Idol, a goldē calfe, &c. yea in your writings you incline to allow your people the vse of the tēples where popish Idolatry is in heynous degree exercised
3. VVhereas you seeme to doubt whether I think that it is vnlawfull to vvalk in the temples in Rome and Spaine, vvhere ordinarily masse is sung: telling me also that I shall heare what you will further say vnto it when I have signifyed vnto you, if thus I hold, &c. All this is very vaine and idle, for vvhen I told you plainely before, as yourself also repeat, that in idol-temples where idol-service is still ordinarily performed we cannot lawfully walk vp and downe as men vse to do in Pauls: was not this enough to signify that I held the temples of Rome and Spaine to be vnlawfull for such vse? or what colour of reason had you to imagine that I should not think the Romish and Spanish temples to be Idol temples and their service, idolatrie? This vaine demurre seemes to be nothing els but an excuse or shift to avoyd the writing of that which you were ashamed tovtter concerning this poynt. 4. VVhereas I demanded the like thing of you, whether you held it lawfull for men so to have walked vp and downe in the house of Baal, and there to have receyved almes as your people do in these temples whereof we speak. To this likewise you give no answer but take time to consider of it. VVell, in the meane time vntill you have taken better advise, see vvhat an vnworthy practise you already staine yourself vvithall. You that condemne our temples to be See be∣fore, p. 165. merely and properly idolies, yea very Idols: you that condemne our reteyning of them for necessary vse, do yet for your proffit vse them to vvalke in, to receive almes in, &c. Though H. Barow vvrite that Discov. p. 134. God allowes no vse at all either ci∣vill or ecclesiasticall of such Idolatrous places: yet contrary to your profession you suffer your people to transgresse for a morsell of bread, by reteyning at least a civil vse of these places: In the middes of your invectives and dispute against them you allovv your disciples to go into these abominable sties, as Barovv Discov. p. 141. calles them: togather vp the crummes vnder the table in Devilles houses, as yourself do Before. pag. 218. call them. Is it not strange that Chri∣stian men, and such as separate from other best Christians in the world wheresoever, should yet be so familiar with devilles, as to creep into the bodies of very Idols or Devilles, to fetch their meate out of their vncleane stomackes and bellies? yea the Ie∣wish Rabbines whom I mention, because you honour them so much, Arba tu∣rim, halac. Tsedakah, or treat. of almes, sig. 254. Thalmud in Babha bathra c. 1. Fol. 10. teach that it is not lawful for an Israelite to receive any almes of an Idolater openly, vnlesse it be in case of necessitie, (which respect in our vse of temples you judge to be a carnal consideration.) And though a Prince or King of the gentiles should send any money vnto them for an almes, though they would not turne it back for peace sake, but receive it to avoyd offence, yet are they to give the same againe vnto some poore of the gentiles, in secret so that the King may not heare of it. How much more ashamed would they be to receive such an almes not onely from Idolaters openly, but from out of the publique Idolie, yea Idol itself, as you professe to doe?
CHAP. XVII. Touching the vvaverings of such as impugne our Temples. Hen. Ains. TO your last observations, of such as heretofore have written against these idol temples, and after that wavered, or chan∣ged their mindes: First, Mr. Barrow (whose writings you mention) wavered not nor changed his mind, but was constant in this, that Idol temples were to be destroyed: and not to be vsed for places of Gods worship: let his writings be viewed. As for others whom you speak of: if they have changed their mindes, I leave you if you please, to demande the reasons of them∣selves. I am to answer for my self, according to the grounds which I mainteine by the scriptures: which if you cannot take away by the word of God; the weaknes of men will litle availe you. And for such amongst our selves as walk not aright, we shall look vnto them as there is cause. If I should take this course with you, to gather the varietie of things written about religion by men of your side, and the change of their judgments afterward, & their weak walkings, &c and put them vpon you to answer: you should have work more then ynough. And how justly you retort my words vsed to you about read prayer: and apply them to this of the Temples: let any indifferent persons judge. For I mainteine our reasons set down in our Apologie & refute your answers given vnto them: but with that question of read prayer, you medle not: though it came in among the synns she∣wed in my argument vnto you, about the causes of our separation.
Answer. Io. Pa. FOure examples of your waverings were observed by me. The first instance of H. Barow his wavering, you deny not, but do in part explane it: The peece of paper affixed to the Discov. p. 133. margent of his booke shewes it more plainely; that his minde became doubtfull if not changed in this poynt, na∣mely, though he held our temples ought to be plucked downe, yet not with such detestation to be vtterly destroyed, as these Idols which had worship given vnto them, but that the idola∣trous shapes being vtterly abolished, the stuffe of these syna∣gogues, as the stone, tymber, lead, yron, &c. might be converted to civill and honest vses, &c. Now those that saw him wave∣ring in this part and doubting whether he had detested where God hath not detested, had just cause to take warning hereby, that they should not rashly hearken to such a person who in all his writings powres forth a flood of detestation against the lawful communion of the Churches of Christe. The second and third instancee of Mr Iohnsons wavering, & Mr. Robbinsons recantation, you deny not. You leave me to de∣mand the reasons of themselves: you say you are to answer for yourself, &c. But is not the case strangely altered? Have not both these laboured to answer for you; Mr. Iohnson in his answer to Mr. White, seeking to excuse & diminish the fault of your apo∣stasy obiected to you; Mr. Robinson also in many poynts seeking to defend your cause in his book against Mr. Bernard? And have you now never a word to answer for them? Is not this ingra∣tefull dealing with your frends? Nay rather take heed that you become not ingratefull vnto God, by neglecting his mercy which he shewes vnto you, in setting these examples of your old frends before you; that in them you might learne to turne from your errour vnto the Lord and to the communion of his people. The fourth example of wavering which is observed was in
the people of your owne congregation, together with your to∣leration of the same. Of this you say, And for such amongst our selves as walk not right, we shall look vnto them as there is cause. But who sees not what a faint answer this is? for 1, when as I had shewed that divers of your people did not walk according to your profession: they frequenting the places which you call Idol-temples and teach men to avoyd them as execrable, as de∣villes houses: was there not a cause for you to look vnto such, whō so long you had let alone? yea or have you to this houre brought them to publique repentance after so many yeares, when as they have publiquely and openly vsed such places? sup∣pose they did now abstaine from those temples, yet according to your See be∣fore. p. 36. & 121. owne writing against me you are holden in the cords of your trangression, and this sin remaines vpon you till it be purged and broken of by repentance: your owne Luk. 13.3.5. Mark. 1.15. Act. 20.21. & 26.18. allegations of scripture do serve to condemne yourself herein. As Cains murder cleaved vnto him so long as he repented not, suppose he slew no more men after Abel: so the guilt of this sin in fre∣quenting devilles houses according to your profession, doth still cleave vnto you so long as there is no repentance for it, suppose the practise should ceasse. 2, But doth this practise ceasse among you? No not that also: VV. S. in speciall whom I before noted vnto you, is seene of many still openly and publiquely frequenting these temples which you so plead against: yea & professeth before divers that he will con∣tinue so to practise. I did before in my former writing manifest your notorious partialitie herein, and you cannot either deny or defend it: and yet after a yeares warning you continue in the same halting course, tolerating that among yourselves for which you separate from vs, and thus have doubled the guilt of your partiality: let all men of conscience judge what sincerity there is in your course. 3, what doth it help you by vaine ar∣guments and pretences to seek the ruine and rasing of our tem∣ples, whiles other of your owne societie do do help to repaire our temples, as I shewed you
Pag. 29. before? The stroke of your
hammer makes a great sound, yet it breakes nothing in our temples: but the stroke of some of your peoples hammers and axes have done good service vnto vs in making our temple fit for our vse. 4, as for your owne person in particular, do you not remember that you and Mr. Th. your elder have bene content to come vnto our temple, to present yourselves before our Eldership, & to be examined and heard what you could say in an ecclesiasticall controversie in the case of C. B. to give evi∣dence or light in the tryall of that matter? And therfore seing you confesse the triall and examination of such causes to be Animad. vers. p. 49. 50. workes of the Sabath day, holy and religious actions, as well as the propheticall and priestly office of Christe, it may hereby appeare that you also by your owne example do build that which you seek to break downe, in that you have voluntarily come into an Idol-temple as you call it and this not for a civil but a holy and religious action. Thus also have sundry others of your people done, in comming to beare witnesse in such cases. But you obiect, that if you should take this course with vs, to∣gather the varietie of things written about religion by men of our side & the change of their judgements afterward, and their weak wal∣kings, &c. put them vpon vs to answer: I should have work more then ynough. Answer. 1, whatsoever pretences you make to the contrary, yet is this thing done by yourself: and few or none have done it so much as you: Throughout your Counter∣poyson, there be abundant examples hereof. VVhen you so bitterly inveigh against the hellish errors taught by the transfor∣med ministers, to make men keep communion with Belial, as you speak: you say, Fore∣speech to the Coun∣terpoys. worthy it is to be observed how the ministers of En∣gland are come to contradict and depart from their owne grounds for to mainteyne their corrupt estate. And is it not also as lawfull & as worthy a thing for vs to observe how the ministers of the se∣paration are come to contradict themselves, to depart from their owne grounds, &c. you alledge, that Ibidem. men will hardly be a known of the manifold evills & gross corruptions, that prevayl in
their assemblies: That therfore you are forced to produce their owne writers to witness with you: to complayne of the sins that reigne among them. Even so because you will hardly be a known of the manifold evills and gross corruptions that prevayl in your assemblie, therfore are we forced to produce your owne writers as Mr. Iohnson & Mr. Robinson that complayn of the sins that reign among you, &c. And this we do, to this end, (to vse your owne words in the same place) that if you will yet resist, the world may see, that you are condemned by yourselves. Againe in the next leafe vnto your preface, in the Table or Direction to some principall things conteyned in your counterpoyson, you note the Testimonies of the ministers of England against the estate of that Church, and refer vs vnto more places and pages of your book for those testimonies, then vnto any other matter in your ta∣ble: hereby you acknowledg such testimonies to be among the principal things of your writings, & to be looked after & sought for oftener and in more places of your booke, then any other principall matter conteyned therein. In your answer to Mr. B. you Coun∣terpo. pag. 153. 155. note his changing and weak walking, &c. Shall these observations in you be
principall matters; and shall they be of no regard, of no worth, nor yet to be endured, when we observe the like matters against you? 2, there is not the like reason that I should be required to answer for all the differences and contradictions that have bene or are betwixt the ministers that are of the same religion with me: they being so many thou∣sands, and such as for the most of them I never saw their faces nor so much as heard of their names; whereas these whom I obiect vnto you are but three or foure in all: and not onely so but some of them such as have already answered for you: so that both for number and bond of thankfulnes, you both bet∣ter may and ought to answer for them. 3, the thing which I obiect here vnto you is not so much your disagreement and differences, as your inexcusable and blinde partialitie in the same, whiles you suffer such things amōg yourselves for which you do condemne, disclaime and renounce the communion ofother churches: This vnchristian dealing I shewed to be cōtrary to prov. 16.17. the High way of the vpright man, which you had poynted at with your finger. Mr. Ainsworth, if you can finde the like vnconscionable partialitie in me, then presse me with it, and call for answer: If I teach men to separate from the Churches of Christe, for those very things which I practise my self and wink at in others, then let me beare the shame of such evill dealing. In the meane time consider that this cloke of par∣tialitie is the robe of confusion wherewith you aray and bewray yourself & your profession. Moreover, as for Mr. H. his sermon, and how justly I retort your words to me vsed about read prayer, & apply them to the practise of Mr. Iohnson and Robinson contrary to you in the question of temples, I desire also with you, that any indifferent persons judge. For I vrge you with their practise which your∣self cannot deny: you tell me of a matter which I have shewed to be otherwise. You tell me of read prayer which is not the question betwixt vs at this time; whereas I vrged you with your differences about the temples, which you cannot deny to be the present question betwixt vs. As for your reasons in your Apologie & my answers, and your disorderly bringing in of read prayer in your maine argument sent vnto me, there is enough sayd Chap. 2. before, wherevnto I refer the reader. CHAP. XVIII. Of some other differences. Hen. Ains. TO the other things which I signified we misliked in you: you answer in general: that the question betwixt vs is not about all things wherin we differ, but onely about those things which we hold to be just causes of renouncing your communion. You say, Our separation or schisme is a double iniquitie and an errour of errors, &c. and you would have the axe of our separation layd vnto the root of your religion, &c. and you account all other differences, to
be a wandring from the question. Herevpon I answer, that I am willing to hold onely vnto the mayn causes of our separation, and to let other particulars rest, til this question be ended. For as you began to write, so I gave you to choose, & stil give you, what things to reason of: & I mislike not your choise. For as I would not willingly abide in any error, so much lesse in an error of errors: though I am yet perswaded: it is your great syn so to call it: but let the word of God be judge between vs. Now for our separation, I set you down an argument fortified with many scrip∣tures & reasons: against which, you have not alleged anyone word of God: let your former answer be viewed. So mine errour of errours if such it be, must remaine with me stil, for my conscience cannot be convinced but by the word of God. You allege our renouncing of your communion: and that eyther is not (as before I shewed you) or it is as you stood one with the Church of England in the synns thereof, wherin we with you were all once intangled. But God of his grace hath given vs repentance vnto life, and we have manifested the par∣ticulars: you have not so doen, therfore (for ought that we know) your synns remaine vpon you. Yea you disclaime our separation as a schisme, in your pulpit, in private, and in printed works: how can we now give you the right hand of fellowship, seing repentance from dead works, is one of the Heb. 6.1. principles of the doctrine of Christ? And for this your particular congregation, here gathered, you cannot say we re∣nounce it or separate from it, vvho vvere never of it: but if any se∣paration be, I have before shewed it is first vpon yourselves. I shal not need therfore at this time to make any reply vnto your particular answers vnto the differences propounded. Onely for the present, I put you in minde that you have not as yet alleged any one vvord of God for your festival dayes, mariage by the minister consistorie, or commu∣nion of your members vvith an other Church, vvorship, ministe∣rie, &c. so far differing from yours in appearance. But vvhen these things shal come to discussing, I hope you vvil not be so barren.
So for the differences that you allege from vs, touching mariage vvith the members of the Dutch church, mariages and divorces vvithout autho∣ritie of the Magistrate, judging of ecclesiastical causes on the Lordsday, omitting and thrusting out in part sometimes the administration of the vvord & Sacraments, and for the ministers set maintenance: in the trial of them, I shal by Gods grace manifest, that in the most vve are vvronged: and for that vvhich vve doe hld in any of them, vve vvil confirm it by the vvord of God, and reasons from the same, other∣weise, we vvil reforme it. Answer. Io. Pa. TOuching 3 other differences betwixt vs: I noted divers things distinctly: vnto which you make a confused and defective reply: vnto my first answer, you say something vnto the two last, nothing at all. For the first, you seeme to allow my choise, that we hold onely vnto the maine causes of your separation, &c. but I spake not of the maine causes, but of the
just causes of your separation, whether great or small; so that you leave the matter in some vncertainty still, not she∣wing me which and how many you hold for iust causes, when I had nominated sundry differences betwixt vs. You say, you set downe an argument for your separation fortifyed vvith many scriptures, &c. And I have shewed the contents of your maine argument, to be beside the question of our Church: and there is no place of scripture which I can discerne to be alled∣ged against our estate in particular, but I have given answer therevnto. And for our particular congregation, though you were never of it, yet may we justly say that you have renoun∣ced the communion thereof, and not onely as we agree with England but as we agree with these Churches: for you that had separated yourself from all the true Churches long before this our particular Church was gathered; and you that do still re∣nounce and refuse the worship of God in such temples as we vse, (if there were nothing els) do thereby renounce commu∣nion with vs in our ordinary worship of God. That we have just cause to disclaime your separation as a schisme, I have la∣boured to shew in some part in this treatise, and will endevour make it yet more plaine, as the Lord shall give strength and opportunitie. And if there were nothing els, your allegation of this scripture Heb. 6.1. might shew vs your schisme: vvhen having spoken of our standing one with England; of your owne repentance for it; of our sins remayning vpon vs, &c. you say, how can vve give you the right hand of fellowship, seing repentance from dead vvorkes, is one of the principles of the doctrine of Christ? The substance of this obiection hath bene twise largely Chap. 4. & 6. an∣swered before: yet since you repeat it againe, I do againe tell you, 1. If it were granted that our communion with Englād were a sin, yet might we have true repentance though we could not see the same to acknowledge it. Your contrary plea sa∣vours of the errour of the perfectionists and enclines to fami∣lisme: for if true repentance cannot be without the knowledge of every particular sin, then do you teach a perfection of know∣ledge contrary to the 1 Cor 8.2 & 13.9. scriptures: If true repentance may be had without the knowledge of of ech particular sin, then why not without the knowledge of this sin as well as of others? The Apostle shewes that repentance from dead vvorkes Heb. 6.1. is necessary to salvation, but he doth not deny that to be true repentance, where there is ignorance of some particular dead works that are in vs: this holy scripture is therfore abused by you. 2, sup∣pose that we vvere vvithout true repentance, yet vvhere is the scripture, that shevves our Church ought therfore to be sepa∣rated from? The sin of some doth not pollute the rest vvhich approve not thereof. 3, whereas in my second answer Pag. 31. be∣fore I noted as great differences among yourselves, as these 3. last be wherein you differ from vs; notwithstanding your vn∣conscionable course might thereby appeare vnto all, in holding such communion among yourselves as you deny in others: yet as if either partialitie were no blot, but a beautifull wart in the face of your Church: or els as if you dispaired of washing away this blot, even so do you passe by this matter in silence without any reply vnto it. VVhereas you put me in minde that I have not as yet alled∣ged
any one word of God for our festivall dayes, mariage by the minister, consistorie, and communion of our members with an other Church, &c. I answer, that seing you are the accuser, that maintaine a separation from vs in these respects, the falt is yours that have not brought any word of God to conclude a se∣paration from vs vpon these grounds: Though in your Apolo∣gie you have pretended scripture to shew some of these things vnlawfull, yet have you not directed any reasons against our communion for these things: even as in your Apologie you have pretended scripture against our vse of the Lords prayer, & yet confesse that you would not separate for this. As for our communion with England I have sayd enough before Chap 4. & 6. so far as concernes separation from vs vpon such a pre∣tence. As for our consistorie or Eldership, I shewed in my for∣mer writing how you have allowed it yourself in communica∣ting therewith, and you have answered not a word vnto it. Now those that refute themselves on this maner, have no reason to call for further refutation, vnlesse they acknowledge their er∣rours in such practises. Besides seing you have not yet answe∣red, neither the Expos. of Mat. 18. first nor the Christian plea. last booke of Mr. Iohnson whe∣rein he hath written against your popular governement, what meane you to call for more? If more be requisite, you may see that I Pag. 33. promised you in my former writing that when I should receive any arguments from you to prove your refusal of com∣munion vpon these grounds, that I would then give further answer vnto you. The errours which you have published in your
Animadversion for the maintenance of your popular or∣der, and the enormities which in that order are committed by you in your vnlawfull excommunications and censures are so many that they require a distinct treatise for the refutation the∣reof: of which I purpose to say more hereafter as occasion is given. As for the state of the question and what we hold in these matters, I have set it downe in my former writing, and to this poynt also you say nothing. Touching the other diffe∣rences betwixt vs, which are here ambiguously repeated by youand not so that the reader might well vnderstand the meaning thereof, I am ready to manifest that I have not done you any wrong in the relation thereof; and that you cannot confirme any of them by the vvord of God: if you will bring any reasons to conclude a separation from thence. CHAP. XIX. The Conclusion.
Hen. Ains. VNto your Conclusion I willingly assent, and by Gods grace shal endeavour so to doe: wishing the like in you. And vpon this occasion I shal put you in minde of that which in part appeareth in this your writing, and more fully in the disguised pamphlets that come out of your congregation: how you take a speciall delyte and think it for your vantage, to vpbrayd mns differences, to rake into particular mens synns and infirmities, yea though they be repented of, and to blazon them abroad to the world, for the discredit of the cause which they professe, or have professed. If the arrowes of the Almighty did stick fast in you, & you felt your owne miserie: you would no: write after this manner. If a Iew or Iulian apostata should gather and publish all the open professed differences in Chri∣stendom, yea among them that err from the trueth: what would this tend vnto, but to the disgrace of Christ; and yet help Iudaisme nothing. But if the contentions and particular synns, I say not of all Christen∣dom, but of England or the Churches in Netherland, or the like, which you acknowledge true Churches, were thus blazoned: what a sink of yll savour would be smelt. And are there no personal synns amongst yourselves may vve think: that you take such a course. If God herein should reward you according to your works, where should you appea∣re? I counsell you therfore to take a better course. Errour may be refuted by the word of God, without any such leaven of maliciousnes: and the truth needeth no such fleshly meanes to mainteine it. If you like not of this counsel: you may walk on in the light of your fyre, and in the sparks that you have kindled: but my soule shal not come into your se∣cret: though I shal not cease to wish your welfare, so long and so far as I may. November 9. 1617. Henry Ainsworth. Answer. Io. Pa. WHereas you take occasion from the Conclusion of my former writing, to complaine against me that I think it for our vantage, to vpbrayde mens differences, &c. I cannot but marvell at your strange partialitie, wherewith you begin, continue and end this your writing: for have not you yourself first endevoured to seek advantage by Fol. 4. B. vpbrayding me with the difference of Mr. Hu. from me, which I shewed to be otherwise? Have you not vpbrayded me with the difference of the courts of England wherevnto when as I had given you divets Pag. 33. answers, you reply not a word? And besides many other differences of men which you vrge me with all in this writing, your other bookes do much more abound with the same, as I have shewed before. Remēber what Barow faith of the ministers of England of the
Discov. p. 183. & 162. refut. of Giff. p. 138. 139. particular personal er∣rours, which they in their publique doctrine and dayly ministerie sparse abroad, even as that flood of bitter waters, &c. that there arise such an innumerable heap of errours, so many divers, variable, incon∣stant & contrarie opinions amongst them, that (as the ignorant Pa∣pists say) it is impossible to finde two of them in one mind and judge∣ment, yea in any two Churches of the land to heare the same doctrines because indeed they preach either their owne dreames and phantasies, or els their lucuorations out of humane vvritings, &c. Thus hath God in his just judgement devided the tongues and confounded the lan∣guage of these Babylonish builders, that they almost agree not in or vpon any thing; one preaching one thing, another the quite contrary; one building after this sort, an other after that: one calling or this law, this thing, an other for that. Thus is their Kingdome devided, their estate confused, and their house shall shortly be left vnto themdesolate. Now vvhen thus you vvrite and print yourselves, touching mens differences, and prophesy of desolation to en∣sue therevpon; with what forehead can you condemne in others, this very thing which you commend in your owne pra∣ctise? yea the differences as you record them are slanderously & vntruely set downe, but the differences which I note are such as you cannot deny any one of them; and shall you have more liberty to publish falshood, then we to speak truth? As for the publishing of the notorious scandalles of such as continue in schisme, and labour dayly to seduce men from the Church of God: (which you call a raking into particular mens syns and infirmities) you have not brought any one word of God to refute this course: Had you done it, I doubt not but I should then have shewed how you had perverted the same. How can men beware of schismes, and divisions; of offences & scandalles committed in the same, as the Apostle Rom. 16.17.18. Iude. 17.18.19. requires, vnlesse they have warning and intelligence thereof? Are vve not taught to look vpon the lives and
Phil. 3.2.17.18.19. 2 Tim. 4.14.15. & 3.1-11. walking of men, that professe to be our guides? If need were I might produce vnto you a multi∣tude of examples from all stories divine and humane, of the ages past and of the time present, and even your owne exam∣ples both against others and against yourselves, for your convi∣ction herein. But this would require a whole volume: and more needes not, while so litle is alledged against it. Your maine sins and scandalles, are not repented of, as you would in∣sinuate: the vnlawfull excommunications, and the notorious slanders published by you are not recalled: if some other faults be acknowledged by some, yet while you stand in open defiance against all the Churches of Christe, and proclaime a separation from them all, is there not a cause to proclaime and blazon the iniquities of such deceivers, that the simple may take the more heed? you speak of disguised pamphlets that are come out of our congregation: but the bookes which you seeme to ayme at, are such as for the matter of them are taken out of your offensive company, and do in part shew the disguised practises of yourseparation: for the persons that published them, they also were such as came out of your company, who leaving their schisme, which they once professed with you, were more fit to vvitnesse such things as they had heard and seene among you: for the hel∣pers, which they had herein, they had (besides others) Mr. Th. now an Elder of your congregation also (but then a deacon) out of vvhose The Hun∣ting of the foxe. part. 1. vvriting vvhich he communicated vvith them, they receyved sundry things vvhich they published, and many more vvhich should have bene published, had not their book bene misprinted contrary to their mindes: for the maner of printing and publishing one of those bookes, great injury hath bene done vnto them, as hath bene noted before. You say, If the arrowes of the Almighty did stick fast in me, & I felt mine owne misery: I would not write after this maner. But on the contrary, the more I feele mine ovvne miserie, the more carefull ought I to be to deliver others from their miserie also: and the declaration of the manifold evilles committed in your separation, being a meanes and help to pluck some out of the fire and to save them from your miserable schisme, therfore should this meanes be the more diligently vsed in such case. If you on the other side did feele your owne misery as you ought, you vvould not exalt yourself with the Iudg. 9.15. bramble above all the trees of the forest, against all the Churches of God on earth as though none were vvorthy of your fellowship: if you had true sense and feeling of your owne scandalles, you vvould be more humble & not maintaine such a vaine separation. Hawty Edom had his nest among the starres: but a nest among the starres will not content you. There is no communion with the worthiest ministers, the Rev. 1. & 2. lights and starres of the Churches, that you can avvay vvith: Therfore have you got a higher sphere of separation above them all. But remember that the wandring starres are Rev. 12.4 drawne from the heaven, remember that you among the rest have often fallen from your orb by Apo∣stasy: know yourself at length, that you fall not further.
You obiect, that if a Iew or Iulian apostata should gather andpublish all the open professed differences in Christendome, yea among them that erre from the truth: what would this tend vnto, but to the disgrace of Christ: and yet help Iudaism nothing, &c. I answer, 1. Suppose this would help Iudaism nothing, but be a further occasion of offence vnto Infidelles, yet might it be a great help vnto the weak Christians that were already members of a true Church to preserve them from the wayes of false Christians, vvhen they saw their differences and contradictions. 2. This might also tend vnto the honour of Christe, to have false Chri∣stes and false Christians discovered, and might help the elect Iewes to bring them vnto true Christians, and keep them from Antichriste. Yea when the time of their visitation is come, that the Iewes shalbe called and grafted in againe, this know∣ledge of the differences among Christians, may be a great mea∣nes to direct them vnto the truth: for the godly shall rise by that thing vvhereat others stumble. 3, if it be an vnlawfull thing to publish the open and professed differences of Chri∣stendome, then is your sin great in this behalf, as I have she∣wed already, and might easily bring an 100. more examples & instāces to prove the same: as for Iulian the apostata, though his apostasy was the deeper, yet is he the glasse of your evill, & you may name him and thinke of him with feare and trembling: for the number of apostasyes, I think you cannot shew that he hath apostate and fallen from his profession so often as you have done: and as for contempt of the Church of God and true Christians, for which he is most infamous, I dare vnder∣take to manifest that your separation hath published more re∣proches and slanders of them, then you can shew that he hath done. 4. As for the contentions and particular sins of true Churches, whether would a Ievv or Turk be more offended to heare of some vvicked and vnchast persons in your company: or to heare you say of the Church of England, that H. Bar. discov. p. 182. there is not almost one among them that hath his wife chast, or their bed pri∣vate: vvhether vvould be a greater stumbling block vnto them to heare the scandalles of your company reproved: or to heare
you affirme that Inquir. of T. VVh. p. 26. you could not without apostasy so much as heare the word of God preached in any of the Reformed dutch and French Churches, if they be like vnto those in this citie? VVhether would a Iulian more triumph and be hardned against Christianitie to heare of your apostasy: or to heare you affirme (if he did with all beleeve it,) that Counter∣p. 168. the reforming preachers were the greatest de∣ceyvers of the people, vnder shew of holynes: and that it is a blessed work of God that the most dangerous seducers should thus first be dis∣covered. Had you conscience of the things that tend to the disgrace of Christ and Christianitie, then would you be hum∣bled for these your writings, and revoke them with speed. Againe you ask, And are there no personal sins amongst your∣selves may we think, that you take such a course? If God herein should reward you according to your works, where should you appeare? &c. Answ. VVe acknowledge our sins to be innumerable, & all our owne righteousnes to be as a defiled garment, and have no where to appeare save vnder the righteousnes of Christe: but if according to your example, in the middes of our sins we should lift vp our heads so high, as to disclaime the fellowship of such as are farr better then our selves, yea of all the faithfull congregations in the vvorld: vvhere should vve then appeare? If in the middes of my corruption, I should exalt my ministe∣rie as onely lavvfull to be communicated vvith, and teach the godly to abandon and separate from al other ministers vvhere∣soever, as you doe: where should I then appeare? Then might I feare as Mr. Robinson notes concerning you in the refutation of your priuate schisme, that
Relig. comm. p. 5. God would be provoked to suffer vs to fall into such personall sins and evilles from which thou∣sands of others have bene preserved, &c. Then vvere it most just that these personall sins and scandalles should be pu∣blished for a warning to others, to keep them from the like presumption. This is the poynt, which you cover and hide in your reasonings. This I desire that every Modest Chri∣stian would consider and judge of. And as for you, vvhere think you to appeare in the day of Christe? among the goatson the left hand you think not: among the sheep on the right hand vvith vs, it is contrary to your present separation from vs. If you expect a place in the Church triumphant, according to the place vvhich you take vnto yourself on earth, separated from all the Churches militant here: then must you also look for some solitary place in heaven, separated from the common Saints, and exalted above the rest. As for your counsell to me; it is such as Christ Iesus hath taught me not to embrace: for he hath taught vs to bevvare of errour, & to knovv false teachers the better, by their scandalous and vvicked practises, vvhich he Mat. 23.13.14, &c. 2 Pet. 2.3.10, &c. Rev. 9.7.8, &c. publisheth vnto men; This his practise in your language, is the leaven of maliciousnes and a fleshly meanes. My purpose and endevour is to follovv him that is light it self vvalking in the middes of his golden candlesticks, vvhither you refuse to follovv him. Into the se∣cret of your separation let not my soule enter: yea let every soule bevvare of that mysterie of iniquitie, vvhich as a vvilde fire consumes the communion of Saints and their loving so∣cietie. By this schisme you have shut out your self from the secret of the righteous, and from their assemblie. The Lord shevv mercy vnto you in raysing you out of this pit, and keep the feet of his Saints from falling into this or the like snare. Farevvell in the Lord. Decemb. 6. 1618. John Paget.
AN ADMONITION Touching TALMVDIQVE and RABBINICAL ALLEGATIONS. Mr. Ainsworth, it was much beyond my expecta∣tion, when as I met with your allegations of Rabbines against me in this controversy: Here∣vpon I enquired after your annotations on Genesis and Exodus, which before this time, I had not seene; & there I saw them so frequently alledged, with such pompe of glorious titles, and vnderserved honour given vnto them that I supposed both the puritie and sufficiencie of the holy scriptures to be much eclypsed and empaired thereby. For this cause I have thought it expedient to note some things concerning these authors, for help of the Christian readers that they may be the better able to discerne and judge of them.
All vse of the Talmud I do not condemne: There is some vse of the Rabbines for vnderstanding and learning of the holy tongue: And a principall vse of them is, thereby to re∣fute the Jewes themselves from their owne writings; and not them onely, but all such also as dote vpon their wri∣tings in such maner as you doe. And to this end have I al∣ledged them against you, which otherwise I would not have done: It was far from my thoughts, when I first vnder∣tooke this controversie with you. Your maner of quoting them, I cannot approove of: many scandalles and errours I do observe in your vse of them. CHAP. I. FIrst of all, it is an offēsive thing so abūdātly to allege such authors for our guides vnto the mysteries of re¦ligion, as do abound with innumerable dotages, pre∣sūptuous & vaine traditiōs, lying visiōs, fayned mira∣cles, prodigious & monstrous fables. And such are the Thalmu∣dists & Cabalists, whō you (Mr. Ainsw.) do so often bring vpon the stage. There is almost no work or vvord of God recorded in the scriptures, vvhich they do not defile vvith their glosse. For example. TOuching the Angels: As the Rabbines of the Sadducees faction, vvere very grosse, saying there is Act. 23.8. neither Angel nor spirit: so the Rabbines of the Pharisaical sect were as bold in a contrary extremity to faine any thing of them: And to give in∣stāce first of all in your Doctour Maimony, he saith that the visiō of Angelles is nothing but the vision of prophecy and accor∣ding to the apprehension of the beholder: that therfore Maimony Morch Nebu∣chim, Che∣rek. 2. pe∣lek. 7. A∣braham whose vertue was great or strong saw them as men: but vnto Lot whose strength was evil they appeared as Angels. The Chaldee paraphrast expounding those words, the soule of the heaven shall cary the voyce, &c. saith that Targu n on Eccles. 10.20. the Angel Raziel shall pro∣claime it every day from heaven vpon the mount of Horch, &c. They presume to tell vs what peculiar Angels were allotted vnto se∣verall persons to be their guides and maisters: as vnto Ioa. Reuchlin. Cabal. lib. 1. Adam they assigne Raziel; to Shem Iophiel: to Abraham
Zadkiel: to Isaak Gabriel; to Iaakob Peliel: to Moses Metatron, &c. So forparticular actions and words recorded in the scriptures, the Rabbines tell vs how many and which angels were employed therein: In expounding psal. 137. the Chaldee paraphrast faynes Micael whom he calles the Prince of Ierusalem to make the the prayer against Edom, vers. 7, Targum on psal. 137. & Gabriel whom he calles the Prince of Sion, to pronounce the blessing on them that should destroy Babel, vers. 8.9. when Ester had sent Hatach to certify Mordecai of the Kings decree, Ester 4.10.12.13. the paraphrast saith, that Targum on Ester, 4. Haman in his rage slew Hatach, and that then the Angels Micael & Gabriel came and supplyed the place of Ha∣tach, delivering Esters message to Mordecai, and againe Mor∣decai his answer vnto Ester. And further he telles vs of King Ahasuerus his vision how he being at Esters banquet, he Ibid. on Chap. 7. lift vp his eyes, and saw and behold 10 Angels like vnto Hamans 10 Son∣nes cutting downe the trees in the royal garden, &c. That when Ha∣man fell downe before Ester, the Angel Gabriel had thrust him downe, &c. R. Simai Isaak Ben Arama in Akedath Isaak. Por- 44. par. 2. saith, when Israel had set we will doe, before we will heare, (resolving and promising to do the law before they had heard it, Exod. 19.8. with 20.19.) then forth with there came 60, millions of Angels, and bound two crownes vpon every one of the Israelites, one in respect of we wil doe, another in respect of we wil heare: but whē they sinned in the Calfe, there came downe an 120 millions of destroying Angels, and broke them off, as it is sayd, The Children of Israel pluckt of their ornaments (Exod. 33.6.) Tou∣ching the Angels ascending and and descending on the ladder in the vision, Gen. 28,12. they say, the R. Solo∣mon Iarchi in Gen. 28.12. Angels of the land of Israel went vp, and the outlandish Angels came downe. And so accordingly of the Angels that met Iaakob at Mahanaim, which signifyeth two hostes: they on Gen. 32. say, they were one hoste of outlandish Angels that had convoyed him to the border of Israel; and that the Angels of the land of Israel, vvere the other host, that came to receive him there. Other of the Rabbines
Ioa. Merc. in Gen. 19.13. say that the Angels which sayd of Sodom, we will destroy this place, were deposed from their ministery for an 138. yeares, be∣cause they had ascribed vnto themselves that which was propervnto God; and were not restored vntill Iacobs time, when they ascended againe to heaven by the ladder which he saw in the vision, &c. TOuching wicked spirits or devilles: Some of the Rabbines Sebast. Munster, Annot. on Levit. 17. hold that as other creatures are compounded of 4. ele∣ments, so these of 2, to wit, of the fire and ayre: And that they have 3 properties of the ministring Angels, viz. wings; swift motion; and foreknowledge of things to come: and 3. proper∣ties of the sonnes of men, viz. to eate and drinke as men: to procreate others and multiply by generation as men: to dye & to have their bodies dissolved as men. For their meate, they say they lick the moystnes of the ayre, and are affected with per∣fumes and smell of the fire (according to that Rabbinical con∣ceit noted in the Apocryphal story, where it is sayd, that the Tobit, ch. 6.8.9. with 8.3. perfume made with the liver and heart of a certaine fish, would drive away the divel.) Others of these Rabbines say vpon Gē. 2.2. That they were created imperfect in the evening of the Sabath: and that God having made their spirits, being preven∣ted with the Sabath that came vpon him, was faine to leave his work half made: & that therfore their spirits want their bodies which otherwise should have bene made for them, &c. They write Elias Le∣vita in Tishbi in lilith. that there are 4 mothers of the divels, viz. Lilith, Naa∣mah, Ogereth & Machalath: The Targum on Eccles. 1.12. Chaldee paraphrast shewes the Prince of the spirits by name, when he saith that Aschmedai the King of the Devilles was sent vnto Solomō to cast him out of his throne & to take his signet from him. The same Targ. and Rasion Psal. 91.6. para∣phrast also with R. Solomon Iarchi do tell vs of night spirits and noone spirits; that Deber is the name of a spirit destroying in the night and Keteb a spirit destroying at noone day: In so much that both the vulgar Latine and Greek translations following these Rabbines in ps. 91. do there make mention of a noone-devil. VVith the like presumption is Samael noted by Maimony in Morch Nebu. chel. 2. per. 31. them to be the name of an other, that rode vpon the serpent, and decey∣ved Evah. That these spirits are male and female, and have difference of sexe, is often R. Solo∣mon Iar. n Esa. 34
14. affirmed by them, so that when Godcommanded Noah to take male and female of every living thing to keep them alive in the Ark with him, they say that On Gen. 6.19. the divels also were to be receyved vvith the rest, as though God had given charge to preserve them from drowning: that their generations might be continued in the world. They say R. David Kimchion 1 Sam. 28.12. that when wicked spirits are raysed vp, and called for by vvit∣ches, or such like; that their maner is to ascend with their feet vpward and their head downeward; and that the spirit raysed by the witch of Endor came vp with his head first contrary to the custome in reverence & honour of King Saul; and that the∣reby the vvitch knew him to be King. Others go further and Elias Le∣vita vbi supra. teach mē how to defend themselves against them by charmes and circles, &c. TOuching the Spheres and starres: The Rabbines hold that Maimony in mor. Nebu. chel. 2. per. 5. & 6. & 8. they are living bodies, having an vnderstanding soule; that they have imagination, election, will, an vnderstanding of their opera∣tions, &c. And besides philosophical reasons alledged for proofe hereof, they do also pervert many scriptures to establish this opinion, as ps. 19.1. The heavens declare the glory of God: They say, that man is far wide from the truth, that thinks this to be spoken in respect of that which appeares in them: seing that in the Hebrew tongue, that word of counting or declaring is not attributed but vnto the thing that hath vnderstanding, &c. They say, No man but a foole or an adversary of the truth will contradict this proofe which is taken from the words of the Prophets. To this purpose also they alledge, The starres of the morning praised me together, Iob. 38.7. Againe Maimony there argueth from. Gen. 1.16. Deut. 4.19. that they must needes apprehend and know all things which they governe, &c. Besides this, he embraceth the opinion of Pythagoras which Aristotle reiected: namely, that Ibidem Perek 9. the heavens by their motions do make sweet and pleasant sounds, though there be many things that hin∣der vs from hearing those strong and sweet sounds, &c. If the starres have such knowledge, it is the lesse wonder, that the Sun should find out and make knowne those heads of the peo∣ple which sinned in Baalpeor: which were hanged vp vnto the
Lord before the Sun, Numb. 25.4. where (as R. Solomon Commēt. on Numb. 25.4. records) the Sun did manifest & discover the sinner and the guilty per∣sons by pearcing through the cloud and shining vpon them. And still they hold a prognostication of things to come, by these starres. As the sun before is sayd to have discovered the sinners: so the moone hath like vertue ascribed vnto her by them. It is Ioa. Buxt Synag. Iud. Cap. 16. observed out of Rambam, R. Menachem Rakanat, R. Bechai and others, that on the seventh day of the seventh moneth at night, God shewes whatsoever shal fal out vnto them the yeare following by the shadow of their bodies in the moone light, as if their shadow want a head, or if they have no shadow, that then they shal certainely dy that yeare, &c. The ground of this magical observation they draw from the Numb. 14.9. words of Ioshua and Caleb, vnto the people touching the Ca∣naanites, saying their shadow is departed from them: for so they read the word of shadow in stead of shield. They say, that R. Solo. in Gen. 1.14. when the lights are eclypsed it is an evill signe for ever: And whereas it is sayd, be not afrayd of the signes of heaven, they interpret it thus, when you do the will of God, ye have no need to care for the ven∣geance. VVhen they apply the number of the spheres vnto the commandements, they say R. Abra∣ham Aben Ezra com∣ment. on Exo. 20. that the fift commandement, ho∣nour thy father, &c. hath reference vnto the sphere of Tsedek or Iupiter, because it teacheth concerning peace and righteousnes and mercy, &c. That the sixt commandement, Thou shalt not kil, hath re∣ference vnto Mars because it teacheth vs concerning the shedding of blood and woundes, &c. That the seventh commandement hath refe∣rence to Venus, that teacheth concerning the Bed, &c. And so for the rest. Vpon those words of Pharaoh, Ragnah or evill is before you, they say, R. Solom. on Exo. 10 10. & Aben Ezra on Exo. 32.12 that Pharaoh did vnderstand by his astrological instrumēt, that there was a star called Ragnah which did arise to meete the Israelites in the wildernes and that it was a signe of blood and slaughtvr vnto them and that therevpon when Israel sinned in the Calf, & God fought to destroy them, Moses sayd in his prayer, why should the Egyptians say, he hath brought them forth vnto Ragnah, of which Pharaoh sayd, Rag∣nah
is before you: That then forthwith God repented concer∣ning Ragnah (that evill star) and turned the blood into the blood of Circumcision when Ioshua circumcised them, and so took away the shame of Egypt. Againe, they write R. Sol. on Gen. 15.5. that when God brought Abram forth, Gen. 15.5. it was from his Astrological instrument, by which he saw that Abram should have no chil∣dren; and that God shewed him, though Abram should have no Children, yet Abraham should have Children, when his name was changed, &c. They tell vs Seb. Munst. Annot. on Gen. 12.1. also in Maasch thorah in the story of Abram that when he was but 3. yeares old, he was cast into the furnace by Nimrod, for destroying his fathers Idols; when the Astrologians told Nimrod that the star of Abram at his birth had devoured 4 other starres, &c. More∣over they teach not onely a prediction of future things by the starres, but other strange operations also: vpon the defect of the letter Vau in the word Meoroth which signifyeth the lights which God created the fourth day, they Rasi or R. Solom Iarchi on Gen. 1.14. tell how dangerous a day that is, in respect of the squinancy wherevnto the Children are then most subiect: and of the fast ordayned that day of the week to prevent that evill. They Ioan. Isaak Le∣vita prefat. ad Ruach hachen. write that the Sun to celebrate the day of his nativitie, doth evermore throughout the whole yeare even in time of greatest tempests, yet alwayes shine vpon the fourth day of the week on which it was created. Of the Sonnes of God mentioned Gen. 6.2. they Aben Ezra on Gen. 6.2. say that they were wise men exercised in astrologie, which took vnto themselves wives which were borne vnder the same disposition of the hea∣vens that they themselves were, and that so being of the same constellation they brought forth mighty men, &c. Others of them do not onely record that the starres teach, but Ben Ara∣ma, in Ake∣dath Isaak, Portâ. 45. also stirre vs vp vnto severall actions and vertues, as that Tsedek or Iupiter megnorer el hatsedek stirreth vp vnto righteousnes and the feare of the Lord; That Nogah or Venus stirreth vp love, &c. TOuching the Cloudes and other meteores in the lowest heavens: R. Samuel bar Isaak saith,
Talmud in Bera∣coth cap. 9 Fol. 59. A Behold, the Cloudes of themorning there is no ioy in them, as it is written, your goodnes is as a morning Cloud, Hos. 6. And the like prognostications they do observe in the same place touching the lightnings and other Cloudes. Touching the Rainebow though God appoynted it to be the signe of his covenant vnto perpetual generations, yet Rasion Gen. 9 12. because of the defect of Vau in the word Doroth which signifieth generations, they observe and teach that there were some ge∣nerations of just and perfect men wherein they needed not this signe of the Rainebow: as namely in the generation of Hezekiah King of Iudah, and in the generation of R. Shimeon ben Iochai. From the winde that blowes vpon a certaine day they progno∣sticate what weather they shal have for the whole yeare follo∣wing: R. Isaak bar Abidemi Thalmud in Ioma, C. 1. Fol. 21. saith, that vpon the latter good day of the feast, every man lookes after the smoke of the campe: If the smoak incline to the North, then the poore are glad, and the rich housholders are sad: viz. because the South winde blowing at that time, and driving the smoak into the North is a signe of great raine that yeare, which shal rot the fruits, and so force the rich to bring them forth and sell them for small price vnto the poore: If the smoak incline to the South then the rich are glad, and the poore are sad, that Northwind driving the smoak Southward being a signe of such a dry season, that the rich may store vp their fruits and not bring them forth to the poore: If the smoak encline to the vvest then all are sad: because the hurtfull East wind driving the smoak into the vvest is a signe of dearth and famine: If the smoak incline to the East, thē all are glad, because the vvest winde driving the smoak into the East is a signe of such a temperate season as shall bring abun∣dance for benefit both of rich and poore. So they
R. David Kimchion Iosh. 5.2. say of the North winde that it did not blow for the space of 40. yeares to∣gether whiles Israel was in the wildernes, least it should have blowne away the cloude of glory from the Tabernacle: the na∣ture of the North winde being to scatter the cloudes (Iob. 37.22.) And that for this cause also they did not circumcise their Children for 40 yeares, because they wanted the North windewhose propertie is to heale; and that therfore the sore made by cutting the flesh in circumcision would have bene dangerous to the Children. They presume also to tell vs what particular Angels are set over several windes of which afterward. TOuching man: R. Ieremiah ben Eleazar saith that Talmud in Bera∣coth cap. 9 Fol. 61. God crea∣ted the first man do partsuphin, with two faces or persons, as it is sayd Ps. 139.5, thou hast fashioned me behind and before. This they also Rasi on Gen. 1.27. collect from that which Moses saith, that God crea∣ted them male & female: Hence they gather that the first man was created with a double person at the first, that he was both man and woman, both male and female, an Hermaphrodite: and that these 2. persons were parted asunder then when God tooke the rib out of the side of Adam, &c. As for the soules of men, they hold that they were created before the bodies: that all the Rasi on Esa. 48.16. & on Mal. 1.1. Prophets were in their soules present at the delivery of the law on mount Sinai, many generations before they were borne, & that their prophecies were there delivered vnto them. Some of them teach that God created man with ori∣ginal sin: R. Nachman bar Chasda Talmud in Bera∣coth. c. 9. Fol. 81. asking the question why vajitser in Gen. 2.7, is written with two iods, makes this answer, that the holy blessed God created man with two inclinations or dispositions, with ietser tob, & ietser ragh, with a good dispo∣sitiou & an evill disposition. And in the same place it is sayd of the two reynes that the one at the right side counselleth vnto good, and the other at the left side counselleth vnto evill, &c. VVhen a man dyes and is buried, they write that the Elias Le∣vita in Tishbi in Chibbut hakkeber. Angel of death comes and sits vpon the sepulchre & then the soule en∣tring into the body againe, causeth the man to stand vpon his feet: Then the Angel of death with a chayne in his hand half of yron, and half of fire striketh the man, so that at the first stroke his members are dissolved: at the second his bones are scattred, which the Angels come and gather: at the third he is turned to dust and ashes and so the body returnes into the se∣pulcher, &c. As for the soule, as the same Elias Tishbi in Gilgul. shewes, they say it is three times created: This they vnderstand of the revo∣lution
of soules through the bodies of three men: And for proof hereof they alledg that saying in Iob, Iob. 33.29. All these things will God work thrise with a man. Hence also they say the soule of the first man was translated into the body of David, & from thence is to returne into the body of Messias: This the Caba∣lists note by the three letters of Adams name, A, D, M, whereof the first stands for Adam, the second for David, the third for Messias. But they teach that the soules of great sinners do passe into the bodies of beasts: as the soule of a Sodomite into the body of a hare: and the soule of an adulterer into the body of a Camel and that therfore David in the Psal. 13.5 psalme praiseth God, with these word, ki gamal li, which they interpret thus, because he hath delivered my soule from the Camel: he for his adultery having deserved to be translated into the body of an vncleane Ca∣mel, &c. TOuching the stories of particular men: Of Adam they Rasi in Gen. 5.3. say that for those hundred and thirtie yeares vntill Sheth, he lived separate from his wife, viz. after his banishment out of Eden. Of Cain, & the mark set vpon him; R. Solomon On Gen. 4.15. saith it was a letter of Gods name imprinted in the forehead of Cain: R. Iehudah saith it was the sphere of the Sun which was made to rise vpon him: R. Nehemiah Akedath Isaak, Por∣tâ 11. saith it was the le∣prosy arising on him: R. Aba saith it was a dog given vnto him: viz. to go before him and defend him from wilde beasts or those that would kill him: R.A. Ioseph saith it was a horne that grew out of him, &c. Of Lamech, they R. Sol. on Gen. 4.23. write that he being blinde slew Cain: that being led by his sonne
Tubal cain, to whō Cain appeared as a wilde beast, he spoke vnto his father to shoote, vvho shot and killed Kain: that vvhen he knew vvhat he had done, to wit, that it vvas Kain his ancestour whom he had slaine, then he smote one hand vpon another, and clapt his sonne Tubal-kain betwixt them and so slevv him also: That herevpon vvhen his vvives separated from him, he excused himself by his errour: that if Kain vvho slevv his brother pre∣sumptuously had his punishment deferd for seven genera∣tions,then he offending through errour and mistaking should be forborne for many more sevens, &c. Of Noah they R. Solom¦on Gen. 5.29. write that vntill his time they had no instruments of plowing: that he prepared them: that the earth brought forth thornes and thistles when they sowed wheat, for the curse of the first man: that in the dayes of Noah, this curse ceassed: that this is it which is vvritten of him, he shall comfort vs, &c. VVhereas there is mention, of his drunkennes and nakednes in the middes of his tent: because Ahotoh signifying his tent is there written with the letter he, they Idem on Gen. 9.21.22.23, &c. collect thence that by way of a mysterie thereby is noted hovv the 10 tribes vvhich are called Aholah (Ezek. 23.) should go into captivitie for drinking vvine in bowles. And whereas it is sayd, that Cham saw the nakednes of his father: some of the Rabbines expound it, that Cham gelded Noah, and that he sayd vnto his brethren: The first man had but two sonnes and one slew the other for the possession of the world, but our father hath three sonnes and yet he seeke to have a fourth. Ther∣fore they say that Canaan the fourth sonne of Cham was cursed, because he would not that his father Noah should beget a fourth sonne, &c. And that Shem & Iapheth for covering their father obteyned this blessing, viz. that the posteritie of Shem should weare zizith or fringes on their garments: that the po∣sterity of Iapheth should obteyned a buriall, as it is said, I will give vnto Gog a place there for burial, &c. (Ezek. 39.11.) Of Abram & Noah they R. Isaak Ben. Ara∣ma in Ake∣dath Isaak, Portâ 16. observe, because it is sayd of Noah that he walked with God (Gen. 6.9.) and to Abram, walk before me (Gen. 17.1) that therfore Noah was in feriour to Abram: like to litle Children whereof the less is led by the hand and goes with the father, and the other that is stronger is appoynted to go before him, &c. VVhen they tell hovv Terach brought Abram his sonne before Nimrod for breaking his Idolles, and hovv he vvas cast into the fiery furnace, they record further concerning Ha∣ran his brother, that he thought vvithin himself, if Abram overcome I vvill be like vnto him: if R. Solomō Gen. 28. Nimrod overcome I vvil be like vnto him: And vvhen Abraham vvas delivered,
Haranbeing demanded to vvhom he vvould be like, he answered to Abram: vvherevpon they cast him into the fiery furnace, whe∣rein he vvas burned. This they vvill have to be noted when it is sayd, Gen. 11.28 Then Haron dyed before the face of Terah his Father, in vr of the Chaldees: because vr signifieth fire. VVhere it is sayd that Abram brought forth three hundred & eighteene persons to pur∣sue the Kings: the R. Sol. on Gen. 14 14. Rabbines vvill have this to be vnderstood of Eliezer alone, who was Abrams steward: that he alone went with Abram to the battel, because according to their Gematria, the numerall letters of Eliezer his name in the Hebrevv do stand for three hundred and eighteene. Of Og the giant, they R. Solom. on Gen. 14.13. write that it vvas he vvhich escaped from the slaughter of the Sodo∣mites made by Amraphel & his companions: that he came & told Abram of the battel, thinking that Abram also vvould be slaine, and that he then would get Sarai to be his wife: And that this Og also escaped from the flood being one of those Nephil∣ims, the giants that lived before the flood. Indeed if this Og vvas of such a stature as the Thalmudists, do Thalmud in Beracoth c. 9. fo. 54. write, viz. that Moses being 10 cubites high, & having an axe in his hand 10 cubites long, and leaping also 10 cubites from the ground could yet reach but vnto the ankles of Og, vvhen he killed him: then might this giant have rested vpon some mountaine, over which the vvaters prevayled 15. cubites: And so as 8. persons vvere saved in the ark, he should be the ninth, that escaped drowning being out of the ark. They R. Sol. on Gen. 4.22. say of Naamah that she vvas the wife of Noah: of Idem on Gen. 16.1. Hagar that she vvas the daughter of Pharaoh, who when he saw the vvonders done for Sarah, sayd it is better that my daughter be a servant in this house, then a Queene in an other house. Of Idem on Gen. 19.26 Lots vvife, that she vvas turned into a pillar of salt because she refused to give a litle salt vnto the travellers or strangers that came into her house. Of Thamar defiled by Iudah, they On Gen. 38.24. say that she was the daughter of Melchizedek or Shem, and vvas therfore to be burned because being the Priests daughter she playd the harlot. Of Rebekah they tell great vvonders: hovv
On Gen. 24.17. vvhen she came to draw vvater, the vvaterof it self came vp out of the well to meet her: how the Ibid. on vers. 42. earth lept and remooved vnder Abrahams servant to bring him in one day to his iourneys end, vnto Mesopotamia: how an Ibid. on vers. 55. an∣gel came & killed Bethuel for seeking to delay the journey of Re∣bekah vnto Isaak. Of Leah they On Gen. 29.17. say that her eyes were become tender with weeping for feare that she should have bene gi∣ven for a wife vnto Esaw the elder brother, as Rachel her yonger sister was given to Iaakob the yonger brother. Of Dinah they On Gen. 30.21. say that she being first conceyved a male in the wombe of Leah, was by her prayer turned into a female, least her sister Rachel should be inferiour to the handmaydes in Children, &c And further they say of Dinah, not being reckoned with his ele∣ven Children, when Iaakob was to meet Esaw, that On Gen. 32.22. she was put into a chest and lockt vp, least Esaw should set his eyes vpon her: and that therfore Iaakob was punished, because she being given to Esaw might have bene a meanes to have converted him to goodnes: that therfore she fell into the hand of Sche∣chem. The like thing do they record of Sarah also, viz. that Abram going downe into Egypt because of the famine, On Gen. 12.14. did shut vp Sarah into a chest, and that she was found by the recey∣vers of the tribute, who opened the chest and saw her. Of Levi they On Gen. 29.34. say, that when he was borne, God sent the Angel Gabriel to bring the Child before him: and that so he gave him this name: and gave him the foure & twenty gifts of the Priest∣hood: that in this respect he was called Levi. Of Ioshua his buriall in Timnath-serah, or Timnath-heres, Iudg. 2.9. they R. David Kimchi, &. R. Sol. on, Iosh. 24.30. say, that the place was so called, because of temunath Heres or the image of the Sun that was set vpon his sepulchre, with this sa∣ying, This is he that made the Sun to stand still, &c. And that the mountaine vvas called Gaash which signifyeth shaking and mooving: because when the Israelites at the burial of Ioshua did not mourne and lament for him as was meet; the earth did then quake and the mountaine was mooved against them. VVhen Ioshua sayd o sun, (dom) stay thou in Gibeon, &c. they R. Sol. on Iosh. 10.12. say that by vertue of a song called Dom, Dom, he stayed the
Sun: and that all the while so long as he did sing Dom, it stood stil, and went not forward. Of the two spies sent by Ioshua, they R. David Kimchi on Iosh. 2.4. say that they were Caleb and Phinchas: and that Phinchas being an Angel he stood before the people and they neither knew him nor saw him: and that therfore it is sayd of Caleb onely, that Rahab the harlot did hide him, &c. Of Sampson they Idem on Iud. 16.28 vvrite, that when he desired to be avenged of the Phili∣stines for his eyes, that he prayed for the vengeance vpon them but onely in respect of one of his eyes, & that he desired of God that the reward for his other ey & the losse of it might be reser∣ved vnto him in the world to come. Of Iphtah though some Ralbag or R. Levi ben. Gersō on Iudg. 12 7. write that he was buryed in divers cities for his honour; that having neither sonne nor daughter his bones were buryed part of them in one citie & part of them in an other, for a me∣moriall how he had delivered them from the Ammonites: yet others R. David Kimchi ibid. say the contrary, that he was striken with a greevous boyle: that the members of his body fell of, some in one city & some in an other: that so they were buryed in divers cities: & this for a punishment vnto him because he slew his daughter, and did not further enquire concerning his vow: Of Samuel they R. Solo. on 1. Sam. 28.13.15. & Kimchi ibidem. write that he was raysed vp by the witch of Endor: & that Samuel thereby vvas much disquieted and fore afrayd thinking that it had bene the day of judgement, and that he had bene called to judgement: and that therfore he brought Moses with him for his help and safe conduct, &c. Of Paltiel they R. David Kim. on 2. Sam. 3.15. & R. Sol. ibid. write that he was so called because God delivered him from from sinning against Mical the wife of David, and that he had layd a sword betwixt him & her in the bed for a token there∣of, &c. Of Obededom they R. Solom. on 2. Sam. 6.11. write that the blessing of his house consisted in this that his wife & his eight daughters in law brought forth ech of them six sonnes at once, and that hence are those 62. mentioned 1. Chro. 26.8. Of Naboth, they Kimchi & Rasi on 1. Kin. 22.20.21. write that the spirit which came forth to be a lying spirit in the mouth of Ahabs Prophets, was the spirit of Naboth, &c. Of Elias & Elisha they R. Sol. on 1. Kin. 18.34 & on 2. Kin. 3.11. write that Elisha powring water on the handes
of Elias, his fingers did miraculously become like to fountaines of vvater to fill the ditch made about the altar in mount Car∣mel, &c. Of Ahaz they R. David Kimchi & R. Solo. on 2. Kin. 20.11. feigne this miracle that when he dyed the day was shortned 10. degrees, and that the Sunne went downe ten houres before the time, to the end that the mour∣ning of the people for him might quickly be at an end, because he was wicked: and that in recompence hereof, in the dayes of Hezekias the Sun came back and returned those 10. degrees which it hasted to go downe in Ahaz his time. And with such fictions and additions vnto the holy story, they abound in every place. TOuching the sensitive creatures, as birds, beastes and fishes they presume in like maner: Of the Raven that Noah sent out of the arke, they R. Sol. on Gen. 8 7. say that he flew about the arke & went not as he was sent for the jelousy that he had of his make or fellow against Noah: and that this same Raven also was reser∣ved vnto Elias his time to bring him bread and flesh morning and evening. And some of the Rabbines presume and R. David Kimchi on 1. Kin. 17.4 say that this bread and flesh vvas brought by the Ravens from the table of Ahab: others say it was brought frō the table of Ichosha∣phat. Of a certaine Bird, which they call Bar-juchne, it is written in the Tractat. Becoroth Cap 9. f. 57 Thalmud, that when this fearfull bird, cast but one egge out of her nest, it drowned 60 townes, and broke downe 300. Cedar trees. And as Elias Levita Tishbi in vocabu∣lo Iuchna. records, with this bird also is the banquet for the righteous prepared, togather with the Le∣viathan, and the wilde Oxe. Againe Rabba bar Channah saith he Thal∣mud in Babha ba∣thra Cap. 5. Fol. 73. saw on a certaine time a frog as big as Akra a towne in Hagronia conteyning 60. houses: that a serpent or Dragon came and devoured that frog: that straightway a great Raven or Poshkanisa came and devoured both the Frog & the Dragon, and flying away light vpon a tree, &c. These and a huge num∣ber more of such fables are recorded by your ancient Rabbines & Hebrew doctours, by so much worse then Aesops fables: in that these are R. Otto in Gali. ra∣zia lib. 3. c.
11. told for truth, but his not so: these are confir∣med with pretence of holy scripture, to the great abuse of thename of God: but so are not his: these are set downe without any good vse of them, but his fables had their moralles anne∣xed for vse and instruction of men. VVhat good morall vse can we make of this Parable of the great frog, vnlesse happily it may serve to represent vnto vs the estate of your separation▪ you yourself Defenc. against Mr. Smith. Pag. 106. compare Mr. Smith vnto Behemoth in bignes, & some reason there was, for by the profession of separation which he then made he devoured all the Churches of Christe, and so was comparable in greatnes to this Rabbines frog: but presently Mr. Iohnson like the great Dragon comes and devoures Mr. Smith: and straightway come you like the great Raven of the separation and devoure both the frog & the Dragon, both Mr. Smith & Mr. Iohnson so that you Mr. Ainsworth, remaine the huge Poshkantsa that devoure and swallow vp all: All the chur∣ches of God, all Christians, yea all the separate companies be∣side are in your belly: according to your doctrine no religious communion may be reteyned with any of them. And ther∣fore as the Lord once theatned the devouring citie; Zephan. 3.1. wo vnto the craw; as the word in the Hebrew signifies: so may it still be sayd, vvoe vnto this craw of the separation that devoures all Christian communion. Touching Behemoth; both the Targum on psal. 50.10. & Rasi ibid. &c. Chaldee paraphrast & other of the Rabbines expounding those words of the Psalme: The beasts on a thousand mountaines, interpret them of one beast, of Behemoth, that great creature which is mentioned Iob. 40.10 This Behemoth is sayd in one day to eat vp and devoure the grasse of those thousand mountaines, which they wil also have to spring againe and to be renewed every day. And this beast as they say is reserved for the banquet of the righteous in the garden of Eden in the world to come, viz. vvhen their messias shal come. They Talmud, in cholin. c. 3. fol. 60 tell vs also of a strange Oxe with one horne in his forehead, which the first man should offer for a sacrifice the first day that he was created: They Targum on ps. 69.31 & Rasi, ibid. say that this is that yong Bullock mentioned in psal.
69.31. from whence they also do collect that this Oxe had the horne created before thehoofes, because the order in the words in the psalme is thus, which hath hornes & hoofes, the horne being first mentioned. Of the Ramme which Abraham offred in stead of his sonne Isaak, they Rasi on Gen. 22.13. say it was created in the beginning of the world, and pre∣pared herevnto from the sixt day of the creation: This Ramme they hold to be one of those 10. things created in the evening of the first Sabath. And they note further, that when this Ramme came running vnto Abraham; Satan seing the same thrust the Ramme into the bush, &c. Of a Roe in the forest of Elai, they Thorah Or, 1. Glos in Thal∣mud, chol. c. 3. fol. 59 write that in the time of sleep one eye is still opē, when the other is shut: And the Thargum on Cant. 3.14. Chaldee paraphrast noting this same thing, will have this to be that Roe wherevnto the Messias is compared. The Thalmud Tractat. Cholin, c. 3. f. 59. records, that on a cer∣taine time when the Romane Emperour enquired of Rabbi Ie∣hoshua the sonne of Hananias, why their God compared himself vnto a Lyon: and whether he was so strong that he could kill a Lyon. The Rabbine answers, that their God did not compare himself ynto a common Lyon but vnto the Lyon that was in the forrest of Elai. Herevpon the Emperour desires that this Lyon may be shewed vnto him: and the Rabbine making sup∣plication vnto God, the sayd Lyon comes running out of the forrest, and being 400. miles from the Emperour, he roared so strongly, that the women with Childe in Rome fell in travel before their time, and the walles of the citie fell downe. VVhen as he had come an 100. miles neerer, then he roared againe so terribly, that all the Romanes teeth fell our of their heads, and the Emperour himself half dead fell downe from his throne vnto the ground: intreating the Rabbine that this Lyon might returne vnto the forest, from whence he came: which also was done according to his desire. By the view of these fables, the reader may learne in some part, what to judge and how to esteeme of your Thalmudicall allegations. VVhat goodnes or fruit is there in these fables? vvill you have your separation represented by this Lyon in the forest of Ela? If it were true that you professe and pretend, the terrour of your roaring
should not onely make the walles of Rome to fall downe, but the walles of all reformed Churches: both their materiall buildings & temples as you plead in this writing, and also all their spirituall society and communion should be dissolved: but as the Lyon of Elai when he drew neere to Rome, was yet turned back by the Rabbine: so when you drew neere to Rome, through the title of your book that roared in the Franckford catalogue as I noted Pag. before, yet have you also bene perswa∣ded to stay that roaring a while, and to spare them that were ready to perish at the sound thereof. Of the Leviathan, R. Iehuda Thalmud in Babha Bathra. c. 5 f. 74. & 75. saith, whatsoever God hath created, he hath created male and female, and so without doubt the Leviathan: And least they being so great should destroy the world if they did multiply, therfore God hath gelded the male killed the female & powdred her with salt for the righteous in the world to come. For proofe of this he alledgeth Esa. 27.1. And in the same place, R. Ionathan saith, that when the angel Gabriel shall hunt this Leviathan, he could nor prevaile except God did help him. This hunting they collect from that place in Iob. 40.20. Wilt thou draw out Leviathan with a hooke? Of the Whale that swallowed Ionas, they R. Solom. on Ion. 2.5 say that the two eyes of the fish were in stead of two vvindooes vnto the prophet, through which he saw all that was in the Sea: that God shewed him the red Sea, & how Israel passed through the middes thereof, &c. Because it is sayd, that Suph or the weedes were wrapt about his head, they do vainely collect from thence that jam suph or the red Sea was before him: there being the continent betwixt the red Sea and that Sea whereinto Ionas was cast. And here they R. Solom. on Ion. 1.17. write further, that the great whale which first swallowed Ionas, was a male, where Ionas had such a large roome in his belly, that he did not give his minde vnto prayer: wherevpon God spoke vnto this VVhale to cast him out of his belly into the mouth of the female who being full of yong ones, Ionas had not there such roome, and so being in a strait, that then he prayed, as it is sayd, out of the bowelles of the Fish. Ion. 1.17.
TOuching the vegetative creatures as plants, trees, &c. They Thalmud in Cholin. Cap. 3. f. 60 & Rasi on Gen. 2.5. say of them in generall, that though they were created the third day, yet they did not then appeare, but the earth brought them forth onely to the dore of the earth, vvhere men tread, vntill the sixt day: that then at the prayer of Adam there came shewers of raine, that then they budded forth and were seene. Of the trees in the orchyards of Eliphaz, Bildad & Zophar, there is this miracle recorded by the Targum on Iob. 2.11. Chaldee paraphrast, that when these three frends of Iob saw the trees in their orchards withered away: that the bread for their food was turned into living flesh that the vvine of their feasts vvas turned into blood, then they came every man from his place to visit Iob: and that for this meritotious vvork they vvere delivered from the place ap∣poynted vnto them in hell. Of the tree of life, they have this paradox, that Maimo∣ny in Mo∣reh Neb. chel. 2. per. 31. it vvas a journey of fifty yeares: & that this mea∣sure was the height of it, besides the head of it, & the breadth of the branches. Of the cedars growing in the garden of Eden, the Chaldee paraphrast vvrites Targum on Cant. 1.16. how they shalbe brought from thence for the building of a new temple at the coming of Mes∣sias. Of the tree planted by the rivers of vvaters, wherevnto the godly man is compared, in Psal. 1.3. they Ben Ara∣ma in Ake∣dath Isaak. Portâ. 12. say, that it vvas a tree, vvhich God planted in the arke vpon the face of the vva∣ters. And hundreds of such like vanities do fill their vvritings every vvhere. BVt you say that for Preface to Annota∣tions on Genesis. Iewish forbidden fables of which there are too many you passe them over as vnproffitable. Answ. 1. The vvriters of notorious fables and lyes do therfore loose their credit in other assertions, and deserve to have their vvritings vvholly passed over, as being guided therein by the Ioh. 8.44 father of lyes, and so being the instruments of Satan to lead men into er∣rour are to be had in suspicion in all that they say, vnlesse there be sufficient proofe of the same by some other meanes. 2. How true it is that you passe over their fabulous vvritings in ex∣pounding the scriptures let the reader consider by these fevv instances that follow: you
Annot. on Gen. 4.22. record hovv the Hebrevv Do∣ctourssay of Naamah, that all the world wandred (in love) after her, yea even the sonnes of God, (as in Gen. 6.2.) and that of her there were borne evill spirits into the world. You Annot. on Gen. 18.2. relate from the fabulous Thargum Ierusalemy that the three Angelles sent vnto Abraham were sent for three things, because it can∣not be, that moe things then one should be sent by the hand of one of the high angelles: that the first Angell was sent to shew glad tidings to Abraham, &c. The second to deliver Lot: the third to overthrow Sodom, &c. This fable is not onely repug∣nant to the scriptures but to other of the Rabbines also relating it after an other maner: R. Solomon Iarchi Com∣on Gen. 18 2, &c. saith, that one of these three Angelles was sent to bring the good tidings to Sarah one to overthrow Sodom and one to heale Abraham (mea∣ning for his sore after circumcision) &c. & that he which hea∣led Abraham was Raphael. Other of them tell this tale yet an other way. Some thing like vnto this vnproffitable Iewish fa∣ble, is that which you Annot. on Exo. 28 30. record frō Maimony touching the enqui∣ry by vrim: that they made not inquirie of two things at once: & if they so enquired, yet the answer was but vnto the first one∣ly. You Annot. on Gen. 46 27. record from R. Menachem, touching the 70. persons that went downe into Egipt, that things beneath do mystically signify things above: and that these 70. soules signifyed the 70. Angelles that are about Gods glorious throne, the presidents over the (seventie) nations. VVhy might you not as well send vs to the fables of S. Denys touching the divers orders and offi∣ces of Angelles for the exposition and illustration of the scrip∣tures as vnto these dotards? In your exposition of Moses his sight of the back parts of the Lord, you Annot. on Exo. 33 23. record this Iewish tradition from Maimony & R. Menachem, that God then appea∣red like sheliach tsibbur, clad with a robe like a minister of the congregation. You On Exo. 32.16. report from the Thargum that the first tables of the law were hevven out of the saphir of the throne of Gods glorie mentioned in Exo. 24,10. These Iewish tradi∣tions are presumptuous Col. 2.18 1 Cor. 4.6 Deut. 4.2. & 12.32. & 29.29. forbidden additions to the holy sto∣rie more vnlawfull then many of their grossest fables, like vnto
those forged mirackles which the popish legends do adde vn∣to the story of the new testament touching the acts of the A∣postles and other saints. Though Moses vvas Numb. 12 7. Heb. 3.2. faithfull in all the house of God, yet as if his story had bene defective, and his writings imperfect, you help to make it vp with the super∣stitious traditions of the Rabbines. You Annot. Exo. 26.1. tell vs from their canons, that wheresoever fine linnen twisted, is spoken of in the law, it must be six double thred: On Exo. 28.33. That wheresoever this word twisted is vsed alone (as it is in Exo. 39 24) it must be eight dou∣ble thred: That the robe was all of blew, and the threds thereof were Ibid. on vers. 32. twelve times double: That the breast plate & Ephod were On Exo. 28.6. woven with 28 threds, &c. Moses Gen. 14.22.23. telleth vs that A∣braham would not have so much as a threed from the King of Sodom, to avoyd offence, least he should say he had made A∣braham rich: and by his example you also had done better if in the exposition of the law you had not taken the description of one threed from the infidel Moses Bar Meimon, otherwise thē the faithfull Moses hath described the same: The Rabbines may say they have made you rich: that your Annotations are enri∣ched with their traditions: so are you an offense to the Iewes. Againe to give light vnto the scriptures you Annot. on Exod. 27.21. send vs vnto the Thalmud, and alledge from thence the superstitious order in trimming and lighting the lamps of the golden candlestick: The Children of light need not to learne such things from the Prince of darknes. Though Moses in his story was guided by the spirit of him that is the Dan 8.13 wonderfull Numbrer, yet as if the numbers and measures of the sanctuary had bene insuffi∣ciently described by him, you for our further instruction vvill needes Annot. on Exo. 25.30. record vnto vs a more full reckoning frō the Thalmu∣diques: as for example, that they say touching the shew bread, that the lēgth of every cake was 10. hādbredths, & the breadth, 5. handtbreaths, and the height 7, fingers. That the
On Exo. 28.33. belles on Aarons robe were in number 72, that they hanged 36. on the one skirt, and 36 on the other: that in these 72 belles were 72, clappers, all of gold, &c. That the plate of the holy crownewas Ibid. on vers. 36. a long plate of gold, two fingers broad and reached from one ear to an other: That the Ibid. on vers. 39. girdle was about 3. fingers broad and 32. cubites long, &c. These and many more such like novelties have you recorded from the presumptuous Rab∣bines, who being rashly puft vp of their fleshly mindes have added these things vnto the word of God. Though the spirit of God hath thought it meet to passe over these things, and to mention none of them in his word, yet you on the contrary have thought it meet not to passe them over, but to joyne them vvith your notes for illustration of the scripture. But touching the Iewish forbidden fables, you say further; Preface to annot. some things also you note from them, not as approving them yourself absolutely, but leaving them to further consideration of the prudent. Ans. 1. If you did absolutely approve thē, you should be more absurd then I can yet imagine that you are. It is too much that you approve them in so great a measure, as to alledge such a multitude of them without any note of dislike or censure vpon the allegation of them even in such maner as good writers do vse ordinarily to alledge the testimonies of those whom they do approve. 2. For more particular approbation, let the rea∣der consider how you approve that false and frivolous saying of R. Menachem, namely, that Annot. on Gen. 12 9. Abraham cleaved vnto the condi∣tion of mercie, for that is the south of the world: and therfore all A∣brahams iourneyes were towards the South: to confirme this you do vainely alledge the scriptures Ezek. 40.2. Ier. 1.13.14. For many of Abrahams journeys were not toward the south: And the scriptures do often shew mercy and judgements by & from the North and South indifferently. VVhen you Annot. on Gen. 15 12. alledge the false assertion of Maimony concerning Prophets: that they saw no prophetical vision, but by dream or by night vision, (Numb. 12.6. & 22.19,20.) or by day, after that a dead sleep was fallen vpon them: (Dan. 10.9.) And all that Prophesied, their joynts trembled, there remayned no strenght in them, &c. you adde then for confirmation, But they except Moses, as the scripture also doth, Nūb. 12.7.8. But how doth the scripture make an exceptiō
from that which it never affirmed? Though Moses be exalted above other prophets in the place alledged: yet neither doth the scripture determine visions to be either night visions, or in the day after a dead sleep: neither doth it affirme that trem∣bling of all that prophesied: neither is Moses excepted from that trembling. And Maimony himself when he els where Morch Nebuchim Chel. 2. per. 45. describes eleven degrees of prophesie doth therein refute his owne distinction, whiles there in the tenth and eleventh degree he gives instances of the visions of Ioshua by Iericho and of Abraham in the mount Morijah, which yet were neither by dream, nor by night vision, nor by day after a dead sleep. 3. Though you thus approve their vaine expositions, yet do you at other times refuse their more sound interpretations: as when Com∣ment. on Hos. 12.4. R. Abraham aben Ezra, R. David Kimchi, and R. Sol. Iarchi do expound the action of Iaakob holding Esaw by the heele (which is expressed in the name Iaakob,) to be a signe and note of his power, dignity and victory over Esaw, yet you write that Annot. on ps. 14.7. Iaakob is a name that noteth infirmitie, &c. and do observe that Annot. on Gen. 32 28. the Church, when speech is of her infirmitie, is often called Iaakob: & when her glorie and valour is signifyed, she is called Israel: as throughout the scriptures may be observed: as though we might not as well and truely observe, that the Church, when Esa. 9.12. Ier. 50.17. Rom. 9.3 Mat. 10.6. speech is of her infirmitie, is often called Israel: yea when the miserable apo∣state Church for defection is cast of and divorced from the Lord, the scripture still gives the name of Israel vnto her, rather then the name of Iaakob: and on the other side, when her
Mal. 1.2. Ps. 24.6. & 47.4. Esa. 44.5. glory, valour and dignity is signifyed, she is also called Iaakob. 4. VVhereas you say of those vaine traditions, which you do not absolutely approve, that you leave them to further consideration of the prudent. I ask you what the imprudent and simple shall do, of whom there is the greatest number, and into whose hāds especially these your annotations are like to come: be like it is enough that they stand amazed admiring these rare Rabbinical conceits, though they know not what to say or think of them. How do you forget the rule of the Apostle, which requireththat 1 Cor. 14 25. all things be done vnto edifying? why do you not go before them by telling them your judgement plainely, what you approve, and what you do condemne? 5. Nay, herein you shew lesse zeale and care for the instruction and guiding of the simple and ignorant people, then many of the infidell Rab∣bines themselves have done: for in their Commentaries vpon the Thalmud, when they meete with divers opinions of their doctours, their maner is to tell whose judgement they do follow and approve; as for example in the place which you obiected vnto me to shew that any wise man might advise the Priest, &c. divers opinions of R. Ismael, R. Akiba, R. Iehuda & others being there set downe in the text of the Thalmud, R. Schimean in his glosse thereon Com∣ment. on Thal. Tractat. negaguim, c. 2. sayth in one section, vehaijnu R. Akiba, that is, we are of R. Akiba his minde: on an other se∣ction, abal roeh ani, &c. i. but I respect that which is sayd of R. Iehuda: so your Rambam or Maimony also in his glosse vpon the same Chapter, saith in one section, vehalacah cachachamim, that is, the law or traditiō is according to their Chacamim: vpō an other sectiō, vehalacah cerabbi Iehuda, that is the tradition or right law is according to R. Iuda. And thus also they vse to decla∣re their judgemēts in other place: had you but shewed the like care in your allegation of their traditions, your people should have had lesse cause to cōplaine of your ambiguous expositiōs. CHAP. II. A Second scandal and a more vnworthy thing is this; to alledge the testimonies of such as are not onely fabulous but also blasphemous writers, vn∣lesse it were against themselves and such as rely vpon them.
Iam. 3.11.12. Doth a fountaine send forth at one place both sweet water and bitter? Can a fig tree bring forth olives or a vine figges? Can those impious Rabbines that with a blasphemous mouth do curse the sonne of God, and pray dayly against the Christians that are renewed after his simili∣tude: Can these I say with the same mouth send forth sweet &wholsom waters of instructiō for the flock of Christ to drink at? why do you thē lead Christiās for spirituall information in the law of God, vnto that swine-trough of the Thalmud? Even those infidelles themselves do confess and yeeld that there are many things that disable divers persons to beare witnesse & make them pesulim lehagned, vnmeet and vnworthy to be al∣lowed for witnesses: R. Iaakob that compiled Arba Turim, the 4. Tomes of Thalmudicall canons, sets downe many of these causes, as namely Choshen hammisch pat, tractat. Eduth, sig∣no. 33, 34. 35. wickednes, enmitye, blindnes, deafnes, &c. so that they being wicked enimies of the gospell and of true religion, blinde and deafe that have shut their eyes & stopped their eares from hearing the word of the Lord by his prophets are therfore by their owne sentence to be reiected from bea∣ring any testimony in matters of religion. Now their blasphemies are many: To begin with Maimony, he saith of God and repeats it, that he is Maim. in Misn. in Ie∣sudei hat∣thorah Cap. 2. one of every side, & on every corner, and every way one. This he saith by way of oppo∣sition vnto Christianisme, and so denyes the holy trinitie, and the godhead of Christe, teaching an vnity of person as wel as of essence: Thus where he professeth to describe the founda∣tions of the law, he overthrowes the foundation of our religiō. The holy gospel conteyning the story of Christ, and called Evangelion of the good tydings which it declares, they do blas∣phemously slander, and R. Nathā in Aruch in Aven gillaion & Elias Lev. in Tischbi, in gillaion. call it Aven-gillaion, a vision of vanity or a volume of iniquitie. There is no part of that sacred story concerning the birth, the life, the death, the doctrine and miracles of our blessed Lord Iesus, but they have a multitude of blasphemies touching ech of them, and so vile that I abhor to mention them. One impious Rabbine in speciall in a certaine treatise which he entitles Nizzachō, which he intēds as a triūph over the gospel, hath bene bolder then the rest to publish the the same, as is Seb. Mst. Annor. in Mat. 1.1. &c. shewed at large in the annotations vpon the Hebrew edition of the gospel of
Mathew: where they are in part refuted. All men know in generall that they deny Iesus the sonne of Mary, to be the Messias and saviour of the world; andthat herein the blaspheme they son of God as a deceiver and as a false Christ. And yet this they do with such vanitie and contradiction among themselves, that all may see their mad∣nes therein: Some of them say that their Messias is not yet borne, and others say he is borne but not reveiled yet, because of their iniquities. Of them that say he is borne and come into the world, some say he is among the Lepers at Roome∣gates: and that Talmud in Sanhe∣drin. c. 11. Fol. 98. R. Iehoschua ben levi finding Elias at the gates of Paradise & enquiring for the Messias, did by his direction finde him among those Lepers, and asked him of the time when he would reveale himself. Others of them say, Emunath Ichud. p. 44 that he is in Paradise (to vvit, on earth,) being borne the same day that the second temple was destroyed, and that Elias must first anoynt him for King, and that then he shall come, &c. Some of them say that there be two Christes or Messiasses, one the sonne of Ioseph, an other the sonne of David, one poore, th'other more mighty: These two Messiasses the Targum on Cant. 4.5. Chalde paraphrast will have to be signifyed by the tvvo yong roes that feed among the lilies. And divers of the Rabbines do in other places Aben Ez∣ra & R. Solomon comment. on Zach. 12.10. note the same thing. Some Thalmud Sanhedrin. c. 11. fol. 99 others of them say that King Heze∣kias was the Messias, and that now there is no Messias for Israel. And Ibid. f. 94 R. Thanchom enquiring vvhy Mem is shut in the vvord
Lemarbeh in the prophecy concerning Christ Esa. 9. vvhereas in other places it is open in the middes of words: he shewes this to be the occasion: vvhen as God sought to make Hezekias to be the Messias, he saith that Sennacherib, Gog and Magog yea and the whole consistory or councel of God came vnto him and sayd, o Lord of the world, seing King David hath prai∣sed thee with so many songs why wilt thou not make him Mes∣sias rather then Hezekias for whom thou hast done wonders & yet he hath not sung one song vnto thee: Herevpon he saith that immediately the Mem in Lemarbe was shut vp, viz. as a token that Hezekias should not be Christ: but then after this comes the earth itself and opens her mouth and saith O Lord of the world I will sing a hymne vnto thee in stead ofthis righteous Hezekias, & so herevpon it vvas concluded that Hezekias should be the Messias: Now the proofe which the Thalmud brings to shew that the earth did sing for Hezekias, is taken from Esa. 24.16. from the vttermost part of the earth we have heard prayses, glory to the just, &c. Some of the Rabbines do reckon the yeares & make a computation of times when their Messias shall come: & this vvith many and great absurdities & contradictions among themselves: Others of them seing how oft they have bene deceyved do say the times are not to be reckoned: R. Samuel bar Nachman & R. Ionathan do lay the curse vpon such as presume to reckon the time of his coming, saying, Thal. in Sanhedrin C. 11. f. 97. Let their bones be broken that count the times. VVhereas they Seb. Mun. annot. in Mat. blaspheme Christ Iesus in respect of his age, living but three or foure and thirty yeares, as though he vvas accursed like the wicked, of whom it is sayd he shall not live out half his dayes: see vvith vvhat vvarrant & agree∣ment among themselves they do this: R. Eliezer Talmud in Sanhe∣drin c. 11. Fol. 99. saith that the dayes of Messias shalbe 40. yeares, according to the yeares that they had seene evill, namely, according to the 40. yeares that they wandred in the wildernes, ps. 90.15. with ps. 95.10. & Deut. 8.2 R. Eleazar ben Azaria saith that the yeares of Messias must be 70. yeares according to the yeares of one King, Esa. 23.15. That one King they say is their Messias. One Rab saith, he must live 3. generations, noted in Dor Dorim, signifying a generation and generations, which they reckon for three, ps. 71.5. R. Dosa saith that the dayes of Messias must be 400. yeares, according to the yeares that they have seene evill, viz. according to the 400. yeares that Israel soiourned in Egypt, ps 90.15. with Gen. 15.13 An other Rabbi saith, that the yeares of the Messias must be 365. acccording to the number of the dayes of the sun fini∣shing his course in a yeare: this they gather from the yeare of the Lord mentioned in
Esa. 61.2. R. Nachman bar Isaak saith that his yeares must be according to the dayes of Noah vntill this time Esa. 54.9. R, Ichudah and R. Samuel say that his dayes shalbe as long as from the creation of the vvorld vnto the time presentfrom Deut. 11.21. Others of them say, that their Messias must live seven thousand yeares: This they gather from the vvords of the Prophet, As a bridegroome is glad over the bride, so shall thy God reioyce over thee, Esa. 62.5. Now the En mish∣pat gloss. in Tal. vbi supra. glosse vpō the Talmud in that place shewes vs how to count 7000. out of that verse, by reckoning the 7. dayes of the bridegroomes mariage feast, and making ech day to stand for a yeare, because a 1000 yeares with God is but as one day: and so those 7 dayes do note 7000. yea∣res, Iudg. 14.12.17. with Psal. 90.4. VVhereas they blaspheme the name Iesus given by the Angel vnto our Lord, & turne it into a curse, by certaine words according to the initiall letters thereof: see what vaine coniectures & collections they make for other names to be given vnto him: Talm. in Sanhedrin, Cap. 11. Fol. 98. The Schollers of R. Shiloh say that the name of Messias shalbe Shiloh from Gen. 49.10. & the schollers of R. Iannai say his name shalbe Iinnon from Ps. 72.17. The schollers of R. Chanina say his name shalbe Cha∣nina which signifies grace from Ier. 16.13. Others say his name shalbe Menachē or Cōforter frō Lā. 1.16. But the name Iesus they hold in execratiō: so that their blasphemies of his majestie may justly cause their testimonie & judgement in expounding the mysteries of holy scriptures to be refused & not alledged by vs. BVt you do not onely alledge them, but even their blasphe∣mous sayings and testimonies also without any note of dis∣like: as for example, you
Annot. on Exo. 28.30. tell vs how the Bab. Thalmud in Ioma Cap. 1. Fol. 21. speaking of Hag. 1.8. vvhere the Hebrew word Eccabda (I wilbe glorified) wanteth the letter H, which in numbring signifieth five, saith, The want of H, sheweth the want of five things in the secōd temple, which had bene in the first, namely, 1. The ark, with the mercie-seat and Cherubims: 2. The fyre (frō heavē) 3. The maiestie or divine presence:) 4. The holy Ghost: 5. And the vrim & Thummim. This Rabbinicall observation is most impious, false and blasphemous: first, it serves to overthrow the whole new Testament, to deny Christ Iesus, and to condemne all his holy Apostles, Evangelists, Iohn Baptist and other excellent Saints and servants of God who lived vnder the second templeand worshipped God therein, as though they all had bene de∣ceyvers & none of them endued with the holy Ghoste, which this Thalmud saith was wanting in the second temple. Second∣ly, this observation is directly contrary to the scope of that Pro∣phet in his whole prophecie, and even to the meaning of the word Eccabda I will be glorifyed: The spirit entending to pro∣mise Hag. 1.8. with ch. 2.4-10. more full and excellent revelation of the glory and grace of God in this second temple rather then in the first, how ab∣is it so to pervert the word of the Lord quite contrary to his meaning? But it is the lesse mervaile that you should thus produce this testimony of the Talmud, when as so many learned men have alledged it before you: and especially that Ioan. Rainold. censura li∣bror. apo∣cryph. Tō. 2. praelect. 134. wor∣thy light of our Church, whose memorial is blessed, who dispu∣ting against the Papists touching the fire come downe frō hea∣ven which in the second book of the Maccabees is sayd to have bene reserved in a pit during the time of the captivitie vntill the second temple was built, doth for their conviction alledge this testimonie, to shew that that fire was vvanting in the se∣cond temple, and therfore in a vvhole lecture throughout the same doth labour to procure credit vnto this testimonie. His maine reason is, that howsoever the Iewish vvriters do aboūd vvith many monstrous lyes and fables, yet when they speak against themselves & the honour of their owne nation, they are rather to be credited, & their testimony receyved. But touching this poynt vve are to consider: 1. VVhen adversaries of the truth bearing vvitnesse against themselves do not agree in that testimony with themselves, then can vve not safely receive their testimony, hovvsoever they may bring great shame vpon themselves and may have their mouthes stopped thereby. Novv in this Thalmudicall testimonie touching the vvant of the five things in the second temple, the Thalmudists do not agree among themselves: for the Thalmud Ierusalemy alledged by D. Rai. reckoned these 5 things to be vvanting: Tract. Maccoth, Cap. 2. Fol. 32. col.
1. the fire: the arke: vrim and Thummim: the anoynting oyle: the holy ghost: TheTalmud Babylonique of vvhich D. Rai. confesseth he could not come to the sight of it) leaves out the anoynting oyle and In Ioma. c. 1. f. 21. rec∣kons vp five or rather 7. other things: the ark, the mercy seat, the Cherubims, the fire, the divine presence, and vrim & Thummim: R. David Kimchi Commēt. in Hag. 1.8 speaking of the five things that should be wan∣ting, doth neither reckon the anoynting oyle, nor the mercy-seat, nor the Cherubims: R. Solomon Iarchi in his Commēt. Ibid. reckoning omits the anoynting oyle, the mercy seat, the Cherubims and the ark also: so that vnless he count vrim and Thummim for two, which none of the former did, he must come short of the number of five, Aben Ezra in his commentaries on the same place omits this mysterie, & thinks it not meet to make any mention at all thereof. Againe the Thalmud Ierusalemy relates this matter from R. Samuel in the name of R: Acha (not Achar as is printed in the lecture above mentioned:) but the Babylo∣nian Thalmud relates it from R. Samuel in the name of R. Aini. and therein disagrees also. And other differences there are be∣twixt them also, so that for this cause their credit is like the cre∣dit of those Mark. 14 56. disagreeing witnesses that rose vp against Christe. 2. Those witnesses which so speak against themselves, that they do vvithall speak against the honour of Christ therein, are not to be credited: but the Rabbines in this place affirming the holy Ghost to be vvanting in the second temple, do herein speak against Christ, and make him (that Mat 3.16 Ioh. 3.34. receyved the holy Ghost &
Ioh. 16.13.14. Act. 2.4. communicated the same vnto others more then ever be∣fore) to be inferiour vnto all the Prophets that went before. If this Thalmudicall testimony touching the want of these 5. things in the second temple vvere true, according to the mea∣ning of the Rabbines, then could not Iesus be the true Messias. 3, It might easily be shewed by an 100. instances, that these Rabbines do often speak falsely against the honour of their owne nation, and against the vvorthiest men of God in their nation, to honour themselves vvith the invention of some Ca∣balisticall conceit: though to the dishonour of Abraham, of Iaakob, of Samuel, of David, Hezekias, Elisha, &c. Yet to mag∣nifytheir owne fictions, they tell many fabulous things tou∣ching the faults of these persons. And so to broch their cu∣rious & absurd conceit from Eccabda vnder shew of a great my∣sterie, it is no marvel, nor vnvsuall thing if the devisers there∣of should vtter some things against the honour of their publi∣que estate, especially when those priviledges which they take from the second temple, are given in the same place to the first temple, for the honour of their nation at that time. As for the antiquity of these Talmuds, and Rabboth that relate this testimony, it gives no more credit herevnto then vnto the rest of their fables and impious traditions: And therfore is of no worth further then it receives confirmation from els where: or serves by way of supposition to convince such as rely vpon the same. CHAP. III. THe third Scandall in the allegation of these Thal∣mudicall traditions, is in respect of the divine ho∣nour which the Iewes give vnto them, holding that they are the very word of God, immediately delivered of God vnto Moses in mount Sinai, when as he was 40. dayes and 40 nights in the mount with God. It is not enough for them to profess, teach and practise such fabu∣lous, superstitious and blasphemous things, vnless they obtrude them vpon God, equalling them with the holy scriptures and preferring them before the writings of the Prophets. They tell vs that there is a double lavv, thorah abschebicthab, a vvritten law: thorah schebeal peh, a law in the mouth: which Moses did re∣ceive but not write, onely delivering it from mouth to mouth vnto posteritie: And this is their Thalmud. R. Aben Ezra in his preface to the commentaries vvhich he vvrote on the lavv calleth it the ioy of their heart and the health of their bones, & saith there is no difference betwixt these two lawes. R. Solomon Iarchi Commēt. on Deut. 4.14. teacheth, that the ordinances and lawes which the Lord comman∣ded
Moses to teach Israel Deut. 4.14. vvere this traditional law, thorah schebealpeh, the law delivered by mouth and not vvrit∣ten: though now at last the Iewes have vvritten the same. Maimony to shevv the dignitie and excellencie of these tradi∣tions, In mis∣neh, in te∣phil. col hasshanah. alledgeth that saying from Hab. 3.6, his vvayes are everlasting; but (saith he) read not, halicoth, vvayes: but hala∣coth traditions. And saith, whosoever teacheth those traditions let him be assured that he is a child of the vvorld to come. That Targum or Chaldee paraphrast which you often alledge, doth interpret those kisses of the mouth, Cant 1.1. to be the six parts of the Thalmud: and aftervvards againe most absurdly Thargum on Cant. 5.10. speaks of the same, desiring to serve that God, which in the day being clothed with a robe white as snow studyeth the 24. bookes of the Bible, and in the night season studieth the six parts of the Thalmud. And the Thargum Ierusalemy expounds those words of Iaakob in his blessing of Iuda, that his on Gen. 49.12. teeth should be white with milke, of such as are bakian bahalacah exer∣cised in the tradition of the Thalmud. And further that they prefer their Thalmud before the holy scriptures, it appeares by such sayings as are Buxtorf. recens. operis Tal. p. 197.202. noted to be ordinary among the Rab∣bines: namely, that the words of their vvise men were more amiable and excellent then the words of the Prophets that the scripture or text of the Bible is to be compared vnto water: the mischna, (which is one part of the Talmud) vnto wine: & the Thalmud (or Gemara) vnto Condite: that the law is like vnto salt, the mischna like vnto Pepper & the Thalmud like vnto sweet spices. If this be so, it is no marvel that you do so sugar and spice your annotatiōs with the traditiōs of these vvise men. It is affir∣med in the In Bab∣ha metsia c. 2. Fol.
33 Thalmud, that to be exercised in the scriptures it is a vertue & no vertue, that is very small in cōparison: to be exer∣cised in the mischna, that is a vertue for which they receyve a re∣ward: to be exercised in the Gemara, (which is an other part of the Thalmud) is a vertue, then which none is more excellent, R. Solo∣mon expounding those words of Moses touching the submissiō vnto the) judgement of the Priests and Iudges in Israel, that itwas not to be declined from neither to the right hand nor to the left, doth herevpon reach that they are to be obeyed and followed, Com∣ment. on Deut. 17.11. when they say that the right hand is the left, or that the left hand is the right hand: and hovv much more when they say that the right hand is the right hand, and that the left hand is the left hand? Thus do they set men in the seat of God, and make vile flesh like vnto the most high, yea and exalt them into a throne of dignitie above him. In this regard it is more offensive to alledge such counterfaite stuffe as doth fasly beare the name of God, as if it were suggested by his divine and extra∣ordinary inspiration. In the popish legends there are many fained visions and mirackles recorded, and some of them devi∣sed onely to perswade vnto mercy and workes of charitie: yet do vve justly abhor them and the vse of them to any such end, because they are forged with the great abuse of Gods name: for the Kingdome of God needs not to be vpholden with any props or pillars borowed from the Kingdom of Satan. He that being to beare witnesse of any matter, shall first be convi∣cted of a lye touching the meanes of his knowledge, and tou∣ching the person from whom he pretends he heard that which he is to vvitnesse, even for this cause deserves to be condemned and to have his testimony reiected: And even so the Thal∣mudists being herein manifestly guilty of a notorious & blas∣phemously touching the meanes of their knowledg, while they pretend a divine revelation from God for all that they say, though he never delivered the same vnto any: for this cause is their testimony also to be refused exceptit be against themsel∣ves. And for this cause also your boldnes and your fault in fre∣quent alledging of them, is the more inexcusable.
CHAP. IV. A Fourth Scandall, is your forgerie in the allegation of these Rabbines, and this in divers kindes. First, in that you joyne with the Iewes in making divers of their traditions to be part of the authen∣tique word of God: and namely, in canonizing the divers readings that are in the line and in the magine of the Masorites Bible: for example, in not, to himself: not be∣trothed her, and yet betrothed her to himself: of these you say, Annot. on Exo. 21 8. Moses hearing it of God, did by his spirit, write both. Before this time, I never heard of any Christian, that durst avouch so pe∣remptorily, this presumptuous or rather blasphemous asser∣tion, by which you make God like vnto Ianus Bifrons the Idoll with two faces, to look two divers vvayes at once, in these divers and contrary readings of the same text. Do you not remember what a fearfull Prov. 30.6. Rev. 22.18 curse is pronounced against those that adde vnto the book of God? why then do you bring these additions and maintaine them, as the worke of Gods spirit? It is great sin to adde vnto the vvritings of men, and to put forth things in their name, whereof they are not authors: but much more to deale so with God. It is a poynt of treason against the King to counterfait his hand, his seale, his coyne: how much more to counterfait the hand and writing of God, to coyne new scripture, and to set the stampe of the Rabbines vpon the coyne of the Lord, by adding their tradi∣tions vnto his word, and giving divine authoritie vnto them? But it is the lesse marvell that you who erre so strangely in dis∣cerning the Church of God, should also erre in discerning the scriptures of God. You Annot. Ibid. plead, that the Hebrew hath both readings, the first in the line, the later in the margine: I answer. 1. There be many Hebrew Bibles: which do want these readings that you speak of: That ancient edition of the Hebrew Bible by
Sebastian Munster haththem not: That great edition of the Hebrew by Plantine hath not these additions in the margine: The most excellent and divers editions hereof by Rob. Stephanus both in 4o and in 16o, have them not. A new edition of Raphelengius hath them not. The late edition by R. Isaak Bar Shimeon hath thē not: so that we may say with as good reason as you, that the Hebrew hath them not. 2. That Masoriticall Bible of Bomberg, that hath these divers readings, hath also so many other traditionall observatiōs, in the margine thereof round about, that I think you wilbe loth to af∣me them to be receyved from God & written by his spirit: & yet that Masoriticall bible which mainteyneth these divers readings delivers one sort of traditions as well as the other, and puts no difference betwixt them. 3. There are also sundry editions of the new Testamēt, which have divers readings, one in the line, an other in the margine, yet can we not hence conclude that both these readings are receyved from God: and yet may we say of these as well as you do of the other, that the Greek hath both readings, &c. though onely one of them were delivered by the spirit extraordinarily from God. And even so, Arias Monta∣nus in his edition of the Hebrew Bible, though he have noted the divers readings in the margine, yet not as if they were deli∣vered by the spirit of God; but as In appa∣ratu Bibl. praefat. ad lect. var. falts growne by the calami∣tie of times, the negligence and ignorance of scribes, or other∣wise, &c. You alledge further, that the writing differeth in the eye, (lo, not; and
lo, to himself) but hath no difference in the eare: so Mo∣ses hearing it of God, did by his spirit, write both. Answ. 1, how know you that there vvas no difference of sound in Moses his eare, when he heard those words whose letters do differ? vvant of a distinct sound, in words that signify distinct and severall things is an imperfection of speech, and a defect in the lan∣guage: but now the language spokē vnto Moses being Hebrew which is the perfectest language: the Lord that spake, speaking after a most perfect maner: and Moses that heard being pre∣pared therevnto of God, after the most perfect maner that wasneedfull for the receyving of that law; who is it now, that can justly affirme, that at this time distinct words had an indistinct & confused sound without any difference in the eare? 2. Though the common rule of grammar at this day teach that those two Aleph, vau. letters are quiescent or silent and not pro∣nounced in the end of vvords, yet are there still some exceptiōs made by some, and the other He, jod. two being of like nature for the pronunciation are by many learned men pronounced in like case in the end of vvords. Some write that these quiescent letters as they are called, do cause a different pronuntiation, in making the vowelles vnto which they are joyned to be drawne out with a longer sounde and therfore are by them called Val. Schind. In∣stitut. Hebr. lib. 1. p. 12. literaeflatus & protractionis. Others tell vs that Ioa. Dru∣sius de re∣cta lectio∣ne ling. Sanct. cap. 8. Cholem hath six or seven differēt kindes of sounds according to the diversitie of letters with which it is joy∣ned, and in particular what distinct and peculiar kinde of sound it hath in lo, not: and how it differs from Cholem in other places. And if this be so, how can any man affirme that there was no difference in the eare betwixt lo, not, & lo, to himself, whē Moses heard them of God? 3. This your distinction of difference in the eye, and no difference in the eare seemes to be very idle, and of no vse to give any light vnto the matter that you are speaking of: you can not pretend the like distinction to bring in some other of the divers readings noted by the Masorites, seing many of them do manifestly differ in the eare, as much or more then in the eye. To vvhat purpose then serveth this distinction? 4. If there be litle or no difference of sound betwixt these words, this is the more against you: and helpes to make it more apparant that these and the like divers readings did arise from the errour of the scribes that wrote out the copies of the Bible, which might easily be deceyved in those words, which by their sound were not distinguished from one an other. And thus also from the likenes of the figure in divers letters, as in van & Iod, it is observed that Io. Bux∣torf. The∣saur. gram. lib. 1. c. 28 in writing of them one hath degenerated in∣to
the other. And if we look vpon those seven classes or rankes, wherevnto Masoreth hammaso∣reth in Ta∣bulis secū∣dis, Orat. 1. Elias Levita hath reduced these divers readings, we may thereby plainely observe that they are all such, as through some similitude either in sound, in figure, or in signi∣fication or through transposition, coniunction, or division of the letters, or the like occasion the pen of the scribe might quickly slip and misse therein: for example to give instance in two like letters: he telles vs that in 52 places of these divers rea∣dings, jod is written in the beginning of a word, and the Masorites will have it be read vau: And on the contra in 56. places vau is written in the beginning of a word and they read it jod: Againe in 70. places jod is written in the middes of a word and they read it & pronounce it as vau, &c. And hence as it seemeth, Rabbinicall superstition and curiositie meeting with these divers readings have turned humane slips and errours into sacred mysteries, & given divine authoritie vnto the faults of men. As the Pope in his Kalender many times canonizeth thē for Saints, who are the Children of Hell: so have the Iewes in their Masorah tur∣ned the errours of men into Canonicall scriptute. VVhy do you follow them herein? FOr confirmation of your opinion, you produce witnesses, & say, The Hebrew Doctours (in Thalmud Bab. in Nedarim, Chap. 4 Fol. 37. B) say, The words read and not written, and written and not read, were the tradition of Moses from (mount) Sinai: that is, as the Hebrew Scholion on that place noteth, so Moses receyved in Sinai, & delivered to Israel. I answer, 1. These witnesses being already convicted of falshood, do∣tages and blasphemies are not to be admitted to speak in this controversie, their testimonie is not to be receyved. This Thalmud which you alledge, is that bed of slumber into which the Lord had
Esa. 29.10 Rom. 11.8 threatned to cast the Iewes: in this bed of er∣rour do your Hebrew Doctours lye snorting in the spirit of slumber: vvhat meane you to waken them and call them vp to come and tell vs their dreames? You may as well alledge their testimonie, to make vs beleeve that their Thalmudicallcanons and constitutions, are from God as well as the holy scriptures, and that we are bound to exercise ourselves in them, rather then in the scriptures: for this they affirme as I shewed before. And there is no tradition so impious or absurd, but the Thalmudists commend the same vnto vs, even with the same phrase, that is here vsed in this your allegation. At every turne they say, Thalmud in Mena∣choth. c. 1. Fol. 29. Maimony in Tephil∣lim, cap. 1. Sec. 3. R. Alphes in Tephil∣lim, fol. 78. a. b, & 79. a. b, &c. Halacah lemoshe missinai. i. a tradition of Moses from (mount) Sinai. VVith this cloak they aray their supersti∣tions, and with this false boasting they sell their Rabbinicall wares. How great is the scandall which you give vnto the Iewes by this your dealing? how may they be encouraged to drink more deepely of that spiced cup of their Thalmud, when as they see the wine thereof to go downe so pleasantly with you, by receiving their testimonie and their traditions in so great a measure? 2. If there vvere nothing els but the foolish traditions cō∣teyned in this very Chapter vnto which you send vs, touching Ben Modar with other vaine observations; vve might there∣by be sufficiently warned not to receive the testimony of this Thalmud. R. Iosei bar Chanina Thalm. in Neda∣rim, c. 4. F. 38. a saith, The law vvas not givē but vnto Moses & to his seed, because it was sayd, write thee & engra∣ve for thee two tables of stone, but Moses having a good ey: of his li∣berality gave it to Israel. &c. R. Iochanan srith in the same place, The holy blessed God doth not cause his schecinah or habitatiō to abide but vpō a strōg mā, a rich mā, a wise mā & an hūble mā, & that all these were in Moses: that he was a strōg mā, because it is sayd, he spread the covering over the tabernacle, &c. Exo. 40.19. This same thing is also noted by Commēt. on Exo. 39 33. R. Solomon from R. Tanchuma, that no mā had the strēgth to do this thing but Moses alone, &c. That he was strong also, in that he could beare the two tables of stone in his hand, that he could break them, the length of them being six, the breadth six, and the thicknes thirteen cu∣bites, &c. That he was vvise; that all the 50 gates of vnder∣standing were given vnto Moses, one excepted; that they prove from ps. 8.5. That he vvas meek from Numb. 12.3. That he
was rich from Numb. 16.15. So they write of divers others: as of Ionah whom they prove to be rich, because he payd the fare of the ship: Ion. 1.3. R. Iohanan saith it vvas the hyre of the whole ship: R. Romanus saith it came to foure thousand pieces of gold, &c. vvith a number of such like presumptions. 3. There be also of the Rabbines themselves that reiect this superstitious conceit of these divers readings delivered vnto Moses from mount Sinai. R. David Kimchi one of the learne∣dest and most judicious among them all, though he ascribe too much vnto their Kabalah and tradition, yet Kimchi Preface vnto Ioshua. he judgeth that these divers writings and readings came from the dispersion of the Iewes, from the difference of copies written by divers scri∣bes: and that Ezra and the men of the great congregation (as they are called) in correcting the copies vvhen they found dif∣ference, went according to their knowledge after the greatest number, and when they did not clearely vnderstand some wordes, sometimes they wrote them and did not poynt them: sometimes they wrote one way in the margent, and did not write so in the text, &c. And this is the judgement of other Rabbines also as of Ephodaeus, and Don Isaak Abarbinel or Abra∣binael, that this diversity of writing and reading arose from hephsed, balbul & Saphek, that is, from corruption, confusion, doubting and vncertainty of scribes, &c. This is acknowledged by Preface to Masori∣tes Bible. R. Iacob ben Chajim, vvho in vaine labours to refute them. Had you but cleaved vnto the sounder sort of Rabbines you should not have gone so far astray. 4. It is worthy to be observed also, that the very same testi∣mony alledged by you frō the Thalmud, Nedar. c. 4 f. 37. is that maine stone of offence, whereat the later Rabbines have stum∣bled and fallen into the pit of superstition, and therfore is it so oft cited by them, viz. by Preface ad Sepher mitsvoth gadol. R. Moses mikkotsi: by Preface ad Bibl. masorit. R. Iacob ben Chajim: by Masor hammasor. prefat. ter∣tia. Elias Levita, &c. Had you duely considered in what superstitious maner they vse the same, and how it serves their turne, you would not so lightly have produced such vvitnesse.
5. To come neerer vnto this your testimony itself: if vveconsider the instances and examples of the vvords vvriten and not read: and read and not written, which the In Neda∣rim. c. 4. f. 37. Thalmud pro∣pounds vnto vs as a tradition of Moses from mount Sinai: we may perceive that there is never a one of them taken from the law, from the five bookes of Moses, but all of them from later Pro∣phets, from the bookes of Ruth, of Samuel, Kings, of Ieremie and Ezekiel. If your witnesse had sayd that Moses had delivered the divers vvritings and readings of his owne bookes, there had bene some more colour for it, but that Moses in mount Sinai should deliver the divers writings and readings of Ezekiel and Ieremie that prophesyed so many generations after him: this is most senseless and absurd to imagine. Had not Ieremy and Ezekiel the spirit of God to direct them in the vvriting of those particular vvords, as vvel as to set downe the maine matters of their prophesy vvhich they foretold? And vvhat need vvas there then of a tradition from Moses, for the vvriting or reading of them? And vvho can say that Moses foreknew these things? Though the Masorites have numbred vnto vs many divers writings and readings out of the bookes of Moses, yet the Thal∣mud in your allegation mentions none of them, but such as are in the Prophets. 6. Suppose all vvere true that the Thalmud and the glosse therevpon doth testify in this place: namely that these divers readings were the tradition of Moses from mount Sinai, &c. yet would not this make good your assertion nor prove the same, vvhen as you say that Moses by the spirit of God did write both; The Thalmud here saith nothing of writing one vvord in the text, and an other in the margine. The Rabbines here speak onely of receyving and delivering, but not of writing both. They Elias Le∣vita Maso∣reth ham∣masoreth, praefat. 3. hold that their traditions vvere nor vvritten by Moses, but delivered from mouth to mouth and aftervvards vvritten by Ezra and others, &c. Herein therfore you go further then your Thalmudicall testimonie vvill extend, & passe the bounds of sobrietie in this your assertion, more then many of the pre∣sumptuous Rabbines themselves.
7. If it vvere true, as you plead, that Keri and Chethib, the divers readings (as you call them) as not betrothed her and betro∣thed her to himself, vvere both vvritten by Moses, by the spirit of God: then are they both holy and divine scripture: then do you herein declare your self to be guilty of great sin, treachery and vnfaithfull dealing vvith the scriptures, in that you do leave out divers parts of the same at your pleasure in your translation both of the psalmes and of these tvvo first bookes of Moses vvhich you have already published: for though some of these divers readings be noted by you in your anno∣tations on Genesis, yet are many of them quite left out: as namely, in Gen. 8.17. and Gen. 10.19, and Gen. 25.23, and Gen. 27.3, and Gen. 33.4, and Gen. 36.5, &c. Againe in your tran∣slation of Exodus you leave out very many also, as in Exo. 13.11 and Exo. 16.2. and Ibid. vers. 8, &c. And in your translation of the Psalmes, though divers be noted by you, yet are a great number left out, and passed by, as in Ps. 5.9, and Ps. 6 4, and Ps. 10.10. and Ps. 123.4, and Ps. 139.16. vvith a multitude more as may be seene in the Masorites Bible, onely one of these rea∣dings are mentioned by you, and yet there is as much & the same vvarrant for both in ech of these places, as there is for both those in Exo. 21,8, vvhich you say vvere vvritten by Mo∣ses. This being so, hovv great is your sacriledge that devoure holy things, and steale avvay the vvord of God (so acknovvled∣ged by yourself) from the people of God. There is Prov. 20.15. gold and a multitude of precious stones, but the lippes of knowledge are a pre∣cious Iewell: ech jod and title of holy scripture vvritten by the spirit of God, are in vvorth above all pearles, vvhat meane you then vvith Achan to dig in the earth, to hide these vvedges of gold in the ground and to bury them in your tent? Consider your estate: either you are vnder the curse for adding some of the readings vnto the vvord of God, or els it hangs over your head for diminishing from the vvord of God, in taking avvay and concealing the rest, that are of like authoritie vvith the former. The Rabbines R. Solo∣mon Iarchi on Gen.
17.5. vvrite that jod being taken avvayfrom the name Sarai contended vvith Schecinah, vvith God vntill satisfaction vvas made vnto this Iod by adding it againe vnto the name of Hosea making it to be Iehoshua: How much rather might many jods contend with you for taking them away from the holy scripture, if they be divine traditions as you say? The Iewes do also R. Sol on Gen. 2.7. write, the word jitser vsed to describe the forming of man, being written with two jods, Gen. 2.7. doth shew vnto vs how man was formed both for this vvorld and for the world to come at the resurrection of the dead: but the word jitser vsed to describe the forming of beasts, Gen. 2.17. being in the Hebrew written with one Iod onely, shewes that the beasts are not formed to stand vp vnto judgement in the world to come. If this be so, what a world of injury and wrong have you done, by omitting it so often? Yea seing Christ him∣self telleth vs, Mat. 5.18. that heaven and earth shall perish, rather then one jod or title of his law escape, &c. shall not heaven & earth be witnesse against you that do let so many of those jods and titles to escape and passe away in your translation, when as yet you confesse that they vvere vvritten by the spirit of God? why have you not translated the reading of the margent, & set it in the margent of your translation, as wel as the reading of the text, if both be from the spirit of God? why have you not done it in other places, as wel as in this place Exo. 21.8? But it may be that as in many things you honour the Iewish exposi∣tions and opinions too much, that so you Iudaize in this also: that as they, so you think it not meet to reveale in writing ma∣ny of your speciall mysteries and secrets vnto them that are without, but deliver them from mouth to mouth vnto your owne people. Seing the communion of all Churches in Christendome is according to your profession an vnlawfull and an vncleane thing, it is the lesse marvell that you refuse to cast your pearles before such polluted persons whom you dare not touch nor joyne yourself vnto them in the worship of God. Alwayes these two things are evident and apparant in you, that as you make litle conscience of the rules of your separation
among your selves, for then there would be yet more divisions among you then there are: so also you make litle conscience of these divers readings, which you say were written by Moses: for if you did reverence them according your owne plea, you would not passe by so many of them in such maner as you do. 8. Suppose that yow would go about to set downe all the di∣vers readings, how could you come to any certainty, to know which be they? In the place of the Thalmud quoted by you, there be not above twelve or thirteene mentioned: and this of lo, not: and lo, to himself is none of them▪ VVhere vvill you find those other hundreds of them? If you betake yourself vnto the Masorites Bible, from whence many have taken them you may as wel take a thousand superstitions more which by like warrant are there recorded vnto vs as divine traditions. VVhereas you tell vs here of the Hebrew scholion confirming the testimony of the Thalmud: had you looked well vpon the same, you might further have seene this also, that the very same hebrew R. Nissim gloss. in Talm. in Nedarim. c. 4. f. 37. glosse doth there dissent from the Thalmud, touching some of these divers readings: Touching eth dehuggad (as they call it) in Ruth; though the Thalmud note it to be read and not written, yet the Hebrew scholion saith, In the bookes or copies which we have it is both written & read: neither is it mentio∣ned in the Masorah among the words that are read and not writtē. Againe, touching eth dehammitsvah (as they call it) though the Thalmud notes it among the words written and not read, yet R. Nissim in his Ibidem. f. 38. gloss herevpon doth shew, that how so∣ever some say this is found in the section of the law which they name ethchannan, yet it is not found there in any copies which they have, nor yet in the Masora, &c. R. Iacob ben Chajim Praefat. ad Bibl. Ma∣sorit. relates the same thing, and addes further a different opinion of R. Solomon Iarchi about the same. And Elias Levita in the warning which he
Masor. hammas. praefat. 3. gives concerning the Bibles printed at Ve∣nice both in greater and lesser volumes, anno 278 (according to the Iewes lesser computation,) saith that the Masoriticall tra∣ditionsabout the divers readings there specified are full of er∣rour, that he which added them was vnlearned, had no judge∣ment touching divers copies, that he put that in the text which should have bene in the margent, and contra, &c. From whence then vvill you get a just and sufficient warrant of all these divers readings, which you hold to be divine traditions written by the spirit of God? 9. VVhen you think that you have found out these divers readings, & are resolved of the number of them: what vvill you do to finde out the meaning of them? every vvord of God is for the aedification of his Church: and Prov. 8.9 they are all plaine to them that will vnderstand & straight to them that would finde knowledge: God hath taught vs how to Neh. 8.8 expound the scripture by the scripture itself, by comparing one part thereof vvith an other. But where is the rule of interpretation, by which we may finde out the mysteries of these divers readings? for example, vvhen Zeboim Gen. 10.19. goim, Gen. 25.23. and Ioush, Gen. 36.5. are written in the text vvithout vau and in the margine with vau: vvhen the vowelles for the word Perath are vvritten and not the letters, 2. Sam. 8.3. VVhen the letters of the vvord Iidroch are vvritten and not the vowels, Ierem. 51.3. by vvhat found kinde of interpretation can both these writings be so expoun∣ded that the consciences of Gods people may rest therein, and be edifyed vnto the Kingdome of God? If we go vnto the Iewes Cabala, they will give vs new and strange kinde of exposi∣tions vpon the want or change of a letter; because R. Solo∣mon Iar. on Gen. 25 24. & on Gē. 38.27. theomim the word that signifyeth twinnes Gen. 25.24. is written in the text with defect of the letter which is in the margine, that is a signe that one of Rebekahs Children was just and the other wicked: but because the vvord theomim for twinnes is written full in the story of Thamar, Gen. 38.27. that was a signe that both her Children should be righteous. They expound
Ioan. Rainol. censur. lib. apocr. tom. 1. praelec. 27. the vvant of Iod in the last syllable of Tanninim signifying the whales Gen. 1.21. to be a signe vnto vs how God gelded the male Leviathan to hinder the procreation of them least they should devoureall, &c. From the defect of vas in doroth Gen. 9.12. they teach that the Rainebovv should not be seene in some generations, as I noted Pag. before: But vvhat vvise man is there that vvill not reiect these vanities? And yet vvhether you or any other can dravv any sounder observations from these changes of jod and van and such like divers readings, it is much to be feared. If these vvere vvritten by the spirit of God as you vvill have it, then must they be for our Rō. 15.4 learning and instruction, for en∣crease of our comfort and hope: but if you cannot shevv that there is a certaine and sure vvay to gather necessary doctrine from them for our edification, then have vve no reason to think vvith you that they are any part of the scriptures of God, or vvritten by the spirit of God. 10. In the last place, that all may see how dangerous a thing it is to regard the testimony of these Thalmudists, touching these divers readings, I vvill propound vnto the reader one other vile practise of them, viz. their al tikri in changing and altering the reading of the scripture according to their lust, which is done on this maner: They Thalmud in Mena∣choth, c. 1. Fol. 29. teach from those words in Esay, 26.4. bejah jehovah tsur ghnolamim, that God created two vvorlds vvith the two letters of the vvord jah; with jod and hè: but being in doubt whether the world to come was created with jod and the vvorld present vvith hè; or on the contrary: for help in this doubt they go to an other place of scripture Gen. 2.4. vvhich they do thus corrupt: whereas it is there sayd in the text touching heaven and earth, behibbaream, when they were created: they say al tikri, read not, behibbaream, but behèbaream: that is, he created them with hè: and then also they give other reasons why the world to come should be created vvith jod, & this world with he; viz. because the righteous which belong to the world to come are litle in their owne eyes, and also bowed downe, as the letter Iod in this forme () is litle & bowed also, &c. These collections, (beside the corruption of the text) are like vn∣to the
De∣inghe. Fol. 20. B. collections of Thomas Leaar once one of your sepa∣ration, but now an Arian, who by his cabala from the letters &characters of the Hebrew Alphabet professeth to shew vs the course of the sun, the waye to the Indies, vvith other secrets of Astronomie. Againe, they Thalmud in Bera∣coth c. 9. Fol. 54. write that the stone which Og the King of Bashan sought to cast at the Israelites, vvas three miles long according to the length of their campe: that when he had lift this stone vpon his head, God sent a pismire vvhich made a hole in this stone, so that it fell downe about his neck: and that while Og strove to get it from about his neck, his teeth pre∣sently grew out into such a length, that he could not lift vp the stone nor deliver himself from it: for proofe of this miracle, they alledge the Psal. 3.7 words of the psalmist, thou hast broken the teeth of the wicked: but vvithall they bring their al tikri, and say, read not schibbarta, thou hast broken: but scherababta, vvhich signi∣fies the quite contrary, to vvit, thou hast encreased or augmen∣ted, namely the teeth of Og, that the stone could not be got from his neck. R. Meir Thalmud in Sotah, c. 7. f. 37. saith, vvhen Israel stood by the Sea, (Exo. 14.) the tribes did strive one vvith an other, one sayd I vvill go dovvne first into the Sea: an other sayd I vvill descend first into the Sea; but the tribe of Beniamin lept forth & vvent dovvne first into the Sea; their proofe there is from the words of the Psalme, There was litle Beniamin, Rodem, their ruler: But say they, al-tikri, read not, rodem, but radiam he descended into the Sea. This proofe is some thing like vnto your ovvne Annot. on Psal. 68 28. ex∣position of this very vvord, vvhen as you also from the cor∣rupt Greek version, vvhich translateth this vvord rodem to sig∣nify in a traunce, do there tell vs that these things applyed to Christs times and after one very mysticall; from hence you shevv hovv Paul of Beniamin was converted in a traunce or ecstasie, &c. that Beniamin the least is here put first: so in the heavenly Ierusalem the first foundation was a Iasper, on which Beniamins name was graven, &c. Of this your revelation, ecstasy or Phantasy more is to be sayd Cap. 7. hereafter. This kinde of corrupting the text is ordi∣nary vvith them: some examples hereof I noted before out of the Pag. 370. Thalmud and Pag. Maimony; and an 100. more might easily be alledged to shevv the same. Elias Levita
Masor. hammasor. prefa. 3. bringing anexample or tvvo hereof Esa. 54.13. & Psal. 50.23, vvhere they say al-tikri, read not banajic thy Children: but bonaijc thy buil∣ders: read not sam deres he that disposeth his vvay, but scham de∣res, there is the vvay: he giveth this judgement herevpon, viz. that if the pricks or vovvels had bene given before from Sinai, that then this should have bene a heynous practise. And ther∣fore seing the vowels are so ancient  and seing also that they have presumed to make this change as vvell in letters as in pricks, as the examples first mentioned do shew, it doth ther∣fore follow from his grant, that this al tikri or changing of the reading hath bene a heynous corruption of the scripture. And therfore howsoever otherwise, they have bene superstitious in keeping a reckoning of all the vvords and letters in the scrip∣ture: and that God also hath vsed their superstition vnto our good in some things: yet their boldnes and licentiousnes in these kind of depravations makes that their testimony about the reading of the scripture is not to be rested vpon. BVt you bring yet more vvitnesse for the countenancing of your assertion, and say, Annot. on Exo. 21.8. The Chaldee version in this and other the like places, translateth according to the margine: an evident proof that these divers readings were not added by the Maforites, as some think: seing the Masorites were not so ancient. I answer▪ First, this testimony is against yourself: for if the Chaldee version in this and other the like places, translate accor∣ding to the margine, and that onely (as it doth) or els accor∣ding to the text onely: then doth it afford vnto vs, not both the divers readings, but one onely: and so is contrary to your translation that yeelds two. Had the Chaldee paraphrast thought, that
Moses by the spirit of God, had written both these divers, readings, (as you say he did) then it had bene sacriledge in him to have suppressed and kept back one of them from vs. This vve see also in the Arabique version, which though it sometimes translate according to the readings vvhich the Ma∣sorites have set in the margine, as in 1 Sam. 2.3. and sometimes according to the reading which is set vvithin the line of thetext, as in Psal. 100., &c. yet still it hath bt one reading, and must therfore be guilty of perfidie and treachery against the holy Ghost, if it had acknowledged two readings appoynted of God. The like is to be observed also in the Persian Thargum, which still followes not a double reading, but keepes to one onely, as in gardan o, Gen. 33.3, & perasaue, Deut. 33.9, & so in other places. And this also is that vvhich is commonly practi∣sed in other vulgar translations vsed in the Churches of Christ this day, who are therfore vvitnesses against you in this matter, vnless they vvill condemne themselves of vnfaithfulnes in keeping the scriptures. Secondly, though the Chaldee version do sometimes follow that reading vvhich now stands in the margine: yet vvho can affirme that it stood in the margine of that copie which this paraphrast then vsed, rather then in the text itself? The Ma∣sorites though coming after the Chaldee paraphrast might finde divers copies of the scripture, differing one from an other: from these might they gather the divers readings, and to write some of them in the text, and some of them in the mar∣gine: even as many Printers of late, having gathered and noted divers readings from such as vvere ancienter then themselves, do now adde them to the margine of the new Testament. And therfore that vvhich you call an evident proofe of the Mascrites not adding them: is no proofe at all. It is one thing to invent or devise divers reading; an other, togather, compile and adde them to the scriptures. Thirdly, suppose the Chaldee versiōs had followed & mainteyned both the divers readings, & that they had placed the partly in the text & partly in the margine: yet is not their authoritie so great, that we might therevpō say with you, that Moses did by the spirit of God write both. These Chaldee paraphrasts in their versions do insert many fabulous things, & oftē go astray in most grosse maner: so that such vveighty poynts are not to be built vpon their credit. The
Onkelos Targum on Gen. 4.23. first and ancient test of them, and freer frō er∣rour then the rest, translates the vvords of Lamech quite con∣traryto the text: whereas the scripture makes Lamech to say, I have killed or would kill a man, &c. this paraphrast makes him to say, I have not killed a man: This his errour is Annot. on Gen. Ibid. acknowled∣ged by yourself: and herein I do agree with you, for how soever Animadv. contra Bel∣lar. de ver∣bo dei, lib. 2. Cap. 3. Iunius sayth, that the vvords in the Chaldee paraphrast are to be read interrogatively, have I not killed? that is, I have: accor∣ding to the meaning of the Hebrew text: yet seing the other words of the paraphrast which follow immediately in that place do not so fitly agree with such an interrogation: I do therfore take the paraphrast his meaning to be according to the Rabbinical exposition of that story, vvhich I noted Pag. before; viz. that he had not killed a man, presumptuously but by errour not so that I should beare sin for him, or that my seed should be con∣sumed for him: for so the paraphrast explanes his meaning, and so R. Solomon Commēt. on Gen. 4.23. would have Lamechs meaning to be: though the scripture seemes to teach an other thing. Againe this para∣phrast translating the story of the well which the Princes of Israel digged, doth quite pervert the text, and turnes it into a fable, and saith that this Onkelos Targum on Numb. 21.18.19.20. well being given vnto them from the wildernes, went with them downe into the vallies, and ascended with them vp vnto the hilles and high places, and followed them still, &c VVhereas it is sayd in the blessing of Gad, that there was a por∣tion of the law giver hid: this he turnes into an other fable, and saith, that Onkelos Targum on Deut. 33 21. Moses the great scribe of Israel was buried in the in∣heritance of Gad, vvhich is directly contrary vnto the scripture, vvhich shewes that Moses was Deut. 34,6. buryed in the land of Moab, a place which none of the tribes possessed: and the tribe of Reuben was also situate betwixt this place and the tribe of Gad. From this paraphrast do other of the Rasi on Deut. 33.21. Rabbines borow this fiction also. And a number of other errours and false translations might be shewed in him. As for the other Chaldee Para∣phrast, R. Ionathan ben vzziel whom the Iewes do so highly ex∣toll, he is yet more full of errours: They say of him, that
Thalmud in Succa, c. 2. Fol. 28. A in the houre that he vsed to fit and study the law, every bird that flew over him was presently burnt: And the glosse thereon doth give thisreason, that the vvordes of the law did then reioyce, as vvhen they were given at Sinai, vvhere the law vvas given with fire. And to make the matter the more credible, En mish∣pat, ibidem there are brought the like examples of R. Eliezer, and R. Iehoshua compassed vvith flames of fire round about them. The other Ibidem. glosse vpon the Thalmud, giving a reason why the birds were burnt, saith that the ministring Angelles were about him, and gathered them∣selves vnto him to heare the words of the law from his mouth. These vvords of the paraphrast his mouth are such, that even the fabulous Papists themselves, do justly reiect many of them: & therfore some of these instances which I bring, are not to be found in the King of Spaine his great Bible printed by Plantine, but in the Masorites Bible: This I thought good to advertise the reader of, least any should be deceyved in seeking them there, vvhere they are left out and omitted. Touching the army of Sisera, this paraphrast faith, R. Iona∣than ben vzziel Tar∣gum on Iudg. 5.8. that he came vp vvith 40000. heads or cheeftaines of his campe: On vers. 5 vvith 50000. men armed vvith svvords: vvith 60000. armed vvith speares: vvith 70000. armed vvith targets: vvith 80000. shooters of stones or bolts: beside the 900. charets of yrō, &c. And there he telles vs of commotion & contention betvvixt the mountaines, Tabor, Hermon, & Carmel ech of them persvvading themselves that the Majestie of God should abide vpon them and be revealed vnto them: and how mount Sinai being a litle and weak mountaine the glory of God vvas revealed vpon it, &c. Vpon the song of Hannah he saith, Targum on 1. Sam. 2.1.2, &c. that she was endued with the spi∣rit of prophecie, and how in particular she prophecied of her Sonne Samuel and divers wonders to be wrought by him: of He∣man her Sonnes son who with his 14. Sonnes should sing praise with violes and harpes in the sanctuary of the Lord: of Sennacherib, of Nebuchadnezzar: of the Kingdome of Graecia, of the sonnes of Haman; of Roome, &c. Touching Goliath the giant of Gath he Targum on 1. Sam. 17.8. bringeth divers fictions, how it should be he that slew the two sonnes of Eli, that tooke the arke, &c. Tou∣ching Solomon, he
Targ. on 1. Kin. 4.33. feigneth, that he prophecied of the kings ofthe house of David, vvhich should beare rule in this vvorld and in the vvorld to come, (the world) of the Messias. Touching the army of Sennacherib, he saith, that Targum on Esay, 10 32. he brought with him fortie thousand guspanin or charets or coaches of gold for the Princes clothed with robes to sit in: that he brought with him two hundred thousand armed with swords and speares: and two hundred and sixtie thousand shooters of stones: and an hundred thousand valiant man to run before him: that the length of his campe vvas foure hundred miles: that his horse∣quarter vvas fortie miles: that the number of his hoste vvas two hundred and sixtie thousand millions vvanting one: that so they came vp against Abraham when they cast him into the middes of the fiery furnace: and that so they shall come vp when Gog and Magog come, &c. Touching the vision of the 4 creatures shewed vnto Ezekiel, vvhereas the scripture mentio∣neth onely foure faces, which ech of these creatures had: this Chaldee paraphrast Targum on Ezek. 1.6, addes further that ech of them had sixteen faces, and that so the number of faces vnto these 4. creatures were in all sixtie foure faces: VVhereas the scripture mentions onely foure wings vnto ech creature, this paraphrast addes fur∣thet by a strange kinde of reckoning, that there were sixteen wings to every one of the faces: & that the number of the wings of the foure creatures were two hundred fiftie & six wings, &c. And in many other places doth this paraphrast pervert the prophecies concerning Christ, and misinterpret the scriptures quite besides the meaning of the holy spirit. VVhen this paraphrast had thus translated the first and latter Prophets, the Iewes say Thalmud in Megil∣lah Cap. 1. that there vvas an earthquake, and that the earth vvas mooved for the space of 400. miles: that there came a voyce, (a bathkol) saying, who is this that reveales my secret to the sonnes of men? And after that an other voyce, Let it suffice thee: it is enough, and they give the reason why this Ionathan might proceed no further in his paraphrase vvith the other bookes of the old testament, least he should reveale the time of Messias his coming noted in Daniel: But after him rises vp
a third chaldee paraphrast, R. Ioseph the blinde, as he is common∣ly called, even that blinde guide vvhom you do so often and so abundantly alledge in your annotations on the psalmes. And this paraphrast is full of Thalmudique fables, and wresteth and profaneth the holy scriptures to confirme those fables: as for example, the R. Ioseph Caecus, Targum on Ps. 50.10. fable of Behemoth before noted, vvhich dayly de∣voures the grasse of a thousand mountaines: the Ibid. on vers. 11. fable of Tarnegol, the vvilde cock vvhose feet rest vpon the earth, and his head toucheth the heaven, and there crowes or sings before God: the On Ps. 69 31. fable of that fat Oxe which Adam offred having hornes before hoofes: the On Psal. 104.26. fable of Leviathan reserved for the sport and play at the banket of the righteous at the coming of Messias: In Psal. 57.3. this paraphrast saith that God com∣manded a spider to make a vveb in the mouth of the cave for Davids defence. In ps. 78.49. he addes vnto the text, that God layd two hundred & fifty strokes vpon thē in his great anger, by the hand of wicked devilles. In Ps. 137.4. he saith that the Levites bit of their thumbes with their teeth, when those that led them captives required songs of them. And the whole psalme is turned into a dialogue: and the words of the psalme are attribu∣ted to five sorts of persons: some to the Babylonians; some to the Iewes, some to a voyce of the holy Ghost some to the Angel Micael called the Prince of Ierusalem: some to the Angel Ga∣briel called there the Prince of Sion. And Micael is sayd to pray against Edom: and Gabriel is feyned to pronounce a blessing vpon thē that destroy the Babylonians. Touching Iob he feig∣neth that his Targum on Iob. 1.3. substance was far greater then the text sheweth he putteth On v. 15. Lilith queene of Zemargad for the shabeans: he On Iob 2 9. feig∣neth Dinah to be the wife of Iob: he telles a miraculous wonder touching the three frends of Iob, noted before. He alludes vnto the On Iob. 3 7. & 38.36 & 39.16. fables of the cock: and a number of other fictions he hath in that book. As for the paraphrase on Pster, it is full of vaine and presumptuous fictions: as, that Targum on Ester. 1. a decree was made concerning Vashti that she should be slaine naked, because of her counsaile to hinder the building of the temple: that King
Ahasuerus sought to sit on the throne of Solomon which was brought from Ierusalem by Shesbak King of Egipt; and from thence was taken by Sennacherib and from thence returned to Ierusalem in the dayes of Hezekias: & from thence was brought againe to Egipt by Pharaoh: and from thence to Babel by Nebu∣chadnezar: and from thence to Elam by Cyrus: and that now Ahasucrus sought to sit vpon this throne, but could not, that he sent for workmen from Alexandria to make an other like vnto this, and that they could not: but made an other worse then it in two yeares space, and that in the third yeare Ahasucrus did sit vpon it: that with the six hundred & fourescore brasen Chests full of gold and pearle found by Cyrus in a haven of Euphra∣tes he made that feast for a hundred and fourescore dayes: that in his second feast he appoynted them to drinke in the golden Vessels of the sanctuary brought from Ierusalem by the wicked Nebuchadnezzar, and that the other vessels of the King did change their shape before the vessels of the sanctuarie: that Mordecai absteyned from that feast and prayed & fasted vntill the seventh day; that the King sent for vashti to come naked before the people to shew her beauty that this was, because she had made the daughters of Israel naked, and so to carde wool & flax vpon the Sabath day: and a multitude of such like presum∣ptions and pervertings of the holy text are there to be seene throughout that whole story from the beginning to the end thereof. In Ruth likewise the Chaldee paraphrast telleth vs of ten famines: of which Targum on Ruth, 1. one was in the dayes of Adam, an other in the dayes of Lamech, &c. he saith that Ruth was the daughter Eglō King of Moab: that Boaz On Ruth 2. sayd vnto her at the first finding of her in his field, that it was told him by prophecie that Kings & Prophets should come of her: that whē Boaz measured vnto her On c. 3.15. fix measures of barley, she obteyning strēgth from God to cary the same, did then forth with prophecie that six righteous persons should proceed from her, whereof every one should be blessed with six blessings, to wit, David, Daniel, and his compa∣nions, and the King Messias: And
Isaak ben Arama on Ruth, 3.15 other of the Rabbines say, thatthose six blessings were the gift of the spirit mentioned with six names or attributes in Esay. 11.2. But they differ about the per∣sons, some reckoning Hezekias and Iosias among those six. Sun∣dry other such things doth this paraphrast there record. In the paraphrase vpon the Lamentations it is sayd, that Targum on Lam. 5.5. vvhen the wicked Nebuchadnezzar saw some of the captived Princes of the Children of Israel, to go empty without burden, he commanded them to sow the bookes of the law together, to make sackes of them, to fill them with gravell from the shore of Euphrates, and then to lay them vpon their neckes; that then there was no rest vnto their eyes. As for the Chaldee para∣phrase on the Canticles so often alledged by you, it is all over in every Chapter replenished with Thalmudique fictions: And vvhat vvorth is there then in these witnesses, if they had given testimonie vnto those divers readings that you maintaine? If their translations according to the margine or line be of autho∣rity, you may thereby bring the Rabbinicall fables into the text and prove them to be divine scripture, written by the spirit of God, as wel as you may justify lo, not; and lo, to himself. YOu adde yet further in the Annot. on Exo. 21.8. same place: that the Greek copies here varie, some having, hath betrothed her to him, other some, hath not betrothed: and so Theodotio and symmachus also translated, hath not betrothed. Answer. 1. Howsoever they translate this place in the Greek with much varietie: yet this is to be observed that none of the se∣verall translations do commend vnto vs a double reading, as your translation doth: ech of them shewes vnto vs but one onely reading: and therfore the example of every one of them testifyeth against you. Had the Greek translatours imagined that the double readings vvere a divine tradition delivered vn∣to Moses at mount Sinai, it had bene great impiety in them to have suppressed the same: This had bene to have clipped the Lords coyne by paring away so many parts of his holy word. 2: As for these Greek translations of the old Testament, had they bene more direct for your purpose, yet should their
testimonie have litle holpen you in this matter; Their credit is very small, in respect of the innumerable errours, falsifications and corruptions of the holy text whereof they are most appa∣rantly guilty. You say indeed touching the Greek and Chaldee versions, that they are, Preface to annot. on Gen. both, of great authoritie, espe∣cially the Greek, honoured even by the Apostles in their so often follo∣wing not onely the words but even the theologicall exposition. And for the declaration of this, you produce divers examples, com∣paring the Greek version with the new Testament in Esa. 11.10. with Rom. 15.12. In Prov. 3.34. with Iam. 4.6. In Prov. 11.31, with 1 Pet. 4.18. In Esa 42.4. with Mat. 12.21. with sundry others And els where also you Preface to annot. on Psalmes write to the same purpose I answer. First, for the translatiō of the 72. interpreters in the dayes of Ptolomaeus Philadelphus: it is vncertaine whether they transla∣ted any more then the five bookes of Moses: for the testimony of ancient writers varieth much about this matter: And Iose∣phus witnesseth, that Ptolemee had not the whole scripture, but the Antiq. Iud. proaen. lib. 1. c. 1. law onely from these interpreters: and alledgeth this as a reason, why he vndertook a more full declaration of the Ievves story. And this reason of his, is against their opinion also, vvho imagine that the rest of the scriptures were translated by other 72. interpreters in the dayes of Herod and the last Ptolemee for if the whole storie of the old Testament had bene by such a famous translation of other Septuagints turned into Greek & published vnto the world, then could not Iosephus have alled∣ged this reason as a speciall cause of his enterprise. And then if this testimonie of Iosephus be true, the most of those instances which in both your forenamed prefaces you bring to counte∣nance this translation of the Septuagint as being approved in the new Testament, are quite beside the matter; because the most of these your instances are taken not from the law, but from other parts of scripture, vvhich according to the testi∣mony of Iosephus were not translated by the septuagint.
Secondly, the translation of the septuagint whether it was of the law onely, or of the whole scripture of the old Testament, is much to be suspected as an vnfaithfull and maimed work even from the first beginning thereof: seing divers Hieron. prefat. in Pētateuch. vvitnesses do record vnto vs of them, that they did purposely adde, alter detract and change many things in their Greek translation otherwise then they were in the originall Hebrew text. The honour that many give vnto these interpreters is far too great, August. de civitate Dei lib. 18. Cap. 43. affirming even their aberrations and contrarieties to the text, to be written by the direction of a divine and propheticall spirit: and tell vs also of Epiphan. de mensu∣ris & pon∣deribus. miraculous things touching this translation, and this both with contradiction to them∣selves and apparant contrariety to the truth. The Iewes them selves confesse that this translation of the law hath bene a burden vpon their consciences; for which they do repent vnto this day R. Iaakob describing the divers fasts which they observe, ech moneth in the yeare, saith that they fast Arba Tu∣rim, lib. Orach chajim. in in Taanith, or treat. of fasting, fig. 580. in the eight day of the moneth Tebeth, because then the law was written in Greek in the dayes of king Ptolaemeus and that there was darknes in the world for three dayes. This their practise is sutable to their auncient envy against the gentiles, 1. Thess. 2.16. Act. 22.21.22. And being so affected, it is the lesse marvell, if they sought to hide or change divers things in their translation. Thirdly, that auncient translation of the septuagints doth not appeare at this day. Some think we have onely some frag∣ments thereof: and others think it to be quite lost. Touching these opinions, D. Whitaker De sacra scriptura. contr. 1. quaest. 2. Cap. 3. saith Verior illorum sententia vide∣tur, qui versionem illam omnino perijsse existimant. He approves their iudgement most, that hold it altogether lost. And againe in the same place, after many corruptions noted in it, he saith we may thence conclude that either we have not this transla∣tion of the 70 elders; or els that it is so infinitely and filthily corrupted, that it is now of very small authoritie. Fourthly, as for that Greek translation which is extant at this day, going vnder the name of the septuagint, & which you ho∣nour so much and alledge so often, it appeares evidently to be a most corrupt thing, full offorgeries, and swarming with er∣rours
over all from the beginning to the end of it. All good writers at this day do generally vpon occasion vvitnesse so much. In speciall there is one Engel∣bertus En∣gels in proaem. pentaglott. val. Schind. learned man who hath taken paines to set downe some generall heads & as it were standerds vnder which those troopes and legions of errour and falsifica∣tions might be in some part reduced and marshalled. Di∣vers examples he shewes of severall kindes, and yet vnto ech kinde more instances might be added: yea and more generall heads of such errours be described also. Many witnesse that it was corrupt of old: but for this time present, the corruptions are vnspeakable and without number: and more also then the corruptions of Onkelos and Ionathan the Chaldee paraphrasts, & therfore also of lesse authoritie though you in your compari∣son affirme the contrary. Fiftly, as the errours of this Greek translation are for number many: so are they for the nature of thē very great. Some of them do directly contradict the text as in Ps. 105.2.8. Gen. 26.32. in the first place affirming what the scripture denyes, & in the later de∣nying that which God affirmes in his word. They impugne the truth of the holy story, in describing the yeares of sundry pa∣triarkes, especially by giving so many yeares vnto Methuschelah as if he had lived 14. yeares after the flood, Gen. 5. In stead of 40. they put 3 dayes, Ion. 3. That most absurd fable of the Iewes tou∣ching the play with Leviathā is countenaced by this translatiō of the septuagint Ps. 104.26. The most impious errour of the Ar¦rians denying the eternall godhead of Christ, doth also receive strength from this corrupt version, whiles they translate Prov. 8.22. he hath created me in the beginning of his wayes: in stead of he hath possessed me, as though Christe were but a mere crea∣ture. In respect of these forgeries, it is most vntrue which you say, of this Greek translation, with the Chaldee: that they are both, of great authoritie. The Chaldee Paraphrast translateth that place of the Proverbs as the Greek hath it.
Sixthly, whereas you say, that the Apostles do so often follow not onely the words, but even the Theologicall exposition of these inter∣preters;this is also an vncertaine and vnwarrantable assertion for all the examples that you alledge who is it that cā certainely prove ynto vs that the Apostles followed the septuagint & that those corrupted Greek versions of the old Yestament were not rather corrected according to the allegations of the Apostles in the new; Seing this translation is generally supposed to be a patchery out of many; what hinders but that the correctours of the septuagint, in later editions, might follow the words of the Apostles, & that so by this meanes, that agreement of exposi∣tions words and phrases which is betwixt them in some place might arise? Sevently, suppose the Apostles in their Greek writings did vse the version of the septuagint, in some allegations as being then best knowne there being few or none other translations at that time, it doth not follow hence that it should therfore be honoured above others in these times, when as there is not the like occasion of writing in Greek; when as there are many other translations extant more fit for vse, and far freer from cor∣ruption. Eighthly, as for the translations of Symmachus & Theodotio, they being both of them heretiques and enimies of Christe, and one of them also an Apostate from Christianity to Iudaisme, yea & since that time also their translations being exceedingly corrupted, it skilles not much, whether the margine or the line, or both be followed and observed in the fragments of their Greek versions. Their credit is far too weake to procure divine authoritie vnto both the divers readings which are in the Ma∣sorites Bible, yea though they had plainely avouched the same, which yet is not shewed out of them: even by your owne in∣stance of their translation, they followed but one reading onely, and therfore their example, if it be ought worth, is against your self, who deliver two vnto vs, and those both as from the Lord. ANother spice of this transgression is, that
Annot. on Gē. 23.2 & 33.4. & on 34.31. &c. you propound vnto vs for grounds of instruction, to be observed & me∣ditatedvpon, such traditions of the Masorites as are not mani∣fested to be from God, no more then those divers readings be∣fore spoken of: as namely the great and litle letters in the mid∣des of words and sentences; the extraordinary prickes that are set over some words, &c. Touching these we may observe; First, that they have no other ground then the Kabala or tradition of the Masorites: These and other such like traditions they hold to be the strength of the law and of divine warrant, and commended vnto vs by the holy Ghost: Elias Levita in his explication of the masora or tradition sings on this maner: Maso∣reth ham∣masoreth, in his ryth∣mical pre∣face. vahalo hammasorah, hi sig lethorah: Is not the masora, the hedge of the law? And to this purpose after his owne song, he alledgeth the song of songs, Cant. 3.7.8. with the opinion of the Rab∣bines, touching those 60. strong men which are round about Solomons bed, the valiant men of Israel, all handling the sword, expert in warre, every one having his sword vpon his thigh for the feare by night: these saith he are the tradition or masoreth, Ibid. pre∣fat. tertia. and their signes, least the law should be forgotten in the captivity. R. So∣lomon in his commentaries on the same scripture teacheth the same. But note the vncertainty & vanitie of thē, evē from their owne vaine and perverted expositions: The Chaldee paraphrast vpon the same place expoundeth those 60. strong men, to be the Priests spreading out their hands, standing vpon their pul∣pits, & blessing the people, the house of Israel with the 60. letters delivered vnto Moses their maister, &c. By those 60. letters (as I take it) they meane that forme of blessing prescribed, Numb. 6.24.25.26. for by the reckoning I finde that in it there are just 60. letters, conteyned in those 3. verses. Aben Ezra in his comment on Cant. 3. expounds those 60. strong men to be the 60. myriads or six hundred thousand that entred into the Land. Secondly, whereas on Gen. 33.4. you say.
Therfore the word kyssed is extraordinarily noted in the Hebrew with three pricks over it, as leading the reader to observe well this matter: let vs see what extraordinary mysteries your Iew doctours will teach vs from hence: It is Ioan. Buxt. The∣saur gram. Cap. 5. ex Ialkut. shewed vs out of their records thus, Rabbi Iann sayd the pricking doth shew that Esau sought not Lenas∣scheko. to kysse Iaakob, but Lenas∣scheco. to bite him: and his neck became marble, so that the teeth of that wicked one were set on edge. Therfore also it followeth, And they wept to wit, one for his neck, th'other for his teeth. R. Solomon in his com∣mentaries on that place notes further the difference of the Rab∣bines touching this matter. Thirdly, whereas vpon the word harlot in Gen. 34,31, you say: In the Hebrewe Zonah, the first letter is extraordinarily great, for some hidden meaning, What if it be, to signify the stout and big words of these yong men to their father? So a litle letter is vsed before in Gen. 23.2. to signify moderation without excesse in Abrahams weeping. Your coniecture for Zonah hath some colour, though a trifling vanity and without ground, but your assertion to countenance the same from the litle letter in Gen. 23. to signify moderation is a very vnreasonable and absurd speculation. For what colour of reason is there, that a moderate sorow should be signifyed by an immoderately litle letter, that an ordinate affection should be represented by an inordinate extraordi∣nary token? if the big letter in Zonah note the fault of the ex∣cessive stout and big words in the yong men to their father: why should not the letter in BAcAH, WEpTE, wanting the due proportion and measure with the rest, as wel note a defect and fault of the too litle sorow in Abraham? The comparing of these two examples so vnequally opposed and mismatched to∣gather doth justly reprove and refute your collection from the same. Fourthly, whereas you pleaded Pag. 46 before, that the separation of Mr. Cluse your elder from the French church, was lawfull, be∣cause of their preaching from humane apocryphal catechismes; even by the like reason may you see that your ministery also is to be forsaken and left, if you preach in your congregation, and ex∣pound the scriptures in such maner as you do here. For what are these extraordinary prickes, that you speak of: these formes of great and litle letters in the middes of words and sentences,
but humane apocryphall devises of Rabbines and Thalmu∣diques? what divine warrant have you for them, and for your expounding of them and of Keri & cethib, both togather in one place? It is ten times more lawfull to expound the principles of Christian religion in Catechismes according to the maner of the French Churches, then to expound these Iewish fables and toyes in such maner as you do. These Iewish devises are 1. Tim. 1 4. Tit. 1.13. ex∣pressely condemned by the holy Ghost: th'other not so. Fiftly, if the Lord by the finger of his spirit do direct vs to take speciall observatiō of those extraordinary prickes that you tell vs of in Gen. 33.4. to the end that we might search out some hidden meaning therein: then are you againe guilty of great perfidie and vnfaithfullnes, which in your translation and annotations also in other places do passe them over and con∣ceale those parts of the scripture, where divine vvarnings of meditation are propounded vnto vs. For whereas there are fif∣teene words noted by the scribes and by some printers to have such prickes over their heads: five of them are by you already wrapt vp in darknes and passed over in silence, namely in Gen. 16.5. & 18.9. and 19.33, and 37.12. & Psal. 27.13. In ech of these places, are these prickes to be seene, vvhich you omit with out giving any vvarning of them. So do you also passe by the litle letter in Annot. on Gen. 2 4. behibbarcam: the great letter in Annot. on Psal. 80.13. & vers. 15. Cannah, and the suspended letter lifted vp in the word jagnar, &c. These being of like regard by the tradition of the Masorites, ought in like maner to have bene noted by you: and suppose you could not have shewed the reason of them in these places, yet should you at least have given warning of them vnto your readers and have left them to their consideration. In like maner do you also passe by the crownes of the speciall letters which are so oft noted therewith in the lavv, of vvhich it is sayd by R. Iudah, that Thalmud in Mena∣choth cap. 3. Fol. 29. Moses on a certaine time ascending on high, he found the holy blessed God binding crownes vpon the letters; to vvit, three for ech of the seven letters conteyned in the vvord schagnatnazgats, as was noted
Pag. 294 before. In the same place of the Thalmud it is recor∣dedhow the Lord foretold vnto Moses, that after certaine gene∣ratiōs there should come a man evē Akibah bē Ioseph by name, who should expound vnto vs all those crownes, prickes and titles of the letters: that the Lord also at Moses request did shew that man vnto him: and that Moses in admiration of him did say, O Lord of the world hast thou such a man as this, and dost thou deliver thy law by mine hand? &c. Now R. Akiba being come: and you being so familiar with these Talmudists, is it not wonder that you have nothing to say for our instruction, touching these crownes and miters, especially there being the same Talmudique warrant to prove that they are divine, holy & from God, as there is to prove Keri and cethib, the divers readings to be both written by the spirit of God? VVhen the Lord shewed the patterne of the tabernacle and instruments thereof vnto Moses, he commanded him to make Exod. 25 11.24.25. & 30.3. limbes or crownes of gold for the arke, the table and altar of incense: & it had bene great vnfaithfulnes in Moses to have neglected the same. Now the frame of the holy scriptures is as precious and excellent as was the forme of the tabernacle: if therfore those prickes over speciall wordes belong vnto them of right as their crownes, then is your vnfaithfulnes in the house of God, great in your omitting of them. And as for the Iew doctours, they plot with these prickes a Crovvne of thornes for the head of the Lord directly contrary vnto the letter and sense of the scripture: as in Gen. 19.33. where it is sayd of Lot touching his eldest daughter, that he perceyved not, neither when she lay downe, nor when she rose vp: because of the prick that crowneth the vvord rose, Thal∣mud de nazir. cap. 4. P. 23. they gather and teach that though he perceyved her not when she lay downe, yet he percevved her when she rose vp. VVhere it is sayd in Gen. 37.12. they went to feed the flock, &c. because of the prick over the word the, R. Solomon Commēt. on these places. gathers that they went not but to feed themselves. In Numb. 3.39. because of the crowne, of prickes over the word
Aaron, R. Sol. gathers that Aaron was not in the number of the Levites. In Deut. 29.29.because of the prickes over the words, to vs and to our Children the same Rabbine teacheth that Israel was not vrged to do the things revealed vntill they had passed over Iorden & taken vpon them the oth in mount Gerizim, &c. ANother curiositie of much like nature with the former is, when according to the maner of the Cabalists, you draw observations to illustrate your doctrine from the transposed letters of the scripture. As for example concerning Er and Noah you Annot. on Gē. 38.7. say thus: The letters in Hebrue of this word evil, and of his name Er, are the same, the order onely changed: the like where∣of is before in Noes name and Grace, Gen. 6.8. I answer, 1. The letters of the scripture being thus transposed by men, are no scripture nor ground of instruction; if the order be onely chan∣ged, it is enough to change the whole sense: if accidentally it come to passe in one or two wordes, that there is an agreement of sense, yet in hundreds it falles out otherwise: and therfore there is no found collections or annotations to be made from such a forged order of transposed letters. 2, though the He∣brue letters that signify Evil, be the same with Er his name, yet the vowells differ, and they also make the signification differēt: 3, sutable vnto this curiositie, is that presumptuous assertion which in your annotations on the same verse you make by oc∣casion of this
Er and his evill, in that you say, as our Lord Christe was to come of Iudas, Heb. 7.14. so God would have no wicked man to be his progenitour. For where hath God revealed this vnto you, which you do so peremptorily affirme? or why do you presume above that which is written? The sonne of God hath abased himself for vs in wonderfull maner, and in many de∣grees; in that he was made man; suppose man had bene with∣out sin: in that he took vpon him our nature, evē after the fall, after that our nature was abased and dishonoured with sin: in that he refused not to come of such parents, as vvere stayned with notorious adulteries, as David & Bathsheba: in that he re∣fused not to discend vnto vs through the loynes & vvombe of incestnous parents, and even at the act of incest, at the same time and instant, as in Iudah & Thamar begetting Pharez: in that he came of vvicked parents before their effectuall conversion, as Iosh. 24 2. with Gen. 11. with Gen. 12. of Terah begetting Abram, before God called him. And further, how know you that none of Christes progenitours frō Arpacshad to Terah, from Nathan to Salathiel: from Salathiel to Iesus in so many generations, were vvicked men? vvhy dare you speak so boldly, where the scripture is silent? As it is sin to remoove the ancient bounds, so is it also a sinfull presumption to set downe such bounds and limits of Christs humiliation as God hath not described vnto vs in his vvord. Besides, is there not as much reason to say that God would have no vvicked vvoman from Evah to Marie to be the mother of Christe, as that no wicked man should be his progenitour? And if this may be affirmed in honour of Christs kinred, why may it not as wel be extended vnto others that were in the same loynes with him: and where shall the stay be? if modestie and sobrietie stay vs not, there wilbe no end of forging and presuming above the scriptures. OF this sort also is that kinde of observation which you com∣mend vnto vs when as you note the word sleep, to signify, quiet sleep without cark and sorow: And for proofe to confirme the same, you adde: Annot. on Psal. 127.2. Therfore also the Hebrue word Shena is written with, a quiet dumm letter, (otherweise then vsual) to denote the more quietnes. Answ. 1. The Masorites indeed both in Ma∣sora magna, & parva do set their marke vpon this word, for a memoriall of their tradition concerning the same: Elias Levi∣ta also in his explication of the Masora doth
Masoreth hammaso∣reth in Ta∣bulis pri∣mis: Orat. 9. mention this word Shena, but he doth withall in the same place note many other words of like nature and observatiō, viz. 22 words wher∣in Aleph is quiescent or deficient in the middes or in the end of them: and 17 others which they call maphkin Aleph: All these vary from the common and vsuall maner; and do yeeld the like ground and warrant for instructions to be gathered from them, as doth the word Shena in Psal. 127.2. Yea and not these onely, but all the other formes of words, full, defective,changed, &c. which he hath noted in that treatise. Elias Levita there alluding to the tables of the law, in his first tables hath 10 words or sections: and in his second tables 10. other sections describing those words from whence the Masoriticall mysteries are collected. And if any sound collections are to be drawne from such grounds then are you to blame which passe by such words without giving your readers any warning thereof: If your annotations on this place, ps. 127. be just, then are they defe∣ctive in other the like places as in Ps. 94.5. Gen. 20.6, &c. 2. If some mysterie were to be gathered from Aleph in Shena, yet how should we be assured, that it doth denote more quietnes, as you affirme? if it had bene writtē Shena with the letter hè in the end according to the vsual maner: you might as well have sayd that hè is a quiet dumm letter: being quiescēt in the end of a word as wel as Aleph. And we see the word Shenah without Aleph is els where vsed to signify a most quiet sleep: as the Eccles. 5.11. sweet sleep of the labourer: and the Ierem. 31 26. sweet sleep of the Prophets; and the Prov. 3.24. sweet sleep of the godly. Yea and further the word Esa. 56.10. ha∣zah vsed to express the sleep of the greatest sleepers, hath in it a double hè vvithout any Aleph, as most fit to denote vnto vs a strong sleep. Moreover if Aleph in Shenah be a note of grea∣ter quietnes, then why should it not signify the same in other vvords as vvell as in this? And then according to this your col∣lection, if hè be a more quiet letter then Aleph, the thrones of earthly Princes should be more quiet without cark and sorow, then is the throne of God; because the word Gen. 41.40. Iudg. 3 20, &c. Cese vsed ordina∣rily for their thrones, is written with Aleph, the quiet dumme letter, denoting (as you say) more quietnes; whereas the word Iob. 26.9 Ceseh whereby the throne of God is described, doth (otherwise then vsual) want the letter Aleph and hath hè in stead there∣of. MVch like vnto this, is that kinde of instruction, which you Annot. on Gē. 1.1. vse, when having alledged some scriptures, to prove by the heavēs & earth in Gē. 1.1. are vnderstood, the world & all things therein: things visible and invisible: You adde further, that the He∣brew
articles eth & ha, seem also to imply so much; eth, having the first and last letter of the Hebrew alphabet, and so being of generall comprehension: & ha, of plaine demonstration. If this kind of tea∣ching were good you might as well say, that when the Prophets Esaias, Amos and Micaiah are sayd to see the Lord in their se∣verall visions; they did see him and all that is in him: because this same article eth is prefixed before the name of the Lord in ech of their Esay. 6.1 Amos. 9.1. 2. Kin. 22.19. visions; and that it being of such generall com∣prehension doth imply so much. But seing this is impossible, you shall do well to ceasse from the wisedome of such Cabali∣sticall collections. CHAP. V. A Fift errour is, in that you alledge the words of the Rabbines contrary to their meaning; either not vnderstanding what they meane, or els wilfully per∣verting that which they say, and this also in mat∣ters of greatest weight: This may be seene in many instances. First, when as you speak of Adam cast out of Eden, & kept from the tree of life, you say; Annot. on Gen. 3.24. The ancient Iewes had an expecta∣tion of recovery of this losse by Christe, though now they are ignorant of him: for they write of 7 things which the King Christ shall shew unto Israel, two of which are the garden of Eden and the tree of life. R. Elias ben Mosis, in sepher reshith chocmah, fol.
412. Also expounding that in Song 1.3. the King hath brought me into his Chambers: Our Doctours of blessed memorie, have sayd, that these are the Chambers of the garden of Eden. And againe, there are also that say of the tree of life, that it was not created in vayne, but the men of the resurrection (that are raysed from the dead) shall eat thereof, and live for ever R. Menachem on Gen. 3. And by the garden of Eden (or paradise) it seemes they understood the Kingdome of heaven, for the chalde Pa∣raphrast on Song. 4.12. saith, as the garden of Eden into which no man hath power to enter; but the iust, whose soules are sent thither, by thehands of Angels. I answer. 1. VVhy might you not as well have sayd, that the later Iewes as well as the ancient Iewes, have still an expectation of the recovery of this losse by Christe, namely of the garden of Eden, and of the tree of life, &c. do not the Iewes that now live receive and approve the writings of these Rabbines here alled∣ged by you? how then do you shew any difference betwixt them in this poynt? 2. How can you say by way of opposition, in comparing the later Iewes with the ancient, that now they are ignorant of Christe, seing the ancient Iewes were also ignorant of him? The Chal∣dee paraphrast being of cheefest authoritie among all that are here alledged by you, was most ignorant of Christe: he knew not that Christe vvas come, but On Cant. 8. writes of him as of one that should come hereafter, though by consent of all he lived after the death of Christe. And further he vvrites of two Christes that are to come: for, expounding those vvords in Cant. 4.5, and 7.3. Thy two breasts are as two young roes that are twinnes, &c. this pa∣raphrast sayth, that these are two Messiasses that are to come, namely Messias the sonne of David, and Messias the sonne Ephraim. And many other things he vvrites most ignorantly touching Christe, being a blinde guide vnto the later Iewes that yet are alive to confirme them in their ignorance. 3. Though the Rabbines speaking of the garden of Eden and of the tree of life, do therewithall mention the men of the resurrection and the sending of them thi∣ther by the hands of Angels: yet is this no token that they vn∣derstood hereby the Kingdome of heaven: because these blinde Doctours hold and teach that there is a double resurrection, one in which the bodies of men shall be raysed vp to live on earth againe at the coming of Messias: and an other at the last judge∣ment, when they shall be raysed vp to live in the Kingdome of heaven. The Chaldee paraphrast expounding those words, Cant. 8.5 who is this that commeth vp out of the wildernes, &c. and alluding to that place in
Zach. 14.4. Zechariah, where it is sayd that the mounte ofolives shall cleave in the middes, shewes that at the coming of Messias (which he mentioned a litle On Cant. 8.1. before) the dead shall arise, the mount of oyntment shall be divided, the dead of Israel shall ascend from vnder it, also the dead that dyed in the captivitie shall come Orach Cubbaia. the thorny way from vnder the earth and shall ascend from vnder the mount of oyntment or of olives. The meaning is that those vvhich dyed in Israel, in the holy land shall rise againe with greater ease; and those Iewes which now living in disper∣sion shall dy in other countries must not rise againe in the lands where they dyed, but must have their bodies royled and tumbled vnder the ground through divers holes and clefts in the earth vntill they come vnder the mount of olives, and then that being divided in the middes, they must arise in that place. Aben Ezra shewes Commēt. on Dan. 12 2. further that those vvhich rise at the com∣ming of Messias shall live long time on earth, that their dayes shall be as the dayes of a tree, and then dye the second time & rise againe with an other resurrection afterward. Yea, this kinde of resurrection of the body is beleeved and receyved as an artickle of the Iewes faith, and recorded in their creede, as is shewed at large first by Sebast. Munster in Emunath Iehud. p. 46. 47. 53. that their creed vvhich he published togather vvith the Hebrew edition of the gospell according to Mathew: and afterwards by Synag. Iudaic. pag. 29, &c. Buxtorf; at which resurrection the Iewes think that they shal live on earth so many hundred yeares as the Patriarkes did in the old vvorld before the flood, before that they dye the second time: and with all they vvrite of so many miracles to be vvrought for them at that time, as it is no marvel that they do vvithall dreame of their cariage into an earthly paradise by the hands of Angells at the same time. 4. Though the Chaldee paraphrast speak of the just entring into the garden of Eden, &c. yet doth it not appeare that he meant the Kingdome of heaven, but the garden vvhere Adam was placed at first, even the earthly Eden: seing in the same booke he speakes of the vse thereof in divers things▪ having spoken of the beauty of the first temple, he saith,
on Cant. 1.16. but the houseof the sanctuary to come, which is to be built in the dayes of Messias the King, shall be much more beautifull in that the walles thereof shalbe of the cedars of the garden of Eden. That is the third ma∣teriall temple vvhich they expect: and accordingly they ex∣pect that the matter thereof shalbe not from heaven, but from the earthly Eden. Againe, speaking of the comming of their Messias and of the feast that is to be made at the same time vpō the earth, he saith, on Cant. 8.2. and there we shall keep the feast with the Le∣viathan, and we shall drink the old red wine, which hath bene layd vp in the grapes from the day that the world was created, and of the pomegranate fruits which are prepared for the iust in the garden of Eden. And after this he speakes of divers things to be done on earth, so that it is every way plaine that he intended not an heavenly, but an earthly Paradise in these places. 5. As for the testimony of R. Menachem, if vve go no further then the vvords here cited by yourself, even by them it is appa∣rant, that he had not a spirituall meaning, but spoke of that tree from vvhich Adam vvas derred, and of that tree created in the beginning, vvhich he saith was not created in vaine: meaning that the men of the resurrection, of that first supposed and pre∣tended resurrection should eate thereof. 6. As for the testimony of Elias ben Moses in Reshith chocmah, it is so vaine & superstitious a thing that I marvell you vvould alledge the same, 1. vvhereas he vvrites of 7. things vvhich the King Christ shall shew vnto Israel, you onely mention two of them, viz. the garden of Eden: and the tree of life; had you but mentioned the other five: the reader might easily have discerned how vainely you have alledged this testimonie: The other 5 things which he saith Messias shall shew vnto Israel are these, to wit; the throne of glory: the lifting vp of Korah and his company: Hell; the godly and the iust: all the living and the dead: He speakes here of the garden of Eden, and the tree of life, as he speakes of
Hell: to be shewed, he speakes not of enioying: therfore this testimony doth not so much as prove that they expected a recovery of the former losse: as you would have it: Muchless doth it shew that by the garden of Eden or Paradise, they vnderstood the Kingdome of heaven, as it seemes vnto you: That seemes rather to be vnderstood by the throne of glory, which is here distinguished from Paradise: Least of all doth it shew that the ancient Iewes were lesse ignorant, then the Iewes of our time: for what can be more ignorant then this dreame of these 7. spectacles to be shewed at the Messias his coming, whē as not one of them was shewed vnto Israel according to the meaning of this Rabbine? 2. They that do but consider what other vaine and senseless things he writes in his numbers in the same place, may discerne what a carnal Rabbine this Elias was; as na∣mely, that 7. sorts of men are accursed, which vvant phylacteries on their head and armes, fringes on their coates, post-papers on their gates, shooes on their feet; which have no wife: nor Child: which teach not their Children; which go not to their meeting house: which run not after the commandements: which eate with vnwashen hands▪ That there vvere 7. men over whom jetser haragh or evill concupiscence had no power, viz. Abraham, Isaak, Iaakob, Henoch, Moses, Ishai, David: what rea∣son is there to say thus of these, rather then of Ioseph, Ioshua, Sa∣muel, Elias, Esaias, &c. But you proceed, and say further; Annot. ibid on Gen. 3. And that the Iewes vn∣derstood not these things carnally, appeareth by these words of theirs. In the world to come there is no eating or drinking, nor any other of the things, which the bodies of the Sonnes of Adam, have need of in this world: as sitting and standing and sleep, and death & sorow and mirth and the like: so our ancient wisemen have sayd, In the world to come, there is no eating nor drinking nor vse of mariage but the iust do sit with their crownes vpon their heads, and have the fruition of the glory of the Maiesty of God. Maimony in misn. treat. of Repentance, Chap. 8. Sect. 2. Herevnto I answer. 1. The world to come whereof the Rabbines often speak, is diversly taken in their writings: Elias Levita In Tishbi in Athad. shewes that it is taken 3. wayes, for the dayes of the Messias: for the time that immediately followes death: and for the day of judgement:
The same is Citante Drusio; praeterit. on Mat. 12.32 noted by others also out of Don Isaak Abarbinel. Now Maimony in this place alledged by you, speaking of the world to come either in the second or third acception, doth not at all deny, exclude or remoove a carnall vnderstanding of the other Iewish Rabbines touching the garden of Eden and the tree of life in the supposed time of their Messias his co∣ming and living vpon earth: though they thought there was no eating, drinking, or marying after the day of judgement, this proves not that they thought so touching the time of their Messias his conversing with them on earth. R. Abraham Aben Ezra also doth very plainely and distinctly Com∣ment. on Dan. 12.2. shew the opinion of the Rabbines herein, namely that when those that dyed in the captivitie are raysed vp at the coming of their redeemer, then they shall be delighted or feasted with Leviathan, with Ziz, and with Behemoth, and shall dye againe the second time, and shall live againe at there surrection of the dead in the world to come, where they do not eate or drinke, but onely enioy the brightnes of Schecinah, or the divine presence. And thus distinguishing the two worlds to come, he declares that in the first they did expect a carnall & earthly feasting and banquetting of the bodies that rose againe, though after the day of judgement they beleeved it should be otherwise. 2. Though they thought there was no vse of mariage and materiall food after the generall judgement, yet they expected a most carnall vse of mariage for their Messias on earth, and as is recorded in the artickles of their faith, they beleeved, that Emu∣nàth Iehud p. 54. 55. every King of the gentiles should count it their honour to give their daughters vnto him: and though Kings daughters were his wives, yet the Queene an Israelitesse should sit at his right hand in a crowne of the gold of Ophir, &c. That his other wives should come vnto him at certaine times when they were called to enter in vnto the King, but that the Queene his cheefe wife should evermore be in his bed cham∣ber, &c. that after he had lived many yeares he should dye with ho∣nour & his Sonne should reigne after him and his sonnes Sonne, &c. And sundry testimonies of scripture are in the same place per∣verted
by them for the proofe of this their carnall opiniō. And besides that which is before noted touching their feasting with the wine of Paradise, the carnall boldnes of the ancient Rab∣bines in describing the banquets of that expected time of their Messias, is yet greater: in that they presume to determine the largenes of the cups that shall then be vsed, saying that Thalmud in Ioma, c. 8. Fol. 110. the cup whereof David shal drink in the world to come conteyneth two hundred, one and twentie measures or logs: as it is sayd, my cup is full: revaiah according to the Gematria is so: The ground of this my∣sterie is taken from the words of ps. 23.5. Cosirevaiah, my cup is full; where the numerall letters of the word revaiah according to the Cabalists observation do expresse this Number; to vvit, R in Hebrew account standing for 200, v for 6,  for 10, & h for . and these added togther make 221, the measure of that royall cup. 3. You alledge the testimony of Maimony by the halfes, and thereby hide the absurdity of that Infidel which is meet to be knowne, that the reader be not deceyved by you. Maimony sayth indeed that in the world to come, there is neither eating nor drinking, &c. But he saith vvithall in the same Chapter and Section alledged by you, that Misneh, in Teshu∣bah cap. 8. Sec. 2. in the world to come there is nei∣ther body nor bodily substance (of any person,) but the soules of the righteous alone without bodies, as the ministring Angels without bodie. This he would prove from the saying of their vvise men that say, in the vvorld to come there is neither eating nor drinking, &c. Behold (saith he) it is made plaine vnto thee that there is no body there because there is no eating & drinking there, &c And Sec. 3. afterwards againe he vvould shew this from the 1 Sam. 25 words of
Abigail vnto David, that there is no body there, but a bundle of life, &c. And againe he saith, all the good things that the prophets prophecyed of for Israel, they were nothing els but things for the body, which Israel shall enioy in the dayes of the King Messias, in the time that he shall turne the Kingdome to Israel, &c. Thus doth the place alledged shew what a carnall opinion Maimony had con∣cerning the Messias, and how carnally the Rabbines did vnder∣standthe spirituall promises and prophecies concerning Christ, quite contrary to that which you would make your readers to beleeve. Though they imagined a resurrection of the body to live vpon earth againe with their Messias, yet they denyed the resurrection of the body to live in heaven therewith after the last judgement. Thus you deale with the testimonies of the Rabbines, as hucksters with their deceitfull merchandise: you paint and colour them, and set a deceitfull glosse vpon them, that so you might the better vent these Rabbinicall vvares. 4. How can you alledge this testimony of Maimony to shew a difference betwixt the ancient Rabbines and the Iewes that now live, touching their opinion of Eden and the tree of life to be enioyed by them, seing Maimony is of so great credit with them now at this present? where is there a Rabbine or Iew that now differs from him herein and will not acknowledge as much as is conteyned in this your allegation? This being so, the opposition which you make betwixt the ancient and later Iewes in this matter touching their expectation of recovery of their losse by Christe is very vaine. ANother instance of your perverting the meaning of the Rabbines, as though they tooke Michael to be Christe, is to be observed in you, in that you say, concerning the man that Iaakob wrestled withall: Annot. on Gen. 32 24. The Ancient Iewish Rabbines acknow∣ledged this Angel to be Christe: Our doctours of blessed memorie (R.D. Kimchi, on Hos. 12.4.) have sayd this Angel was Michael: and of him he saith (Gen. 48.16.) the Angel that redeemed me frō all evil. Then you adde; Micael is Christe the Arch-Angel, Dan. 10.21. Iude 9. Rev. 12,7. Later Rabbines do feigne, that this was Esaus Angel, who sought to hinder Iacob, &c. The like observation you have Annot. on Gen. 31 11. & on Exod. 14.19. els where also, as though they tooke Michael to be Christe: Here∣vnto I answer. 1. Your opposition here also betwixt the ancient and the later Rabbines is vaine. For it doth not appeare that the do∣ctours of blessed memorie whom Kimchi speakes of, were more ancient, then those Rabbines that feigne this person that vvrest∣led
with Iaakob, to be Esaws Angel. R. D. Kimchi in his com∣mentarie even vpon the same verse alledged here by you doth twise give vnto his owne Father Ioseph Kimchi that title of blessed memorie, yet was he not more ancient then R. Solomon Iarchi who Com∣ment. on Hos. 12.4. expoundes that wrestler to be Esaws Angel. David Kimchi is recorded to have lived anno 1190, and Rab. Solomon to have dyed anno 1105. The title of blessed memorie doth not carie any such antiquity with it, as you would here make vs beleeve. 2. How know you that the later Rabbines feigned this ex∣position, and that they did not receive it from their ancients, as vvell as many other the like fond interpretations? yea R. Solo∣mon when he expoundes that vvrestler to be the Angel of Esaw, he saith it is Commēt on Gen. 32 24. perush rabbothenu the exposition of their Rab∣bines: which speech beares as much shevv of antiquiry in it as that of R. Kimchies doth. 3. That the Rabbines of old did not take Michael to be their Messias or Christe, it is evident over all by their vvritings. The Chaldee paraphrast on Cāt. 8.4. &c. framing that last chapter of Solomons song into a dialogue, brings in many persons speaking one after an o∣ther: vers. 4. the King Messias is brought in giving a charge: v. 5. Solomon speakes as a Prophet vers. 6. the Church or Children of Israel speake: vers. 6. The Lord of the vvorld, God himself is sayd to speak: vers. 7. the Angells of heaven are brought in speaking: and vers. 8. Michael the Prince of the nation of Israel, and as a cheefe Angel hath his speech also and so hath a distinct person attributed vnto him divers from the Messias. Againe in the description of those ten miracles which the Iewes do Abkath rochel ci∣tante Bux∣torf Synag. c. 36. faigne to be wrought before the coming of the Messias, Mi∣chael the arch-Angel is evidently noted as a distinct person going before and making way for the Messias the sonne of Da∣vid, and blowing three times the great horne or trumpet and working wonders therewith: so that by their opinion he must needs be a distinct person from the Messias. The Chaldee para∣phrast in an
on ps. 137 other place as hath bene shevved before ascribesthe like workes to Michael and Gabriel, as being follow Angels of the like condition. And other Cabalists do likewise shew this; they Bereshith Rabba. Fol. 1. write that Michael was created in the beginning to∣gather with other Angels: they give the like office to him with the rest, and divide workes betwixt them in like sort: In the ad∣ministration of the world they Ioann. Reuchlin. de arte ca∣balistica. lib. 3. give vnto Michael the rule and governement of the east winde; to Raphael the governement of the west winde: to Gabriel the governement of the North winde, and to Noriel the rule of the South winde. And Mi∣chael is reckoned among the 72. Angels by which they ascend vnto God in their prayers. These 4. Angels are also R. Abra∣ham in Ze∣ror Ham∣mor, on Numb. citante Io. Buxtor. de Abbrev. hebr. p. 35. sayd to cary the Chariot of the divine maiestie, and to have waited on God when he came downe on mount Sinai, like vnto 4 standerd bearers, even as the Israelites marched vnder 4. ensignes: Mi∣chael having the right hand, Gabriel the left hand: Noriel going before, & Raphael following. In the like maner also when they assigne vnto 7. Angels the governement of the 7. dayes, they ascribe vnto him his lot and his portion of one day as they do vnto the rest, Iunius annot. on Tobit. 12.15. giving Sunday to Raphael, Munday to Gabriel, Tuesday to Sammael, vvednesday to Michael, Thursday to Tzid∣kiel, Fryday to Anael, and Satterday to Kephariel: So that by all these testimonies and many more the like it is apparant, that they did not take Michael to be Christe. 4. VVhereas you alledge some scriptures to prove that Mi∣chael is Christe; that is nothing to the question; nothing vnto the honour of the ancient Rabbines vnless you could prove that they held the same thing with the scriptures: but the contrary therevnto is already manifested. AGaine you seeme to erre from the Rabbines meaning in this, that you ascribe vnto them the knowledge of Christe from their speeches of Schecinah. You say, Annot. on Exo. 34 9.
By the maiestie or divine presence of the Lord, which the Hebrewes call Schecinah: we may well vnderstand Christe: for the Hebrewes vsually distinguish this from God the Father: and say; there is no comming before the blessed and most high King, without schecinah. R. Menachem on Le∣vit.10. Our saviour more plainely saith, No man commeth vnto the Father but by me, Ioh. 14.6. Of him the ancient Iewes seeme to speak, vnder this name Schecinah: though at this day they despise their sal∣vation. See before on Exod. 33.14.15. & 34.6, & 14.19. Answer. 1. VVhereas you do here oppose the anciēt Iewes acknowled∣ging Schecinah against the later in regard of their dispising their salvation, this is vaine: for both the ancient Iewes you speak of, and this magical Menachem with the rest have despised their sal∣vation in refusing Christe, as well as the latter Iewes: and the Iewes at this day againe do acknowledge Schecinah, according to the testimonies and speeches of the ancient Iewes. How vniust then is this opposition? 2. If the ancient Iewes spoke of Christe vnder the name of Schecinah, then did they despise their salvation, in that they held Schecinah to be See be∣fore P. 336 one of those 5. things that were wanting in the second temple, whiles our Lord Iesus did live on earth. So they must needes be blasphemers of him and denyers of the Lord of life, looking for an other Schecinah. 3. This word Schecinah properly signifies habitation or dwel∣ling, and so may be vnderstood and applyed to any speciall reve∣lation of the grace and glory of God resting or dwelling vpon any place or person ordinarily or extraordinarily according to the divers degrees in which it pleaseth him to manifest the same. According to this signification may all the testimonies alledged by you be vnderstood of the Iewes, and yet they still remaine ignorant of the person of Christe. VVhereas you al∣ledge out of Menachem, that there is no comming before God with∣out Schecinah, this may be vnderstood of some certaine measure of the spirit, required in those that should draw neerer vnto God then the ordinary sort of men: according to the like testi∣mony vvhich you
Annot. on Exo. 28 30. alledge out of Maimony giving a reason vvhy the Priests in the second temple did not enquire of God by vrim and Thummim. Every Priest that speaketh not by the holy Ghost, and on whom the divine maiestie resteth not: they enquire not by him. And so the saying of Menachem hath no affinity withthe saying of Christ Ioh. 14.6. For any Priest or godly person might come vnto the Father by Christe, according to the mea∣ning of Christe, though they wanted that extraordinary Scheci∣nah. And further how doth this his testimony shew vnto vs their distinction of God the Father? &c. As for the other notes you refer vs vnto in Exo. 33. and 34. by that which is already sayd it may appeare that there is no necessitie of vnderstanding them of Christes person, considering withall, that the Rabbines vse to attribute the titles of Christe vnto the Angels; and that sometimes also the name of God is given vnto the signes and tokens of his presence. 4. Seing Schecinah habitation, or dwelling in the Church & in the members thereof is Iohn 14.17.23. Eph. 2.22. 1. Ioh. 4.15.16. common to ech person in the tri∣nitie, to the Father and to the holy Ghost as wel as the Sonne; and seing withall that this name of Schecinah is by the Chaldee paraphrasts and other writers often attributed to God ab∣solutely considred, what reason have you to restreyne their meaning to the second person in the trinitie? 5. R. Moses Bar Maimon writing of Schecinah or habitation, saith; Morch Nebu∣chim, Che∣lek. 1. pe∣rck. 25. where so ever this word is spoken of God, it signifieth the firmnes of his glory, that is, of his glory created in that place, or the firmnes of his care abiding vpon any thing: And so he brings example, that so the glory of God dwelt vpon mount Sinai. Ac¦cording to this his interpretatiō may that place of the Prophet be vnderstood: Esa. 4.5. And the Lord shall create vpon every place of mount Sion and the assemblies thereof a cloude and smoke by day, &c. Now while the Rabbines do thus expound the word of the out¦ward sensible tokens of Gods glorious protection and care, and of the graces created or infused vpon his Church, we can not justly from this their phrase conclude, that they spoke of the increated Sonne of God vnder this name. 6. It is recorded, that Thal∣mud in Ba∣ba bathra Fol. 134. and in Suc∣ca Fol. 28. Hillel the old man had 80. disciples: 30, of them were worthy that the Schecinah should rest vpon them, as vpon Moses: other 30. of them were worthy that the Sun should stand still vnto them, as vnto Ioshua the son of Nun: 20 of them, were
of a middle sort, &c. Hēce it appeares that these Rabbines did vn∣derstand by Schecinah the more high degree of knowledge and grace of the spirit: for were they so senseless to think that the first 30 onely were partakers of Christe, and that the other 50. were without the Messias, or that their graces vvere not from him, whom they should acknowledge so boūtifull vnto others? If so, then surely you have no reason to think the later Rab∣bines more ignorant then those ancient dotards that were so far from the knowledge of the way to salvation and life. 7. If Michael, Gabriel, Nuriel and Raphael do cary the Chariot of Schecinah, as was noted before according to the opinion of the Rabbines: then is it probable that either they thought Michael was not Christe, contrary to your imaginatiō; or els that they thought not Schecinah to be Christe, as it yet seemes vnto you: for should the Messias be both horse and rider at once in their account? 8. VVhereas the Thargam or Chaldee paraphrast saith on Pf. 110.1. The Lord sayd in his word, &c. If by word he meant the Messias, according to Preface to Annot. on Gen. your opinion, then doth he also vpon the same psalme plainely distinguish Schecinah from the Mes∣sias: for there he faith further vers. 5. The Shecinta or Schecinah of the Lord is at thy right hand: So by your owne exposition if they make Schecinah a helper to Christe at his right hand it will follow that the ancient Iewes should not thinke Christe to be Schecinah. And many other places might easily be alledged out of the same paraphrast, to shew that the Iewes held the Messias and Schecinah to be two severall things: but this may suffice for the present. WIth this kind of errour we may reckon your misinter∣pretation of some of the divers readings recorded by the Masorites: for example, the word jadau, you expound it thus, Annot. on Exod. 32.19. his hands) or, his hand: that is, ech of his hands: the Hebrew hath both readings: the first by the vowels and margine: the other by the letters in the line. And againe, the like: vvhen after the same maner, you interpret the word berichan, to signify Annot. on Exo. 35 11. & on Exo.
39.33. barrs or,barr: &c. But herein you erre, seing both the readings whether in the margine or in the line, are to be translated his hands, his barres: and neither of them his hand, his barr: and the same is to be held for the other diuers readings wherevnto you refer vs in Levit. 9.22. Deut. 2.33. and the like. If the word read in the line had had Cholem annexed with van, then should it have bene so as you say: but seing it hath there a ka∣mets coming before van; that R. D. Kimchi in Miclol. Fol. 197. kinde of affix is still a note of pluralitie in the signification of words. Though sometimes jod be wanting in the last syllable of such words by a gramma∣tical figure, yet do they not therfore ceasse to reteyne a plural signification; as is Ioa. Buxt. Thesaur. gramm. lib. 2. c. 8. shewed in divers words, in ghnammudan, pillars: Exod. 27.12. Tabbeghnothan, rings, Exo. 28.28. vvhich are of the same forme with the words jadau & berichan as they are written within the line in the places above mentioned. Could you shew that the words in the line, had other maner of vowels belonging vnto them, then vnto those in the mar∣gine; then should you have some reason for that you vvrite here in your annotations: But seing it is observed concerning those 848 divers readings, that the readings in the line and the margine differ onely in letters, and that Elias Le∣vita Masor, hammasor. praefat. 3. there is no difference in the vowelles in any of them: and seing the copies of the holy scripture do also witnesse the same thing vnto vs: therfore had you no warrant to vvrite so as you have done. These things may seeme small: but seing they concerne the purity of the holy scriptures, therfore are they not to be despised, especially of you, which would have the divers readings to be both writ∣ten by the spirit of God. HItherto also may be referred your vnfound observation vpon the word Zebojim: when you note, that
Annot. on Gen. 14 2. it is written by the letters in the line Zebiim, of Zebi which signifieth glorie, pleasantnes, & a Roe: by which name the pleasant and glorious Land of Israel is called, in Ezek. 20.6. But by the vowels and in the margine noted to be read Zebojim, as being vnworthy the pleasant name. Here you erre many wayes, 1. There is no warrant
to say it is written by the letters in the line Zebiim; for the letters in the line without vowels, do yeeld no word at all: if you de∣vise vowels for it, as you do, then you destroy the tradition of the Masorites, who (as I shewed before from Elias Levita) do ad∣mit no difference of vowels in any of their divers readings: And where as they make two divers readings: if your observation were admitted, we should then have three, viz the first, Zebiim: the second Zebojim, without vau as it is now in the text: the third Zebojim with vau as it is in the margine: the first devised by yourself: the two latter already receyved by the Masorites. 2, if difference of vowels vvere to be admitted in these divers readings, yet not in such maner as you feigne for you erre in de∣riving Zebiim of Zebi; by putting Chirck for Kamets; Zebiim for Zebaim: This your errour is plainely reprooved by the Kimchi in Miclol, Fol. 239. cheefest of the Rabbines that shew the forming of this vvord. 3, suppose Zeboim was put for Zebiim, yet have you no reason hence to ga∣ther that it vvas vnworthy the pleasant name: for vvhy may not Zeboim come of Zebi also, and so cary in it a signification of glory and pleasantnes as vvel as your imagined Zebiim? And if Zeboim do not come of Zebi then shevv from vvhence it comes and vvhat signification it hath wherein no glory and pleasant∣nes is implyed. 4, by this kind of collection where you thus exclude and remoove the signification of one of the divers rea∣dings from the subiect spoken of, you do also overthrow your interpretation of these divers readings in other places, where you labour to reteyne, to establish and to apply the significatiō of them both vnto the subiect matter that is mentioned with them. VVith such inconveniences are you justly entangled, vvhiles you maintaine these divers readings for grounds of do∣ctrine and instruction: whiles the Masorites traditions are cho∣sen of you as your text, vvhich thus you preach on. Hereby you run into absurdities vvhich even the Rabbines themselves are free from.
CHAP. VI. A Sixth Scandall is that blasphemous assertion touching the help of the Rabbines, when as con∣cerning the Chaldee paraphrast and other Hebrew doctours, you say that you alledge their expositions for two causes: the one, Preface to Annot. on Genesis. to give light vnto the ordinan∣ces of Moses touching the externall practise of them, in the common wealth of Israel, which the Rabbines did record, and without whose help, many of those legall rites (especially in Exodus and Leviticus) will not well be vnderstood, &c. To this presumption I answer, in defence of the holy scriptures; First, The law of God is Ps. 19.7.8. & 119.130. Prov. 1.1.—6. & 8.8.9. perfect: and not onely for the truth thereof, but also for the perspicuity, and evidence sufficiēt in itself (as a divine instrument) to convert the soule from any sin: to give wisedome vnto the simple, and to enlighten their eyes in any doubt or danger: why do you then accuse them of imper∣fection, as though the well vnderstanding of them did depend vpon the records of the Rabbines? The whole scripture is 2 Tim. 3.16.17. given by inspiration of God, and is proffitable to teach, to convince, to correct, to instruct in righteousnes that the man of God may be absolute, being made perfect vnto all good vvorkes: But you contradicting the spirit of God tell vs that without help of the Rabbines many legall rites will not be well vnderstood: and so according to your tenent, the man of God cannot be absolute, nor made perfect vnto all good workes, and to all the workes of his ministery as to expound Exodus & Le∣viticus well, vnless he be a Scholler of the Rabbines: To be a disciple of the Prophets and Apostles, and of Christ Iesus him∣self is not sufficient with you, vnless he be also a student and proficient in the Schoole of the Thalmud. As
Iudg. 14.18. Sampson once vpbraided the Philistines, that they could not have found out his riddle, but that they plowed with his heifer: even so the Iewes at this day might vpbraid the Christians, & tell vs out ofyour mouth, (if there were any truth in this your assertion) that we could not have founde out their mysteries, nor well vnder∣stood the ordinances of Moses, except we had plowed with their heifer of the Thalmud. You ought to feare the Lord who is a jealous God and Esa. 48.11 will not give his glory to the Thalmudists: Neh. 8.8. Ezra and Act. 9.22. & 17,2.3. Paul and Act. 18.28. others honoured the scriptures, and did well expound them when they gave the vnderstanding thereof by the scripture it self, and by comparing them togather: but you dishonour the scriptures and take away a great part of their glory, when you say they will not be well vnderstood without help of Rabbines: yea you are herein guilty of the same blasphemy with the Rabbines themselves: and your speech is in effect one with theirs, who are noted to affirme that R. Bechai in Cad hak kemach. Fol. 77. the law written can∣not be expounded or made plaine without the help of the mouth tra∣dition: for from those pretended Thalmudicall traditions are your explications drawne. How do you forget yourself & your former writings in which you profess touching the Shepheard of Rome, that Answ. to Ioh. Ains. p. 22. you will never go over the Alpes to fetch your food from him? And yet here you run over the Alpes, yea over the mountaines of Ararat to fetch your food from the Babylo∣nian Thalmud as though you could not be wel fed without Rab∣binicall chaffe. Heretofore you could vvrite and maintaine; that Ibid. p. 153. It is a ly against the truth to say, that the holy Bible which we have written, doth not sufficiently express divers mysteries of vs to be beleeved: And yet here to make vvay for the broaching and venting of your Rabbinicall vvares, you contradict yourself: for if many legall rites will not be well vnderstood without the Rabbines, then doth not the holy Bible sufficiently expresse di∣vers mysteries vnto our vnderstanding: And thus yourself are guilty of the like ly against the truth, whiles to vvin credit vnto the Rabbinicall expositions, you spare not to slander both the perspicuity of the scriptures, and also the Ioh. 1.16. & 7.37.38 & 14.26. & 16.13. Eph. 4.8.14. Esay. 29.18. & 35.7.8. Heb. 8.10.11. grace of God given vnto the Churches of Christ so abundantly in these last dayes: as though the spirit of truth, and all the gifts which Christ ascē∣ding on high hath given to vs could not lead men to vnderstād
the scriptures well: as though without a threed of direction frō those infidel Iewes, that deny Christe, vve could not come out of the pretended Labyrinth of the scriptures. Secondly, as for the externall practise of Moses ordinances in the common wealth of Israel, recorded by the Rabbines: what extraordinary light is to be expected from those blinde guides whom our Saviour every where condemneth for their igno∣rance, blindenes and superstition? even the Pharisees, those more ancient Rabbines, (by which title you do so often com∣mend them) were ignorant of the law, and by their traditions receyved from their Elders had falsifyed & corrupted the right practise of the ordinances of Moses, and to magnifye their owne devises and inventions, they Mat. 5.20.—43. & 15.2,3.—14. & 16.12, & 23.16, &c. wrested and changed the law, & the right observation of the whole decalogue and of every commandement in the same: vnto the legall rites they ioyned a burden of their owne traditions, mens precepts, vaine wor∣ship, plants which the heavenly father had never planted, and made the commandements of God of no authoritie, for these things Christ often reproved them, denounced woe vnto them, and for this cause the Iewes againe denounce woe vnto our Blessed Saviour and Thalmud tract. Git∣tin Cap. 5. blaspheme him wickedly with words which I abhor to mention, as being a contemner of their wise men. And is it not madnes then to think, that the law of God will not be well vnderstood, without the help of such accursed and woful guides? But to give the reader some more particular instances of this; Let it be considered what a sory change you have made in lea∣ving the ministers of Christe to be come a disciple of your Iew-doctours. Against the Church of God in England you protest on this maner and say vnto vs:
H. Bar. refut. of Giff. p. 214 we hold that you have poysoned all the fountaines of sincere doctrine and pervert the whole Testament, & turne away the practise thereof by your damnable false expositions, yea that you teach not one poynt sincerely. If this were true then had you reason to separate: and not to heare such damnable do∣ctrine: but let vs see whether those fountaines be purer, with∣outdrinking whereat you would make vs beleeve we could not vvell vnderstand some parts of the holy scripture. AGainst the first commandemēt, your Rabbines teach vs to choose a false God without Christ: they impugne the do∣ctrine of the holy Trinitie, as I shewed before. They teach many things not agreeing with the nature & maiestie of God: as that he should Rasi on Psa. 104.26 play hre houres in the day with Leviathā; that Chald. paraphr. on Cant. 5.10. in the day he exercises himself in the scripture, & in the night studies the Thalmud: that in the Thalmud in Beracoth Cap. 9. Fol. 59. houre when he remēbers the disper∣sion of Israel, he lets two teares fall into the great Sea and makes lamentation for the destruction of the temple: That the Thalm. in Cholin. c. 3. F. 60. & Rasi on Numb. 28.15. Sun and moone being created equal in light at first, vpon the com∣plaint of the moone, he diminished her light: but the moone expostulated so long vvith God, that as they write he appoyn∣ted a sin offring to be brought for himself for a reconciliation: even that Goate offred for a sin offring in the beginning of every moneth. That the Sunne, Moone, and Starres are li∣ving creatures having reason and speech, the Iewes hold firmely as I noted before: and therfore no vvonder that the Moone should so plead with God. As the creatures pray in their wants so they teach that the creatour himself doth make prayers: R. Io∣hanan in the name of R. Iosei Thalmud in Bera∣coth, c. 1. Fol. 7. proves it by that place in Esa. 56 7. where God calles the temple Beth tephillathi; The house of my prayer: They note it is not called the house of their prayers, but of his. And R. Zutra bar Tobijah shewes what his prayer is, viz. that his mercy may overcome his vvrath and his other pro∣perties, &c. Concerning the anger of God, they vvrite further in the same place, that God is alwayes angry once in a day: vvhich they would prove from that saying Ps. 7.11. But this anger they say is but for a moment: and how much is a moment? They teach that if an houre be divided into five millions, eight thou∣sand, eight hundred, eighty eight parts, then a moment is one of them. They say no creature knowes that moment save onely Balaam: because it is sayd, he saw the vision of the almighty, &c. Numb. 24. and therfore in
Balaams time God was not angryonce a day according to his maner, least Balaā should have cur∣sed Israel in that moment, and so destroyed them: this they will have to be noted from Numb. 23.8. with Mica. 6.5. For it is held that if in that moment of Gods anger any man should curse an other, he must needes dy presently: and that men cannot pre∣vayle vvith God in that moment: And herevpon they vvrite also that God bade Moses to stay and waite till his face or anger vvas past, that then he vvould give him rest, viz. vvhen the mo∣ment of his passion and indignation vvas over: that they would prove from Exod. 33.14. Concerning that moment of indignation they say that the cockes then standing vpon one foote, their combes become pale and loose their rednes, &c. Into such a horrible pit of ignorance of their creatour, have these miserable Ievves bene cast, by the heavy hand of God vpō them. Their confidence in creatures appeares by the sundry sorts of Elias Le∣vita in Tishbi in Lilith. charmes vvhich they have taken from the names of Angels vvritten on their vvalles and dores in time of danger. Yea as the rude Indians are sayd to offer sacrifice to the Divel for feare, least he hurt them: so the Ibidem in Samael. Iewes themselves vvrite of their offring or gift, vvhich in the feast of reconciliation they give vnto the wicked spirit or fiend vvhom they call Sa∣mael. IN stead of Gods true and pure worship required in the second commandement, they bring in a Sea of superstition: In stead of worshiping Christ, they have Seb. Munst. de fide Iudae: p. 110. prayers against him, so exe∣crable, as that I think it not meet to rehearse the same. And for other prayers how vaine are they? Among the 5 things that stay them from prayer, one is when their hands are not cleane: And of this they vvrite, that
Maimo∣ny in Mis∣neh, in Te∣phillah, or treat. of prayer, c. 4. Sect. 1.2 5 if a man have journey by the vvay, and the time of prayer be come and a man have no vvater: if there be betwixt him and the vvater the space of 4. miles or 8000. cubites, he is first to go vnto the place of vvater, to vvash and then after that to pray: but if there be betvvixt him & the vvater a greater space then this, he is to vvrive or rub his hands vvith gravel or dust or the like and then to pray. But this di∣stance of 4. miles they do there expound of the place before them; but for the place after them, they are to returne but one mile back for vvater and no more: This vvashing of hands they require for every set time of prayer beside the morning: for then they require the vvashing of face, hands and feet before prayer. For praeparation to prayer, they require a settling of the mind and thoughts: And therfore they teach, Ibidem, Sec. 15. if a man re∣turne from a journey and be vveary or troubled it is vnlawfull for him to pray: and their vvise men say, a man shall be vveary three dayes vntill he rest and refresh his mind, and after that he may pray. In the time of prayer they vse phylacteries: and of these R. Hanina in the name of R. Iohanan gives this rule; that R. Al∣phes in phillim, or treat. of phylacte∣ries, Fol. 78. A. they may not make the phylacteries of the head, to serve for phylacteries vnto the hand: but the hand-phylacteries are allowed to be made head phylacteries: because they may not descend from a greater holynes to a lesse: but contra. Touching the hand whe∣reon these phylacteries are to be vvorne, the Rabbines say, R. Alphes ibid. f. 81. a it is the left hand; for proofe thereof they alledge these scrip∣tures, his hand hath founded the earth, and his right hand hath spread out the heavens: and againe, she put her hand to the nayle, and her right hand to the hammer of the workmen, Iudg. 5. But if a man be left-handed, then he is to vveare them on his right hand, be∣cause that is vnto him as his left hand. The like care they have about their zizith or fringes vvith as many superstitions as there be threeds in a fringe. Further, Thalmud in Babha bathra c. 2, Fol. 25. if a man seek vvisedome in his prayer, he is to pray towards the South; if he seek riches, he is to pray towards the North: and the reason that they give hereof is, because the table vvas set on the North-side, and the Candlestick on the South-side, (Exod. 40.22.24.) VVhen for their necessities they go into the place, where they think it is not meet that the Angels should be present vvith them: they have
Arba tu∣rim, Orach Chaijm, tract. 1. fig. 3. a set forme of prayer, in vvhich they desire those Angels, the ministers of the most high to keep them, to help them and to stay for them, vntill they come forth of that house: vvithmany other superstitions annexed, not fit to be named. They think also, that Ibid. fig. 4 there is an evill spirit abiding vpon their hāds vntill they have vvashed, &c. VVhen they are see to pray, they tell vs that R. Alphes in Bera∣coth, c. 4. F. 22. though a King salute them, they may not answer him, and though a serpent bite them by the heele, they may not ceasse. Yet the glosse vpon that place, helpes to mitigate the matter a litle, and faith, R. Ionah commēt. on R. Al∣phes. though they may not ceasse to speak, yet they may go aside to shake of the serpent, to avoyd danger &c. After prayer for the further confounding or Orach Chajim, in Rosch hasschanah fig. 581. & in Seder Tekiath Shophar, fig. 596. astonishing of Satan, as they say, they vse sometimes to sound a Trumpet, or to take vp a great showte together, without sounding of the Trumpet. He that killes a bird or beast, Iore de∣ghnah, Treat. of covering blood, fig. 28. must cover the blood & a set forme of prayer or blessing is appoynted for that action; except it be, whē they kill a beast which they call Cavi begottē of a Roe and a hee goat: though they cover the blood thereof, yet may they not doe it with prayer & blessing evē as they teach that Tract. Milah. fig. 365. they are to circumcise an Hermaphrodite, a person that is both male and female, but without that set forme of blessing appoynted for the action of circumcision. And infinite and the traditions wherein they put holynes and religion: Yea they Thalmud in Sanhe∣drin, c. 7. F. 68. tell vs of 300. traditions about one kinde of leprous spot and of three thousand traditions about the planting of Cucumbers besides those which are for the plucking of them up. And how many millions of superstitions must they then have for all other things? But if there were nothing els but their set formes of prayers which they vse: according to your profession they must be violatours of the second commandement & great Idolaters. And touching these they say, that Maimo∣ny in Mis∣neh, in Be∣racod
. Ezra the scribe and his consistory ordeyned the forme of all their blessings, & that it is not meet to adde vnto one of them or to diminish from them: and that whosoever changeth the coyne which their wise men have coyned in their blessings, cannot but erre, &c. If in any thing the Rabbies might know the exter∣nal practise in the common-wealth of Israel then in this ge∣neral poynt, that they vsed set formes of prayer, though they might erre touching some particular prayers: If in this matter they cannot help you better to vnderstand the practise of Gods people, then in none other rites. Shew if you can, how we may regard them in any tradition, if not in this. FOr the third commandemēt, they have also most vaine do∣ctrines, touching taking the name of God in vaine. They say, whosoever Maimony in Mis∣neh, tract. Iesudei hath orah, Cap. 6,1.2 3, &c. destroyes any of the holy and pure names of God, he is Lukah, to be beaten or whipt: for proofe they alledge Deut. 12.3.4: Now these are the 7. names, Iehovah, Adonai, Eloah, Elohim, Ehich, Shaddai, Tsebaoth: whosoever blots out but one letter of these names, he is Lukah, to be beaten: And fur∣ther, they say, whosoever blots out any letter added to the name of God, in the forepart thereof, as L in Laihovah: and B in Belohim, that is free: but the letters added to the name of God, in the afterpart thereof, as C in Eloheca: on M in Elohecem, may not be blotted out, but are holy as the name of God. Yet he that blotts them out is not Lukah: but punished with a lesser kind of punishment, with Maccath Marduth, &c. Againe they hold it for an heynous sin, that any man should pronounce this name Iehovah: onely they Thalmud in Kiddu∣shin c. 4. f. 71, & in Sotah, c. 7. Fol. 37. allow it to be pronounced in the sanctuary, and that onely by the Priests and that not at all times but onely in the solemne blessing appoynted Numb. 6, & that also with a swift voyce, that the found thereof may be as it were swallowed vp. The reason alledged is, because the Lord saith, this is my name for ever, and this is my memorial Exod. 3.15, vvhere they do not read, leghnolam, for ever; but leghnallem, to hide, to conceale: as though God would have his name Iehovah concealed, & Adonai or Elohim to be his memorial pronounced in stead of it: And divers like superstitions they have about the name of 12 letters, and the name of 42 letters. Yet they
Aben Ezra on Zach. 14.9. Thalmud in Pesa∣chim, c. 3. Fol. 50. hold that in the world to come, viz. vvhen their Messias comes, that then it shalbe pronounced of all; because it is sayd, Zach. 14.9. that there shalbe one Lord, and his name one, to vvit, the name Iehovah to be read as it is written, &c. Moreover as they abuse the name of God, by obtruding all their traditionsvpon him, as if he had given them at Sinai; by perventing the law that he hath given: so do they also by concealing some parts of scripture, when they say, R. Al∣phes in Megilla, c. 4. f. 365. some of them are to be read and expounded: some of them are to be read and not expounded: and some of them neither to be read nor expounded; And divers instan∣ces they give for ech of these kindes. And not onely this, but they do also shew in strange maner, how a great part of the scriptures shalbe abolished, even then when they will have their traditions to continue: they say, that Maimony in Misneh, tract. Me∣gillall, c. 2. sec. 18. all the bookes of the Prophets and Cethubim (viz. Iob, psalm, proverbs, canticles, Da∣niel, Ezra, &c.) shall ceasse in the dayes of Messias, except the volume of Ester: behold it shall continue as the 5. bookes of the law and as the traditions of the law schebeal-peh, delivered by mouth, which are not to ceasse for ever. This is the blasphemie of your Maimony. Concerning othes, as our Saviour in his time Mat. 5.34 & 23.16, &c. reproved di∣vers of their errours: so are their later Rabbines also to be con∣demned. In that Sebast. Munster, Annot. on Gen. 2. story where the 7 places of paradise are de∣scribed by them, with their severall glory, and with the severall persons that are in ech of those places, they say, that when the same were shewed vnto Iehoshua ben Levi by the Angell of death at the commandement of God, he sodainely lept from the divel into that place, and swore by the name of God that he would not depart thence; Herevpon though the Angel of death would have drawne him back, and though the ministring Angels also complayned hereof vnto God, yet because- of his oth, it was concluded of God that he should stay there, it having bene found that this Rabbine had never made false oth before. The like liberty and presumption in swearing do others of them commend vnto vs on earth, when as some of their great Rabbines having a speciall request vnto God do tell him with an oth that they vvill not depart from the place where they stand vntill they see their desire granted. Thus it is Thalmud in Taanith, or treat. of fasting, c. 3. accorded of Chone Hammagal, that in a time of great drought when as other humiliation would not prevaile, he shut vp him self in our with a Cake, and prayed thus, O Lord of the world, thy
Children direct their eyes vnto me, knowing that I am deare vnto thee as a Childe vnto his Father: I sweare by thy holy name, that I will not depart hence, vntill thou have pitie vpon thy infants: This being done there came shewers of raine. And thus R. Solomon Iarchi their great Parshandatha or cheef expositour of the law, inter∣preting those words of the prophet I will stand vpon my watch, Rasi & Kimchi comment. on Habak, c. 1.1. writes herevpon: ghnugah ghnag Habakuk, &c. that is to say, Habakkuk baked a Cake and stood in it or by it, and sayd, I will not depart hence vntill I heare what he will say vnto me, &c. And this exposition is also related by Kimchi in the same place. This practise is like vnto the dealing of some presumptuous persons in these our times, of whom I have heard, that coming vnto persons possessed and taking with them a pound of raysins do avow they vvill eat nothing els vntill the persons be disposses∣sed. Many other vaine doctrines they have touching othes & blasphemies but I may not insist further vpon them. TOuching the observation of the Sabath taught in the 4th. commandement, they R. Abra∣ham Aben Ezra com∣ment. on Exod. 20. Isaak ben Arama in Akedath Isaak, portâ 45. shew from their wise men, that the 7. planets have ech of them a severall day in the week assigned vnto them wherein they beare rule and shew their force; that among these planets Saturne & Mars are hurtfull starres above the rest: that those who begin any work or enter vpon any journey when they beare rule shall not prosper but come to some hurt: that among all the dayes of the week there is not to be found any day and night together wherein those two hurt full planets beare rule save onely vpon the Sabath day: & that therfore it is not convenient for men to be then exercised in wordly affaires, save onely in the service of God: This is layd downe as a reason of rest vpon the seventh day: If this were just and sound, it should go ill with Christians who have their Sa∣bath now changed from the seventh to the first day of the week: Now for the keeping of this Sabath, they propound most carnall and absurd observations: they then Maimony in Misneh, tract. Scha∣bath, c. 30. require that a mā have cleane and faire apparel, and change of apparel; and if a man have not change of apparel, yet they require him so to
weare it, that it may seeme not to be the common apparel. They binde every man to make; banquets on the Sabath, and if it be possible to keep them with wine: to spread the table vpon the evening when the Sabath begins: and to see that it be spread when the Sabath goes out, though a man had no more meate then an Olive to set vpon the same: And for honour of the Sa∣bath, they do then especially commend taschmish hammittah, the vse of the mariage bed. And they teach there, that it is vnlawfull to mourne or cry on the Sabath even to pray for cō∣passion and to seek mercy from God, even in affliction, except it be extraordinary, as when the citie is beseeged, &c. They say, Ibidem, c. 19. sec. 1.3. whosoever weares armes on the Sabath, which are put on like apparel, as helmet, brigandine, and bootes of brasse, he is free: but who so caries armes that are not like vnto apparel, as speare sword, bow or the like, he is guilty: That it is vnlawful for a woman to go forth on the Sabath, with a ring which hath a sig∣net vpon it; but if a man do it, he is free: and on the contrary, that it is vnlawfull for a man to go forth on the Sabath with a ring, which hath no signet vpon it, but if a woman do it she is free. They say, Ibid. c. 27. whosoever goes out of his bounds on the Sabath, he is Lukah to be beaten; those bounds they describe to be 2000 cubites: but if a man walk through the citie where he lives, though it were as great as Nineveh, that it is lawfull. If a mā through ignorance or otherwise exceed that bounds then he hath but 4 cubites left him to stir in. If for performing the ne∣cessities of nature he be vrged to go aside, yet he must returne to that place againe, (to his circle.) They teach, that Ibid. c. 16. sec. 12. if one man alone (overtaken vvith the Sabath in his journey) do rest in a plaine and make a trench round about him: if there be in it a space conteyning two measures (of seed,) it is lawfull for him to walk through all that space, but if there be in it more then the space of two measures, then he may not moove aboue 4. cubites: & so it is if there be two men together. But if there be three Israelites or more thē these behold these are a cāpe, & it is lawfull for them to vvalk for all their necessities, though it
were divers miles: and this so, that the space of the two mea∣sures which they have compassed in be not left voyd vvithout some vessels or implements in the same; otherwise it is vnlaw∣full for them to moove through the whole trench, but onely for 4. cubites: And a Child may not make vp the number for a campe, &c. If we will beleeve Rabbines this was the external practise of the legal rites in the Iewes common wealth: how should vve vnderstand these things without their help? FRom the observation of the fift commandement they teach men to go astray both in defect and excesse of giving ho∣nour divers wayes: As in Christes time they did frustrate this commandement of God by their sacrilegious Mat. 15.4,5,6. Korban, in gi∣ving that vnto the Priests which they should have bestowed on their parents: So do they still teach men to practise. They say, Maimony in Misneh, in thalmud thorah, c. 5. sect. 1, &c. if a man see a thing lost by his Father, and a thing lost by his Rabbi, he is first to bring the thing lost vnto his Rabbi: If his Father and his Rabbi be laden with burdens, he is first to take of the burden of his Rabbi, then of his father. If his father and his Rabbi be taken captives, he is first to redeeme his Rabbi then his Father. They say in the same place, that it is vnlawfull for a man to teach in the presence of his Rabbi for ever: and whosoever teacheth a tradition in the presence of his Rabbi is guilty of death. If there be the space of 12 miles betwixt him & his Rabbi, and a man ask him a word of the tradition, it is then lawfull to answer him, &c. But for a man to set himself to be seene, and to sit downe to teach whosoever shall ask him: though he be in one end of the world and his Rabbi in the other end of the world, yet it is vnlawfull for him so to teach, vntill his Rabbi dy, or except he get a license from him, &c. If the R. Al∣phes in Moed Ka∣ton, c. 3. Fol. 380. Father of the house of judgement transgresse, they may not censure or suspend him for it, but they say vnto him, boast of thy glory and stay at home, &c. If a student, or yong schol∣ler transgresse they may not suspend him openly but in the night, when the Sun is gone downe: and their proofe is as Rasch∣bal there noteth, because it is sayd by the Prophet: Thou shalt
fall in the day: and the Prophet shall fall with thee in the night: Hos. 4.5. And the night shall cover him (Mica. 3.6.) Againe whereas the law of God appoynteth, that he vvhich curseth Father or Mother shall dy: they do frustrate this commande∣ment, by this distinction, that Arb. Tur. l. Ior. dea. trac. cibod ab. fig. 241. this is to be vnderstood of such as curse by some of the proper names of God: but if they curse by any of his attributes they are not subiect to this punishment but onely sin as if they should curse any other of Israel, that is not their parent. And where God ordeyned those that smite Father or mother, to be put to death, this they say is to be vn∣derstood of such smiting where a wound or blew marke follo∣wes: and that otherwise it is but as if they had striken an other Israelite, &c. They give this honour vnto their parent of parents, the father of their great court, that the same errour which is an heynous sin in an other, shall not yet be so in him: for whereas they Maimo. in Morch Nebuchim lib. 3. perck. 42. make 4. degrees of transgressiō, viz. 1, against a mans vvill: 2 of errour: 3 of pride: 4 of malice; They do in the same place note, that there is herein this great difference be∣twixt private men, and their cheefe rulers: namely that if a pri∣vate man work any transgression and judge according to his owne vnderstanding, it is a transgression of pride: and he may may be put to death for it: but the cheefe rulers and the high Priest not so: in them this is but a transgression of errour. AGainst the sixt commandement, they give allowance of murder, divers wayes. They say, R. Moses mikkotsi in SMG, in Loim, praecept.  163. if ten men do strike a man with ten staves, so that every one be sufficient to kill him, & he dy; whether they stroke him one after an other, or whe∣ther they stroke him together as one man, they are all free from being slaine by the court of judgement, because it is sayd every soule of a man which is one, if he kill, &c. They say, Maimon. in Misneh, in Aisure Biah, cap. 12. whosoe∣ver goes in vnto a woman that is a gentile, (vnder vvhom they comprehend Christians) whether by vvay of mariage, or by way of fornication, if he do it manifestly in the sight of ten or moe Israelites, if they finde him and be zealous and kill him: behold
these are to be praysed and preserved: this is halacah lemosheh Missinai, a tradition delivered vnto Moses at Sinai: But if the zealous come to kill this man and he escape, and kill the zea∣lous to deliver himself out of his hand, then is not he to be slaine for killing the zealous. In an other case they SMG. in A sin, praec. 70. hold it lavvfull to kill the Gentile that doth but strike a Ievv, and for proof they alledge Moses his example, Exo. 2.11.12. Againe they Arba Tu∣rim, l. Io∣reh dea, in Abodah Zarah, sig. 158. teach, that if any of the Idolatrous gentiles (such as they esteeme Christians to be) do fall into a pit, or into a place of danger, he that sees them may not lift them or help them out, except they hyre him: even as they may not heale such persons but for a revvard, &c. But if they be heretiques, apostates, or the the like, such as do leave their Iudaisme and embrace Christia∣nitie, they hold it lawful to thrust them downe with their hands viz. to drowne or kill them as occasion is offred. And many other bloody doctrines are mainteyned by them. MOst vaine also are the Rabbinicall doctrines touching mariage, tending many wayes to the violation of the 7th. Commandement: They say, Arb. Tur. lib. Eben Ezer, in Aisure Bi∣ah, sig. 1. that every man is bound to take a wife, to encrease and multiply: that he which doth not mary, is as he that sheddeth blood: and as he that defaceth the image of God: and that he causeth Schecinah or the maiestie of God to depart from Israel: that whosoever lives without a wife, lives without goodnes, without joy without blessing, without ha∣bitation, vvithout law, without wall, without peace, &. that such an one is no man, &c. that the commandement of taking a vvife is exceeding great, because they may not sell the book of the law, but for to learne the law, and for to get a wife: that this commandement lyes vpon a man when he is
18. yeares old: that he may not passe 20 vvithout a wife: the disciples of R. Is∣mael say that vntill 20 yeares God stayes for a man that he may take a vvife: but if he passe 20 yeares without a wife, the holy blessed God saith, let the bones of that man be broken. R. Asher saith if he passe 20 yeares without a wife, the house of judgement is to compell him to mary. Onely they have anexception for students as ben Azzai that made the law his wife, &c. If a man have had a wife and Children by her in his youth, he must also as R. Iehoshua saith take one in his age: and so to prove that a man may not live a vvidower they alledge that saying of Solomon, Eccl. 11.6. If a man have liued vvith a vvife 10. yeares & she have brought him no Children, they say he is bound to put her away, that he may fulfill the commandement, encrease and multiply. Further, that a man is to take many wives to encrease and multiply: but the counsell of their wisest men is that a man should have but 4 wives that he may the better please them: that yet if they live in such places where the law allowes them to take but one wife (as herein Christendome) they are then to follow the cu∣stome. Besides this as they have many canons touching ma∣riage vnmeet to be mentioned, so they Eben Ezer in Ai∣sure Biah, sig. 24. have allowance of some practises which are monstrous and against nature not to be named. And wo to them that fetch the exposition of Gods law from such practises as are recorded by these Rab∣bines. Againe, they teach that Maimony in Aisure Biah, c. 17. sect. 2. & 3. every Preist whether high Priest or other inferiour priest that takes one of the three women (ei∣ther harlot, or divorced or polluted) and shall marie her, he is to be punished: but if he go in vnto her after the maner of an harlot, he is not to be punished: because it is sayd, he shall not take: vntill he take and mary her, &c. But if the high Priest go in vnto a widow (after the maner of a harlot) he is puni∣shed once: if he mary her, he is to have double punishmēt, &c. They teach Ibidem cap. 3. also, that he which goes in vnto a deafe vvoman; to a mad woman: to a person that is Tomtom, i in respect of certaine knowledge neither male nor female: to an Herma∣phrodite that is both male and female, &c. that all these are free, if presumption be not added. Their other vaine traditions concerning women, wives and maydes are innumerable.
OF their false expositions of the eight commandement, there is also a great number. Their Thalmudique ca∣nonsrequire a man to restore the thing lost by an Israelite, but R. Moses mikkotsi SMG. in Asin. praec. 74. if they finde a thing lost by an heretique, an Epicure, an Ido∣later and such as openly pollute the Sabath, they give men li∣berty not to restore vnto them the thing lost by them, &c. If a Thalmud Sanhedrin, c. 8. fo. 72. theefe dig through and break into the house of a man and steale away his goods, they do not require restitution in this case as in other thefts, because the theefe herein adventured his life, and it had bene lawfull to have killed him if he had bene taken in the fact. And Choshen hamish∣pat, in Ge∣nibah, sig. 351. such a kind of excuse they have to free him that steales vpon the Sabath day. If a theefe Ibidem, sig. 350. steale a thing and sell it, and an other theef come and steale it: the first theef is to restore 4 or 5- fold: the second is required to restore double if he stole it after the owners thereof despayred to finde it: but if he stole it before they despayred to find it againe, then is he free from the double restitution, by their canons. They say, SMG, in Asin, praec. 71. if a man steale any thing from a gentile, from any that is not an Israelite, or if he steale the treasures of the sanctuary he is freed from restoring double, because it is sayd he shall restore double vnto his neighbour, &c. Touching receyving of almes, Ioreh dea. tract. Tse∣dakah, sig. 253. their canons are, that a man which hath meate for two meales may not receive any thing from their Tamchavi, the common dish, or almes-basket: if a man have meate for fourteene mea∣les, he may not receive any thing from their Kopheh, the com∣mon purse or poore mans Boxe: if a man have two hundred peeces of that money, which they call Zuz, (commōly reckoned to be the fourth part of a shekel,) though he do not traffique with them: or if he have fifty of those peeces, and do traffique with them, then may he receyve no almes at all: if a man have two hundred of those peeces of money, wanting a peny or a dinar: though any would give him a thousand more of those same peeces at one time, behold he may then receyve them all: Or if a man have a house and much houshold stuffe, and have not these two hundred peeces of money, he may still receive & need not sell his houshold stuffe, though they be vessels of sil∣ver & vessels of gold, &c.
AGainst the truth and lawfull vvitnessing thereof, taught in the 9th. commandement; they bring divers glosses to pervert the same. They R. Moses mikkotsi in SMG. in Asin, prae∣cep. 74. allow a man in many cases to break his word and his promise: and divers instances hereof are alled∣ged by them, in such bargaines or agreements, wherein they have promised to give vnto an other more then he deserves, & then is convenient for him. VVhen many give testimony concerning one matter, if there be Choshe hammish∣pat in Eduth, sig. 36. & SMG, in Loim, praec. 213. one of the witnesses that be a Kinsman, or otherwise insufficient to beare witnesse; then they hold that the testimony of them all ceasseth, yea though they be an hunddred of them, yet their testimony is voyd. They hold Ibid. in Loim, praec. 214. also that it is not lawfull for a man to joyne in te∣stimony with a wicked man, although the wicked man be wil∣ling to witnesse the truth also. VVhen they Chosh. hammish∣pat, tract. Eduth, sig. 36. examine wit∣nesses apart and ask them whether they went to see that thing, or to be witnesses: they hold, he that answers, he went to be a wit∣nesse makes the whole testimony vnlawfull: he that answers, he went to see, doth not preiudice the testimony. Moreover SMG. Loin, praec. 215. because it is sayd, the Fathers shall not be slaine for the chil∣dren, nor the Children for the Fathers; they collect and conclu∣de that fathers may not be put to death vpon the testimony of their Children: nor Children vpon the testimony of their Fathers. And many other such like canons they have concer∣ning this matter. COncerning the lust forbidden in the 10th. commandement the more ancient Rabbines have denyed the same to be any transgression of Gods law as appeares Mat. 5.22 28. by our Saviours re∣futation of their opinion therein: But divers of the Maimon. in Moreh Nebuchim chel. 3. perek. 34. & R. Mo∣ses mikko. in Loin, 158. later Rabbines do acknowledge this concupiscence of the heart to be a sin and forbidden of God. The ancient Iew-doctours whom you vse most to commend, are herein most erroneous and greater corrupters of Gods law, then their successours. And how much more are we to reiect these Rabbinical traditions, when as the Rabbines themselves do begin to be weary and ashamed of them?
THirdly, as for those legal rites which (as you say) will not be well vnderstood without help of Rabbines especially in Exodus & Leviticus: The truth is that the Rabbines dote about nothing more then about them. This is evident by manifold examples: Among other legal Ordinances described in Leviti∣cus, the first and the tenth day of the seventh moneth were ap∣poynted to be kept holy, Lev. 23.24.27. Of these dayes thus say the Rabbines; R. Alphes in Rosch hasschanah Cap. 1. Fol. 303. Three bookes are opened in the beginning of the yeare, one schel Tsadikim gemurim, for those that are perfect∣ly just: an other schel Reschaghnim gemurim, for those that are perfectly wicked: a third schel Benonijim, for the midle sort: The first sort are then presently written and sealed vnto life: the se∣cond sort are presently written and sealed vnto death: the third sort are suspended and stand vntill the day of reconciliation, (for 10. dayes, from the first vnto the tenth day of the seventh moneth:) If in that meane time they do wel or merit, they are then vvritten into the book of life: if they do not merit, they are then written into the book of death. Herevpon they say, for ever a man must look to himself, when he is half pure, and half guilty: by one good work he may bring himself lecaph za∣cuth, into the state of purity; and by one transgression he may bring himself lecaph chobah, into the state of guiltines and be cursed for ever. Therfore they exhort to seek the Lord while he may be found, that is, the 10 dayes betwixt the beginning of the yeare, & the day of reconciliation. The schoole of Schammai R. Al∣phes, ibid. Fol. 304. ma∣kes the same distinction of persons for the day of judgement, & saith of the third sort, the midle kinde, that being layd in the balance they go downe to hell: then they cry and come vp againe: and for proofe of this their going downe to hel for a while, they alledge divers scriptures, viz. Zach. 13.9. 1 Sam. 2.6. Ps. 116.1, &c. But
the schoole of Hillel saith further of that third sort: if they be of the sinners of Israel they shall be twelve moneths in Hell, and after that be delivered: but as for here∣tiques, apostates, &c. those go downe to hel for evermore. Againe where as God commanded in the levitical ordinances,that there should be drink offrings of wine with certaine other sacrifices; with these do the Rabbines teach drink offrings with vvater to be vsed at the feast of Tabernacles. The Maso∣rites for a note thereof, set this signe Masorah ketamah on Numb. 29. 19. . Elias Levita expounding this mark shewes Masoreth hammaso∣reth, in schibre Luchoth, sive in frag¦mentis Ta∣bularum. that by the three numeral let∣ters in Bûz are noted the second, sixt, and seventh dayes in the feast of Tabernacles, where in the description of the drink of∣frings for those three dayes, there is written in the Hebrew for the second day niscehem with mem: for the sixt nesaceha with jod before the affix, and for the seventh day cemishpatam with mem, these three last letters yeelding the word maijm which signi∣fyeth waters herevpon they collect and conclude that they had drink-offrings of water for those three dayes as well as drink offrings of vvine, for the other 5. dayes of that feast which in their description have still niscah, a drink offring without addi∣tion of jod or mem, Numb. 29.16.—38. And this observation is also recorded in their Talmud from Taanith, c. 1. Fo. 2. R. Iehudah ben Bathirah, & from R. Akiba. If these be just and true expositions, who could have found them out or wel vnderstood them without help of Rabbines? Againe, the observation of the Sabath is often commanded in Exodus and often in Leviticus: and see how wel they record the externall practise thereof in the common wealth of Israel: and what cause you have vpon such records to cōmend their expo∣sitions vnto vs. They teach vs that it is a principall duety of the Sabath to make good cheare vpon that day: and to keep 3 feasts in the same: at the beginning, middle & end therof. Thalmud in Sabath c. 16. f. 118 R. Iose bles∣sing himself saith, let my portion be vvith them that keep the three banquets of the Sabath. This they say is, Esa. 58.13 to call the Sa∣bath a delight. i. Oneg. R. Iehudah, saith this Oneg or delight, Thalmud ibid. is to have tartes, great fishes, and heads of garlick. To those that thus delight themselves on the Sabath, they apply that saying of David, delight thyself in the Lord, and he shall give thee thine hearts desire, ps. 37.4. And for confirmation of this they tell vs many strange stories:
Thalm. ibid. f. 119. R. Chaia telles of the housholder that had agolden table with sixteene silver chaynes affixed therevnto, which sixteene men could scarsely cary; also that it was furni∣shed with dishes, spoones, trenchers, pots, &c. & all this given him of God, because whensoever he found a good fat beast, he kept the same to honour the Sabath withall, by making good cheare. And because the word Oneg, or delight, in Esa. 58. doth want the letter vau, the numeral letter which standeth for six: hence they collect that they ought not to continue fa∣sting on the Sabath above six houres: And for this they have Arba Tu∣rim in O∣rach cha∣jim, in Sa∣bath, sig. 288. a Canon requiring great care herein least the delight of the Sabath should be violated; that they must make hast to end their prayers and service before midday, that they may then keep the second feast of the Sabath, &c. As for the works for∣bidden on the Sabath, they make them of two sorts, Aboth me∣lacoth,
Thalmud Tract. de Sabb. & Ioa. Buxt. in Synag. Iudaic. c. 11 & Toledoth melacoth, that is, Father or head workes, and the generations proceeding from them and both sorts vnder great penalty are condemned by them: The head workes they reduce vnto 39. artickles: the ofspring derived from these are a huge number. A head work forbidden is, to plow or till the ground: vnder this article they condemne all digging, filling of ditches, watring of herbes, &c. Therfore their Rabbines permit men to sprinckle, their houses or chambers vvith vvater, that the dust be not raysed, but forbid men to sweep with besomes: least in sweeping any clefts or holes like vnto litle ditches should be filled vvith dust. A work forbidden is, cutting downe of corne, and reaping: vnder this article they comprise all pluc∣king of apples, dates, figges, gathering of beries. And therfore they permit men to eat apples or other fruits, if they will put their mouthes vnto them as they hang vpon the tree: but with the hand to pluck away an apple from the tree or berie from the bush, that they vtterly condemne. Sowing corne on the Sabath is a head work forbidden: but vnder this also, they forbid men in giving of corne to hennes or the like creatures, to cast any more graines of corne vnto them then they vvill be sure to eate: for if any graines lighting vpon the earth where the rainefalles, should hap to spring and grow, this should then prove a great sin, like to that of the husbandman that sowes his field on the Sabath day. To beare a burden vpon the Sabath is a capitall sin: and herevpon they forbid men to weare pattins vpon the Sabath, as the maner of some is that are to walk through myerie and foule places: their reason is, though these seeme to cary a man: yet indeed he beares the burden of them when he lifts vp his feete and goes with them. Killing of beasts by butchers is vnlawfull on the Sabath: ac∣cordingly they teach that if a flea be found leaping on the earth or on clothes it is not lawfull to take it on the Sabath, but if the flea bite, then it is lawfull to take it to remoove it and cast it away, but not to kill it: but if it be a lowse that may be killed. Yet on the cōtrary side R. Eliezer teacheth that vvhosoever kills a lowse vpon the Sabath, doth as much as if he should kill a Camell. And herevpon touching the hunting of a flea there growes a great and subtile dispute among the Thalmudistes. The workes of artificers in their ordinary trades and callings being forbidden: thence they Sebastian. Munster in Mat. 15. say, we may not blow the fire with bellowes on the Sabath, because it representeth the vvork of an artificer; but through a hollow reed or cane men may lawfully do it. And in making a fire, great care is to be vsed that the stickes be not so layd, that they should cary shew of a building: That vvere vnlawfull, like the building of a house on the Sabath. Moreover there is great Thalmud in Betsah, or treat. of the egge. c. 1. fol 1. controversy betwixt the schoole of Hillel and Schammai touching the egge that is layd vpon a a good day. And some of them Seb. Mūst. in Mat. 15. say, that it is vnlaw∣full to touch an egge that is layd vpon a good day, and conse∣quently that it is much more vnlawfull to eat the same: yea if they be vncertaine vvhen the egge vvas layd and do but doubt whether it is layd on a good day or on a common day that it is then vnlawfull to be eaten: yea if such an egge be layd among a thousand other egges, that they cannot know it from the rest, that then they all become vnlawfull. Thus do the Rabbines record the externall practise of Moses ordinances in the com∣mon
wealth of Israel: thus do they help vs to vnderstand the observation of the Sabath and other legal rites: There is as much assurance of truth and right in these traditions as in others that you alledge from them: and I desire the reader to excuse me in the rehearsall of them, because the knowledge hereof helpes to refute your presumptuous assertion touching the help to be receaved from them. VVhen they have Thalmud de Sabb. c. 16. f. 119 & Arba Turim in Orach Chajim trac. Schab fig. 262. prayed diligently on the Sabath, and in speciall have vttred that verse, Then the heaven and the earth were finished & all the hoste of them: Gen. 2.1. The Rabbines tell vs, that then there be two Angelles one good, the other evill, which bring them home to their hou∣ses, and laying their hands vpon their head, do say, Behold, this coale hath touched thy lippes; thine iniquity shalbe taken away and thy sin purged. R. Iose saith, that there be two Angelles, the one good, the other evill, which every Sabath day in the evening do lead ech man from the Synagogue to their house: where if these Angelles do finde the Sabath-candle burning, the table spread, and the bed prepared, then the good Angel sayth; God grant, that the Sabath following, all things may be in this house so as now they are, wherevnto the evill Angell is constrayned to say Amen, whether he will or not. On the contrary, if these two Angelles coming to the house, do finde the former things vnprepared, then the evill Angell saith, let all things be in this house the next Sabath, as now they are: wherevnto the good Angell is compelled to say Amen, whether he will or not. The Rabbines say it is impossible for Christians and others to keep the Sabath as the Iewes do, because they want a soule which the Iewes have more then they. By vertue of this superfluous soule, they say that the heart of the Iewes is enlarged to reioyce and to be glad and hereby they banish all cares and troubles out of their breasts, and so keep the rest of the Sabath. This
Thalmud in Betsah c. 2. fol. 16 & Thal∣mud in Taanith c. 4. fol. 27 soule as R. Simeon ben Lakish affirmeth is given them every week at the beginning of the Sabath and taken away at the end of the Sabath againe. This they also labour to prove by the scriptures, from the word of Moses, Exo. 31.17, and in the seventhday he rested and was refreshed; schabbath vaijnnaphesch. VVhere∣as the men of the station appoynted 4. fastes in the week, to wit, on the, second, third, fourth, and fift dayes: on the second day for them that went downe to the Sea; on the third, for them that travelled in the wildernes: on the fourth, for litle children that the squinancie should not fall on them; on the fift, for women great with Childe, and for nurses that they should not let their sucklings fall: on the evening of the Sabath they fasted not, for honour of the Sabath, and much less vpon the Sabath it self: but on the first of the week: what is the reason? R. Sa∣muel bar Nachmani saith, because that day is the third after their affliction; Resh Lakish saith, because of neshamah iattirah, the re∣dundant Soule: for Resch Lakish saith, a redundant soule is givē to man in the beginning of the Sabath and taken away in the going out of the Sabath, as it is sayd, schabbath vaijnnaphesch: streightway as he hath kept the Sabath that soule departeth or is lost. For this losse no marvel if they fasted the next day of the week. Againe, the Rabbines teach, that vpon the Sabath day the Soules in hell do rest from their torment: and their fire that vses to burne them all the week, ceasseth. They Thalmud in Sanhe∣drin, c. 7. fol. 65. say, that Turnus Rophus demanding what the Sabath day was above other dayes, R. Akiba answered him, that the excellency thereof above other dayes was proved by three things, by the river Sambation: by them that had familiar spirits: by his Fathers se∣pulchre, where the smoke did not ascend vpon the Sabath: And the Rabbinique
Gloss. on Talm. ibid. scholiast on the same place declares, how that river Sambation though it flow and run violently all the week yet rests on the Sabath day: how the spirits are not raysed on the Sabath day: how the soules in hell tormented and burned all the other dayes of the yeare, do yet rest on the Sabath: and that so accordingly the soule of this Turnus his Father being in hell, and the smoke of his burning ascending through his grave on other dayes, did yet ceasse on the Sabath. VVhen the Iewes have ended their prayers & concluded the Sabath, then comes an evill Angel called Dumah which commands them to re∣turnevnto their torment. Ioa. Buxt. Synag. Iu∣daic. p. 253 Herevpon it is an ordinance & rite amōg the Iews that they may not quite empty any vessels of the water in thē vpō the Sabath, but alvvayes to leave some in, least those miserable soules that are come out of hel for the space of the Sabath, should any where vvant vvater to coole and re∣fresh themselves withall. And a thousand such like vaine observations are reteyned among them. On this maner (Mr. Ainsworth) do your ancient and later Iewes record the exter∣nall practises of Moses ordinances: so that it is manifestly true which one sayd, Buxt. ibid. p. 36. it doth as well become the Iew-doctours to ex∣pound the holy scripture, as it doth a wild bore to dig a vineyard. Fourthly, To come yet neerer vnto you, tel vs what one legal rite there is vvhich could not be well vnderstood without the Rabbines exposition alledged by you in any part of your an∣notations: Name one if you can: Nay even such Iewish re∣cords and expositions, as you yourself do pick out and present vnto vs as more worthy to be remembred then others: with which also you do adorne your book & paynt the face of your annotations: even those also are so full of notorious absurdi∣ties, presumptions without scripture and apparant pervertings of the same, that by them it may easily be discerned what litle reason or warrant you had to say, that many of those legal rites especially in Exodus and Leviticus, will not be wel vnderstood with∣out the help of the Rabbines. For example, Touching the divers gestures in the worship of God, you
Annot. on Exo. 4.31. record, that the Hebrew-doctours in the Zohar do help vs thus to vnderstand them: that the bending of the head, with the face toward the ground, was for to escape judgement and the bowing of themselves (or worshipping,) was for to obtaine mercy: and that the bending of the head was before the worshipping: according to the mysterie of the sin offring before the burnt offring. To illustrate this vaine distinction you alledge divers places of scripture to shew the order of the sin-offring & burnt-offring: you might have done better to have alledged as many in refutation of this Zohar. Touching other externall practises in the Iewes com∣monwealth: you tell vs from the Rabbinicall records, Annot. on Exo. 21.19. He that kicked his neighbour with his foote, payd five shekels: he that smote him with his thigh, payd three shekels: he that bent his fist and smote him, payd thirteen shekels: if he smote him with the palme of his hand one shekel, &c. Touching the neighbours gored Ox, you Ibid. on vers. 35. note that the Hebrew doctours take it strictly and say. If an Israelites Oxe push an Ox sanctified (vnto God:) or an Oxe that is sanctifyed do push an Israelites oxe: he is not bound to pay (by this law;) for it is sayd his neighbours Oxe. Touching the law of fire kindled in stacks of corne, you On Exo. 22.16. note, that the Hebrew Doctours explayn thus: One brings fyre, an other after brings wood: he that brings the wood is bound to pay. One brings wood, and then an other brings fyre: now he that brings the fire is bound to pay. If one come & make the flame, then he is bound to pay, &c. Touching the kinde of vsury, you Ibid. on vers. 25. shew vs this their exposition: It is vnlawfull to take vsurie before or after. As, one intending to borrow of a man, sends him a gift, to the end that he may lend vnto him: this is vsurie afore∣hand. Or, he hath borowed of a man, and payd him againe: and sends him a gift, for his money which he had of him for nought: this is after vsurie. Who so boroweth of his neighbour, and was not wont in former time to salute him first: it is vnlawfull for him to salute him first, (& I need not to say to praise him:) for it is written, Vsurie of any word (or thing) Deut. 23.19. though they be but words they are vnlawfull. Likewise it is vnlawfull for the borower to learne his leder to read, &c. all the while his money is in his hand, if he were not wont to do it be∣fore: as it is sayd, Vsurie of any thing: And againe a litle after in the same place. He that lends vnto his neighbour, may not reteyne his servant to do work for him, although the servant sit still and hath nothing to doe, &c. Touching the law of first fruits, you Ibid. on vers. 29. note that the Hebrew canons say, They bring no first-fruits but of seven things, viz. of wheat, and of barley, and of grapes, and of figs, and of pomgranates, and of olives and of dates. And if one bring other be∣sides these seven kindes, they are not sanctifyed. They bring no first fruits of liquors, save of olives and grapes: if a man bring other li∣quors they are not receyved of him. There is no measure of first fruits
set by the law: but by the Doctours a man must separate one of sixtie. If the well vnderstanding of the legal rites do consist in such ex∣plications and interpretations as these: then will I yeeld vnto you that the ordinances of Moses will not be well vnderstood without the Rabbinicall records, as you would have it: I think no man alive would have arrived vnto these profound deter∣minatiōs, nor ever have light vpon these expositions, except he had plowed with the Iewes heifer of the Thalmud. Touching the precept of keeping men farr from false matters, you Annot on Exo. 23.7. note, that from thēce the Iewes have a rule, A iudge that knoweth of his fellow, that he is a violent extortioner or a wicked man, it is vnlawful to be ioyned in society with him, as it is written from a word of falshood thou shalt be farr. And so they in Ierusalem, that had a clear conscience were wont to doe: they sate not in judgement, till they knew who should sit; nor sealed any writing, til they knevv who should seale it with them, &c. If this rule were sound, then would it help much to the establishing of your separation and not onely of it: but of a further then you, I thinke, will maintaine. Touching the fruits of the seventh yeare, you Ibid. on vers. 11. note how it is shewed by the Hebrew records, that whatsoe∣ver was properly mans meat, as wheat, figges, grapes and the like: they might not make of them medicine,, plaisters &c though for mans vse because it is sayd, To you for meat, Lev. 25.6. & not for medicine, &c. A number of these vaine traditions I observed before in set∣ting downe your first scādall in allegatiō of the Thalmudists & many more such like might be also noted, wherein it may ap∣peare how well the Rabbines vnderstood the external practise of the legall rites: yea I may justly say of these their expositions as yourself do of the Answer to Iohn Ains. p. 65. popes determinations. VVhereas men might have some good measure of light in these mysteries, by the plaine scriptures it is come to passe by these Rabbines and Thalmudique glosses, interpretations, comments, &c. that darknes and grosse darknes hath covered many people, who if they had never read any thing, but the book of God, mought have seen much more clearely, through his grace: P. 66. 67. Their ex∣positiōs
do often times as wel clear the truth, as a cloud before the sun. Yea even the plainest places, which in holy writ are as bright as noone day; these Thalmudists have enveloped with Egyptian darknes. Their expositions do illustrate the scrip∣tures, as the smoke of the pit did the Sun and the aier Apo. 9.2. So far wide are you, in saying that many legall rites vvill not be well vnderstood without their help. You once Ibid. p. 21. sayd well: The scriptures are not so bare and naked as to need the raggs of mens inventions to array them. VVhy do you now then yourself so plod and labour to aray them with the mensturous rags of the Rabbines? Fiftly, where as you Preface to annot. on Gen. say further: By their records also, many particulars about the Passeover, which Christ kept, Mat. 26. the phy∣lacteries which the Pharisees wore, Mat. 23. and other things men∣tioned in the Evangelists, will much be cleared: whereof see the an∣notations on Exo. 12, & Exo. 13.9. Even these more speciall in∣stances chosen out by you, do also plainely witnesse against you that the Thalmudique traditions do not so much cleare as dar∣ken and obscure the ordinances of God; and the story of the scriptures: As for your annotations on Exo. 12. touching their keeping of the passeover, which you desire vs to see: there vve see a number of superstitious traditions related by you, but not reproved by you as was meete: you Annot. on Exo. 12.8. tell vs of their sauce charo∣seth a memoriall of the clay wherein they wrought in Egipt: you note the 4. Cups of wine which every man and woman was bound to drink that night vvithout faile: you note the measure of ech cup contayning a quarter of a log, so much as an egge & a half: you note the severall blessings to be made for every cup by itself: you note their tradition of vvashing their hands twise that night, vvhereas other nights they do it but once: and their blessing for the vvashing of hands: that all other nights, they eate either sitting or lying: but this night; lying onely: you make relation also of a fift cup and the great hymn, that vvas sayd for it, viz. the psalme 136. But that they are not bound to this cup as to the foure former cups. And in fine, having re∣lated
these and some other of their traditions, you say further; These observations of the Iewes whiles their common wealth stood, & to this day: may give light to some particulars in the passeover that Christ kept: as why they lay downe, one leaning on an others bosome, Ioh. 13.23. (a signe of rest and security) and stood not as at the first passeover, neither sate on high as we vse. Why Christ rose from sup∣per, and washed and sate downe againe, Ioh. 13.4.5.12. Why he blessed or gave thanks for the bread apart, and for the cup (or wine) apart, Mark. 14.22.23, and why it is sayd, he took the cup after supper, Luk. 22.20. also concerning the Hymne which they sung at the end, Mat. 26.30, &c. But vve are here to consider, that 1. It is vncertaine vvhether these vvere the observations of the Ievves vvhiles their common vvealth stood: The records of the Rabbines from whose mouth you speak, are full of lyes, fictions, contradictions even for matters of fact and practise: and even for these particular observations here mentioned by you: if you deny it, I can bring you plentifull proof thereof: And how great folly is it, to stuff our expositions of the scripture with such things as the con∣science can not be assured of the truth thereof? 2. Suppose the observations of the Iewes before Christe were such as you in particular do relate: how vnworthily do you apply his holy in∣stitution vnto their vaine inventions? Do you not make Christe Iesus guilty of their superstitions and presumptuous ad∣ditions vnto the ordinance of God, as though framed him∣self vnto their vnlawfull practises and followed the same? The light you boast of, is darknes, and not light. These things which the Rabbines record are not according to the law and the testi∣monie: & whiles they speak not according to that word, vvhat light Esa. 8.20 is in them? The maner of Christs sitting downe with lea∣ning vpō one an others bosome, was according to the cōmō & ordinary maner of their sitting downe to meate at those times as appeareth by the vse of the
Mat. 9.10, & 22,10.11. & 26.7. Mark. 16.14. Luk. 7 37. & 22.27. like phrase serving to describe the same: and therfore was directly contrary to the superstition of the Iewes, that all other nights did eat sitting or lying, thatnight lying onely: and therfore a superstitious bondage.. As for Christs rising from supper to vvash his disciples feet: what cōmunity is there betwixt it & the superstitious hand-washing of the Iewes? If our Saviour Mat. 15.2, &c. had no regard of the pharisaicall washing of hands at other times; much lesse had he regard to this invention in the worship of God and celebration of this sacrament: yea it is impiety to think that he followed their fashion either in this or in any of the like traditions. 3. The observations of the Iewes in keeping their passeover, according to the records of the Rabbines are ten times more then these that you have repeated: and they are of like nature, of like war∣rant and authoritye, even from their owne braines: you might as vvel have repeated them also: as namely, The mysterie of the Arba Tu∣rim in Orach Chajim, sig. 473, &c three cakes covered betwixt two napkins in a dish; one which was highest representing the high Priest: the middle most re∣presenting the tribe of Levi: & the lowest representing the whole people of Israel: a mysterie as worthy to be noted as that which you mention of the 4. cups, &c. You might as wel have related the mysterie of their quishions then sometimes leaned vpon, sometimes not: their hiding of a peece of a cake vnder a napkin, to signify how their elders coming out of Egipt caried their dough vpon their shoulders bound in clothes, &c. Some other of these traditions I noted before, in describing their Idol-temple; and many more if need require may be brought forth for a testimony, how far they were from the right exter∣nall practise of Moses his ordinances. As for your notes vpon that
Annot. on Exo. 13 9. other place, which you send vs to look vpon tou∣ching the Phylacteries: 1. vve finde there so much supersti∣tion and vanitie recorded by yourself out of the Rabbines tou∣ching the maner, order, time and fruit of them, as may justly serve to reprove your owne assertion, touching the necessary help of such recorders: It is wonder, that you beholding and considering their grosse corrupting of Moses ordinances in the externall practise thereof, are not yet ashamed to affirme that many legall rites will not be well vnderstood without theirhelp. I finde, by comparing your notes with the Iewes re∣cords, that you do yet omit the Arba Tu∣rim in Orach Chaijm, trac. tephil. sig. 25, &c. greatest part of the most super∣stitious observations which those magical Rabbines and char∣mers do record touching those phylacteries: as namely, the qualitie of the parchment whereon they wrote the sentences of scripture; the colour of the ynk, and the matter of the ynk whe∣rewith they were written: the colour of the lether into which they were put: the qualitie of the beast of whose skin that lether was made; the quality & cōdition of the mā that must kill that beast: The condition of the Tanner that must dresse that lether the qualitie of those persons that might weare those phylacte∣ries; the qualitie of the place where they must be kept when they were layd aside: the maner of their penance and fasting if they had let them fall to the ground: the curious x maner of the knots they make in tying and binding them, so that the let∣ters of the vvord schaddai, which is one of the names of God be represented and figured out therein. These and many other such things they Thalmud in Bera∣choth cap. 1. p. 7. hold to be divine traditions delivered of God vnto Moses in mount Sinai when the Lord shewed his hinder parts vnto him. If Christian men did see the volumes of dotages which the Thalmudists have written touching these phylacteries, they might thereby learne to beware of following you to seek the well vnderstanding of Gods ordinances from such blinde guides: But this I observe throughout your allegatiō of the Rabbines that to win the more credit vnto your owne notes, you conceale the grossest absurdities of them, like the de∣ceitfull merchant that to vent his wares conceales the greatest faults thereof: Thus, the simple may be deceyved by you both. 3, that the place of the Evangelists Mat. 23, touching the phy∣lacteries which the Pharisees vvore, should much be cleared by these Rabbinical records, as you pretend, it is but a bare asser∣tion. VVherein is the text cleared? In what poynt may we better vnderstand the words of our Saviour? And what is it in the rebuke of the pharisees which we could not as clearely vn∣derstand, without help of the Rabbines? vve may not measure
nor Judge of the Pharisaical traditiōs observed in Christs time, by the records of the Rabbines vvhom you alledge: because the Thalmudique traditions recorded by these Rabbines are many of them of later invention, and far different from the traditions observed heretofore in Christs time. For vvhereas Mat. 12.11, & Luk. 14.5. the Pha∣risees of old, if a sheep, ox or asse fell into a pit vpon the Sabath day, would allow the same straighway to be lift vp & taken out on the Sabath; the Thalmud de Sabbat. c. 18. p. 128. Thalmud allovves it not, but onely allowes meat to be given vnto the beast in the vvater; or if the water be deep, that bottles of stravv or such like things be put vnder the beast to save it from drovvning. R. Iulius Otto a Ievv converted vnto Christianisme, in his book entitled the Gali. Ra∣zia lib. 1. c. 13. revelation of secrets shevves many parables recorded in the Thalmud, vvhich the Rabbines (as it seemes) have had out of the Gospel, though corruptly set downe by them: for how it can be shewed, that Christe hath taken ought out the Thalmud, which was compiled long after his death, and stuffed with new invented traditions of the infidel and reprobate Rabbines, accursed for reiecting of the sonne of God; And what is the Thalmud but even the black darknes, and the Mat. 8.12 vtter darknes into which the Iewes are now cast? And what light is to be expected from such a hellish dungeon, where we may see the Rabbines, sitting fast bound in the chaynes of ignorance, superstition, infidelity and blasphemy? How dare you say, that some parts of the scrip∣ture will not be well vnderstood: vnless we become schollers in that accursed schoole? Sixthly, how can we expect any great light from the exposi∣tions of the Rabbines, when as they professe that they may not commit the secrets of their law vnto vs: yea they make it mat∣ter of death and condemnation to reveale the same vnto vs; that for such Elias, Le∣vita Masor. hammasor. praefat cause they should go downe to hell with greefe, and be devoured with the fire that is not blowne. They may not teach them but onely to Israelites, and those also having the five conditions which they observe from Esa. 2. And fur∣ther as your Rambam or Maimony saith, when they do teach the
Israelites so qualifyed, yet it must not be by writing, Morch nebuchim chel. 3. per. 1. ex edit. Iustinian. but from mouth to mouth. Or at least if they expoūd the secrets of their law in writing, it must be so obscurely and darkely that none but their owne Schollers and frends can vnderstand: and so Mai∣mony in the same place professeth vnto his speciall frend & schol∣ler touching his owne writing to him: as Aristotle once sayd of his writings, vnto Alexander; that they were to be vnderstood of the onely that had bene hearers of him. Hence it is that in the Iewish writings there are many ambiguities: and many things spoken according to receyved opinions, when they have yet an other meaning  Maimony in Misneh (as he is Annot. on Gen. 1.17. alledged by you) teaches that there be 9 spheres, namely, one for ech of the seven planets, one that hath in it all the other starres which are seene in the firmament: and a ninth sphere which turneth about every day from east to west, &c. But in other later writings, he Mo. ne∣buch. chel. 2. perek. 10, & 11. laboureth at large to shew according to the demōstrations of Abubacus that there are but foure spheres, to wit, the sphere of the fixed starres; one sphere for five planets: the sphere of the Sun: and the sphere of the Moone; And these according to the number of the elemēts: that the sphere of the moone moveth the element of water, that the sphere of the Sun moveth the elemēt of fire: that the sphere of the five planets mooveth the ayer: & that the multitude & varietie of their motions in that sphere in their re∣trogradatiōs, progressions & stations causeth the change of the ayre and wether: that the sphere of the fixed starres, changeth the earth, &c. These things he seekes to illustrate by the ladder on which the Angelles ascended and discended: by the 4. stepps of that ladder, and the 4. Angelles, two ascending and two dis∣cending and meeting together vpon one step, &c. likewise by the 4 Chariots in Zacharie, coming out from betwixt the mountaines of brasse, &c. Hereby it appeares what vncertainty there is in such writings where they do purposely obscure and hide their meanings: like charmers they do obscurely Esa. 29.4. mumble and whisper out of the dust: and their talke is as of one that hath the spirit of divination, a hollow voyce, loth to be heard, or
vnderstood. A man may say of the Rabbines mystical do∣ctrine, as themselves do write of Moses his sepulchre, which they R. Solom. on Deut. 34.6. reckon for one of those ten things which they say were crea∣ted in the beginning of the world, in the evening of the Sabath on the sixt day: of this sepulchre they Isaak ben Arama in Akedath Isaak, por∣tâ, 105. write whē some wēt to see it: when they stood above in a high place, they saw it as if it were below: vvhen they stood below, they saw it as if it were above: when this company devided themselves, half of them that went below saw it over against them that vvere above: and the other half that stood above savv it as if it vvere over against them belovv. So doth the meaning of the Rabbines vanish and fly avvay from them that seek after some of their myste∣ries: To follovv after them is to grasp after a shadovv. Lastly, if it were true vvhich the Rabbines and your Mai∣mony in speciall doth vvrite touching the cause of prophecy ceassing, and the spirit of vnderstanding vvithdravvne from men, then should there be no reason to seek the right vnder∣standing of the scriptures from them. Maimony Moreh nebuchim chelek. 2. perek. 37. records that the cause is affliction and greefe: because the imaginative fa∣culty is vveakned thereby: that the spirit of prophecy rests not vpon an afflicted sorovvfull man: that prophecy is taken avvay in the time of anger & anguish: that therfore Iaacob prophecied not all the dayes of his sorovv because his imaginative povver laboured about mourning for Ioseph: that prophecy rested not on Moses after the sending of the spies as it did before, vntill all that generation vvas consumed: because he vvas greeved for their evilles, &c. that this sorovv and greefe is the next cause of prophecy departing in time of captivitie and dispersion, &c. that this is it vvhich vvas sayd by the prophet they shalbe disper∣sed or scattred, to seek the word of the Lord and shall not finde it: & againe, Their King and their prince is among the nations, there is no law, neither have the prophets found out the prophecy of the Lord. So Kimchi Commēt. on Ps. 3.5, expounds the vvords of David, that he lay downe and slept, viz. vvhen by Cushi he heard the sorovvfull tidings: that then the spirit of prophecy ceased in him, because it rests not
on a sorowfull person: that when Nathan came to him with good and joyfull matter, then he awoke and rose againe, then the spirit came againe vnto him. Thus their owne words and wri∣tings are against thēselves: & according to the same, they being now scattred abroad, and their present dispersion being a most greevous captivitie vnto them, as they every where call it, the law is not among them, the word of God is not to be found among them: The spirit of the holy prophets and of good vn∣derstanding is departed from them: And therfore their help to vnderstand the ordinances of Moses should not be thought so necessary as you vvould perswade vs. CHAP. VII. YOur seventh errour and scandall in alledging the Rabbines is; that you approve and justify their presumptuous expositions of Moses, which they vainely and boldly affirme vvithout the vvar∣rāt of the scripture. It was great presumption in you to say that many legal rites could not be well vnderstood with∣out their help: yea although their expositions had bene good and sound: for other men endued with the spirit of vvise∣dome might have brought in like maner as good and sound expositions as they: but when you justify their rotten and vn∣sound traditions, this is an other evill. To give instance in such an exposition as you do much insist vpon, and describe largely with tables, as being a flourishing ornament of your annotations; Touching the names of the tribes engraven vpon the stones, according to their birthes; you expound it Annot. on Exo. 28.10. or gene∣rations by their mothers: first all Leahs Children, (as Moses himself reckoneth them Exo. 1. vers. 2.3.) and then the other mothers Children and Rachels last: as shall after be more fully shewed, in their several stones; vers. 17, &c. This is a mere presuming to vnderstand above that vvhich is vvritten, contrary to that reverence and sobriety vvhich God requires: for 1, who hath told you or what
Bath-kol hath rung it in your eares, that all Leahs Children were first in the stones according to their naming in Exod. 1. rather then according to the reckoning which Moses himself makes of them by their birthes Gen. 29. & 30. Secondly, if you will have all Leahs Children togather, though some of them by birth vvere yonger then the sonnes of the handmayds, as in Exod 1. VVhy do you not in like maner set Benjamin before the sonnes of the handmayds as in the same place is done Exod. 1.3.4. which gives as much vvarrant for one as for the other? But while scripture fayles you, you bring in Maimony for your help, to give some authoritie & shew vnto your exposition, & say; Of this also Maimony writeth, impl. of sanct. c. 9. s. 9. He set on ech shoulder, a Beryll stone, fouresquare, embossed in gold: and he graved on the two stones, the names of the tribes, six on one stone, & six on an other, according to their birthes: & they wrote Iosephs name Ihoseph (as he is written in psal. 81.6.) So there were 25. letters on the one stone and 25. on the other. And the stone whereon Reuben was written, was on the right shoulder: and the stone that Simeon was written on, was on the left, after the maner here set downe. diagram of a stone engraving, showing six of the names of the Twelve Tribes of the Israelites Symeon Jhudah Zebulun Dan Asher Benjamin diagram of a stone engraving, showing six of the names of the Twelve Tribes of the Israelites Reuben Levi Jssachar Naphtali Gad Ihoseph Touching this testimony and table of Maimony, I answer:
First, it is composed of many presumptions without warrāt of scripture: and namely, these, 1. That Iosephs name in this place should be vvritten with H, and withall such a distribution of their names that ech of the stones might have just 25 letters vpon them: a cabalisticall fancy: 2, that Symeon was written on the left shoulder as in the table: and not with Reuben on the same stone: as also the separating of Ioseph and Benidmin & not setting them on the same stone: and some other of them in like maner also: 3. The vnequall setting of the handmayds Chil∣dren in the middes neither perfectly according to the time of their birth whiles Issachar and Zebulunare set before Dan and Naphtan nor according to the dignity of the Mothers, while Rachels sonnes are placed after the handmayds: 4, the placing of Naphtali before Dan his elder brother, being both sonnes of the same mother, of Bilhah the handmayde: In all these your Rambam Col. 2.18 hath vniustly advanced himself in those things which he never saw, rashly puft vp of the minde of his flesh, & was not taught of God in the scriptures. Such curious and light bladders of presumption blowne vp with the breath of blinde and infidel Rabbines ought not to be admitted of you, nei∣ther are they to be tolerated of any Christians. Secondly, to come vnto the Rabbines themselves if any weight vvere in them, they also in this matter are rather against you then for you; though all of them to lay them vpon the ba∣lance are lighter then vanitie: 1. R. Solomon Iarchi more an∣cient then your Maimony, sets downe an other order of their names in his exposition of this place: he Cōment. on Exo. 28 10. explaneth, according to their birthes: according to the order wherin they were borne, Reubē, Symeon, Levi and Iudah, Dan and Naphtali vpon one stone: & vpon the second Gad and Asher, Issachar and Zebulun, Ioseph & Bonia∣min full (that is, written with two jods) because so he is written in the Gen. 35.18. place of his birth, 25 letters vpon ech stone: after the maner here set downe.
diagram of a stone engraving, showing six of the names of the Twelve Tribes of the Israelites Gad Asher Jssachar Zebulun Ioseph Beniamin diagram of a stone engraving, showing six of the names of the Twelve Tribes of the Israelites Reuben Symeon Levi Jhudah Dan Naphtali This exposition of R. Solomon though it have a vaine respect to the equal number of letters on ech stone, yet is it far more agreeable to the simplicity of the scriptures then that of Mai∣mony, being free from those 4. vnwarrantable presumptions delivered by him. VVhy do you take the worse and leave the better? 2. R. Moses Kotsensis Sepher mitsvoth haggadol. trac. vessels of sanct. praecept. affirmat. 173. also as he relates the exposition of Maimony, so doth he also set downe the interpretation of R. Solomon and doth not determine the ordering of the stones by Maimony to be more just and vvarrantable, then the order de∣clared by Iarchi. 3. VVhen there is speech in the Thalmud of the distribution of the 12. tribes, 6 vpon mount Gerizim to blesse and 6 vpon mount Ebal to curse: it is thus recorded there Thalmud in Sotah cap. 7. f. 36. R. Cahana saith, as they are divided here, so were they divided in the stones of the Ephod, &c. Now the division of them vpon the two mountaines was thus: on Gerizim stood, Deut. 27 12.13. Simeon, Levi, Iu∣dah, Issachar, Ioseph, Beniamin: on Ebal stood,
Reuben, Gad, Asher, Zebulun, Dan & Naphtali: This order of the two les contra∣dicts your order of the two stones: Againe in the same next of the Thalmud it is noted that the names of he tribes vpon the second stone were according to their birthes, but not on the first, be∣cause Iudah was there placed formost. Thus they expounded Exod. 28.18. referring those vvords, according to their birthes, vnto the latter clause of the verse onely, and not vnto the for∣mer part. Thalmud. in Sotah c. 7. Fol. 36. A. B. 4, in the same  tractate it is recorded that R. Ha∣mina the sonne of Gamaliel sayd, the names of the tribes are not di∣stributed in the st of the Ephod accorg to the order of the di∣stribution in the book of numbers, but according to the order in the book of Exod. to wit, the sonnes of Loah according to their order: the sonnes of Rachel one of this side an other of that: and the sonnes of the handmaydes in the middes. This testimonie is very corruptly and imperfectly Adverti∣sement. of corruptiōs N. 1. alledged by Mr. Brn, and yet after he hath perverted the same, he saith vainely, this note of the Thal∣mud endeth this sie: and again in the margine he poynts at it and calles it, an exquisite note for a translatour: vvhereas if there be any weight in that testimonie (as there is not, it being a mere presumptiō) hē doth it plainely refute both his opiniō, & yours that without judgement follow him too much, in this matter of ordering the stones: for if the sonnes of the hand∣maydes were placed in the middes betwixt the sonnes of Rachel as in Exo. 1.5. on this maner, Beniamin, Dan, Naphtali, Gad, Ascher, Ioseph, as R. Hanina would have, then are both your descriptions false, being different from this order. 5. R. Iohana in that glosse vpon the Thalmud which hath this title affixed, Lex fux. gloss. on Sota vbi supra. Thorah or, saith, Beniamin was half vpon this side, to wit, vpon the second stone, where the names were written accor∣ding to the order an mount Ebal, Ben; and vpon the first stone, jamin. In the glosse vpon the otherside of the Thalmud, it is againe noted how Iehud was placed first among the stones. 6. For a further proof of the lightnes and insufficiently of these Rabbi∣nicall expositions and presumptions, consider but the vani∣ties that are recorded in the same leafe of the Thalmud above noted: speaking of the Deut, 27.5.7. altar vpon the stones vvhereof God had commanded them to vvrite his law, they record, that the law was written vpon the stones of the altar in 70. languages as it is sayd, well and plainely, &c. They say there also, The hornet passed not over with them: but is it not vvritten, Exo. 23. I vvill send the
hornet before thee? R. Simeon ben Lakish saith, at the brink of Iorden the hornet stood and sprinkled bitternes or gall vpon them, and blinded their eyes above, and made them eunuches below, as it is sayd, Amos. 2. I destroyed the Amorites before them, whose height was like the height of Cedars, and he vvas strong as the okes: notvvithstanding I destroyed his fruit from above and his root from beneath. R. Papa saith, there vvere tvvo hor∣nets one for Moses and one for Ioshuah; that of Moses passed not over, but that of Ioshua did go over. There also they write how the Angel Gabriel taught the 70. languages vnto Ioseph: with other such like fictions. Let sober men take heed how they build any of their opinions vpon such presumptuous exposi∣tours as these be: let not men seek for order among the sonnes of confusion that dwell in the shadow of death, where there is no order, but their light is as darknes itself. AGaine, touching the order of the Tribes names vpon the stones of the Breast-plate, you note thus. Anhor. on Exo. 28.21. And here the Greek translation addeth, according to their generatiōs (or birthes) as was expressed in the tenth verse, and is here againe implyed. For in the same order that they were graven vpon the Berylles, were they here set and graven vpon twelve severall stones: as they are here set down in the Page following. Vpon the 1 Sardine. was gra∣ven 1 Reuben. Sonns of Lea. 2 Topaze. 2 Symeon. 3 Smaragd. 3 Levi. 4 Chalcedonie. 4 Iudah. 5 Saphir. 5 Issachar. 6 Sardonyx. 6 Zabulon. 7 Hyacinth. 7 Dan. Of Bilha, Rachels mayd 8 Chrysoprase. 8 Naphtali. 9 Amethyst. 9 Gad. Of Zelpha, Leahs mayd 10 Chrysolite. 10 Aser. 11 Beryll. 11. Ioseph. Of Rachel. 12. Iasper 12 Beniamin
Herevnto I answer, 1. The names of the tribes are often described vnto vs expressely and plainely: many times Gen. 29. with 30. ch. & 35.23.6. & 45.8.—24. & 49.3-27 Exod. 1.2.3, &c. before and many times Numb. 1.5.—42. & 2.3.—29. & 7.12.—78. & 10.14.—27. & 13.5.—16. & 26.5.48. Deut. 27.12.13. & 33.6-24. 1 Chro. 2.1.2. Rev. 7.5-8 after this place in Exodus, but never accor∣ding to this order which you imagine here: alwayes some diffe∣rence is observed more or lesse. And what presumption is this, without warrant of scripture revealed to apply the names vnto the stones, contrary vnto the order of reckoning the tribes in every place? vvhat modest Christian dare imitate you here∣in? 2. VVhereas you tell vs that the Greek translation addeth, according to their generations: I have shewed before that the greek translation which you alledge so oft in vaine, is a most corrupt, and forged thing abounding with many vnlawfull & presumptuous additions, subtractions and alterations of the holy text, and therfore we ought not to build expositions so boldly vpon the credit and authority of such a false and decea∣vable translation. 3. Suppose it had bene expressed in the text, that the names of the tribes: had bene engraven vpon these stones according to their generations: yet doth it not follow that they should be engraven according to the order, which you do here so perem∣ptorily avouch and demonstrate in this table; for if the order according to the time of their birth be precisely followed, then are they to be reckoned as in Gen. 29, & 30, and then should the Children of the handmayds be set before Issachar & Zabulon, contrary to this your order: if the time of their birthes be followed in some part and measure, yet so as respect be had vnto the dignity of Leah and Rachel above their maydes, then might the order of Gen. 35, or Gen. 46, have bene followed: which both are also contrary vnto this your order; neither of them leaving Beniamin to the last place, as you doe. Christian humi∣litye and shamefastnes should have taught you to have sus∣pended your judgement herein, & not to have intruded your self into such things as God hath not manifested vnto you.
But for the establishing of this your assertion, you tell vs inthe same Annot. on Exo. 28.21. place, that This order of names is before shewed out of the Ierusalemy Thargum: The testimony of this Thargum you propound vnto vs and very carefully set before our eyes Ibid. on vers. 17.18 19. & 20. foure severall times according to the four parts of it: you minse it as if it were Manna or some angells food to feast vs therewith and to instruct vs concerning the four rewes of stones; And this is that testimony which Mr. Broughton also hath in like maner Adverti∣sement of corruptiōs N. 1. al∣ledged to the same purpose. Herevnto I answer, 1. The testimony of this fabulous wri∣ting is of no worth, being full of vnwarrantable presumptions, fables, errours and most grosse absurdities. In the first section of Genesis, this Thargum saith, that Two thousand yeares before the world was created, God created the law, and prepared Hell and the garden of Eden, &c. On Exod. 1. this Thargum saith of Shiphrah the midwife, that she was Iochebed; and of Puah, that she vvas Miriam; that these women fearing God got them a good name in the rest of the generations, and built them houses, the house of the Levites, and the house of the great Priesthood: This Ierusalem paraphrast on Gen. 32. confirmes the fable of Esaw his biting Iaakob by the neck, as was noted before, and saith that both wept, Esaw because his teeth vvere set on edge, and Iaakob be∣cause his neck was become Marble. This same Thargum on Deut. 33. telleth vs, how the glory of God vvas revealed on Mount
Seir to give the law to the sonnes of Esaw: but when they found written therein ye shall not kill, they vvould not re∣ceave it. That then this glory shined on the mount of the bor∣der, to deliver this law vnto the sonns of Ismael: but vvhē they found vvritten therein ye shall not steale, they would not receive it. That then the glory of God returned and vvas revealed on mount Sinai with millions of holy Angels: That then Israel sayd, whatsoever the vvord of the Lord saith, we vvill do it and will receyve it, &c. And with a multitude of such like fabulous matters is that Thargum full stuffed: when you feed your rea∣ders with allegations of such authors, you may fill their bellies with gravel and ashes, and choake them in stead of nourishingthem. And a heap of such vanities are in the same, which shew the vnsoundnes thereof. 2. Even in that very place which you alledge is there appa∣rant and manifest errour in expounding the stones of the breast plate: and to omit others, this is to be observed in the two last stones, which this Thargum translates, Bedoicha & margalitha; Bdelium & a pearle: and herein contradicteth your translation: By this Thargum, Beniamins name should not be engraven vpon the Iasper, as you would have it: If you think the Thar∣gum to be erroneous in this poynt, why do you follow the pre∣sumption of it in an other which is vttred as it vvere vvith the same breath in the exposition of the same verse touching order of the names? 3. Against this Thargum Ierusalemy, I may oppose the Thalmud Ierusalemy: though neither of them be indeed of any worth, yet of you they are much esteemed and oft alledged; and of the Iewes this Thalmud is the more respected. In Thalmud Ierusalemy in Sotah Fol. 21. B. it, among the opinions of other Rabbines, according to that vvhich I noted before out of the Babylonian Thalmud, the opinion of R. Zabida is recorded, touching the names in the Ephod, that the first were not written according to the order (of their birth) because Iehudah was King, but the later were written according to the order. And so if, (as you affirme) the same order of engraving was observed both on the two shoulder stones and on the 12 in the breastplate, then this Thalmud Ierusalemy affordes vs an order contrary to you and to your Thargum Ierusalemy. Againe, for confirmation of the order described by you; you alledge that Annot. on Exo. 28 21. the same is also expressed by the Chaldee paraphrast on Song. 5.14. where speaking of the 12 tribes engraved on 12 precious stones, he nameth them thus: 1, Reuben, 2 Symeon, 3 Levi, 4 Iudah, 5 Issachar, 6 Zabulon, 7 Dan, 8 Naphtali, 9 Gad, 10 Asher, 11 Ioseph, 12 Beniamin: who were like to the 12. celestiall signes, bright as lamps, and polished in their works like yvorie, and shining like Saphirs. I answer;
1. This Chaldee paraphrase of R. Ioseph Caecus (as it is com∣monlytaken,) I have Pag. 390. already shewed to be most fabulous superstitious and erroneous, a fit match to be alledged as wit∣nesse with your Thargum Ierusalemy; neither of them being of any credit: vpon the words of the former Chapter, Song. 4.6 vntill the day break and shadowes flee away, &c. this paraphrast speakes like a charmer or Magician shewing vs a distinction of devilles, making some to be night spirits, some morning sprights, and some noone sprights: as also away of putting them to flight by the smel of the perfume in the sanctuary: not much vnlike to the Tobit. 6.9. & 8.2.3. chasing away of the feēd Asmodeus by the perfume of the heart and liver of a fish. The expositions which this para∣phrast gives on ech chapter of this Song, are a pregnant proofe of the authors insufficiency to be allowed as a witness in these controversies. 2. To go no further then this paraphrase on this verse which you alledge; vve may here observe how he erreth in the exposition of the stones, in making the seventh to be a Beryll & the eight a saphir, manifestly contrary to the text, & contra∣ry to you also: Had you fully set downe your allegation, as you do a part thereof; had you noted how this paraphrast translates the stones, so as you do his naming of the tribes, then the rea∣der might easily have perceived either your authors errour, or els the refutation of yourself by his words cited in this place. But you did wisely to leave out that which is against yourself. 3. This paraphrast in this same place alledged, saith that the names of the three Fathers of the world, Abraham, Isaac and Iaa∣kob were engraven togather with the twelve tribes: Thus also it is recorded in both the Thalmud Babylon. in joma, c. 7. Fol. 73. Thalmud Ierusalemy in joma Fol. 44. Thalmud, viz. for so much as the let∣ters Tsadi & Koph were not found in the names of the 12 tribes in the breastplate, therfore as R. Samuel saith, the names of Abraham, Isaac, and Iaakob were written above the names of the tribes in the breast plate; and because there wants also the letter Teth in those 12 names, therfore as R. Acha saith there was written vnder them, schibte jeschurun: or as R. Moses Mikkotsi
Sepher mitsvoth haggadol precept. affirm. 173. noteth, schibte jah: And so by this meanes they would have allthe letters of the whole Hebrew Alphabet conteyned in the breastplate; to the end that any answer of God by vrim and Thummim might be delivered in the letters of the breastplate and so read and vnderstood. Seing these be their bold asser∣tiōs, who would not be afraid to take the testimony of these pre¦sumptuous Rabbines? And much more ought every minister of Christ to be ashamed to alledge their testimonies in his ex∣pounding of the scriptures, whiles with one breath they do at the same time send forth such vnsound fancies. 4. Even as you yourself alledge & repeate the words of this pa∣raphrast: his vanitie appeares further in this, that by way of my∣sterie these twelve stones are compared to the Zodiack, like vnto the twelve celestiall signes, &c. which Iosephus antiq. Iu∣daic. lib. 3. c. 9. others yet have set downe more fully, describing the the fabrick of the world by the high Priests attire; The 4 elements they shew thus: the earth by the sylk, sea by the purple, ayre by the blew, fire by the skarlet co∣lour; the sun & moone by the 2 stones on the shoulders: the 12 signes of the Zodiack by the 12. stones in the breastplate: the thūders & lightnings by the soūd of the belles & pomegranates: the highest heavens by the holy crowne, &c. So your Maimony Mo. ne∣buch, chel. 2 perek. 11 & Chel. 3 per. 5. expounds many places of scripture. And the vanity of these presumptuous speculations is such that if there were nothing els it might justly deterre vs from building our expositions vpō their traditions, as you do. To give one instance more hereof in stead of many, and this touching these garments and orna∣ments of the high priest: R. Simon sayth, Thalmud Ierusalem, in Ioma. Fol. 44. col. 2, & 3. As the offrings did serve to make reconciliatiō for sins, so the garments also: That the Coate made attonemēt for thē that had worne linsey-wool∣sey: Some say, it made attonement for them that shed blood, because it is written, they dipped the coat in blood: (Gen. 37.31.) That the Dinnen Breeches did reconcile those that had vncove∣red the shame, &c. That the
Miter reconciled the proud in spi∣rit. That the Girdle did make reconciliation for theeves; and as some say for the frowardnes of heart: That the Breastplate of judgement did expiate them that had perverted judgement:That the Ephod did expiate their sin that had committed Ido∣latry: Their proofe is because it is sayd, without Ephod and with∣out Teraphim (Hos. 4.4.) That the Belles of the Robe did make atto∣nement for an evill tongue: That the Golden plate vpon the fore∣head of the high-priest did reconcile the blasphemers: and their proofe is because it is sayd, the stone sticked in his forehead (1. Sa. 17 49.) some say it did reconcile the impudent that had an hard face, their proofe is because it is sayd, thou haddest a whores fore∣head (Ier. 3.3.) Others of them, as In Ake∣dath Isaak, portâ. 51. Ben Arama out of vajikra rabba, do record this same mysterie: But let those that seek the meaning of the holy Ghost, leave these things to the Rabbines, & let Iewish fables alone. 5. Against this Chaldee paraphrast may be opposed an other Chaldee paraphrast vpon the law going vnder the name of Ionathan, who though he be vaine, yet is he not worse then this; but he is one of the authors whom you yourself do Annot. on Exo. 3.14. al∣ledge in the exposition of Moses, and he (as is Adverti∣sem. of corrup. N. 3. confessed) pla∣ceth the names of the tribes vpon the stones in an other order then you would have them: so that one of the Chaldee para∣phrasts speaks as much against you, as th'other doth for you Let them both alone and seek better vvarrant for your exposi∣tions of the holy scripture. In conclusion of this poynt touching the order of the stones, you say, Annot. on Exo. 28.21. The same order we shewed also from Maimony, to be vpon the two Berylls verse 10, except the transplacing of Bilhahs sonnes. To this I answer, 1. the presumption of Maimony in this matter is already manifested before. 2. even this very ex∣ception serves for the refutation both of you and your Maimony for what warrant is there to make this exception, and to assigne a different order and place to the sonnes of Bilhah vpon the shoulders and vpon the breast of Aaron? what reason have you to follow such as without warrant do thus place and transplace the tribes according to their fancie?
A Fruit of this your presumptuous intrusion touching the order of the names in the stones, is your errour about the translation of the stones themselves; and in speciall that you interpret Annot. on Exo. 28.18. jahalom to be the sardonyx, which should have bene translated the Adamant or Diamonde, accor∣ding to the example of the best translatours both new and old: For 1. The Adamant is knowne and found to be the hardest of all stones, resisting the power Plinie, histor. nat. lib. 37, c. 4. both of yron and fire, neither brokē by the one nor moltē by the other: & therevpō in Greek named Adamas of the invincible force of it, not easily subdued. Herevnto agreeth the hebrew name jahalom, comming of the word to strike with the hammer: shewing that this stone is as the hammer of other stones, breaking them, but not broken by them: Herevnto agreeth the Chaldee name, Onkelos on Exo. 28 18. Ionathan on Ezek. 28.13. Sabhalom, so cal∣led of enduring the strokes of the Hammer. Herevnto agreeth the arabique name, al mas which On Exo. 28.18. Aben Ezra and from him In lib. ra∣dic. on ja∣halom. Kimchi do note to be given vnto jahalom, because it breaketh all other stones and boreth through the Bdelium, &c. The Ada∣mant is also in the Arabique named pentaglot. val. shind. in Dum. Diama of Dum a word that notes durablenes and continuance: The Persian Thargum likewise gives such a name vnto this stone, as shewes the same nature of it: and calleth it On Exod. 28.18. loguard having affinity with the word garad which signifyeth Scalpere to cut or grave: and according to this Pliny saith of the Adamants; Natur. histor. lib. 37. c. 4. expetuntur a scalptoribus, &c. They are desired of engravers, &c. It seemes that of this stone they have their scalpra or scalpella, instruments of cutting and engra∣ving. Now seing the name Iahalom doth so fitly agree vnto the nature of the Adamant, it is against al reason to leave and chan∣ge the fittest name, and in your translation to give a new name without the force and help of any new argument. VVhereas you say of the Sardonyx that
On Exo. 28.18. It is a very hard stone like the Adamantor Diamond: and Mr. Broughton also saith, that it is the hardest next the Diamond, and fit for the notation of jahalom; I ask for your proofc herein: where is your vvarrant that theSardonyx is a very hard stone like the Adamant? It is vvonder you would not expresse it, if you had any. And besides, if it were as you say, that the Sardonyx were like vnto or next vnto the Adamant in hardnes: yet hereby you confesse that the Ada∣mant excelleth in hardnes: and all reason requires that the thing which is most excellent in his kinde should beate the name or denomination above the rest, vnless some other ne∣cessary proofe vvere brought to the contrary. 2. Seing the maner of the holy Ghost is to describe & com∣mend vnto vs the vvorth of excellent things by Prov. 3.15. & 8.11 & 20.15. & 31.10. Mat. 7.6. comparing them vnto precious stones and pearles: and in this place Exod. 28. the Lord vvould shew vnto vs the deare & precious account that he makes of his Children by engraving their names in these gemmes and setting them vpon the breast of his sonne fi∣gured by the high priest: seing also that the Diamond is Pliny, Natur. hist. l. 37. c. 4. estee∣med of greatest price, not onely among gemmes, but above other huma∣ne things; for this cause, you ought not to have changed the common interpretation, by leaving out the most precious Ada∣mant serving most fitly to expresse the meaning of the Lord, vnlesse you could have brought vnto vs some rare and strong argument for your so doing. He that doth vnjustly take out the more precious stone, and instead thereof put in a baser into the breastplate, doth thereby in some measure obscure and darken the counsell of the Lord, and hide the brightnes of his grace. 3. Seing the counsell of God in appoynting this breastplate to be made, vvas (as in the rest of the tabernacle-vvorks to shevv his vvisedome and glory by giving gifts vnto men, & by Exod. 31.1-6. putting vvisedome into the hearts of all that were vvise-hear∣ted; and in speciall, (as is of purpose largely described) by calling Bezaleel and
filling him with the spirit of God, in wisedome and in vnderstanding, and in knowledge in all workmanship: and yet more particularly by reaching him the art to work in gold, to ingrave in stone and to filler set the precious stones in gold: seing the Adamant is more hard to be engraven then other stones, & that therfore the wisedome of God in teaching them to set this stone in thebreastplate, might appeare rather more, then in setting of the other stones: for this cause, men ought not vvithout sure ground to remoove this stone out of the breast-plate, least they be found guilty of cutting off one speciall meanes and oc∣casion of shewing and manifesting Gods wisedome and glory seing in all his works the Lord vseth to seek such occasions. Pliny Vbi supra. considering the hardnes of the Adamant, and withall the meanes that were found out to break the same by steeping it in the fresh and warme blood of a Goate, breakes out into admiration concerning this experiment, and acknowledgeth all such inventions to be the gift of some divine power or god∣head teaching men such wisedome and skill. VVhether this invention of preparing the Adamant to be engraven by the meanes of goates blood, was found out in the dayes of Beza∣leel at the making of the breastplate: or whether any other way proportionable vnto this was then vsed, it is vncertaine: Alwayes we are sure, that such rare invention and skill vvas vsed by the help of Gods spirit, as might justly moove men to break out into Admiration, and vvith Pliny to acknowledge the wisedome of a divine power teaching the same. Herevnto should men attend, and take heed of denying any meanes or occasion that might serve to manifest and demonstrate this glory of God. 4. VVhen as you dispute against Mr. Brought on touching sylk or vvool in the high Priests Ephod: you alledge for yourself against him, the judgements and interprerations of divers lear∣ned men, as namely, of Answ. to Mr. Broug. Pag. 3.
Tremellius, Iunius, Marcus Marinus in Arca Noa, Munsterus, Vatablus, Pelicanus, Lyra, Arias Montanus, For∣sterus, Avenarius: If the judgement and interpretations of these men, vvere at that time of any weight for you against him, thē are they now at this time also of weight against both you and him, touching the precious stones in the high Priests Ephod: for there is never a one of these your ten authors but they are against you in this matter: none of them interpret jahalom to be a Sardonyx as you do: ech of them allowes a place for theAdamant or Diamond, in the Ephod. And besides these, there are yet more then ten other witnesses, which do all of them con∣tradict your translation of this stone; Iohan. Buxtorfius, Mercerus, Pagninus, David de Pomis, Reuchlinus, Valentinus Schindlerus, Iose∣phus, Hierome, Calvine, and even that Greek translation which you do so oftē alledge, though it have not the name of the Adamāt yet it hath not the Sardonyx: and to these may be added the te∣stimony of other translatours in the English, Dutch, French Bi∣bles & many others: and not one of them but they are in their translations & expositions of this word witnesses against you. It seemes you have taken the Adamant from the breastplate of the highpriest that you might set it in your owne breast, or in your owne forehead, and so by vertue thereof hardened your face not onely against all reason and judgement of the learned in this controversy, but against all the Churches of Christ by opposing them: By the vertue of this invincible & hard Ada∣mant in your forehead you stand out against all the churches of God, and renounce the fellowship of every one of them. But as Mr. Smith once vvrote for his separation, that Parallels p. 34.35. having Iohn the divine for him, he respected not vvhat all other divines could say against him: so you also flying vnto the Revelation of Iohn, for vvarrant of your translation, do tell vs, that Annot. on Exod. 28.18. ja∣halom, in Rev. 21.20. is named in Greek Sardonyx. And this also M. Broughton hath Advertis. of corrupt. M. 2. told vs before you. In an other place you you say, Answer to Mr. Brough. p. 37. you followed the translation of Iohn the Apostle Rev. 21 of whom you were perswaded in generall, before you knew the particu∣lars, that he translated all the stones from Aarons breast to the hea¦venly Ierusalem. That you might most safely follow him (you say)
none of grace will deny. I answer; Though none of grace will deny that you ought to follow the Apostle, yet many of grace and learning will deny that you do follow him: your bare per∣swasion and therevpon your bold assertion that Iohn did tran∣slate all the 12. stones from Aarons breast, and that he named Iahalom in Greek Sardonyx, is no vvarant for any of grace to follow you herein. VVhere is your proof or shew of proofthat Iohn did so translate all the stones, as you speake? your bare perswasions and assertions that he did so do not help you, but make you more guilty of presumption, in obtruding your conceits vpon the holy Ghost and taking the name of God in vaine. VVe see the names of the tribes themselves are reckoned vp by the Rev. 7.5..8. holy Ghost in the Revelation with omission of Dan, otherwise then they are reckoned in any place of the old testament: and how know you then, or how can any affirme that the very same stones mentioned Exod. 28. are all without exception and omission of any reckoned vp in Rev. 21. as by your translation and annotations you make the simple to beleeve? Through this your presumption in expounding the stones of the breastplate it comes to passe that you deale not so sound∣ly in your controversy about the supremacy of Peter, as other∣wise you might have done: vvhen you vvould shew the vani∣ty of the popish argument, taken from this, that Peter was na∣med first among the Apostles, you declare it thus: Answ. to Ioh. Ainsw p. 73. The first foundation of the wall of the heavenly Ierusalem, was a Iasper, the stone of Beniamin, th' Apostle Pauls tribe: will you grant me hence to conclude that S. Paul was head of the Catholique Church? In these words you give advantage to your adversary, for thus might he answer you. 1, it is presumption to say that the Iasper vvas Beniamins stone: your allegation of Exo. 28. is but an abuse of scripture: you might as well have sayd that the Iasper was the stone of Ascher or Naphtalt; being alike vncertaine. 2. though the Iasper had bene the stone of Beniamin in Exod. 28. yet could it not be the stone of Paul in Rev. 21.19. because those 12. stones had the names of the Rev. 21.14. lambes twelve Apostles, of which number Paul vvas
Mat. 10.1-5. & Act. 1.26 1 Cor. 15.5.8. none, but was distinguished and reckoned apart from the twelve: vvhatsoever therfore may be sayd for peter in other places, paul could not step in to plead for any head ship above the rest from that place. 3. Suppose the stones in Rev. 21. had bene all of them, the very same that vvere men∣tioned in Exo. 28. yet could not the Apostles be distinguishedthereby or claime for preheminence in respect of the tribe, be∣cause divers of them were of the same tribe being brethren, as Peter & Andrew: Iames and Iohn; Iames and Iude; and for some of the rest they were happily of the same tribes with these: and therfore of necessity sundry of them must have their names vvritten not vpon the stone of that tribe whereof they descen∣ded by birth, but on some other: and thus your instance faileth in the very ground thereof, and therfore cannot justly serve for such a declaration of your reproof of their argument, as you in∣tend thereby. Lastly, to conclude this poynt: to shew the folly of the Rab∣bines, and how vaine their testimony in these things is, observe their superstition and contradiction about an other of Aarons ornaments: for example, The Rabbines as is Drusius comment, ad loca diff. Exo. p. 217 cap. 52. observed, have three opinions, touching the golden plate, viz. 1. R. Eleazar shewes how the words engraven vpon the same vvere vvritten in one line, on this maner, Holines to Iehovah 2. R. Levi, thought if they were engravē in two lines thē the word Holines was writ∣ten in the line below, & To Iehovah in the line above. 3, others as in Moses Mikkotsi thinking they were engraven in two lines would have Holines to in the vnder line: & Iehovah above. Tou∣ching this plate, you observe out of Maimony,
Annot. on Exo. 28 36. the letters were so gravē that they stood out above the rest of the plate & were not cut inward: which is a mere presumption and rather refuted by the signification of the word there vsed to expresse that ingraving then approved by the same. And whither may men be led if they will hearken vnto these presumptions as you have done touching the order of the stones in the Breastplate? Let the example of Drusius be a warning to you and others, that they take not so much heed vnto Iewish fables: This learned man, by his too great regard of the Rabbines in their vvritings, was coloured with divers of their absurd opinions: taking some of them for a certaine truth, and brought also to doubt and fluctuate about others: for example; whereas the Rabbines write that Esaws Angel wrestled with Iaakob for the blessingand R. David Kimchi in Hos. 12. wept because he could not prevayle, Drusius writes, Praeterit. lib. 4. in Ioh. 11. vers. 35. if an Angel once wept, what marvel that Iesus should weep? and that the Angel did weep which wrestled with Iaakob, it is certaine from Hos. 12.4. Whereas the superstitious Rabbines hold it to be a haynous crime & a matter of death for any (except the priests) to read or name this word Iehovah as it is written, herein also he followes them thus far; that he accounts it Praeterit. lib. 10 in Apo. 19. vers. 12. mere ignorance, if not blasphemy, to hold that it may lawfully be read: and after againe he saith Ibid. in append. ad p. 445. he thinkes that no godly man which feares the Lord can with a safe conscience vse the same. In his annotations vpon those words, a voyce from heaven Mat. 3.17. he saith, Praeterit. lib. 1. p. 6.7 it was not so much a voyce, as Bath-kol, or an Eccho; and in the same place noting out of the Rabbines 4. degrees of prophecy, he observes this Bath-kol to be the lowest degree: and below vrim and Thummim. The seven spirits mentioned Rev. 1.4. he notes to be Praeterit. l. 10. p. 402 Angelles: and declares this by the counterfait story of To∣bit. c. 12.18. & by the testimony of Ionathā speaking of the sevē arch-Angels that stand before God. Vpon the doctrine of the Rabbines, he professeth that he is In loca diffic. Lev. c. 61. doubtfull and wavering in his minde whether Polygamie was forbidden by the law or not. Thus was he caryed, but your danger of being caryed further, is so much the greater in respect of your presumptuous estate of se∣paratiō wherein you stād: in the practise & professiō whereof (as if you were a new Priest risen vp with vrim & Thummim to shew the errours of these last dayes) you arrogate vnto yourself alone, above all other ministers the knowledge of these three things, viz. of a true Church: of a true minister: and of a true Christian: name one Minister of Chiste in the world, if you can that beside yourself is able to discerne of these three things: And think seriously withall in the feare of God, whether you be not in danger of being blowen away with the vvinde of pre∣sumption and errour, for vvant of true humility.
CHAP. VIII. YOur great partialitie in alledging these Rabbines is an other mayne offence in you; & this appeares in divers kindes: First, betwixt yourself and opposites; you are par∣tial in blaming them so much for vsing the testimo∣nies of men, whiles yourself do vse them far more frequently: you have often complained of me for making flesh my arme in alledging the authoritie of men against you: even when I did it not, as hath bene shewed Pag. 45.47.50. before. Herein you seeme to be like vnto that famous vsurer who rejoyced to heare that sin of vsury reproved, condemned and publiquely preached against: in hope that others thereby would vse it the lesse, that he might vse it the more and have the more customers for his interest: but you are in this vnlike him and more blame-worthy, in that he onely reioyced to see others condemne it, whereas you your self do often and openly condemne a practise, in the middes of your owne most immoderate vse thereof. Secondly, in respect of the authors alledged you are very partial; whiles you alledge Infidels rather then the most lear∣ned Christians endued with the spirit of wisedome and vnder∣standing: yea so far that in your annotations even in Genesis & Exodus alone you have alledged these Iewish writers more thē a thousand times in exact number, whereas among them all I finde not the name of one Christian vvriter from the Apostles time vnto our age once alledged by you. But to prevent this blame you say, Preface to Annot. on Genesis.
The Christian Fathers and Doctours because they are vsually cited by other expositors abundantly: I thought needless to re∣pete: and the rather for brevitie, which is requisite in annotations. But against this excuse it is to be observed, 1. that as for the heathnish writers though they be as vsually cited by other ex∣positours, and though they be as commonly knowne as the Christian Fathers and Doctours, yet you do very often alledgethem, and repeat the common allegations of them formerly vsed by others and finde place enough for them among your annotations: should not the Christian writers therfore at least have had as much honour as they, in your allegations? 2, you do also alledge and repeate many Iewish testimonies for∣merly alledged by others: If need be I can shew you manifold instances in your annotations; so that you had no cause vpon this pretense of rarenes to have alledged them so much: there being many excellent observations of some Christian vvriters that are far more rare and vnknowne then sundry of the Rab∣binical testimonies alledged by you. 3, though sundry of your Thalmudique testimonies be not commonly knowne, yet seing the most of them are vnproffitable, vaine traditions and fabulous matters: it had bene more proffit for the Christian readers, and a greater help for their vnderstanding of the scrip∣tures to have alledged some of the best Christian writers in stead of some of the worst of those Rabbines. 4, it is to be observed, that though you glory in the name of a Rabbine for every trifeling allegatiō which you bring from them, yet when by stealth you Annot. on Gen. 37.35 alledge the rare observations of some Chri∣stians, as that of Hades derived from Adam, and divers others: then do you conceale the names of the authors as if you were ashamed to learne or borow anything from them, you being separate from such a society in the Church of God as they all embraced. Herein you seeme to be like vnto the Iewes, who though they have their set forme of prayer or blessings which they vse at the lighting of Candles; yet their canon is, R. Alphes in Bera∣coth, cap. 8 Fol.
42. that they may not blesse for the candle which they light at the candle of the gentiles or of Christians: so you, when you light your candle at the Iewes, in alledging any thing from them, as if there were special cause of blessing for it, your maner is to give them ho∣nourable titles of Hebrew Doctours, Iew Doctours, Ancient Rab∣bines, &c. and not onely that but without regard of that brevitie which you pretend, your maner is to alledge their testimoniesat large with the superfluous and vaine titles they assume vnto themselves, viz. our ancient wise men: our Rabbines of blessed me∣morie, &c. But on the contrary when you light your candle at the Christians, in expounding the scriptures, you smother their names in silence, as if you were ashamed of them. Thirdly, even towards the Rabbines themselves you are very partiall, in alledging divers of the worst sort far oftener, then those which are more proffitable among them. Aben Ezra, R. David Kimchi, Ralbag or R. Levi ben Gersom, which have takē great paines to expound the words and phrases in the text of the scripture, whose writings are far more proffitable then those of Maimony, that spent his time most in expounding the Thalmud and the vaine traditions thereof, are yet very seldome alledged by you. Others that are not half so judicious and far more fa∣bulous writings, as R. Menachem, R. Eliezer, R. Bechai, the Thalmud, the Zohar, Tanchuma, Bereshith Rabba, Elleshemoth rabba, &c. being the maine fountaines of blind superstition and the greatest corrupters of Gods ordinances have most honour given vnto them by you. As for R. Eliezer whom in special you reckon to be one of Annot. on Gē. 14.18. the best and most ancient Hebrue Doctours, whose Pirkei are often alledged by you: how many of his observations or testimonies be there, even of the best that you could choose and pick out of all his vvritings that are worthy to be recorded? From him you note that Adams dressing of the garden should be his Annot. on Gen. 2.15. labour in, and keeping of gods law: that God did On Gen. 3.14. cut off the feet of the serpent and curse him: that the vvindow or light which Noah vvas commanded to make in the ark, On Gen. 6.16. was a precious stone hanged in the Ark, which gave light to all creatures which were the rein: that On Gen. 14.18. Melchizedek was Sem: that On Gen. 25.21. Isaak went with his wife, to Mount Moriah, to the place where he had bene bound Gen. 22.9.) and prayed there: that as the Chalde paraphrast translates Iaakobs dwelling in tents to be a A Minister of the howse of doctrine: so others as in Pirkei R. Eliezer, that he dwelt in tents and Ibid. on vers. 27. studied the law: that Ibid. on veri. 34. Lentiles were vvont to be eaten of men in their sorow and mourning: and that Iaakob did feed vpon Lentiles in mour∣ning
and sorow; for that the Kingdome and dominion and firstbirth∣right was Esaus: that the sonnes of Esau should not fall, vntill the re∣mainder of Iaakob come and give to the sonnes of Esau, food of Lenti∣les with mourning and sorow and take from them the dominion, King∣dome and firstbirthright which Iaakob bought of him by oath: that Iaakob On Gen. 29.10. as a mighty strong man rolled away the stone frō the welles mouth, &c. that the sheepheardes saw it and wondred all: and were not able to rolle away the stone, but Iaakob rolled it away himself alone: that Iaakobs sinew being touched: On Gen. 32.32. it became like the fat of a dead thing: therfore it is vnlawfull for the sonns of Israel to eat of the si∣new, &c. that the On Gen. 37.15. man which met Ioseph in the field was the Angel Gabriel, called in Dan. 9.21. the man Gabriel: that of the 20 shekels of silver for which Ioseph was sold, On Gen. 37.28. every of the ten Pa∣triarks, had two shekels to buy shooes for their feet. These as it see∣mes are the best observations which you could finde in the best of the Rabbines: the choyse of the choyse: And yet of them all there is not one of them free from pre∣sumption. And cannot the holy scriptures be well vnderstood without these forgeries? In stead of these fictions you might have brought far more proffitable annotations from Aben Ez∣ra, Kimchi & Ralbag before mentioned touching the words and phrases of scripture: but you prefer the worst, & give least ho∣nour vnto the best of them. It is true indeed that there are ma∣ny fables also recorded in these Rabbines, as I shewed Cap. 1. before yet are they but drops in comparison of that flood of errour, presumption and curiositie which is to be found in others of your most honoured Thalmudists: And as is observed by Ioa. Rain. censura. lib. apocr. tom. 1. praelec. 77. o∣thers touching Kimchi, so is it plaine for the other two also, that the fables rehearsed by them are not set downe as their owne assertions, but ordinarily in the name of others. Lastly, in the writings of one and the same Rabbine you seeme to deale partially: The superstitious Mishneh of Maimo∣ny is most frequently alledged by you: but his Morch Nebuchim which is of far better vse is scarsely touched by you in one or two allegations. This later work of his, being made long after
his Mishneh, though full of Rabbinical vanitie, yet is not like to his former: in so much that the Iewes of France, as some do Nebiensis in Octaplo. Annot. in Psal. 68. record, did themselves burne this his book because it seemed too much to favour the doctrine and profession of Christians. TO conclude, as these things do serve for a Glasse of your er∣rour in alledging the Rabbines: so the due consideration of the Iewish errours here noted vpon occasion of this contro∣versie, may justly serve for a Glasse of Gods most severe judge∣ment against Israel, that we may justify and glorify him in the same. Hereby we see the Mat. 8.12 Children of the Kingdome bound hand and foote in the cords of these errours and cast out into the vtter darknes of obstinate infidelitie, superstition and blas∣phemy. Hereby we see the truth of Gods word, in the present wrath that lyes vpon them according to the ancient prophesies Ps. 69.23. Rō. 11.10 for blinding of their eyes and bowing downe their backes. Hereby we should learne to kisse the sonne least he be angry, and to hearken to the voyce of Christ in his Gospel, whiles it is called to day; when as we see the contempt thereof to be so fearefully avenged on this elect nation, by giving them vp so long a time vnto such horrible delusions, and by scattring some of them into all quarters, (even as the Iud. 19.29. Levites concubine cut into many pieces and sent abroad) that all the people of the earth might see and know the work of God vpon them for their dayly instruction. Hereby we may also learne to be touched with the miseries of this nation, holy in the root and still beloved for the fathers sake. As Mat. 2.18 Rachel is sayd to mourne for her Children slayne in Beth-leem and the coasts there∣of: so may both Rachel and Leah be sayd to make lamenta∣tion for these reiected and dispersed tribes. The miseries of Desolate Ierusalem do call and cry vnto vs, lowder then ever they did of old,
Lam. 1.12 Have ye no regard, all ye that passe by the way? Behold and see if there be any sorow like vnto my sorow which is done vnto me, wherewith the Lord hath afflicted me in the day of his fierce wrath. VVhen we pray for them we pray for our selves: theirconversion is our Rom. 11.12, &c. riches & life to the vvorld. And we may be bold to make our prayers for them, having the special promise of God for their restauration. Arise therfore & put on strength o arme of the Lord: rise vp as in the old time and as in the an∣cient generations: turne againe the captivity of Sion, and take away the iniquities of Iaakob: Lord how long wilt thou be an∣gry for ever; shall thy jealousy burne like fire? Remember thy covenant made with Abraham, Isaak and Iaakob, and call home thy banished: Let the new Ierusalem discend from heaven as a Bride trimmed for her husband in the conversiō of thy people: make a way for thy redeemed: remoove the stones of offence, the Idolatries, superstitions, schismes and separations among Christians▪ Take away the vayle that is spread vpon the eyes of the Iewes, and shew thy salvation vnto them, that the whole earth may be full of thy glory shining in the face of Iesus Christ. AMEN. ERRATA. PAg. 48. l. 10. for ear read are: Pag. 107. 26. for such read suck: Pag. 208. read Amram. Pag. 384. in the margent, read, rPag. 369. spag. 370. Pag. 437. in the margent read, Ketannah.
