20729 99856965 22621
A TREATISE INTITLED, BEWARE OF M. IEWEL. BY Iohn Rastel MASTER OF ARTE AND STVDENT OF DI∣VINITIE. Math. 7. ¶Beware of false Prophe, which come vnto you in the cotes of sheepe, but inwardlye are Ra∣uen g wolues. &c. RESPICITE VOLAILIA COELI. ET PVLLOS CORVORVM. ANTVERPIAE Ex officina Ioannis Foulerī. M.D.LXVI.
To the Indifferent Reader. THE VVorthinesse of a certaine boke, lately set furth in the name of M. IeVVel, doth in England perchaunse, make it to be pretious Vnto many, but Vnto Vs that are in these partes of beyond the Seas, the Raritie only thereof, gaue a Price and Value Vnto it. Inso much that receiuing one of them for my selfe, two monthes (at the least) after they had bene abrode in Eng∣lande, I could not keepe the whole altogeather to my selfe, but was faine to diuide it in the middle. And yet there was no losse therein, because a frind was gratified with that halfe whiche I mighte spare, and the other remaining with me woulde keepe me so long occupied, Vntill both of Vs might hainge partes one with the other, and I (if I thoughte good) continue my reading forwarde as I had begon without any Interruption or stay at all, But I savv such geare and such store therof, in the one halfe only, that I had litle mind to goe through the other. And now that diuiding of the Fooke into tvvo partes vvhich the Rarietie thereof occasioned me to make not altogeather so vvillingly, but that I could haue vvished it better, that same novv fell out so happely and agreably to
my purpose, that although I might consider and see, vvhat stuffing vvere in the vvhole, yet, of free choise and for good causes, I vvould meddle vvith no more then the halfe. And truly, to choose vvho can let me, except some such vnreasonable▪ Heretike as taketh all freevvill avvay, frō a man▪ Mary to choose any one vvay, of tvvo that may be taken, that may be reproued in the Chooser, ex∣cept the causes vvhich he folovved, be alovvable. In the seeking of vvhich, least any man should ex∣tend his vvit so much, that by long discoursing he should make it the lesser and vveaker, and ima∣gine vvith himselfe, vpon Secrete Conferences, Policies, Conclusions and Orders made a∣mong the Catholikes, for the ansvvering of their Aduersaries: I vvill therefore shortly and faith∣fully tell them my selfe. First in foure Articles only, vvhich occupy vvel nere halfe the Reply, I foūd so much mater vvorth the briefe noting, that it vvould fully serue to the making of a iust boke. Concerning then the qualitie of those thinges, it vvas so corrupt and infectuous, that it required some present and spedy preseruatiue against it. I prouided also that the reader should not be vvearied through any lōg processe or discourse. Furthermore, if M, Ievvel himself, in this vacation and leisure of his vntill
D, Harding come vpon him againe, or if any other of the right Iannizers in deede vvhich haue fled from the Catholike faith, vvould make me an An∣svver: I thought good so to measure out my Booke vnto them, that they should not put the faulte in the greatnesse therof, vvhen they do not in conue∣nient time say their minde vnto me for it. Byside this, the chiefe poyntes vvhich I did minde to speake of are such, that if I vvould haue perused the vvhole Reply, yet I should haue brought but more Examples only to the prouing of those my Obiections against M. Ievvel, vvhich already are declared by inough and sufficient. And to Con∣clude I say only BEWARE OF M. IE∣WEL, that is, I shevv good causes to the Indif∣ferent Reader, vvherfore he should try him thrise, before he trust him once: Other are comming, vvhich shall bring him to more ieobardy, & strike directly at that crafty head of his, as if they should say, NOW M. IEWEL BEWARE. Other causes therefore contrary to these, vvho so euer shall name, he shall not expound my intent and meaning, but open his ovvne euil minde and suspitions. And I trust, as these seemed probable inough vnto me, vvherefore I might and shoulde ather certaine thinges (vvhat I vvould my selfe) out of M. Ievvels boke, and dispose them as I haue
done, so may any Reasonable man be content vvith this, vvhich for his vvarning sake I haue noted and neuer think that M. Ievvel is not touched because euery Article of his is not by me discussed: Or that, for all this vvhich yet is said, he must not be mistrusted, because euery line and sentence of his boke is not Ansvvered. For euery man, as he is vvel disposed, so may he doe: and vvhat so euer vvay, close or Open, fre∣quented or Solitary, Short or Long, Direct for∣vvard, or about, Easy or Intricate, vvhat so euer vvay be taken, if vve come to one end, and meete togeather in the discouering of Craft or Heresye, the cause of the Catholikes is the stronger, the hartes of the Protestantes may be the fainter. Some one (perchaunse) hath a patient minde to folovve M. Ievvel, Sentence by Sentence: An other vvill not be bound to goe after him vppon euery trifeling Occasion, but leauing bymatters and impertinent, gathereth out his Sense and con∣futeth it: Some againe chooseth one Speciall Ar∣ticle out, and spedely Ansvvereth it, An other is not content vvith so sevv as one or tvvo, and therefore is longer a doing. There is that thin∣keth it inough to Iustifye the vntruthes that D. Harding is charged vvithall. That seemeth not
inough to an other, but he noteth M. Ievvel for his plaine lies, and them out of measure. VVhat shall I say more of other? My selfe haue folovved an order much different from any the forsaid, and no doubt, but an other may come after all that is hi∣therto reckened, and finde more matter againste M. Ievvel vvith a peculiar disposition thereof. Let the vvay therefore, vvhich any man ta∣keth be neuer condemned, but the end to vvhich he bringeth processes, let that be considered. M. Ievvel (I speake it vvithout flattery) hath a Rare gift in vvryting, he must not be proude of it. He ventereth so boldlye, he fighteth so o∣penly, and is armed so singlely, that if tvventye Catholikes should at one time encountre vvith him, no one shoulde neede to strike in the same place that an other dothe, nor faile so to strike him that his credite and cause shoulde be vvounded. Yet, to them that stand a farre of from the sight of the mater, he is harnessed so fine∣ly, he handeleth his vveapon so cunninglye, he chaungeth from one hand to an other so readely, yea shrinketh and geaueth backe so Artificiallye, that he may vvell seeme to haue done a greate Acte, and to make it doubtfull at the least, vvho hath the victorie.
And so concerning these tvvo poyntes, because of the first, I may lavvfully take my vantage: And though in most places I leaue him vntouched, in o∣ther yet, (except he be vnsensible) I doe inough to make him feele it. Then because of the second, I geue thee (Indifferent Reader) lavvfull vvarning, that of all men that euer hitherto haue vvryten, he is the most Bragging, Deceitfull and Impudent. Hovv true this is, it shall appeere by my profes: And the profes hovv ready they are, it is euident in this present Treatise, and shall further appeere by an other vvhich is furth cumming. Concerning this vvhich is Printed: In the first boke therof, I haue brought into a short Table or Sum, (as it vvere) the State of the Question conteined in euery of the foure first Ar∣ticles: The Art of M. Ievvel, in sauing himself from Subscription in euery one: And the Issue of the Cō∣trouersy, vpō vvhich a more direct Ansvver is to be required, and more Iust reply to be inferred. And in perusing of this part, it vvill be quickly seene, vvhe∣ther I slaunder M. Ievvel, in charging him vvith Shifting, Falsifing, Corrupting, and Desperate handeling of such matters as come against him, Or no. In the second boke, I come to more particular
poyntes, And declare in seuerall Chapters, by most manifest Examples: That he hath ouercharged his Boke vvith Com∣mon Places, needlesse, but harmelesse. That he starteth into Digressions, Impure and frutelesse. That he troubleth Consciencies vvith other Cō∣mon places so frutelesse, that they vvill make them faithlesse. That he peruerteth D. Hardinges meaning. That he disgraceth his Authorities. That he vvrangleth vvith him. That he dissimbleth or Butteth vvith him. That he refelleth one Trueth by an other. That he reporteth of him very vncourteously, By all vvhich Euidences, if it be not sufficiently proued, that he is a man of little Modesty, Truthe and Conscience, I vvill shortly set furth a thirde boke against him. In vvhich, the abusing of sundry Doctours and vvryters Authorities, to the mainte∣nance of his falseheade and Heresy, &c. shalbe so plainly exemplified, that (I trust) it vvill be consi∣dered as a true and profitable Conclusion: BE∣VVARE OF M. IEVVEL. But novv, after all these paines taken, some∣times gladly, sometimes patientlye, but alvvayes faithfully and that to this end, that Truthe might
be knovven, And falsehead detected, And that the nevve Doctrine of the late Gospell might, either best of all be forsaken, or els be better examined: Are there none or very fevve, that vvill take the paines to reade our Bookes? Or if there be, that vvould gladly reade them, or vvith in∣differencye iudge of them, is it not lavvfull to bring some in for thē? VVhat haue the Catholikes done of late, so vnnaturally, or vnreasonablye, that from hencefurth they must vvryte no more against the Chalenger? Or feare, that if they doe vvryte, the Vates shall be searched vvhich bring in the Bookes, and the Bookes not exami∣ned, that bring in the Argumentes? Is it for our person sake or our cause sake that vve are so ex∣cluded? Is the place from vvhence vve vvryte, or the matter vvhyche vve vvryte, cōdemned of you. It is obiected vnto vs, that we are yonge Dyuines. The Obiection vvere good if vve fo∣lovved the deuises of our ovvne heades, and not the lerned Commentaries of most Auncient Fathers. But novv the person is young, the Conclusion is old. And againe, the youngest dyuine emong vs that haue vvryten, might fiue yeres sense, haue proceded (vvithout Grace asking) and haue gone for a Do∣ctour (if it had so liked him) in any of this Ages heresies for any exception that vvoulde haue bene
made, against his Age or lerning. Not only as Do∣ctours are made in the Country abrode, vvhere he that can Read best, Or say vvithout Eoke most Or Rovvle in Termes most fast, Or Rayle (in deede) most loud, is Created a Doctour for his labour: but as Doctors allso are made at these daies in Vniuer∣sities by Disputing, Ansvvering and Grace taking. But vve are not the wisest of all the Ca∣tholikes. VVe may borovv then of our ovvn Com∣pany, and neuer be in your daunger for lending vs any. And yet that alone vvhich vve haue, is not so simple but vve are able vvel to perceiue, vvher the best of your Arguments faileth. But we are the disconted of Louane. If Louane it selfe be contented vvith vs, the Testi∣mony of such an Vniuersitie, should be no reproche vnto vs. As again, vvho cā blame any Catholike in all the vvorld, for misliking the {pro}cedings of heresy? It vvil be said we are fugitiues. VVe are not of that kinde, of the vvhich it is vvrytten, Fugit nemine persequente,Prou. 28 he fleeth when no man pursueth him. Again, vve are not fled so far yet, as Geneua is. Nor fled in hart or behauiour from the Catholike Faith of all chri∣stendome, Or from one heresy vnto an other. And further it vvil be obiected, we liue in disor∣der. In dede vve liue not vnder an hedor vvardē,
depriued of our Collegies, vvithout any our fault against the Statutes: neither are there here such Offices, Charges, Romes, or Places Vacant, by ta∣king of vvhich the persons vvhich in England ful∣filled the like very vvorshipfully and vertuouslye, might declare hovv they be able to rule thē selues, and also to kepe other in Order: yet vve liue vnder the Rule of the holy Commaundementes of God, and the approued Canōs of the Catholike Church, And the lavvdable Customes or policies of the pla∣ces where vve remaine. And further yet, vve shall be saide to wryte for corrupte and priuate gaine. But vve are not (vve trust) so il frynded that vve neede it, or so il disposed that vve minde it. Againe, they vvhich haue forsaken great and sure liuinges in England, of one, tvvo, or three hundred pound yerely, they thought not (I beleue) to set vp a shoppe beyond sea, and by making of nevv bokes, and selling them for x. pence, or xij. pence a peece to reare vp both Priuate and Corrupt gaine vnto themselues. To be short, we shalbe accompted vn∣naturall, vvhether for sauing our head, vvhen a blovv is comming at it? Or, for leauing our Cō∣modities vtterly? Or chainging of the lesse for
the Greater? Or for Louing and Fearing of God more then Man? Some are so kind to their Coū∣try that rather then abide the lack of it, they care not hovv farre they goe from God. And there haue ben in times past some so faithfull to their Princes, that (vvhether in Sport or Ernest) they haue said it, he is not worthy of the fauoure of his Prince, that would sticke to go to Hell for his Prince. But he beleued, perchaunse there vvas no Hell at all. And so night venter boldlye, vvhere (by his iudgment) there vvas no daunger. Othervvise if he had so much light of Eaithe, as to confesse an Hel, and yet so great blindnesse of Affe∣ction, as to loue any Creature so much, that he vvould cast avvay his ovvne soule for euer the {pro}ppre∣ly vvas vnnaturall, and his saying is Intolerable. As for vs, God be mercifull, and geaue vs the Grace to loue him best, nay to loue him vvithout comparison. And after him to loue them best, vvhich come nighest vnto him, either by Image of Vertue, or Similitude of Povver and Office, eue∣ry one yet in his degree and place. But all these Obiections (I suppose) are Perso∣nal, and may be made either of Idle heades for their fantasy, or by Aduersaries, for some Anger, Or of Gentlemen merchantes for their pleasure, or of men right vvorshipfull, vpon sad reporte made
vnto them. But yet, vvhat is any of these vnto the question: whether in the six hundred yeares after Christ, there wer any Sole Receauing or Receiuing vnder both kinds: And so furth in any other of the Challengers Articles? nothing at all vndoubtedly. For be they true, be they false, (because vve vvil not spend much time about it,) they concerne priuate mennes Conditions, and not the Catholike Religion. And they are (as it vvere) a spotted Cote vpon a Reasonable mannes backe, but they proue not, that he hath no Reason at all vvhich vveareth the Cote. VVherfore it becometh not vs, so basely to thinke of their iudgements that consider of our Bokes, that because of the Authors small fauor, the boke it selfe should be out of fauor, or because the person is Condemned, that immedi∣atly the Boke is ansvvered. Some cause therfore vndoubtedly there is, in the Bokes thēselues, for vvhich they are misliked? But vvhat is that? Is it for the Vntruthes sake vvhich are conteined in them? Is it for the Wreasting and Racking of the Scriptures? Is it for mis∣alleging,Iewel in his Pre∣face to the Reader. misconstrueing, corrupting, or al∣tering the holy Fathers &c. These thinges in deede are directly obiected, to D. Harding, by M. Ievvel but (I trovv) the Serche is not therefore a∣poynted, that no Ansvver should come in against
them. Yet except this only be the cause, vvherfore els is the bringing in of them so daungerous? Is there any thing in them, against the Obedi∣ence and Fidelitie due to a Soueraigne? Is there any one blast in them against the Gouernment of vvomen? Do they moue the Cōmons to take vvea∣pons against the Nobilitie? Or doe they instruct the Nobilitie hovv to let the Commons of their liber∣tie? In one vvord to speake it, doe vve meddle vvith the proper maters of VVeastminster Ilaule, Par∣leament house or Cyuile Policie, and not only in∣treat of Articles proponed in Scholes, meete for Conuocations, and Generall to all Christendome? Take (for exāple) any one, vvhat so euer you vvil, of the Articles proponed by M. Ievvel. He denyeth: vve affirme. He contrarieth vs: vve againe resist him. Before any man encountred vvith hym, he Raigned in peace and vvas Magnified. It vvas thought, no man vvas euer hable to matche him, and therefore for very despair of any succour, ma∣ny submitted them selues vnto him. But novve, sense there haue ben found, vvhich haue met vvith him, it is perceaued that he had no certaine vi∣ctorye. And if it seemed so before, yet novve the battle beginning a freshe, there is sturred vp a clo∣ser attention in euery mannes minde, to marke hovv truely it is fought.
And in marking diligently, he is novve and then found to be iustly noted of Hypocrisy, Foly, Heresy, and other faultes, Novv they vvhich read not the Bokes can not marke so muche: Yet they also, of o∣thers that haue reader and considered, may lerne. It cummeth then at length to the knovvledge of many. And, the very nature of Truthe or disposi∣tions of men so geuing it, many are confirmed, ma∣ny are vvarned, many are troubled, euery one is moued. Some see it manifestly, M. Iewel is cō∣futed, other looke not so narovvly but say, I will better thinke of these matters, Other be lothe to chainge their opinion and are grieued to heare of ought sayed against him: So that somevvhat is vvrought, I think in euery man one vvay or other about these matters. This by likelihode then, is the Sedition, vvhich our Bokes are said to moue: They confirme some in the Truthe, that they be not lightly remoued from it: They direct other vnto the Truthe, that they pretend not lacke of Instruction: they confounde and confute other by the Truthe, that they may take lesse pride in their Chiualry: and they sturre vp a General attention, to marke on vvhose side the Truthe shall stand, and vvho shall most Faith∣fully behaue himselfe in the mater.
Are the Authors then of this maner of Sedition▪ to be punished? Or the bokes, by vvhich Lies, De∣ceiptes, and Heresies be detected, are they to be con∣demned? If Protestantes may be suffered, to vvryte as largely as they vvill, shall they be permitted allso to vvryte as falsely as they vvill? Or if no Priuilege, be it neuer so Speciall, doth license them to print any Slaunders or Lies yet if aftervvardes they be found out, and marked in theyr Bokes, may no man freely tell them of it, but he shall incurre the daunger of the Lavv, and further displeasure? Surely this case is very hard, to call first, into Question, those Truthes of vvhiche the Catholike Church vvoulde haue no doubt feared: And then, to graunt the Protestāt such fauour, that he might allvvaies denye and still driue the Catholike to proue, And further (as longe as the Catholike made a stay of yelding so much to his Ad∣uersary) to dravv that to an Argument of a vveake cause and a faint hart, and to incline to the nevve Gospellers side: And novv last of all, (vvhen the Catholikes ansvver them, and so ansvver, that they make the other, euery day more and more to be ta∣ken in their craft and heresy) novv, (I say) to forbid the Catholikes to Ansvver for themselues, Or to speake any more against such faultes as they finde, this surely is a case very strainge and hard: So hard vndoubtedly, that vvhat to ansvver vnto it vve can
not tell. For if our Aduersaries vvill haue the matter tri∣ed by Lerning, our Diuinitie (the end shall declare it) is much truer than theirs: but if they vvill novve defend themselues by force of Authoritye, One ex∣traordinary Argument made by a nevve and freshe Sercher, shall more dissvvade, then a vvhole shiplode of our Bokes can moue, vvhen the reading of them it taken avvay. But is it not possible, to finde fauoure in his sight, vvhich hath the Ordering of these matters commit∣ted vnto him? Yeas verely possible inoughe, if the Suer for it be notus Pontifici, and fauored of the Superintendents? Louanians then must holde their peace, but the Apology of England (I trovv) may be heard. VVhy: vvhat sayeth it? Mary, for men to be carelesse what is spokē by them and their owne mater &c. is the part doubtlesse of dis∣solute and Rechlesse persons,The Apo∣logy of England. and of them which wickedly winke at the Iniuries done vnto the name of God. Againe. Al Lawes and Natures owne voyce, doe commaund vs to defend our owne Cause and Innocencye. Againe. The Auncient Christians. &c. put vp Supplications, and made meanes to Em∣perours and Princes, that they might defend themselues and their felowes in open Audi∣ence.
Loe, hovv vvell the makers of that Apology could speake for themselues, and hovv vvell it serueth our purpose at this present? Yet the Oddes is exceding great. For the Catholikes hauing continued time out of minde, in a consent and certaintye of theyr Faith, might vvell take order, that no man at all should be suffered to speake againste those thinges vvhich vvere so generally receiued and alovved: but these men vvhich bring a nevv and vpstart Religion into the vvorld, neither commending it by Authori∣ty of any their Predecessours, nor concluding it by Reason, nor Confirming it by Miracle, hovv shoulde they forbid a man to consider and vevv their Opini∣ons, and require him first to build vpon them, before he see the sure ground of them? If therefore vnto them it be an vnlavvfull and vnnaturall matter, that it should be denied to any man to defend his ovvne cause, it seemeth that vve may vvel be suffered to make our Ansvvers vnto our Aduersaries: And it seemeth allso, that those maye Read our Ansvvers, vvhose losse and perill it vvil be, to be kept, by any meanes, avvay from the hearing of the cause examined. But perchaunse they vvil not be knovven vvhich made the Apologye: and cumming out vvithout a Priuilege, vvho can tell vvhether it be of anye Au∣thority? Especially D.Harding hauing ansvvered
it, and confounding the great boast and crakes set vpon it. VVhat say vve then to M. Ievvel himselfe? might not he be inreted, to speak in his best maner, for vs? Of the Readinesse of his good vvill, vve haue already a Testymonie. For vnto D. Cole alleaging a Re∣cognisance, vvhich so bound him in, that he vvas not at liberty to dispute and reason vvith him, I would wishe (sayeth he) the Quenes Maiesty would not onlye set you at libertie,Iew. in the second answer to D. Cole. but also com∣maund you to shew your groundes. Bysides this, he hath so required, so desired, so prouoked, so ernestly sued vnto the Catholikes, to haue their An∣svver vnto his Articles, that if it should novv stande vvith his good vvill and Conscience, yet it agreeth not vvith his honor and vvorthinesse, to see in hys life time such bokes, as to the vvryting of vvhich his prouoking, gaue a necessary occasion, to be so condē∣ned, that they shoulde neuer be examined or An∣svvered. To you therefore M. Ievvel I speake it, as in this case one of the Indifferent Readers. VVhy prouoke ye vs to vvryte? VVhy consent you to this policye of forbidding our bokes, that vve should not vvryte? VVhy suffer ye not the Trueth to haue her ful course? VVhy constraine you them by feare, vvhome ye shuld better persvvade by lerning? VVhy foresee you not
that except our bokes be suffered to be Readen, you shalbe iudged to be afraid, or ouercummed? VVhy Consider you not politikely, that except the Papistes doe keepe you occupied, you vvill fall to greater bat∣tels betvvene your selues, and vtterly desye one the other? You said in the Preface of your Reply: Blessed be the name of God that hathe offe∣red this Occasion. For I haue no doubt, but of this necessary conflicte, through his mer∣cy, there shall issue some sparkle to the Glo∣ry of his name. VVhy suffer you then the mater of Gods glory and your victory to be taken avvaye? VVhy pretend you, as though you vvere sure of vvin∣ning and glad of the Occasion, by vvhich your gospel, the more it is impugned and standeth, the more it is glorified, and yet heare of the prohibition of oure Bokes, and hast not to say against it? If you had not challenged the Catholikes, the case had bene more tolerable, but novv it can neuer stand vvith your or your Religions honesty, not to defende your selfe but by terrour. But (to returne againe vnto the Indifferēt Rea∣der) let our sayinges, if they come properly and di∣rectly from vs, be straitvvaies condemned: Let no Reason and Argument be good for vs, thoughe the very same in our Aduersaries case, must be admit∣ted vvho so euer say nay: And let M. Ievvel forget
his old Charitye, and vvishe novve, that vve might be constrained to holde our handes and tongues, vvhich vvished before, that vve should be constrai∣ned to vvryte and Speake: Let all these Iniuries be patiently suffered: Yet vvho can let vs to vvishe thee vvell, and tel thee of thy Soules daunger vvhen Heresy is flattering vvith thee: And note the very places vnto thee, in vvhich her lying Sprite is coue∣red, And be glad to haue thinges for thee in a Rea∣dinesse, if the vvinde should happely turne, to sende them in to thee? Novv if this be an vnnaturall or Seditious minde, haue me excused I pray thee, I ne∣uer thought it so, nor feared, it vvould so be taken. And I can not promise such Obedience, or vvarrant to my selfe such perfection, that if a Rebell and Ad∣uersary against God and his Church should openlye blaspheme and deceaue, I vvould not speake against him, and trouble his procedinges vvith my Obiecti∣ons. Yet, if, as many other mysteries, vnheard of be∣fore, be reueled in these daies, so it should likevvise novv be brought vnto light, that allthough a Theefe vvere espied to doe his feate in any house, no man for all that should cry out against him, for fear of trou∣bling them in the house, vvhich are at their bokes, at their meat, at their game, at their rest, or anye such like: then truely as vve might be so astonied at this strainge Reuelation, that for a time vve coulde
not speake, yet neuerthelesse (I trust) vve shoulde turne vnto God and pray. And so in like manner, vvhen that is perceaued and confessed that in no kinde of case, any more may be vvryten against M. Ievvel, then shal vve pray God, as he hath vvrought by our speaking, so that he vvill continue and vvork by our silence. And as the silence of the Catholikes vvhen they vvere excedingly prouoked to speake, did more harme perchaunse then al the other argumēts of the Heretikes, so the letting of the Catholikes to speake, vvhereas through the importunitie of the Aduersary, they haue bene moued therevnto shal by Gods Grace, more sensibly make others to consider vvhat Faith they haue forsaken, and vvhat opinions they folovv, then if our Bokes should freely come in and be Readen. Amen. Fare vvel, Reader, and be Indifferent. At Antvverpe the .10. of May.
REgiae Maiestatis Priui∣legio permissum est Ioanni Rastello Anglo, vt librum inscriptū, A Treatise intitled, BEWARE OF M. IEWEL, Typis mandare, ac impunè distrahere liceat. Datum Bruxellis. 8. Martij. Anno Domini. 1565. Subsig. De la Torre. Opus istud perlectum est & approbatum á Viris An∣glici Idiomatis & sacrae Theologiae peritissimis, qui∣bus tutô hac in re credendum esse iudico. Idcirco operaepretium fore censeo, vt imprimatur. Itá testor Cunerus Petri, Pastor S. Petri. Louanij. 7. Martij. 1565.
THE FIRST ARTICLE. THE question of the fyrste article, is: Whether anye priuate Masse were in the whole world, for the space of sixe hundred yeres after Christe. What call we priuate Masse? A priuate Masse? (say the Catholikes) is that, which is not solemne. And other byside this, of that name, they haue none. But what meane ye Heretikes by it? Mary, whereas the priest receiueth the Sacramente him self alone,Ie. pa. 4. that we call (sayth M. Iewel) priuate Masse, yea allthoughe the whole pa∣rishe be present. Ergo, this terme so ta∣ken, is not in the proper bokes & scholes of Catholikes, but is alltogether of the de∣uise of Protestantes. To what ende is the mouinge of this question aboute priuate Masse? Or what hath any Diuine to doe with it? The con∣clusion is, that if it can be proued, M. Iewell is content to yeld and subscribe. But what if it can not be proued? For∣soothe then is M. Iewel, I trowe, a true man of his worde. Is this all? And hath this great fighting, and writinge on bothe
sydes no further end, but to the commenda∣tion or dispraise of one man, and hym not so wonderfull? No truly, it is not for the ler∣ned or studiouse so to doe, suche specially as haue, or take charge of religion, but rather to direct all theyr oppositions and answers vnto that end, by whiche somewhat may be concluded, either duly, to the honor of God, or profitably, to the defense of the Church. Haue both sydes then, done so for theyr part? That now is to be considered. First concerninge the Catholike, he goeth direct∣ly to some purpose, and bringeth the ques∣tion vnto that state, in whiche the aduer∣sarie is so answered, that the Churche also is defended. The Protestant, he, at the be∣ginninge seemed also to meane playnlye, but nowe, he hath brought the question vnto suche pointes, as by whiche neither his aduersarie is any thinge hurted, nor the Churche, whiche he impugnethe, any thinge touched. By whiche it appeareth, the one to haue labored to some end, the other to haue cra∣ked to no purpose. As in example: D Harding conceyueth the matter thus:
If priuate Masse, in respect only of that it is priuate,Maior. after your meaning, be reproueable:Hard. 39 it is for ye single Com∣munion, that is to say, for yt the Priest receiueth the Sacrament alone, But the single Communion is law∣full,Minor. yea good and godly: Ergo the priuate Masse,Conclu. in this respecte, that it is priuate, is not re∣proueable. It followeth then, that Christes insti∣tution is not broken,The Ca∣tholike re¦soneth to some pur∣pose. when the Priest re∣ceiueth alone: And consequently, the Ca∣tholike Churche is not to be condemned, for allowing that manner of receiuyng. Thus hath D. Harding, and euery other Catholike, learned to referre his reasoning to some purpose, that others may be edifi∣fied by it. But nowe on the other side, what say you, M. Iewel, to the matter? what im∣porte you wyth all your preparaunce? Whome prouoke you? What cōclusion seke
ou? you aske a question of priuate Masse, whether any suche were, six hundred yeres after Christ. A straunge question vnto Ca∣tholikes, and therfore you muste expounde your meaning vnto vs. 1. I demaund (say you) of the open ChurchIe. p. 59 2. I demaund of Priestes. 3. I demaunde of the Masse. 4. I demaund of the right vse of the holy supper that ought to stand. 5. I demaund of the vsage that thē was ordinary. Fiue greate demaundes, and somewhat terrible vnto the vnskilful, as a visarde vnto a childe, that can not iudge what is within it. But marke,M. Iew els greate a doe a∣bout no∣thyng. good Reader, how litle he shal make of them. Let me grauut vnto you, M. Iewel, that I can not proue any priest, to haue SAIDE MASSE ORDINA∣RILY, in OPEN CHVRCH, and to haue receiued alone. What inferre you herevpon? Or how doth this further your procedings, or disproue the present doings of the Catholike Church? This sure is an idle question, which maketh so much a doe about that, which the contrary syde maye graunt without any preiudice to the cause. For concerning the first: Christes institu∣tion may be fulfilled in priuate houses.
The second: women, boyes, and lay mē, are christen soules, aud proue, that Christes iustitution is not broken, if they be allowed to receiue alone. As for the third: I answer, that your que∣stiō was not of Masse, but of priuate Masse. And if you wil make the question of Masse, tell vs of it, and you shallbe prouided for. To the fifth: that which may be but ouer done well, nedeth not many repetitions of the same, to proue that it is lawfull. Only now therfore, the fourth demaund doth remaine to be discussed, which is of the right vse of ye holy supper. To which our auswer is, that he vseth it rightlye, which receiueth it with faithe, hope, and charitye. But as for receiuing alone, or with compa∣nye, the Catholike Church acknowledgeth her selfe to be therin at liberty, to vse either the one, or the other manner. Vpon this question (whiche in deede is the proper of your firste article) if you dare openlye en∣counter with vs, then are you come to the same state of controuersy, to whiche all Ca∣tholikes haue brought it. Neither can you complain that he swarueth from that he hath taken in hand.Iew. 5. But if ye will not reason a∣bout sole receiuing, but stande vpon your
circumstancies and demanndes nothinge substantiall, then doe I answer, as I did before, that I can not proue priuate Masse after suche solemne maner as you require: that (I meane) it was ORDINARY, and in OPEN CHVRCHES: conten∣ting my selfe with this, that although by euident example, I find not, it was so, yet by moste necessary principles I can proue that it might haue bene so. And further reioysing in this, that although I do yelde in your demaundes vnto you (the fourthe only excepted, which only is worth the as∣king, and in which you be sufficientlye an∣swered) yet you may not loke, that the La∣dies of Israell with their Lutes and Timbrels will receiue you in triumphe, because with all your strokes hitherto, you haue hurted no body. Your questions therfore, M. Iewel, be∣ing altogether so vain and fruteles, yt they neither touch vs nor profite you, let vs re∣turne vnto D. Hardinges argument or re∣solution, to geue therby vnto the indiffe∣rent Reader,The true state of ye question a¦boute pri∣uate masse the true meaning of this first Article: and to put before him, ye Catholike beliefe of the Church in this matter. The state of the question, as Catholikes
haue conceiued it, is comprehended in this one foresaid argument: If priuate Masse,Maior. in respect only of that it is priuate, be reprouable, it is for the single Communion, But single Communion is not re∣proueable:Minor. Ergo priuate Masse, in this res∣pecte that it is priuate,Conclu. is not reproue∣able. This argument is good,The pro∣fe of the cōsequēce in this ar∣gument: and holdeth of that common rule: A destructione conse∣quentis, ad destructionem antecedētis. That is, to make it plaine, when we make a con∣ditionall or double proposicion, the deniall of the former parte, dothe well folowe vp∣on the deniall of the later. As in exam∣ple: If M. Iewel be a lawfull Bishop, (this is the former parte) he was duelye consecrated, (this is the later part. And bothe these ioyned together do make one Proposition.
Take away now the later part, and ye shall conclude the taking away of ye former, as: But M. Iewel was not duely conse∣crated: Ergo he is not a lawfull bishop. The argument therfore, whiche D. Har∣ding hath proponed, is of a verye good and right making. But what thinketh M. Iewel of it? He frameth it after his owne likinge,Here be∣ginneth M. Iew¦el to work his seate in alterīg thinges to his pur∣pose. and that, which the author himselfe would haue to be Hypothetical, he maketh it allto∣gether Cathegorical, in this sorte: The priuate Masse is single communion. Single communion is lawfull: Ergo priuate Masse is lawfull. Then dothe he not answer neither this argument, but by another which shallbe fo∣lish, & of his owne making, he would haue this to be iudged. As, The ministration of priuate Masse is a single communion, Single communion is lawfull for a woman: Ergo, the ministration of priuate Masse is lawfull for a woman. No no M. Iewel, you can not goe inui∣sible. We se well inough how you cast in the terme Ministration, to make a sport, or Ab∣surditie. Of whiche follie or sutteltie you wilbe tolde in due season. But concerning
D. Hardings argument, it is an hypothetical Syllogismus: and these which you make are altogether Cathegorical, so that they be of far other kinde and makinge. Whiche geaueth me to suspecte, that your wittes were not in their natural place in your hed, when you were so much occupied, (as your boke declareth) in consideration of Medius Terminus,Ie. pa. 9 Subiectum, and Praedicatum: least your reader mighte be deceiued by that ar∣gument of D. Hardinges, which had neither directe Medius terminus, nor Praedicatum, nor Subiectum, to be feared, as beinge not made in Mode and Figure, but concluded out of that rule or consequence, A destru∣ctione consequentis, &c. Of whych I haue spoken. The forme therefore of D. Hardinges ar∣gument being proued good, let vs consy∣der the matter and truthe of euery propo∣sition in it. The Maior is declared after this sorte. If priuate Masse be not reprouea∣ble,The pro∣fe of the maior in the fore∣said argu¦ment. in this respecte only, that it is pri∣uate and hath single Communion: thē doe you M. Iewel digresse from the
purpose,The pro∣fe of the Maior in the forsaid argumēt. and aske more, then one ques∣tion, at one tyme. But we could not suspecte, that you would iumble with vs so confusely. Ergo it is saied with good reason, that, if priuate Masse be reproueable, it is in this respecte only, that it is priuate and hath single com∣munion. The forme hereof is good a destructione consequentis &c. as aboue. The Maior I will declare. For if you will not be bound to rest vppon the terme and sense of priuate, but be at liberty to com∣prehend within your meaninge, all that is imported in the name of Masse, then may you require of vs, by vertu of this question to make answer vnto you, not only of sole receauinge, but of receuinge in both kinds, of the seruice in the latiue tonge, of the reall presence of Christe in the Sacrament, of the sacrifice, and many other matters bysides. Because all these are included within the compasse of these two wordes Priuate, and Masse. Now to the Minor.
But we could not suspecte that ye would so iumble with vs. For distinct articles being put forth by you, of Communion vnder both kindes, Ser∣uice in the vulgar tonge &c. Ye signifie ther∣by, that ye loke for a seuerall answer vnto eche of them, and that, within the question of priuate Masse, ye intended not to passe the boundes and sense of this worde Priuate, For of Consecration (we may be sure I trust) you moued no question, whether it be proper to the Priest, or whether the people may also doe it. Yet the Masse doth extend it selfe vnto consecration. If therefore, neither we are so suspitious as to feare it, neither you so folish as to say it, that in as∣king vs a questiō of priuate Masse, ye douted or demaunded, whether ye Priest alone doth consecrate and not the people, or, whether one Prieste alone may consecrate by hym selfe, without helpe or assemble of other Priestes, (if this one point which proper∣lye pertaineth to the Priestes office and the substance of a Masse) was not respec∣ted of you in the question of priuate Mas∣se: you muste needes confesse and yelde,
that you referred this first article of yours, to some one speciall and singular matter, and that ye extended it not, vnto all que∣stions that mighte be moued vppon the Masse. And that speciall thinge what it should be, besides sole receiuinge, it was not, nor could not be perceiued: Ergo it is saide with good reason, that if the priuate Masse be reproueable, it is for the single com∣munion. Yet knowing so much as we doe, if all were to begin againe, we woulde not vse these Ifs and discourses, to finde oute what you did meane by priuate Masse, but we would rather wil you, to procede againste vs in order, and not to couer manye Arti∣cles vnder pretence of one question, that in sifting from one to the other, ye myghte seeme to tarye still in one place, by kee∣ping the selfe same termes (priuate Masse) and yet euer skip from one poynte to ano∣ther, because ye prouide to be at your own proper choise, what one sense of manye, ye will haue to be conceiued by priuate Masse, and, at pleasure, to passe from any one sēse to the other. But who wold haue thought it, that they affected to make confusion, which promised to bring all truthe into or∣der
and syght? Or that they which preten∣ded to require good profes for Sole recey∣uing onlye, woulde afterwardes bynde the answerer to proue the sole receiuynge at MASSE,M. Iēw∣els large walkes in plain mat¦ter, & one direct ques¦tion. and then, the SAYING of Masse and after that, the saying of it in OPEN CHVRCH, and yet farther, the ORDI∣NARY saying & receiuing in open Church & (to be shorte) binde him to proue CON∣SECRATION, OBLATION, E∣LEVATION, ALTAR, VES∣MENT, or any other thing to the Masse be∣longing? By which words we may see how many questions M. Iewel would saye (for a nead) to be comprehended & ment of him in these. ij. words priuate Masse. D. Harding therfore which knew not so much, or could not suspecte so much (as, y• M. Iewel did at one time, and with one breathe, aske of so manye distinct matters in one plaine pro∣position, without geuing therof any war∣ninge) made that conditionall and Maior proposition, to that his argumēt, of whiche I haue spoken,The mi∣nor of D. Hardings argumē declared. which Maior being so rea∣sonable and allowable, I come now to the prouing of the Minor of ye same argument, which is this: Single communion is allowable.
Here, because M. Iewel is contente to be tried, by the examples of the sixe hundred yeres after Christe, and because this kinde of perswasion is most sensible, I wil bring two or three of them, for our purpose. The Byshopes of Rome,Eccl. His lib. 5. Ca. 24. Har. fo. 2. when any Catholike Byshopes came thither from other countries, vsed to send them the Sacrament to receaue: Ergo single Communion is allowable. What answereth M. Iewel vnto this? Or howe concludeth he (as it were) in D. Hardinges name? Ergo (forsooth saieth he) there was Masse, and addeth further:Iew. P. 41. This conclusion is far fet and hangeth losely.Behold, in another example. M. Iew. feate. For I might demaund whiche of the three saied Masse? He that sent the Sacrament, or he that receaued it, or els the messenger that brought it? It were a straunge matter to see a Masse and yet no man to say Masse. Lo how closely M. Iewel ke∣peth his wittes together. He is opposed with Single Communion, and he demaun∣deth of the Masse: the obiection goeth vpon the receauinge the Communion, and he as∣keth (without answer making) who saied the Masse. But to another example.
Tertullian dehorting his wife from mariyng to an Infidel after his death:Har. fo. 3. will not thy husband know (saieth he of the sacrament) what thou eatest se∣cretly before al other meates. &c. Ergo single Communion is alloweable. But M. Iewel taketh it not so. how thē?Iew. 46. The same feate aga∣ine folo∣wed. Mary. Ergo Tertullians wife saied priuate Masse. And herevpon then wil ryse a greate dout, whether a woman might say Masse, or no, or who helped her if she saied it. Yet sauing for M. Iewels pleasure, that neaded not, because D. Harding speaketh directly not, of saying Masse, but only of receauing the single Communion. Another example:Har. fo. 34. Serapion lyeng at the point of death,Eccl. Hi. lib. 6. Ca. 34. ye Priest whom he sent for, being sycke him selfe, sent the sacramēt vnto him and he receaued it and departed. Ergo single Communion is aloweable. I pray you M. Iewel, is not this spokē pla∣ine enough? no truly, not to such a wrāgler. For, as though it were to be marked in this story, not, how Serapiō receued ye sacramēt,
but only who brought it vnto him, so see∣keth M. Iewel for the bringer of it, and fin∣dinge that it was Serapions boy,All of like pretiesent and of like small ho∣nestie. to whom the priest deliuered it, he layeth hādes vpon him and concludeth: Ergo Serapions boy saied priuate Masse. Thus doth M. Iewel handle D. Harding through the whole first article, either like an hypocrite dissembling it, that we vnder∣stād by priuate Masse or single Communion, not the saying and celebratinge of Masse, or Communion, but that onlye act, of who soeuer it be, which receaueth the Commu∣nion alone: either like a dull or distracted person not perceauing it, that all the Argu∣mentes, Examples, and Authorities are, to that only end, referred. But he hath not so litle wit, as not to perceaue whereabout D. Harding went. For, in the answer to the 23. Diuision, wher D. Harding sheweth in what sense he taketh the question of priuate Masse:Iewel 56 he confesseth that D. Harding hath taken paines to proue Sole receauinge, and single Communion that was neuer denyed. And againe. Now he demaundeth whether I reproue the Masse, or the priuate Masse. What meaneth this, that priuate Masse and sole receauing be so sodenly growen in one?
See then, he confesseth that D. Hardinge doth vnderstand by Priuate Masse, sole re∣ceauing. And therfore he misliketh it, say∣inge, what Meaneth this &c. And then he laboreth to proue that it must not be his meaninge, and why? forsooth, because: Surely M. Harding well knoweth that the nature of the wordes is not one.Iew. 57. Neither who so euer receaueth alone, doth therefore of necessitie saie Priuate Masse. True it is, M. Iew. and therfore D. Har¦dinge knowing right well ye Priuate Masse, might diuersely be taken, & that you would make it to signify the SAYING of Priuat Masse, & he not so, but the Single Cōmuni∣on and Sole Receauing: therfore he warued you of it, that the question might be di∣stinctly handled. You therfore confessinge so much, that he went about to proue Sole Receauinge only and not to medle in this article wt the Masse, either you haue played the very hypocrites part, in pretendinge a talke to the purpose whiche in deede you knew to be otherwise: Either you haue shewed a shamefull and hatefull vilany, in burdeninge a man of good estimation and lerninge with so many, and folish conse∣quences as you attribute vnto hym. And
further you haue abused greate numbers of your Readers moste wickedly, in dra∣winge theyr soules after you into pervi∣tion, by makinge them beleue that you speake as you knowe, your knowledge being contrarie to your vtterance. For suppose that your meaninge, in the question were, as you saye, and that your demaund was, to be satisfied in all these pointes: Whether a Priest did SAIE MASSE, in OPEN CHVRCH, ORDINARILY, and receaue alone, in the sixe hundred yeares after Christe, and that, if any of these Circumstances were lefte vnproued, ye woulde not be bound to subscribe, suppose I saye, that this were true, yet seeinge your Aduer∣sarye folowed another sense, ye should haue consydered, if, not hym, yet your selfe, your lerned Counsell, your Secre∣tarye and Scribes, your Prynter, and Reader, and haue made a better answer with lesse coste and labor, declaringe in sewe wordes, howe Doctor Hardinge had mistaken you, and expoundinge in playne wordes, how your owne meaning should be concerned.
But nowe, whereas Doctor Hardinge folowed the right sense in deede of the ques∣tion, and your sense, M. Iewel, thereup∣pon, hath no end or purpose to whiche it serueth: why aske you so importunately for the Masse? why demaund you? IF here be a Masse, which of the two is it,Iew. 32. that sayeth this Masse? Is it the sicke man, or the Priest?. Why trifle you? That the question is moued not of anye other man or woman,33. but of the Masse,The some of M. Iewels answers in this first Ar∣ticle. and only of the Priest that saieth the Masse. Why lye you? M. Harding hath brought forth these Fa∣thers for his Masse. Why wrangle you?42 That for lacke of Priestes M. Harding al∣legeth Tertullians wife,44. Certaine women out of Cyprian, and Serapions boy, not the fittest persons that might haue bene found to saye Masse. Why pitie you hym of your pure cōpassion? Alas doeth M. Hardinge thinke it was the maner in old tymes,59. that laye people should saye Masse? Why describe you the matter so cunning∣ly, and saye?
M. Hardinge shall not finde here any Masse spoken of at all,76 neither bread nor wine, nor Consecration, nor Oblation, nor Eleuation, nor Altar, nor Vestiment, nor any thing to the Masse belonginge? And to be short, (D. Harding intendinge to speake not of the Masse, or sayinge of it, but only of sole receauing) Why triumph you & why crake you,91 that The Masse which we must neades beleue, is so Auncient, so vniuersal, so Catho∣like, so holy, so Gloriouse, cā not be foūd nei∣ther in Churches nor Chappels, nor in secret Oratories, nor in Priuate howses, in Towne or Citie, but must be sought out in some Pe∣tie parish in the coūtrie, and that by coniec∣ture only. To this effect then, cometh the first ar∣ticle. M. Iewel dalieth stil, yt D. Harding she weth not any Priuate Masse, that is (by his interpretatiō) where any Priest SAID masse, ORDINARILI, in OPEN CHVRCH and receaued alone: D. Harding proueth Priuate Masse, that is to say, single Com∣munion, or Sole receauing. Of M. Iewels mening, no purpose fo∣loweth. For whē it is graunted, for example that we are not able to proue against him (with
all those Circumstances) what is his cause the better for it? Of D. Hardinges con∣clusion this commoditie groweth, that sole receauing is allowable by the crample and Testimonies of the Primatiue Church. Ergo it standeth well with Christes in∣stitution. Frome hencefoorth therefore, let no Heretike crake of Christs institution, as though that could not admit Sole re∣ceauing. So shall the Church haue some peace, and the Catholikes be quieted in this sure truth, that Sole Receauing is not a∣gainst Christes institution. This ground now and verity standing, let M. Iewel (if he dare) come visiblie furth, and shew an open face and intent, without all dubling. And then shall it be playnly perceaued, whether he must yelde and subscribe or no. Here for example are six questions. Whether a sicke mā hauing no penance to fulfill, may receaue alone at his departing. Whether a sicke man whiche is not yet reconciled, but tarieth in his penance, may receaue alone at the point of his death. Whether a sicke man being not in daun∣ger of death may receaue alone. Whether a man in good health and good
lyfe may receaue alone. Whether a Priest not celebrating, may receaue alone. Whether a Priest at Masse, may receaue alone. Betwixt these sixe, eche of them towar∣des an other, there is some difference, and therefore they make two seueral questions. The truth which is confessed on both sides, is: That Christes institution doth stand with Sole Receauing in generall. For he which is put from the Com∣munion, and lyeth at the pointe of death maye receaue alone, euen by Master Ie∣wels confession: which yet is impossible to be true, if Sole Receauing were abso∣lutely againste Christes Institution. Therefore, in what other speciall kinde of Sole Receauing his Institution is vio∣lated, therein muste, of right, be the ques∣tion. And therein let M. Iewel ioyne, (if he thinke hym selfe able) with the Ca∣tholike. As, whether a sicke man beinge not put from the Communion for some faulte of
his, maye at the pointe of death receaue alone or no, and so furth, in any of the six foresayed questions. Now when it shall be put furth in one speciall case, if he shall then fetche his vagaries about, and run ouer his Com∣mon Places, That Christes Institution is to be obserued, That the Primitiue Church had a Communion, and proue it by sundrie wais, Out of holy Fathers, Out of M. Har∣dinges owne Doctors (as he will terme them) and Out of the very Masse boke it selfe. &c Let it be vnderstanded, that if he speake so in generall, and applieth it not to the speciall case proponed, he falleth within daunger of his owne sentence. Vanitas vanitatum.Iew. 16. And, that it is a greate token of idlenesse, to bee earnest and copious in prouynge that thinge, that no man de∣nieth. Againe, It is a lewed kinde of Logike, stoutely to proue that thinge, that needeth no profe, & to leaue the thing that should be proued. On the other syde, if he wyll deale sincerelye and vprightely in deede, and, leaue to vse suche feares as he hath in this
his first Replie practised, then shal it quick∣ly be perceiued, that either he must yeld and subscribe, or els craue a licence to be loosed frome y• bond, into which he cast hym selfe, through his own hastines, in his Challēge. The second Article. (⁂) IN this second Article, the question is,96 whether there was then (vnder∣stād six hundred yeres after Christ) any Cōmunion ministred vnto ye people vnder one kynd. Is this al? It seemeth to be al, because in the vttering of the Challenge, there is no other forme of wordes concerning this question. Yet least perchance we shall be handeled here, as we haue bene in the first Article, let vs aske M. Iewel what he in∣tendeth and what he demaundeth in this question. Syr, and please you, what if we proue vnto you, that some haue receaued the Sa∣crement vnder one kind at home in theyr
owne houses as Serapion did:Ecc. hict. lib. 6.  34. is not the question concluded against you? No saieth M. Iewel. The question is of the vsage and order of the CHVRCH.Iew.  The firste shift of M. Iew. M. Hardinges answer is of Serapions death bed, as though there had bene no CHVRCH yet erected in those daies. Yes verely there were, but as we maye say with S. Hierome:In Apdlogia ad∣uersus Iouin Christ is not one at home in the house, an other in the Church, and that which is not contrary to Christes institution and commaundement, maye be done without the Church, of building which, he gaue no commaundement. But let vs go further. If I may proue vnto you, that some certaine persons as sicke men and faintye, haue receiued vnder one kind: shall that stand vs in any stead against you? No say∣eth M. Iewel.Iew. 13. The se∣cond shift. This is the only thing that I denied, that ye are notable to bring anye one sufficient example, or authority, that e∣uer the WHOLE PEOPLE receiued the Communion in open Church vnder one kinde. Surely you be an hard man to deale withall, which will measure your witnesses by quantity, and not by quality, and sike there, for a number, where a fewe
and honest examples were to be credi∣ted. Well, I will not yet leaue you so. What if I can proue that receiuing vnder one kind, was to be found in close Chappels and Oratories, in Wildernesse and Canes, whyther contempt of the world, or auoy∣dinge of persecution draue the Christians: go we not directly vnto the question, and bring you into necessity of subscribing and yelding? No sayeth Maister Iewel a∣gaine. The question that standeth betwene vs,The third Shifte. Iew. 96. is moued thus, WHETHER THE HO¦LY COMMVNION. &c. were euer ministred OPENLY in the Church. Yet he lieth, for neither OPENLYE, nei∣ther CHVRCHE is specifyed in the question. How say ye to infantes, if I proue that they in old time receiued in one kind, O∣PENLY,The urth Shifte. and in the CHVRCH, doth not this make against you? No sayeth Maister Iewel. Maister Harding maketh his whole plea vpon an infant, and yet of in∣fantes as he knoweth I spake nothing. No more did ye of OPEN CHVRCH,Iew. 139.
WHOLE PEOPLE, LAY MEN, Priestes or others: But ye made an vni∣uersal and indefinite negatiue proposition, which is by all reason sufficiently reproued, if but in one particular, the contrarye be proued. But let vs consider the compasse of your inuentiou a litle further. What if we proue that the two Disciples whom Christ ouer∣toke in the way to Emaus, receiued the Sa∣crament vnder one kind? Or that S. Am∣brose and S. Basile receiued likewise vn∣der one? is not all this plaine contrary to your assertions? No sayeth M. Iewel. For the question is moued of LAY PEO¦PLE.Iew. 12. The fifth Shifte. M. Harding bringeth examples of Christ and two disciples, who were of the number of Seuenty and two, and therfore it maye well be thought they were ministers and not of the lay sort. And againe: I demaunde of the lavitie, he aunswe∣reth of Sainct Ambrose and Sainct Basile whiche were Bishoppes. In dede M. Iewel you muste pardon him, for hee thoughte that a good argu∣mente for Communion vnder one kinde
might haue ben taken of Christ & his two disciples, or of S. Ambrose, or S. Basils authority alone. But seing you haue now so conueighed the matter, that all that will not serue, where might a man finde exam∣ples to please you? If it were by one example to be shewed that the laitye and WHOLE PEOPLE receiued O∣PENLY vnder one kinde, and in the CHVRCH, would this satisfie you? No not this. For the thing denied by M. Ie∣wel,The sixth shifte. Iew. 14 is this. That the Sacrament was euer ministred vnto the people in one kind open∣ly in any congregation, or in the OPEN ORDER and vsage of any CHVRCH And againe: It will not folowe that this was the COMMON ORDER of the Church.Iew. 133. By which wordes OR∣DER, and VSAGE, we see one or two euidences would not be taken, because so few proue not an VSAGE. How now then? When will this felow leaue his flying backe? You should (M. Iewel) come nearer and nearer, or stay at the least in some Conclusion. But ye adde still more and more to the question, and seeke to come out of the straits, into which through folish hardinesse you are cast by
your owne glorious Sermon. Surely ye be gone a great way, from those plaine and few wordes, which, this question of Communion vnder both kindes, had at the beginning. Yet will I folowe you, if perchaunce I may see some end. Therfore if I were able to proue, that the WHOLE PEOPLE (withoute mentioning of Bishops, Priestes, or In∣fants) did receiue vnder one kind OPEN¦LY, in any CONGREGATION, or in the OPEN ORDER and VSAGE of any Church: Then I trust, you would geue ouer all contention. No, you will neuer leaue till you haue brought it to an endlesse controuersye. The Negatiue of our side, (say you) which so much troubleth him is this.Iew. 14 Che. vij. shift. That for the space of six hun∣dred yeares after Christ, it can not be found in any old Doctor or Councell, that euer the holy Communion was ministred to the peo∣ple, in the Church, or in any open assemble, in one kinde only, AS IT IS NOWE MINISRED IN THE CHVRCH OF ROME. You be safe M. Iewel, I warrant you, you be safe. All the Catho∣likes in the whole world, are not able to take you. For what ecceptions
will not you make, and what Extensi∣ons will not you deuise, vnder pretense of these wordes: AS IT IS NOW MI∣NISTRED IN THE CHVRCH OF ROME. Come who will, let him bring what he can: If from the Priestes crowne downe to his foote: And from Confite or to lte Missa est, he proue not the like to haue bene vsed then, as is nowe: in Amice, Albe, Stole, Girdle, Praying, Bles∣sing, Eleuating, Breaking, Communica∣ting and distributing. &c. who shall let M. Iewel to say, that he demaunded of such order of ministring, as is now in the Church of Rome? For as well he may in this matter of Receiuing vnder both kin∣des, make question of the Priestes vest∣iuentes, and of his soft speaking: as in the question of Priuate Masse, which concer∣neth nothinge else but Sole Receiuinge, draw the state of it vnto saying of Masse, and therevpon shewe many feates of his Cheualry. And when shall he then come to the poynt of the controuersye, whiche hath chosen such compasses to wander a∣bout in? Therefore M. Iewel if you hold your selfe here, you be safe enough I war∣rant you.
But are ye not ashamed so to trifle, and to fight for nothing with suche con∣tention? We can not proue against you so formallye and demonstratiuelye as you require, neither can we answer your chal∣lenge as nowe you haue expressed it. But what then? Where is the profit of your victorye? What spoiles bring ye to your companye? This is your fault Maister Iewell,The vain contention of M. Iewel. as in the former Article, so now againe in this, that you make a mightie shew, and are not hable to fasten one blowe, you laboure with hande and tounge, as thoughe you woulde conquere some, and free passage beinge graunted you, ye can take nothinge away from vs. For let not the receauing vnder both kindes be foūd in, OPEN CHVRCH, and, VSAGE OF THE CHVRCH, and, in the WHOLE PEOPLE, And, AS IT IS NOWE MI∣NISTRED IN THE CHVR∣CHE OF ROME: Yet for so muche as by Christe and his two Disciples, by Saincte Ambrose, Scrapion and o∣thers, we proue that it is not contrarie to
his Institution, we confound your lying tonge, which speaketh so lowdely and ear∣nestly thereof, as though the Catholike Church did not kepe it, because the Laietie now, receaueth vnder one kynd in moste. places. If it be true (as your selfe confesse either voluntariely or constrained by the Catho∣likes) that Receauing vnder one kind, hath Examples for it in the Primitiue Churche,The Ca∣tholike hathe his purpose. and those yeres which you were content to be tried by, then is it aloweable. And then surely, it is not against Christes In∣stitution. And then, doth the vse of the Church now, stand with Christes Institu∣tion: and then shuld not you so shamefully abuse your Aduersarie,Iew. 119 with how can M. Harding warrant the manifeste breach, of Christes INSTITVTION?343 Againe: The causes that moueth the Church of Rome to break Christes INSTITVTION are not great.150 Againe: M. Harding, thus maintai¦ning the open abuse of the holy mysteries offendeth against Christes INSTITV∣TION.9 Again: what? troweth he there is no difference betwene obeing Gods COM¦MAVNDEMENT, and breaking gods COMMAVNDEMENT? Againe:
With what indifferent iudgement then can M. Harding thus compare these thinges together,116 an INSTITVTION with no IN∣STITVTION? Againe,114 the best stay that these mē cā lay hold vpō, is to deny Chri∣stes INSTITVTION. Again,110 M. Harding thinketh that the people may safely breake Christes INSTITVTION &c: As though either he, or any other Catholik wēt about it. But if it be so in deede, and if you will abyde by it, that Christes Institution is broken, when any receaueth vnder one kinde alone: goe not then from that state of the question. and before this be tried, troble not vs, and others with matters imper∣tinent. Wherefore did you mone this question, whether within six hundred yeares after Christ, any Communion was ministred vnto the people vnder one kind; did ye it not to this end, that you might conclude there vpon, (if no man woulde aunswer you) that Christes Institution is now broken of the Catholikes, which minister otherwise then they did in the Primitiue Churche? Ergo, the marke which you loke vnto, is Christes Institution: which to proue to be with vs, or against vs, we therefore consi∣der the doinges of the Primitiue Church.
And because exāples are foūd enē in ye age, & such records, as your self dare not yet deny, by which we know, ye receauing vnder one kind was many times vsed: we cōclude in ye principal, yt it is not against Christes Insti∣tution to receaue vnder one kinde. Do you deni ye cōsequēt? How cā you, which haue so appeled to the primitiue Church, as though you wold be cōtēt & quiet, if good testimo∣nies of that time could be alleged againste you? What say ye thē to ye Antecedēt? ye cō∣fesse it in plain words ye some receaued then vnder one kind,Iew. 132. saying: Neither did I deny that euer any one mā receued the Cōmuniō in one kind. But yet (you reply) it was an abuse. I here you wel. But that is another question.The. viij. shift. And it is another shift also, much fouler thē any of the fornamed. Remember your self M. Iewel, I pray you, and let vs conclude our matters in order. The first question should haue bene▪ VVhether Christes Institution doth stand with receauing vnder one kinde. The first wt you, but the second rather wt vs, is: whether any Communion was then ministred vnto the people vnder one kinde. We proue, & you cōfesse y• some hath hen mi∣nistred. Ergo it is time ye yeld & subscribe.
A iij. question now, & if you wil, shal be: whether it were an abuse in ye primi tiue Church to receue vnder one kind. And so furth in many other, according to the circumstancies of Persons, time, and places. But before we come to thē, do you in the meane time as you promised: for we haue proued yt which you denied.Either yelde or take bet∣ter hold fast, and be∣gin again. If you striue, & say ye mēt yt it was not OPENLY receiued vnder both kinds, & ORDINARI¦ly: Thā what a trifer or wrāgler be you, to chalēge vs about circūstāces, before we wer agreed vpō ye substāce of ye mater. yet if you wil nedes haue OPENLY wt his felowes put in, thē begin again, & speak more plain¦ly. for as ye haue proponed ye mater, ye ace ouercōme. And yet before ye begin wt those cirūstāces, I warn you, it wil be to no pur¦pose, because our selues may confesse vnto you, yt we cā not gaine say it: & you shal cō∣clude nothing against vs, by it. For ye chur∣ches cause is sufficiētly defēded, if receiuing vnder one kind may be proued, by any aūci¦ēt exāple, wtout any exception made by you. Thus it may be againe sene, how M. Iew. speaketh, in all this second Article, to no purpose, if he make the question so circum∣stantiall, as he hath labored to haue it.
On the other syde, the Catholike cause is sufficientlye defended, both by our owne witnesses, and by confession of our Aduer∣saries, because it is proued sundry wayes, that receauing vnder one kind was kno∣wen and vsed in the Primitiue Churche, and therefore vndoubtedly it is not repug∣nant to Christes Institution. The third Article. (⁂) COncerning this question of the Com∣mon Prayers, whether in the sixe hundred yeres after Christ, they wert in a strange tonge which the People did not vnderstand: what can any Catho∣lik of these partes of the world say more, then that they were in the Greeke tounge or Latine tounge only? For whereas nei∣ther Authoritye of Scripture cōmaundeth it, neither veritie of Tradition confirmeth it, neither report of Historie witnesseth it, neither yet any Token or Memorie sig∣nifieth it, that the Publike Seruice of the Churche Easte or Weaste, was within the compasse of the first six hundred yeres, in
any other tounge then Greeke or Latine: what lightnesse muste it be, to forsake the orders which we haue, and take others, I can not tell what?1. Cor. 14. The Apostle maketh an expresse dis∣tinction betwene the Idiote and him that supplieth the place.It is no wisedome to chaūge that We haue, for an other thing, no mā is sure What. Of the Idiote (concer∣ning the Common Prayers) he geueth no precept, of the other he sayeth, how shall he, that supplieth the place of the Iiote, answer Amen, vpon thy blessing? Now by Tradi∣tion, we haue receaued no other, but Latine or Greeke Seruice. Of the change of the vulgar toūge, into any of these two, Greek or Latin, or of setting vp of these, in stede of the knowen and vulgar tounge, there is no mention in any writer. And laste of al, ther can be shewed no token or sufficient si∣militude, that the Seruice of old tyme, was in the vulgar tounge. Ergo how should a reasonable man condemne that whiche hym selfe seeth so generally vsed, and fo∣lowe another vnknowē manner, to which he is vncertainely referred? S. Augustine saieth it but of Ceremo∣nies,August. ad Ia∣nuar. ep. 118. that, If the whole Church throughout the world, doe obserue any thing: to dispute thereof it is a point of most insolent madnes.
And if it be so in ceremonies, is it not much more so in publike Seruice? For in Cere∣monies (because of indifferencie of thē in them selues, and infirmity of some persōs, which be ouer curiouse against them) ma∣nie poyntes might be reasoned vpon, and (If manifest neede require) be omitted. Yet, If the whole Church vse them, there ought to be no question. But in publike Seruice, which perteyneth to the state of the Church, and in which, the mouing of any dout causeth the whole Religion to be shaken: how is it to be suffered, that she should be apposed? Or that any Priuate persons without reason or authority, shuld cal that into question, which is generally receaued? The Heretikes of this age say, that the Latine Seruice (for example) in all the West Churche, hathe not come frome the six hundred yeres after Christe. Frome whence came it then? Who were the plan∣ters of it? Who were the mainteyners? If they did it wt consent of al the Weast Coū∣tries, that is a great preiudice against your contentionsnesse.How un∣likely. If they did it by force or violence, would no man complaine of it presently? Or put it in writing, for instruc∣tion
of the posteritie? Surely, this can not be but a great wonder, yt the Cōmon Ser∣uice of the West Church, was not general∣ly in Latine euery where at y• begynning: And, that so many thousand Churches, in so many seuerall and diuerse Countries thereof, should altogether, most faithfully, hold and kepe the same: And no man yet tell, of what begynning. But what should a Catholike be trobled in his mind or geue eare to Peekers of quarells? If the iust and quiet Possessours of Aun∣cient and good Landes, should be made to bring foorth Euidencies, and, either an∣swer to all demaundes whiche it pleaseth the Aduersarie to moue, or ells to be quyte and cleane thrust out of all, without any further iudgmēt: would it not be accomp∣ted so vnreasonable and iniuriouse, that no wise man or honest man, could alowe it or suffer it? What cause then is there, why the troblers of quyet possessouts in Religion, should be praysed and houore, as ghostly Sruyers (I trow) of all Christendome? How hold you this, quod he? Mary, what is that to thee? Thou seest I hold it. Yea but how came you by it? Firste who gaue you the authority to aske me that question?
Then spare not,Enchro∣ching and busy here∣tikes. but lay it to my charge, if thou hast any euidence against me. It was not so in the Primitiue Church. Yes forsooth was it. Bring me then (sayeth he) any sufficient authority of Doctor or Councell. Folish felow, wilt thou put me to my proofes, which am in possessyon, and haue long dwelt here, as it can not be denied, thy self being not able to shew from whence I had it, except it were of the first Lordes and Patrones? What right I haue, the same I haue receiued. And those that deliuered it to me, toke it of others before them. And they againe, receiued it of their forefathers. Neither canst yu proue any chaunge of Titles to haue come in be∣twene, from the first Apostles & Fathers, to their children which now do liue. Is it not therfore a sufficient defence to vs, that thou canst not deny, but the West Church doth vse, and hath (for hundred of yeres to∣gether) spokē Latiu generally in her Ser∣uice, and art not able to shew, where she e∣uer vsed English, Dutch, French, or Spa∣nish? Thy silence in this question doth answer for vs. And it should be a demon∣stration to all reasonable men, that vn∣doubtedly the publike Seruice here in the
Weast was in Latin from the beginning,Trafitiō for the because, no other beginning therof can be shewed, nor the ceasing of those vulgare Tongues, which (as M. Iewel getteth) were once vsed, can any where be found, or espied. Thus much should and would be said, if the right way might be alowed. But now, present possession maketh no∣thing. And therfore is D. Harding con∣strained, to folow ye pleasure of y• Extorcio∣tier, & to proue, that to be ours of auncient ryght: ye long possession wherof without any disturbāce, cōcludeth it to be our right. Wherein though he hath done very well, yet he bringeth nothing, but M. Iewel tur¦neth it to a gesse, a likelihode, a coniecture. Which phrases are so common wyth him, through all this Article, as though he would admit no Authority or Argument, but such as is taken out of the Scriptures, or such as should be so euident and in∣uincible, that he could haue no power to answer them. His Phrases are these: M.Harding is not able to proue this with all his gesses.Iewel. Againe:160 The Minor he war∣ranteth but by a gesse only.166 Againe: Re∣ply is made and that by gesses and likelihods.180 Againe: This gesse standeth vppon two
poyntes. And so in other places moe. For this cause, that it may be perceiued, whether he allso vseth not Gheasses, & that he may learn in time, to be good to others, when he is fauorable to him selfe: before I speake of D. Hardinges reason, let vs a while hold our peace, and put M. Iewel to answering. Tel vs, I pray you, Sir, for truths sake, you which are so well seene in Antiquities, and can appose, and presse others so ernest∣ly with obscure questions about the Pri∣mitiue Church: Is it not reason that you geue better instructions, which finde fault with the Catholikes opinions? And i the iudgment and answere of the whole Church that now is, can not satisfye you: should you, with any conscience, require your opinion to be receiued, except ye bring Demonstrations for it? Tell vs therfore I beseeche you, with∣out Gesses, Coniectures, and Like lihodes, (which you can not away withall,) was the publike Seruice of the Churche, within the six hundred yeares after Christ,Harding Pol. 74. in the Syriacal, or Arabike, in the AEgiptian, AEthiopian, Persian,
Armeniā, Scythiā, Frēch, or Britain tounge? Here you may answer vnto vs: This is no indifferent dealing.Iew. 165 And again: Sodainly he altereth the whole state of the cause, and shifteth his handes and requireth me to shew. But, that it may appeare you deale plainly, and seeke nothing but truthe: Answer I pray you throughly and direct∣ly. In one example or two, you are con∣tent, but why not in examples for all? For the Syriacal tounge you speake the moste, but why bring you not somewhat for eche of the other? You will refer the rest to an other place (vnto which straighte waits we will folowe you) but presently thus you say. At Paulaes funerall, all the multitude of the Citye of Palestine met together.Hierony mus in Epita∣phio Pan  The Psalmes were songe in order, in Hebrewe, Greeke, Latine, and Syrian tonge. Well, here in dede is mention of the Sy∣rian Tounge, and of Psalmes song in it. But how proue you, these Psalmes to in∣fer the Cōmon Seruice in the same tounge: For, by Psalmes, I vnderstand Hymnes, Songes, and Praises, made to the houor of God, and memorie of S. Paula. For Theodoretus reporteth (as you beare meLib. 4. cap. 10.
witnesse) that Ephrem made Hymnes and Psalmes in the Syrian tounge, And that the same were songe at the solemne Feastes of Martyrs.Lib. 4. ca. 29. Iew. 157 All Psalmes therefore, were not the Psalmes of Dauid (for Ephrem made new of his owne) and the synginge of Psalmes at Paulaes funerall,Here be∣ginneth M. Iew. with his sses. proue not, but by Gheasse, that they were part of the Common Seruice. And therefore, though ye haue brought foorth a place where men∣tion is made of Psalmes in the Syrian tounge: yet doe ye not satisfie our demaūd and expectation, whiche aske of Publike Seruice, and looke to be, playnly and eui∣dently answered. Ye adde vnto this, a testimonie out of S. Augustine, where he willeth the pries∣tes to correct the errors of theyr Latine speache: That the people vnto the thinge they playnly vnderstand, may say Amen. And what of this?Iew. 156 This (say you) of S.Augus∣tine, seemeth to be spoken generally of all Tounges. To whome seemeth it? To your self (I thinke) and your cumpanie only.An other gesse of M. Iew. And if to any other besyde, it should likewise seeme so, yet Seeming hangeth but vpon Gheas∣ses and lykelihoodes. And therefore is, nei∣ther
to be vsed of you, which are to resolute to allege them: neither to be named a∣gainst vs, which seeke now after your Eui∣dences and perfect Instructions, and must not be serued with Lykelihoodes. But ye refer vs to another place. To that place then will we come, and repete our question again. VVhether your side is able to shew, that the publik Seruice of the Church in any nation was (in the Syriacall, or Arabike, or AEgyptiā, AEthiopiā, Persian, Armenian, Scythian, Frēch, Britaine tounge, or) in any other then in Greeke and Latine. Here you may againe finde fault as you did before and say:Iew. 15▪ He altereth cunningly the whole case, and willeth me to shew. But we shall desire you againe, to be cōtent and yelde to our request: If there be such good∣nesse and pregnancie of your cause, as you speake of, and specially if ye speake for the better contentation of the Good Christian Reader. But remember that ye must exi∣dently answer vs without Gheasses, and
Likelihodes. Go to then, wher begin you? Eckius sayeth,Iew. 175 the Indians had their Ser∣uice in the Indian tounge. Durandus saith, the Iewes that were Christened had their Seruice in the Hebrewe tounge. Call ye this, A contentation of a good Christian Readers mind, to proue vnto hym a Conclusion, by those mennes sayinges, whome, by your example, the better and perfiter Christian he is, the lesse he must ac∣cept for witnesses? What tel ye vs now, of Eckius and Durandus, whom you make vs not to passe vpon?More we¦ke (after M. Iew. mind) thē  This kind of resoning of there authority, whome you would haue vs thinke to be of no Authoritye, is more weake & vncertain, then if ye should aime onlye and gesse at the matter, whiche we loke to be fully quieted in, by your muche reading and learning. Eckius also sayeth no more,Eckius in Locis commu∣nibus. but it was permitted. And he spe∣keth of that which was done a this side the six hundred yeres, to the which only, your answer should be referred. And Durādus maketh no mention of Iewes, as though the celebration of the mysteries, had ben for their sakes done in Hebrew, but of the be∣ginnings of the primitiue Church, in which not only Iewes but Gentiles also in great
number came to the faith of Christ, he saieth generally: In the primitiue Churche,Lib. 4. cap. 1. the Diuine Mysteries were celebrated in the Hebrew tounge. Of which we may iustly gather, that euery Christian vnderstode not the Seruice, because more then Iewes were then Christened, and the Hebrewe tounge was not vulgar to any, sauing Ie∣wes. So that the tongue which they vsed in the Diuine mysteries, was straunge and vnknowen vnto many, which from Paga∣nisee were conuerted to Christ. But Nycolaus de Lyra,Iew. 17 An other gheasse of M. Iew. and Thomas of A∣quine say (authors whome you thinke wor∣thy of small credit) the Common Seruice, in the Primitiue Church, was in the Common vulgar tongue. This is true, though it were but in the Greeke or Latin tounge only. And so doth it not answer our question throughly. But what if D. Harding him selfe haue in plaine wordes confessed,Iew. 17. that Common prai∣ers were pronoūced in the primitiue Church in a Common tounge knowen to the people? But when he shall answer you, that he taketh not Common praite and Common Sernice both for one thing, (whih with∣out what if I am sure he will doe) what is that, to the question which we put forth▪
Or how haue ye answered, to the Conten∣tation of your good Christian reader? Thus then, all this hytherto is litle or nothinge worth. And we loke for strōger argumen∣tes at your learned handes. And therefore perchaunce you say: Yet Good Christian Reader for thy bet∣ter satiffaction,Iew. 176 it may please thee to knowe, that in the Primitiue Church,Far from the questi¦on. the Common Seruice was not ministred, by one man a∣lone, but by the Priest and whole Congre∣gation, alltogether. But was it in any other tounge, then Greeke or Latine? This is demaunded, to this you haue to answer. And remember here your bluid Senator,Iew. 327 which talked and pointed to the higher end of ye table, ye Mul∣let which he so much praised, being far be∣neth, at the lower end. Clemens Alexandrinus sayeth, In the Common Prayers they haue all,Iew. 176 An gother esse of M. Iew. as it were, one voice and one mynd. So may they, though it be out of publike Seruice. Also where he talketh of Prayers indefinitely, you adde the word (Common) vnto them,falthode. leaste it should be any thinge doubtfull. What call you that, a Gheasse, or a Ieaste?
S. Chrysostome sayeth,Iew. 176 An other Gheasse of M. Iew. not only the Priest geaueth thankes, but also all the People. That is, because he is a publike Mini∣ster, to whose prayers all the people must ioyne their consentes, so that they are not excused if they thinke of other matters when ye priest prayeth, but are bound to ap¦plie their deuotions to his, as in whom they all do serue God. But what is this to the vulgare Tongue in Publike Seruice? Isydorus writeth thus:Iew. 176 Moe Gheasses. when they singe they must singe all togeher, when they pray, they must pray all together. He speaketh of the Clergie only, that ye neede not extend it to the laye people. And therfore, if you haue no better then this, we may well put you to other proofes. Which are not far of. For,Iew. 176 Moe Gheasses. out of y• old father Origen, you tell vs: That al seueral nations, pray vnto god and praise him in their mother tongue. This may be done in Prinat prayers, And our request is, to haue sure argumen∣tes for Publike Seruice. Out of S, Ambrose, There were Iewes (say you) which in their Sermons and Obla∣tions,Iew. 176 Moe Gheasses. vsed sometime the Syrian tongue and
some tymes the Hebrew. This perteineth then to Sermons and Offeringes, not to Common prayers. And it was, you may perceaue, no appointed and sett order of Common seruice, in which they changed their tongues so, at their plea¦sures. Out of S. Basil, ye tell vs, of Such, as offered vp to the lord the Psalme of Confes∣sion.Iew. 176. And againe, ye number out of him, Egyptians, and bothe the Countries of Ly¦bia, and the Thebanes,Moe Gheasses. Palestines, Arabi∣ns, Phenicians, Syrians, and the borde∣rers of Euphrates, and generally all, that haue VVatchinges,177. and Prayers, and Com∣mon Psalmodie in estimation. But to what purpose name ye, al these diuerse countries. To make that cleere, which we doubted of? and to proue, y• the publike Seruice was, at those dayes, in so many tongues? By what reason or argu∣ment? because al these, had common Psal∣modie in estimation? And who, emonge vs, estemeth in not? Take you rather heede to this, of whose Psalmodie it may be doubted, which haue so litle Prayinge,
and no watching. But what meane you here, by Common Psalmodie? Thinke you that al these countries so seuerall, mett in one Place, and songe Psalmes together? that is incredible. How then? wil you gather this sense of it, that the same Psal∣mes were reade and songe euery where? Tell vs then in what tongue they were vsed? And consider, whether one tongue, (as the Greeke for example) might not haue serued to that purpose? For in the weast now, we know the selfe same Psal∣mes, yea and text also, euery where to be vsed.Basil. in epist. ad Cler. Ne∣ocae. But was not this S. Basiles meaninge, that the manner of Watchinge, Prayinge, and singinge Psalmes, should not seeme strannge and newly inuented, because it is allowed & practised in so ma∣ny and seuerall countries? yes verely this only is his meaninge. for, certaine hereti∣kes there were then, which stirred vp the myndes and stomakes of the Clergie of Neocaesaria, perswadinge them, that the old manner and Custome of synging Psalmes was changed, and saying: At non erant haec tempore Gregorii Ma∣gni. But theese thinges were not in
Gregorie the Great his dayes. Vnto whom S. Basil answereth, that ye maner of psalmodie which he vseth, is not his parti∣cular, but common to him and Egiptians, and both Contries of Lybia, and the The∣banes etc. But where finde you here (M. Iew.) that these psalmes were in the pecu∣liar tongue, of euerie of these countries, or that they were of the publike Seruice? S. Basile speaketh no further, but concerning the order of vsinge them, and you make him to beare you witnesse, in what tongue those psalmes were vttered. Out of S. Hierome you proue to vs,Iew. 177 An other Gheasse of M. Ie∣wels. That the voices and letters of all nations, do sound out Christ his passion and Resurrection. As who shoud say, that, in Kynge Hen∣ry the seauenths tyme, the publike Seruice in England was not in the Latine tonge, because many English bokes did intreate of Christes passion and Resurrection, and because the people in their vulgar ton∣gue did speake much of it. Out of Aeneas Syluius,lesse then a Gheasse for the Seruice in the pri∣mitye Church. Iew. 77 you say, A voice washeard, as it had ben from heauen  (And now you begynne, deuoutly to hearken to Reuelations, though neuer written in go spell, nor six hundered yeares after Christ)
Let euerie spirit prayse the lord, and let eue∣rie tonge acknowledge him. And that there∣upon, the Sclauons wee suffered to vse their owne tonge in their Common Seruice. When chaunsed this? About the yeare of our Lord eight hundred and three skore. That is to say, ye come to late by two hundred and threskore yeares or therea∣bout, to proue what was done in the six hundred yeares after Christ. Againe, such sute, for the Sclauons, as you speake of, to haue the Cōmon Seruice in their moo∣ther tongue, proueth what was ordina∣rily vsed then to the contrarie in al Chri∣stendome. The great staie of the Pope and Cardinals in grauntinge it, declareth how Straunge, Needelesse, or daungerouse, the Rulers of y• Church, 800. and odd yeares sence, thought that request to be. The voice from heauen importeth, that it neaded a spe¦ciall signe and testimonie to obtaine a di∣spensation in a matter so extraordinarie. Out of Innocentius, you bringe, ye can not tell what. But first what was this In∣nocentius? A Pope of Rome. when lyned be? About 300. yeares sence. And dare you confirme your cause, with Popes decrees, of so late yeares? But where, dehreed e this? In the Councel of Lateran. That
Councel, which of all other ye most detest, as in which Transsubstantiation, was in ex∣presse termes declared, and in which the kyngedome (as you will say) of ye Popishe Church was defended. Is it possible then, (to goe no further) that, out of that world and Councel, a Decree should be alleged by the which, M. Iewels Schismaticall o∣pinion should be confirmed? Consider by this one example, (indiffe∣rent Reader) how this felow abuseth thy vnskillfulnesse, or lacke of leysure to examin the places, which he allegeth out of the Auncient fathers,Who so bold as Iewel. or practise of the Primi∣tiue Church: which dareth, as it were, at high noone, and in ye very sight of y• world, to make men beleue, that Innocentius (for∣sooth) the third, was a fauorer of their pro∣cedinges? And so to interpret his wordes and sett them foorth in great letters, as though he had decreed, that if (for example) Englishe men, Douch men, French men, Italians, Spaniardes &c. were mengled to¦gether in one Citye, the Bishope thereof, should prouide meete men, to minister the holy Seruice,Iew. 177. ACCORDINGE TO THE DIVERSITIE OF THEIR MANNERS AND TONGVES, which sould be to say, In English, Douch,
French &c. But doth Innocentius meane so? Nay doth he say so? for if ye dare to set furth his wordes in Latin as though your fide∣litie should be seene, and yet, in the Englis∣shinge of them, corrupt the same wordes: who may trust you in your Comment and construction vpon them? Prouideant (sa∣yeth he, of the Bishopes of such Cityes or dioceses, where sundrie nations dwelled together) viros idoneos qui secundum diuer¦sitates rituum & linguarum diuina ILLIS offica CELEBRENTET ECCLE∣SIASTICA SACRAMENTA ad∣ministrēt, That is, we straightly commād, yt the Bishope of such Cityes, prouide meete mē, which according to the diuer sitie of Rites and Tongues, maye cele∣brat ye diuine Seruice vnto thē, & mi∣nister the Sacramentes of the Church. But, M. Iew. leaueth out quite the in∣terpretation of Illis celebrent may cele∣brate vnto them: And,M. Ie∣wels false¦hoode, and that to  but  Gheasse. Ecclesiastica Sa∣cramenta, The Sacramentes of the Church makinge of two verbes but one, and of two Accusatiue cases but one: and ap∣plienge
ye verbe to ye former Accusatiue case, which should gouerne y• later only: and leauinge the later accusatiue case, not only without the proper verbe to rule it,Iew. 177 but al∣togeather leauinge it out. As in example. VVe doe therfore straightly commaund that the Bishopes of such Cities or dioceses pro∣uide meete men to minister (he should haue added ye proper accusatiue case: The Sacra∣mentes of the Church, but it leeketh him not, he leaueth it out quite) The holy Seruice (he should haue put before it the proper verbe belonging to it: To celebrate vnto them, the diuine or holy Seruice. for, by say∣inge vnto them, the Pope, signifieth, that the people sayed not the seruice, but the priest.) ACCORDING to the diuersi∣tie of their manners (more playnly it would haue ben sayed, their Rites or Ceremonies) and tongues. If any man thinke this omission to be of smal importance: I answer, that in him, which is so curiouse to note in the Margen Rituum & Linguarum, and to english them in y• text with great letters, the better to be considered, in him, it is no smal fault to place and construe wordes at his pleasure, and to conueygh those away out of the sen∣tence, which beinge left alone, doe open
and expound the whole matter. For inter∣pretinge ye Canō truly, your greate doub M. Iewel (of Accordinge to the Vniuersi∣tie of their manners and tongues) will easily be answered. for the Bishopes (to make it plaine) are commaunded, to prouide meete men, to celebrate the diuine Ser∣uice vnto thē, Accordinge to the diuer¦sitie of their manners or Rites, and to minister the Sacramētes of the Church vnto them, accordinge to the diuersitie of their tongues. For as it is not enough, to bringe a simple Italian, (if he be confessed and absoed) to a priest of the Latine Church, but to such a , as vn¦derstandeth and speaketh ye Italiā tongue: So in sayinge of Seruice to the same man, it is enough to keepe the Rites and Ce∣remonies which he hath ben vsed vnto, in his owne countrie, and it is not required that it should be saied in the Italian ton∣gue, because in Confession respect is had to singular persons, but in publik Seruice ye whole state of the Church is considered. In confession also the priestes goe downe to men, but in publike Seruice
ascend vpward to God. In talking with men our tongue should be knowen vnto them, in praieinge to God the thiefe care ys of denotion. And therfore, it was not sin¦cerely done of M. Iew. so to turne, & leaue out, the wordes of this decree: neither are litle omissions in this kinde, litle faultes. Who then may trust him with expoun∣dinge the wordes? or what hope might he haue, so to handle the matter, that Innocen¦tius the third, might seme to condemne his owne Church of Rome: and straightly com¦maund, that accordinge to the diuersitie of manners and tonges the holy Seruice should be ministred? Was this law euer put in exe∣cution in Rome it selfe? Was it not an easie matter, for him beinge Pope, to doe it? Did not sundrie nations of diuerse tōgues mete in that Citie togeather, to geaue him occa∣sion to do it? yet hath he not done it. and the Romaines tontinew still their Seruice in the Latine, though their vulgar speach be Italian. It appeareth then that Inno∣centius had no such meaninge as you de∣uise. And note the wordes of the decree. Let meete men be prouided, to celebrate and mi∣nister to People of diuers Countries, Ac∣cordinge
to the diuersitie of their Rites and tongues. Here I would aske, what di∣uersitie it speaketh of? Such as was not yet extant in the Church, or such as was presently vsed? If ye meane the first: that can not be. for of those Rites which are not yet, who can say, Let them be serued accor∣dinge to the diuersitie of their Rites! If ye meane the second, that is, If ye vnderstand, that such diuersitie of Rites and tongues as was then all readie found in the Catho∣like Church, should be vsed toward ye peo∣ple of euerie countrie, where diuerse na∣tions met togeather, within one Citie or diocese: this proueth not, that the English men dwellinge at Rome, should haue a new English Seruice made for them, but only,The right meaning of Inno∣centius decree. that the like Rites and tongue, as were vsed in their Countrie at home, in their Cō¦mon Seruice, should be enioyed of them in Rome. After the which rate, the Italians abidinge in Constantinople, should haue the Latin Seruice, and not the Greeke: And the Greekes in Venice, should haue the Seruice after their owne manner, and not after the Latine. But what is this to our question? for to
make it playner, let vs suppose yt, a French man dwellinge then in Rome, with other his countrie men, wold require to haue his Common prayer in the French tongue. To him would I say, by what reason or consequent doest thou require it? Here, let his answer be, how Innocentius de∣creed, that euery nation should be proui∣ded for, according to the diuersitie of their manners and tongues. I would aske him againe, what manner or tongue haste thou, in the Church Seruice in Fraunce? If he answered, we haue the French: he should be taken in an open lye, because none was than thought vpon. If he answered, (as ye truth was) we haue it in Latin but we haue other fashions in it, then these of Rome haue: then should he perceaue Innocenti∣us and the Councels meaninge. which was that the celebratinge of publike Seruice, and ministration of Sacramentes, as it was then presently vsed, in seuerall Coun∣tries: so should it be in a readinesse for the men of ye same Countries (when they met together in one Citie) accordinge to y• diuer¦sitie of their Rites and tongues. Therfore if you (M. Iew.) can shew by any meanes, that the Church Seruice of
England was, at that tyme, in the En∣glish tonge, then may I graunt vnto you, yt when ye goe to Rome or Constātinople, you may clayme the benefite of Innocētius decree to be serued English wise. But if you can not find, that in any of so many se∣uerall Countries, as may be rekoned, the Seruice was then in any other tongue then Greeke or Latin, then shal you see it plainly and necessarily concluded, that eue∣ry of them was prouided for According to the diuersitie of Rites and tongue (Tonge, you must meane, which they vsed in publik Seruice, and in Churches, and not in open Market Place, or Pryuate howses) and yet no one of them all should haue o∣ther tongue then Greeke or Latine. And therfore, this testimonie doth nor serue you, nor satisfie vs. And byside this, I must tell you, that were it neuer so good and fitt for your purpose, yet is it byside your Glo∣rie, to vse Popes decrees of so late ma∣kinge. Now to conclude: M. Iew. signifieth vn¦to vs, that he might allege much more, e∣uen out of Addias him selfe,Iew. 17▪ whom M. Hardinge so much estemeth. But I will only note the complaint of one Iohn Bil∣let.
Whome (I beleue) you as much esteme as you doe Abdias.A lamen∣tation of some of histrdes vpon M. Iewel would ser¦ue here wel, for Complain¦te the  of Iohn Billet. Iew. 176 But wherein will ye note his complaint? Concerninge this case? What case? whether that, The Com¦mon Seruice was not ministred, by one man alone, but by the Priest and the whole Con∣gregatiō together, which is ye thinge ye pro∣mised to shew? Or that the publike Ser∣uice was, in the six hundred yeares after Christ, in any other tongue then Gréeke or Latine, which question was only demaun∣ded, and vnto which, you were content to answer, for the better Contentation of myn∣des, and better satisfaction of the Reader? Goe to then, what eyleth that, One Iohn Billet,Iew. 178 as you cal hym, and whereof com∣playneth he? Mary what shall we do (sayeth he) in our dayes, when as there is, either none at al, or very seldome, that readeth or heareth, or vnderstandeth Vnderstandeth what? the publike Ser∣uice? no but the Gospell which was readen in the Seruice. for the wordes next before, are, that whereas in the Primitiue Church no man should speake wich tongues, on∣lesse some were present to expound them: here of (sayeth he) grew a laudable Custo∣me yt after ye Gospell was read litterally
it should straight waies be expounded in the vulgar tongue. And there vpon foloweth his Complaint: what shall we do in our dayes &c. He complaineth therfore of lacke of learninge in the Reader or hearer: not of the vnknowen Tongue in which the Gospell was read. for if the ex∣position of it doe folow in ye vulgar tongue, the Custome is laudable. And so hereby is presupposed, that the Gospell was then in another tongue then vulgar. But now if the exposition foloweth not, and few either readers or hearers vnder∣stand the Gospell: what is to be done? Ve∣rely the suerest way is, to sett moe Childrē to schole, and to make better prouision for Scholars, and to chouse out of Scholars, in to the Clergie. But what is your aduise M. Iew.? mary, yt the Seruice (I trow) should be in the vulgar tongue. But ye find not this, in Iohn Billets complaint. And ex∣cept you gather this Conclusion, how make ye an end of your processe with his testimonie? Marke, I pray you (M. Iewel Iohn Billets conclusion vpon his owne Complaint. It (seemeth sayeth he) It were better now to hould their peace,
then so to singe. Lo, he talketh of holdinge their peace in the Church, not of cryenge out in the vulgar tongue. Neither wiss∣sheth he nor alloweth he y• takinge vp of a new tongue and Seruice, but of amending the ignorance of hearers and readers concerninge the old. Also he sayeth,yet moe Ghsses of M. Iewel. It see∣meth: but determineth nothinge. And ther∣fore it is a wonder that you espied not that Gheasse of his, wherby, we (though it made for your purpose) are not satisfied. And, to be as exact as your selfe are, he was not within the first six hundred yeares after Christ. Therfore you haue sayed hi∣therto, with al your Gheasses nothinge to the purpose, nor proued, that the Seruice was in the Primitiue Church in some o∣ther tongue, then Greeke or Latine. But perchaunce the neerer you come homeward, y• better you be instructed. and therfore leauinge to aske you of the Syri∣an, AEthiopian, Persian and Armenian with y• lyke, what say you to the French tongue? Was the Seruice of Gallia, (now Fraunce) in the vulgar tongue, within the six hundred after Christ? It was not sayed (you will answere) in such order as M. Harding Gheasseth.Iew. 84
Doe you then tell vs without Gheasses I pray you, how it was. But in a knowen tounge vnto the people.Iewel. What was that? Speake M. Iewel. Tel vs of some certaintie, for of al thinges you loue no Gheasses That it was in a tounge knowen vnto the people it is euident by Seuerus Sulpitius.Iewel. To all or some? for herein consisteth the very point. To some, we graunt, and that helpeth you nothing. To all, how proue you, out of Sulpitius, or any other? Here a∣gaine you be at a staie. But goe ye foorth with Sulpitius. The Reader was shut out, by meane of the thronge. One of the companie toke the Psalter,Moreges∣ses for the seruice in yt vulgare tounge. Iewel. Read the verse of the Psalme: Out of the mouth of Infantes and Sucklings, thou hast wrought prayse. And as sone as that verse was read, the people made a shout, and the contrarie part was confounded. Here we see the practise of the Church of Gallia. A proper practise I promise you, that as soone as the verse of the Psalme was read, the people made a shout. Thinke you, that this Psalme, and Readinge, of ye which Sulpitius speaketh, was any part of the
Publike Seruice? Or thinke you, the people to haue bene so wyld and dissolute at those dayes, that they made shoutes, when they were in theyr Seruice? But this is enough for you, that they made a shoute. By which you gather, that they vnderstoode what was readde. Yet doe ye not satisfie our question, which is of Pub∣like Seruice, and whether all the people vnderstode it or no. But M.The histo¦rye which Sulpiti∣us telleth, M. Iew. mangleth. Iewell, if it had pleased you, to haue reported this Historie as Sulpitius telleth it, neither we coulde wonder at the peoples shoute: neither you make an argument thereof, that they vnderstoode the Church Seruice. For to adde, to your tale that which lacketh, when S. Martyne stoode to be Bisshoppe, one of the cheefe Bysshopes of the Countrie (whose name was DEFENSOR) was his grea∣teste Aduersarye.Sulpitius lib. i. de vita D. Marti. For which cause, the People beinge offended with hym, when that verse, of whiche you speake was readen, in the end of the whiche, these wordes are (accordinge to an olde La∣tine translation) Vt destruas inimicum & defensorem they hearinge the worde DE∣FENSOREM,
some for ioy (I beleue) that it alluded so rightely to the name of theyr Aduersarye, and other perchaunce of Symplicitie, thinkinge that the Psalme did speak of DEFENSOR the Bis∣shope, made a shoute, And signified or agreed, that it was happelye spoken. Whiche, I see not howe it proueth the pub∣like Seruice to haue bene in a knowen tounge, and all the People to haue vnder∣standen it. But this I mighte gather, that the Psalmes were then openly readde in the Latine tounge. In whiche thinge what is your opi∣nion, M. Iewel? In what toung (thinke you) was the Common Seruice of the Church of France? You answer:Iew. 148 Whether it were in the vulgar Tounge or in the Latine Tounge, it was a Tounge knowen to the People. But doth this answer, agree with your absolute intelligence, whiche would be compted to knowe the state of the Pri∣mitiue Churche so perfectlye: that what so euer others bringe agaynste you, it muste bee taken for Coniectures onlye, and Gheasses? See now, in what darke∣nesse of vnderstandinge, your selfe are.
And how much you be to seking, when you be partycularly apposed? You say of France, that they had theyr Seruice in a knowen tounge:M. Iew. at a stay. but what tounge that was, you can not readily tell. And why so? Can ye say precisely, that all the people vnderstoode it (for of all the people our question is) except ye be sure what toūge it was? And if it wer in any o∣ther then ye vulgar French, can ye warrāt that the whole Congregation vnderstode it▪ And marke, that they must not only vn∣derstand it simply, but also turne it to theyr purpose cunnyngly. Except you thinke, that it was an easye matter for euery body to do (t the reading of the foresayd verse of the Psalme) to perceaue the allusion and conueyghance, which might be made, from defensorem the worde of the Psalme, to DEFENSOR the Bysshope that resisted S. Martine. And that in one instant, eue∣ry man did make the sense of the Psalme to answer and serue his iust indignation a∣gainst DEFENSOR the Bisshope, and so gaue an vniforme shout, for that they goodwills, and the meaninge of that verse of the Psalme, did so happely meete both together.
And if, as I doe now tel it, there be thou∣sandes which wil not perceaue it, forlacke (not of Englishe) but of quicke vnderstan∣ding or close attention: who ma thinke, that all the vulgar people, vnderstoode the grace of that facte not looked for, whiche Sulpitius declareth? Or that they being not able to conteine them selues, for the greatenes aud agreablnes which they saw in it, brake out into a shout or acclamation? But herein is your craft and subtiltie M. Iewel y•, vnder the generalitie or inde∣fitenes of wordes, ye prouide to kepe some gappes alwayes open, by which you may shift frome sense to sense, and prolonge the tyme of your taking. For wher ye can safe∣ly saye it without espying, that, the seruice was in the vulgar tounge: there will you meane by a Strange toūge, that which is not vulgar, in which sense, the Latin toūge, in England, is a strange tounge. And where it is lyke to be playnly proued a∣gainst you, that the Common Seruice was in another tounge then the vulgar: There, by a Strange tounge, you will vnderstand, not a contrary to the vulgar, but a contra∣ry to the knowen tounge, & so in this sense
the Latine is not a Strange tounge in Englande, because it is vnderstanden of the inhabitours, though not generallye of all. And so by this kinde of Shiftinge in the question of the Common Seruice of Gallia,Present shiftes at a nead. where it appeareth, by that one verse of the Psalme which Seuerus Sulpitius reher∣seth, that it was in Latine, there, ye care not for the distinction: but, whether it were in the vulgare tounge or in the Latine, it was (you say) in a Tounge knowen to the people.Iew. 184 But, when we shall come to our owne Countrye of Englande, and beginne to proue, that Seruice there, was in Latine: You can not abyde to heare it, but you will needes haue it to be in the vulgare Tounge. Yet ye nede not so to answer (if it plea∣sed you) because, if the Latine Tounge were graunted, to haue bene in the Pub∣like Seruice of England, when Sainte Augustine conuerted it: Yet might ye as well answer, that the Latine was a kno∣wen Tounge there, as you seeme easye to be perswaded, that it was a knowen
Tounge, to al the people in France. By which your handlynge of the matter, it is moste euidente, that you are sure lytle or nothinge, of the state of the Pri∣mitiue Churche concerninge the Parti∣culars of it, but, that you frame your conclusion to your knowlege. And where you fynde, that the Ser∣uice was in the Latine Tounge, there will you make, that the Latine was a knowen Tounge: And where your selfe can fynde nothinge, nor your Aduersarye brynge for his purpose playne euidence: there wyll you reste, and saye, that the Common Seruyce was in the Vulgare Tounge only. Againste which your Determination, if it shoulde be proued hereafter that the Latine Seruice was vsed, euen there, where you thoughte otherwise: then woulde you (without all doubte) retorne to your foresayed place of Euasion, that Whether it were in the Vulgar Tounge, or in the Latine, it was a Tounge knowen to the People. Nowe to leaue all other Churches of the world, and for your readines M. Iewel,
and our shortnesse sake, to speake to you of England only: In what tongue was the Seruice there at the beginning? That be∣ginning I meane, when we were first con∣uerted to the faith by S. Augustin? Whom your Simplicity, and holinesse, and merci∣fulnesse, and humility aboue measure, is so good as to iudge, to be vnworthy to be cal∣led a Saincte,Is this your Te Deū Lauda∣mus, for S. Au¦gustines coming in to Eng∣land, and cōuerting it. but an Hypocrite, a Superstiti∣ous man, Cruell, Bloudy, and Proud aboue measure, and that by the reporte of them, which sawe him and knewe him. As who should say, that such men were meete ves∣sels, for God to dwell in, and woorke the conuersion of Idolatours, such as our fore∣fathers (according to the fleshe) were: Or, as though S. Gregorye, which sent him, sawe him not, and knew him not, yea and tried him not better before he sent him,Iew. 185 then any Britains could doe, which stomaked & enuied his doinges, when he was come ne∣rer vnto them: Or, as thoughe this were an high poynt in your Schooles, when a question is asked of the Seruice which any Country had at the first conuersion therof, to defame and slaunder that Person, which first conuerted it, and put forthe, to be mar∣ked of others, or lightly beleue it your selfe,
the worst that the malice of the enemy could speake against him, without any counter∣poysing of it, with the iust and true commē∣dations, which, the best men then liuing, or the general voyce of the world afterwards, gaue vnto him. To say no more vnto you for this blabbing or slaundering, then God reward you for it, I continue in my questi∣on, asking you: What manner tongue was vsed in the Common Seruice of England, at the first conuersion of it? The Latine you will not graunt to haue bene vsed, though S. Augu∣stine with other Monkes, planted then by likelihoode, no other then thē selues knew: except you thinke that they stayed frō pub∣like Mynistration, vntill them selues had learned our English, or aught the people with all speede to vnderstand their Latine) and though S. Gregory reioysed that Al∣leluya was songe in England. But,Iew. 185 these be but gheasses,185. you say. And Maister Harding should not thus mocke the world.186 He knoweth well a Childe woulde not make such reasons.188 Againe: God wot he might haue made it better. Wel Sir, for this purpose I am desirous to heare your answers because ye wot, they
neede to be absolute and excellent, whiche come from your grauity and learning. If then our Common Seruice were not in the Latine: was it in ye Hebrew, or Greke, or any vnknowen tounge? For ye seeme to incline to the surmises of ye Brittish Chro∣nicles concerning Ioseph of Arimathaea, and to the report of Theodoretus,167 that S. Paule came into this Ilande, nowe called Eng∣land. So that it is hard to say, what An∣tiquities you haue in store, concerninge this matter. Yet because y• greatest part hereof is like to be proued by Surmises, I beleue rather that your finall answer will be, that the Seruice in Englande, was in the vulgar English tounge. But howe proue you this? So common a thing, as the pub∣like Seruice, So farre and widespred a brode, as the Realme of England is long and rounde, So generally planted as you suppose, So diligently remembred and marked, as people muste doe, whyche (by your reade) must say Amen, and vn∣derstand the Priest when he celebrateth: This to be so taken away, that you can shewe no token whether euer it was or
no, is it credible, or is it possible? Can ye thē blame vs, if we aske for some Monumentes and Bookes, to be shewed out of one place or other, Or if none at all be founde, (for no doubt you haue sear∣ched and labored) can ye blame vs if we doubt of the matter? Yet say you: O what foly is this? What to doe?Iew. 187 How loth or vnable rather M. Iewel is to shew any eui∣dence. Iew. 187 to aske for witnesses in a doubtfull matter? And to loke for some steppe of a foote or token of highe way, which thousand thousandes haue Ordina∣rily, and Openly passed by? But, who is able to shewe anye Booke wrytten in Englyshe a thousande yeares a goe? If ye can not shewe a whole booke, yet shewe but a peece of the leafe of one: Or some token or testimonye thereof, that euer any such booke was vsed. It foloweth: Or if it could be shewed, yet who were a∣ble to vnderstand it? You may see then, how vaine it is, to thinke that the Apostles or their successors did commit the woorde of God to vulgare tonges, which being so subiect vnto chāges
coulde not well be trusted with the preser∣uing of the true Scriptures. For if the English Seruice (which vndoubtedly, if any suche had bene consisted of the holye Scriptures) if it should haue had the scrip∣tures translated into it, there to be kept for the Christians: in what case should we haue bene nowe, being not able to vnderstande that English? Or in what case shoulde the Scripture it selfe haue bene, if, as the pro∣priety of the tongue was altered, so it shuld again be interpreted to the capacity of eue∣ry generation? Yet ye procede further. There is no boke to be found of the pray∣ers,Iew. 187 that the Druides made in Fraunce, or the Gymnosophistae in India. And will M. Har∣ding therof conclude, that therfore the Dru∣ides or Gymnosophistae praied in Latine? First, how know you, what may be she∣wed, for the Gymnosophistes Prayers in India: How long studied you there? How narowly searched you? Or what cer∣tificates haue you receiued, of any man of credit, from that Country? Consider then, that the Druides and Gymnosophistae were Idolatours: & no maruel therfore, thoughe all their bokes and Superstitions be gone and consumed. But the Christians Ser∣uice
in the Vulgar tounge, pertaineth (you will say) to the substaunce of true religion, and coulde not therfore be so broughte to nought, that no monment therof should be remaining. Or the Druides also, and the Gymnosophistes, we know some what, the names (at the least) of them be preser∣ued, and what men these were, we finde it expounded. But of the Seruice in Eng∣lish, before now of late, who euer read, who euer heard, who euer thought? Neither doth Doctor Hardinge reason with you after this sort: There is no old boke to be found of the Seruice in Englishe:It is his maner, not so good as common. ergo it was in Latine. This is but a tricke of your Logike M. Iewel, to alter the sense of your aduersary, and forme his arguments after your plea∣sure. But this rather is his reason. If the Seruice had bene in Englishe, conside∣ring the multitude of bookes and Chur∣ches, some memory would be left of it: But none is found, Ergo by good consequence there was neuer any such Seruice. And you, to shift your handes of this argument, doe make as though his only Demaunde
were, to haue Englishe bokes of the aunci∣ent Seruice brought forth: and as though his conclusion should be, if ye shewed not ye plaine bokes, Ergo yt seruice was in Latin. But that you may not escape so, I will not aske you for Bookes, nor Monuments nor Relikes, nor tokens of the English ser∣uice: But in this one, and reasonable, and easy question to be answered, I wold faine perceiue, what sense you haue or vnderstā∣ding. When you were borne, and long be∣fore that, the Seruice in England was in the Latine tonge: If therfore it had not ben so, from the beginning: when began the Latine? when ceased the English? Doubtlesse (sayeth D. Harding) some mention would haue bene made of the time & causes hereof.Harding Fol. 88. For, if in the smallest mat∣ters of the Church Seruice, there haue ben found, which haue noted the particulars, as that Damasus caused the Psalmes to be sōg by sides, and Thelesphorus made Gloria in excelsis to be song, and that S. Gregory ad∣ded ye Anthems and Alleluya, & so in euery part of the Masse: Is it possible, yt so great a change of the publike Seruice from Eng∣lish into Latin, should not be marked of a∣ny man, or put in record by any wryter? Was it done sodainly in the night, when
al were a slepe? Or in the morning, did eue∣ry man forget him self? Or were there no wryters then? Or were all corrupted? Or was there no Heretike, to leaue behind him a note of it: but yt such an euident, & wonder ful chaūge of the whole Seruice, frō Eng∣lish, (as you M. Iewel think) into Latine, should either not be espied, or not cōmitted to memory? What āswer ye now vnto this? Ye answer not one worde, ye make,M. Iew. duin, and yet would not be kno∣wen of it. as though ye did not see it, ye pull ye reader frō yt matter, to the Druides of France, & Gym∣nosophistes of India, ye speke as though D. Harding framed a direct argumēt for y• La∣tine tounge, & asked you no question of the English Seruice. Ye cry out, O what a foly is this. And as though al mē were foles (for ye answer not one word to ye principal poynt) You do not bring so much as a gesse, a cōiec¦ture, a likelihode. You steale away though you be eied, & the questiō being so resonable you answer not one word to it. Whē began yt Latin Seruice M. Iewel? whē ceased the English? If there be any thing in record of it, bring it forth: if ther be nothing, thē do I proue yt you are blind in these maters, & yt al y• grace of your reply, & force of your lerning, cōsisteth in rieling of other mēs argumēts
(an easy matter in Rhetorike) not in cōfir∣ming any of your owne, which should not be to sekinge in a new Gospeller. Thus haue I then discoursed with M. Iewel, about the publike Seruice in the Syriacall, Egyptian, Ethiopian, Persian, Armenian, Scythian, Frenche or Britain tounge. I haue asked, whether he coulde proue any of these to haue bene vsed within the six hundred after Christ. I haue requyred sure demonstrations, because he contemneth Coniectures and Gheasses. I haue cōsidered both those common places of his, pa. 155. 175. in which he brin∣geth the best and moste that he can say for the Cōtentatiō and Satisfactiō of his reader. I finde no mention of Publike Seruice in any tounge in the primitiue Church, by∣side Greeke or Latine. He proueth his matters by Gheasses, he alleageth Authorities and Examples which were long sence the first six hundred yeres: to which tyme we bounde him as he doth vs. I bring hym to the question of our owne coūtry, and leaue him not one likely word
which he might answer. And so (I trust) he will be taken, as he is, for a mouer of contention, about other mēs right and possession, him self hable to bring furth no one scrap neuer so little, of any old Euidence to make expressely for his pur∣pose. As for vs, this only, is a very good & sufficient answer, to say: We found at our comming vnto the faith of Christ the Latin Seruice, of ye Englissh we neuer herd before now of late: And surely, A chainge from Englisshe into latine, could not be but no∣ted in some place: And without euident de¦monstration to the contrarie, we ought not to be moued with any winde: & so we nee∣ded not to troble our selues any further, but put them to shew. Yet, because D. Harding hath not dealt so sparingly, but hath ben content to bring good Reason and Authoritie for that, which was and is sufficiently defended, with the force and worthinesse of Traditiō, by which it hath ben commēded vnto vs: I therefore also, wil put furth and declare, that his argument, which he prosequuteth most in this Article. That by conferryng the order and weight of reasonynge on bothe sydes, it maie the soner and better appere which
of y• two, vseth more vncertain Gesses, Cō∣iectures, & lykelyhoodes. M. Iewel, whō I haue proued to shewe nothing for Pub∣like Seruice in ye vulgare tonge, or D. Har¦ding, which shal be perceiued to cōclude di∣rectly for y• publike Seruice in Greeke or Latin, & not euery vulgar tonge. First thē, The questiō is,Iew. 11 whether, for the space of 600 yeres after christ, the people had their Cōmō praiers ī a strāge tōge, yt they vnderstode not. D.Hardinge, to make his owne purpose plaine, answereth with a distinction, that, If M. Iewel meaneth by ye peoples Cōmō Prayers,Hard. 72. such as they made Comōly to God in priuate deuotion, he thinketh they vttered thē, in yt tōge which they vnderstode:A distinc∣tion of com¦mon prai∣ers. but if he mean bi thē, ye pub¦like seruice of ye Church (whereof the most part hath bene pronounced by the Bishops, Priests, Deacōs, & other Ec¦clesiasticall ministers) he graunteth yt some of the people vnderstode the lan∣gage therof, & some vnderstode it not. And so vpō this later point cōsisteth yt que∣stiō. Yet M. Iew. hath a quarel to ye former saying. This distinction of Common Prai∣ers,
is both vnperfit and nedeles. Nay, distinctions can neuer be nedelesse, where, some Reader, is like to be of small & plain vnderstāding, & wher, ye Aduersary is ful of words, ful of shifts, ful of digressions, ful of craking & vātage making, ful of equi∣uocatiōs. For see but this one short exā∣ple. D. Harding graunteth,Hard. 94 y• Prayers in the Primitiue Church were in a known tōge. M. Iew. layeth hold vpon yt word,175 & re∣porteth y• M. Hard. confesseth, that the Cōmō praiers wer {pro}noūced, in a cōmō known tōge.Falsely. Here therfor, wold not a distinctiō do good yt of Praiers some be Cōmon, some be priuate & that D. Harding spake of priuate: but M. Iew. draweth it to Cōmō Prayers? yet this is no great matter, (sauing for M. Iewels boldnes in additiō) because D. harding wil in an other place, not refuse yt terme of Cō∣mō praiers, but cōfesse yt they were, at ye be∣ginning, in a Cōmō tonge.Iew. 175 But now if vpō this graūt M. Iewel wil begin to triūph & say, althoug he haue wātōli denied Christ, yet I trow, he wil not deni himself. And again M. Hard. cōfesseth that the cōmō Praiers wer {pro}∣noūced in a Cōmon known tōge. &c. Now quite cōtrary, as a mā that had vtterli forgot∣tē himself, he sayeth: The Cōmon seruice was neuer said, but either in the Greke tōge, or in
the latine. And againe (auouching it with his warrant verely) VERELy his sainges can not stand both together. After all these sharp spitefull, glorious and bragging wordes, is not a distinction nedefull to declare ye truth of D. Hardings cause and meaning? For, Common Praiers may be vnderstanded two waies First, that praier, which is commonly made to God in priuate deuotion, is or may be called com∣mon. Secondly the publike Seruice of the Church beareth the name of Common praier. & of this we shall by and by speake more. Concerning the first sense, Common prayer was in a tongue knowen to the peo¦ple, were they Iewes, Greks, Latines, A∣phricans, Frenchmen or Englishmen. Cō¦cerning the second it was in no other ton∣gue, than Greke or Latine: & some vnder∣stode it, some vnderstode it not. How think we then? was it not nedefull to put this distinction, in the very begin∣ning of this Article? For by this meane,One di∣stinction  M. Ie∣wels . nei¦ther D.Harding hath vtterly forgottē him self, neither M. Iewell meanely remēbred himself. The plain dealing of the one, is eui¦dently defended, the blinde bragging of the other, is iustly abhorred. The lybertie of
making distinctions is with reason to be graunted, the licensiousnes in confounding of wordes and senses, is with conscience to be stopped. And now may D. harding con∣fesse, that the Common Praiers (as they are distinct from Common Seruice) were sayed in a knowen tongue: neither can M. Ie∣well gather any speciall conclusion there∣of, which quite ouerthroweth our whole purpose. Now for the other parte,Iew. 15. if the foresayed distinction be vnperfite, doe yow then, M. Iewell, add somewhat vnto it: for take away from it yow can not well, as hauing two membres, and vnitie being indiuisibill. But what is the reason, where fore you mislike the distinction? For the secrete Praiers,15. that the faithful make seuerally by them selues, haue euer more ben called Priuate, and neuer Com∣mon. In dede as you vtter this matter, there ap¦peereth no likelihode of cause, why the Se∣crete Prayers, which the faithful make se∣uerally by themselues, should be called Cō¦mon. But add this one worde Commonly, (which D. Harding expresseth, and on which, the strength and consequence of his saieng resteth) and then, if your self can not
be ashamed of your craftines, yet other mai be warned, by ye exāple, to take hede of you. As The secrete praiers that the faithful made Cōmōly by thē selues be called Cōmō. What absurdity in this? Or what vātage to be ta∣kē against it? none surely at al. Yet because it stode not wt your pride & cōtētiousnes, to let your aduersaries distinctiō frely passe, wt out sōe disprofe, & iustli speke against it you could not, as he {pro}poned it: therfor ye made as though ye did not see ye place & force of y• word, (cōmōli) but quite leuing it out, ye in fer your reply, as though D. Har. had saide, Secrete Praiers be called Common. But perchāce, though ye dissēble ye word (cō¦mōly) yet your answer goth rightly against his mening. What āswer is yt? Mary that the secret praiers of the faithfull,Iew. 152. haue euermore bē called cōmō & neuer priuate. What if thei haue ben alwais so cald? Is yt a good argu∣mēt in your cōsciēce? Do ye not your selues vsurp, such ā authority & supremacy ouer al christēdō, yt ye dare both speak & do, ye cōtra∣ry to yt, which hath bē euer more said & prac¦tised? for what if priuate praiers haue neuer ben called cōmō? yet yt shall not let, but you wil at your plesure name thē so, whē you be disposed. And therfore D. Harding as it se∣meth to me, spake very warely, in referring
the matter to your meaning only, saying: (If you mean M. Iew. by ye peoples cōmō praiers. &c. Again: But if by ye cōmon praiers you mean ye publike seruice &c As if he should say: M. Iewel hath ye vpper groūd aboue vs: what he denieth, y• must we proue: what he affirmeth, yt is wel proued &c & therfor I wil put this matter to his own meaning & make my distinctiō accordingli. Byside this they may for some cause, continu¦ing priuate, be called cōmō although (which negatiue is very hard for you to proue) thei were neuer heretofore so named. For in Englād now at this presēt, ine shuld say, The Aue Maria is a Common Praier, (as at rehersal wherof thousāds emōg ye peo¦ple do lift vp their mindes towardes God) though it be not cōmōly vsed in your pub∣like seruice (for special & pure fear perchāce lest our Ladie shuld be to much remēbred & Christ lesse regarded) yet doth he not speake truly & {pro}prely y• doth so say? you think not, I trust, y• it is a Salutatiō & Praiers for ho¦ly dais only, or Church only, or Lords & La¦dies only: & what fault thē is it in speache, when it is Cōmonly vsed, to call it a Cōmō praier? I wil say more, not only Priuate praiers being cōmōly said mai be & are cald cōmō praiers, & differ frō publik seruice: but
also those self same praiers, which are made openly, in the hearing and sight of other, & vnto which they answer Amē, are of an o∣ther sorte & kinde, thā the Cōmon praier, as it is takē for publike Seruice. As, when the Apostles, in the cumpany of a hundred and twēty persons together,Act. 1. praied, that God would shew, whether of the two, Ioseph or Matthias, he would choose to take the place of ye ministery & Apostleship, frō which Iu∣das the Traitour had falsely departed: was not that a Common praier? yet cā you not proue (I beleue) that it was a parte of their Ordinary & Cōmon Seruice. Byside this also, when the Christiās met together in the Primitiue Church, among other gifts, which were plētifully thē geuē by the holyghost, ye gift of Prayer was one. That is, some one of the cūpany (and he not alwaies of the Clergy) graciousely inspi∣red, vttered in the audience of the rest, that forme or matter of Praier, which the other should lerne and folow, being yet to seking how to doe by them selues. And this was in true speach a Cōmon prayer, yet was it not their Cōmon Seruice. For in publike Seruice, the Ecclesiastical ministers doe goe before & pronoūce it, but this was such
as lay men sometymes did vtter. Also in Pu¦blike Seruice the order is appointed and set, but in this case of which I speake, the Prayer was not knowen, before it was geauen: and they were not euery day sure of the geuing, the Holyghost alwaies dispo¦sing it by more or lesse, according to his bles¦sed inspiration. Seing therefore, that these kindes of Cō∣mon Prayers are so distincted, first in res∣pect of the Cōmones of thē (though the vse be Priuate according to deuotiō) Secondly for the open communicating of them accor∣ding to ye Holyghosts inspiration, Thirdly because of the order & continuance of them, according to the Catholike Churchs law & cōstitution: why doth M. Iewel finde fault with distinctions, or that which is graun∣ted to be true in the first and seconde, why will he haue it to be like in ye thirde kinde? And because the people vnderstode wt they praied Priuately, or some other, what they vttered by the Holyghosts gift, spiritually, how can he conclude therefore, that the Cō∣mon Seruice was also in a tongue knowē vnto all the people vndoubtedly? How cā he deny y• first? How doth he nor cōsider y• second? How much abuseth he his
Aduersary and his Reader in the third? For whiles he woulde haue it beleued, that Common Praier is no other thing to say, then Common Seruice of the Church: what so euer either Scriptures and aunci∣ent Fathers doe proue,Craft in double vn¦derstan∣ding of a word. concerning Com∣mon Praier, that it was in the Primitiue Churche in a knowen Tounge: that he draweth to Common Seruice of the Churche. And againste all forewar∣ning, and distinction, and reason, he will triumphe therevpon, and crake, that it was euery where in a Tongue knowen to all the people. For whiche cause this distinction is the better to be marked, least M. Iew. through his confusion, trouble the clerenesse of the matter. Now therefore concerning the other part of D. Hardings distinction, in which he declareth vnto you, wherevpon he min∣deth to ioyne with you in this third Arti∣cle, what say yow therevnto? His wordes be plaine: If you meane by Common praiers the Publike Seruice,Hard. 72. some vnderstode it, and some vnderstode it not.
Here vnwares he implieth a repugnance in reason,Iew. 15 and a manifest contradiction. Whye so? may not both there propo∣sitions stand togeather? When your felfe doe preache, M. Iew∣ell, some, I beleue, vnderstande you not, and some vnderstand you: (for many stand a far of & some nerer vnto you) & some vn∣derstand not all fyne English, yet some vn∣derstand it well inough. I will say, further. Your self I thinke, sometymes vnderstand your self, and some tymes ye doe not. Yet here is no necessi∣tie of contradiction. For they nede not to be contrarye sayinges one to the other, in whiche sometymes ye knowe where ye be, some tymes ye speake, you can not tell what. As, in the Declaming against the Sel∣linge and Byinge of Masses, you knowe what you speake: but in declaring of Chri∣stes Presence in the Sacrament, to be Re∣allye, Verely, Substantially, not by imagina∣tion &c. and yet by faith Onlye: M. Ie∣wel himselfe vnderstandeth not M. Iew∣el. Yet, this is no Contradiction, nei∣ther shoulde that be the faulte, whiche I woulde therevppon, obiecte vnto you:
but this rather that ye goe about to destroy the Religion it self, because of the euill ma∣ners of them which professe it: or, that you, which haue no Masters worth the hearing whom ye can or dare name vnto vs, pre∣sume to reach the Catholike Church, Di∣uinitie. How proue you then, a Contradiction to be implied herein, and a Contradiction of M. Hardings, where he saieth: Some vn∣derstode the Common Seruice, some vnder∣stode it not? For euen in England it self when the Latine Seruice was of late vsed, as it had continued hundreds of yeres to∣gether, it was true in lesser Cities by many degrees than London or Yorck: that some vnderstode it, some vnderstode it not: yet Latin is not so Common now in Englād, as it was, in ye Primitiue Church, through all these weast parts, where the Emperour of Rome had chiefe iurisdiction and go∣uernment. But let vs consider, how M. Iewel pro∣ueth y• foresaied cōtradiction. For if some of the people vnderstode it not, how could al ye people say Amen?orthie  Iew. 52. Aske ye how? I will tell you. The ignorant sorte of the people, which for their lack of lerning, knew no
more than their owne tōgue, & yet for Ch¦rities sake at the least, should think the best of the Churches Seruice, they, when the lerned began, might ioyne to, their voices and declare by Amen, that they pray and wishe and assent, as their betters doe be∣fore them. And is this vnlikely or im∣possible? What shall we then thinke of ye Amen, which soundeth at Paules Crosse, when some famous and feruent Brother preacheth? Doth euery one that crieth A∣men, heare his Prayer? And can ye reproue one for his good will, in helping for∣ward to make the shoute greater, though he know not what the matter is: but only beleueth, that it is well saied, what soeuer that man of God vttereth? If there haue ben found emong your peuish Martyrs, which would dye, they knew not for what, but only that some one whom they loued, died before them: may not the faithfull peo∣ple answer to the Quiers Amen, them sel∣ues vnderstanding not what was spoken, but trusting the others knowledge and Au¦thoritie? Againe, what necessitie that all the peo∣ple should say, Amen▪ Or who maketh a
conclusion so generall? Surely not D. Harding. And therfore he for his part vtte∣red no Contradiction. Who then? M. Iewell by likelihode will tell vs.Iew. 152. S. Paules wordes be playne. How shal the vnlearned say Amen to thy thankes geuing? For he knoweth not, what thou saiest. This renneth directly against M. Harding. Al the people gaue their assent and said Amen &c. How haue you proued, that All? By S. Paules words? First he hath not this word All.The Apo¦stle falsify to by M. Iewel. Thē you falsify him, because he should not make directly against your purposse. For his words are not, how shall the vnlear¦ned say Amen. But how shal he that SVPPLI¦ETH the PLACE of the Idiote and vn∣learned say Amen? He speaketh not therfore generally: nor of al ye people? but, he noteth by special words sōe distinct persōs, which stode & answered in the place and stead of ye people. It is rather and trulier gathered by this place of S. Paule, (if you corrupt him not) yt all ye people did not answer Amē ordinarily: but y• others ther were appoin∣ted, to supply their place. And so may D. Harding repete his proposition again, (as he doth) & say wtout reproch of cōtradictiō: Isaye, that the Seruice was in a
tonge, which some people vnderstode and some vnderstode not: And M. Iewell in reprouing him for it hath done nothing els, but shewed his egernes and his feblenes. But what meaneth D. Harding by it, yt the Seruice was in a knowen tongue: which some people vnderstoode, and some vnderstode not? Whether intendeth he some subtiltie, and will play such a parte as M. Iewell often tymes doth, in hyding his purpose vnder y• generalitie of termes: that ye may not be sure wher to finde him? No truly. The thing it self doth testify the contrary. For concerning the,Hard. 7. Tongue I meane (saieth he) the Greke tongue and ye Latine tounge. Concerning those Some,Hard. 77. which vnderstode it, he meaneth (as it is easy to be perceyued) Lerned men, Gen∣tilmen, Merchantes, al of liberal edu∣cation. Concerning the other Some. which vnderstode it not, he meaneth, al vplan∣dishe people, Tillers of groūd, heard mē & womē. hn doth he deale plainly and
sensiblie, And not only that, but mo∣destly also and quietly. I neuer read (saieth he) neither, I think, M. Iewel &c. that the Common seruice was in any other barbarous, and vulgare tongue within the six hundred yeres after Christ. And here, least errour should rise, by mistaking of termes: I cal (saieth he) al tongues barbarous by∣side the Hebrew, Greeke, and Latine. So that it may be well noted, that D. Harding seketh, by distincting of duble and doutfull wordes, and by his naming of y• sēse on which he intēdeth to reason, to haue the truth openly knowen, & shortly to haue ye question perceyned. But M. Iewel wor∣keth by a contrary sprite, and as before he misliked with the distinction of Common Praiers: so now he is offended with the distinction of Tongues,M. Ie∣wel ly∣keth not distincti∣ons. where D. Harding placeth on the one side, Hebrew, Greke & Latine, and on the other, Barbarous and Vulgare tongues. Of whom he saieth.
All other tounges byside Greeke and Latine he condemneth for Barbarous,Iew. 155 by what authoritie I can not tell. See the malice of the man, and of the word.Falshode intepeting of words. He condemneth (you say) all other tounges for barbarous. wher find ye this? And if ye finde it not, how dare you affirme it, excepte by Authority, your self cannot tell what? I cal (saieth D. Harding) al tounges barbarous and Vulgar &c.Hard. 73. And that ye mighte not gather thereof, that he spake so in reproche and condem∣nation of any tounge, he putteth before the reason of it, saying: To be the better vnderstanded, I cal all tounges barbarous &c. He sowght not therefore to CONDEM∣NE any Tounge, but to declare, what he would meane by a Barbarous toūge. Nei∣ther maketh he himselfe a Controller and Iudge ouer other mens opinions herein: but an Interpretour of his owne. Yet doth M. Iewel so take him vp for ye matter, as thought this geare dyd sauor of heresye. And therfore like a Diuine) for conutation
thereof, he goeth to ye highest cause, that is God him selfe, saying: For in respect of God there is neither Iew nor Gentile, nor Greeke, nor Barbarous. If you aleage this as out of the Scrip∣ture (as it appeareth that ye doe by the quotation in the margine and by the dis∣tincte lettre in whiche it is printed) then must I tel you, that the Apostle nameth in deede Iewe and Greeke: but Gentile or Barbarous he nameth not, neither spea∣keth he of theyr diuersitie in tounges, but, in religion and affectiōs. But if you allude onlye to that place, and by accommodation make a further meaning of it: let it be wri∣ten then, in the cursiue letter of your owne wordes, so much as is not expressely in the Scripture. Yet your saying is true, though your doing be suspitious, and it maketh to this purpose: that one shoulde not con∣demne an other: But, that one might not call an other after the proper name of the Countrye where hee was borne, thinke you that it is forbydden? Or is it againste the blessede and vniforme will and mynde of God, to call one Tounge Greeke, an other Latine: Or one pure and yne, an other ragged and Barbarous?
In respect of God, there is neyther Iew nor Gentile: ergo (you shall see a meruei∣lous conclusion gathered out of Diuini∣tye) who soeuer calleth some Iewes and some Gentiles, speaketh, by what Autho∣ritie M. Iewel can not tell. Or els thus, In respect of God there is neyther Greeke nor Barbarous: Ergo who so calleth one a Greeke Tounge, an other Barbarous, speaketh, Master Iewel can not tell by what Authoritye. Againe, In respecte of God, all is one: but in respecte of men are not some Toun∣ges Eloquent, and other Barbarous? And doe not your selfe confesse, in thys very place,M. Iew. forgetteth himselfe. of whiche we speake, that S. Paule, makinge a full Diuision of the whole worlde, nameth some Greekes and some Barbarous? Yet in respecte of God there is neither Greke nor Barba∣rous.pa. 155. Truly, if D. Hardinge woulde haue made this distinction of his owne heade only, you should not yet so curiously haue reproued hym for it, consideringe that he sayth no more but: I cal tounges Barbarous &c. And makethe no rule to the worlde, And that you haue his meaninge, thereby expressed vnto you.
But least you thinke hym to be singular herein, you shall finde in Contradus Ges∣nerns (no Papiste I warant you) that: Barbarae siue Barbaricae linguae,Conin suo Mi∣chridatis praeter Graecam & Latinam, omnes dicuntur. Nos etiam Hebraeam exci∣pimus. All tounges are called Barba∣rous or barbaricall byside the Greeke and Latine: but we also doe except the Hebrew tounge. I note therefore this much, that you may consider with what Sprite ye procede: whiche will not suffer a Lerned man, to seperate by commodious distinction, the three moste principal knowen and lerned Tounges, Hebrew, Greeke and Latine, from other baser and Ruder tounges. And that you fetch a far of, such a reasō, to ouer∣thwart only his sayinges as may serue a∣gainste the Apostle himself, for calling some Greekes and some Barbarous. These thinges thus presupposed, that Common Prayers and Common Seruice of the Church are not al one, and that some there were within the sixe hundred after
Christ, which vnderstoode not the Publike Seruice, and, that all Tounges are Bar∣barous and Vulgare, byside Greeke and Latine: D. Harding begynneth to make argumentes for profe of his purpose. Whereof it may begathered,Iew. 159 How gre∣dye. that hitherto he hath proued nothing. Much better it might be gathered, that hitherto he hath made a plaine way to the matter, by putting asyde suche doubtes, as might come in betwene through occasion of wordes mistaken and misunderstanden. What needeth therefore this brauerie? Or what meaneth this hastines? Or why tri∣umpheth he, not only before the victorye, but also before battaile? Wil not M. Iewel suffer a man to make a preface vnto his treatise, And speake some generall thinges pertcining to the question, before he make his principall argument against it? but he must shew furth his winninges (I can not tell what) and say: hereof it may be gathe∣red, that he hath hitherto proued nothing? There is neither Wit, nor Grauitie, not Commoditie, in it, so to hall and put vnto him, out of no occasion, that which may sounde to disgracing of the Aduersary, and magnifyinge of his owne cause. But to the
pointe of the question. The chiefe Argument that D. Harding maketh, is of one sorte, as if he should say: The inferiour Countries and Churches, folowed the same tounge in publike Ser∣nice, which theyr Mother or Principall Church had: But those inferiour Churches had sundry and seueral Languages: ergo the vulgar people of thē, could not vnder∣stand that general and vniforme tounge, of the Principall Church. This Argument he prosecuteth in order: firste by Example of the Greeke Church, then of the Latine: and, before he bringeth the Examples, he doth in both places signify, what he inten∣deth to proue, and by what meanes or Propositions he will proue it. And firste therefore these are to be considered, either because they serue to the openinge of the state of this question: either because it will be perceyued by them, what truste is to be geuen to M. Iewel: which so despe∣rately (as I may say) doth put to and take away from D. Hardings words, yt to know his falsehoode and Craftines, it should be a good lesson, to such as loue their saluation. D. Harding, before he sheweth particu∣larly, what he can say of the Seruice in the
Greeke Church, hath these wordes: If Icā shew, yt the people of some coun∣tries of ye Greeke church which al had their praiers and Seruice in ye Greeke tounge,The prin∣cipes out of which D. Har∣ding will deduce his Conclu∣sion, in the question of Publike Seruice. for ye more part vnderstode not the Greeke tounge: thē haue I proued, that I promised. In which sentence he declareth his in∣tent and purpose, and sheweth what ye pro∣positions are, which being proued, will serue that purpose. The first is this. The people of some Countries of the Greeke church vnderstode not, for the more parte, the Greeke tounge. The seconde is. Al the people of those countries had their Common praiers in the Greeke tounge. This is y• most, y• any man cā peeke out of those words: except it be an other as M. Iewel is, which as he can make of nothing somewhat, so doth he make of somwhat al: for thus he gloseth vpon the text of D. Har∣dinges wordes. Two propositōs M. Hardīg hath here chosē to proue.Iew. 19. the one is that AL the greeke church,
had the common Seruice,More fal∣shoe of M. Iew∣els. WHOLY and THOROVGHLY in the Greeke tounge. Here first you lye, For in D. Hardinges sentence, these wordes, WHOLY and THOROVGHLY, are not founde at al: and the, WHICH AL, that you seeme to take as spoken of the whole Greeke Churche, is not thereto referred of D. Harding, but to the people only of those some Countries, which he mentioned the lyne before. And therfor as much difference as there is, betwene a General and a Spe∣ciall proposion, Or the people of al Greece, & Al the people of some Coutries of Greece: so greate and euident oddes there is, be∣twene true meaning and M. Iewels dea∣ling. Nowe to the other proposition as M. Iewel reherseth it: The other proposition is, That some whole Countries in the Grekee Church vn∣derstoode not the Greeke tounge.Yet more craft. Before, you were blamed for addinge, here now are you to be noted for taking a∣way. But what is that? No smal thinge surely, nor such as may be spared: but those very wordes, which declare the truth and reasonablenesse of the proposition. For it is to absolute and vnlikely to say, Some
whole Countries of the Greeke Church vn∣derstoode not the Greeke tounge, but that, for the more parte, (which wordes M. Ie∣well suppressed), they vnderstode not the Greeke tongue, that will be true in theyr iudgement, which can consider, how many Simple, Rude, and Ignorant there are, in euery Country, which know no other then their vulgar tongue: And of the better sort, how many there are, which so know an o∣ther tounge beside their owne, that they are not much the wiser for it. You may see then how daungerous and sore a felow M. Iewel is. Now concerning other two propositiōs (which M. Iewel hath with like Arte ga∣thered out of D. Hardinges words, about the Latine tounge, as he hath done about the Greeke) to make his craft more sensy∣ble, let D. Hardings own words be plain∣ly set forthe. After that theese Countreys,Harding Fol. 59. (saith D. Harding speking of ye west church had bene instructed in the Faithe, as thinges grewe to perfection, they had
their Seruice accordingly. No doubte such, as was vsed in the Churches, from whence their first Apostles and Prea∣chers were sent. And because, the first Preachers of the Faithe came to these weast partes from Rome, dire∣cted some from S. Peter, some from S. Clement, some others afterwarde from other Bishoppes of that sea Aposto∣like: they planted and set vp in the Countries by them conuerted, the Ser∣uice of the Church of Rome, or some o∣ther verye like, and that in the La∣tine Tounge onlye, for ought that can be shewed to the contrary. Hereof may be gathered two Proposi∣tions. The first,Propositi¦ōs seruing to the que¦stion of Publike Seruice. the weast Churches had suche Seruice, as was vsed in the Chur∣ches, from whence their first Apostles
and Preachers came. The seconde, the firste planters of the Faithe came to these weast partes from Rome. But, how doth M. Iewel conceiue these matters? His proufe (sayeth he) for the Latine Ser∣uice hangeth vpon two poyntes. The fyrste is, that all the Faithe of the weast parte of the worlde, came onlye from the Byshoppes of Rome. First, you be deceiued in your numbring, because this is not the first,Iew. 167 M. Iew. busy in changing & shfting, and alte∣ring and adding. but the seconde Proposition by D. Hardinges accompte. Then, in that second of D. Hardinges, ye finde not these wordes, AL THE FAITH OF THE WEST: or these, CAME ONLY FROM ROME. For that had bene nothing else, but to geue you an occa∣sion to slip away from the Principall que∣stion, and to enter into an endlesse & nede∣lesse talke, about, AL THE FAITH to come from, and to come ONLY from Rome. Which because it was not geuen, therefore you make it to your self of your owne wit, And reason strongly in ye matter: yt the faith came not into these quarters, ONLY from
because S. Paule planted the faith in Eng∣land,Nedelesse proues, of M. Iew. and full of heasses. and also Ioseph of Aramathea, (as is surmised by the Brittishe Chronicles: And because we (the Welshmen you meane) be∣ing your selfe borne in Deuonsheere) folo∣wed the Church of Grecia in keping of Ea∣ster, with such other mighty Argumentes. Thē, for the other part, that AL FAITH came not from Rome, ye presse vs sore with Tertullians authority, that Hierusalem was the mother and the Springe of Religion: as who should thinke, that Iacob was not fa∣ther of Ioseph, because Iacob himself was begoten of Isaac: and that Rome could not be mother of the Weast Churches, because she her self had her Parents out of Hieru∣salem: Or, as though D. Harding had stay∣ed vpon the question of AL FAITH, and that, ONLY from Rome, which at, all ma∣keth no mention of, AL, or ONLyE: So loosely you haue behaued your self in your first poynt. let vs now consider your secōd. The seconde is,Iew. 167 that the Planters of the same faith ministred the Common Seruyce EVERY WHERE IN THE LA∣TINE TOVNGE. This is the first of D. Hardinges Pro∣positions, though M. Iewell make it the
second poynt: and in D. Hardinges words there is speciall mention neither of LATIN TOVNGE,More chā¦ging and altering of M. Iew. neither of EVERY WHERE. But generally he sayed it, that suche Ser∣uice was in these west partes: as was v∣sed in the Churches from whence their first Apostles and preachers were sent. And this might stand, whether they came from Hierusalem, Greece or Rome. Wher∣fore he specified nothing, vntill his seconde Proposition: where, out of this Principle, he gathereth, that because the faith came in to the Weast from Rome, and they had the Latine Seruice: therefore, it should folowe by good reason, that it was also deliuered in Latine, where they planted the Christian Religion. Consider now (indifferent Reader) how shamefully M. Iewel had disordered these matters. Of fower plaine and credible propositions, he hath made such a conuey∣aunce, by Adding: by Taking away: by ma∣king of Particulars General: by Drawing the Generall to special poynts: by Making that first which is second: by Promoting ye inferior vnto ye Superiors place: yt he hath left nothing as he found it, but, as it wer of
set purpose, labored to make confusion.The sūme of M. Ie¦wels con∣ueiaunce in oure Propositi¦ons onlye. Al ye people of some countries had their seruice in Greke, saith D. Harding. He wil proue, saithe M. Iewel, that ALL the Greke Church had it WHOLY & THRO∣VGHLY in the Greeke tounge. Some whole Countries for ye more part vnderstode not Greke, quod D. Hard. Some whole Countries vnderstoode not Greeke, quod M. Iewel by his gathering. The faith came into the west from Rome, quod D. Harding. Al the faith came only from Rome, sayeth M. Iewel vpon it. The plāters of ye faith set vp, in the Coūtries by thē cōuerted, such Seruice as thē selues vsed quod D. Harding. The planters of the same faith, (quod M. Iewel vpon it) ministred the Common ser∣uice EVERY WHER in the LATIN tōge. What miserable shifting and changing is this? What boldnesse in ventering? What Ordinary course in deceiuing? Yet this, in dede, is ye way to saue himself frō taking, if he cā bring the questiō to such a Generali∣ty: yt if he be driuen frō one place, he mai flee to an other, to make y• aduersary weri of fo∣lowing,
& the Reader weary of loking. For suppose, ye Latine Seruice were vsed in A∣phrica, ye vulgar people not vnderstanding it, yet that is not EVERy WHER. Sup∣pose it were vsed in Fraunce, yet neither ye proueth EVERy WHER. Come nearer home to England, and proue it to haue ben vsed there, yet very much lacketh of EVE∣Ry WHER. And so may M. Iewel like a bishop in deede not of Sarum but of the West Church, go frō Country to Country, in a straunge Visitation, & neuer make an end of Interrogatories & Inquisitiōs: vn∣til D. Harding shal satisfy his Lordship in al poynts, and proue y• EVERy WHERE IN THE WEST, the Seruice was mini∣stred in ye Latine tounge. Which thing I do not say, yt the Catholikes are not able to de∣clare, (but be yt as it may be,) I note ye craft & cūning of M. Iew. which wold draw all things to such a generality or precisenesse of termes, ALL FAITH, ONLy FROM ROME, EVERy WHER, &c. and in any part alter, an other mannes Propositions. Thus hauing declared what the chiefe Propositions were, whiche D. Hardinge thought vpon in this Controuersye, and which M. Iewel hath so hādled, as though no body would thinke vpon them: Let vs
now return to that Argument, in shewing of which, the most of this Article consisteth: And which, if it be proued accordingly, shal constrain M. Iewel to subscribe. Which al∣though it may be exemplified in both Chur¦ches, Greke & Latine, yet for so much as be¦ing ended in one, it may very easely be ap∣plied to the other, and also because I haue already bene to long in this Article: I will make it no further, then to ye Greke church: After this maner. The lesse Asia had the Seruice in the Greeke tounge:D. Hard. argumēt, against this thirde Article of M. Iew. Fol. 75. But sundrye Countries of the same Asia vnderstode not the Greke tounge, Ergo they had their Seruice in a tounge, which they vnderstode not. Take heede good Reader (sayeth M. Ie∣well) Onlesse thou eie him wel,Iew 160 M. Harding wil steale from thee. Againe: Here is a faire glosse, but be not deceiued. M. Harding kno∣weth wel inough, it is but a fallacy, that is to say a deceitful argumēt, named in the scholes ex meris particularibus, or, A non distributo ad distributum. Onlesse he amend the Maior and make it an vniuersal and say thus: Al Asia she lesse had the Seruice in the Greke toūge.
Concerning D. Hardinges knowlege, I beleue he putteth nothing in print, that he thinketh to be a fallacie. But why, is it a deceytfull Argument? Because it is na∣med in Scholes, ex meris particularibus. Yet the Scholes,M. Iew. Logike more har∣der then that of the Scholes. I trow, speak not of D. Har∣dinges argument, neither doe they con∣demne all Argumentes, which consiste of mere particulars. For the Syllogismus, na∣med in Scholes expositorius, is of that ma∣king, and therefore your rule (M. Iewell) hath exceptions. But you find fault with it an other way saying: Or, a non distributo ad distributum, as though it were to be suspected, that D. Harding (in sayeing, Asia the Lesse had the Seruice in the Greeke tounge) had meant to except some countries thereof: and that therfore it should be nede to bid him to put in Al, and amend the proposition. Wheras, within six lines before,Neadlesse fear. he doubted not to say (Al the Greeke Church had theyr Com∣mon Seruice in the Greeke tounge) to put you out of feare (M. Iewel) that he would not deny it of the lesse Asia being but a part of the Greeke Church, that which he graū∣ted of the whole, & which also you specially marked.
marked. How say you also to this argumēt? Englād hath the Seruice in the English tōge, Wales the same Seruice that Englād hath: er∣go Wales hath the Seruice in the English tōg. Surely it seemeth good inough. And though some Protestant of other countreis, (thinking perchaunce that in the reformed Church of England, euery part thereof is prouided for, According to the diuersitie of Rites and Tounges, as Innocētius hath by his vnderstanding, decreed) though he (I say) would tel me, that it is a deceytful ar∣gument named in Scholes ex meris parti∣cularibus, or, a non distributo ad distributū: Yet would I not chainge my minde, but think it stil a good reason, which I see pro∣ued so euidently to my face, by the practise and vse of our country, that I can not deny the consequence. Therfore perchaunce you are to scrupulous or to curious, M. Iewel in these schole points of which you speake, or rather, if ye mater shuld be examined to y• vttermost, I think you would be proued ob∣liuious, or worthy to be set again to schole to lerne more Logik. But for shortnes sake let ye Maior be reformed as you require, as Al Asia ye lesse had ye cōmon seruice in the Greeke tounge,
But sundry nations in Asia the lesse vnderstode not the Greeke tounge: Ergo sundry natiōs in Asia the lesse vnderstod not the Common Seruice. The argument being now amended in ye point, for which only ye bid your Reader take heed and eie him wel, if both proposi∣tions may be proued, thē shal it behoue M. Iew. to subscribe. Therfore, to the Maior and first of the two, what say you? That Asia the lesse had the Seruice in greke, it is doubted of no mā, nor lernd nor vnlernd.Iew. 160 See, what a good wil can do? Now, whē you be disposed, you are so fre,Bounte∣futty. y• rather then fail, the vnlearned also shallbe supposed to know y• Asia the lesse had theyr Seruice in Greke: which yet, being vnlearned, know not what Asia ye lesse is, & much lesse what tonge was there vsed, a M. yeres a go. For how should they come to ye knowledge? by seing & hearing? they are not thē aliue now which so do know it. By reading & consi∣dering ye bokes & records of those dayes? They are not thē vnlearned which can so doe. By gessing it and gathering it by their own reason, or of an other mās talke? That could not put thē out of doubt in ye matter.
That could not put them out of doubt in the matter. Yet sayeth M. Iewel, It is doubted of no man, nor learned nor vnlear∣ned. It foloweth. But that al Asia the lesse had throughout in al parts the same Seruice (why adde you) THROVGHOVT, In al partes, the same Seruice?Shifts in a readines This signifieth, that ye haue your termes and shiftes in a readinesse, if neede be. But goe ye forwarde. If it be denied, M. Hardinge with all his learning, is not hable to proue it. But you, I trow, are able, and that may be perchaunce the cause, why you say, If it be denied.Contenti∣ons. Sparinge, as it were for consci∣ence sake, to deny that which may be pro∣ued: and yet taking that praise away frome your aduersary, that he should be able to doe it. But what shal we doe with your If? A greate sturre you haue kepte, in bidding the Reader take heede. And to eye D. Har∣ding least he steale away, in examininge the argument, in amending the Maior: & now when it is, as you wisshed, and the propo∣sition is full and vniuersall, you steale a∣way in deede by an If, and can not be cer∣tainely eyed, whither ye goe or what ye in∣tend. Yet, because the presumption is very
good, that you would not spare your aduer¦sary, if opportunitie serued, or leese any vantage that might be taken: we may con∣ceyue, that you permit ye Maior to stand as graunted. But yet againe, least hereafter you shuld driue him in your āger to proue it, and flatly then deny that, which now fa∣uorably ye remit vnto him, signifyeing on∣ly by an If, the liberty which you haue to vse more rigour & extremity, but not folo∣wing the vantage to the vttermoste: there∣fore will I tell you sumwhat before hand, how ye Maior shalbe proued, that you may well thinke vpon a direct answer. I proue it by this consequence.The fyrst profe of ye Maior in the princi∣pall argu∣ment afore saide. All Asia the lesse was of the Greke church: Ergo they had ye Seruice in the Greeke Tounge. The consequence if you will doubt of it foloweth of that Rule, A definitione ad de∣finitum. For after ye haue declared,What the Greekes church . what this word, Church meaneth, and founde, that it includeth without exception all the nūber of thē, which through ye whole world confesse & professe, one God one faith and one Obedience: after this, I say, when you come to ye particulars, and define vnto vs,
what ye Greke Church is: you shalbe con∣strained to meane y• society & cumpany of the faithful, whose publike Seruice is in ye Greeke tounge. The antecedēt I neade not proue,Iew. 164 least M. Iewel should cal it vanitas vanitatum, & tel vs, y• it is not denied neither of learned nor vnlearned. And yet least he should in∣terprete this my opiniō to be but for a shift and euasion, I will shew him good cause, wherefore I take it.159. For, if M. Iewel find no fault with D. Harding, for comprising within the name of the Greeke Church: That coūtrie which properly is called Graecia, Macedonia, Thracia, Asia ye lesse & coūtries adioining, ye prouinces allotted to ye Patriarke of Alexandria in AEgypt and of Antiochia in Syria: I can not feare, yt he wil be lesse indiffe∣rent and quiet towards me: which speak so much within my bounds, and mention no other Countries belonging to the Greeke Church, but only the lesse Asia. Beside this, your selfe, M. Iewel, diuide the Church, not only into the Greeke and the Latine: but also in to the Churches of Aethiopia, Scythia, India, Arabia, Syria, Persia
Media, Armenia, & a great number of other countries. In which part then of al these, is Asia the lesse? Not in the Latin Church, not in the cumpasse of Aethiopia, Scythia, India, Arabia, Syria, Persia, Media, Armenia or any other of ye great nūber of Countries which you signify. If it be in any, name it vnto vs, & shew your Authority: yt and if it be not (as in dede it is manifest by ye borders whiche learned and experte Wryters doe note to be attributed and made vnto them) then muste all Asia the lesse be of the Greke Churche. And again, if throughout al ye lesse Asia, ye Publike Seruice had not ben in one cōmon and currant Greke, it must haue folowed, y• according to ye diuersity of tounges & coū∣tries therof, a distinct interpretation of the Scriptures, was also prouided for thē. For the Publike Seruice consisteth chiefly of the Scriptures, as the proper bookes of Christians (whiche are to be, either in∣structed, Or furthered, Or perfited in the lawe of God) and as mooste proper for that place, where all Prophane thinges sette a syde, the Diuine Hystoryes, Psal∣mes, Gospels and Lessōs are to be reher∣sed & cōsidered. Will M. Iewel deny this:
how can he? which is so redye to graunt it,M. Iew. a falsifier of coūcels. 153. that the belieth two Councels (of Laodi∣ca and of Carthage) sayeing them to haue decreede, that nothing must be redde in the Church to the people, sauing only the Cano∣nicall Scriptures. Yet the Councel is not so, but, in prouiding that no other bookes should be red there, as in the name of Scrip∣tures, but onlye the Canonicall Scriptu∣res, it declareth, what a singular estimation and vse of them was in the Common Ser∣uice of the Church. This Seruice then, consisting chiefly of Scriptures, must not the people vnder∣stande it? By M. Iewels Diuinitie they muste. Ergo the tounges, in which the Scriptures were then writen, should be knowen vnto them. And to bring this to passe, looke how many seueral Countries were in the lesse Asia: so many interpreta∣cions of the Scriptures were made cor∣respondent vnto them. But what shal we nowe saye?Of the in∣terpretati¦on of scrip¦tures into Greeke. For manye skore yeres after Christ there was in all the world but one Greeke interpretation of the Scriptures, and that was made by seauentie Elders of ye Iewes in y• tyme of Ptolomeus Philadel∣phus. After which, there folowed six inter∣pretations:
the first of Aquila, the second of Symmachus, y• third of Theodotio,Euthymi¦us in prae¦satione in Psal∣mos. ye fourth had no certaine Author, and was founde in Hiericho. The fift, was (without Authors name) found in Nicopolis. The sixte, was made by Lucianus the Heremite and Mar∣tyr, and found in a tower of Nicomedia. Consider now by this, indifferent Rea∣der, how litle store and copy of Interpreta∣tions of Scriptures, was then, when of vij. only so great accompt is made: And howe litle haste was made to set them abrode, which were so kept in by the Authors: and howe great price was then made of them, the finding of which is so singularly noted. But let vs staye our selues vpon those first yeres, in which there was no other in∣terpretation of the Scriptures in ye Greeke Tounge, but that of the Septuagintes. In this case then, did all Churches of A∣sia the lesse, vse that Interpretation? They must haue vsed it, or else haue none. Did all vnderstand it? How is it possi∣ble, the seuerall Countries and Tounges in Asia the lesse, being at the least. xiiij. in number. Forth then: had some Churches no Seruice at all, because they vnderstode not the Greeke of the Septuagintes? Or
Or had they such Seruice,Here let M. Iew. shew hys know∣ledge. in whiche n Scripture was read? Either ye must ad∣mit this absurdity, either ye must hold your peace (M. Iewel) for lacke of answer, ei∣ther ye must subscribe and yelde to the Ca∣tholikes. For, if the Scriptures were then in no other Greeke tounge, then that of the Septuagintes: And if the vulgar peo∣ple of diuers Countries and Languages in the lesse Asia vnderstode not that Greeke: And if without the Scriptures, the Pub∣like Seruice be not made: either the Ser∣uice was in that tounge which all the Vul∣gare people of the lesse Asia did not vnder∣stand, (and then you must subscribe) Or else in some Churches they had no Seruice, because they had no Scriptures turned in∣to the Vulgare tounge, (which is most ab∣surde and vnreasonable) Or else you muste secretely confesse it, that you can not fynde, what tounge they vsed in their Seruice, or what you may answer to this Argument. Thirdly I proue the Maior,The. iii. proe. by an In∣duction. In Smyrna, in Pontus, in Cappado∣cia, in Lycaonia, in Caria or Thracia, t Sic de singulis, and so in eche other
Countrey of the lesse Asia the Seruice was in the Greeke tounge: Ergo (the Maior foloweth,) that all the lesse Asia had their Seruice in the Greeke tounge. The Induction is good and lawfull, as consisting of a sufficient Enumeration of particular Countries in the lesse Asia, with Importing, or Supplying, or Making good, the rest vnrehersed, by this clause, Et sic de singulis, and so in eche of the rest. The Antecedent I proue,Iew 161. concerning those Countries which I named. And I proue it by your warrant (M. Iewel) be∣cause it is surest. Verily, say you, Polycar∣pus was Bishop of Smyrna, Gregorius Bi∣shop of Pontus, S. Basil was Bishop of Caesa∣rea in Cappadocia, Amphilochius B. of Ico∣nium in Lycaonia, Gregorius S.Basiles bro∣ther B. of Nyssa in Caria or Thracia after your reckoning: All these in sondrye Coun∣tries in Asia preached openlye in the Greeke tonge, and the vulgar people vnderstode thē. I take your Confession, and proue there by, in your Iudgemente, and euerye o∣ther Protestantes, that the Seruice also was in the Greeke tounge in those Countreis:
except you would answer, that they prea∣ched in the Greeke and knowen Tounge, but ministred in an other then Greeke or knowen. And herein I vse the vauntage of your graunt, to proue that the Seruice was in Greeke: but that it was knowen vnto all ye Vulgare people, therin we agree not wt you. Yea ye very Sermōs & Treari∣ses of S. Basile, Gregory Nazianzene and Gregory Nissine, as they are nowe extant, were not surely vnderstanded of the Com∣mon people of those Countries, wher they sate Bishops: but were pronounced, to the capacity of the vulgare audience, in termes most familiar and knowen, and afterwards penned in the learned Tounge, as well for other Nations as their owne Countries. For the Seruice being wryten in the Com∣mon Greeke, as appereth by S. Basiles Liturgie or Masse, and their bokes also ke∣ping the same Tounge: it is impossible, by common reason, that the Vulgare people of Cappadocia, Pōtus and Caria should vn∣derstand it, whose language shalbe straite∣waies proued (in declaring of the Minor proposition) to haue bene either Barba∣rous, that is no Greeke at all: either so cor∣rupt and vncleane Greeke, that in compa∣rison
of the Tounges, vsed in the foresayde Liturgie or Sermons, they were (at the least) as far to seking, what was saide: as a vulgare Italian or Frenchman is, when he heareth a Latine Oration. Concerning nowe the other Countreis which I haue not named, you can not re∣quire it of me, to goe particularly throughe them: but your part is to geue an Instance and to name any one, that had not the Ser∣uice in the Greeke tounge: vntill whiche time the Maior standeth in good force, and may well be vsed of vs for certaine, whiche can not suspect the contrary. Now ther∣fore let vs come to the Minor proposition. Sundry Nations (saithe D. Har∣ding) in Asia the lesse vnderstode not the Greeke.Harding Fol. 75. But to what end?Iew. 160 for neither this is denied by any of vs, nor is it any part of the questiō. If ye deny it not, then foloweth the Cō∣clusion, that sundry Nations in Asia the lesse vnderstode not the Common Seruice: and so the end is, that you must subscribe.Subscribe If it be no part of the question, how coulde you by force therof, be driuen to yeld? But consider what foloweth.
And yet notwithstanding,Iew. 160 is not M. Har∣ding able to proue it with all his gheasses. Loe,What a stomake? he confesseth the Proposition to be true, and yet (so contentious he is) he will stand against D. Harding, that he is not a∣ble to proue it. Which stomake being once taken, what foule shifts will not a man in∣uent, rather then he wil take a double foile: The one, in yelding vnto his Aduersarye, the other in not defending that, whiche he toke vpon him to say. But for so muche as M. Iewel is so set, let vs proue the Minor, and consider his Answer thervnto. The Minor is thus declared by ye Actes of the Apostles.Sundry Coūtries of Asia the lesse vn∣derstode not the learned Greeke? The inhabitors of Cappadocia and Pā∣philia are within Asia the lesse, and eche of them had a distinct and peculiar language. For S. Luke reporteth, as of others so also of these, y• when the Apostles begā to speak in diuers tounges, they were astonied and wondered at ye matter,Act. 2. saying: A see, are not all these that speak, men of Galilee? and how doth euery one of vs, heare oure Tounge, in which we were borne? The Lycaonians also are of Asia the lesse. And S. Luke noteth, that the people of Lystris spake Lyeaonice,Act. 14. that is, after the proper and peculiar tonge
of the Country of Lycaonia, wherof Listris was one of the Cities. Ergo, sundry coun∣tries of Asia the lesse vnderstode not the Greke. What answereth M. Iewel? Mary to the first of these two authorities he saith: What if answer be made,Iew. 16 that all these re∣hearsed in the Actes of the Apostles were not diuers Tounges but rather certain differen∣cies in one Tounge? Yet more what ifs?Contenti∣ous if sing, & striuing of M. Ie¦wel. And are ye not yet at a poynt, to answer directly neither to Maior nor to Minor, but, that in both you muste hange vpon Ifs? Here may we see, what a sprite can do. He said that M. Harding is not able to proue his Minor (which he saide to try mastries) and now rather thē he will seme not to abide by his worde, he neither wil holde his Tounge, nor yet speake anye thing to the purpose: but by a what if, he prouideth that if he be taken tardy, he may not leese all, but say, I affirmed nothynge, but only put forth a case: and if no man re∣proue him, that then, his What if, may stād for a perfite Resolution. But let vs consider your saying better. What if answere be made. &c. as before. Mary without peraduenture, it will be an idle answer and to no effect.
For, to let it passe that S. Luke expressely sayeth, Euery one hearde them speake Lingua sua, in his owne Tounge, and to graunt vnto you, that all the toungs mentioned in the Actes, were not diuers, but that some were distincted from other, only by certaine differencies: Yet those dif∣ferences were so great, that the Vulgare people of one Tounge, vnderstode not them of an other: For (I trust) you meane not such differencies, as are made by reason of Swiftnesse, Slownesse, Smothnesse or Hardnesse, and so furthe of Tounges: but such only as cōsist in the variety of Letters, Wordes and Dialect. In which respect, though the Tounge of Saxonie, Flanders, England and Scotland be one: yet because of a peculiar Property and Dialect whiche is in them, the Vulgar Saxons are not on∣ly Strangers to Englishe men, but allso to the Flemminges their neighbors: and the Vulgare Scottesman not only vnderstan∣deth not the Flemming, but of the Sow∣therland so nigh vnto him, he knoweth not the wordes and meaning. There be about three skore seueral Coū∣tries, that vse the Tounge named Illyrica,
but though the kind of the Tounge be one,Gesne∣rus in Mithri∣date. and the difference consiste in Dialecte and proprietie only: yet they vnderstand not one the other, as in example: Hungari∣ans, Moscouites, Polonians, Sclauons, Bohe∣mians, & caet. Also, if you wil conclude vpon this, be∣cause the kinde of tounge was one, of some of them which are rehersed in the Actes of the Apostles, that therfore, they vnderstode one the other: What miracle call you this to make men astonied at? And that Cappa∣docians and Bythinians, hearing the A∣postles speaking vnto them in theyr owne Tounge, vnderstoode them both at once? Or howe could S. Luke so forget himselfe, that to commend and set furth the greate worke and gifte of God shewed by ye toun∣ges of the Apostles, he would make a great mater of it, and say, that: the inhabitants of Pōtus, Cappadocia, Phrygia, Pam∣philia, & Asia wer amased & astonied asking: how do we euery one of vs here our tounge, in which we were borne? if in deede these had one naturall tounge, & vnderstode one an other, sauinge for cer∣tein
odd differences. Cartainly if ye differēce were smal, the miracle must needs be smal, which S. Luke telleth for greate. If an English man, knowing no other tounge byside his owne, and a Welshman, of ye like knowledge in his naturall tounge only, shoulde come together to Diuinitye Schole in Oxforde, and both of them vn∣derstād ye Kinges Reader, this were much to be wondred at: but if there come to Pau∣les Crosse, out of eche Sheer in England, seueral persons, and vnderstand the Prea∣chers English, doe they loke one vpon an other for it? do they wōder at the working sprite in him, and say: howe doe we heare, euery one of vs, this fellowe, whiche is borne an English man, to speake our Vul∣gar tounge? Yet no doubt there is a diffe∣rence of speache, betwen English men of diuers Sheers. But it is not so great, as to make a miracle when they, Englishe men borne, vnderstand the self same tounge in an English Preacher. Now, that in the Actes of the Apostles was a wonderfull Strainge and Diuine matter, and ye grace and strength of it con∣sisted herein, that they (whom for y• purpose S. Luke rekeneth vp) vnderstoode at one
tyme, a third person speakinge vnto them, & could not yet vnderstand eche the other, speaking together. Wherefore you may as wel confesse, M. Iewel, y• al there expressed had a diuers language: as ye some had,M. Iew. what if hepeth nothing. but a certaine differēce only frō other, therein. Because, y• difference helpeth you so litle, that we proue thereby ye tounge of Cappa∣docia, Pontus, and Asia, to haue bene so muche distincte one frome ye other: that the Common & learned Greeke tounge, which was vsed in the Churches of those selfsame coūtries, could not be vnderstāded of euery vulgar mā womā & child, of those coūtries. But let vs consider M. Iewels answer, to the other Authority of the Actes of the Apostles, that we may al vnder one cōfute his oft repeted Iffinge and shiftinge. To that of the Lycaonians thus he sayeth: The people of Lycaonia spake vnto Paule and Barnabas Lycaonicè: Ergo,Iew. 164 saieth M. Harding, they spake no Greeke. This is one cōmon trik, of your Logike, to peruerte and alter the intent of your ad∣uersary.A commō tricke of M. Iew. D. Hardings cōclusiō wil be this: Ergo they vnderstod not the learned Greeke tounge: for to this purpose he allegeth all his Authorities.
Therefore, whether they spake Greeke or no, that is not the mater: but whether they spake or vnderstoode suche Greeke, as the Scriptures and Church Seruice were then conteyned in, Or such as we reade now in the workes and Liturgies of S. Basile, Gregorie Nazianzene, or Chrysostome. Considertherfore (M. Iewel) how proper∣ly ye procede and argue. But what if S. Luke had saied, they spake Ionicê,Iew. 164 Aeolicè, or Doricê, which tounges were adioyning fast vpon Lycaonia. would he therfore conclude they spake no Greeke? Here loe is a what if, to further the cause. But what seke you by it.M. Iew. much de∣ceyued in his aunīg M. Iewel? Sub∣pose, goe to, that S. Luke, in place of Lyca∣onicè, had writen Ionicê, what then? would he therfore (say you of M. Harding) cōclude they spake no Greeke? No forsoth: for he sought not after ye cōclusiō. And Alas therfore (to take more iust pity of you then you can doe of others) here hath M. Iewell loste a good Argument. Againe, he knoweth, that the Greeke tounge is diuided by the learned therein, in to fyue Dialectes: of which Ionica, Aeolica, and Dorica, are three, and therefore he spea∣keth Greeke that speaketh in them, but we
haue no such warrant for the Lycaonicall Tounge. Thirdly he might conclude, ye al though they spake Greeke, yet not that which is Attica or the pure and Common Greeke tounge: in which two the Scriptures, and old Fathers writings, are set furth. But what talke you of that, whiche S. Luke might haue sayed, and do not answer to that, which he hath writen? These toun-(ges say you, meaning Ionica, Aeolica Do∣rica) were adioyning fast vpon Lycaonia.An Idle reason or talke of M. Iew. I finde no fault with your Cosmographie, but I see not, what end ye bringe it to. For Spaine is adioyning faste vppon France, yet Spanish and French, are two sundry languages. And Lycaonia though it should stand in the myddest of Ionium or Aeolia, it needeth not yet, forget it felse and become Ionical or Aolical. Verely (say you) if a man by way of conten∣tion would say, the Lycaonical tounge was a Corruption or differēce of the greeke tonge and not a seueral tounge of it self (M. Harding should haue much a do to proue the cōtrary. So should he, to proue that S. Peter was euer at Rome. For what is so plaine or tes∣tified, that a Contentious felow can not say
or suppose somewhat, against it. But this way (one would think) you folow not your selfe, and therfore you goe warely and wi∣sely forward, with Verely if a man & caet. Yet ye seeme to take, as it were, some cum∣fort of it: that M. Harding shuld haue much adoe with a Wrangler, if one would cōtend with him. And sodainly your selfe begyn to play that part in prouing, that the Lycao∣nians should speake Greeke, saying: Doubtlesse they whorshipped Iupiter:Here is to be learned how one might go inthe way of concen∣tion. But M. Iew. doth as  If  &c. And they had the Greeke Sacrifice as it appeareth by the wordes of S. Luke. And it may be credibly gathered that Paule and Barnabas spake to them in Greeke. Doubtlesse you haue well declared and pithly, what a man would say, by way of Contention. Otherwise, ye might by these reasons proue that ye Romanes also spake, after a certaine corrupte kinde of Greeke, because they worshipped Iupiter the God of the Greekes:Alex. ab Alexand genidl. dier, li. 6 And had Greeke Sacri∣fice also, as much as they of Lycaonia, & because S. Paule wrote to thē in Greeke. &, as it may be credibly gathered, spake also vnto them in Greeke. Howebeit (say you) whether it were so or otherwise, it importeth nothing (why then reason you so mightey about it) sauing that
M. Harding maketh the matter so certaine. I perey  then it is one of your cares,A Greate , and set to resist how to ouerthwart D. Harding: And, sauinge that he sayeth it, otherwise you care not to graunt, that the Lycaonians had a seueral tounge by them selues. For whe∣ther it were so or otherwise, it inporteth no∣thing, you say. Yet neither this is, is true, y• you say: Because, it importeth doth way. For if their tounge were a corrupt Greke (as ye Italiā or Spanish is a corrupt Latin) thē did they not vnderstād psalmes & chapiters of Scripture in theyr Seruice, which were trāslated into true & cleane Greke on¦ly. And if they had a seueral Tounge by thē¦selues, much lesse thē, did they vnderstand, what was sayed in the Church. The question also, is not herein whether, they spake greeke or no: but whether they vnderstode the learned Greek or no. So y• vnderstāding therefore al to be is. And whereas we see by experience at the dayes, that euery Englishman vendersten∣deth not ye Scot, nor ye lower coūtries the speak Duch, vnderstand the hygh (which yet differ but in we think, y• euery one in Asia y• spake greke, vn derstode also the proper & oure greeke:
For the pure Greeke, which holy Fathers haue writen, and in which the Scriptures be preserued, is comprised within a small cumpasse of Countries, and continueth af∣ter one maner still: but the Corrupte and Barbarous Greeke extendeth it selfe farre and wide, and is, by sundry occasions, alte∣red, euery day, wandring further and fur∣ther of, from the likenesse and vicinitie to the cleane and Learned Greeke. And ther∣fore, Ioannes Grammaticus writing pur∣posly of ye Greeke Dialectes, him self being a Greeke writer, sayeth, that if ye will take into the number, y• Dialect called Cōmunis: then are there fyue of them, Ionica, Attica, Dorica, Aeolica, Communis. But the bar∣barous Dialectes (sayeth he) being of great number and far out of reache, it is not easy to declare. . Yea rather we muste not call them Dia∣lects, but tounges. So vnlike they were to other Greke Tounges, not only the Com∣mon but also ye peculiare fower Dialectes. So that if the Lycaonians had a Seueral tounge, vtterly distincted from Greeke, so much wilbe imported therby: ye al vnderstod not ye greeke Seruice, nor yet ye Sermōs
of Amphilochius, or any other Bishop ther if they spake, as they wryte. And if on the other side, they spake Greeke, but yet cor∣ruptly & barbarously, that it selfe importeth so much, that they vnderstode not their ser∣uice, whiche was wrytten in the learned Greeke. And as I haue said now for Ly∣caonia, so may I reason of Cappadocia, Pō∣tus, Thracia, and proue that whether the people of that Country spake Greeke or o∣therwise: yet vndoubtedly they vnderstode not (all of them) the Greeke of the Church Seruice. Wherfore the Maior being presupposed as euident, that all Asia the lesse had the Seruice in Greeke, (vntil M. Iewel bring an instance) and M. Iewel helpinge forward to the prouing of it by his graunt, that these Countries within it, Smyrna, Pō∣tus, Cappadocia, Lycaonia, Caria, had their Sermons and (by consequence) Seruice in Greeke: The Minor being also abundātly proued by D. Harding, and by me suffciēt∣ly declared, that sundrye Countries in Asia the lesse vnderstode not the learned Greeke. The Conclusion foloweth, y• some Coun∣tries had the Seruice in that tounge, which
was vnknowen and strainge vnto them, and that Master Iewell mus yeld and subscribe. And thus muche concerning the Greeke Church. To speake now of the Latin Church, and to prosequente the forsayed argument by it also, I think it nedlesse. Either because that which hath ben spokē of ye Greeke Church, y• it had ye publike Seruice in ye greeke tōge, may easely be applied to ye Latin Church, to proue the Latin Seruice there (which once admitted, M. Iewel will not deny, but that sundry Countries of the same Church vn∣derstoode not Latine, nor had it as theyr Vulgare tounge, where vpon his yelding must folow) either because my intent is, not to speake so much, as the matter geaueth occasion, but shortly to comprehend the Some of that whiche is done: Either be∣cause the Aduersary will be so vnable and impotent to answer that which allreadye is sayed: that, to troble hym with more, were loste lavor. I maye also moste iustlye saye it, that he is so wilfully dispo∣sed and sette, not to yelde, and hath so ma∣ny wayes, through much Practise of his owne, and helpe of other Subtile eades, To Dissoble the righte Obiections, To
make longe Answers to Thinges that were not moued,  Au∣thorityes alleaged, To brynge all thyn∣ges into playne doubte, or Spition thereof: that nothinge shall be brought whiche he will not , except it be very sensible. For whiche cause, it had not bene euill, neuer to haue mentioned, so muche as I haue done of D. Hardinges Argu∣mentes, but, by a more compendious waye, to haue lefte them passe by, in si∣lence, and to haue stayed in the myddle of this Article, where, I lefte Master Ie∣well, without anye good Argumente or Lykelyhoode for his Assertion, Requi∣ringe hym to shewe, what sure Euiden∣eies, he or his Fryndes could bringe furth, in the cause. Yet for so muche as I spared not to de∣clare also, howe D. Hardinge hath reaso∣ned, nowe it remayneth, not only to co∣syder his Argumentes, but also to com∣pare them: that is, not onlye to attend and marke what strength they haue by thē selues, but also how much more force & certayntie they haue in resepte of M. Ie∣wels
surmises. Consider it by it selfe and say: The Latin Church is therfore called La∣tine, because of the tounge which is cōmon and currant through it. Againe, in all Italy at the least, the Ser∣uice was in true Latine, but vndoubtedly the vulgare speache of the whole Countrye was not pure Latine. Againe: If there had bene in the Weast Church any other Tounge then Latine, it could not, but by some token be apparent and euident, and some fragmentes or por∣tions, of the Seruice in the Vulgar tounge would haue bene preserued, if by no other meanes, yet by History. Consider I saye these thinges in them selues, and it may become a right good and wise man, not to mistrust, at this present, the vse of the Latine Tounge in Publike Seruice, which he maye by so good reason gather to haue bene vsed at the beginning in suche Churches, where they that were present, vnderstode it not. But compare nowe with this, that on the other syde which M. Iewel alleageth, that in Olde time they had in their prayers, al,Iew. 176 as it were one voyce and one minde: and, that al seueral
nations praied vnto God and praised him in their owne natural and Mother tounge: and, That watchinges, Praiers and Common Psal∣modie, was in estimation in iūdrie countries, and, That Christe is nowe the voice of the whole world: Compare, I say, these allega∣tions with the Authorities of D. Harding, and thou shalt synde, that the oddes is so greate, that in these of M. Iewels there is no Testimonye or Reason at all, for Pub∣like Seruice. Yet if this shal not seeme so to his Fauorers, and if they wil needes de∣fende it, that M. Iewel hath spoken like a Greate Clerke to no litle purpose, maie it please them, to intreate him to satisfie vs a litle more, y• we may vnderstand but of our owne Countrie (to troble him with no other) when the Englisshe Seruice ceased, and when the Latine began. And if he shal neuer be able to bring any Token or Argument, that euer it was in any other Tounge then Latine,Reasona∣ble. sauing of late in King Edward the vj. dayes, can it with any conscience be required of a Ca∣tholike, to forsake that Order of which the Aduersary, with all his Serche or Curio∣sitie, can geue no other begynninge, but from the founders of our Christian faithe
in England? Or will he enforce vs to subscribe to his newly inuented manner of Seruice, which neither we, nor he, did euer Reade or heare, that it was vsed in any tyme these fiuetene hundred yeres? All other Argumentes maye be lette passe, This one of Tradition beinge so a∣uaileable and sufficient,Traditiō that, excepte we would of set purpose and againste all con∣science folow new deuises and inuentions, we ought not to forsake the Auncient and receaued Order in Seruice. And therefore to the ouerthrowing of this third Article, and strieng of a faithfull and Catholike harte, let it be answered to all busie peekers of quarels about other mens right: I holde the Latine Seruice by Tradition, I beleue it came frome the first planters of the faith in our countrie. If I he deceaued, tell me, frome whome els, And whē, And how, I receaued it? And shew, by whome, when, And how, the Englishe Seruice was firste receaued, and afterwardes how it decaied? And if thou canst not in these two poyn∣tes, neither speake againste the firste, nor shewe for the second: hold thy peace then like a wise man, and blame not them which
holde aduisedly the Latine Seruice, because they haue receaued it, And will not Yeld rasshly to ye chainging of it into Englishe, because no Ex¦ample maketh for it.
The fourthe Article ⁂ Whether the Bisshope of Rome was, within six hundred yeres after Christe, called an Vniuersall Bisshope and head of the Church. BY what name foeuer, the B. of Rome was then called, if it be plainly pro∣ued, that his Supreme power and Authoritie ouer the whole Churche, was then acknowledged and cōfessed: there is no more to be required or sought for in this Article. Is not this true? And shall not euery quiet & reasonable man, be con∣tented herewithal? Yes verely. Except we would be brought to that foly, we muste not passe vppon the thinges themselues, but seeke only after the names of them: And discredit the Truth of the matter, for lacke of finding the worde whiche betoke∣neth it. Will it please then M. Iewel. to be contented and answered, if we proue to him the Popes Supreme Authoritie ouer the Church: though we alleage not the very termes of Vniuersal Bisshope or head, which he asketh for.
I would some indifferēt man would per∣swade with him,A reaso∣nable re∣questo to remit somewhat of ye rigor of his, and extreme hard dealing, that if the Thinge it selfe be found, & the Terme of it to seekinge, yet, he obey the appro∣ued Authoritie and confound not al order for lacke of significant wordes to expresse it by. Yet, he shall haue Termes significāt enough: as Principalitie, Primacie, Chiefe Rule, and such others, as the Fathers vse, in speakinge of the See of Rome. Mary, for those two which he requireth, he must not be to hasty vpon vs, consideringe, that it is not the word that maketh a Thinge, but the wil of God or act of man. And againe, that one Thinge may, by sundrie wayes of like force, be expressed, y• if some one lacke, some other may supply it. Lyke as therefore in cominge to some one place, that hath many wayes leadinge thither, he, should lacke either his sight or his reason, which would wrangle and con∣tend with me, that I am not there, because I knowe not, or folowed not, that way which he would haue taken, & yet I chose (I trow) a good way enough, which brought me directly to my purpose: So in ye seeking out of the Truth which is in the thinges
themselues, vnto which we are conducted many wayes by varietie and copie of wor∣des, he that could not deny it me, but that I haue the Matter I sought for, and yet would aske me where is the speciall word, Head of the Church which signifieth the Popes Supremicie, doth by al reason de∣clare, not, that I am far from my purpose, but that him selfe is desirous to peeke quarels and seeke digressions. Let vs be iudged then with tolerable indifferēcie. Hath not D. Hardinge folowed a reasonable and allowable order, which, in this question of the Supremicie, proueth the Thinge it selfe, and counteth it of no greate importance, to seeke for the speciall wordes which M. Iew. requireth? Is not so much enough for a quiet Reader? And ye end beinge attained vnto, haue we to goe any further? I could proue no. But I do not mistrust, so little Iudgment or Consci∣ence, to be in honest natures. And first therfore I desire this, wel to be remēbred & noted, yt ye heretike hath no vātage against ye Catholike, for his goinge to ye matter, and passinge ouer Names, & Titles, & wordes. Secondly it foloweth to be marked well, that D. Harding (not, because ye question it
selfe required it of necessitie, but, for that he would satisfie to the vttermost M. Iewels, or some others, curiositie) he sheweth out of good authoritie the very selfe names which M. Iewel requireth: (Vniuersall bishop & Head of the Church,) to haue ben spoken of the B. of Rome, within the compasse of the six hundred yeares after Christ. But marke it (I pray thee good Reader) perfitely, that by the conferringe of Person with person, Behauior with behauior, Chalenger with defender, and Aunswer with Argument, the triflinge or earnest dealinge may the better appeare, the more nigh these con∣traries, be in sight the one of the other. Now then in the third place, consider, how vnreasonably M. Iew. craketh, in this Article, against him, which by all right was not bound to Names, and Titles, pro∣uinge the Thinges them selues, and which afterward, brought furth the very Names so much asked for: least perchaunce by M. Iewels triumphinge there vpon, many should certainely beleue, we had lost ye victo¦rie. Whosoeuer therefore wil haue some ex∣amples, where a great shew is made of no∣thinge, to beware in him selfe of yt foly, let him marke these that folowe.
The chief Authoritie beinge ac∣knowleged and confessed,at. fo. 101. whether thē he were called, by either of those names that you deny, or no: it is not, of greate importance. M. Hardinge seemeth in part willingly to yeeld.Iew. 220 Againe: It was as easy a matter for Christ, to geue Peter the Power and Title bothe togeather, as to geue him the power alone, without the Title. Here, I can not chuse but answer some what, though for desire of shortnesse I haue and must let many thinges passe, which might be staied vpon. Who doubteth, but Christ in deede might haue geuen the Title (which M. Iew. findeth lackinge) togeather with the power and Authoritie ouer the Church? yet for so much as he hath not done it, it becometh not vs to find any imperfe∣ction in his doinges: but to honor them with all Reuerence, though we see no rea∣son for them, or with all humilitie to thinke vpon them, whether good causes may be brought furth and alleged for them or no. And truly, concerninge this matter of
which we speake, we may rightly iudge, yt because weyght and worthinesse is in the Thinges them selues, therfore he gaue the power to S. Peter. As for Names and Titles, because they are so easely geueu (as appereth by styles of Noble men and Prin¦ces) his maiestie was not ouer curiouse in them. Yet, he left not S. Peter without a name of honor also, sayinge: Thou shalt be called Cephas,Io. 1. which is interpreted Petrus, a rocke or Stone. Which Title, duly considered, is of more weight and worthinesse, than either the name of Head, Rector, Gouernor, Prince,Christ ga¦ue S. Pe¦ter a Title of dignitie and po∣wer. or vniuersal Bishope. Which as they signifie a Preeminence aboue others, so do they not warrant, a Continuance, a Stedfastnes, a sure Ground to buyld vpon, and a Princi∣pall and Chiefe Stone in the house of God, as Cephas or Petros (which are to say a Rocke) doe. for our Sauyour expressed it, in the hearinge of the twelue, and sayed to S. Peter only and specially: Thou art Peter or a Rocke,Mat. 16. and, vpō this rocke, will I buyld my Church,
and the gates of hell shal not preuaile against it. And to thee will I geue, the keyes of the kingdome of heauens, and what thinge soeuer thou byndest vpon Earth, shalbe bound in heauē: & what thinge soeuer thou loosest vpon Earth, shalbe loosed in Heauen. Mary this Title of Vniuersall bishope or Head of the Church, he gaue not him in plaine Termes. But what of that? He instituted effectuall Sacramentes: yet he neuer called any of them by the name of Sacrament. He taught men to beleue in the Trinitie, yet the word is not found in all scripture. The prophet Dauid calleth the Apostles Princes of all the Earth,Psal. 44. yet Christ which gaue them Authoritie ouer al, sayeth no more but: Goe and Preach the Gospell to al creatures.Mar. 16. And againe, I send you furth as sheepe emong wolues.Mat. 10. Againe: your master is one, Christ, and al ye, are Brethern:Mat. 23. and neuer called them Princes. How then? Doth M. Iew. find an im∣perfection
in Christes doinges? And thinketh he secretly in his hart, that a Po∣wer is not well geuen without a Title? And that, if him selfe might haue ordered the matter,To anger or troble the Catho¦likes M. Iewel makth obiections against God him∣selfe. the Name and Office should haue ben geuen, both together? from whēce cometh this, that a wretched and a vile cre∣ature, hath to saye any thinge against his Maker? The Catholike Church is cōtēned, The iudgement of ye highest Bishope in the earth is condēned, & to hinder y• Pope, And āger y• Catholikes, he is not afraied to dally with Almightie God him selfe, And to aske of vs, whether it was not an easy matter for him, to geue Peter the Power and Title, al together. That when we shall confesse the Title was not geuen,Either foolishe or blasphe¦mous. he may infer: Ergo neither the Power. Which argument, If your selfe M. Iewel thinke to be naught, what a wyse man are you, so trimly to set it furth? If it be good, what a Miserable felow are you, which dare so to speake of him, that is Alwyse, and Almightie? As though it should not be agreable, to geue a Power and not the Title. Confesse that you haue ouershot your selfe, in ma∣kinge so much, of a weake reason: Or looke to be Answeered accordingly,
when him selfe shal come in Iudgement for such purpose. But let vs goe forward. To this Church of Rome,D. Har. Fo. 106. it is ne∣cessarie, al that be faithfull to repaire and come togeather: for the mightier Principalitie of the same.Iren. lib. 3. cap. 3. Againe: Andrew reeiued not the Primacie, but Peter.Amb. 2. Cor. 12. Againe, The Primacie or Principalitie of the Apostolike Chayre,Aug. epi. 162. hath euermore bene in force in the Romaine Church. Now marke what M. Iew. concludeth. He answereth after his maner vnto euery one, but he triumpheth not therein, but in this, sayinge: M. Hardinge trippinge (as he sayeth) so nicely ouer the Doctors, hath not yet once towched,Iew. 254 Here be∣gynneth the he and . the thingethat was looked for, and that he hath only, and with such affiance, take in hand For, notwithstanding a great Pōpe of wordes and the Names of manie holie Fathers, yet hath he not hitherto shewed, that the Bishope of Rome within the space o six hundred yeares after Christ, was euer called the Vniuersall bishope, Or the head of the vniuersall Church, VVhich thinge i
he could haue shewed, I beleue he wold not so lightlie haue tripte it ouer. See, how ernest he is, vpon the name of Vniuersall Bishop. And how sore him selfe stumbleth, at one simple word (Tripping.) And how much he craketh, before the end, that the word he looketh for, is not yet shewed. But see in an other place. D. Harding, from the 108. leafe to the 119. of his boke, proueth the necessitie of one head, and authoritie of the Bishope of Rome. By naturall reason. By Appeales made to Rome. By Excommunications directed from Rome. By Elections of Bishopes, confirmed by the Pope. By his Approuinge or Disprouinge of Councels, By restoringe, of Bishopes wrongfulli cōdēned, to their Churches. By Bishops and Patriarches reconci∣led vnto him. And then goeinge forward in this matter, Although it be a childish thinge (saieth he) to sticke at the name, any thinge is called by, yet I will
bringe good witnesse for these names, VNIVERSAL BISHOPE & HEAD of the CHVRCH. This, I trow, should cause M. Iew. to be more calme and quiet, consideringe that he shall not tary longe, but haue the very Names brought furth, which he craueth so much for. But, he must make somewhat of nothinge, aud seeme to be a Winner, before his aduersarie ioyne with him. And therfore, he taketh him selfe to Coniectures and Gheasses, sayinge: Here M. Hardinge secretlie confesseth,Iew. fol. 295. An other copy of vn¦reasonable crakinge. that in al he hath hitherto alleaged, he hath not yet found, that the bishop of Rome was knowen in the world, within the space of the first six hundred yeares after Christ, by the Name, either of the Vniuersall bishop, or of the Head of the Church. Well, because you are so importunate and hastie with vs vpon the foresayd Titles: I can not stay now, to tell you here againe of your crakinge, but wil make speede, to the places which might satisfie your expectation. D. Hardinge therfore, from the 119.
leafe, to the 124. proueth, by S. Gregorie, that the Councell of Chalcedon called the Bishop of Rome the vniuersall Bi∣shop: And by S. Chrysostome, S. Hie∣rome, S. Cyrill, and others, he proueth that Peter was called the Head of the Church. Now betwene he sayeth, that euery where almost, this Name is attri∣buted to S. Peter either in Termes equiualent, or expresly.Har. fo. 110. Thereupon, M. Iewell triumpheth. Thus he doubteth at the matter and stam∣mereth and faltereth at the beginninge.Iew. 30 But if the B. of Rome were the Head of the Church in deede,More crakinge. so allowed and taken in the whole world: why was he neuer expresly and plainly Named so? VVas there no man in the world then, for the space of six hundred yeares, able to expresse his Name; Againe. It had bene the simpler and plainer dealinge for M. Hardinge to haue saied, This Name can not yet be found: and so to haue taken a longer daie. What will you doe when you ouer∣come
in deede, which although ye stroke be but cominge, make rekeninge of your gaines, And accompt it halfe a Victorie, for that it is not more quickly geuen? But D. Hardinge, before he bringeth furth the ex∣presse Terme (Head) to diminish the neede∣les curiositie of some persons, he sayeth: VVhat forceth it,Har. fo. 11. whether that very terme (HEAD) be found in any auncient writer, or no? And it foloweth, But to take away occasion of cauill, I wil alleage a few places, where the ex∣presse Terme (HEAD) is attribu∣ted to Peter the first B. of Rome. Here now should M. Iew. be attent, in harkeninge to the Obiection. But, as though al the matter were lyke to be lost, for lacke of a good face to set vpon it, he looketh merily vpō the cause, And turneth his eye away from that which is coming against him, And is glad for a thinge past & gone, I can not tell what: Sayinge. Gentill reader,Iew. 306 I beseche the, marke wel this dealinge. This Name the (Head) of the v∣niuersall Church is the (verie Thing) that we denie,Fol. 77. And that M. Hardinge hath taken in
hand to proue, And boldly auoucheth, that he hath already plainly shewed and proued the same: yet now, in the end, finding him self destitute,Lycinge and. he turneth it of, as a thinge of nought. Againe: VVithin the space of the first six hundred yeares, there were in Rome 68. Bishops,Iew. 20 for their Constance in fayth, for their vertu and Lerninge, far exceedinge the rest that haue bene ithence. The Number of them beinge so greate,Bragg∣ge owt of measure. their Learninge so no table, their Life so holie, it is meruaile M. Hardinge should not be able to showe that ani one of them al, in so Long time, was once caled the (Head) of the Church, & therfor should thus rest vpon S. Peter, who, when he receaued these Titles was not bishop of Rome, And of whom there is no question moued. Here lacketh (I confesse) no Inuention or Exornation. A Title only or two are sought for. The finding of which, is made to be of Greate Importance. The omnipotencie of Christ is conside∣red for the matter (because he was hable to geaue the Power & Title both togeather) The disposition of the Aduersarye (be∣cause if he could, he would bring them furthe.) The space of six hundred yeres (whether
in that tyme no man was hable to expres∣se them.) The number and worthinesse of 68. Biss¦hopes of Rome, (with a special maruel, y• M. Hardinge should not be hable to shew that any one of them al, in so Longe tyme was once called Heade of the Church.) And al this (with much more, which I let passe) is considered and Amplified to the most Vantage, As though it would be saide: Good Lord what a felow is he, that hath so opposed al the world? And how can that be, but of Greate force to saluation, about which, so Notable a Clerke doth keepe so greuous a Stur? Yet in very deede, those his Sentences are not Argumentes of his well sayinge, but rather Copies, of his foule crakinge. Which how vayne and vnsensible it is, let it now be tried, by indifferēt Readers. For, if it had ben plainly Answered vnto him, at the beginninge: That these forsaied Titles could not be found, he might (I graunt) haue Concluded as he doth:Iew. 306 Ergo mie asser∣tion is true, (vnderstād verbo tenus, that is, concerninge the outward sound of ye word only) But Crake thereof he could not by any right: Because he winneth no more, but that no such Name was then vsed: and
cometh not to the Thinge it selfe, and Sub¦staunce of the questiō. Yea rather, he might be ashamed, To Looke so bygge, And Speake so lowdly, And Prouoke so gene∣rally, And Stur about so busily, And geaue great hope of victorie, And when all that he asketh, is Graunted, to be able to make no other vantage, but only this: Ergo mie as∣sertion is True. Yea forsoth A worthie As∣sertion, To proue that, And stand vpon yt, And bragge on that, which the Aduersarie may easely graunt, without any losse of the cause, & you hauinge it yelded vnto you, cā infer nothing against ye Popes supremicie. Take it vnto you M. Iew. that the name, Vniuersall Head, is not found: We are con∣tent with y• sense or Meaninge of the name.A Greate victorie and nothing taken. Returne you home, from your Greate fight, with certaine bare Titles & Letters: And the aduersarie hath not much to com∣plaine, keepinge the Thinge it selfe with him, vnder other wordes and Letters. You haue done valiantly, (I trow) to stand against al mē aliue vpon two names and Titles: And we are not much hurted, when, for all your Cost, and Charges, you haue come nothing nigh to ye matter, which by those Names or other, is imported.
Thus, if D. Hardinge would make short, and graunt vnto M. Iew. his Assertion: Yet should he so litle make any Bost or Tri¦umphe thereof, that the might rather be ashamed, to leaue the Thinges them sel∣ues, and striue vpon the bare Names of them. But, on the other side, now, whereas D. Harding hath, not only so de∣clared the cause of the B. of Rome, that, without seekinge or caringe for the Names of Vniuersall Bishop or head, he hath, plainely proued his Supremicie: But also hath condescended vnto M. Iewels Infir∣mitie or Curiositie, And hath brought furth, in conuenient place, the very Names themselues which M. Iew. demaundeth: What modestie or honestie is this,Consider M. Ie∣wels be hauiour. so, to Triumph, and Crake, as though thei were not at al found out and recited? If he Answered D. Hardinge before he had Read what he had sayed: he Answered by happ and not by cunninge: If he Read ouer this Article, before he beganne to Re∣plie against it, how did he not marke, that in the later part thereof, the very Names which he asketh for, are alleged out of the Auncient Fathers? And then further, how should he, so, either dissemble or trifle, as, to
presse in still vpon his aduersarie, with Im¦portunate & Impertinēt askinge for those Titles, (the place of shewinge the which foloweth afterward) and thereupon so solemly to Triumph, as though no such Title were to be found at all, because they were not found Immediately in the begin∣ninge of the Article, but in the latermost part only thereof? But here now let vs consider, whether M. Iew. as he was hastie in askinge for those foresaied Titles, whiles the place was not yet come where D. Hardinge apointed to vtter thē: so now, whē they are brought furth against him let vs see whether he Shifteth not as fast away from them, as euer he was Inquisitiue for them, And whether he do not in deede Trip nicely ouer the Doctors: Leo the greate,Har. fol. 119. B. of Rome, was cal∣led in the Councell of Chalcedon by the Name of VNIVRSAL BISHOP. And this Councell was within the six hundred yeares after Christ:Note the seuen fetches or flinges, or vagaries, or delaies or trials how to escape, Ergo your Assertion M. Iew. is false. In answeringe to this Argument, first you comfort your selfe, that this is the first Testimonie of D Hardinges, for profe
of the Name it selfe: with,which M. Iewel he∣re najetg vefire ge cine  Iew. 295 Ergo hitherto, he hath nor found it. Much good may it do you if yow can make anie thing of it, sauing a Beggarly and an Idle Bragge. Then, you signifie, that you will sticke at the Name it selfe. Because D. Hardinge warned you, That ye Thinge sufficiently proued, to sticke at ye Name it self was but a Childish point. 3. After this, you cast the Accompt,Hard. fol. 119. that the Councell of Chal¦cedon was holden in the yeare of our lord 488. Ergo of the whole number of the six hundred yeares,Iew. 296. M Hardinge freely euen at the sight, hath yelded vs backe, foure hun∣dred eight skore and eight yeares (writen out at length and not in figures of Arith∣metike, to make the more show) towardes the rekeninge. As who should say, he shall not goe backe againe, And glad I am that there remayne but 112. yeares to ac∣compt vpon, for the which I will Shift well enough. Fourthly, He addeth that Leo Accuseth that whole Councell of Ambition, and that the Apostolike See of Rome, in part allowed it not By which you may gather, that the Pope thē, much within ye 600. after Christ,
toke him selfe to be of Greater Authoritie then the whole Councel: the Actes wherof, he either Confirmed or Disalowed by his final sentence. After this you come to VVhat If, and say: VVhat if there were no such Title, either Geauen or offered in the Councell{reversed ?}Iew. 297 Againe: VVhy doth not M. Hardinge alleage, either y• Place or the Canō or the wordes? Againe. Why geaueth he no Note in the Margine? &c. Mary, because he went not about to pro¦ue his sayinge by any Canon or decree of ye Councell, but by other sufficient authoritie. Now a man would thinke that by this tyme, ye had tryfied enough. Yet ye pro∣cede in your Vanitie, & find matter of talke where none is geuē,Iew. 297. with: Perhaps he will say, this Canon was burnt by some heretikes. &c. No M. Iew. he wil not say so: Yet you, as though he were like to say it, do make a Solemne & Curiouse Confutation of it: How that it were much for him to say so. And concludinge with a victorious Epiphone∣ma and Acclamation, ye Vaunt and say. M. Hardinge hath no other Councell, within 600. yeares after Christ to hold by, but only this: and yet the same can not be found. Wel syr, what haue ye more to daly vpō?
Will ye now at length come to the matter? You haue perchaunce forgot your selfe, And therfore I will put you in memorie, what you must answer vnto. D. Hardinge, to proue that the B. of Rome hath ben called by the Name of Vni∣uersall bishop, allegeth S. Gregorie. You haue asked where it is to be found in the Councel, And you would make him to be laughed at,Iew. 198 Or discredited, that He allegeth a Coūcell without a Canō. But he speaketh it expressely yt, you shall looke for it, not in ye Coūcell, but in S. GREGORIE. What answer ye now? This is an vntruth to beguile the reader.Iew. Then I beshrew the lyer. But, how do you proue it? For Gregorie sayeth not,97. Shift. the bishops in that Councell, Saluted, Intitled, Proclamed, or Called the bishop of Rome by that name: only he saieth, the Name of Vniuersal bishop was Offered by the Councell of Chalcedon to the B. of Rome.S. Grego¦rie shame∣ful inter¦preted. He saieth they Offered to Call him so, but that they Called him so in deede, he saieth not. What meane you bere by, They OFFE∣RED to call him so? Is OFFERED taken there, for makinge a Profer, Or for goinge about to call him so? If it be, how
might this Ridle of yours be perceaued? or how might I conceaue, that they made such an Offer? First, they stode vp perchaunce, They looked one vpon another, They turned them selues to yt Presidentes of that Councell, They held furth their hādes as if they had somewhat to geaue, They bowed wt their bodies, They gaped & breathed, like mē very desyrouse & willinge to Offer some what: but speake they durst not. Who then can tell vs, of their Meaninge? or who can say, that those Bishops, by these Gestu∣res, do Intend to call the B. of Rome, an Vniuersall bishop? For, A thousand other matters there are, which may lye in the hart of man, before the vtteringe of which, these Profers and Signes do goe. How can M. Iew. then, make vs vnder∣stand it, that the Offers which the Fathers of the Chalcedō Councell made, were Pro∣per and Speciall tokens of the Title Vniuersal bishop, which they were readie to call him by, And not of some other thinge? Or how can he say, that not Callinge him so in deede, they went yet about it to Call him so? Thinketh he, that they had respect so longe before, to his Honestie, And feared to let the Title of Vniuersall bishop to passe
their Lippes, least M. Iew. should be con∣strained to yeld and Subscribe, and that therfore they Offered (no man I beleue can tell how) to Call him so, but Called him not so in deede. Suppose it M. Iewel (which is proba∣ble enough, least by deuienge my case, you should crst, Alas, then hath he lost a good ar∣gument) suppose I say, that A Catholike were before you, And consideringe your owtward Behauior, with Relation had to your Bookes, Or otherwise takinge Occa∣sion or Indignation, would thinke you in his conscience, to be an Hypocrite and A wrangler, And therewith Offer to call you so: except he veter so much by expresse word or writinge of his owne, Or consent vnto it, by sae other mans mouth or hande, coud you, with all your Lerned Councell, be able to change  therewithall, and say that In deede he Called you not so, but yet Offered so to doe? No surely, except ye had A Familiar (which through his subtilitie of Nature, is able to  better of a mans intent and meaninge, than the quickest per∣son of sight and witt in all the word) no mortall Creature is able to know what is within a man.
Returne then, with your consideration, vnto the fathers of the Chaledon Co∣cell. If they Offered to Call ye B. of Rome vniuersall Bishop, either that was percea∣ued by their wordes, either by their wri∣tinge, or some other plaine Signe. If writinge, that confirmeth the Popes Su∣premicie better, then if they had but spokē it, because it tarieth longer, and testifieth plainer. If by wordes, then vndoubtedly they Called him so. But, if they made but a Profer, and did it not in deede, who could tell you, that their Profer had such a Sense and Meaninge in it? whereas it is impossible to know particularly, what an other thinketh, except it be vttered of the partie him selfe, by some word, Or Signe as good as his word? And bysides this, If you can say, that their Secret mind and wil was so bent and disposed toward the B. of Rome as you imagine, how so euer you came by ye knowledge, Yet this is mani¦fest, ye it must not be absurd for vs to geaue him a Singular Reuerence and , whō so Great & Graue a Councel thought in their hartes, to excell in authoritie aboue others, & therfore should Offer (to signifie their good will) to cal him Vniuersal bishop
though in deede they Called him not so. But who is the Author of this false tale M. Iewel. where had he it? Of S. Grego∣rie, as he sayeth. But doth S. Gregorie say so? be not these his very wordes: Nomen OBLATVM est, the name was OFFE∣RED? Doth it not serue the purpose of which he speaketh in those Epistles, that the Name was in deede geauen to his Pre∣decessors? For he sayeth, that they neuer con¦sented to reaceue it. But how could this be, except that very Name, which they refused, had ben Offered? for if they did but Offer to cal him so: then did they not yet so cal him. & not callinge him by the name,The for∣sayed shift vtterly taken awaie. how could the other well refuse, that, which at all was not vttered? But that this shift of Interpre¦tation may not serue you, marke what S. Gregorie writeth vnto the Bishop of Con¦stantinople.Lib 4. epist. 38. VVere not the Bishops (as your holinesse knoweth) of this Apostolike see,The B. of Rome called vni¦uersal. Oblato honore. (which by Gods disposinge I serue and attend) called (by the reuerend Coūcel of Chalcedō VNIVERSALES VNIVERSAL, by an Honor or Name (not sought for, but) Offered?
Here M. Iewel ye haue, that the B. of Rome were called so. S. Gregory testifi∣eth it, his Authority you seeme to regard & honor, especially in this matter of Vniuer∣sall Bishop. Ergo your Assertion is false, fo∣lowing the very word and Title, which so Cowhartly, and yet Braggingly allwaies you driue vs to finde. And now therefore you must Subscribe. Except you will flee from the word, vpon which you haue hi∣therto so much sticked, vnto your Meaning vpon the word. Which we woulde sayne haue you to do: but thē, you could not crake as you haue done, by setting forth your selfe, vnder this bare Title of vniuersall Bishop or Head. &c. which now being found out a∣gainst you, you begin to seke more rome be¦cause you are pinched, and to extende this word CALLED to signify, SALVTED, INTITLED, PROCLAIMED, but this Shift is not yet so currant. Howbeit, great feare there is, leaste after an other boke set forthe as big as this whiche alrea∣dy is made, by much turning of wordes, y will more often vse INTITLED and PROCLAIMED in steade of Called, that the question may be, not what was thē one, but what OPENLY and Ordinarily
was INTITLED and PROCLAI∣MED. But let vs cōsider a plainer place against you, and so discouer an other maner of shif∣ting. You sticke vpon the bare Fame, and as long as the Equiualent, and nt ye same which you specified, is brought forth, ye in∣sult still and egge your Aduersarye. What wil you say now then, whē it shalbe plain∣ly shewed? Athanasius, Ischyriō, Theodorus saluted S. Leo in three sundry Epistles, by the name of Vniuersall Patriarche: Ergo your Assertion is false and you must Sub∣scribe. How auoid you? Mary ye cōfesse it to be true. But of that whole number of sixe hundred and thirty Bishops,Iew. 298 there assēbled, I trow M. Harding is not wel able to shew, that any one euer Saluted or Called him so. Why doe you take your question so, that three honest mens Testimonies are not suf∣ficient,What a  and but you must haue a whole Coūcell to call the Pope Vniuersall Bishop, Or els ye wil not be consuted? You asked, whether the B. of Rome was then called vniuersall Bi∣shop.Iew. 0 And you limited it not within the cō∣passe of Generall Councell. Therfore if ye
will sticke to the wordes, you muste Sub∣scribe, Or els confesse, that this was one of the shiftes which you kept in store. But why should you refuse the Te∣stimonies of Athanasius, Ischyrion, and Theodorus, supposing that it were true, ye in the Councel of Chalcedon, no one called the B. of Rome Vniuersall Bishop? The one of them, Athanasius, was a Priest, the other two were Deacons. But what of that? You make light of them as though they were some abiectes of the world, and say: A straunge Priest,Iew. 298 and two poore Deacons in their Priuate Sutes for their Goodes and Legacies, named Leo the Vniuersall Bishop. Ergo, within six hundred yeares Christe, there were that Called and the B. of Rome Vniuersall Bishop. B. ye except against Priestes, and Pore Dea∣cons, and suche as haue  and ye will allowe none of the Cleargy for a witnesse, except he be a Bishop, and sit in a generall Councell. Or a  and Prelate. Ergo, here againe ye sticke not to the wordes of your question, but a Copy of another kind of your .
How say ye now then to S. Peter? He was Bishop of Rome, and he was called Heade of the Churche: Ergo, a Bishop of Rome was called Head of the Churche. Haue ye any shift for this argument? But M. Harding knoweth the case is mo∣uedIew. 308 not of S. Peter, but specially and namely of the bishop of Rome. But Master D. Harding inferreth, that S. Peter was Bishop of Rome: ergo your Assertion is false, if you sticke to the bare Letter of your question, and inuent not some otherway to eskape by. But when wil M. Iewel be to seeking? For I dout not (sayeth he) But M. Harding doth remember,Iew. 309 that the question that lieth betweene vs, riseth not of any Extraordinary Name once or twice ge∣uen vpon some speciall Affection:Shiftinge and lying. but of the vsuall and knowen Title of the Bishoppe of Rome. How shoulde he remember that, whiche you were not so Gentle or Wise, to tel him of? Haue ye not alwaies pressed hym, with bringing forth of the Name of vniuersal Bi∣shop▪ Haue ye not misliked with him for it, that he would not be bound to shewe the Name, though he brought as much in sense
as the Name importeth? This haue ye done through your whole Aunswer with extreme Craking and In∣sultation. And now, when to satisfy your fantasticall request, he hath alleaged the ve∣ry Names and Titles, which you vaunted your selfe so much vpon, as thoughe they were neuer able to be found in any wryter: ye flee to the Interpretation and Limitati∣on of your question, and stick not to ye plain and Grammatical construction of it. And now (see the vanity) your selfe are able to bring forth good Authoritye, where some Bishop of the worlde was called vni∣uersall Patriarch,Iew. 30 Hipocrite. and that, not by shifting of Termes one for another, but in plaine, mani∣fest and expresse wordes, and suche as in no wise, may be denied. Say you so? Why then haue you, all this while, made such a matter of findinge oute these Termes vniuersal bishop, and hed. &c. as though you would straight waies sub∣scribe and yeld, if you might therein be an∣swered. And why say you so constantly in an other place, This Name is the verye thing that we deny. If your selfe haue the places for that purpose already prepared & gathe∣red (vndoubtedly to the Greate Praise ofIew. 06.
your Note Boke) why doe you with suche brauery demaund them of your Aduersa∣ries? Or with extreme Iniquitie, make a Tumult and Stur in mens consciencies for that word, in which your selfe do know you are but a Bragger? For, if the Bishope of Constantinople were called an Vniuersall Patriarch & caet. how could you mistruste, but as much and with more reason, might haue bene sayed of the B. of Rome, which was (as you confesse) the Cheife of the four Patriaches? Or how could you be so earnest, in reprouinge of that Title, which your wisedome confesseth (for a Surplu∣sage to shew your greate learning and stu∣dy) to haue bene geuen to baser persons then the B. of Rome is? If your Conscience were open, through your owne sincere and true Dealing, Or if by the Authorities, which we should allege, you were constrayned, outwardly to ex∣presse, what ye conceaue and cōcele within: then should it be euident in sight, that ye passe no more for the Names of Vniuersall Bishope, Or Head of the Vniuersal Church, though a thowsand Fathers had geauen them to the B. of of Rome: then you doe regard the Termes, Realy, Verely & truly
with such like,M. Iew. seketh not peace and concord, but conē∣tion and site. when they are by Catholike writers attributed to Christes body in the Sacrament. And like as whē these words, Principality, Primacy, Cheife Rule or Ruler, are proued to haue ben spokē by old Fathers of ye See of Rome, or B. there: you turne your selfe to some dictionary or Eti∣mologicō of your owne or others,Iewel. 244 & say, A Principal Church, is sometime vsed of the Fa∣thers in this sense, to signifie a Ciuil dominiō or principalitie of a Citie. Againe, Primatus is vsed for any superioriti or prefermēt aboue others: Againe, Princeps, in the latin tōge is oftē vsed for a mā,245 that, for his vertu or rome, or any singular qualitie, is to be had in estima¦tiō aboue others:246 To be short, wheras you say, being pressed to S. Ambrose authoritie which called Damasus y• B. of Rome,Iew. 306 The Rector & gouernor of ye church. Let vs cōsider whether the selfame form of speach, haue bē applied to any other in like sort. By which shift, you satisfie ye cōmō readers, vn∣til you be againe answered to your greater cōfusiō: so, hauing in your bosō, Iam sure, lik distinctiōs & expositiōs, wher Vniuersal B. & Head of the church, are sundry wayes vsed, you wold neuer (if you had ben aquiet & louer of truth) so lōg haue cōtinued,
in requiring those vey Termes to be alle∣ge, which, as you do expound them, proue not to you sufficiētly ye Popes Supremicy. You affirme,194 that, in deede in a kinde of speach, both Rome and Antioche, and other great Cities, famous for Religion, may be cal∣led the Head and Spring of the Gospel. And what shal let you then to turne thē to phra∣ses, whatsoeuer Titles be found attributed to the B. of Rome: & so, by a kind of speach, to make that Common which is Singular? Wherby it is manifest that ye maintain Cō∣tention, and put those thinges forth, which you know to be Nedelesse and Weake, and Feeble, only to try perchaunce the strength of your Aduersaries, to the Commēdation of your owne Learning, Or Vttering of yt Notes which ye haue gathered, Or to op∣presse your Answerer wyth multitude of words and quarels, yt for the very heaps of them, being either not Answered at all, Or answered not so speedily, you might triūph i y• meane space, wt some probability. For, when y• Catholikes alleage Termes of like force and Equiualent, then wil you haue no other but the Names of Vniuersall Bishop and Head &c and then the Name is the thing that you deny.From oe corner to an other.
And when those selues same very NAMES are brought before you, then ye make as though it were no harde matter to haue founde them out, but then bring you the lyke of your owne Motion: and then you run to Limitations vpon your question, and to Shiftinge frome one point to an∣other, declaringe thereby, that your sense only is to be cōsidered, although ye peeked the quarell against the Word. But where will you staie your selfe? For if it were proued, in most ample manner, with al Conditions and Circum∣stances (as you by Shiftinge, haue nowe added to the Principall question) that, the B. of Rome was not called, but Intitled and Proclamed, not of Priests & pore Dea∣cons, but of some Riche Prelates sitting in GENERAL COVNCEL, and that, not once or twise vpō fauor, but by an Vsu∣all and knowen Stile: All this would not conuert M. Iewel. For in the end of this Article these be his wordes, Or rather his difinitiue sentence: Although that which the Pope claymeth,Extre shi. were his very right, yet by his owne Iudge∣ment, he is whorthie to lose it. For Pope Gregorie saieth: Priuilegium meretur amit∣tere, qui abutitur potestae.Iew. 31 He that abuseth
his authoritie, is worthie to lose his priuilege. And Pope Siluerius sayeth: Etiam quod ha∣buit amittat, qui quod non accepit, vsurpat. He that vsurpeth that he receaued not, let him loose that he had. Be it so. He, for his own part deserueth. Like as the Temporal heades and Princes of the world, whē they doe not their office, are worthie of losinge it. But who shall depose them? It must be done by Law, and not by Insurrection. And vntil lawful pro∣cesse against them be ended, the Common Wealthes are bound to obey them, be they neuer so vnworthie. Yet the Princes are made by men, and raceaue Authoritie, not immediatly from God, but of the Cōmon Wealth which doth choose them. But the Pope, whome Christ him selfe (without Consent of men goinge before, or voyce of y• world) hath made Head of his Church, throughout the whole worlde: who shall take his Priuilege frome him, if he should be thereof vnworthie? For the Prerogatiue and chiefe Autho∣ritie geauen by God, muste continew, what soeuer the partye his merites are,
The Apostle also saieng: There is no power except it be frō God: and obey you,Rom. 13. Prepositours and such as are set ouer you.Heb. 13. And if the chosen of God,1. Reg. 24 King Dauid hauinge Saull at a vantage, besought God to staye his handes, that hym selfe might not kill hym sweringe, that, As trewlye as GOD liueth, excepte God stroke hym, or hys tyme were come to dye, or he should be destroyed in Battayle, he would not lay hāds vpon the Anoynted of God: And if our Sauiour Christe com∣maunded the Iewes, To doe that which the Scribes and Pharisies dyd saye vnto them, though their lyuing and behauiour otherwise was so euill, that he charged them, not to doe as they dyd, who dare be so bould, as hurte Or disso∣beye, the Anoynted of God, The Highest Bisshoppe in all Christendome, the Suc∣cessour of S. Peter, lawfullye sutttrg in Chaire and Place, of Instructinge and gouerning the Faithfull?
Wil the Superintendētes of the Church of England doe it? By what law and reason? Mary, y• Canon law shalbe brought furth, 11. quaest. 2. piuilegium. and 25. quaest. 2. Sic decet & caet. And M. Iewel shal alleage a Glose or make a Glose vpon it, Of which the whole Fraternity must cōclude, that if it were neuer so much proued, that the B. of Rome, was Called in the six hundred yeres after Christ, Head of the Vniuersall Church, And though it were his verye Right: Ye, for as much he abuseth his Priuilege, he deserueth to leese it, And we wil haue him no more Obeied. Fare well he. And so breketh out this fourth Artitle, into Presumptuons Contempte of Law∣full Authoritie. Thus haue we the cumpasse of M. Ie∣wels triflinge Processe. First, the Name (he saieth) can not be found, and as long as that Answer will hold, he Insulteth and Braggeth like Iewel him selfe. Then, the Calling of S. Leo Vniversal Bisshope, in the Councel of Chalcedon, was not a Calling of him so in deede, but an Offering to cal him so. And so the tes∣tymony of y• inward Goodwill is not suf∣ficiente, but he muste haue it declared by
worde of mouthe. Thirdly, poore Priestes and Deacons, but none of the Councell of Chalcedon did geue it. So by like none but Noble Per∣sonages, and men of honor shall geaue Voices. Fourthly, though S. Peter, the first Bisshope of Rome, were so called, yet the question is not moued of him, but of the Pope. So might the Successour challenge nothing, of the Prerogatiue of his Prede∣cessour. Fyfthly, if it were geuen but once Or twise, it is no matter: because our question (sayth he) is of the Vsual Stile. So must we bringe furth a Proclamation (I trow) Or Scale for it, Or els nothing is done. Sixthly in a kinde of Speache the B. of Rome, as also of Constantinople may be called by the Title of VNIVERSAL. So shail it be but a Phrase only, and of no weight Or Substance, what so euer be alleaged for these Titles aforsayed. Last of all, if it were the Popes Right, Yet is he worthy to leese it. And so it ooteth no more, to Reason of this ques∣tion, for that they haue done, they wil not : Such is theyr finall determination.
By which way of violence and force, if the cause of Religion may be folowed, ye will be to stronge (M. Iewel) not only for Op∣pressed Catholikes in these your prospe∣rous daies, but allso againste quiet Catho∣likes, where they liue with the loue of their Soueraignes. But if this muste needes seeme vnreasonable in Professors of a new Gospel, which take vpon them to direct vs by the expresse woorde of the Lorde in the Right knowledge of all Truthe and Ho∣nesty: I will truste, that this Detection of you their Chiefe man of Warre, Shifting, Striuing, Craking, Dissembling, Ly∣ing, Triumphing. &c. will cause the Indifferent Reader, to Beware of M. Iewel. (❧❧ ❧) Thus endeth the First Booke.
THE SECOND Booke, Declaring by more Speciall Detection of M. Iewels behauiour, that it is needeful to BEWARE of hym. THE proper Conueiaunce and Art, which M. Iewel hath vsed in the foresayed Articles, I haue for the speciall poyntes of those questiōs, shortly and suf∣ficiently discouered. For which his conueyance, allthough the Iudifferent or Waueringe myndes, should wisely BEWARE of him, and his owne frendes and deere brothers the Pro∣testantes, myght with a good zeale require
of him, either to begyn a Newe Challenge, Or defende him selfe better in the Old: And thoughe I my selfe might, for these causes, thinke enough to be already sayed againste him: Yet because Affection and Loue is not only blinde in it selfe, but dar∣keneth also the sighte of vnderstandinge and Reason, that his Fauorers will not lightly perceaue his foule fasshions, except they appeere both Many, and Great, and Notable: And because the weaker and doubtfuller in such mater, are not satisfyed with suffiente, but require abundauce and euidencie: I will for these two sortes of mens sakes, declare yet further and plai∣ner, what Worthinesse is in M. Iewels Replye.
Of the Common Places which M. Iewel hath ouercharged his boke withal, in the first four Articles. CAP. I. FIrst, concerning the outward shewe only and face of his boke, it is so great in quantitye, so faire in sight, and so Liuely (as I may say) by resō of ma∣ny Allegations and Authorities, out of Councels, Fathers, Histories, Law Ciuil and Canon, and the Glose also therevpon: that it cummeeh very quickly into ones minde, to thinke: that, a matter of nothing, should not increase to such bygnes, nor an euil fauored cause so well be set furth, nor Auncient witnesses be so thickly brought out to no purpose. And this I take to be one knacke of his cunning, that he prouided to make his Re∣plie in such a forme, as might dehort some frome the Reading (because of the length thereof not agreinge with theyr greate businesse) And amase other in reading (be∣cause it cumbreth the memory with so ma∣ny matters) And gette some renoune and
praise to his owne side, thoughe there fo∣lowed no Reading (because it wil be com∣monly beleued, that, I trow) in makinge so many wordes, he is not to seeking of an Answer. And if he will not haue me to call it, a knacke of his Cunning, then surely will it be proued to be, a Lacke of discretion: so that he shall not escape iust reproche, either for his craftines, if he perceyued it, either for his dulnesse, if he did not consider it. For the biggnesse of a boke is not repro∣ueable, if accordinge to the nature of the matter, the handeling of it be proportio∣ned. But, whosoeuer increaseth his worke aboue mesure, by taking in that which is not agreable: either he is to wise for the Simple, by making them conceiue muche of that whiche is litle: Or he is not wise enough in the iudgement of the Learned, by puffinge that vp to a greate quantitie, which would, by reason, be lesse in Sight and more in Substance. But lete vs, firste, make our Obiection and also proue it, and then, afterwar¦des, consyder whether it dothe argue, a Craftines rather, or a dullnes to be founde
in M. Iewels Inuention. I laye it then vnto your faulte, that ye haue ouercharged your Booke, with Common Places and Impertinent. And, because I woulde be, mye selfe, the better perceyued, and you also there∣by, shoulde be directed, the more Or∣derly to make your Answer: I take your Common Places to be of two kindes. The one consystethe of Thinges, which we maye vse as well as you: And to the vsynge of whiche, you doe peeke an Occasion out of the Question it selfe, though you neede not yet to vse it at all, or els more Discretelye, shoulde haue vsed it. And these I call Common Places. The other consisteth of suche Mat∣ters, as we can not, or maye not vse, and whiche you also should, at no tyme, followe, thoughe it be moste familiar with you. And if at any other tyme you might, yet in the case of these Articles whiche are proponed, you had no occasion to vse them. And these I cal digressions, not because
the foresayed places might not runne vn∣der that Title: but because in them, you may pretend some excuse, and here you can bringe none. To begyn therfore with your Common places, you are surely no niggard of them. Out it gothe, vpon neuer so litle occasion, that which you haue gathered, and if none at all be expressely offered, yet you will make one, rather then not vtter your cun∣ning. Will you haue a fewe notes of them? I could serue you, with a hundred and odde, gathered out of one halfe only of your boke and no more. But these few, which I shall recken may be sufficient, bothe to proue my obiection true, and cause you to amend that fault hereafter. Iewel. Pag. 15 Euery man ought to prepare himselfe,be∣fore he come to God. Iewel. Pag. 25. The example of Christ must be folowed. Iewel. Pag. 28 The company of Communicantes was cal∣led Communio. Iewel. Pag. 28.The wicked Communicate togeather. Iewel. Pag. 45. Small faultes are not to be contemned. Iewel. Pag. 52. Heretikes haue alleaged Custome. Iewel. Pag. 66. Deceauers blase their doings by the names
of famous men. Iewel. Pag. 89 The company of Priestes was greate in the old time. Iewel. Pag. 94 The people in old time did Communicate. Iewel. Pag. 101 We must be obedient to God. Iewel. Pag. 107 We must not hang vpon the authoritie of mortall men. Iewel. Pag. 111 Christes institution must be kept. Iewel. Pag. 118 Gods holye spirite bloweth, where it thin∣keth good. Iewel. Pag. 127 The fewer places muste be expounded by the moe. Iewel. Pag. 131 The mysteries were kept in both kindes. Iewel. Pag. 141 Manye abuses haue bene about the myste∣ries. Iewel. Pag. 143 Hauing Gods woorde we want no autho∣ritye. Iewel. Pag. 162 All the East spake not one tounge. Iewel. Pag. 167 Religion came not first from Rome. Iewel. Pag. 171 God loketh not for vtterance of voyce. Iewel. Pag. 181 The people of Hyppo spake Latin. Iewel. Pag. 204 Appeale is to be made to the Churche in doubtfull cases. Iewel. Pag. 210 Great profite in reading of Scriptures. Iewel. Pag. 216 Ignorance is the mother of errours. Iewel. Pag. 229 One Bishop must be in one City. Iewel. Pag. 230 Vniuersa Fraternitas, the whole brother∣hoode, signifieth the companie within euerie seuerall and particular Diocese.
241 Princes haue ben fauorable to Bishops. Papa in old tyme signified Father, and was geuen generallie to all Bishopes. 242 The prerogatiue to sit before other, is called . 259 In the old tymes, men that stode in doubt, sought vnto the best learned. 263 The Bishopes of other Countries called the Bishope of Rome brother, or felow. 280 It is lawful for Bishopes, to excōmunicat. 281 Bishopes haue the alowing, of the Electiō or consecration of Bishops. 295 Euery great Metropolitane Citie within her owne Prouince, may be honored with the Title of Mother Church. 300 The Title (Vniuersall) hath bene geuen to some Bishoppes. These be your Common places, M. Ie∣well: but these, by the third part, are not all that I doe finde in halfe your boke. And if they were all, yet they might haue occu∣pied, by very many partes, lesse roome in your Booke, then they doe. What cause then, why you dilated them so much? Let vs come to one or two particulars. That Christes Institution is to be kepte, is one of your Common places. An other is.
That the people of old tyme did Communi∣cate with the Priest. The first of these you speake muche for, and allege to that purpose: Iew. 25 S. Paul. 1. Cor▪ 11. Iew. 60 S. Hierom in. 1. Cor. 11. Iew. 91 S. Matthe. 26. Iew. 111 S. Chrysostom. Ho. 61 Ad Po. An∣tioch. Iew. 143 S. Cyprian. li. 2. Ep. 3. and, ad Iu∣baianum. Iew. 144 And again, S.Cyprian. li. 2. Ep. 3. Iew. 150 S. Hierom ad Galat. li. 3. ca. 5. S. Hylar. ad Const. Augustum. S. Augustin. de vnitate Ecclesiae. And, S.Cyprian once againe: lib. 2. Epi. 3. Besides Indignations and Inuectiues of your owne againste the Catholikes in this matter, as thoughe they coulde not a∣bide Christes Institution.
In folowing of which Place, if you had spared your selfe and bestowed that Tyme and Labor in defynyng of Christs Institu∣tion vnto vs, which you wasted to no pur∣pose in prouing that it must be obserued, it had ben wel spent of you and as we Loo∣ked for: but to proue that which is not doubted of, and to leaue the doubt vnresol∣ued, which ōly is moued, it serueth to make the Replie Greate, but not to make it per∣fite and full. The second you proue by S. Iames Ly∣turgie,Iew. 11. Abdias in vita S. I homae,30. & S. Mat∣thei, Iustinus Mart. Apol. 2.37. Dionys. Eccl. Hist. cap. 3. S. Basil. Lyturgie,38. S. Chrisostomes Lyturgie.42. S. Ignatius ad Philad. S. Paul. 2. Cor. 10.78. S. Hierome 1. Cor. 11. S. Chrysost. 1. Cor. Hom. 27.94. S. August. In Ioan. tract. 26. S. Chrysostom 1. Cor. Hom. 24. S. Cyprian ad Magnum. S. Cyril in Ioan. lib. 11. cap. 26. S. Hierom in Eccl. cap. 3. Iusti. Martyr Apol. 2. Concil Agathēse cap. 60. epist. Decret. Syri∣cij. S.Hierom in 1. Cor. 11. S.Ambro. 1. Cor. 11. Canon Apost. cap. 9. And by the Canon law it selfe, the authoritie whereof you doe despise: De Consecr. distin. 2. Peracta. distin. 2. Episcopus distin. 2. Si non. distin. 2. Si quis. Bysides these you alleage. S. Clement
Ep. 2. S. Augustin. lib. 2. de sermon. Dom. in monte. S.August. in psal. 16. Clemens. Stro. lib. 1. S. Chrysos. 1. Cor. Hom. 27. S.Chrysost. 2. Cor. Hom. 18. S. Gregori Dialog. lib. 2. cap. 23. And when you haue al done, no mā doubteth of it. What meaneth it then, that you in so Many Places, so Abundantly, and so Ex∣actly, haue commended and set furth these two Conclusions? Thought you the Catho¦likes to be so wicked, that, they would con∣temne, the expresse Institution of Christ? Or to be so ignorant of so cōmon a matter, as in the primitiue Church, was, and yet now still is, the Communion? Thē are yo surely, either euill disposed, or simply pra∣ctised. But thought you it good, to vtter (howsoeuer it were) what you had to say for these matters? Verily then,Of al naught chose the least, and it would be amen∣ded. 1 either you ho∣ped thereby to make some thinke well of your Cunning (and that was a crafty In∣uention) Or els without further respect to any your Vantage, yow busied only your self in a Needelesse Matter: And that was a plaine Vanitie. Now, if it was not, neither for lack of Conscience in you, nor for lack of Intelli∣gence, that you haue taken so greate a paine
to proue moste vndoubted and cleare Con∣clusions: it remayneth that you Answer my Obiection by some likely cause and reason, And shew, wherefore you haue bene so Longe and Tediouse in copiouse and oft repeted prouinge of a plaine Conclusion. Vntill which tyme it is casie to be percey∣ued: that these Common Places of yours keepe a Vaine and Superfluous sturr in your Replie to D. Harding. *Note. COncerning this later Common place so lernedly proued by M. Iewel, beware of this One Argument. There was alwaies a Communion in the Primitiue Church: Ergo there was no Masse. For as the world goeth now, this word A Communion, doth signifie, either the act of some receiuing togeather, either that pro¦per kinde of Seruice, which is now vsed in England at the Ministration of the Lordes Supper. In the first of these, two senses, true it is that A Communion was I can not saie, alwaies, but no inconuenience wil folow if it be graunted that it was alwaies in the primityue Church. And that it was very Common and Ordinarie, the heape of the
Authorities by M. Iewel rehersed, doe make for it. In the second: It was neuer knowen in the primitiue Church: And no One of al the places which M. Iewel hath gathe¦red, doth contee so much. Againe, concer∣ning the first: The Argumēt is very false. For euen at these daies, A Masse and A Communion doe agree in sight together, at such tymes as the People receiue with the Priest at the Altar. Concerning the second: the Argument is good but the Antecedent can neuer be pro¦ued: that in the Primityue Church such (a Single and Simple, and Irreuerent, and Dead) Ministration of the Dyuine Mysteries was vsed then, as is taken vp in the Englisshe Communion at this pre∣sent.
Of M. Iewels Digressions. CAP. II. Concerning now ye other kinde of your cōmō places, which I doe rightly call Digressions, they are so frequented of you, as though ye founde some spe¦ciall Cumfort in them, after werinesse takē in other thinges: And they are so Outragi∣ous, as though you went not for a Bishope of Sarisburie, but were some Slaūderous, Fumisshe, And vnlerned Protestant: And to the matter proponed they are so Imper∣tinent, that you may Lawfully be charged with the fault, of increasing your Replie with them. Haue you so much Leasure (M. Iewel) to spend your labour, in Extraua∣gātes? Or if your Leasure serued you neuer so much, haue you so litle discretion, to occu¦pie your tyme in naughtie and idle talke? In your Answer, to D.Hardinges Pre∣face, straitewayes you peeke out of ye Glose, (which is nor Scripture nor Canon,Iew. fol. 1 pag. 1 nor Doctors sentence) A Slaunder against the Pope: And to make yt matter more odious, you vtter it, as spoken by the Pope him
self with his owne mouth, I can not err. &c. Which in deed neither he euer sayed, nei∣ther they which spake it of him, toke in such sense as you doe imagine. Fol. 2. pag. 2. In the same answer, you put D. Harding againe, in remembrance of the Pope, and you speake your pleasure of him, alleging A Glose for your authoritie. Pagina 2. & 6. Of your Replie, Againe yow be vp with the Pope. To what greate Purpose, Or vpon what Occasion, your self perchaunce doe know: but vnto vs, it seemeth an vnreasonable and shamefull matter, to Accuse anie Per∣son, out of the Lawful Court,Out of Season and Rea∣son. And to speake against the Pope, Cardinals, Priestes &c. when other questions are to be hande∣led. Your part and dutie had ben, to answer vnto D.Hardinges Argumentes: And not to turne your mynde to finding of Faultes. Remember yet, how oft ye vse that Lewde figure, of speaking against Thinges and Persons out of place: As,
Pag. 11 Against. The Clergie. Pag. 16 Against. Confession, and Priestes. Pag. 18 Against. The Scholemen. Pag. 24 Against. The Ceremonies of the Church. Pag. 39 Against. The B. of Rome. Pag. 40 Against. The B. of Rome. Pag. 52 Against. S. Hierome, Ter∣tullian, Origen, & against Reliques. Pag. 56 Against. Pope, Cardinals, Priestes. Pag. 83 Against. Miracles. Pag. 92 Against. Deuout answers of Priestes. Pag. 189 Against. The Pope. Pag. 195 Against. Aultars of stone. Pag. 204 Against. The Clergie and Churche. This maketh your Ser¦mons plausible, and re∣ysheth al your writinges Pag. 220 Against. The Pope. Pag. 221 Against. The Pope. Pag. 225 Against. The Pope. Pag. 234 Against. Bishopes and Priestes. Pag. 236 Against. The Pope. Pag. 248 Against. The Pope. Pag. 249 Against. The Pope.
Pag. 258 Against. The Popes. Pag. 259 Against. The Pope, and Scholemen. Pag. 262 Against. The Pope. Pag. 274 Against. The Pope. Pag. 275 Against. The Pope. Pag. 277 The Pope. Pag. 278 Against. Bonifacius the Pope. Pag. 288 Against. The Pope. Pag. 289 Against. The Bishope of Rome. Pag. 297 Against. The Pope. Pag. 310 Against. The Pope. Pag. 317 Against. Scholemen. Pag. 313 Against. The Pope. How thinke we then, may this be called a Replie, (which is presupposed to folow the sayinges of yt aduersaries wt a iust answer) Or an Infamous Libell rather (which the lighter the heade is, yt soner it inuenteth to make, & vtter abrode at all aduenture? Againe: Is it, thinke we, a litle space in a Boke, which is hable to conteyne so many Excursions, or Digressions? These surely, which I haue noted here, I finde within ye cumpasse of fower Articles only: Out of which, I know, I might gather many mo. If these digressions then, which haue
a Speciall fling against the Pope of Rome, and sometimes against the Clergie, amoūt to so Greate a nūber, And if these, by them selues alone, must needes grow to some big¦nesse, (for Some of them continue halfe y• side, some y• whole, & Some almoste a leafe, altogeatherout of the matter) I neede not to reken vp any more, to confirme my Ob∣iection: and by these few, in respect, the wise may sone gather, what maner of old endes and Shreddes, M. Iewells new Boke is stuffed withal. But now, as in the foresaied Common Places, it was straitwaies perceaued with out further declaratiō, yt they were cōmō in deed, & might serue the Catholikes, as wel as the Protestantes: So in these, of which we speake, though I say it, yet that doth not proue it, that they be digressions. How then? must I goe through all and shew, how they belong not to the question pro∣poned? That would be to long and te∣dious. Shall I refer all to the Readers Diligence? Yet would not that satisfie either M.Iewell (if he disdained it not) Or Some other, whosoeuer would take it vpō him, but that it should be answered: I bring in my Obiections in A Mummery,
and Dolosus versatur in generalibus, He that walketh in Generalities,Iew. 61 walketh not plainly. Briefly therefore, I will bring furth foure or fyue Examples, that if M. Iew. cā proue thē to be no digressions, I may be licensed to Replie: And if he can not honestly denie thē to be so, yt then he amend that fault, and speake more to the purpose hereafter. D. Har. by way of naturall reason saieth thus in effect,Har. fol. 109. yt if God had ordeined, yt in ye Church should be sundry heades & Rulers, and none to be constituted to be ouer other, then he should seeme to haue set vp a Confusion and an Anarchie, (which is, the destruction of all Common Weales) But he is most wise, & most tender also ouer his Church: ergo, he hath (by all likelihode) appointed her one Heade & Go∣uernour. Ergo the Supremicie of one man the successour of S. Peter and Chiefe of all Bishopes, must not be thought absurde. What answer you to this reason, M. Iew? You tell vs of A speciall Glose of Petrus Bertrandus vpon the Decretales,Iew. 258 The first Example of an Abso¦lute Di∣gression. that: Non videretur Dominus discretus fuisse &c. Our Lord should haue semed not to haue ben di∣screte & puident (that I may say it with reue∣rence
of him) except he had left one such vi∣care behind him. Yow gather further, out of ye same Glose, Christo data est omnis potestas &c. Al maner power in heauē and earth is geauen to Christ: therfore the highest Bishope which is his vi∣care, hath the same power. Againe, ye add more Gloses, that: Papa po¦test facere omnia, quae Christus ipse potest. the Pope may doe, what so euer Christ hym∣selfe may do. And, Papae & Christi vnū est tri¦bunal, ye Pope & Christ haue one Cōsistorie. And not content with this, you allege an extrauagant, that speaketh of a Closet in the Popes brest, and you tell vs of one: Whose pleasure may stand in steede of a Law, vnto whome what so euer he doe, no man may say: Domine, cur ita facis? syr, why doe you so? And last of all, when you had ended now, with Gloses & Canons not vnderstāded of you,Ye neded not to haue gone out of your Saie to  so urth at length in  most Shameful and open . you bring, out of ye closet of your owne brest, a certaine descriptiō of a straūge Offi∣cer: that neither doth exhorte nor teach nor minister Sacrament, nor exercise discipline, nor doth ye dutie either of Bisshop, or of priest Or of deacō, or anie other the meanest officer of ye Church: but only taketh vpō him to Rule & Gouerne the whole Churche. And so, wt much a doe, endeth yt Digression, without
anie begynning at all made to the answer of y• argumēt. Which, I praie you to cōsider. Is it not reason, M. Iew. yt for auoiding of Confusion, which quikly ariseth in a mul¦titude, where no Order is, y• One be Chief ouer all?Iew. 25. Bertrandus (sae you) hath a Special glose &c. What haue Diuines to doe with Bertrandus glose? Answer you the text of the Argument. Likewise they say,Iew. Papa potest facere omnia &c. That is an other glose, but why tell you vs thereof, and vtter not rather a parte of your aduise concerning ye quiet Gouerning of ye Church?Iew. Again, Papae & Christi vū est tribunal &c. They ye say it, know in what true sense they say it. But what is all this to our question? Now, as for ye Closet in ye Popes brest, & Domine, cur ita facis, except your self be he, to whom no man must say, Syr, why doe you so? We may iustly oppose you in it, Syr why made you this digressi∣on? And because ye cā gue no reason for it, thinke, yt a Closet would doe you good in your brest, to kepe your wittes  toge¦ther. An other Exāple of a needlesse digression is to be seen pagin. 288.The se∣cond exam¦ple. For, whereas D. Harding had sayed, that Athanasis and
Paulus, being deposed by the Arrians assi∣sted wt the Emperour Constantius, were restored to their roomes againe by Iulius ye Pope, M. Iew. ppealeth to ye iudgement & discretion of his Reader, yt it is vnlikely. And why so? He answereth: For neither was Bonifacius the 8. Yet bor∣ne,Iew. 288 yt determined,Fine for Iewels. that the Emperour should be inferiour to the Pope: Nor Pope Innocen∣tius the third, or his Glose, that rated the mat¦ter by good Geometricall proportion, and pronounced, that the Pope, is fyfty & seauen degrees aboue the Emperour, euen iust as much, as the Sonne is aboue the Moone: Nor Pope Alexander the third, that set his foote in the Emperours necke. A fine digression, a grosse Reason. Haue you not readen,Hist. Ec. lib. 9. ca. 30. Chrys. li. 3. de Sa∣rd. M. Iewell, that S. Am∣brose controlled the Emperour? Doth not S. Chrysostome say, that as the Soule ex∣celleth the Body: so doth a Priest passe in dignitie, a Temporall Kinge? Yet was neither Bonifacius the 8. nor Pope Innocen∣tius the third borne at those dayes. What new kinde of Logike is this? Gonifacius was not borne, when Iulius lyued: ergo it is not likely, ye Iulius did restore Athana∣sius to his roome, frō which heretikes, wt y•
Emperous fauor, had pulled him downe. Again,New found L¦gyke. there was no Glose then to rate y• degrees of y• magnitude of the Sōne aboue y• Moone, & applie it to ye Pope & Empe∣rour: ergo ye Pope & ye Emperour are not of vnlike quātitie, iust (I trow) as the Sōne & Moone are both of one bignesse. If this be tru, thē haue you directly āswered: but seing it is false, then haue you Idelly wandered. But let vs see an other Example.Iew. 251 A thirde Example. When I heare) sayeth M. Iewell) M. Hardinge to geue vnto the Bishope of Rome a power peerlesse (what doe ye then? Prepare your self, by liklyhode, to Answer him. No, no, you haue other matters to thinke vpon) me thinketh (say you) I heare Doctour Durandus say: Hic est Melchisedech &c. This is Melchisedech whose priesthode is not comparable vnto others. He is the head of all Bishopes, from whome al they descend, as membres from the head, and of whose fulnesse al they receyue. Me thinketh I heare, that is written by the Canonistes? Dominus Deus noster Papa, Our lord God the Pope. In this point I beleue you wel M. Iew. For,Hier. as to S. Hierome and other (whose thoughtes and mindes were still vpon
God) that Trumpet of the last day seemed to haue sowned alwaies in their eares: so to you, which haue such affection to y• Gloses vpon yt Canon law, as though your Chiefe Armour & Treasure were in thē in making war against y• Supremicie, Doctour Du∣rand, or Hostiensis,Whether doth M. Iewel meditate vpon Glo∣ses for de∣uotion or know∣ledge Or Charities sake. or Petrus Bertrādus, or yt Glose vpō Vnam sanctam de Maioritate & obedientia, are so nigh at hart wt you & so ready in your memory: y• for respect of them you forgett ye present question: And D.Har. speaking vnto you, it seemeth to you it is Doctour Durand. Verily M. Iewell, this is but your thinking, And whether it be through your much Sudie, and emp∣tinesse of heade, Or through egrenesse of Stomake and abundance of Choler, that you be so distracted: the truth is, D. Har. neither saied it. nor alluded in anie parte vnto, Dominus Deus noster Papa, that you might thinck your self to heare in him the Canonistes speaking. But you had a fansie to bring in those wordes: And for that cause, no Occasion being geuen by D.Har. your owne Thought was your Guyde and Warrant, that you might seeme yet to haue some mention made vnto you of D.
Durand and the Canonistes: lest your di∣gression should haue ben to manifest. Now one Example more, and then an end of this Chapiter. D. Harding to proue that the Publike Seruice of England was in Latine, when it was conuerted first vnto the faith, he bringeth furth one Iohn Archechaunter of S. Peters Church at Rome: which was therefore interteined in England, that he should teach the course of Seruice for the whole yere, as it was done at S.Peters in Rome. Of which this must folow by all reason, that if the Church Seruice in England had ben in English: An Archechanuter of Rome, so great A Stranger, had ben nothing a meete Person to teach naturall Englisshmn, to Singe, Write and Reade in their owne Na¦turall Tongue. But this witnesse, sayeth M. Iewell, cometh to Late. How much to late? Mary fower skore yeres. For Iohn the Archechaunter Liued in the tyme of Pope Agatho in the yere of our Lord 680. Well this is hard dealing: but hereof we shall speake in an other Place. In the
meane season, Iudge thou now indifferent Reader, and speake freely, hath M.Iewel any occasion geuē here vnto him, to medle with the Popes Decrees or Gloses vpon them? None at all. For the Argument a∣gainst him comprehendeth no more, but, that the Latine Seruice was in England at y• begynning: and his answer stretcheth no further, then to the plaine refusall of the witnesse brought in, hecause he liued with∣out the cumpasse of the sixe hundred yeres after Christ. And this once saied he is at an end. Yet see, what a tale he will tell thee.Iew. 189 For Iohn the Archechaunter (sayeth he) lyued in the tyme of Pope Agatho, in the yere of our Lord 680. in whose name this decree is writ∣ten. Sic omnes sanctiones Apostolicae Sedis &c.As much to the matter as the ma∣king of a Canon to the taking of a iorney Or the sin¦ginge at yorke to the sense of a Rubrike in Law. Al the constitutions of the Apostolik see must be receaued so, as the if they were con∣firmed by the very heuenly voice of S.Peter. Vnto such a tyrannie the Church of Rome at that tyme was growen. And the glose vp∣pon the same saieth: Papa sanctitatem suam recipit a Cathedra. The Pope receaueth his holynesse of his Chaire. Therefore herein M. Harding somewhat misrekened him selfe. Wherefore I praie you? Because of the forsayed Decree writen in Pope Agatho
his name? Or the saying of the Glose ther∣vpon? No, it is plaine that you conclude, D. Harding to haue misrekened him selfe, because that Pope Agatho lyued in the yere of our Lorde 680. and Iohn the Arche∣chaunter was of the same tyme. Howe now then? Doe you proue, by the decree and Glose which you full solemly haue al∣leaged, that Pope Agatho lyued in the yere of our Lord 680? But there is no mention of such matter in them. Wherefore then haue you brought in the Decree and the Glose? You dissemble your Arte, or els the consequence and hanginge of this geare together (if any at all had bene) woulde haue appered. But in dede, there lacked a poynt of plain deling. For whē you had once named Pope Agatho, you should haue vsed a Therefore or some such like saying: Because I haue mē∣tioned Pope Agatho, therfor I wil tel the (gētle Reader, what Decree was writen in his name, and what the Glose vpon the same saieth. In like phrase, as a certaine Preacher, after he had declared the fall of Adam, taken by the eatinge of an Apple: Now good people (sayed he) because I haue tolde you of an Apple, which is an Indifferent thing: lette
vs speake of the fast in Lent. Now, if you disdain (M. Iewel) to vse this Therfore of my prompting, & tie your tale together wt it: there is no cause why we may not infer a worse against you. I meane this: You haue therefore gone so ofte byside the right waie, to speaking of Gloses and Caonistes, either of a feruent Pasion of Malice againste the Catholike Faith, which made you alwayes greedie of disgracing it, Either of a vaine loue to∣wardes your owne prayse, which itched you forwarde, to vtter your much reading. Againe, the Places which you, so ofte and thicke,Expound your own meaninge, if we M.  haue mis∣sed. doe bring againste the Pope, are odious at the firste hearinge: but when they shall be Considered and Answered, either they shall he founde not to be so as you reporte, either els to haue a true and Christian sense in them. Therefore to presse vs wt them, out of Place & Season, that we should not intend to answer thē, that they, so  away, for the present, without Answer, might hinder our cause in the iudgement of many a Reader, it was craf∣tely done and vnhonestlye. As, on the other side, if you (God wote) meante no harme at all, but without all immoderate
Affection or Crafty cumpasse, went plaine∣ly and directly forwarde in your matters, only that your Replie might be full: then haue you done grosselye and vnorderly. To be shorte, whatsoeuer, and howso∣euer the causes be, the Indifferent Reader may iudge of ye Effect, and perceaue that they are vndoubted Digressions, whiche you haue made from the question, to Ca∣nons and the Gloses vpon thē, and which I burden you withall. And I burden you herewithall, so much the more iustely and ernestly,M. Iew. finth fault with digressiōs because your selfe are so Rigorous, vppon lesse Occa∣sion or none at all, againste D. Hardinge. For when he, in the Article of Priuate Masse, did put it as a sure Ground: that the Masse or Vnbloudye Sacrifice, was so manye wayes to the Proued, that you coulde not withstande the Catholy∣kes therein,Hard. Fol. 25. And towched shortelye in a Leafe and a half, the Authorities which dydde serue that Purpose, of whiche he might haue made A Iuste Treatise, and neuer haue gone byside hys Purpose: yet that litle whiche he spake greeueth you so much, that you say:
It is a simple kinde of Rhetorike,Iew. p 12 to vse so large digressions frome the matter, before ye once enter into the matter. As who should say, that the Author of a Treatise might not take what Order he would: Or that to speake of the Masse, were an Impertinent thinge to Priuate Masse, Or that in the discussing of a com∣pound it were not lawfull, to open the na∣ture of ye simple: Or, when two things are at one tyme (yet couertly) impugned, to shew that the one of them standeth vppon sure ground, thereby to discumforte the Aduersarie. After like sorte of quarrelling, whereas D. Harding concluded, that: Single Communion was not only suffered in tyme of persecution,Hard. 38. but al∣so allowed in quiet & peaceable tymes euen in the Churche of Rome it selfe, where true Religion hath euer bene moste exactly obserued & caet. M. Iewel greately offended herewith all, and merueilinge (as it were) at the Matter: But why doth M. Hardinge (sayeth he)Iew. 5
thus out of reason, rush into the Church of Rome that was longe agoe? But, why say you so M. Iewel? Doth not the Argument, which he maketh, re∣quire that he should commend that See? For Rome itselfe allowed (sayeth he) pai∣ate Masse: ergo it is the lesse to be douted of. Whiche Argument because it will at these dayes seeme the worse, the more that it dependeth of the Authoritie of that See: could he doe lesse, then bring one testimo∣nie in the praise thereof? and call you this a Russhing in thereto out of season? But what should he haue done by your fyne aduise? Mary, say you:See the malice to speake il of Rome, he taketh it to be to some pur∣pose, and to speake wel therof he cōpteth it out of season. It had bene more to the purpose to haue vewed the state of the same Church as it standeth now. Had it so? And you being so Malicious∣ly and wickedly disposed, would the Au∣thoritie thereof, as it is now, haue preuai∣led with you? Lette anie indifferent man be Iudge, whether it had bene aptlye done of D. Harding, in warrantinge of Sole Receauinge as alowed in Rome, to com∣mend y• Consequēce by telling the faults which may be founde in that Citie nowe, rather then the testimony of the Bishopes
of all Gallia: whiche within the six hun∣dred yeres after Christe, acknowleged, that from thence came the Fountaine and spring of theyr Religion. Againe, let any Indifferent man iudge, whether M. Iewell hath Answered this prayse of the Bisshoppes of Gallia geauen so longe agoe vnto the Churche of Rome, by his Accusinge of Bisshoppes, Cardi∣nales, and Priestes: Or by Lamentinge the case of Rome as S. Bernarde dyd, Or by makinge of Prouerbes vppon it, as Euripides sometyme dyd of the Citie of Athens. Surely in this very place,Is this the liberty of the Gos¦pell, or the Charitye of your Sprites? where with∣out cause he reproueth his Aduersarie for commendinge out of season (as he iudgeth) the See of Rome, it is a greate shame to Rushe into Discommendation of Bis∣shoppes, Cardinals and Priestes atten∣dinge vppon that See: And to like it bet∣ter to Examine and Iudge the Present of Rome, then to remember the Auncient Dignitie and Vertue thereof, to confirmation of suche pointes, as in those dayes were by it alowed, Other places and Signes thre are,
out of which I doe gather, that M. Iewel can not abide Digressions, as when he sayeth: This Question is out of course.Iew. 149 We may well suffer M. Hardinge to wander at large in matters that relieue him nothing.153. I it were lawfull for others so to doe, it were no greate Masterie to write Bookes. Again These be none of the maters, that lie in Question. M. Harding maketh a longe discourse of the Apostles & caet.155. If he had shewed to what end, we might the better haue knowen his purpose. But to what end?160. For neither, it is denied of vs, nor it is any part of our question. Which thinge neither is denied by me,180. nor any wise toucheth the question. By these I am persuaded, that he would haue ye matter it self folowed, and loueth not to haue the time idelly bestowed. Nowe though I am hable to declare, that Doctour Hardinge in these pointes hath done no otherwise then he lawfullye might: Yet to lette that passe, I Con∣clude agaynste  Iewell, that of all
thinges it is most Absurd in him that is so Precise with other,Vnequall measure. to be wide and large to∣wardes him selfe in the selfe same kinde of thing, for which (though vniustlye) he re∣proueth other. And if,Iew. 153. as M. Iewel confesseth, it be no great mastery to wryte bookes, if it be lawful to wāder at large in matters that relieue not: Let no man wonder at the worthynesse of him, which hath wrytten so mightye a Re∣ply, considering that he runneth so far into Common Places, and Rusheth so fowlye, into dispraise of Popes, Cardinals, Priests and Church of Rome: whiche neither ma∣keth the new Gospellers the honester mē, neither destroieth the Present and Aunci∣ent faith of the Catholike Church. ¶Of a thirde kinde of Common Places, worse then any of the foresaid two. CAP. III. TO proue by examininge of sundrye wintesses, A Truthe which is either plaine by it selfe, Or els by the Ad∣uersary confessed, it is an idle spen∣ding
and prolonging of tyme, to the shame of the party that vseth it: And no hurt at al to the vnderstanding of the Iudge or the Court, by troubling them with some dout or erroure. For in laboring to perswade but a Trueth, which euery man oughte to cleaue vnto, be the vnderstanding neuer so closelye vnited therevnto by fulnesse of perswasion, it can be no sinne or daunger to stand fast by that, which not to assent vn∣to, were reproueable. And therefore, sa∣uing for other tircumstances, of Subteltie or Vanitie vsed therein, M. Iewel is not hurtfull to any poynte of true Faithe and Religion, in his folowing of those Com∣mon Places, of which I haue spoken all ready. On the other side, when an Heretike goeth from the matter that he hathe taken in hand, to Accuse, and Condemne, and bring into harred, Popes, Cardinalles, Priestes. &c. by gathering in of Ruinors, by folowing of Suspitions, and setting open vnto the world the worst that he can speake of the Clergy: This, although it be Vniustly, Proudly, and Vncharitably don, yet doth it not greatly touche in any parte our Faith or Religion. For if all were true
that is fained vpon Popes, Cardinals and Priestes: Or if nothing be false, of that which their Enemies reporte, of some of them, what foloweth then? No more sure∣ly, than that suche Persons are offenders, and that the faultes of the Clergy are to be Corrected. And I pray God be mercifull vnto his Church, that either no Crimes be found among the worthier members of it, Or iust Canons and lawes may be execu∣ted, suche as allready are made for the pur∣pose. But let these thinges be, as they may or will be, who hath made Englishmen Iud∣ges ouer Romanes? Or who but the cur∣sed Children, doe tell tales abrode of their Fathers Priuities? Againe, why should there not be Praying for Soules depar∣ted, because Some haue taken mony for it? Or whye due honor not geuen to Sacra∣mentes, because some Sir Iohns are irre∣nerent? It is not safe to leape out of the Arke, into the maine waters, beeause of some euil sent of men or bcastes therin. Or to leaue the folowing of Christe, because Publicanes and lypnners went in his com∣panye. The Apostleship is honorable, thoughe
Iudas be a Traitor: And the Doctrine of him that sitteth orderlye in the Chaire, is pure and good, though the breathe whyche commeth from him doe sauoure. These things therefore considered, let M. Iewel make Impure digressions, not sparinge to beraie his owne clothes in a fowle waye and intent, so that he may get some dust or durt, to hurle after e heeles of Popes and Cardinals. Yet al this concer∣neth but maners only, and should not in anie Indifferent iudgement or meane dis∣cretion, remoue a Christian from the sed∣fastnes of his faith. But nowe A thirde kind of Common Places which I finde resorted vnto of M. Iewel, Yea rather pointed out vnto vs by him, is so wide and so daungerous, that a man shall not only goe quickely out of his waye in folowinge them by him selfe, but also when God shall send him a Guide to conducte him in the way, be vncertaine and doutful meanes as M. Iewel . It semeth that now  long since intended Purpoes of the almost come to theyr  there
lacketh no more nowe, but that, by Open Apostasie, he make the faith of Christe to be forsaken: and that, not so much as the name thereof, shal be suffered in the world. Speake I this without cause? Let any Indifferent man be Iudge. For take the fundations awaye frome an howse, and can it contynue any space together? Take all credite awaye, betwixte man and man in this trade of life, and will there be left a∣ny Occupying to and fro? If no Authori∣tie and law be in a Common wealthe, can the state thereof endure? What is that a∣mong Christians which hath brought them vnto the Faith, and Staied, and Gouerned them in it? Is it not the Authority of the Churche, Commending the Doctrine of Christ vnto vs, By Fathers, By Coun∣cels, By Custome and Tradition, And by Succession of Bishoppes euen from S. Peter hitherto?Prepara∣tion for y• Antichrist Emong all which, if no one, may safely be leaned vnto, what re∣maineth in all the world worthye of cre∣dite? And except there be an Authoritye and Order, which we may and must folow, what Faith can we haue at all? But who is he, that prepareth suche waies for the Antichrist? Or who shaketh
the Hartes and Consciencies of Christi∣ans, euen from the very botome and foun∣dations of them? Mary, except you BE∣WARE of him, M. Iewel emonge o∣ther, is he. And either he keepeth yet still in store, some secrete Reuelatiōs, by which perchaunce he will perswade the worlde, (which is incredible) Or els (As farre as we may gather by his Reply) neither him selfe hath any Faith, neither will suffer any other to be quiet in it. Like a Rhetorician, which for Glorie or Gaine sake, feareth nothing so much as to be found Tongetied in any matter, especi∣ally professing to speake aptly and copious∣ly in euery matter, And to that end proui∣deth his Common places to be in a rea∣dinesse. For witnesses and Against witnes∣ses. For Rumors and againste Ru∣mors, For trying oute a matter by Racking, and Against racking: So hathe M. Iewel done.Diuinitye brought to Rhetoricke He hathe brought Diuinitie downe to Rhetoricke, And, as though the kingdome of God con∣sisted in Talke, and not in Vertue and
Power, so doth he shewe vnto his diligen Readers, the Arte how to weakē the Ad∣uersaries staies and Authorities, and in an∣swering all other men, yet for their owne partes neuer to be answered. And to this end, serueth thys worst kind of Common Places, of which I gene thee (Indifferent Reader) faire warning. As in example, For Custome, against Custome: For Fa∣thers, against Fathers: For Councels a∣gainst Councels: For Vnity, against V∣nity: For Ceremonies, against Ceremo∣nis: For Miracles, against Miracles. In which how M. Iewel hathe furnished hym selfe, let it firste be declared, and then after∣warde Considered. For Custome. If he doubt S. Paule,Iew. 101. yet the verie practise and continuall Order of the primitiue Chur∣che, fullie declareth what Christe mente. And they say: Consuetudo est Optima Interpres Legum. Custome is the best Interpreter of the Lawe.
Si De Interpretatione legis quaera∣tur. &c. If question happen to be moued, touching the meaning of a Law, first of all we must see,De legi∣bus et Se natuscō sulto & Longa Consue. Si de. what order hathe bene vsed in the like Ca∣ses in times past. For the Custome and pra∣ctise of the people, is the best expounder of the Lawe. Against Custome. THe Reason that S. Basile maketh of Cu∣stome and continuaunce,Iew. 49. being wel con∣sidered is very weake, bothe for many other good and Iust causes, and allso the same Cu∣stome, as it was neuer Vniuersally receiued, so vpon better aduise by Order of the Chur∣che, it was cleane abolisshed. For wise men in Goddes cause haue euermore mistrusted the Authority of Custome. The Heretikes in old time named Aquarij, that in the holy Mi∣nistration vsed Water onlye, and no Wine,It is vt∣terly vn∣true: for in his Epi∣stles, ad Iubai∣anū, Qui rinum, Pōpeiū. notwithstāding they manifestly brake Chri∣stes Institution as our Aduersaries do nowe, yet they vphelde their doinges therein, by Long Custome. But S. Cypriane being then aliue, wrote thus against them.
Victi ratione Opponunt Consuetudi∣nem quasi Consuetudo sit maior Veri∣tate. & caet.he speketh not agaīst aquarios but agaīst the Catho¦likes, whi¦che by Cu¦stome and Traditiō consuted his Opini¦on concer∣ninge Re∣baptizing of them, whom He  had bapti¦sed before 97 Being ouercome with Reason, they defende them selfe with Custome, as though Custome were better then the truth. We maie not pre∣scribe of Custome, but we must ouercome with reason. Custome without truth is the Mother of errour. Consuetudo, Initium ab aliqua Igno∣rantia vel simplicitate sortita, in vsū per successionem corroboratur. Sed Dominus noster Christus veritatē se, non consuetudinē, cognominanit &c. Custome either of simplcitie,If ye al∣low Ter∣tulliā, whi goe your maidens with open ace: If ye alow hym not, whye vse you his  or of Ignorāce, geating once an entrie, is inured and harde∣ned by succession, and is defended against the truth. For Christ our Lord called himself Truth, and not Custome, Let them take hede therefore, vnto whome the thinge seemeth new, that in it self is old. It is not so much the Noueltie of the matter, as the Truth that proueth an Heresye. Whatsoeuer sauoreth against the truth, it is an Heresie, be the Cu∣stome thereof neuer so old. These foresayed Places are Pro & Con. This that foloweth, I can not tel where to
set it. Whether, emong those that make for Custome, or against it. But as I find it, so shal you haue it. S. Augustine in this Caseys very reasonable his wordes be these:Iew. 143 Vbi Authoritas desinit, ibi Consuetudo Ma¦iorum Pro lege tenenda est: Where Au∣thoritie faileth. This seemeth in some Case to make for Custome. But Consider what foloweth in M. Iewel. But hauing Gods worde and CHrists Institution, we want no Authoritie. In what steede then shal any Custome stand vs, where the ru∣dest Protestant in A whole Countrie, wil crake and bost of it, that Gods worde is his warrant in al his procedinges? But let vs goe to an other place. For Fathers. COncerning Auncient Fathers we com∣mend them sufficiently, when we defend them ernestly, Or speake of them reuerētly. And there needeth not a Texte for their praise, owt of the Scriptures or Auncient Historie, when our selues doe actuall?
tender their Integritie of Estimation, And speake many faire and good wordes of them. So doth M. Iewel: Sometymes Complainyng or sorowing that thei are not rightly alleged. As, For proufe hereof M. Harding allegeth the Authoritie of Dionysius wherein he dothIew. 26. Greate wronge to that GOOD OLD FATHER, &c.Hypocrite Sometymes requiring thē to be brought furth and beleued: As, The mater being so weightie, and not yet thoroughly beleued,Iew. 23. it had ben good for M. Harding, to haue made profe thereof, by the authoritie of S. August. S. Hierome or some other OLD CATHOLIK Doctours. At an other tyme, Gentelly intreatyng the Reader to consider the place of the Do∣ctour, and so sweetly leading hym by reaso∣ble request, that he can not chuse but con∣ceiue much of the worthines of the Father. As, Good Christian Reader, Yf thou haue Chry¦sostome peruse this place,Iew. 269 and weigh wel his wordes: If thow haue hym not, yet be not ouerhastie of beleife. At an an other tyme againe: Vehement∣ly
inueighing against his Aduersarie, as though he dyd not esteme the Fathers. Which although D. Harding in that place doe not, yet M. Iewel, in takyng hym vp for it, as if he had done it, declareth there∣by his Zelous Affection towardes them: As, I alleged the saieing of S. Basyle:Iew. 169 That the Church &c. The saieing of S. Hierome: That the noise &c. Lykewyse the saieing of Chry∣sostome: Common Petitions &c. But WHAT THEN. saieth M Harding. Why WHAT THEN? Thinketh M Harding that the Authoritie of Arnobius, S. Ambrose. S. Augustine. S. Hierome. S. Chrysostome, And other holie Fathers is so light, that he is hable to blow them al awaie, with these two vaine Sillables, WHAT THEN? To be short, when hymselfe directly estemeth them, it moueth the Reader to thinke also wel of them: As in Exam∣ple, S. Augustine is verie REASONA∣BLE.Iew. 14. Verily Gregories Authoritie in this case were right good,188. if he would saie the word.
It is S. Ambrose Interpretation.199. With other lyke Phrases. To this place it maye also be referred, when he craueth ernestly for the expresse wordes of the Fathers: As. If the holy Fathers had so belewed,Iew. 148. they had wordes, and were hable to vtter it. Was there no man then in the world,302. for the space of six hundred yeres, hable to Ex∣presse his name? As though he would saie: Al the olde Fa∣thers of the Churche,306. bothe Greekes and La∣tines wanted wordes and Eloquence, and ei∣ther they could not, or they durst not Cal the Head of the Church by his owne peculiar name. As who should saie that M. Iewel is so addicted to the Fathers, that if any one of them saie the worde, he Subscribeth and yeldeth. Against Fathers. FAthers, because thei are many in num∣bers, therefore to make the matter more easie for the Conquering of them, it ys politikely done, to set furth a General Ex∣ception against them except they appeere
by a certaine daie, which is, before the 600. yere after Christ, shalbe gone or Expired. for in deede how M. Iewel taketh the six hundred yere, I can not yet redily tel. As:Iew. 123 Dionysius, one of late yeres, and therefore Lead awaie with many errours. S. Bernard is A Doctour but of Late yeres:116. Therefore his authoritie We must weigh the Lighter. An other policie ys, to cause the Allea∣ging of Fathers to be generally suspected: As, There ys no way so easy, to beguile the sim¦ple,Iew. in his prefa∣ce to the reader. as the name and countenance of Aunciēt Fathers. The Arian Heretikes alleged for themselues, the Auncient Father Origen the Nestorian Heretiques alleged the Councel of Nice: The Donatian heretiques alleged S. Cyprian: The Pelagian heretiques alleged S. Ambrose, S. Hierome, and S. Augustine. And Dioscorus the heretike, alleged Gre¦gorius, Cyrillus, and Athanasius, and com¦pleined openly in the Councel, euen in lyke sort, and as iustly, as M. Iewel doth now: Ego defendo dogmata sanctorum Pa∣trum:In Con. Chalc. Act. 1. Ego illorum habeo testimonia, nō obiter nec in trāscursu sed in ipsorū
libris posita. I maiīteine the Doctrine of the holy Fathers. I haue their wit∣nesses, not vttered by Chaunce, or by the waie, but writen in their bokes. Also to deny the Authoritie of the testy∣monie is one waie: and is done sometymes boldly and iestingly. As, Concerning the Epistle of Athanasius to Felix, and cer∣taine other Epistles, that be extant in his name. A scarcrow (saieth M. Iewel) stuft with straw,Iew. 332. and set vpright, maie Seeme a far of to be A Man. Euen so a forger of lies and fables, prickt vp in the apparel of Auncient names maie seeme to the Ignorant An olde Catho∣like Father. Againe: The maner of his vtterance is childissh,133. and babling, emptie of mater, and ful of wordes without measure. The substance of the whole is nothing els but flattering. &c. Sometymes againe couertly and cour∣teously: As, The Decretal Epistle,Iew. 264 that is abrode vnder the name of Iulius semeth to sauor of some corruption Lykewyse:212. This Exposition of Chryso∣stom
is very strange,303. and agreeth with few o∣thers. Againe: Although this place of Chrysostome import not greatly (as who should saie, I would not care much to graunt al that he writeth) Yet being wel shifted and considered, it maie seeme very suspitions, as nothing agreeing, either with that went before, or with that foloweth after, but altogeather sauering of some corrupti∣on. Furthermore though the person of the Father can not be denyed, yet the Estima∣tion of by in maie be hyndred. As: This Augustine, whome M. Harding cal∣leth Sainct,Iew. 185 and some others, the Apostle of England, was not that Greate Learned Father S. Augustine &c. but an Hypocrite, a super∣stitious man, Cruel, Bloudie, and proude aboue measure. Againe: He wrote to Rome for resoluti∣on of certaine questions &c. so Childisshe & so Rude that a man maie wel doubt,Yet S. Gregorie answered them with out any such rusly kyng. 310. whether Augustine were ruder, or the people. Item: Touchinge Victor that wrote the storie of the Vandals, he is neither scripture, nor Councel, nor Doctour, nor writeth the Order or Practise of the Primitiue Churche.
Againe. Vnto this superstition S. Hie∣rome himself gaue greate Occasion, many times, both writing and speaking vnseemely of the state of Mariage. Now to make this mater more likely,Iew. 52. M. Iewel doth cun∣ningly, to number hym emong other that were gyltie: As, In this errour were diuers of the Old lerned Fathers. Tertullian saieth, I Allow not Ma∣riage. Origine saieth, No man can offer the continual sacrifice, vnlesse he be a Virgin. S. Hierome saieth: It is not good to touche a woman, Therefore it ys il to touche a woman. Vpon occasion of which errour the people sometymes for∣bare the Churches, where Martyrs were buried. To conclude, there is a certaine figure of Replyinge, when in graunting vnto some matter, you secretely take it awaie a∣gaine? As, I maye not disgrace the credite of this storie,Iew. 136. albeit in Sozomenus and Nicephorus, of bothe whome, the same is recorded, there be sundrie thinges that maie be wel filed. By these helpes then, A yong Diuine
shal meetly wel be furnisshed to keepe his tongue occupied withal, least a suddaine silence should cast him into a Confusion. For Old Councels. TOuchinge the Authoritie of Councels, because thei seeme often tymes to vary,Iew. 124 Gelasius thought it best to take vp the ma∣ter thus: In gestis Conciliorum &c. VVhen so euer Contrarietie of sentēce,Dist. 50. Domi. sancto. ys found in the Actes of Councels, Let the sentence of that Councel be taken, that hath the elder and better Autho∣ritie. For Prouincial Councels, against the General. GOD hath oftentymes restored his Churche,Iew.  and reformed Abuses and He∣resies, by particular conference, within seue∣ral Realmes and Coūtries. As we see by these priuate Councels holden at Carthage vnder S. Cypriane: At Neocesaria in Pontus: At Ancyra in Galatia. And by other like without ani consent of a General Councel. So like∣wise saieth S. Ambrose, against Secundus and
Palladius: The Bishopes of the East parte, and so the Bishopes of ye weast, haue euer vsed seuerally to assemble themselues together as occasion was offered,Not in contempt of the whole world. And to reform their churches by themselues, without trobling of the whole world. Si prouocandum putauerint. &c. If they thinke it needeful to appeale from their owne Bishopes,Iew. 235 Conc. Aphric. cap. 6. Let them not Appeale, but only vnto Councels to be holden within the countrie of A∣phrica. Against Councels. TIb being Emperour, when he heard of the wonderful workes yt were wrought by Christ in Iurie,Iew. 18. thought therefore, he was a God, and promoted A Bil vnto the Coun∣cel, that Christ might be proclamed, and takē for a God. But the Councel was otherwise bent, and would alow him for no God. Ter∣tullian laugeth at their folie: his wordes be these:In Apo∣log. Apud vos de humano arbitrio
Diuinitas pensitatur &c. Emong you the diuinitie and state of God, is weigh¦ed by mans Iudgment. Except God please man, God (emong you) shalbe no God. Now therefore, man must be Good and fauorable vnto his God. The Like folie seemeth to be in them, that thinke Gods Trueth to be no trueth, onlesse the consent of a Councel allow it for trueth. At this might be true, if the Holyghost had not promised vnto the Church to cary with it for euer, and to instruct it. Againe, Gods Trueth is trueth in it selfe: yet vnto vs it is not knowen, but by meanes. Now emong those meanes, which is the most worthie? The text of the Scripture, which except some body tel me, I shal not know, in what estimation to haue it: ye repor of a few men of our owne parishe or Countrie? Or y• determinatiō & cōsent of a general or prouincial Coūcel? I should thinke, yt, seing we come to faith by meanes of mē whō we credite, it were not amisse to harkē Chiefly after ye voice of a general Coūcel, where, As greate authoritie & as worthie of credite is represented, as maie be possiblie found in al
the world. But M.Iewel is afeard o a folie. and like a wyse man, and such as worketh surely, he careth for none but fo God him selfe: and Let men tel hym wha they list, he hangeth not vpon the Autho∣ritie of any of them al, Or of al together, receuing of Gods owne mouth (I trow) immediatly, that which confirmeth hym in his faith and religion.Iew. 207. Cicero saieth very wel of hymself: Ni∣hil nobis opus erat lege, de quibus nihil esset actum legibus. To restore me from exile, I needed no Lawe, against whom there was nothing done by lawe.Yf the Saxon Lyke one waie and the Pals∣graue an other, maie both defend themelfs by these Exāples and con∣temne what so euer Au∣thoritie in Christen∣dome? Iosue ca. 24. So maie we likewise saie, we neede no Coun∣cel to restore Gods Truth, that was taken awaie from vs without a Councel. Euerie prince is bound in the whole, to see the re∣formation of his owne Church and Countri. Neither wil God hold him excused, if he saie, I wil tarye til al other Princes, and the whole world doe the Lyke. Iosue that noble prince, when he had assembled al the tribes of Israel before him, thus he spake vnto them. Si malum vobis videtur &c. If ye thinke it il to serue the Lord, ye shal
haue your choise, But I and my house wil serue the Lord.Is it Lawful then, to re¦fuse the Nicene Councel. euen in this res∣pect only as it con∣sisted of Chiefe heades and Go∣uernours of al Chri¦stendome. Tertul. aduersu Praxe. It pleased God to plant his Church in this Realme. three hundred yeres, before the first General Councel was holden at Nice. The Lordes hand is not shortened. He is like∣wise hable nowe, to reforme, the same by his holie word, without tarieing for a General Councel. For Antiquitie. TErtullian saieth: Hoc aduersus om∣nes Haereses valet, id esse verū, quod∣cunque prius &c. This marke preuai leth Against al Heresies: That is the Trueth, that was vsed first: That is false and corrupt, that was brought in afterward. And therefore the holy fathers in the Councel of Nice made this general shoute, and agreed vpon the same, . Let the Aunciēt orders hold stil, referring themselues thereby, to the vse and order of the Primi∣tiue Church. Contrarywyse, Valentinus Marcion, and other Lyke Heretykes,
thought themselues wisest of al others, and therefore vtterly refused, (as M.Harding and his felowes doe now) to stand to the Apostles orders. Thus Ireneus writeth of them:Irenaeus lib. 3. ca. 2. Dicunt se, non solum presbyte∣ris &c. They wil saie, yt thei are wiser not only then other Priestes, but also then the Apostles, and that they haue found owt the perfite trueth. Against Antiquitie. NOtwithstanding it appeare by S.Augu∣stine, S.Cyprian,Iew. 12 and others, that Infan¦tes in the primitiue Church in sundrie places, were admitted to the holy Communion, yet AFTERWARDE vpon good aduyse, they were iustly remoued from it, because that benig in that age, they were not thought hable to examine and proue thēselues, accor∣ding to the doctrine of S.Paule,1. Cor. 11 and so to eate of that Breade, and Drinke of that Cup. By this rekening then, they of the pri∣mitiue Churche, vnderstode not S. Paule so wel as the aftercummers. And so hath Tertullians saiing litle effect, how,
That is the Trueth that was vsed first. It wil serue also in this place, al that M. Iew. hath gathered: Against Fathers and cu∣stome, as aboue is declared. For Vnitie. GOD hath other waies and meanes (saieth M. Iew.) then by the Gouerne∣ment of the Bishopes of Rome, whereby he hath euer gouerned his Church, and pre¦serued Vnitie. How proueth he this? Mary. S. Cyprian saieth, Ideo plures &c. Therefore there be many Bishopes in the Church,Iew, 260 that one rūning, into heresies y• rest may help e & againe:Cypr. lib. 3. epi. 13. lib. 4. epi. 9. The Churche is pre¦serued in. Vnitie by ye cōsent of bishopes agreing in one. And to this end S. Hie∣come saieth, as is before alleged: Noue∣rint Episcopi &c. Let Bishopes vnder stād,In epi. ad Titum cap. 1. that they ought to rule ye Church as al in one. Against Vnitie. IMmediatly vpō yt forsaied wordes, folo∣weth a Cōmō place against Vnitie. As
if M. Iewel would plainely protest, that when it maketh any thing for his syde, then it shalbe alowed and praised, And yt when the aduersarie would turne it to his pur∣pose, then shal it be litle or nothing worthe. As in example:Iew. 260 Hieron. contra Luciferi¦anos. S. Hierome saieth: Nomine vnitatis & fidei, Infidelitas scripta est. Infide∣litie hath ben writen, vnder the Name of faith, and Vnitie. So lykewyse saieth the wyse man. In tanto viuentes ignorā∣tiae bello,Sap. 14. tot & tanta mala Pacem ap∣pellabant. VVhereas they Lyued in such a warr of ignorance so many and so greate mischiefs they called Vnitie. What remaineth then now to be folowed of certaintie? Or what staie shal there be for a right meanyng affection and trobled conscience? If no such hold is to be taken of Fathers, Councels, Custom &c. but that the Enemie wil make it to be forsaken vtterly, or daungerously doubted of: what Refuge is there left, or what Authoritie? Shal the Bishopes which are for the tyme, rule in the causes of Religion? That surely
is already so apointed by God, and that if it were otherwise, should chieflie be wyshed for and procured. But what hope is there to haue this graunted of M. Iewel? Or if at one time he wil yeld vnto it, at an other he will deny it. For sometimes he will haue all Bishops equall: And what order then can be set there, where no one is bet∣ter then an other? Sometimes he will haue differencies and distinctions of Au∣thoritie among them. Yet then how little shall that preuaile, when he wil not be obe∣dient to that Authority? As in example. For aequalitie of Bishops. S. Hierome wryteth thus vnto E∣uagrius.Iew. 2 Si Authoritas quaeritur. &c. If we seeke for Authority, the world is grea∣ter then the Citie of Rome. VVhere∣soeuer there is a Bishop, whether he be at Rome, or at Eugubium, or at Con∣stantinople or at Rhegium. &c. he is of like worthines and of like priesthode.
Because we are not onely led inwardly by Gods Spirit,Iew. 257. but allso outwardly by our sen∣ses, therefore hath Christ appointed not one man to be his Vicar Generall ouer all, but e∣uery of his Apostles, and so euery Priest, to be his Vicar within his diuision. So saieth Eusebius B. of Rome. Caput Ecclesiae Christus est.Epist. 3 &c. Christ is the heade of the Church. And his Vicares be the Priestes, that doe their Message in the Churche, in the steede of Christ. Euery Bishop hath a portion of the Flocke allotted vnto him,Iew. 266. Cyp li. 1. Epi. 3. whiche he must rule and gouerne, and yeld accōpt vnto the Lord for the same. For distinction emong Bishops. The Decrees of the Councel of Nice,Iew. 336. Conc. A∣phric. Ca. 105 haue committed bothe the inferioure clerkes, and also the Bishoppes, vnto their Metropolitaes. The Fathers of the Councell of Aphrica
haue decreed thus, that the B. of the first See,Iew. 240 Ca. 6. be not called the chief of Priests, or the high∣est Priest, or by any other like title, but only the Bishop of the first See. In the Councel of Cōstantinople it is wry∣ten thus:Iew. 245 Const. 1. Ca. 2. Let the Bishops of Alexandria haue the charge only of the East, the honor of pri∣maci euer reserued to the church of Antioch. More to this place might be broughte, out of M. Iew. workes, especially Pa. 250. 267. and. 286. But by what Primate, Pa∣triarche, or high Bishop would he be ruled, which putteth the Spirituall Gouernment of the Church, in the handes of Temporall Princes, and maketh euery Bishop the Vi∣car of Christ? In such sort, as if there were no higher or better person then he, for Au∣thority, in all the world. And therefore i these poynts hitherto, there wil be no hold or stay. For Succession. But perchaunce all thinges shalbe deter∣mined by Succession.Iew. 277. For Irenaeus sayeth: Presbyteris illis. &c. We ought to obey the Bisops in the church that haue their succession from the Apostles, which together with the succession of the Bi∣shoprike,
haue receiued the certaine gifte of the Trnthe, according to the will of the Fa∣ther. This in deede would serue, if it were cōsidered, but M. Iewel liketh it not. For in the next side before, he saith of yc Pope. &c Against Succession. THey Feast and cheare them selues,Iew. 276. and Smothe the world with vaine talke. But S. Ihon sayeth: Nolite dicere. &c.Matth. 3. Neuer say (Pe∣ter or) Abraham was our Father. S.Paule speaking of his Successors saith thus:Act. 20. Equidem Scio. &c. I know, that af∣ter my departure from you, there shall Rauening wolues come amongest you, that shall not spare the flocke. And S.Hierome sayeth:Dist. 40. Nō est fa. Non sunt sanctorum filij. &c. They be not euer∣more the Children of holy men, that sit in the roomes of holy men. But notwithstanding all these foresaide perplexities and doubtes, at length I trow
we shall come to some Resolution and qui∣etnesse. For the word of God and the scrip∣ture shallbe the Iudge. And yet, here also is a great vncertainty. For M. Iewel, for the most part appealeth to ye expresse worde in the Scripture. His Reply is full of his bragges therein, and with suche faire pro∣mises the greater sort is seduced. One example in a matter so manifest is suffici∣ent. As: For the VVorde of God or Scripture. SPeaking, of the Scholemens conclusy∣ons about Christes presence vnder the formes of bread and wine, he sayeth: We may not here accompt,Iew. 99. what may be in either of them, by drift of vaine fantasie: but rather we ought to consider, what Christ in the first Institution thereof did, and what he commaunded to be done. Here loe, he refuseth to haue the sense dis∣cussed, but sticketh to the bare text. But it wil not be allwaies so, as appereth by these Examples.
Against the VVorde of God or Scripture. CHrist did not therefore so abase himselfe to washe his Disciples feete,Iew. 117. to the intent they according to the letter, should doe the same, but in himselfe to shewe them a perfite Example of humility. &c. In like manner,Math. 18 10. &. 8 Christ set a Childe before his Disciples, and willed them all to be as Children. He bad them to shake of the dust from their Shewes, and to cary neither Rod, nor Scrip, about them, and to salute no man vpon the way: not, that they shoulde practise these thinges according to the rigoure of the wordes, but to the intent, that by the same, they mighte be induced to a deeper vnder∣standing: And S. Hierome sayeth.Iew. 150. Whosoeuer vnderstandeth the Scrip∣tures,Hieron. ad Gal. li. 3. ca. 5. otherwise then the sense of the holy Ghost requireth, by whiche holye Ghost the Scriptures were wrytten, although he be not yet departed from the churche, yet he maye well be called an Heretike.
The sense rather and the meaninge of the Scriptures is to be taken,Iew. 198. Orig. ad Ro. ca. 3. li. 3. Iew. 211. then the wordes. To say, The word of God, only because it is wryten or spoken, is auaileable of it selfe without vnderstanding, is a Superstitious and Iewishe kinde of foly. Let vs make nowe an end of this Cha∣piter, for there is no ende of questionynge and altering, as farre as is to be learned of M. Iewel. And my Deduction or Argu∣ment is short.When the Sonne of man com∣meth, shall he fynde think you, faith vpon the earthe. Lucae 18. If the sense of the Scrip∣ture, be the thing that is to be honoured and folowed: And if that Sese is not to be perceiued of euerye one that vnderstan∣deth the Grammatical construction and ex∣position of the wordes: we muste learne it of some body biside our owne selues. And they of whome we learne it, must be suche, as vpon whose Authority we may builde and neuer chaunge: But neither by Fa∣thers, nor Councels, nor Customes, nor present state of Bishops, nor by the texte it selfe of the Scripture, that Authoritye can be established (for by Maister Iewels ac∣compte, neuer a one of them dothe fullye satisfye in any mater) ergo we are left vp∣pon this reckening alltogether vnquiet,
and to seeking where to staye our Consci∣encies. Is not this a perfecte Religion? Or is not this a skilfull Professor of it, by whome it is brought to passe that no Faithe at all, can be appoynted vnto vs? The Catholike yet, may sone be in qui∣et. For obeying that visible Churche, of which the Pope is a visible heade, he lea∣ueth to the determination of it, all thinges perteining to Councels, Customes, Fa∣thers and Scriptures. But these felowes, that know not, What to followe or forsake, but by the Testimonye of Councels, Cu∣stomes, Fathers. &c. and yet dare not ful∣ly trust those selfe same thinges or persons which are their guides: what a misera∣ble case are they in, cōcerning them selues, and how Artificially, doe they take Faithe, cleane away in some, and weaken it excea∣dingly in other? BEWARE therefore of them by time (Indifferent Reader.) And concerninge the stedfastnesse which should be of Faithe, be not made alltogeather Indifferente, throughe this laste and worste kind of M. Iewels Common Places.
Thus hauing declared euidently, that M. Iewells greate boke in Quantitie, is of simall matter in substance, and, that his Common places and Digressions are so many, that his straite folowing of the ques∣tion, and his direct Answers to the pur∣pose must be sone rekoned: I trust, the In∣different Reader will BEWARE of him, and not muche maruell at that Bolke, where litle Corne is sure to be found: Nor thinke those vessels to be ful, whose bour∣des are longe, and whopes of greate cum∣passe. Now, to make his behauiour more plaine yet and manifest, let vs come to cer∣taine other Specialties, and loke more par∣ticularly into his boke. And firste, it shal∣be worth the while to consider, how M. Iewell hath ordered D. Harding: In Peruerting his meaninge, In disgrating his Authorities, In Wranglinge with him, In Dissimbling and butting with him, In Refelling one truth by an an other, And in Courteous (as they say) Repor∣tinge of him: Which ended, I wilcome, in ye third boke, to other men: as, Auncient Fathers, Later Doctours, and so furth, shortly prouing it
vnto thee (Indifferent Reader) that M. Iewell hath so abused him selfe, And thee, And them all, more or lesse, one waye or other: that he will neuer be able to saue his honestie. First then concerning the firste pointe. That M. Iewel peruerteth D. Hardinges meaning CAP. 4. I Will leaue it to thy further considera∣tion (Indifferent Reader) leisuerly to examyne it by thy selfe, how much it ma∣keth to the ending of controuersies, or bringing of these matters to some Issue, that such as be Doers therein, should dili∣gently intend vnto the sense of the Aduer∣sarye, and applie therevnto a iust and di∣rect Answer. For if it be otherwise, the Obiection first of all, remaineth vnanswe∣red: And then, new matter of disputation and talke is ministred, through the peruer∣sitie of the Answerer. Stomakes also doe rise, Bokes are multiplied, Readers wee∣ried, And the further men goe foreward, in the waye, as it were, of finding out the
pointe of the question, the more intricat it is dayely made vnto them, by makinge and seeking of bypathes without the ques∣tion. If I would conclude that we are moued and warned not only by wordes but also by other Signes, And to that purpose would make mention of the bell, which warneth vs, either to come to Ser∣mōs, either to attēd more deuoutly at some speciall tyme of the Seruice: If my Aduer∣sary in this case, would tell the Readers, that my meaning is to teach the people by a Bell rope, and to make one of the greate Bels in the Steple, A Preacher, and a les∣er one in the Quier a Deacon, to what purpose were our reasoning, or what end were like to be, of such a beginning? But as I sayed, these thinges I leaue to thy further consideration, choosing rather by Examples to verifie my sayeinges, then (as the indignitie of the matter requireth) to inueigh against this foule Demeanure of peruerting the Sense of any mans say∣inges, which M. Iewel vseth. VVe are bounde to folowe Christes Examples,Hard. 28 Quoad substantiam, non quoad externam ceremoniam. For
the substance not for the outwarde Ceremonie. Here is great paine taken,Iew. 22. The firste Example. to proue that Christian men, in the ministration of Christs supper, are not boūd to folowe the Example of Christ. Againe: Why doth he defend his Sole Receauing, contrary to his owne wis∣shing,33. and cōtrary to the Example of Christ, as him selfe confesseth. You say not truly. But contrarywise D. Hardinges conclusion is, that we are bounde to folow Christes Example, And that we are not yet forbydde Absolutely, from Sole Receauing, though Christ him selfe Receaued with cumpanie. Because he did not that, for an Example, as beinge a mere Accident touching that whiche he then intended, no more then he meant to charge vs with Receauing in a Parlor, Or Chamber, Or at Night tyme only, Or Sittinge at supper, because all these thin∣ges are founde to haue bene obserued of Christe, and therefore (as some frowarde Heretike might say) that we should folow his Example. The Communion hath his name of the,Iew. 27 nother Example. effect, for that it ioyneth vs to God: Ergo saieth M. Harding, if signifieth not the Com∣municating
of many together. No he sayeth not so, but thus rather:Hard. 2 Ergo you can not thincke your selfe to haue an Argument againste, Priuate Masse, of the word (Commu∣nion) as though the Sacrament were called a communion, in consideration of many receauers togeather. In which sense in deede, if it be a Com∣munion, then is it no Priuate Masse. But, as the Truth is, and as D. Harding taketh the worde, it standeth well inoughe with Sole Receauing. And the partie receauing alone, is ioyned to God, and Communica∣teth with Christ the Heade, and his whole bodye. Note further, that D. Harding made his forsayed Argument, to Answer yours (M. Iewel) whiche are so deceiued, that wheresoeuer you find mention of Commu∣niō, thervpō straitewayes ye cōclud against Sole Receauing, Or Priuate Masse. Wher∣by it is euident, that you haue abused him much, & defiled your selfe not a litle, in rea∣soning, as it were in D. Hardinges name,
after this fasshion. Iew. 30▪ It is called Cōmunion. Ergo it maie be Priuate. Iew. 30▪ It is called Cōmunion. Ergo it maie be receaued of one alone. Iew. 30▪ It is called Cōmunion. Ergo the Priest may receaue it without Communicates. Againe:Iew. 37. By the Communion all faithful are ioyned together: Ergo the Priest may saye Priuate Masse. Serapions boy ministred the Sacrament to his Master:Iew. 46. The iij. Example. Ergo Serapions boy said pri∣uate Masse. D. Hardinge sayeth not so, but: Ergo the Example of Serapion (whichHard. Fol. 34 receaued alone) confirmeth our pur∣pose of Single Communion. And note, that in this kind of Peruersion, M. Iewel continueth through the whole first Article, turning ye to saying of Masse, which D. Harding alleaged for profe of Sole Rerceauing only, either in al conue∣nient tymes and places, Generally: either at Masse tyme and in the Church, Conse∣quently. D. Harding,The iiij. Exampl. in translating a testimony of S. Hierom making for Sole receauing, englisshed also a peece of Persius ye Poetes
Verse, as he founde it in the Texte of his Author. Wherein, though he did but as faithfull Interpretours doe vse, yet M. Iewel, not only taketh it so, as if D. Har∣dinge of his owne heade, had put it in, but also, as though he meant to applie it to his purpose in the question of priuate Masse. His wordes be these: Here, M. Harding interlaceth (no,Iew. 51. he interpreteth only S. Hierome, and addeth nothinge of his owne) other matter of the office of wedlocke, the wordes of Persius the Pagane Poee, and the superstitious ceremo∣nie of the Heathens, as I take it, litle pertei∣ning vnto his Masse. True it is (M. Iewell) Such geare per∣teineth no more to the Masse, then yoke felowes doe to Priestes, except both should be set to the Carte. And wherefore then doe you so speake, as though it were any part of D. Hardings meaning? It is a Sacrament of Vnitie: therefore if it be abused, we may seeke no Redresse. It is nothinge lyke: but thus he conclu∣deth: Ergo let them take heede who moued by slender reasons for bothe kindes, doe rashly and dangerously cō∣demne the Churche, for geuinge of it
vnder one. For this in deed, is a mani∣fest breach of vnitie. The fruite of the Sacrament dependeth not of the ourmes of bread and wine.Iew. 99. The sixth Example. Ther∣fore we may breake Christes Institution. The more Impiouse this conclusion is, the more wicked are you, to laie it to his charge, which at all hath none such. For thus he Reasoneth. The fruite of the Sacrament,Hard. fo. 50. pa. 2. de∣pendeth not of the outwarde formes of bread and wine, but redoundeth of the Vertue of fleshe and Bloude of Christ, which vnder either kind is wholy and verely present. Ergo the church stan∣deth vppon good groundes, in Minis∣string the Sacramēt, vnder one kynde vnto the people, by which no lesse fruit commeth vnto them, then if they re∣ceaued vnder bothe. The Priest consecrateth the Sacrament, and offereth the Sacrifice: Therefore the people is not bound to Receaued in both kyndes. Againe: The Church hath her libertie: ergo she is not bounde to Christes Institution.
Be not ashamed (M. Iewel) to reade D. Hardinges wordes againe: And marke then whether you deale like an honest man with him, or no. The some of his discourse, is this: The Sacrament maie be con∣sidered 2. waies: Either as it is a Sacrifice, Or as it is a Sacrament. Concerning the first, the formes of breade and wine bothe, are necessary,Sacrifice. that the shed¦ding of Christes bloude, And separating of his life from his body,Har. 51. may the better be re¦presented. And in this part, D. Har. speaketh nothing, of the peoples Recea∣ing: though in deede owt hereof, as owt of A Principle, it could afterwardes be deduc∣ted, that ye people are not bounde to receaue in both kyndes. But it maketh much to the purpose, to place euery thing aright: as, though your head be part of your body, yet to set that and your heele together, were no good fasshion. Concerning the second, because it is re∣spected as meate,Sacra∣ment. which the people do re∣ceiue, to Preparation or Preseruation of Body and Soule into euerlasting life, in which meate the Substance, and not the Forme is sought for, therefore the Church is at her libertie, (not to breake Christes
Institution as you M. Iewel doe iangle) but to serue them, either with both kyndes, either one alone, as it shal seeme expedient. Some men doe lothe wine, Some people cā hardly geat,Iew. 113. The 8. Example. some cā hardly keepe wine ergo. there must be made a law general, y• ye whole world shal Communicate in one kynde. D. Har. wordes are these, after ye forsaide causes alleged:Har. 56. Ergo, it had ben byside reason, to haue bounde al to ye necessity of both kynds. For there be two extremes, in the middle of which is the truth: Al must receaue in both kyndes, Is yt Pro∣testātes heresy:Trueth in the middle of Extre∣mes. Against which, D. Har. in his place cōcludeth. The whole world must receiue in one kynde, Is an other heresy, which M. Iew. forceth here, vpō D. Har. & yet he neither spake it, nor thought it, I am sure. ye middle & Catholik way is, yt, It is an indifferent thing in it selfe, the Laye people to receiue in one or both kyndes, And yt ye Churches order & counsel herein is to be solowed, without any fur∣ther vaine bragging of Christes Institutiō,
as though yt heretikes were yt expounders therof. Iudge therfeore whether M. Iewel hath not in his place done like a ioly clark, so to mysconster a plaine sense & meaning. M. Har. would haue vs put Gods word to daving,The 9. Example. Iew. 121. Slaunde∣rously. And none otherwise to be obedient to Christes Commaundement, then yf a few Bishopes gathered at Trident, shall allow it Who would not thinke, vpon this report of M. Iew. y• D. Har. had spoken blasphe∣mie against God hymselfe. Yet he saied no worse then this:Har. 60. VVe condemne not the Commnnion vnder both kyndes but cō∣fesse, it might be restored againe, by ye Authoritie of the Church lawfully assembled in a General Councel &c. And is there any harm in this? Specially being proued sufficiently yt ye Laie people to receiue in one or both kyndes, is not com∣maunded precisely & necessaryly by God? But this is a Generall peruersitie of M. Iew. through this whole Article, to burden the Catholikes with the Contempt of Gods word, and Christes Institutiō, in y• they minister vnto ye Laitie, vnder one kind
whereas, to speake Indifferently, the mat∣ter is yet in controuersie, betwene vs and hym with his felowes: Or if it be certaine vnto them, that it is against Christes Insti¦tution, the contrarye is as certayne also wt vs. So that it is very peuisshly done, to frame the Catholikes Argumentes, not according to that Principle which they folo∣wed in makinge them (As, that to Receaue in one kynd or both is Indifferent) but ac∣cording to the measure of that heretical con¦clusion, in which the Catholikes doe with∣stand them, As, that, it is Christes Cōmaun¦dement, y• people to receaue in both kinds. The breade which Christ blessed at E∣maus,The 10. example. and gaue vnto his two Disciples, was the Sacrament, And, as sone as they knew him in breaking of the bread,Har. he vanished awaie from their sight, er yt he toke the cup into hys handes: Ergo, saith D. Harding, thei receiued in one kynd. But how taketh M. Iewel the Antecedent here? He maketh an Excla∣mation, Or he taketh an Indignation, Or he falleth into a Lamentation, Or surely he speaketh with much Affection. O (saieth
he) what miserable straites these men be driuē into.Iew. 125 Schoffer. To make vp their tale, they are glad to saie, that Christ lackt leisure. Sir, if you finde any such blasphemous worde, in D.Hardinges boke, I wil thāke you for geauing vs warning: but seeing there is none such, what haste were you in, to be so peruerse and impudent? Surely, there is some occasion, why you crye owt first, And then accuse D. Harding, for spea∣king so of Christ. And in deede in your Reply, y• Reader wil not perceaue but you inueighe most iustly, with, O what misera∣ble &c. For the wordes, which immediatly goe before writen in a distinct letter, as if they were al D. Hardinges, are these: But Christ straight waie vanished from their sight,Falsifier vpon the breaking of the bread: And therefore had NO LEISVRE to deliuer the other portion: neither is there any mention made of the Cup. These you attribute to D. Harding, but that which you put in the middle of, Christes Lacke of LEISVRE,
is not at al in D. Harding. Why cry you then vpon the miserable streictes that we are dryuen into, whereas ourselues made them not? Or what a miserable Iuggler are you, to number it as in D.Hardinges owne text, yt Christ lackt leisure, which at al is not there: And afterwardes to Crie owt against hym, for saieng that, which is of your owne putting in only, & not of his? The sicke mans mouth was drye:The 11. Example. Iew. 134 Scofer. Ergo he could not receiue the Cuppe. Who would make such reasons but M. Harding? But M. Har. maketh thē not: Ergo, who would be so blinde or Wilful, in conceiuing an other mans reason, but M.Iew? For D. Harding gathereth his Argument thus: Bassus the Archepriest, wasshed the mouth of Simeō lyinge sicke & feble,Har. before he gaue hym the diuine Sacra∣ment, And, such procuring of moisture had ben needlesse, if Simeon should haue recei∣ued the holy Cuppe: Ergo he receiued vnder one kind only. Where finde you here M. Iew. y• he could not drinke, because he was dri? It appereth y• your selfe at this place had takē of some Cup to much, which could
either mocke in an ernest matter so drilie, or vnderstād a reasonable argumēt so drōkēly. I cā not see what necessitie is in this reason.Iew. 140 The 12. Example. The man is frentike, Or lieth Speechlesse: Er∣go he cā not receiue the Sacrament bread. In deede your eies herein serue you well. and euery reasonable man will beare you witnesse, that no necessitie, is in this Argu∣ment. But what necessitie was there, why you should not rightly, either perceaue Or report D. Hardings reason? For thus it is: The Sacrament was powred into the mouth of him,Har which in his sicknes demaunded hys housel, And er he dyed, fel into phrenesie, or became speachlesse: Ergo it was geauen, vn∣der onekynde and in forme of wine. For how thinke you, M. Iewel, haue you seen or reade, that when men haue ben extreme sicke, Breade hath ben Powred into their mouthes? by reason thē, it was wine which is sayed to haue ben Powred. Consider also what foloweth in D.Harding, owt of the Councel of Toledo: where you shall fynde it proued, that Some sicke men are so vnable, to take the Sacrament in forme of bread, yt they receiued ōly A draught of our Lordes Cup. Therefore, you are much de∣ceaued, which thinke D. Har. to be as mad
as you, and of phrenesie or lack of Speeche to gather, that they receiued in Forme of breade. If the Manichees would not beleue Leo or Augustine,Iew. 147 The 13. Example. Wickedly. that Christ had one body, how muche lesse would they beleue M. Harding, that Christ hath two bodies, the one in the Bread, the other in the cup, And eche wholy in the other? Where saieth D. Harding so? In no place at all, you maie be assured. but this is that which you carpe at, M. Iewel. The Catholikes beleue, and D. Harding for his parte confesseth, that vnder either kynd, whole Christ is verely present.Har. Fol. 50. Christ therefore is not diuided, by one, Or two, Or moe, as your blasphemous Inention dare make, but, the selfesame Christ, is by diuers and sundrie waies dis∣pensed. For in A naturall and lesser Example: Your Anima, Life, Or Sowle, is but one: the same is Whole in your litle finger, Whole in your thumbe, and in euery part of your body, Whole. Yet, you haue not (I trow) so many lyues by tale, as you haue toes and fingers. Now, if your bre∣thern, Or other vnlerned, wil not perceaue
this true Principle, that, Anima est tota in toto, & tota in qualibet parte, which yet your self, I trust, doe admitt, how litle can they comprehend of Christes whole presence, vnder either kynde of the Sacrament? And how desperate are you, to make some beleue, that D. Hardinges opi∣nion is, that one body of Christ, is in the Breade, An other in the Cup? Whereas you can not be ignorant, of the Catholike and Receiued Faithe herein. M. Hardinge,The 14. Example. Iew. 158 Fansie. seemeth to reason thus: Ephrē made homilies in the Syrian tongue: And S. Hierome translated the Bible into the Slauō Tongue: Ergo, the Common Seruice, was in the Latine or Greeke tongue. Many thinges seeme vnto you M. Iew. which are not so in deede. For D. Harding in these places which you allege, susteineth the person, not of an Opponent (as to you it seemeth) which maketh argument for his owne syde, But of a Respondent (As his boke declareth) which putteth awaie the obiections of his aduersarie.Har. Fol. 74.  75. As in Exāple: The homilies which Ephrem made in the Syrian Tongue, and the scripture
which S. Hierome translated into the Slauon tongue, were not part of the Publike seruice, nor serued to that pur¦pose: Ergo, It is to no purpose to proue by them, that the Publik seruice was in the mother tongue. To this effect D. Har. answereth: And doth not at all gather by holy Ephrem Or S. Hierom, that the Seruice was in the La∣tine or Greeke tongue. There is a proper Place to doe euery thing in, And the Oppo∣nent and Respondentes partes, are distinct one from the other. Here M. Hardinge taketh in hande,The 15. Example. Iew. 158 to An∣swer the Authorities by me alleged, And that with this special note of Remembrance in y• margin, M. IVELS ALLEGATION SOLVTED. It appeereth his Solutions be very short. For what so euer be alleged, it is sufficient for him, to saie, WHAT THEN? For whereas I saied &c.What a do pon no ccasi¦ saugng M. Iew. . Al this is sone An∣swered. For M. Har. saith, WHAT THEN? alleged the saieing of S. Basile, That the sounde &c. The saieing of S. Hierome, THat y• noise &c. Lykewise of Chrysostom, COm∣mon petitions &c. But WHAT THEN?
saith M. Harding, why WHAT THEN? Thinketh M. Harding, that the Authoritie of Arnobius, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, S. Ba∣sile, S. Hierome, S. Chrysostome and other holy fathers is so light, that he is able to blow thē all awaye, with these two vaine syllables, WHAT THEN? Here lacketh no Inuention, here lac∣keth no Amplificatiō, but only a Iust cause to bestow them vpon. For in deede, D. Harding saieth vnto M. Iewel (rowling in his Authorities) WHAT THEN? but he addeth further, No man denietb you this. How then, M. Iewel? Doth D. Har. thinke, the authoritie of holy Fathers to be light? Or, that he is able to blowe them all awaie, wt two vayne syllables? No verely his Sprite is not so mightie. But he direc∣teth his (WHAT THEN) only to you, no Father yet, nor Holy one, askyng, to WHAT END you be so ernest, in that which no man denieth you? Because he re∣uereuceth the holy Fathers, therefore doth he admit their Authorities: but because it greeueth hym to see them brought furth, for a shew only and countenaunce to be made on your syde, without any iust
occasion or purpose: therfore he de∣maundeth of you, by a WHAT THEN, to shew the cause wherfore you alleged thē. You draw a faire length M. Iewel, but you shoote at a wronge marke, Or at none rather at all. But he saieth,The 16. Example. Iew. 199 Needeles∣se Feare. The place of S. Paule, is doubt ful &c. S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, S. Chrysos. &c. vnderstode it diuersly. And wil he ther∣fore conclude thus: These Fathers mistook S. Paules Sense, Ergo S Paule had no sense? Or, diuers Doctours, touching this place, had di¦uerse Iudgements: Ergo, we must haue no Iudgement. Troble not yourselfe M. Iewel, with any of these doubtes. for he geaueth you no occasion. But in answering your argumēt, and not in forming any of his owne, he re∣quireth of you,1. Cor. 14 that, S. Paules sense, where he speaketh of the blessing, and speaking wt Spirit, being so doubtfull as it is, you should not so precisely conclude that he meaneth by Praing in Spirit,ar. Fol.  ye prayeing with a noise of strange wordes, after your strange Interpretation: Or crake before the people, that S. Paules wordes, are most manifest, that al publike Seruice,
should be in the Vulgare Tongue. Now let vs consider M. Hardinges reasons. The state, saieth he,The 17. Example, Iew. 204. Slaun∣derously. of the primitiue Churche was farr vnlike the state of the Church we be now in: Ergo we are not bound to S. Paules Commaundementes. For shame of your selfe, why make you D. Harding to speake so Contemptuously of the Apostle, and so proudly of him selfe?Har. 95. His mynd rather is, that, It is no Com¦maundement at al of the Apostle, because there were necessarye occasions, to geaue it in the primitiue Church, which are not so necessary now: And so it ceaseth to be a Cō∣maundement vnto vs. As, that women should goe couered, it was his expresse Cō∣maundement, yet now, I trust, you make noe cōscience of it,1. Cor. 11 to suffer your Sisters to goe wt open face. Not because you Reason thus: we are not bounde to the Apostles com maundement, but, because the state of this tyme, and that, beinge diuers, you would interprete, that it continueth no more to be Commaundement. Againe he saieth:The 18. Example. Iew. 204 Some one or other in a parisshe vnderstandeth somwhat of the Latine tongue: Ergo they owght to haue the Serulce in a strange Tongue.Har. fol 95. Not so M. Iewel, but: Ergo the latine tongue
is not vtterly Strange and vnknowen, And therefore not forbidden by S. Paule. The People is sufficiently istructed in Re∣ligiō:The 10. Exemple. Iew. 204 . They come togeather now, not so much to be instructed, as to praie: ergo, they ought to haue the Seruice in a Strange tongue. Neither is this so, M. Iewel, but Ergo there is no necessitie, wherefore it should be in the vulgare. As, for this Absolute conclusion, that it ought to be in Latine, how can any Catholitie make it, Whereas it is confessed, that the Pope hath dispensed with the Slauons to haue their Seruice in the vulgare Tongue, And may, if cause so require, permit it also vnto o∣ther Countries. It were good (saieth M Harding) the peo∣ple vnderstode the Seruice.The 10. Example. Iew. 206 Forgette not this good Reader, that the People vnderstode their Seruice M. Harding himselfe confesseth it were good. And why so? Yea but remember, good Reader, or els marke D. Hardinges owne wordes, in which, he speaketh not absolutly of the peo∣ple, but of people hauing humble and Re∣uerent hartes. And such to vnder∣stande their Seruice it were (he graunteth)
good. but see what foloweth in M. Iewel. And why so? doubtlesse because is for∣ced to see and say, that it would redound to the Glorie of God, And to the greate Cum∣fort and Profite of the people. Therefore he faieth, it WERE GOOD. whereof we maie gather this argument, of the con∣trary: Then, that the people in this brute sort, is kept stil in ignorance,Much making of nothing. not vnderstandinge any portion of their Common Seruice, by M. Hardinges confession, It is il. And is it not lawful to doe that is Good, to Redresse that Is il, to seeke Gods glorie, And the cumfort of his People, without consent of a General Councel? &c. It were Good M. Iewel, euery man to know, The Rules of Physik, (to haue thereby how to helpe hymself) The Statu∣tes of the Common Law, (the better to keepe them,) The Counsel of God in wor∣king owr Redemptiō: And may you then, wel gather this Argument of the contrarie, that it is il to be ignorant of Phisike, Law, & Diuinitie? Surely, least you should take this aduantage, And shew after a wise sorte your folly,Shame∣ful Craft or Er∣rour. D. Harding prouided very well, but that you diuide his sentēce, which is but one. For, after he had saied:
It were good the people hauing humble & reuerēt hartes vnderstode ye seruice: Har. I denie not: Although you make, not only a ful point there, but also an ende of your 31. diuision, as who should thinke, D. Har. had saied as much as he wil in this sentēce: Yet there foloweth immediatly this aduer satiue, yet al, standeth not in vnderstan dinge. By which he meaneth expresly, that though it were Good, the people to vnderstand their seruice, yet it is not il, to be vnskilful thereof, because al standeth not in vnder standinge, as he proueth owt of two places of S. Augu∣stine. Now (see your fidelitie M. Iewel) this Aduersatiue YET, which openeth the mat∣ter, And should goe together with ye former parte of the sentence, you cut awai cleane from it, And begyn your 32. diuision with it: that you might seeme not to haue Reaso∣ned al in vaine, in saieing: This is good, ergo the other is il. Whereas if you take D. Har. whole meaning, you shal finde him to say no more in Effect, but, This is good: yet ye
other is not to be mislyked. Haue you any Priuilege thus to peruert right Senses at your pleasure? Owt of Origine M. Harding gathereth this Reason:The 21. Example. Few. 210 The Angels are delited to heare vs reade or Praie although we of our weak∣nes know not throughly what we speake: Ergo the people in Origens tyme had the Common Seruice in a strange tongue. Not so M. Iewel, although the Conclusion be true. but if you add further to the Antece∣dent as you should doe, that the Reading of Psalmes though not vnder standed, do prouoke the Angels to help vs, then folo∣weth the right consequent in deede, Ergo there cometh profite to the Rea¦der and hearer of the seruice in the Latine tongue,Har. 97▪ though it be not vn∣derstanded. The people,The 22. Example: Iew. 214 saieth M. Harding, is grosse and simple, And can not vnderstand the scri∣ptures, by hearing the same in the Mother tongue: Ergo, they must heare it pronoun∣ced in the Latine tongue. This semeth to be a very simple Argument. It is so in deede, yet it is of your owne making which myslike it. For D. Har.
concludeth after an other sort, saieing: Ergo, if our new masters wil condem¦ne the Latine seruice in the Latine Churche,Had. Fol. 98. for that the people vnder∣stand it not, thei must also condemne, for a great part, ye Englishe seruice, Which, the common people, for ye greatest parte of the Scriptures read therein, doe not vnderstand. Seruice in the vulgare Tongue,The 23. Example. Iew. 216 is cause of Schismes and errours: Ergo, within 6. hun∣dred yeares afte Christ, it was ministred in some place, in a tongue vnknowen vnto the people.Falsely. The force of this conclusion is eui∣dent. A very child may sone see through it. Much more then, you see through it your selfe. And doe ye not then perceaue, y• it is of your owne subtile making, and none of D. Hardinges, whose Reason is this: The people of those countries,Har. 99. where the seruice was in the vulgare tongue haue continued in schismes and Er∣rours: Ergo, example is not to be taken of them, for the seruice in the
vulgare Tongue. Of S. Ambroses wordes, M. Harding rea∣soneth thus:The 24. Example. Iew. 246 Peter, was the Chiefe of the Apostles, Ergo, the Pope is Head of the vni∣uersal Church. This Argument would be better considered. for as it is, it holdeth but weakly. Verely this is a weake Solution. But let the Argument be better considered, & formed in those termes which D. Harding vseth. S. Androw folowed our Sauior be∣fore ye S. Peter did,Amb. 2. Co. 12. Har. 106. And yet Androw receiued not the Primacie, but Peter: ergo, the Apostolike see & Church of Rome hath the Primacie. Consider you now what Answer you may deuise. For this Argument doth not meddle, with the question of the Apostles Preeminence emong themselues, vnto which only you bringe it: but of Primacie in yt Church of Christ, ouer which though other Apostles were generall officers, yet the supremacie was singularly in S. Pe∣ter. Paule went vp to Hierusalem to visite Pe∣terThe 25. Example. Iew. 253.
Ergo, the Bishope of Rome, is Head of the Church.Folishely. Is it not tyme, M. Iewel, either that some Physitian, or God hymselfe visite you, either to purge you of that cuil hu∣mor which occupieth your heade: Or to take vengeance of you, which do so abuse your Readers in matters of so Great weight? D. Harding hymselfe maketh no other Argument in this place, but of Au∣thoritie. and the reason which he bringeth, and you peruert is Theodoritus an Aun∣cient Bishopes: who writing to Pope Leo saieth thus:Har. 108. If Paule, the preacher of truth and trumpet of the Holy Ghost ranne to Peter to bring from hym A determination And declara∣tion, for them who at Antioche were in Argument and contention, concer∣ning lyuing after Moyses Law: much more we, which are but smal & vile, shal runne to your Throne Aposto∣like, that of you we maie haue salue for the sores of the Churches.
Doe you then, M. Iewel, cal this goeing for determination in a doubtfull question nothing els but S. Paules visi∣ting of S. Peter? And would you haue it conceiued, either, that S. Peter was sicke there & il at ease, Or that for good willes sake and curtesie only, S. Paule went to visite hym? Byside this, D. Harding groū¦ded not his Conclusion vpon this ar∣gument, but that rather which foloweth in Theodoritus, which is this: For in al thinges it is meete, that you haue the cheife doinges: Ergo it foloweth wel of Theodoritus authori¦tie, that the Pope is supreme. The Church of Christ is one: Ergo, the Pope is an vniuersal Bishope.The 26. Eyample. Iew. 255 That is an other question, Which D. Harding went not about to proue by Na¦tural Reason, but his present conclusion is this: A multitude can not continue ONE,Har. 108. onlesse it be conteined and holden in, by ONE: But the Church continueth ONE, Ergo: it must
haue ONE Heade or Gouernour. Now, whether the Bishope of Sarum or London, or Rome, or Constantinople &c. shalbe that One Head, ouer al ye mem∣bers of Christes mystical body in earth, that may be afterwardes consydered: but in yt meane tyme D. Har. goeth no further then Natural reason doth leade hym, that, in A greate multitude and cumpanie, it is meete to haue One ouer the rest, if thei shal be kept in Vnitie. Mankynd dependeth most of sense:The 27. Example. Iew. 257 Vnsensi∣ble. Ergo the Pope is the Heade of the Vni∣uersal Church. Here is a very vnsensible Ar∣gument▪ nor sense nor reason can make it good. Why make you it then? For D. Har. concludeth not so. But, whereas you in sayeing Christ only to be the Heade of the Churche, would inferre that the Pope is not anie Heade at al: in Answering this your obiection, he declareth that, man∣kynd dependeth moste of sense, and receiueth al lerning and instruction of sensible thinges:Har. 108. Ergo notwithstan∣ding Christ be the cheife Heade, yet be∣cause
he lyueth not visiblie emong vs,109. the Church hath neede of a man to be her Gouernour, whom she maie per∣ceiue by owtward sense. Which man, whether he must be the Pope or no, he commeth not so low in this place. M. Hardinges reasons procede thus:The 28. Example. Iew. fol. 260. God is careful and hath special Prouidence for his Church: Doubtful places of yt scriptures must be expoūded: General Councels must he summoned: Bishopes being at variance must he reconciled: Ergo, the Bishope of Rome is Christes General Vicar, and Head of the Vniuersal Churche. Ergo,Indirect∣ly. (saieth D. Har.) by natural reason there must be One Heade in ye Churche and one chiefe seruant in ye howsehold of Christ. Mary yt y• Pope is he: yt is out of the cumpasse of natural Reason. which although it attaine vnto it, that by most perfite waie of Gouernemēt, there should be One heade: Yet yt this or yt man should be he, by her owne power she cā not bring it to passe. & therefore, it was not directly so cōcluded of D. Har. in this place, as M. Iewel ful peruersly gathereth.
This is a very poore helpe in deede.The 29. Example. Iew. 274. Fautlesse. M. Harding here is faine to resemble the Biss∣hopes of Rome, touching their doctrine to Balaam, to Caiphas And to a Leaden Seale: And touching their lyues to confesse,False. thei are Lampes without light. The first is false, through your repor∣ting: the seconde is fautlesse, in D. Har. saieing. Concerning doctrine, he saieth: that the See of Rome hath this singular Grace, that he which sitteth in it, is com∣pelled to teach truthe, like as Balaam and Caiphas were made to fulfill the blessed wil of God, notwithstanding their false∣hode and wickednesse. The comparison therefore is not Ignominious to the Ca∣tholikes, but must Glorious to the praise of God, and most comfortable to the con∣sciences of true Christians. And it con∣sisteth, not as you report it (M. Iewel) spitefully enough, in resembling the doc∣trine of the Bishopes of Rome, to ye Per∣sons of Balaam and Caiphas: but in re∣sembling the Prouidence, Assistance, and Grace of God,Sophis∣trie. in directing their doctrine vnto the like Spirite of Trueth and Pro∣phecie, as God hymselfe vttered by Balaā and Caiphas, withowt their good wills.
In resembling also the doctrine of the B. of Rome, not vnto the mater of a leadden Scale, but vnto the Forme of a Seale, which is as true in the basest metal, as in the purest. And so let the Bishop of Rome be as he wil, his doeinges shal not let the working of God: but as perfite a printe of his Truth, shal be made with a Leaden Seale, as a Golden. Concerning now the other pointe, of lampes withowt light, he maketh not a General Rule, nor saieth that ye Bishopes of Rome are so, (which worde you M. Iewel doe vse) but, sometyme (saieth he) the see hath failed in Charitie, and it hath ben in case as it might truly saie: Our lampes be without light. And this may be saied, either charitablie enough, naming no persons, and sorowing ye case: either very discreetly against Heretikes, which so obiect vnto vs the euil liues of Popes, as though it were an Article of our faith, that a Pope can neuer synne: or our cause were vtterly destroied, if so much were confessed or graunted, which is so far otherwise, that it proueth rather
the prouidence & mercie of God towardes his Church to be exceding sure & greate in assisting the See of Rome, in which euil men are constrained to tel Truthe, yt ye hope of ye faithful might be stedfast in God,August. epi. 166. and not come & goe at the good or euil life of any Pope. These Examples (I trust) are suffici∣ent and plaine enough of themselues, not only to proue, that M. Iewel hath very dissorderly behaued hymselfe, in repeting of D. Hardings Argumentes, but also to warne euery Indifferent & Gentle reader of the Daunger which needes must folow, if without further serche or Consideration of the mater he take that for a Trueth and Certaintie, which M. Iewel once com∣mitteth vnto printing. Note also, that al these forsayed Argu∣mentes which M. Iewel hath thrust out of their right waie, to find fault with thē: contynue yet stil in their true sense and meaning, without any iust Replie or An∣swer to the contrarie. And so must those pointes of the Controuersies, betwene hym and vs, remaine as wel proued on the Catholykes syde, which are touched
specially in these forsaied argumentes and Examples, vnto which he hath geauen no direct or cleare Answer. How M. Iewel disgraceth D. Har. Authorities. CAP. V. IT foloweth now shortly to declare, how M. Iewel Disgraceth and extenuateth, the Authorities of D. Har. For emong Sophistes, it is one of the kindes of Answering, when they can not directly or sufficiētly put away the argument: to de∣face then, by A croked worde, and a wrie mouth, Or a Lippe (as it were) the whole mater. Which, the more vngracious it is, the deeper it is printed in the myndes of to many: And the viler it is, the more it needeth to be discouered, that ernest and sad Truthe, may not be so easely outfaced. Surely if in temporall maters, where the thinges that men striue vpon are sen∣sible, this maner of dealing (of which Examples shall folow out of M. Iewell)
be vsed, the Stomakes doe so increase, y• it maketh men quickly to let goe Wordes, and to come to blowes. Yet God forbid, that I should wisshe for any such Conclu∣sion: but this doe I meane only, that if so greate offense be taken of a Temporall Iniurie: much more it should greeue vs to see maters of Religion depraued. And truely in Temporall causes, men oftimes are to quicke, but concerning the State of right faith and vnderstanding, they neede not mistrust least they be to deuont and diligent. Let the Examples declare, whether I burden M. Iewel rightly, or no. D. Har. after other causes which moued him, not to discredite y• Treatise of Amphi¦lochius vpō S. Basiles life & miracles, he sayeth at the last, that this Treatise, is to be seē in the Librarie of S. Nasarius, in the Citie of Verona in Italie, Wri∣ten in Veleme, for three hūdred yeres past, bearing the name of Amphilo∣chius Bishope of Iconium. But, A Calues skinne (quod M. Iewel) is no suffi∣cient warrant of trueth.
In deede who can deny it? Neither doth D. Harding Conclude that it is to be credited, because it was writen in ve∣leme: but because it was writen so long agoe, and kept to this day in a Librarie at Verona. D. Harding putteth a case of foure or fyue,Another Example. which in time of siknesse should be de¦sirous to Receiue: And, if neither the Preist be able, neither other be willing to Communicate with them, may not (saieth he) they Receie seuerally? And doe not they Communicate together? See now, M. Iewells demeanure. Alas (saieth he) must he leaue al the old Doctours and holy Fathers, and begg at deathes dore, to geat sumwhat to help his Masse? Alas M. Iewel, are you so vnsensible,Iew. 31. Kynd hart. that you thinke it to be a leaning of all Old Doctours, to make an Argument of A Sicke mans case? And, as you haue all∣readie made a Rule, that no Authoritie a∣gainst you shall stand, but that which is taken, iust out of the next six hundred after Christ: will you so now perchannce con∣temne all Reasons as beggarly, which are not without a certaine precincte of
Deathes Dore? I permit it to your Con∣science, whether this your (Alas) became your State, Or can be suffered in an ernest Question. An other Example.A Third Example. Here first I would aske the Indifferent Reader, whe∣ther an English man borne might not vse in his writinges the Authoritie of S. Ba∣sile? And whether, S. Basile reporting it, y• they which lyned in wildernesse, Or in Alexandria, Or in Egypt, had the Commu¦nion at home, And kept it with thē selues, And Receyued it of them selues: it were not lawfull to speake it againe, and to vse that Testimonie? Yet M. Iewell sayeth: Verely,Iew. 138. if M. Harding could finde any thing in the Church, he would not thus hunt the Mountaines: neither would he flee for ayde into AEgypt, if he could finde any neere at home. What would this felow call the Liuing it self of holy men in Mountaines, which nicknameth the diligent gathering of Ar∣gumentes out of their lyuing a hunting of Mountaines: And calleth the vsing of the Fathers of Egypts Authoritie, a fleeing for ayde into AEgypt? How far I pray
you, will you suffer vs to goe for an Ar∣gument, without Obiecting of fleeing, vnto vs? Yet what aske I you Leaue Or Counsel in this mater, which am sure, y• Truth is not founde only in Europe: but in euery place of the world, where Christ is confessed. Againe, Who goeth farther? He that goeth in his Answer beyonde Reason, Or he y• Reasoneth vpon a fact done beyonde the See called Mediterraneum, And ap∣plieth it to his purpose? Keepe your self warme at home M. Iewell, as long as you may: for if you be once out of your owne Countrie, your Religion is so Vni∣uersall and Catholike, that many myles before ye come to the Mountaines or E∣gypt, you will be taken for a Renegate. He hath alleged (saieth M. Iewell of Doctor Harding) two women,The fourth Example. Iew. 142 Disdaine∣fully. three sicke folk in their death beddes: Personnes excō∣municate, Infantes, Phrenetikes, and Madd men: He hath alleged Napkyns, Chestes, Chambers, Mountaines and wildernesse. He alleged these in deede, to proue Sole Receiuing. And if your Mastership contemne the persons, because they were
VVomen, Sicke folke, Infantes, Phre¦netikes: Or the thinges themselues, be∣cause in telling of thē, mention is made, of Napkins, Chestes, Chambers and Mountaines: Yet let the Indifferent Reader consider, that these base Persons and Thinges were not, by or for thēselues respected of D. Harding: but the Autho∣ritie of Tertulliā, Eusebius, S. Cyprian, S. Basile, S. Ambrose, and other (out of whome these Examples of Women, In∣fantes, Mad men, Napkins and Chestes, were taken) was only regarded and folo∣wed.By such Eloquēce as M. Iewel vseth, the professed enemies of Christs Gospel, might furnisshe their wicked∣nesse. Matth. 8. 9. 12. Sainct Matthew (all faithfull beleue) did write a True Gospell, the Authoritie thereof is moste vndoubted and holy. Would M. Iewell then thinke it sincerely done to scoff out the matter, And to de∣praue the whole, by telling vs, that all the discourse or the most that he maketh, is of, Lazares, Boyes, Old womens Agues, Sicke folkes, Blinde beggars, Dūme persons, Mad men, Lunatikes, Old
Nettes, Barley Loaues, two Fisshes, and Greate Store of Hey. S. Augustine testifieth of the Peoples affection in his tyme, that for Reuerence towardes the Sacrament, they were care∣full to haue a cleane Lynen Clothe to carie it therein home with them,Hard. fo. 54. And receaue it, when they were disposed. S. Cyprian witnesseth, that the Sacrament was kepte in a womans chest, & that when she being vnworthy, would haue opened and Recei∣ued it: fire came furth and fraied her away. And in this sorte could I reherse other au∣thorities, to proue, that Sole Receauinge was not only vsed, but Reuerently also vsed, in the Primitiue Church. And will M. Iewel so Extenuate these matters, as though it were no more worth then a chest, or a Napkin, that which is alleaged of the reporte of S. Augustine, and S. Cyprian? If it lothed those Holy and Reuerend Fathers to speake of Chestes & Napkyns, when the narration and historie so Requi∣red: may it freely be skorned at, to reherse ye self same fact after them againe, and to make mention of Chestes and Napkyns? But here also, let any Indifferent man be Iudge, whether it standeth with the Gra∣uitie
of an high Minister, so cōtemptuously to speake of the Testimonies of Auncient Fathers. D. Harding alleageth the Councels of Agatha,The fyfth Example. Hard. fol. 42. 43. of Auerna, and Constantinople, which make mention of priuate Oratories & Chapels to say Masse in. Here vpon saith M. Iewel: In his former allegation, he sought his Masse in litle Townes and Villages: now he hunteth for it, in priuate mens houses.Iew. 73. Much in his pastim Was the last Supper of Christe, Or his Institutinge there of the Sacrament, and Sacrifice of the new Lawe, any pointe the worse, because it was but an obscure Par∣lor, where he wrought those Mysteries? And call you this A Huntinge for a Masse in Priuate houses, to Reason out of the open decree of three Auncient Councels? If you would vse lesse barking and by∣ting, then to hunt after Auncient Recor∣des, we would not mislike it in you. D. Hardinge proueth out of Leontius a Bisshope in Cypres, that: Iohn the holy Patriarche of Alex∣andria,The sixth Example. Hard. fol. 43. sayed Masse, and Receaued alone.
M. Iewel inferreth: A straite case for M. Hardinge to runne to Alexandria, A thousande miles beyonde al Christendome, to seeke his Masse, and that not in Open Church neither, but in Priuate Oratories. Why is it a straite case? May not a Ler∣ned man as sone come from Englande to Alexandria,Iew. 78. Childissh¦ly as he may turne from one boke to an other, and thinke nowe of one thing, then of an other? Alexandria is not so farre in miles beyonde al Christendome, as you be far in your degrees beyonde all Grauitie. For if the Authoritie of Leon∣tius doth not weighe with you, it is A plaine answer to refuse it: but to obiecte the bringing of an Argument out of an Historie reported for done in Alexandria, and to Terme it A Runninge beyonde all Christendome, it may be founde in children which in their Declamations are permit∣ted to vse what so euer Figure they can, Or in the Vices parte vppon the Scaf∣folde, Or in Iesters monthes at the tables of Secular men: but in theyr Writinges, which would seeme to folow the Spirite of Christ, and Zeale of Trueth, it can not be suffered.
S. Basile (Amphilochius writeth) was thought of Christe to celebrate Masse, in whiche he diuided the Sacramente into three partes, and Receauing one by hym selfe alone, the other two he Reserued. And so by this Testimonie, Priuate Masse is sufficiently proued. Or, if it proue nothing to hym whiche refuseth the Authoritie of Amphilochius by whome it is writen, yet to him which would take it for a true histo∣rye, no doubt but it serueth for Priuate Masse. M. Iewell then supposing it to be true, let vs see how he tranaileth to dis∣grace it. His wordes are these: But if all this (that Amphilochius repor∣teth of S. Basils Saicing of Masse) were good record, and mater of trueth: yet & caet. What intend you by this Yet? Would ye not beleue it? Would ye not embrace it? Would ye not be ruled by it? Would ye not yeld and Subscribe? Considering that Am∣philochius liued wtin ye six hundred after Christ? No surely, you would not. For you haue so many wayes to depraue thinges, yt you may graunt our asking vnto vs, and kepe your selfe still to the winninge syde. Which how cunningly you do in this place I will take the paynes to consider.
If al this were good record &c. Yet were it but a Miracle. Do ye make a But at a Miracle? And such a Miracle,Marke to the  of this place the exqui∣sie excep∣ions a∣gainst the witnesse. as standeth with a Truth? I o∣ked, that you wuld haue diminisshed some∣what of the price of the Good Record of which you oake, and to that end your YET did lead vs: but you haue so forgoten your slfe, that you make it the stronger, by that very thing, which you brought to weaken it by. For a Record may be true and good, and yet it foloweth not the fact to be alo∣wed: but if a Miracle be wrought about it, it is not only to be compted as True, be∣cause of the thing it self & witnesse of Man, but also to be alowed as Good, because of the testimonie of God geauen to it by Mi∣racle. It foloweth in M. Iewel: But a Vision. As who should say, that an Historie were the worse, because it consiseth of a Vision from God, and not of the externall sight and Record of man. What wise man would euer say: Let it be true, that Iacob saw An∣gels goeing and cumming vp and doune vpon the ladder betwene Heauen & earth, yet were it but a Vision. Is this your sight in Diuinitie, to diminissh a Truth by the
manner of Representing it. It may be proued that to see thinges in a Vision, whē the mind is eleuated from bodyly senses, is perfiter in degree of dignitie, then to see them with corporall eyes, where more meanes and more grosse are occupied. Yet (sayeth M. Iewel, contemptuously) it were but a Vision. It foloweth in hym: And perhaps a Dreame. Wisely sayed, I promise you, and agre∣ably to your former wordes. For how can these two Propositions stande together? If it were a matter of truth, yet perhaps but a Dreame. Doe not these, the one playnly hynder the other? Or can ye graunt yt one, and feare the other? Nay, if it were of good Recorde and mater of trueth, then vndou∣tedly it was no Dreame. But you, of a great confidence and courage doe permit vs the first, And yet of a miserable forgetfulnesse or fearfulnesse, are not resolued in ye second. In sayeing: If all were good Record: you permit vs to take it, and your selfe, by puttinge the case, doe graunte it: In ad∣dinge, Yet were it perhaps but a Dreame, you take awaye from vs that whiche you graunted, and your owne selfe are contra∣ried by your selfe. For (to saye it againe)
if it were mater of truth, it was no dreame: and if perhaps it were A Dreame, you should not then haue bene so absolute or bountifull, as to let vs receaue it for a ma∣ter of Trueth. It foloweth: But one mans fact. You asked but for any one sufficient ex∣ample, when you challenged vs. The fault therfore can not be in that it is One, but if you dare answer that S. Basils fact alowed by Christ himselfe, is not sufficient, then say you somewhat. It foloweth. But once done. Once done is truly done, and so much is inough against thē which deny y• it was at any time done. Againe, Once done in the presence of Christe, and by hys apointe∣ment, is for euer done, to confirme the faith of the Catholikes. I foloweth: Not in the day tyme, but at midnight. What thinke you then M. Iewell, that there is no Trueth, when the Sunne is downe? Or that euil Sprites only doe occupie the worlde at midnight? Or that God is A God of the daye, and not of the Nyghte? Is not this A wor∣thie cause to set losse by S. Basiles Masse, for that, whē other were asleepe, he waked
And that Christe made him not tarie till brode daye, but straite wayes to rise and Say Masse at midnight? What fault you find with midnight I can not tel: but your Literall sense in this place beinge so foo∣lisshe, either you haue some pure and fine Mysticall sense, Or els you take so litle rest in the night, that in the day time your wit∣tes be not your owne. It foloweth: And that without cumpanie, and without Witnesse. Concerning the companie, Christ and his Angels were present: concerning the Witnesses, take awaye Eubulus which saw it, yet as many were present, as were at the Annuntiation of our Ladie, Or the Resur∣rection of Christ our Sauiour. at whiche though no man was present, yet by the euent of thinges, and credite of thē which hae reported it, it is as true as an Article of our faith. Againe, what neede witnesses, your selfe permitting the Recorde of Am∣philochius to be good, and the mater true? How hangeth this together M. Iewell? If all were true, yet was it done without wit∣nese For what would you say I pray you? meane you this, that if it were true, yet it was false? Or, if the Recorde were good, yet
is it not to be credited? For to what other purpose ye complaine of lacke of witnesse, I can not tell, but for that you iudge the Recorde without it, not to be good. Other∣wise if you will not plucke backe your Li∣beralitie, nor take awaye that which you haue graunted, but let it stand that the Re∣cord is good, why disgrace you it by saying, yet it was without witnesse? And so by conse∣quence, no good Recorde. Thus in this Testimonie also, it appeareth, what wise∣dome and Arte M. Iewel hath in defacing of Authorities: and that after, him selfe (all circumstancies considered) hath permitted them to stand for true and good. D. Harding,The vi. Example. out of S. Bede, doth make reporte of one Iames a Deacon of Yorke, a very cunning man in songe: and of Ced∣nom a Diuine maker of Dities,Hard. fol. 88 90. whome M. Iewell calleth Cedname (For so his name is reade in Beda writen in parchement saieth he, forgetting him selfe that a sheepe∣skynne can be no more sufficient warrant▪ of trueth, then a calfeskinne) but (be it Ced∣nom or Cednam) what saieth he to hym, Or to Iames the Deacon? I litle thought, M. Harding would so much haue bewrayed his want,18. Blinde Harper. to proue his mater by Pipers and Poetes.
Make you no more accompt, of Musi∣cians and Versifiers? Many a Minstrel is in your Ministerie, and many A Twanger vpon his harp A: & whome venerable Bede commendeth to the posteritie with singu∣lar praises, are they but Pypers and Po∣etes with you? Asaph, Heman and Idithū, because they made, and songe prayses vnto God, might a sober Panyme call them Pi∣pers and Poetes? Iuuencus, Sedulius, Pru∣dentius, ought they to be of litle price or es∣timation, because they were makers of Verses? Cednom (sayeth Bede) made songes, conteyning mater of the holy Scrip∣ture, with such exceding sweetnesse, and with such a grace: that many feelinge theyr har∣tes compuncte and prickte, with hearinge and reading of them, withdrewe them selues from the loue of the worlde. Speake not therefore M. Iewell againste the Grace of God: And these sweete meanes, whiche he hath prouided, to allure men thereby to his Loue, terme them not Pypinge or Poetrye. Perchaunce, if ye had some such pyper as Cednom was, to syng and play before you, when the Sprite trowbleth you,
there might be hope, that you would be more quiete and reasonable. Hope, I say, there might be, but no assurance, because sometymes you are so taken, that I feare, if Kinge Dauid hym selfe should play before you, though you would not be so furious, as to caste your speare at hym: yet you would be so madly meryly dispo∣sed, as to call him a Piper. By these few Examples then, lette it be tried, whether M. Iewell hath folowed an honest fashion, in his Replieng. And whether it becummeth hym, which would be compted vprighte in his Doinges, so to play the Childes, the Womans, the Madmans, the Phrenetykes, Or the Mynstrels parte, in Toyinge, in Ies∣tinge, in Imagyninge, and in Harpinge so as he hath done, about D. Hardinges Testimonies. For what is there now lefte, which may not be (after M, Iewels Rhetorike) contemned? If the Authoritie of suche as haue writen at any tyme these nyne hundred yeres be alleaged, it is (sayeth M. Iewel straitewayes) out of the cumpasse of the first six hundred yeres.
If we bringe the Example of such as lyued solitarilie within those six hundred yeres: Ye flee (sayth he) for ayde into Aegipt, or ye hunt the Mountaines. If the Example of populouse Cities far distant from vs be alleaged, then ye goe (saieth he) A thowsand miles beyond Chri∣stendome. If ye speake of their case, which are nigh their death, Alas (saieth he) ye begge at dea∣thes dore. If the Auncient Fathers, S. Cyprian, S. Basile, S. Ambrose, and others, be brought in, to confirme your purpose, you must take heede, that no mention in theyr testimonies be made of Boyes, women, Infantes, Phrenetikes, Cheastes, Cham∣bers, wildernesse &c? For then al the whole shalbe disgraced, because of those base thin∣ges and Persons. Besyde this, a confessed Trueth is not to be estemed, if it were either but once, Or without cumpanie, Or done at midnight. To be shorte, no Musitian shalbe alo∣wed, because he is a Piper, and no maker of verses, neuer so good, because he is a Poete. And so the conclusion will be, that nothing almoste shalbe brought so worthy
and euident: but M. Iewel, by his arte and policie, wil make it obscure and simple. If this be tolerable, thē is D. Harding an∣swered: but if this be vnreasonable, then hath not M. Iewell vsed a necessarie point of discretion Or modestie. Of M. Iewels wrangling with D. Harding. CAP. 6. THis, whiche already I haue speci∣fied, is to muche for a sober man to vse: but this yet is not all that M. Iewel abuseth himselfe in, againste D. Harding. For byside peruerting or de∣facing of his Authorities, he wrangleth al∣so, very contentiously with him. And that, not after a general sense only or meaninge of this worde, but after a Singular & pro∣per fasshion. For (to speake in general) Al the deprauing of D. Hardings Argumen∣tes, al the disgracing of his witnesse, al the turning and shifting from one pointe and state of the question to an other, which (as I haue shewed) M. Iewel vseth in the first
foure articles: all this (I say) may wel goe vnder the name of contention and quare∣ling: and in this sense, the whole Replie, is stuffed therewithall. But, in this place, I note that singular kind of cōtētiousnes, by force of which, any man driueth his aduer∣sary to prouing of that, which is either so possible, that a thousand experiencies de∣clare it: either so credible, that they them selues which aske for profe of it, do openly and plainly confesse, that they doe not deny it. As in three or fower Examples: VVhat if foure or fiue (sayeth D. Harding) of sundrie houses in a sick∣nes tyme, being at the point of death, in one Parisshe, require to haue theyr rightes er they departe? This case, is not only possible by course of time, but also common through infection of cōtagious aiers. But yet M. Iew. replieth. What if no man happen to be sicke? Then hath M Harding loste a good Argument. But what if some happen to be sicke? Then haue you (M. Iewell) found a Rude Obiection. For of the two, which is more possible? To haue in a plage tyme, foure
or fiue Sycke: Or to haue a tyme of Sycknes, and none at all Sycke in it? For, of a tyme of Sycknes, D. Hardinge dyd speake. And if you will put (A what if) againste the tyme it selfe, and suppose that there is no plage at all: as this I graunt is possible, so is, by lyke Reason, the other also. Neither can you by putting your case, so distroie the contrarie suppo∣sition, that you might seeme to make it frustrate and voide: Or disapointe thereby your Aduersaries purpose. What if foure or fyue Principall Pro∣testantes should be connerted by Reading the Bookes of Catholykes: could not they vtter many secrete Deuises of yours, for Open professing of whiche you lacke but a better world? Yea, but saie you againe, what if suche wayes be taken for lettinge of Catholyke Bookes to come into the Realme, that by Readinge of them, none shall see what is Answered? In deede, you haue put me a case,Iew. 3. whiche is lykely inough, and I could sone Answer vnto it, that it is a hard Case also, to Prouoke, and Challenge, And bid men speak, & make as though we should haue cōmendation for our freenes.
And at yt very beginning, to let thē yt wuld and should, or reade or heare what we say. But yet, what were this to y• answer of my question? For it is possible inough, that al∣though you make the serche neuer so dili∣gent, yet some wise men of your owne side wil be desirous to vnderstād our answers, & not be hastie to condēne vs before iudge∣mēt. Therfore, whē a likely or possible case is put, to make a cleane cōtrary vnto it, as though it were thē fully refelled, what other thing is it, but to fight vpon anger, & not for truth: And to procure troble only to ye aduersary, and not to manifest and open your owne doctrine. Of what affectiō & humor shal I say it cū∣meth, y• you dare permit ye historie which Amphilochius writeth of S. Basile to be true,Iew. 91. & yet wil not be ruled by it? Doth not this proue, y• you haue a sprite of cōtention within you, and that you shift to make ex∣ceptions against the Trueth?Iew. 89. That you mislike not daily preaching, & yet y• you reproue D. Harding for saieing y• in Antioche ye scripturs were dayly expoū∣ded & preached, doth it not argue a contēti∣os stomake? for suppose yt it were not true, yet no harm cūming therof vnto ye reader,
what neede was there of a special and so∣lemne refelling of it? No dout but if you were disposed (M. Iew.) you could quick¦ly fynd it owt, that dayly exposition of the scripture might be in Antioche, and yet ye cōmon people be called thereunto but once a weeke, as S. Chrysostome saieth. For it might be throughowt the Churches of Antioche by course, and in that course, the sermon might be one daye in S. Chryso∣stomes church. Also there might be dayly expounding of the scriptures to ye Clergie though not to the people: And the Propo∣sition conteyning in it nothing against good maners, or truth of doctrine, a quiet man in so much matter byside, requiring in deede a ful Answer, would not haue troubled hymselfe with this question. When you saie in an other place, that,Iew. 16 It is neither denied of you, nor any part of your quaestion, that sundrie nations in Asia the lesse vnderstoode not the Greeke, and yet notwithstandinge, is not M. Harding hable to proue it with al his Gheasses doe ye not signifie by these wordes, that your good wil is not, plainely and peaceablie to declare the Trueth of your doctrine: but your Stomake is against ye person of
your aduersarie, and that ye seeke to con∣trarie his saieinges? When you saye: Verely if a man by waie of contention, would saie, the Licaonical tongue was a corruptiō or difference of the Greeke tongue, & not a seueral tongue of it selfe, M. Har. should haue much a doe,Iew. 164 to proue the contrarie: And in saieing so, whē yourselfe by, & by, doe contrarie D. Har. therein, is it not straitewaies manifest, yt you folow the waye of contention? More might be brought against you, M. Iew. in this kinde: but if by these few Examples it be perceiued, that you haue wrangled and striued, where no cause was offered, I trust that although yourself be so affected, yt you wil neuer submit your∣selfe, And yeld to the Catholike and Ro∣mane Church, yet other, which loue trueth and Sinceritie, wil take heede how they commit the settling of their myndes & con¦sciencies, to the Positions and Answeres of a man so contentiouse. As on the other side if these so manifest Examples, proue not plainely what you are, it profiteth not to bring more copie, where store suffi∣cient is not considered.
Of the Buts Which M. Iewel vseth with D. Harding. CAP. VII. THe marke, that M. Iewel shooteth at, is to Refel D. Hardings answer: which how many wayes he hath pricked and roued at, as also how artificially he hath bestowed his strength therein, I haue, by example, declared. And now I thinke it good to shew, what buts he vseth. Such buts of his I meane, which like an Hypocrite he would seeme to haue set vp of his own motion, where as in deede D. Harding had made them vnto him before, that he should not, al at pleasure, Roue or hobbe abrode at euery marke yt liked his fansie. As in Exāple D. Har. thought it good, (before he should speak of Sole receiuing or priuate Masse) shortly to alleage such authorities, by which y• Masse or Sacrifice of ye new testa∣stament, was cōfirmed. Against which, M. Iew. speaketh his worst, & proueth three leaues together, ye either the witnesses be not lawful, either that they proue not Priuate Masse. Now the Trueth being this, y• D. Har. brought thē not in, to con∣firme
Priuate Masse, M. Iewel therefore least he might seeme to haue taken his Marke amisse, so long togeather as three leaues are in his Replie, he commeth (as I saie) from Rouing abowte the mater, to the very state thereof, saieinge: BVT he wil saie,The first Example. Iew. 12. wel shott. he alleged al these do∣ctours to an other purpose, to proue the Sa∣crifice. Wil he saie so M. Iewel? and hath he not rather saied it alreadie? Are not these his expresse wordes: that, although you in a printed Sermon,Har. 24. and preached at Poules Crosse, pretend enemitie against Priuate Masse in word, yet in deede, that you extēd your whole witt and cunning, vtterly to abolisshe the vnbloudy and dayly Sacrifice of the Churche? And hereupon, doth not he name shortly the Authorities, by which he might proue the vnbloudy Sacrifice? In the end of which maketh he not a transition saieing, Now this presupposed, that the Masse standeth vpon good and suf∣ficient groundes, let vs come to our special purpose, & saie somewhat o Priuate Masse? What vanitie then was it of yours, (M. Iewel) to make so greate a talke against the witnesses alleged that they proue not Priuate Masse, for which yet they were
not brought, and how like an Hypocritie come you in with your, But he wil saie he alleged al these Doctours to an other pur∣pose, whereas D. Harding so plainely de∣clared it, that in deede he vsed them not for profe of priuate Masse, but only of the dayly and vnbloudy Sacrifice. After a like sort,The 1. Example. concerning the nūber of Canons which were made in the first Nicene Councel, you aske this question, and to seeming, oppose your Aduersarie with it, saieing: What leadeth M. Harding to saie,Iew. 239 The bishope of Rome hath these three score and ten Canons in safe keeping? Why doth he thus dissemble and mocke the world? Cer∣tainely the bishope of Rome himselfe dis∣clameth it, and saith he hath them not. for thus he writeth touching the same: There are in the Church of Rome only twentie Ca¦nons of the Councel of Nice, By what neg∣ligence the rest are lost, it is not knowen. The Pope saieth there are but twentie Ca∣nons extant: M. Harding saieth, there are three score and ten Canons. I trow, it is no reason we should beleue M. Harding, and leaue the Pope. It is no reason in deede. Yet if they speake not contrarie one to the other, then
is it no Reason, that you should in such sort handle the mater, as though thei were repugnant. For true it is, that as ye Pope saied, there are but twentie Canons extāt, yet yt there were once more then twentie, it appereth by these wordes which folow immediatly: By what negligence the rest are lost, it is not knowen. Also that there were in Tyme Past three score and ten Ca¦nons of the Councel of Nice,Har. 104. true it is, and so it is saied of D. Harding: but that there are at this Present Tyme so manie, he saieth it not, though you boldly report it of hym, to make A Contradiction, be∣twene hym and the Pope. Now, maie we thinke, that you per∣ceiued not this much by yourselfe? Yeas without al doubt you dyd. and therefore not ignorant that you had ouershott your selfe, and that the Catholike would bring you from your Rouing, to certaine and set Markes, yourselfe come welfauoredly to them, and saie: BVT Steuen the Bishope of Rome saieth: there were sometyme in Rome the ful three score and ten Canons. O M. Iewel, doe you see, that this wil
be your Answer? Or rather that so much is included in the wordes of Pope Stepha∣nus, And yet dyd you bring his Testimo∣nie in, to proue D. Hardings report false, which saied no more, then that the whole number, of these three score and ten Canons, was kept diligently in the Church of Rome? Tel vs now, who dissimbleth? Or who mocketh the world? And therefore was not this BVT of yours first consydered, before you dyd so sharply inueigh against D. Harding? For both the Pope and he, speakyng of the Tyme Past, it is true that three score and ten Canons of the Nicene Councel were in Rome: And the Pope speakyng of the tyme Present, that twentie only are extant is not contrarie to hym that speaketh of yt Tyme Past, saieng that, three score and ten Canons were kept in Rome. And therefore it may be iustly returned vpon you againe M. Iewel, that, Non s∣atis commodè diuisa sunt temporibus tibi Daue haec.Iew. 237
Let vs bring an other Example.The third Example. To proue the Souerantie of the Churche of Rome, D. Har. allegeth S. Iren. saieing:Iren. lib. 3. cap. 3. Ad hanc ecclesiam propter maiorem principalitatem &c. To this Church (of Rome) it is necessarie all the Churches, that is to saye, al that be faithful any where, to repaire & come togeather, for the mightier Principa∣litie of the same. In answering to this testimonie: first, saieth M. Iewel, Irenaeus speaketh not of the Supremacie.Rouing. Then, saieth M. Iewel againe: Irenaeus writeth only against Valen¦tinus, tinus, Cerdon and Marcion old Heretikes, whom he biddeth for trial of their doctrine, to behold the Churches which the Apostles planted. After this, he telleth vs y• Ire∣neus resteth specially vpon the Example of the Church of Rome, & by this rouing, he would haue it thought, that he hath not Answered nothing. And then it foloweth: But they wil Replie, Irenaeus saieth, pro∣pter maiorem principalitatem.Iew. 244 Hypocrite Haue ye founde it now at length? and dyd ye not perceaue at the first alleging of
Ireneus, y• y• force of D. Hardinges Argu∣ment consisted in these wordes, propter maiorem principalitatem, because of the greater principalitie of ye Church of Rome? Why dissimble you then? And why plaie you the hypocrite so artificially, in keping that backe, which should haue ben at the very first Answered: And in delyuering it whē it cummeth, after such a sort, as maie cause the Reader to conceine, that it is of your owne pure Inuention, and not of your aduersaries obiection: And that you doe freely of your owne wil and wit en∣crease ye strength of the witnesses brought against you, and speake more for your Ad∣uersarye, then he hath done for hymselfe? Thei wil (you saie) Replie. Wil thei? Naie thei doe: And not Replie, as though it would depend of a former argument, but Obiect, without anie preambles, that, The Greater or mightier Principali∣tie of the Church of Rome, which Irenaeus speaketh of, doth proue the Su∣premacie therof aboue al other Churches. Yet you But only, at it. There is also a very plaine TestimonieThe fourth Ex¦ample.
of S. Ambrose, alleged by D. Har. for the Supremacie of the see of Rome: And the strength of the argumēt consisteth in this yt the Chieftie of the Apostolike priesthood is affirmed by him to florisshe there.Amb. lib. . cap. 6. Note ye wordes, Chieftie, and priesthoode. For vntil answer be made to thē, al besides is but Rouing. As in Example owt of M. Iewel. He admitteth first, S. Ambrose wordes, and addeth more vnto them, to the praise of the Church of Rome. He preferreth (and worthely) the Glorie of Christs Gospel before the power of the Romane Empire.Al byside ye marcke. He encreaseth the mater, by the testimoni∣es of S. Augustine, and S. Chrysostome, and leaueth it as a most plaine and mani∣fest Trueth, that Rome was more noble for the Gospel of Christ then the Empire of the world. And whereas he is not so dul, but perceaueth wel enough, that al this geare cummeth not to the point of ye argument, then he cummeth to his fami∣liar BVT, saieing: But S. Ambrose saieth,Iew. 248 Apostolici sa∣cerdotij principatum: The principa∣litie
of the Apostolike Priesthoode. Yea forsoth M. Iewel, of the Principa∣litie of Priesthoode, S. Ambrose speaketh. And we maye wel wonder, that al this while, you haue dissembled, as though you had not seene the marke which we set be∣fore you, to direct your answer there vnto. Now how wel you haue Replied concer∣ning these two Testimonies. of S. Iren. and S. Ambrose, it shal be examined in the place proper for it, which wil be in the third Booke. At this present, I note your Craft only and Hypocrisie, by which you conueigh the matter so, that you maie first wander abrode, withowt scope in deede, yet not withowt some apparance of direct Answer, and that, afterwardes, you come with A BVT to the very poynt of the argument, and make it seeme that this BVT was set vp of your owne self, and not of the aduersarie. Of which kynde, he that wil require moe examples, maie for the seking, easely haue thē. And when he findeth thē, let hym remember, that it is but a lewde kynde of Rhetorike, either so to daly with the Ad∣uersarie,
either so to delay the right An∣swer vnto the mater proponed. And now to an other point. Of M. Iewels Refellyng one Truthe by an other. CAP. VIII. IT is A common thing with you (M. Iewel) in Answering, to put awaie one Trueth by an other: Or by adding one to an other, so to confoūde them bothe, that no certainety shalbe founde in the question. Which surely is a good pro∣uision, yt you may haue sumwhat alwaies to Replie: but except there folow a better Application, it should not in any part sa∣tisfie. As in Example, When Ireneus witnesseth that Bi∣shopes of the Greke Church cummyng to Rome,The first Example. Eccl. Histor. lib. 5. ca. 24. had the Eucharistia sent vnto them, to signifie their mutual Communion in Sacrament, notwithstanding their Di∣uersitie in keeping of Easter: though you should bring neuer so manye Examples,
that, Paulinus sent at one tyme a loaf of breade to S. Augustine,Iew. 40. at an other, fyue loues, and them in token of good wil: yet doe ye not proue hereby, that the Euchari∣stia, which S. Ireneus speaketh of, was not, as the Catholikes expounde it, the Sacrament. For neither is the bread which S. Paulinus sēt, called Eucharistia, neither doe such Presentes from one to other, proue a consent in Religion: And yt which S. Ireneus speaketh of is called Eucharistia, and the cause for which it was sent (which was to signifie their vnitie,Eucha∣ristit. in the Substance of our Religion) doth re∣quire that it should be ye Sacrament. And so I saie, true it is that Bishopes presen∣ted Bisshopes, with tokens of mutual frindship: but this Trueth must not de∣stroie or confound an other Trueth, of the Custome in the Church of Rome, to send the very Sacrament to the Bishopes that came from the East Churche. And in this place (M. Iewel) you lacke not Inuentiō, but Application: And you bring furth in deede faire loues, but you match them not rightly with the Sacrament. The sum of M. Iewels Answer is this: The loafe which Paulinus sent vnto S. Au∣gustine
was not the Sacrament: Ergo, the Eucharistia which S. Irenaeus witnesseth to haue ben sent to bishopes of the East cum∣myng to Rome, was not the Sacrament. Leontius a Breeke writer,The 2. Example. reporteth of the Patriarke of Alexandria, yt he saied Masse (fecit Missas) in his Oratorie. yet wil it not necessarily folow (saieth M. Ieu.)Iew. 78. Missa. that Missa in this place, importeth the masse. For, as I haue already proued by sundry Au¦thorities, Missa is oftentymes vsed for any kynd of praier. But what then? If it be oftentymes so vsed, must it not be otherwise vsed in this place df Leontius? How proue you this Consequence? Or how Applie you ye one place to the other? Breifly then to repete it, M. Iewels answer is this: Missa is often tymes taken for any kynd of Praier: Ergo the Masse, which holy Iohn the Almener saied, was not properly masse. In the same historie of Leontius, D.The 3. Example. Harding expoundeth (cum benedixisset san¦cta) thus in Englishe: when the Patriarch had consecrated.Benedi∣cere san∣cta. Which proueth (by the waie) that (missa) the Masse, of which the Storie speaketh, is not taken for any kind of Praier, because, blessing of the holy thinges or consecratiō is not vsed generally in euery kynde, but in Special mater, Tyme,
and place. But to note, what M. Iewel concludeth, of Benedicere sancta: These wordes doe no more signifie (faieth he) the cōsecration of the Sacrament,Iew. 78. as M. Harding hath translated it, then these wor∣des, Extollite manus vestras in sancta, doe signifie the lifting vp of handes to the Sacra∣ment. And why so? Chrysostome in his Ly∣turgie vseth the same manner of speach, to a far other purpose. What is yt? He allegeth the wordes, and then inferreth: It maie ap∣peare, that Chrysostome by these wordes, meant a solemne praier to cōclude ye whole. But how applie you now these thinges to yonr purpose? because, S. Chrysos. mea¦neth by Benedicere Sancta, a praier to con∣clude his liturgie, doth Leontius vnder∣stād, iust ye same by those wordes? In what Logik fynde you that Consequence? Or, by what maner of likelihoode, make you it probable? Mark it better (M. Iew.) & you shal perceaue, yt which you would cōclude not ōly to be vnlikely, but also impossible. For, ye benediction of which S. Chrysost. speaketh, was you saie a solēne Praier to cō¦clude ye whole: but ye Benedictiō of which Leōtius telleth you, was before the Pater noster, of the masse, which Praier is vsed, when the Mysteries are not yet Re∣ceiued.
Therefore vndoubtedly the meaning is not one in them both, con∣cerning Benedicere Sancta, which is re∣ferred to so distinct Tymes and Condi∣tions, And your Craftines may be espied which would destroy one Trueth by an o∣ther. The Answer which M. Iewel maketh is this: Benedicere Sancta, signifieth in S. Chrysostome a solemne Praier made to con∣clude the whole: Ergo, benedicere Sancta, that is, to blesse the holy thinges, doth not signifie in Leontius Historie, Consecration. Let vs come to an other Example.The 4. Example. Matth. 16. Petra. Our sauiour saied vnto S. Peter, Thow art Peter, A Rocke, and vpon this Rocke wil I builde my Churche: Ergo, S. Peter was most fast sett aboue all other in wor∣thinesse, and he was a most sure and Prin∣cipal person in the building of Christ his Churche: Such, as by which, all the faith∣full should be staied. Which proueth his singular Prerogatiue. But (saieth M. Iewel) Christ is the Rocke.Iew. 222. Who denieth it? Againe, The con∣fession of S. Peter, is the Rocke. Neither this is denied. And to proue this, that no Catholike denieth, he lacketh no Autho∣rities. But how foloweth this, that
because Christ is the Rock, therfore S. Pe∣ter is not the Rocke? Or because ye Church is builded on the faith of S. Peter, there∣fore it was not builded vppon the person which had that faith? By like Reason you might conclude,By suche argumēts al religion hathe bene confuted. God is our King and our Father: Ergo, we owe not supreme Reue∣rence in their kinde, to our Prince, Or our Parents. Which is nothing els, but by one Truth, to destroy an other: And for lacke of Vnderstanding, And abundance of Presu∣ming, neither to distinct duties and offices accordingly, neither to refraine from deter∣mining, that which we know not, ouer ha∣stely. Otherwise it were quickly to be per∣ceaued, that Christ is the Rocke by merite, S. Peter by mere mercy: Christ by Abso∣lute Authority S. Peter by meanes of Le∣gacy: Christ before and aboue all other, S. Peter aboue al other, but yet after, and not before Christ. By which commodity of di∣stinctions, those propositiōs which Prote∣stantes faine to be contrary, one to ye other, will stand and agree well together. The briefe Argument of M. Iewels is this. The Rocke which Christ spake of to S. Peter, signifieth the cōfessiō of S. Peters faith: ergo it signifieth not S. Peter confessing it.
An other Example.The. v Example. Ambr. 2. Cor. 12. S Androw folowed our sauiour before S. Peter. And yet (saith S. Ambrose) Androw receiued not Prima∣tum, the Primacie, but Peter. But,Iew. 245 M. Iewel Auswereth: It is easye to be shewed, that Primatus emong the olde fa∣thers, is farre otherwise vsed, I meane, for any Superioritie or preferment before others.primatus And this he proueth at large by Phrases of Speach vsed about Esau, about the Here∣tike Abbate Eutyches, Or towardes any of the foure Patriarches. But what conclu∣deth he? Thincketh he▪ because the Primacy that Esau lost for a dish of pottage, was to wear a better cote then his felowes, Or to syt highest at the Table, Or to haue thrise or fiue times more meat for his part, then an other, Or any other suche thing belonging to the honour of the first borne: that the pri∣macy which S. Ambrose attributeth to S. Peter, may haue the very self same sense in it? Or, because Eutyches had a Primacie in his Abbey, may it therfore be lawfull for vs to imagine, that all the Apostles liued in one Cloister togeather, and that S. Pe∣ter was no more then an Abbate amonge them?
Beside this, if Primatus doth signify a∣ny Preferment, it serueth also to signify the Supremacy. And so, as you wishe that it should be taken in your sense, so should you iustly haue prouided for it, least it were ta∣ken in an other sense. And this truly had bene your part, (M. Iewel) to proue that S. Ambrose dothe not meane by S. Peters Primacie, the General Gouernmēt ouer al the worlde. As for the bare shewing of it, y• Primatus hath diuers senses, it is mete & cōuenient for a Scholemaster or maker of Dictionaries: but in an Answerer it is not resonable, except ther folow an Applicatiō thereof to his purpose. You loue allwaies to drine the Catholikes to the prouing side, knowing it to be safest & easyest for you, to stand stil at the denial of euery thing. And who so folishe that can not doe so? If (saye you) this worde Primatus muste signifie that power and Gouerment,Iew. 145 that M. Harding fantasieth: then must it folow of ne∣cessitie, that Esau, Eutyches, the bishop of Antioche, and the Bishop of Alexandria, had the Vniuersall power and Gouernmēt of the whole worlde. As who should say, that the question had
bene, whether Primatus hath any moe sig∣nifications then one: Or that D. Harding had taken vpon him, to proue that Prima∣tus where so euer it be founde, must needes signifie the Supremacy of the B. of Rome. No, (M. Iewel) let Primatus haue as manye diuers significations, as you haue deuises to confound A trueth, D. Harding obiecteth you, the testimony of S. Ambrose where it is plaine, that S. Peter had a Pri∣macy. To this now make a direct answer, not by telling a long Tale & True inough of the Significations of Primatus, but in Applying them to the Purpose, and In∣structing vs, in what one sense it is to be taken in S. Ambrose. And if you dare say, that he meant suche a Primacy, as Esau lost for a dishe of Pottage, Or such, as the Heretike Eutiches had in his Abbey, then shall we prouide an Answer for you. But whereas the very wordes themselues doe geue it, that it coulde not be so Simple a mater, (for S. Androw, as euery other of ye Apostles, had Authority geuen him in the whole worlde, and yet the Primacie was bestowed vpon S. Peter only, of whiche it foloweth, that emong the chiefest he was the chiefe) What helpeth it you, to the An∣swering
of S. Ambrose, to declare that Pri∣matus is taken for any Superiority or Pre∣ferment? Againe whereas you can not denye it, but S. Peter had a Dignitie & Preferment aboue other, how wel should you haue don to Specify wherein it consisted? But you thinke it inough perchaunce, to shewe that you are not altogether vnlearned, and that you haue in your daies, Heard, Reade, and Seene many thinges. Which in deede were inough to doe, if Christians might seke for their owne Praise only, and not the setting forth of the Trueth, but the case being other wise, content not your selfe herewith (M. Iewel) to play the bare parte of a Gram∣marian: nor thinke the office of an Answe∣rer fulfilled, if in telling one Trueth, you destroy an other. The Answer that M. Iewel maketh is this: Primatus doth signifie anye Prefer∣ment, Ergo, it signifieth not in S. Ambrose the Supremacie of S. Peter. Againe: Esau lost his Primacie for a messe of pottage, Ergo S. Peters Primacie was not an vniuersall Go∣uernment. Now as I haue saide of this worde Pri∣matus,The. vj. Example. so might I also of this word Prin∣cipatus,
Principalitie,Princi∣patus. which S. Augustine vseth to Bonifacius Bishop of Rome in these wordes: Who is he that knoweth not, that, that Principalitie of Apostleship, (which vndoubtedlye was in the See of Rome) is to be preferred before any Bishoprike that is?August. de Bapt. cont Dō. lib. 2. which place prouing so euidently, that the See of Rome passeth in Dignitie what soeuer Bishopricke in the worlde, yet M. Iewel answereth, that it signifieth not here a Supreme Gouernment. Aske him the cause why, and he can say no more but that, Socrates is called Prince of Philosophers,Iew. 249 And Plato Prince of Oratours, And Pom∣peius Prince of the world, And Elias head of the Prophets. In which places, Princeps is ta∣ken, not for a Prince or Gouernour, but on∣ly, for A man that for his qualities is to be e∣stemed aboue the rest. And in this sense S. Augustine calleth the See of Rome, as it was in his time, principatum sedis Apostolicae. Well Sir, that, Princeps is often vsed for A man had in estimation for his vertue, rome, or any singular qualitie, euery Grammarian can witnesse. But that it is alwais so vsed, who telleth you? And excepte you proue that it hath no other Signification bisyde,
how can you inferre, that because Socrates is called Prince of the Phylosophers in respect of his knowledge, so the See of Rome shoulde be called Princeps or chife in respect of some qualitie only, (you tell not what) and not of Supreme Gouern∣ment. For Supreme Gouernment it self, is it not a certain qualitie? And Pompeius whome your selfe name as Prince of the world, though he were so in deede: in res∣pect either of Vertue or Office, yet was he not Supreme Gouernour. How hangeth this Tale then togeather, that Princeps is not taken for a Chiefe Gouernour,Like Ger¦mans Lip¦pes. because it is often vsed to signifie an Estimation a∣boue others in vertue. &c? Or who woulde euer so confounde a Trueth by a Trueth, but he that loueth not the Trueth? I woulde aske you allso (M. Iewel) what qualitie that should be in the Aposto∣like See of Rome, for which it shoulde be preferred aboue other Bishoprickes of all the worlde? It is not (you say) for Su∣preme Gouernmēts sake. Wherefore then? Is it for Estimation of vertue, Gloquence, Philosophy or any such like? Name the quality if you can but you can not.
Only you stay vpon the Negatiue, that it had not the Principalitie because of Su∣preme Gouernment: And to that you adde that Princeps is taken, in the places which you allege, only for a man that for his qua∣lities is to be esteemed. As wel you might proue, (M. Iewel) that Socrates was not Prince of Philosophers, because Prin∣ceps is taken oftentimes for A Chiefe Go∣uernour in A country, which Socrates ne∣uer was. See then (indifferent Reader) whether this be an honest and plaine maner in an∣swering, to refell one Trueth by an other, Or so to deny one Sense of A word, that he can not tell, what other Sense of the same worde, to folow? Surely where M. Iew∣els senses in this matter should be, I can not tel. For like as when we say, Socrates is the Prince of Philosophers, we are vnder∣standed to make the Comparison betwene him and other Philosophers, and not to meddle with Oratours, Captaines, Artifi∣cers, Or any of a diuers state and conditi∣on: So, when S. Augustin witnesseth, that the Principalitye of the Apostleship (which is in the Sea of Rome,) is to be preferred before all other what so euer Bishoprikes,
what wise man doubteth, but that ye Com∣parison here is to be made, betweene the degrees of Power and Charge that are les∣ser or greater in that kinde of Office? Now by a Bisshopricke, what is imported? Is not a Spirituall Function and Charge ouer Soules vnderstanded thereby? And in this Charge are not Archbysshoppes aboue Bisshopes, and Patriarches aboue Archebisshopes? But in what thing aboue? In Iurisdiction vndoubtedly, & Gouern∣ment, larger then their Inferiour haue. Therefore, if the See of Rome, doe passe in Principalitie, all other Bisshoprikes (as S. Augustine witnesseth) And if the Supe∣riortie or Inferiortie in Bisshoprikes must be considered according to the greatnesse or smalnesse of the Iurisdiction whiche is a∣pointed to them (as the Definition of the Name will declare) howe should not the See of Rome haue an vniuersall Autho∣ritie or Gouernment ouer al Christendome, which hath such a Principalitie geauen it, that all other Bisshoprikes are not compa∣rable vnto it? Not comparable, I meane, in those thinges, that perteine to Authoritie and Gouernment, suche as is annexed to the
Condition, Substance, or Nature of Bisshoprikes. For in Vertue, Policie, Elo∣quence, Fauor of Emperours, Abundance of Riches and lyuinges, and many other lyke thinges which are Personal or Tem∣poral, the Bisshoppes of Constantinople may far excell the Pope. Yea, in such Bis∣shoply and Spirituall things also, as con∣cerne theyr Character and Order, euerye Bisshope in the world, doth Baptise, Con∣firme, Absolue and Consecrate as perfitely and excellentely as the B. of Rome. But yet for all this, concerning the examininge and practising of these selfe same thinges which by Vertue of theyr order they maie doe, and concerning the power of Iuris∣diction, As, to plant and to pul vp, to Cite, to dipense, To Forbidde, to Commaunde, To prescribe Orders, To determyne dou∣tes, and so furth: what so euer Bisshoprike it be, The Principalitie of the Apostleshippe, that is in Rome, muste be preferred. And what lacketh then here, to Supreme Go∣uernmēt concerning causes Ecclesiasticall? Howe lilte also muste it be, to passe all others in Degree of Bisshoprike, if anie one were exempted from him?
The greater & fouler is your fault ther∣fore (M. Iewell) whiche woulde make your Reader beleue, that the Principaly∣tie of ye Apostolike See of Rome, in respect of other Bisshoprikes, consisteth in any other Qualytie (what, you can not tell) and not in Supreme Gouernment. Wher∣as, in Comparinge of Bysshoprike with Bysshoprike, the Authoritie of Gouern∣ment is directly to be considered. The Answer of M. Iewell is this. Princeps is often vsed for a man had in esti∣mation for any Vertue, Roome, Or Sin∣gular Qualitie: Ergo, the Principalytie whiche S. Augustine attributeth to the Apos∣tolike See consisteth not in Supreme Go∣uer̄ment. It woulde be ouer longe and tedious, to teken vp all Examples, by whiche I might euidently confirme, this obiection of myne, that Maister Iewell vseth the settinge further of one Trueth, to the dis∣gracinge or dissanulling rather of an other. As when the Catholikes say, to proue the Supremacie of the Bisshope of Rome: Iulius restored Athanasius:The .vij Example. Iew. 290 M. Iewell Answereth: Maximus also res∣tored vnto him, his Communion.
When they say:The viij. Example. Touching faith and Religion the See of Rome hath alwaies bene consulted: He Answereth:Iew. 294 Marcellinus, Dulcitius, Bo∣nifacius, Euodius and other sent theyr ques∣tions to S. Augustine. When they say:The .ix. Example. S. Peter was cal∣led, Princeps or Chiefe of the Apostles: He Answereth: So we reed in Scriptures, Princeps Familiae, Princeps Legationis, Prin∣ceps Coquorum, that is, the Chiefe of rhe house or stocke,Iew. 302. the Chiefe of the Embassage, the Chiefe of the Cookes. When the Catholikes say:The .x. Example. S. Peter the Master of the whole world apointed S. Iames to be Bis∣shope of Hierusalem:Iew. 303 He Answereth: That vnto Michael is com∣mitted the nation of the Iewes. But, Land and Sea, and all the habitation of the world, is committed to S. Paule. When they say,The .xi. Example. that Rome is the moste notable and chief Church of the worlde:
He Answereth that, Cicero to blase the no∣bilitie of that Citie, calleth lucem orbisterra∣rum, atue arcem omnium Gentiū,Iew. 304 the light of the world and the Castle of all nations. To make an end, when they say out of S. Ambrose,The .xii. Example. That Damasus the Pope is called the Rector and Ruler of the house of God: To put the mater out of al doubt, see what he answereth therevnto. But to put the mater out of doubt, let vs consider whether the selfe same forme of Speach,Iew. 306 haue bene applied to any others in like sorte. And then he telleth where other Bisshopes haue bene sayed to be Rulers in the Church. But doth this kinde of Auswer, either satisfie the Obiection, Or Determine the Trueth, Or quiet a doubtful minde? Doth not this kinde of Reasoning bring vs ra∣ther into perplexities, that it may not be knowen, how to be resolued in any mater? Is there any fitter waye for the Antichrist to worke by,Antichrist high way for  then, by Forme and Phrases of Speache, to confound all Faith and Re∣ligion? Doe you beleue (M. Iewel) that Christ is the Sonne of God? But doe you beleue
that he is the natural Sonne of his Father, of the same Substance & Eternitie with him? If you doe so in deede, what say you to this Argument, that Iudges in ye Scrip∣tures are called Goddes,Ex. 22 and that, the frin∣des and Seruantes of God, are called Goddes?psal. 81. Would this put the mater out of doubt, that Christe is not the Sonne of God (I meane by Nature) because you coulde finde it oute (after you had consi∣dered it) where the selfsame form of speache is applied to others in like sort? And where suche, as are not the naturall Children of God, are called yet the Children of God? Christ saueth vs, & in Form of Speache S. Paule sayeth to Timothie: Doeinge so, thou shalt saue thy self,1. Tim. 4. and them that heare thee. And would you conclude herevpon, that the Power of sauinge is all one in them bothe, because the Forme of the worde, is all one? Or that it is not pro∣perly and worthely veryfyed of Christe, because it is but improperly attributed to S. Timothie? Consider then I praie you (M. Iewel) whether this will put the mater oute of doubt, if in Refelling the Sense of some one place whiche pleaseth you not, you
bringe a lyke Forme of Speache vsed in an other place: And without further probation, require to haue the vnderstan∣dinge which your Aduersaie gathereth of his witnesse, to be reformed accordinge to the meaninge of the Sentencies which you allege: As, because Princeps, that is Chiefe, is vsed in bothe places, whe∣ther you say Princeps Apostolorum, or Prin∣ceps Coquorum: Therefore to conclude, that the Chieftie of S. Peter Emonge the Apostles, was no other thinge then the Chieftie of N. emonge the Cookes. Beware therefore (Christen Reader) of M. Iewell, And especially in those places: whiche as they make moste for the Catholyke Faith, so hath he no other re∣fuge for sauinge hym selfe from Sub∣scribinge vnto them, but this very Sim∣ple one and Feeble, to seeke where lyke Phrases may be founde of an other Sense yet and meanynge, thereby to bringe in to doubt (or as he supposeth) to putre out of doubte, that the Sense of the Ca∣tholykes Obiection can not contynue. Whiche, in fewe wordes, is no other, then to shewe hymselfe A Grammarian only,
And to destroie one trueth by an other, as though. One phrase might not haue two good Senses, eche one agreeing with the place in which they are apointed to serue. The sum of M. Iewels Argument is this: The like forme or phrase of speache is to be found in an other sense: Ergo, to put the mater out of doubt, this Present place (of which the question is) hath not a different or sundrie sense frome that other. The Summe of my meaning, is this: that no man be deceaued through this kind of M. Iewels Answering, wherein, he so telleth one Trueth, that he disswadeth an other. This practise of the Protestātes hath already done harme inough. let them beginne rather to amend, theyr former ini∣quites, then to adde fresshe vnto them. They haue answered: God must be wor∣shipped in Spirite: Which is most true, and haue thereby taken awaie an other trueth, that, God is also to be worshipped with our body and bodily thinges. They haue answered: The true Fast is to abstaine frome Synne. Whiche is vndoub∣teely True: but by that faire shew of pure holynes, they haue Destroied an other
Trueth that, Togeather with the fas∣ting from synne, we must also take paynes in our body, and abstaine now and then, from meate and drinke. Thei haue Answered: We must receiue the body of Christ by faithe, which in some sense is most true. But thei haue there withal taught the people, not to beleue the Real presence of Christ in the Sacra∣ment: which presence yet is as true, as the other is certaine. In other cases moe, they haue done the lyke. It is to much that thei haue already done: let them not therefore con∣tinue in this trade of Answering, nor of dealing in maters of Religion. Specially when thei bring the mater, to Phrases of Speache, and Signification of wordes, and by one Sense take awaie an other, whereas bothe in their seueral places doe agree with Truthe: this kynd of hande∣ling or Tumblyng rather of thinges, the more further of it is, from the Common Capacitie and iudgement of the Reader, yt sorer it trobleth his conscience, & ye harder it is to be remedyed. For the lesse he is able to examine it, the more he mistrusteth,
when he seeth many wordes made on the contrarie side about it: and by yt same reason, because he lacketh the lernyng and Intelligence, he wil not so easely conceiue what is told hym, or perceiue what is what in the question. For, like as you M. Iew. haue now in∣structed vs, in the significations, of Missa, Princeps, Principalitie, and Rector: so, if an other would teach vs, as concernyng the Motherheade of our blessed Lady, The excellencie of Christ, the Resurrection of our flesshe, yt A Mother, Christ, & flesshe, signifie not alwaies a natural mother, Or the Saluiour of the world, or this sensible and palpable flesshe: would it not cost vs so many wordes in yt refelling of it, & cause vs so narowly to examine, euery circum∣stāce aboute it, yt y• common reader should either not intēd, for slewth or wearynes, to cōsider it, Or not be hable to percea∣ue it, or if he dyd, to saie yet to himselfe, Byr Lady, this geare is not so cleare and manifest, but argumentes maie be found out against it? To what purpose then is it, to peeke vp phrases only, & to geue vs the sundrie significatiōs ōly of wordes? Sure¦ly to no other end, thē to bring in a confu∣sion. In so much, yt a man shal not be able to affirme any thing almost, be it neuer so
manifest, but by y• lyke feat a Replie wil be made against it. Is it not true at this pre∣sent, that you (M. Iew) stand for a Bishop of Sarum? Let so much then be writen vnto Geneua, And let the brothers there, Reioyse, and Praise the Lord for it, that so lerned and Feruent a Minister is set ouer the congregation. But in the begynning of their ioy, if it should be saied sadly vnto them, that they were not best to be so glad before they be sure thereof, because A Bi∣shope is not alwaies taken for a preacher of the word, or minister of the Sacramentes, but signifieth sometymes a man which for any singular Qualities sake, hath a Charge & sight ouer any thinge committed vnto him &c. would not this obiection, let y• furth goeing and course of their gladnes? No doubt thereof. For by that tyme his need∣lesse talke were answered, and he for al y• would replie againe, that it foloweth not Necessarily, M. Iew. to haue any spiritual office in yt he is reported to be a Bishope, because Cicero himself in his Epis. vseth a lyk word to a far other sēse, it would make some to doubt of ye mater, & other to mar∣uel at ye putting vp of ye doubt, & euery one to be trobled wt some affectiō either wt it or against it, the end therefore wil be cōfusiō.
I speake not here against distinctions: neither can I mislyke with his diligence, that when one word is taken sundrie waies, doth set euery sense of the worde in his proper Place. But this is that, which would be amended in M. Iewel, that in Reasoning against vs, he be not content to tel vs Barely, that Princeps, or principatus, or Rector is vsed dyuersly: but that he declare, in what one sense it must be taken, concernyng that place a∣bout which our question ys, Or in what other sense, then that which we doe take it in Otherwise: If the question were, VVhether any Masse be, at this daie, saied in Rome: we affirmyng, that there ys: He Replieth in deede, when he An∣swereth, that, Missa is taken for any kind of Praier. but, if he adde no more, and if he cā not saie, in his conscience that the Masse at Rome is such a kynde of Praier only, he Replieth but lyke A Sophist, and mainteyneth only a Cōtradiction, to y• in∣crease of Contention. And, neither wil he yelde to our proposition, because he replieth against it, neither doth he veny our proposition, because it is but a Truth which he saieth, and therefore nothing
contrarie to that of ours: Neither wil he applye his owne sense of the word Missa (or what so euer other it be) to the questi∣on proponed, but like a man not only Amased hymselfe, but that would haue al other to be vncertaine in euery mater, so he leaueth it as he found it in some note boke or Lexicon, that Missa, Princeps, Prin¦cipatus, are taken not alwaies in one Sense. Beware therefore of hym. Of the Courteous, Mylde & Gentle, behauiour of M. Iewel to∣wardes D. Harding. CAP. IX. YOur frindes (M. Iew.) beleue it, & your self doe also acknowledge it: y• you haue dealt in this Cōflict wt D, Har. very honestly & modestly. And, if they think so, I maruel not, because a good will is so readie, to alow y• Praises of hym whom it liketh, y• of euery occasiō, it doth admit ye persuasion, y• leadeth there vnto. In so much, y• without further Lo∣king into your Boke, & Considering of ye Specialties, it is vnto some a plaine De∣monstration, yt you are of a very Quiet & Gentle Sprite, because you haue charged
your aduersarie only with Vntruethes, and abstained from the Terme of Lies. Wherein, though they be greatly decea∣ued (because in dede, in doeing your worst, you could neuer haue rightly called them Lies, which shalbe shortly proued, to be not so much as, Vntruethes) yet are they easely to be pardoned, because it is A com¦mon mater in good Natures & dispositi∣ons, quickly to be moued with the shew of Vertue and honestie, without long ta∣rying and further trial, whether it be true or Counterfaite. But: As for you, M. Iewel, it is great wōder, not, that you speake Sweetly and meane bitterly, or speake sharpely and think it Truely: but, yt you doe pretend Modestie and practise Extremitie, shewing in wor∣des, as though either you had no Choler at all, either kept it downe from Inflam∣mations, And in deedes expressing such passions, as declare exceding copie of bit∣ter humors.Iew. : Gentle M. Iew. I wil not (you say at the be∣gynning) Answer heate for heat, but in such kinde of Eloquence, wil rather geaue place. And againe:42. No, No, M. Iewel triūpheth not, but geueth al triumph, victorie, & glorie vnto God.79. & inan other place: Of my argu∣ments I make no Vaunt. If they sound wel
In Gods eares, they are wel in tuene. Doe not these phrases and ye like declare, the man to be much mortified, that vseth them? And, that he is so far of from gea∣uing Reproche or Taunt of his owne ma¦king: that he will not so much as vse the occasion, when it is offred, or requite lyke with lyke, being Prouoked? And who is he so perfite by his owne Testimonie? Forfoth M. Iewel. And that M. Iewel, which (bysyde those forsaied behauiours, of which I haue spoken) spareth not to cal men Innizers, Rene∣gates,Iew. pa. Robbers of the people,2. and deceiuers of them in al cumfort,3 Blind Guides, So∣ueraigne Heretikes, Wilful Deuisers,Modest M. Iew. A∣gainst their owne knoulege, violently to re¦pel y• institutiō of Christ,55 Deniers of Christs institution, Improuers of Gods commaun∣dement,96 Men that vse scorneful and sclaun∣derous tales.114 That M. Iewel,118 which char∣geth them with Wilful malice,2 Hatred of trueth,3. Childissh fables, Lies & sclaunders, Vaine folie, and Manifest falsehoode. Euen yt Iewel, which sayeth of the Bi∣shopes of Rome (to let goe other, as fauo∣rable & gentle wordes towardes thē) yt as Iulianus ye Emperour in his phrenesie, some
tymes imagined y• yt greate Alexāders soule was come by successiō to dwel in him: euē so now the bishopes of Rome Imagine by like phātasie or phrenesie, yt S. Peters soule come¦th by successiō to dwel in thē. Such Priui∣lege & grace he hath boldly to set furth so Incredible & Slaunderous Lies: & yet to be taken for a Quiet and Peaceable man. But against Strangers & Foreners, he is (you wil graunt) somewhat Ernest and zelous: Marye towardes D. Har. his old acquaintance & countriemā, he is very so∣ber So I trow,& tēperate.Iew. pag. 1. as by these his familiar Termes it will appeere.4 He laith to D. Har. charge,5 Cauils, Intō perat humors of speaking euil,See what store He hath kept vn to him∣selfe for al his leauing such kind of Elo∣quēce vnto his aduer∣sarie. Inflaming14 of his choler,19 Villanie, Vnhonest coūte∣nāce, wicked wilfulnes, Wātō foly,23 Wel broking of his owne lerning,73 Bringing of blind Geasses,79 Skorning, & yt as his maner is, Wilful renoūcing of gods knowē truth,84 Presuming of his owne wit and eloquence,85 Brauery,129 Ostentatiō of lerning, Grosse error, Pōpe of words,165 New fantasy, Kind of lerning not only peuish, but also fātastical & mere frātike,149 Refresshing himself with one pore sillable,254 leuing his lerning vtterly,39. & holding by bare Gheasses as he cōmonly doth,106 Speaking only by authoritie and {pro}∣uing nothing,112 as his maner is, Narow se∣king
to finde some couert for his errour:122. Leauing ye whole rout of his cōpanie,127 & glad¦nes to run alone,145 Blindnes, Bitternes of talk inflamed  Malice,172 whereof it semeth he wanteth no store:174 Wantonly denying of Christ,175 Amasing of the ignorant Reader wt a countenance of great learning: Faction,181 Cōtētiō,217 Mainteyning of vntruth, cōtrary to his own knowledge,219 Doctrine seruing only to maintein Ignorāce & the kingdō of231 darknes,269 Liking of those authorities aboue al others,284. which are most vain & shamles a∣boue al others. Manifest corruptiō and fal∣sifiēg of Doctours, Purposely corrupting both the Greke & the Latine of Socrates. These wordes be yours, M. Iew. not only for yt they be vttered by you: but also, for that they perteyne directly & properly vnto your self. With these and other like pearles (As a Ieweller abunding in such Pretiousnes) ye haue thoroughly besett your whole boke, yt it might ye more glitter in ye eie of your reader. Here  your Stage is fully freight. Some man would think, it were Vetus Comoedia: But it is not Ab¦solutely so, because ye admitt vnto your Stage the Nouam also. And like A cun∣ning and wise Plaier, ye temper one hu∣mour diuersely, keeping still y• sharpenes
of your sense and meaning, but expressing it not alwayes vncourteously. For lyke a good natured & nurtered aduersary you order sometymes D. Harding manerly & shamefastly, As: This argument is very weake,Iew. pa. 27. Iew. 104 Tender Compas∣sion. I wil not say it is vnlerned or proce∣deth of ignorance. Againe: if it be, either ye violence of nature, or the maner of his Ca∣tholike doctrine, that dryueth M. Harding thus to taunt, he must be borne withal.204 And againe: O what meaneth M. Harding thus to deale? Lothe I am to make the cōparion,225. but true it is: very children doe not vse to reason in so Childissh sort. Againe: If I List to vse his owne termes, I might wel cal this, foisting or cogging, or I know not what. Lo what a kind hart here is? He wil not saie yt he may say, he wil beare wt his ad∣uersarie. Loth he is, to doe yt he doth. If he List, he could he sharper. As who should think, M. Iew. of hymself surely is of A Sweete & Gentle dispositiō, he inflameth not his Choler, not because he hath none: but either he wil not, either he is loth, either he listeth not. He answereth not heate for heate, not only because he promised so: but euen of very pure mildenes of Sprite, and Moderation. Yet sauing for the ciuilitie
in vtterance, al in effect is one: Whether one say, he lyeth, or sauing his reuerence he lyeth. And I lyke M. Iew. no better whē he saieth: Loth I am to make the Comparison,Iew. pa. 204 but true it is, very childrene doe not vse to reason in so childisshe sort:164 than when he goeth plainely to worke without dissi∣mulation,245 calling it,60. Lewed Logike,Where now is Loth I am, and he must be borne withal. that D. Har. vseth, And with these Phrases disgra¦cing his sayinges: This Argument is much acrase, It is vtterly vnsensible and voyde of reason, It halteth downe right of one syde, It hangeth only vpon lacke of cariage, A very Childe may one see through ht it, It is a good Frydayes Argument:166. 129 216. Againe: This conclusion is faint, It is single sould &c.135. 65. 137. 263. For both wayes the aduersary is greuously touched. Yea rather, where by other Signes it is plaine and euident,Iew. 308. that D. Harding is nothing at all spared, there to pretend A Good Countenance and a Quicte Affection: it is the more bit∣ter and odious. What meane you by these wordes M. Iew? here by y• way, I must put M. Har. in re¦mēbrance, notwithstāding for his estimatiō sake, he would faine haue his foorth in these
matters: Yet should he not therefore thus beguile the eies of the simple, & thus mys∣reporte and falsiie the wordes of the aun∣cient Fathers? Doe you not herein charge him with high Pride, extreme Crueltie & wicked falsehoode? When you call him Somwhat short witted,198 29.26 54.143 & obiect against him wicked wilfulnesse, Wanton folie, Bro∣king of his owne lerning, and tell hym that His worde is not yet Canonized, And, that his worde is no Charter: doe ye not Accuse him, by these wordes, vnto yt world & con∣demne hym or contēne him in your owne hart, for a Solemne, arrogant, high myn∣ded, Folisshe, Light and Vnskilful man? This being then so euident, yt you no∣thing regarde hym, when so euer you spea¦ke so Courteously as though in deede you had no Disdaine or Choler: it is, to ye be∣traieing of your Craft and Hypocrisie, & no profe at all of your Sinceritie or mo∣destie. Neither doe you mistike the sharpe & bitter Termes, because of an inward hu¦militie of your owne, & ernest Imitation of Meeknes: but because you shall make your aduersaries sayings appere yt more Feruent, ye more quietnes in Answering your self doe Pretend and Counterfaiete.
I maruell (say you) M. Harding being so graue a man,Iew. 173. would borow Ruffians Termes to scof withal.M. Iew. Maruel. This you say, because he v∣sed the Termes of Cogging and Foisting yt die. And to make this more odious, you extoll the Grauitie of your aduersarie on ye one side, & increase ye vilenes of ye termes on ye other side: as though thei could neuer haue ben lerned but of Ruffians. And be∣twene these Extremes, your self stand a marueyling, as if you should think: Sure∣ly if it were to me, I would neuer vse such Methaphores, as are taken of Shamefull Occupations. But, If these Termes offend you (M. Iewell) why call you them out of season to memory?Iew. 22 Why are you not content wt once noting of so Graue A man for them, but againe and againe repete them, out of Tyme and Place:235. I might (saie you) cal this Foisting or Cogging. Likewise, Here might M. Harding well bestow his termes, here might he truely saie, the pope coggeth and foisteth. Doth this Cogging of your Aduersary, become your Modestie? Or, is it for loue of Meeknes and Puritie, that you can not abide the wordes which are vsed in some Art or Feate of small Honestie? I would or might conceiue
so much, if your self practised not the con∣trary. For when you say: He heweth and Mangleth Chrysostomes words,Iew. 65. Iew. 225. He Mangleth and Maimeth S. Gre¦gories wordes,269 He Shuffleth in wordes, Now haue an eie Good Reader to M Har.124 fingers,160 And marke how he Iuggleth with S. Augustines wordes,Maruel at your selfe 198 M. Iew. Onlesse thou eie him wel, he wil steal from thee, He Plaieth roūd about, merely, with his owne phātasie,221 Here M. Har. saieth,225 he wil trip & Daunce lightly ouer the Doctours,237 Was he staied with the Choinecough?240 Non satis commodè diuisa sunt tēporibus tibi Daue haec.299 He bringeth in Councels in a Mummery,302. O what Ran∣ging and Hunting here is to beate vp that thing, that wil not be found? He cummeth in only with ioly Brags and Great vauntes as if he were Playing at Post, and should wynne al by Vieinge: When you say all this (M. Iewel) in half your Booke only, bysides that which I haue already spoken, and that which I haue left vn∣touched: Into what cumpanie shall I say you haue fallen, to borow these Termes of them to skof withall? What Hewers, Ruffians, Shufflers, Iugglers, Tum¦blers, Daūcers, Dauyes, Mummers,
Rangers, and Cardeplayers Haue you mette withall: of whom you should borow fit Termes for expressing of your Gentle Affections? Doubtlesse (you say) such kinde of dea∣ling,Iew. in ye answer to D. Har. preface. Matth. 11. An Holy Lesson. as is without gal or bitternes, as it is most commendable in it self: so it seemeth most sitting in them, that trauaile in Gods cause. Christ saieth, Learne of me: for I am meeke and Gentle. You therefore which know so much: with what Sprite haue you multiplied your Reprocheful Metaphores, against D. Harding? Or how speake you, against Vngentle and Sharpe Termes: your self in this very forsayd place (where of purpose you frame your talke to a singular forme of mo∣destie) calling by craft, a man of Professed grauitie, as your self acknowledge, A SCORPION,Quickly forgotten. & obiecting vnto him, his yonger IANNIZERS? And in ye next leafe, that He thinketh al the world singeth SANCTVS, SANCTVS, &receaueth hym with OZANNA. Is this your Remem∣bring of that Good Lesson of Christ, which you teach D. Har. Learne of me, for I am meeke & gētle? Cometh this, of your Smoth and Calme Affections? Doe you stand fast and quiet vpon the Shoare?
Thinke you D. Harding, for calling you Goliath, Thersires &c. to be blowen out by the tempestes of his affectiōs and to be tos∣sed from the shoare: And were you in no storme at all, when the Sprite moued you to say, that with those wordes he Solaceth himself, and Refressheth his Sprites? Your self (M. Iewell) are not a meete man to geaue Rules, Or to geaue sentēce in these maters, being so Eger and Light of mynd: that neither ye haue any staie of your self, Nor yet doe refraine, from cō∣mending your self of Modestie. But, if there be emong your brothers any so per∣fitt, that can tell, When, Where and in What sort &c. the Aduersarie may be sharpely spoken vnto, And can shew vs an Example thereof, in his owne wri∣tinge: let hym put his Couclusions, and we shall  be at a point, to know what behauiour we may boldly folow, when the cause it self geaueth vs to reproue you. As for such humblenes and Meeknes that a man should not in any , an Heretike an Heretike, Or an Hypocrite an Hypocrite: Wel it may be perchaūce ye counsell of some indifferēt
man, which neither loueth y• one opinion nor hateth the other: but precept and Com∣mandement of God, it is not. Our Saui∣our hym selfe without any Inflaming of his Choler, vsing the Termes of Hypocrite,Math. 1. 13. & 23. Tit. 1. Phil. 3 Iud. epis. 1. Io. 2. Blinde Guides, Fox, and Dalbed Sepulchres: And the Apostles after him, not sparinge to name suche as deserued it, Naughtie Beastes, Idle Belies, Dogges, Clowdes with∣out water, Antichristes & caet. Perchaunce therefore, if the mynde be Simple, and the harte vncorrupted, and if the Reproche which we geaue, be truely occasioned of our Aduersaries sayeinges or doeinges, and not inuented of our selues: our whole Acte, is out of daunger. But this I am sure of, that it becummeth not him, which wil be Exacte against others in such maters, and take vpon him the Coun∣tenance of a Quiete, Gentle, Courteous, Patience, and holy man: to offend more extremely in ye same kind of thing, for which he misliketh with others. And because, you are so Reported and Praised (M. Iewell) to deale in this your Reply, very Modest∣ly and Charitable, like A man that sayeth lesse then he could, And that fauoreth the stimation of his Aduersarie, choosing ra∣ther
to diminisshe somewhat of that fyer which is enkindled, than to adde more ma∣ter vnto it: I thought it expedient to de∣clare A Parte of such Notes and Signes, by which it may be perceaued, that for all the faire shewe of a good Complexion in∣wardly, yet you be full of ill humors. And that, notwithstanding the sweete Sprite, that fauor reporteth to come from you, you are so bitter and sower in Experience, that the Reader needeth aduertisement, To BEWARE Of you. It foloweth now, shortly to declare, in what sort M. Iewell hath abused many other, with whome he hath to doe in his Replie. I meane, not only Auncient Coun∣cels or Fathers within the First six hun∣dred yeres, but any kinde of writer, whose Testimonie he vseth or Refuseth. His Contradictions also, his Grosse Errours or Heresies, And the Places or Argumen∣tes, which for all his Greate Replie, he hath not Answered, they would not be left vntouched. But, because these pointes, though I mynd, but shortly, to note them, wyll occupie more tyme and Paper, then, at this present, I thinke good to tarie, or
this Boke wil commodiously beare, beinge already of a sufficient bignesse: I wil ther∣fore put it ouer to A Third Boke. Which if it should, either not come furth at all, Or more slowly come furth, then either my in∣tent surely and purpose is, Or thy desire perchaunse and expectation wil be: yet doe I leaue this, in the meane time, sufficient∣ly proued, that M. Iewel is, in deed, suche a man, as of whome thou oughteste to BEWARE, though in worde, he see∣meth to be one of the moste vprighteste Protestantes, that in these dayes, laboreth in the Englisshe Vineyarde. For Who so zelous as he, for settinge furth of the Procedinges? who so copious as he, in alleaging Auncient Fathers and Councels? Who so stowte in challēging & bragginge? Who so sweete in alluringe & flatering? What he is in Sermos by liuely vtterance, I neuer harde, or I haue forgot∣tē: but what he is in his writings through a sadde and louing countenance, I see, and am both weary of it, and sory for it. For I find in his words so great reuerence & re∣membrance of God, so tender compassion and care of his Reader, that excepte I did certainely knowe it, by all his writtinges,
yt he dealeth vniustly, I might easely thinke it, yt he feareth God, & regardeth men. I speake not this (saieth he) in vehemency of sprite,Iew. in his Ser∣mon. or heate of talke, but euen as before GOD, by the waie of simplicitie and truth. Againe: As truly as GOD is GOD & caet. And againe in an other place of the same answer,In the 1. answer to D. Cole. . I proteste before God. And in this Reply, When I reade these wordes of M. Hardinges, I am strikē with horrour, to con∣sider the terrible Iudgement of God: It is much to be feared that he that is lead awaie of this sorte, offendeth not of Ignorance, for so were the faulte more pardonable, but againste the manifeste knowen trueth, and againste the spirite of God. Here loe in these phrases is expressed the similitude of A right good man, whiche continually walketh in the sight of God, and hath suth consideration of his maiesrie that the mind sometimes being attentiue∣ly se thervpō, draweth (I can not tel how) much of ye corporal Spirite & sense with it, and ieaueth the body in an horrour. Concerning then his affection towar∣des men: God graunt (saieth he) vnto all his people the Spirite of wisedome and vnder∣standing & caet. Againe. O good Reader, they deale not simple, they dissimble, they
meane it not. Againe, Alas this was no parte of S. Augustines minde.Iew. pa. 5. 3. 124. 117. Beware good Rea∣der, this man seeketh waies to deceaue thee. Againe. O good Christian Reader, marke the dealing of this man, and Beware of hym. Againe. Take heede good Reader, M. Har∣dinge hath here throwen A greate Miste of learning, to dasle thy sight. Here loe againe such Charitie and Con∣science is pretended, as though M. Iewel (good man) did hate nothinge more then deceauing of the Reader, and castinge of any myste before his eyes: And that he so intendeth the Glorie of God,In his  and wathe of Soules, as though without any request made vnto him, he did, for his parte, vtter∣ly denie his learning, denie his Bishoprike, denie his estimation, denie his name, deny himselfe: Only The Faith of Christ and the Truthe of God he could not deny. Yet, all these deuoute Affections, and Earnest sayinges notwithstanding, thou shalt find him in deede so contrary vnto them, as though he cared neither for God nor for man. Remember (if thou hast reade this boke) or Consider (if thou wilte he assured) what Hvpocrisie and Iniurie, he vseth in the first Article, of priuate Masse? For whereas D. Harding reasoned only
about Sole receauing, he draweth mast vio∣lētly & wrōgfully, al his argumēts to saieing of Masse, of Receiuing vnder both kindes. In the second Article, what A Trifler, and Shifter, and wrangler doth he shewe himselfe to be? First he stoutly saieth, The Communion in the primitiue Church was not ministred vnto the people in one kinde. If you proue the contrarie by some Ex∣amples, yea, saieth he, but it was not mi∣nistred so vnto the WHOLE PEOPLE: Againe, not in the OPEN CHVRCH. fur∣ther yet, NOT ORDINARILY, and last of all, NOT AS IT IS NOW VSED & caet. In the third Articie, of the Publike Ser∣uice in the vulgare tounge? How Conten∣tious & weyward is be? Nothing cā please him or satisfie him. Al yt D. Harding doth alleage is but Coniectures and Gheasses. In yt fourth Article of the Supremacie, he calleth for the name of Vniuersal Bishop or Heade of the Church. And A name as good as y•, shal not suffise: the very Name it selfe, he must haue, or els the Catholikes (let them be sure thereof) shall here of it. As longe then, as the Name cometh not, he braggeth: when it cummeth in deede, be contemneth it, and sheweth how it was no greate maestrie to find it. So contenti∣ously
and so shamefully, as though were not A God whiche beholdeth iudgeth our secret thoughtes, or as tho it should not perteine to any mans C science, to care or passe muche vpon th maters, but only to haue some what to alwaies for him selfe, leaste he should at any tyme to his Aduersarie. How, for the second boke, his Common Places and Digressions, his Abusing of D. Harding so many waies, as I specified, doe meetly wel proue (I thanke) that he followeth not the plaine waye of Simpliciti of Truth. If they do not, then some Charitable Protestant, deliuer me of my opinion therein by answeringe my Examples and Argumentes. If they doe, I praie thē to remember themselues, & either to moue M. Iewel to ye amending of his faults, & ye Correcting yet once more Againe, of his Reply: or to make no more of this which he hath done, then it deserueth. But to make here an end: If my doe bring any profite vnto thee (Indiffe∣rent Reader) I am sufficiently recom∣sed for them, by the vantage take of thy profite: If they al, they yet cā not be al loste because of
considereth my Intent, & knowet for iust causes inued to take these . Being theerfore myselfe out of all of losse by this bargainē, for thēt, I him, yt thou also mayst winne or if thy occupieing be not hitherto yt thou shouldest loke to winne, yet I ay God hartely, yt thou maiest not lese, , to speake it more plainely vnto thee, yt thou maiest BEWARE OF M. IEWEL. Faultes escaped in the Printing. Folio. Page. Line. Fault. Correction. 60. 2. 2 the he 70. 1. 12. lefte let 86. 2. 4. the he 104. 2. 20.   put out (the) 116. 1. 6. shifted sifted 128. 2. 23. Receaued Receaue. 141. 2. 17. must most 75. 1. 24. Cogging. Egging. ¶Faultes in the Margent. Pa.     . ying lying
