20957 22528056 25593
FIrst ye thust be diligent to know your Masters plea¦sure and to know the order, & custome of his house. For diuers maisters are of sundry conditions & appe¦tites. And if thou be admitted in any office as Buttry, or Pantry, in some places they are all one. Then take an in∣uētory of all such thinges as ye take charge of, how it is spent. For it pleaseth a maister to haue a true reckening, thē in your office of ye pantry se yt your bread be chipped & squared, & note how much ye spend in one day. Also se your napry clene, & sort euery thig by it self, the clene frō ye foul & kepe your house of office clene, & all that belongeth to it. Whē your master wil go to his meate, take a towel about your neck, thē take a cupbord cloth, a basin & an ewer, & a towell to aray your cupborde, then couer your table, & set on salt, brede & trenchours, the salt before ye bread, & tren∣chours before the salt, & set your napkins & spones on the cupbord redy, & lay euery mā a trēchour and napkin and a spone: & if ye haue mo messes then one at your masters ta¦ble consider what degre ye persons are of, & thereafter you may serue thē, & thē set down euery thig at that messe as before, except your karuing kniues. If there be many gē∣tlemē or yomē, thē set on bread, salt, trēchours, spones, af¦ter they be set, or els after ye custō of the house. Also sō do vse to set before euery mā a lofe of bread & his cup, & some vse the cōtrary, thus must you haue respect to the custō of your house, & in some places it is vse to set drink & a lofe or two. In some places the keruer dooth vse to sewe and set downe and goeth before the course, and beareth no dishe, and in some place, he beareth the firste dishe, and maketh obeysaunce to his Mayster, and setteth it down couered before the degre of a Knight, or els not vsed, & take of the couers & set them by. Also the karuer hath authoritie to carue to all at his masters mes in special, also vnto other that sit ioyning by them if he list, also ye haue voyders in a redines to auoid the morsels that they do leane on their
trenchours. Then with your trenchour knife take of such fragments and put them in your voyder, and set thē cleā again. And whether youre soueraign haue trenchours or bread voyd the ōce or twise, specialy whē they are wet, or geue him clean, and as ye se men leaue eating of the first and second dish: so auoyd them from the table. And then if that so bee ye haue any more courses then one or two: ye may make the more hast in voyding, and euer let one dish or two stand till the next course, and then take vp all and set downe freshe and cleane voyders withall, and let thē not be to ful or ye empty them, and then set cleane againe and looke what sauce is ordeined for anye meat voyde a∣way the sauce therof when ye take away the meate. And at the degree of a knight ye may set down your cup, coue∣red, and lift of the couer and set it on again, and when he listeth to drink and taketh of the couer: take the couer in thy hand and set it on again, and when he hath dronken looke the cup of wine or ale be not empty, but often renu¦ed. Also the karuer shall breake his dish before his master or at side Cupbord with cleane kniues, and se there be no lack of bread nor ale, and when men haue wel eaten, and do beginne to ware wery of eating, or if ye perceyue by ye countenaunce of youre mayster when ye shall take vp the meat and voyde the table: begin at the lowest mease, take away your spones if there be any, howbeit ye may auoyd them, after brothes and bake meates are past. Then take away your voiders and then your dishes of meate as they were set down so take thē vp in order and then set down cheese or fruites, and that ended auoid your chese & fruits and couer your cup, Ale or Wine, first auoyd the Ale, & thē the Wine, then set on a broad voyder and put therein the small peces of bread and small cromes, wt trenchours and napkins, and with your trenchour knife or napkin make cleane the table, then set away your bread whole and al∣so your voyder, and then take vp the salt and make obey∣saunce,
mark if your maister vse to washe at the table, or stāding, if he be at the table cast a clene towel vpon your table cloth & set down youre basin and ewer before youre soueraigne, and take the ewer in your hand and geue thē water, then auoyd your basin and ewer and folde ye borde cloth together with your towell therin, and so take them of the borde. And when your soueraigne shall washe: set youre towel on the left hand of him, and the water before you at supper or dinner, if it be to bedward set vp your ba¦sin & your towel on the cupbord againe. And if your mas∣ter wil haue any conceits after diner, as Apples, Nuts or creame, then lay forth a towel on the borde, and set therō a lofe or two, se that ye haue trenchours and spoones in a redines if nede require, and then serue forth your master well, and so take it vp againe with a voyder. ¶ The ordering of your Maisters chamber at night to bedward. ARay your cupborde with a cupborde cloth with your basin and ewer, cādle light and towel, if ye haue help set one to beare a Torch, or some other light before & another felow to beare a Towel for youre table wt bread as thou seest nede. And if you haue banket dishes whatso∣euer it be, as frutes put in sondry dishes and all other con¦fections & conceites of spicery, also whē the dishes are em¦ty auoid thē frō the table, if youre soueraine be a Knight or Squier: set down your dishes couered and your cup al∣so. And if your soueraigne be not set at the table let youre dishes stand couered til he be set, and when he is set: then take away the voiders. And when your maister entēdeth to bedward se that ye haue fire & candle sufficient, & se ye haue cleane water in at night and in the morning, and if your maister ly in freshe sheetes dry of the dankishenes by the fire. And if he lie in a straunge place, se his sheetes be
cleane & sweet, and then folde down his bed, and warme his night kerchef, and se his house of office be cleane, and help of his clothing and draw the curtaines, & make sure the fire & cāble, & auoyd the dogs & shut all the dores. And in the euening or in the mornig your master being alone if ye haue any thinge to say to him, then is good layser & time to know his pleasure. In the morning if it be colde make a fire & haue in clene water, & bring him his Peti∣cote warme with his Doublet and all his Apparel clene brushed, & his shoes made cleane, & help to aray him, trus his points, strike vp his hosen clene, and se all thing clene & clenly about him, giue him good attendaunce, & in espe∣ciall among straungers, for attendaunce doth plese mas∣ters very wel. Thus doinge with diligence God wil pre∣fer you to honour and good fortune, ¶ Here foloweth the booke of Nurtur and of good maners, for Man and Childe. AL ye that woold lerne, and then wold be called wise Obedience lerne in youth, in age it wil auoyd vice I am blind in Poets art, therof I can no skill, Al eloquence I put a part, and folow mine own wil, Corrupt in speech my breues and longs to know: Borne and bred in Deuonshire, my termes wil wel show Take ye best and leaue the worst, of truth I meane none il If the mater be not curious, thintēt is good mark it well Pardon I ask if I offend, thus boldly for to write To master or seruant (young & olde) I do my self submit I would reform both youth and age, if any thing be amis To you wil I shew my minde, reforme ye where nede is All that haue yoūg people, good maners set them to learn To their elders wt gētle condictōs, let do nor say no harm If they do il, wise men may report their Parents sone How shold they teach other good, belike thē selues cā none I good Father maketh good Childrē, if wisdō be thē win
