22037 99852132 17439
REASONS For which the Service Booke, urged upon SCOTLAND ought to bee refused. 1. IT conteineth divers points and directions, which would breed a change in some Articles of that doctrine and discipline of the Church of the said Kingdome, which is both warranted in Scripture & approved by Parlament: & it seemeth to be as well against Statewise∣dome as against Religion, to change any thing either in the matter or forme of the said doctrine and discipline, without first shewing both some evill or defect in the things to be changed, and what good and be∣nefit it is that the said Service booke will afforde more to the Edifi∣cation of the Church, or true worship of Almightie God, then the points of doctrine and discipline, which the said Service book would breed a change of? 2. In the pretended Communion, it hath all the substance and essen∣tiall parts of the Masse, and so brings in the most abominable Idolatry that ever was in the world, in worshiping of a breaden God and makes way to the Antichrist of Rome, to bring this Land under his bondage againe, as may be seen at large by the particulars of that Communion, where in some things, that were put out of the Service of book of Eng∣land, for smelling so strong of the Masse, are restored, and many o∣ther things, that were never in it, are brought in, out of the Masse booke, though they labour to cover the matter. It hath the commemo∣ration of the dead: The Table set Altar wayes: The oblation of the Bread and Wine to God before the consecration: Jt hath the Popish consecration, that the Lord would sanctifie by his Word and by his ho∣ly Spirit, those gifts and creatures of Bread and wine, that tbey may be unto us the body and blood of his Son, and then repeat the words of institution to God for that purpose. It hath an oblation of it againe, af∣ter it is Consecrat, the consummation by the Priest, kneeling before the consecrat Bread and Wine. It takes away the eating and drinking
by faith, mentioned in the English Liturgie. It hath the pat in challice, two paternosters in English before the Masse, and severall other parti∣culars, that would take a long time to rehearse and confute. 3. Though they would take away the Idolatrous masse out of it, yet it hath a number of Popish superstitions and Idolatrous ceremonies, as 29 holy dayes, whereof 22 are dedicated to Saints, two of them to the Virgin Mary, the one whereof is called, The Anuntiation of our Lady, so shee is made a Lady to Christians, not being on Earth, shee must be a Lady in Heaven: Js not this to make her a Goddesse? It hath 14 Fasting dayes, and some weekes. It hath also the humane Sacraments of Crosse in Baptisme, laying on of the Bishops hand in confirmation: a Ring for the outward seall in Marriage: a sancti∣fied Font, holie water, holinesse of Churches and Chancels: pri∣vate Baptisme, private Communions, Ceremonies for Buriall of the dead, and purification of women after Childbirth, the Priest stan∣ding, kneeling, turning to the people, and consequently from them, speaking with a loud voice, and consequently sometimes with a lowe voice. People standing at Gospels, at Gloria patri, & Creeds: their answering to the Minister, and many such like, in number above 50. besides any religious Ornament, that the King, or his Successours shall prescribe, and Ceremnies that Bishops shall deteremine, or that shall be conteined in Bookes of Homilies to be set forth heereafter. 4. And though they would take out of the Booke, both the Masse & all those superstitious Ceremnies yet it hath a number of other materiall errours: as leaving unread about a 120 Cbapters of Gods Word, and putting this reproach upon them, that they are least edifying, & might best be spared, and reading sundrie Chapters out of Apocrypha, under the stile of holy Scripture of the old Testament It hath a Letanie more like conjuring then like prayers: Jt hath some places out of which papists may prove, that Sacraments are absolutlie necessary to salvation, in ap∣pointing Baptisme in private, with such haste, that if necessitie require, he that baptizes needs not so much as to say the Lords Prayer, and out of which they may prove, that Sacraments give grace by their worke wrought, in saying, Children baptized, have all things necessarie
to salvation, and be undoubtedly saved. It hath other places out of which they may prove mo Sacraments then two which they say everie Parishoner, who is already baptized, shall communicate and shall also receave the Sacraments, and that Sacraments two, are generally neces∣sarie to salvation, as if there were others, eyther not so generall, or not so necessarie. It hath other places out of which they may proue univer∣sall grace: saying, God the Father made me, and all the world, and God the Sonne redeemed mee, and all mankinde: One Collect pretends to begge from God, that which they dare not presume to name, and a number others of this sort. 5. Though likewise they amend all those errours, and that there were no materiall errour in it at all: so they read nothing at all but Scrip∣tures, yea, and tht all their Prayers, and Exhortations were nothing but words of Scripture, yet such a Liturgie were not lawfull to be made the only forme of Gods worship in publick: for, though a formed Litur∣gie may be to serve for Rule to other Churches & monuments to Poste∣ritie what formes are used or that it may lead the way or be a directi∣on to thse that are beginning in the Ministrie, yet it is not by reading of Prayers and Exhortations that the Lord appoints his servants of the Ministrie to worship Him, or edifie his people, but he hath givn gifts to them to Exhort, Pray, and Preach, which they ought to stir up and use, and though they may in their private studies take epe of other mens gifts yet it is not lawfull for a man to te himselfe or be tyed by others, to a prescript forme of words in prayer and exhortation, for these reasons: First, Such a prescript forme is against the Glorie of God. in stinting to him such a dayly measure of service, and so hindring the many spirituall Petitions and praises that otherwise would be, if Gods gifts were used. Secondly, It is against the dignitie of Christ, in making his gifts needlesse: for, though he send downe no gifts at all, they can serve themselves with the Booke, without them. Thirdly, Jt quenches the holy Spirit, because he gets no employment. Fourthly, It hinders the Edification of Gods people, they may as well stay at home and be edified by reading the Booke themselves. Fifthly, It is against the Conversion of those that know not God: will ever a Rab-ryme of words sayd over without feeling or blessing, worke upon an unrenewed heart?
serve to convince an Hereticke, to check a pro∣phane Person, or to waken a secure Soule: they may long go on or such a ser∣vice byte upon them: yea, it fosters people in a presumptious conceit, that they are well enough if they be present, and say their part of service. Seventhly, It fosters. a lasie ministrie, and makes way for putting downe Preaching: they need take no paynes, and therefore need no stipend: yea, they may come from the Ailhouse, or a worse place, and step to and read their Ser∣vice, without eyther check or preparation. Eyghtly, Jt may all be done by a Boy of 7 years old, and so every private man that can read: yea, a Turcke if he can read, may be such a Minister. Ninthly, It cannot expresse the severall needs of all people to God, or deale with them, according to their severall estates, that will alter otherwise then any prescript forme can be applyed to. Tenthly, Jf any one stinted Liturgie had beene good, or needfull, no doubt but CHRIST would have set one downe to us. 6. Though a perscript forme of Liturgie were lawfull, yet there is no warrand for imposing of one: for, might not able Ministers (at least) make a prescript forme to themselves, which would fit them and their people best? But if it were lawfull to impose one, then there is one in this Countrie already. Ought not that rather be imposed, then any other, seeing it is already established by Parla∣ment, now of a long time? But now, if a new one ought to be imposed, then it ought to come in by a lawfull manner: by a generall Assemblie, and men chosen to make it that are knowne to have the gift of prayer themselves, and not the Masse booke, translated into English, urged by Antichristian Prelats, upon Gods people, without consent of any Generall Assembly or Parlament, against the will of all men, and with no small offence and scandall to the mindes and consciences of such, as thinke all Liturgie unlawfull, that is either in the Mss way, or inconsistent with the practise and peace of the reformed Churches of Scotland hitherto, and against the hearts of such as know many things in the English Liturgie and Canons, which the practise of, neyther hath warrand in Gods Word, nor can bring any such addition, to the profit, honor, or power of the King, that is able to compense the losse hee may make of his good Sub∣jects affections, by commanding such a change, as the urged Liturgie would bring to the peace of our Church, and respect due to the Acts of Parlament and long custome, whereby our Church dis∣cipline, order, and Government hath beene established. PRINTED in the year of GOD, 1638.
