23127 23163005 26328
Meditations, and Resolutions, Moral, Divine, Poli∣ticall. Century 1. Written for the instructi∣on and bettering of Youth; but, especially, of the better and more Noble. By Antony Stafford, Gent. There is also annexed an Oration of Iustus Lipsius, against Calumnie; translated out of Latine, into En∣glish. AT LONDON, Printed by H. L. and are to be sold by Thomas Saun∣ders. 1612.
To the Right Honourable, FRAN∣CIS, Countesse of Hertford (Daughter to the Right Honourable, Thomas, Vicount Bindon) Antony Stafford, wishes the effects of her wishes. VVHat I had a long time sought for in
others (excellent La∣dy) and could neuer find, of my selfe, at last I found in you. I meane, Madame, a true definitiō of Ho∣nor: Which, as I first found in you; so at last I honoured you for it, and will do to my last. And should I not, I were as worth∣lesse as you are wor∣thy; sith I neuer in a∣ny, but in you, disco∣ver'd the height of Blood, of Beauty, of
Vertue, of Spirit, and (which vvonder at World, or thou thy selfe wilt be wondred at) with all these, the height of lowe Hu∣mility: Of Humility, Madame, in you to bee admired; not to be imitated: or if to bee imitated, not to be equalled. I know, your Ladishippe (in whom Mildness and Modestie haue made a Mariage) will ra∣ther mislike than ad∣mit
these prayses. Pardon me, Madam; you should not doe so. For, as Vertue cānot be ouerpriz'd; no more can she euer be ouer-prais'd. Were it not the world would thinke that Partialitie did prompt mee, I would yet ad to yor praises; not that you might reade them; but that after Ages, by them, might knowe howe faire was the
fairer part of fairest you; and knowing it, admire it; & with admiration, imitate it. It would be long (incōparable Ladie) it wold be very long, before wee shold win any one to belong to Vertue, vvith the meer praysing her in abstract, should vve not praise her in som person gracious in Gods eye, and the Worlds. I know, Madame, I
shall bee prays'd for praising you; & dis∣prays'd for offring to expresse the infinite honour and seruice I owe you, vvith so poore a present, so little a labour, as this vnlicked Work. The truth is, Madam, that finding my Booke to haue little spirit, or life in it, I made vse of your Name to make it liue. For, it could not liue long, with∣out your euer-liuing
vertues to relieue it. I am so farre from expecting thanks; as that I humbly craue pardon, for presu∣ming so much to a∣buse your Name, as to sette it before so weake a Worke. If I liue, most woorthy Lady, I heer promise you and the Age, a farre greater, and a farre better. If in the meane time I die, I die infinitely indeb∣ted. Thus, with my
vncessant prayers for your Ladiship, and your thrice honora∣ble Lord, I rest Your Honors humble, loyall Servant, and vnwoorthy kins∣man, Antony Stafford.
TO THE Vnderstander. VNderstander (for, to euery Reader I write not) beholde this Booke with a gentle eye, and entertaine it with fauour. It was penn'd by him who had rather say, Est iudicium in nobis, than est furor in nobis. Winke therefore at the want of witte thou shalt finde; since it is a worke
of iudgement onely. As for the Asses of the Age, I care as little for their censures, as their compa∣nies. Though they can pick out good sense, yet they will not; contrarie to the equity of a Reader; who, in a place doubtful, should striue to vnderstand, be∣fore he cry out, Non sense. They little knovve, that hee, who writes in euery thing properly, shall neuer vvrite anie thing plea∣singly. If I were disposed to carpe, I doe not thinke there are ten lines in any booke extant, out of which I would not pick somthing
to cauill at. My greatest comfort is, I neuer yet saw any carper that had any iudgement. VVhich vvhosoeuer wants, lacks the very salt of wit: with∣out which, whatsoeuer is read, lies ravve, and vn∣digested. But, that which makes mee most merrie, is, that some of our prin∣ted puppies thinke them∣selues worthy to bee com∣pared vvith the most au∣thenticke, auncient Au∣thours; vvhose vvittes they come as short of, as of their vvorkes. I haue heard some of them cen∣sure Authours, vvhome
they doe as little vnder∣stand, as they doe them∣selues. If they had but some small deale of mat∣ter vvith their manie vvordes, they might (I confesse) rubbe-out rea∣sonably vvell, amongst coxcombes, that are ca∣pable of no higher mat∣ters than themselues. But, as they are, I vvould in∣treate them to content themselues vvith their Iigge-learning: in which when they haue knowne all they can, they then knowe iust nothing; and, as Seneca saith, opero∣sè nihil agunt. I write
not this out of Spleene, for the wrong they haue done mee: for, my spirite is pearcht so farre a∣boue them, that they can∣not fling so high, as to hit it. Doe not I knowe, that these Times let-loose literatores, to set vpon literatiores? Yes, yes: I knowe it; and haue put∣on a resolution to beare both vvith the iniquity, and the stoliditie of the Times. Farewell, Vn∣derstander, and vse mee wel.
The Authors request to the vnderstanding Reader. THe materiall Faults, e∣scaped, are here vnder∣written. Do me the fauour, to correct them with thy penne, before thou read on. Page 64. Line 14. for lowest, read least. p. 124. l. 17. for some, read Sense. p 163. l. 5. for not, read nay.
MEDITATIONS MORAL, DIVINE, POLITICALL. ({inverted ⁂}) WHen I consider in what estate Man was crea∣ted, I cannot but thinke of his folly; who, through a false hope of knowing good and euill, lost the e∣nough of good hee had, and found too much euil. This makes mee call to
minde the vaine ambi∣tion of those, who seeke to prie into that vnreuealed (and there∣fore inscrutable) know∣ledge of the Deity: vp∣pon whom GOD loo∣king down, saies in a piti∣full derision (as hee did to Adam) Beholde, the men are become as one of vs. This meditati∣on stretcheth-out it selfe, and biddes mee also con∣sider the arrogancie of those, who scorne to erre, or to bee repre∣hended for their errours, not-withstanding that they see Man to haue er∣red
in the state of Inno∣cencie. I will therefore seeke to knowe my selfe (the next and surest way to knowe GOD) and by an humble Confes∣sion, begge Remission of my faults. I say, I will confesse them vnto God; not boast of them to Man. 2 When I thinke who made me, and wherfore hee made me, I hold my selfe a glorious creature: when I consider of what hee made mee, I then thinke my selfe corrupti∣ble and miserable. I will
therefore temper the for∣mer with the later: so shal I neuer grow too proud, nor too abiect. 3 When I behold Beau∣ty, it puts me in minde of my Glorification: but withall, I find, that it hin∣dereth much my Morti∣fication. I will therefore, as neere as I can, neuer fix mine eye vpon Beau∣ty; least by being neuer mortified, I neuer be glo∣rified. 4 When a man is borne, hee beginnes to die: but when the iust man dies,
hee then but beginnes to liue. I will therefore in my beginning thinke of my end; that in my end, I may reioyce in my better and neuer-ending begin∣ning. 5 Iob made a couenant with his eyes, least at any time they should looke vpon a Mayde: but, since I cannot make a coue∣nant with mine eyes, least at any time they look vp∣pon a Maide, I will trie if I can make a couenant with my heart, least at a∣ny time it desire a Maide.
6 GOD made Hea∣uen for the good, Hell for the badde: but, he made earth for both. This shewes vs, that while wee liue heere, wee must of necessity conuerse with both. I will therefore lay mine eares open to all; but, my heart to few. 7 Our Master hath left vs two Sacraments. One of which tell's vs that wee are Christians:
the other biddes vs liue like Christians. This later is that Tree of Life; the passage where∣to is guarded by no Cherubin, nor by any brandished Sword: but whosoeuer will, may come thither; and, ea∣ting worthily, may liue for euer. VVhen there∣fore I eate of this Tree, I will remember out of whose bloud it sprang. The memory whereof will suggest vnto mee, that if I eate not this fruit worthily, I am vn∣worthy to be a branch of the Tree: that is, if I eate
not his body worthily, I am then vnworthy to be a member of that body whereof he is the head. 8 The first murtherer of all mankinde, was also the first Lyer; two hor∣rible vices, and alike bloudy. For, a man had better bee murthered, then belyed; haue his person slaine, then his fame. I will therefore flie from a Lyer, as from an Aspe: the poyson of whose tongue is mor∣tall. 9 Besides our internall,
originall, and actuall sinnes, wee haue exter∣nall & accidentall crimes layed vpon vs by our fa∣milies; but, in my con∣ceit, very vniustly: for, wee haue enough to an∣swere for the first man; and are no way liable to the debts of his succes∣sors. VVhy should man lay more vpon man, than GOD himselfe doth? As with him the vertues of my House cannot saue me, no more can the vices of it damne mee. The Law of God shall be with me, aboue the Law of Armes, or the Law
of Nations. 10 Those that serue God only vpon Sundayes, are like seruants extraordina∣rie; who come to waite vpon their great Lords, onely vpon great dayes: But I will make euery day my Sabbath; and will follow my Lord in ordinary, making Chari∣tie my Cognizance. 11 VVhile the Papists and wee contend which of vs erre most in mat∣ters of faith, wee striue who shall erre most in
matters of life: so that wee studie at once, who shall beleeue best, and who shall liue worst; not who shall bee most vertuous, but who most enuious. My chiefest care therefore shall bee, to liue well: so shall I euer bee sure to fare better, than hee who beleeues well, and liues ill. 12 Two sortes of men I loathe, and detest; a Foole, and a Carper. Yet, of the two, I would make choyce to holde discourse with the
Carper: for, I had rather be misunderstood in all, then not to bee vnder∣stood at all. I will there∣fore onely beware of the one: but I will scorne the other. 13 Laughing is onely pro∣per to man, amongst all liuing creatures: where∣as indeede he ought euer to be weeping, in that he euer sinnes; & the beasts euer laughing, to see man so much abuse his so much reason. O! if a man knew before hee came into the world, what hee should endure
in the world, hee would feare his first day, more than his last. I will ther∣fore weepe at mine owne misery, and neuer laugh but at mine owne folly: and since my Master was Vir dolorum, a man of griefes, it shall not be said that I am Vir volupta∣tum, a man of mirth. 14 Valour hath many ser∣vants going vnder her name: but few of them are her true fauorites. Some snatch courage from her; and, wanting wisedome to rule it, are disclaimed by her. O∣thers
are Giants in their wordes, and Dwarfes in their deedes. She hates him, who speakes more than he dares doe; and makes him her Cham∣pion, who dares do more than he dare speake. I, I: hee is the man with her, who wounds his enemy with his sword; not with his word. Yet, Christiani∣ty vnhorses euen Valour her selfe; and, deposing her, makes new lawes, and proclaimes him the brauest combatant, who can conquer himselfe: that is, who can ascend so high aboue Nature,
as to descend belowe himselfe, and to offer seruice where hee owes reuenge. I will inuoke GOD to endue mee with this supernaturall gift; and, withall, to deli∣uer mee from a valiant drunkard, and a valiant foole. 15 VVhen my memory lookes back, as far as she can see, me thinks it is but yesterday: & yet I know, by course of Nature, my life cannot bee trebbl'd. Now, I haue indured so much misery in my one Yesterday, that I am af∣fraide
to thinke of the two To-morrowes. 16 It is a woonder, to see the childish whining we now-adayes vse at the fu∣neralls of our friends. If we could houl them back againe, our lamentations were to some purpose: but as they are, they are vaine, and in vain. If ther∣fore my friend be good, I will be glad that he is rid of the world: if hee bee bad, I will not bee sorry that the world is rid of him: but, that so wofull a world is like to receiue him. If I haue a friend,
whose soule ioyn'd with mine, makes but one minde; and that at his death, I see, my teares must burst out, or my heart within; I may then perhaps yeeld to the infir∣mity of the flesh: yet not so much, that he hath left the world, as that he hath left mee in it. 17 He is the most misera∣ble of men, who fashions his body and minde ac∣cording to the opinion of the vulgar; and he the happiest, who conforms his life to the lawes of a true iudgement. This
mā knows, that we must heare with many, but de∣cree with few, & ioyning forces with two or three braue retired spirits, hee bandies with a legion of the Vulgar. Hee lookes downe with pitie on the poore Plebeians; & (like Xerxes) bewailes their hard hap, in that none of their names shal liue after a few yeares. Knowing that the eternall sub∣stance of his soule was breath'd into him, by the Eternall, he cares for no∣thing which is not able to hold-out with Eternity. I will therefore despise
things momentary: and since I haue ful assurance, that I shall liue in the o∣ther world, my deedes shal do their best to make me liue in this. 18 Now-a-dayes the clo∣thes are spoken to, and not the men: and few haue regard to the riches of the breast; but, of the backe. He, who in his fa∣shions differs, and dege∣nerates most from his ancestours, is held the most generous Gentle∣mā. The world is grown so sensuall, that the parts of the body are preferr'd
before those of the mind; so that to say, He is a man of good parts, is as much to say, as He is a man of good members. Christ sayes that the body is more worth then the rai∣ment: but some of our Gallants make them clothes more worth then their bodies. With me it shall not be a good argu∣ment, to say, I will weare this, because it becomes me; but, I will weare this, because it becomes a man: and he that speakes to my clothes, and not to me, shall bee answered by my clothes, and not by me.
19 Some are neuer well, but when they are vn∣packing their bosomes with wordes, and whis∣pering their thoughts in the eares of their reputed friends: & at length, tho∣rough the perfidiousnes of som fals brother, they are brought either to die shamefull deaths, or to liue the like liues. If ther∣fore I find my tongue to be so laxatiue, as that it cannot holde, but must needes bewray me, I will locke my secrets deepe in my hart: & if my tongue vnlocke my heart, I will
bite it, and beate my heart for not tying my tongue. I will not doe GOD so great a disho∣nour, as to demy-deifie Man, in making him priuy to my heart and thoughts. 20 Nothing giues vs de∣light in this world, but Beauty. We take pleasure in beholding heauē when it is faire, and cleere: but when it is ouer-cast, our minds are clouded, and our bodies ill disposed. Wee loue Vesta better, when her face is smooth, and her colours fresh,
than when her beauty is blasted, and her visage wrinkled. For, in Sum∣mer euery man lies, with, & vpon his first mother, nuzzles himselfe in her lap, and playes with her dainties; whereas in the Winter euery mā keeps his house: and yet if that be not neate and sweete, we loath that too. One and the samething, being young, delights; beeing old, displeases. I wil ther∣fore ioy in nothing, more thā in Beauty; nor admire any thing, more than her: yet since she is such an Inchantresse, my bodi∣ly
eye shall neuer beholde her, but withall my spiri∣tuall eye shal be fixt vpon hir Maker; who made her to feede the sense, not to bewitch the soule: who left her vs, to make vs conceiue how much more excellent is that in∣conceiueable fairness of the celestiall Canaan. In a word; shee is but a cor∣ruptible type of an incor∣ruptible treasure. And as Christ shal consume An∣tichrist with the bright∣nes of his glory: so shall the blasing beauty of the other world, blast the fa∣ding fairness of this.
21 More then many there are, to whom Superstiti∣on dictates, that it is plea∣sing to GOD to weare squalid, and vncleane clo∣thes; and that the well∣fare of the soule consists in the foule keeping of the bodie. Others there are, whom Hypocrisie leades the same way. They both erre: the for∣mer, by not knowing the Scriptures; the later, by transgressing against thē: for, Christ commands vs not to looke soure, as the Hypocrites, who disfi∣gure their faces, that they
may seeme vnto men to fast. I will therefore wash my handes, and face, and anoint my head; that my head my bee anoynted with the oyle of gladnes. And since I cannot en∣dure to see the lodging of my body durty, I will much more haue a care, to keepe the chamber of my soule cleane. When my soule is sadde, my countenance shal be mer∣rie: neither wil I so much care to cast vp mine eyes to heauen, as to lift vp my heart to God; not so much respecting the throne, as the inthron'd.
22 Many there are, who neuer serue God, but whē hee serues their turne. Hence it comes to passe, that the Sea-man mut∣ters against him, when he hath not a good winde; & the Plough-mā, when he hath badde weather. All this proceedes from nothing, but the impru∣dency of man; which ac∣cuseth the Prouidence of God, of Improuidency. Before there was any raine at al, what did God then? Did hee not send a mist vp from the earth, which watered all the
earth? Hee will not haue his power tied to any or∣dinary meane; but, will shew vs what hee is, by what he can doe. When therefore mine owne meanes faile me, I will re∣lie vpon God: who is as able to giue mee some∣thing, as to make me of nothing; to keepe me to the last, as to make me at the first. 23 He that striues to please the intoxicated multi∣tude, labours as much in vaine, as he that sought to put the winds in a bagge. And the reason is, because
it is impossible to please the godly and vngodly, the judicial and the vnju∣diciall, the sensible & the senselesse, both at once. Neyther Christ, nor his fore-runner could please them. For, Iohn came neyther eating nor drin∣king; and they said, He had a diuell. The Sonne of Man came eating and drinking; and they said, Behold a glutton, and a drinker of wine, a friend to Publicans and sinners. I will therefore take my Sauiours counsel, & seeke to iustifie my iudgement to the children of VVise∣dome,
of whom she is iu∣stified; and not to fooles, by whom shee is daily crucified. 24 As many haue hungry stomackes; but, few dis∣gesting: so many haue apprehending wits; but, few iudging. Hence it comes to passe, that some are wise in words, & fools in actions. For my part, I had rather it should be said, that I am one of the iudgements of the town, then that I am one of the wits of the towne. 25 Diuers men propound
vnto themselues diuers ends. One makes honor his end; another, riches: a third hunts after both: a fourth seeks to purchase to himselfe the name and fame of a Schollar; a fift, of a Souldier, &c. As for me, I wil make the honor of God mine end. So shall I be sure that mine end shall not be dishonoura∣ble. 26 I haue often wonder'd with my selfe, to thinke that Schollars are the most poore of all others; notwithstanding that they haue the best wits of all
others. And my won∣der neuer left mee, till I considered, that they car'd not for the things of this world, which the Mothe & Canker could corrupt; but, laid vp their treasures in the other world: whereas they, who knew nothing, but the things of this world, carkt and car'd most for the world. Some say, that because Salomon vs'd the riches hee had so ill, therfore God would ne∣uer since blesse Schollars with them: But, that is false: for, wee see Kings Philosophers, and Di∣uines.
I wil beseech God, to giue mee an estate e∣qually distant from a∣bundance, and penury. So shall I neuer rise so high as presumption, nor fall so low as despaire: yet of the two, I had ra∣ther haue nothing than know nothing; that my body should want, than my soule. 27 The Hermits are re∣prehended, for seque∣string themselues from the world: and it is the opinion of many reue∣rend Diuines, that hee is most valiant, who grap∣ples
with the enemy; that is, who talkes face to face with the wicked. Yet too much relying vpon this Maxime, hath brought many into the iawes of danger; but, hath fetcht few out. To be a good man in the middest of Sodome, to bee abstemi∣ous in Germany, to bee chaste in Italy, all these are hard and rare things; we seeing many returne absolutely vitious from thence, that almost went absolutely vertuous thi∣ther. True it is, that Christ kept company with Publicans: but, as
true it is, that hee was without the leauell of temptation. We see one man change nature with another, and put on the disposition of him, with whom hee conuerses. I will therefore not onely shun euil, but the meanes to come to it; & to auoid hurt, I will keepe my selfe out of shot: neyther will I presume, being but a man, to follow my Ma∣ster in that which he did as God. 28 Man consists of two parts; the body and the minde: that is, saith La∣ctantius,
of heauen and earth. I will therfore not grudge to let my earth go to earth; that my hea∣uen may go to heauen. 29 The greatest and most common care men haue, is, to passe away the time. They desire most to passe away that, which is most pretious. O! if they knew what treasure Time offers to their soules, they would looke with a iealous eye vpon the houre-glasse, and sigh at the dropping of euery sand. They abuse & lose Time, the mother of Ex∣perience;
and so, lose Ex∣perience, the Mother of Wisedome. It is a hard case, when a dying man shall think with himselfe, that he hath left nothing behind him, wherby po∣sterity may knowe, hee did once liue. If that this man (saith Seneca) inha∣bit this world a thousand yeeres, yet can wee not truly say, Hic vir diu vi∣xit, This man liu'd long; but, Hic vir diu fuit, This man was long. For my part, I had rather the cō∣pany would passe away, then the time; except it be such company, as may
helpe mee to redeeme the time. And while I liue heere, I will studie so to vse Time, as that I may come to liue there, where is no time. 30 In these times, when mē wil lay an imputation vpō one, they will say, He is Morally honest. Certain it is, that hee, who is at no time morally honest, can neuer be religiouslie good. God shewes that hee is our Father by his works, in, and for vs: & we should shewe, that we are his children by our works, to his, & for him.
It is not enough, to say with the thiefe, Lord, re∣member mee, when thou cōmest into thy kingdome, vnlesse wee remēber him here. To belieue Christ, is not enough; neither is it enough to beleeue in him: for, wee ought as well belieue in his com∣maundements, that wee must doe them; as in his promises, that wee shall haue them. Wee reade, that wee should declare our faith by our workes; that is, our invisible belief by our visible life: but, we no where read, that wee should shewe our workes
by our faith. True it is, that the Scripture bids vs, not to giue almes so∣nante tuba, vvith our tongues talking of that wee giue; but, with our harts thinking for whom we giue. No, no: he that glories in his works, shall neuer bee glorified for thē. The Publican could not haue done a work so acceptable in the sight of Christ, as was the disclai∣ming his owne workes. For, as we haue nothing, but from God: so God will haue vs confesse, that we can do nothing with∣out him. I wil haue mer∣cie
on my neighbor, that God may haue mercy on mee; and saue him from momentarie misery, that I may be saued frō eter∣nall. Yet, in so doing, will I knowe what I doe; & wil tell, that I doe it for the discharge of my du∣ty, and to Gods glory; who hath promised to make mee a great one in heauen, if I relieue but one of his little ones on earth. 31 Wee reade, that Al∣phonsus, and Fridericus, Kings of Spaine and Si∣cily, recouered their long
lost health (being giuen∣ouer by the Physicians) by reading historie: Al∣phonsus by reading T. Li∣uius; and Fridericus by reading Q. Curtius. Two Christian Kings were healed by profane histo∣rie. O! if vaine, and vn∣certaine Annales haue such a miraculous opera∣tion: what haue those sa∣cred pages, penned by the hands of Prophets, and Apostles; & wherin the Spirit of GOD hath expressed the maiestie of God? All you that are sick, come you hither; & read heere, where Com∣fort
her selfe offers to cure you. Come hither Lambes, and you may wade: come hither Ele∣phants, & you may swim. Come hither Children, and feed on milke: come hither you tooth'd vn∣derstandings, & you shal feed on hard meat. Lord let mine eyes lose their light, in beholding this light: and let mee reade that till I die, which can make mee liue, neuer to die. 32 Nothing torments a man more then ambiti∣on. She is the only enemy
to Content, and Rebel a∣gainst Reason. Shee is borne with her eyes cast vp; that is, comparing her selfe with those, that are aboue her. If shee cast her eyes downe, it is but in scorne of those that are belovve her. If shee should bee pearcht vpon the verie toppe of heauen, yet shee vvould desire to clime higher. That I may not bee sub∣iect to this aspyring di∣uell, I will be contrary to her; and neuer compare my selfe, but with my In∣feriours. And if I see no man more contemptible
than my selfe, I vvill yet retaine the maiestie of a Man; and thinke that I am placed Lord, and King, ouer the Beasts. 33 There is nothing dura∣ble in this vvorld, but grief. As for the word re∣ioyce, it requires, in most toongs, an Ablatiue Case; and is taken away before it be throughly enioyed. Griefe is a firme and ne∣uer-flitting companiō of Man: and it neuer for∣sakes him; though all his friends do. The first note man sings, is how∣ling; and his last, groning.
I will therefore moralize vpon this, and think that the all-griefe wee haue in this world, is but a figure of that all-ioy we shall in∣ioy in the next world; & as a sowre Preparatiue, to make vs relish that sweet food the better. 34 Friends are threefold; profitable, delightful, ver∣tuous. The two former are imbraced in this world; the later casierd. The name of an honest man is growne odious: and the reputation to be such a one, is a clogge to a mans rising. And there∣fore
as one saies, That he had rather be rich, than be accoūted so: so a man had better be honest, thā be reputed so. In these gayish times, the out∣ward appearance is more looked into, thn the in∣ward essence  that of Seneca is Annu∣lis magi quam animis creditur. For my part, I will not make choice of a friend, that hath not all those three accidents vni∣ted in him; to wit, pro∣fit, pleasure, and vertue. But of what profession shall this my friend bee? A knowing, doing scho∣lar.
Hee is the true profi∣table friend, the onely de∣lightfull, the most trulie vertuous. That he is pro∣fitable, appeares in this, that in exchanging vvith him a demand for an an∣swere, a man shall gaine a secret, worth a Signiory. That he is delightfull, no man will deny, that hath his vnderstanding but once tickled with his di∣scourse. That hee is the truliest vertuous, is easily prooued; in that other men are in loue with ver∣tue onely by relation: wheras the Scholar, with his vnderstanding part,
pries into her fairest partes, and loues her for her selfe onely, without any other base respect. A Merchant loueth a Merchant; as hoping to gaine by him. A Souldi∣er loueth a Souldier; as expecting to be rescued by him: but, a Schollar loueth a Schollar; as de∣siring to be better instru∣cted by him. I, I: this is loue indeed; and this is a friend indeed: & he that loues not such a friend, hates himselfe. 35 It is a thing worthy obseruation, how the
vulgar feedes vpon false opinions. For example; if a man seduce a woman to commit what should be omitted, he is little or nothing defam'd therby, but shee: the seducer is not so much blam'd, as the seduced. If a child consent with a man to cōmit a villany, I would faine know, whether the child, or the man deserue the sharper censure. If the stronger vessell ouerturn the weaker, which of thē causeth the fall? Some obiect, that a woman should haue more mode∣stie than a man; & there∣fore
is held more culpa∣ble in the breach there∣of. That a woman should be more shamefac't than a man, I grant; that more shame-minded, I denie. A man should not haue a earefull blush: but, hee should euer retaine an honest shame. And yet, whosoeuer should main∣taine (against all Ethicks) that modestie is cōmon (though not alike com∣mon) to euery age, and sex, he should on his side haue probabilitie: out of which, absurditie neuer yet issued. I haue seene a fellow blush, whose face
Age had pleighted, and whose eyes could neither send out light, nor re∣ceiue it in. And indeed, it is a thing common to e∣uery man, to blush for error in manners, though not in life. Some will an∣swere, There are men, whom nothing can make blush. To whom I re∣ply, that I doubt not, but there are both men and women, whom Impu∣dencie her selfe hath trai∣ned vp; and, sitting on their faces, beats-backe the blushing bloud. A∣mongst all the vulgar er∣rors, that of extenuating
mans offence is the gros∣sest: and I would I could with reason murther this opinion. Howsoeuer; if I cannot beat the vulgar from it, yet I will be sure the vulgar shal neuer beat it into mee. 36 It is an Aphorisme in Physick, that we consist of those things by which wee are nourisht: So also falls it out with the soule. For, if she feed vpō gross nd vncleane conversati∣on, shee proues impure: if the conversation bee choice and good, shee growes faire and louelie.
Howsoeuer my bodie fare, I will be careful that my soule sucke her sus∣tenance out of vvhat is sweet and good: if it bee otherwise, shee shall not once chew it; much lesse digest it. 37 As at som times, meats; so at som times, discour∣ses are out of season. To discourse in matters of policie, or of controuer∣sie, in the presence of wo∣men, is altogether as much out of season, as Oisters in Iuly. Let me therefore consider how, vvhen, and to whom I
speak: and if I can speak to no purpose, I will (if I can) hold my tongue to some purpose. 38 There is no such laugh∣ing-stock in the world, as the worldling: Hee saith in his heart, There is no God; and liues therafter: & on the other side, God saith, hee is not his child; and therefore giues him ouer to his lusts, and per∣mits him so to liue. Hee thinkes the ioy to come vncertaine; and therfore prefers a present certaine sorrow before it; beeing afraid to let his body put
off his infirmities. Lord take me thither, where I shall not conceiue the griefe I doe heere: by ta∣king mee from hence; where I cannot conceiue the ioy, I shal haue there. 39 I cannot but laugh at the vaine wishes of men. One vvishes that hee might neuer want mony; another, that he might e∣uer enioy health; a third, that hee might neuer die. Not one of my desires shall fight against necessi∣tie: but, I wil rather wish for that which must bee, than wish, that that
may not bee, which must bee. 40 All opinions are not to be told; but onely such, as either learned men, or else the Church of God haue held before vs. To leaue antiquitie, & cleaue to our own opinions, ar∣gues a selfe-opinion, and no wisedom. Some there are, who care not hovv raw their opinions be, so they be rare. I for my part, had rather wander with cōpany, than alone; make another mans iudg¦ment my ground, than ground my selfe vpon
mine owne iudgement: for I had rather that my Author should be laugh∣ed at, than my selfe. 41 Amongst the diuerse complaints of men, there is none so ordinarie, as that of Age: but, especi∣ally womē are vext with this old vnwelcom guest; & had rather cease to be, than cease to be young. Hee that tells a woman, shee hath a wrinkle in her face, giues her a woūd in the hart. If her com∣plexion faile neuer so lit∣tle, her spirit falls with it. Shee feares not Death a∣whit,
but his ordinarie forerunner, Age. Many men also become vvo∣manish; & haue herma∣phroditicall minds. If a verdit of vvomen once pronounce them ill-fa∣uor'd, they streight se∣quester themselues from the world; as, vnworthy of the world. I care not if my corruptible part rot, so my fairer part fade not: nor passe I so much for the beautie of the Case, as for the glorious splendour of the inclosed Image. 42 Many trauell: but, few
deserue to be stiled Tra∣uellers. To fetch-home apish gestures, queint fa∣shions, new vices, is now becom the proposed end of a Traueller. There is no better sport, than to read some of their writ∣ten Obseruations. One sets downe, what delicate Wines, and Salats haue been subiect to the com∣mand of his palate. Ano∣ther discouers strange stratagems in a gun-hole. A third, writes out all superscriptions of Ho∣spitals, &c. Phy vpon it; that a man should goe from home, to goe from
himselfe, and returne de∣stitute of the little wit he caried out with him. The wisest of Grecians estee∣med him wise, who had seene many Cities, and the diuers manners of men. Euery Carrier can see many Citties, & the different natures of Na∣tions: but, to discern be∣twixt them, & pick wis∣dome out of them, that requires the man; and such a man did Homer re∣quire. The reason why wee trauell, is, because all happy wits raigne not vnder one Climate; and therfore are to be hunted
out. Who would not wade a million of miles, to enterchange discourse with a Scaliger, a Lipsius, or a Causabone? My mind therefore shall tra∣uel more than my body; when the later rests, the former shall labour: and my care shal be greater to please my Vnderstāding, than my Sense. 43 It is a common saying, that a continuall compa∣nion is a mans shadovv. This saying is neuer so true, as when a substan∣tiall fellow hath an Asse, and a shadowe to associ∣ate
him. And as shadows cannot be seene in dark∣nesse, but by light; no more can darke and dull vnderstandings discerne this shadow frō this sub∣stance: for, that cannot bee discouer'd without the light of some bright Intellect. 44 An Hypocrite thinkes himselfe the vvisest of men: but, at last he finds it otherwise. He thinks, that his knauerie is vn∣seene, because it is vnpu∣nisht: but, hee is decei∣ued. For, not onely the searcher of hearts sees
him, but also men (who can guesse at hearts) will at length espie him. For, as hee that weares ano∣ther mans garment, will at length bee discouered either by the ouer∣length, too shortnesse, or ouer-widenesse, or some other default of the rai∣ment: so he that puts on an outward habite of sin∣cerity, of which he neuer had the lowest inward tincture, will in time bee found faulty through the want of some thing, or other, requisite to such a holy professor. I will not therefore dissemble, ei∣ther
with God, or man; but, professe that liuing, which I will pronounce dying. 45 Some will imitate Great men thogh it be in the greatest vices. These are miss-led by opinion. For, as a golden rule, be∣ing crooked, cānot mea∣sure a thing, so well, as a plaine straight stick: so neither can wee square our actions by the vnru∣ly liues of Princes so fitly, as by the plain, euen, and vertuous courses of the Poor. I will honor Great∣nesse: but, I will both
honour & imitate good∣nes; and will not hold him good who is great, but him great who is good. 46 A drunkard is no good secret-keeper. It is the property of a drunkard, to disgorge his bosome, with his stomak; to emp∣ty his minde, with his maw. I will, therefore, not tell a bibber what I would not heare againe; least I heare of it againe, from those to whom I dare not auouch it againe. 47 Some say all they hear;
& report that with con∣fidence, which was rela∣ted to them with doubt. These alwayes purchase laughter; and now and then peril. I wil not, ther∣fore, tell all I heare: but, I will heare, againe and a∣gaine, that which I tell. 48 Curiosity, and Inqui∣sition, are two great ene∣mies to Wisedome One being demaunded what Caesar whispered in his eare, made answere, that Caesar tolde him, hee would inuent a very strange punishment for such as pried into his
words, and actions. This Vice is very incident to young Courtiers: who inquire after the discour∣ses and courses of Ioue & Iuno; of the King and Queene. I will not aske what I should not aske; least I hear what I would not heare. 49 There is nothing so much to bee desired in this world, as health; Without it, the body cannot trauell; nor the soule well discourse. Without it, Kings e∣steem themselues more miserable than Beggers;
and would giue their Kingdomes for an houre of ease. I will vse health, as I do my dearest friend. whome I detaine by all meanes I can: and, going away, I straight deuise how to get him againe. 50 No vice gets a man so many enemies, as Pride. The humble loath the proud man, because hee is so farre different from their straine: and the haughtie hate him, be∣cause hee would equall them. If I bee proud of any thing, it shall bee of my humilitie.
51 Some make their bel¦lies their gods; and pray to him that feedes the Foule of the Aire, to feed them with the Foule of the Aire. They are not so much solicitous what they shall weare to-mor∣row, as what they shall eat to-morrow. For my part, as I will looke to my bellie, that it sterue not; so I will looke to it, that it stretch not. 52 No humane study is so profitable, as morall Phi∣losophie. No other study, saith Seneca, can dimi∣nish
greefes, and subdue Passions; nor make a man more liberall, more iust, more temperate. Seneca might haue also added, that no other study can fit a man with manners, and a faire behauior. Fer∣dinand the Emperor, ma∣king a speech in a publike assembly, by chance gaue Priscian a fillip or two. Which a Bishop hearing, started vp, and said; Cae∣sar, you haue forgotten your Grammar: to whom Caesar, And you haue for∣gotten your Ethicks, Bi∣shoppe. The reply was good; but, not rough e∣nough
for an admonitiō o rude. From, hence it is that Schollars, defectiue in this studie, are tear∣med, by the Vulgar, Meer Schollars; that is, Pure uppies. Before I seeke to know other things, I will eeke to knowe my selfe. 53 Constancy is no vertue, if it be (might I so speak) devoted to vice. Change, in the vitious, is as great a vertue, as Constancie in the vertuous. I wil ther∣fore be incōstant to Vice, who is incertaine and in∣stable of her selfe; & con∣stant to Vertue, who is
euer the same, and her selfe. 54 They say, there is a kind of resemblance be∣tween Sleepe and Death. As therefore hee that is wearied with the dayes toyle, doth not grudge to goe to bed, as hoping to rise againe: So I, opprest with the excesse & cares of many dayes, wil glad∣ly sleepe-out that long, slowe-pas't Night. Nei∣ther will I think much to goe to my earthly bed; as knowing that I shall rise againe, and put-on an incorruptible raiment.
55 Mariage was ordained by God for mans com∣fort: and yet man often times abuseth it to Gods dishonour, and his owne discomfort. The reason heerof is, because al bo∣dies are not of one con∣stitution: and therefore soules, following the hu∣mors of their bodies, haue not all one disposi∣tion. VVhen therefore two differing natures meet, & see they are tied one to the other; they will cut the very thred of life, to be loose, though it be with the loss of their
soules. Parents, therfore, do ill, to match those to∣gether, betwixt vvhom Nature hath placed an Antipathy, & a loathing. What a cruell part is it of a Parent, to marry his childe to him that hath most, whē shee hates him most? I pray God, some of them doe not one day giue a deare account of some deare soules, whose faire bodies they haue begotten; doing perpe∣tuall penance, for placing wealth aboue woorth. Had I a child, that loath'd the man that I lik't, I would sooner send her to
the Church-yard to bee buried, than to the Church to be married; and should thinke, I did her a greater courtesie, to wed her to a Graue, than to Griefe. 56 There is nothing that man at once glories in, and grudges at, but Ser∣uice. Hee is proud, when hee thinks himselfe the servant of God: and hee is abiect, when hee consi∣ders that hee is subiect to his fellow subiects. Hee mutters against God, ac∣cusing him of iniustice, for that hee dimmes his
bright beginning, with a base succession; & made him not only to his own glory, but also to augmēt the vaine glory of men. The very name of King, is as an allarum to stir & rouse vp his envy: and he feares him with the same feare, that he does the di∣uell. Man is deceiued: for, the Deity is serued not onely in the Deity, but in Magistrates, in Parents, in Tutors; & in all those, whom hee, that is aboue all, hath placed aboue vs. I will not therefore think I serue God onely, when I immediatly obey his
will; but also, when I o∣bey the wills of those, whom hee wills me to o∣bey: & I wil make a holy vow, of an idle comple∣ment; vowing my selfe the servant of his ser∣uants. 57 As there are few good Physicians for the body: o there are not many for the soule. As those of the bodie let many die, for want of skill: so those of the soule let manie pe∣rish, because they knowe not how to apply them∣selues vnto them. I haue seene an Empirick pre∣scribe
a cold remedy for a colde disease; like those who seek to cure the de∣speration of Gods mer∣cie, with the declaration of his iustice. As therfore the Physician of the bo∣die is not esteemed, ex∣cept hee can giue a reason for what hee does; no more is the Physician of the soule to be valued, vn∣lesse hee can giue a reason of that hee saies. GOD hath left to his Ministers, weapons to wound, and balmes to heale; Keyes to open, & keyes to shut: but, some of them wan∣ting theological pruden∣cie,
manage these things amisse. As, therefore, knowing the constituti∣on of mine owne body, I will giue the Physician direction in som things: so, knowing well the ill e∣state of mine own soule, I will in some things sup∣ply the defect and igno∣rance of my ghostly Phy∣sician. 58 It is a common speech, that Euery man is either a foole or a Physician: that is, he knowes, what does him good, and takes it; and look what does him hurt, hee refuses it. It
fares not so in matters of the soule. For, in those, most are fooles: and few are Physicians; like chil∣drē, coueting that which harmes them, and flying that which helps them. I care not if I be a foole in my bodily diet, so I be a Physician for the health of my soule. 59 It is a thing worthy the consideratiō; that thogh the soule be her selfe im∣prisoned in the body, yet shee cannot endure that her prison should be im∣prisoned. Of this there is a two-folde reason: first,
because shee loues not to be double walled in; and, secondly, this brings to her mind, her owne im∣prisonment, vvith the thraldome, and subiecti∣on shee liues in to the Sense. Yet withall, tis a thing remarkable in her, that shee is neuer so glad, as when shee hath giuen her body the slip, & left it imprisoned in the Graue: though at Natures first motion, she was loth to part from it; as hauing dwelt so long in it. Lord, let my bodie goe to his earthly prison, that my soule may enioy that hea∣uenly
liberty. So shall she bee free of Heauen, and free from Earth. 60 Examples, taken from Great men, hurt more, than if they were taken from Poore. The reason is, because adversitie makes a man know him selfe; whereas prosperity makes him knowe him∣selfe too well. Now, it is more safe to follow him, that knowes him selfe, than him that does not. For, as a true knowledge of God, and of his truth, is the beginning of di∣uine wisedome: so a true
knowledge of a mans selfe, is the beginning of humane. I will therfore sooner imitate those whō misery hath tamed, than those whom ioyes haue made wilde. 61 It is a great follie, to write, and print things foolish. Things foolish I call things lewd, & void of sense. Tis strange, that man should not bee con∣tent, that onely the pre∣sent generation should call him foole; but, that posterity also shold prick & picke him out for one. For my part, I will not
impart that knowledge to any man, which may make him forget himselfe; and (when hee comes to remember himselfe) may make him knowe that I forgot my selfe. 62 All flatterers are odi∣ous, and dangerous; and aboue all others, the Cree∣per. The first and most pernitious that euer was, was a Creeper, & begui∣led the Woman; vvho thoght that such a craw∣ler could not haue such craft, as afterward shee found he had. Such Flat∣terers are poyson to
Princes, and oftentimes a bane to the best dispo∣sed. Flattery is now-a-dayes admitted into the Courts of Princes: nay, into the bosome of Prin∣ces; not cōsidering that though her ward below, yet shee aymes high, and hits those soonest vvho lie highest. Those Courts are as happy that want her, as those are cursed & vnhappy that haue her. 63 As the stomack if it be fedde a long time with one meate, at length loathes the same: so the soule despises ordinary
& accustomed discourse. I will therefore feede my soule with varietie; but, not with confusion. 64 Euery man thinks, that, which is opposed to the extreamest of his griefes, to be mans chiefe felici∣ty. The poor man iudges riches, the sicke man health, the prisoner li∣berty, to bee the highest happinesse. I my selfe, when I haue been discon∣tented (as I haue beene often) haue thought con∣tent to be the best blisse: and I often fall into the relapse, and imbrace
that opinion. Hence-for∣ward, I will place my fe∣licity in those things, which may bring me to that neuer fading felicity: and if my soule haue con∣tent heere, I will thinke that shee is contented with this world; and so hath lost the only marke of her immortality. 65 God lookes for most honour from those, to whom hee hath giuen greatest honor. As Prin∣ces haue the highest place vpon Earth; so should they do the grea∣test homage to Heauen.
66 Nothing in this life is so vnsauory as Old-age. The sadnes of mans last dayes, is sufficient to pay him for the folly of the first. The neerer Age comes to her growth, the neerer Beauty is to her bane. For, in this pen∣siue time, euery thing withers, and groweth old, but Euill: and that retaines his full vigour. Lord, let my soule then flourish when my body fades: and let the con∣cord of my minde fight against the discord of my body.
67 Nothing is so terrible to the greatest part of mortality, as Death. This little leane dwarfe will beard a Monarch, in the midst of his Army; making him shake, that whilome shook Towers, and made the Earth it selfe tremble with the weight of his Hoaste. Great Alexander was a little childe in this: and though he had often met Death face to face, yet at last he turned his back to him, and would haue hid himselfe from him; as hoping to be inuisible to
his inuisible Enemy. What an absurdity is it in a man to seek to choak Nature! or to grudge her the voyding of her excre∣ments! As when I was borne, another died: so I will consider, that when I die, another is borne. If Nature bee wearie of mee, I will bee weary of my selfe: I were a foole if I should not. For, as no man can play vpon a broken instrument; no more can any soule recre∣ate her selfe with a bad instrumentaliz'd body. If, therefore Life flie from me, I will not flie from
Death. 68 When men are calum∣niated, they growe an∣gry: and if they be repre∣hended for any predomi∣nant vice in them, they seeke to excuse and exte∣nuate it. I will not do so; but, will hearken to E∣pictetus: who wils mee, not to deny the sinnes mine enemy taxes mee with; but, to reproue his ignorance: in that, being vnacquainted with the infinitie of my crimes, he layes only two or three to my charge; whereas indeede I am guilty of a million.
69 As Sin sold the world to Death: so Death bought the world at the hands of Sinne; it being the will of the heauenly Father, with the death of one to buy euerlasting life for all. Blessed be he then, that died the cursed death of the Crosse, that wee may lead a blessed life without crosses. 70 Christ himselfe sayes, that Many are called, but few are chosen. Many are call'd Christians, who are not chosen to liue with Christ. Many
are in the Church, that are not of the Church: and many visible mem∣bers there are, which be∣long not to the inuisible body; nor receiue their motion from the inuisi∣ble Head. We, whose soules look vpon others throgh the dimme spec∣tacles of Sense, doe often times take a Iudas for a Nathanall, and (con∣tarily) a Simon Peter, for a Simon Magus. Let vs then spare to iudge; least wee be iudged to bee vn∣iust, by that iust Iudge, at the dreadful day of Iudg∣ment. I, I: this is a
course; and this wil I ob∣serue: because I knowe not, whether or no, the Saul I see novv, may proue a Paul to-morow. 71 The world delights in those, that delight in it. The reason therfore, why the world cōtemnes me, is because it is cōtemned of mee. So then there must be a mitigation on both sides. To a mitiga∣tion I may be brought; to a subiection, neuer. 72 The diuell is neuer so busie, as when a man is idle. Hee hath no so fit
instrument to worke by, as by Sloth: which is, in∣deed, the mother of vice. I will therefore abandon this mother; least in time she bring mee to that fa∣ther. 73 Many pray: but, fewe pray aright. Some pre∣sume to beg that, which God in his iustice cannot grant: and others againe despaire to craue that, which God in his mercy will not deny. I will not therefore begge all that which I would; but, all that which I should.
74 There is nothing in this world, that all men shunne so much, as Base∣nesse: yet many run into it, because few know the true definition of it. Opi∣nion styles many things base, which Vertue calls bright, and glorious. We see Gentlemen asham'd, and hang downe their heads, when they looke vp to the place, vvhere their Ancestors sate. And why doe they this? Be∣cause they doe not think it any disparagement, to decline from the vertue of their Ancestors; but,
from their riches. If Po∣uertie take-vp her resi∣dence in mee, or change beings with me; yet shall she neuer make me think my selfe base, so long as Vertue leaues mee anie one sparke of her bright∣nesse. 75 The basest griefe of all, is that, which receiues his birth frō the death of a Horse or a Cow; or from the losse of the two too high-priz'd Metalls. Phy vpon it, that a man should hurt his internall substāce, for the want of externall. If the Sun and
Moone shine vpon mee, I shall thinke they doe me a sufficient fauour; with∣out presuming to im∣plore their descension in to my pockets: but, if the Sunne and Moone, that is, Gold & Siluer, vouch∣safing to make my poc∣kets their Spheres, shall afterwards (out of their Planeticall inconstancie) skippe out, and wander frō me; I wil not mourn, and say, I haue lost them: but, that I haue rendred, and sent them backe to him, who sent, and gaue them vnto mee.
76 Pouertie lyes begging in the streets, and no man pitties her. The reason is, because it is against the nature of man to pittie a cōmon enemy to Man∣kind. Man should consi∣der, that though Pouer∣tie bee his worldly ene∣my, yet she is his spiritu∣all friend. 77 Euery thing hath his fit application: but, few find it. Some, by the ex∣traordinary application of a thing common, will bring the Reader both into admiration and de∣light.
Others againe, by an vnwittie application, make non Sense; and in∣fuse lothing into the nice stomack of the Reader I wil apply nothing, which may not imply some∣thing. 78 All men cry-out for plaine dealing: but, fewe loue the trade. It is an old Prouerb, that he that vseth it long, shall die a beggar. Sure I am, that hee, who vseth it euer, shall die rich: Hee that aw him in secret, wil re∣ward him in secret. Hee shall enter, and inhabite
heauen, and partake of that true treasure; wher∣as the hypocrite leaues his wealth behind him, and carries his woe with him. 79 Eating, and drinking too much, are two great vices. Yet, of the two, too much eating is the grea∣ter. To drink too much, comes often times from constraint: but, to eat too much, proceeds from a mans inordinate appe∣tite. Hee that is a drun∣kard, may iustlie blame others: but, he that is a glutton, can iustly blame
none but himselfe. I wil, therfore, make my appe∣tite conformable to my digestion: so shal I be sure neither to eat too much, nor too little. 80 Some fearing their names should die, build houses; to make posteri∣tie know, that they once were, and were wealthy. This indeede tells the world that they had pur∣ses; but, not that they had pates. He is the man, who trusts not to often∣tripping Tradition; but pleads his owne Cause to Posteritie; making her
confesse, that hee was a man of deeds, thogh not a man of drosse. 81 A great mans fauor is hardly got, & easily lost. Hee keeps a man to serue his turne; but, not to ob∣serue his turnings. The greatest part of his fol∣lowers, are like his hor∣ses: they carry him; and hee guides them. That hors which offers to fling him, or that is not tēder∣mouth'd, hee puts off, as a head-strong Iade. It is better therefore to serue God, who is voyd of all accidents, and humors;
than man, who by them is made voide of reason: and hee that is most vnfit to obserue man, is the most fit to serue God. 82 The Church militant, labours to bee vnited to the triumphant; and the triumphant longs for the vnion. Lord then ioyne them; and let sor∣row seuer them no lon∣ger. 83 Nature binds men one to the other; but, neuer so fast as when she chains them together with the linkes of vertue. Nature
may make mee loue my kinred: but, Vertue will make mee doe more. 84 Hee that hates a man, because he hath some no∣torious vices, is rash and vnaduised: for, if hee did but looke into the same man, he should find some eminent vertues in him. I will not shunne his pre∣sence that hath a good nature, and but one ver∣tue; as knowing my selfe to be all vitious. 85 It is an vsuall speech, that nothing is saide, vvhich hath not beene
said before. If it be meāt, that no words are spoke, which haue not beene spoke before, that is false: and if the meaning bee, that nothing is thought, vvhich hath not beene thought before, that is false too. For, we see that euery day reveales a new secret to the world; and that for neuer heard-of thinges, wee are faine to faine neuer heard of words. I will rather think all braines are exhausted, than Nature. 86 Vertue is placed euen in the middest of Vice.
Liberalitie, is placed be∣twixt Auarice and Pro∣digality; Valour, betwixt Cowardise & Rashnesse; Mercie, betwixt Cruelty, and a fond Lenity. Take courage, Vertue: thou shalt once shake-off thy priuation; and put-on a habit, without reiterated actions. 87 Hee that meets with a contentious foole, doth wisely in granting all hee obiects: for, it is more policie, to gaine a friend without trouble, than a foe with it. 88
The same holdes with GOD, that does with great Lords: he loues to be well followed and at∣tended. But, neither de∣sert, nor great friends, can preferre a man to him: onely those whom hee likes, hee chooses. I had rather follow him, than go before Emperours. 89 A yong man is like a wilde horse; who, if hee want a curbe, will runne himselfe to death. Those parents, therefore, are wise, who ioyne correc∣tion, with direction; and keepe those in, who else
would lash-out. 90 It is a thing difficult, to finde out the humors of men; because many dissemble their dispositi∣ons. This businesse re∣quires a crafty, and ex∣perienced wit: for, de∣ceit is neuer so soon dis∣couer'd as by the deceit∣full. 91 Passion is the onely e∣nemy to Wisedome. He that conquers this ene∣my, makes Wisedome his friend. 92 A lingring hatred is
badde. Gods children are angry, yet sinne not. My wrath shall go down with the sunne: but, my loue shall endure longer than the sunne it selfe. 93 Affectation makes a wise man a foole; but, if it meete with a foole, it makes him an intolera∣ble Asse. In these later, lame times, we see many affect defects; and to bee proud of that, which in∣deede they should bee asham'd of. Since Na∣ture hath made me som∣what better than a foole; let mee beware, that af∣fectation
make mee not worse than a foole. 94 It is a question worth the inquiring into, whe∣ther or no, all ostentation bee to be auoided. The Philosophers cried-out, Sume superbiam quaesitā meritis: Assume a pride proportionable to thy me∣rits. And indeede, both Morality, and Policy, perswade it; for, general∣ly, wee see those vnder∣ualued of all men, who vnderualue themselues. Yet, the word of God is to be obserued, before the obseruations of men.
95 Cōmines obserues this in Lewis the XI. that hee would euen toile, to gain any man that might ei∣ther profit, or hurt him This is an excellent poli¦cie; and little or nothing (or rather, in nothing) repugnant to diuinity. 96 Religion is often made a cloak to villany. But, at one time or other, Vil¦lany will cast-off her cloak: and he that is wise, will perceiue and detest it. I wonder, that men do not tremble (as being before God) when they
dissemble before men. 97 Nothing should so neerely touch, nor so much moue a Prince, as a base report of his pre∣decessour; though hee were his vtter enemy. For, though he himselfe lead the life of a blessed Angell; yet, from some mouthes wherein Ca∣lumny cloysters her selfe) as much imputa∣tion shall bee laied vpon him, as can be cast vpon the Diuell; which, his Successour, in imitation of him, will winke-at. How many ministers of
hell, now-adayes not on∣ly reuile Gods on Earth, with words, but with written wordes also? Historiographers may lightly touch the faults of Princes: but, if they raile at their persons, they cease to bee Historians, and become maleuolent Oratours. Princes, ther∣fore, should not imagine that their present fame wil be permanent; but, should take this prescri∣bed, or som other course: by which, they may as well stoppe the mouthes of the reuealers of their vices, and reuilers of their
persons; as let-loose the tongues that trumpet∣out their vertues. 98 As, on the one side, it sauours much of indis∣cretion, to remember a man of any thing by which hee hath either done himselfe disgrace, or receiu'd it frō others: so, on the other side, it is a point of Wisdome, to put one in minde of any action of his brauely per∣formed; of any speech of his vtter'd with the asto∣nishment of the audi∣ence▪ or of any Office in the Common-wealth,
which hee hath vnder∣gone with honour, and with augmentation of his reputation. Hee that delights to displease men, will at length reape no great pleasure. 99 Humility may bee without honour: but, honour cannot be with∣out humility: if it bee, it is but bastard. There is no surer way than this, to finde-out bastards, fa∣ther'd vpon the Nobili∣ty. 100 It is foolish, to bragge of riches, or any external
thing, in the company of others. For, the better sort will thinke it done in enuy, and emulation of them: and the worse will take it done, in con∣tempt of them. He that brags of things without, hath but little within. 101 If the Miser did but looke into what he does, hee would neuer bee so miserable. He is euer so∣licitous; and hath scarce one happy houre in the course of his whole life. He hoords and layes-vp, not knowing who shall enioy it: and oftentimes
they enioy it, who lay it out as fast; not caring what become of it. So that it plainly appeares, the whole life of an Vsu∣rer is nothing but misery and vexation. O that a Cormorant did knovve, how many beautiful bo∣dies starue, & how many substantiall soules faint, for want of his cash! hee would not onely willing∣ly part with all his pelfe, but sel his owne body to solace their soules. But, indeed, he is not so much to be blamed: because, whereas charity begins at home in others, cruel¦tie
beginnes at home in him: & he almost starues himself, that others, whō hee suffers to starue, may not take exception. Eue∣ry-one is not guilty of this Vice. The Prodigall hath such vse for his mo∣ny at home, that he can put none to vse abroad. Some get by the vse of their mony: he loseth by the vse of his.
To Vertue. O Great, & glorious Goddesse of the good; thou suter, and thou vvooer of the vvicked; thou, without whō the mightiest Mo∣narchs are but poore, & miserable; and with whō the basest Begger is great, and mighty: thou Mistres of so many mild Martyrs; thou Gouer∣nesse of all sweet disposi∣tions; thou beginner, cō∣tinuer,
& perfecter of all honorable actions, Ver∣tue; to thee I consecrate this little languishing Work, together with all the humble indeauors of my soule. Gracious Mi∣stresse, as thou hast hi∣therto hardned mee a∣gainst all the buffets of hard-fisted Fortune, and armed mee against the kicking of Asses, and the hissing of Geese: so giue me still encouragements to maintaine thy cause a∣gainst thy black-visag'd enemy, Vice. And seeing thou art a Mistres of ma∣ny seruants, I must not
only remember my self, but beseech thee also, to remember all those that suffer for thy sake. Giue an end to their miserie: least misery cause their end; and so thou be desti∣tute of seruants: for, the next Age (take the word of thy deuoted) will not afford thee many. Make much therefore, make much of those, vvho by thee are made more than earthly: let them adorne earth yet a while; and let vs a little longer triumph in them heer, before they themselues triumph in heauen. The world hath
need of them, bright Em∣presse: The world hath neede of them; in that pretious precepts neuer shine so much, as vvhen they are set in examples; nor examples, as vvhen they are sette in curious creatures. The Philosopher saith, that, if the vvorld had the full view of thee, thou wouldest so dazle the eyes of Mortalitie, that admiration vvould lay it in a transe. But, some cannot behold thy essence: and therefore, we were much to blame, if we should not honour
thee much in those, in whom wee see euen a lit∣tle of thee. But, if we see almost all thee, in som o∣ther selfe of thine; then pardon vs, if we giue you both alike worship. As I began, so I end with my selfe; and beseech thee once more, that I may be no more: I meane, that my massie part may fall, before my ethereall fall into any thing base, or belowe the height of that blood, which hath runne through the veines of so many valiant & truly ho∣norable persons. If thou grant this, great God∣desse,
I vvill then make this my Motto, Virtute tutè.
An Aduertise¦ment from the Transla∣tor, to the Rea∣der. VVHosoeuer shall come to the rea∣ding of this O∣ration, let him know, that it is not translated like Quae genus, to teach any man to construe. I haue not rendred verbum ver∣bo: but, verba verbo; and in some places, verbum verbis. As in Printing, many faults vsually escape in the first Proofe: so ma∣ny errors in the first Edi∣tion.
I confesse, through haste, I haue not alwayes closely followed the Au∣thors steppes. If euer it be reprinted, all shall bee re∣dressed. In the mean time, it may bee vvell vnder∣stood, though it bee ill translated. I had neuer vndertaken it, had it not been written against Ca∣lumny: who hath wronged mee; and may heereafter, more, than euer Fortune did, or can doe. No, no: I had rather contemplate a thousand lines, than turn one; the taske beeing more noble: Sith, as Aristotle saith, Deus, si qua felici∣tate
gaudet, gaudet con∣templatione. Besides; I plainely see, that the only thing which hath brought Scholars out of request, hath been Translating. Let these suffice. An Oration of Iustus Lipsius, against Calumny. THis day, this day, am I to speake of Calumny, and to draw and lugge this Vice into the light. Thou God, who art goodnesse, brightnesse, and all loue,
bee a light to the steps of my dimme Intellect, and lead me against a vice, of all vices the greatest enemy to thee. Moue my minde and tongue, that I may instill inno∣cency and humanity in∣to Humanity; winning men to shew honesty, peace, & charity, in their liues, discourses, and wri∣tings. Calumny I heere define to be, a guilefull, priuie wounding, and di∣minishing of anothers fame, either in word, or with penne. Calumny is so called a caluendo: which (being an olde,
and obsolete word) im∣plied as much, as to a∣buse, or deceiue. For, Ca∣lumny, in generall, lieth, and beguileth (as heere∣after I will shew) and deriues her authority frō lying, and deceiuing. The Graecians named her ; and that, verie properly: because shee pearces, stickes, & strikes-through, with the all-har∣ming dart of her ve∣nom'd tongue. So that Calumny hath two pro∣posed ends: the one, to deceiue; which the La∣tines consider'd: the o∣ther, to hurt; which the
Graecians oft obserued. O Vice of Vices! and yet in these Times what is more frequent? what more inseparable com∣panion of publique, and priuate ruines? I may yet adde, and ask, what hath beene more neglected by moderne, and antient Writers? Wherefore, since there is not any one found (to my know∣ledge) who hath writ∣ten of it, or against it; I hope, this Treatise of it will not bee vnprofitable to you, nor inglorious to mee, who first beginne to lay it open, and to ex∣plane
it with my plaine stile. Three principall things then there are, from which the present discourse must be deriu'd. First, I will shew how fil∣thy, and loathsome Ca∣lumny is; secondly, how pernicious; thirdly, how to be auoided. Whilst I seuerally discourse of these, somewhat amply, and acutely, I shall desire this faire Audience, not onely to lend mee their minds, but their eares; and to fill and guide the sailes (as I may say) of my Oration, with the Zephyrus, or gentle gale
of their loue-breathing thoughts. As for the filthiness of Calumny, it cannot bee more cleerely prooued, than by this two-folde argument: to weet, that it selfe, and all those in whom it dwels, are most loathsome. The persons, that harbour it, are bran∣ded with these three markes; base, idle, prat∣ling: So truely, by mee termed base, that I deny not only any good, but any indifferently good, or lofty spirit, euer to haue been blemisht with this blot. Examine the
olde, and these our mo∣derne Times, and you shall neuer reade, see, or heare, that any haue beene prone to this vice, but onely sad, and ma∣ligne natures, envying others and distrusting themselues; whom me∣lancholy Saturne hath blasted with his starre. Did you neuer see little, cowardly dogs barke at guests, that durst not bite beasts? Why, such are these worser sort of men; who are borne onely to hurt and vexe the harme∣lesse. I say, they are borne to that end; because they
doe so leane, and incline to this vice, that they are neuer quiet, but when they haue made others vnquiet. Their second marke is Idlenesse: than which nothing is more apparent; since the first sparke, and tinder of Ca∣lumny, is Sloth: for, no man will haue leasure to enquire into other mens affaires, who is deteined by his owne. In sluggish, and dronish people, this godlesse Goddesse takes∣vp her lodging, and there laies the foundation of her kingdome. Hee that denies this, let him but a
little frequent the Pala∣ces of Princes, and pla¦ces of Pleading: in which, occasion & mat∣ter of Calumny is daily, and aboundantly, sowen by those, who make this their only businesse, To walke and talke. VVhat∣soeuer is publikely, or priuately done, is there censured, and scourged. The Prince, & his Coun∣sellours are said to doe a∣misse: one man is said to haue done this; another man to haue spoken that. To conclude; no report of any man can stand with them vnblemisht,
and vnslandred. And if wise, and experienced men did this, I could the better beare with it: but, now, men not only most idle, but also most igno∣rant, do busie themselues in those things, to whose height, their sense, and vnderstanding will not reach. As in a ship an vnskilful passenger is not to bee endur'd, that tea∣ches, & chides the Ma∣riners, when he himselfe will lend hand neither to the Rudder, nor to the Ore: so also, vnto vs, these emptie vessells must needes bee molestfull,
which sound most, and haue least liquor in them. To be briefe; their last marke is prattling. And, indeede, how should they be other? since it is proper to these babblers, not only to speak much, but much euill. Haue a∣ny of you at any time ranked your selues with those head-strong vnta∣med people, who haue, as Pindar saith, vncurbed mouthes? If you haue; tell me, was not the grea∣test part of their talke not onely of some body, but against some body? surely, it was. For, they
vent things, both heard, and vnheard; mingling things true and certaine, with things vaine, and vncertaine. And, as in a lake of Iudaea, call'd As∣phaltes, nothing sinks; but vvhatsoeuer is cast-in, swimmes vpon the sur∣face of the water: so, no∣thing goes to the bot∣tome of their bosomes; all things keep the toppe, and slote ouer. But, to say the truth, how should they fauor others, when they cannot spare them∣selues? For, it is the na∣ture of this disease, to make them raile against
themselues, when they haue nothing to speake against others. As in an extreame & long dearth, our bodies, for want of nourishment, feede vpon themselues: so falles it out with them. I haue now sufficient∣ly discoursed vnto you of the Minions of Ca∣lumny: I will therefore (as order requires) bring her selfe vpon the Stage, with her owne true coū∣tenance. I confesse, all vice to be detestable, vg∣lie, and loathsome; but, this aboue all other: vvhich doth not onely
reigne in filthy people, but is also begotten, and borne of loathsome Pa∣rents. The Poets faine their Chimaera to haue three bodies. They fain: but, I dare sweare, that to the composition of Ca∣lumny, the mixtion of three vices is necessarie. For, Lying, and Enuy are her Parents; and Curio∣sitie, her Nurse. Consi∣der, with your selues, vvhat a faire infant this must needes bee, which receiues her beeing from three such foule vices. I said, and said truly, that Lying was her father; be∣cause
it inspires and ani∣mates Calumny: which without Lying, langui∣sheth, hauing neither life nor soule. What Backbi∣ter was euer yet content with the naked truth on∣ly? which of them vvas euer yet pleased to call a figge a figge? And, in∣deede, hee cannot choose but doe so; in that hee hath no power to hurt, nor can attaine to his proposed end, if he keep himselfe within the limits of truth. Therefore hee addes to euery thing and as that sound of neigh∣bouring Valleies (which
wee call Eccho) returnes wo or three words, for one: so he doubles things heard, and seene. Haue I in a word or two com∣plained of any man? hee wil say, I haue sharply ac∣cused him. Haue I made doubt of any thing? hee will say, I haue carped at all. Haue I my selfe some doubtfull speach, or sen∣tence, hee wil choose the worse sense. In a word; as the Physicians say of their cupping glasses, that they draw-out no∣thing but the most im∣pure blood of all: so I may more truly say of a
Slanderer, that he neither attracts, nor receiues a∣ny thing vnto him, or in∣to him, that is not euill. But, I would hee did de∣tract onely: for, often∣times, he addes, and re∣ports those things to haue been done, & spoke by vs, which we neuer so much as dream'd of. As Spiders, with a woon∣derfull Art, bring-foorth threds and cobwebs, out of their bodies: so, hee begets, and weaues sub∣tle snares with his wit. I haue truly & sufficiently shewed, that Lying is the Father of Calumny: it
now resteth that I proue Envy to be her Mother; who in the malignant wombe of her wit, con∣ceiues, beares, and at last brings forth this impious infant. This is easily pro∣ued, by the maners and deeds of Calumniators: for, they sildome drawe that fame-defacing wea∣pon vpon base people, & men of their owne coate; but, vpon those vvhom they see to excell others in vertue, in learning, or in some other thing wor∣thy admiration. As Run∣ners doe not looke backe for the laggers, but striue
to out-strip the formost: so, Calumny pursues the better sort. It vvas obserued in the sportes of old, that Bulls would roare, and wex enrag'd at the sight of any redde, or purple thing; which, notwith∣standing are the most faire of all colours: the like may be seene in these men; whose rancor is stir∣red vp by Vertue. Last of all, I added, that Curiositie was the Nurse of Calumny. And that, very truly; sith she seeds and fosters this Damsell with the long sought-for
meat of speeches and ru∣mors. Take her frō Ca∣lumny, and what can she doe? Shee will straight wex weak, faint, & emp∣tie; hauing more will, thā power to hurt. For, shee hath matter ministred to her, by Curiosity: who, dwelling neuer at home, but ranging alwaies a∣broad, enters not onely the houses, but the minds of all men; beeing euer watchful, neuer sleeping. It is she, it is she, that ga∣thers reports together, & vents them to him that next accosteth her, salu∣ting him thus: Giue me
your hand. What news? What's done at Court? How stand the affaires of England? Hovv, of France? What doth Titi∣us? What doth Seius? These things, & other of like nature, dooth she pry into, & meddle with; yet neuer growes ful, nor satisfied. But, as a pu∣trid and scabbed limbe delights to bee scratcht, and rubb'd: so she itcheth for sharpe and opprobri∣ous speeches. Neither onely hath shee itching, and greedy eares, but quicke & pearcing eyes: which when shee opens,
what is it shee sees not? Yea, euen those things which shee sees not. She thē searcheth into things revealed, and vnreuealed. Tiberius, the Emperour, is reported to haue beene so quick-sighted, that he could see as well in the night, as in the day: but, this may more fitlie bee said of Curiosity; in that, neither darknesse, nor so∣litude, can keepe-out her all-searching sight. Doost thou shut thy doores? she will pearce throgh them. Doost thou tie-vp thy tongue? shee will prie in∣to thy bosome. Doost
thou shun the societie of men? shee wil neuerthe∣lesse find thee out. As Flies, and such little crea∣tures, can by no meanes be kept-out; no more can shee, by any Art. Shee is sole Queen of that Fami∣lie of the Curio's, whom the Comick Poet verie wittily thus paints forth; They haue a great care of other mens affaires. They would seeme to knowe all things; but, indeed, know nothing. They know what the King whisperd in the eare of the Queene; and what Ioue discoursed of with Iuno. Nay, which
is more; they know things which neuer were, nor e∣uer shall be. By this time, I am sure, you euidently per∣ceiue the vglinesse of Ca∣lumny; which lodgeth in base, filthy persons, and hath like Parents; be∣gottē by Lying, brought forth by Envy, & broght vp by Curiositie. Come on now, and follow mee to the Mischiefe that at∣tends her: which I thoght good to make the second part of my race. And be∣fore I runne it, pause with mee awhile, and refresh your minds.
The Mischiefe in Ca∣lumny, is Forcible & Va∣riable: & that so great (I auerre it seriously, with∣out an Hyperbole) as I find the like in no other vice. I say, Forcible, because she wounds deeply, & priui∣ly. Variable, in that (for the most part) she neither leaues any thing, nor any body, vntouched. Let vs handle euery one of these by themselues. That she wounds deeply, the holy Prophet wil witnes with mee, crying-out; Their teeth are darts and ar∣rowes: and their tongue is a sharpe sword. Neither
is there any great diffe∣rence betwixt the words of this diuine man, & of that Spartan, who being demaunded whether, or no his sword were sharp enough, replyed, More keene than Calumny; in∣timating therby, that no edge of iron and steele, could compare in keene∣nesse with the edge of the tongue. VVhat cannot this touch? or what tou∣cheth it, that it toucheth not to the quick? As that subtill force of Light∣ning pearceth through euery thing: so, nothing can be so closely shut, nor
so far remooued, but Ca∣lumny wil burn through it. And this she doth the more effectually, in that shee doth it priuily, and (as I added) by treache∣ry. How can a weapon bee avoided, that is not seene? The clowds fore∣warne vs of the ensuing tempest; smoake of the ensuing fire; a Spy, of the approach of the Enemy: but, the mischiefe that comes from a Calumni∣ator, is sudden, and vn∣expected. Doost thou thinke hee threatens? he then flatters. Doost thou take him for thine ene∣mie?
he will induce thee to belieue that hee is thy friend; and will first tie thee with the snaring praises of his tongue, and then with the same will wound thee. And as a Scorpion, if thou handle him, will seeme to play with thee, till hee get opportunitie with the winding of his taile to sting thee: so, when thou fearest little hurt from a Calumniator, hee hath thē already harmed thee. O detestable deceite! which my Historian (as from an Oracle) notes, when hee saith, A mans
greatest enemies are his greatest praisers. Giue me poyson openly, and I will beware of it: but, if you cunningly mingle it with my meate, or drink, how can I shun it then? The same may bee said of Ca∣lumny: which may truly be called, poysoned ho∣ny. It is not a thing dif∣ficult (saith singular Sa∣lust) to a stout and vali∣ant man, to conquer an as∣saulting enemy; but, good men neuer suspect, and therfore neuer go about to shun hidden & vnknown dangers. How Forcible and violent the Mischief
is which proceeds from Calumny, hath suffici∣ently beene proued: you shall now heare how Va∣riable or diuers it is. It doth hurt (as I said be∣fore) in most matters, and to most persons; a thing more remarquable in Calumny, than in any other vice. It hurts not one, or two; but, many: If I be lustfull, two only are contaminated with the impurity of the crime. Say, I am coue∣tous: it may be I cheate three, or foure of their money. If I be drunke, perhaps I wrong some
man with blowes, or with words. But, with Calumny it is far other∣wise: for, shee spares no Age, sex, nor order; and may rightly be called a publique calamity, and the Phaeton (if I may so say) of the Earth's circle. Who was euer so happy, or so wise, that could brag hee was safe from her reach? There was ne∣uer any. Her tearing teeth are whetted to hurt all men; but, those most, who are of most merit. He that excells in any thing, is sure to be tro∣den-downe by her. As
they, who pull-downe houses, doe first take a way the pillars: so, Ca∣lumny (desiring to de∣stroy Mortality) first seekes to supplant those, vpon whom the pub∣lique good is builded. Prudent, honest, and learned men, are her pro∣claimed enemies: whose fame shee sometimes shakes with the engines of reproach; and some∣times, againe, seekes to ouerthrow it with the cunning vndermining of suspicion. Neither onely doth she iniure & wrong sundry men; but, in sun∣dry
matters also. Nor is there any thing deare and pretious to a man, but she will be sure with her wiles either wholly to bereaue him of it, or very much to empaire it. Doe riches delight thee? She will, if she can, dispos∣sesse thee of them. Dost thou reioice in great ti∣tles, and honours? Of those shee will depriue thee. Dooth any man place his felicity in his friends? Here shee will imploy her vttermost art, and strength; and will seuer Laelius from Sci∣pio, Pylades from Orestes.
What is so pretious to a man▪ as his fame? which to good men is aboue all goods, and life it selfe. For, riches, and life, are things brittle, and flit∣ting; our goods going often away before vs, & our liues alwaies with vs: but, our fame is that which doth eternize vs; that only remaines, when we are rotten. Why, this fame, this treasure of the wise, this life-enlight∣ning gemme, Calumny dooth daily seeke to ob∣scure, and vtterly to de∣face. For, because shee cannot hurt Vertue it self
(the Chiefe-good in vs) she seekes to ouer-cloud, and lessen vertuous acti∣ons: which are, as it were, the shadowes, not the very images of Vertue. But, why talke I of men, and humane affaires? O good God! shee neither spares thee, nor thy hea∣uen. For shee will finde in diuine matters also something to debate of; by which she may offend not only thine, but thee. It is thy decree, thy sanction, that the secrets of the minde be reserued for the moderatour of the minde: neither are the
strings of the heart, to be plaied vpon by any, but by him that made them. But, Calumny violates this Law: for, now-a-dayes (O hatefull daies!) shee directs her eyes, and tongue hither; prying in∣to this inmost Temple. Shee cries-out, that this man is not vpright in his gouernement; that a se∣cond is not valiant; that a third is a close fellow, and not open enough. In a word; what remaines, but that the thoughts, & meaning of our mindes be summon'd to appeare before this calumniating
Iudgement seate? Homer, the true Prince (in my iudgement) not of Poets onely, but of all other men (I vnderstand Pro∣fane) faines a certaine Goddesse, which he cal∣leth Ate; from whom all offence & mischiefe took their sourse and deriuati∣on. Vnder the couer of which fiction, I assure my selfe (as certainely as I now speak and breathe that he intēded to touch & twitch Calumny. For, thus he describeth her: A mischieuous Goddesse (I interprete him sum∣marily)
vvhich offendeth all: Which toucheth not the earth; but, walks vpon the heads of men, And hath hurt Iupiter himselfe. Answer me now truly, and on your word. Was there euer any Painter, with a curious and artifi∣ciall pencill, or Oratour with plentifull Rheto∣rick, who vvith more light and propriety, hath marked-out the true ge∣nuine forme of odious Calumnie? I thinke, ne∣uer any. Hee telleth you,
that shee offendeth all. Iust my doctrine; that all men, in all places, are en∣dangerd by her. She tou∣cheth not the earth. True: for, shee sildom aimes base, earthy, and lowe∣creeping spirits: but, as it followeth in the verse, shee walks vpon the heads of men; to wit, shee di∣rects her flight to the highest matters, & most eminent persons. In con∣clusion; shee hurts Iupiter himselfe: (VVho makes question of it?) either in casting Calumnie and a∣spersion vpon diuine and holy actions; or in not
suffering Religiō herselfe to goe free and vntoucht of her venomed tooth. These are but the villa∣nies, wherewith shee sports her self in priuate; beeing nothing in com∣parison of those vvhich she commits publiquely, & in the Courts of Prin∣ces. For, here is her pro∣per & true throne: heere shee plaies the vvanton, and curuets within her circle. But, time so strai∣tens mee, that I cannot chase & pursue this sub∣iect in all particulars. Briefely, thus: What∣soeuer deceit, oppression,
or villanie hath beene in any Age, or in any Court whatsoeuer, it flowed first from this head, from this fountaine. What was it, that allured A∣lexander to murther so many of his deer friends, but Calumnie? that banished Socrates from his naturall life, Rutilius from his natiue Cittie, but Calumny? that fed, as it were, vvith nevv blood, and gaue life to Tiberius, Caligula, and Nero, and so many mon∣sters of Kings, but this hateful Calumny? And,
not to speake onelie of former Times, this Age, this miserable Age, doth sufficiently testifie, that those flights, those slaughters, those generall calamities, those Seas, & inundations of miserie, vnder which wee grone, haue no other birth, sourse, nor Generation, but from the Riuerets of Court-Calumnie. Are your soules grieued, that these arrowes of se∣dition stick in the bowels of the Common-vveale? Calumny fixt thē there. That the fire of Ciuill
warres hath burned, now so many yeers? Calumny did first kindle it. And we neuer see, or haue seene, any wickednesse whatso∣euer, but infused and dif∣fused from this poysning Fountaine. Subiects a∣gainst their Princes, Princes against their sub∣iects, are first stirred-vp, kindled, prouoked, & en∣flamed (as it were) by this fanne of words. And as the Seas, naturally calme, by the wind grow swoln and enraged: so, many Princes, of good & gen∣tle dispositions, are set on fire by these matches.
You see now the Forci∣ble & Variable Mischief, attēding Calūny. Which mee thinks our old Chri∣stians did well vnder∣stand, when they named the father of all sinnes, or rather Sinne it selfe (that Monster from Hell) by a Greek word, ; a Detractor, or one which is accustomed to calum∣niate: thinking (it seems) that our most malitious enemy could not bee made known by a word of more malice. Neither did the ancient Lawgi∣uers, with less iudgemēt, consider her vnbridled
and ouer-mastering vio∣lence. Who, when they restrained all other vices with lawes and punish∣mēts; to this one (which I wonder at) they made waie for her Cariere; giuing her free scope to be hurtfull. For, num∣ber vp all the Nations in the world; I am decei∣ued, if you name one, that (with any sanction or penall Law) hath bridled & supprest it. The Athe∣nians, I confesse, were wont to inflict Pecuniary punishments vpon such offenders: the Romans burnt them in the fore∣heads
heads with the letter K. But, let not this lead anie man into error: for, they were onely such as prac∣tic'd it in Courts of Iu∣stice, and in publike ac∣cusations. What then? were they either so blind, as not to see this mis∣chief? or so foolish, as see∣ing it, to giue it allowāce & approbation? Neither of these: but, with great iudgement & discretion they held any vice vn∣punishable, which they thought vncurable. Small Riuers are with∣stood with bayes and sluces: but, what Moun∣taines
can resit a cōmon Deluge? Calumny hath made an inundation ouer all the earth: and lurkes close in the marrow of ill dispositions and wicked natures; beeing no longer esteem'd-of as a fault; but as a custom. What shold they do then? VVhy, like wise and discreet Physi∣cians: which do not rash∣ly handle with their fin∣gers a Canker, or the Plague. So as the great∣nesse and diffusion of the euill, hath giuen it this freedome and enlarge∣ment: neither was it euer tolerated, but through
despair, But, least I shold weary-out my selfe, and detain you with too long an Oration, I will guyde my ship to her Port or Hauen, and come to the third and last part; name∣ly, the Auoyding of Ca∣lumny: which if any man so vnderstand, as ho∣ping to be secur'd against all Calumny, he deceiues himselfe, & requites that of mee, which was neuer in the power of man. Let not Thales onely, that Fauorite of Wisdome, but euen Wisdome her selfe, vndertake this task, they can neuer performe
it. What shall wee doe then? I can onely succor thee with two bucklers, to repulse and giue abate∣ment to the violence of her charge. The first of which is Innocence: the other, Patience. Whosoe∣uer would avoid the by∣tings of this mischiefe∣breathing Goddesse, let him aboue any thing arme himselfe with Inno∣cence: and indeed they, which liue in integritie of life, warines of speech, modestie of actions, why should they fear her? For as no filth doth easily ad∣here to smooth & wel po∣lished
places: so, no abu∣siue speeches can settle thēselues on vnblemisht deedes. This hath bin oftentimes a good reme∣die: I shouldly, if I should say alwaies. I know well that Tully writes, as fire cast into water, is in an in∣stant extinguished: so, a false accusation on a chast life. I wold to God, those wordes were as true, as wittie: for, how manie men, euen of the purest and most immaculate conuersation, haue beene wounded by this Calum∣ny, and will euer be so! How many haue beene
wounded, euen to the letting-out of the best blood, and iuice of their reputation! Neither is it any maruaile. For, Ca∣lumny (as I said before) supports her selfe by Ly∣ing. And she may doe it safely; because shee hath but one iudge: and that one, such, as (for the most part) neuer enquires fur∣ther; but, belieues at first. Wherefore, a cer∣taine flatterer of a King, saw further into this matter, than did the fore∣named Orator: who was wont to say, that nothing was to bee spoken against
any man: for, said hee, though the wound may be healed, the scarre will remain. A shrewd speech: but (belieue mee) very wittie; and which takes his originall, and credite from our owne natures. For, it is grafted in the dispositions of many men, not onely to giue open, but credulous eare, to al whispering reports: and the more willinglie, if they treat of any wrōg done, or to be done. Hee, whose chance it is to be spotted, will hardly wash himselfe cleane a∣gaine: for, the suspicion
will remaine, though the crime doe not. And ther∣fore I did not vnwisely, to paint out Patience for the buckler, wherewith the innocent might de∣fend themselues. The vse of Patience consists in bearing vneuitable Ca∣lumnies courageously, & with a high crest. Varro was wont to say of an ill wife, That either a man must endure her, or ridde himselfe of her. Do thou the same heere; tolera∣ting, what cannot be ta∣ken-away. What said I? thou shouldst bear them? nay, rather despise them.
As a courageous Souldi∣er scorns the weak darts, that (like haile) make a light ratling round about his Helmet: So doth the wise, and fortified man, all scoffes, and derisions. For, what can they take frō him? His good name? That will euer be good, amongst good men. Can they robbe him of his Vertue & his Wisedom? Those are no way sub∣iect to the will of man. To conclude; when all these carping detractours haue spoke, and done their vttermost, this man of men (with a true and
lofty courage) cries-out, All that is mine I carry with mee. But, thou wilt reply, that the meere co∣lour and appearance of Infamie is to be feared. If thou be guilty, feare it: if not, why fearest thou? Apply it not to thy selfe; and all is well. Diogenes, the Cinicke (a man of a towring wisedome; who therin not only exceeded men, but almost equalled euen the Gods them∣selues) was wont to say, when the people mockt him; They deride me: yet, I am not derided. Do thou the like: and so heare all
those scoffes and iests, broken (directly) vp∣on thee, as if they had aymed at some other. Calumniatours neuer lightly cōtemne or scorn any man, that hath not first contemn'd himselfe. Marcus Cato (that Ro¦man Socrates) hauing re¦ceiued a blow from one, and the party comming afterwards to giue him satisfaction, and to in∣treat pardon▪ he sent him away only with this an∣swere; I assure thee, I re∣member no such matter. O worthy man, beyond other men! who thought
it a greater glory, not to regard an iniurie, than to pardon it. And, indeede, if wee iudicially examine them, how smal are those things, that do so much trouble vs! For the most part, no deeds at all; but onely a fewe trifling wordes, whose chiefest strength consists alto∣gether in the interpre∣tours construction. Re∣fuse to vnderstand them; and, withall, the scoffer hath lost the whole pur∣pose and fruit of his con∣tumely. These (gentle Auditours) are the safest weapons against Calum∣ny:
not those, which the vulgar fight withall; Me∣mory, and Reuenge. As in trauelling, if a dogge, or horse dash mee, I am nothing mov'd at him, nor striue to doe the like to him; but rather, rubbe it off: so should wee doe here; accounting of them as of Curres, and Iades: whose iniuries proceede not from iudgement; but, from froward passion But, here I ende; ta∣king down, and folding together, the sailes (as I may say) of my Oration. You haue heard three things concerning this
Vice: the Filthinesse of it; the Mischiefe; and the Remedy against it. I be∣seech you, in the name of the immortall God, to banish farre from your tongues, and eares, this infectious plague. For, he offends, not onely that vtters Calumnies; but, he that heares them with approbation. And as it is impossible to handle hot iron, with out harme, and danger: the like also be∣falls vs, in giuing assi∣stance to these fierie tongues. I knowe well, they will insinuate, and fawne vpon you; making
a shevv of Ioue in their countenance, & of mild∣nesse in their words: but, belieue mee, they are Aspes, and Vipers; which blowe-in their poy∣son, through soft and de∣ceitfull kisses. These I hold not worthy of ad∣monition; but rather, of dire imprecation: and therefore, I pray, with DAVID; Confound the lying lippes, O God, that speake against the Righteous. FINIS.
