23667 99846538 11514
A Pleasant Conceited Historie, called The taming of a Shrew. As it was sundry times acted by the Right honorable the Earle of Pembrook his seruants. Printed at London by Peter Short and are to be sold by Cutbert Burbie, at his shop at the Royall Exchange. 1594.
A Pleasant conceited Historie, called The Taming of a Shrew. Enter a Tapster, beating out of his doores Slie Droonken. Tapster. YOu whorson droonken slaue, you had best be gone, And empty your droonken panch some where else For in this house thou shalt not rest to night. Exit Tapster. Slie. Tilly vally, by crisee Tapster Ile fese you anon. Fils the tother pot and alls paid for, looke you I doo drinke it of mine owne Instegation, Omne bene Heere Ile lie a while, why Tapster I say, Fils a fresh cushen heere. Heigh ho, heers good warme lying. He fals asleepe. Enter a Noble man and his men from hunting. Lord. Now that the gloomie shaddow of the night, Longing to view Orions drisling lookes, Leapes from th'antarticke World vnto the skie And dims the Welkin with her pitchie breath, And darkesome night oreshades the christall heauens, Here breake we off our hunting for to night,
Cupple vppe the hounds and let vs hie vs home, And bid the huntsman see them meated well, For they haue all deseru'd it well to daie, But soft, what sleepie fellow is this lies heere? Or is he dead, see one what he dooth lacke? Seruingman. My lord, tis nothing but a drunken sleepe, His head is too heauie for his bodie, And he hath drunke so much that he can go no furder. Lord. Fie, how the slauish villaine stinkes of drinke. Ho, sirha arise. What so sound asleepe? Go take him vppe and beare him to my house, And beare him easilie for feare he wake, And in my fairest chamber make a fire, And set a sumptuous banquet on the boord, And put my richest garmentes on his backe, Then set him at the Table in a chaire: When that is doone against he shall awake, Let heauenlie musicke play about him still, Go two of you awaie and beare him hence, And then Ile tell you what I haue deuisde, But see in any case you wake him not. Exeunt two with Slie. Now take my cloake and giue me one of yours, Al fellowes now, and see you take me so, For we will waite vpon this droonken man, To see his countnance when he dooth awake And finde himselfe clothed in such attire, With heauenlie musicke sounding in his eares, And such a banquet set before his eies, The fellow sure will thinke he is in heauen, But we will be about him when he wakes, And see you call him Lord, at euerie word, And offer thou him his horse to ride abroad,
And thou his hawkes and houndes to hunt the deere, And I will aske what sutes he meanes to weare, And what so ere he saith, see you doo not laugh, But still perswade him that he is a Lord. Enter one. Mes. And it please your honour your plaiers be com And doo attend your honours pleasure here. Lord. The fittest time they could haue chosen out, Bid one or two of them come hither straight, Now will I fit my selfe accordinglie, For they shall play to him when he awakes. Enter two of the players with packs at their backs, and a boy. Now sirs, what store of plaies haue you? San. Marrie my lord you maie haue a Tragicall Or a comoditie, or what you will. The other. A Comedie thou shouldst say, souns thout shame vs all. Lord. And whats the name of your Comedie? San. Marrie my lord tis calde The taming of a shrew: Tis a good lesson for vs my lord, for vs y are maried men Lord. The taming of a shrew, thats excellent sure, Go see that you make you readie straight, For you must play before a lord to night, Say you are his men and I your fellow, Hees something foolish, but what so ere he saies, See that you be not dasht out of countenance. And sirha go you make you ready straight, And dresse your selfe like some louelie ladie, And when I call see that you come to me, For I will say to him thou art his wife, Dallie with him and hug him in thine armes, And if he desire to goe to bed with thee,
Then faine some scuse and say thou wilt anon. Be gone I say, and see thou doost it well. By. Feare not my Lord, Ile dandell him well enough And make him thinke I loue him mightilie. Ex. boy. Lord. Now sirs go you and make you ready to, For you must play assoone as he dooth wake. San. O braue, sirha Tom, we must play before A foolish Lord, come lets go make vs ready, Go get a dishclout to make cleane your shooes, And Ile speake for the properties, My Lord, we must Haue a shoulder of mutton for a propertie, And a little vinegre to make our Diuell rore. Lord. Very well: sirha see that they want nothing. Exeunt omnes. Enter two with a table and a banquet on it, and two other, with Slie asleepe in a chaire, richlie apparelled, & the musick plaieng. One. So: sirha now go call my Lord, And tel him that all things is ready as he wild it. Another. Set thou some wine vpon the boord And then Ile go fetch my Lord presentlie. Exit. Enter the Lord and his men. Lord. How now, what is all thinges readie? One. I my Lord. Lord. Then sound the musick, and Ile wake him straight, And see you doo as earst I gaue in charge. My lord, My lord, he sleepes soundlie: My lord. Slie. Tapster, gis a little small ale. Heigh ho, Lord. Heers wine my lord, the purest of the grape. Slie. For which Lord? Lord. For your honour my Lord.
Slie. Who I, am I a Lord? Iesus what fine apparell haue I got. Lord. More richer farre your honour hath to weare, And if it please you I will fetch them straight. Wil. And if your honour please to ride abroad, Ile fetch you lustie steedes more swift of pace Then winged Pegasus in all his pride, That ran so swiftlie ouer the Persian plaines. Tom. And if your honour please to hunt the deere, Your hounds stands readie cuppeld at the doore, Who in running will oretake the Row, And make the long breathde Tygre broken winded. Slie. By the masse I thinke I am a Lord indeed, Whats thy name? Lord. Simon and it please your honour. Slie. Simon, thats as much to say Simion or Simon Put foorth thy hand and fill the pot. Giue me thy hand, Sim. am I a lord indeed? Lord. I my gratious Lord, and your louelie ladie Long time hath moorned for your absence heere, And now with ioy behold where she dooth come To gratulate your honours safe returne. Enter the boy in Womans attire. Slie. Sim. Is this she? Lord. I my Lord. Slie. Masse tis a prettie wench, whats her name? Boy. Oh that my louelie Lord would once vouchsafe To looke on me, and leaue these frantike fits, Or were I now but halfe so eloquent, To paint in words what ile performe in deedes, I know your honour then would pittie me. Slie. Harke you mistresse, wil you eat a peece of bread,
Come sit downe on my knee, Sim drinke to hir Sim, For she and I will go to bed anon. Lord. May it please you, your honors plaiers be come To offer your honour a plaie. Slie. A plaie Sim, O braue, be they my plaiers? Lord. I my Lord. Slie. Is there not a foole in the plaie? Lord. Yes my lord. Slie. When wil they plaie Sim? Lord. Euen when it please your honor, they be readie. Boy. My lord Ile go bid them begin their plaie. Slie. Doo, but looke that you come againe. Boy. I warrant you my lord, I wil not leaue you thus. Exit boy. Slie. Come Sim, where be the plaiers? Sim stand by Me and weele flout the plaiers out of their cotes. Lord. Ile cal them my lord. Hoe where are you there? Sound Trumpets. Enter two yoong Gentlemen, and a man and a boie. Pol. Welcome to Athens my beloued friend, To Platoes schooles and Aristotles walkes, Welcome from Cestus famous for the loue Of good Leander and his Tragedie, For whom the Helespont weepes brinish teares, The greatest griefe is I cannot as I would Giue entertainment to my deerest friend. Aurel. Thankes noble Polidor my second selfe, The faithfull loue which I haue found in thee Hath made me leaue my fathers princelie court, The Duke of Cestus thrise renowmed seate, To come to Athens thus to find thee out,
Which since I haue so happilie attaind, My fortune now I doo account as great As earst did Caesar when he conquered most, But tell me noble friend where shal we lodge, For I am vnacquainted in this place. Poli. My Lord if you vouchsafe of schollers fare, My house, my selfe, and all is yours to vse, You and your men shall staie and lodge with me. Aurel. With all my hart, I will requite thy loue, Enter Simon, Alphonsus, and his three daughters. But staie; what dames are these so bright of hew Whose eies are brighter then the lampes of heauen, Fairer then rocks of pearle and pretious stone, More louelie farre then is the morning sunne, When first she opes hir orientall gates. Alfon. Daughters be gone, and hie you to ye church, And I will hie me downe vnto the key, To see what Marchandise is come a shore. Ex. Omnes. Pol. Why how now my Lord, what in a dumpe, To see these damsels passe away so soone? Aurel. Trust me my friend I must confesse to thee, I tooke so much delight in these faire dames, As I doo wish they had not gone so soone, But if thou canst, resolue me what they be, And what old man it was that went with them, For I doo long to see them once againe. Pol. I cannot blame your honor good my lord, For they are both louely, wise, faire and yong, And one of them the yoongest of the three I long haue lou'd (sweet friend) and she lou'd me, But neuer yet we could not find a meanes How we might compasse our desired ioyes.
Aurel. Why, is not her father willing to the match? Pol. Yes trust me, but he hath solemnlie sworne, His eldest daughter first shall be espowsde, Before he grauntes his yoongest leaue to loue, And therefore he that meanes to get their loues, Must first prouide for her if he will speed, And he that hath her shall be fettred so, As good be wedded to the diuell himselfe, For such a skould as she did neuer liue, And till that she be sped none else can speed, Which makes me thinke that all my labours lost, And whosoere can get hir firme good will, A large dowrie he shall be sure to haue, For her father is a man of mightie wealth, And an ancient Cittizen of the towne, And that was he that went along with them. Aurel. But he shall keepe hir still by my aduise, And yet I needs must loue his second daughter The image of honor and Nobilitie, In whose sweet person is comprisde the somme Of natures skill and heauenlie maiestie. Pol. I like your choise, and glad you chose not mine, Then if you like to follow on your loue, We must deuise a meanes and find some one That will attempt to wed this deuilish skould, And I doo know the man. Come hither boy, Go your waies sirha to Ferandoes house, Desire him take the paines to come to me, For I must speake with him immediatlie. Boy. I will sir, and fetch him presentlie. Pol. A man I thinke will fit hir humor right, As blunt in speech as she is sharpe of toong, And he I thinke will match hir euerie waie, And yet he is a man of wealth sufficient,
And for his person worth as good as she, And if he compasse hir to be his wife, Then may we freelie visite both our loues. Aurel. O might I see the center of my soule Whose sacred beautie hath inchanted me, More faire then was the Grecian Helena For whose sweet sake so many princes dide, That came with thousand shippes to Tenedos, But when we come vnto hir fathers house, Tell him I am a Marchants sonne of Cestus, That comes for traffike vnto Athens heere, And heere sirha I will change with you for once, And now be thou the Duke of Cestus sonne, Reuell and spend as if thou wert my selfe, For I will court my loue in this disguise. Val. My lord, how if the Duke your father should By some meanes come to Athens for to see How you doo profit in these publike schooles, And find me clothed thus in your attire, How would he take it then thinke you my lord? Aurel. Tush feare not Valeria let me alone, But staie, heere comes some other companie. Enter Ferando and his man Saunders with a blew coat. Pol. Here comes the man that I did tel you of. Feran. Good morrow gentlemen to all at once. How now Polidor, what man still in loue? Euer wooing and canst thou neuer speed, God send me better luck when I shall woo. San. I warrant you maister and you take my councell. Feran. Why sirha, are you so cunning? San. Who I, twere better for you by fiue marke And you could tel how to doo it as well as I.
Pol. I would thy maister once were in the vaine, To trie himselfe how he could woe a wench. Feran. Faith I am euen now a going. San. I faith sir, my maisters going to this geere now. Pol. Whither in faith Ferando, tell me true. Feran. To bonie Kate, the patientst wench aliue The diuel himselfe dares scarce venter to woo her, Signior Alfonsos eldest daughter, And he hath promisde me six thousand crownes If I can win her once to be my wife, And she and I must woo with skoulding sure, And I will hold hir toot till she be wearie, Or else Ile make her yeeld to graunt me loue. Pol. How like you this Aurelius, I thinke he knew Our mindes before we sent to him, But tell me, when doo you meane to speake with her? Feran. Faith presentlie, doo you but stand aside, And I will make her father bring hir hither, And she, and I, and he, will talke alone. Pol. With al our heartes, Come Aurelius Let vs be gone and leaue him heere alone. Exit. Feran. Ho Signiour Alfonso, whose within there? Alfon. Signiour Ferando your welcome hartilie, You are a stranger sir vnto my house. Harke you sir, looke what I did promise you Ile performe, if you get my daughters loue. Feran. Then when I haue talkt a word or two with hir, Doo you step in and giue her hand to me, And tell her when the marriage daie shal be, For I doo know she would be married faine, And when our nuptiall rites be once performde Let me alone to tame hir well enough, Now call her foorth that I may speake with hir. Enter Kate.
Alfon. Ha Kate, Come hither wench & list to me, Vse this gentleman friendlie as thou canst. Feran. Twentie good morrowes to my louely Kate. Kate. You iest I am sure, is she yours alreadie? Feran. I tell thee Kate I know thou lou'st me well. Kate. The deuill you doo, who told you so? Feran. My mind sweet Kate doth say I am the man, Must wed, and bed, and marrie bonnie Kate. Kate. Was euer seene so grose an asse as this? Feran. I, to stand so long and neuer get a kisse. Kate. Hands off I say, and get you from this place; Or I wil set my ten commandments in your face. Feran. I prethe doo kate; they say thou art a shrew, And I like thee the better for I would haue thee so. Kate. Let go my hand, for feare it reach your eare. Feran. No kate, this hand is mine and I thy loue. Kate. In faith sir no the woodcock wants his taile. Feran. But yet his bil wil serue, if the other faile. Alfon. How now Ferando, what saies my daughter? Feran. Shees willing sir and loues me as hir life. Kate. Tis for your skin then, but not to be your wife. Alfon. Come hither Kate and let me giue thy hand To him that I haue chosen for thy loue, And thou to morrow shalt be wed to him. Kate. Why father, what do you meane to do with me, To giue me thus vnto this brainsick man, That in his mood cares not to murder me? She turnes aside and speakes. But yet I will consent and marrie him, For I methinkes haue liude too long a maid, And match him to, or else his manhoods good. Alfon. Giue me thy hand Ferando loues thee wel, And will with wealth and ease maintaine thy state. Here Ferando take her for thy wife,
And sunday next shall be your wedding day. Feran. Why so, did I not tell thee I should be the man Father, I leaue my louelie Kate with you, Prouide your selues against our mariage daie, For I must hie me to my countrie house In hast, to see prouision may be made, To entertaine my Kate when she dooth come. Alfon. Doo so, come Kate, why doost thou looke So sad, be merrie wench thy wedding daies at hand. Sonne fare you well, and see you keepe your promise. Exit Alfonso and Kate. Feran. So, all thus farre goes well. Ho Saunder. Enter Saunder laughing. San. Sander, I faith your a beast, I crie God hartilie Mercie, my harts readie to run out of my bellie with Laughing, I stood behind the doore all this while, And heard what you said to hir. Feran. Why didst thou think that I did not speake wel to hir? San. You spoke like an asse to her, Ile tel you what, And I had been there to haue woode hir, and had this Cloke on that you haue, chud haue had her before she Had gone a foot furder, and you talke of Woodcocks with her, and I cannot tell you what. Feran. Wel sirha, & yet thou seest I haue got her for all this. San. I marry twas more by hap then any good cunning I hope sheele make you one of the head men of the parish shortly. Feran. Wel sirha leaue your iesting and go to Polidors house, The yong gentleman that was here with me, And tell him the circumstance of all thou knowst, Tell him on sunday next we must be married, And if he aske thee whither I am gone, Tell him into the countrie to my house, And vpon sundaie Ile be heere againe. Ex. Ferando,
San. I warrant you Maister feare not me For dooing of my businesse. Now hang him that has not a liuerie cote To slash it out and swash it out amongst the proudest On them. Why looke you now Ile scarce put vp Plaine Saunder now at any of their handes, for and any Bodie haue any thing to doo with my maister, straight They come crouching vpon me, I beseech you good M. Saunder speake a good word for me, and then am I so Stout and takes it vpon me, & stands vpon my pantoflles To them out of all crie, why I haue a life like a giant Now, but that my maister hath such a pestilent mind To a woman now a late, and I haue a prettie wench To my sister, and I had thought to haue preferd my Maister to her, and that would haue beene a good Deale in my waie but that hees sped alreadie. Enter Polidors boie. Boy. Friend, well met. San. Souns, friend well met. I hold my life he sees Not my maisters liuerie coat, Plaine friend hop of my thum, kno you who we are. Boy. Trust me sir it is the vse where I was borne, To salute men after this manner, yet notwithstanding If you be angrie with me for calling of you friend, I am the more sorie for it, hoping the stile Of a foole will make you amends for all. San. The slaue is sorie for his fault, now we cannot be Angrie, wel whats the matter that you would do with vs. Boy. Marry sir, I heare you pertain to signior Ferando. San. I and thou beest not blind thou maist see, Ecce signum, heere. Boy. Shall I intreat you to doo me a message to your Maister?
San. I, it may be, & you tel vs from whence you com. Boy. Marrie sir I serue yong Polidor your maisters friend. San. Do you serue him, and whats your name? Boy. My name sirha, I tell thee sirha is cald Catapie. San. Cake and pie, O my teeth waters to haue a peece of thee. Boy. Why slaue wouldst thou eate me? San. Eate thee, who would not eate Cake and pie? Boy. Why villaine my name is Catapie, But wilt thou tell me where thy maister is. San. Nay thou must first tell me where thy maister is, For I haue good newes for him, I can tell thee. Boy. Why see where he comes. Enter Polidor, Aurelius and Valeria. Pol. Come sweet Aurelius my faithfull friend, Now will we go to see those louelie dames Richer in beawtie then the orient pearle, Whiter then is the Alpine Christall mould, And farre more louelie then the terean plant, That blushing in the aire turnes to a stone. What Sander, what newes with you? San. Marry sir my maister sends you word That you must come to his wedding to morrow. Pol. What, shall he be married then? San. Faith I, you thinke he standes as long about it as you doo. Pol. Whither is thy maister gone now? San. Marrie hees gone to our house in the Countrie, To make all thinges in a readinesse against my new Mistresse comes thither, but heele come againe to morrowe. Pol. This is suddainlie dispatcht belike, Well, sirha boy, take Saunder in with you
And haue him to the buttrie presentlie. Boy. I will sir: come Saunder. Exit Saunder and the Boy. Aurel. Valeria as erste we did deuise, Take thou thy lute and go to Alfonsos house, And say that Polidor sent thee thither. Pol. I Valeria for he spoke to me, To helpe him to some cunning Musition, To teach his eldest daughter on the lute, And thou I know will fit his turne so well As thou shalt get great fauour at his handes, Begon Valeria and say I sent thee to him. Valer I will sir and stay your comming at Alfonsos house. Exit Valeria Pol. Now sweete Aurelius by this deuise Shall we haue leisure for to courte our loues, For whilst that she is learning on the lute, Hir sisters may take time to steele abrode, For otherwise shele keep them both within, And make them worke whilst she hir selfe doth play, But come lets go vnto Alfonsos house, And see how Valeria and Kate agreese, I doute his Musick skarse will please his skoller, But stay here comes Alfonso. Enter Alfonso Alfonso. What M. Polidor you are well mett, I thanke you for the man you sent to me, A good Musition I thinke he is, I haue set my daughter and him togither, But is this gentellman a frend of youres? Pol. He is, I praie you sir bid him welcome, He's a wealthie Marchants sonne of Cestus. Alfonso. Your welcom sir and if my house aforde
You any thing that may content your mind, I pray you sir make bold with me. Aurel. I thanke you sir, and if what I haue got, By marchandise or trauell on the seas, Sattins or lawnes or azure colloured silke, Or pretious firie pointed stones of Indie, You shall command both them my selfe and all. Alfon. Thanks gentle sir, Polidor take him in, And bid him welcome to vnto my house, For thou I thinke must be my second sonne, Ferando, Polidor doost thou not know Must marry Kate, and to morrow is the day. Pol. Such newes I heard, and I came now to know. Alfon. Polidor tis true, goe let me alone, For I must see against the bridegroome come, That all thinges be according to his mind, And so Ile leaue you for an houre or two. Exit. Pol. Come then Aurcleus come in with me, And weele go sit a while and chat with them, And after bring them foorth to take the aire. Exit. Then Slie speakes. Slie. Sim, when will the foole come againe? Lord. Heele come againe my Lord anon. Slie. Gis some more drinke here, souns wheres The Tapster, here Sim eate some of these things. Lord. So I doo my Lord. Slie. Here Sim, I drinke to thee. Lord. My Lord heere comes the plaiers againe, Slie. O braue, heers two fine gentlewomen. Enter Valeria with a Lute and Kate with him. Vale. The sencelesse trees by musick haue bin moou'd And at the sound of pleasant tuned strings,
Haue sauage beastes hung downe their listning heads, As though they had beene cast into a trance. Then it may be that she whom nought can please, With musickes sound in time may be surprisde, Come louely mistresse will you take your lute, And play the lesson that I taught you last? Kate. It is no matter whether I doo or no, For trust me I take no great delight in it. Vale. I would sweet mistresse that it laie in me, To helpe you to that thing thats your delight. Kate. In you with a pestlence, are you so kind? Then make a night cap of your fiddles case, To warme your head, and hide your filthie face. Val. If that sweet mistresse were your harts content, You should command a greater thing then that, Although it were ten times to my disgrace. Kate. Your so kind twere pittie you should be hang'd, And yet methinkes the foole dooth looke asquint. Val. Why mistresse doo you mocke me? Kate. No, but I meane to moue thee. Val. Well, will you plaie a little? Kate. I, giue me the Lute. She plaies. Val. That stop was false, play it againe. Kate. Then mend it thou, thou filthy asse. Val. What, doo you bid me kisse your arse? Kate. How now iack sause, your a iollie mate, Your best be still least I crosse your pate, And make your musicke flie about your eares, Ile make it and your foolish coxcombe meet. She offers to strike him with the lute. Val. Hold mistresse, souns wil you breake my lute? Kate. I on thy head, and if thou speake to me,
There take it vp and fiddle somewhere else, She throwes it downe. And see you come no more into this place, Least that I clap your fiddle on your face. Ex. Kate. Val. Souns, teach hir to play vpon the lute? The deuill shal teach her first, I am glad shees gone, For I was neare so fraid in all my life, But that my lute should flie about mine eares, My maister shall teach her his selfe for me, For Ile keepe me far enough without hir reach, For he and Polydor sent me before To be with her and teach her on the lute, Whilst they did court the other gentlewomen, And heere methinkes they come togither. Enter Aurelius, Polidor, Emelia, and Philena. Pol. How now Valeria, whears your mistresse? Val. At the vengeance I thinke and no where else. Aurel. Why Valeria, will she not learne apace? Val. Yes berlady she has learnt too much already, And that I had felt had I not spoke hir faire, But she shall neare be learnt for me againe. Aurel. Well Valeria go to my chamber, And beare him companie that came to daie From Cestus, where our aged father dwels. Ex. Valeria. Pol. Come faire Emelia my louelie loue, Brighter then the burnisht pallace of the sunne, The eie-sight of the glorious firmament, In whose bright lookes sparkles the radiant fire, Wilie Prometheus slilie stole from Ioue, Infusing breath, life, motion, soule, To euerie obiect striken by thine eies. Oh faire Emelia I pine for thee, And either must enioy thy loue, or die.
Eme. Fie man, I know you will not die for loue: Ah Polidor thou needst not to complaine, Eternall heauen sooner be dissolude, And all that pearseth Phebus siluer eie, Before such hap befall to Polidor. Pol. Thanks faire Emelia for these sweet words, But what saith Phylena to hir friend? Phyle. Why I am buying marchandise of him. Aurel. Mistresse you shall not need to buie of me, For when I crost the bubling Canibey, And sailde along the Cristall Helispont, I filde my cofers of the wealthie mines, Where I did cause Millions of labouring Moores To vndermine the cauernes of the earth, To seeke for strange and new found pretious stones, And diue into the sea to gather pearle, As faire as Iuno offered Priams sonne, And you shall take your liberall choice of all. Phyle. I thanke you sir and would Phylena might In any curtesie requite you so, As she with willing hart could well bestow. Enter Alfonso. Alfon. How now daughters, is Ferando come? Eme. Not yet father, I wonder he staies so long. Alfon. And wheres your sister that she is not heere? Phyle. She is making of hir readie father To goe to church and if that he were come. Pol. I warrant you heele not be long awaie. Alfon. Go daughters get you in, and bid your Sister prouide her selfe against that we doo come, And see you goe to church along with vs. Exit Philena and Emelia. I maruell that Ferando comes not away.
Pol. His Tailor it may be hath bin too slacke, In his apparrell which he meanes to weare, For no question but some fantasticke sutes He is determined to weare to day, And richly powdered with pretious stones, Spotted with liquid gold, thick set with pearle, And such he meanes shall be his wedding sutes. Alfon. I carde not I what cost he did bestow, In gold or silke, so he himselfe were heere, For I had rather lose a thousand crownes, Then that he should deceiue vs heere to daie, But soft I thinke I see him come. Enter Ferando baselie attired, and a red cap on his head. Feran. Godmorow father, Polidor well met, You wonder I know that I haue staid so long. Alfon. I marrie son, we were almost perswaded, That we should scarse haue had our bridegroome heere, But say, why art thou thus basely attired? Feran. Thus richlie father you should haue said, For when my wife and I am married once, Shees such a shrew, if we should once fal out, Sheele pul my costlie sutes ouer mine eares, And therefore am I thus attired awhile, For manie thinges I tell you's in my head, And none must know thereof but Kate and I, For we shall liue like lammes and Lions sure, Nor lammes to Lions neuer was so tame, If once they lie within the Lions pawes As Kate to me if we were married once, And therefore come let vs to church presently. Pol. Fie Ferando not thus atired for shame, Come to my Chamber and there sute thy selfe,
Of twentie sutes that I did neuer were▪ Feran. Tush Polidor I haue as many sutes Fantasticke made to fit my humor so As any in Athens and as richlie wrought As was the Massie Robe that late adornd, The stately legate of the Persian King, And this from them haue I made choise to weare. Alfon. I prethie Ferando let me intreat Before thou goste vnto the church with vs, To put some other sute vpon thy backe. Feran. Not for the world if I might gaine it so, And therefore take me thus or not at all, Enter Kate. But soft se where my Kate doth come, I must salute hir: how fares my louely Kate? What art thou readie? shall we go to church? Kate. Not I with one so mad, so basely tirde, To marrie such a filthie slauish groome, That as it seemes sometimes is from his wits, Or else he would not thus haue come to vs. Feran. Tush Kate these words addes greater loue in me And makes me thinke thee fairrer then before, Sweete Kate the louelier then Dianas purple robe, Whiter then are the snowie Apenis, Or icie haire that groes on Boreas chin. Father I sweare by Ibis golden beake, More faire and Radiente is my bonie Kate, Then siluer Zanthus when he doth imbrace, The ruddie Simies at Idas feete, And care not thou swete Kate how I be clad, Thou shalt haue garments wrought of Median silke, Enchast with pretious Iewells fecht from far, By Italian Marchants that with Russian stemes, Plous vp huge sorrowes in the Terren Maine,
And better farre my louely Kate shall weare, Then come sweet loue and let vs to the church, For this I sweare shall be my wedding sute. Exeunt omnes. Alfon. Come gentlemen go along with vs, For thus doo what we can he will be wed. Exit. Enter Polidors boy and Sander. Boy. Come hither sirha boy. San. Boy; oh disgrace to my person, souns boy Of your face, you haue many boies with such Pickadeuantes I am sure, souns would you Not haue a bloudie nose for this? Boy. Come, come, I did but iest, where is that Same peece of pie that I gaue thee to keepe. San. The pie? I you haue more minde of your bellie Then to go see what your maister dooes. Boy. Tush tis no matter man I prethe giue it me, I am verie hungry I promise thee. San. Why you may take it and the deuill burst You with it, one cannot saue a bit after supper, But you are alwaies readie to munch it vp. Boy. Why come man, we shall haue good cheere Anon at the bridehouse, for your maisters gone to Church to be married alreadie, and thears Such cheere as passeth. San. O braue, I would I had eate no meat this week, For I haue neuer a corner left in my bellie To put a venson pastie in, I thinke I shall burst my selfe With eating, for Ile so cram me downe the tarts And the marchpaines, out of all crie. Boy. I, but how wilt thou doo now thy maisters Married, thy mistresse is such a deuill, as sheele make Thee forget thy eating quickly, sheele beat thee so.
San. Let my maister alone with hir for that, for Heele make hir tame wel inough ere longe I warent thee For he's such a churle waxen now of late that and he be Neuer so little angry he thums me out of all crie, But in my minde sirra the yongest is a verie Prettie wench, and if I thought thy maister would Not haue hir Ide haue a flinge at hir My selfe, Ile see soone whether twill be a match Or no: and it will not Ile set the matter Hard for my selfe I warrant thee. Boy. Sounes you slaue will you be a Riuall with My maister in his loue, speake but such Another worde and Ile cut off one of thy legges. San. Oh, cruell iudgement, nay then sirra, My tongue shall talke no more to you, marry my Timber shall tell the trustie message of his maister, Euen on the very forehead on thee, thou abusious Villaine, therefore prepare thy selfe. Boy. Come hither thou Imperfecksious slaue in Regard of thy beggery, holde thee theres Twoshillings for thee? to pay for the Healing of thy left legge which I meane Furiously to inuade or to maime at the least. San. O supernodicall foule? well Ile take your two shillinges but Ile barre striking at legges. Boy. Not I, for Ile strike any where. San. Here here take your two shillings again Ile see thee hangd ere Ile fight with thee, I gat a broken shin the other day, Tis not, whole yet and therefore Ile not fight Come come why should we fall out? Boy. Well sirray your faire words hath something Alaied my Coller: I am content for this once To put it vp and be frends with thee,
But soft see where they come all from church, Belike they be Married allredy. Enter Ferando and Kate and Alfonso and Polidor and Emelia and Aurelius and Philema. Feran. Father farwell, my Kate and I must home, Sirra go make ready my horse presentlie. Alfon. Your horse! what son I hope you doo but iest, I am sure you will not go so suddainly. Kate. Let him go or tarry I am resolu'de to stay, And not to trauell on my wedding day. Feran. Tut Kate I tell thee we must needes go home, Villaine hast thou saddled my horse? San. Which horse, your curtall? Feran. Sounes you slaue stand you prating here? Saddell the bay gelding for your Mistris. Kate Not for me: for Ile not go. San. The ostler will not let me haue him, you owe ten pence▪ For his meate, and 6 pence for stuffing my mistris saddle. Feran. Here villaine go pay him straight. San. Shall I giue them another pecke of lauender. Feran. Out slaue and bring them presently to the dore Alfon. Why son I hope at least youle dine with vs. San. I pray you maister lets stay till dinner be don. Feran. Sounes villaine art thou here yet? Ex. Sander. Come Kate our dinner is prouided at home. Kate. But not for me, for here I meane to dine. Ile haue my will in this as well as you, Though you in madding mood would leaue your frends Despite of you Ile tarry with them still. Feran. I Kate so thou shalt but at some other time, When as thy sisters here shall be espousd, Then thou and I will keepe our wedding day, In better sort then now we can prouide,
For here I promise thee before them all, We will ere long returne to them againe, Come Kate stand not on termes we will awaie, This is my day, to morrow thou shalt rule, And I will doo what euer thou commandes. Gentlemen farwell, wele take our leues, It will be late before that we come home. Exit Ferando and Kate. Pol. Farwell Ferando since you will be gone. Alfon. So mad a cupple did I neuer see. Emel. They're euen as well macht as I would wish. Phile. And yet I hardly thinke that he can tame her. For when he has don she will do what she list. Aurel. Her manhood then is good I do beleeue. Pol. Aurelius or else I misse my marke, Her toung will walke if she doth hold her handes, I am in dout ere halfe a month be past Hele curse the priest that married him so soone, And yet it may be she will be reclaimde, For she is verie patient grone of late. Alfon. God hold it that it may continue still, I would be loth that they should disagree, But he I hope will holde her in a while. Pol. Within this two daies I will ride to him, And see how louingly they do agree. Alfon. Now Aurelius what say you to this, What haue you sent to Cestus as you said, To certifie your father of your loue, For I would gladlie he would like of it, And if he be the man you tell to me, I gesse he is a Marchant of great wealth. And I haue seene him oft at Athens here, And for his sake assure thee thou art welcome. Pol. And so to me whilest Polidor doth liue.
Aurel. I find it so right worthie gentlemen, And of what worth your frendship I esteme, I leue censure of your seuerall thoughts, But for requitall of your fauours past, Rests yet behind, which when occasion serues I vow shalbe remembred to the full, And for my fathers comming to this place, I do expect within this weeke at most. Alfon. Inough Aurelieus? but we forget Our Marriage dinner now the bride is gon, Come let vs se what there they left behind. Exit Omnes Enter Sanders with two or three seruing men San. Come sirs prouide all thinges as fast as you can, For my Masters hard at hand and my new Mistris And all, and he sent me before to see all thinges redy. Tom. Welcome home Sander sirra how lookes our New Mistris they say she's a plagie shrew. San. I and that thou shalt find I can tell thee and thou Dost not please her well, why my Maister Has such a doo with hir as it passeth and he's euen like a madman. Will. Why Sander what dos he say. San. Why Ile tell you what: when they should Go to church to be maried he puts on an olde Ierkin and a paire of canuas breeches downe to the Small of his legge and a red cap on his head and he Lookes as thou wilt burst thy selfe with laffing When thou seest him: he's ene as good as a Foole for me: and then when they should go to dinner He made me Saddle the horse and away he came. And nere tarried for dinner and therefore you had best Get supper reddy against they come, for
They be hard at hand I am sure by this time. Tom. Sounes see where they be all redy. Enter Ferando and Kate. Feran. Now welcome Kate: wher'es these villains Here, what? not supper yet vppon the borde: Nor table spred nor nothing don at all, Wheres that villaine that I sent before. San. Now, adsum, sir. Feran. Come hether you villaine Ile cut your nose, You Rogue: helpe me of with my bootes: wilt please You to lay the cloth? sounes the villaine Hurts my foote? pull easely I say; yet againe. He beates them all. They couer the bord and fetch in the meate. Sounes? burnt and skorcht who drest this meate? Will. Forsouth Iohn cooke. He throwes downe the table and meate and all, and beates them. Feran. Go you villaines bringe you me such meate, Out of my sight I say and beare it hence, Come Kate wele haue other meate prouided, Is there a fire in my chamber sir? San. I forsooth. Exit Ferando and Kate. Manent seruingmen and eate vp all the meate. Tom. Sounes? I thinke of my conscience my Masters Mad since he was maried. Will. I laft what a boxe he gaue Sander For pulling of his bootes. Enter Ferando againe. San. I hurt his foote for the nonce man. Feran. Did you so you damned villaine. He beates them all out againe. This humor must I holde me to a while,
To bridle and hold backe my headstrong wife, With curbes of hunger: ease: and want of sleepe, Nor sleepe nor meate shall she inioie to night, Ile mew her vp as men do mew their hawkes, And make her gentlie come vnto the lure, Were she as stuborne or as full of strength As were the Thracian horse Alcides tamde, That King Egeus fed with flesh of men, Yet would I pull her downe and make her come As hungry hawkes do flie vnto there lure. Exit. Enter Aurelius and Valeria. Aurel. Valeria attend: I haue a louely loue, As bright as is the heauen cristalline, As faire as is the milke white way of Ioue, As chast as Phoebe in her sommer sportes, As softe and tender as the asure downe, That circles Cithereas siluer doues. Her do I meane to make my louely bride, And in her bed to breath the sweete content, That I thou knowst long time haue aimed at. Now Valeria it rests in thee to helpe To compasse this, that I might gaine my loue, Which easilie thou maist performe at will, If that the marchant which thou toldst me of, Will as he sayd go to Alfonsos house, And say he is my father, and there with all Pas ouer certaine deedes of land to me, That I thereby may gaine my hearts desire, And he is promised reward of me. Val. Feare not my Lord Ile fetch him straight to you, For hele do any thing that you command, But tell me my Lord, is Ferando married then? Aurel. He is: and Polidor shortly shall be wed, And he meanes to tame his wife erelong.
Vale. He saies so. Aurel. Faith he's gon vnto the taming schoole. Val. The taming schoole▪ why is there such a place? Aurel. I: and Ferando is the Maister of the schoole. Val. Thats rare: but what decorum dos he vse? Aurel. Faith I know not: but by som odde deuise Or other, but come Valeria I long to see the man, By whome we must comprise our plotted drift, That I may tell him what we haue to doo. Val. Then come my Lord and I will bring you to him straight. Aurel. Agreed, then lets go. Exeunt Enter Sander and his Mistres. San. Come Mistris. Kate. Sander I prethe helpe me to some meate, I am so faint that I can scarsely stande. San. I marry mistris but you know my maister Has giuen me a charge that you must eate nothing, But that which he himselfe giueth you. Kate. Why man thy Maister needs neuer know it. San. You say true indede: why looke you Mistris, What say you to a peese of beeffe and mustard now? Kate. Why I say tis excellent meate, canst thou helpe me to some? San. I, I could helpe you to some but that I doubt the mustard is too collerick for you, But what say you to a sheepes head and garlick? Kate. Why any thing, I care not what it be. San. I but the garlike I doubt will make your breath stincke, and then my Maister will course me for letting You eate it: But what say you to a fat Capon? Kate. Thats meate for a King sweet Sander helpe Me to some of it. San. Nay berlady then tis too deere for vs, we must
Not meddle with the Kings meate. Kate Out villaine dost thou mocke me, Take that for thy sawsinesse. She beates him. San. Sounes are you so light fingerd with a murrin, Ile keepe you fasting for it this two daies. Kate. I tell thee villaine Ile tear the flesh of Thy face and eate it and thou prates to me thus. San. Here comes my Maister now hele course you. Enter Ferando with a peece of meate vppon his daggers point and Polidor with him. Feran. Se here Kate I haue prouided meate for thee, Here take it: what ist not worthie thankes, Goe sirra? take it awaie againe you shallbe Thankefull for the next you haue. Kate Why I thanke you for it. Feran. Nay now tis not worth a pin go sirray and take It hence I say. San. Yes sir Ile Carrie it hence: Maister let her Haue none for she can fight as hungrie as she is. Pol. I pray you sir let it stand, for Ile eate Some with her my selfe. Feran. Well sirra set it downe againe. Kate. Nay nay I pray you let him take it hence, And keepe it for your owne diete for Ile none, Ile nere be beholding to you for your Meate, I tell thee flatlie here vnto the thy teethe Thou shalt not keepe me nor feede me as thou list, For I will home againe vnto my fathers house. Feran. I, when you'r meeke and gentell but not Before, I know your stomack is not yet come downe, Therefore no maruell thou canste not eate, And I will goe vnto your Fathers house, Come Polidor let vs goe in againe,
And Kate come in with vs I know ere longe, That thou and I shall louingly agree. Ex. Omnes Enter Aurelius Valeria and Phylotus the Marchant. Aurel. Now Senior Phylotus, we will go Vnto Alfonsos house, and be sure you say As I did tell you, concerning the man That dwells in Cestus, whose son I said I was, For you doo very much resemble him, And feare not: you may be bold to speake your mind. Phylo. I warrant you sir take you no care, Ile vse my selfe so cunning in the cause, As you shall soone inioie your harts delight. Aurel. Thankes sweet Phylotus, then stay you here, And I will go and fetch him hither straight. Ho, Senior Alfonso: a word with you. Enter Alfonso. Alfon. Whose there? what Aurelius whats the matter That you stand so like a stranger at the doore? Aurel. My father sir is newly come to towne, And I haue brought him here to speake with you, Concerning those matters that I tolde you of, And he can certefie you of the truth. Alfon. Is this your father? you are welcome sir. Phylo. Thankes Alfonso, for thats your name I gesse, I vnderstand my son hath set his mind And bent his liking to your daughters loue, And for because he is my only son, And I would gladly that he should doo well, I tell you sir, I not mislike his choise, If you agree to giue him your consent, He shall haue liuing to maintaine his state,
Three hundred poundes a yeere I will assure To him and to his heyres, and if they do ioyne, And knit themselues in holy wedlock bande, A thousand massie in gots of pure gold, And twise as many bares of siluer plate, I freely giue him, and in writing straight, I will confirme what I haue said in wordes. Alfon. Trust me I must commend your liberall mind, And louing care you beare vnto your son, And here I giue him freely my consent, As for my daughter I thinke he knowes her mind, And I will in large her dowrie for your sake. And solemnise with ioie your nuptiall rites, But is this gentleman of Cestus too? Aurel. He is the Duke of Cestus thrise renowned son, Who for the loue his honour beares to me: Hath thus accompanied me to this place. Alfonso. You weare to blame you told me not before, Pardon me my Lord, for if I had knowne Your honour had bin here in place with me, I would haue donne my dutie to your honour. Val. Thankes good Alfonso: but I did come to see When as these marriage rites should be performed, And if in these nuptialls you vouchsafe, To honour thus the prince of Cestus frend, In celebration of his spousall rites, He shall remaine a lasting friend to you, What saies Aurelius father. Phylo. I humbly thanke your honour good my Lord, And ere we parte before your honor here: Shall articles of such content be drawne, As twixt our houses and posteities, Eternallie this league of peace shall last, Inuiolat and pure on either part:
Alfonso. With all my heart, and if your honour please, To walke along with vs vnto my house, We will confirme these leagues of lasting loue. Val. Come then Aurelius I will go with you. Ex. omnes. Enter Ferando and Kate and Sander. San. Master the haberdasher has brought my Mistresse home her cappe here. Feran. Come hither sirra: what haue you there? Habar. A veluet cappe sir and it please you. Feran. Who spoake for it? didst thou Kate? Kate. What if I did, come hither sirra, giue me The cap, Ile see if it will fit me. She sets it one hir head. Feran. O monstrous: why it becomes thee not, Let me see it Kate: here sirra take it hence, This cappe is out of fashion quite. Kate The fashion is good inough: belike you, Meane to make a foole of me. Feran. Why true he meanes to make a foole of thee, To haue thee put on such a curtald cappe, sirra begon with it. Enter the Taylor with a gowne. San. Here is the Taylor too with my Mistris gowne. Feran. Let me see it Taylor: what with cuts and iagges? Sounes you villaine, thou hast spoiled the gowne. Taylor. Why sir I made it as your man gaue me direc∣tion, You may reade the note here. Feran. Come hither sirra: Taylor reade the note. Taylor. Item a faire round compast cape. San. I thats true. Taylor. And a large truncke sleeue.
San. Thats a lie maister, I sayd two truncke sleeues. Feran. Well sir goe forward. Tailor. Item a loose bodied gowne. San. Maister if euer I sayd loose bodies gowne, Sew me in a seame and beate me to death, With a bottome of browne thred. Tailor. I made it as the note bad me. San. I say the note lies in his throate and thou too, And thou sayst it. Taylor. Nay nay nere be so hot sirra, for I feare you not. San. Doost thou heare Taylor, thou hast braued Many men: braue not me. Thou'st faste many men. Taylor. Well sir. San. Face not me Ile nether be faste nor braued At thy handes I can tell thee. Kate. Come come I like the fashion of it well enough, Heres more a do then needs Ile haue it, And if you do not like it hide your eies, I thinke I shall haue nothing by your will. Feran. Go I say and take it vp for your maisters vse. San. Souns: villaine not for thy life touch it not, Souns, take vp my mistris gowne to his Maisters vse? Feran. Well sir: whats your conceit of it. San. I haue a deeper conceite in it then you thinke for, take vp my Mistris gowne To his maisters vse? Feran. Tailor come hether: for this time take it Hence againe, and Ile content thee for thy paines. Taylor. I thanke you sir. Exit Taylor. Feran. Come Kate we now will go see thy fathers house Euen in these honest meane abilliments, Our purses shallbe rich, our garments plaine,
To shrowd our bodies from the winter rage, And thats inough, what should we care for more. Thy sisters Kate to morrow must be wed, And I haue promised them thou shouldst be there The morning is well vp lets hast away, It will be nine a clocke ere we come there. Kate. Nine a clock, why tis allreadie past two In the after noone by all the clocks in the towne. Feran. I say tis but nine a clock in the morning. Kate. I say tis tow a clock in the after noone. Feran. It shall be nine then ere we go to your fathers, Come backe againe, we will not go to day. Nothing but crossing of me still, Ile haue you say as I doo ere you go. Exeunt omnes. Enter Polidor, Emelia, Aurelius and Philema. Pol. Faire Emelia sommers sun bright Queene, Brighter of hew then is the burning clime, Where Phoebus in his bright aequator sits, Creating gold and pressious minneralls, What would Emelia doo? if I were forst To leaue faire Athens and to range the world. Eme. Should thou assay to scale the seate of loue, Mounting the suttle ayrie regions Or be snacht vp as erste was Ganimed, Loue should giue winges vnto my swift desires, And prune my thoughts that I would follow thee, Or fall and perish as did Icarus. Aurel. Sweetly resolued faire Emelia, But would Phylema say as much to me, If I should aske a question now of thee, What if the duke of Cestus only son, Which came with me vnto your fathers house, Should seeke to git Phylemas loue from me,
And make thee Duches of that stately towne, Wouldst thou not then forsake me for his loue? Phyle. Not for great Neptune, no nor Ioue himselfe, Will Phylema leaue Aurelius loue, Could he install me Empres of the world, Or make me Queene and guidres of the heauens, Yet would I not exchange thy loue for his, Thy company is poore Philemas heauen, And without thee, heauen were hell to me. Eme. And should my loue as erste did Hercules Attempt to passe the burning valtes of hell, I would with piteous lookes and pleasing wordes, As once did Orpheus with his harmony, And rauishing sound of his melodious harpe, Intreate grim Pluto and of him obtaine, That thou mightest go and safe retourne againe. Phyle. And should my loue as earst Leander did, Attempte to swimme the boyling helispont For Heros loue: no towers of brasse should hold But I would follow thee through those raging flouds, With lockes disheuered and my brest all bare, With bended knees vpon Abidas shoore, I would with smokie sighes and brinish teares, Importune Neptune and the watry Gods, To send a guard of siluer scaled Dolphyns, With sounding Tritons to be our conuoy, And to transport vs safe vnto the shore, Whilst I would hang about thy louely necke, Redoubling kisse on kisse vpon thy cheekes, And with our pastime still the swelling waues. Eme. Should Polidor as great Achilles did, Onely imploy himselfe to follow armes, Like to the warlike Amazonian Queene, Pentheselea Hectors paramore,
Who foyld the bloudie Pirrhus murderous greeke, Ile thrust my selfe amongst the thickest throngs, And with my vtmost force assist my loue. Phyle. Let Eole storme: be mild and quiet thou, Let Neptune swell, be Aurelius calme and pleased, I care not I, betide what may betide, Let fates and fortune doo the worst they can, I recke them not: they not discord with me, Whilst that my loue and I do well agree▪ Aurel. Sweet Phylema bewties mynerall, From whence the sun exhales his glorious shine, And clad the heauen in thy reflected raies, And now my liefest loue, the time drawes nie, That Himen mounted in his saffron robe, Must with his torches waight vpon thy traine, As Hellens brothers on the horned Moone, Now Iuno to thy number shall I adde, The fairest bride that euer Marchant had. Pol. Come faire Emelia the preeste is gon, And at the church your father and the reste, Do stay to see our marriage rites performde, And knit in sight of heauen this Gordian knot. That teeth of fretting time may nere vntwist, Then come faire loue and gratulate with me, This daies content and sweet solemnity. Ex. Omnes Slie Sim must they be married now? Lord. I my Lord. Enter Ferando and Kate and Sander. Slie. Looke Sim the foole is come againe now. Feran. Sirra go fetch our horsses forth, and bring Them to the backe gate presentile. San. I will sir I warrant you, Exit Sander. Feran. Come Kate the Moone shines cleere to night methinkes.
Kate. The moone? why husband you are deceiud It is the sun. Feran. Yet againe: come backe againe it shall be The moone ere we come at your fathers. Kate. Why Ile say as you say it is the moone. Feran. Iesus saue the glorious moone. Kate. Iesus saue the glorious moone. Feran. I am glad Kate your stomack is come downe, I know it well thou knowest it is the sun, But I did trie to see if thou wouldst speake, And crosse me now as thou hast donne before, And trust me kate hadst thou not named the moone, We had gon back againe as sure as death, But soft whose this thats comming here. Enter the Duke of Cestus alone. Duke. Thus all alone from Cestus am I come, And left my princelie courte and noble traine, To come to Athens, and in this disguise, To see what course my son Aurelius takes, But stay, heres some it may be Trauells thether, Good sir can you derect me the way to Athens? Ferando speakes to the olde man. Faire louely maide yoong and affable, More cleere of hew and far more beautifull, Then pretious Sardonix or purple rockes, Of Amithests or glistering Hiasinthe, More amiable farre then is the plain, Where glistring Cepherus in siluer boures, Gaseth vpon the Giant Andromede, Sweet Kate entertaine this louely woman. Duke. I thinke the man is mad he calles me a woman.
Kate. Faire louely lady, bright and Christalline, Bewteous and stately as the eie-traind bird, As glorious as the morning washt with dew, Within whose eies she takes her dawning beames, And golden sommer sleepes vpon thy cheekes, Wrap vp thy radiations in some cloud, Least that thy bewty make this stately towne, Inhabitable like the burning Zone, With sweet reflections of thy louely face. Duke. What is she mad to? or is my shape transformd▪ That both of them perswade me I am a woman, But they are mad sure, and therefore Ile begon, And leaue their companies for fear of harme, And vnto Athens hast to seeke my son. Exit Duke. Feran. Why so Kate this was friendly done of thee, And kindly too: why thus must we two liue, One minde, one heart, and one content for both, This good old man dos thinke that we are mad, And glad he is I am sure, that he is gonne, But come sweet Kate for we will after him, And now perswade him to his shape againe. Ex. omnes. Enter Alfonso and Phylotus and Valeria, Polidor, Emelia, Aurelius and Phylema. Alfon. Come louely sonnes your marriage rites performed, Lets hie vs home to see what cheere we haue, I wonder that Ferando and his wife Comes not to see this great solemnitie. Pol. No maruell if Ferando be away, His wife I think hath troubled so his wits,
That he remaines at home to keepe them warme, For forward wedlocke as the prouer be sayes, Hath brought him to his night cappe long agoe. Phylo. But Polidor let my son and you take heede, That Ferando say not ere long as much to you, And now Alfonso more to shew my loue, If vnto Cestus you do send your ships, My selfe will fraught them with Arabian silkes, Rich affrick spices Arras counter poines, Muske Cassia: sweet smelling Ambergreece, Pearle, curroll▪ christall, iett, and iuorie, To gratulate the fauors of my son, And friendly loue that you haue shone to him. Vale. And for to honour him and this faire bride, Enter the Duke of Cestus. Ile yerly send you from my fathers courte, Chests of refind suger seuerally, Ten tunne of tunis wine, sucket sweet druges, To celibrate and solemnise this day, And custome free your marchants shall conuerse: And interchange the profits of your land, Sending you gold for brasse, siluer for leade, Casses of silke for packes of woll and cloth, To binde this friendship and confirme this league. Duke. I am glad sir that you would be so franke, Are you become the Duke of Cestus son, And reuels with my treasure in the towne, Base villaine that thus dishonorest me. Val. Sounes it is the Duke what shall I doo, Dishonour thee why, knowst thou what thou saist? Duke. Her's no villaine: he will not know me now, But what say you? haue you forgot me too? Phylo. Why sir, are you acquainted with my son? Duke. With thyson? no trust me if he be thine,
I pray you sir who am I? Aurel. Pardon me father: humblie on my knees, I do intreat your grace to heare me speake. Duke. Peace villaine: lay handes on them, And send them to prison straight. Phylotus and Valeria runnes away. Then Slie speakes. Slie. I say wele haue no sending to prison. Lord. My Lord this is but the play, theyr but in iest. Slie. I tell thee Sim wele haue no sending, To prison thats flat: why Sim am not I Don Christo Vary? Therefore I say they shall not go to prison. Lord. No more they shall not my Lord, They be run away. Slie. Are they run away Sim? thats well, Then gis some more drinke, and let them play againe. Lord. Here my Lord. Slie drinkes and then falls a sleepe. Duke. Ah trecherous boy that durst presume, To wed thy selfe without thy fathers leaue, I sweare by fayre Cintheas burning rayes, By Merops head and by seauen mouthed Nile, Had I but knowne ere thou hadst wedded her, Were in thy brest the worlds immortall soule, This angrie sword should rip thy hatefull chest, And hewd thee smaller then the Libian sandes, Turne hence thy face: oh cruell impious boy, Alfonso I did not thinke you would presume, To mach your daughter with my princely house, And nere make me acquainted with the cause▪ Alfon. My Lord by heauens I sweare vnto your grace, I knew none other but Valeria your man, Had bin the Duke of Cestus nobleson,
Nor did my daughter I dare sweare for her. Duke. That damned villaine that hath deluded me▪ Whome I did send guide vnto my son, Oh that my furious force could cleaue the earth, That I might muster bands of hellish feendes, To rack his heart and teare his impious soule. The ceaselesse turning of celestiall orbes, Kindles not greater flames in flitting aire, Then passionate anguish of my raging brest, Aurel. Then let my death sweet father end your griefe, For I it is that thus haue wrought your woes, Then be reuengd on me for here I sweare, That they are innocent of what I did, Oh had I charge to cut of Hydraes hed, To make the toplesse Alpes a champion field, To kill vntamed monsters with my sword, To trauell dayly in the hottest sun, And watch in winter when the nightes be colde, I would with gladnesse vndertake them all, And thinke the paine but pleasure that I felt, So that my noble father at my returne, Would but forget and pardon my offence, Phile. Let me intreat your grace vpon my knees, To pardon him and let my death discharge The heauy wrath your grace hath vowd gainst him. Pol. And good my Lord let vs intreat your grace, To purge your stomack of this Melancholy, Taynt not your princely minde with griefe my Lord, But pardon and forgiue these louers faults, That kneeling craue your gratious fauor here. Emel. Great prince of Cestus, let a womans wordes, Intreat a pardon in your lordly brest, Both for your princely son, and vs my Lord. Duke. Aurelius stand vp I pardon thee,
I see that vertue will haue enemies, And fortune willbe thwarting honour still, And you faire virgin too I am content, To accept you for my daughter since tis don, And see you princely vsde in Cestus courte. Phyle. Thankes good my Lord and I no longer liue, Then I obey and honour you in all: Alfon. Let me giue thankes vnto your royall grace, For this great honor don to me and mine, And if your grace will walke vnto my house, I will in humblest maner I can, show The eternall seruice I doo owe your grace. Duke Thanks good Alfonso: but I came alone, And not as did beseeme the Cestian Duke, Nor would I haue it knowne within the towne, That I was here and thus without my traine, But as I came alone so will I go, And leaue my son to solemnise his feast, And ere't belong Ile come againe to you, And do him honour as beseemes the son Of mightie Ierobell the Cestian Duke, Till when Ile leaue you, Farwell Aurelius. Aurel. Not yet my Lord, Ile bring you to your ship. Exeunt Omnes. Slie sleepes. Lord. Whose within there? come hither sirs my Lords A sleepe againe: go take him easily vp, And put him in his one apparell againe, And lay him in the place where we did find him, Iust vnderneath the alehouse side below, But see you wake him not in any case. Boy. It shall be don my Lord come helpe to beare him hence, Exit.
Enter Ferando, Aurelius and Polidor and his boy and Valeria and Sander. Feran. Come gentlemen now that suppers donne, How shall we spend the time till we go to bed? Aurel. Faith if you will in triall of our wiues, Who will come sownest at their husbands call. Pol. Nay then Ferando he must needes sit out, For he may call I thinke till he be weary, Before his wife will come before she list. Feran. Tis well for you that haue such gentle wiues, Yet in this triall will I not sit out, It may be Kate will come as soone as yours. Aurel. My wife comes soonest for a hundred pound. Pol. I take it: Ile lay as much to youres, That my wife comes as soone as I do send. Aurel. How now Ferando you dare not lay belike. Feran. Why true I dare not lay indeede; But how, so little mony on so sure a thing, A hundred pound: why I haue layd as much Vpon my dogge, in running at a Deere, She shall not come so farre for such a trifle, But will you lay fiue hundred markes with me, And whose wife soonest comes when he doth call, And shewes her selfe most louing vnto him, Let him inioye the wager I haue laid, Now what say you? dare you aduenture thus? Pol. I weare it a thousand pounds I durst presume On my wiues loue: and I will lay with thee. Enter Alfonso. Alfon. How now sons what in conference so hard, May I without offence, know where abouts.
Aurel. Faith father a waighty cause about our wiues Fiue hundred markes already we haue layd, And he whose wife doth shew most loue to him, He must inioie the wager to himselfe. Alfon. Why then Ferando he is sure to lose, I promise thee son thy wife will hardly come, And therefore I would not wish thee lay so much. Feran. Tush father were it ten times more, I durst aduenture on my louely Kate, But if I lose Ile pay, and so shall you. Aurel. Vpon mine honour if I loose Ile pay. Pol. And so will I vpon my faith I vow. Feran. Then sit we downe and let vs send for them. Alfon. I promise thee Ferando I am afraid thou wilt lose Aurel. Ile send for my wife first, Valeria Go bid your Mistris come to me. Val. I will my Lord. Exit Valeria. Aurel. Now for my hundred pound. Would any lay ten hundred more with me, I know I should obtaine it by her loue. Feran. I pray God you haue not laid too much already. Aurel. Trust me Ferando I am sure you haue, For you I dare presume haue lost it all. Enter Valeria againe. Now sirra what saies your mistris? Val. She is something busie but shele come anon. Feran. Why so, did not I tell you this before, She is busie and cannot come. Aurel. I pray God your wife send you so good an an∣swere She may be busie yet she sayes shele come. Feran. Well well: Polidor send you for your wife.
Pol. Agreed Boy desire your mistris to come hither. Boy. I will sir Ex. Boy. Feran. I so so he desiers her to come. Alfon. Polidor I dare presume for thee, I thinke thy wife will not deny to come. And I do maruell much Aurelius, That your wife came not when you sent for her. Enter the Boy againe▪ Pol. Now wheres your Mistris? Boy. She bad me tell you that she will not come, And you haue any businesse, you must come to her. Feran. Oh monstrous intollerable presumption, Worse then a blasing starre, or snow at midsommer, Earthquakes or any thing vnseasonable, She will not come: but he must come to her. Pol. Well sir I pray you lets here what Answere your wife will make. Feran. Sirra, command your Mistris to come To me presentlie. Exit Sander. Aurel. I thinke my wife for all she did not come, Will proue most kinde for now I haue no feare, For I am sure Ferandos wife, she will not come. Feran. The mores the pittie: then I must lose. Enter Kate and Sander. But I haue won for see where Kate doth come. Kate. Sweet husband did you send for me? Feran. I did my loue I sent for thee to come, Come hither Kate, whats that vpon thy head Kate. Nothing husband but my cap I thinke. Feran. Pull it of and treade it vnder thy feete, Tis foolish I will not haue thee weare it. She takes of her cap and treads on it.
Pol. Oh wonderfull metamorphosis. Aurel. This is a wonder: almost past beleefe. Feran. This is a token of her true loue to me, And yet Ile trie her further you shall see, Come hither Kate where are thy sisters. Kate. They be sitting in the bridall chamber. Feran. Fetch them hither and if they will not come, Bring them perforce and make them come with thee. Kate. I will. Alfon. I promise thee Ferando I would haue sworne, Thy wife would nere haue donne so much for thee. Feran. But you shall see she will do more then this, For see where she brings her sisters forth by force. Enter Kate thrusting Phylema and Emelia before her, and makes them come vnto their husbands call. Kate See husband I haue brought them both. Feran. Tis well don Kate. Eme. I sure and like a louing peece, your worthy To haue great praise for this attempt. Phyle. I for making a foole of her selfe and vs. Aurel. Beshrew thee Phylema, thou hast Lost me a hundred pound to night. For I did lay that thou wouldst first haue come. Pol. But thou Emelia hast lost me a great deale more. Eme. You might haue kept it better then, Who bad you lay? Feran. Now louely Kate before there husbands here, I prethe tell vnto these hedstrong women, What dutie wiues doo owe vnto their husbands. Kate. Then you that liue thus by your pompered wills, Now list to me and marke what I shall say, Theternall power that with his only breath, Shall cause this end and this beginning frame,
Not in time, nor before time, but with time, confusd, For all the course of yeares, of ages, moneths, Of seasons temperate, of dayes and houres, Are tund and stopt, by measure of his hand, The first world was, a forme, without a forme, A heape confusd a mixture all deformd, A gulfe of gulfes, a body bodiles, Where all the elements were orderles, Before the great commander of the world▪ The King of Kings the glorious God of heauen▪ Who in six daies did frame his heauenly worke, And made all things to stand in perfit course. Then to his image he did make a man. Olde Adam and from his side a sleepe, A rib was taken, of which the Lord did make, The woe of man so termd by Adam then, Woman for that, by her came sinne to vs, And for her sin was Adam doomd to die, As Sara to her husband, so should we, Obey them, loue them, keepe, and nourish them, If they by any meanes doo want our helpes, Laying our handes vnder theire feete to tread, If that by that we, might procure there ease, And for a president Ile first begin, And lay my hand vnder my husbands feete She laies her hand vnder her husbands feete. Feran. Inough sweet, the wager thou hast won, And they I am sure cannot denie the same. Alfon. I Ferando the wager thou hast won, And for to shew thee how I am pleasd in this, A hundred poundes I freely giue thee more, Another dowry for another daughter, For she is not the same she was before. Feran. Thankes sweet father, gentlemen godnight
For Kate and I will leaue you forto night, Tis Kate and I am wed, and you are sped. And so farwell for we will to our beds. Exit Ferando and Kate and Sander. Alfon. Now Aurelius what say you to this? Aurel. Beleeue me father I reioice to see, Ferando and his wife so louingly agree. Exit Aurelius and Phylema and Alfonso and Valeria. Eme. How now Polidor in a dump, what sayst thou man? Pol. I say thou art a shrew. Eme. Thats better then a sheepe. Pol. Well since tis don let it go, come lets in. Exit Polidor and Emelia. Then enter two bearing of Slie in his Owne apparrell againe, and leaues him Where they found him, and then goes out. Then enter the Tapster. Tapster. Now that the darkesome night is ouerpast, And dawning day apeares in cristall sky, Now must I hast abroad: but soft whose this? What Slie oh wondrous hath he laine here allnight, Ile wake him, I thinke he's starued by this, But that his belly was so stuft with ale, What how Slie, Awake for shame. Slie. Sim gis some more wine: whats all the Plaiers gon: am not I a Lord? Tapster. A Lord with a murrin: come art thou dronken still? Slie. Whose this? Tapster, oh Lord sirra, I haue had The brauest dreame to night, that euer thou Hardest in all thy life.
Tapster. I marry but you had best get you home, For your wife will course you for dreming here to night, Slie Will she? I know now how to tame a shrew, I dreamt vpon it all this night till now, And thou hast wakt me out of the best dreame That euer I had in my life, but Ile to my Wife presently and tame her too And if she anger me. Tapster. Nay tarry Slie for Ile go home with thee, And heare the rest that thou hast dreamt to night. Exeunt Omnes. FINIS.
