24060 99853715 19109
Cassius of Parma his Orpheus: With Nathan Chitraeus his Commen∣tarie, abridged into short notes: most profitable for the framing of the manners of Schollers. Translated and abridged by Roger Rawlyns of Lyncolnes Inne, Student in the Common Lawes. At London. 1587.
TO THE MOST HONO∣rable Lord, the Lord Robert Earle of Essex and Ewe, Ʋicount Hereforde, and Bourghchier, Lord Ferrers of Chartley, Bourghchier, and Louayne, Master of the Queenes Maiesties Horse, and Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter: Roger Rawlyns wisheth the true felicitie. RIght Honorable, whereas Loue among men, was sometimes of so great accompt, as the same hath been taken to be the first and chief cause of a Com∣mon-wealth, and not vtilitie, (as affirmeth the learned Scot) which enforced men by a naturall in∣stinct to communicate their priuate labors to pub∣like vse, being for such their loue, requited with the loue of those, whom they did so benefite. Now, the matter is cleane contrarie: for who is more misli∣ked of the worst, which are the most, than he that studieth most to common profite? Which conside∣ration, as it hath been one hinderance to me in my Studie (the more is my fault) so is it the cause, why I purpose to suppresse, to the vse only of my priuate friends, that, which otherwise, I could be contented should bee common. And although they can by no meanes occupie either their Sense, or Reason, but the same will leade them perforce vnto a thankefull remembrance of our fathers, who haue by cunning, ei∣ther ordered the nature, or inuented, or ordered the qualities of things, in a most pleasant course: yet they themselues haue no care, to practize in the like manner, for their owne ease, and helpe of their posteritie: suffering their knowledge gotten in the time of their life, to depart with their last breath: And some more vnlouing than others, neither will themselues, neither will they without reproches, suffer o∣thers to labour in like practizes of Arte, seeming of condition, somewhat like the man, that being cured of follie, was highlie offended, affirming, that he neuer liued so pleasant a life, as when he was a foole. So as we may see (except it be in some men more Christian than others) now, churlishnes to succeede loue, vnthankeful∣nes,
thankefulnes, follie, wisedome: that being most true in the multitude, which luuenal saith of his times: The earth doth now bring foorth, of bodie small Bad men, of little wit, or none at all. But to the Cause, the Scope, and Center of all my speeches, that is, concerning the Arte, in studying, or ordering the Common Lawes, as I neuer fainted in opi∣nion, that the same may bee performed, and in what manner: as staying my selfe vpon Principles, which of their owne nature are inexpugnable, and feare not the frowning of a Censurer. So doo I feare nothing more, than that I haue small part in the same performance: for I am hindered in the meanes, which are said to be∣long to a Student of the Common Laws, that is, to be leade in his seate, to haue an yron head, and a golden purse. For the first, how little time (of late) I haue sate at it, they could be are me witnes, that haue been acquainted with my busines. For the second, how greatlie I haue been distracted, I my selfe knowe, Nec ostentabo vulnera & sicatrices meas. For the third, my purse was neuer so heauie, but that I could lift it without helpe. Moreouer, I finde with some griefe by obseruation in other men, that he that practiseth in any publike cause, (as Cardanus saith) set∣teth to sale his owne imperfections, his faults will swell in the eyes of his Aduer∣saries, he must subiect himselfe to infamous slaunders, enuious reproches, and con∣tempts, which notwithstanding ought againe of him to be contemned: Vt deriso∣res nostros de sumno quasi despicientes, derideamus. Yet herein I doo content my selfe, as, he to descry land, whereunto the Pilot must guide the ship: or as a weake wretch, to giue aime vnto others, whose strings I am not able to stirre, and whom I wish, may strike the marke. London this 27. of September 1587. From Crowne Court in Chauncery Lane. Your Honors most humble Ro. Rawlyns.
ILLVSTRISSIMO DO∣mino, Comiti Essexio, studioso∣rum omnium Mecaenati, R. R. hanc Chartam (honoris causa) di∣cat consecrátque. CVi (obsecro) haec potiùs dicarem quàm tibi? qui nobilitate excellis, Nec sinis ingenium nobilitate premi: Quare, Iuris meum Compendium non potest so∣lùm meam in te obseruantiam apud omnes te∣stari, sed etiam te huius sanctissimae disciplinae ad∣monere: Sanctissimam disciplinam appello, quia tecum loquor, cui non est ignota eius praestantia, & diuinitas. Dubitarem sanè ita loqui si cum ijs sermo esset, qui, cùm artem sibi necessariam igno∣rent, eos odio prosequuntur, à quibus intelligunt seeo nomine superari: cupiúntque nulla esse iura, nullas leges, quo faciliùs ar∣bitrio suo belluino omnia turbent. Sed, fremant, qui volunt, dicam quod sentio. Praestat iudicandi scientia, iudicandi potestati, & dignus igitur, qui praesit iudi∣cio, praestat Iudici imperito. Haec omnia tu optimè scis. Itaque ad te libentèr ve∣niet ars illa, quae iudicandi normam tradit, quae diuinas, humanásque res dispo∣nit, quae omnes homines in officio continet, malos poenis coercet, bonos prae∣mijs afficit, & (vt vno verbo dicam) humanam societatem conseruat. Inquit IV∣LIVS PACIVS, Petro Saletano, epistola sua, in quatuor libros Institutionum, IMP. CAES. IVSTINIANI. Tui honori deditissimus: R. Rawlyns.
To his louing Masters and friends, the Students of Lyncolns Jnne, R. R. wisheth profite and pleasure in their studies. MOst beloued Gentlemen, I haue herein desperatelie aduentured vpon your fauours, hoping that you will take affection for satisfaction, where iudge∣ment is wanting for currant payment. If I haue offended through follie or imperfection, you may giue me thankes for that, because therein is exer∣cised your wisedome and patience, (as Saint Paule speaketh of himselfe) wisemen can easilie beare with fooles. If you shall iudge me of presumption, (as the Prouerbe is, Sus Mineruam) why then (alas) pardon that too, I most hartelie pray you: for, I must confesse, (without flatterie) that I doo so much the more feare your censures, by how much the more I long after your goodwills. The best for me, is, that the price of my bookes is but your pardon and loue, which ye may giue with∣out cost: and which if ye shall denie me, yet will I not cease to loue you, and to cloy you with my countrey fruites. Your most louing friend and seruant: Ro. Rawlyns.
Of Cassius of Parma, the Author of this Fragment. COncerning the Author, it is thought that this was the very same man, of whom Horace maketh mention in the 1. of his Satyres, the 10. booke, verse the 62. to this purpose: Not otherwise then when a man hath brought His mind within the compasse of sixe feete: Pleasde herewithall, or if his hand haue wrought Two hundreth verses, ere he goe to meate: And after dinner, then as many moe: Such was the wit of that Etrurian Cassius, which as a running streame did flowe: So that a fire was made to burne this Man Of his owne writings, as the fame doth goe. And againe Horace maketh mention of Cassius in the 1. booke, Epistle. 5. which he wrote to Albius Tibullus, the 3. verse. Albius, O perfect Iudge of all our speach, What should I say, that thou hast now in hand? Thou writest somewhat (that may ouerreach Cassius his fragments) in the Pedan land. By which we may gather, that Cassius was of no small accompt, especiallie a∣mongst those that were learned, and of iudgement. Of Orphëus. Therefore did Cassius (as it seemeth) giue this Pamphlet this inscription of Orphëus, as in commendation of whose labour in Studie, and Continencie, all his verses might be made. Of Orphëus, Plato maketh mention Booke 10. of his Commonwealth, where he faigneth, that Orphëus his soule (when he died) would not be borne againe of a woman, for the hatred which he bare to that Sexe, but did choose rather the life of a Swan, as Thamyris had done of a Nightingale. Of the Argument of this Booke. Cassius of Parma, would by these verses, as it were with the pencill of his wit, & eloquence, expresse the likenes & the patterne of a good and gentle Nature, contending to attaine the height and excellencie of learning and eloquence: and of such a Nature, he doth first shew (not obscurely) the signes, then the needfull helpes, next, what should be done of boyes, and yong men, while they are yet in the floure of their age: and lastly, what is by them to be auoyded, by the exam∣ple of Orphëus, while he was yet but a yong man. Cassij Parmensis Orphëus. Arguta primùm cùm plectra parentis, & auro Distinctam sumpsit citharam Rhodopëius heres, Ridehan segnes pulsus, digitósque micantes
Serius, & chordis indoctè dissona vocis. Mox pudor exardens, & gloria dulcis honesti, Lusibus auertit puerilibus: omnis & illùc Pèrditus incumbens, Musae pallebat amore. Et nunc maternis inhiat, nunc ille paternis Cantibus: hìnc illìnc discens dependet vtrin{que}. Nulla Venus faciem coepit mentita dolosis Compedibus: somni fuerat, parcus{que} Lydi: Donec, ridiculus dudùm, modulamine siluas, Euulsos{que}, suis scopulos radicibus egit: Ausus & ire vtam mortalibus inconcessam, Poenarum oblitos demulsit carmine manes. "Non leuis adscensus, si quis petit ardua: sudor "Plurimus hunc tollit: nocturno ex somnis oliuo "Immoritur: delet, quod mox laudauerat in se, "Qui cupit aeterno donari frondis honore. The same Verses englished. When first the noble child of Rhodopy, His Parents quill, in tender hand gan hold, Therewith to sound his harpe of Iuory Decked with lynes and asterisks of gold: His singers drawled, and his strokes were cold With peering ioynts, wherewith they laugh, to see How to the strings his note did disagree. Straight shamefastnes enflaming with desire And glorious sweetnes of so faire a thing, From childish sports, which yonger yeares require, Doo turne him quite: hencefoorth to play and sing For life he plies: the loue whereof doth bring Palenes of face: yet still through earnestnes He hangs his iawe, while that with greedines He heares his father, or his mother play: On him, or her he listening doth depend Euen at their lips, no painted wanton, gay By borrowed hue, could force his heart to bend Such guilefull giues a liking eye to lend. Nor were his sleepe and food outragious: So that, now, he (lately ridiculous) Could cause the Rock to mooue, rent from the roote, And woods draw neere, he plaid and sang so well, That daring goe, where els no mortall foote Had trod: he stild the sprites and ghosts which dwell Below, did ease from punishments of hell. "None easie clyming can preuaile to gaine "Athing of woorth: it will be got with paine.
Which who desires, that man endureth sweate," Endangering his life through want of rest," The asting oyle, can prooue his labour great:" What first he liked, now he doth detest," And blots that thing, which whilome pleasde him best." The man must, thus demeane himselfe (I say)" Who seekes the gift of neuer dying bay." Signes. 1 Good Parents. 2 An alacritie, or naturall quicknes of wit. 3 To blush, or to be ashamed of euill doing. 4 A desire to balance the euill deede with greater poize of well doing. 5 A moderate disposition to pastime or playing. Helpes. 1 A good Teacher or Schoolemaster, as here is supposed by Apollo and Cal∣liope, the Parents of Orphëus. 2 If the Parents being themselues learned, doo teach and ouersee the teach∣ing of their children, and so are not constrained to giue credite to some blinde Schoolemaster, reasoning with as little iudgement, as a blind man doth of co∣lours. 3 A mutuall affection betweene the Scholler and the Master, so as the Schol∣ler doo beare a childlike loue to the Teacher, and the Teacher a fatherlike loue to the Scholler. 4 It helpes much oftentimes, if the child bee brought vp in the fathers voca∣tion, with which, by seeing, and by hearing, euen from his cradle, he seemeth to be acquainted. 5 That he begin to be taught in due time, not too late, least he prooue a loy∣terer: nor too soone, least he be at the first discouraged. 6 That the Teacher be not oftentimes changed: for, as Trees often remoued take no sure roote in any ground: so children put from one Teacher to ano∣ther, doo no great good any where. 7 That the Parents betweene themselues doo not varie, either concerning the matter or manner of their childrens education, especiallie in the hearing of their children, who will easilie take aduantage of such controuersies, and thereby, as in a doubt, whether they shall doo this thing, or that thing, they will not easilie applie themselues vnto any thing. 8 That the instruments, meanes, or tooles of their vocation, be in most faire wise ordered, as that a Scholler haue his booke of a faire print, well bound, phil∣lited and spotted with gold, &c. for herein are children much delighted. 9 That all bee begun, with the helpe of God, which is here inferred, because that Apollo and Calliope, are said to haue been accompted among the number of the heathen Gods. Things to be done. 1 The Scholler must nothing esteeme to be derided of others, for derision is incident to all good beginnings.
2 He must not be discouraged, though the thing seene hard at the first to be learned: for, nothing is casie at the first. 3 Though moderate recreation bee allowed, yet, he must not take it in too great measure: for, not wisemen but sooles keepe a continuall holiday. 4 Not many things, but onely one thing is to bee attempted for, one busines of anie moment will require one whole man. 5 He must prosecute his attempted and purposed vocation with earnest, and continuall labour: which, it is thought they doo, which are Louers of Enterpri∣zes, of Paines, with heate and continuance. 6 He must bee a louer of learning: for, otherwise, bee his labour earnest, and continuall, yet it is done against the wooll, for he performeth it with great cold∣nes. 7 He must aske, and resolue questions, he must loue commendations, and bee desirous to finde out the trueth: that he bee readie to aske, heare, and put in practize the councells and resolutions of his betters. 8 An exchaunge of his good endeuours, with others his equalls for their like endeuours, and a comparing of the same together, with an emulation and de∣sire to doo better, and with an amending of his owne doings. Things to be auoyded. 1 A phantasie, or false opinion of his owne well doing. 2 Slacknes, which is, an intermission, or negligent handling of his Studie: which is like vnto retchlesnes, which neither knoweth, nor attempteth any good thing. Sloath knowing, but, not vrging, nor bringing the thing knowne, to a good end, but deferring euerie thing to another day, by pretence of idle excuses. Idlenes, which so performeth, that, as good neuer a whit, as neuer the better. 3 This nightly working, though it be here noted in Orphëus, yet is it not sim∣plie to be commended, but the day must be to the Scholler to trauel in, the night for him to rest in: for by continuall labour are the eyes hurt, the wit dulled, the face in colour, and the bodie by swellings, and other diseases thence growing, deformed and corrupted. 4 A resolute determination, not to amend the things, which he liketh him∣selfe, without cause, which seemeth to be somewhat like the first poynt Orphëus here doth the contrarie, what late he liked, now he doth detest. For, a Scholler ought, vpon good reason shewed, to relinquish his owne vntrue, vncertaine, or worser course, to followe the more certaine, and better course of another man. 5 Lust, or vnlawfull loue, which comming of Sloath, is nourished by excesse: and how can he entend to his studie, or any other good medirations, who, as it is in Plautus, is like a wretch, vexed, troubled, and tossed in the slaughter house of loue: who, where himselfe is, his mind is not: where he is not, his mind is. 6 Too much sleeping, which is called the brother of death, and as Menander saith, A patterne Ʋnto men, and an image of death. 7 Ouerliberall diet, or gluttonie, which is a beastlie vice in them, who like hogges, seeme to grunt out these words: We care not for Rumors, so that we may haue wherewith to fill the Rume. FINIS.
NESTOR his Antilochus: Poynting out the trueth and necessitie of Arte in studie: by R. R. of Lyncolnes Inne, Student in the Common Lawes. Ridentem dicere verum Quis vetat? Iuuenal. At London. 1587.
NESTOR HIS Antilochus. WHen I was come to reade this Prosopopey, wherin Ho∣mer, the chiefe of Poëts, who is said to bee accompa∣nied with the Muses, was to make a speach of coun∣saile, fit to beseeme the prudent King Nestor, called The Sheapheard of men, to giue to his owne sonne, to the winning of a worthie prize, and with the prize re∣nowne, amongst other Runners, noble Kings and Princes of Greece, which was by Achilles ordained, to the celebrating of the funerals of his deare friend Pa∣troclus, hauing hungerlie tasted other of his pleasant deuises, I conceaued hope, herewith to bee fed, euen, (Ad satietatem) to fulnes: Neque spes fallebat amantem. These be the verses: When prudent Nestor, standing neere his sonne Wise like himselfe: his counsaile thus begun. Antilochus: because, while but a lad Both Ioue and Neptune (louing thee full well) All horsemanship, which either of them had Haue taught thee: now I need not much to tell: Yet though thou know the raynes to loose and pull, Be circumspect withall, thine horse be dull. Their horse indeed are farre  more swift, yet thou With warie wit, maiest counterpeize their pace: Then all good councell take vnto thee now My friend, to get the credite of the Race: The  Carpenter by Arte doth bring to passe That feate, which flies the strong, yet brainles Asse. Againe, by Arte, the Pilot, he doth guide On troubled Seas, his swift and tossed barke: By Arte, the Couch-man knoweth how to ride: To leaue his fellowe farre behind the marke. The man, who trusteth to his horse and Couch, Full fraught with follie,  wandereth too much Amidst the Race, and lets his horses stray, When, who knowes helpes, although his horse be bad: An  eye vnto the marke, he still doth lay, And driueth close, with pace,  discreet, and sad. He raynning well, doth euermore  obserue The goale, from which, he  careth, not to . swerue.
1 And first, whereas the Poët, supposeth the Hearer; to be wise like the Spea∣ker, he therein councelleth, that no precious stone be throwne before a Cocke, no learned speach to be vttered to swinish men: Qui balbi, praeter balba, nihil intelligunt, & palatum habent sapientius quàm ingenium: who can better rel∣lish reasons of the sunne, than reasons that proceed from men. 2 For the Allegorizing hereof, from the particular vse of Arte in riding, to the generall vse thereof in Studying: least I should therein seeme to deale as auck∣wardlie, as the Grammar Scholler did in his Simile: (Euen as a Ship is tossed on the Sea, so ought a father to loue his child) it is to bee remembred, that by some learned, the Affections, which follow the Sense, and are common to vs with beasts, are likened to Horses: The Hart and Braine wherein the Soule hath her chiefe residence, to the Seate of a Chariot, the whole bodie to a Chariot, and Reason the power of the Soule, to the Rider, which as with raynes keepeth back, or putteth forward the Affections, least they being too dull, should hinder from good: or too forwarde, should leade both bodie and soule to hurt: whence seemes to be taken the raigning of Princes: for they being of a farther reach and entendment than the common sort, do seeme no otherwise than the Rider doth the Horse, than Reason doth the Affections, to excell in ruling the common people, who are numbred among the three euills: Ignis, mare, Populus, tria ma∣la. In conclusion the Allegory holding as before, I may translate this verse. Fertur equis Auriga, nec audit currus habenas. Thus: Affections doo beare the man away, Which Reasons Rule, will neare adeale obay. 3 Nestor graunting naturall wit and consideration to his sonne, and yet gi∣uing him counsaile, or knowledge of Arte, doth confirme that difference, be∣tweene Consideration and Prudence, which is taken by Sir Thomas Eliot, viz. Consideration to be a bare considerance of the Causes, but Prudence to be with a consideration, a continuance also of the Causes helping, and an auoydance of the Causes hindering, the atchieuing of the ends of our purposes: that one be∣ing more proper to youth, this other to age. For which reason, Antilochus ha∣uing by sleight, not by prudence, gotten the prize from the wise and aged King Menelaus, yet deiecting himselfe, and acknowledging Menelaus his wisedome, offereth him his gotten prize, with these words: O Menclaus, suffer now this wrong, Your yeares are more, your wisedome greater too Than mine: for why, I am but very yong: And youth (you know) doo many waies misdoo. And though mine wit more readie be than thine, Thy prudent counsaile ouerreacheth mine. Which modest confession of Antilochus notwithstanding, yet wisedome is not alwaies in the gray haire, but in such as doo ouercome their Affections, accor∣ding to that saying: Sedatis & extinctis cupiditatum ardoribus, & calore iu∣uenili refrigerato, cum quadam tamen naturali probitate, senescere debent, qui sapientiam inhiant. But now for the councell or knowledge of Arte, which I haue said Nestor gaue vnto his sonne, it is to be remembred that the word  is translated Ars, Consilium, or Prudentia, and , the Coniugate thereof,
Artista, Consiliarius, or Prudens. Now, if Arte and Counsaile, an Artist and a Counsailor be conuerted, it should seeme, that a Councellor should haue skill in Arte, especiallie, for that, that our Lawes are knowne by the name of Iurispru∣dentia, and Arte, and Prudence, are signified by one and the same word . 4 I hope I shall not stretch the figure, if by the more swiftnes of Horses, I vn∣derstand, a greater promptnes and alacritie of wit in some, than in other some. For by likening the Affections to Horses, I entend all other naturall gifts com∣mon to vs with Beasts, as Ingeny, in which the Foxe excelleth the Asse, and in which, some men exceed others naturallie, and yet they againe, by Arte & good habite of them, whom they doo naturally excell for wit, are themselues excel∣led: which meaning I applie to this place. The excellencie of Arte, aboue natu∣rall wit, may appeare by the euent of that controuersie betweene Atax and Vlis∣ses, in penning whereof, Ouid, though in other matters he goeth beyond many other Latine Poets, yet therein he excelleth himselfe: In which controuersie, though he attribute vnto Aiax a good naturall wit, as appeareth in that, he vr∣ged, whatsoeuer might stand, to the setting out of his owne worthines, in re∣membring the leawd and cowardlie pranckes of Vlisses, in extenuating those deedes of Vlisses, whereby he had gotten credite with the Graecians, yet Vlisses by more skilfull and artificiall insinuation with the Iudges, in vrging his own Acts with more modestie, and Aiax his faults more sharplie, in extenuating his good deedes more cunninglie, and either passing ouer with silence, putting ouer to o∣thers, or els auoyding fault with fault, one of his owne by obiecting another to Aiax, he got the Armour, which causeth the Poët to conclude. Mota manus procerum est, &c. The Nobles, which were Iudges, did agree, And then, what cunning could, a man might see: The strong mans harnes, was the wise mans see. Which excellencie of cunning aboue wit and strength, may also appeare by that part of Vlisses his speach, wherein he compareth himselfe with Aiax, to this meaning: I doo foresee, but thou without a minde Bearst strength: thou knowest to fight, but I the fit Seasons for battaile, with Atrides finde: Thou but in bodie: we excell in wit. How much the Pilot doth the Mariner, How much the Captaine doth excell his man, So much am I for policie thy better: And of my bodie, by mine heart I can Performe by farre, more than I may by hand: In inward parts doth all the glorie sland. Which excellencie of wisedome aboue strength, may also appeare by the me∣timent, wherewithall Master Martin Luther is said to haue iested at those Swa∣trouters,
so called of their blacke Curtolles, wherewith they serued, and at such other Launce Knights, who cutting their horse tailes the beautie of horses, ware feathers in their helmets (a feather and a penne, being in Latin signified by one word Penna) entending, that now Souldiours did cease to take their glorie from strength, which they defaced, and ascribed the same to learning, which they ad∣uaunced. 5 This Simile is herein excellent, because (as I haue elsewhere shewed) Me∣zimmah, which signifieth Structura, signifieth also, Prudentia, or Dolus mali∣tiosus, no difference, being betweene Prudence and Subtiltie, in the manner of doing, but in the purpose of the doer: So as Prudence being in the Hebrew tongue, so called of a building: the Simile seemeth good. I knowe not whether the ruling of the Magistrate may be said of the Carpenter his Rule, wherewith he ordereth in iust measure and proportion. The Pilot: Tully hath the same Simile, whereof Princes are said, Clauum te∣nere Reipub. To sterne the Common-wealth. That of the Couchman: is continued through the whole discourse, and is commended as before. 6 The mind may bee said to bee besides her gouernment, or to stray either by impotencie of nature, by euill habite, or by want of good habite: when the de∣fect is by nature, we call the man either a naturall, or an ideot. An Ideot, may be said he, that exercising the phantasie with idle contemplations, neuer discendeth to particulars. But, when this exercise is in iudgement vnto some certaine end, then is it no fault, but necessarie to studie: for who was more famous amongst the Philosophers for any thing, than was Plato, called Diuinus, for his Idëa? which signifieth (originalis rerum species) or as Tully calleth it (ferè species) it see∣meth therefore, if vniuersalls be the beginnings of Studie: that they which la∣bour almost wholly in particulars, goe not the neerest way. If this vse of the minde, be in Diuinitie, it is most commendable: for the Apostles are called : for they do lift from earthly things, and therfore are called separatae formae, and of , commeth the verbe , to see, which is as commonlie spoken of the mind as of the Sense: whence cunning men were sometimes called Seers: and these make one part of Arte. But if this qualitie of the mind, in considering Vniuersales do there rest, not discending to particulars, the knowledge of which are the other part, or orderlie perfecting of Arte, Arte being of things also, and not all onely, of those separated formes: then is it said of such Schollers, that the greatest Clarkes are not the wisest men. That straying of the minde, which commeth by euill habite, is either when a man is De non sane memory, or non compos mentis: The first, when reason is vtterlie defaced, comming, either by o∣uer labouring the minde, or by predominance of the affections, which make a man forget what he sometimes was, or by cuill habite of the bodie, either in health, by defect, or superfluitie of meates, defect of sleepe, or by sicknesse. The other may come by the same meanes, but differeth in the manner, as being able which the other cannot) to speake the trueth in manner of discourse, but not in (the matter of discourse, as of him, that would fetch ouer the old Moones, and would bring ouer Ilands, because younger brothers wanted in England. The
minde straieth for want of good habite, either when wee are deceaued in the Principles, or in not exact considering of the particulars: or else when the mind hath not gotten the masterie of the Affections, but reason yeeldeth, by reason of the continuall fight betweene the flesh, and her Ruffians with the Soule, which is called , The warre of nature, whence Ouid maketh Medea, being in loue with Theseus, to dispute her owne cause, thus, pro, and contra. Shake off (if that thou mayst) from maidens brest These flames of loue, which thou doest entertaine: Vnhappie, if I could, it were my best, But this new force doth otherwise constraine: And when that loue one thing perswades me to, Reason, another thing, would haue me do. Reason being at the last ouercome, she thus concludeth. I see the best, and doe allowe the same, I follow bad. 7 The Aegyptians, by an eye, looking foreright, in their Hierogliphikes, be∣tokened Prudence: And thereto agreeth the common saying: Remember the end, and thou shalt not doo amisse: which I vnderstand, to be spoken not onely concerning death, but also concerning the practizes of Studie. 8 Soft fire makes sweete malt, and Soft and Sure, are the Prouerbes. The words in this place, are, Bouinis loris, An oxes pace: for Softnes Ennius commen∣deth Fabius. One man delaying, hath restorde our wealth, Not prizing Rumors higher than our health. 9 That the shame of being foyled, ought to bee a great encouragement to well doing, whence Nestor bidding his sonne beware, least in vnaduised dri∣uing, he should wound his horses and breake his Chariot, he addeth what would thence followe. Sport to thy fellowes, but a shame to thee, Considering therefore, all so prudent bee. Which in our purpose, differeth not much from that of Horace. Of idlenes contempt will growe in end: Oh shame for me to liue without a frend. And that of Virgil. He knowing his owne Vertues, Very shame Doubled his strength, and did his force enflame. 10 Perseuerance is councelled: which is hence noted in Antilochus, that when Atrides being offended, did counsaile him to driue after another manner than he did. Antilochus, without regard or feare, Droue faster still, as one that did not heare.
11 In generall, Arte is after one manner thus described, Ars est  con∣sideratio ex finibus assumptis, Arte is the consideration of causes from  ends propounded: according vnto which, and orderlie consideration must be ta∣ken of the causes, as it is in this other description of Arte, Ars est ratio, ordi∣nem & viam efficiens, Arte is reason, causing order and way: That is ordering, and making easie: So that from both these descriptions one more plaine may be drawne, which is this: Arte is an orderlie consideration of the Causes from certaine ends propounded: For, that which in the latter is saide Reason, is here Consideration: Order is included by his Coniugato; Orderlie; way is an effect and no efficient cause of Arte: for as a faire way is to a traueller, so is a way made by Arte, pleasant to a Scholler. FINIS.
CERTAINE Generall Conclu∣sions concerning the condi∣tion of our Common Lawes, and that of the same there may be made a Science. By R.R. &c. Let no man seeke his owne, but euery man anothers wealth. 1. Cor. Chap. 10. vers. 24. As when an Eunuch offereth violence to a Virgin, so doth he which abuseth the Lawes. Eccles. At London. 1587.
Certaine generall Conclusions con∣cerning the condition of our Common Lawes. 1 That of many imperfect Lawes, our Common Lawe, as hauing fewer imper∣fections, is most perfect. THis shall be manifested by comparison. First, The Lawes of the Medes & Persians were of such con∣dition, as that they might not be altered, whereby was taken away that Rule, which is the very Si∣nowes of all Lawes. Quod inconsultò fecimus, con∣sultò reuocemus: Like vnto these were the written lawes of the Athenians. It is said of the Venetians, who (besides our Common weale) are of all Na∣tions in the world chieflie gouerned by Common Lawes of their owne: He that shall substanciallie consider the manner of their proceedings, shall plainlie see that all matters are determined by the Iudges consciences, and not by the Ciuill nor yet by their owne Lawes: but all good Lawes grounded vpon reason doo exercise a power ouer the Judge himselfe, as shall be more plainlie shewed in the 9. Conclusion. Againe, it is said of their Lawes, that in triall of matter vpon life and death, the partie himselfe is neuer suffered to speake, but he hath an aduocate for him, and the Auagadori against him: So that many times the person tarieth two, three, and sometime foure yeares or euer he come vnto his triall of life and death. It is otherwise, and better in our Lawe, where the per∣son is not onely suffered to speake, but also diuers prisons haue bookes touching Plees of the Crowne, by which some of them during the time of their imprison∣ment, become so cunning, as that they cannot onely iudge of their owne case, but also instruct others, whose cases are different from theirs: besides the Ses∣sions or Gaole deliuerie are often times: so as the persons are not long troubled with the feare of death, which is worse than death it selfe. If wee shall compare our Lawe with the Ciuill Lawe, a learned Lawier Master Fortescue hath giuen an instance, how in the Ciuill Law triall is by witnesses onely, but in our Lawe by witnesse and by the Countrey, where also it is lawfull by iust proofe to except against a witnesse, and where the Iurie (if the action be locall, of lands or hou∣ses) is panelled, from, or as neere as may be to that Countie where the thing in controuersie lieth: which is a speciall poynt, in asmuch, as in vaine are good lawes made, if that in triall they may be corrupted.
Accipe sio legum errores, & crimine ab vno, Disce omenes. But our lawes, as the lawes of the famous Law-giuer Licurgus, are not writ∣ten, that is, they are not therefore lawes, because that they are written, as those of the Persians and Athenians, but they are yearely obseruations vpon manners, as are our yeare-bookes: whence it is said of the lawes of the Lacedemonians, and so likewise many be sayd of our lawes: Lacedamonij verò, non jure scripto, sed moribus tantùm vsu annorum comprobatis pro legibus vse sunt: Ideóque Locurgus leges scriptas Spartanis nullas dedit, sed omnium conscensu, mores, tanquàm silex edita fuisset, experiundo obseruárunt: hi{que} adeò tenaces fuêre, vt omni scripto ju∣ri anteïrent. So that hence may be gathered two extremities: one, in attributing too much vnto the writing, as those of the Medes and Persians, and of the Athe∣nians: another, in attributing too little to the writing, that is, to the written rea∣son as those lawes of the Venetians, betweene both these standeth our lawe, nei∣ther giuing too much to the lawe, which without good reason is written, nor taking any thing from that lawe which is written with good reason. 2 That it is impossible that our Lawes, as they are now, should be perfect. LIke as is the cause, such is the effect: but man in his reason vnreformed, is imperfect, therefore cannot the lawes be perfected without Logique, which is a Reason reformed. The waies of God are perfect with iustice in mercie, but the lawes of men are mercilesse iustice, or rigor, whence the lawe is thus described: Lex est commune praeceptum, virorum prudentium, delictorum, quae sponte vel ignorantia contra∣huntur coërtio, Reip sponsio communis. Iustice, in regard of the imperfection and vntrueth of the precept, which no way can preiudice the perfection and trueth of Arte, is thus described: Iustitia est constans & perpetua VOLVNTAS suum cuique tribuendi: And againe, Lex est ratio suum vnicuique tribuens, vel id saltèm AFFECTANS. Last∣ly, because that by the alteration of times, it may bee necessarie to alter the lawes. 3 That though the Lawe in it selfe be rigorous and imperfect, yet as much as the common profite will suffer, it is made gentle, mercifull, and perfect by the Chauncerie. FOr that is one end of that Court, and is therefore called a Court of Consci∣ence, because it reasoneth on the part of the Complaynant by Argument ta∣ken from the law of nature Quod tibi fieri non vis alters ne feceris: & hence also is it called Cancellaria quasi Cancellans, as taking away & anihilating the extre∣mities of the Common Lawes: So is the Clients matter in the Common Law termed a Case, but in the Chauncerie a Cause: A Case it is termed because, ac∣cording to the description of casus (casus dicitur quandò prater efficientis scopum, nec necessariò, neque euidenti causa antecedente, aliquid accidit) the partie at the Common Law doth not of himselfe know the reason or cause why it is by law adiudged with, or against him: but it is otherwise in the Chauncerie, where he is more able by light of nature to foresee the end, and to giue a reason himselfe of his cause or matter.
The Iudge at the Common Lawe by reason maketh iust, or putteth a finite determination of the Lawe: but the Chauncerie adding nothing, it onely ma∣keth equall, that is, by the vse thereof it tendeth more to a perfection: as when a Carpenter hauing cut his piller, doth not so leaue, but proceedeth to polish it: whence it is said of the Iudge of the Common Lawe, Ratio statuentis: and of the Iudge in the Chauncerie, Aequitas decernentis. Where note that the Lord, Chauncellor is entitled with a speciall addition of discretion, because that he ought so to relceue the case of a priuate person, as not∣withstanding the prudence of the Law may be kept touching common profite, for better is it to suffer a mischiefe to one man, than an inconuenience to the whole Common-wealth: and of this ballancing or discerning in causes may it be said of the Lord Chauncellor, Qui sub libra mansuetudinis, & lenimento clementiae cuncta deliberat. Now, waying is not but of two seuerall matters; so as in one scale is the Common Lawe, in another Conscience: yet not that the Common Lawe doth neuer ioyne with Conscience, but because that Consci∣ence cannot euer in all cases be joyned with the Common Lawes, and is by rea∣son of the subtill practizes of common persons to deceiue lawes: so that the Iudge cannot so circumspectly pitch his hayes, but that these crastie fellowes will finde cuasions: for whereas Trespasse is described thus, Transgressio est, quic∣quid prater modum fit: and the manner or meanes of doing being but ab Acci∣dent in outward things, and the Common Lawe hauing abilitie to see no fur∣ther: such subtill deuisers, will so handle those offences which they make, as the causes of the same resting only inward in their hearts, the partie grieued shall be left remedilesse at the Common Lawes: wherefore in this Court is the mat∣ter brought to light from out his conscience: and as for a Foxe which like as a Beare or Wolfe, will not rudelie rush into euerie engyne made for his apprehen∣sion this grin as proceeding of further purpose is ordained, as in case of a Pledge by Moses lawes, the defendant was driuen to an oath to end controuersies. 4 That notwithstanding the Lawes are imperfect, yet that of them so much as they are they may be made an Arte. Because that Arte maketh nothing but of things alreadie made, putteth a di∣stinct determination. 5 That the Lawe though infinite in practize, is notwithstanding finite in pre∣cepts. FOr that thing may be certaine, finite, and perfect in precepts, which is vncer∣taine, infinite, and imperfect in practize: and so do I desire to be vnderstood whereas I said before of Reason that it was imperfect, wherby I meane, the prac∣tize of Logique, and so the practize of euery other Science: for I doubt not, but that there may be a perfect Logique. Ptolomey to this purpose putteth a conclu∣sion: Certa possunt esse, qua tamon sunt infinita: which the Logitian (as I take it) expounding, saith, Rations certa sunt, quae numero sunt infinita: And to this purpose the Wiseman himselfe seemeth to affirme, saying, Mans wisedome is vn∣perfect, and his knowledge in each Science vncertaine. But who knoweth not, that nothing is more proper to any thing, than certaintie is to a Science concer∣ning the precepts? therefore must this vncertaintie and this imperfection be vn∣derstood
of practize. The Lawyer saith of King E. 1. Quam juste, quàm miseri∣corditèr, quàm discretè erga subditos suos tempore pacis, pacis author, & amator se habuit, non ambigitur: cùm tantae aequitatis sit suae celsitudinis cura, quòd, in ca nullus judicum tàm attritae frontis, tàm temeraria sit presumptionis, quòd à ju∣stiae tramite, aliquatènus declinare, aut aequitatis excedere praesumat. By which speach as he maketh it plaine, that the Law is an Arte, and so finite and perfect, so elsewhere, though calling the Lawe an Arte, yet comparing the same to the game at the Chests, he calleth it both infinite and imperfect, which we therfore must vnderstand of the practize: as thus, Haec quidem ars arts lusili Scaccarij re∣ctè comparatur, tùm quod vtraque infinita est & imperfecta, tùm quòd sicut Rex, regem Scaccorum asfuta quarit subtilitate mactare, sic pars actrix litigád, vel disrationando, reum nititur conuincere, redargutum sua veritate, vel cautela. Againe, of God it is said, that his waies are vnsearchable, and his pathes past finding out, therefore mans doings may bee sought for, mans doings may bee found out. The Wiseman saith that it is, The glorie of God to keepe a thing secret, but the Kings honor is to search out a thing: It is a mans honor to bring a thing to light: as to make a Science of that which is obscure: To giue some light that the lawes infinite in practize are notwithstanding finite in principles and rea∣sons: let it be thus. As the Phisition hath finite Symples, and concerning them finite reasons, of which Symples, though he doo make infinite Compounds, yet are they all prooued good or bad to that end whereunto they are prepared, by reasons drawne from the finite Simples: So the Lawyer hath his finite elements, Acts, Persons, Things, and their Adiuncts, and concerning them finite reasons, of which though he compound Cases infinite, yet are all those cases decided, ac∣cording to the finite reasons of the finite elements. 6 That such Lawyers as affirme, that there is no science of the Lawes, doe af∣firme that they professe they knowe not what. BEcause (that except the Law be wholly knowne) there may be somewhat in the lawe which not being in the Councellor his knowledge may alter the case. Besides it is said, Forma dat esse, because that in all studie wee striue to per∣fection, which is a Science: therefore in that respect can no man be said to know the same, except he knowe the same as a Science: For as a web of Arras, beauti∣full for diuersitie of colours, goodlie for proportions, and profitable for the mat∣ter of the storie, is nothing so beautifull, nothing so goodlie, nothing so profi∣table, when as it is mangled and cut in peeces: so the Lawe dispersed here and there confusedlie, is nothing so beautifull, nothing so goodly, nothing so profi∣table, as if it were built vp in one Structure: Notwithstanding, if a man knowe the whole lawe but for any one case, for so much he may be said to haue the science of the whole lawe. 7 That for want of the science of the Lawes, the Queene way sometime loose her right, what she doth by lawe may be suspected of wrong: Iustice may be corrupted in the Iudge and Officer, and the making of the lawes more perfect, greatlie hindered. WIthout instance I will speake in a generall manner, thus: because that such matters in lawe as are of one sort, as well of the Crowne, as of right
and title in land, of debt, of trespasse, and of the case with the duetie and autho∣ritie of officers in iudgement, as also of the writs, and of the Acts of Practize, lye so confounded togither, as forgetfulnes & neglect may cause ignorance through their misorders: whereas by Arte an easie way is made to finde euerie thing, and that fullie and whollie in his proper place: for that is the effect of Arte: whence a learned man faith, that Arte worketh, Vt non sit necesse quaerents, cae∣pitulorum numerosit atem euoluere, cui, breuit as collecta, quod quaritur, offert si∣ne labore. And of Diuision, it is said, Diuisio animum legentis incitat, mentem intelligentiae praeparat, & memoriam artificioè reforman. The Lawes (if in a Science) might bee greatlie perfected: because that with better iudgement doo we apprehend and iudge of the effects of that thing which is composed and set vp before our eyes, than of that which is dispersed, and is not all at once presen∣ted vnto vs. 8 That Logique is the instrument of the science of the Lawe. Because that it is the instrument of all Sciences. 9 That any argument drawne from Diuinitie or humanitie (sauing the pru∣dence of the Law, wherein may be crossed no rule of Diuinitie) is of forcible proofe, though there be no bookes for it. THis is prooued by the first definition of law: and he that shall denie a good argument so drawne for want of a booke, shall doo asmuch as take away the Sunne, from which the Lawe as the Moone taketh her light: for the prin∣ciples which are taken from the lawe of God, of nature and of reason, are many more than those which are of Man, and are giuen by the absolute discretion of the Iudge, and which doo concerne the prudence of the Lawe. And therefore hereunto may be applied that saying of a Lawyer: Leges autem Anglicanas, li∣cèt non scriptas, leges appellari, non est absurdum: Si enim ob solum scripturae de∣fectum leges minimè censerentur, maioris procùl dubio auctoritatis robur, ipsis le∣gibus videretur accommodare scriptum, quàm decernentis aequitas, aut ratio sta∣tuentis. 10 That though it require great practize to knowe the whole bodie of the Law and to order the same, yet may it being ordered and well opened be with∣out difficultie vnderstood of a man, which is no Lawyer. BEcause that to make easie is the end of Arte, and because that it is easier (as experience teacheth) to vnderstand many principles well put together, than to put many principles well together. So therefore may a man hearing the Lawe well deliuered, vnderstand the same, though he doo not professe the studie of it. 11 That whereof there is no reason giuen, that can be no Lawe, and so that the elder Lawe, if it haue the better reason, is the better Lawe. BEcause that the Lawe is nothing else but reason, and (as Tully saith) that Ve∣nus taketh her name à Venustate, not Venustas à venere, so may it be said of
the Iudge, that he taketh his name Iudex à Iudicio, not Iudicium à iudice. Rae∣mus he saith of the inartificiall argument, which is Testimony, whereof Lawe is a species, Argumentum in artificiale est, quod non sua natura, sed assumpta ali∣cuius artificialis vi arguit: It aque cùm exquisita rerum veritas subtiliùs exqui∣ritur, perexiguam vim probationis habet: in ciuilibus autem, & humanis rebus plerumqùe hoc argumentum praecipuam fidem è moribus arguentis efficit, si pru∣dentia, virtus, & beneuolentia adfuerint. 12 That of the two, it were better the Lawes were bad, and the Lawyers good, than to haue good Lawes and bad Lawyers. BY how much the efficient is more worthie than the effect: for a good Law∣yer being a good man, of necessitie must make good Lawes, but not con∣uertibly: for good Lawes are abused sometimes by the practizes of the profes∣sors themselues: whence is that saying, Meliùs gubernatur ciuitas ab optimo vi∣ro, quàm ab optima lege. In Conclusion. THat the Lawes (though in themselues sometimes too strict) are qualified, and so though being imperfect, are perfected, and though imperfect yet may they bee made an Arte: though Cases and their reasons are vncertaine and infinite in practize, yet are they certaine and finite, in precepts: though hard at the first to bee knowne and ordered, yet being ordered, they may with more ease be vnderstood by the Student, and by him being well opened may without great difficultie be vnderstood by the Client. FINIS.
WHo knowes to plot the fashion of a frame, Albeit, it flatter not vnlearned eyes, Tis like, can tell, how to set vp the same, Through little chinkes, that who such light espies, Encouraging he hasteneth for an end The good beginnings of a louing frend. But wretched I, for sight though not the worst, My feebled wits supporting ill their charge Surcharg'd (alas) in chase by men accurst, (Whose honny mouthes their hidden wrongs enlarge) As toyled Deere seekes shelter in the Towne, Do flie those curres, before you falling downe. For, well I knowe your helpe and fauour might Be staues, whereon my fainting Muse should guide Such steps, that Error could not strangle Right Through ideot tongues, or hearts of hellish pride: Your Honor shall be rich in title then, As Princes earst, a fosterer of Men. Malum, patienti, Lucrum.
