24740 S101789 99837592 1924
A IOVRNALL OF ALL THE PROCEEDINGS of the Duke of BVCKINGHAM his Grace, in the Isle of Ree, a part of France. Whereunto is added the names of the French Nobilitie that were slaine. Set forth by a Gentleman of speciall note who was a Spectator of all that hapned. Published by Authoritie. LONDON Printed for Thomas Walkley, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Eagle and Childe in Britaines-Bursse. 1627.
A IOVRNALL OF ALL the proceedings of the Duke of BVC∣KINGHAM his Grace, in the Ile of Ree, a part of France. 1627. IVne the 24. 1627. being Sunday the Duke being in the good Ship of the Kings called the Triumph, weyed Ankor in Stodes Bay, and sayled so farre as St. Hellens Point; and on the Wednesday following, set saile from that place, and was followed by 100. sayle of Ships, little more or lesse. That day we tackt to and againe, vntill wee had recouered the point East of the Ile of Wight: And on the Thursday wee stood on our way towards the West, vntill wee were come almost to the height of Plimouth; and then about 8. of the clocke at night we stood off to the Sea East and by South, and vpon the Fry∣day wee did see a point of Land on our Larboard bowe in our iudgements 12. leagues off, called the Vshing, in 47. degrees, or thereabout (a part of France.) Then we stood off to the Sea that day, and Saturday, and Sunday, and Monday: on Monday towards night we did see 14. sayle of Ships a head of vs, which stood in toward vs about one houre,
but by that time they had deserued what we were, not liking to speake with vs, they stood away to the West before a winde: The Lord Admirall with 60 sayle of ships stood after them, some 24. houres, but could not come vp to them, but did perceiue them to bee Dunkerks; and then againe stood on his way for his intended Port. Hauing lost the Lord Haruey in the Repulse, with some 40. Saile of ships with him, which did not follow the Admiral at the first pursuit of Dunkerks, but stood still to the East, and there they plyed to and againe for 8. dayes; So that the Admirall was come to Anchor neere the East end of the Ile of Ree on the Monday: and the Lord Haruey came thither on the Wednesday, being the 10. of Iuly: but both had one part of one storme. For the Nonsuch of the Kings had spent her Fore mast, and some of the ships that were with the Repulse lost their long Boates (being towed at their sterne) but our happy meeting againe made our losse to seeme the lesse. So we spent two nights and one day in Counsell, and determining what was to be done to our best aduantage; and so at last it was determined that the Souldiers should be landed on thursday at the East end of the Ile of Ree, which was done about 3. of the clocke in the af∣ter-noone, the Duke in person with the foremost,
and causing them to recouer as much ground as they could on the side of the hill: Did take his Barge againe, accompanied with master Grimes Gentleman of the Horse, and goes from one Shipp to another, to pray them to make all the hast they could possible: but returning to the Land againe, he found them in such a desperate manner running into the Sea, to catch hold of any Boat to be gone, that they drowned themselues and others: but tht Duke to appease these Reuolters, stands in the head of the Barge, with his Sword drawne in his hand, praying some, and taxing othersome with feare and cowardise, to returne to their Comman∣ders on the shore, which were in great danger: for had not Coronell Borowes and Coronell Brett be∣stird themselues like valient men, and keeping their Regiments from Routing, the Enemy had had the honour of the day to all likelyhood, (for neuer was seene so braue a Charge as this. They did suffer vs to land some 2000. men, and then did the French Horse in 3. troopes, some 200 or more and some 1200 foot so valiently charge into the middest of our Army vp to the saddle into the Sea, and so valiently behaued themselues, that very few of the Horse that came one did euer get of. If their Foot had bin as desperate as their Horse, without question we had lost the honour of the
first encounter: but God the disposer of all things, strooke the Enemy with such feare, that they made as much hast as they could to be gone, and left vs to land all our men, and order them in battell array: the which was done that day, and the next all our Forces both men and horse were landed, and ma∣king good that Fort, we did not stirre from thence before Saturday night, and then aduancing for∣ward not more then halfe a mile, wee rested that night. On the Sunday Morning we marched vp into the Iland at least 3. miles to a towne called Allaflote where the Minister and some of the chiefe Pro∣testants of the towne came to our generall (the Duke) and did deliuer themselues and Towne into his hands: praying him that he would bee fa∣uorable vnto the Papists, and not put them to the mercy of the Souldiers, for feare least heareafter the day that was lost might be recouered and so the Protestants should be put all to the sword, the which the Duke taking into consideration did charge all the Soulders vpon paine of death, not to stirre from theire collors, so they rested all that night in the field and the Duke did take part with them, lying in the head of Coronell Borowes Regiment on a canuas Horse couered with two
cloakes, his followers lying on the ground about him: The next day a councell was called, and it was agreed on, that we should martch towards St. Martins on the Tuseday morning, which was done; the Duke and Mounsier Sebuesa, accompanied with some Lords and Knights did accompany the corps of Sir William Hayden to the Earth with much griefe, for the vnfortunat death of so worthy a man, hee was buried at Allaflota, the Duke returnes to lodge in the field, but that night it did so Lighten, Thunder, and Raigne, that I haue seldome seene the like. On the Tewsday morning we marched on our apoyinted way although the morning was but little fairer then the night, but it pleased God that before twelue of the clock the sunne did shew it selfe fauourable in drying our wet cloathing, the enemy did send out many scouts to looke vpon vs, but I thinke the longer they lookt on vs, the worse they liked vs, for I thinke our Armie from Front to Reare did take vp at least one Mile and halfe: Yet then did march out of their fort some troopes of Horse, and some companies of foote and did make a shew as if they would giue vs a battaile, but bee∣ter aduising with themselues they suffered vs to Martch vntill we had gained both Sun and Winde of them.
The Duke did at that instant time so couragious∣ly martch in the formost companies, that it did so animate the Souldiers, that I haue hard many of the Souldiers wish that the French would stand one Encounter, that they might shew theire loue vnto theire Generall (but that would not be at this pre∣sent,) after we had martched vp to the East side of the towne so farre as the Sea would giue vs leaue: we began to come nearer to the towne, our Drakes performing their parts on the Horsemen that came foorth to see vs, and killed one gentleman and two Horses. About fiue of the clocke at night, some of the chiefe men of the Towne came foorth with a flagge of truce, and did offer to deliuer themselues and towne into the hands of our Generall: they being Protestans that were left, the Duke accepted of their offer, and so marching into the Towne, and quartring his Soldiers in seuerall parts of it, did ride vp to the Prison house, to see if any English were there, but finding none he returned to the water side, where Collonell Borowes quarter was, ther did he see the malice of the enemie in burning of three good ship in the Harbour that had bin taken from the English: and then taking his barge, he went aboard the ships, commanding all them to send victuals a shore for his Souldiers, so
that there was no want of any thing, although the Enemie had taken all their owne prouision, and the Protestants away with them into the Fort: and now doe they begin to batter night and day vpon the Towne with their Ordnance; but al∣though they had battered from Tuesday vntill Fri∣day night, I could not heare of more then one man that was killed: although the Fort be within Mus∣ket shot of the Towne, and the shot flying into all parts of the Towne as on Thursday as the Duke and Sabuesa were talking, there came two shot so neere them, that they were faine to goe to end their discourse in some other place: It was appointed that on the Saturday twenty field-Peeces at least & nine Drakes should be mounted against the Fort, with our Pyoners and our Souldiers to make some Trenching worke: but that I cannot speake of, but will pray for a good successe to their intent and pur∣pose: and so for England with the good Shippe of the Kings called the Charles, whom God preserue. Saturday the 20. of Iuly. 1627.
A note of such Commanders and Officers as were slaine in the first encounter at the East of the Ile of Ro, the 12. day of Iuly. 1627. Slaine. Sir William Haydon Master of the Ordnance. Mounsier Blankart he was Chiefe for Mounsier Sabesa. Sir Thomas Thornax Lieutenant Coronell. Sir Thomas Yorke quarter Master Generall. Captaine Babington. Captaine Glinne. Captaine Goring. Captaine Blundon. Captaine Cuntrey. Captaine Woodhouse Corporall of the field. Captaine Heatley. Captaine Iohn Powell. Captaine Morgan Powell. Lieutenant Anderson. Lieutenant Sidnam. Lieutenant Grimsham. Master Iohnson Enginer. Ensigne Champernone. Ensigne Goardon. Master Iohn Temple. Master Netherton quarter Master.
Hurt. Sir George Blundon Sergeant Maior Generall. Sir Charles Rich Coronell. Sir Edward Conoway Coronell. Sir Richard Grinfild. Sir Edward Halley. Captaine Abraham. Captaine Rainsford. Lieutenant Welcome. Lieutenant Marcome. Lieutenant Thornax. Ensigne Bennet. Sir Edward Conawayes brother. There was slaine of the French that day 125. Horsemen, of them was 23. Marquesses, and Barons, and Knights, and the rest all Gentlemen of note in France: and of the foote Companies some Commanders slaine of note, and com∣mon Souldiers the number vncertaine: this Battell did not last much more then halfe an houre. There is in this thing to be noted the Dukes Noblenesse, in that hee gaue them leaue to take away the slaine Bodies of these Noble men, without paying one penny for them, although they did offer largely as 1000. pound for one bo∣dy, and in giuing them leaue to carrie their wounded bo∣dies ouer to the maine land to looke for cure, and himselfe did imploy his owne Chirurgions to dresse some of them abord the Tryumph.
Slaine of the Nobilitie of France. Monsier du Plessis Hay. Monsier de Fueil. Monsier de Roche Tauchuyn. Monsier de la Chantebouchere. Monsier de la Quichachere. Monsier de la luniere. Monsier de la Touche Vuchere. Monsier de la Pitneytiere. Monsier de la Leruantiere. Monsier le Baron de Cauze. Monsier de Souigny. Monsier de Noudille. Monsier de Bossonide. Monsier de Montaigne. Monsier de Lorboby. Monsier de Tablay. Monsier le Baron Chantail. Monsier de la Laude. Monsier de Nuelle. Monsier St. Surin. Monsier de Conte Tamini, &c. With other Gentlemen of note in France who were slaine with these French Noblemen in all amounting to 125.
A Iournall. WEdnesday the 26. of Iune we set saile, but hauing the winde very contrary, we beate vp and downe the Sea vntill the second of Iuly, when we discouered 14. Sailes of Dunkerkers, (as we afterwards vnderstood;) My Lord Generall appointed some of his Shippes to chace them, who pursued them all night and next day, and fol∣lowed them so close as they were forced in the night to fling ouerboord some of their Ballast and their Stuffe, and to put foorth studding Sailes, and goe right before the winde, hauing lost ground vpon a tack and at veering, and so not without difficultie escaped vs. From that day we beate vp and downe the Sea vntill the eight of Iuly, when the winde came good. On wednedsday the tenth, we had a great tempest and verie thicke weather, and so obscure, as being driuen by the winde neere the coast, and in the morning (not being able to make land) we ran a great hazard: But God be thanked, about noone the weather growing more cleere, we discouered the Ile of Retz, and the same day we entred into the Pertuy Breton. The chase of the Dunkirkers did seperate the Squadron of the Reare Admirall from vs (together) with some other Shippes, so as my Lord Duke staying for the arri∣uall of the rest of the Fleete, did nothing on tewesday at night, & on wednesday morning but compasse the Iland with his Vessels, and stop all the entrances into the Iland. On wednesday at night arriued my Lord Heruey very happily with the Reareward, and next day at noone we landed. After we had put on shore vpwards of one thousand Foote, the Enemie (who had laine in certaine hollow groundes) began to appeare, with aboute 300. or 400.
Horse, the greatest part Gentlemen well quallified, and neere one thousand Foote of the Regiments of Cham∣pagne. The Horsse were deuided into fiue squadrons, whereof three gaue on very furiously, and made three Ralims and charges againe; and by the report of all that saw them, neuer Caualiere did better; So as they draue some of our new Men, who were the last landed, & the least in order, into the Sea, where some of them were drowned; and they ouerthrew some Boates and drowned some Gentlemen of quallitie of our side who were pres∣sing on to get on Land, and came within Pistoll shot of my Lord Generall, who was all the while close by the Shore in his Bag, calling foorth and disposing of the Boates as they went on land, for the second discharge of the Boates after he had been on land with the first, and caused them to be drawne into a fitte place: But of those who gane on, there were about 120 slaine, of the princi∣pall Gentry, and the most forward, with Pikes, Swords, and the but end of the Soldiers Muskets; the rest got off, most of them or their Horses wounded and vtterly rou∣ted: And the two other Companies comming to giue on, iust as they were routed, were so astonished, as they wheeled aboute, and neuer gaue stroake. The Infanterie came on in an other part, and gaue their first Fires as neere and with as much resolution as was possible; But after they had tasted of our Pikes, they gaue quickly ouer, and ran away in the foulest disorder that could be, and did not that day answere the opinion that all France hath of the Regiment of Champagne. My Lord Generall had ordered certaine Shippes to scoure the landing place with their Ordinance, but the assault was so sodaine as they did little hurt to the Enemy; and in the very heate of the Combate, it fell out that one of our owne Shippes had engtangled himselfe betweene our battering Shippes and the Land, by which meanes they were hindred in performing of their charge. The Enemie lost so manie Noblemen and Gentlemen of
Marque, as the Horsse haue hardly euer since shewed themselues, nor neuer attempted any thing with effect: And the Foote haue kept themselues wholy retired in their Cittadell. That night and the next day was spent on our side in retrenching & in putting necessaries for our Soldiers on Land, and in landing of our Horsse. The Enemie sent a Trumpet with the Barron of Am∣bleuille, to demande the Dead, who was receaued with such curtesie, and the Dead rendred with such Militarie ho∣nors, as they confesse themselues no lesse vanquished by my Lord Generalls Fauours, then by his Armes. The 14. day a Councell was kept, and the rest of the day was spent in vnshipping of the Ordinance & Muni∣tion, and preparing of eight Drakes to be drawne along with our Forces by Men for want of carriage: And at night the Armie was drawne into Battaile, and seuen Companies, with Colonell Bartu were left in the re∣trenchment. On the 15. day, our Armie marched by fiue in the morning, and tooke in Saint Marie and la Flote, where they lodged that night: In which places my Lord Gene∣rall left the Inhabitants in as great suerty and more liber∣tie then they were before; the Soldiers taking nothing but what they paide for. Mounsiere de Toyras had sent a brauing complement that he would visit him that day; for which, my Lord Ge∣nerall gaue the Bearer a good reward, but it prooued but a Complement. The 16. his Grace reposed the Armie, and buried the Bodie of Sir William Heydon, with all Militarie honour, himselfe and M. de Seabise accompaning the Corpes. On the 17. the Armie marched to Saint Martines, the principall Towne of the Iland, as great as Plimouth, where the Enemies Cauelerie did appeare againe, whome our Infanterie had so great a winde to be dealing with, as hardly the Officers could keepe them from setting on
them in disorder: But as they aduanced, they were s∣ted with one of our Drakes, which killed two or three Horses, and hurt some Men. Here one of our Cauelerie aduanced himselfe and prof∣fered a single Combat, but no Man answered him. This euening our Armie lodged as peaceably in Saint Martines as if we had been in Voyage and not in Warre; the Inhabitants receauing vs with great cheerefulnesse, embrasing M. de Subses feete, and calling him their good Prince. There were taken some hurt Men and some Prisoners in the Towne; and the Enemie quitting their Baricadoes, wholy retired themselues into the Citadell. And our Armie is now wholy employed in landing of our Canon, dressing our Batteries, and preparing our Trenches. FINIS.
A Continued August 17 IOVRNALL OF ALL THE PROCEEDINGS of the Duke of BVCKINGHAM his Grace, in the Isle of Ree, a part of France. Jn whom are combined Religion, Fortitude, and Clemencie; being the true Cha∣racters of a noble Generall. Published by Authoritie. LONDON Printed for Thomas Walkley, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Eagle and Childe in Britaines-Bursse. 1627.
A Iournall of the proceedings of my Lord DVKE in his Voyage. IVne the 24. 1627. being Sunday after Di∣uine Seruice and Sermon, the Lord Gene∣rall tooke his Barge, and enioyned all the Officers and Commanders to attend him to the Fleet, lying then at Anchor in Stokes Bay, which hee weighed the same day, and fell downe towards Saint Hellens poynt, where hee cast Anchor againe, and stayed there for want of winde till the 27. of Iune. The same night hearing there were some Commaunders behinde in the Towne, who kept disorder; he went a shore himselfe, and searcht all the houses in the Towne, where he found some Captaines that had been disorderly: Amongst the rest there was one that gaue an vnmannerly answere, who was casheered for his labour. That night the Lord Generall lay a shore: the next mor∣ning betimes he went a board. On Wednesday the 27. wee weighed Anchor with 100. sayle of Ships, and tackt to and againe vntill wee recouered the Poynt East of the Ile of Wight. Thursday the 28. wee stoode on our course towards the West, vntill we were come to the height of Plymouth, about eight of the clock at night: wee stoode West, and East, and by South. And on Friday the 29. wee sayled with a slacke winde; but before night wee got sight of land on our Lar∣board, seeming to be 12. leagues off a part of France, called the Vshant, in 47. degrees or there-abouts. Wee stoode on to Sea that night, with a fresh gayle of winde, which serued
vs vntill the next morning at two of the clocke, and then wee were becalmde till Monday the first of Iuly, at foure of the clocke. At which time we sent a Boy to the top of the mayne Mast, to see what he could discouer, he spied on the head of vs 14. sayle of Shipps some foure leagues off, and very fortu∣nately within a quarter of an houre after there arose a good gayle of winde fully with vs, so that the Admirall and all the rest made hast to hoyst vp sayle and chase these Ships. Before nine of the clocke at night a Catch of his Maiesties ouertook them, which was commanded by Captaine Dunning, he cal∣led to them and asked what they were, they tolde him a con∣trary tale: he desired then to winde about, and come aboard and speake with our Admirall. They bid him goe before to their Admirall, and what he did they would follow: he came to their Admirall and desired him to winde about and speake with our Admirall. Their Admirall asked Dunning what Fleete it was, he tolde him it was the King of Englands Fleet, hee asked what they were doing there: hee tolde them they were Tacking to and againe to scoure the Seas. No (saith he) I know you are going to Burdeaux, but there you will finde them prepared for you, and they will giue you hot seruice. Hee asked who was our Admirall, hee tolde them my Lord Duke of Buckingham. Whereupon hee fell in rayling, and called vs all Roagues and Rascalls, and commanded the Gun∣ner to shoote; he shot halfe a dozen shot at him, and shor him twice through the sayle, hard by the middle of the mayne Mast: so that Dunning fell a sterne of him, and tackt about to vs, and tolde vs what had past, and that he conceiued them to be Dunkerks men of Warre, very well appointed, which did much comfort our Generall, and all the rest. We chased them all night: and on Tuesday the 20. of Iuly at light day, wee had got neere vnto them with some of our Shipps. The Lyon had ot the Winde-ward of them. Three of the Colly∣ers, and the Maria, with the Catch, was got almost within shot of th, ut in this time they were throwing out their Ballest, and making themselues light: and when they had
done that, they hoysed vp studding Sailes, and after outsailed vs quite; We followed them so farre, as there was no hopes, and then wound about to our intended course: At foure of the clocke the same day, my Lord caused to send vppe to the maine Mast, to tell how manie Shippes we were in company, and we found we were then no more then three score; for we had lost in that Chase my Lord Haruey, with fortie saile of Shippes, who met not with vs till wednesday the 11. of Iuly. We were kept from the place where we intended (with contrarie windes and calmes) till tewesday the 10. of Iuly; About two of the clocke, then fell a violent storme, with a thicke mist, so that we were put into great danger. The Nonesuch in this storme had spent her Fore-mast, and many of the other Shippes lost their Long-boates, being ty∣ed at the Sterne. About eight of the clock the storme broke vp, and it grew to bee cleare; Then we discerned the Isle of Ree to be within three leagues of vs, whither we steered our course; And about ten of the clocke cast anchor ouer a∣gainst Saint Martines, the prime Towne in that Island. The Next morning being wednesday, we weyed anchor, and say∣led downe lower to a point of the Island next to the maine-Land, and ouer against Rochell. There we cast anchor, and placed our Shippes round about the Island, that the Enemie might neither export nor import any thing for their aduan∣tage. That done, being the 11. of Iuly, we had very good sport in chasing those Barques and Hoyes which were offering to goe from the Island to the maine-Land, and from the maine-Land to the Island: We tooke many of them, and there were none that got eyther in or out. About sixe of the clocke that day, my Lord Haruey appeares with his fortie saile of Ships, which was vnto vs a great comfort: About eight of the clocke the same day, the Lord Generall called a Councell, and resolued to land our Men the next morning, vpon that point which lay iust to vs, as being the most safe place; At which time he gaue order to some Shippes to batter a Fort, which
lay a league off on the right hand, & continued the battering till ten of the clocke the next day; then we found there was no resistance in the Fort, whereupon, the Lord Generall com∣manded to giue ouer. On tewesday the 12. the L. Generall was vp and readie by three of the clock in the morning, and receiued the Com∣munion that morning at fiue of the clocke, and after tooke his Barge and went aboard the Nonsuch to Monsiure Subcesa, and returned from thence at sixe: At seuen of the clocke, Monsiure Sabuesa, Monsiure Blancarte and Sir William Becher went to Rochell: At eight of the clocke, the L. Generall sent Master Grymes (the Gentleman of his Horse) with a Foote-boy of his that could both runne and swimme well, and sixe Muskatieres (to the point of the Island, where they were to land their Men) to see if they could discouer any Men or Ordnance, that they had planted there to encounter vs: When he came to the shoare, he caused the Foote-boy to strippe himselfe, and to run along, and he run three quarters of a mile into the Countrey, and found all that Coast cleere, sauing three Horse-men, that the Enemies had set out to be Scoutes, which chased him back to the Sea side; The Boy was releiued by the Ship Ordnance and the Muskets in the Boate: At ten of the clocke, he turned back to the Triumph, and gaue the L. Generall an accompt what he had discoue∣red; Whereupon, the L. Generall gaue present order for all Officers to be in a readinesse, and to meete him aboard the Kings good Shippe (called the Lyon) lying next the Pointe, where they were to land their Men, for there he would keepe his Randeuous for that time: At twelue of the clocke, he tooke his Barge, accompanied with Sir George Blundell Ser∣geant Maior, attended by M. Grymes and M. Ashburneham, and went to all those Ships that had Land Soldiers, and com∣manded them that they should presently draw themselues as neere that point of the Island as they could; After that, he went to all the Ships, and appointed the Captaines of them, how and where to attend with their Shippes, and commanded
them presently to prouide their Barges and long Boates, to land their Land Souldiers, and to send them to the Lyon. Hee then made choyse of tenne Ships of lesser burthen, and directed them to draw their Shipps as close as they could to either side of the point of the Island, where the Souldiers were to be Landed, and commanded them that if the Enemie did appeare within shotte, they should presently play vpon them. He being aboard at the same time of one of these Shippes, went vp to the top of the mayne Mast, and discouered of the Enemies three Troupes of Horse, and 16. or 18. hundred Foote, all ready in Battalia some English mile or more off the place, where wee were to land our men: hee came pre∣sently downe and tolde vs what hee had discouered, and shot at them himselfe two or three Peeces of Ordnance, and com∣manded the rest of the Peeces to play vpon them still: with that tooke Barge and went to the Lyon, where hee found all the Officers ready with their long Boates to land their men. In this time came backe from Rochell Monsieur Sabuesa, and Sir William Beecher, who stayed there till Saturday fol∣lowing. Monsieur Saint Blancart disswaded the Lord Ge∣nerall to forbeare the Landing of his men vntill the next morning: but the Lord Generall fearing it would giue time to the Enemie to strengthen himselfe. Hee would by no meanes heare of any delay. Whereupon Monsieur Saint Blancart like a braue man, choosed himselfe a Pike, and put himselfe into Sir John Burrowes Regiment. By this time it was three of the clocke when the Lord Ge∣nerall commanded to land two Regiments, that were of the olde Companies, whereof Sir Iohn Burrowes and Sir Alex∣ander Brett were Commanders, he went with them himselfe on shore, and appointed the two Colonels in what place they should land their men. And being landed, commanded them to put their men in Battalia with all speed, fearing the Ene∣mie vvould giue them a suddaine assault.
The men being vveary in lying on Shipboard, lingred vvashing their hands in the Sea; but the Lord Generall vvith a Cudgell runne to and fro amongst them, beating some, and threatning other-some, and got them thrust vp three Pykes length to the skirt of the banke, vvhere they vvere to be. There vvas a third Regiment that vvas ready to land: in the meane time came Sir William Courtney to the Lord Ge∣nerall, and tolde him, that vnlesse hee should doe the same curtesie for him vvhich he did for the other two Collonells, hee should not get his men landed, and that his vvere olde Souldiers, and vvould doe good seruice if the Enemie made assault. Whereupon my Lord called Sir William Courtney, & vvent into his Barge, vvith an intention to hasten a shore his Re∣giment, and as soone as he had gone about fourescore from the shore, hee presently heard the fight begun, and turning backe, he saw three Troupes of French Horse, charging our Foote vvith all the fiercenesse that might be: And the third Regiment, those that vvere vnlanded, pressing themselues amongst the Shippes to succour themselues: the rest of that Regiment that vvere landed hee sawe prest into the vvater by the French Horse; and Sir William Haydon being caried violently to the Sea by the Reuolters, was there drowned. Whereupon he set S. William Courtney into another Boate, with commande to make all expedition to get his Men lan∣ded; And very brauely himselfe drew his Sword, and turned his Barge (attended by Master Grymes and M. Ashburneham) and thrust himselfe vpon the Reuolters; and rebuking some, and encouraging others, told them, he hoped they came not with any intent but to aduenture themselues so farre as he would leade them: Wherevpon, he thrust himselfe on to the shoare, (and they followed slowly) and animating of the o∣ther Foote which were run into the water they most of them leapt out of the water, and vpon the Lord Generalls words threw themselues forwards as if they would haue fought brauely, but before we could get where the blowes were, the
Battaile was ended. My Lord Generall had ordered certaine Shippes to scoure the Landing place with their Ordnance, but the assault was so sodaine as they did little hurt to the Enemie; and in verie heate of the combate, it fell out, that one of our owne Shipps had entangled himselfe betweene our Battering shippes and the Land, by which meanes they were hindred in performing of their charge. If the French Foote had come on to haue charged present∣ly vppon the discharge of the Horse, it had been impossible that we could haue withstood them; But as God would haue it, the Horse-men made more hast then in iudgement they should haue don: Before the Foote came we had killed most of their Horses; But when the Foote did come, they came very orderly and brauely, being 1500. comming within a Pike and a halfe of our Men before they discharged; and the Leader of the Foote (being a braue and goodlie Gentleman) tooke off his hatte, wherevpon all their Foote discharged their Muskets, and after they fell to it with Swords and ph of Pike, vntill they were breathlesse on both sides: The French finding our Pikes to be longer than theirs threw away their Pikes, and went to it with Stones, and so did our Men, but ours beate them out, and made them flye away very dis∣orderly, that happie was he that got first off his Armor to betake him to his heeles. This Battaile did not continue in all much aboue halfe an hower, but our Horse were not yet landed; But if we had had twentie Horse to haue followed them, we had killed them vp euery Man. That night we intrenched our selues in that place, fearing the Enemie would giue vs an assault in the night. My Lord Generall spent that euening in viewing of the dead Bodies, and visiting those that were hurt on our side, and giuing great charge to the Chirurgions to take spe∣ciall care of them. We tooke fower of the French Gentlemen, but they were all hurt before; two of them dyed the next day, one of them
is aliue yet in the Tryumph, his thigh being shotte to peeces, the other, being a Page, the Lord Generall sent him to his Master. The next morning very earlie, the Lord Generall came on shore againe, and spent all the whole daie there, calling the Commanders to him, and ordering them to bring him notes of euery seuerall Companie, how many they were, and how manie were perished in the conflict; By which vve found, there was nineteene Captaines, Antients and Lieuetenants killed, and twelue other Officers hurt, but in no danger of death, and some thirty fiue common Soldiers drowned, but none killed; for the French men discharged all on our Gen∣try, and neuer looked at the Common sort. Our Gentry (when the common Soldiers began to route) clapt themselues together, and shewed themselues the brauest Men in the world, espetially Sir Iohn Burrowes, Sir Alexander Brett, Sir George Blundell, and a Brother of Sir Alexander Bretts: There was not one Gentleman of our Nation in the field that did not act his part brauely. This being Friday, the day after the Battaile, the 13. of Iuly, Monsieur de Thorax, Gouernour of the Island, sent the Barron Ambleuile with a Trumpet to speake wth the Lord Generall: His Message was, to desire my Lords fa∣uour to giue them leaue to fetch away their dead bodies: they being so suddenly demaunded by them, my Lord made scruple in granting it. Whereupon the Gentry made meanes by some of our Officers to buy the bodies, and offered for one 1000. pounds. When my Lord Generall had conside∣red, he gaue leaue that they should take them away. Within foure houres the Gouernours sent another Trum∣pet, with one of his Pages, to giue him thankes for his fa∣uour, and to report to him that he would neuer after harbour an ill thought of the English, for hee iudged the Gentry of them to be the brauest men in the world. Although before the Battaile he made no more account of vs then if wee had beene all Beeues: and enquiring what number we were, wee
tolde him 6000. He said he would kill vs and salt vs, as wee did Oxen in England. At the same time he sent my Lord Generall word, that he would wayte on him himselfe, so that we made full account that hee would giue vs Battell. The same day wee put our selues in Battalia, and expected them all that day, yet hee came not. The next day being the 14. of Iuly, we made our selues ready to Martch, and at 6. of the clocke we marched an English mile further into the Countrey, leauing Sir Pere∣grine Bartue in the place with some Companies. The 15. by 6. of the clocke in the morning, vve marched on to a Village vvithin an English mile, and tooke in that vvithout any disturbance. Then vve marched on two Eng∣lish miles further, to a Towne called St. Maries, vvhen vvee came neere to the Towne, the Protestants came out and yeelded the Towne to the Lord Generall, so hee went with some Gentlemen with him, and tooke possession, and made the Souldiers martch by, and not suffer them to come to the Towne, fearing they vvould pillage and disturbe the peo∣ple; so vve marched on the same day, to a Towne called La Flote. In the mid vvay the Enemie appeared vvith 120. horse and 1500. Foote, the which were left vnkilled. Wee did verily thinke they would haue giuen vs Battell, but it did not proue so: for as soone as they viewed vs, they returned backe againe. We vvere ready for them, for our men vvere very forward to fight, so vve marched on vvithin halfe a mile of La Flote, vvhere the Protestants of that Towne met vs, and surren∣dred the Towne and themselues vvith a suite they had to the Lord Generall, vvhich vvas that hee vvould for their sakes shew fauour to the Romish Catholiques: for that they had liued long together in that Towne, and euer receiued good Quarter and vsage from them: And that now seeing he vvas become Master of both, he vvould requite it on their behalfe to the Catholiques, vvhich hee very Nobly consented vnto, and vvent vvith them to the Towne, and tooke possession,
and presently turned backe to the Souldiers, and Encamped them round about the same, and vvould not suffer any of them to goe into it, fearing they vvould make Pillage, and that night lay amongst them in the open Field, vvith no o∣ther bedding, saue one Cloake vnder his head, and another vpon him. The next day being the 16 he went into the Towne, ac∣companied with Monsieur Subesa, and some other Lords, to bury Sir William Heydon, and returned into the Field at night, and lay as he did before. But that night about two of the clocke, there fell very miserable vveather, vvith Thun∣dering and Rayning, and continued so till twelue of the clock the next day. The next day, being the 17. vve martched on towards St. Martyns, though it Rayned very fearefully: and about 12. of the clocke it grew faire; at which time vve vvere vvithin three English miles of the Towne. By that time we had marched a mile further, we could see the Enemie sally out of the Fort vvith Horse and Foote: so they Martched towards vs, and vvere vvithin the distance of an English mile: and wee thought they vvould take the aduantage of our weary Martching, and giue vs Battell. Therefore it was holden fit by the Lord Generall, that we should take all aduantage we could in that place, which was onely to gaine the Sunne and the Winde of them. We mar∣ched on toward the end of the Towne, that lay next vnto the Sea side, and furthest from the Fort. And by that wee had aduantage both of Sunne and Winde. Within lesse then an English mile of the end of the Towne, we could see the Horse approach very fiercely, as though they would come suddenly vpon vs. Whereupon the Lord Generall gaue order to the Master of the Ordnance, to shoote some of our Drakes at them; which he did, and killed a Gentleman and two Horses, and put all the rest in feare and disorder. Here Captaine Coningham (Lieutenant of the Horse) ad∣uanced
himselfe on horsebacke, and proffered a single com∣bate, but no Man answered him. Whereupon they presently put out a Flagge of Truce, and sent some of the Protestantes to vs to render the Towne, without any condition; So that we presently marched into it in Battalia, and quartered all our Soldiers therein. The Lord Generall rode to euery Com∣pany, and desired them to be carefull of themselues and not to wrong the Towne, and that they should take nothing but what was giuen them and what they payde for, and that he would goe aboard the victualing Shippes, and told them they should want nothing, which contented them verie well, and thanked God with a loude voyce that they had such a worthy Lord Generall. He tooke his Barge, and accordingly went, and as he was going, there was a poore Englishman in distresse in a Sand∣bed, where the Tyde had locked him about, and had no meanes to saue himselfe, but must runne towards the Fort, where the Enemie was retired with all his Forces: My Lord hearing him so cry out, caused to stay his Barge (although the Barge-men told him he would endanger the casting away of himselfe; and the Gentlemen perswaded him also, that he should not hazard himselfe in the danger, yet would he not stirre before he had releeued this Man and got him into his Barge; So after went aboard of the Victualing Shippes, and saw all the proportions of the Victuals sent to the Soldiers; and after went aboard the Tryumph. And on wednesday the 16. made a dispatch for England, to acquaint the King with his fortunate proceedings. The Enemy was retired into the Fort a Musket shot, with 1500. Men, of which number, there was 120. Horse left; they had neyther Water nor Wood in their Fort, and had but some eight or nine Peeces of Ordnance, and the Fort too little for so great a Company, so that it was not likely that they could hold it long, and we hope to be Masters of it, as well as of the Island, within a very short time. Thurseday and Fryday, we were raysing a Mount to plant
our Ordnance against it. Saterday the 21. we planted twentie one peeces of Ord∣nance, and eleuen Drakes, and the Master Gunner was very confident to batter them from the Fort in a very short time: We were working with our Pyoniers, and our Soldiers tren∣ching against the Fort. This is all I was an Eye witnesse to. So God send them good successe, and I for England, in his Maiesties Good Ship, called the Charles. There was slayne that day in (the Battaile) of the French 125. Horsemen, dead on the ground, besides a great many that were deadly hurt, of vvhich number, there vvere 23. Marquesses and Barons; all the rest Knightes and Gentle∣men, of the best quallitie in all France: Some Commanders of their Foote vvere killed, with 100. or 120. Common Soldiers.
Receiued at Court the 5. of August. THe Cittadell in the Isle St. Martins, holds out still, the Walls and Fortifications thereof being made so strong and substantiall, that our Cannon that beate on it perpetu∣ally could doe little hurt to it, in so much as my Lord wrought by Mynes, and hath cut off two Pipes that carried vvater to the same, but findes that part of the ground which is penetrable neere the Cittadell, to be loose sandy ground, which will not Mine, and the foundation of the Cittadell, and the part neere the same is Rocky, not to be wrought: so as my Lord hauing beaten the Enemie out of his out-workes into the Fort, is resolued to endeuour to recouer the same by famine, there being 3000. men in the Castle, and they want∣ing Firing and Water. My Lord hath planted aboue 20. Peeces of Ordnance by Sea and Land against the Cittadell: and the third shot that the Kings Cananere made, killed 41. French men, as some who were then in the Fort related. My Lord lately intercepted two small Vessels laden vvith Victuals, and one laden vvith Munition, vvhich vvere in the night, passing from the mayne ouer the Riuer to releeue the Cittadell, that vvhich vvas laden vvith Munition, vvas in the taking sunke vvith a Shot, and 37. French men in one of the other Vessells slaine, vvhich made the third yeeld vvithout resistance. My Lord walkes the round most nights, to see the Watch performe their Duty: And Sunday last vvas seauen dayes lay in our Trenches all night, vpon aduertisements, that the E∣nemie vvould sally, and assault the men in our Workes. My Lord Montioy (chiefe Commaunder of the Horse) very happily surprized 28. of the best of the Enemies Mus∣katieres, vvho vvere sent out of the Fort for a guard to some vvho vvere sent to fetch vvater at a Well, not farre distant
from the Fort: as soone as they perceiued our Horse to ap∣proach, they ranne into a Mill, and there (vpon quarter de∣maunded and graunted) they yeelded. My Lord hath by Proclamation giuen permission to the Inhabitants of the Ile to make Salt, with which Commodity his Grace intendeth to satisfie the Dutch men (who were ta∣ken vp to transport Horses and Prouisions for the Armie) for the hire of their Ships, and likewise to furnish England with Salt. The Gouernour of the Cittadell and Ile of St. Martins, sendeth euery day some Messenger to speake with my Lord: And about tenne dayes since vnder colour of a Parly, sent a Disciple of the Iesuites to haue mischieued his Grace: the Villaine being come to act his Villanie, when hee began to speake to my Lord, changed his colour, and so trembled, that he could scarce speake: whereupon his Grace commaunded one that was with him, to search him, & there was found in the Sleeue of his Doublet, a long Rauilliack-like Knife poy∣soned, which at the first he said he caried for his defence: but that being no place to carrie a Weapon for defence, he was that night committed, and being threatned to be tortured, hee desired to be brought before the Lord Generall, which was graunted; and then he confessed that the Gouernour had dissiplined, and hired him to murther my Lord: and being questioned how he durst vndertake such a mischieuous work, since he could not hope to escape death, or enioy the reward he was to haue: he said he did beleeue it would cost him his life; but being perswaded, it was a meritorious worke, and promised, his Wife and Children for it should be aduanced, he vndertooke the same; and falling downe at my Lords feet, besought his pardon. My Lord sent him backe to the pri∣son, and after three dayes pardoned him, and sent him ouer into the mayne. All Souldiers cry out against the Gouernour for this trea∣chery, and say, hee deserues not to haue any Quarter, that would offer the same to one who hath in all poynts caried
himselfe so Nobly towards him, and all the French that haue beene at his mercy, for my Lord sent him back his Brothers Page, which was taken in the day of Battell; and hauing found the Gouernours brothers Gentleman of his Horse wounded in the Field, caused him to bee sent a board his owne Ship, and looked vnto by his owne Chirurgion. Sir George Blundell is lately dead of the wounds hee for∣merly receiued in the day of Battell. There is Newes from Paris the French King is very sicke, and no man dares tell him of his Graces landing in that Island; he lies at Villeroy, and Monsieur (that Kings Brother) at Paris. The Duke of Sauoy, and Count of Soissons, are in Armes vpon the Froutiers of Daulphine, and the Dukes of Roan and Mountmoreney are in Armes in Languedoc. Monsieur, the Marshall Crequi (Gouernour of the Daul∣phine) sent Post to Paris for a Commission and money to leauie men; returned with a Commission but without any money. I must adde this, which (I beleeue) makes my Lords actions to prosper, that his Grace doth duly euery morning and eue∣ning serue God, either priuatly in his Chamber, or publikly in the whole Armie, and hath caused a strict course to bee held with such as neglect the seruice of God. Thus endeth the Journall at this time.
Receiued at Yorke-House. August 15. THE RELATION OF Mr. Garetson, Master of the Shippe called the Bread and Beere-pott of Horne in Holland, made and taken at Plimmouth the 12. of August 1627 by Sir Iames Bagge, knight, who reporteth the same as followeth. Ʋidelicet. THat he was that day chased with a Ship, (as he supposed, to be a Man of warre of Dunkerke) and to free himselfe, did put into the port of Plimouth, this present euening, being the 12. aforesaide, and that he was at Burdeaux about the 29. of Iuly last, where the Gouernor and People were taken with such a feare of the aproach of the English, that they destroyed the Cloysters and Ware-houses, and
all the Suburbes of the saide Citie, to the end the aproach of the English might be the more difficile. And from Burdeaux he went to Southers, and from thence to Rochell, where he arriued the first of August; And from thence he went to St. Martines, where his Excellencie was be∣sieging the Cittadell, and making a Trench to impeach the sallying forth of the Horse; And for as much as all passages by water were stopped, (except the intercourse betweene Ro∣chell and St. Martines.) He was enforced to returne for Rochell, and from thence went ouer land to Southers, where he laded his Shippe with Salte; And sayling from Southers, came within halfe a League of St. Martines, where being by the lee, there came out three English Shippes to vnderstand what he was, and finding him to be a Hollan∣der, gaue him relation, that the 5. day of this moneth the Cittadell was by his Grace taken, & the French men permitted to depart thence, only with Bastinadoes in their hands: And the Captaines of those Shippes told him, that the 6. of this month there was an English Shippe
dispatched, with information of his Exce∣lencies full proceedings, and conquest of that Island. He further sayeth; that at Southers it was re∣ported, that the French King sent to Rochell to require them to declare whether they would abandon the English, and serue him or not: To giue answere to which, the Rochelers desired seuen daies respite; But he sayeth, that diuers of the Principall and others of Rochell, daily repaire to his Maiesties Generall. He also sayeth, that there is a command gi∣uen, that none speake with the French King, and it is muttered, that he is dead. He sayeth, that there was a French man ap∣prehended in the Dukes presence, with a knife in his sleeue, who waighted an opertunitie to attempt the murther of his Grace. FJNJS.
