25122 99846919 11916
THE TEARS OF Fancie. OR, Loue Disdained. Aetna grauius Amor. Printed at London for William Barley, dwell in Gratious streete ouer against Leaden Hall. 1593.
ID GOe Idle lines vnpolisht rude and base, Vnworthy words to blason beauties glory: (Beauty that hath my restles hart in chase, Beauty the subiect of my ruefull story.) I warne thée shunne the bower of her abiding, Be not so bold ne hardy as to vse to her: Least shée inraged with thée fall a chiding, And so her anger proue thy woes renewer. Yet if shée daigne to rew thy dreadfull smart, And reading laugh, and laughing so mislike thée: Bid her desist, and looke within my hart, Where shée may sée how ruthles shée did strike mée. If shee be pleasde though shée reward thée not, What others say of me regard it not.
Sonnet. I. IN prime of youthly yeares as then not wounded, With Loues impoisoned dart or bitter gall: Nor minde nor thoughts on fickle Fancie grounded, But carelesse hunting after pleasures ball. I tooke delight to laugh at Louers follie, Accounting beautie but a fading blossome: What I esteemd prophane, they deemed holie, Ioying the thraldome which I counted loathsome. Their plaints were such as no thing might relieue them, Their harts did wellnie breake loues paine induring: Yet still I smild to see how loue did grieue them, Vnwise they were their sorrowes selfe procuring. Thus whilst they honoured Cupid for a God, I held him as a boy not past the rod, Sonnet. II. LOng time I fought, and fiercely waged warre, Against the God of amarous Desire: Who sets the senses mongst themselues atiarre, The hart inflaming with his lustfullfire. The winged boy vpon his mothers knee, Wantonlie playing neere to Paphos shrine: Scorning that I should checke his Deitie, VVhose dreaded power tam'd the gods diuine. From forth his quiuer drew the keenest dart, VVherewith high Ioue he oftentimes had wounded: And fiercely aimd it at my stubborne hart, But backe againe the idle shaft rebounded. Loue saw and frownd, that he was so beguiled, I laught outright, and Venus sweetely smiled.
Son. III. SHee smild to see her sonne in such a rage, I laught to thinke how I had Loue preuented: He frownd and vowd nought should his ire asswage, Till I had stoopt to Loue, and loue repented. The more he rag'd the greater grew our laughter, The more we laught the fiercer was his ire: And in his anger sware my poore harts slaughter, VVhich in my breast beautie should set on fire. Faire Venus seeing her deere sonne in chollar, Fearing mishap by his too hasty anger: Perswaded him that shee would worke my dollor, And by her meanes procure my endles langor. So Loue and loues Queene (Loue hauing consented, Agreed that I by Loue should be tormented. Sonnet. IIII. THo taking in her lap the God of loue, Shee lightly mounted through the Christall aire: And in her Coach ydrawne with siluer Doues, To Vulcans smokie Forge shee did repaire. VVhere hauing wonne the Ciclops to her will, Loues quiuer fraught with arrowes of the best: His bended bow in hand all armd to kill, He vowd reuenge and threatned my vnrest. And to be sure that he would deadly strike me, His blindfold eies he did a while vncouer: Choosing an arrow that should much mislike me, He bad wound him that scornes to be a Louer. But when he saw his bootles arrow shiuer, He brake his bow, and cast away his quiuer.
Sonnet. V. HOpeles and helpeles too, poore loue amated, To see himselfe affronted with disdaine: And all his skill and power spent in vaine, At me the onely obiect that he hated. Now Cytherea from Olimpus mount, Descending from the sphere with her deere sonne: VVith Douelike wings to Alcidalyon, Loue on her knee, shee by the Christall fount; Aduisde the boy what scandall it would bee, If Fame should to the open world discouer How I suruiu'd and scornd Loues sacred power. Then Cupid lightly leaping from her knee, Vnto his mother vowd my discontenting: Vnhappie vowe the ground of my lamenting. Sonnet. VI. THen on the sodaine fast away he fled, He fled apace as from pursuing foe: Ne euer lookt he backe, ne turnd his head, Vntill he came whereas he wrought my woe. Tho casting from his backe his bended bow. He quickly clad himselfe in strange disguise: In strange disguise that no man might him know, So coucht himselfe within my Ladies eies. But in her eies such glorious bearnes did shine, That welnigh burnt loues party coloured wings, VVhilst I stood gazing on her sunne-bright eien, The wanton boy shee in my bosome flings. He built his pleasant bower in my brest, So I in loue, and loue in me doth rest.
Sonnet. VII. NOw Loue triumphed hauing got the day, Proudly insulting, tyrannizing still: As Hawke that ceazeth on the yeelding pray, So am I made the scorne of Victors will. Now eies with teares, now hart with sorrow fraught, Hart sorrowes at my watry teares lamenting: Eyes shed salt teares to see harts pining thought, And both that then loue scornd are now repenting. But all in vaine too late I pleade repentance, For teares in eies and sighs in hart must weeld me: The feathered boy hath doomd my fatall sentence, That I to tyrannizing Loue must yeeld me. And bow my necke erst subiect to no yoke, To Loues false lure (such force hath beauties stroke. Sonnet. VIII. O What a life is it that Louers ioy, VVherein both paine and pleasure shrouded is: Both heauenly pleasures and eke hells annoy, Hells fowle annoyance and eke heauenly blisse. VVherein vaine hope doth feede the Louers hart, And brittle ioy sustaine a pining thought: VVhen blacke dispaire renewes a Louers smart, And quite extirps what first content had wrought. VVhere faire resemblance eke the mind allureth, To wanton lewd lust giuing pleasure scope: And late repentance endles paines procureth, But none of these afflict me saue vaine hope. And sad dispaire, dispaire and hope perplexing, Vaine hope my hart, dispaire my fancie vexing.
Sonnet. XVII. THen from her fled my hart in sorrow wrapped. Like vnto one that shund prusuing slaughter: All wel nigh breathles told me what had happed, How both in Court and countrie he had sought her. The drerie teares of many loue repenting, Corriuals in my loue whom fancie stroked: Partners in loue and partners in lamenting, My fellow thralls whose necks as mine were yoked. The shepheards praises and their harts amis, Vrgd by my Mistres ouer weening pride: For none that sees her but captiued is, And last he told which to my hart did glide; How all the teares I spent were vaine and forceles, For shee in hart had vowd to be remorceles. Sonnet. XVIII. THo with a showre of teares I entertained, My wounded hart into my brest accloied: VVith thousand sundrie cares and griefes vnfained, Vnfained griefes and cares my hart annoied. Annoying sorrowes at my harts returning, Assaild my thoughts with neuer ceasing horror: That euen my hart hart like to Aetna burning, Did often times conspire for to abhorre her. But enuious loue still bent to eke my mourning, A grieuous pennance for my fault inflicted: That eies should weepe and hart be euer groaning; So loue to worke my sorrowes was addicted. But earths sole wonder whose eies my sense appalled, The fault was loues, then pardon me, for loue is franticke called.
Sonnet. 19. MY hart impos'd this penance on mine eies, (Eies the first causers of my harss lamenting: That they should weepe till loue and fancie dies, Fond loue the last cause of my harts repenting. Mine eies vpon my hart infflict this paine, (Bold hart that dard to harbour thoughts of loue) That it should loue and purchase fell disdaine, A grieuous penance which my hart doth proue. Mine eies did weepe as hart had them imposed, My hart did pine as eies had it constrained: Eies in their teares my paled face disclosed, Hart in his sighs did show it was disdained. So th'one did weepe th'other sighed, both grieued, For both must liue and loue, both vnrelieued. Sonnet. 20. MY hart accus'd mine eies and was offended, Vowing the cause was in mine eies aspiring: Mine eies affirmd my hart might well amend it, If he at first had banisht loues desiring. Hart said that loue did enter at the eies, And from the eies descended to the hart: Eies said that in the hart did sparkes arise, Which kindled flame that wrought the inward smart Hart said eies tears might soone haue quencht that Eies said harts sighs at first might loue exile: So hart the eies and eies the hart did blame, VVhilst both did pine for both the paine did feele. Hart sighed and bled, eies wept and gaz'd too much, Yet must I gaze because I see none such.
Sonnet. 21 FOrtune forwearied with my bitter mone, Did pittie seldome seene my wretched fate: And brought to passe that I my loue alone, Vnwares attacht to plead my hard estate. Some say that loue makes louers eloquent, And with diuinest wit doth them inspire: But beautie my tongues office did preuent, And quite extinguished my first desire. As if her eies had power to strike me dead, So was I dased at her crimson die: As one that had beheld Medusaes head, All senses faild their Master but the eie. Had that sense faild and from me eke beene taken, Then I had loue and loue had me forsaken. Sonnet. 22. I Saw the obiect of my pining thought, VVithin a garden of sweete natures placing: VVhere in an arbour artificiall wrought, By workemans wondrous skill the garden gracing. Did boast his glorie glorie farre renowned, For in his shadie boughs my Mistres slept: And with a garland of his branches crowned, Her daintie forehead from the sunney kept. Imperious loue vpon her eielids tending, Playing his wanton sports at euery becke, And into euerie finest limbe descending, From eies to lips from lips to yuorie necke. And euerie limbe supplide and t'euerie part, Had free accesse but durst not touch her hart.
Sonnet. 23 A Ye me that loue wants power to pierce the hart, Of my harts obiect beauties rarest wonder: VVhat is become of that hart-thrilling dart, VVhose power brought the heauenly powers vnder. Ah gentle loue if empty be thy quiuer. Vn maske thy selfe and looke within my brest: VVhere thou shalt find the dart that made me shiuer, But can I liue and see my loue distrest. Ah no that shaft was cause of sorrow endles, And paine perpetuall should my Lady proue: If hart were pierst, the deare loue be not friendles, Although I neuer found a friend of loue, If not without her hart, her loue be gained, Let me liue still forlorne and die disdained. Sonnet. XXIIII. STill let me liue forlorne and die disdained, My hart consenting to continuall languish: If loue (my harts sore) may not be obtained, But with the danger of my Ladies anguish. Let me oppose my selfe gainst sorrowes force, And arme my hart to beare woes heauy load: Vnpittied let me die without remorce, Rather than monster fame shall blase abroad; That I was causer of her woes induring, Or brought faire beauty to so fowle a domage: If life or death might be her ioyes procuring, Both life, loue, death, and all should doe her homage. But shee liues safe in freedomes liberty, I liue and die in loues extremitie.
Sonnet. XXV. THe priuate place which I did choose to waile, And deere lament my loues pride was a groue: Plac'd twixt two hills within a lowlie dale, Which now by fame was cald the vale of loue. The vale of loue for there I spent my plainings, Plaints that bewraid my sicke harts bitter wounding: Loue sick harts deepe wounds with dispaire me paining, The bordering hills my sorrowing plaints resounding. Each tree did beare the figure of her name, VVhich my faint hand vppon their backs ingraued: And euery tree did seeme herfore to blame, Calling her proud that mee of ioyes depraued. But vaine for shee had vowed to forsake mee, And I to endles anguish must be take mee. Sonnet. XXVI. IT pleasd my Mistris once to take the aire, Amid the vale of loue for her disporting: The birds perceauing one so heauenly faire, With other Ladies to the groue resorting. Gan dolefully report my sorrowes endles, But shee nill listen to my woes repeating: But did protest that I should sorrow friendles, So liue I now and looke for ioyes defeating. But ioyfull birds melodious harmonie, Whose siluer tuned songs might well haue mooued her: Inforst the rest to rewe my miserie, Though shee denyd to pittie him that lou'd her. For shee had vowd her faire should neuer please me, Yet nothing but her loue can once appease me,
Sonnet. 27. THe banke whereon I leand my restles head, Placd at the bottome of a mirtle tree: I oft had watered with the teares I shed, Sad teares did with the fallen earth agree. Since when the flocks that grase vpon the plaine, Doe in their kind lament my woes though dumbe: And euery one as faithfull doth refraine To eate that grasse which sacred is become. And euerie tree forbeareth to let fall, Their dewie drops mongst any brinish teares: Onee the mirth whose hart as mine is thrall, To mlt in sorrowes sourse no whit forbeare. So franticke loue with griefe our paind harts wringing▪ That still we wept and still the grasse was springing. Sonnet. 28. FAst flowing teares from watery eies abounding, In tract of time by sorrow so constrained: And framd a fountaine in which Eccho sounding, The'nd of my plaints (vaine plaints of Loue disdained.) VVhen to the wel of mine owne eies weeping, I gan repaire renewing former greeuing: And endles moane Eccho me companie keeping, Her vnreuealed woe my woe reuealing. My sorrowes ground was on her sorrow grounded, The Lad was fire but proud that her perplexed: Her harts deepe wound was in my hart deepe wounded Faire and too proud is she that my hart vexed. But faire and too proud must release harts pining, Or hart must sigh and burst with ioies declining.
Sonnet. 29. TAking a truce with teares sweete pleasures foe, I thus began hard by the fountayne side: O deere copartner of my wretched waie, Nosooner saide but woe poore eccho cride. Then I a gaine what woe did thee betide, That can be greater than disdayne, disdayne: Quoth eccho Then sayd I O womens pride, Pride answered echo. O inflicting payne, When wofull eccho payne a gayne repeated, Redoubling sorrow with a sorrowing sound: For both of vs were now in sorrow seated, Pride and disdaine disdainefull pride the ground. That forst poore Eccho mourne ay sorrowing euer, And me lament in teares ay ioyning neuer. Sonnet. 30. ABout the well which from mine eies did flow, The woefull witnes of harts desolation: Yet teares nor woe nor ought could worke compassion, Did diuers trees of sundry natures growe. The mirrhe sweet bleeding in the latter wound, Into the christall waues her teares did power: As pittying me on whome blind loue did lower, Vpon whose backe I wrote my sorrows ground. And on her rugged rind I wrote forlorne, Forlorne I wrote for sorrowe me oppressed: Oppressing sorrowe had my hart distressed, And made the abiect outcast of loues scorne, The leaues conspiring with the winds sweet sounding, With gentle murmor playnd my harts deepe wounding.
Sonnet. XXXI. I VVrote vppon there sides to eke their plaining, If sad laments might multiply their sorrowe: My loues faire lookes and eke my loues disdaining, My loues coy lookes constraines me pine for woe. My loues disdaine which was her louers dolour: My loues proud hart which my harts blisse did banish: My loues transparent beames and rosy colour, The pride of which did cause my ioyes to vanish. My loues bright shining beeautie like the starte, That early riseth sore for the sunnes appearance: A guide vnto my thoughts that wandring arre, Doth force me breath abroad my woes indurance. O life forlorne, O loue vnkindly frowning, Thy eies my hart dispaire my fad hope drowning. Sonnet. XXXII. THose whose kind harts sweet pittie did at faint, VVith ruthfull teares bemond my miseries: Those which had heard my neuer ceasing plaint, Or read my woes ingrauen on the trees. At last did win my Ladie to consort them, Vnto the fountaine of my flowing anguish: VVhere she vnkind and they might boldly sport them, VVhilst I meane while in sorrows lappe did languish. Their meaning was that she some teares should shed, Into the well in pitty of my pining: She gaue consent and putting forth her head, Did in the well perceaue her beautie shining. VVhich seeing she withdrew her head puft vp with prid And would not shed a teare should I haue died.
Sonnet. XXXIII. Some say that women loue for to be praised, But droope when as they thinke their faire must die: Ioying to haue their beauties glorie raised, By fames shril trompe aboue the starrie skie. I then whome want of skill might be with drawing, Extold her beautie not as yet deserued: She said my words were flatterie and fayning, For good intent to bad euent soone swerued. Some say againe they will denie and take it, I gaue my hart my hart that dearely cost me: No sooner offerd but she did forsake it, Scorning my proffered gift so still she crost me. But were I (alas I am not) false and truthles: Then had she reason to be sterne and ruthles. Sonnet. XXXIIII. WHy liue I wretch and see my ioyes decay, VVhy liue I and no hope of loues aduancing: VVhy doe myne eies behold the sunnie day, VVhy liue I wretch in hope of better chancing. O wherefore tells my toung this dolefull tale, That euery eare may heare my bitter plaint: VVas neuer hart that yet bemond my bale, VVhy liue I wretch my pangs in vaine to paint. VVhy striue I gainst the streame or gainst the hill, VVhy are my sorrowes buried in the dust: VVhy doe I toile and loose my labour still, VVhy doe I feede on hope or bild on trust. Since hope had neuer hap and trust finds treason, VVhy liue I wretch disdainde and see no reason?
Sonnet. XXXV. AMongst the Idle toyes that tosfe my brayne, And reaue my troubled mynd from quiet rest: Ale crd loue I find doth still remayne, To breede debate within my grieued brest. VVhen weary woe doth worke to wound my will, And hart surchargd with sorrow liues opressed: My sowlen eyes then cannot wayle there fill, Sorrow is so far spent and I distressed. My toung hath not the cunning skill to tell, The smallest greife that gripes my trobbing hart: Myne eies haue not the secret power to swell, Into such hugie seas of wounding smart. That will might melt to waues of bitter woe, And I might swelt or drowne in sorrowes so, Sonnet. 36. MY waterie eies let fall no trickling teares, But flouds that ouer flow abundantly: VVhose spring and fountaine first in forst by feares, Doth drowne my hart in waues of misery. My voice is like vnto the raging wind, VVhich roareth still and neuer is at rest: The diuers thoughts that tumble in my minde, Are restlesse like the wheele that wherles alway. The smokie sighes that boyle out of my brest, Are farre vnlike to those which others vse: For Louers sighes sometimes doe take their rest, And lends their minds a little space to muse. But mine are like vnto the surging seas, VVhom tempest calme nor quiet can appease.
Sonnet. 37. VVHere may I now my carefull corps conuay, From company the worker of my woe: How may I winke or hide mine eies alwaies, VVhich gase on that whereof my griefe doth growe, How shall I seeme my sighes for to suppresse, VVhich helpe the hart which else would swelt in sunder, VVhich hurts the helpe that makes my torment lesse: VVhich helps and hurts, O woefull wearie wonder, How now, but thus in solitarie wise: To step aside and make hie waie to moane, To make two fountaines of my dasled eies, To sigh my fill till breath and all begone. To die in sorrow and in woe repent me, That loue at last would though too late lament me. Sonnet. 38. O VVould my loue although too late lament mee, And pitty take of teares from eies distilling: To beare these sorrowes well I could content me, And ten times more to suffer would be willing. If she would daine to grace me with her fauour, The thought thereof sustained greife should banish: And in beholding of her rare behauiour, A smiyle of her should force dispaire to vanishe: But she is bent to tiranze vpon me, Dispaire perswades there is no hope to haue her: My hart doth whisper I am woe begone me, Then cease thy vaine plaints and desist to craue her. Here end my sorrowes here my salt teares stint I, For shes obdurate, sterne, remorseles flintie
Sonnet XXX.XIX. HEere end my sorrow no here my sorrow springeth, Here end my woe no here begins my wailing: Here cease my griefe no here my griefe deepe wringeth Sorrow woe griefe nor ought else is auailing. Here cease my teares no here begins eies weeping, Here end my plaints no here begins my pining: Here hart be free no sighes in hart still keeping, Teares plaints and sighes all cause of ioyes declining. Here end my loue no here doth loue inspire me, Here end my hope no here doth hope faire florish: Heere end my life no let not death desire me, Loue hope and life and all with me must perish. For sorrow woe griefe teares and plaints oft plained, Sighes loue hope life and I must die disdained. Sonnet. 40. THe common ioye the cheere of companie, Twixt myrth and mone doth plague me euermore: For pleasant talke or musicks melodie, Yelds no such salue vnto my secret sore. For still I liue in spight of cruell death, And die againe in spight of lingring life: Feede still with hope which doth prolong my breath, But choackt with feare and strangled still with strife, VVittnes the daies which I in dole consume, And weary nights beare record of my woe: O wrong full world which makst my fancie fume, Fie fickle Fortune fie thou art my foe. O heauie hap so froward is my chance, No daies nor nights nor worlds can me aduance.
Sonnet. 41. Imperious loue who in the prime of youth, I light esteemed as an idle toy: Though late thy fierie dart hath causd my ruth, And turnd sweet happines to darke annoy. VVhy hast thou pleasure in my harts deepe groning, And dost not rew and pittie my vexations? VVhy hast thou ioy at my laments and moning, And art not moued at my imprecations? VVhy hast thou stroke my hart with swift desire, And perst my Ladies eies with fell disdaine? VVhy hath fond fancie set my thoughts on fire, And pent my hart in prison of sad paine? VVhy am I drownd in dolors neuer ceasing, My ioies still fading, and my woes increasing. Sonnet. 42. O Thou that rulest in Ramnis golden gate, Let pittie pierce thy vnrelenting mind: Vnlade me of the burthen cruell fate, (Fell enuious fates too cruell and vnkind) Haue heapt vpon me by too froward loue, Too froward loue the enemie of fortune: Whose fierce assaults my hart (too late) did proue, My sillie hart which sorrow did importune. Yet in thy power is my harts redeeming, My harts redeeming from vile thraldomes force: Vile thrall to one my sorrowes not esteeming, Though shee be cruell yet haue thou remorce. Be thou to me no more inconstant variable, But let thy fickle wheele rest firme and stable.
Sonnet. 43. LOng haue I swome against the wished waue, But now constrained by a lothsome life: I greedilie doe seeke the greedie graue, To make an end of all these stormes and strife. Sweete death giue end to my tormenting woes, And let my passions penetrate thy brest: Suffer my hart which doth such griefes in close By timelie fates inioie eternall rest. Let me not dwell in dole sith thou maist ease me, Let me not languish in such endles durance: One happie stroke of thy sad hand will please me, Please me good death it is thy procurance. To end my harts griefe (heart shee did abhorre thee) O hast thee gentle death I linger for thee. Sonnet. 44. LOng haue I sued to fortune death and loue, But fortune, loue, nor death will daine to heare me: I fortunes frowne, deaths spight, loues horror proue, And must in loue dispairing liue I feare me. Loue wounded me, yet nill recure my wounding, And yet my plaints haue often him inuoked: Fortune hath often heard my sorrowes sounding, Sorrowes which my poore hart haue welnigh choked. Death well might haue beene moued when I lamented, But cruell death was deafe when I complained: Death, loue and fortune all might haue relented, But fortune, loue, and death, and all disdained. To pittie me or ease my restles minde, How can they choose since they are bold and blinde.
Sonnet. 45. WHen neither sighs nor sorrowes were of force I let my Mistres see my naked brest: where view of wounded hart might worke remorce, And moue her mind to pittie my vnrest. VVith fled fast eie shee gazed on my hart, wherein shee saw the picture of her beautie: which hauing seene as one agast shee start, Accusing all my thoughts with breach of duetie. As if my hart had robd her of her faire, No, no, her faire bereand my hart of ioy: And fates disdaine hath kild me with dispaire, Dispaire the fountaine of my sad annoy. And more, alas, a cruell one I serued, Lest loued of her whose loue I most deserued. Sonnet. 46. MY Mistres seeing her faire counterfet, So sweetelie framed in my bleeding brest: On it her fancie shee so firmelie set, Thinking her selfe for want of it distrest. Enuying that anie should inioy her Image, Since all vnworthie were of such an honor: Tho gan shee me command to leaue my gage, The first end of my ioy, last cause of dolor. But it so fast was fixed to my hart, Ioind with vnseparable sweete commixture, That nought had force or power them to part: Here take my hart quoth I, with it the picture, But oh coy Dame intolleberable smart. Rather then touch my hart or come about it, She turnd her face and chose to goe without it.
Sonnet. 47. BEhold deare Mistres how each pleasant greene, will now renew his sommers liuerie: The fragrant flowers which haue not long beene seene, will flourish now ere long in brauerie. But I alas within whose mourning mind, The grafts of griefe are onelie giuen to grow: Cannot inioy the spring which others find, But still my will must wither all in woe. The lustie ver that whilome might exchange, My griefe to ioy, and my delight increase: Springs now else where and showes to me but strange, My winters woe therefore can neuer cease. In other coasts his sunne doth clearely shine, And comfort lend to euery mould but mine. Sonnet. 48. THe tender buds whom cold hath long kept in, And winters rage inforst to hide their head: will spring and sprowt as they doe now begin, That euerie one will ioy to see them spread. But cold of care so nips my ioies at roote, There is no hope to recouer what is lost: No sunne doth shine that well can doe it boote, Yet still I striue but loose both toile and cost. For what can spring that feeles no force of ver, what hower can flourish where no sunne doth shine: These balles deare loue, within my brest I beare, To breake my barke and make my pith to pine. Needs must I fall, I fade both root and rinde, My branches bowe at blast of euerie winde.
Sonnet. 49. DIana and her nimps in siluane brooke, Did wash themselues in secret farre apart: Bu bold Acteon dard on them to looke, For which faire Phoebe turnd him to a Hart. His hounds vnweeting of his sodaine change, Did hale and pull him downe with open crie: He then repenting that he so did range, would speake but could not, so did sigh and die. But my Diana fairer and more cruel, Bereft me of my hart and in disdaine: Hath turnd it out to feede on fancies fuel, And liue in bondage and eternal paine. So hartles doe I liue yet cannot die, Desire the dog, doth chase it to and fro: Vnto her brest for succour it doth flie, If shee debarre it whither shall it go. Now liues my hart in danger to be slaine, Vnlesse her hart my hart wil entertaine. Sonnet. 50. HAand, hart, and eie, tucht thought and did behold, The onelie glorie that on earth doth grow: Hand quakt, hart sighd, but eie was foolish bold, To gaze til gazing wrought harts grounded woe. The obiect of these senses heauenlie saint, with such a maiestie did me appall: As hand to write her praise did feare and faint, And hart did bleede to thinke me Beauties thrall. But eie more hardie than the hand or hart, Did glorie in her eies reflecting light: And yet that light did breede my endles smart. And yet mine eies nill leaue there former sight, But gazing pine, which eie, hand, hart doth trie, And what I loue, is but hand, hart, and eie.
Sonnet. 51. EAch tree did boast the wished spring times pride, when solitarie in the vale of loue: I hid my selfe so from the world to hide, The vncouth passions which my hart did proue. No tree whose branches did not brauelie spring, No branch whereon a fine bird did not sit: No bird but did her shrill notes sweetelie sing, No song but did containe a louelie dit. Trees, branches, birds, and songs were framed faire, Fit to allure fraile minde to careles ease: But carefull was my thoughts yet in dispaire, I dwelt for brittle hope me cannot please. For when I view my loues faire eies reflecting, I entertaine dispaire, vaine hope reiecting. Sonnet. 52. EAch Creature ioyes Appollos happie sight, And feede them selues with his fayre beames reflect∣ing Nyght wandering trauelers at Cinihias sight, Clere vp their clowdy thoughts fond fere reiecting But darke disdayne eclipsed hath my sun, VVhose shining beames my wandering thought were guiding, For want whereof my litle worlde is done That I vnneath can stay my mind from sliding, O happie birds that at your pleasure maie: Behold the glorious light of sols a raies, Most wretched I borne in some dismall daie: That cannot see the beames my sun displaies, My glorious sun in whome all vertue shrowds That light the world but shines to me in clowds
Sonnet. 53. IN Clownes she shines and so obscurely shineth, That like a mastles shipe o seas I wner: For want of her to guide my hart that pineth, Yet can I not intreat ne yet command her, So am I tied in Laborinths of fancy, In darke and obscure Laborinths of loue: That euerie one may plaine behold that can see, How I am fetterd and what paines I proue. The Lampe whose light should lead my ship about, Is placed vpon my Mistris heauenlie face: Her hand doth hold the clew must lead me out, And free my hart from thraldomes lothed place. But cleane to lead me out or Lampe to light me, She scornefullie denide the more to spight me. Sonnet. 54. BLame me not deere loue though I talke at randon, Terming thee scornefull, proud, vnkind, disdaineful Since all I doe cannot my woes abandon, Or ridde me of the yoake I feele so painefull. If I doe paint thy pride or want of pittie, Consider likewise how I blase thy beautie: Inforced to the first in mournefull dittie, Constrained to the last by seruile dutie: And take thou no offence if I misdeemed, Thy beauties glorie quencheth thy prides blemish: Better it is of all to be esteemed, Faire and too proud than not faire and too squemishe. And seeing thou must scorne and tis aprooued, Scorne to be ruthles since thou art beloued.
Sonnet. 55. MY loue more bright than Cinthias horned head, That spreads her wings to beautifie the heauens: When Titan coucheth in his purple bed, Thou liuest by Titan and inioiest his beames. Shee flies when he begins to run his race, And hides her head his beautie staines her brightnes: Thou staiest thy beautie yeelds the sunne no place, For thou excelst his beames in glories sweetnes. Shee hath eclips, thou neuer doest eclips, Shee sometimes wanes thy glorie still doth waxe: None but Endymyon hangeth at her lips, Thy beautie burnes the world as fire doth flaxe. Shee shines by months, thou houres, months, and yeares, Oh th beautie should inforce such teares. Sonnet. 56. WEre words dissolued to sighs, sighs into teares, d euerie teare to torments of the mind: The minds distresse into those deadly feares, That find more death than death it selfe can find. VVere all the woes of all the world in one, Sorrow and death set downe in all their pride: Yet were they insufficient to bemone, The restles horrors that my hart doth hide. where blacke dispaire doth feede on euerie thought, And deepe dispaire is cause of endles griefe: where euerie sense with sorrowes ouer-wrought, Liues but in death dispairing of reliefe. whilst thus my hart with loues plague torne asunder, May of the world be cald the wofull wonder.
Sonnet. LVII. THe hunted Hart sometime doth leaue the Hound, My Hart alas is neuer out of chace: The liue-hounds life sometime is yet vnbound, My bands are hopeles of so high a grace. For natures sickenes sometimes may haue ease, Fortune though fickle sometime is a friend: The minds affliction patience may appease, And death is cause that many torments end. Yet I am sicke, but shee that should restore me, Withholds the sacred balme that would recute me: And fortune eke (though many eyes deplore me) Nill lend such chance that might to ioy procure me. Patience wants power to appease my weeping, And death denies what I haue long beene seeking. Sonnet. LVIII. WHen as I marke the ioy of euery wight, Howe in their mindes deepe throbbing sorrow ceaseth And by what meanes they nourish their delight, Their sweete delight my paine the more increaseth. For as the Deare that sees his fellow feede, Amid the lusty heard, himselfe sore brused: O as the bird that feeles herselfe to bleede, Ad lies aloofe of all her pheeres refused. So haue I found and now too deerely trie, That pleasure doubleth paine and blisse annoy: Yet still I twit my selfe of Surcuidrie, As one that am vnworthy to inioy, The lasting frute of such a heauenly loue, For whom these endles sorrowes I approue.
Sonnet. LIX. OFt haue I raild against loue many waies, But pardon loue I honour now thy power: For were my Pallace Greece Pyramides, Cupid should there erect a stately bower. And in my Pallace sing his sugred songs, And Venus Doues my selfe will finely feede: And nurce her sparrowes and her milke white Swans. Yea, in my restles bosome should they breede. And thou deare Ladie sacred and diuine, Shalt haue thy place within my hart assignd: Thy picture yea thy fierie darting eien, Ile carrie painted in my grieued mind. The chiefest coulles shall be scarlet blood, Which Cupid pricketh from my wofull hart: And teares commixt shall further forth my good, To paint thy glories cording their desart. I now am changd from what I woont to be, Cupid is God, And there is none but he.
Sonnet. LX. WHo taught thee first to sigh A lasse sweet hart? loue. Who taught thy tongue to marshall words of plaint? loue. Who fild thine eies with teares of bitter smart? loue. Who gaue thee griefe and made thy ioyes so faint? loue. VVho first did paint with coullers pale thy face? loue. VVho first did breake thy sleepes of quiet rest? loue. VVho forst thee vnto wanton loue giue place? loue. VVho thrald thy thoughts in fancie so distrest? loue. VVho made thee bide both constant firme and sure. loue. VVho made thee scorne the world and loue thy friend? loue. VVho made thy mind with patience paines indure? loue. VVho made thee settle stedfast to the end. loue. Then loue thy choice though loue be neuer gained, Still liue in loue, dispaire not though disdained. FINIS. T. W.
