3055.5 99846224 11177
❧ The bayte & snare of Fortune. Wherin may be seen that mo∣ney is not the only cause of mis∣chefe and vnfortunat endes: but a necessary mean to mayntayne a ver∣tuous quiet lyfe. Treated in a Dialoge be∣twene man and money. ¶Imprinted at London, by Iohn Wayland, at the signe of the Sunne oueragainst the Conduite in Flete∣strete. Cum priuilegio per ep∣eium.
The Prologe. SAynt Paule Doctor of veritie, sayeth that Auarice is the Roote and beginnyng of all euylles: Algates the men of this tyme present, be therto much enclined. For of all Estates fro the hyghest vnto the lowest, all geue theyr study vnto Auarice, and euery one desyreth to haue golde and syluer: and for to haue the same they trauayle nyght and daye, by water and by land{is}, thynkyng therin to fynde quietnes and rest, whiche shal neuer be: For in ryches is neuer reast. The more that a man hath thereof the more he desyreth. For Auarice of the owne nature is vnsaciable, accor∣dyng to the saying of the Sage in the fift Chapter of Ecclesiastes. The couetous man is neuer satisfied. And Horace the Poete sayeth that the Coueteus man is alwayes anhungred. And S. Ierome sayeth that the looue of worldely goodes is vnsaciable. And Boece in his thyrd booke of Consolacion sayeth that if the man whiche is auaricious had all the worlde in his dominacion, he woulde not be content: for euer he woulde desyer to haue worldly goodes more and more, and principally money, whiche neuer shoulde be noyons vnto man wer not his couetise, whiche euer nneth mans harte: For God hath made the syluer as well as o∣ther thynges for the seruice of man. vnto whome he hath made all thing subiect. But whan the man setteth his appetite, and desyreth to get mo∣ney otherwyse than by ryght and conscience, that may be called auarice whiche hath dominion vpon the man aboue reason: and so it appeareth that : whiche shoulde be maystres is the seruaunt, and she that should be subiecte, is the ladye, whiche is great blyndnes in man. Ths is money maystres of the man, and man to money is subiecte, and is therwith so abused, that he doeth more therefore than for his ma∣ker, or for the health of his soule: O faulte of wisdome, o fault of rea∣son, O faulse couetise thou art cause of the perdicion of many men, thou art case that infinite euyls be dayly committed in this mortall worlde. And now to shew more playnly that men be enclyned to gather money, and consequently be subiecte to the same, I haue put here in wrytyng a question made betwene Man and Money, by maner of a Disputacion, whiche vary in theyr wordes the one agaynst the other: For money woulde shewe his great power, and man speaketh agaynst hym. But after great disputa∣cion the man abydeth vanquished because of his couetous mynde, coessing that it is a great felicity to haue money in possessi∣on. (∴) (∴)
The Baite and Snare of Fortune. Money begynneth. O All mankynde desyrous of honour, That woulde of worldly welth haue iouysaunce Cum hyther to me that am of wurthy valour. I am the prince perelesse in puissaunce My name is money, that haue in gouernaunce All wurthy faytes to lose or els to bynde: Ech man requyreth to haue myne acquayntaunce, For good Fortune by my frendship they fynde. o lorde there is, lady, nor chorle of kinde, What for my power and wise circumspeccion, That they ne beare to me a louing minde, And gladly would lyue vnder my proteccion: What man of himselfe by might or wise inspection, Without my meane can wurke a worthy dede▪ None doubtles, for I set all in good direccion: Who lacketh money is not like to spede. Man aunswereth. WYth boasting wordes thy selfe how doest thou laue, Presumpcion in thee appereth to be great: Thou art false money, full of deceit and fraude. In vaunting wordes is set thy full conceite, Of cursednes thou art the chiefe receit: I am the man that shall it proue anon, Against thy pride so shall I lay a bayte, And cast thée forth a bone to pike vpon. In all the lawes and bokes many one I finde how thou art roote of all mischief, Through thee full many a wight hath misgone: For vnto man thou art so dere and lyef, That he becummeth a robber, and a thief, For thee forsaking God and algoodnes, And hanged is at last for thee with great reprief: This wage be winneth by thy worthines. Money. MAn I perceiue thou speakest without thy boke▪ But I shall aunswere to thy foolishnes: Thy wit is nought it standeth all a croke, Thy tounge is racle, thy wit is rechles
Thus to reporte of me suche wickednes That neuer knowingly against thee did ne spake: With me to dispute thy minde is great (I gesse) Speke what thou wilt, and answere shall I make. Vnto my faite good hede if thou doe take, Who lacketh me he liketh not easely, Displeasure and thought doth bring him vnto wrake And ploungeth his hert full ofte in fantasye: Marchandise he seeth to sell, and faine would bye But I am away that euer doe the dede. Than sinketh his thought in depe melancoly Distresse and dolour doth cause his hert to blede. Man. THou speakest inough but holde me yet excuse Thy worde to beleue, for al thine appetite On leasing is set, that man were well abused That woulde for thy bost, and wordes white Haue in the fauoure, loue, or els delyte: For whos lyst to liue at libertie And of displeasure and trouble would be quite Oughte as fro a serpent fro thy loue to flie. All wickednes is wrought by meane of thee As Robberies, rapine, vsury, and strife With fraude, flattery, disceite and subtiltie Brawling and barat, with all misordered lyfe. Thou raisest debate betwixe the man and wife Thou causest man oft to sweare bloud, armes, and braynes And sodainly at last he dieth vpon a knife All for thy loue, thys is a goodly gaynes. Money. THou speakest not well, I tell thee man againe, For who that hath me is honoured as a lorde, A knaue can I make for nede a captaine The great man shall lowte (and neuer to remorbe) Vnto the villayne, the wise man shall accorde Lowly to the foole, his bonet to auale With master Doctour in mouth at euery worde And knee to grounde to boote him of his bale.
But he that lacketh my frendship in his male Had he the strength of Samson in his time, The tongue of Tully for to tell his tale, And Salomons wit liuing without crime, Yet for he hath no helpe nor succoure by me The people in play shal point him with the finger Loe there goeth a semesypher in algorisme, There goeth a wretch, a foole, and a barat bringer. Man. WEre it not tath I haue intelleccion Reason and wisdum to knowe what is what, Thy foolish presumcion and hardy obieccion Would bring me in doubte what for this or that, Whether I should beleue thy wordes or nat: By iust probacion yet trust I for to finde Good matter inough thy boasting and barat Clerely to confounde, and make thy reason blynde. Ful oft I thinke and muse in my mynde Vpon thy faite thou cursed creature, Encombred thou hast full many of mankynde, As well is founden written in Scripture: Such fantasie men haue vnto thy false figure And so desire thy cursed acquaintaunce That the poore soule may seke his aduenture, So dost thou draw them to the diuils daunce. Money. BE stil man I say, for I haue litel Ioye Thus to heare thee Iangle as he that taketh no hede. Who builded London that named was newe Troye But I puisant peny, that eche man cloth and fede. Euer groweth grace out of my gromel sede Yorke, Lincolne, Linne, Leycestre, Lichfelde, and Lancasire I bilded Bristow, Bremingam and Barwik vpon twede Dureīme, Darby, Dorcestre, Douer, and Dancastre. Winchestre, Walden, Worcestre, Ware, Warwik & Westchestre Cambryge, Carleil, Couentre, Calais, and Canterbery Bath, Boston, Bedforde, Bokinghā, Roeston, and Rochester Medlā, Manchestre, Malmesburi, Stawmforde, & Tukesbury
Southamtō, Sandwith, Suduy, sat Albōs & Salesbury Northamton, Newarke, Nonghā, New Ca vpon Tine Great cause may I haue, for to be glad and mr, Sith these and thousandes moe be made by me and mine. Man. TO heare thy wordes it is a wnes For neuer was noble Ct , But by the occasion of thy sdnes Hath been destroied ful many  C▪ Howbeit mankinde by great subtile▪ By diligent laboure and politike prudente Through out the world in euery countrey Hath made many Cities and townes Not by thy meane, but by experience Of his pregnant wisdum in eche oprcion▪ He made and forged thee by high and Of earth that is matter most vile Thou geuest to thy selfe a great As profitable to man, which is eche Full many a fayre Citie to vtter By thee hath been brought, that Money GReatly hast thou erred as manner well as Me thus to rebuke, and vtterly dispise, Full litel reason is in thy head comprised Me thus to reproue it is no gentil guse. Great lordes and ladies that be both good and wise And al degrees haue me in lane and fauour And gladly a meane would finde and deuise My kinde acqueintaunce to purchase euery houre. Thou knowest how god the high Of earth hath formed man after his Of al the worlde he made him gouernoure And after that, I wil not kepe in cage How man made me with crosse and crowned Out of the earth wherof himselfe he came, Why should man be contrary to me in his Sith he came of the earth and I came of the
Man. AS in this case thou sayest me trouth in dede, God hath made man of erth a vyle substaunce This do I beleue as parcell of my crede But than god gaue him soule made to his owne semblance. With many faire giftes he did him than aduaunce Endowed him with vertue, grace, wysdome, and reason, To order him and his, and do his obseruaunce Vnto god his maker, whan time requireth and season. A thinge vnreasonable art thou not worthy two peason Vnworthy to be compted of gods high creacion But mā him self the made, whan grace was with him geason As nought out of nought, by cursed instigacion Of subtil Sathanas that gaue him informacion: Than welth, grace and goodnes their roumes gan to resigne, Thy pride amonges Princes toke such a dominacion That many royall royalmes ben brought vnto ruine. Money. THough doest great wrong so strongly me to blame, That god hath made man of the .iiii. Elementes. To serue him as his lorde, I fully graunt the same, In Genesis written the mater euident is: And man hath made me (what nede these argumente) In semblable wyse to serue him at his nede, Liuing by reason▪ and as conuenient is Preseruing his soule from vice in worde and dede. Whan god formed man (thy selfe thou mayst it rede) He gaue him fre will that he in all goodnes Might make here in erth his profit and his spede Of me and all other creatures more and les: Syth man hath reason, and will of his lightnes Misuse me, putting his soule in ieopardy, Should I be blamed▪ for his vnstablenes No god forbid, there is no reason why? Money. BE still false money, and vnderstand my sawes Ful cursed art thou, and made all in dispite,
Of reason, of right, decrees, and all good lawes: For after that man had made the for delite The golden world furthwith was quenched quite, What time all ioye was to the people rife No crosse nor coyne of the not worth a myte Had they that tyme, and ledde a mery lyfe. Their Marchandise they gaue man chylde and wyfe One thinge for an other by way of Innocence, Al riches was commune without barat or strife Tresours men hated as deth or pestilence: Ful ioyously they lyued without concupiscence Of the, that art nowe the causer of all vyce. Thy cursed coyne and inconuenience So brenneth mennes hertes with fyre of auarice. Money. THy wordes as Iapes ought wel to be recompted For by thy speche Ise thou wouldest susteyne That one man than, an other not surmounted: It is not trouth, for it appereth playne Howe sum were subiectes, and sum were soueraigne, Record I rake in the olde testament Of Nembroth the great, as kinge and Capitaine That had great people to him obedient. Wherfore I siluer, as thing expedient Was sought out and coyned, mankinde to succoure, None Emperoure there is, King, Duke, ne Regent But I must vpholde his dignitie and honoure: Who maynteyneth Iustyce but myne excellent power? Who ponisheth mysdoers that doe the poer oppresse, Who wageth the seruaunt who paieth the souldeour, But I pusant eny that doth all wronges redresse. Man. NAy leaue out rebres, and say that do all wrong, For when truth is tried that wyl be the conclusion. Is Iustice doen by money: for shame stop thy tong, Such wourdes to pronounce it a great abusion: ay Iustice by money is brought to clere confusion. But noble wisemen that reason haue in store
With connyng and conscience, and cast for no collusion By these is Iustice exalted evermore. But by false mean these depe men in lore, Haue oft a crossed cloude cast afore their sight, That neuer a true letter written them before Can be vnderstand, so stopped is the lyght: The poore mā hath his matter made wrong out of the right, And thervpon is geuen false iudgement: Thus iustice by thee reuerced lyeth vpright, And law depe in the dyke is dryuen down and drent. Money AS for an answer, I say vnto thee man, Parte of thy wordes be true, I doe consent, Saying that the lawes be ended now and than By great learned men of wise entendment. But who so euer before them doth present His righteous matter without my help in hande His case vp so downe is cast incontinent, The grounde therof they can not vnderstande. But he that hath treasure, golde, siluer, house and lande, He shall be obeyed as lord with yonge and olde, That man may leade the world well in a bande. For eche man to him geueth, and sayeth, good mayster holde. Who so hath De quibus, hath pleasures manyfolde, Him nedeth not to care for children ne for wife, For trouble or vexacion, for hunger or for colde, He taketh no thought, but leadeth a mery life. Man. The more we dispute, the falser doo, I fynde Thy wordes peuish peny, for man without measure Hath payne for thy sake, though his desirous mynde. Bothe nyght and daye with all his busie cure, Ouer hylles and dales (alas poore creature) He rydeth, he runneth, and ouer sea he sayleth, He dyggeth, he delueth, and dolour doth endure For peny, yet his peine sumtime him nought auaileth. If man would marke wel how peny him preuayleth, A mer'uaylous thyng it wer for to consider.
To serue hys maker both nyght and day he faylth, But mynde of money hym draweth he careth not whyder He renneth for money now hyther and now thyder, More daungerous in dede thou arte and poysonable Than is the venym of serpent, toade, or spyder, Through mynde of money is man made myserable. Money. IF man woulde be content with suffisaunce Of worldly substaunce, hauiour, and ryches He shoulde for certayne lyue without greuaunce, Without suthe trauayle, peyne, and busines, Happy shoulde he bee me peny to posses, To lyue for euer in ioy, disporte and pleasure. And yf hym lyst, so gouerne hym doutles, To be without all rancour and displeasure. But sith he cannot be content with measure, Much trauaile and payne behoueth it him to take Pennies to purchase with riche substaunce and treasure. Quietnes and rest for me he doth forsake, with trauaile and paine he is content to wake Because he knoweth my puissaunt excellence Me to assemble with meanes that he can make, He doeth him endeuour with all his diligence. Man. HE that on money so fixeth his entent More wicked he is than euer was Iudas, Leading his life in sorow and tourment, And euer a bydyng a miserable caas, Of vies an heape, he hath both more and lasse, As couetise and pride, with clasping nygardy, Trechery also him shall not ouerpas, Enuy nor wrath, nor wretthed vsury. In him is neyther law, prudence, nor pollicy To do a good dede he neuer can haue leasure: All grace and goodnes haue leaue to passe by, His mynde is set hollie of riches to haue seasure, In detestable vites is set his only pleasure, And goodes for to assemble in great aboundaunce,
Wherof he hath no mynde againe to make disseasure, But poore men to punishe vnto the outraunce. Money. TO heare thee speake, it semeth plaine in dede That man without me with sinne is neuer blent: That is not so, nowe take vnto me hede. Whan Sathā with subtiltie doeth mannes mynde preuent, And than of his lyghtnes inclineth his entent Aduertence to geue vnto his false temptacion, And after doeth the dede with foule and vile consent, Shall I beare the blame for his abhominacion? Nowe marke well my saying, after the worldes creacion First was made Adam, as father of mankinde: Who fell not long after to preuaricacion. His makers commaundement as creature vnkinde, Right sinfully he transgressed, so pride made him blynde: Cain after mourdered Abel the meane tyme was not long. That tyme was I vncoyned, therfore man chaunge thy mind To blame me of all euils, in dede thou dost great wrong. Money. This is a faire excuse if it might be so taken, Yet infinite euils thou causest and offence: Goddes high commaundement for thee is oft forsaken, His lawes be broken by disobedience. Men drawe to them Money with all their diligence, By barat, by subtiltie, by rapine and deceyt: The poore thou defoulest by forse and violence, That beg must he nedes, thou holdest him so straite. Enuy thou raisest among them that be great, That many Royalmes therby decay and be destroyed, Slaine are the Captaynēs, and wrath lyeth in awayte Til cities and townes are perished and annoyed: On misery and mischief thus money is employed, For money man applieth him to all abhominacion. Grace and good maners for thee he doeth auoyde: No reason can be layed to this, nor replication.
Money. If I lacked reason against thee to reply, My matter wer lyke ful porely to be stayed, Yf all these euilles and wretched misery Myght be founde in me that thou hast to me layed In thee wer than the ryght, it myght not be denayed: But man of his nature he is so myserable with all the worldes wealth he can not be appayed His mynde euermbreis so insaciable. The deuylles temptation to him is acceptable That Cresus the kyng was not so couetous: In all his dedes than is he varyable, A brawler, a baratour, and oft sedicious And yet wurst of all he is so letherous That he  consumeth in fowle fornication. Beware yet I aduise him, for pockes be perylous, Least theyr vnclenly corrosgues hym cal to consummation. Man. YF I of my lyghtnes would to thee condescende, Thou wouldest blase thyself as creture good and true. Nay glutton, the wynde standeth in an other ende: Thou makest women wanton, and to auoyd vertue, For thee they sell theyr bodyes, and so they do ensue With vicious lyuyng theyr sensuall appetite: Yet lechery at last theyr bale sumtyme doeth brue, That oft they lyue in dolour after theyr foule delyte. Spousereche with sum is counted not a myte, So money may be gotten they care not how or what: Fyne keuerchefes as silke, and smockes as snow so white, Hattes, kyrtles, gounes & gyrdles, this geat must nedes be gat With brouches, beades, and ringes, and who shal pay for that? The husbandes be so poore, they lacke both golde and gages: To inde therfore sum frendship where florens be more fat, Oft fall they to aduoutry, and breake theyr mariages. Money. ANd I make aunswere apertly yet agayne That thy woordes be neyther true nor stable: I am in no wise cause▪ I tell it thee for certayne
Though woman by her wit and mynde that is mutable Doe otherwise than right, as frayle and variable, Two thinges in women make hourely theyr inuasion, Enducinge them euer to warkes vituperable: For of all vertue these two be chief abrasion. The fyrst may be called the false perswasion Of Sathanas that neuer ceaseth them to assayle: The other is ambition, these two be the chief occasion That man nor woman in vertue can preuayle, And womens heartes of nature be so frayle, Light as the leaf, and mouyng as the wynde, Redy to consent to thinges of none auayle, That they of afterclaps haue no thought nor mynde. Man. FVll cursed art thou money and muche vnfortunate, And founden wast thou fyrst in euyll time and tyde, The kardes, the dice, and other plaies inordinate, By thee ben vp brought, wherby God is renyed, And newly with blasphemies and othes crucified. By thee are committed vices out of numbre, His poore soule to perysh to man thou art a gyde, And death with euill ende at last him doth obumbre. Thou teachest him the maner his soule to encombre, Wherby he renieth God, and wilfully offendeth, For thee by night and daye withouten slepe or slombre, All vices he auaunceth, no vertue he entendeth. The poore for all his pouertie by thee his porcion spendeth, The world goeth to wretchednes by thee, and to destruction. By thee to fowle enormitie all goeth, and there it endeth, For to all wretched wickednes thou art induction. Money. THou speakest I perceyue without consideracion. So cruelly to blame me of all enormitie: Mine armes in dede thou blasest in an homely fashion. Marke well my wurdes a whyle now I pray thee, Where seest thou any man that is of grauitie Blaspheming his God, or swearing by his name? Neuer in thy life, this lesson take of me, But riotours and rybaldes that haue no dread of shame.
The wise man that loueth his honour and good fame Blasphemyng his maker thou shalt hym neuer here, In play, disporte, and pastyme, in gladnes and in grame, He hath respect to sadnes, his reason is so nere. But baratours and brayneles brybours met in fere, Theyr maker they dismember, and on his name they wunder, At table, at tauerne, at churche, and euery where: Great horror is to hear, howe they rent hym asunder. Man. THou myghtest be a minion to kepe good company, For tounge thou hast ynough thy matter to susteyne: If I vnto thy purpose consent woulde or applie, Thou wouldest say here that Iesus our kyng and souerayne Is not by thee offended, yes yes, I tell the plaine, By night of tunes a million, and muche more by the daie. Who woulde to thee geue credence a foole he wer certaine, For thou art full of ficcion, thy wurdes be false alwaie. But answer nowe my question penie I thee praie, That thinkest thee so myghty, so sterne, so gay and stoute: Yelde me a solucion to this that I shall saie, Concerning a matter wherof I stande in doute: Thou sayest that by thy maistrie thou bringest muche aboute, And of thy wurthie valour great ost doest thou blowe: What is thy puissaunt power, I praie thee speake it oute? For this is all the matter that I woulde of thee know. Money. WEll doe I vnderstand thy purpose and intention, And also perceiue theffect of thy demaunde: It is not so harde, nor of so high inuencion, But yf thou wer in Tems in midwarde of the sande, I shoulde full well assayle it ere thou mightest cum to land▪ My valour and power thy question is to knowe, It is no littel matter thou shalt it vnderstande, I am of noble fame, beloued with high and lowe. Vpon the churche of God great substance I bestowe, The ministers that seuer hym be all at my wages: The poore haue my succour in hunger, frost, and snowe, I feede both horse and man in holy pilgrimages.
For faier yong lusty maydens I purchase mariages: Whan Churches and chapels be falling in dekay, I must make reparacion: with masters and with pages My helpe must nedes be had, or els there is no pay. Man. WIth wordes thou wouldest susteine that no good dede Is doen without thee, thine aide, or assistens: Which all I denye, and shall it proue for nede That euer been thy wordes vnworthy of credence: Vntrue art thou euer, and by thy false pretens, Doest teache men the trace of all iniquitie. Prouoking him euen to inconueniens, And plounging his heart in great perplexitie. Affirme wouldest thou faine by thy peruersiti. That man cannot be saued from endles paine Without thy fauour, thine aide and amitie, Wherin I say no reason doeth remaine: Full many a soule (more pitie it is certaine) Is damned by thee to euerlasting fire. And many one moe in ioye should euer raigne If they should leaue thy loue in hote desier. Money. REgarde man and consider as reason wil discerne, How I as of my selfe can nothing doe ne say: In thee lieth al the dede, that hast me to gouerne, Wherfore if thou of thy lightnes thee list by night or day To leade me that am blinde no streite but croked way, The fault if we fall is thine, not mine in dede. To order me aright it is no childes play, Looke therfore ere thou leape, the better shalt thou spede. I am the post and piller vnto all Adams seede, The father of the faith sumtime is made by me, The Pope I meane, Gods vicar, and captaine of his crede, Great Emperours and Kinges I crowne in magestie, Duke, Marquise, earle, baron, and Lordes of eche degree. Riche Cardinals, Archbishops, the bishop and his Deane, Abbot, Priour, prouest, the bailife with his fee All that haue promocion may thanke me and my meane.
Man. O Money full of vanitie, thou makest me all dismayed, Considering and knowyng thy fraude and faculties, Wherwith full nere the worlde is destroyed and decayed: Men be I graunt full of vice and vanities, In townes, in boroughes, in castels and cities: But this notwithstandyng at last Atropos kerueth A sunder theyr heartes, as she that without pitie is, So goeth the corps to earth, the soule as it deserueth. By arrogance oultrageous thy tounge on vanting swerueth, Saving that by money be pourchased high estates, Bothe Emperour and Kyng at last by death he sterueth, That auayleth it then theyr floreyns and ducates? Eche prince and prelate the darte of death chekmates. Record may be taken of Ceasar and Pompeus, Of Alexander, of Arthure, and Hector past theyr dates, Of Charlemayn, gentle Iosue, and Iudas Machabeus. Money. THy wysedome to redresse, and spirites to reuiue, And of thy troubled reason to make a reformacion, Of Adam thy fyrst father sumwhat I shall discryue. Immortall was he made by God at his creation, But after that by Sathanas subtyl instigacion, He fed hym with the frute, therwith he dyd transgression, And so becam he mortal, for death tooke dominacion And mortall still continueth of man the hole succession. Sith death on father Adam thus tooke his fyrst possession, He proudely executeth his priuilege eche houre On prelate, prince and poore man he vseth his oppression, Indifferently he dealeth as wel with ryche as poure, As soone the young as olde he dayly doeth deuour. To caytyfes he is comfort for al disease he cureth. Aboue all kynges and Capitanes he is a conqueront, His pryde shall neuer perish whyle the worlde endureth. Man. O money all thy wurdes I do well vnderstand, But nothyng to my pourpose doe I in them espy, Thy sayinges to deny styll will I take in hand,
And sum what on thy backe of charge yet lay shall I. I knowe to thyne opinion eche person will applye, For al men are glad to haue thyne alliaunce, The poore is deceyued, the ryche hath gaynes therby, Men fauoure thy faulse fygure and haue therin affiaunce. The rychman oppresseth the pore by his puissaunce: And whan the poore fyndeth hym self at indigence, Wrongfully intreated and dryuen to penaunce, His reason than he leaseth, his wit and intelligence, Turmentyng hymself by great impacience: His maker he blasphemeth, all halowes he despyteth. And who causeth all this inconuenience, But mony, that euer to mischyfe men encyteth. Mony. THe ryche peraduenture oppresseth nowe and than, The pore man in dede: but who is cause of this? Couetise and auarice the daughters of Sathan, Euermore entising a man to wcke amis: The Church they despoyle, the poore the poste may kis, For nothyng they leaue hym, to plaine hym nought auayleth. Shal I than beare the blame? no lay it where it is: Laye the blame on rapine that so vniustly dealeth. I knowe it of trouth, whan drede mannes mynde assayleth. When he draweth in age to fall in pouerty, Considering howe peny in purse hym much preuaileth, As neybour that is necessary in eche necessity, His fauour and affection enclyneth muche to me, And good reason why: for who that may not haue To helpe hym in his age, in carefull case is he, An hundred tymes a day he wysheth for his graue. Man. INough hast thou pronounced, nowe shal I thee confounde: By thee as I haue sayde, was lost the worlde of golde. But no we marke wel the wurdes that I shal tel thee rounde, By thee the gentyll Iesus vnto the Iewes was solde, Whych after his great paynes and passions manyfolde Was stretched on a tree, and naked therto nayled, Best aied he was by Iudas, for thyrty penies tolde, Thy cursed coyne with couetise so strongly him assayleth.
Great cause hath now the Saot to wepe & to bewaile it, That euer thou wast founden or fro the erth out tried: For to haue been vnborne it had hym more auayled, Than to haue eought the treason wherby his master died. But where is now the traytour, the thefe, the homicide▪ With Sathan and his feres in the infernall glede. In perdurable paynes behoueth him to abyde, For loue of thee faulse money loe thus he hath his mede. Money. I Se thy hart is great, with wurdes thou woldest defame me Reproching me that Iesus should be by me betrayed: With helpe of cursed Iscariot vniustly doest thou blame me, Thou doest mistake the matter, vntruly hast thou sayed, Thou layest on me the blame, but holde thee man appayed, The trouth of the mater I shal to thee expres. Three causes of his death in dede there may be layed, That he was soulde by treason as fyrst I wyll confes. The Iewes wer much disdaynous and ful of wickednes, Al soubtilties they searched, they set their false intent To death to haue him iudged they brought their false witnes Vnto their Prouost ylate their prince they dyd present, Who to his condemnacion dyd finally consent, For drede to be depriued and put out from his office, Though sound were none occasion, on Christ he gaue sentence Great crymes are thus committed by meane of auarice. Man. SO perfitely dispute agaynst thee can not I, But thou doest assoyle the same incontinent. To all my wurdes full wel thou doest reply. With apprebacion right conuenient. And so I do perceyue as by mine owne iudgement▪ If man with his money would be so reasonable To vse it in vertue, and with a good entent, The vsage therof shuld neuer be dampnable. But when man of him selfe is so insaciable To couet worldly goodes without reason or measure, Ful wretched is he doubtles, and more than miserable Of his abhominacion it is a great displeasure,
A man to haue money, welth, and worldly treasure In vertue to auaunce him, and vices to auoyde: Of his welth and welfare all other may haue pleasure, So he him crosse from couetise for doubte to be acloyde. Money. THree thinges there be to man as venim poysonable Whan they be all assembled the man for to assayle: The fyrst is age the croked with stouping limmes vnstable, On man he daily crepeth, no watching may auayle: And sicknes is the second that doeth the strength to fayle, The colour he consumeth, all pleasure he subdueth, The thyrde is paynfull pouertie, these thre be shreude catayle. Whan these be met in man theyr metyng sore he rueth. I say for my conclusion, all solace him ensueth That hath of pence plentie to take whan time requireth, He may lyue out of daunger, for euer his ioye renueth, But poore men that be penyles melancholy them fyreth, The poore opprest with pouertie ful of this death desyreth, So dulleth him his dolour, of God taketh he no hede, That after all his misery he wretchedly expireth To steale, to beg or borow, man is compelled for nede. Man. VVorldly goodes by suffisaunce to man is necessary, To take them at his nede and serue him in goodnes, But yet he must regarde, for drede his welth miscary, That all his goodes be got by way of rightousnes. Let God alwayes be serued before all busines, In gatheryng of his goodes man may not vse deceate, Goodes kept agaynst al right, fy fy on such ryches, The pore must be relyued with clothyng, drinke and meate. Pride maye not bee exalted because the goodes be greate, In sumptousnes of clothing let measure be a mean, Let reason shape the fashion, not ouer large ne strayte, All prodigall expences is wisedome to refrayne. For he that is excessiue a caytyfe shal remayne. Whan Right hath gadered riches, let Reason than expende it In vertue, to the honour of God our soueraine, So order we our money that God be not offended. Finis.
The Author. REgarde well all my Lordes that shall this treatise reade Of man and his money, this is the disputacion, Great reasō make they both, who to the same taketh hede, Euer him boasteth money as high in reputacion, Recording vp his valour, but man mak deegaion. Vnto all men my reason I say as I haue thought, Solas is most in season whan siluer is vnsought. By penny to preferment many a man is brought In borough, towne and citie, all men of eche estate Enforce them selfe to please him, the poore is sette at nought, Succour he seketh, but siluer and he be at debate. Therfore to make conclusion I say now at my gate, Of great good dedes my Money full manye be done doubtles, Neuertheles yet is it cause of many a wyckednes. Explicit nomen authoris. Good Counsayle GEt thy goods truly, Spende them precisely. Set thy goods duly, Lende thou them wisely. True getting, Cise spending, Due setting, Wise lending, Haue e little or much, Kepeth a manne full rutche Vntyll hys endyng. Finis.
