447.5 S109861 99845504 10409
A PROG∣nostication for this yere M. D. xlvi, written by the experte docter of Astronomie & Phisicke Archilles. P Gasser. L Dominators are Mars & Luna.
Prognostication THE FIRST CHAPI¦ter entreateth generally of the course of the planetes and vvhat vvether shalbe this yere. THIS YERE (AS well for that ye more parte of ye planetes in eche figure of he∣uē at lodged in wa∣tery sygnes or figu∣res, as for that the Mone, ladi of ye firmamēt or whole worlde in ye sayd signes shal not ha¦ue the comen & accustomed power) shalbe moyst with heate of the ayer and foule as concerning the ceason. SPRYNG tyme namely, of which the moone shalbe lady with the ayde of Mars & Iuppiter, shall be colde and moist with much wyn∣des and foule wether. SOMER vnto whom Mars and Mercury e∣qually
shal gouerne, shal kepe tem∣perate fayrenes, but yet often shall brust forth with soūdy thunderous wyndes. HERVEST ceasō, whom Mercury with the helpe of Saturn & Venus shal gouerne, shalbe wyn∣dye, clowdy and sōwhat rayny, but all together / variable and dyuerse in heat. VVINTER which by Ve∣nus with thayd of Mars shalbe ru¦led, shall be very colde, with rayne and snow. Finally, these ar ye daū∣gerous and suspecte dayes of this whole yere .iiii.ix.xx. and .xxix. of Marche, the .vii.xv.xxii.xxiii. and xxix, of April. the .x.xvii. and xxx. of Maie, the .ii.xvii.xxiii, and xxviii. of Iuly, the fyrste and .xix of Sep∣tēber the .xx. and .xxvi. of October, ¶ Of the perticuler ceasōs of euery Moneth in the yere. Ianuary, THE full Moone the seconde day the .iiii. houre xxiii. minute af∣ter
none, temperate as touchīg any gret colde, but on the morow snowy wyndes shall fall, & euen so it shall come to passe on the .v, day, wherin the moone shall be ioyned vnto the clowdy sterre that is in the head of Sagittary, & Venus at ye euening-tyde before the Sonne setteth with ARCTVR ye Wagō keper, a ster so named, and is so called because he foloweth the wagon that is cal∣led Charlemaynes wayne of the vp landish, but of some, the Beare, by∣cause they moue about the Pole, as the Beare about the stake: & of the learned, both he and the wagon are named BOETES because they mo∣ue slowly as Oxen do. The Poetes fayne that he was Iupiters sonne, & nominate ARCADES. but he is called ARCTVRVS for that he is girded roūd about wt the Nor∣thern sterres. The syxt daye whan Mars ryseth or springeth vp with the hert of ye SCORPION (an other name of a sterre) before none, and the Sonne shalbe entred in to ye house of Saturne, the ayer shall be
troubled with rayne, paraduēture vntyll the next day that the moone close in the night with HYADES. THE fyrst quarter shalbe the .ix. day vii houre before none, & the cold shall not be much aswaged. The ix. daye, whylest the Sonne shall spring with the Dolphī or Porpose it shall snow. The .xiii. day, Mars risyng with ARCTVR and SA¦TVRNE sette euen ouer againste the Mone, shal cause a cloudy sky, The xiiii. day, whan Venus setteth with FOMAHAND in the twy¦light, it shal snow. THE ful mone shalbe on the xvii. day at one of the clocke xvi mi, before none, whan Ve¦nus with the cloudy sterre, that is in the head of SAGITTARI a¦fore the Sonne, and Mercury after the sonne shal arise with ALGOL moist windes shal blow, And ye xix day whan Mercury in the morning after the Sonne shall spring with the Gottes tayle, and Mars in the night shall be in a quartyle aspecte with the Mone, it shall ether snow or rayne, & so shall cōtinew the next
day because of ye openīg of ye gate be¦twene Saturne & the Mone, and on the xxi. day, because the Sonne shal set with FOMAHAND, it shal peraduenture endure. On the xxiiii day, whan Iuppiter afore the Son in ye euenyng, shalbe ouerwhelmed with ye Croune of ARIADNES and after that the Sōne selfe lyke∣wise shal set with the Egle, the frost somwhat shalbe relented or thawed THE last quarter of the Mone shalbe the xxv. day at v. of the clock after none. On ye .xxvii day whilest Mars shall ryse ere the Son shyne with ALKAYR, that is with the Egle or flyeng VVLTVRE) & the Moone shalbe coupled with the same Mars at none, and afterward in ye nyght shalbe coupled with Sa∣turne: & further Venus in the twy¦lyght shall set with the Southerne Croune, cloudes & wyndes shalbe raysed. The xxxi. day, whyles the Sonne shall spring with the hed of MEDVSAE Mars shall ascende with ye hed of SERPENTARY in the day, & in the nyght, the mone
shalbe ioyned with the Gotes tayle the ayer shalbe troubled. February THE new mone shalbe kyndled in a pyttie degree on the fyrst day of February at ii. of the clocke .xlviii mi. afore noone, in which day also the Son shal settle with the Gotes tayle. Also on the second day whan Mercury about none shalbe ioyned with the Moone, & shal set at night after the Sōne with FIDICVLA the lytell stryng: Lykewyse on the third dai, colde, wt moist wīdes shal begyn to hurt. The v day, whā Ve∣nus with the shulder of PEGASE shall spring in the mornyng, and in the nyght the two infortunate ster∣res shal couple in ye same East parte of heuē, the aier shalbe troublesom. The fyrst quar, hapneth on the vii. day, the viii houre after none, with which lyght, the same Mone a lytel before Noone shall be ioyned with PLEIADES the .vii. Sterres, and Mars afore the Sōne shall set
with ARCTVR, more hoate or warme rayne. The ix. day, clowdy. The xii. day whan Venus shalbe co¦uered or set with FOMAHAND afore the Sonne, the Moone after the Sonne sette, shall drawe nyghe the Racke and the lytel Asses: Also on the xiii. day, whyles the Sonne shalbe ioyned vnto the cloudy sterre that is in the beginning of the she∣dyng or powrīg out of the waterer or in ye figure Aquarius, & at night shalbe set with thuttermost Ster of ERIDANI, snow & stormes shal trouble the ayer. THE full Mone the v, day, the .vii. howre. the .lv. mi. after none, wīdy wt moist & vnstable wether. On the xvii. day, rayne or snow shal fall, namely, whan Ven{us} in theuenīg before the goyng down of the Sonne, shall ioyne with the Egle & the Gotes tayle. On the xix day, peraduēture the same tempest or wether shall endure, bicause that Iupiter with the hed of ANDRO¦MEDE, in the day tyme, shalbe long before the Sonne, and Venus with the head of ALGOLE in
lyke maner, a lytell before the Son ascend or ryse. THE last quarter shalbe the .xxiii, day at .viii. of the clocke afore Noone, in a pitty de∣gree, on which day, Mars, before ye day spring, with a cloudy ster, that is in the hed of Sagittary the Sho¦ter, and also with the Snout of the lytell horse, shall ryse, & the Moone not long after, with the same clow∣dy ster in the shoters hed, shal holde a Synode or Counsell, that is, she shalbe ioyned with the same sterre, as men be ioyned in coūsels, which shall cause troublous wyndes, and shal contynue tyll the next day. On the xxv day ye cold shalbe relēted, as well bicause that the Sonne shalbe set vnder or ioyned with the cloudy ster, as also bycause that the Son in the same euening shall go doune or set with the tayle of the Whalle fish. On the xxviii day, it shal ether rayne or snow. Marche. ON THE fyrst day of Marche
Venus, entering into the sygne of Pisces, shall cause moystnes. THE new Moone EMBOLISMAL that is, the superfluous Mone, shal appere on the second day, & xii. min. after the poyncte of the Mone, tem∣perate, as touching colde & here, but yet somwhat wyndy, & enclyned to moystture. On the third day, whan Venus shall couple with the sterre NEBVLOSE, & that the sterre called PORTE APERTIO, be betwene ye Sonne & Saturne, thā shall it be colde wether, or {per}chaunce hore or white frostes, & so it shal con¦tinue the next day, bicause the Son setteth with the Sterre, called the shoulder of ye wynged or fliēg horse On the vii. day, bicause Venus shal ioyne with FOMAHAND (which is the last ster in the sygne Aquari{us}) afore myd day, & the Son with the wombe or belly of PEGA¦SE, at Noone shal spring or ascēd. and the Moone shall ioyne wt HY∣ADES, & at the last, the Son shal set wt the belly of the Whale fysh: therfore the ayer shalbe somewhat
moyst. THE fyrst quarter shalbe on the ix. daye, x. houre before myd day. variable or cloudy wether. On the x, days, for the euenes of the day and nyght in the spring tyme. And on the xi. day, for the settyng of Ve∣nus with the harpe afore the Son, ther shal styl out hote or sowli rayn The xix day, ye ayer shalbe troubled ī like maner. THE ful, EMBOLIS MAL or od Mone, shalbe on ye vii day one of the clocke xxxii mi. after None, not only in a puteall or pitty degree of both ye lyghtes, that is of both Sonne & Moone: but also on the same day the Mone, or it be mid day shall ioyne with the Vyneyard keper: vnstable tempestes shalbe pro longed euyn vnto the next day folo∣wing, wherin Mars both setteth wt ARIADNES his Crowne, and the euēing hath a iiii. coruerd aspect vnto DIANA, that is the Mone, shall cause Northerne wyndes to blow. On the xx. day it shalbe rayn and perchaunce the next .iii. dayes folowyng, bycause the Sonne shall settle wt MARKEB (that is with
the shoulder of the great horse) and wt the belly of the whale fish, except in some places, the Sterre, called PORTE ADPERTIO shall bring a hore or whyte froste. THE last quar, shall happen in a vaporous or smoky degree on the xxv. day, vii. houre afore None, and Mars also shal spring in ye mornīg with ye hed of ANDROMEDE and therefore, troblesome & moist, or els snowy wether shall appere. On the xxx. day, rayne & wynd shal blow. THE new Mone, shalbe renewed on the xxxi day of Marche .ix. houre xi. mi. after Noone, with clere and fayre wether, perchaūce with newe thunders. Aprill, ABOVT the secōd day of Aprill the Sonne goyng downe wiih AL¦PHERAT (that is with the ster of the shyn of PEGASAE or gret horse) ye aier shalbe very trobleous. On the .v. daye, the ster PORTE ADPERTIO, beyng betwene Saturne
the next daye folowing, may bring among our mountaynes more trou∣blesom wyndes. On the xxviii. day in the dawnīg of the day Venus is ioyned with ALGOLE, & with in a lytell after Mercury with A∣CARNER before the Son shall ascend vp into the myddes of heuen and at the last, Mercury being with RIGOLE, not long before the Sonne shall set, we may looke for a trobelous wether, & perchaūce snow On the xxix. daye, for as muche as Venus and PLIADES in the morning spring, shall go before the Sonne, and CILLENIVM shal be coupled with PHEBVS, ther∣fore ye shall haue hote wyndes and hurtfull to the eares & eyes, which ar to be feared & dred. THE newe Mone, the last day ar .vi. of ye clocke xvi, mi. afore Noone, and lykewyse the goyng together of the Moone with VIRGILIE that is the vii sterres. & the ioynīg of Mars with a Fyxt clowdy sterre: & finally the ioyning of the Soone with MAIA (one of the .vii, Systers among the
vii. sterres, betoken windes. Maye. ABOVTE ye first day of May, Mercury shall spring ymedi∣ately after the Sūne, and shal shine vnder the sonne beames with FO∣MAHAND, and Ven{us} also bur∣ned at nighte shalbe drouned vnder ye HORISON (out of our sight) with RIGILE afore ye Sonne: A∣gaine on the nexte daye in the mor∣nyng the Sunne shalbe lifted vp wt FOMAHAND & the same shall attain & possesse the middes of hea∣uen with PLEIADES at none, & Mercury also shalbe ioyned wyth the same heape or figure of sterres. Furthermore, on the .iii. daye Mer∣curi with PLEIADES & the gir∣dle of ORION shal descend or go doune in ye euenyng after the Sūne, vnder ye line that endith our sighte: and to these on the .iiii. daye the a∣foresaid messenger of goddes (Mer∣cury) with the Dogge shall mete a litle after the sunne set, which beto∣ken lightnynges and hayl, and per∣aduenture
snowe vpō the mountai∣nes, according to the expectation of our commune people. On ye .vi. daye Ven{us} shal rise wt FOMAHAND afore the sunne, and with PLEIA∣DES a litle afore noone. THE first quarter of the Mone the .vii. day at .vii. of the clocke af∣ter noone, and the couplyng of Ve∣nus with VIRGILLIE the vii. sterres, shall bryng in diuers fliyng fiers by night, The .ix. daye shalbe cloudy and thunderous, for the sūne shal set at night bothe with the eye of Taurus (the bulle) and with the ster SIRIA. On the, x. day it shall rayn very much, for both ADPER∣TIO PORTAE, ye opening of the gate, and the mone after none shalbe ioyned with PROTRIGERE, & ve∣nus at euen a litle afore the sūne go∣ing doune wt PLEIADES & with ORIONS girdle shal go vnder. On the .ii. daye Mercurius in folo∣wyng the sunne shall assende wyth HYADES and Venus vnder ye be∣ames in going before the sunne shall set wt ALHABOR the great dogge
Againe, on the .xii. daye Venus shal be ouerwhelmed with ALDEBA∣RAM (the bulles eye,) and Mercu∣rius shall ryse with the goate. On the .xiii. daye Mercurius shall ryse with ALDEBARAM (the bulles eye) after the sunne, and the sunne shal spring vp wt SVCCVLI the pigges. On the .xiiii. day also Mer∣curius shal settle with the hedde of ALGOL after the sunne goyng doune, therfore, for the space of .iiii. daies thei shal geue & bring in by ti∣mes partly showers partly thūder. THE full Moone of Maye the xv. day, v. of the clocke .lvi. minutes after noone shalbe made windy and sumwhat moysty. The .xvii. & .xviii daye shalbe mixed with reigne and thunder, whē Marcury in the breke of the daye shall assende with the right shulder of ORION and at ye twilyght with the same sterre both the sunne and Venus shal sette to∣gether, but not without hayle. On the .xx. daye Phebus, the sunne ry∣syng in ye mornyng with HIADES, and after him Mercury with PRO∣CYON,
the litle dogge, which we call CANICVLA of whō the day∣es that are called the CANICV∣LAR dayes take their name, at ni∣ght goyng awaye shall cause moyst wyndes to blowe. THE last quarter of the Mone shalbe on the .xxii. day at .vii. of the clock after noone, it shal raine. The xxiii. daye Venus vnder the sunne shal spring with the bulles eye, & as∣cende with the goate: and therefore the cloudes gathered together shall cast oute thunder and lightnyng, so that the next daye, what for the ry∣syng of the Sunne with the bulles eye and for the ascending of Venus the tempest shall scarsely cease. On the .xxvi. day, the ayre shalbe metly temperate, excepte the Sunne with RIGILE at noone, and after hym Mercury with the great dogge, ex∣altyng, and Venus at night folow∣yng the sunne settyng with the hed of ALGOLE, and at the laste Sa∣turnus goyng backewarde both on this day and on the next day dessen∣dyng with the Waggandriuer not
muche after the sunne set, shal sodē∣ly sende furth rayne and hayle,. On the .xxvii. daye the sunne settyng wt GORGONS hed and Mars as∣cēdyng in the night with FOMA∣HAND, shal cause thunder. THE newe Mone shalbe in a pu∣teall or pittie degree. On the .xxix. day of this present moneth of May at .iiii. of the clocke .x. minute, after noone, wherin at night Mercuri al∣so shall sette after the Sunne with bright HIDRIA or water pott, & it shalbe temperate heate, sumwhat cloudye and wyndye. Also the .xxx. and .xxxi. day because Mercuri shal assende with the righte shoulder of ORION in the mornyng before the sunne, therfore ye shall haue rayne, Iune. ABOVTE the .ii. daye of Iune, whylest the Mone early in the mornyng shal go vnto ye racke vnder the yerth, and in the euening whilest AD PERCIO PORTAE is betwene Saturne and the sunne,
hayle is to be looked for, but in the toppes of moūtaines snowe. On the v. daye Mercury foloyng the sunne shall ryse with RIGYL, & when Venus the folowyng mayde of the sunne at nyghte shall goo vnder the yearth with ALGOMAISA, it shall thunder, THE fyrst quarter of the Mone, shalbe the .vi. daye not muche afore noone, in so much, as Mars shal set with VVEGA, therfore a wyndy and moyst tempest shall take place, whiche on the next daye Venus vn∣der entryng the sygne Cancer the Crabbe, shall more increase. On the ix. daye, when Mars with the So∣therne Croune early in the morning & Venus sprynging after the sunne with the sterre of the fyrst hedde, of the twine, whiche twine is called Gemini the signe. Also, on ye .x. daye the sunne departing away with the lytle dogge shall cause small wyn∣des and thunder. The standyng or steiyng of the sunne (that is whē he is at the highest and can go no hier) in Sommer shalbe on the .xii. daye.
The .xiii. daye shalbe cloudye with lightnyng. THE ful moone shalbe the .xiiii day, at .ii. of the clock .xxx. minutes afore noone, wherin the sunne shall assend in the mornyng with the hed of the first twine, and the mone shal be ioyned with the cloudy sterre in the toppe of the hedde of the shoter or of the signe Sagittarye aboute noone, the wether shall be vnstable with variable tempestes. On the .xv daye Venus shall spryng vp after ye sunne wyth the hedde of the latter twine. On the xvi. day the same Ve∣nus late after the sūne shal set with the bright water potte. On the .xvii daye Venus agayne shall spring af∣ter the sunne with the righte shoul∣der of ORION, and the Mone shal go together wyth the goates tayle, whiche shal cause muche lightnyng and sumwhere haile: which tempest euen on the next daye, the sunne ry∣syng with ORIONS left shulder, and amounting with the great dog, ioyned vnto him onely in length, af∣terward the Mone appliyng vnto ye
cloudye sterre of the water powred out of ye waterer, at after noone shal augment with moist thunder. THE laste quarter shalbe the xx. day the .xi. of the clocke after no∣ne wyndye. On the .xxii. daye, the sunne with the hedde of the hynder twine, and furthwyth after Venus with RIGILLE ascēdyng shal mixe thunder with heate, except the couplyng of Venus and Mercury on the morowe sende furthe rayne. On the .xxiiii. daye in the morning, ye sunne springyng with ORIONS right shulder, and at euen the Mone coupled with HIADES, Likwise on the .xxv. daye, the sunne settyng wyth ALPHARD, ye bright wa∣ter pott, shal powre out many thun∣dry showers. On ye .xxvii. day Mer∣cury goyng backward rysing in the mornyng with RIGILE, shal suc∣cede the sunne, and afterward again shall clyme into the hearte of heauē with ALGOMEISA. THE newe Moone shalbe on the xxviii. day at .iii. of the clocke .xxiiii minutes afore noone, and shal bring
furth whote wyndes, but not verye muche healthsum, nor yet withoute moystnes. On the .xxx. day, the sūne going vnder the east with RIGIL and after in the myddes of heauen, wt ALGOMAISA shall cause heate a litle to abate. Iuly. ON the first day of Iuly, Venus ioyned with the racke, shall set with it after the sunne, and it shall thunder. On the .iii. daye Mars set∣tyng betwene day and nyght wyth MARKEB, ye shulder of the great horse and Iupiter in ye signe Aquari or waterer set ouer agaynst Venus in a streighte lyne deuidyng the cir∣cle in the middes, shal bring in raine vntyll the next day, wherin Venus shal ryse vp after the sunne with the lytle hogge and the Moone shall go beyond the Grape gatherer at after noone. THE first quarter of the Mone shalbe on the .vi. daye afore none, at iiii. of the clock: in whiche the CA∣NICVLER
or dog dayes begyn and the heate shalbe doubled wyth lightning On the .x. day the darke heauen shal yelde mortall diseases. On the .xii. day Venus assending in the day with ye litle dogge shal raise vp whote wind and thunder. THE ful Mone the .xiii. day at .i. of the clocke .xxvi. minu. after none. On the .xiiii. day whylest the sunne entryng the Lyon, shall spring with the rack & the Mone at night shalbe copled with the Goates taile. On ye xv. and .xvi. daye, when Phebus the Sunne shal ryse with the litle dogge sterre in the mornyng, & at euen shal go donne with the racke and hedde of the first twine, PRODROMI the aforerunners shall bryng thun∣der and lightning, and parauenture a great hayl shal fal. The .xviii. day when fayre Venus with the prynce∣ly sterre of the Lyon shall set after the Sunne, heate shalbe doubled. THE last quarter of the Moone the .xx. daye, at .iiii. of the clocke a∣fore noone, in whych day also Mer∣curye afore the Sunne shall assende
with RIGOLE and shal amount with the greate Beare, and at laste the same Venus shall goo vnder the hearte of heauen with RIGOLE therefore a varyable tempest shall ryse, and perauenture it shall rayne aboundauntly, vnto whyche on the next day Venus rysyng in the breke of daye wyth RIGOLE and al∣so the Moone commyng wyth the vii. sterres, shalbe contrary. On the xxii. daye, the heate shall sumwhat abate. On the .xxv. daye the Sunne assendyng in the mornyng wyth the Dogge, from whiche day, the dogge dayes haue theyr name. Also on the xxvi. daye Venus in the morning entryng the Virgin (or sygne of the Virgyn) and the Moone at nyghte commyng to the racke, shall brynge furth moyst windes and thunder. THE new Moone shalbe in a pu∣teal or pitty degree on the .xxvii. dai of this present moneth, at .iiii. of the clocke .xl. minutes, after noone, and it shalbe whote, & inclyned to thun∣der and east or southeast wynde. On the xxviii. day Venus shal assend in
the mornyng afore the sunne wyth the bright water potte, and that the Sonne selfe shal clyme ye same bright water potte at myd day, and therto Mercurius shall go doune afore the sūne set with HERCVLES hed On the .xxix. day aboute noone, the openyng of the gate shalbe betwixt the backward going of Iupiter and Mercury, and at nyghte Mercurye shall set with the litle asses, and the racke. On the .xxx. day Mercury in the morning afore the sunne wyth the racke, and afterward the sunne selfe shall ryse with the vttermoste sterre of ERIDANVS, & afterward Mercury shall clyme into the heart of heauen afore noone agayne with the litle asses, at last the same Mer∣cury shal set afore the sūne at night wt APPOLLIVS head, where∣fore worse tempestes shalbe in great valleis, but on the mounteines in e∣uery place sharper shall aryse. August.
ABOVTE the .iii. day of Au∣gust, whylest Venus shall rise after the sunne with the lions taile, a cloudy skye shall appeare. THE fyrst quarter of the Mone shalbe the .iiii. daye, at eyght of the clocke, after none, in a misty or smo∣kie degree, and shalbe whote & win∣die. On the .vi. daye in the mornyng Mercury spryngyng with ye greate dogge, and the sunne walking with the princelye sterre of the lyon shall make or cause a thundry and windy tempest with cloudes. On ye .ix. day it shall reigne, and likewyse on the x. day: wherin Venus in the breake of the daye clymeth with the lyons tayle, & setteth afore the sunne with the hearte of the same ymage of the lyon. THE ful Moone shalbe the .xi. day at .ix. of the clocke .xxxv. minu∣tes, after noone and the eyre shall waxe colde and moyste. On the .xii. daye, Mercury, not only in the mor∣nyng shall spryng afore the Sunne wyth RIGVLLE, but also with the same REGVLLE shal passe
vnder themiddes of heauen, and the Mone ioyned with the cloudye ster∣res, shal get and procure wynd. On the .xiiii. daye it shall thunder and lyghten, and the Dogge tyme shall finysshe or ende. On the .xvi. daye in the mornyng whē the Sunne assen∣dyng the line ending the sight, with the brighte sterre of the water potte shal bryng temperatenes. THE last quarter shall be the .xviii. daye aboute noone, and shall reyse vp vnstable wyndes. On the .xxi. daye Venus shall spryng vp af∣ter the Sunne, wyth the Waggan driuer. On the .xxii. day Venus ioy∣ned vnto PROTRIGETER, and contrary or euen agayne Mars shall make an openyng of the gate, and shall bryng furth rayne. THE new Mone shalbe the .xxvi daye. the .viii. houre and .iiii. minu∣tes afore noone, in whych daye Ve∣nus after the Sūne shal spring with the Northren crowne, wherfore the eyre shall geue awyndye moysture with muche thunder. On the .xxvii. day late in the euenyng Venus shal
sette with the virgins eare of corne On the .xxviii. daye afore noone, the Mone shalbe ioyned in the length of the ZODIAC with ye PEVIN∣DEMIATOR or the Grapega∣therer. The heat of Summer shal be¦gynne to be wythdrawne by rayne, and that forbecause Venus settyng both with the taile and backe of the Lyon after the Sunne, she shall not ryse and auaunce agayne in the end of August withoute snowe among the mountaynes. September. THE ADPERTIO POR∣TAE or openyng of the gate be∣twene Saturne and the Sunne be∣yng on the first daye of September not farre from noone, and whē Ve∣nus shall folowe not muche after wyth AZIMECH or the Vir∣gyns eare of corne, the ayre shall be∣gynne too be chaunged into haruest showers.
THE first quarter of the Mone shalbe the .iii. daye at .x. of the clock afore none. On which day also Mer∣cury with the Waggandriuer, and Venus shall spryng after the sunne with the virgins eare of corne: noy∣some and cloudy windes shal blowe On the .vi. day Mercury assendyng the lyne that endeth the sight wyth ARIADNES croune, & the .vii. daye the Moone aboute noone ioy∣ned with the goates taile shal geue rayne. On the .ix. daye in the mor∣ning wt PROTRIGETER, and further, almost .ii. houres after Ve∣nus with the harpe: also at the laste that slowe siccle bearer Saturne with the swifte Egle, not withoute stormes shall spryng. THE full Mone the .x, day at v. of the clocke .xlix. mi. before None, in the beginnīg hore frostes, but im∣mediatly folowyng shall be wynde with vnstable moystnesse: for both Venus on the same daye shall passe with the cloudye sterre, & Mercury long after the Sonne. settyng with the Virgens eare of cornie shal giue
them selfes to beholde Cupido. On the, xii. & .xiii, likewyse, for as moch as the Heruest euenesse of daye and night shalbe, & Mercury hal spring after the Sonne with the Virgyns eare of corne, and Venus shal go vn¦der the myddes of heauen with the Wagō driuer. Also on the, xiiii. day whylest the Mone before none shall draw nygh vnto the .vii. sterres, the ayer shalbe troubeled. THE last quarter shalbe about midnyght on the .xvi. day, on which day, the Son risyng in the morning with the tem¦pestious sterre of the Wagon driuer if not rayne, yet peraduenture it shall gyue a whyte hoared frost or snow. On the .xviii. day, Mercuri{us} risyng after the Sonne VVEGA the flieng VVLTER. And on the ix. daye the Mone early in the mor∣nyng coupled wyth the Racke: and farthermore Venus spryngyng af∣ter the Sunne with the bryght ster∣res of the balaunce and auaunsing, ioyned bodely with the more So∣thren balance, shal cause moist win∣des and cloudy. On the .xxiii. daye,
in the mornyng, the Sonne shal ryse with the Northerne croune, & after Noone Marcury shall clymbe the myddes of heuen with the Wagn driuer: Lykewyse on the xxiiii. day the Moone afore Noone shall come to the Grape gatherer, and at night the Sonne shall sette with the Vyr∣gins care of corne, frō whence moist cloudes shall take place. THE new moone the .xxv. day at .i. of the clocke .x. mi. before None, shalbe va¦riable and vnstable with thunder in some places. On the .xxviii. daye in the morning the Sōne with the Ra∣uen & after him Marcury shall ryse with ye bright sterres of the Blāce, Agayne, on ye .xxix. day Venus shal mount with ARIADNES croune, and the Sonne shall sette with the backe and tayle of the Lyon, and ar the last on the .xxx. daye, the Sonne ascending the hert of heuē with the Virgyns eare of corne, shall cause a cloudy sky. October.
THE fyrst day of October, Ve∣nus with the hert of the Scorpion shall scasely go doune in the euenīg after the Sonne without trouble∣some wyndes. THE fyrst quarter of the Mone shalbe the .xxii. day at .xi. of ye clock at after Noone, on whiche daye the Sonne in the mornyng shall spring with the Virgins eare of corne, and some cold rayne shal soone folow. The .v. day shalbe cloudy, The .vii. day a whyte frost shall prepayre the gatheryng in of the Grapes. The full Moone the nynth daye at ii, of the clocke. the liii. minute after noone, and Venus shall ascend the myddes of heuen with ANTER therefore looke for colde Wyndes and somwhat moisty on the morow and next day after: as well because in the one, the Sonne in the mornīg shall spring with the lytel Stryng, as in the other in the very moment or poynte as it were of Noone, the Moone shal be put vnder the seuen Sterres.
On the xiii. daye, as Venus in the breake of the daye shall swym with the Arow & the Scorpions hert, and Saturne shalbe set contrary too the Moone by a strayte lyne a lytell be∣fore noone: euen so on the .xiiii. day the Son ascending vp with the Wa¦gō driuer shal cause cloudi or snowi wether. THE last quarter shalbe the, xvi. day at .iii of the clocke after none, on which day the Moone, not far from the West corner, about the same tyme of Noone goynge to the Racke shall cause moyst wyndes. On the .xx. daye, Mercury goyng backward shal spring with the most clere & bright sterres of ye Balaunce and ioyned vnto the Sonne shal ge∣ue a white hored frost, which on the xxi. day folowing because that the Son in the morning with the a fore sayd bright sterres of the Balaunce and after him Venus shall springe with the Egle: and agayn at after Noone the Moone shalbe ioyned wt PROTRYGETER: and last of all the Sonne shall settle with ye more south Bowle of ye Balaunce,
wherfore the colde shal scace ceasse. THE new Mone shalbe ye .xxiiii day at .vii. of the clocke & the vii mi. after Noone, windy and moyst, and peraduenture it shalbe more truly sayd to be snow. On the, xxvii, day Saturnus shall begynne late to set with the Wagon driuer. On the xxviii, day, the Moone opening the gate vnto Saturne fyrst in a windy sygne, afterward ioyned to Venus in a pytte degree before Noone: a¦gayn the same Venus goyng doune in the nyght with the Wagon dry∣uer shal ouer turne frō aboue thicke cloudes or snow, On the .xxxi. day the cloudes shalbe caryed with gret wyndes, namely, because the Sōne shal spring with the head of OPHI¦VCHVS the Serpent holder, & is hercules, for whylest he held a ser∣pent with his hand, he was by Iu∣piter tanslated among the sterres. Nouember. THE fyrst quarter of the Mone shalbe the first day at .x. of the clok
afore none & shal continew vntyll ye next day whylest the sōne auaūseth with the bright northern croune, & a litle after the Mone shalbe ioyned with the cloudy sterre that is in the beginnīg of ye Water sheder of the Waterer, & therfore it shalbe colde & wyndy. The .iiii. day, the ayer shal be vnquyet & troublous. On the .v day whylest Venus shall ryse in the breake of the daye wt the cloudy ster that is in the Shoters hed & auaūce with the fallyng Vulture or Gripe, & the Sōne ioyned with the lytell cloudy sterre in the Scorpion, only setteth at nyght wt the herte of the same constellatiō, at ye last the clou∣des shal bring furth & deliuer snow. THE ful Moone shalbe the .viii day at one of ye clock .xvii. mi. before noone in a pytty degree, & for that ye Mone shal take her counsell wt the vii. sterres & after folowing wt HIA¦DES, it shal rayne: These HIA∣DES ar .v. Sterres situate in the Bulles head, & ar so called among the Bretians, of Hio, to rayn, for as oft as they either spring or set, it rai¦neth:
but of the Latinistes they at named SVCCVLI, Pygges, be∣cause Swyne delyte to wallowe in myer that cometh of rayne, On the .x. day Mercurius springing before the Sōne with the bryghtest sterres of the Balaunce, and the Moone beholding Saturne set in a contrary spoke or lyne, sygnifyeth a whyte hored frost or snow. THE last quar. shalbe ye, xv, daye, x. of the clocke afore noone, moyst & wyndy, The, xvii. it shall snow. ye, xviii. day the sonne shal spring wt ANTARE & Venus shal auaunce wt the flyeng Gripe. the, ix, dai Venus setteth wt ye tallyng Gripe after ye sōne. the, xx, the Sōne in the morning ascendeth with the Harrow, & Iupiter shal co¦uer wt the Swan or sygnettes tayle betwene day & nyght, The .xxi. day Mercury at night goeth away with ANTER afore ye Sōne, wherfore al these .iiii, dayes either shalbe dar¦kened with cloudes, or els vnquyet wyndes shall haue preheminence. THE new Moone the, xxiii. day scace halfe an houre before Noone shall sende furth colde wynde, and
in many places moyst for the space almost of two dayes. On the .xxvii, day cloudes, & peraduenture snow shall step , The .xxix, day the sōne ascendeth in the mornyng with the Egle, & Mercury shall clymbe the middes of heuen with ARCTVR before ye Sōne, not without whyrle wyndes. THE fyrst quarter shal be the .xxx. day at .vii. of the clocke after Noone with cold and wynde, December, ABOVT the first day why lest Mercury shal ascend wt ARCTVR early before the Sonne risyng, & as the Sonne self shalbe couered with the Serpent holders head, the ayer shalbe troublesom, which shall con∣tynue vntyll the next day. The .iiii. day it shall snow. The .v day why∣lest the Sonne shall ryse with the halfe of the Dolphin in the mornīg and at nyght shall go away to rest with the Wagon driuer. On the vi. day whan Venus shall go doune in
the nyght after the Sonne set with the vttermost ster of the Shede wa∣ter, than looke for moyst wyndes. THE full Moone the .vii, daye at one of the clocke .xliii. min. after none: on which day because Mer∣cury also shal spring with the Egle in the morning, snowy wyndes shal ryse: and shall waxe bygger on the nexte day because of Saturne ioy∣ning with the Sonne. On the tenth day, the Mone shalbe ioyned to the Racke in the morning, and Venus after that shall come to the spring with the head of MEDVSA. On the .xi. day, ye same Venus shall sette with the Egle and the Gotes tayle in the nyght, On the .xii. day whylest VVYNTER shal spring & the Semewes dayes, Mars shall ascēd the lyne that endeth our sight about None, with the .vii. Sterres and Mercury at nyght shal descend the same tyme with the Wagondri∣uer, and shall cause snowy rayne. THE last quarter shalbe the .xv day at .vii. of the clocke before none vnstedfast wether: for on the same
daye the Sonne shall ryse with the cloudy sterre of the Shoters head, & after with the fallyng Gripe shall ascende h hert of Heuen, The, xix. day, the Sonne and Mercury shall couple before Noone in a pitty de∣gree, and Iupiter shall begyn to set late with the vttermost sterre of the Shede water, for these causes snow shalbe loked for. THE new moone the .xxiii, day at, iiii, of ye clock .xvii, mi. before noone shall cause a thaw partely with wynde & partely with moysture. The .xxiiii. daye shall be cloudy and also snowy. The, xxviii day Venus applyeng vnto the clou∣dy sterre of the Shed water agayne shall geue snow or cloudes. THE fyrst quarter of the Mone shalbe the .xxx, day at .ii. of the clok after noone, on which day the Sōne shall auaunce in the myddes wt the Egle & the strow, & at euen shall set with the northern crowne, therfore they betoken snow and rayn vntyll the nexte daye wherein Venus is a∣uaunsed with the Shed water.
¶ Of generall significations of the Ele¦mentes. Of the Lorde of the yeare, and of certayne Coniunctions. ALTHOVGH this yere of M.D.xlvi. be not blemysshed with any Eclippes neither of Sonne nor Moone, yet Mars sygnifyer of the comen and vulgare people & lord of the yere, & here vnto also the ascen∣dent of the reuolution of the world, shall cause in all this yere the peple to be vnstable and inconstant. Also though they bring heuynes & feares euery where, yet most of all in the Est parte, not without the gret hyn¦deraūce or vndoyng of many, & also the losse & destructiō of many catel. Furthermore, the same Mars in the sayd reuolutiō, set ouer agaynst the Moone: betokeneth corruption of ye ayer, fyer flyēg by night, a blasyng Sterre, sundrye diseases, & finally the consumyng by fyer of Vyllages and Cities, with infinite disceytful¦nes. wherfore, let al those peple that ar subiect to Capricorn thinke these thīgs spokē vnto them. But the con¦iunctiō of ye said Mars wt Saturne
On the v day of February in the se∣cond house of heuen, not rysen, but to rise, signifieth distruction of goo¦des, Subtaunce, Houses & house∣hold stuffe: and signifyeth also the ingrate disobedience of seruauntes and labourers: And that the ryche and great men shalbe had in no esti∣mation among their seruaūtes, and yet many of their seruaūtes shalbe promoted by them: and also the sol∣diers proudly shall disdayn to obey the order and cōmaundmēte of their Capitaynes. In lyke maner as Ra¦gelus teacheth, the Congregation or Counsell of Mars with Iupiter which thei shall celebrate or solēp∣nely kepe, The .vii. day of April in the morning in the .xi. house of heuē betokeneth many euels: as ye darth and death of beastes, theft, prison∣mentes and battayles chiefly vnto the subiectes of Aquarius, Also Ve¦nus placed with Mercuri in ye same sygne of heuen, signifieth lacke of substaunce, the vncōly dedes of men stynking delytes with women: and that not a few secrets shalbe disclo¦sed,
letters shall be opened: wher∣fore whatsoeuer thou doest, doo it prudētly & wisely & behold the end. ¶ Of plenty and scarcytie of grayne, of the lucke of thīges springīg of the erth. THE estate of the Fruyt of the erth shalbe indifferent good (god so willyng) but Mars much thretneth hurt vnto trees, & so shal yeld a wa∣uerynge estate of all grayne: But for all that, for the habitation of ye Moone in the fygure coniunctional and for the application of her, a ly∣tell after the same coniunction to a quadrate aspecte of Saturne, the price of necessary foode shall rather diminish then encreace: whā at the first the parte of plentifulnes of the whole yere shal fal in the .xii. house & in the tryne or thre cornered aspect of Mercury. But what shal not the execrable gredines of gold or money
and the curssed swetenes of lucre & vsury defyle & breke? Now I wyll tell you by course the {per}ticuler luck of euery thing, as our VRANIA hath ben accustomed, that is as our heuenly Figure hath ben accusto∣med to be declared. VRANIA is one of the, ix. Muses. & is by inter∣pretation CELESTIS Heuenly. ¶ Great Bestes and fat shall dy Gottes and small Beastes shall be of lytel valure. ¶ Butter & mylke shalbe plentifull and not dere, but it shalbe thyn and watery. ¶ Rysse, Wheat, Rye, & other more plesaūt Graynes, in growyng men may bewayle the blastyng, & in the market vsury. ¶ Secale, Barly, Otes & such lyke, shall grow more fortunate, and in price more cheap. ¶ Millium panicum, Myrica, shal haue them selfes after a waueryng sorte, as wel in growyng as in com∣myng to the market. ¶ Cicer, Pease. Lētes shal encrease in differently. ¶ Apples, Peares, Peaches, Plummes and Cheryes, for the perel that shal fall in the de∣gree
of their parte, thei shalbe skant ¶ Hasell nuttes and Wallnuttes lykewyse shalbe scarse and deare. ¶ Beanes, Rapes, Onions and Ca¦byges shal habound greatly. ¶ Hempe and Flaxe shall springe much, but yeld lytell, and therfore shalbe deare. ¶ Honny shalbe of indifferent pri∣ces, yet very plentyfull, howbeit it shalbe watery. ¶ Wyne shalbe indifferētly priced but the Grapes to come shalbe in∣fortunate in increase, because the hore frostes shal hurt them. Of Metalles. MARS in an erthy sygne beto∣keneth generally corruption of the Mynes, yet neuertheles Golde in spring tyme shalbe enhāced in price and the vayne of it shalbe lesse de∣syred. ¶ In Somer it shalbe of dyuers prices, but it shall not enryche the workers thereof.
¶ In Heruest the price of it shal be∣gynne to be lesse, and the labourers of it ar promysed perelles. In Wyn¦ter lykewyse it shal fall in price and it shalbe dygged out very vnpure. ¶ Syluer in spring tyme shall pos∣sesse the best state, and it shallbe as well profitable vnto the worke men as precious vnto the occupiers. In Somer contrary wyse it shall gyue busynes both to the Merchauntes and Myners.. In Heruest it shall ascend agayne in byeng. In Wyn∣ter it shalbe indifferently prised e∣uery where. ¶ Quicke Syluer in Spring tyme shall be perylouse in gettyng & of lytell value in estima∣tiō. In Somer it shalbe worse and lesse plenty than in estimation. In Heruest it shall be of a good state and dere. In Wynter it shall not be equall vnto the sweate and expences. ¶ Tynne in Spring time shalbe equally draune out, that is with out either losse or gayne to the byers or sellers. In Somer it shalbe of a good state & much preas∣sed for to be bought.
In heruest it shalbe more habunda∣unt, but of lytle pryce. In Winter worst of all. ¶ Yron, steele, and briestone, In spryng time shalbe of an honest rate and not dere. In sommer lykewise: In heruest as thei shalbe made derer so shall they haue a worse state, or more vnpure. In winter thei shalbe pure, but of litle estimation. ¶ Copper and brasse in spryngti∣me shall deminyshe in pryce, but let the labourers in the Mynes beware perrel, namely the fallyng doune of it. In Somer it shall increase worse both in Mynes and merket, And like wyse in heruest season. In wynter ceason it shalbe of more value. ¶ Leade in spryngtyme shalbe of the purest condicion & dere, but not profytable to the workemen. In so∣mer, aswel the goodnes as the pryce shalbe deminished In heruest yet stil it shall fall in pryce, and shall bryng diseases too the labourers in it. In wynter again it shalbe better in qualitie, but the pryce thereof shall not be inhaunced.
¶ Of pestilences and imi∣nent sicknesses. THE assendent in the fygure of the reuolution, & Mars lord of the yeare, threaten euil the health of men, speciallye the quadrangale of the bulle, & also the croked aspect of Saturne to the Moone a lytle after the coniunction of the Lightes the Moone goyng before, threaten pesti∣lence, but yet neither vniuersall nor great. But surely the .vi. house shall geue many diseases, whote & sharpe to the which, aswell the lorde of the yere, as the clyppyng or ioyning to∣gether of the vnfortunate Planetes shall puruay sodayne and vnloked for death of men in strōg & lusty age. ¶ The diseases of Mars shall in∣crease or be of most strength and po∣wer. In the spryng tyme, as are pe∣stilence, feuers or agues, continuall tertians, CAVSON or most whot burnyng ague bredde of pure coller in veynes nighe vnto the heart, and differeth from a tertian, that is al∣so
engendred in the veynes, but yet far from the hearte, VARIOLAE whiche is a disease that chyldren & young men haue often, but olde men very seldome. Erisipilas whiche is also called IGNISSACER the holy fier, of some S. Antonies fyer, and as Galyn saith, it is a swelling that commeth of a whote and thyn blood, and is sumtyme myxed wyth coler, brustyng out of blod. The iaū∣dish, whot impostemes, madnes, sca∣bines of the preuities, and reines, wt the griefes and paynes of the eyes. ¶ In Somer season partly who∣ter diseases of the hedde, and pesti∣lence, hedde aches, partly paynes of the shinnes with Saturnyn, or dise∣ses of Saturne, as the leprosy, EC∣TICA or consumption, MELAN∣CHOLIA or madnes. THE∣NESMVS which is a continuall desyre too exonerate or too ease the wombe that maye neither be defer∣red nor escaped: and whē any thyng is voided it shalbe very litle and that most commenlye blood, the fystule, the cancre, & STRVMAE, which
are heard impostumes, sumtimes cō∣myng in the necke, and sumtyme vn∣der the armehooles, and sumtyme aboute the preuie partes, and differ from Glandule in matter onlye, for GLANDVLE cōmeth of flegme and STRVMAE of Melancolye. ¶ Haruest season shalbe stayned very much with the peines or grefes of the feete and thighes, palsy, qua∣kynges, ytche, and with imflamati∣on of the eyes. ¶ The Wynter shalbe noyfull, with rotten feuers, falling sickenes defnes, and with diseases of ye gut∣tes, of DIAPHRAGMA which is a lytle synnowe skynne ioynyng to the maw, and with infirmities of the belly and wyth flegme. ¶ Of peace and warre THE warrier & wrothful Mars Lord of this yere shal send furth in violence of anger & ragyng wod∣nes euery wher vnto the CAPRI∣NISTES or subiectes to the signe of the Goate, and to the whole qua∣drangle
of it, all vexacions and tro∣bles, so that lytle rest shall be lefte theym, but they shall steadefastlye loke for all artillery and weapens, warre, robbery, diminishing of peo∣ple, manslaughter, & killyng: which mischiefe aboue all thyng the con∣iunctiō of the same Mars with Sa∣turne shall sharpen and moue vnto mankynde wyth fyerse sworde, as Hispalēce wryteth. And as the gret slaughter fallyng in the .xii. house of heauen, whyche is of imprison∣ment and emnities, shall rayse vp euery wher vehement and cruel as∣saultes, and fraudulent and subtyl batelles: so shall, the greate Ecli∣pes of the Sunne in the signe of the waterer that was in the yeare. M. CCCCC. xliiii. stir vp no smal per∣turbation or hurly burlye at the be∣ginning of this our yere, and so shal take his leaue of them for euer. The great hurtes & sedicions of the com∣men people, are too be feared in the Southpart of ye worlde. After Glo∣cauien, when Mars shalbe myxed with the Sunne, in a sharpe aspecte
whiche shall fall aboute the begyn∣nyng of Maye and September. ¶ Of the perticuler fortunes of men aswel in prosperitie as inaduersitie. ALTHOVGH it be impos∣sible to the Astronomer to shew before the particuler natures of all vnseperable thinges, and to discusse the secret and hidden operations & influences of al the sterres euen too the vttermost poynte, (which thyng Ptolomy knewe,) yet is it manyfest that diuers of those thynges which yerly we doo marke and intitle, and that we eyther promyse or threaten in oure symple Astrologicall Prog∣nostications, not at all aduentures but by the ordre and course of ye he∣uens mercked and studied vpon be∣fore, do chaunce after. And therfore accordyng to the accustomed maner we wyl set furth clerely and playn∣ly vnto you as nye as we can, aswel the fortune of such people as are vn∣der
the zodiac or .xii. signes, as also to declare bi ordre the disposicion of the planetes. Therfore whatsoeuer mortal man either nowe borne or to be borne shal perceiue how to count the conuersions or reuolutions of their yeres & birthe figures of their ascendentes in anye one daye of the daies vnder specified & noted. They if thei cannot wisely auoyde nor pa∣ciently suffre and bear the euyl for∣tune, daūgerous lyfe or displesures of body iminent and at hand, let thē cal vnto GOD that he of his great mercy, wil either take them shortly awaye, or elles of hys fauourable goodnes to mittigate & aswage thē. ¶ The infortunate and vn∣luckie dayes in ye birthes and reuolutions of Men, for the yeare of our lord. M.D.xlvi. THE .iii. daye of Ianuary. the .v and .xiiii. of Februari. The .iiii. xx. and .xxx. of March, The .vii. and xxx, of April. the .iii. x. xvii & .xxx. of
Maye. The .ii. & .xvii. of Iune. The ix. xxii. and .xxv. of Auguste. The .i. ii. x. and .xviii. of September. The xxv. and .x vii. of October. The .viii xiii. and .xxiiii. of December. ¶ And cōtrarie wise, better chaunce shal happen to them that ether now are begottē, or shall haue ye tyme of their reuolution vnto their age pas∣sed in anye of the dayes folowyng: for these luckye dayes not only lede a ryght blessed lyfe, but also shalbe preserued, heped vp and fylled with ryches and dignitie. ¶ The fortunate and luckye dayes in birthes and reuolu∣cions of Men for this yeare be these. THE xxix. day of Ianuary. The ix. xi. and .xxviii. of March, The xxii. of April. The .xviii. of Maye, The .xxiii. of Iune. The .xvii. and xxxiii. of August. The .x. of Septem¦ber. The, v. of October, The .xv. and xxviii. of Nouember, and the .ii. day of December.
¶ Of the subiectes of the vii. planetes. THE black swart persons sub∣iecte to Saturne as the Iewes, the Mores, solitarye persons, aged persones, Husbande men, Masons, Shomakers, Porters, and Brycke∣makers, Glouers, Corriers, Bery∣ers of dead coarses, Dunge fermers and clensers of Masers, and al wor¦kers of suche grosse workes. ¶ In spring tyme shalbe troubled with diseases in their fere Also thei shal fynde greate vnfaythfulnes in their seruauntes. And further, the sayd Saturnistes shalbe gredy and desirefull of the ryches that ryche persons haue. In summer thei shal suffre losse and hinderaunce. In her¦uest ceason, thei shalbe obscure in their religion, and wrapped in ma∣ny couenauntes and bandes, but let them beware of cold diseases of the vttter partes of their body. ¶ In wynter thei shalbe in theyr best state and condicion, for thei shal
beholde, wyth an vnwyllyng eye, the death deserued of the vnfaithful and the power of the subiectes of the Sun. ¶ The roase coulered persōs sub∣iect to Iupiter, as Patriarches, Car∣dinalles, Bishoppes, Iudges, Offi∣cialles, Councellers, and all other learned and wyse men, for their ap∣proued wysedomes, shalbe had in much estimation and honour. ¶ The hye coulered persons and other subiect to Mars, as Turkes, Tartarians, Souldiers of al sortes and nations, Capitaines of warre, Sargeauntes, Phisicians, Chirur∣gyans, Alchamistes, Yrone smythes Turmētours, Hangemē, Butchers, Thefes, and whosoeuer chiefly de∣lyght in fyre and Yrone. In spryng∣tyme yf thei bee not diseased in the shoulders and legges, thei shall go in message or iourney, they shal war and shal purchase and get great pro∣fyt of the VENERIANS. In summer thei shal vse secret matters and many of theym shalbe occupied in Mariages and Marchaundyse,
In heruest let them bewar lest their pride and glorye begyn to fayle. In winter thei shal get both the fauour of the IOVISTES and VENE∣RIANS, and their fortune shalbe increased, and they shalbe pregnant and of quicke wyttes to al thyng be gunne or taken in hand: but let them beware of diseases in the head. ¶ The beautiful persons and good¦ly visages, and al other of their pro∣perties subiect to the Sunne, as Em∣perours, Kynges, Prynces, Lordes Knightes and Gentilmē. In spring tyme, through the enuye of the Sa∣turnians or subiectes to Saturne, whiche are the Turckes, thei shalbe disquieted. The summer shalbe sus∣pect to theim, yet shal thei reigne in large benefites and great renoume. In heruest thei shalbe pleasaūt and ioyous: but the winter shalbe suspet to them. ¶ The deintie chyldren of Venus with other subiect vnto her as Sa∣rasyns, Gentiles, al Musicians, sin∣gyng men, Minstrels, Plaiers, wor∣kers of precious stone, Brotherers,
Steiners, and Diers, Taylers, Lo∣uers, young Damosels, single Wo∣men, and al Womenkind. In spring tyme thei shal wander from place to place, and shalbe as it were wanton but yet they shal profit by the Mer∣cians. In sommer they shalbe hyn∣dered of the Solariās, and also thei shal lament the iniuries and wron∣ges of the Saturnians: thei shalbe made glad, and delighted by their frendes. In heruest they shall pro∣fyt and waxe ryche, and not wtout som fauor of ye Iouists, thei shal geue dyligēce to haue chyldrē. In winter thei shal prosper through the fauour of fryndes, and such thinges as thei loke not for, thei shal obteyn preue∣ly by the ayde of the Mercians: let remyng wemen kepe theym selues warely in spryng tyme and haruest. ¶ Such as are subiect to Mercury as Marchauntes, Scrybes, Poetes Astronymers, Geometricians, Phi∣losophers, Southsaiers, studientes of Artes Printers, Paynters, and Po∣ticaries. In spryngtime thei shalbe heauy, ydle, and rechles, of euil con∣dicion
& altogether goyng back. In somer thei shalbe geuen clerly vnto godly wisedome and holy matters, without pompe. In hervest thei shal multiply in substaūce and other ne∣cessaryes. In winter thei being gre∣ued with sorowe of the Lunarians subiectes to the Moone, and shut or closed vp, may not dispute in theyr artes: but howsoeuer it shalbe they shalbe holpen by the Saturnians ¶ The whyte sunnes of the Mone and all her other subiectes, as infe∣rior persons & cōmen people, house∣wyfes, or Matrons, Wemē that go∣uerne, Chaferers, Millers, Bathke∣pers, Mariners, Fyshers, Idell go∣ers aboute, Carriers, messēgers, and al ye delighteth in water, In spryng tyme they shal prosper, but thei shal be afrayed of wyles and guyles of the Saturniās, and the open mischi∣fes and euil doing of the Mercians In somer thei shalbe sycke of bodye and not strong in other matters, to which aswel the Saturnians as So∣listes shal do their cure. Heruest shal be indifferent to them, but they shal
receiue hurt by Mariages. In win∣ter thei shal fal into hinderaunce of substaunce, and hatred of the Satur∣nians, in their promotions. ¶ The sonnes of the .xii. sig∣nes of the zodiac. THOSE that be borne vnder A∣ries. In spryngtime shal optain frendshyp of the Iouistes and Sa∣turnians, but of the Mercians hate and thei shalbe disposed to pastime, and pleasures, but thei shalbe trou∣bled with diseases. In somer death and losses shall noye theim. In her∣uest thei shal finde fryndes and hel∣pers, but the Mercurians shalbe ad∣uersaries and enemies to theim. In wynter thei shall suffre hurt by woundes, and other diseases: and a∣mong many frendshyppes, thei shal perceiue many lies. The infortunat and euil dayes vnto them shalbe frō the .xvii. of Februarye to the begyn∣nyng of April, from the .xi. of Iuly, to the .ii. of September, and agayne,
from the .xvii. of Nouember vntyl the ende of the yeare. ¶ Thei that be borne vnder Tau∣rus. In spring tyme shalbe disposed to Mariages and other busines and they shal optayne the fauour of ma∣ny, but not wythout contēcions. In somer thei shall receiue promotions both for theyr wisedome and honest behauoure. In heruest thei shal get fryndship of the Lunistes, benefites of ye Iouians, and good reporte: but howsoeuer it be the Venerians shal be moued agaynst thē. Wynter, shal be displeasaunt and daungerous to thē. They shal loke for euyl fortune the fyrst .iii. dayes of Ianuary, and from the .i. daye of Apryl vntyll the xiiii. of Maye. ¶ Thei that are borne vnder Ge∣mini. In spryngtyme shalbe vexed or greuyd with the malice of the Sa∣turnians, and shal receiue hurte. In somer they shalbe vexed in theyr of∣fices and promotions on all sydes. In Heruest heauines, slaunders, e∣nemies and prisonmentes shal vexe them euery where. In wynter they
shal prospere in their iourneies, and shal study and delight in godlye ex∣ercises. The whole yeare shalbe in∣fortunate and ful of perell vnto thē by the stere of Saturne, but let thē take hede to them selfes & to theirs from the .iiii. of Ianuary tyl ye .xvii of Februarye. Also, from the .xv. of May, tyl the .x. of Iuly. Fynallye, from the .iiii. of September tyll the xvi. of Nouember. ¶ Thei that are borne vnder Cācer Springtime and winter thei shal tra¦uail. Thei shalbe very studious and desireous of good learning, but thei shal haue the Mercians enemyes to thē. In somer thei shal haue louyng felowes and frendes, chefly the Ve¦nerians, and thei shal prospere. In heruest likewise thei shalbe in good condition, yet let them obserue the tyme as it is sayd in Aries. ¶ Thei that are borne vnder Leo In spryngtyme shal make an end of great iourneis, & shal procure thyn∣ges to Goddes honor, and manye of them shall increase in riches. In so∣mer agayne, thei shalbe afrayed of
enemies, lest thei should be put from their dignities. In Heruest they be¦yng gredy of ryches shall enter into bandes, and shalbe bus in maters of their frendes. In Wynter they shall prospere very well, except the Iouistes, Venerians & Mercuriās entermedle wt them. But lette them be wyse & circumspect in the tymes that are mentioned in the Bull. ¶ They that ar borne vnder Vir∣go the Virgyn, In spring tyme shal florish, if the Saturnians hynder them not. Somer shalbe noysome & incōmodious to them. In Heruest also they shall suffer discōmodities in the inheritaūce of their predeces∣sours: But Wīter shalbe somwhat more fauorable to theym: howbeit they shall haue lyke Iuditial days all this yere, as hath the subiectes of Gemini. They that be borne vnder Libra the Balaunce, in spring tyme shalbe somtyme mery & sōtime heauy, both among their enmies & frēdes in dif∣ferently. In Sommer they shalbe full of newes, and at diuerse conten¦cions
with their brethern. In Har∣uest thei shalbe disposed to wisdom and geuen to delycatnes and apt to generation by the helpe of the Sa∣turnians. In Wynter, they beyng compassed with enemies in marcial affayres, shall behaue them selues politickly. Yet notwithstanding let them fere the days yt ar set in Aries. ¶ They that be borne vnder Scorpio, the Scorpion. In Spring tyme shal prospere. In Somer they shalbe seruisable vnto their Paren¦tes & nygh kynsfolke, and obedient to the Law of their Countrey. In Heruest they shalbe mery & ge∣uen to the plesures of the flesh and other pastymes, by the fauor of the Venerians. In Wynter they being enriched with the goodes of the Lu¦nistes & Mercurians shall not passe vpon lernyng. Let them walke cir∣cumspectly in those times which ar had in suspiciō in Taurus the Bul. ¶ They that are borne vnder Sagittarius, the Shoter, shal this yere suffer displeasures of the Sa∣turnians: but the Dragons tayle
in this Signe signifieth ye suppres∣syon of some great Personages, In Spring time thei shal profite lytel. In Somer they shall suffer losse of their inheritaūce: but they shal get the good wylles of the comē peple. In Heruest thei being greued with sycknesses & found trespassers & of∣fenders shal hardly escape the cru∣elty of Mars. In Wynter thei shal gladly obey vnto Lawes: But let them be circumspecte in iorneyeng, and aboue al that they take hede of the suspect dayes mencioned before in Gemini. ¶ They that be borne vnder Ca∣pricorne the Goat, In Spring tyme whyle they contend & fall out with their neybours and brethern, shall suffer losse of their goodes by the Marcians. In Somer, their chyl∣dren & heyres & al their other ioyes shalbe contrary to them: & so shall it be also both to the Mercurians & Marcians. In Heruest, they geuīg them selfes to mariages & merchaū¦dises shal purchase the displeasure of the Mercuriās. In Wynter thei
hating the Marciās shal not let to talke frely ī maters of lernīg. Thei shal haue very euyl fortune in those euyl & suspect dayes that ar expres∣sed in Aries, ¶ They that be borne vnder Aquarius the Waterer: In Springtyme they shal lede their ly∣ues amongest their neybours indif∣ferētly. In somer they shalbe helth¦full. In Heruest they shall go from place to place for the deth of the Ve¦nerians & Lunistes. Wynter shalbe good to ye fathers & īheritours of ye cuntrey, yet the power of ye lunists shal repugne them. Let thē beware the iudicial dais rehersed in ye Bul. ¶ They that be born vnder Pisces the Fysshes. In Spring tyme they shal proue ye fortune of the cuntrey But the Saturnistes shall maligne them. In Somer thei shal fere war. In heruest they shal prosper except the Marcians & Saturnistes hyn∣der them. Wynter shalbe indifferēt to them. But let them take hede to the contrary dayes men∣cioned before in Gemi¦ni, the Twynnes.
¶ Vnder what quadrangle of the Zodiach signes euery Region and Citie is situate The first Quadrangle ¶ ARIES the Ram hath as Ptolo∣me writeth these Regions and Cities, Coclosyre, Palestin, Britayne, hye Frau¦nce, Braccate, Garmany, Basterny. And after the myndes of late wryters, The lande of Pole the lesser, The duchye of Burgundy, Silesy the hyer, Sweuland. And of Cities, Neaples, Florence, Ca∣pua, Ferrarie, Vincenty, Verone, Parga∣nye, Imola, Pauye, Brunswicke, Traiect Lyndoa, Parcyuncle, Vinestrace. Craco∣uy, Marselies, Ceaser august{us}, ¶ Cancer the crab hath as Ptolome sayth, Numi∣di. Afryk, Bythimi, Phrigia, Colche, Car¦thage. After the later wryters, the kyng∣dme of Fraunce, the kyngdome of Scot∣land, the kyngdome of Granate, ye earl∣dome of Burgundy, Prussy, Hollande, Seland. And of Cites. Constantynople, Thunes, Venice, Myllayn, Geneue, Lu∣kes, Pisas, Lubeck, Treuerne, Maide∣burge, Gorlityne, Berne, Yorke, Saynt Andrewes, &c. Libra the balaunce hath by Ptolomies sai¦yng, Bactrian, Caspy, Serim, Thebaide∣oasin, and Troglodit. After the later wri∣ters, Acthiope, Turky, Austrige: Elsary
Sundgauye, Leuonye, Sebandye, and Delphynate. And of Cytyes, Cayl∣tye, Lande, Suesse, Placentyne, Argentine Vienne of Austrige, Franckford, Men∣sch, Spires, Hal, of Suene, Hailprun, Wnin, Landshute, Frysynge, Mospa∣chye, Fldkyrchy, of Rhery, Arelate, and Lushborne. Capricornus the Got hath, by Ptolomy Indy. Arian, Gedrosye, Macydon, Illyre Tracy. After the later wryters, Bossne, Albani, Bulgari, Grece, Lithuani, Masso∣ni, Saroni, Churius, Hessi, Marcas, and Brādēburgh a {pro}te of Stiri. And of Cites Anconi, Fauant, Torton, Foroli, August, Vindelice, Cōstance, Iuliac, Cleuoni, Bei¦ge, Gaunte, Machlin. Vilue, Oxforde, & the Isles Orchadas, The second Quadrangle. Taurus the Bul hath as Ptolomy saith Parthy, Mede, Persyde, the Isles Cicla∣des, Ciprese, the sea costes of the lesser Asia. After later writters, Pole the greter white Russy, Campany, Rhete, Helvece, Francon, Lutheringe, Hyreland, & a parte of the Suetes. And of Cities, Bononi Se¦nas, Mantua, Tarmyte, Parme, Pa∣norme, hurege, Lucerne, Herbipolym, Metime, Bryxin the chief citie of Histri. Leo the Lyon hath by Ptolemy, Phe∣nyce, Calde, Orchin, Italy, Galli, Togate, Sycile, Apule. After the later writers Bo∣heme
kyngdom, parte of Turcky, Aemyle, Sabine. And of Cities, Damasco, Rome, Rauenne, Syracuse, Perusy, Cremone, Prage, Vlme, Confluence, Lince, Kremse. Scorpius the Scorpion hath by Ptolo¦my, Matagonite, Commagei. Cappa∣doce, Syrie, Iury, Idumea, Mauritane, & Getule. By the later writers, Nortuege, Suetye in the west, Cathalone, Baueyre the hyer, & Foroiule. And of Cities Tra∣pezonte, Algere, Aquile, Padwey, Vrbane Pistore, Camerne, Brixye, Tarusre, Mes∣sane, Gedan, Lypsye, Monace, Aichstade, Vienne, Allobroge, Valence in Hyspane. Aquarius the Waterer hath after Pto¦lomy, Oxiane, Sogdirne, Araby the stony Azanse, Aethyope, & Sarmace. After the later writers, greate Tartery, Danye, red Russy, Amaroby, ye south parte of Suece, Walache, Pedesmount, Westphale, Mo¦selaunce peple. And of Cities, Alkayr or Memphym, Ironemounte, Pisaure, Tri∣dente, Hamburgh, Breme, Saltzeburge, Ingoldstand & a lytell parte of Bauere. The thyrd Quadrangle. Gemini the Twynne hath by Ptolomy Hyrcany Armenye Margiane Cyrenaice prouince Merinarice, Aegipte the lower. After the later writers the kyngdom of England, Sardine, Brabant, Wirtem∣berge duchy, Flandres, & Lumberdy, And of Cities, Viterby, Cesene, Taurine, Re∣gye,
Vercel, Norinbergh, Louen, Magūce Bamberge, Bruges in Flaundres, Villace Kitzinge, Hassforde, London, & Corduba. Virgo the Virgine hath by Ptolomy Mesopotamy, Babilon, Assyria, Grece A∣chaie and Crete. And after the later wri∣trs Cicile, reace, Athens duchy, Caren∣teane, Sylete the lower, Athesane prouīce a parte of Rhene, Rhodes. And of Ci∣ties, gret Alexander, Hierusalem, Corinth Papy, red, Cumas, Brunduse, Vratis∣laue, Erdford, Basil, Haidelberge, Dagni Parys, Lyons, & Tholos. Sagittarius the shoter hath by Ptho∣lome, Araby the lucky, Thirhene, Celtica Spaine. Bi ye later writers Portugall Hū¦garye. Denmarke, Norwaye, Sclauone, Mysna. And of Cities Volaterre, Mutī, Colyn, Aggrippe, Stutgard, Rotenburge Tubare, Indeburge, Bude, Gaschone, Narbon, Auinion, and Tolete. Pisces the Fishes haue after Ptolomy Phazam, Nazamonite, Garamātice, Lyde Cilice, & Pamphile. And by ye later writers Calabr, Norway. And of Cities, Parēce Rynsbourgh, Wormes, Rawane, Com∣postella, and Hyspalim. LONDINI Ex officina Richardi Graftoni clarissimo Principi Edouardo  Typographia Cum priuilegio ad impri¦mendum solum
