5541 99840761 5290
THE Famous, pleasant, and variable Historie, of Palladine of England. Discoursing of honorable Aduentures, of Knightly deedes of Armes and Chiualrie: enterlaced likewise with the loue of sundrie noble personages, as time and affection limi∣ted their desires. Heerein is no offence offered to the wise by wanton speeches, or encouragement to the loose by lasciuious matter. Translated out of French by A. M. one of the messengers of her Maiesties Chamber. Patere aut abstine. AT LONDON, Printed by Edward Allde for Iohn Perin, dwelling in Paules Churchyard at the signe of the Angell, And are there to be sould. 1588.
¶ TO THE RIGHT Honorable, Robert Deuorax, Earle of Essex, and Ewe: Viscount of Hereford and Bourchier: Lord Ferrers of Chartley, Bourchier and Louayne: Maister of the Queenes Maiesties Horsse: A. M. wisheth increase of all happinesse. AMong those (right Ho∣norable) that offered incense in the Temple of Iupiter, in plates of Golde ac∣cording to the custome, a simple Heards∣man religiously affected, brought his of∣fering on a broken potsheard: for which he being reprooued by Iupiters Priest, boldly returned this answere. The Gods that dispose all, knowe all, rich men are discerned by their great gifts, and poore men by their simple, yet happily their zeale is not alike: for rather had I be thought vnmannerly by this homely present, then vndutifull by want of better abilitie. In like manner, right noble Lord, among those ripe and cu∣rious wittes, that offer to your learned view matter of valew, squa∣red and leueld by deepe knowledge and experience: a simple zea∣lous man, more deuoted in affection to your honors welfare, then able to expresse the same as other can, presents this rude and vn∣pullished peece of worke, not handled with arte, because I want it, nor glozed with borrowed phrases, because I am loth to be∣come indebted: but equall with the poore Heardsmans potsheard, and with him chusing rather to be thought homely, then vnduti∣full,
knowing that the Eagles eyes of Iupiter, can search into the substance of the one and other. This woorke of Palladine, with all his imperfections, I hum∣blie commit to your honorable protection: knowing, that in respect of your owne loue to Chiualrie, you will thinke well of him, and because he is an English man, in the better sort fauour him. For my selfe, as I neuer knew honor partiall in opinion, but with vpright iudgement to ballance each mans de∣seruing: so in this assurance, with reuerence, I end, as forward as any in affection to your Honor. A. Monday.
To the corteous and freendly Readers. MY promise was, that by Easter Tearme this worke should be published, and accor∣ding to my promise, heere doo I send it: not doubting but you will so fauourably censure ther∣on, as my paynes, and the plea∣sure of the Historie deserueth. If you happen to fynde any mislike in the translation, or that it is not so currant English as fyne eares hunt after: let this serue as a sufficient excuse for mee, that in transla∣ting, men are bound to their Writers words, and such as roue at random, may set downe what they please. And this I am to intreate on the Printers be∣halfe, and mine owne, whereas in dyuers places there are faultes escaped, as woordes verie much mis∣taken, many left out, and others common: that you will freendly let passe such ouer-sightes, and at the next Impression they shall bee amended; for I beeyng often absent, and the Printer carefull to
end his worke by appoynted time, haue beene the cause of all these escapes. Thus committing my Booke and my selfe to your fauourable iudgement, I ceasse. From my house without Cripple-gate this 23. of Aprill. Yours to bee commaunded, Anthony Monday.
THE Famous, pleasant, and variable Historie of Palladine. Discoursing of Knightly and woorthy deedes of Armes: and vnfolding the loue of many great Princes and Lords, but especially of PALLADINE, Soone to the King Milanor of England, and the faire Selerina, sister to the King of Portugall, &c. CHAP. I. * Of the birth of Prince PALLADINE, and the strange aduenture that happened on the day of his birth, in the Citie of London, before the Pallace of King Milanor. AT what time the puis∣sant and spacious Empire of Greece and most fertile Asia, was held in subiection by the great Turke, and the Romaine Monarchy was com∣maunded by the wise Emperour Iustinian, Gouernour of both high and nether Allmayne: raigned in great Brittayne, now called England, a King named
Milanor, who from his youth was so well instructed in good letters, and the Sciences liberall, as among the most learned Doctors he was reckned peerelesse, before he came to the age of eightéene yéeres. During this time of his e∣ducation, his Gouernors to make him perfect in all things beseeming so great a Prince, caused him to practise the managing of great Horsses, to vse the Tilt and Tourney, with all other-feates of agilitie incident to Armes: where∣in right soone he grew so prompt and excellent, as all the Lords and Subiects of his Realme were not onely a∣bashed at his forwardnes, but thought themselues especi∣ally blessed, to liue vnder the regiment of so braue a King. Nor was this ioy alone to them, but many other nations and forreigne Princes did participate therein, especially the Kings of Scottes and Norgalles his neighbours, who hearing of the great bountie, prowesse, magnanimitie, and other lawdable vertues in this King, determined to be freends to him and his, holding this opinion, that beeing confederate with England in loue, no other King or Prince durst molest them with warres. Upon this consideration, they sent their Ambassadours to his Maiestie, to promise and sweare peace, amitie, and inuiolable concord, with obeysance, and acknowledging him their Superiour, where they were receiued honourably, and with content, a matter greatly auailing them afterward, as you shall perceiue by the following discourse of our Historie. The King of Portugall vnderstanding the manifold vertues, and power of King Milanor, as also that so many Kings and Princes desired his fréendly alliaunce, preuay∣led so well by his sundry Embassades, as the King of England married with his Sister named Selerina, faire in perfections, yong and gratious among all the Ladies in her time, and to continue holy loue betwéene this King and Queene, soone after she was conceyued with a goodly Sonne, at whose birth happened such a maruelous aduen∣ture, as no registred memorie records the like.
At what time the Quéene was in trauayle, suddenly was the Citie of London couered with a darke and feare∣full Clowde, the heauens deliuering such thunder and lightning, the earth likewise shaking and trembling so straungely, as the Citizens expected death euery moment, imagining the end of the world was come vpon them. For the space of two houres this wonderfull tempest endured, vntill the Quéene was deliuered of her burthen, when the Clowde began to vanish away, and the heauens looked fayre and cheerefull as before. After this despairing Storme, the people who with feare and terror of the thun∣der, had hid themselues in vaultes and caues, amazed and fearefull, began to shew themselues: but when the Gentle∣men in the Kings Pallace came to open the windowes, they beheld in the great waste place before the Court, thrée Statues of Copper, each one about eight foote in height, and by each of them stoode a Collomne of blacke Marble, on the formost whereof, hanged a Shéeld of fine and pure Steele, right curiously engrauen and pollished, and enri∣ched with many pretious stones and iewelles: in bréefe, such was the workemanship and deuise thereof, as ney∣ther sword, launce, or bullet from an Harquebuzo, could any way pierce or enter it. Aboue this Sheeld on the same piller, was engrauen these verses in faire gréene letters, whereto the Statue pointed with one of his fingers. Pallas the wise Goddesse, whose skill thus framed me, Ordaind I must be giuen, vnto the cheefe in chiualrie. The second Statue shewed on his Piller, the God of loue Cupid, being framed of massie Orientall Pearle, holding a golden bowe in his hand, and his arrowes in a Quiuer of golde by his side, vnder his féete on the Piller was engrauen these verses in Romane letters. No one so stout or affable, can take me from this place, Except in loyaltie of loue, all other he surpasse. The third Statue, made in forme of a goodly beawti∣full
woman, shewed on the Collomne standing by her, the Image of the Goddesse Venus, in white Alablaster, ha∣uing on her head a Crowne of Golde, embellished with many Rubies, Diamonds, Emeraulds, and other preci∣ous Stones of great value. This Image of Venus held in her left hand a flaming strebrand, and pointed with her right hand to the Crowne. Under her feete hung a Table, wherein was written two French verses, thus Englished. This Crowne is for the Ladie framd. That chiefe in beautie shall be namd. The two first Statues séemed like two fierce and strong Sauage men, each of them hauing a great fauchion hang∣ing in Skarffes by their sides, and in such sort were they charmed, as whosoeuer made offer to take the Crowne, or touch the God of Loue, was immediatly assayled by one of the men, who would not giue ouer till he had vanqui∣shed him. Many Knightes of England, and other Coun∣treys, aduentured their fortunes at these Statues, but were still repulsed, vntill the Knight came that conquered these monstrous men, as héereafter in the Historie shall be declared. In like manner, at the Image of Venus, the Ladyes profered to take away her Crowne, but the Statue stan∣ding by, repelled them continually, so that they which once had assayed, durst meddle no more: wherefore, the Crowne remayned vnconquered, vntill the Lady came that surpassed all other in beawty, to whome the honor of the Crowne was vowed. After they had long beheld and considered this aduen∣ture so admirable, and vnable to coniecture the meaning thereof, diuers went to aduertise the King of this acci∣dent, who was no lesse abashed héereat then the other were, especially the Queene, whose feare was not a litle, hearing the terrible thunder and tempest that happened, by which occasion she had more spéedie deliuerance then
was expected, and with greater ease, then commonly wo∣men haue: yet was the child in such goodly shape, resem∣bling his Father, as the Mother was highly pleased there∣with, hoping this Infant would remaine an inuiolable league of loue betwéene the King and her, and the rather, the intelligence of this new spectacle animated her there∣with. The King giuing little credite to this strange report, went in person with all the Princes and Lords of his Court to behold the same, and séeing that it was true in∣déede, confessing likewise the thing in strangenesse to sur∣passe the memorie of all former aduentures: he sent im∣mediately for the most skilfull Philosophers in his Realm, who hauing learnedly considered thereof, assured the King, that at the instant appearing of those rare spectacles, a Child should be borne, that in bountie, prowesse and loyal∣tie, should exceede all the Knightes in the world: for whose renowne, a wise Nigromancer had appointed that occasion, that each curious eye might discerne his rare vertues, among all that should aduenture for the Shéeld and Trophe of Cupid. Nor can we iudge my Lord, sayd these wise men, that the same is reserued for any other, then your new borne Sonne, at whose houre of birth, the Statues appeared, or (at leaste) some other that shall issue from him: for our iudgemente in his Astracisme doth perswade vs, that he shall be valiant and renowmed in feates of Armes, and in loyaltie was neuer man found his second. As for the Image of Venus, that beareth the rich Crowne, we gesse (my Lord) it is meant to some Daugh∣ter you shall haue héereafter, who in beautie and gratious nature, shall excéede all of her time. If it like your Maie∣stie, to make experience of what we haue sayd, you must send for all the fairest Ladies in your Realme, and per∣mit them to trie their vertue, in taking the Crowne from the head of the Image, in which attempt, you shall receiue
occasion of excéeding pleasure: for the brazen statue which you behold standing by it, will repulse the Ladies in such sort, as they shall repent their bold aduenture. The King very ioyfull to heare these newes, said: By the faith of a Prince, I will cause proofe to be made héereof within these few dayes, and first, the Ladies of our Citie of London shall begin, if they can not speede in their at∣tempt, the Ladies through our Realme shall be aduertised thereof, as also they of Scotland and Norgalles, which haue commendation beyond other Nations for beautie. In the meane while I will go conferre with the Quéene héere∣on, who (as I thinke) will not be a little glad, to heare that such good fortune is reserued for our yong Sonne. As he was about to depart thence, he beheld the inscriptions en∣grauen on the Pillers, which causing to be read, and vn∣derstanding the effect of them all three: In sooth (quoth he) I will for the loue of Pallas, who framed this faire Sheeld, that my Sonne at his Christening shall be named Palla∣dine, which came so to passe, as you shall reade héereafter. CHAP. II. ¶ How the King Milanor recounted the meruaile of the three Statues to the Queene, and of the great Triumphs was made at the Baptizing of the yong Prince, who was named Palladine. THE King hauing aduisedly consi∣dered this strange accident, and vn∣derstood to what end it was appoin∣ted, went very ioyfully to the Quéenes Chamber, and there to her rehearsed what the wise men had said, which newes were so welcome to her, as nothing could be more. I know behoueth vs Madame (quoth he) to forethinke on
the Baptizing of our Sonne, who shall be his Sureties in that holy Sacrament, to which I can request no fitter per∣sons, then our freendly, breethren and neighbors, the Kings of Scotland and Norgalles, so please you Madame to ioyne with me in opinion. The Queene was so well contented with this motion, as Ambassadours were immediately dispatched, who so well executed the trust committed to their charge, as the Kings reputed themselues highly ho∣nored by this request, and all things are now preparing for the Baptisme of this noble yong Prince. At the arriuall of these two Kings, great ioyes and triumphs were made by the Citizens of London, and as concerning their entertain∣ment at the Court, you must thinke it was according to their high estates, withall, that Englishmen are not to learne to welcome Strangers. When the day was come that the yong Prince should be Christened, as the King his Father had requested, he was named Palladine: and afterward, to honor the tune and the royall companie, there wanted no worthy deuises, with exquisite Chiualrie perfourmed both at the Tilt and Tourney, wherein the King of Scots bare great estimation, being a yong Prince, aged sixe and twenty yéeres, and one, that in Knightly exercises carried especiall account. Yet was not this ioy alone in the Court, but in London like∣wise the Citizens shewed the like, where the Conduits ranne diuers sorts of Wines, the Stréetes were stored with Tables before the dores, and all kinde of good chéere placed thereon, with such ringing of Belles, and making Bone-fiers, as neuer was the like seene before that time. It were too long a matter to rehearse, what braue Theatres were erected, and therein presented most excel∣lent Comedies, with Maskes, Mommeries, and all kinde of delightfull inuentions, during the time of this Feast, which continued fifteene dayes together. It shall suffise me to tell yee, how the King Milanor hearing that the Kings of Scotland and Norgalles would now returne home againe,
was desirous to haue the aduenture tried of the thrée Sta∣tues before they went, and therefore caused to be proclai∣med by sounde of Trompet, through all the streetes in London, that all Knights and Gentlemen should on the morrow come to the Pallace, to aduenture their fortune for the rich Sheeld, and the God Cupid, so that if any one could take them from the Statues, with right good will they should enioy them. The like protestation was made of the Image of Venus, and the rich Crowne, which was destenied to the most accomplished Lady in beautie, the fame whereof, called faire beauties darlings to the Court on heapes, each one thinking to beare away the Crowne, by the benefite of her amiable lookes. Wherefore, the place and houre being appointed, God knowes how they labou∣red to augment their naturall beautie by arteficiall meanes, as oyntments, distilled waters, perfumes, and o∣ther like extraordinarie matters, which many Gentlewo∣men (who haue any naturall imperfection) at this day vse to make them seeme more amiable. But now is the day come to make triall of the aduen∣ture, when the King Milanor, with the Kings of Scotland and Norgalles, and all the Ladies of the Court, went to the voyde place before the Pallace, and there on a faire Skaf∣folde couered with rich Tapistrie, sate downe to take view of the valiant Knightes, who durst presume to take the Sheeld from the Piller. No sooner were they placed as be∣seemed their estates, but twelue English Knightes, estee∣med of greatest courage and valour in the Countrey, pre∣sented themselues (well armed) to trie their fortune. After they had done reuerence to the Kings and Estates present, he that imagined himselfe of highest resolution a∣mong them, stept vp on foure of the staires before the Pil∣ler, thinking to reach the Shéeld that hung thereon, but the enchaunted Image drawing his fauchion, with such furi∣ous strokes repulsed him downe againe, as he durst not presume to meddle any more, to the no little maruaile of
the King and his companie, who were not wont to behold such vncouth spectacles. Next, came a gallant yong Knight, well prouided with a Romaine Target, and a short arming Sword, and with maruellous valour, he ranne vp the steps before the Col∣lomne, and attained to the highest step of all, but he went downe againe sooner then he expected, for the Image threw him so violently backe againe, as he tumbled headlong downe the staires to the ground. Like fortune fell to the rest of the twelue, some shewing greater magnanimitie in fight then other did, yet their foile was alike, and this Shéeld of honor could not be wonne by any of them. Then came the Quéene to the Skaffold, where the Kings sate, and vnderstanding how the Knightes had sped in this first Aduenture, she sayd. Straunge is it (my good Lords) that no one of our Knightes can preuaile, let the Gentlemen prooue the aduenture of the second Statue, whereon the God of loue sheweth himselfe, which must be conquered by none (as I heare) but by the most loyall Knight in the world, by this meane shall we know them that haue best deserued toward their Ladies, and who excéedeth all other in constancie, Madame, aunswered the King Milanor, we thinke your councell verie necessarie, for long will this Sheeld hang heere, if no other Knightes then of our Realme come to trie their fortune: such there∣fore as hold best opinion of their owne loialtie, make triall of your vertue at the God of Loue, and frée libertie we graunt to all straunge Knightes, as to them of our Realme, which our Heralds shall signifie for their better assurance.
CHAP. III. ¶ How many Knightes and Gentlemen of England, Scot∣land, and Norgalles, aduentured to winne the Image of Cupid, destenied to the most loyall, and how they were all repulsed: and the Ladies likewise in heir triall for the rich Crowne. WHen the Herald had publikely deli∣uered his charge, the King com∣maunded all the Knightes to vn∣arme themselues, for loyaltie (quoth he) is not to be discouered by armes, but by the hidden vertue & thought, consisting in the hart of a man. My Lord, sayd the Quéene, had you not assured me to whome this aduen∣ture is reserued, I would haue intreated your Maiestie to make the first triall. Then Madame, quoth the King, you haue some suspition of my loyaltie. Not so my Lord, sayd she, for nothing is lesse in my thought, and so certaine per∣swasion do I hold thereof, as I feare not that all present should behold your vertue, to the greater enlarging of your honor and mine owne. While these spéeches passed, a yong English Gentle∣man came to mount the steps, that enuironed the Col∣lomne whereon the God of Loue stoode, but as he lifted his foote to the nethermost step, the Statue tumbled him backe, with his héeles vpward, so that euery one laughed hartely thereat. In sooth my fréend, said the King, verie little loyaltie remaines in you, whome loue cannot abyde the sight of, if your Lady be in this company, good occasion hath she to get her a better seruant. Then came another, who had many times inuocated on the name and fauour of his Mistresse, and he without
any impeachment mounted on the third step, making an offer to attaine the fourth, but the Statue thrust him downe againe, whereby he might perceiue his owne insuf∣ficiencie, Beleeue me, quoth the Quéene, he hath done much better than the other, and the Lady he loueth, is greatly beholding to him, for iustly may he be accounted loyall, in that the Image suffered him to ascend so high. Then one of the King of Norgalles Knightes came to trie his fortune, whome the Statue repulsed with such shame, as all the day after he would not be séene, I pro∣mise ye Gentleman, said the King his maister, you might haue spared the labour in comming so farre, to returne home with so foule a rebuke, and little néede had ye to shew vs your great inconstancie, brother quoth the King of Scots, be not offended with him, for well he knowes, that his Mistresse is not in this companie. You say true bro∣ther, aunswered the King of Norgalles, but if I knew her, I would aduertise her of his exceeding vertue. Héere commes another of my Knightes to make a bet∣ter proofe, and yet perhaps, will amend his fellowes disho∣nor. The Knight attained the highest step, without any disturbance, and as he lifted his hand to take the Image of Cupid, the Statue tooke him by the arme, and set him on the ground againe, I see then, said the King of Nor∣galles, each one must heere be iudged according to the great∣nesse and defect of his loyaltie. Afterward came a little Scottishman, as thicke as tall, his beard growing scattering like bristles, his nose flat to his face, two teeth standing before gagd out of his mouth, a man in euery part very much mishapen, and seruing as a Iester to make the King laugh, he had married a wo∣man as handsome as himselfe, yet was he iealous of her out of all measure. This proper Squire séeing so many re∣pulsed by the Statue, by breach of their loyaltie to their Wiues and Ladies, considered with himselfe, that he had neuer violated the bonds of marriage, but euermore kept
his faith to his wife, therefore he would hazard his good hap, not doubting but to carie the Image of Cupid with him into Scotland. Hauing demaunded leaue of the King his Maister, with a little cudgell in his hand, he came to the Collomne, and went vp to the verie highest step, the Statue not offering any signe of resistance: but as this deformed fellow would haue embraced the Image of Cu∣pid, the Statue snatched the cudgell out of his hand, and so rapt him therewith about the shoulders, as he was con∣strained to hye him downe againe, the Kings and all pre∣sent merily laughing at this iest. Alas poore foole, said the King of Scots, how durst thou presume to shew thy selfe in this action? Why my Lord, aunswered the Queene, your little man is yet found the most loyall, and no Gentleman this day hath witnessed the like. Beléeue me Madame, aunswered the King of Scots, it is against his will that he is so loyall, for being so euill fauoured and deformed, how can he finde any woman to offend with him. Come he∣ther little fellow said the King Milanor, you haue beene beaten with your owne cudgell, because ye came no better prouided: but that the honor of the day may remaine to you, I will that at this present no further triall shall bée made, enough hath beene done my men, let now the Ladyes by their beautie aduenture for the rich Crowne of Venus, and let it suffise that a little fellow hath strained all our Knightes. The Quéene in person began the enterprise, but reiected as vnworthy of the fatall Crowne, and after her followed the Ladies of the Court, whose fortunes were like or worsse in effect, to their no little disgrace in their owne conceites, who prized their beauties at the highest rate. The London Danies had likewise their time of proofe, yet could their daintie faces carie no pawne in this at∣tempt, for the Crowne was reserued for the onely Lady, who might not be paragonned by any other whatsoeuer.
CHAP. IIII. ¶ How after all the Triumphs were ended, perfourmed at the Baptisme of the yong Prince Palladine, and the ad∣uentures thus left of the three Statues, the Kings of Scotland and Norgalles tooke their leaue of the King Milanor and the Queene, and returned from England into their owne Countreys. BY this time were all the Princes and Ladyes throughly satisfyed with the pastimes, wherefore with sound of Trompets, Clarions and Cornets, they returned to the Pal∣lace, where was prepared for them a most roiall banquet: and bicause the Kings of Scotland and Norgalles were to depart on the morrow, the Citizens of London in honor of their Prince, came with di∣uers stately Maskes to the Pallace, where they behaued themselues to their credit, and the Kings good liking. Afterward entred the hall twelue Gentlemen of the Court, in complete Armour, with blunt Foyles and Tar∣gets, when deuiding themselues sixe against sixe, hauing for their barre two Pykes, which were held ouerthwart by two of the Kings Guard, they layde on each other such eager strokes, as their swords flew in péeces, and their Ar∣mour was battered in many places. Then they withdrew themselues, giuing place to twelue other, who Combatted with the Pyke, arming Sword and Battle-Axe, and thus was the night consumed in such disports, to delight the Kings of Scotland and Norgalles, who in the morning tooke their leaue of the King and Quéene, and were conducted on their iourney by many English Lords. The King Mi∣lanor and his Quéene beeing not a little contented, that
the Princes had done them such honor in their Realme, but greatest of all was their comfort in their Sonne Pal∣ladine, who in prowesse and loyaltie should surpasse all o∣ther of his time, and was carefully nourished by a vertu∣ous Gentlewoman, wife to an aged Squire, named Ro∣mandrin of Gaule, with whome he remained, till he came to the age of fiue yeeres. About this time the Quéene trauailed againe, and was deliuered of two goodly Daughters béeing Twinnes, the one whereof was named Marcelina, and the other Floraea: these swéete babes were tenderly regarded in the Court, and there will we leaue them with the Quéene their Mo∣ther, remembring yong Palladine, who is in the custodie of graue and learned tutors, enstructed in the Languages, as also Greeke and Latine, wherein he profited so well, as at tenne yeeres he could speake them as perfect as his English toong. Héerewithall he practised Knightly Chi∣ualrie, to manadge great Horsses, and all Gentlemanlike exercises, searching the bowelles of the chéefest Historians, from them to learne the practises and sleights of Millita∣rie profession. And when the time would not serue him to Hawke and Hunt, he would kéepe himselfe from idlenesse with his Lute, Bandora and Uirginalles, with diuers o∣ther sweete Instruments, wherein he tooke delight, and grew verie excellent. This yong Prince thus giuen to all honest and vertu∣ous quallities, began to haue some feeling of his high and magnanimous spirit, so that to experiment and trie his owne strength, he would cope with diuers yong Lords & Gentlemen of his age, to runne in the Listes, to breake Launces, to Combate with the Mace, the Arming-sword, and all other weapons, both on horssebacke, and on foote. In all which exercises, he found not his equall, which made him desirous of the order of Knighthood, to the end he might séeke after strange Aduentures, as the King his Father had done in his youthfull time. Thus continued
he sixe or seauen moneths in this desire, not daring to a∣quaint the King his Father therewith, least he should re∣fuse his request in respect of his yong yeeres, but the deste∣nies, who foresawe the maruellous déedes of Armes he should accomplish, and the straunge enchaments that should be finished by him, would not suffer  remaine long slothfull in his Fathers Court among  Ladies and beautifull creatures, but bringing his  to per∣fection, found the meane that he should be Knigd by the King his Father, as héereafter you shall read more at large. CHAP. V. ¶ How the Duke Temoreo of Millaine, sent his Sonne Man∣teleo into England, to be made Knight with the Prince Palladine, and how Manteleo became enamoured of the Princesse Marcelina. DUring this time, the Duke of Mil∣laine had a Sonne named Maeleo, a yong Prince, and of vertuous na∣ture, brauely disposed to Knightly resolutions, and being aged about eightéene yéeres. He hauing often∣times heard the famous report, e∣uery where bruted of the Prince Palladine of England, and what a strange aduenture happened at his birth, which could not as yet be ended by any, was very desirous to go see him, that he might be aquainted with the Prince so renowmed. And one day finding the Duke his Father walking in his Garden, he came and knéeled before him, desiring licence for three or foure moneths, to trauaile into England, that he might be aquainted with the Prince Palladine, of so espe∣ciall report, as also the wise and debonaire King Milanor his Father, with whome (quoth he) all Kings and Princes
louers of vertue, haue euermore desired fréendly allyance. Witnesse héerof is the King of Portugall, the Kings of Scots and Norgalles, and diuers other Princes straungers: by his hand my Lord, so it stand with your liking, would I receiue my order of Knighthood, which he I hope will not denie me, in respect of his owne gratious humanitie, and the consideration he will haue of your person, when he shall vnderstand that I am your Sonne. The Duke hearing his Sonne in these tearmes, was well pleased to behold him of so good a mind, and conten∣ted likewise to graunt what he demaunded, saying. In sooth my Sonne, seeing Fraunce and England are now in peace together, the lesse do I doubt of thy going thither, and boldly mayst thou assure him, that he hath a perpe∣tuall fréend of me, determine then to depart when thou wilt, foorthwith shall I giue order for thy prouision in tra∣uaile: but returne not till thou hast tried the aduenture so renowmed, which hapned before the Kings Pallace on the day of his Sonnes birth, and if thy good fortune may bring it to an end, well mayst thou intreate the King for thy Order, in that thou shalt well deserue thy Knighthood, see∣ing so many haue fayled in triall thereof. Manteleo hauing humbly thanked the Duke his Father, for graunting him the thing he onely desired, said. I promise you my Lord, that I will not returne thence without proofe of my for∣tune, albeit I were sure to be repulsed more sharply then any hath béene heeretofore: yet since the aduenture is so ordeyned, let me dye ere I be dishonored with feare or dis∣maying. Héereupon, the Duke called the maister of his Horsse, to whome he gaue charge to prouide his Sonnes estate toward England, and that all things might be rea∣die for his departure within thrée daies following: which was accordingly perfourmed, and so the Prince Manteleo with his trayne set forward from Millaine, in the wéeke next after Pentecost, making such expedition in trauaile, as hauing passed the fairest Cities in Fraunce, which he
was desirous to see, he came to Bullin, where he tooke ship∣ping, and with a merry gale of winde, in lesse then eigh∣teene houres, he landed in England. The King Milanor aduertised of his arriuall, was greatly contented therewith, commaunding in all the Townes where-through he should passe, that he should be receyued and intreated honorably. And when he drew néere London, the Gouernours were charged to méete him on the way, the Prince Palladine likewise to welcome him at the Citie gates, and the King with his Quéene and La∣dies, remained at the Pallace to entertaine him. Euerie thing thus perfourmed in greatest maiestie, the Prince of Millaine was receiued with generall ioy of the Citizens, and the Prince Palladine accompanied with many great Lords of England, to whome Manteleo behaued himselfe with honorable modestie, as well he could his Courtship in those affayres, and riding along with the English Prince, he entred into these speeches. The fame of so many lawdable vertues, accompanyed with heroicall prowesse and magnanimitie, which amply are discerned in your dayly cogitations, hath earnestly prouoked me (good Prince) to be aquainted with you, for which onely occasion, I left my natiue Countrey, to see this Realme, euery where named happie, by the honorable re∣giment of the King your Father, whose vertues you imi∣tate so effectually, as you remaine a wonder to them that neuer saw you. And long may good successe attend your dayly actions, heauen making me so fortunate, to winne acceptance in your eyes, in that I haue deuoted my selfe to estéeme of you aboue all other. Sir Manteleo, answered the Prince Palladine, as I knowe my selfe farre vnworthie these titles of prayse, so am I perswaded, that your speeches proceed of good affecti∣on towards me, flying reports are oftentimes found vn∣true: yet do not I mislike your opinion of me, which hath sorted out the meane to sée and knowe you in this Coun∣trey,
as our honorable and well wishing fréend. Of the King my Father haue I heard of your parents, and good acquaintance hath he had with the Duke your Father, when as a Knight errant he sought after aduentures: as∣sure your selfe therefore right welcome hither, and gladly shall I accept of you as my freend and companion. Thus beguiled they the time, til they came to the Pallace, where the Prince of Millaine stayed to behold the Statues, rea∣ding the deuises he had so long desired to see, whereat, not able to maruaile sufficiently, they went on into the great Hall, where the King embraced him verie louingly, the Princes and Lords likewise present, entertained him with excéeding kindnesse and humanitie, in that they had heard the King many times report, the worthie chiualrie of the Duke of Millaine his Father. After the King had welcomed this stranger with ma∣nyfold courtesies, and had vnderstood the cause of his com∣ming to his Court, he sent him with the Prince Palladine to salute the Quéene and her Daughters. But loue, whose puissance as yet he had neuer felt, finding time and oppor∣tunitie so conuenient, when Manteleo had done his reue∣rence to the Queene, comming to the Princesses that at∣tended on her, hauing kissed the first, named Marcelina: he found his sences so strangely inueigled, as he stoode silent before her a prettie while, being not able to deliuer one word, so was he rauished with contemplation of her beau∣tie. Which the Princesse well noting, and imagining this passion to procéede by bashfulnesse, or feare, which often∣times preuents yong Gentlemen when they enter the pre∣sence of great Ladies, she tooke the Prince by the hand, and thus began. My Lord, you are so welcome, as your owne hart can wish, great hath béene your payne and trauayle, comming so farre to see this Court, no sufficient recompence can the King our Father make yée, nor we poore Ladies, for this excéeding kindnesse. These words forcing Manteleo to re∣couer
his spirits, caused him returne this aunswere. In comming hither (swéete Madame) haue I sustay∣ned no paine or trauaile, but rather comfort, pleasure, and pastime. For long since is it, that I desired to offer my ser∣uice to the King your Father, as well for the rare vertues which makes him farre renowmed, as also to renew the auncient amitie, that yée and the Duke my Father haue had together, when they as Knightes errant trauayled straunge Countreys. Another and chéefe cause, was to see my Lord your Brother, whose second in prowesse is not to be found: and you likewise faire Ladies, whome heauen hath not onely enriched with especiall vertues, but also with rare and most perfect beautie. And though my Starres alotted me no greater good héereby, then to be∣hold the surpassing worke of nature in you both, yet would I repute my trauaile more largely requited, then were I created Emperour of the world, adioyning héere to, if any seruice remayned in me that might be to your liking. During these spéeches, he threw many piercing lookes on the Princesse Marcelina, and she returned the like on him, thinking she had neuer seene a more comely Knight in all perfections, her Brother Palladine excepted, gathe∣ring by his lookes and yéelding countenance, that she had wonne some earnest in his loue: with which imagination, her hart was highly contented, and to continue him in this good affection, she thus replyed. Not a little doo I think my selfe beholding to you, my good Lord, noting your forward zeale to the King my Fa∣thers seruice: loth am I to presse yée with such regard to∣wards me, in that my deseruings are altogether too simple, let my good will then excuse my want, assuring your selfe of a maydens prayers wheresoeuer you go. As Manteleo would haue aunswered, the Prince Pal∣ladine came, and thus brake off their talke. I beséech yée my Lord and companion, to withdraw your selfe into your Chamber, there to repose your selfe after your iourney, for
of necessitie you must be sore wearied, hauing spent so little time betwéene Millaine and England. Manteleo departed to his Chamber with Palladine, and in two lodgings ioyning together lay these new fréends. There did the Millayne Prince cloath himselfe in braue and sumptuous garments, not forgetting the graious spéeches of fayre Marcelina. who likewise so soone as he departed, could not kéepe in her owne opinions, but with her Sister fell in commendation of Manteleo: setling the loue of him so néere her heart, as she resolued neuer to haue any other Husband, so pleased the King and Quéene to giue their consent. Continuing in this determination, thence forward her extreame desires made her pensiue and solitarie, yet would she not impart her disease to any one, because she would first make triall of the Princes constan∣cie, least his loue might be impeached with dissembling alliaunce. But now is the houre of Supper come, when the amo∣rous Prince Manteleo was placed at the table, right ouer against his beloued Marcelina, neither of them being of∣fended at this good hap, but vsing the same as an especiall benefite, with secret glaunces to court each other. Which the Princesse Floraea dilligently marked, and seeing her Sister so often to chaunge her couller, coupling therewith many bitten in sighes, she tofore hauing neuer shewed the like: became iealous of the matter, thinking the Prince should as soone affect her as her Sister, yet made she no outward shew of this conceite. But when the Tables were withdrawne, and each one preparing themselues to daunce, Manteleo tooke his Lady Marcelina, without ma∣king any offer to Floraea, wherewith she became so mal con∣tent as to despight them, she would euery day after sit so néere them, as they could not speake one word to each o∣ther, but she might easily vnderstand what they said. The Prince well noting how hee was crost, would the oftner entertaine Marcelina to Daunce, taking the
benefite at the end of each Measure, which gaue them li∣bertie to conferre together, no one in those excused times being able to impeach them, whereat Floraea greatly repi∣ned, séeing them talke with such affectionate protestations. The Pastimes ended, the King and Queene went to their lodgings, Manteleo humbly giuing them the good night, not forgetting the Saint he serued in desires, and afterward the Prince Palladine accompanied him to his Chamber, where after many other spéeches betwéene them, they concluded on the morrow to request their Knighthood of the King. So Palladine left Manteleo for that night, whose mind was busied with his Ladies fa∣uorable words, not doubting but to shew himselfe so for∣ward in Armes, as the Princesse should receiue good occa∣sion to affect him, and graunt him the honor he earnestly desired. In this good hope he laid him downe to rest, the Princesse Marcelina nothing inferiour to him in amorous opinions, and that night her brother Palladine had told her, that Manteleo and he would intreate their Order of the King, wherewith she was not alittle contented, deter∣mining thence forward, to entertaine the Prince of Mil∣laine as her Knight. CHAP. VI. ¶How the Princes Palladine and Manteleo, with many o∣ther great Lords, were Knighted by the King Milanor: and of an aduenture that happened in the Court, which Palladine and Manteleo ended. FAire Aurora chasing away the clow∣die night, the Prince Palladine, ac∣companied with many Gentlemen, came to bid Manteleo good morrow. Why? my Lord and companion, quoth he, it séemes you haue for∣gotten what we determined yester∣night. Pardon me good Prince, aun∣swered
Manteleo, my memorie is not so short: but so swéet∣ly haue I slept this night, as hindered me from rising soo∣ner. Then went they to salute the King, and intreated his Highnesse to graunt them their Knighthood. When his Maiestie perceiuing their forwardnesse, and noting the earnest desire of Manteleo, thus aunswered. Loth am I to denie your request, albeit as yet you are ouer-yong, but the good opinion I haue of your prowesse, and fortunate successe that may befall ye héereafter: doth supply your want of yeeres, wherefore, this night per∣fourme the holy watch, and to morrow will I giue ye your Order. The two Princes humbly thanking his Maiestie, went to giue order for their Armour and furniture, and at night they entred the Chappell, where spending the time in the accustomed religious exercise, they expect the houre of their long desired honor. In the morning, the King with his Nobilitie entred the Chappell, and as he was busied in the Ceremonies vsed in such affaires, there entred two Damosels verie brauely apparelled, each of them hauing a goodly Sword in her hand, and with them was an armed Knight: then one of the Damosels comming before the King, vpon her knee deliuered these spéeches. Mightie and renowmed King, excelling in vertue all Princes liuing, vnderstand, that this Knight my Brother, is enchaunted by a wicked Sorcerer, for not graunting to accomplish his carnall desire, so that since the time of his refusall, he hath not conuersed with any woman in the world, not with his owne Wife héere present, but hateth all Women to the death, to the no little greefe of me and my faire Sister, séeing her selfe so despised of her husband, without giuing any occasion of offence. Any many Coun∣treys haue we trauailed, to finde the man or woman that can end this enchauntment, yet hetherto haue we lost all our labour. But true it is, that as we passed through the lesser Aegipt, we happened to meete with an auncient
Lady, who gaue vs these two Swords, which (as she said) cannot be drawne by any, but by two Knightes, the most valiant and loyall of their tune. These worthie men shall vncharme this Knight, and to them belong these Swords, being the best that euer were framed, and their names that shall draw these Swords out of their scabbards, are engrauen on the weapons, yet not to be seene till they be drawne. Wherefore right mightie King, we humbly in∣treate, that this sad aduenture may be tried by your Knightes, for very often haue we heard, that this Court is stored with men of greatest vertue. If the King and all present, were amazed at the com∣ming of the Damosels and the Knight, much more were they by hearing the reason of the enchantment. In sooth, said that Quéene, I cannot but pittie the poore Gentleman, that for the carefull regard of his loyaltie, he should receiue so great discourtesie. Doubtlesse, quoth the King, he was a cruell villaine that enchaunted him on this occasion, and were he heere, either would I cause him to end the enchauntment himselfe, or recompence him with his iust desarts. As for you Lady that are Sister to this Knight, right gladly do I graunt what you haue re∣quested, and neuer could you haue come in better time, for the greatest part of the Knightes in our Realme are heere at our Court, besides, diuers other am I presently to en∣due with the Order, which being done, they shall all trie their fortune in this aduenture. Heerevpon, the newe Knightes were immediatly dubbed, and each after other laboured to pull foorth the enchaunted Swords, which they could not stirre the length of halfe a foote, except Orli∣man of Flaunders, and Durandell of Cieue, who drew them wel-neere to the middest. The new Knightes Palladine and Manteleo, séeing no one could altogether vnsheath them, tooke the Swords to trie what they were able to do, and they drew them foorth so easily as they had beene their owne weapons, each one
reioysing the aduenture was ended, especially Marcelina, who by this first proofe perceiued, what Knightly bountie and loyaltie remained in her freend. The Damosels being glad of this good hap, the Knightes Sister thus spake to the King. Yet is not this all Sir, so it may stand with your liking my brother must dub these Knightes with these Swords, and they are to graunt him one request, which he shall af∣terward demaund of them. For that I am content, sayd the King, but let vs see whose names are engrauen on the Swords. Palladine shewed his to the King, and thereon was engrauen in great Romane Lett these words, Palladine of Aquilea, whereat he was th ioyfull and a∣mazed, that the Surname of Aquilea was giuen to Palla∣dine. For Aquilia was a Realme vnder the gouernment of the Pagans, and Palladine was a Christian, nor could he tell what to imagine héereof, but desired Manteleo to shew his Sword▪ whereon was engrauen in the like Cha∣racters, Manteleo the Millaynois, which made him equall with his companion in gladnesse, but most of all faire Mar∣celina, in whose brest loues fire more and more enkindled. The strange Knight feeling himselfe released from en∣chauntment, tooke the Swords, and therewith gaue the Order to the two Princes, afterward thus speaking to them. Will yee (my Lords) graunt me now one boone? That shall we Sir, quoth they, the King hath alreadie pro∣mised, we must not then denie it. My request is, sayd the Knight, that you would depart hence with me within these three dayes, and accompanie me to the place whither I shall conduct yee. Heereof will we not faile, aunswered Palladine, so please yee to set forward to morrow. Not so, quoth the King, you must forethke in what equipage you are to depart hence, as also what companie you must haue with yee: beside, I will that the Knight and the La∣dyes rest themselues awhile in our Court. If Palladine was ioyfull to follow aduentures, you
must thinke Manteleo was as sorie, seeing he must so soone forsake his Marcelina, who hauing likewise heard what was concluded, shewed by the change of her vermilion collour to pale and wan, how greatly this seperation dis∣pleased her, deuising by what meanes she might hinder this voyage. Manteleo beholding the teares in his Ladies eyes, ima∣gined the cause, and thereby her earnest affection towards him, which touched him inwardly with such assaults, as feeling a sudden weakenesse to surprize him, he was forced to leane on his Squires shoulder, whereat the King mar∣uailing, said. How now Sir Manteleo? are you not well? In sooth my Lord, quoth he, neuer was I in so straunge an alteration before. I perceiue said the King the cause heere∣of, these Ladies aduenture hath kept you too long fasting, high time is it that you had some refection. The Prince was contented to allow this fit excuse, least otherwise his secret loue should be disclosed. Let vs to meate then, sayd the King, for long fasting is hurtfull, and mine owne sto∣macke telles me that it is dinner time. CHAP. VII. ¶ Of the feast was made, after the two Princes Palladine and Manteleo were Knighted, and how they  the aduenture of the Statues, which they could fi SO departed the King from the Chappell, and in the great Hall the Tables were couered for dinner, where wanted no store of choyse and daintie delicates, exceeding the rather at this time, for the honor of the new made Knightes. The Prince Manteleo sate in his wonted place before Marcelina, but vnhappy
was it for her, that her Sister Floraea sate so néere her, who still remained suspitious of their silence, by which occasion, these tormented louers durst not speake to each other, but all dinner time with humble and affectionate regards, they deliuered the secret messages of their hearts. When the Tables were withdrawne, some falling to dauncing, and others to deuise with their Ladyes: by good hap, one of the new Knightes, being one of the chéefest Lords in the Court, intreated the Princesse Floraea to daunce, meane while the Millanois had leysure to courte his mistresse. Well my good Lord, quoth she, is there no remedie but we must loose your companie within these thrée dayes? beléeue me, little did I thinke you would haue left vs so soone. Assure your selfe Madame, said the Prince, there is nothing can be more displeasant to me, but in respect, I cannot with honestie, and without great impeach to mine honor, gain-say the matter so absolutely promised, let me intreate ye not to misdéeme of any thing. And heere I vow by the religious faith I owe to your excellencie, that hi∣ther will I returne againe so soone as I can possible. Be∣side, if the Knight whome we must accompanie, shall offer to stray farre from this Realme, some sufficient excuse will I finde to forsake his companie. Meane while, let me in∣treate ye to affoord me thus much fauour, to accept me as your Knight and seruant: and if as yet I haue deliuered no desart, whereby I might attaine to such a tipe of hap∣pinesse, I hope such shall be my behauiour heereafter, as you shall haue no cause to repent your gift. Ah my Lord, quoth she, such soueraigntie haue you gai∣ned ouer my thoughts, as nothing can I refuse, what you with honor request: I accept you then as my Knight (with which words she tooke a rich Diamond from her finger) in signe whereof, take this iewell, and weare it for my sake wheresoeuer you come héereafter. He taking the ring with exceeding reuerence, thus aunswered. Sweete Madame, most humbly doo I thanke ye for this
fauour, which I will kéepe as mine owne life. And néedlesse is it for you to giue me any thing, whereby I might the better remember ye, for so liuely is your diuine figure im∣printed in my hart, that no fortune, how good or bad so e∣uer can haue power to blemish or deface. As she was a∣bout to aunswere, the King started from his chaire, and comming to the Prince Manteleo, sayd, Better leysure to daunce shall we haue after supper, let vs now go see our yong Knightes in the Listes, to trie if since their order was giuen, their strength is impaired or increased. Then ceassed the instruments and the dauncing, the Knightes going all to arme themselues, each one verie ioyfull of this occasion, but especially the Prince Manteleo, for the great desire he had to be séene in the Ioust, yet re∣membring the aduenture of the Statues, fame would he trie his fortune there ere he entred the Listes, and mouing the King thereof, his Maiestie liked it very well, who with the Queene, and all the Courtly assistants, came to their wonted Scaffold, when the Prince Palladine was the first that aduentured for the Shéeld, saying. I haue heard that such as laboured to win this Sheeld, haue beene verie sharply repulsed by this Statue, but I thinke it was through want of demaunding licence to take it, therefore will I reason with the kéeper thereof, to knowe if this Sheeld be destenied to me. So aduancing himselfe to the Statue, armed at all points verie brauely, he thus spake. Suffer me (faire Image) to take this Shéeld downe without the Combate, or if I may not haue it otherwise, determine to defend thy selfe. The Statue made in re∣semblance of a sauadge man, thus replied. I will not Combate with one so yong, and a Knight so vnexperien∣ced as thou art, therefore I councell thée to go make proofe of thy bountie else where, then will I deale with thee in Combate, otherwise, neuer thinke to win this Sheeld. I see well said Palladine to Manteleo, that the end heereof is not reserued for me. Try (my Lord) if your fortune be
any better then mine. Héerevpon, Manteleo mounted the steps, thinking to go take downe the Sheeld, but the Sta∣tue thrust his hand before it, saying. Nor is it (as yet) for thée, that thou shouldest attempt to take this Sheeld, it behoues thee to be much more exercised in armes, and therefore content thy selfe. Good reason haue I to thinke, said Manteleo, that I haue not as yet merited so high a guerdon, by reason of my insufficiencie in martiall affaires, therefore I will presume no further: but in the aduenture of Cupid▪ predestinated to the most loyall, after you Sir Palladine will I hazard my selfe. By my faith, quoth the Prince, I will not meddle with him, for (as yet) I haue nothing to do with the God of Loue, nor know I what puissance he hath ouer humaine creatures, therefore will I stand foorth of his reach. The like may I say, quoth Manteleo, yet will I attempt to win his portrait: so giuing a piercing glaunce on the Prin∣cesse Marcelina, he drew his Sword, and with resolued as∣surance approched the Statue, who presently snatching his fauchion from his side, resisted him in such sort, as be∣twéene them was a long and doubtfull Combate, to the great admiration of the King and all present. Yet maugre the peasant strokes of the brazen Image, he attained to the highest step of all, each one then thinking that Cupid was his owne: but so weightie were the cruell charges of the Statue, as he was enforced to fall downe backward in a swoune, to the great greefe of the King, Queene, and Pal∣ladine, but chéefely of Marcelina, who seeing his Armour broken in so many places, and the blood (as she thought) to issue from him so aboundantly, perswaded her selfe that he had yeelded vp his ghost. Ah gentle Prince, quoth she to her selfe, if thou be dead, I am the onely cause thereof, for well I know, that for my loue thou didst enterprise this aduenture, too deere hast thou bought thy comming into England and the earnest affection thou didst beare to me. While Marcelina continued these regrets, the Prince
Palladine with other Knightes recouered Manteleo, and vnarming him, perceiued he was not wounded at all, but weary and ouer-trauailed, with so long resisting the cruell blowes of the Image, whereon could none of the Princes strokes be discerned, though the clanching of his weapon made a wonderfull noise. Manteleo finding himselfe fresh and lustie, would haue returned againe to the Statue, but the King stayed him with these words. Me thinks (my Lord) you haue done inough alreadie, let others now haue time for their triall. At which spee∣ches, the other Knightes followed as their turnes came, each one being as roughly handled as the Prince Mante∣leo: who gréeued that he had not ended the aduenture, thinking that Marcelina would withdraw her affection, reputing him vnworthie her loue, that could deliuer no better proofe of his loyaltie. And in truth at the first she was iealous thereof, but in the end she perswaded her self, that such a hidden vertue could not be discerned in a man, vntill he receiued the swéetes of loue by his Lady, which opinion made her zeale more vehement to the Prince. The King seeing the day was verie farre spent, referred the rest of the sports till the morrow, when Manteleo had good hope to recouer his honor in the Ioust, to the especiall good liking of his Lady and mistresse. So the King with his Lords returned to the Pallace, and the Knightes ha∣uing vnarmed themselues, came into the Chamber of Pre∣sence, where the Prince deuising with his faire Goddesse, with many perswasions excused his bad successe, which she could not but take in good part, considering that intire loue couers all occasions of dislike.
CHAP. VIII. ¶ How Manteleo wun the honor of the Tournament, and vanquished two straunge Knightes. NOw is the day come, when the yong Knightes should shew themselues in open féeld, except the Prince Mante∣leo, who excused himselfe by riding on hunting, and therefore borro∣wing his freend Palladines hounds, left the Court, causing his horsse and armour to be secretly conuaide to a keepers Lodge, which was a mile and more from the Citie, because he would not haue any one knowe what he intended. Meane while the Ioustes began, the King maruelling at the absence of Manteleo, especially Palladin and faire Marcelina, who missing her freend at dinner, imagined he was gone without bidding her adiew, and the occasion thereof to be, because he had failed in the aduenture of Cupid. The Champions comming into the féeld, the foremost were Mustiell of Rostock, and Brunifort his brother, on the other side came Durandell of Cleue, and Orliman of Flaun∣ders, with all their companie in séemely equipage. When the Heralds had commaunded the Knightes to their de∣uoire, Mustiell and Durandell gaue the spurres to their horsses, and after they had broken thrée Launces▪ a peece with braue chiualrie, at the fourth encounter they met to∣gether so furiously, as they were both cast foorth of their saddles to the ground. Next followed Brunifort and Orli∣man, who dismounted each other at the first attaint, but Brunifort recouered his horsse againe quickly, when Sedo∣nis Sonne to the Duke of Suffolke bad him play, yet accom∣panied Orliman in his misfortune. Heereupon, Grinday,
sonne to the Duke of Orton, reuenged his fellowes wrong▪ and such valour they shewed on either side, as the honor of the day was giuen to them, the King with all his Nobles being readie to depart: when suddenly entred the Lystes two strange Knightes in white Armour, resembling each other, the one bearing in his Sheeld thrée Griffons Sable volant, in a feeld Argent, the other, three Griffons Argent in a Sable feeld. After these Knightes had shewen many carires, and braue voltages with their horsses before the Ladies, one of them encountred Brunifort with such courage, as he was throwne to the ground with his heeles vpward: the like successe had Mustiell, Orliman, and the rest, to the no little admiration of the King and all the Ladies, and great vexation of Palladine, who would not Ioust, because his companion Manteleo was not there. As the King was about to depart, giuing the prize to these two strange Knightes, there entred the Lystes ano∣ther Champion in white Armour, bearing in his Shéeld a Hart Guelles, bound with a golden chaine, and without making any reuerence, or shewing any brauadoes with his horsse, he met one of the strange Knightes so roughly, as he was sent to measure his length on the ground. The other strange Knight, to reuenge his fellowes iniurie, came cou∣ragiously against this new-come Knight, and after the breach of two or thrée Launces, was sent to kéep his fréend companie, whereat not alittle enraged, he drew his Sword, and comming to the Knight, said. I confesse Sir, that thou hast the maistrie ouer me at the Launce, let me now try my fortune better or worsse in Combate. Where∣to the other willingly consented, but the King intercepted them, saying. Not so Gentlemen, I will not that any Combate shall now be fought, in respect the Ioust was or∣deyned for pleasure, and to exercise our Knightes to de∣light their Ladies: enough therefore is done for this day, let anger ceasse betwéene yée, and fréendly embrace each
other, letting me vnderstand: of whence you are, that I may doo you the honor you haue deserued. With right good will my Lord, aunswered the vanquished Knight, my companion and I are freends with this Knight, who de∣serues great estimation for his worthie prowesse. As for our names, and of whence we are, I am called Landash∣nes, Sonne to the King of Norgalles: and my freend is na∣med Simprinell, Sonne to the King of Scots. When the King Milanor, and the Prince Palladine had knowledge of the Knightes, they came from the Scaffold, and embraced them with excéeding courtesie: but when they knew the Conquerour to be Manteleo, I leaue their maruellous ioy to your imaginations. Is it true my Lord? quoth the King, haue you stollen such an occasion to ex∣presse your valour? Your Maiestie knowes, aunswered Manteleo, that I am but newly Knighted, and therefore but little experienced in Armes, nor durst I discouer my selfe before your Highnesse, least my fortune should haue prooued as contrary as it did yesterday, which you must imagine I tooke discontentedly. You néede not feare héere∣after, said the King, to shew your selfe in chéefest places of Chiualrie, in that a beginning so good and fortunate, must néedes in continuance be as prosperous. Heereupon, the three Knightes verie louingly embraced each other, swea∣ring a perpetuall league of amitie betweene them, which they religiously held irreuocable, as in the discourse of our historie you may behold. Manteleo hauing saluted the Quéene and her Ladyes, Palladine came to welcome his freend, rebuking him for not acquainting him with his intent: which he excused as he did to the King, hauing more mind to regard his sweete Mistresse, then to be entertained with all these ceremonies. And you must thinke her ioyes were beyond common con∣ceit, seeing her Knight returned whom she feared was lost: nor was she so suspitious at his repulse against the God of loue, as she was now alous of his honorable successe.
These bien venues and embracings passed ouer, the King and all of them returned to the Pallace, where the two new-come princes had their lodgings appointed, Palladine and Manteleo keeping them companie, recounting the ad∣uenture of the two Damosels and the enchaunted Knight, with whome on the morrow they were to depart. There∣fore they spent that night in dauncing and courtlye dis∣ports, the Princes of Norgalles and Scots deuising with the Ladies, wherewith the Court of England was plentifully stored, and whome they commended to excell all other na∣tions in beawtie. CHAP. IX. ¶ How the Princes Palladine, and Manteleo, departed from London, with the Knight that was enchaunted and the two Damosels, and what happened to them by the way. ON the morrow earely in the mor∣ning, Palladine and Manteleo ar∣med themselues, & with the Knight that was enchaunted and the two Damosels, they came and tooke their leaue of the King and Queene: afterward they went to the yong Princesses chamber, when Marceli∣na perceiuing her Knight would néedes be gone, brake foorth into feares and sad regrets. What meane yee Sister, quoth Palladine is our departure displeasing to you: Not so good brother, answered she, but I doubt least your returne should be hindered by any mis∣fortune, for you are as yet but yong, and little acquainted with the contrary nature of straunge Countreys. I con∣fesse that Sister, quoth Palladine but euery one must haue a learning, beside, you knowe ou promise to this Knight
constrayneth vs héereto, nor would I for all the world breake my word: as for our returne, perswade yourselfe it will be sooner then you imagine. I assure yée thereof Ma∣dame, sayd the Knight that was enchaunted, for I will not leade them farre from this Realme, nor into any place of danger. Manteleo had his heart so scaled vp with gréefe, beholding his mistresse to shed so many teares, as he was not able to speake one word, whereby Palladine presently gathered suspition, that secret loue betwéene them had caused this chaunge, wherefore, bidding his Sisters a∣diew, he departed the chamber with the Knight and the Damosels, leauing Manteleo to say what further hée would, but greefe brake him off with these spéeches. You knowe Madame what I haue promised, with which words, the teares trickling downe his cheekes, he kissed her, and the Princesse Floraea likewise, and so went to séeke Palladine, whome he found readie mounted with their Squires at the Court gate. So departed these two companions in armes with their trayne, with resolution before their returne, to make the world aquainted with their bountie and prowesse: chéefely Manteleo for the loue of his Marcelina, who pre∣sently after her Lords departure, withdrew her selfe alone into her Cabinet, and continuing her teares, breathed foorth these sad laments. Ah loue, who euer thought thy strength to be of such puissance, so violent hath thine entrance beene into my hart, as impossible is it for me to liue long, vnlesse my loy∣all fréend giue me remedie, for none but he can giue me re∣medie. Alas, why is it not permitted vs to trauaile straunge Countreys as well as men: had fortune so fa∣uoured our sexe, thou shouldst not (swéete fréend) be long without me, but miserable is our condition to be thus sub∣iected. Many other amorous complaints made the sor∣rowfull Marcelina, whom we will now leaue, and returne to the Princes, being scant a mile on their way: when Pal∣ladine
intreated the Knight that was enchaunted, to tell him whether they should trauaile, of whence he was, how, and wherefore he had béene enchaunted. My Lord, answered the Knight, right gladly would I satisfie your demaund, but hardly can I recount my infor∣tunes without extreame greefe, so greatly doth the verie remembrance thereof displease me: therefore I pray yee be contented that my Sister be the reporter heereof, for well can she reueale euery accident. Trust me, sayd Palla∣dine, and well it liketh me to heare her speake: so riding a∣long, and the Damosell betweene them, she began her dis∣course in this manner. Séeing it pleaseth you to vnderstand the fortunes of this Knight, willingly will I discouer them vnto you, bee∣ing farre otherwise then I rehearsed in the presence of the King, on the day when you receyued your Knighthood: but the cause why I so disguised the truth, was through feare least his Maiestie would haue hindered your going with vs. Understand then, that this Knight my Brother, this Lady my Cousin, and my selfe, were all three borne in the Realme of Hungaria, at what time it was vnder the gouernment of the great Turke. My Brother was there married to one of the most beautifull Ladies in the Coun∣trey, and dwelt in a small Uillage on the frontiers of the Realme, where a Gentleman (much about your yéeres) fell in aquaintance with him, the continuance whereof bred such amitie betwéene them, as my Brother intreated him to lodge in his house, and two of his neerest kinsemen with him. But in an vnhappie houre chaunced this fréend∣ship, for this Gentleman too vncourteous for this great kindnesse, seeing my Brothers wife so perfect in beautie, became enamoured of her in such sort, as he onely desired the knowledge of her, forgetting the honor and regard of his fréendly hoste. Yet could not intreaties, sollicitings, giftes and faire prouses, obtaine that of her he thirsted after, wherefore despairing of his successe, he went to a
Sorcerer, who gaue him a drugge of such force, as should depriue my Sister of her speech, by meanes whereof, hee might rauish her, or carie her whether him pleased, she bée∣ing not able to defend her selfe, or call for any ayde. This Gentleman hauing enstructed his two kinsemen in the matter, came one night into my Sisters chamber, and be∣ing assured that my Brother and his seruants slept sound∣ly, tooke her thence against her will, afterward giuing her to his freends, who caried her thence into a Ship was rea∣die to set Sayle. In short time they had gotten whether they would, landing at a strong Castell belonging to this Gentleman, where, though he had her in his custodie, yet could he obtayne nothing but refusalls, and sharpe dis∣daynes, yet in time he imagined to make her more trac∣table. My Brother in the morning seeing his wife and guests thus gone, suspected the ill that happened, for di∣uers that met them toward the Sea, came and told him what they sawe, wherevpon, he tooke this iniurie so gree∣uously, as he was euen at the point to despaire. A loall Traytor (quoth he) is this the recompence for my good will to thee? for the honor and good entertainement thou hast had in my house, doost thou reward me with this vil∣lanie? Come my freends, let vs follow them, and either by fire, water, or weapons, destroy the adulterer, that hath thus robd me of my onely delight. May it be (sweete wife) that this happened with thy consent? couldst thou serue him so ye loued thee as his life? no, well may I be as∣sured of thy loyalty. An Aunt of ours, who sometime was wife to a sage Nigromancer, seeing my Brother wel-neer beside himselfe, such was his gréefe for the losse of his wife, tooke pittie on him, and to preuent the ill which she fore∣sawe was like to ensue, she wrote a letter to a wise ma∣trone in the Realme of Aquilea, commaunding vs to carie it to her, and that my Brother should trauaile thither with vs, which we did, finding the good old Lady where the Letter directed vs, which was in a little Desert of
mountaines, hauing no other habitation then in the caues▪ which séemed olde and greatly ruinated, in the middest wherof was a fountaine, ouershadowed with the boughes of a great Elme tree. So soone as she beheld vs, she de∣maunded for the Letter we brought, which when she had read, she commaunded vs to rest our selues by the foun∣taine, while she went into her Caue for the two Swords you now enioy, and returning, she bathed them in the fountaine, mumbling certaine spéeches softly to her selfe, and comming to vs, sayd. Sée héere Ladies two Swords, which can be drawne out of their sheathes by none, except the two best Knightes in the world, by whose assistance this Gentleman shall recouer his losse, and be reuenged on the Traytor that thus wronged him. Take these Swords with yée, and search the Courts of Kings and most renow∣med Princes, to finde those gentle Knightes excelling in vertues, and them twaine that can drawe foorth these Swords, shall you conduct to the place where the Lady a∣bideth, for whome this noble Gentleman is so tormented, to whome (for her sake that sent yée) will I presently giue such a remedie, as shall diminish part of the greefe he en∣dureth. So giuing vs the two Swords, with a little white wand she smote thrée blowes on the Elme tree, from whence flew foorth a Bird crying very pitifully: then with the wand she troubled the water in the fountaine, vsing certaine priuate spéeches againe, and taking a little of the water in her hand, she dreined it on my brothers head, say∣ing. Now go and commend me to your Aunt, and to the two Knightes that shall draw the Swords, to whome I will that thou giue the order of Knighthood, to the ende their vertue, courage, and magnanimitie may be encrea∣sed. So left we the old Lady, and euer since followed her commaundement, making a bootelesse search in many pla∣ces, till we found you to whome the aduenture was deste∣med. And thus (my Lords) haue you heard the entire dis∣course of my Brothers misfortune. Now as concerning
what remaineth, we must conduct ye into Hungaria, to the Castell where my faire Sister is enclosed, and where the villaine abideth that stole her from my Brother. Yet is her honor preserued from any attaint, for as the Traytor one day would haue rauished her, mine Aunt (of whome I spake) by aduenture came thither, and hauing throwne the paillard out of the chamber by the shoulders, enchaunted the same in such sort, as none may enter therein but my Brother, nor can he come there but by your ayde. A déede of such honor and charitie I hope you will not refuse, in reuenging our wrong on that maleuolent villaine, which shall be easie for you to doo, as the aforesaid wise prophe∣tesse declared to vs. The Princes hauing heard this mon∣strous treason, thus aunswered. We will assist ye faire Lady to our vttermost, nor shall ye neede to whet vs on with perswasions, for we are bound by dutie to reuenge actions so soule and enorme. For this kinde replye, she gaue them many thanks, spending the time in these and like conferences, and two daies rode they without any ad∣uenture worthie the rehearsall. CHAP. X. ¶ How Palladine and Manteleo met foure Knightes, with whome they Combatted, and the issue thereof. THE third day, as the Princes with their companie issued foorth of a thick wood, they met four Knightes, of whome (after ourteous salutati∣ons) Palladine demaunded whether they trauailed. Directly towardes London, aunswered one of them, where the King abideth as we vn∣derstand. And the cause of our iour∣ney thether, is to trie an aduenture of two Swords, which
not long since were caried thither, vnable to be drawne by any, but by two of the best Knightes in the world. If you go for no other occasion, aunswered Palladine, well may ye spare that labour, for two yong Knightes en∣ded the aduenture two dayes since and more. Two yong Knightes? quoth another of them, of what Countrey I pray ye? The one, said Palladine, is an Eng∣lishman, and the other an Italian, borne in Millayne. By my faith, quoth the Knight in a great laughter, belike then the enchauntment was no hard matter to finish, nor was any hidden vertue to be discernd therein, when an Italian and an Englishman could bring it to ende. Uery fewe good Knightes are founde among the Italians, in whome is more ostentation and brauadoes, then matter of moment and effect: and in Englishmen is much lesse, being repu∣ted in all Countreys for men of little estimation. The two yong Princes hearing their Countreys so dis∣praised, began to growe in maruailous choller, especially Manteeo, who bending the browes, and enflamed with vnquenchable anger, thus aunswered. Of whence are you Sir, that can so well collaude the Knightes of England and Italy? What mooues you to vse such spéeches, being in the Kingdome you discommend? Trust me, if you haue any wit, you make no shew thereof in your words. Be not angrie, aunswered the Knight, I see by your couller that you sweate in your Armour: but if ye continue this moode. you haue met with Spanyards that will walke ye a little. And heere haue you met an Englishman and an Italian sayd Manteleo, euen they that ended the aduenture of the en∣chaunted Swords, who presently will teach ye to temper your toong. With these words, he went to his Squire for his Launce, placing it to encounter him that gaue the spéeches, but Palladine called to him, saying: Forbeare my Lord, and let me deals with him, for I ought to begin first, be∣cause the offence was first made to me. Beside, they are in
my Countrey, it belongeth then to me to correct their folly, making by proofe what an Englishman is able to doo. If you see me stand in néede of your helpe, doo as you shall finde occasion, otherwise, let me alone with these lusty Spanyards. Palladine without any further spéeches, with a braue ca∣rire encountred the prating companion, who, though he brake his Launce with good courage on the Prince, was throwne with such violence from his horsse, as he lay not able to stirre hand or foote. Which when the other three beheld, they ran altogether against the Prince, who gaue the foremost such a freendly welcome, as falling on his head to the ground, brake his necke with the weight of his owne bodie. The other twaine (at this encounter) had broken their Launces on Palladine, and now drew their Swords, thinking to reuenge their fellowes ill fortune▪ but greatly did they finde themselues deceiued, for the Prince séeing he had no more to deale withall thou these two, redoubled so many fierce strokes vpon them, as the one fell out of his Saddle depriued of his sences, and the o∣ther to saue his life, would haue fled away: the Prince dis∣appointing him of that benefit, by hamstringing his horsse, caused him to fall to the earth, when snatching off his Hel∣met, with his Sword would haue smitten his head from his shoulders. Alas Sir Knight, cried the vanquished Spanyard, saue my life, I yeeld my selfe to thy mercy: what I haue done against thee, was in reuenge of my Brother whome thou first dismounted▪ accurssed be the houre that he spake so vndiscretly, this is not the first time I haue en∣dangered my life, onely to sustaine his fond and ouerfoolish quarrels. Mercie I graunt thee, aunswered Palladine so thou promise and sweare to fulfill one thing, which is, that so soone as thy woundes are healed, thou shalt go to the King of Englands Court, there submitting thy selfe to his will and mercie. And thou shalt say to him, that the two Knightes which departed thence with two Ladyes, and if Knight who was there deliuered from enchauntment, in
reuerent wise salute his Maiestie, hauing sent thée to be disposed at his pleasure. Moreouer, thou shalt not faile to tell him the cause, why we sent thee in this sort to his high∣nesse. The like declaration shalt thou make before the Queene, and her two Daughters Marcelina, and Florea. All this will I gladly accomplish answered the Spanyard, but as for my Brother, and the other Knightes, I thinke they will neuer passe further, for by ought I can perceiue, there is no signe of life left in them. They haue no more, aunswered Manteleo, then they worthily deserued, ought they to misprise or detract strange Knightes, cheefely such as are of one nation? yet let vs see in what estate they are. So comming to the Knight that was first dismoun∣ted, and finding him dead, by reason of the aboundance of blood he had lost, as also because his Helmet hindered him from the aire: Unhappy man, said his Brother, oftentimes haue I told thee, that thy pride and ouer-wéening would one day cause thy death. Be thou warned heereby, sayd the enchaunted Knight, and learne another time to vse more courtesie to Knightes, how yong or old soeuer they be: for thou and thy companions did imagine, that because these two yong Princes were no further entred i yeeres, that therefore they were vnprouided of courag and vertue, but by outward behauiour neuer iudge o men heereafter. Too well doo I perceiue your words ar true, but I beseech ye looke if my Cosins haue accompanied my Brother in death, or no. Palladine finding them to be aliue, offered with his Sword to haue smitten off their heads. Uillaines (quoth he) you are but dead men▪ if you will redeeme your liues, you shall promise me to go ubmit your selues to the King of Englands mercie, recounting to him wherefore, how, and by whome you haue beene van∣quished. Sir, answered one of them, there is nothing that we will not gladly promise and perfourme, for the aun∣some of our , and  I sweare to yee, that I will not faile  you haue commaunded. You must a∣uouch
the like quoth the Prince to the other Knight, wherevpon, he that was so sore hurt with his fall from his horsse, could make no aunswere but by signes, so that with many sad countenances he shewed his consenting. Now may yee depart when ye please, said Palladine, and say, that Englishmen are better Knightes then Spanyards. So hauing buried the Knight that was slaine, they depar∣ted, not a little glad they were so well escaped, but they tooke small care of perfourming their promise, as you shall perceiue by the sequell of our historie. CHAP. XI. ¶ How Palladine and Manteleo with their company, arri∣ued in the Realme of Hungaria, where the Gentleman remayned that stole the Lady from the enchaunted Knight, and what fortuned to them by the way. AFter the Princes had left the Spany¦ardes, they rode on their iourney, and comming to the port of Gor∣forte, they tooke Shipping when the Seas were still and calme, expecting a winde to passe into Holland, which fitting their expectations, crossing through Zeland, they came to Triell, where Palladine furnished himselfe with new Armour, because his other was greatly batte∣red in Iousting with the Knightes. Hauing contented themselues with the sight of Hol∣lnd, they passed the Rheme, and entred Almayne, where arriuing on the frontires of Bohemia, they beheld a Lion comming toward them, carying a yong Infant (wrapped in swadling clothes) in his mouth, and a yong woman running after the beast, with verie pitifull cries and accla∣mations. Behold (quoth Palladine) how a sauadge beast
hath gotten a yong Infant, let vs alight, to sée if we can force him forgoe his pray. The poore woman seeing how readie they were to helpe her, cryed aloude to them, that they should get betwéene the Lion and his Caue, least (en∣tring with the child) there should remaine no hope of re∣couerie. When the Lion saw he could not enter his denne, he let fal the Infant, and furiously assailed the Prince Manteleo, who gaue the beast such a wound on the head, as made him cry and rore very dreadfully. At which noyse, a Lio∣nesse came foorth of the Caue from her yong ones, and she likewise ranne on the noble Manteleo, but Palladine and his Squires so valiantly assisted him, as the beastes were in short time ouercome and slaine. Then came the poore woman and tooke vp her child, which when she beheld had escaped all daunger, on her knées she humbly thanked the Princes for their good assistance. One of the Damosels ta∣king the child in her armes, and séeing it both beautifull and comely, said to the mother. Great had béene the losse good woman, that these cruell beastes should haue deuou∣red so swéete an Infant: but why were you so negligent to endaunger it so much? Madame, aunswered the poore woman, not by my fault did this inconuenience happen, for I earning my liuing by dayly labour, by binding faggots which my husband cuts in the wood, left my child with one of my neighbours in kéeping. How she suffered this mishap, I know not, but as I returned from the wood, and méeting the Lion with my child, which full well I knew by the swadling cloathes, I made what haste I could after the beast, hoping by some meanes to recouer my child, which now (I thanke God and you) I haue done. Nor is this the first time we haue béene thus serued: for in this little Uillage, béeing but tenne or twelue housholds in number, three children haue béene lost within these sixe moneths, the parents still thin∣king some Boores or peasants had stollen them, but now in
good time haue wee founde the Théefe. And seeing these Gentlemen haue slaine the Lion and Lionesse, it may be they haue some yong ones in this Caue, which I gladly would haue destroyed likewise, so shall we be in no further daunger heereafter. That will I soone trie, said Palladine: go to your house, and fetch me some fire, and withall, bring some sheaues of thrasshed corne, for Lions cannot abide the sight of fire, and by this meane shall we see what is in the darke Caue. Right soone did the woman accomplish her charge, bringing strawe and fire with her, and sixe or seauen sturdy fellowes, with staues, flayles, and pikeforkes: when Pal∣ladine hauing set the strawe on fire, with the coutrey pea∣sants entred the Caue, where he found thrée yong Lio∣nesses like little dogs, and the clothes of diuers children deuoured by the beasts. To behold this strange sight, he called the two Damosels, and the poore woman into the Caue, saying: These beastes should haue dined with your child to day, but God hath appointed his end in better sort, and because you shall remaine in no further dread of these yong ones, were I not so farre from England, I would send them to the King, who I am sure would accept them for our sakes. My Lord, quoth one of the poore countrey∣men, I will vndertake to fulfill your mind in this, and will carie them to England if you please to commaund me: full well doo I knowe how to vse them, for my Father nourished one like to these a long time, and when it grew great, he gaue it to our King, who sent it as an especiall present to the King of Fraunce. In sooth, quoth the Prince, if thou will perfourme what thou hast promised, I will giue thee money to defray thy charges, and theirs likewise whome thou wilt take with thee. Letters will I also send by thee, to safe-conduct thee on the way, and that thou mayst be welcome into England▪ whence thou canst not re∣turne without sufficient recompence. Of that my Lord I haue no doubt, aunswered the poore man, for oftentimes
haue I heard reported, that the King ilanor of England▪ is one of the most vertuous Princes on the earth: and though I receyud no other benefite by him, I would ac∣count my labour well bestowed, onely to see a King ac∣counted so famous. Beside, such great good haue you done vs, in killing these rauenous and daungerous beastes, as in signe of our willing mindes, to make you further re∣compence if we were able, if the iourney were tenne times further, you should commaund vs. So comming foorth of the Caue, the poore men prouided Panniars to carrie the yong beastes: in meane while, the Prince wrote to the King his Father, describing what had befallen them in their iourney, and what valour Manteleo had shewen in killing the Lions: not forgetting his salutations to the Princesse Marcelina, with all the other Ladyes of the Court. Hauing sealed his Letters, he gaue them to the countreyman, and money sufficient to beare his charges, who taking his leaue of the Princes, in few dayes after set on his iourney toward England. Palladine and Manteleo mounting on horsseback, with their companie tooke the way to Hungaria, which at length they reached, lodging in a little Uillage, about a mile di∣stant from the Castell where the Gentleman abode, who detaned the wife to the Knight that had beene enchaun∣ted. There the Princes concluded to rest themselues that night, and on the morrow, the Knightes Sister should goe to accuse the Gentleman of Treason, and to knowe of him whether he would maintaine his cause man to man in Combate, or two against two, or three to thrée if he durst so accept it. Upon this determination they supped merily together, Manteleo still remembring his faire Marcelina, and Palladine his intended action of honor. So betaking themselues to rest, Palladine dreamed, that he beheld a goodly Lady before him, who vsing certaine speeches to him softly, layd her hand very kindly on his head, and so departing the chamber againe, made such a noyse, as he
awaked therewith. Long hée studied what this Lady should be, but could not gesse on any thing directly, where∣fore he concealed his dreame to himselfe, albeit not long after he compassed his desire, as you shall at large behold heereafter. CHAP. XII. ¶ How the Princes Palladine, Manteleo, and the enchaun∣ted Knight, fought the Combate with the Gentleman of the Castell and his two Brethren, and the successe therof. MAny were the seuerall apparitions that these Princes had in their sléep this night, the one, of his loue in the Court of England, and the other of the Lady that thus had sollicited him, wherin the enchaunted Knight had likewise a share, remembring the wrong done vnto his wife, by the Traytor whom he had so fréend∣ly vsed in his house, the conceite of which ingratefull acte, presented him with many strange cogitations. Earely in the morning they all arose, and the Knightes Sister, accompanied with one of the Prince Palladines Squires, rode to the Castell where the Gentleman dwelt, to deliuer the message before determined. And finding him, sitting at the Castell gate, with two or thrée of his ser∣uaunts that attended on him: without vsing any courte∣sie or salutation, but with a stearne and angrie counte∣nance, thus spake. Well knowest thou, villayne as thou art, that vio∣lently thou didst carie away my Brothers wife, who lod∣ged and entertained thée fréendly in his house, wherefore I say to thée, that thou art the most vile and abiect creature liuing, hauing committed the greatest treason and disloy∣altie, that euer was heard of a man toward his freend. A
Knight will I bring, that to thy eard shall testifie what I haue said, by aduenturing his person in Combate against thée: or if thou thinke it conuenient, two against two, or three to three, so many will I bring hither before two houres are expired. The Gentleman abashed to heare a woman speake so brauely, she being accompanied but with one Squire, thus replied. I beléeue (Damosell) it is not long since ye came from Paradise, for you are yet maruel∣lous glorious, but I hope ere night to quallify your pride, and him or them that dare bid me the Combate. And where thou chargest me with detaining a Lady, who (as thou sayest) is thy Brothers wife, héere will I kéepe her still, and hence shall she not go, till I haue had my pleasure on her. But to spend no time in pratling with a foolish wo∣man, go fetch the thrée Knghtes thou threatnest me with∣all, and they shall finde héere throe other, whereof my selfe will be one, say, we graunt them the Combate, and bid them looke they come well prouided, for all their wit and strength I thinke will scant helpe them. The Damosell and the Squire returned with this an∣swere to the Princes, who hauing heard the Gentlemans mishap, presently mounted on horssebacke, and rode to∣ward the Castell. In this time, the Gentleman went into the Castell to his Brethren, and aduertised them of the Damosels chal∣lenge, wherevpon, they immediatly armed themselues, the Gentleman causing twentie of his seruants to be secretly ambushed, to succour him if his enemies were the stronger, and if they could not take them prisoners, then to murther them without any redemption. By this time are the Princes and the enchaunted Knight come to the Castell, where they found the thrée Brethren staying their comming, and without any fur∣ther spéeches, they prepared to the carire, when Palladine would haue encountred the Gentleman of the Castell, but the enchaunted Knight intreated him to the contrarie,
saying. Let me trie my fortune with him, good Sir Knight, for he it is that hath iniuied me, and now shall I be suffi∣ciently auenged on him. Palladine was well contented it should be so, and while the Knight gaue his horsse the spurres to meete the Gentleman, he and Manteleo found his Brethren play: so that after they had brauely broken their Launces, and fought a long and dangerous Combat with the Sword, the Gentleman was throwne downe sore wounded, and his Brethren were both flame out∣right. Now (though too late) rushed foorth the ambushed seruants, and they being twentie in number, set with such violence on the Princes and their Squires, as their hosses were slaine vnder them, and themselues in very great danger of death, but that Lydiseo the Prince of Hungaria▪ suddenly arriued there, for that day had he beene on hun∣ting, and because the bordering Turkes did oftentimes in∣iurie the King his Father, he seldome rode without armed Knightes in his companie. When he beheld so many a∣gainst so few, he commaunded his Knightes to assist the weaker side, so that the greater part of them were slaine, and the rest thinking to saue their liues, fled into the Ca∣stell, yet were they so narrowly pursued, as they could not drawe the bridge, but were all taken, and reserued in pri∣son for a further punishment. The two Damosels glad of this happie victorie▪ hum∣bled themselues before the Prince Lydieo, thanking him for this gratious assistance: the like did Palladine▪ and Manteleo, confessing their liues preserued onely by hys meanes. Afterward, he requested to knowe the cause of their fight, which the Knightes Sister effectually discour∣sed, wherevpon, they went to he the Lady that was im∣prisoned, whome they could not tell where to finde, tell a poore old Gardiner came vnto them, saying, that the key of the dungion where the remained, his maister alway kept at a string fastened about his necke, not trusting anone to see her but himselfe▪ Lydiseo coomming to the Gentle∣man,
found that he had some life left in him, wherefore ta∣king the key from about his necke, and causing his men to bring him into the Castell, that further iustice might be showen on him for his offence, by the old Gardiner they were brought to the Ladyes dungion, where they found her so spent with greefe, and her farre face so martired with great effuse of teares, as would haue moued a stony hart to pittie her. How ioyfull the Knight was to see his Lady, how glad she likewise was to behold her husband, I leaue to the opinion of long absent true louers: yet this was her cheefest comfort, that her husband enioyed her againe, free from any spot of dishonor, and though she had endured long miserie, yet could not the villayne abuse her chastitie. Lydiseo sent the trayterous Gentleman to the King his Father, and with him other of the chéefest offendors, with Letters describing their notorious villainie, wherevpon, they were drawne in péeces by wilde horsses, as such a no∣torious offence full well deserued. CHAP. XIII. ¶ How the wise Orbiconte appeared to Paladine in his sleepe: and what talke she had with him. LYdiseo the Prince of Hungaria, ha∣uing heard by the enchaunted Knight and the Ladyes, the noble vertues of Palladine and Manteleo, remained still in the Castell with them, vsing them with verie kinde and princely courtesie, being sorie for certaine dangerous woundes they had receiued in fight, which he caused to be tended with carefull dilligence. The enchaunted Knight likewise told his Lady, the successe of his iourney into England, how he receiued the
Swords of the wise Sorceresse, and how the two Princes (by drawing them) ended his enchauntment: they hauing at his request trauailed so farre, onely for her deliuerance from the cruell Gentleman. Now thankefull she shewed her selfe for their honorable paines, her great care in curing their woundes, and readie seruice to supply all wants, de∣clared the vertues of so good a minde. Needlesse were it to tell ye, how Lydiseo procured from the King his Father many presents of good will to the Princes, and dayly ac∣companied them with his owne person, as the men in whome he most of all delighted: I shall therefore reueale what happened to Palladine, while he attended the cure of his woundes in this Castell. As one night the Prince lay soundly sléeping in his bed, the Lady that before had appeared to him, presented her selfe now to him againe, speaking to him in this manner. Know Sir Palladine, that I am a Pagan, named the wise Orbiconte▪ who through the assertion thy vertues cause me beare thée, am come to aduertise thée, that I framed those two Swords, which the Knight enchaunted brought to thée and Manteleo, that you twaine might helpe him to recouer his lost Lady. And because I haue fore-seen by my magique and hidden knowledge, that by thee I shall one day attaine to high estate of honor: I will not conceale from thee, that the destenies haue reserued onely to thée, the atchiuement of many great and braue enterprises, as also the finishing of rare aduentures and enchauntments, wherein thou shalt endure much paine and trauaile. Beside, I am to let thée vnderstand, that fortune hath sorted thée out a Lady, who at this day is estéemed peere∣lesse in beautie, whome to finde, thou shalt trauaile many strange regions, with labour that will be long and trouble∣some: yet shalt thou still be protected by me, and comforted by the great fame thou shalt heare of her beautie, surpas∣sing all the Princesses in the world. Begin the search of her so soone as thou canst possible, and thinke not my spée∣ches
friuolous, for thou shalt finde them vndoubtedly true. So vanished away the wise Orbiconte, leauing the Prince in meruailous doubts, what this Pagan woman might be, that seemed to beare him so great affection. In the end, such deliberate aduise he tooke of her words, perswading himselfe of their truth and certaintie, as he concluded to seeke the Lady, the onely Phenir among the fairest in beautie. Of her immediately he became amorous, deter∣mining to depart from the Prince Manteleo, because he would haue no competitour in his loue. But before we passe any further, and to bewray the cause of this aduertisement by the wise Orbiconte, you must note, that she was Sister to the King of Aquilea▪ hauing béen espoused to a Duke, one of the greatest Lords in that Realme, by whome she had three faire Daughters. All her life time she spent in the superstitious sciences of Nigromancie and Gemancie, and casting the reuolution of her daughters natiuitie, she found by her arte: that  the Prince Palladine might be brought into that Countrey, each of her daughters should haue a Sonne by him that should in chiualrie surpasse all the Knights of their time; the one of them being destenied to be an Emperour, and the other two to be Kings of wonderfull possessions. Now to compasse the meane, whereby Palladine might be brought to this farre distant Countrey, you must like∣wise note, that the King of Aquilea, brother to Orbiconte, had the fairest daughter that euer was seene: by which oc∣casion, this enchauntresse appeared to the Prince, inciting him to follow the search of the fairest Lady in the world, promising him to enioy this rare virgin named. Nonpa∣reha. And when he should be thus brought into that Coun∣trey, she deuised to exercise her arte in such sort, as he should haue the honor of her daughters, to the ende she might expect the fortune of the children, who were appoin∣ted to so high dignities. Resolued on this intent, she be∣tooke her selfe to dwell among the mountaines, where she
framed the two enchaunted Swords, as the first motion to draw Palladine toward Aquilea, where at the time ap∣poynted he shall arriue. But now he is with the Prince Lydiseo at the Castell, where he and Manteleo hauing their woundes healed, the enchaunted Knight (with his Lady and Sister) returned to their owne home: the vision of wise Orbiconte calleth Palladine thence, and faine would Manteleo returne to∣ward England, because he liued by the onely remembrance of his mistresse Marcelina, so comming to Lydiseo, Palla∣dine thus began. Worthie Prince, your care for our health hath excéeded our deserts, yet we remayne with humble dutie to make requitall: hauing accomplished our promise to the en∣chaunted Knight, who with his Lady and fréends are safely where they would be, we craue licence for our de∣parture to our Countries, where our parents expect our comming continually. Many gracious spéeches were vttered by the Prince, and many liberall and bountifull promises, onely to cause them goe with him to the King his Fathers Court: but all was to no purpose, they promised to visit the King at more conuenient leysure, because very vrgent occasions did now hasten their departure. When Lydiseo sawe he could not perswade them, he gaue to each of them a verie sumptuous armour, and foure of the best horsses in his stable, with diuers other giftes of inestimable valew: so after many courtesies and kind em∣bracings, Palladine and Manteleo set forward on their iourney, and Lydiseo hauing seazed the Castell to the King his Fathers vse, on the next day following rode to the Court, where he acquainted the King with al that had happened. The Princes hauing ridden most part of the day, came at length to a faire fountaine, standing in a fresh coole shadowe of trees, where they alighted, minding to dine
with such prouision as their Squires had brought with them. Afterward, they lay downe in the shade to sleepe a-little, which Manteleo and the Squires did very soundly: but Palladine not able to forget the words of the wise Or∣biconte, arose, and being loth to trouble them that slept, tooke his helmet and his sword, intending to walke among the trees till they awaked. He had not gone from his com∣panie the space of halfe a bow shoote, but he espied a goodly plaine, in the middest whereof stoode a faire pauillion, with two or thrée bundles of Launces erected at the entrance. Maruailing what the meaning heereof might be, he kept himselfe still hid among the trees, to see if any one would come in or out of the Tent. At length, he beheld come ri∣ding on the plaine, two Knightes with a Damosell that bare a goodly Shéeld, which with the beams of the Sun, dazeled the eyes of the beholders. These two Knightes and the Damosell would haue passed the Tent, but hée espied one came suddenly foorth, and stayd them, saying. You may not passe by (Gentlemen) so easily, you are well armed for the triall of the Launce: you must therefore make some proofe in this place of your chiualrie, else must you leaue your Armour and Horsses behinde yee. And first of all, you Damosell must deliuer me the Sheeld you cary, for it liketh me well, and I shall best deserue it. I may not doo so, aunswered the Damosell, because you are not the man it is sent vnto, and for whome it was purposely made. Whether I be he or no, quoth the Knight of the Tent, haue it I will: with which words he offered to take it violently from her, but the two Knightes stayed him with these spéeches. Sir Knight, we neyther refuse the Ioust or Combate with thee, but in presuming to take the Shéeld perforce from the Damosell, we iudge it rather the behauiour of a shéefe and robber, then sitting with the credit of a Gentle∣man, or one that by brauerie of minde, desires to trie the courage of Knightes errant. Are you offended, quoth the
Knight of the Tent, at any thing I haue sayd or done? be∣léeue me, I will haue the Shéeld, and cause you to repent your audacious folly. Come foorth, queth he to his Knights in the Tent, and teach these lustic companions a little bet∣ter dutie. Presently issued foorth two Knightes on horsse∣backe, and coutching their Launces, they ncountred them that defended the Damosell, who threw them from their Sadles with such violence, as they lay not able to stirre any limme. Two more came foorth of the Tent, and fol∣lowed their companions in fortune, whereat the Knight was so angrie, as he mounted on horssebacke himselfe, cal∣ling sire more foorth to take part with him. Se my freends quoth he, foure of our men are slaine, or in great dan∣ger, let vs alltogether run on these villaines that so vsed them, for man to man I see they are strongest, such there∣fore as loue me, follow me. So by their furious assault, the two Knightes were dismounted, and by the tune the other had finished their course, they drew their Swords, and buckling on their Sheelds, came with resolute courage to meete their enemies. Right sorrowfull was the Damosell to see the Knightes that defended her cause, in such daun∣ger: but Palladine beholding the valour of the twayne, and the cowardly villaime of the other, came foorth of the wood, and taking part with them so much wronged, in short time layde foure of them breathlesse on the ground. The other three would gladly haue giuen ouersight, but Palladine and the Damosels Knightes layde on such loade, as two more were sent to accompany theyr fel∣lowes, the third (to saue hys life) yeelded to their mer∣cie.
CHAP. XIIII. ¶ How Manteleo sound Palladine, with the two Knightes, and the Damosell, that brought the Sheeld from the wife Orbiconte. IN the time of this sharpe skirmish, the Prince Manteleo awaked, and missing his companion Palladine, called the Squires, who were no lesse amazed at the absence of their maister, but séeing his horsse and Launce there, they imagined he could not be strayed verie farre. As they walked into the wood to seeke him, they heard the clanching of weapons, and entring on the plaine, they espied Palladine with the two Knightes and the Damosell, and a man kneeling on his knees before him, crauing pardon for his life. Manteleo being glad he had found his freend, came to him with merrie and chéerefull countenance: when the two Knightes seeing his face, immediatly knew him, and casting downe their helmets, came and embraced him, saying: How highly are we beholding to the vertuous Prince Palladine, without whose assistance our liues had perished? Palladine knowing them to bée Durandell of Cleue, and Orliman of Flaunders, of whose chiualrie he had heard mickle commendation, embraced them with marue∣lous affection, the like did Manteleo, and no small gratu∣lations were entercoursed betwéene these foure Princes. When the Damosell heard the name of Palladine, she alighted from her Palfray, and with humble seuerence on her knee, thus spake to him. Happie and successefull Knight, whose vertues are re∣nowined through the wide world, the wise Orbiconte hath
sent you this Sheeld, commending her selfe dutifully to your good grace, intreating you to forsake your companie awhile, and with me to go visit her that honors you. Palladine hearing her speake of the wise Orbiconte, who had so often appeared to him in visions, was as ioy∣full, as Manteleo and the other were sorrowfull, to leaue the companie of him they loued so well: but hee ha∣uing taken the Sheeld, returned this aunswere to the Damosell. Faire freend, I thanke your mistresse and you likewise, promising to goe with ye whether you please, though leth I am to forgoe the companie of these gentle Princes: but seeing it liketh the Lady Orbiconte it should be so, I obey her commaund right willingly, hoping to see my good freends againe ere it be long. As Palladine thus spake, his couller altered very pale and wanne, whereby the Damosell judged that he was wounded, wherefore she said: I perceiue (my Lord) you are scant well, let us enter this Tent I pray ye, where you shall be unarmed, and these Knightes likewise, that I may see what woundes you haue receiued: for my Lady Orbi∣cone gaue me at my departure from her, a bore of most pretious and arteficiall ointment, so that let your wounds be how dangerous soeuer, in four and twentie houres I will awarrant they shall be perfectly healed. Upon this aduise they entred the Tent, where when they were vnar∣med, the Damosell verie cunningly dressed their wounds, finding these of Orliman and Durandell to be most doubt∣full, yet her comfortable speeches made them expect speedie recouerie. Afterward, they sate downe to refresh them∣selues, with such viands as they found there readie in the Tent: and Palladine calling for the prisoner, said: Knight, if thou desire the safetie of thine owne life, tell me without fabling, what the Knight was that first proffered to take the Sheeld from the Damosell: and vpon what occasion you kept the passage heere, to forbid the course of Knightes
errant. Nor will I Sir (quoth the Knight) hide bne iote of the truthe from you. Knowe then, that he which would haue taken the Sheeld from the Damosell, was brother to a Gentleman, who not long since (by the Kings commaundement) was put to a most shamefull death, for that vniustly he detayned a Knightes wife: to whose Castell, came two strange Knightes, and by the ayde of Lydiseo, Prince of Hungaria, they tooke the Gentleman sore wounded, who was after∣ward executed, slew many of his seruants, as also his two brethren, deliuering the Lady to her husband againe, who now liue in quiet in their owne Castell. This Knight that stroue for the Sheeld, was likewise brother to that Gentleman, who hearing the misfortune of his brethren, vowed to take vengeance on those two Knightes, by whose meanes, he was now left freendlesse in the world. Upon this determination, heere caused he his pauillion to be erected, sending his espials abroade, to al∣lure all Knightes by this passage, hoping at length to finde those twayne, which I thinke he imagined to be they that conducted the Damosell: because he commaunded vs all to assaile them, but whether they be the same or no, he is now greatly deceiued of his hope, and thus haue you heard the verie truth of our being heere. Thanks be to heauen, sayd the Prince Palladine that kept vs out of this danger, for if we had passed this way, we had either beene slaine or taken by these vie minded men. But my hazard was greatest, quoth the Damosell, had I not met with these two noble Knightes, who (in my defence) thrust their owne liued into question. Damosell aunswered Durandell of Cleue. we haue done no more then our dutie, and what all true Knightes are sworne vnto. After they had stayed so long as them pleased, they rode to a Towne not farre distant thence, leauing the Knight to prouide buriall for his companions, and help for such as yet remained aliue, swearing him, neuer after to
be seene in any such bad action. At this Towne, they abode two or three dayes, to furnish themselues of what they wanted, as also to repaire their Armour, which was much brused. At length, the Damosell tooke Palladine aside fra∣ming her speeches to him in this manner. My Lord, seeing you finde your selfe in good estate of health, let me intreate ye to bid your freends adiew, that carely in the morning we may depart to the place whether my Lady commaun∣ded me to conduct ye, because you must be assistant to such a one, as shall héereafter doo very much for you. Damosell quoth Palladine, presently shall you see me bid them fare∣well, for great is my affection toward your mistresse ser∣uice, seeing she fauours the man so much she neuer sawe. Then turning to the three Princes, he sayd. My noble companions, you knowe my promise to this Damosell, to follow her whither she shall guide me: now is she impor∣tunate for my departure, wherefore let me intreate ye not to be offended, if earely in the morning I take my leaue, assuring you, that neuer shall I forget your manifold cour∣tesies. And let my solemne promise perswade yée, that these earnest affaires once dispatched, to you will I pre∣sently shape my course, meane while, commaund me as your freendly seruant. My Lord, aunswered Manteleo, albeit this seperation is gréeuous to vs, yet séeing it a cause concerning your ho∣nor, and may aduantage some distressed person, kéep your promise, right paciently shall we beare your absence, ho∣ping to see you shortly in England at the King your Fa∣thers Court, for thither shall we presently direct our iour∣ney. Palladine hauing intreated them, to doo his humble dutie to the King his Father, to the Quéene likewise, and his two Sisters, embraced them all thrée right louingly, each one with teares shewing their gréefe of departure. Like courteous farewell tooke they of the Damosell, who gaue them many thanks for their fréendly succour, and so each one entring their chamber for that night, Lycelio the
Squire to Palladine, prepared all things readie for his maister, who determined to be on horssebacke by breake of day. CHAP. XV. ¶ How Palladine went with the Damosell that came from the wise Orbiconte, and Manteleo, Durandell and Orli∣man trauayled toward England, and were seperated from each other by a strange aduenture. EArly in the morning, Palladine, Ly∣celio, and the Damosell set forward on their iourney, directing theyr course to the Realme of Ireland, lea∣uing the thrée Princes soundly slee∣ping, who the same day rod to∣ward England, without finding any aduenture on land or Sea worthie the rehearsall. After they had re∣freshed themselues thrée or foure daies at Douer▪ a Towne that stands on the Sea coast of England, they concluded to ride to London, where they heard the King as then kept his Court. When they had ridden eight or ten miles, they sawe comming foorth of a Forrest two poore men, all be∣smeared with blood, and verie sore wounded, wherevpon, they imagined that some théeues had thus vsed them, and therefore rode toward them to vnderstand the cause. Good Gentleman, cried one of them so wounded, for Gods sake helpe vs. Of whence are ye? sayd the Prince Man∣teleo. We are Sir, quoth the poore man, of Bohemia, tra∣uailing from the King of Englands Court home againe: and to his Maiestie were we sent with thrée young Lions, which two Knightes (trauailing through our Countrey) gaue vs charge to carie thither. And as we came through this wood, thrée théeues suddenly set vpon vs, who woun∣ded vs as you see, tooke the money from vs we receyued of
the King, and haue slaine two of our compaions. Manteleo remembring the poore men, how Palladine and he had sent them with the Lions: was meruailous sorie to see them so misused, demaunding if the theeues were on horssebacke or on oote. The poore men aunswered, that they were on foote, and could not (as yet) be gone verie farre. Without any further speeches, Manteleo and his Squire galloped one way, and Durandell with Orliman an other way, hoping to compasse the theeues, that they should not escape. One of them Mnteleo espied running, with the Sword still in his hand all bloodie: Stay villaine, quoth , fo thou canst not escape so easily. The theefe see∣ing he could not saue his life by flight, got him to a tree, which he could not climbe so soone, but the Prince gaue him a quittance for his life. As he fell downe to the ground, the bag of money tumbled out of his bosome, when the Squire alighting, & giuing it to his maister, re∣turned to the place where he left the poore men, saying. Hold heere my freends your money againe, and feare not him that tooke it from ye, for I haue made him sure for following ye any further: if the Knightes that were with me finde his fellowes, I doubt not but they will serue them as I haue done. Many thanks did they returne the Prince for this great gentlenesse, bringing him to their other com∣panions. The one of them hauing some life left in him, had setled himselfe against a tree, being the man that vnder∣tooke the cariage of the Lions. By many signes he shewed that he knew the Prince, as also how graciously the King had vsed him: but no hope of life was left in him, for his inward bleeding presently strangled him. The Prince willed the poore men goe to the next towne, where their wounds ought be bound vp, and they might prouide bu∣riall for the other two: meane while, he with his Squire rode to seeke Durandell and Orliman, who hauing at length slaine the other two theeues, had strayed so farre in such vnfrequented wayes, as they knew not how to re∣turne
to finde Manteleo, but tooke their iourney straight to Lndon, where they were in good hope to meete with him. The King Milanor hearing of their arriuall, entertay∣ned them very honorably, the like did the Queene and her daughters, to whome they rehearsed the Knightly deedes of Palladine and Manteleo▪ the manner how they were se∣perated, and how the theeues had vsed the poore men of Bohm: yet the Prince Manteleo, (as they thought) would not be long thence, because they parted so lately with him. Glad was the King of their tidings, especially Marcelin, whose life was prolonged by the onely hope of her loue. As for Manteleo, after he had long sought for Durandell and Orliman, yet neyther could finde them, or heare any tidings of them: he returned to the towne whither he sent the poore men, and there tooke order for the healing of their woundes. On the morrow as he rode toward London▪ he espied foure Knightes Combatting against two, wherevpon, he went to helpe the two Knightes, and in the end, compelled the foure to yeeld. The two Knightes were the Princes of Norgailes and  to wit, Landastines and Simprinell, the quarrell growing through chollerick speeches, and by the meanes of Manteleo pacified, each shaking hands to∣gether as louers and freends. Greatly meruailed Mante∣leo to meete Landastines and Simprinell there, considering at his departure he left them at the Court, highly fauou∣red of the King and his Nobillitie: but thus it fell out. After that Palladine and Manteleo were departed with the enchaunted Knight, the Prince Landastines fauoured of the King Milanor, began to affect the Princesse Florea: who seeing her Sister prouided of a louer, thought she would not leade Apes in Hell, and therefore entertayned Landastines as her Knight and seruant. He glorying in his honorable conquest, and by sollemne vowes assured her of his permanent constancie, craued licence of his faire mi∣stresse,
with Simprinell t goe view the pleasures of Eng∣▪ the goodly Cities and well fortetied Castels, promi∣sing to returne within a moneth againe. And as they were iournying backe to the Court, Manteleo found them as you haue heard, and now they all thrée are gone to  where, to make any ceremonious discourse of their entertainement, would hinder ye from matter of greater moment, and too long shall Palladine be left vn∣heard of. Let it then suffise ye, the King is sorie his Sonne is not returned, yet perswaded by Manteleo of his speedie presence: ioyning withall, that a King whose life was spent in affaires of highest consequence, would be desirous that his Sonne should imitate his vertues. As for Marce∣lina and Florea, such as haue felt the weight of affection, and know that absent louers make a heauen of their mee∣ting: such I thinke will heere allow, that freends so intire∣ly combined together, would hardly now fall out with one another. If then their silent passionate desires, sorted out time and place conuenient, where gracious loue might fa∣uour their endeuours, and quench the furie of so violent impressions: leaue them contented with their fortunate successe, Manteleo with his mistresse Marcelina, and Lan∣dastines with his faire Goddesse Florea, because we must now returne to the cheefe person in our Historie, and to the Damosell of the wise Orbiconte.
CHAP. XVI. ¶ How the Prince Palladine was conducted to the Realme of Dace, by the Damosell of Orbiconte, that brought him the Sheeld: and how he reskewed a Knight that was caried to prison. YOU remember, that the Damosel sent from the wise Orbiconte, cau∣sed Palladine to leaue Manteleo, Durandell of Cleue and Orliman of Flaunders, and hauing trauailed long in hir company, at length they entred the Realme of Dace, begui∣ling the time with many discour∣ses, as concerning her mistresse, where-among, he requested to know whome he should suc∣co. My Lord, quoth she, I hope this day your selfe shall see the man, a Knight of high and especiall desert, who will not forget your honorable paines, in deliuering him from cruell death, or perpetuall imprisonment. As they thus deuised togeather, the Damosell aligh∣ting from her Palfrey, hearing the voyce of men and neighing of horsses, she desired the Prince to shroud him∣selfe in secret, least he should be espied by any in the Castel. At length, they sawe foure Knightes and their Squires before the Castell, and in the midst of them a man, hauing his armes pinniond behind him, and his legs bound vnder his horsse belly. Behold Sir, said the Damosell, this is the man, of whome I told ye, being detained prisoner by these foure Knightes, now try your fortune in reskewing him: for if they get him once within the Castell, he shall be put to a most cruell death. Palladine immediatly mounted on Horssebacke, and drawing his Sword, without vsing any speeches to the Knightes, gaue one of them such a stroke on
the head, as he clet his scull to the verie téeth. The other three set on him all at once, and two of them he tumbled headlong from their horsses: the third would haue fled in∣to the Castell, but the Prince gaue him such a wound be∣twéene the head and the shoulders, as he fell downe dead to the ground. In this while, the Damosell and Lycelio vnbound the Knight, who taking a Sword and Shéeld be∣longing to one of the slaine, came to assist Palladine, least any other should come foorth of the Castell to resist him. When the Porter sawe the Prince enter the Castell, and with him the Knight, whome his maisters Sonnes were sent to kill, or bring thither prisoner, he ranne vp the staires into the Hall, crying: murther, murther, to armes Gentlemen, for we are all betrayed. At this fearefull cry, the Lord of the Castell being an auncient man, went to the window ouer the gate, and see∣ing his Sonne and seruants lying on the ground, eyther slaine, or in no better case: he fell in a swoune, and had not one of his Gentlemen beene by to helpe him, he neuer had recouered life againe. But being come to himselfe, he with seauen more were presently armed, and vnderstanding by the Porter, that but thrée men kept the Castell gate, he with his people came downe into the Court, and like a Lion enraged, smote at Palladine, saying: Uillaine, well mayst thou cursse thy comming hither to murther my Sonnes, both thou and the Traytor in thy company shall déerely abide it. Uery sharply did they beset the Prince, his Squire Lycelio and the Knight: yet in the end, they vanquished all but two, who submitted themselues and called for mercie: for which good fortune, the Knight hum∣bly thanked Palladine▪ who calling the Damosell into the Castell, because feare made her tary still without, made fast the gate, and went vp into a faire chamber, where they were vnarmed, and their wounds bound vp. And while prouision was making for their Supper, the Prince ntreated the Knight to te he occasion why he was
brought thither so bound and misused. Worthie Sir, aunswered the Knight, a true discourse shall I make of all my trouble, and thus it is. The Lord of this place, the auncient man whome you first ouercame in the Court, had thrée Sonnes, one where∣of I found about a moneth since in a little Warren néer to my house, which is distant hence not past a mile: and thi∣ther had he allured a yong mayden, the daughter to a poore tenaunt of mine, where villainously he sought to dishonor her. My selfe (by good hap) walking that way, beheld the poore virgin before him on her knees, he hauing his Sword drawne in his hand, threatning therewith to cut her throate, if she would not accomplish his vnlawfull desire. When I sawe this vncouth spectacle, and that the poore mayden was out of breath, with strugling and striuing to defend her chastitie, I came to him, and fréendly intreated him to forbeare that bad minde: but he immediatly, with∣out vsing any words better or worsse, left the mayden, and with his Sword began to assayle me, where doubt∣lesse I had béene murthered, had I not béene prouided for mine owne defence: yet did I make such good shift with him, as he was fayne to submit himselfe to my mercie, which I was contented to graunt him, vpon promise, that he would neuer offer the like vile attempt, not fitting the name of a Gentleman, who rather ought to defend the chastitie of virgins. But the forsworne wretch kept not his promise with me, for so soone as I had left him, he ran after the poore mayden againe, who thought to saue her selfe by flight to her Fathers house, and in despight that he was vanquished by me, or what else I knowe not, he stabd her to the heart with his dagger. I hearing her pitifull cry when the wound was giuen, ran after the murtherer, who turned againe valiantly to resist me: but I handled him in such sort, as he accompanyed the poore mayden in death. A Lackey that attended on this lubricious villayne, seeing his mayster had giuen his last farewell to the world im∣mediatly
caryed the newes to the Lord his Father, and his other two Brethren, whom you slew without the gate. The Brethren made sollemne promise to their Father, that they would take the most cruell vengeance on me as could be deuised, awayting opportunitie to execute theyr bloodie intents: and this day as I was walking in my gar∣den, hauing no other defence then as you sée me in my doublet, they layd violent hands on me, binding me on the horsse as you found me, and but for you, God knowes how they meant to haue vsed me. Sir Knight, quoth Palladine, thanke God for your deli∣uerance, and next to him the wise Lady Orbiconte, who sent this Damosell to conduct me hither for your succour. Ah my good Lord, aunswered the Knight, often haue I heard of that worthy woman, who (as I vnderstand) is Sister to the King of Aquilea, a maruailous louer of Knightes vertuous and valiant: I promise ye right soone will I go giue her thanks for this excéeding fauour. Palladine hearing him speake of Aquilea, remem∣bred the letters engrauen on his Sword, for which cause, he determined to trauaile thither, to finde the wise Orbi∣conte, that she might shew him the Lady, whereof in his sléepe she did aduertise him. Upon this resolution, they sate downe to meate, and after the Tables were with∣drawne, the Damosell thus spake. Sir Knight, you haue accomplished the promise you made me, for which I thanke ye, and will make report thereof to my Lady and mistresse, to whome I must with all dilligence returne, being assured of this Knightes safe∣tie: wherefore I humbly take my leaue, because I meane to be gone very earely in the morning. Palladine sorie she would be gone so soone, sayd: If it like ye faire Damosell, I will conduct ye on your way for your Ladyes sake, who beares me such affection without any desert. My Lord, quoth she, I hartely thanke ye, but my Lady commaunded me to returne alone, assuring me to escape on the way
without any disturbance: and albeit she had not so char∣ged me, yet should ye not by my meanes trauaile so soone, for your wounds are yet not to dally withall, but I will leaue an vnguent with your Squire, that shall right soone recouer them from danger. Seeing then (sayd Palladine) that my companie is needlesse, let me intreate ye to com∣mend me to your mistresse, to whome (while I liue) I shall remaine an affectionate seruant and Knight. And to the end you may remember me: and in requitall of the good Sheeld you brought me, weare this chayne of gold for my sake, and forget not my humble dutie to the Lady Or∣biconte. The Damosell receiuing the chayne, tooke her leaue of him and the Knight, and on the morrow rode to∣ward Aquilea, leauing Palladine with the Knight, who brought the Prince to his owne Castell, shewing him h place where the incontinent villaine murthered the yong virgin. CHAP. XVII. ¶ How the Prince Palladine trauailing toward Aquilea, was aduertised of the beautie of Brisalda, Duchesse of Bulgaria, for whose loue, Dardalon the proud mayntay∣ned Ioustes against all commers: and of the cruell Com∣bate betweene him and Palladine. PAlladine remained with the Knight till his wounds were healed, being entertayned meruaylous nobly, and setting on his iourney toward Aquilea: on the frontiers of Dace, he met an armed Knight, with a Squire bearing his Helmet and Launce, whome after he had salu∣ted, he requested to knowe whether he trauailed. I go Sir (answered the Knight) to Bulgaria, to make proofe of my fortune against a strong and puissant
champion, who maintaineth the Ioust against all that come: for the loue of the Duchesse Brisalda, estéemed the fairst Princesse in the world, being yet scant seuenteene yéeres of age. I like well his attempt, said Palladine, what∣soeuer he be: but knowe ye not how he is called? Darda∣lon the prowd, men name him (quoth the Knight) and fitly doth that surname agrée with him, for he is one of the most vaineglorious men that euer was heard of, beside, excée∣ding in crueltie to Knightes that deale with him, for if he vanquish any one, he neuer pardons him, no, though he yéeld himselfe to his mercie. Beleeue me, said Palladine, small commendation gets he thereby, being rather estee∣med a coward, then valiant: for he vseth such crueltie, to terrify those as shall afterward deale with him. But the enterprises of Tourneys for the loue of Ladyes, should not extend to such extremitie, but rather for honor and fame onely: yea, though to a mortall enemy, mercy should be giuen him when he yéeldeth himselfe. The brute beasts shew greater humanitie, as we may reade in examples, of Lyons, Beares, Dogs, and diuers other, who ceasse from rage and furie on a yéelding pray. It is necessarie then, answered the Knight, that such men should haue such mea∣sure serued them, and no greater mercie ought they to haue, then themselues tofore haue shewed to other: as for my selfe, if fortune fauour me against him, he shall find as little pittie as he hath giuen. By my Sword (quoth the Prince) I so desire to see that cruell Knight, as I will beare ye companie, so you please to accept thereof: for perhaps the great villaine is some Deuill, and then it is necessarie he should be well coniured. Great honor and pleasure, quoth the Knight, shall you héerein doo me, for I desire no∣thing more then companie. So leauing the marches of Dace, they tooke Shipping on Danubium, and coasting Valachia, entred Bulgaria, landing at the Citie of Varr, where Dardalon kept his Iousts and Triumphs. But the Duchesse Brisalda tooke small pleasure in his labours, for as
he was a man of huge and monstrous stature, so was he mishapen, and of ougly countenance, yet by his prowesse he imagined to gaine her loue: wherein he was greatly de∣ceiued, albeit the feare of his mightie kinred, chéefely of a Giant that was his Cousin, made the poore Lady giue him good looks, because by rigour he held the whole countrey in awe. Palladine and the Knight being come on shore, went presently to the place where the Ioustes were kept  they entred the throng, they sawe that Dardalon had euen then ouercome a Knight, who knéeling on his knees, cryed: I confesse my selfe vanquished, I yeeld, I yeeld. But Dar∣dalon feigning he heard him not, nor the Princesse who called to saue his life, because the Knight was néere allyed to her: smote his head from his shoulders, shewing it in great brauerie to the Duchesse. Palladine séeing the monstrous crueltie of this huge villaine, could stay no longer, but stepping to him, sayd. Dardalon, I neuer saw thée before this instant, when I beheld thée to shew horrible crueltie, putting the Knight to death that yeelded himselfe vanquished: had it béene but for the Ladyes sake.  called to thée to saue his life, me thinks of dutie thou shouldest haue spared him, and were it not I sée thée wounded, thou shouldest perceiue I dare iustify my words. Dardalon beholding Palladine without his helmet, and so yong in yéeres, scoffingly thus aunswe∣red. Alas good Gentleman, didst thou neuer sée me before? I thinke thou wilt say thou séest me too soone: as for any wound I haue, it cannot hinder me from correcting such a saucy companion. Without any more words they moun∣ted on horssebacke, and Dardalon taking a verie strong Launce, thought to giue the Prince an vnhappy welcome: but he sate more sure then he expected, and but that him∣selfe caught hold by his horsse mayne, he had béene sent to fetch an errand on the ground. A long and dangerous Combate was fought betwéene them, the Prince many
times in danger, but worthely escaping, and in the end so wearied his monstrous enemie, as he got him downe vpon his backe. Then taking off his helmet, looked to the Du∣chesse Brisalda, if she would haue his life preserued, but sée∣ing that neither she or any of the Ladyes made signe for it, he tooke off his head, to the great ioy of all the standers by: except such as were allyed to Dardalon, who presently drew their weapons to reuenge his death, but other Knightes stept in to assist the Prince, so that not one of them escaped aliue, yet Palladine and his company recey∣ued no wounds of danger. The Duchesse noting the va∣liant prowesse of a Knight so yong and louely, would faine knowe of whence he was, wherefore causing the Ioustes to end for that day, she sent to intreate him come lodge in her Pallace, where her Chirurgions should haue care of his wounds. Which courteous offer the Prince accepted, not so much for the daunger of his hurts, as for his desire to be fauoured of the Duchesse, whome he imagined▪ the fairest that euer he sawe. Then was he conducted by two Gentlemen into one of the seemeliest Chambers in the Pallace, where he was vnarmed, and his wounds visited by the Chirurgions attending on the Duchesse, who sent him a faire night mantle of blew Sattin, embroidered with gold, and furred with Martins, for which, most hum∣bly he thanked her, carying good opinion to enioy her loue, so he could compasse the meane to speake with her. For he imagined this to be the Lady, or whome the wise Orbi∣conte had foretold him, and for whose loue he should passe many dangers, as now he had done against the prowde Dardalon?
CHAP. XVIII. ¶ How the Duchesse Brisalda came to see Palladine, what speeches they had together: and how he slew the Gian Brandidoll, Cousin to Dardalon the prowde. BRisalda the yong beautifull Du∣chesse, to whom the inueigling God had giuen a liuely attaint of loue to the Prince Palladine, determi∣ned to go see him in his chamber, to vnderstand of his health, and in such sort to perswade him, as he should still remaine in her Court. So clothing her selfe in most sump∣tuous garments, and being attended on by her wayting Ladyes, she went to the Princes lodging: and after two or three gracious courtesies passed betwéene them, she said, Sir Knight, right welcome are ye to our Court, com∣maund me, or any thing else héere to your liking: for so much doo I account my selfe indebted to you, hauing slayne the cruell and proud Dardalon, as while I liue, I shall ne∣uer returne sufficient recompence. The Prince falling on his knée, and killing her faire white hand, thus answered. If I haue done any thing (Madame) that contents you, I am very glad thereof, thanking the God of heauen that fauoured me in the attempt, and if in ought else I can doo ye any seruice, till the latest houre of death will I willing∣ly imploy my selfe. Brisalda, who was (as it were) raui∣shed with contemplating his beautie, tooke him by the hand, and causing him to arise, sayd: With all my heart (gentle Sir) I thanke ye, and accept your offer so freendly made: for I greatly doubt ere long I shall neede your as∣sistance, against the Giant Brandidoll▪ Cousin to him whome you haue slaine, for no sooner shall he heare of his
death, but hither will he come, and accuse me as authour thereof, because Dardalon being enamoured of me, ordey∣ned this Tourney, thinking to espouse me either by loue or force. In this did Brandidoll promise his ayd, and diuers other of their faction as bad as they, many of them being now slayne, which so contents me, as nothing can do more. And were I as well rid of cruell Brandidoll, hencefoorth should I liue in peace, without feare or suspition of any one: for when the mightie enemies are quailed, the mea∣ner dare not presume to stirre. Madame, quoth Palladine, perswade your selfe in this, that in respect of your innocencie, God will not suffer you to take any wrong, but that your enemies shall worke their owne confusion. Longer they would haue conti∣nued in talke, but that the Gentleman Ussher gaue war∣ning of dinner: wherefore the Duchesse went and sate downe at the Table, Palladine sitting iust opposite to her, who tooke so great pleasure in hearing him speake, as she had no mind to eate or drinke. All which Palladine heed∣fully noted, and God knowes how well it liked him, for if the one were passionate in loue, you may think ye other was in the same predicament. Oftentimes would they throwe such wounding lookes on each other, as neyther had power to speake a word: but to couer this alteration, the Prince feigned to listen to the consort of musique, which plaied all dinner time maruellous swéetly. The Tables with∣drawne, she tooke him by the hand, and caused him to sit downe in a chaire by her, while many yong Lords and La∣dyes daunced after that Countrey manner. You may not daunce Sir, quoth she, because our Chirurgions doo thinke it hurtfull for your woundes: beside, rest is verie néedfull for you, in respect of the rough combate you had with Dardalon, whome to your great honor you worthely conquered. For any thing I haue done, swéete Madame (quoth he) let the credit thereof remaine to your selfe: and thinke me as readie to doo you seruice, as he that is most
forward among your seruants, of which number I desire ye to accept me as one. Unsemely were it good Knight, quoth she, to account of you as my seruāt, but if you please to stay in this Cuntry, you shall perceiue by my endeuours heereafter, that I both honor and reuerence such men as you are. As she would haue proceeded further, her Gouer∣nesse came, and said, it was time she should resort to her Chamber: wherevpon they parted, not without sufficient shewes on either side, that betweene them was a sympa∣thie of affection. What seuerall afflictions they endured in absence, let them imagine, who haue no comfort but in the presence of their fauourite. As for the Duchesse, she on the morrow sent the Prince a rich Diamond by one of her Ladies, with this message, yt it was her determined iew∣ell to the best combatant, and therefore his due, as hauing deserued it beyond all other. Palladine receiued it verie thankefully, returning this aunswere by the Lady, that in requitall of that gentle gift, he would that day enter the Listes, and against all commers maintaine the beautie of the Duchesse. As for his wounds, Lycelio had annointed them with the precious vnguent, which the Damosell brought from the wise Orbiconte, so that they were verie soundly healed. For ioy of this aunswere, the Duchesse caused a goodly Scaffold to be erected, whereon, she and her Ladies would stand to see the Iousts: and at each end of the Listes, were sumptuous Trophees curiously placed, decked with diuers impreses and mots of loue, in artifi∣ciall Tables hanging thereon. While Palladine and the other Lords were arming thselues, he was aduertised of an other Knight new entred the féeld, who was the Prince Alian of Iela, a yong, braue and gallant Knight at armes, one that was highly affected to the Duchesse Brisalda. So soone as he was entred the Listes, he was encoun∣tred by a Moore Knight vnknowne, who was dismounted at the first course: the like successe had eight or ten more,
which Palladine perceiuing, he gaue his horsse the spurres against this lustie champion, lifting him halfe a foote in height from his Saddle. And as they were taking new Launces for the second race, there entred a mightie man, armed cap a pe, who furiously said, Where is the villaine that slew my Cousin Dardalon? by the great God, this day will I giue his flesh to the dogs, and hers likewise that was the cause therof, pointing to the yong Duchesse Brisalda. And because he had heard that a yong Knight did his kinseman to death, he ranne in a rage on the Prince Alfian of Ireland, giuing him such a stroke on the head with his great Semitarie, as the gentle Alfian fell beside his horsse. Palladine thinking this to be Brandidoll, and séeing him readie to smite off the Princes head, ranne to him, saying: It is with me that thou must deale, I slew thy Cousin Dardalon, as his villainie and crueltie well deserued. Brandidoll without making any aunswere, left the Prince of Ireland, and ioyned with Palladine, when continued be∣twéene them a long and terrible combate. Each one verily expected Palladines death, such was the great oddes be∣twéene him and his enemie: but so happily it fell out in the ende, that Brandidoll by treading on the trunchion of a Launce, fell downe backward, when the Prince taking his aduantage, got sure hold of him, and smote off his head. For ioy of this victorie, the Trompets chéerefully sounded, and the Duchesse discending from the Scaffold, commaunded the Ioustes to ceasse for that day, and com∣ming to the Prince, gaue him many thanks, in that he had deliuered her from two such cruell enemies, who sought the subuersion and spoile of her honor. With meruailous signes of ioy they returned to the Pallace, where Palladine was immediatly brought to his chamber, and such wounds as he had receiued in fight, were dilligently regarded by the Duchesse Chirurgions. Each day would she duly come to sée him, and vnderstanding that he was Sonne to th
King of England, practised how to vnite her selfe with him in marriage. And as an earnest of her perfect loue, she per∣mitted him to gather that daintie flower, which many had with long pursuite laboured for: he not refusing so braue a conquest, because he verily perswaded himselfe, that Bri∣sald was the Lady, of whome the wise Orbiconte had told him: wherefore during the space of sixe wéekes, he continued there in this heauen of delight, till fortune, iealous of so mutuall agreement, separated them, as you shall presently heare. CHAP. XIX. ¶How a strange aduenture happened in the Citie of Varne, by the ending whereof, the Prince Palladine de∣termined to depart from the Duchesse Brisalda. HEere must I intreate ye to re∣member the Princes of Norgalles and Scots, Landastines and Simpri∣nell, whome we left in the King of Englands Court, Landastines being enamoured on the Princesse Flo∣rea, Sister to Palladine, as Mante∣leo was of his faire Marcelina. Simprinell loth to part them that agréed so well, left his companion in England, trauailing to the King of Norgalles Court, where he certified his Maie∣stie of the good estate of his Sonne Landastines. Which newes were so welcome to the King, as he intreated Sim∣prinell to abide in his Court, that he might shew him the pleasures of his Realme: whereto the yong Prince right willingly condiscended, as one desirous to behold nouel∣ties. But rather the chéefest cause was, his affection to the faire Princesse Belanicia, daughter to the King of Nor∣galles, with whose beawtie he was meruailously enthral∣led,
and not daring to acquaint her with his loue, he fell in∣to a dangerous sicknes, to the great gréef of the King, who loued him as he had béene his owne Sonne. In the end, the Phisitions hauing declared to Simprinell, how peril∣lous his case stood by concealing his gréefe, made him thus resolued, that before he died, he would make knowne to the Princesse Belanicia (who oftentimes came her selfe to visit him, and sent him many comfortable meates in his sicknesse) the originall cause of his extremitie. And one time among other, the Lady that was most vsually sent by the Princesse, and in whome she reposed greatest confi∣dence, desired him to bewray from whence his sicknesse grew, promising withall, that she would labour to her vt∣termost, to procure his health. The yong Prince very modest and bashfull, taking the Lady by the hand, thus aunswered. Faire freend, I thanke ye for your readie good will in séeking my helpe, which is a matter not impossible to bee done: but as for the cause of my languishing disease, I will not acquaint ye therewith, vnlesse ye sweare to keepe the same secret, not reuealing it to any one but such as I shall name. Assure your selfe thereof, said the Lady, by the faith of a virgin. Know then sweete Lady, quoth Simprinell, that my extreame sicknesse happened by no other cause, then the loue and affection I beare to your mistresse: and feare to offend her or the King, hath by silence of my loue brought me to this daunger. Why my Lord? quoth she, you that are of so high and honorable discent, can ye offend my Lady by louing her? or you that are as good as she, doo not deserue loue for loue? she is the child of a King, and so are you, beside, she is humble and gracious as any Prin∣cesse liuing, then feare not to let her knowe your daunger. Alas Madame, quoth he, neuer shall I dare to speake to her: but may it please you to solicite my cause, yet with carefull héed of her dislike, I shall confesse my life preser∣ued by you. And so much will I doo for ye my Lord, quoth
she, without giuing her any occasion of offence: but rather shall I doo it in such sort, as by a speedie answere you shall perceiue her mind. Go then good madame, said the Prince, and boldly may ye assure her, that my life or death is in her hand. So went the Lady to her mistresse, to whome she imparted what you haue heard, wherewith she was so well pleased, as she presently sent to him againe this aun∣swere, that she entertained his loue with the like, and that as he would witnesse his affection towards her, he should practise what spéed he could deuise for his health. These words breathed such life into the Prince, as within few dayes he was perfectly recouered, when after many amorous parlees with Belanicia, she to make a triall how his loue was grounded, hauing heard report of the faire Duchesse Brisalda: desired him to trauell to Varne in Bulgaria, carying with him her liuely counterfeit, and there to maintaine against all Knightes whatsoeuer, that she was fairer then the Duchesse Brisalda, on which condition, she would accept him as her Knight and loyall seruant. Simprinell glad to be so commaunded, the next day hee departed with his foure Squires, and comming to Varne, where the Duchesse remained, heard what braue imploy∣ment was there in Chiualrie: wherefore comming to the accustomed place of the Tourney, on a faire Piller he pla∣ced his Ladyes picture, saying, he would maintaine a∣gainst all commers, that his mistresse excéeded the Du∣chesse Brisalda in beautie. The Knightes attendant on the Duchesse, were amazed héereat, preparing themselues to defend her cause: but Simprinell willed them first to bring the Duchesse counterfeit, and it to be placed by his Ladies, and the conquerour should carie them both with him. Right soone was the Duchesse figure set on the Piller, and Simprinell this first day dismounted twelue Knights: Palladine being ridden abroade on hunting, which made Brisalda despaire of her fortune, fearing the strange cham∣pion would depart vnconquered.
This dayes good successe, emboldened Simprinell to try the second, when Palladine entring the Listes among the other Knightes, whome one by one he saw brauely vnhor∣sed, he came to Simprinell with these spéeches. In sooth (Sir Knight) I commend your enterprise, beeing a cause that maketh many forward in Armes: but as for the Lady, whome you extoll beyond my Lady the Duchesse héer present, I say and will auerre the contrary, against you and all other till the houre of death. If affecti∣on hath blinded your eyes, I soone shall alter that opinion, when your owne selfe shall confesse, that your Lady is no way to be compared with mine. I imagine by your words Sir, answered Simprinell▪ that you will defend your mistresse by the toong onely: but let vs goe to the matter roundly, for you are not yet so good an Oratour, as to perswade me from a resolued assu∣rance. You thinke then, quoth Palladine, that I thinke to e∣scape the Combate by my words. Not so, for you shall sée me effectually defend the honor of her beautie who is my mistresse. So giuing the spurres to their horsses, they en∣countred with such violence, as Palladine lost his stirrops, but Simprinell was cast foorth of his saddle to the great ioy of the Duchesse and her freends, that his presumptuous ar∣rogancie was so worthely checked. Afterward they fell to the Combate with the Sword, and long they fought without any aduantage, till Palla∣dine by tripping his enemie, got him downe, and himselfe vpon him, when holding his Sword ouer him, he sayd: Now must thou confesse the Duchesse Brisalda, to be a Lady farre excelling thine in beautie, elfe art thou not like to sée her again. Seeing fortune hath throwne me into this extremitie, said Simprinell, I confesse my selfe van∣quished: but to say that my mistresse is inferiour to thine, I will not though I die therefore, nor am I otherwise bound by my owne conditions, then to leaue her portrait
to the will of the conquerour. The Iudges of the féeld gaue sentence accordingly, wherevpon Palladine left Simprinell, and went to place the Duchesse counterfeit aboue Belani∣cia, albeit he perceiued her figure much more beautifull: by which conceit he gathered, that this was she of whome the wise Orbiconte told him, wherefore he onely minded Bela∣nicia, purposing right soone to forsake the Duchesse. As he was vnarming in his chamber, he began to thinke how he might leaue Brisalda, and what excuse would serue for his departure: yet when he considered his good enter∣tainement, and what especiall fauour he had receiued at her hands, he altered his mind, reputing the words of Or∣biconte for méere illusions. And as he continued in this déepe musing, he thought he heard one whisper in his eare, saying: It is not heere Palladine that thou must abide, wherefore follow the good fortune that is promised thée. Héerevpon he concluded, what euer happened, he would depart on the morrow, and thereof that night he meant to aduertise the Duchesse, to whome he went right soone afterward. CHAP. XX. ¶ How Palladine aduertised the Duchesse of his departure, and how trauailing to the Realme of Norgalles, he had a dangerous Combate with Simprinell, whome he knew afterward. SUch were yt troublesome thoughts of Palladine, in hastening his depar∣ture toward Belanicia, as without any longer stay he came to the Du∣chesse, who séeing him looke so sad, desired to knowe the cause thereof. In sooth Madame, quoth he, I can not forget the strange Knight that I Iousted withall this day: right
sorie I am that I demaunded not his name: for I imagin I haue sometime seene him in England. If that be all, sayd the Duchesse, we will send for the Knight hither: but her sending was in vaine, for he departed immediatly after the Combate. When Palladine sawe no excuses would serue, but she would néedes presse him with earnest request of his penstuenesse, he said. Let it not dislike ye good Madame, if I haue intended any thing for your honor and mine owne, but rather con∣ceiue thereof as it deserueth. Full well you knowe faire mistresse, that hardly can we continue our loue together, enioying the benefite yt good hap affoords vs, without iea∣lous suspition of your Lords and Ladyes: and affection maketh amorous fréends oftentimes forgetfull of them∣selues, so that béeing subiect to the iudgement of many, they shall hardly escape without scandalous and peremp∣torie spéeches. And nothing (sweet Madame) is more hurt∣full to our honors, especially yours, in respect of your great∣nesse and authoritie: to preuent which danger, and that héereafter we may stand out of the reach of wounding toongs, I meane to trauaile to England to the King my Father, whome I wil acquaint with the intended mariage betwéene vs, and his good will obtained, right soone shall I returne to haue it accomplished. In the meane while, you may conferre thereon with the Lords of your Councell, who (I thinke) will not dislike thereof, when they vnder∣stand my birth and parentage, so shall our credits be safely defended, and what hath past alreadie, be sufficiently re∣compenced. When Brisalda heard these spéeches, her heart was so swollen with gréefe, as she was not able to make any aun∣swere: whereat he could not but meruaile, considering his words tended to great reason: yet with such zealous per∣swasions he still laboured her, making faithfull promise of his spéedie returne, as in the end he obtained her consent, albeit God knowes verie vnwillingly. Giuing her then an
amorous conge, he tooke two bracelets from his armes, verie richly embellished with pearle and stone, and presen∣ted them to the Duchesse, saying. On the same day I came to your Court, swéete Madame, you gaue me a iewell, which I will kéepe for your sake while I liue: that you may likewise remember me, I beséech ye to weare these bracelets, which were giuen me by my mother on the day I was Knighted. Alas my Lord, quoth she, I doubt you haue left me such a remembrance, as except you spéedily returne againe, will beare me company to my latest home. Yet will I kéepe one of the bracelets for your sake, and when you come againe, I will haue the other. So putting the bracelet on her arme, she vowed neuer to take it off, vntill she sawe her Knight returned. With many kind em∣bracings, and deuoute kisses, he returned to his lodging, and the Duchesse to her chamber, where calling her trustie maiden to her, who was a captiue Moore, and one not a little in her fauour, being acquainted with all that had passed betweene the Prince and her, with many bitter sighes and teares, she telles the Moore the summe of her greefe. The Moore perswaded her, that the Prince heerein had done aduisedly, for safetie of both their honors, if their loue (as greatly she doubted) had sorted to effect: for se∣crecie must be the meane to couer such matters, which she would so substancially bring to passe, as none but them∣selues should be acquainted therewith. With much adóo the Duchesse was pacified, and on the morrow when Pal∣ladine departed, she sent him a pursse of gold to spend in his trauaile, causing her Lords to accompanie him two or thrée miles on his way: and so (though loth) these louers are seperated, the Duchesse abiding olitarie in her Pal∣lace, and Palladine (hauing bidden the Lords adiew) is iourneying in haste toward Norgalles. He had not ridden halfe part of the day, but a Knight with thrée Squires gallopped after him, crying: Stay Sir Knight, for héere commes one that must speake with thée.
Palladine presently turning his horsse, tooke his Launce from his Squire, thus aunswering. What is he that would speake with me? let him kéepe out at the length of my Launce, till I haue better know∣ledge of him, why he should come to seeke me in such haste. Because thou wouldest so faine knowe me, aunswered the Knight, thou shalt vnderstand, that I am the man thou didst vanquish yesterday, more by fortune then prowesse: therefore I would now trie againe, how well I can re∣uenge my former foyle. So fetching their carire, they en∣countred together so brauely, as they were both dismoun∣ted, and while their Squires laboured to catch their horsses that ran about the féeld, they fell to the combate with the Sword, and wounded each other very dange∣rously, till in the end Palladine got the aduantage: and as he made proffer to smite off his enemies head, he knew him to be Simprinell, Sonne to the King of Scots. Soone was all the former vnkindnesse pacified, and each embra∣ced other verie louingly, reproouing themselues of great wrong to fréendship, yet excusing the same by ignorance. When their Squires sawe how they were wounded, one of them thus spake. In this wood (my Lords) is a faire Abbey, and there remaineth one verie skilfull in Chirur∣gerie: so please ye to goe thither, the Abbot will entertaine ye gently, because he is brother to a worthie Gentleman, who spent his time as a Knight errant, and for his sake he loueth all strange Knightes whatsoeuer. They not misliking this councell, went presently to the Abbey, where the Abbot welcommed them as beseemed their estates: and while their Supper was prouiding, the skilfull man hauing visited their woundes, they walked into the faire Orchards and Gardens, recounting to each other their seuerall fortunes, since they were together in the Court of England. Simprinell discoursed his loue to Belanicia of Norgalles, and the cause of his comming to the Citie of Varne: which when Palladine heard, he determi∣ned
not only to forget his affection to Belanicia, but also to assist his freend to his vttermost in obtaining her loue, saying. My noble fréend, I knowe what manner of disease loue is, if one haue not receiued the swéetes thereof, albeit, when I sawe you in England, I had no knowledge at all therein: wherefore, if I shall accompanie you to Norgalles, such good speeches will I vse of you to your Lady, as she shall not be offended for not bringing her portrait againe, or that of the Duchesse which she sent ye for. Simprinell thanked the Prince for his offer, but he was farre otherwise addicted, saying: he had promised his Lady a further iourney for her loue, wherein he would not haue any companie. With this answere was Palladine well contented, di∣recting his course another way: so hauing stayed two daies at the Abbey, and either of them being able to beare Armour, he left Simprinell there, and courteously taking his leaue of the Abbot, set on whither fate and fortune would guide him. And after he had ridden fiue or sixe dayes, he met a horsseman, with whome, falling in talke, he vnderstood, that the great Prince Caesar of Roome, had at Paris enter∣prised a noble Tournament, for the loue of the faire Rosa∣monde of Fraunce, a Princesse estéemed incomparable in beautie. And I (quoth the Courrier) am sent to the King of Norgalles Court, who hath a faire Daughter named Be∣lanicia, before whome, I must reueale my message, and declare the Prince Caesars challenge, in presence of all the Kings Knightes. Afterward, I must trauaile to Bulgaria, and in the Court of the Duchesse Brisalda, a Lady likewise renowmed for her beautie, I must make knowne of this famous Tournament. Palladine glad to heare the Duchesse so commended, and that now he had the meanes to see the Princesse Bela∣nicia, accompanied the messenger to Norgalles, and by the
way, méeting Belanicia riding in her Litter abroade for her recreation, with diuers Knightes that attended on her, Palladine was prouoked to Ioust with them, by a con∣temptuous challenge of one of her Knightes. But such was their ill lucke, as all her champions were dismoun∣ted, till her brother Landastines tooke the cause in hand, ha∣uing left the English Court to come sée the King his father: and after they had broken many Launces, not being able to preuaile against each other, they ended the sport, and Landastines knowing Palladine, tooke him with him to the Court, where he was welcommed honorably by the King, as also the faire Belanicia his daughter. CHAP. XXI. ¶ How Simprinell being healed of his wounds, returned to Varne, where he vanquished the Prince Alfian of Ireland, and brought away the portrait of Brisalda. WHen Simprinell felt himselfe well recouered, and remembred, how he had not onely failed in winning the portrait of the Duchesse, but in the attempt had lost ye figure of his mi∣stresse Belanicia: he determined not to goe to Norgalles, vnlesse he could accomplish his Ladye? commaunde∣ment. Wherefore taking his leaue of the Abbot, he rode backe againe to Varne, and comming to the place of triumphes, found the Duchesse with her Ladyes placed on the Scaffolds, and the Prince Alfian of Ireland the Champion for Brisalda, who preuayled woor∣thely against all that encountred with him. Simprinell looking on his Ladyes picture, and séeing it embased vnder the Duchesse, had such a violent impression strooke him to the harte, as he intended to recouer her honor againe, or
else to leaue his life in the feeld. And in this resolution he encountred the Irish Prince, passing two or three courses brauely, the shiuers of their Launces flying vp into the aire: but at the third attaint, he met Alfian so roughly, as both horsse and man were sent to the ground. When Alfian had recouered his feete, hee drew his Sword, and comming to Simprinell▪ who by this time was alighted, and prepared for him: when they began a fierce and cruell combate, whereof Simprinell in the end had the honor. Then comming to the Duchesse, with cour∣teous reuerence he demaunded of her, if she would permit him to carie thence the portraites: whereto she made no answere, but in a great anger strong from the Scaffold, because her champion had defended her cause no better. Heereupon, the Iudges as the equitie of the case required, deliuered the portraites to Simprinell, which he giue∣ing to his Squires, mounted on horssebacke, returning presently backe to the Abbey, not alittle glad of his high good fortune. At the Abbey he stayed thrée or foure dayes, to heale such woundes as he tooke in the last combate, and afterward departed toward Norgalles, where he arriued without any aduenture by the way to hinder him. If he were welcome to the Lords and Ladies, I referre to your opinions, and how the Princesse Belanicia liked thereof, when she sawe her Knight returned with the Duchesse counterfeit, let Ladyes desirous of especiall account, ima∣gine her content: but in requitall of his great paines, so confidently did she loue him afterward, as by imparting the same to her brother Landastines, who highly fauoured his freend. Simprinell: the King was made acquainted therewith, and Ambassadours sent to the King of Scots, such good liking thereof beeing found betweene them both, as the mariage was consumated, and long loue requited with desired recompence. Afterward, Simprinell imparted to Landastines, how at first he was foyled by the Prince Palladine, and in his
absence had woon his Ladyes credit againe: which Landa∣stines tooke so vnkindly, as they concluded to trauaile to Paris, whither the English Prince was gone before, to re∣concile this wrong to former amitie. And thither are ridden Landastines and Simprinell, to the great gréefe of the King and Quéene, but chéefely of Belanicia, so soone to forgoe her Lord and husband. Palladine entised with the report of this braue Tour∣nament, held at Paris by the Prince Caesar for faire Rosa∣monde of Fraunce, would néedes be séene in those worthie exploites: and landing at Callis (loth to be knowne in England, least the King his Father should hinder his in∣tended iourney,) he met with the Duke of Gaule, accom∣panyed with twentie Knightes brauely mounted, he like∣wise riding to the Prince Caesars Tourney, by the com∣maundement of the faire Agricia of Naples, whome he ho∣nored as his Lady and mistresse. After they had saluted each other, Palladine presently knew the Duke, remembring he had séene him in his Fa∣thers Court: yet would not he make any shew thereof, because he was so slenderly accompanyed, hauing no one with him but his Squire Lycelio, and therefore was con∣tent to be esteemed but as a poore Knight errant. The Duke merily demaunded of Palladine, whether he trauailed, and about what affaires. My Lord, quoth the Prince, my iourney is to Paris, and no other busines haue I there, then to make one in the famous Tournament, ordained by the Prince Caesar of Roome for loue of the faire Rosamonde of Fraunce. But will you, quoth the Duke, aduenture your selfe against a Prince so magnanimous? In sooth (aunswered Palladine) I will try my fortune both against him and o∣ther, if I may. Alas, said the Duke scoffingly, your courage excéedes your abilitie, if you desire the combate, as you professe: I would aduise ye not to meddle with Caesar, for if ye doo,
you will hardly deale with any other afterward. Let that fall out, quoth Palladine, as my fatall Starres haue ap∣pointed: if I be vanquished, I must put it vp with pa∣tience: for I am as all men are, subiect to fortune. You are then, said the Duke, the Knight of fortune, and she your mistresse: yet can I scant thinke it, vnlesse that is she which is painted in your Shéeld. Palladine seeing the Duke so scorne him, angerly aun∣swered. In truth my Lord, your lips hang in your light, in ta∣king the God of loue to be fortune. I see I am deceiued, quoth the Duke, for Cupid hath made you a louing Knight: by the faith I beare to Chi∣ualrie, me thinks amorous conceites doo ill agrée with so yong a countenance. I scant thinke, said Palladine, that your elder countenance can disgrace mine so yong. Be not angrie Gentleman, quoth the Duke, the tune is dan∣gerous for diseases: and if you chase your selfe too much, you may chance to be beguiled of all your wit. If I happen héereafter, said Palladine▪ either to borrow some wit of you, or to lend you more then you seeme to haue, thinke a yong man as able as he that lookes more auncient: and for your scoffing floutes, the next time I meete with yee, you and I will try who is the better man. So taking a Scarffe from about his arme, he threw it to the Duke, saying: In witnesse of my words, there is my gadge, which I will fetch againe before I will forfeit it, and pay you vsurie inough for your taunting speeches. With which words he galloped an other way, the Duke in great laughter bidding him adiew: but Palladine rode on verie paciently, minding to be reuenged on the Duke when he came to Paris. But it fell out contrarie to his expectation, for the Duke, and all his Knightes riding toward Paris▪ were taken by two cruell Outlawes, that kept a strong Castell, they beeing named Brulanfutior, and Frucidant, who likewise kept the Prince Lewes of Fraunce prisoner,
because Brulanfurior sought to marie with his Sister Ro∣samonde: and béeing denyed, as vnworthie so faire a Princesse, hée and his Brother left the Court, alluring with them the yong Prince Lewes▪ and there led a most hatefull and despised life, emprisoning all the Knightes they could get, and stealing all necessaries from the poore countreymen. By this Castell Palladine chaunced to ride, when he saw the seruants to these cruel men, take violently a great heard of Sheepe from two poore Shepheards, which he got them againe by killing the theeues: and afterward vnder∣standing the thraldome of Prince Lewes, disguised in Shepheards habits, he and Lycelio entred the Castell, where by pollicie they slew Brulanfurior and Frucidant, with all the villaines that attended on them. Then sear∣ching the Prisons, they found the Prince Lewes, the Dukes of Sauoy, Gaule, and Guienne, the Countie of Champaigne, and many other great Lords prisoners there: to whome he gaue libertie, and so the Duke of Gaule con∣fessing his former folly, was freendly pardoned by the Prince Palladine, and there stayed three or foure dayes in companie with the Princes, while Lycelio annointed his woundes with the precious vnguent, so that they were sound and perfectly healed.
CHAP. XXII. ¶ How the Princes Palladine, and Lewes of Fraunce, arriued at Paris, and of the noble deedes of armes, accompli∣shed by the Prince Caesar in the Ioustes, which he main∣tained for the loue of faire Rosamonde of Fraunce. QUietly remained the Princes in the Castell of Brulanfurior and be∣guiling the time with repetition of many Knightly aduentures, till féeling themselues in good plight to trauaile, and knowing the day was now at hand, when ye Prince Caesar would begin his enterprise for faire Rosamonde: when Lewes committing the Castell to the custodie of a trustie Gentle∣man, and what prisoners remained, to stay the censure of the King his Father, with Palladine he set forward to Paris. Loth was the English Prince to be knowne (as yet) to the King of Fraunce vntill he had tried his fortune against Caesar of Roome: wherefore he intreated Prince Lewes and the rest to conceale his name: and for I would not be knowne (quoth Palladine) by my Shéeld, I beséech ye good freend Lewes to lend me yours, which I will imploy with such chiualrie, as you shal not be dishonored therby. Prince Lewes graunted Palladines request, and comming to Lore where the King then lay, no little ioy was made for the re∣turne of the yong Prince. And when the King demaunded for the Knight that slew Brulanfurior and Frucidant, the Prince aunswered that he was gone to Paris▪ but would not be knowne till he had Iosted with the Prince Caesar. On the morrow the Tournament began, and the Knightes entring the Lystes, the King and all the estates
placed to regard the sports: Prince Caesar verie brauely came foorth of his Tent, and the first that made offer to runne with him, was the Duke of Gaule, who bare in his Sheeld for his deuise, a Knight fighting with a Lion. Whereby was figured, the noble assistance he gaue to his Lady Agricia, who had beene deuoured by a Lion had not he defended her: whereupon, she entertained him as her Knightly seruant, commanding him to trauaile to Paris, and to maintaine her beautie against Prince Caesar of Roome, as farre excelling faire Rosamonde of Fraunce. For this cause he entred the Listes, and comming to Caesar, thus spake. Hither am I come Sir Knight, to iustifie that my mistresse faire Agricia of Naples, exceedeth Rosamonde in all perfections of beautie. And I, quoth Caesar will maintaine the contrarie, that the Lady thou hast named, deserues not to be equalled with my diuine Goddesse. So coutching their Launces, they met together with exquisite chiualrie, and at the second encounter, the Duke of Gaule was vnhorssed: when being caried into his Tent by his Squires, verie sore hurt and brused with his fall, he entred into many dolorous complaints, because he had so lost the honor of his mistresse. Landastines of Norgalles, and Simprinell of Scotland, be∣ing come thither to finde the Prince Palladine, determined to make proofe of their valour against Caesar, but they ac∣companied the Duke of Gaule in misfortune, and so did di∣uers other Knightes after them. Then entred the Listes two braue gallants, the one in azured Armour thick set with Starres of gold, and in his Sheeld, a Lady reskewed from a Giant: the other bare for his deuise, Fame triumphant in a siluer feeld. The Knight in azure Armour, made signe to Caesar, that he would first aduenture for his Lady: yet such was his ill hap in the end, as both horsse & man were throwne to the ground. When the Knight of Fame sawe his fréend dismounted, he came to Caesar with these speeches.
Sir Knight, I confesse as well as thou doost, that my Lady Rosamonde excelleth all other in beautie: but this will I make good on thy body, that I am more woorthie to be her seruant then thou art. It should séeme then, answe∣red Caesar, that I deserue not to be so accounted: this con∣trouersie shall the strength of my Launce presently discide, and thou or I will be her onely seruant. Heereupon, they encountred verie valiantly, breaking many Launces, yet neither able to mooue the other, whereat, they both grew angrie, desiring the King to let them haue stronger Laun∣ces, or else to permit them the Combate with the Sword: but the King would not suffer them to meddle with Swords, commanding each of them a very strong Launce, at which charge, the Prince Caesar was brauely dismoun∣ted, and the Knight of Fame had almost borne him com∣panie. A great murmuring presently grew among the people, some auouching, that because the strange Knight so hardly recouered himselfe, therefore Prince Caesar should not be held as vanquished, but that they should prooue their fortune once more. But the Iudges gaue verdict to the contrarie, attributing the conquest to the Knight of Fame: which when Caesar heard, he went to the King, to intreate his Maiestie for the Combate with its Sword: but he denyed it him, saying, that the Ioustes being enterprised for loue, ought not to be ended in hatred. At these words, Prince Caesar went to his Lady Rosa∣monde, who gaue him many thanks for his honorable paines: and though his successe happened so ill in the end, yet would not she withdraw her loue. But now commes Palladine into the feeld, being sorie he had not the conquest of Caesar, yet determining to end his choller on the Knight of fame, to whome he approached, saying: It gréeues me Sir Knight that I Iousted not with noble Caesar, for if I had, little praise couldest thou haue gotten to day. Your reason? aunswered the Knight of fame. Because I had woon ye honor ({quod} Palladine) which
thou vsurpest, and yet remains in doubt among a number, which if thou darest say thou hast deserued, I will auouch the contrary: beside, yt it appertaines not to thee, to be ser∣uant to the faire Lady Rosamonde nor to the very meanest among her Ladies: for (as I vnderstand) she is prouided of one beyond thee many degrees. Good Sir, aunswered the Knight of fame, you are very bold and braue in spéeches: What mooueth ye so much to abase me, seeing you knowe not of whence or what I am? nor hast thou seene any mat∣ter in me deseruing these words. But I perceiue the cause héereof groweth, by the desire thou hast to deale with me, wherein thou shalt haue thy desire, either at the Launce or Sword, so pleaseth the King to graunt vs that libertie. Then turning to his Maiestie, the Knight of Fame intrea∣ted the combate, with the Sword, if they could not finish their quarrell at the Launce. Loth was the King to suffer such danger, but the Iudges, with many Lords and Ba∣rons there present, noting the earnest desire of the Knight, and that they were both strangers, perswaded his high∣nesse, intending to cause them giue ouer, if in fight either of them should be in perill of life. When they had thus obtained what they would, they gaue their horsses the spurres, and with a verie rough en∣counter, they were both dismounted, whereat Palladine verie angrie, drew his Sword, and marching against the Knight of Fame, such a cruell combate continued betwéene them, as neuer had the like beene seene in Fraunce. The King beholding their Armour broken, and the ground coulored with their scarlet blood, sent his Sonne the Prince Lewes to intreate them giue ouer: which they immediatly did, the Knight of Fame being not a little glad thereof, because he was brought into verie great debilitie, onely by the exceeding aboundant losse of his blood. Lewes bringing them before the King his Father, caused them both to be graciously entertained, and taking Palladine by the hand, sayd. Sée heere my Lord the man that slew Brulanfurior
and his brother, who deliuered me from imprisonment, and many Knightes that were held captiue in the Castell. The King not alittle ioyfull of these newes, arose and embraced Palladine, saying. Worthie Knight, I am more indebted to you then any man else in the world, for you alone haue done that to me, which neither with strength or pollicie I was able to com∣passe. I enioy my Sonne againe by your meanes, and my people are deliuered from those mercilesse villaines, whome neyther law nor loue could bridle: let me vnder∣stand of whence you are, that I may knowe the man to whome I am so highly beholding. My Lord, aunswered the Prince, my name is Palla∣dine, Sonne to the King Milanor of England, your louing brother and vowed fréend. At these words, the King was much more glad then before, and casting his armes about his necke, with in∣ward conceite of ioy, the teares trickled downe his face: then came the Quéene and faire Rosamonde her daugh∣ter, who welcommed the Prince with maruailous cour∣tesie, the like did Landastines, Simprinell and Lydiseo of Hungaria, who was the man that came with the Knight of Fame, and at report of these Triumphes trauailed into Fraunce. As for the Knight of Fame himselfe, he was called Don Robert, the Prince of Freeze, a stout, couragious and har∣die champion, greatly deuoted to the loue of faire Rosa∣monde. The King presently departed to his Pallace, there to honor these braue Knightes as they worthely deserued: but Caesar of Room highly thanked Palladine for reuen∣ging his foyle on the Knight of Fame, swearing to him an inuiolable league of amitie, which grew to such effect, as you shall héereafter behold.
CHAP. XXIII. ¶ How the Princes Don Robert of Freeze, and Lydiseo of Hungaria, being healed of their woundes, departed from Paris: and of a letter which the wise Orbiconte sent to Palladine, who was passionate for the loue of faire Ro∣samonde of Fraunce. DOn Robert of Freeze, hauing kept his chamber certaine dayes, by reason of the dangerous woundes he had re∣ceiued, and Palladine likewise in the selfesame estate, yet carefully atten∣ded on by the Kings Chirurgions, a greater corsey happened to them both, then either their woundes or doubt of health. For Don Robert séeing he was not regarded of the faire Princesse Rosa∣monde, whome he loued as déerely as his own life, thought to haue committed violence on himselfe, but that by good aduise he was better perswaded, and being out of hope to compasse his desire, when he was somewhat recouered, he and Lydiseo of Hungaria tooke their leaue of the King, sha∣ping their course through Piccardie toward Bullin, where they embarqued themselues, and sailed into England, for that they were desirous to sée the good King Milnor, to whome they brought letters from his Sonne Palladine. Landastines likewise as not vnmindfull of his Florea, sent the message of his heart vnder seale by Lydiseo, excusing his absence which should not be long, and hoping to bring her brother home with him. As for Palladine, he became so affected to the Princesse Rosamonde, whome he imagi∣ned to be the Lady foretold by the wise Orbiconte: as he wasted and consumed in pensiue thoughts, practising how to obtaine her loue, albeit he aduentured the hard strata∣gemes
of death. Oftentimes would he priuately conferre with her, and she would aunswere him with such rare mo∣destie, as increased his torments aboue the compasse of reason. Nor was she forgetfull of his dangerous paines, in deliuerance of her brother Lewes from imprisonment, ioy∣ning therewithall the common benefit, by the death of Brulanfurior and his brother Frucidant: but as for the pri∣uiledge of her loue, the Prince Caesar of Roeme was Lord thereof, and her setled affection impossible to be remoued. All which he perceiued by such manifest signes, as made him were frantike in silent cogitations: sometime thin∣king to forestall his fréend, by making the first request of her in mariage: then againe intending the death of Caesar, rather then to misse of the faire Rosamonde. And though the Romaine Prince loued him déerely, yet the furie of blinde loue made Palladine so impatient, as he minded no∣thing but Caesars death, which with a sharpe Launce in the Ioust he imagined might easily be done, or with an in∣fected cup of poyson giuen him in his chamber. But the wise Orbiconte still directing Palladines course, and knowing by her arte his secret intent, onely by being deceiued in his owne opinion: would separate Palladine from Caesar, by calling him to his destenyed Countrey, whereof we spake in the beginning of our Historie, and thus it happened. The Prince being in his Chamber with Landastines, Simprinell, and his Squire Lycelio, imagining how to fi∣nish his determination: on a sudden there entred a little deformed Dwarffe, who saluting Palladine, gaue him a Letter, saying. My Lord, the wise Orbiconte hath sent ye this Letter, the contents whereof, she commaunds you to fulfill, other∣wise, great harme will happen to you. He had no sooner spoken these words, but immediatly he vanished away. How now? quoth Landastines, whether is the little Iack an Apes gone? oftentimes haue I séene the craftie
deceits of Iugglers, but neuer sawe I such a trick before: I hold my life the Deuill fetched him away. This strange accident made Palladine remember the voyce that whis∣pered in his eare at Varne, when he determined to depart from the Duchesse Brisalda: and desirous to knowe the newes from Orbiconte, he feigned that he would lie downe vpon his bed, wherefore Landastines and Simprinell with∣drew themselues, when he opening the Letter, read as followeth. The Letter from Orbiconte the wise, to Palladine the Prince of England. HAuing certaine knowledge (vertuous Prince) of the extreame loue thou bearest to the beawtifull Rosa∣monde, and the doubtfull estate whereinto her amiable lookes hath brought thée: I am to aduertise thee, in respect of the loue I beare thée, as also the good support I shall one day receyue by thee, that the Prince Caesar of Roome is appoynted for her, and no other then hée shall she haue in marriage. Therefore withdrawe thy earnest desire, and the execution of that thou hast determined: which is, to demaund her for thy wife, and to preuent the life of Cae∣sar, whome she entirely loueth and honoreth in heart: as∣suring thée, that another is reserued for thée, who excel∣leth in beawtie the faire Rosamonde, and all the other Ladyes of Christendome: whose liuely portraite thou shalt sée to morrow, brought to the place where thou art by a Knight, whome thou shalt vanquish in Combate, and by that meane recouer her picture. Then taking leaue of the Court, thou shalt trauaile to seeke her in her Coun∣trey, which shall be named to thée by the Knight: and ne∣uer feare any dangers in thy iourney, for thou shalt be fa∣uoured by fortune and me, who haue foreséene all these things that shall happen. Thy good freend, Orbiconte the wise, and Prophetesse.
Palladine hauing read this Letter, was meruailously perplexed in his spirit, doubting whether he might credit the aduertisement of Orbiconte, or execute his intent tou∣ching faire Rosamonde: whome he reputed so accompli∣shed with all perfections of beawtie, as he iudged it impos∣sible to finde her second in the whole world. Beside, he was throughly inueigled with her loue, as he despaired how he could diuert his fancie: on the other side he was as great∣ly displeased, to vnderstand that she would loue none but Caesar, and that to him she onely was vowed. In these di∣uers opinions he spent the whole night, yet in the end con∣sidering by the Letter of Orbiconte, that what he had pre∣tended was knowne to her, he concluded to credit her mes∣sage, and especially if the Knight came accordingly on the morrow, with the portrait of her he desired so much to sée, vpon this determination he slept till morning. CHAP. XXIIII. ¶ How a Pagan Prince came to the Court of Fraunce, bringing with him the portraite of the Princesse Nonpa∣relia: and of the Combate betweene him and Palladine, who hauing woon the portraite, departed from the Court. THE next morning, the King and all his Barons being in the great in the great Hall, Palladine, Landastines and Simpri∣nell likewise in companie, there en∣tred a Squire, attired after the Morisco manner, who making great reuerence, thus began. Mightie and redoubted King, I am sent from the Prince Zarcanell of Chipre, who yet abideth without the Citie, to craue li∣cence of your Maiestie, that he may report before you and
your Lords, an enterprise which he hath determined to execute before you. Squire, aunswered the King, say to thy maister, that he shall be welcome, and boldly let him enter our Citie: for we graunt him frée accesse to our presence, to open any thing he hath intended. The Squire returned presently to his Lord, who vn∣derstanding the Kings gracious answere, commanded his seruants to goe to the playne before the Court, and there with all spéed to set vp his Tent: in meane while, himselfe accompanied with thrée Gentlemen, came before the King, and hauing humbly saluted his Maiestie, before all the Princes and Lords thus spake. Gracious Prince, I am perswaded that your highnesse well doth knowe, what authority loue hath ouer humaine creatures, and how vnable they are to resist his power: therefore I beséech ye not to thinke it strange, if I declare what loue hath enforced me to doo. So it is, that hauing heard the beawtie of faire Non∣parelia, so highly renowmed aboue all Ladyes in the world: as one couetous to sée a thing so excellent, I tra∣uailed to Aquilea, and there sound by proofe, that fame had rather spared then spokē what she might, there I be∣came immediatly enthralled with her loue, and by gra∣cious behauiours towards her preuayled so farre, as she accepted me to be her Knight: with this charge and condi∣tion, that I should carie her diuine figure into the Courtes of all Christian Princes, where Ladies or Damosels were famous for beawtie, and against all commers to main∣taine my mistresse rare preheminence. If froward fortune gaue me the ouerthrowe, then must I leaue to the conque∣rour my Ladies counterfeit: but if my luckye Starres graunted me the victorie, I am to carie with me the van∣quished Ladyes portraite. And hauing heard (my good Lord) that your daughter Rosamonde is named among the fairest in Christendome, I directed my iourney hither:
and may it like you to deliuer her counterfeit on the afore∣named conditions, I am readie to doo my deuoire in the open féeld before your Pallace gate, where I haue caused my Tent to be erected. Right well am I contented, sayd the King, and immediatly will I come thither with my daughter, whose portrait shall be there openly presented, and if any one will combate for her, there shall she be to re∣gard her fortune. Palladine standing by, coniectured this to be the Knight, whereof the wise Orbiconte made mention in her Letter: wherefore he first auaunced himselfe, ear∣nestly intreating the King, that he might defend his daughter Rosamonds beawtie. Whereto the King pre∣sently graunted, scant to the good liking of Caesar, who still bare his arme in a Scarffe: and began iealously to suspect Palladine, minding to reuenge him as occasion serued. Upon this agreement, Zarcanell departed to his Tent, where beeing well armed, and brauely mounted, expected his aduersarie, who not long after came with the King, the Prince Lewes, and many noble Lords in gallant equi∣page. The Quéene, her daughter Rosamonde, and all the Ladyes of the Court, came with great spéed to their Scaf∣fold, to behold the portrait of the Lady so highly commen∣ded, which hung on a Launce at the entrance of his Tent: and both the Champions being readie for the Ioust, Zar∣canell comming to Palladine, thus spake. Sir Knight, as the huge world can not endure two Sunnes, so may not my eyes abide these two figures, pre∣senting the rarest beawtie in the world, the one of them being a Pagan, and the other a Christian. But this con∣tention betweene vs shall be soone ended, without any fa∣tall hazard of the weapon, if thou wilt confesse before this assemblie, that the incomparable beawtie of my Lady, re∣sembleth the cléere Sunne shining in the day time, and thine the Moone that lighteneth the night. Sir, Sir, aunswered Palladine, we come not hither to argue on the Sunne or Moone, but at the point of the
Launce, and edge of the Sword, to trie betwéene vs the honor of the féeld, whereof if I be maister, I will be your Sunne, and you my Moone if you goe to the ground. Without any further speeches they encountred together, their Launces being broken with such furie, as the English Prince was set on the crupper of his horsse, but Zarcanell nothing moued or shaken. In thrée or foure courses more, Palladine could neuer fasten his Launce on his enemie, yet Zarcanell still brake on him, for he was so nimble, and ranne so close to his horsse, as each one woondered at his fine chiualrie. Without doubt my Lord, quoth the Coun∣tie of Champaigne to the King, neuer did I sée a brauer horsseman, he hath the raines of his Courser at commaun∣dement, that can gouerne him in such sort without any attaint. But Palladine angrie at his hard fortune, met Zarcanell so right at the sixt course, as breaking the girts of his saddle, his horsse ranne away, and left him behinde him. Yet did he quickly recouer himselfe, and drawing his Sword, came valiantly against Palladine, shewing as fine sleights, and agilitie in the Combate, as he did before on horssebacke with his Launce. In the end, it was his for∣tune to be ouercome, when vnder the Sword of Palladine he entred into these complaints. Unhappie that I am, of force I sée I must yéeld my selfe, and not my bodie onelye, but my life also, hauing lost the onely maintenance thereof, the gracious fauour and regard of my mistresse. Ah incomparable miserie, for∣tune that euer esteemed of me hitherto, hath in a moment vtterly reiected me: therefore good Sir Knight, rid me of this paine, and with one stroke end my miserie and life together, for greater good you neuer did to man. Palladine seeing him in such despaire, so pitied his case, as suffering him to arise, he thus comforted him. My fréend, you ought not in this sort to offend your selfe, considering these are but the tricks of fortune, where∣to all men are dayly subiect, and no more hath happened to
you then might haue doone to me. If the Lady for whome you vndertooke this voyage, loued you well, she cannot but augment it, knowing with valour you defended her cause. In sooth my Lord, answered Zarcanell, rather had I die a thousand deathes, then returne to my Lady, hauing not woon the portraite of faire Rosamonde: for her selfe pro∣tested, that neuer would she loue me except I brought it. And héere I vow to you, that I will returne to mine owne Countrey, so soone as I haue recouered my woundes: lea∣uing you not onely the portraite you haue woon, but those likewise that I conquered in Norgalles, and elsewhere, dis∣charging my selfe of loues seruice, séeing he rewards his faithfull seruant no better. Therein vse your pleasure, quoth Palladine, but first goe with me, that your woundes may be searched to preuent further inconuenience. So go∣ing to the King, he desired that his Chirurgions might attend on the Knight: for I assure your Maiestie, quoth he, neuer met I with any man of higher desert. Whereto the King willingly graunted, causing Zarcanell to be con∣ducted to the Court, and to be lodged in one of the fairest chambers, where he was dilligently attended, as in ten dayes he was perfectly recouered. When thanking the King for his noble entertainement, and taking leaue of his Maiestie, the Prince Lewes, Palladine, and the rest, he departed toward his owne Countrey, not alittle agréeued (as you may thinke) for his misfortune. As for Palladine, he remembring the letter sent him by the wise Orbiconte, and hauing imprinted in his heart the Lady Nonparelia, whose counterfeit he kept with choyse regard, determined to take his farewell of the King, and iourney with all speede toward Aquilea. Wherefore in the euening, the King walking in his Garden after supper, he told his Maiestie, that he was desirous to trauaile to the King his Father in England, and therefore that it would please him to licence his departure. The King (though loth) consented thereto, being sorie to forgoe the
valiant Palladine, who was so great a grace to his Court. Hauing then taken his leaue of the King, and of all the noble Princes and Ladyes; he departed on the morrow from Paris, accompanyed with Landastines and Simpri∣nell, taking his way toward Millayne, in hope to finde his fréend Manteleo there, but he was as then newly gone toward Normandie, to pacifie a controuersie betwéene his Father and the Duke, who was a man well prouided with money and munition, for he kept diuers Rouers and Pirates on the Seas, that dayly brought him great store of good booties. CHAP. XXV. ¶ How Palladine met with his freend Manteleo, whome he had almost slayne in fight, but that a Damosell discoue∣red his name. And how Palladine slew the Pirate Dormidon. VPon the fourth day, after Palladine and his fréends departed from Paris, riding through a Forrest, they met a Knight and a Damosell, and with them a Squire gréeuously weeping: the Squire ioyfull to meete these Knightes, came to Palladine with these spéeches. Help Gentlemen, for Gods sake helpe me, to be reuenged on this Traitour, who hath slaine my maister by the pro∣curement of this Damosell. Palladine moued with the Squires teares, rode to the Knight, and thus spake. Knight, or paillard rather, what hath mooued thée to misuse passengers, and to bathe thy hands in innocent blood? Knight if thou wilt, quoth he with the Damosell, but paillard, reserue for thy selfe: as for him that I haue slaine, he was the cause of his owne death, because I found
him readie to haue dishonored this Damosell. It is best for thee to excuse thy déede, sayd Palladine, in respect heere is none that can contrarie thée: but I rather thinke the shame is thine, then his that is dead, as his Squire hath protested to me. Think what thou wilt, quoth the Knight, but the Squire lieth falsly, and I ought to be better belée∣ued then he, if thou didst me the right belonging to Armes: but credit as thou findest occasion, I haue no leysure to stand chatting with thée. And because thou art so lustie, answered Palladine, thou shalt a little tarie my pleasure. So couching their Launces, they met so roughly together, as they were both cast foorth of their saddles: afterward, they continued a cruell Combate with the Sword, till Landastines and Simprinell stepping to the Damosell▪ de∣maunded of her what the Knight was, Alas Gentlemen▪ quoth she, his name is Manteleo the Prince of Myne, whome I sée verie hardly requited, for deliuering me from the villaine that would haue forced me. Landstines pre∣sently stopping betwéene them, sayd: Giue ouer Sir Pal∣ladine, for you fight against your déere fréend Manteleo. At these words, the Princes threw downe their weapons, and with all the ceremonious courtesies incident to fréend∣ship, they louingly embraced each other: whereat, the Damosell greatly meruailed, and the Squire who was the cause of their fight, whereupon, doubting a further danger toward him, because his maister was slaine in so bad a cause, so fast as he could tooke himselfe to flight. After the manifold kinde excuses, which freendly ene∣mies vse together, they rode with the Damosell to her Castell, where their wounds being visited, they afterward iournyed to Millayne: Palladine being honorably wel∣commed by the Duke, and especially fauoured for his loue to his Sonne Manteleo. And hauing feasted there certaine dayes, the Duke recounted to Palladine his present af∣faires with the Duke of Normandie, who after many dis∣honorable actions, was by his power slaine in a battell:
whereupon, the Normans were content to endure his so∣ueraigntie ouer them, and for that cause had they sent their Ambassadors. In the end, by the worthie aduise of Palladine, the Duke tooke the gouernement vpon him, sen∣ding his Sonne Manteleo to receiue the possession thereof. Now thought Palladine he stayed too long, remembring the letter from the wise Orbiconte, therefore would he pre∣sently depart toward Aquilea, to the great gréefe of the Duke and his fréend Manteleo, being loth to forgoe, the English Prince so soone. Landastines and Simprinell, vnder∣standing that Palladine would trauaile alone, albeit more willingly they would haue borne him companie, rode back to Norgalles againe, Simprinell confessing how he had woon the portraite of Brisalda, whereof Palladine made little or no account at all, because he had now almost forgotten her. Manteleo likewise went to Normandie, where he was receiued as their Lord and Gouernour, and hauing esta∣blished all matters concerning the common wealth, he crost the Seas into England, to visit his best beloued Lady Marcelina, whome he had chosen aboue all other in the world. Palladine thus departing from his fréends, hauing none in his company but his Squire Lycelio, and the Shep∣heard Liboran, by whose meanes he entred the Castell of Brulanfurior, and therefore gaue him the name of Liboran the well aduised: tooke Shipping, and coasting by Lystria, at length they came into Albania, where suddenly they met with a Turkish Pirate, named Dormidon, who thin∣king to seaze on this christian bootie, assayled them, yet in the end was ouercome himselfe, and he with the most part of his men throwne into the Sea. After this sharpe encounter on the Sea, Palladine was desirous to take landing at the néerest Island, least they should be surprized by any more Pirates: and because he thought each day a yéere, till he might sée the swéete God∣desse, promised him by Orbiconte, he determined not to
rest himselfe in any place, vntill he had found what he so earnestly desired, charging his Squires thence forward, to call him The Knight without rest, and vnder this name héereafter he trauaileth. The Pilote did as he was commaunded, striking pre∣sently to the néerest Island, which séemed to them verie beawtifull and delectable: but they were no sooner come on land, and their horsses brought on shore, which imme∣diatly offered to feede on the goodly gréene grasse, but a mightie flame of fire issued foorth of the ground, and con∣tinued before them to hinder their passage any further. What meaneth this? sayd the Knight without rest to the Pilote, what may this Isle be named? are we in Scicilia, where many affirme there is a Mountaine, that vomiteth fire and flame foorth in great aboundance? No my Lord, aunswered the Pilote, we are verie farre from thence: Scicilie whereof you speake, is in the Mediterranean Sea, and we are in the Sea Adriatique, a great distance from Aquilea: and as my owne knowledge serueth me, I thinke this soyle is named The Isle of Fire, where hath beene heard and séene matters of great meruaile. And trust me, said the Knight without rest, I neuer sawe the like be∣fore: I pray ye therefore stay for me in this place, while I goe to sée the wonders of this Island: and if I returne not when two dayes are expired, set Sayle and depart whe∣ther ye please. Not so my Lord, aunswered the Pilote, I will not weigh Anker, till I sée yée, or heare from yée: in meane while we will expect a lucky gale of winde, that may send vs merily to Aquilea.
CHAP. XXVI. ¶ What strange and fearefull visions, the Knight without rest sawe in the Isle of Fire: and how he returned in excee∣ding greefe, because he could not finish the enchaunt∣ments. REsolued thus to sée this strange Island, the Knight without rest mounteth on horssebacke, leauing Liboran in the Ship, and taking his Squire Lycelio with him. Ma∣ny Cities, Castels, and Fortresses he séemed to see in the fire, yet no∣thing did so much amaze him, as the voyce and dollorous cryes hée heard in the middest of the flame. Ah loue, sayd one, why doost thou still hold me in this miserable paine? doth my offence committed against thy Maiestie, deserue so grée∣uous punishment as this? how ill aduised then was I, to set so light by thy religious lawes and soueraigne autho∣ritie? Pardon, oh pardon him tha epenteth, and ceasse thy iust indignation against them, who while they liue, will continue thy faithfull subiects: else graunt them death, which they would endure with willing mindes. Such was the complaint of this sorowfull creature, which moued the Knight without rest to such pitie, as the teares trickled downe his chéekes with remembrance of the words: and then he called to minde his great discourtesie to the Duchesse Brisalda, whome he had left without in∣tent to sée againe, by yéelding to the aduertisements of the wise Orbiconte, and so was his minde caryed away with the conceite of this aduenture, as he stoode a good while silent, not able to speake one word: which when Ly∣celio perceiued, he sayd: Let vs returne againe (my Lord)
from hence, for we are not able to passe any further, by reason of the flame that still encreaseth as you see. Lycelio, aunswered the Knight without rest, if thou doost feare or doubt any thing, I pray thee goe backe againe to the Ship, and leaue me to consider better on these meruailes. I will not leaue my Lord, quoth Lycelio, rather will I die first: but if you thinke to goe any further, you must doo it on foote, for your horsse can not endure the fire. On foote will I goe then, aunswered the Knight without rest: for I nei∣ther see or feele any thing as yet, that should hinder me from passing further. With these words he alighted, gi∣uing Lycelio his horsse to leade: but he was no sooner dis∣mounted, and had drawne his Sword, and put on his Sheeld, but he heard another voyce thus complayning. Alas, commeth he now that shall deliuer me from this tor∣ment? or to giue me the death I haue long desired? ah death, death, how swéete would thy stroke be now to me? why doost thou deferre to exercise thy office on me? I fréely yeeld thée my life, and thou refusest or scornest to take it▪ Then heard he another voyce alittle further from him, saying. How dooth my miserie excéed all that euer liued? béeing desirous of death to liue in rest, and yet by no meanes I can attaine it. The Knight without rest greatly mooued at these spée∣ches, thrust his Shéeld before him; and would enter the flame, but he had so many strokes with halbards, and o∣ther weapons, and yet not able to see who smote him, as hardly could he passe any further. But hauing long time fought with these shadowes, at length he came to a Rocke of white Marble, where he was suddenly smitten downe, and the fire seeming to vanish away, such a darkenesse co∣uered him, as he could sée neither heauen or earth, but had innumerable strange visions presented him. First he sawe a huge multitude of Harpies flying about him, making offer to seaze vpon him with their tallants. Then he beheld as many Serpents, houering with their
wings ouer him, casting flame and fire out at their mouthes: yet could not these, and many other appariti∣ons cause him to dismay, but trusting onely in the God of his strength, they vanished away, and he falling in a sléepe, the wise Orbiconte presented her selfe to him, saying: Knight without rest, of whome the heauens haue care, Abide not in this place so sad and full of woe: But follow thy intent which doth more good prepare, And shall on thee thine owne desires bestowe. Another man must these aduentures end, So fortune willes, to whome I thee commend. This sayd, she presently departed, leauing the Knight to finish his dreame, whereat he meruailed when he awaked, to see himselfe alone in that place, not knowing which way to returne to his company: and as he considered on the words of the wise Orbiconte, he arose, and looking on the Rocke, beheld in the middest thereof a Statue of blacke Marble, holding betwéene his armes a Table, whereon these words were written in letters of golde. When the inuincible Dragon shall be chased into this place by the faire Serpent, he shall giue end to these enchauntments by passing the flame: and those two all louers, for whome the King Brandaliseo made these charmes, shall bee then discouered. Hauing read this prophecie, long time he was thinking on the meaning thereof, yet could he not by any meanes com∣passe it: but true it is, that he doubted (according to the words of the wise Orbiconte) that the ending of this ad∣uenture was destenied to another, and not to him, yet if he could he would haue passed further, to see if there had béene any more such matters of regard: but as he made offer to goe, the fire and flame appeared as it did before, and many voices breathed foorth bitter complaints. How happie is the man, quoth he, whose high good fortune shall finish these enchauntments, and thereby deliuer the mise∣rable
soules, whose cries are able to rent a hart of Ada∣mant. When he perceiued he might not passe further, but that he was resisted by the flame and diuers that smote him: he returned to the place where he left Lycelio, and mounting on horssebacke, came backe to the Ship. Then recounted he to the Pilote, what he had heard and séene in the Isle, and how it greeued him, that he could not end the enchauntments, onely to release the poore soules that cried to him. So setting Sayle, they coasted along Dalmatia▪ which then was vnder the Turkes gouernement, and so rode merily toward Aquilea, being then likewise in the Turkes obeysance, but now subiect to the Venetians. CHAP. XXVII. ¶ How the Knight without rest arriued in Aquilea, where he was deliuered from danger by a Knight named Broan∣tine, who brought him into the fauour of the Gouer∣nour of Enna. And of an aduenture that happened at dinner time, which Broantine and Liboran the well adui∣sed brought to end. AFter long and dangerous sailing on the Sea, at length they are come to the Realme of Aquilea, where the Knight without rest landing with his companie, left the Pilote, dire∣cting their iourney vp into the coun∣trey. By the way, the Knight with∣out rest slew a hidious Serpent, pre∣seruing the life of a yong Damosll readie to be deuoured: and comming to the Citie of Enna, tooke vp his lodging where he might most conueniently. The name of a Christian being highly hated among the men of this countrey, the Knight without rest was care∣full to kéepe himselfe vnknowne, being able to speake the
language and Lycelio likewise: but Lyboran to preserue his life, counterfeited himselfe to be dum, accounting any shift good to escape daunger. The Gouernour vnderstanding that strangers were entred the Citie, sent one of his Captaines named Broan∣tine, to enquire of whence and what they were. Broantine comming to their lodging, immediatly knew the Knight without rest, being the Knight that accompanyed him into Bulgaria▪ when Dardalon defended the Iousts for the Du∣chesse Brisalda, and brought him to the Citie of Varne, as you heard before. Sir Palladine, quoth Broantine, you are hartely welcome hither: what cause hath drawne you into this farre Countrey? long it is since I was last in your companie. The Knight without rest amazed at this ac∣quaintance, especially in a heathen countrey, where he ne∣uer was before, aunswered. Good Sir, I must desire ye to pardon me, for I doo not remember that euer I saw ye till now: and it may be you take me for some other body. No my Lord, sayd Broantine, I knowe ye well inough, for I trauailed in your companie to the Court of the Duchesse Brisalda▪ at what time you slew the prowd and cruell Dar∣dalon. I thanke ye gentle Sir, quoth the Knight without rest, for your freendly remembrance: but may I request the cause of your being in this Countrey? In sooth Sir, answered Broantine, such enemies I haue in the Realmes of Dace and Bulgaria▪ for the death of a Knight whome I vnhappily slew, as I am constrained to absent my selfe from thence, yet do I hope in time to conquer my troubles, and to returne home againe in safetie. May I then, quoth the Knight without rest, desire this fauour at your hands, to enstruct me how I shall gouerne my selfe among these people, for I would not willingly be knowne that I am a Christian, in respect of the danger may happen to me there∣by: and therefore haue I changed my name, calling my selfe the Knight without rest, hauing determined to rest in no place, till I haue found one I earnestly séeke for. Re∣ferre
your selfe to me, said Broantine, you shall not be knowne, but both you and they that came with ye, shall be courteously entreated, and the rather, because you can speake this countrey language. I vnderstand it in deede, said the Knight without rest, and speake it indifferently, as my Squire can doo also: but this Gentleman (meaning Liboran) is ignorant therein, and therefore counterfeiteth himselfe dumbe, that he might not be knowne, nor we by him. A good deuise, answered Broantine: stay héere (if you please) till I returne, I will goe make report of you to the Gouernour, and by my spéeches you shall be freendly wel∣commed. So went Broantine to the Gouernour, to whome he said, that the Knight without rest was of his acquain∣tance, a man valiant, hardy, and couragious, professing the same lawe that he did. The Gouernour thinking Broan∣tine was a Pagan, and the Knight without rest in like ma∣ner, was glad of his arriuall, and hoping to haue his assi∣stance in the warres, which the King had with the King of Panonia, sent Broantine to him againe, intreating him to dine with him the next day. According to the Gouernours request the next day, the knight without rest came to the Pallace, where he was entertained verie honorably, the Gouernour vsing these words to him. Sir Knight, our Captaine Broantine hath made such report of your forwardnes in Armes, as while I liue you must account me your fréend: and I will let the King vn∣derstand of your being heere, that he may accept of you as men of vertue deserue. My Lord, answered the knight without rest, I beséech ye thus to aduertise his Maiestie, that there is no Gentleman more readie to his seruice, then I will be, and happie doo I account my selfe, if I can doo any thing worthy his good liking. In this warres a∣gainst the King of Panonia will I shew my selfe, and this Gentleman (pointing to Liboran) who long since lost his spéech, by a catharre that bred within his throate: yet is not his vertue or prowesse any thing diminished, for good
experience haue I had of his noble chiualrie. Liboran ga∣thering by countenance of the knight without rest  the vsed these words on his behalfe: with reuerence to  Go∣uernour, gaue a signe with his head and hands, that he was likewise willing to make one in the Kings seruice, which he courteously accepting, embraced them both, being sorie that Liboran had such an imperfection, so that long after he was called the dumbe Knight. The Gouernour walking with them in the great Hall, declared the whole cause of the warre, betwéene the King his maister, and the King of Panonia, and how within two or thrée dayes he meant to bid him battell. As for the matter of their discord, it grew by this occa∣sion: that the King of Aquilea refused to giue his daugh∣ter Nonparelia in marriage to the King of Panonia, nor the yong Princesse her selfe could not be perswaded to like of him, by reason of the many bad qualities he was endued withall, as also he was a man verie much defourmed. In déede my Lord, answered the knight without rest, I haue oftentimes heard, that the Princesse Nonparelia is the flower of the world for beawtie, an ill match were it then, that so sweete a Lady should haue a husband so hard fauoured. And the onely cause of my comming into this Countrey, was to defend her honor in this enterprised warre, as the Lady beyond all other in rare perfections. Soone after they sate downe to dinner, where wanted no store of costly delicates: and the Tables were no sooner withdrawne, but there entred the Hall a comely aged La∣die, her face all besprent with teares, and her sorrowfull lookes bewraying the anguish of her spirit. A good while she stoode viewing all the Lords, not speaking one word, till the Gouernour moued with pitie, thus spake. Faire Lady, full well doth your countenance bewray, that something hath happened scant to your liking: boldly deliuer the cause of your sadnes, and may I in any thing giue you re∣dresse, be you assured I will perfourme it.
Alas my Lord, quoth she, my case requireth present as∣sistance, for my husband comming with his Sonne to this Citie, onely to aide the King in his warres, foure Knights set vpon them in the Forrest neere at hand, and binding them both hands and feete, haue forcibly caried them a∣way, threatning in most cruell sort to murther them, for some priuate displeasure conceiued against them. The knight without rest presently offered himselfe, desiring the Gouernour that he might redresse the Ladyes wrong: and hauing obtained leaue for his departure, with Libo∣ran, Lycelio, and Captaine Broantine, went immediatly to horssebacke. So riding with the Lady, at length they ouertooke the foure Knightes, who with great cudgels cruelly did beate the Ladies Husband and Sonne: where∣at, the knight without rest highly offended, gaue yt spurres to his horsse to encounter wt them. But Liboran by signes, and Broantine by intreaties, perswaded him to suffer them deale with the foure Knightes, which they did verie vali∣antly, and killing them all foure, deliuered the Knight and his Sonne safely to the Lady. Afterward they rode to the Knightes Castell, where their wounds receiued in fight being searched and bound vp, they were estéemed as their vertues deserued, the good Lady vsing all the meanes she could deuise, to expresse her thankefulnes for this noble courtesie. But the knight without rest still minded Nonpa∣relia, thinking each houre a yéere, till he might sée her: and therefore practised as much as in him lay, the speedie reco∣uerie of Broantine, and Liboran, that he might set forward to the mistresse of his thoughts.
CHAP. XXVIII. ¶ How the Knight without rest was conducted by Broantine, to the Pallae of the wise Orbiconte: and of the good entertainement she made him. NOW haue our Knightes well re∣sted themselues at the Castell, and being now readie to depart, while Liboran & Lycelio prepared euerie thing readie: the Knight without rest, and Broantine, walked toge∣ther in the Garden, where among many other matters, the Prince (perceiuing the faithfull affection of Broantine) bewraied his loue to him, which was the onely cause of his trauaile to Aquilea. And as for the Princesse Nonparelia, quoth he, the renowme of her exceeding beaw∣tie and vertue hath so conquered me, as I haue resolued neuer to loue any other: and might I purchase the fauour of her and the King her Father, I all repute my selfe the happiest man that euer liued. But true it is, and which gréeueth me not alittle, she differeth from me in religion, yet time that preuaileth against all things, may wiling her to become a Christian. In sooth my Lord, aunswered Broantine, the Princesse Nonparelia is the most accompli∣shed Lady liuing, both in beawtie, good grace, and all ver∣tuous qualities: and well may you perswade your self to obtaine her loue, in that you are stored with those perfecti∣ons, that may prouoke Ladyes to loue a man. For if que∣stion should be made as concerning your estate, you are the childe of a King as well as she, not inferiour to him in riches and renowme. If the case be alleaged of your ver∣tue, prowesse, and magnanimitie: my selfe will not be iudge héerein, but innumerable that haue made experience
thereof. The Knight without rest hearing the words of Broantine, brake him off in this manner. Leaue these prayses (good Sir) to God, to whome they onely pertaine, and from whome commeth all the good we enioy: let vs imagine, by what meane she may haue knowledge of me, without preiudiciall daunger of whence and what I am. My Lord, quoth Broantine, I shall haue good accesse to the King, when I shall present you to his Maiestie: and then may you both see and speake to the Princesse, for she is very gracious and affable, what other stead I can stand ye in, vntill the houre of death, you shall commaund me. For this gentlenes, aunswered the Knight without rest, I shall héereafter be carefull to make some part of recompence, and to begin our freendship, as also to preuent the name of ingratitude: I giue you the Countie of Orthon, which is my patrimonie, and which you shall freely enioy, if you like to goe with me into England. I thanke ye my Lord, quoth Broantine, for your liberall offer, let vs follow our intent to the King and madame Nonparelia▪ whom we shall finde at the Court with his Maiestie: where he expecteth the succour from Illiria, which doubtlesse will be heere within eightéene dayes, for then must the battell be fought at Bal∣dina. And as we trauaile thither, I will shew ye one of the chéefe singularities in this Countrey, which is the Pallace of madame Orbiconte the wise, the most excellent and sumptuous spectacle that euer was séene. I pray thee good fréend, said the Knight without rest, let vs depart and stay no longer, for such report haue I heard of that good Lady, as loth would I be to returne and not to sée her, hauing so fit opportunitie to doo it: for since I came into this Coun∣trey, I vnderstand that she is allyed to the King, being his Sister, albeit base borne. Without any more speeches, they went foorth of the Garden, and taking their leaue of the Knight and the Lady, mounted on horssebacke, directing their course toward Baldina: and after certaine dayes trauaile, they came to the Pallace of the wise Orbiconte,
the building whereof was so rare and stately, as in all the world the like might not be found. Long stood the knight without rest to behold this wonder, which Orbiconte her selfe well perceiued standing in her windowe, wherefore she sent one to open the gate, and they entring, began to admire much more then they had done: seeing the great Court paued with Iasper and Porphire, and in the mid∣dest thereof a gorgeous Statue, being the Goddesse Venus curiously carued in Alablaster, and from her two dugs spouted exceeding cléere water, which fell into a huge great Basen of siluer. By her stood her Sonne Cupid, with an arrowe drawne in his bowe, as being readie to shoote: but so arteficially framed after the life, as neuer was a more choyse péece of workemanship séene. From thence they walked into meruailous goodly Gal∣leries, which were painted round about with Poeticall Histories: as the contention betwéene the thrée Goddesses, Pallas, Iuno, and Venus, the iudgement of Paris, the strange alteration of many metamorphosed louers, and the ban∣quet of the Gods, where angry Tisiphone shewed her selfe. On the other side were the labours of Hercules, the de∣struction of famous Troy, and the voyage of the Argo∣nantes. There likewise was liuely portraied the triumph of Venus, drawne in her Chariot by two Turtle Doues, the loue of her Sonne Cupid and faire Psyches, the battailes of many Romaine Emperours, & their seuerall triumphs in Roome: so liuely figured to the eye, as if the persons had béene there in action. While they thus stood to behold these deuises, the wise Orbiconte caused her three Daughters to attire them∣selues in most sumptuous ornaments, and afterward came downe with them into the Gallery: which when the knight without rest perceiued, he came and saluted her with great reuerence, and after many sollemne and kinde
courtesies to the auncient Lady, as also her daughters, the wise Orbiconte thus spake. Sir Palladine, right welcome are ye to this place: for long it is since I desired to sée you heere, that I might en∣tertaine you as your vertues deserue. Madame, answered the Knight without rest, vnséemely is it that you should so much abase your selfe, as to regard me that am but a poore Knight errant. Not so my Lord, quoth she, conceale not your selfe, for well I knowe of whence and what you are: welcome are ye to my Pallace, where it shall be néedlesse for ye to feare any thing, though you are so farre from your owne Coun∣trey, for heere you may assure your selfe of safetie. So en∣tring into the great Hall, which was hanged round about with rich Tapistrie, wherein, the Historie of great Maho∣met was curiously wrought: she welcommed them all a∣gaine, Broantine, Lycelio and Lyboran, who still counter∣feited himselfe to be dumbe, to whome she said. My fréend, speake your language and feare not, for in this place you are in no danger. I knowe that thou art Liboran the well aduised, who with the ayde of Captaine Broantine, deliue∣red a Knight and his Sonne from death, therefore seeke not to hide thy selfe from me. When Liboran heard what she sayd, he imagined she was some Diuineresse, or one that had a familiar spirit, who acquainted her with matters of secrecie: wherefore in the French toong he replied, thanking her for  excée∣ding courtesie, and offering her his vttermost seruice. For which, she was not forgetfull to thanke him, causing cer∣taine of Gentlemen to conduct them to faire Chambers readie prepared for them: and in the Chamber appointed for the Knight without rest, was ingeniously wrought in Tapistrie of cloth of gold, the adulterie of Venus with God Mars, and how lame Vulcane came and found them, with diuers other lasciuious Histories, to prouoke the Prince to carnall delight.
After the Knight without rest was vnarmed, he came and walked with the wise Orbiconte in her Garden, wher∣in were many beawtifull fountaines, and great aboun∣dance of wholesome hearbes, wherwith she made precious vnguents, which she sent to Knightes errant, especially such as defended the honor of Ladies. She walked with them likewise into her Parke, and shewed them what braue game she had there prouided, with all other deuises incident to delight, onely to allure the Knight without rest to stay there, till she had perfourmed her intent for her Daughters, which within few dayes after she cunningly compassed in this manner. The wise Orbiconte calling her Daughters to her, the first whereof being named Iunona the second Palladia, and the third Veneria: gaue them especiall charge, to vse them∣selues in such sort to the Knight without rest, that he might enter into that familiar acquaintance with them, as each thing might sort according to her determination. And one night while the Knightes and her Daughters were dauncing, she walked into her Garden, hauing in her hand a little Booke of parchment, couered ouer with black veluet: there framed she such spelles and charmes, and with secret muttering to her selfe, sent such a coniuration abroade, as nothing should preuent what she had conclu∣ded. Now doo the Knightes repaire to their chambers, thinking to rest themselues as they did the nightes before, and so in déede did Broantine, Liboran, and Licelio, for their chambers were so charmed, as they could not awake till the next day was verie farre spent: but as for the Knight without rest, while he soundly slept, and thought no harme, Iunona in her night mante came to visit him, and so well (it séemed) they agréed together, as the English Prince had the honor of her virginitie. Palladia and Vene∣ria folloed their Sister in fortune, the issue whereof was such, as when time came of natures appointment, they were deliuered of three goodly Sonnes, named Clariseo,
Clarisado, and Clarisano. These thrée children were care∣fully nourished, and in their life time perfourmed Knight∣ly deedes of armes, whereof we will speake héereafter as occasion serueth. By this time had the Knight without rest remayned héere seuen dayes, when Orbiconte knowing by her arte, that the King her Brother would bid his enemie battell within foure daies, she came to the Prince in this manner. Sir Palladine, séeing your affection is so forward, that you will assist my Brother in this warre against the King of Panonia, it is now high time to thinke on your depar∣ture, for I can assure ye, that within foure dayes the fight will begin. Nor can I entertaine any doubt or sorrow for the matter, because I haue alreadie foreseene, that our enemie will sustaine great detriment, losse and destruction onely by your noble and worthie behauiour, prepare yée therefore to set forward to morrow. Madame, answered the Knight without rest, if it like you we will depart presently, the sooner shall we come to our iourneyes end. Not so, quoth she, you shall be ruled by my direction, for you haue time enough to trauaile thi∣ther. So taking him and his freends into her Cabinet, she gaue the Prince a meruailous costly gréene Armour, to Broantine she gaue one of Azure couller, with a Shéeld, wherein was portrayed, how he deliuered the Knight and his Sonne from death: and to Liboran she gaue a carna∣tion Armour, figuring in his Sheeld, the Shepheards life he led by the Castell of Brulanfurior. As for you Sir Palla∣dine, quoth she, I will not giue you any Shéeld, because, that you haue alreadie is better then any one héere, yea, beyond all other in the world, except one that is at London before your Fathers Pallace, which is reserued for one as yet vnborne, whose Father and Mother I knowe not, or the place from whence he is discended. After many other familiar spéeches, the knight without rest thus spake to the wise Orbiconte.
Madame, because I am loth to trouble your rest in the morning, I and my freends will now take our leaue of you, requesting you to dispose of me at your pleasure, in that I haue dedicated my life to your seruice. Sir Palladine, answered Orbiconte, I know that my longe desires are now sufficiently acquited, and your readie good will I haue tried and found: depart in the morning what time you please, and still will I aduertise ye as concerning my affaires, ayding you to my power in all places where you shall come, especially to obtaine your destenied honor. Thus went the Knight without rest and his fréends to their chambers, where passing the night in some sleepes, they arose earely in the morning, and moun∣ting on horssebacke, they rode away merily. But the Knight without rest remembred, how this night he had not béene visited with his accustomed dreames, nor could he forget the words of the wise Orbiconte at his depar∣ture, when she said, that her long desires were sufficiently acquited, whereby he began to suspect, that she by enchant∣ment had caused him companie with her Daughters, but not knowing certainely what to thinke, he remoued his thoughts to matter of more valew.
CHAP. XXIX. ¶ Of the cruell battell betweene the Kings of Aquilea and Panonia, wherein, the Knight without rest, Broantine, and Liboran, shewed worthy and knightly deedes of Armes. And what gracious entertaynement the King of Aqui∣lea, his Daughter Nonparelia, and the Princes her Bre∣thren made them afterward. THE day béeing come, that she en∣camped powers of Aquilea and Pa∣noma should méete: Akniden, and Zorian, Sonnes to the King of A∣quilea, accompanied with the Dukes of Sclauonia and Liburnia, raunge their forces in order of battell, the King their Father being not able to be present, because he lay sicke in the Citie of Aquilea, where he was carefully attended by the Quéene, and her faire Daughter. It was then concluded, that the Prince Almiden should leade the auantgard, the Duke of Sclauonia, and the Prince Zorian the maine battell, and the Duke of Liburnia the ariergard: then were a legion of Dalmatians and Alba∣noyses appointed for the wings, being expert warriours with their Darts aboue all other nations. On the other side, the King of Panonia, his Sonne, the Princes of Misia and Dace, with the Duke of Dardania their confederate, hauing passed the Albane Mountaines, were encamped within a league of Baldina. And of this Armie, the King himselfe was the leader, hauing in his companie a Giant named Muzimalde, the mightiest man in stature that euer was séene, who bare a huge mace of stéele twelue foote in length, being answerable in weight to the greatnes thereof.
The Princes of Misia and Dace had charge of the maine battell, and the Duke of Dardani the ariergard, with two thousand Thracians ordained in the wings, which were newly come to giue them succour. Thus doo these Armies with furie encounter together, and great hauock is made on either side, especially the A∣quileans were in greatest ieoperdie. But now the Knight without rest, Broantine, Liboran, and certaine Gentlemen appointed by the wise Orbiconte to accompanie them, arriue in the féeld, and séeing that side goe to wracke, for whose assistance they trauailed thither: like Lyons and no men they thrust among the thickest, where breaking the aray of their enemies, no one durst stand before them, but paid his life for ransome of his bold∣nes. At length, the Knight without rest encountred the huge Muzimalde, and though the weightie strokes of his mace did often put the Prince in danger, yet by pollicy and fine chiualrie, in the end he got the better of the Giant, sending his soule to the Deuill whome he resembled. The Panomans at this fight were greatly dishartened, finding themselues vnable to hold out any longer: so the Dukes of Sclauonia and Liburnia tooke many noble priso∣ners, among whome were the Princes of Dace and Dar∣dania, the Duke of Misia being slaine by the hand of the Prince Almiden, and the rest of the Panonians with shame driuen to light. When the honor of the day was thus fallen to the A∣quileans, the two Princes Almiden and Zorian, sent for the knight without rest and his companions: whome after they had embraced, they desired to goe with them to the King their Father, who should remunerate the great paines they had taken. And that his Maiestie might vn∣derstand their good successe, a Courrier was sent before in all haste, and being brought into the Kings chamber, where the Quéene and Nonparelia were present, he deli∣uered his letters, wherein the Princes had not spared to
report the worthie déedes of the knight without rest, and theirs likewise that came in his companie, so that the King demaunded of whence and what the Knight was, who in his cause had behaued himselfe so brauely, whereto the messenger thus answered. My Lord, it is as yet vnknowne of whence he is, yet this I can assure ye, that he is one of the most goodly Gentlemen that euer I sawe. And in the Armie it is re∣ported, that had not he come when he did, and your Cap∣taine Broantine with other in their companie, your Ma∣iestie had lost the day: for our auantgaid being broken, the Giant Muzimalde laid on such load, as horsse and man he strooke to the ground. But at the arriuall of this Knight, euen as some God had taken humane shape vpon him, our courage encreased, the huge Giant by his hand was slaine, and all the rest stood amazed, as doubting to fight, or turne their backs. When the King of Panonia (who was in person in the battell) sawe the onely man he trusted in thus confoun∣ded, with his Sonne, and fiue hundred men, he set furi∣ously vpon vs, meaning to reuenge the Giants death if he could: but this heate lasted not long, for our men séeing the incredible magnanimitie of this Knight and his com∣panions, followed him with such alacritie of courage, as the King and all his men were driuen on a heape, and had not a sudden winde and extreame storme fallen among vs, the King and his Sonne had béene slaine or taken. But the weather beating vpon our faces, we could not discerne which way they fled, till we espied them on the tops of the Mountaines: whereupon this Knight and his companions made after them, killing many of them a∣mong the hilles▪ and brought backe with them fiftéene prisoners. For conclusion, I thinke our great Prophet sent this Knight, by whome, the Princes your Sonnes and all our liues are saued. The good King was so glad of these tidings, as he tooke
rich chaine from his arme, and gaue it the messenger, earnestly desiring to sée the Knight without rest, that hée might account of him as his vertues deserued: and foorth∣with he commaunded through his Realme, a generall re∣ioycing should bée made for this happie victorie, with bonfires, ringing of belles, and such like signes of gladnes. The Princesse Nonparelia, hearing the messenger so highly extoll the knight without rest, became immediatly amorous of him: longing for the returne of her Brethren, that she might sée the image of her desire. On the morrow, the King commaunded all his Estates, to goe méete his Sonnes, and the Knight without rest, charging them to honor him, as they would doo him selfe: which they fulfilled effectually, as in the Chapter follo∣wing you shall behold. CHAP. XXX. ¶ How the Aquilean Princes, and the Knight without rest arriued at the Court, and their gracious entertainement by the King, Queene, and faire Nonparelia. GReat haste made the Princes of Aquilea to the Courte, that they might present the Knight without rest, to the King their Father, and when they drewe neere the Citie, such a multitude of people met thē on the way, to sée the Knight so highly renowmed, as they could not ride on for the prease & throng. At the Citie gates, they were welcommed with many learned Orations, all the stréetes being hanged with cost∣ly Tapistry, as it had béene to entertaine the greatest Mo∣narch in the world. And the good old King, very weake and crazie by reason of his late sicknesse, came in person to the
Pallace gate, accompanyed with all the Princes & Lords of his Court, when his two Sonnes hauing humbly kissed his hand, the Knight without rest would haue done the like, but the King would not permit him, wherefore he em∣braced him in his armes, as though he had béene as great a state as himselfe. Gentle Knight, quoth he, welcome and frollick in our Court, for such report haue I heard of your vertue and prowesse, as neuer was I more desirous of any thing, then to see that worthie man, who with honorable paines la∣boured in my seruice, hazarding your life and person, for him that neuer deserued such fauour and freendship. My Lord, answered the Knight without rest, this gra∣cious kindnesse exceedeth all report, in deigning to accept of me so honorably, I being but a poore and simple Knight errant, readie to passe straights of death in your seruice. Ah my Sonne, sayd the King, death hast thou alreadie ad∣uentured for me, for which I cannot returne sufficient re∣compence: yet if I cannot requite you effectually, my good will shall not want wheresoeuer you be, in meane time, aske what you will, and be assured to speede. So taking him by the one hand, and his Sonne Almiden by the other, he went vp into the great Hall, where the Quéene, the Princesse, and all the Courtly Ladies, being choisely tricked in their brauest accoustrements, welcommed them with meruailous kindnesse, especially Nonparelia, who shi∣ned like the morning Starre among the other virgins, her courtesies to the Prince excéeded all comparison. These Courtly ceremonies ouerpassed, the Knightes were conducted to their chambers, to refresh themselues, and change their habites, while the roiall supper was pre∣paring. Now was the Knight without rest thoroughly set to worke, with consideration of the Princesse supernatu∣rall beautie, and longer would he haue continued in this rauishing studie: but that the Prince Zorian came to ad∣uertise him, that the King stayed onely his comming. So
walked they together into the great Hall, where the King caused the Knight without rest to sit next him at the table, and the Princesse Nonparelia right ouer against him: a thing to her no little contentation, that she might behold the worthie personage, who had gained the onely priui∣ledge of her heart. All supper time, these two louers fed on no other viands, then the one regarding the other with piercing lookes: for their amorous affections so ouer∣maisterd their sences, as they forgot to receiue any suste∣nance. The supper ended, the Lords and Ladies of the Court fell to dauncing: meane while, the Princesse Non∣parelia hauing noted the gracious behauiour of the Knight without rest, took the hardines vpon her to come néere him, and hauing with great modestie saluted him, thus spake. As I vnderstand Sir Knight, the King my Father and all his are highly beholding to you, in respect of your hono∣rable paines in the late battell against our enemies. Alas Madame, quoth he, if I had not as then beene pre∣sent, yet doubtlesse you had béene assured of victorie, little then is the glorie that I haue deserued. Heerein you must pardon me Sir, aunswered the Prin∣cesse, for I haue heard credibly reported, that but for you we had lost the day: yet let me intreate so much fauour, as to tell me of whence you are, and what might be the occa∣sion of this great kindnesse, that for my fathers sake you should so gladly thrust your life into danger. Madame, quoth he, so long since did your diuine name ouercome me, and such is your present authoritie ouer me, as death shall not make me conceale or disguise the truth to you. Knowe then sweete Lady, and hold it for certaine, that nothing procured me to assist the King your Father in his late warres, but onely your loue, beautie, and good grace: all which I haue heard so generally commended, as now I confesse report hath not feigned. In sooth my Lord, quoth she, such vertues as you speake of, are hard to be sound in me, but let it be as you please to
alleadge, yet no one is so much bound to thanke you as my selfe: for if the King my Father had lost the honor of the battell, too late had it beene for me to renew the peace, falling into the subiection of the verie worst man in the world, to whome my selfe denied the request of marriage, and héere hence grew the warre betwéene my Father and the King of Panonia. So much good Madame, quoth he, did I heare before, by the Gouernour of Enna, and the wise Lady Orbiconte, who intreated me and my companie verie honorably at her Pallace, and if in this action I haue done you any ser∣uice, I account my labour well bestowed, and repute my selfe beyond all other in fortune: hauing disappointed a Prince so contrarie to the vertues and perfections, where∣with your gracious nature is accompanied, for a man of so bad conditions, ought to haue sorted out one like to him∣selfe. In déede my Lord, quoth she, you haue said the truth, notwithstanding, his euill disposed and deformed bodie made me not refuse him, but his great defect of vertue and honestie: for the gifts of the mind are to be preferred be∣fore those of nature, yet was he acquainted neither with the one or other. Longer would they haue continued in talke, but that the King commaunded to ceasse the daun∣cing, because the Knightes should goe rest themselues in their chambers, wherefore the Princesse (breathing a ve∣hement sigh from her inward soule) gaue the courteous good night to the Knight without rest, who hauing deuout∣ly kissed her faire white hand, followed the King to his lod∣ging, and there committing his highnesse to the fauour of the night, was by the two Princes brought to his cham∣ber, they both louing him as he had béene their brother, especially Zorian the yongest, who determined to accom∣panie him when he left the Court, and to séeke aduentures with him as a Knight errant. As each one thus departed to his lodging, the Princesse
called Broantine to her, and enquired of him what and of whence the knight without rest was. Madame, quoth Broantine, at this time I can hardly satisfie you, yet thus much I dare assure ye, as I vnder∣stood by the wise Lady Orbiconte, that he is discended of royall linage, and one that I am especially bound to, ha∣uing receiued vnspeakable fauours at his hands. In sooth, said the Princesse, he may well be said to pro∣céede of royall parentage, in that his ordinarie behauiour declares no lesse: but doo you knowe the cause of his com∣ming into this Countrey, so slenderly accompanyed, and why he entred a quarrell nothing concerning himselfe? The cause (as I haue heard) good Madame, quoth Bro∣antine, was the renowme of a Ladies beautie, famed through the world to excell the fairest. At these words, the Princesse began bashfully to blush, séeing these spéeches agréed with those the Prince himselfe spake, which encreased the amorous fire alreadie kindled in her heart: and that did Broantine very well perceiue, yet he dissembled as though he knew nothing. So depar∣ted the Princesse to her chamber, and Broantine went pre∣sently to the knight without rest, to whome, he reuealed his talke with Nonparelia, aduising him to follow a mat∣ter so well begun, for there was hope of good successe to be expected. The Prince embracing Broantine, gaue him thanks for his freendly tidings: and the next day happened a notable occasion, both to the honor of the knight without rest and to assure him of the Princesse. For Sulbern cousin to the Giant Muzimalde came and challenged the Com∣bate, against him that slew his kinseman: which the knight without rest accepting, in open feeld ouercame his proude enemie, and thereby wonne the especiall good liking of the King and the whole Court. Yet was not this Combate sought without great daunger, in respect Sulbern was a man in stature equall to Muzimalde, and two such mon∣strous aduersaries, would put an approued champion to
his triall: but though the Knight without rest was verie sore wounded, and many times brought in hazard of his life, yet at length he bare away the honor of the féeld, and the head of his enemie as a present to his mistresse. Now doth Venus lighten all her Lampes, and the religious lo∣uers approch her altars, offering vp the incense of sem∣blable affections: she triumphing in the loue of so braue a Knight, and he gloryig in the onely Dame for beautie, the successe whereof héereafter ensueth. CHAP. XXXI. ¶ How the Princesse Nonparelia came to visit the Knight without rest, what talke they had together. And how the wise Orbiconte came to the Court, who healed the Prin∣ces woundes he receiued in the Combate. VErie dangerous were the woundes of the knight without rest and there∣fore he was constrained to keepe his chamber eight dayes together, in which time, the Princesse Nonpare∣lia sent often to vnderstand of his health, and went her selfe (as oppor∣tunitie serued) to see how he did. But that which most of all gréeued these two louers, was, that they could not conferre toge∣ther so secretly as they would: for she neuer went to him without companie of her Ladyes, whome she was loth to acquaint with her amorous desires. At length, as one desi∣rous to be resolued of his affection towards her, one day she withdrew her selfe into her chamber, feigning to repose her selfe there all the after noone, hauing but two of her wayting Gentlewomen with her, the rest were sporting in the Garden and Orchard: and from her chamber she could goe to the Princes lodging, through the great Gal∣leries
vnséene of any, wherefore, accompanyed with her two Damosels, she came to the knight without rest, finding no bodie with him but Liboran, who generally through the Court was reputed dumbe, he seeing the Princesse, pre∣sently gaue place, walking to the windowe with the two Gentlewomen, where with signes and gestures he deuised with them, they taking great pleasure to behold him, pit∣tying his imperfection, because he was of stature comely, and gentle in conditions. While they thus beguiled the time with Liboran, their mistresse seeing she might safely conferre with the knight without rest, sate downe in a chaire by his bed side, and taking his hand to feele his pulses, giuing a great sigh, thus spake. Alas my Lord, pitie it is that honorable kindnes should be so hardly requited, and though your comming hither hath benefited the King and vs all, yet may you cursse our acquaintance, being bought at a price so déere and dan∣gerous. Not so good Madame, answered the knight without rest, I rather thinke the heauens specially fauoured me, in di∣recting my trauaile to this happie countrie: were it onely but to sée you swéete Lady, that mine eyes might behold the rare perfections, wherewith mine eares could neuer be glutted. You speake your pleasure of me my Lord, answered the Princesse, but were I endued with those titles which you giue me, yet are they farre inferiour to your noble desarts. But leaue this talke my Lord, and tell me how ye fare? and how you féele your wounds recouered? for nothing do I more desire, then to sée you well and frée from danger. Alas Madame, quoth he, the wounds I receiued in the combate against Sulberne, are nothing in respect of that I tooke when I sawe you first. The Princesse well vnderstanding his meaning, yet feigning the contrarie, thus replied.
Why doo you not then acquaint the Kings Chirurgions therewith, who are reputed the most skilfull in all this Countrey? tell them your paine, and feare not, for all diseases are easily healed when they be soone taken in hand, and not suffered to enter the bodie too farre▪ Or if you will not declare it to them, thinking (perhaps) they can giue you no remedie, boldly may you reueale it to me, as to the most secret fréend you haue in the world. And this I dare assure ye, that if your gréefe may be cured by humane ca∣pacitie, my Aunt the wise Orbiconte can doo it effectually: and for her will I presently send a messenger, who will not faile to make all possible speede hither. The knight without rest well noting ye Princesse words, was so rauished in conceite, as he was not able to make any answere: but deliuering many a bitter sigh from the bottome of his hart, he lay as one confounded in a traunce. Why my Lord? quoth she, what think you on? dare you not discouer your disease to me? if you distrust me, I will binde my selfe to you by a sollenme othe, neuer to reueale it to any liuing creature: but will kéepe it as secret as your dumbe fréende that cannot speake, nor shall the ri∣ches of the worlde make me breake my promise. The Knight without rest would yet make no answere, but still sighing, with wonderfull affection behelde the Princesse: who now changing her cullour, and with the teares trikling downe her chéekes, continued her speeches thus. Beléeue me my Lord, me thinkes (vnder correcti∣on) you doo me wronge, in fearing to bewraye your gréefe to me, I beséeche ye (if you beare me any good will at all) not to make your harme vncurable by defaulte of vtte∣raunce to your freende, and consider that silence is the Nursse of many malladies: where contrariwise, disclo∣sing the same in time, the danger is with ease preuented. The woordes of the Princesse, deliuered with such zealous protestations, and with so many gracious offers: caused the Knight without rest (setting all doubtfull feares aside)
thus to answere. Madame séeing you haue coniured me in such sorte, and haue sollemnelye promised withall, to conceale the greefe that torments me, and cannot be séene: I will make known my harme vnto you. And as he would haue procéeded, a Gentleman entred the Chamber, to aduertise the Princesse that the wise Orbiconte was new∣ly ariued, and that she came to visit the Knight without rest. As the Princesse was going to welcome her Aunt, she met her at the Chamber doore, and comming in againe with her, after she had humblye saluted her, she brought her to the Beds side, the Knight without rest being not a little glad to sée her, in consideration of the promise she made him at her Pallaice. Courage my Sonne quoth Orbiconte, for ere thrée dayes be past, I will make your woundes whole and sound, especially that which touch∣eth your heart. It is not to be asked, whether these woordes pleased him or no, and she looking on his wounds, annointed them with a precious ointement, which healed them in suche sorte, as in foure and twentye howers the skarres could hardly be séene: then merilye to her Niece she thus spake. Doo not you hate this Knight, faire Niece, that hath kept you from marying with the King of Panopia? Beléeue me good Aunt, answered the Princesse, I am more beholding to this Knight then to any man els liuing, for he hath saued my life and honor: and may I any way recompence his gentlenes, he shall perceiue that I will not be ingratefull. But while the King my Father laboureth to requite his paines, let him be perswaded of my good will toward him. Madame quoth the Prince, so you continue me in your good grace, I thinke my selfe better recompenced, if I haue deserued any recompence at all: then were I presentlye created Emperour of the worlde. To breake off their con∣ference, a Squire came, who saide that the Tables were couered for Supper, wherfore Orbiconte and the Prin∣cesse tooke their leaue, and went into the great hall, where
the King and the Quéene stayed their comming, who wel∣commed their Sister with meruailous kindenes, spending the time of Supper with repetition of many matters. The Tables were no sooner with-drawen, but Orbiconte ta∣king her Niece aside to one of the windowes, began with her in this manner. Since my comming hither faire Niece, I haue percei∣ued that some thing tormentes ye excéedingly: reueale the occasion thereof to me, and if I may stand ye in any stéede for your helpe, be well assured I will doo it right willingly. The Princesse at these woordes was so astonyed, as she was not able to shape any answere: but shaking like a leafe on the trée, her cullour went and came very strange∣lye, such was her feare that her loue should be discouered. And hauing stayed in this quandarie a good while, at last she perswaded her selfe, that her Aunt by her secret know∣ledge vnderstood her gréefe, wherefore with the teares in her eyes, she thus replied. Let me intreate you good Aunt, to suffer me endure my mishap in silence, without constraining me to tell ye, from whence my great alteration procéedeth: it is vertue in a maiden to suffer patiently, and shame to bewraye her owne thoughtes, though euery hower addeth a worlde of miserie, and burdeneth her minde with more then com∣mon cares. Yet this I would haue ye to thinke, that my extremities (as yet) haue not stretched so farre, but to make me skilfull in iudging of a passion: from which heere∣tofore I haue defended my selfe indifferently, accounting it an offence to modestie, to heare so much as spéech therof. Orbiconte desirous rather to encrease her passion then any way to diminishe it, thus recomforted her. You doo well (good Niece) in respect of your calling, to conceale the tormentes you endure, and which my arte ac∣quainted me withall ere I came hither, for it is a signe of speciall gouernement, to be carefull of disclosing such a se∣cret, as carieth greatest regard among all women. But if
you are so liuely touched with loue, as your gentle hart may be empaired therby, by meanes of the woorthy Knight without rest, who hath doone more for you, then all your Fathers subiectes could without him: you must vnder∣stand, that this is a disease common to euery one nor are you alone, or the first that hath felte the furie of this passi∣on, but many noble Ladies (bashefull and right modestlye gouerned) haue felt the power of the God of Loue, who ruleth and commaundeth when and where him pleaseth. For this cause expect the good houre, and before your infir∣mitie ranckle too farre, giue order and remedie thereto in the best sorte you can. I think it not amisse, that you make some experience of Loues authoritie, but you haue let him enter too farre within your hart that euen your very soule is penitrated therwith: the best and most auayling coun∣saile I can giue ye, is to practise some chaste and honest meane, wherby to enioy the summe of your desire, and so shall you preuent infamie and dishonor, which euery crea∣ture ought carefully to auoide. Alas Madame, quoth the Princesse, I know no mean more honest then the mariage of him and I togeather, but how can that be compassed? or what honor is it to me to moue any spéeche therof? he is a stranger, vnknowen to me of whence or what he is, I am not acquainted with so much as his name. Assure your selfe faire Niece asnwe∣red Orbiconte, that he is Sonne to a most vertuous King, as greatly renowmed as any one in the world: and fur∣ther I will tell ye as concerning him, so you will promise and sweare to me to kéep it secret, for otherwise you shall put him in great danger of his life. Ah good Aunt, quoth Nonparelia, rather let me dye ten thousand deathes, then be the cause of any displeasure to him: therfore acquainte me with his estate, and I will be directed by you in all my after opinions. But by reason that the King arose and went to his Chamber, their talke drake off, the Quéene and her daughter conducting Orbi∣conte
to her lodging: so remained the Princesse  all that night, and earnestly longing for the morning, that she might end the talke betwéene her Aunt and her, for further knowledge of the Knight without rest: who like∣wise was no lesse forward in desire, because after Supper he had not séene the Princesse and Orbiconte. CHAP. XXXII. ¶How the wise Orbiconte tolde the Princesse Nonparelie▪ what and who the Knight without rest was: and how by her meanes, promise of mariage passed between them, ORbiconte béeing in her Chamber, was both pleased and somewhat of∣fended: pleased, in that she had so sounded the thoughts of her Niece: and offended, because she had not concluded her tale, concerning the knight without rest. But no sooner was morning come, when the prin∣cesse sent many times to knowe if her Aunt were stirring, and so soone as she was assured therof: she went to her Chamber, where hauing giuen her the good morrowe, she saide: Madame, I haue not forgot∣ten the promise you made me yesternight. Neither haue I good Niece answered Orbiconte, therfore presently will I be as good as my woorde. So walking with her into the Warderobe, and being none but them selues together, she began her discourse as followeth. Faire Niece, vnder assurance of the promise you made me yester night, I giue you to vnderstād, that the Knight without rest is a Christian, Sonne to the King of England, and his right name is Palladine, giuen him in honor of the wise Goddesse Pallas. And I hauing foreséene ere the time of his birth, that he should be the most vertuous and vali∣ant
Prince of his time, and the Children engendred by him, should very farre excell all other whatsoeuer: I then made choyse of him to be your Husband, séeing your Mo∣ther likewise at that time great with Childe, and she deli∣uered of you sixe monthes after his birthe. That mine in∣tent might sorte to effect, and to make you the onely hap∣py Lady of the world, by enioying a Husband the paragon among all Princes: I sollicited him by dreams and night∣ly visions, yea, by letters and messages in such sorte, as by my meanes he trauailed hether, desirous to sée that rare beautye, wherwith I renowmed you beyond all other La∣dies. And had it not béen for my dilligent admonition, he had ere this time béene maried to faire Rosamonde of Fraunce: where record remaineth of his famous chiualrie, as it dooth in many other places of the world. But neede∣lesse is it to vse many woordes in this matter, you knowe that I desire nothing more then your aduauncement, and no man in the worlde is more accomplished with all per∣fections, either in riches, vertue, braue minde, and all other good qualities: so that if my iudgement faile me not, I think him equall to you euery way, & more woorthy to enioy you then any other. If you be deceiued Madame, said the Princesse, much more must I be then, for me thinkes it is impossible to finde his second: so would you haue said, had you but seene his valiant combate with the Giant Sulberne. If then quoth Orbiconte, you knowe so well what he is, he louing you as his own life, & you him in like sorte: I would aduise ye, with all speede to consu∣mate the mariage betweene ye, albeit vnknowen to the King & Queene, and let me deale for their good will after∣ward. Alas Madame, quoth the Princesse, héerein would I willingly obay ye: but that in religion we are too farre a sunder. For that take you no care saide Orbiconte, in that before it be long, all your Fathers Kingdomes shall be conuerted to Christianitie: therfore boldelye make pro∣mise to the Knight, that you will be baptised so soon as you
come into England, he hauing first sollemnely sworne to marrie with you, as well I knowe he hath no other intent. Héerewith shall his parents be well pleased, and yours heereafter likewise: for then and not before they shall vn∣derstand, that this is for your eternall honor and profit. Nonparelia, who desired nothing more then the conquest of his loue (and withall, the swéete benefite ensuing there∣by) whome she had made Lord and maister of her heart, thus answered. I knowe Madame, that my honorable preferment is the full of your intent, and that you will sheeld me from any blemish or reproch: I therefore commit all to your discre∣tion, and will obey whatsoeuer you commaund me. This night then, said Orbiconte, shall you be assured of your louely Knight, and holy vowes of mariage shall be passed betwéene you: afterward, agrée as you can your selues, for I will accōplish what I haue promised. So went they both to the Princes chamber, where they found him walking with Captaine Broantine, one that knew the deapth of his desire, yet ignorant what Orbiconte and the Princesse had concluded. Many deuoute courtesies passed betwéene them, and Orbiconte taking the Prince aside, thus spake to him. You remember (my Lord) your vowe, when you called your selfe the Knight without rest, that you would neuer entertaine quiet of minde, till you had found your onely beloued in the world, to whome you were de∣stenied before your birth: now be of good chéere, for this night shall you be resolued of the Lady, who being frée in affection from all other, doth honor you with the vnspotted loue of a virgin, estéeming of you as her Lord and husband. No meruaile if these newes were welcome to the Knight without rest▪ who giuing credit to the words of Orbiconte, sealed many a sweete kisse on the daintie lippes of Nonpa∣relia, as pledges of a full contract in the sight of heauen, not to be recalled but by death onely. Short tale to make, Orbiconte that night brought them together, and ioyned
their hands with sollemne and sacred vowes, he to carie her with him into England, and she there to receiue the faith of a Christian. And thus will we leaue them in their amorous purposes, each comforting other with the argu∣ments of loue: and now let vs returne to the Princes and Knightes, whome we left in Fraunce, England, and else∣where. CHAP. XXXIII. ¶ How the Prince Don Robert of Freeze, surnamed the Knight of Fame, hauing taken his leaue of the King Mi∣lanor of England, and Lydiseo, the Prince of Hungaria: found a Knight wounded to the death, and what hap∣ned to him afterward. YOU remember how the Knight of Fame, being vanquished, and sore wounded by the Prince Palladine, at ye Iousts which Caesar maintai∣ned for loue of the faire Rosamond▪ departed with Lydiseo of Hunga∣ria, and crossed the Sea into Eng∣land, where they were graciously entertained by the King Milanor, to whome Lydiseo presented Letters from the Prince his Sonne, and an other from Landastines to his Daughter Floraea. These two Princes hauing soiourned awhile in the Court of England, tooke leaue of the King and the Ladyes, and afterward sundered themselues in trauaile, Lydiseo iorneying toward Hungaria to sée the King his Father, who (as he vnderstood) was fallen into a verie dangerous disease. And the Knight of Fame, coasting through a part of Brittayne and Normandie, went to Burdeaux, and from thence into Spayne: as much to expell the mellancholly, which the remembrance of faire Rosamonde charged his
thoughts withall, as also to make proofe of his valour a∣gainst the Knightes of Spayne, who accounted themselues the most valiant in Europe. Being thus landed in Spayne, he trauailed through di∣uers Forrests, till night ouertaking him, he was constrai∣ned to alight, while his Squire cut down certaine boughes of trees, for his maister to rest himselfe vpon. After they had laid themselues downe as willing to sleepe, not farre from them they heard the voice of a man, breathing foorth many bitter and dollorous complaints, and as it séemed to them, he was nigh his end, for his words faultred in the vtterance, as wanting abilitie to deliuer them, whereupon the Knight of Fame awaking his Squire, said: doost thou not heare one complaine very greeuously? I doo my Lord, answered the Squire, and belike he is in some great dan∣ger. I pray thee then, quoth Don Robert▪ let vs go a little néerer, that we may vnderstand what he saith. So clasp∣ping on their Helmets and Sheelds, they walked soft in to the place where they heard the voice, when they alight heare him continue his complaints in this manner. Unhappie that I am, must I néedes die by the traito∣rous hand of him whome I trusted as mine owne selfe? Ah wretch, why didst thou not tell me thy cruell pretence? it might e, I would haue found meanes to haue satisfied the: of if thou hadst yeelded me better reason, I might haue desisted from my pursuite. Pansnite? alas Madame, all the torments in the world, shall not withdraw me from your gracious loue, nor death it selfe, which I feele hath aendicentred me. O monstrous treason, oh false dissem∣bling and traiterous Cstillian Prince. What say I? Prince? if thou be a Prince, thou art one of the very worst that euer liued. Ah my Lord▪ quoth the Squire to this wounded Knight, you may well beléeue and hold for certaine, as I haue sayd to you many times, that loue can abide no companion: so by the often comming and going of this traytour to Ma∣dame
Minoretta, he could not but seeke to deceiue ye, and to frustrate the hope you had in her: all which you must now endure with pacience, seeing we are all subiect to for∣tunes changes. If fortune then reward me with death, quoth the Knight, iustly may I accuse her of treason, as one that procureth all the mischiefes in the world. Ah traiteresse and wreakefull Lady, why didst thou not suffer me to en∣ioy that honor, which her diuine nature and beautie had grounded in my heart, and whereto I was sollemnely vowed and dedicated: Alas, I féele my strength more and more to forsake me. Ah Minoretta, Minoretta, what wilt thou say when thou hearest of my misfortune? I feare thy loue is rated at the price of thy life. Héerewith his speech failed him, and breathing foorth a vehement sigh, he yeelded vp the ghost. O my God, said his Squire, what shall I now doo? Where shall I bestowe the dead bodie of my mai∣ster? if I returne to the Court of the King his brother, he will suspect that I haue murthered him. Ah sweete Lady Minoretta, what hart breaking will this be to you, vnder∣standing the death of my Lord, and the occasion thereof. The Knight of Fame hearing the sorrowfull words of the Squire, and fearing he would depart and leaue his mai∣ster: came with his Squire from behinde the tree where they were hid, and seeing the wofull man holding his dead maister in his armes, thus spake to him. Tell me good fréend, how did this mishap befall thy maister? The Squire was so amazed, when by the light of the Moone he beheld the Knight of Fame, and his Squire with him, both their swords being drawne: as he was not able to returne any answere, whereby Don Robert perceiued, that the sudden sight of him affrighted the Squire, wherefore he thus spake to him againe. Why doost thou not speake to vs, my fréend? doubtest thou that we come to doo thée any displeasure? perswade thy selfe, that we will assist thee to our vttermost, and therefore feare not to bewray thy
mishap. The Squire throughly resolued by these cour∣teous speeches, casting foorth many bitter sighes into the aire, and trembling as the burthen of his greefe gaue cause, thus answered. Alas my Lord, right gladly shall I reueale to you, the great misfortune now happened to my Lord, who (as you sawe) gaue vp his ghost betweene mine armes, the occasion whereof grew in this manner. My noble maister while he liued, was bastard brother to the King of Scicilie, yet as déerely beloued of his Maie∣stie, as if he had béene his lawfull legitimate brother, such was his vertuous and valiant behauiour: and for the King would assure my Lord of his intire good will and af∣fection, he gaue him the Signorie of Siracusa, with all the titles and benefites belonging thereto. But my woorthie Lord and maister, who was named Don Frionell, hauing about sixe moneths since heard commended, the excellent beautie of Minoretta, Daughter to the King of Portugall: became so enamoured of her, as to compasse the means that he might sée her, he craued leaue of the King his bro∣ther to trauaile into Fraunce, as a Knight errant, séeking after aduentures. Hauing obteined licence for his depar∣ture, in stead of going to Fraunce, he tooke the way toward Portugall, where being arriued, so well he made knowne his prowesse at the Tilt and Tourney, which dayly hée maintained in honor of the Princesse, as the King enter∣taining him into especiall fauour: all the Lords and Knights of Portugall did the like, so that being well estée∣med and honored of euery one, chéefely of the Quéene and her Ladyes, so well he could his Courtship to the Princesse Minoretta, that she accepted him as her Knight, and fauou∣red him aboue all other that made loue to her. In this time came to the Court Don Galitreo of Castile, who no sooner sawe the faire Princesse, but presently he was so esprized with her loue, as he was readie to die at her foote, and therefore diuers times made offer of his ser∣uice to her: but she made no account thereof, declaring by
her gesture and countenance, that my maister was the onely man in her thoughts. Galitreo from this time for∣ward, conceiued mortall hatred against my maister, yet  his villainie with such coullers, as though he ha beene one of his deerest freends. So that my maister being one day commaunded by his Lady Minoretta to goe assist a distressed Lady, whome a cruell Gentleman too much wronged: the traitour receiued opportunitie to set his mischiefe abroche, for he being present when my mai∣ster tooke his charge, gaue no shew of contraie meaning, but no sooner had my Lord restored the wronged Lady, albeit with danger of his person, by reason of certaine wounds he receiued in fight, and returning to the Prin∣cesse againe: but this day as we came into this Forrest, where I vnarmed my Lord to deese his wounds, the traitour Galitreo, accompanied with foure more, disguised and well armed, awaiting cowardly to take my Lord at this aduantage, came to him with these wors▪ Knowest thou me rionel? if thou wilt saue thy life, thou must heere sollemnely sweare to me, neuer to serue the Princesse Mi∣noretta longer, or héereafter to cme in any place where she is. My maister knowing the traitour well enough by his speeches, yet meruailing to méete him in this place, because at his departure he left him in Portug: notwithstanding he was sore wounded and vnarmed, boldly thus answe∣red. Rather let me loose my life, quoth he, and endure a thousand deathes if it were possible▪ then I will forgoe the seruice of my mistresse: but while I can lift my Sword, will I maintaine her as the onely Goddesse of my heart. By God, quoth Galitreo, but I will make thee sure thou shalt not: o drawing his Coutiare, and my maister being thus naked as you sée, because I was attending his wounds, he neuer left striking at him, till he sawe him fall, when both he and his companions gallopped away so fast as they could. Trust one, answered the Knight of Fame, thou hast tolde mee the most monstrous te that euer I
heard of: but thou séeing thy maister so misused, why didst not thou helpe to defend him? Alas my Lord, quoth the Squire, there wanted no good will in mée, but they that accompanyed this traitour, held me with such violence as I could not stirre. The Knight of Fame beholding the cruell woundes Don Frionell had receiued, and what a goodly personage hée had béene in his life time, sighing, sayd. Oh God, what two dangerous enemies are loue and iealousie? in the world there can not bée any woorsse, whereby men may fall into so great hazard. Well my freend, quoth hée to the Squire, héere must wee rest our selues for this night, because we knowe not whether else to goe, and to morrow shall wee prouide for thy maisters bodie, whose death I purpose to reuenge, if I may finde the man that so bloodely murthered him. Assure your selfe my Lord, sayd the Squire, that hee is in Portugall with the Princesse, because for her loue he slewe my maister, who reputed him one of his déerest fréends. There neuer were so great freends, quoth Don Robert, whome loue and iealousie could not moue to discord, and so for that night they lay downe and slept.
CHAP. XXXIIII. ¶ How the Knight of Fame, hauing taken order for the buriall of Don Frionell, trauailed into Portugall, where he fought the combate with Don Galitreo of Castile, and what was the issue thereof. CLéere Phoebus arising from the foul∣ded armes of faire Thetis, the knight of Fame awaked, and not able to sléepe any longer, by reason of his troubled thoughtes, leauing the Squires who as yet had not stirre he walked downe to a Riuer side, where he met an aged Hernut with an earthen Pitcher in his hand full of water, and hauing saluted the old Father, demaunded of him, if any Towne or Uillage were neere at hand, or any religious Church or Chappell, where a Knight might be buried, whome he had found slaine in that Forrest. In sooth my Lord, answered the Hermit, he is not the first that hath béene murthered in this place, for I haue enterred fiftéene or sixteene in my little Chappell, which is kept with holie and religious deuotion: where if you please, the Knight you speake of may be buried, and I will helpe to carie him thither, for no other place is neere at hand by two good leagues and more. Good Father then, said the Knight of Fame, your gentle offer shall be accepted, the bodie is not farre hence, and little labour shall you take: for his Squire and mine shall lay him on a horsse, and so conuay him to your Chappell without trouble. So went he with the Hermit to the dead bodie, and awaking the Squires, conuaied it to the Hermits Chappell in manner aforesaid: where the funerall ceremonies finished, the Knight of Fame rewarded the old Hermit, and afterward
mounted on horseback all thrée, riding straight to Tolledo, and passing the ood Dori, entred the Realme of Portu∣gall, where they vnderstood that Galitreo was as then at the Court. Don Robert sendeth his Squire to the King, to request safe conduct for arriuall at the Pallace, which bée∣ing obtained, in presence of his Maiestie he thus began. Hither am I come worthie Prince, to let you knowe, that in your Court abideth the most traiterous and disloy∣all Knight, as euer was heard of, and who (not four daies since) hath doone such a deede in Spayne, as no one bearing Armes would haue committed the like. By treason and villainie hath he murdred one of the most valiant Knights in Europe as I vnderstand, for neuer did I knowe the man  see him, till he was dead: he being named Don Frionell of Scicilie, who left your Court by commaundement of Madame Minoretta, vpon an occasion best knowne to her selfe. Full well did I knowe the man, answered the King, but name him to me, who slew Frionell in such sort as thou sayest, to the end I may cause him come and defend his cause: and if he did it in manner as thou hast declared, or else can bring any proofe thereof, neuer shall he enter the combate with thée, but iustice shall be inflicted on him as so foule an offence deserueth. As for me my Lord, answe∣red the Knight of Fame, I can make no other proofe there∣of, then by this Squire that serued Don Frionell, in whose armes I sawe the Knight breathe his last, and dying con∣fessed, that the Castilln Prince slewe him by treason: wherefore my Lord send for him, and if he denie it, heere am I readie to auouch it, and by my Sword will make him confesse it. The King hearing him name the Prince of Castile, was greatly astonied héereat, for he knew not that he was ab∣sent from his Court so lately, and the Queene with her Ladies being present, were no lesse abashed: but aboue all, the Princesse Minoretta, who hearing the death of her va∣liant Knight, whome she in loue had made cheefest account
of, immediatly such sorrow strooke to her heart, as her speech failing her, and a cold chilling blood passing the conduts of her vaines, she leaned on the lap of her Gouer∣nesse, where falling in a dead traunce, all the Ladies had much adoo to get life in her againe. But she being recoue∣red, and each one placed as they were before, Galitreo was sent for, to whome the King thus spake. Beléeue me Galitreo, I alwayes conceiued well of you till now, perswading my selfe of your truth and discretion, that nothing in the world could mooue ye so much as to thinke a bad thought, much lesse to commit any acte of treason. But what I say, this Knight auoucheth, that in Spayne you haue doone a deede of high dishonor, where you being armed and well accompanied, outragiously set vpon the noble Lord Don Frionell, he being naked and without defence, then and there you cruelly murdred him, yea, for a cause of no weight as I vnderstand: what answere make ye to this accusation? If Galitreo were then doubt∣fully surprized, I referre to the iudgement of like bad min∣ded men: but hauing beheld the stearne countenance of the Knight of Fame, with counterfeit reuerence thus re∣plyed. My Lord, not onely now, but at all times, calumnia-tours, and false accusers are easily found, the greater part of the auncient Romaine Histories are stored with ex∣amples thereof: but in the end, such bastard broode of de∣tractours, haue felt the desert of their lauish toongs, and innocencie hath vaunted with triumph. This speake I in respect of this paillard, who (vnder your Maiesties cor∣rection hath falsly lied, and as a leaser is to be esteemed. For the woorthie Lord Don Frionell, was one of the dée∣rest freends I had in the world: beside, I dare gadge my life, that this false wretch knowes me not, or euer saw me before this instant. I beléeue well, quoth the Squire to Don Frionell, that this Knight had no knowledge of you till now: but I am assured that he hath spoken truth, and
so my maister himselfe confessed at his latest gaspe, that because Madame Minoretta fauoured him, and despised you, therefore you wrought his death in that cruell man∣ner. The Knight of Fame perceiuing, that Galitreo had no great mind to the combate, interrupted the Squire, and thus spake to the King. I sée well my Lord, that Don Ga∣litreo despairing of his cause, desires to trifle the time with many circumstances, in that he thinketh me vnable to auerre mine accusation, because I want further testimo∣nie, how he and his complices masked and disguised, did the shamefull déed of death and murther: may it therefore like your Maiestie to graunt vs the combate, and in fight will I make manifest his treason. Presumptuous as thou art, quoth Galitreo, doost thou thinke I feare to méete thée in plaine combate? no, so please my Lord the King, I ac∣cept thy challenge, and hauing giuen thee the due be∣longing to a false varlet, will follow the quest of my déere freend Don Frionell. Him maist thou dead, quoth the Knight of Fame, soone enough to thy shame, not farre from the place where thou didst murther him, in a little Hermi∣tage in the same Forrest, where I caused him to be inter∣red, as his Squire and mine owne are able to testifie. Héereupon, the King called two auncient Knightes, who hauing heard the difference betwéene the Knight of Fame and Galitreo, he demaunded their aduise in this doubt∣full matter. They thought it expedient, that the combate should be graunted them, to end the controuersie of fur∣ther proofe: because Frionell might be slaine by the accuser and his Squire, as by Galitreo that stood accused. Where∣fore the King graunted them the combate at the Launce and Sword, as is common among all Knightes, appoin∣ting the Marquesse of Villereal, and the Countie of Ma∣rialne, Iudges of the feeld. All this while, the Princesse Minoretta continued her pensiue mones, praying for the prosperous successe of the newcome Knight, and the confu∣sion of the traitour Galitreo. On the morrow, was this
doubtfull combate tried, being fought on either side with such exceeding valour, as they both fell downe foote to foote, that each one reputed them both for dead: but when the Knight of Fames helmet was opened, and he had receiued the fresh aire, he came to himselfe againe, albeit Galitreo was slaine outright, and therefore condemned as foyled in fight. The King glad of this happie victorie, intrated the Knight of Fame as he had beene his owne Sonne, causing his Chirugions to take care of his wounds, and during the time of his abode there for his health, the continuall good countenance shewed by the Princesse Minoretta made him liue in hope to obtaine: but he was preuented by the King of Nauarre, who sending his Ambassadours to de∣maund the Princesse in marriage, had his request graun∣ted by the King. The Knight of Fame séeing himselfe so infortunate in obtaining a wife, so soone as his wounds were thoroughly cured, tooke his leaue of the King and departed, with in∣tent after he had seene his owne countrey, to trauaile into England againe, to be reuenged on Palladine, for the foyle he susteyned at the Ioustes at Paris, so mounting on horse∣back, he tooke his way directly toward Freezeland. And not able to continue there any long time, because his concei∣ued hate was such toward the English Prince, he trauailed thorough Scotland▪ who méeting suddenly with Simprinell, and not knowing him, a quarrell arose betweene them, the Knight of Fame discommending Palladine, and vowing reuenge on all those that durst take his part, which Sim∣prinell vndertaking, they fell from words to strokes, and such was the good fortune of Don Robert▪ as hauing the better of Simprinell▪ he departed, leauing him there very sore wounded. Maneleo the Prince of Millayne, whome long since we left in his iourney toward Normandie, desirous to see his sweete mistresse Marcelina, by good hap found Simpri∣nell
thus dangerously wounded, and hauing vnderstood the whole summe of his misaduenture, promised to follow the Knight who had thus wronged him, and to reuenge his cause though it cost him his life. Now must I giue you to vnderstand, that Manteleo and the Knight of Fame were very neere allyed, the Fa∣ther to Temoreo the Duke of Millayne, beeing brother to Don Roberts mother: yet this kindred being forgotten be∣twéene them, or at least their angrie displeasure preuailing aboue the remembrance thereof, caused them (meeting to∣gether) to put each others life in very great danger. And being afterward brought by their Squires to a Gentle∣mans Castell néere at hand, where Simprinell likewise lay for the recouerie of his woundes, they had knowledge of each other, when sorrowing their méeting was in such vn∣happie sort, with fréendly gréetings, they excused all that had passed, riding with Simprinell to the King his Fathers Court, where they were entertained as beseemed their ho∣norable calling. CHAP. XXXV. ¶ How the great Turke sent his Ambassadours to the King of Aquilea, to request his Daughter Nonparelia in mar∣riage: and what sorrow it was to her, and the Knight without rest, when they heard the King giue his consent. ALL this while remained Palladine with his faire Nonparelia, in the greatest pleasure and delight that could be imagined, till fortune, en∣uious of their successe, sought to crosse them with her wunted fro∣wardnesse: which Orbiconte by her knowledge well perceiuing, and that now if she layd not to her hel∣ping
hand, all the promised good hap would be squandered for euer, to terrefie the two louers alittle, she came and brake it to them in this manner. It is a common saying, my good fréends, that dangers foretold, hurt the lesse when they come to passe, heereby am I to aduertise ye, that such a matter will shortly happen, as can not but be to your great disliking: yet be of good cheere, and endure it with resolued pacience, for I will preuent the effectuall working thereof. But to hold ye in no longer suspence, knowe, that this night past I made a figure, to vnderstand thereby, if your mariage were to be hindered by any contrarie accident: and I finde, that a mightie Lord, euen he that commaundeth ouer all these countries, will shortly send to request my Niece in ma∣riage, whereto the King her Father will gladly giue con∣sent. At these words the Princesse fell in a swoune, and the Knight without rest was meruailous impacient: but Or∣biconte hauing recouered her, in this sort began to per∣swade her. Why? faire Niece, doo you dispaire or doubt, that I can not hinder the mariage betweene you and the great Turke? knowe you not, that I haue done things of greater valew then that? I neuer thought you had such diffdence in me. Who brought Sir Palladine into this countrey but I? and who gaue you the honor of his loue, but I? and if I haue beene able to doo all this, thinke ye I can not wade through matter of lesse moment? Quiet your selfe, and feare not, but I will compasse your mariage to your owne content, without displeasing my Lord the great Turke, or the King your Father, notwithstanding his promise. Alas my good Aunt, said the Princesse, it is not for my Fathers ease, to purchase himselfe so great an enemie as is the great Turke, who in thrée dayes is able to ruinate our whole countrey: and hauing so bad a neighbour as is the King of Panoma, who doubtlesse would gladly with
the great Lord, in reuenge of the late foyle he sustayned, I see no way to preuent fatall danger. Why Madame? quoth the Knight without rest, victo∣rie consisteth not in strength or multitude, but in the pol∣licie of the Captaines, and discretion of the Souldiours to pursue an enterprise, as many examples are left among Romaines, Carthaginians, Athenians, and infinite other, where a small power hath preuailed against the greater, onely by the wise foresight of their leaders, and withall, hauing truth and iustice on their side. Let vs, said the Princesse, not stand vpon pollicie, or the truth of our cause, we can not be more subtill or hardie then they are: and as for our right in the matter, what reason shall my Father haue to denie so great a Lord? great I may boldly say, because in all the world he hath not his second, both in ri∣ches, puissance, or any thing whatsoeuer. Alas good Niece, said Orbiconte merily, stand not on these doubtfull tearmes, for the case shall neuer be aduentured so farre: cast all your care on me, as yet (I thinke) I neuer fayled ye. So parted they to their chambers, where the Prin∣cesse remained in a hell of greefe, such was her intire af∣fection to the Prince of England. And he likewise could re∣solue on nothing, for now he thought to request the Prin∣cesse in mariage, before the comming of the Ambassadors, perswading himselfe that the King would not deny him: then againe he dispaired of the matter, reputing himselfe vnlikely to enioy her, by reason of their contrarietie in faith and religion, the King being an earnest maintainer of the Pagan lawe. Nor would this imagination serue, wherefore he intended to steale her thence secretly, and to carie her with him into England, while Orbiconte labou∣red at home to appease the trouble that might follow. In the end, he reposed himselfe on the faithfull promise of Or∣biconte, and desired his Lady to doo the like, because he had found her so iust in all his former fortunes. But now are the Ambassadours come to the Court, where being
entertained with great pompe and royaltie, he that was appointed chéefe in the embassade, thus deliuered his mes∣sage to the King. King of Aquilea, the high and mightie Lord my maister being aduertised of the rare vertues wherewith thy Daughter is endued, hath sent me to intreate thée, that thou wouldest bestowe her on him in marriage: and in so dooing, he vowes himselfe thy fréend, and a continuall e∣nemie to thy ill willers. Heerewith he deliuered the Letters of credit, signed with the hand and scale of the great Turke: whereat the King no lesse ioyfull then amazed, that his Daughter should a∣rise to so high fortune, without crauing any aduise in the cause, thus answered. I thanke my gracious Lord with all my heart, that he will so honor me with request of my Daughter in marriage: and her do I fréely giue him, with all that is mine at his disposing. Then did the Ambassadour present the King, sixe goodly Coursers of Turkie, sent him from his Lord and maister, and to the Princesse he gaue a sumptuous Carbanet, gar∣nished with Carbuncles, Orientall Pearles, and stones of inestimable valew, which she receiued with good counte∣nance, albeit God knowes with a heauie heart, in which gréefe, the Knight without rest bare her company, yet durst not outward shew therof. This costly Iewell the Queene immediatly fastened about her Daughters neck, being commended for the rarest that euer was seene: afterward the King walked with the Ambassadours, dooing them all the honor he could any way deuise. While all the Court were busied, Orbiconte came with Nonparelia to Palladines chamber, and there concluded, that he should on the morrow take his leaue of the King, framing his iourney directly toward England, where the Princesse and she would in short time méete him: willing them to make no shew of sorrow at their departure, least suspition might preuent what she had intended, but to re∣solue
them assuredly, that all her promises should sorte to effect. The Knight without rest did as he was aduised, and albeit it was long ere the King would giue consent, because he loued him very déerely: yet at length (with muche adoo) he preuailed, the Prince Zorian obtaining leaue of his Father to accompanie him in trauaile, be∣cause his Maiestie thought he could neuer haue a brauer companion. Many rich giftes the King bestowed on the Knight without rest, especially one of the Coursers sent him from the great Turke, and other thinges néedfull to be vsed in trauaile, and thus he prepared him selfe toward his iourney, reposing his confidence in the wise Orbiconte, that she would bring his Lady safely into England. CHAP, XXXVI. ¶ How the knight without rest and the Prince Zorian, depar∣ted from Aquilea toward England, and how the Knight without rest by the waye, discouered him selfe to the Prince Zorian: who when he came into England, was baptized, and betrothed to the faire Graciana, daughter to the Earle of Flaunders, and the like was Mantelio and Landstines to their Ladies. EUery thing being in redines for our Knightes trauaile, after all the ce∣remonious conges at the parting of freendes, the knight without rest, Zorian, Broantine, Lyboran and Lycelio, all brauelye mounted in seemely equipage: they leaue the Courte of Aquilea, and toward England iourney with all conueniēt speede, the Knight without rest being especially induced to this haste, because he expected the promise of Orbiconte, soone after would followe him with the faire Nonparelia.
Many woorthy aduentures they had by the way, as defen∣ding chaste Damoselles from forced violence, and helping distressed Ladies to their suborned right: which growing to more tediousnes thē delightfull matter, I haue thought good to abridge, as lothe to speake of any thing but what is woorth the hearing. When our Knightes were entered the Realme of Al∣maigne, and the Englishe Prince had made good triall of Zorians loue to him: one night as they laye in Bed to∣geather, he entred into these spéeches. My Lord Zorian, the fréendship solemnely sworne betwéene vs, and the proof of your ready good will in all my actions: will not let me hide one thing f you, which till this present I haue kept with great secrecie, both from the knowledge of the King your Father and you, onely by the perswasion of the Lady Orbiconte your Aunt, to whome I am more behol∣ding then any other liuing creature. For in my iourney toward Aquilea, oftentimes did she preserue me from the danger of death, and by her meanes I left the Court of the King of England my Father, by her promise that I should enioy your faire Sister in mariage, in recompence of some seruice I should doo to the King your Father: and this by her secret knowledge she likewise tolde me, that all your Fathers dominions shall be shortly conuerted to the Chri∣stian faithe, which I professe, and will doo till death. Then he recounted, how Orbiconte sent him the Shéeld he bare, and shewed the Swoord wheron the name of Aquilea was engrauen, being brought to him by the enchaunted knight and two Damosells. He likewise declared how he chan∣ged his name because he would not be knowne, and that Liboran only counterfeited dumbnes, being not able to learne the Aquilian language: all the rest of his trauailes at full he opened, his right name and whether he now iournied. In sooth my Lord Palladine, answered Zorian, such resolute opinion of your vertues haue I imprinted in my
hart, as though you be contrary to me in loue and professi∣on, yet shall not my good will slack, or I forgoe your com∣panie: but I would the time were come, wherein my Fa∣thers kingdome shall embrace Christianitie, which I al∣ready begin to like so well, beleeuing that your God is of greater power then ours, as all our successefull déedes of armes beare witnes: that I ere long will become a Chri∣stian. Yet one thing cheeflye dooth displease me, that my Sister is promised in mariage to my Lord the great Turk, which will be the occasion that my Aunte Orbiconte can∣not keep her woord with you. My Lord and companion saide Palladine, that I haue your good liking in this cause, in sooth it dooth not a little content me: but as for your Sister, there is nothing yet doone but may easily be altered. Madame Orbiconte hath promised to content the great Turke and your Father, and in fewe dayes will safelye arriue with your Sister in England. I would we might finde them there quoth Zorian at our comming, you maye be assured I would not hinder your mariage, but assist it to the vttermost of my power: for more account doo I make of your loue and fréendship, then all the wealthy possessions af my Lord ye great Turk. And one thing will I intreat ye faithfully to prom me, that the next day after our arriuall at your Fathers Court you will take such order as I maye be baptised in the faith of a Christian, for I féele my conscience that way earnestly addicted. Palladine not a little ioyfull of this request, promised to perfourme what he had desired: so sléep causing them to breake off talke, the nexte morning they were earlye on Horsse backe, and passing the Rheme, they entred Lorrayne. Afterward trauersing the Ardeines, Luxenbourge and Liege, they came into Brabant, and from thence (after ma∣ny aduentures ended) they crossed through Flaunders, ta∣king shipping at Callis, and in shorte time landed at Douer in England, where they stayed two or three daies to refresh
them selues. Then comming to London to the Court, God knowes what ioy was there made for their arriuall, the King to see his Sonne returned. Manteleo and Landasti∣nes their long absent fréend, and the Citizens their yong Prince whome they feared was lost: let all their ioye be compared together, and thinke of what efficacie so great a matter is, because pen and paper cannot disclose it. Pal∣ladine not vnmindefull of his passed promise, acquainted the King his Father with the state of Zorian, how graci∣ouslye him selfe was entertained in the Court of Aquilea, and how the Princes Sister was comming after with her Aunt, a Ladye of incomparable vertues and graces, and her noble brother renouncing his paganisme, desired to be receiued into the fellowship of Christians, not being able to enioy peace in conscience, till he were deliuered of his vnbeleefe. The King excéeding glad of these good newes, caused such royall preparation to be made against the next daye, as at a matter of such solemnitie is required: there was Zorian and his Squire christened, the King, the Queene, and the Earle of Flunders witnesses to the Prince, and Palladine, Manteleo and Marcelina to the Squire Ligasto. Returning from the Church to the Pallace, there was ordained a sumptuous feast, and Zorian well regarding the Ladies of England, among them all liked Graciana, daughter to the Earle of Flaunders: being then sodenly so enchaunted with her, as he secretly vowed neuer to loue any other while he liued. Palladine perceiuing his amo∣rous glaunces on Graciana, and noting the many alterati∣ons of his countenaunce: immediatly knew what disease he was troubled withall, which he desirous to ttigate, and to pleasure the Prince Zorian to his vttermoste, the tables being withdrawen, he tooke Graciana by the hand, and bringing her to Zorian thus spake. My Lord and noble companion, for my sake loue this beautifull Lady, she is named Graciana: and I hope you
shall finde her nature answerable to her name, to wit, gra¦cious, vertuous and honest. I promise ye my Lord, quoth Zorian, you haue doone me the greatest pleasure in the World, bringing to me a Lady so woorthily accomplished, that I might learne to imitate her vertues: which haue pearced my hart in such sorte, as would she accept me to be her Knight and seruant neuer should any other Lady haue the honor of my loue, I perceiue well then said Palladine, that you are touched to the quick, doo you twaine deuise togeather, and in meane while, I will goe talke with the Countie her Father. So taking the Earle of Flaunders aside, he rehearsed to him the manifolde vertues of the Prince Zorian, and how in∣tirely he loued his Daughter, thinking it a great prefer∣ment to her, if she ioyned with him in mariage. Like spée∣ches hid he vse to the Queene his Mother, who was Cosin germaine to the Carle of Flaunders, and betweene them bothe handled the matter so effectuallye: as within two dayes Zorian and Eraciana were affianced together, their mariage being deferred, because of Ambassadours were gone to Norgalles and Millaine, to conclude the mariages betwéene Landastines, Manteleo, Marcelina and Florea, and the Princes Fathers consent obtained, all these mari∣ages should be sollemnelye perfourmed togeather: But twenty dayes being now past, and Palladine hearing no tidinges of Nonparelia, he began to waxe melanchollye, halfe distrusting the promise of Orbiconte: yet did not this pensiuenes continue long, for she arriued soone after as you shall presently perceiue.
CHAP. XXXVII. ¶ How the Princesse Nonparelia was deliuered to the great Turkes Ambassadours, and how by the sorceries of the wise Orbiconte, the Ships were scattered, and what per∣swasions she vsed to the Mariers, who were very lothe to saile into England. WIthin thrée dayes after the depar∣ture of Palladine and Zorian from Aquilea, Nonparelia was honou∣rably deliuered to the great Turks Ambassadours, and with meruai∣lous royaltye conuaied on Ship boorde, accompanyed with her Aunt Orbiconte, and a séemelye traine of Ladies beside. The Ankers weyed and the sayles hoysed, they launche into the deepe, the Princesse still fearefull to loose the true owner of her loue yet comforted by her Aunt, that in few dayes they would sée England. Being entred the Mediterranean Sea▪ Orbiconte saw it was time to set her practise abroche, and seeing the Pi∣lots and Mariners were all at rest, with a Booke in her hand she came vp on the deck: where brething her charmes into the aire, and filling the sayles with her vnhallowed spelles, the windes began to blowe terribly, and the Seas were troubled with wonderfull roughnes, that the Mari∣ners awaked with the horror of the storme, awaiting eue∣ry hower their vtter destruction. In this tempest the ships were seperated so farre a sunder, as the Turkes dispaired of euer méeting againe, so that the vessell wherin ye Prin∣cesse and Orbiconte were, by daye was on the borders of Scicilie▪ and very néere to the Labean promontarie, albeit the Pilot could not tell in what Cuntrie they were. Then
Orbiconte calling the Gouernours of the Ship to her, and the Gentlemen appointed to attende on the Princesse in the presence of her Niece thus spake to them. You haue seene my good freendes in what extreame danger we haue beene this night past, and I thinke there is no one amonge yee, but is perswaded that our Gods haue especially preserued vs, yea, by wonderfull miracle from shipwracke, wherwith euery minute of an hower we were threatned. In like sorte you may imagine that not without some secret and hidden cause we are caste into these partes, and scattered from the Ships of my Lordes Ambassadours: héerby doo our Gods euidentlye manifest, that men, how strong or puissant so euer they be, cannot bring to end any intended enterprise, vnlesse it be ordered by their fauour and direction, and heerehence ariseth the the common prouerb: That men purpose, and the Gods dispose. It is well knowne to you, that the King my bro∣ther hath graunted in mariage my Niece Nonparelia to our Lord the great Turke: but our Gods (from whose sight nothing can be shadowed) knowing what before was accorded, and concluded betwéen her and the Knight with∣out rest, whome you haue séene in my brothers Courte, he being the Sonne of a mighty and puissant King: haue ap∣parantly reuealed, that their faithfull promise to eache other must not be falsefied, promise (I say) of mariage be∣twéene them, wherof my selfe am a sworne witnesse. In vaine is it then for you thus to alleadge, that the Knight without rest is a Christian, and my Niece a Pagan: but let it suffise ye, that our Gods will haue it so, as you in short time shall sée further experience. Doo you therfore direct your compasse to the coaste of Spaine, that from thence we maye saile into England, the seate and Kingdome of the Knight without rest, after the deceasse of his Father who is yet liuing. Feare not any inconuenience that may ensue héereby, for I will be your safe protection, and no woorsse shall fall to you héerby then
to my Niece and my ese, and of her haue I greater care then were she my owne Daughter. Heerewith she paused, expecting what answere they would returne: but discerning by their countenances, that they liked not her speeches, as also they were loth to come among the Christians their enemies, without a better warrantise of their safetie, she began againe in this manner. Why my fréendes? are you so fearefull as you shewe your selues? doo you think any harme shall happen to you in my companie? am not I and my Niece sufficient for your assurance? what other safe conduct would ye haue? we goe into the land of our kindred and freends, to confirme a perpetuall peace and concorde, with one of the moste ver∣tuous Princes in the world. My Nephewe the Prince Zo∣rian, who departed (you knowe) with that gentle Knight: there is he louingly entertained & fauoured, by him whom the Gods preordained to be my Nieces husband. Saile we on then merilye, and feare not the displeasure of the King my brother: for well am I assured, that they will not dis∣like this mariage. And were I not fullye perswaded of what I haue saide, that the ende of our enterprise shall sorte to a generall benefit, yea to a full resolued ioye and content on all sides: I would not haue aduentured thus farre, being as carefull of your good as mine owne life. These spéches so throughly animated the Mariners and Gentlemen, as they promised to fulfill what she gaue them in charge, being certaine that Orbiconte tolde them no∣thing, but what she had foreseen by her wonderfull know∣ledge: and therfore passing by Hercules pillers, they en∣tred the Ocian, directing their compasse toward great Bri∣taine. By ye way, they were set vpon by thrée pirats, who seeking to take the spoyle of the Ship, stew many Gentle∣men and Mariners, and when they were brought to the very hardest exigent, that they thought verily to be taken by the Pirates: three English shippes came to their rescue,
wherein the high Admirall of England was, who had béene in Portugall with the King, to aduertise him of the mariage of his two Nieces, to the Princes Manteleo and Landasti∣nes. The Ships of England encountred the Pirats, and af∣ter long fight tooke them: then comming to knowe of whence the Ship was that had béene so distressed, the man that was sent to demaund the question, was Captaine Broantine, who accompanyed the Admirall in this voiage. Ioyfull was Orbiconte when she beheld Broantine, and comming on boord the Admirall, to whome Broantine re∣uealed of whence they were, and that Palladine long ex∣pected their arriuall in England: it is not to be asked how courteously he entertained them, vowing to take sharpe reuenge on the Pirates for their villainous dealing. Bro∣antine declared to Nonparelia, the health of Palladine and her brother Zorian, how he was Christened, and affianced to the faire Graciana of Flaunders: which newes pleased her not a little, as also this happie and fortunate deliue∣rance, which she verily thought hardly to escape with life. The Admirall made them the best chéere he could on Ship boord, and afterward committed them to the charge of Broantine, to see them safely conducted into England: himselfe taking order for the Pirates Ships, which after he had ransacked as he pleased, he followed withall, as wind and weather gaue him leaue.
CHAP. XXXVIII. ¶ How the Princesse Nonparelia, and Orbiconte arriued in England, where they were royally entertayned by the King and his Princesse: And how Palladine bewrayed what had passed betweene him and his Lady, where∣with the King and Queene were well contented. HAuing sayled with a good and pro∣sperous winde, at length the Ships came on the cape of Cornewall, and from thence to the Isle Benedict▪ where coasting as occasion serued, leauing the cape of Pinda, they tooke harborow in the Ile of Wight: from whence Broantine senta Bri∣gandine before, to aduertise Palla∣dine how néere his Lady was, the wise Orbiconte writing to him in this manner. The Letter from the wise Orbiconte, to Palladine Prince of England. THese are to aduertise ye, Lord Palladine, that by the assistance of the highest God, my Niece Nonparelia and I are safely arriued in the Isle of Saint Helena, from whence, we will shortly set forward, according to the pro∣mise I made at your departure from Aquilea, hauing doone my vttermost in your cause for my Niece, who (as you knowe) hath refused the great Emperour of Turkie, making choyse of you aboue all other, in respect of your faithfull vowe to her, made in my chamber at her Fathers Pallace, which I hope you will not now forget, conside∣ring what hath béene doone at your earnest instance. Ther∣fore (if as yet you haue not done it) make the King your
Father, and the Quéene, acquainted therewith, and that so soone as possible you can: because I would sée your ma∣riage perfected before my returne to Aquilea, that I may credibly assure the King my Brother, what high good for∣tune is befallen his Daughter, as also the continuall ho∣nor promised you by the destemes, and not to you alone, but to your issue heereafter likewise. Thus awaiting op∣portunitie, to acquaint you at large with our nauigation, and what dangers we haue escaped on the Sea, as your Admirall and Broanine can testifie, who deliuered vs from bloodthirstie Pirates: I ceasse, presenting hartie good will to you from my Niece and my selfe. From the Isle of Saint Helena. By your affectionate freend. Orbicone. Such were the contents of the Letter, sent from the wise Orbiconte to the Prince Palladine, which was presented him by one of Broantines Gentlemen, as he was walking in the Garden with the King and Queene, conferring on the preparation for the triumphs, at the mariage of Mar∣celina and Florea. No sooner had he read the name of Or∣biconte▪ and from whence the Letter was directed, but he began to change his countenance meruailously, which the King perceiuing, said. What newes hath Broanine sent ye, that makes your rouller alter in such sort? the Letter doubtlesse is the cause thereof. In truth, said the Quéene, I see the Letter imports great matter, let vs vnderstand what is contained therein. Palladine not daring to denie this commaundement, causing the Gentleman that brought the Letter to withdraw himselfe, thus answered. My gracious Lord and Father, this Lette deliuers none but good newes: the Sister to the King of Aquilea, and faire Nonparelia his Daughter, are come to visit your Maiestie. Right welcome are they, said the King, and I will doo them all the honor I may: but what may be the
cause of this kindnesse, séeing our Realme is so farre from Aquila Then Palladine declared the whole discourse of his voiage, how by the aduise of the wise Orbiconte, he had promised the Princesse Nonparelia (after she had receiued her Christendome) to take her in mariage, in that she was accomplished with as rare perfections of beawtie and ver∣tue, as any Princesse in the world beside. You place that formost, quoth the King, which you loue best, preferring corporall beawtie before vertue: but héerein you are to be pardoned, for loue and affection so alter the sences, as makes men put one word in anothers place. I spake of that first my Lord, quoth Palladine, which I first sawe in so faire a creature, namely a choise grace of corporall beaw∣tie: and hauing afterward by frequenting her companie, gathered sufficient knowledge of her inward endow∣ments, I placed them as they came to my acquaintance. And such is my hope, good Father, that your selfe wil iudge no lesse then I doo, when you haue seene her. For the rest, Madame Orbiconte her Aunt shall resolue ye, giuing you to vnderstand matters of weight, and such as you will thinke your selfe happie to knowe: this being the meane to bring to the Christian faith, the great and mightie Kingdome of Aquilea. Thou tellest me wenders my Sonne, quoth the King, but why didst thou not sooner ac∣quaint me heerewith? Because I feared, answered Palla∣dine, that misfortune on the Sea might alter my intent, or the promise of Orbiconte, might be preuented by some other sinister meane. Well my Sonne, quoth the King, I pray that thy desires may haue a fortunate end, and such things as thou speakest of may come to passe▪ meane while, let vs prouide to receiue these two Princes, and make them such entertainement as their calling deserues. Foorthwith he commaunded, that the Pallace should bee adorned with most sumptuous Tapistrie, and calling for the Uiceadmirall, willed him to prepare certaine Ships, that might go meete the Ladies as they came, wherein
Palladine, Zorian, Manteleo, Landastines, and many other great Lords were embarqued. And béeing come to the Ile of Tennet, they espied the Ships sayling amaine toward them, and entring among them, Palladine seeing Orbi∣conte aloft on the deck, knew well where the Princesse Nonparelia was: wherefore going aboord that Ship, cat∣ching Orbiconte in his armes, he thus spake. Welcome good Lady into this Countrey, this day doo you giue me life, and the onely comfort I desire in this world: for had not your assurance at my departure from Aquilea per∣swaded me, I had ere this beene consorted with the dead. As he was thus embracing Orbiconte, the Princesse Non∣parelia came foorth of her Cabin, and with a sweete smiling countenance came to him, saying. Haue you not doone yet my Lord? I am not content that you giue all the welcome to mine Aunt, and allow me no portion thereof, I thinke I haue deserued some part. At these words, he suddenly lea∣uing Orbiconte, embraced his mistresse with such zealous affection, as neither of them were able to speake one word: in which time Zorian and the other Princes, had leisure to welcome the wise Orbiconte. During this time of greeting and salutation, they sayled on with so good a winde, as in short time they entred the Port of London, where this honorable companie were receiued with great magnificence, the Citizens conducting them thorough the streetes with such pompe and sumptuous deuises, as neuer was the like seene in London before. The King and Queene for the greater honor of their Sonne, came to the Court gate to welcome the Princesse, at whose rare beawtie as they did not a little wonder, so there wanted no kinde of courtesie, whereby their good will might at large be ex∣pressed. So walking on into the great Hall, there began a∣gaine new shewes of entertainement, whereby both Orbi∣conte and her Niece perceiued, that the Court of England was incomparable for gracious behauiour. While the King and Queene were conferring with Orbiconte, Palla∣dine
tooke his Lady aside to the windowe, where she at large declared to him, the dangers sustained in their voy∣age, and their good deliuerance by the Admirall of England and Broantine. Héerof sweete Lady, quoth Palladine, your Aunt already hath aduertised me, and I knowe assuredly, that you haue escaped greater perill then you can report to me, all for my loue, wherein I am religiously bound to you while I liue: yet heerewithall consider, that you haue en∣dured all this for your faithfull freend and husband, who now bids you welcome as his loyall and espoused wife. Alas, my Lord, quoth the Princesse, you well knowe that I haue no other intent, and the sooner our nuptials are so∣lemnized, the better shall I be quieted, least any dishonor should ouertake me, in respect of what hath passed be∣tweene vs heeretofore. Madame, answered Palladine, this ace concerneth me as néere as your selfe, and to preuent such danger, we must héerein be aduertised by your Aunt Orbiconte, the rest shall be accomplished with all possible spéede. In all this time, Orbiconte had so preuailed with the King and Quéene, declaring that this mariage was forepointed in their infancie, and should by her meanes be atfied by the King of Aquilea her Brother, as they both promised, that so soone as the King of Portugal was arri∣ued, who was sent for to the mariage of his two Nieces, the wedding should be sollemnized at that instant like∣wise. Untill which time, the Princesse should be enstructed in the Christian faith, and be made partaker of that holy Sacrament, which is the badge and cognisance of all Chri∣stians, so should her obscure thoughts be cléerely illumina∣ted, and the mariage would be more acceptable in the sight of God. The Kings deuise was generally well liked, and the Princesse her selfe willing to vnderstand the rules, which were so farre different from her Pagan profession: in which exercise she had her whole studie and delight, till the time came that she should be Baptized.
CHAP. XXXIX. ¶ How the Princesse Nonparelia and all her Ladyes, were with great pompe and solemnitie Baptised, and all the honorable mariages afterward finished. BY paineful diligence of diuers lear∣ned Diuines, the Princesse was wonne to receiue the faith of a Christian, and all her Ladies like∣wise that came with her from A∣quilea: so they being all attired in white garments, were conducted to the Cathedrall Church in Lon∣don, with such royall pompe and magnificence, as euery eye was set to wonder. Such was her stately maiestie in going▪ and her swéete lookes so effec∣tuall in piercing, as the most deuoutest minde was halfe rauished, yea double charged with the baptisme of these twelue Aquileans. Manteleo, Landastines and the Queene were her sureties at the Font, and diuers honorable per∣sons for the Ladies, who changed none of their names at Palladines request. They were no sooner returned to the Pallace, ut newes was brought, that Don Roderigo the King of Portugall, was come to London: which tidings pleased the King to well, especially all the louers, whose mariages stayed onely for his comming, as I thinke the riches of the whole world could not more content them▪ Roderigo thus arriued, is saluted by the people, embraced by the King his Brother, welcommed by Palladine and the other Princes, kissed so courteously by Nonparelia▪ his two Nieces, and Graciana, Daughter to the Earle of Flaunders, as he imagined himselfe in the like place, as héeretofore was feigned on the Isle of Aualon, and the Kingdome of Feria. On the morrow was the sollemnitie
of the espousalles, and because the Kings, Princes, and great Lords there arriued, stroue who should giue place to each other: it was in the end concluded, that each Bridegroome should leade his Bride himselfe, therefore they went to the Church in this manner. Nonparelia was lead by the Prince of England, Marcelina by Manteleo, Florea by Landastines, Graciana by Zorian, Doronea, Daughter to the Duke of Rostock, by Broantine, Erinnea, Duchesse of Rimandria, by Liboran. Héere doo I omit the description of their sumptuous ornaments, chaines, and iewelles, because you are able to conceiue, that such per∣sons at such a time, want nothing that may set foorth themselues to the vttermost. The feastes at Dinner and Supper ended, the Maskes, Mommeries, and other pa∣stimes giuen ouer: Hymen entred among them, whose Comedie was so bréefe, as he vsed but one acte and two persons in the scene, and that without any auditours pre∣sent, but those whome the play and partes concerned. But cléere Dyan arising, gaue fauour to some, and offence to other, so for that time the pastime ceassed, because the Lords and Ladies came to giue them the good morrowe, especially to Nonparelia, who in time they hoped to sée Queene of England. She hauing with modest and amiable gestures thanked them, demaunded of Marcelina and Flo∣rea her Sisters, how they fared, and how her Brother Zorian did with his faire Princesse of Flaunders: they all replying, that loue that night rewarded their long tra∣uailes, and Venus courteously fauoured her Sonnes pro∣céedings. But leaue we this to such as haue made expe∣rience thereof, and now let vs come to a matter long time kept in silence.
CHAP. XL. ¶ What end the aduenture of the Statues had, namely, that of the Goddesse Cytherea and her Sonne Cupid: and the braue Tournament after the proofe thereof, in honor of the marriage of Palladine and Nonparelia. IN honor of this great sollemnitie, the Princes had concluded on a Tournament at Armes: which to behold, the Ladies of the Court put themselues in comely equipage, when Palladine before them vsed these speeches. Faire Ladies, you knowe how long I haue beene desi∣rous of this day, to make proofe how the aduenture of Loues Images might be brought to end, namely by one of the race of the King my Father. And albeit I am not that happie Knight to whome it is deste∣nied, and whome the heauens will regard with such fa∣uour, as in beawtie and firme affection to God beyond all other: yet will not I faile to hazard my triall, being thus farre assured, that in matters appertaining to a noble minde, no one hath beheld me inferiour to any. And if my vertues are not came to perfection, it will be some greefe to me: because the abilitie of a man shall be prized accor∣ding to his successe in this triall. But to the end these I∣mages newly called to remembrance, may breede no ob∣scure and difficult vnderstanding, you must here note, that in the great waste place before the Court at London, at the top of a great pae of staires stood these Statues: the one representing Venus, holding in her hand a lighted Torche, not to be extinguished but by the conquerour of double passions: and the other was her Sonne Cupid, with an arrowe drawen in his lo, as readie to shoote,
which likewise could not be discharged, but by her that was as much ouercome, as victorious in amorous affecti∣ons. Now although these Statues were made of Marble, yet were they so excellently carued, and approching so neere to the life: as Venus (being attired in habit after the English manner) was able to entise the thoughts of a verie stayed person. Yet resteth one matter to declare, namely, that the man not deseruing the name of a louer, might not present himselfe before these Images: for the sight of such men was so offensiue to them, as they would disdaine to looke vpon them, and exalt themselues vp into the aire, because such vnwoorthie people should not touch them. Returne we now to Prince Palladine againe, he who by generall opinion had not his second in England, and by his new entraunce into the fellowship of the maried, ca∣ried this estimation in his owne conceit: that he should beare away this long desired honor, in triall whereof so many had fayled héeretofore. Yet heerein his high opinion was beguiled, for he must yeeld and giue place to those whome the fates had especially appointed, to wit, his owne Sonne, the Prince Florano of England, and the faithfull Lady Pamphilia of Greece, his wife, as in their historie at large it is discoursed. For this cause, that the chéefest honor might remayne to him beyond all the other, he caused Broantine and Liboran to begin the triall first, then the Prince Zorian followed: yet all of them so slen∣derly fauoured, as they could not attaine to any shew of possibilitie. Which when Landastines and Manteleo be∣held, the desire of glorie they had before, made them now of so high and resolute courage, as impacient of delay, they would not tarie for each other, attempting their fortune together: but this vnkindly heate caught such a sudden cooling, as their timeritie grew insupportable, whereby the Images turned their backs to them. Then they heere∣at
offended, said: that the vertue of loue (in this triall) had not his due, therefore they ought not to be any way dishabled. As for this pece of Witchcraft, quoth they, héere beawtie is preferred before loyaltie: therefore it must consequently followe, that he and she who should de∣spoile these Images, must be the most faire and loyall of all louers. So such as had not exquisite beawtie, and loy∣altie to be tearmed incomparable: were repulsed thence with such discontent, as the open foyle was more gréeuous then death to them. Palladine heereat thoroughly moued, yet more reioycing at anothers fault, then distrusting his owne sufficiencie: aduanced himselfe, and proffering his owne hand to the Torche, and the other to the Bowe, the Images (making obeysance, and shewing amiable coun∣tenance to him) mounted vp on high from him, which cau∣sed such a laughter among the Ladies, as if they had séene a spectacle of greatest meriment. Erinnea Duchesse of Ri∣mandria, and wife to Liboran, with Doronea wife to Bro∣antine, newly created Duke of Bastanella, in their triall, the Images turned their backs to them: Graciana, Mar∣celina, and Florea had but little more credit, sauing that the Images mooued not from them. But now came Nonparelia to her turne, and her beha∣uiour procured a generall contentment: for Venus let her touch the Torche, and set the Crowne on her shoulder, but tooke it back againe immediatly: thereby prefiguring, that she being, had now lost her libertie. When they sawe the aduenture could not be ended, the Ladyes betooke them to their Scaffoldes, and the Knightes entred the Lystes, to make better proofe of their fortune by Chiualrie. Landastines, accompanied with Bro∣antine, Mushell of Rostock. Brunifort his Brother, and Or∣liman of Flaunders, with an hundred Knightes more first entred the féeld. On the other side came the Prince Zorian with Liboran▪ Durandell of Cleue, Grindy of Orton, and Sedonis of
Suffolke, with an hundred braue and couragious Knightes: who at the sound of the Trompets, encountred each other with meruailous valour. Landastines and Zorian Iousted together, beeing of such equall strength and hardy courage, as the victorie could be gained on neither side: to cut off which controuersie, a new assayand entred the Lystes, bearing in his Shéeld a golden Phenix, and vpon his Ar∣mour a coate of Crimosin Uelnet, whereon, these two let∣ters SS were verie thick imbroidered in Gold and Pearle, the sight of this Gallant gaue cause of admiration, and matter of valew was expected to come from him. CHAP. XLI. ¶ Who was the new Knight of the Phoenix, and of a Letter the Prince Palladine receyued, concerning his fyrst loue. REason requireth, that this new as∣saylant should be knowne, and the cause of his comming, least other∣wise you should misconceiue of the matter, and so be depriued of the delight promised thereby. Know you then, that the Knight of the Phenix was the Prince Caesar, Sonne to Othon the Emperour of Roome then reigning, and husband to the faire Rosamond of Fraunce, who hearing of the honorable Triumph at the marriage of the Prince Palladine, and the aduenture of the Statues before the Court at London: trauailed thither, to win the conquest of the one, and credit of the other, that at his re∣turne to his best beloued, he might obtaine the greater grace and fauour. Caesar beeing thus entred the Lystes, and noting the braue chiualrie shewen by the Princes, stood still a good
while, till he sawe both the sides make offer of departure. But fearing to be reprooued for his long stay, as though by cowardise he durst not trie his fortune, he first encountred one of the Prince Zorians Knights, and threw him to the ground with his héeles vpward. Seauen or eight more of them he serued in the like sort, till Landastines would néedes deale with this Champion: but Caesar met him with such violence, as both horsse and man was sent to the ground. The Prince of Norgalles desirous to reuenge this shame, called for a fresh Horsse and a Launce: and calling his e∣nemie to Ioust againe, as he made proffer to begin his carire, the Prince Caesar thus spake to him. Good Sir be not offended with him, who hath saluted you with a courtesie common among Knightes errant: but enduring the same with pacience, giue the like to such as hazard them selues against you. I feele no taste of courtesie, quoth Landastines, in such gréetings, and thou mayst happen to confesse the same with him thou next assaylest, notwithstanding all thy brauerie in speeches. By proofe, said Caesar, I shall be made perfect, a fierce assaylant shall be assured of a braue defen∣dour. So breaking off this contention, he gaue the spurres to his horsse against Zorian, giuing him such a vough charge at the encounter, as he was cast quite out of his saddle. At this sight were Palladine and Manteleo greatly dis∣pleased, whom the King (for the earnest loue he bare them) would not permit to beare Armes in this Tourney, but caused them to accompanie their Ladies on the Scaffold, and to giue iudgement who best deserued: they (as I said) mooued with the behauiour of the Knight of the Phenix, came to the King with great reuerence, Palladine deliue∣ring these spéeches. My Lord, the reuerence and dutie that children owe to their Parents, hath made vs remaine idle among these
Ladies, during the honest exercise of our fréends and com∣panions, estéeming to contradict your commaund, were an offence more then presumptuous. But now are our desires so stirred and prouoked, as we can no longer containe our selues in slothfulnes, but are enforced humbly to intreat, that your highnesse would giue vs leaue to Arme our selues, onely to teach this newcome Gallant, who thinks alreadie he hath made a conquest, that in England are Knights, sprung from the race of the chéefest of the round Table, who are not to be feared with seeing thrée or foure men vnhorssed. My Sonne, quoth the King, my commaund was to no other end, then to withhold ye from the thing you haue now desired, because assayed new Combates without Armes, you should not be endaungered by two trials to∣gether, considering how the one may be a hinderance to the other: and so doubtlesse would it come to passe at this instant, were I not fully perswaded, that honor neuer breakes companie with true loue, but more and more ad∣uanceth his titles, to the great encouragement of all noble mindes. Therefore my Sonnes, doo what you please, I will not hinder ye: go in Gods name, and returne with the full of my desire. Hauing thus obtained what they would, they departed to their lodgings, returning soone armed and well moun∣ted, and passing by the Scaffolds, Palladine intreated his Nonparelia, to giue him one of her Bracelets, wherewith he might enter the Ioust vnder her fauour. In which time, Manteleo went to trie his fortune with the Sonne of Othon, and many Launces were broken betweene them, yet neither able to dismount the other. Wherewith Manteleo beeing angrie, and seeking policie to preuaile a∣gainst his foe: Lord Caesar lifting vp the beuer of his hel∣met, imagining by the rich armes of Manteleo, that he was the Prince of England▪ with courteous reuerence to him, thus spake.
Sir Palladine, perceiuing that you knowe me not, nor the cause of my comming into this Countrey, and séeing you would procéed to the Combate: the loue I beare ye, constraineth me willingly to discouer my selfe, beside, verie loth am I to loose the credit I haue wonne alreadie, and so prouoke you to displeasure against me. I am your fréend Caesar, Sonne to the Emperour, as readie to be com∣maunded by you, as any other of your Knights in England Of this peace was Manteleo not a little glad, yet brauely dissembling the matter, he thus answered. Lord Caesar, I am not the man you take me for, but in respect of this excéeding gentlenes, and the reuerent dutie I owe beside: I will procéed no further, but heere giue ouer all cause of quarrell. And that your desire may be the more satisfyed, I will bring ye to the man you imagined me to be, and likewise you shall knowe, with whome you haue now twise dealt without aduantage. My name is Mante∣leo, Sonne to the Duke of Millayne, and Brother by marriage to the Prince Palladine of England. But the ac∣customed humours among new married folkes, had char∣med Palladine in such sort, as he sawe not when Manteleo thus ventured before him: yet afterward, séeing two ene∣mies so louingly embrace, he meruailed who the Knight of the Phenix should be, at length these two pacefyed came toward the Prince, and in offering to salute him, this cause of stay hindered them. While Palladine was fastening his Ladies Bracelet about his arme, a Squire came before him, who on his knees presented him a Letter, saying. Worthie Lord my Lady and Mistresse the Duchesse of the rich Isles, whome you verie well knowe, commending her selfe to your good grace, hath sent you this Letter: desiring as the latest good you will doo her, to aunswere the same with all con∣uenient spéed. This message, chéefely the verie last words, amazed the Prince, and béeing assailed with diuers imaginations,
he brake open the Seale, and opening the Letter, read there these lines following. The Letter from Brisalda, Duchesse of the rich Islands, to Palladine the Prince of England. AT what time (my Lord) I was so happie, as to sée you héere in the rich Islands, I thought assuredly my good hap had taken such effect, as death it selfe could no way bring to end. Not so much i knowing my selfe to be your beloued, as to remember that my first freend was the Sonne of a King, whose good partes I engraued so liuely in my hart, as none but he was made Lord therof: reser∣uing to my selfe this onely regard, that loue had made me no more yours, then dutie had confirmed you mine. Con∣sidering héerewithall, that as a gadge of my good will, you being surprized with some part of my graces, and passio∣nate beyond measure (as your selfe sayd) if my liking did not consort with yours: I gaue you that remedie for your sicknes, which a Lady of such calling as I am, would not haue bestowed on the greatest Pritice in the world. Not∣withstanding, our desires had then such a Simpathie of affection, as in all matters we were alike, hauing each o∣thers honor in equall commendation, our nobilitie, paren∣tage, and what else beside, combined together in a rich pro∣call knot. But so it is come to posse, that of our first sight, affection, and familiaritie, such a testimonie remaineth, as may not be forgotten: for since your vnkind departure, leauing me in a laborinth of endlesse greef, I am deliuered of a Sonne begotten by you, whom I haue named Vnyon, now aged twentie monethes, who bearing the perfect image of his Fathers graces, is the onely comfort his sor∣rowfull mother hath. And heerein you may beléeue me, that an hundred times he hath preserued my life, hauing so weightie a burthen at my hart, as is the small account you haue made of me since your departure, and the wrong
you doo mée in racing mée foorth of your remembrance, not vouchsasing once to acquaint mée with the cause thereof. Heerein is my hap so hard and regretable, as death were more welcome to mee then life: to asswage which insup∣portable burthen, I haue no comfort but your little Sonne, whome hourely I hold in mine armes, meruailing so swéete a babe should haue so sowre a Father. Yet beeing thus cast off and disdained, the sorrow can not be so irke∣some to me, as the blame would to you, were your dis∣courtesie openly knowne: but such is my loue to you, that my nature vanquished, none but your selfe shall knowe how you haue wronged me, nor further reuenge will I seeke, then with mine owne death to burie your shame. What would your new loue Nonparelia say, if she knew my bed abused by her husband, and she wife to him, who by flesh and blood is maried to mee? she beeing the second, might well thinke the first to be hardly intreated. But let not any doubt héereof offend you, for from her will I safely conceale it: not in respect of any loue to her, but by re∣mayning euermore. Your faithfull and immooueable freend▪ Brisalda, Duchesse of the rich Islands. After he had read the Letter, he was strooken into such umpe, and oppressed with such remorse of conscience, as scantly could he endure from falling beside his horsse: the best meane to preuent the same, was the arriuall of Caesar and Manteleo, which made him quickly change his countenance, when the Emperours Sonne thus spake to him. Sir Palladine the courtesie showen me by the Prince of Millayne your Brother, hath deliuered me from great trouble, enforcing me to forbeare armes, to entertaine him in stead of your selfe. The happie Bridegrooe are you to faire Nonparelia, whose praises soare aboue the Eagle in height: nor can I forget your famous chiualrie,
perfourmed in defence of her portrait, when you conque∣red in Fraunce the prowd Zarcanell, her vnworthie seruant that brought her figure thether. I can not denie my Lord, answered Palladine, but the representation of my Ladies beawtie, hath made me con∣querour in diuers slender enterprises, woon from such as had no abilitie to keepe them, wherein if I haue deserued any reporte, as freends are easily intreated to commend one another: farre inferiour are they to the faire Rosa∣monde, and those aduentures that noble Caesar hath ac∣complished for her. I see well my Lord, quoth Caesar, that you will binde mée to you in such sort, as I shall haue no meane to com∣passe ye least part of gratification: but let vs end this need∣lesse talke, and goe sée the rare creature, whose vertues hath allured hither so many braue Gallants. So wal∣ked they to the Pallace, where the King entertained Cae∣sar verie royally, and all the Ladyes with excéeding cour∣tesie, Landastines and Zorian dooing the lyke, nothing ashamed that the Emperours Sonne had the honor of the Tourney.
CHAP. XLII. ¶ What answere Palladine sent to the Duchesse Brisalda, and how Caesar returned to his faire Rosamonde, Landa∣stines, and Manteleo likewise into their countreys: and of the birth of Florano the Prince of England, Sonne to Palladine and Nonparelia. CAesar being thus welcommed in the Court of England, both by the Lords and Ladyes, especially Nonparelia: Palladine feigning to goe vnarme himselfe, tooke the messenger from the Duchesse Brisalda with him, saying. My freend, you must néedes haue a little pacience, and according to your Ladies request, presently you shall haue a bréefe answere from me. Then calling for meke and paper, he went alone into the Warderobe, be∣cause he would not be suspected by any, and answered the Letter in this sort. The Letter from Palladine, to the Duchesse Brisalda. MAdame, matters hauing so strangely passed hitherto, yet without any cause of offence, you haue had some occasion to complaine, being ignorant of my hinderance in trauaile: but when you shall vnderstand, who hath beene the cause of all the honors obtained by Palladine, you will alter your conceit of displeasure toward me. I desire ye to comfort your selfe, with the sight of our little Sonne Vnyon: of whose welfare I am no lesse glad, then were I Lord of all the Orcedes. Your bed hath not béene abused, hauing thereby gained so faire a flower, and well may you
thus vaunt of your Palladine, that he is vowed to his Sonnes good fortune, maugre the crueltie of the greatest Tirant in the world. And albeit I haue espoused Nonpa∣relia, she must remaine as my wife, without diminishing any part of the good will, wherein I am indebted to Bri∣salda of the rich Islands. Your freend for euer, Palladine. Hauing sealed this Letter with his Seale of Armes, and bound about it a little golden Chaine, whereat he fastened a costly Diamond: he deliuered it to the messen∣ger, saying. My fréend, deliuer this from me to thy noble mistresse, with my continuall dutie to her good grace, de∣siring her to keepe this Iewell for my sake, in that it is the chéefest I make account of. As for your paines, this Chaine of gold from mine owne neck I giue ye, and let it serne as part of a recompence toward your trauaile. Thus is the messenger returned to the Duchesse, who hauing read the Letter from Palladine, qualified her sorrowe by good per∣swasions, and afterward maried with the Prince Alfan of Ireland. Now commeth Palladine into the great Hall, and there renewed his former communication with Caesar, and the euening being spent in Maskes and braue deuises, onely to honor the Emperours Sonne, at length they all betake themselues to their Chambers. On the morrow, Caesar came to the Ladyes, desiring them to se him trie his fortune at the Statues, which he perswading himselfe able to finish, was disappointed with a shamefull repulse, the greefe whereof so offended him, as that day he secretly departed from the Court, net bidding the King or any one adiew. The day following, as Palla∣dine was walking in the Garden with the King, he entred into these speeches. My gracious Lord and Father, hauing graunted me to marrie with the Lady, whose vertuous qualities deser∣ued
a much better husband, I greatly doubt, least the King her Father, being ignorant of our former contract, will finde himselfe so agréeued heereat, that he will seeke re∣uenge as Kings are wont to doo, which in plainer tearmes, is by the Sword. To preuent the daunger imminent in this case, our fréend Lydiseo being now King of Hungaria, through whose Dominions he must néedes passe: I thinke it not amisse to aduertise him héereof, that he may there offer resistance, while we prouide héere our men and mu∣nition in readinesse. Héereto may my Brethren of Nor∣galles and Millayne be auailing likewise, wherefore with their Wiues they intend to returne home into their coun∣treys, and they being our faithfull allyed freends, will there likewise haue their subiects in readinesse, to giue vs succour if néede shall require. My Sonne, answered the King, séeing the marriage is accomplished, it is too late to be blamed, or now to vse spée∣ches in this behalfe, which are but friuolous and vnprofi∣table. I pray thée therefore, reserue to thy children (if thou happen to haue any) a future peace, without any cause of warre or molstation: and well hast thou aduised vs, as concerning our beloued Brother the King of Hungaria, to whome within these ten dayes, I will send mine▪ Ambas∣sadour. Meane while, our Sonnes of Norgalles, and Millayne, shall haue all things readie to depart when they please, as loth to hinder their good determination, or any thing that may be for thy quiet and suretie. Manie other matters were that day dispatched in Councell, all of as great importance as this, which I will passe ouer with silence, because the secrets of Kings are not to bée made common. The Ambassadour for Hungaria being dispatched, con∣duded Manteleo and his Lady to Millayne, where he left this married couple so combred with prouision for warre,  they not forgetting any part of their amorous desires, are ten monethes were past, Marcelina was deliuered
of a goodly Sonne, named Hector of Millayne, imitating his Father in déedes of chiualrie, yet beeing the first of that name that euer wan honor in the feeld. If Manteleo was welcomed with great ioy by his Fa∣ther and his Subiects, Landastines was not inferiour to him when he entred Norgalles, where the old King Harfron his Father woorthely entertained him, being so glad of his good fortune, as hauing embraced and kissed the Princesse Floraea, the teares tricled downe his white beard with in∣ward conceite of ioy. Ah my Sonne, quoth he, how much are we bound to thanke the God of heauen, for this espe∣ciall signe of his grace and fauour? how am I and mine likewise continually to reioice, that our tribute to the Crowne of England is thus fréely forgiuen vs? in happie houre was this mariage concluded, that not onely brin∣geth a continuall league of peace, but disburdeneth vs of a paiment troublesome to our whole countrey. Now dare no enemie vexe vs with warre, séeing we haue the King of England our fréend: wherefore my Sonne, for bringing this comfort to thy Fathers hart, whose age makes him now vnfit to gouerne any longer: heere I deliuer the Crowne into thy hands, not doubting but thou wilt rule as thy Father hath doone before thee. Landastines being thus honored, and put into ye full possession of the Crowne of Norgalles, soone after made the King his Father a Graundsire, by the birth of Don Celidon his Sonne, to the no little ioy of all his Subiects. The like good hap had the Prince Palladine, to honor the aged King Milanor withall: Nonparelia being deliuered of the yong Prince Flerano at whose birth were many good fortunes progno∣sticated, for which, the Citizens of London in signe of their reioycing, caused bonefires to be made in the streetes, and the Belles were rung day and night during the space of a sennighte. All things being come to so good effect, and the maryed Louers in their owne Countreys, the wise Orbicote
would now likewise take her leaue: for a mightie Griffon as red as blood, came flying from the aire into the Pal∣lace, which she laying hold vpon, came before the King Milanor and the Quéene, and to Palladine framed her spe∣ches in this manner. My noble nephewe, I beséech ye as you loue your honor and renowme, and are desirous to make it immor∣tall, that you will cause your yoong Sonne to be carefully nourished: assuring you, that his deedes shall be correspon∣dent to his name, floorishing aboue all the Knightes of his time, he being the onely flower that euer grew in England. And not onely shall he be famous for deedes of Armes and Chiualrie, but vertue and loyaltie he shall haue in such commendation, as no Lady in the world shall be found woorthie of his loue, but Pamphilia Daughter to the Emperour of Greece, as yet vnborne. Florano shall loue loyally this Lady. In his loue he shall be so secret, sure, and well aduised, and she like to him in all these giftes. a through the world they may not be equalled. To him and her, are the aduentures of the Statues reserued, let none therefore séeke before that time to obtaine them. And now will I to Aquilea, to confirme your peace with the King my Brother, and lay downe order for his reuolt to Chri∣stianitie. Her spéeches thus ended, and fréendly embra∣cings passed on all sides: she cast her selfe on the Griffons back, and mounting into the aire, left England, and is gone toward Aquilea. With this meruailous acci∣dent we meane to pause, and héere conclude our long labour, according to the appoint∣ment of Polismar and Palnocid, aunci∣ent Historiographers of woorthy memory, who first deliuered this Historie in the Brit∣tish toong. FINIS.
To the Gentlemen Readers. HEere did Claudius Colet of Cham∣paigne, who wrote this Worke in the French toong, make a full conclusion of the Historie: and I hauing no further scope, but bound to follow the direction of mine Author, heere doo I likewise knit vp the famous discourse of Prince Palladine. What errours haue past in my simple translation, I must commit to the freendly iudgement of such, as knowe that the wisest may step awry, and he was neuer yet heard of that pleased uery hu∣mour. My good will is greater then my abilitie, and when a man doth bestowe his endeuour, onely to delight and not dsplease: it is courtesie to entertaine such a ones labours freendly, considering the recompence is small for a tedious trauaile. The historie of Pal∣mendos and Primaleon, promised in my two partes of Palme∣rin d' Oliua, as leysure will permit shall be perfected: in meane while (for Countries sake) bid Palladine welcome, which the French haue published in the honor of England. Honos alit Artes. Your well wishing freend Anthony Munday. DIuers foule faultes are escaped in the imprinting, in some pla∣ces words mistaken, as rich procall for riciprocall in Bri∣saldaes Letter to Palladine, and diuers other by mishar left out, and partly by want of my attendance to reade the proues, beeing called away by matters of greater importance, and whereto I am bound by dutie of mine office: therefore as you happen to finde them, and are able to conceiue what in truth they should be, let me intreate you freendly to correct them, because I am loth to trouble you with a gathered Errata.
