6274 99840921 5465
¶ A Short discourse of the life of Seruingmen, plainly expressing the way that is best to be followed, and the meanes wherby they may law∣fully challenge a name and title in that vocation and fellowship. With certeine letters verie ne∣cessarie for Seruingmen, and other persons to peruse. With di∣uerse pretie inuentions in English verse. ¶ Hereunto is also annexed a trea∣tise, concerning manners and behauiours. Imprinted at London for Ralphe Newberrie, dwel∣ling in Fleetestrete, a little aboue the Conduit. 1578.
Precepts for Seruingmen. WHO dwelles in place where Enuie raines, and spendes his life in clubbish soyle, Shall reape but heapes of endlesse paines, and put his life to wearie toyle. Who so beleeueth tattling tales, Proceeding out of euery pate, The fort of Enuie surely scales, and yeldes him selfe to froward fate. Who heareth much and medleth least, shall scape the sling of chiding chaps: Who seekes to liue at quiet rest, must be content what euer haps.
❧ TO HIS LOVING Cousin Marmaduke Da∣rell, and to all Seruingmen: Walter Darell wisheth you long life, with happie dayes. MY welbeloued Cousin, eache liuing thing created on earth, aswell the brutish beasts, as also fethered soules, yeldes tribute to man. The Oxe yel∣des his necke to the yoke, his skinne to make shooes, and his fleshe to be ea∣ten. The Sheepe, his carcase for the reliefe of man, his fleese to make cloth to couer our limmes, whereby we are defended from stormie Winter. The Goose giues her fethers to make shafies for defence of our countrie, her quilles to make pennes, which write lawes and statutes: whereby our Common weale is mainteined and vpholden. If this dis∣position be found in things meere voide of reason and vn∣derstanding, much more ought man to yeld accompt of his talent, sith God hath created him after his owne simili∣tude and likenesse, indued him with wisedome, and giuen him such preeminence, that all things on earth are vnder his subiection. The consideration whereof (my welbeloued Cousin) hath moued me at this present to penne this sim∣ple volume, as a testimonie of the good will which I beare you: whose abilitie, had it beene answerable to good will, would haue then assuredly presented you with a iewell of farre greater value, the which, if you accept in good part, my labour hath his hire, and you shall not onely incourage mee to imploy my studie to a matter of deeper iudgement, but towardes you alwayes, during life, binde me firme and faithfull.
To the Reader. THIS one thing I finde moste true and euident (gentle Reader,) that nothing more infecteth the minde of man, then the horrible monster idlenesse: by the which we daily see, no small number drenched in the Seas of manifolde miseries. Like as yron, if it be not occupied, will quickly waxe rustie: and as a flower or plant placed in fertile soyle, without wa∣ter will lose the sappe, and become withered: euen so, the minde of man, if it be not exercised, will eft∣soone become dull, and alter his qualitie. This being vndoubtedly found moste plaine and manifest, that idlenesse is incident to so many casuall calamities, hath incouraged mee to present thee with these sim∣pleinuentions, altogether for an exercise, then any vaine glorie: least otherwise, my mind fraught with idlenesse, become dull for want of exercise. Thus, hoping thou wilt take them in good parte, I bidde thee fare∣well.
¶ A pretie and shorte discourse of the duetie of a Seruingman. ALthoughe the Seruingman bée disdained, and had in small re∣garde amongest a number: yet doth he deserue to be had in high estimation for his worthinesse & calling. Who in all our countrie maketh a brauer shewe at a tri∣umph then the Seruingman? Who sooner trained to battaile and becomes a Souldier? Who better delighteth the mind with pleasant exercise, as haw∣king, hunting, and such like, then the Scruingman? Not euery one hauing a blade by his side, or liuerie cote on his backe, may be termed a Seruingman: for some there are which will crowd them selues in∣to their companie, whose brutish liues neuer sawe one point of seruice: such may be properly called Hindes. Hindes. For foure especiall pointes there are, whereby to knowe a Seruingman: Godlinesse, Clenlinesse, Foure points to knowe a seruingman, to be godly, cleanly, bold, and diligent. Audacitie, and Diligence, which are the chiefest or∣namentes that garnishe his person, without the which he may not be imbraced amongest that wor∣thie companie. For this worde Seruingman, hath great relation to his kind: for a Seruingman may be applied to diuerse cōmodities: as seruing God, seruing his Prince, seruing his Countrie, which way he may profite his Common weale, and not to beare the name of a Seruingman only for outward shewe, who in liuing are viler then senslesse bea∣stes, wanting ciuil gouernement, who may be well compared vnto Drones, which lurke in the hiues of
Bées, & liue by their labours. But him I accompt worthy that calling, which for one singular qualitie VVho deserue to be rightly and properly called Ser∣uingmen deserueth the same: as some for the gift of the mind, some for the exploites in defence of his countrie, some for actiuitie, some for cunning in weapons, some for riding of horses, some for seruice at a ta∣ble, with diuers other things apt for a seruingman, which are euident tokens that he hath imployed his youth to that end and purpose, whereby to attaine to some preferment and winne credit, whereby hée may be receiued into the number of Seruingmen. What maketh the Citizens, yea and the coun∣triemen haue in such disdaine the seruingman? On∣ly Causes of con¦tempt & dis∣daine concei¦ued against Seruingmen. his lewd gouernment, as riott in apparell, dron∣kennesse, quarelling in the stréetes, playing vnthrif∣tily at dice and cardes their substance, swearing most detestable and horrible other: whereby we daily sée, by that meanes they hazarde their health, & discredit themselues by such disorder: who wan∣tonly consuming the same, are forced through ex∣treame want and necessitie, to robb and steale, that oftimes hardly they escape without perill of death. By this meanes they much hinder the preferment of Seruingmē. Such haue I thought good to be ter∣med reprobates: for there cannot be more commen∣dation Reprobates. in a Seruingman, then to sée his life cléerely lead by vertue, alwayes applying his minde to ho∣nest exercise: for otherwise his estate and calling of due order and gouernement is depriued: for happie dayes excéede the heaped summes. And of this be as∣sured, such company as thou frequentest, of such con∣uersation art thou iudged. Therefore the more thou indeuourest thy self in vertuous exercises, the grea∣ter is thy glorie and renowne. Percase to some in this worlde, to liue in suche
sorte, thou shalt be accompted ridiculous. It may be of those which wante gouernement: but suche as are lead by wisedomes rule, and policie, shall haue thée in no small price and highe estimation: the more vertue thou embracest, the greater is thy credit. And further, there is annexed to ye duetie of a Seruingmā, these thrée speciall points, to be Gentle, Trustie and Carefull; for wanting Gentlenes, he is contemned: hauing no Credit, alwayes mistrusted: Gentle, Trustie, Carefull. voide of Care, litle regarded. We sée daily by experience, howe circumspecte eache Gentleman is, in receiuing a seruaunt, doubt∣full to take him without greate warrantize: and this is, by reason that youth hauing their libertie, & nouzeled so long in idlenesse, are prone and apt to vice and wickednesse, vtterly vndoing them selues thorough their owne wilfulnesse, that impossible it is, to bring them to any perfection, as the olde say∣ing manifestly affirmeth. Naturam expellas furca licet, vsque recurret. That which is ingraffed by nature, neither threatenings, or any persuasion may alter: And if it happen such one, who hauing their libertie, bée enterteined into seruice: what offence so euer he commit to his maister, he thinkes it greate scorne to be reformed, be is of so vile & dogged a nature: and this is the cause, so many are maisterlesse: wherby it commeth to passe, that seruices are purchased by money. For a number, hauing good qualities, & des∣cended of honest parentage: by their meanes are greatly hindered. For what is the common saying amongst most men? If a Seruingman repaire to a maide or widowe, by way of marriage, whereby to winne himselfe preferment, but straightway they murmur amongest themselues, backebiting him
shamefully with flaunderous speaches, calling him spend thrist. A lamentable hearing, that all Seruing∣men, for some lewde perfome sakes, shoulde be con∣demned: for this is most certeine, that the least faulte a Seruingman comitteth, is greatly remem∣bred: therefore it standeth them vppon, to haue spe∣ciall regard to avoyde suspicion, considering their credit is their chiefest riches, which once being lost, of the world they are forsaken. An other kind of Seruingmen there is, which pro∣fesseth that life but vpon extremitie, and that is the Seruingmen vpon extre∣mitie. riche Farmours sonne, who hearing the drumme sounde preparing to muster, is meruellous feare∣full to become a souldier, lamenting heauily to his cockering mother, to he a meanes for him he may not be pressed: for (saith he) I am your onely dearling, and to sée me miscarrie it would shorten your days: for of this I am assured, that if I goe on warfare, I am neuer like to returne home againe to my fa∣thers house: for my fortune was reade me, when I was a little one, that I shoulde be shotte quite tho∣rough with a gunne: therefore, (honnie mother) as you tender my safetie, procure me a seruice, that I may farrie at home. Then the mother, (to saue the prettie soule) séeketh out some present, and in hast repaireth to some Gentleman of credit, & vppon re∣quest made, forthwith is receiued, & thus for feare of his costerd becomes a Seruingman. Then Gentle∣men perceiuing they may haue seruantes Gratis, Seruice with∣out wages. without wages, which will play the Seruingmen, & drudge in their businesse, turne out olde seruitors to go pick dasies, who farre from friends & acquain∣tance, béeing vnexperte of trade and occupation, fall into desperation, by meanes of pouertie. So that hereby the Farmour maketh a rodde for
his owne taile: for it standeth by good reason, that being once in aduersitie, if they haue any sparke of manhood in them, rather then they will want reliefe they will séeke to come by it by vnlawfull meanes. And who will they lie in weight to robbe, and be re∣uenged of, but on such rich churles, as were causes of their vndooing. And thus they, by their double di∣ligence, labour & take suche paines, that they créepe in such fauour with their maister, who with their profitable seruice is so infected with couetousnesse, that he hath no consideration of his olde seruants true and faithfull diligence, who for their long ser∣uice, haue well deserued a iust recompense. So that the Gentleman and the Yeoman, aswell the one as Gentlemen & yeomen do cause seruice to decay. the other, haue brought seruices to a verie weake stay, that a number at this day haue seruantes and giue them no wages: and if they haue any one ser∣uing him, which wanteth liuing, if he hath not some good qualitie, in good faith of his maister he shalbe li∣tle regarded. Therefore the estate of a seruingman is brought to this point, that if he practise not some trade in his youth, let him be assured to begge in his age, as the prouerb manifestly affirmeth: Qui antè non cauet post dolebit. He that hath no care afore what mischiefes may afterward insue, shall greately repent him. Those which vppon such extremitie professe the life of Seruingmen, may be properly called Suck∣linges, or otherwise Caterpillers: for they hinder Sucklings or Caterpillers. those which longe time haue serued, not profiting them selues, but wasting their substance: So that hereby they thinke to eschewe one mischiefe, but vndoubtedly they fall into a worser. For they vse a kinde of diligence, but to serue their owne turnes: But as soone as the brunt is past, they beginne to
waxe lazie, and take heart at grasse, thinking with them selues, What dizards are we hauing rich pa∣rentes, A supposed speache. and wealth enough to mainteine our cal∣ling, to moyle & toyle in such sort, & other of our fel∣lowes, hauing litle or nothing to take to, carrie the countenance of Gentlemē, & we to liue thus like sla∣ues? Then labour is turned to loytering, the nose∣gay in the hatt to an Ostrich fether, his russet slapp to a french hose, his buckled shooe to a Spanishe pumpe, his sparing life to prodigalitie, vntill of All vpon bra∣uere. force they become souldiers: for they créepe so déepe into the merchantes bookes, and béecome such pro∣per Billmen, that in the ende their silkes sweates out all their reuenewes. Thus they, not content with their owne estates, aspire to be Gentlemen, by meanes of their fine array, that they growe so lustie, that they think scorne of their owne parents: but it is commonly séene, The forward trée beareth lesse fruite. What auaileth the mariner to saile without his compasse? What good doth a faire house wanting implementes of houshold? What profiteth braue clothes in any person wanting witt and gouerne∣ment? They may be aptly compared vnto a corrupt Carion in a golden cup: let them decke themselues neuer so gaie, & want the chiefest ornament, that is Wisedome, in good faith, they shalbe but imbraced amongst the most sort of men for lucre or gaine, and Wisedome a principall ornament. foothed for that they haue. Therefore, in my simple opinion, I think it more credit for them, to go in the fore ward amongst the number of yeomen, then to come last in the number of Gentlemen, being al∣wayes fearefull to challenge that title: so that, when all is gone, from the countrie cart they came, and to the London cart they must, that they ring suche a
peale that they drawe a yearde of cleane hempe be∣sides the knott. But nowe, to come to the chiefe point and pur∣pose which beautifieth a seruingman, which is, To To be godly is the chiefest thing that beautifleth a Seruingman. be godly. Nothing can prosper which we take in hand, or goe about, vnlesse we applie our minde to the seruice of God: for him must we honour aboue all things, eyther in heauen or earth, beléeue in him onely to be our Sauiour, aske for all good things of him alone: We must be content, not onely for the glorie of God, to bestowe our goods, but also our life, if God so requireth: to cleaue vnto him as the foundation of all goodnesse, to looke for health at his handes, to serue him in all kinde of fortune, to séeke his glorie aboue all thinges, and to serue him ac∣cording to his worde, to walke in such sorte as sée∣meth to his glorie, not in banqueting and dronken∣nesse, not in chambering and wantonnesse, not in strife and enuying: but alwayes haue God before our eyes. Remember we liue not to eate, but eate to liue: for nature is content with a little: whatso∣euer is superfluous, is sinnefull and damnable. Re∣mēber that Adam & Eue did fall thorough gluttonie. Remember that Noe, when he was dronke, was Particular ex¦amples tou¦ching the in conueniences springing frō excessiue ea¦ting & drin¦king. vncouered in his tent, & lay with his priuities bare. Remember that Loth, when he was dronke, com∣mitted incest with his daughters. Remember when the children of Israel sate downe to eate and drink, they did straight way fall into idolatrie and worshi∣ped the golden Calfe. Remember that Amon, the brother of Absolon, was slaine at a banquet, when he was dronke. Remember that Holofernes being dronke, was slaine of a woman. Remember that at a banquet, it was graunted that Saint Iohn the Baptist shoulde lose his head, and yet no cause why:
but for informing the king with trueth, which the flatterers misliked of, and could not abide. Remem∣ber the riche glutton, that fared deintily euerie day, was buried and throwne downe into hell. Remem∣ber the wickednes of Sodome was pride, fulnesse of meate, and abundance of idlenesse. Howe many di∣seases come thereof? Solomon saith, Where is woe? where is sorrowe? where is strife? where is bralling? where are othes: but amongst those whiche vse suche vices? These are terrible histories to admonishe a seruingman: therfore it is the duetie of a Christian, to eschewe such company: for such as are dronkards and riottous persons shal come to pouertie. There∣fore we must frame our liues in such sort, that wée may liue soberly, discréetely, & sagely: to institute our liues in such sort, that our owne conscience ne∣uer accuse vs of any euill, but testifie with vs, that VVho may rightly chal∣lēge the name of a Seruing¦man. we liue to doe all thinges godlie, and he that liueth thus, may rightly challenge the name of a Seruing∣man. There is a certeine dronkennesse aswell in the mind, as in the bodie: for like as the bodie is coun∣ted in sober and safe estate, so long as it is not dis∣tempered with superfluitie of meates and drinkes: so in like manner, so long as the minde is not trou∣bled with vicious affectes, but remaineth in his na∣tiue puritie, it is recounted sober. For a man must haue aspeciall respect to the minde, which being dronken with vices, what doth the sobrietie of the bodie profit? If I kéepe my bodie sober, & in neuer so good temperance, and my minde be dronken with ire, desire of vengeaunce, whoredome, vncleane thoughts, and such other carnall affects, and world∣ly lustes, what doth the sobrietie of the bodie profit? Therefore, as the bodie is to be kept from droncken∣nesse,
so must the minde be kept from vices: so shall we honour God highly, serue our Prince truely, & profit our selues greatly, and béecome right Ser∣uing men. And nowe touching the seconde pointe, called The second point requi¦red in a Ser¦uingman. Cleanlinesse, which is meant, that we should weare our garments in comely order, according to our a∣bilitie and calling, and according to such lawes as by our Prince are set forth and established: and not alwayes in excesse, and delighting in newe fashi∣ons, which declareth that our mindes are vnsted∣fast, and alwayes wauering: wherein we woorke our vtter vndoing. For we are so pufte vp in such pride and prodigalitie, that if we may not weare silkes and veluets, we thincke it a great disgrace to our personages, wherein we hinder our Countrie, & inriche forreigne nations. For if we would weare cloth made in our owne Countrie, according to our predecessours, we should finde it a great deale more commodious, and minister much reléefe to a num∣ber of poore people, in setting them aworke: where nowe, they remaine in extreme pouertie, and all by meanes of prodigalitie, being not content with the benefites of our Countrie. The Frocke maketh not the Frier more deuout, but is rather a signe of Re∣ligion, then a proofe of holinesse. The fethers make not the birde, nor the garmentes the man. So, glo∣rie resteth not in the outward shewe, be it neuer so sumptuous, but in the person garnished with ho∣nest qualities. For the minde delighting in pride & prodigalitie, lusteth after much wickednesse. It is not the rich ornament that carrieth commendation, but a modest minde and honest conuersation. If a man, hauing small portion, spendeth riotously farre beyond his abilitie, men streight way will coniec∣ture
that he commeth by it by fraudulent meanes, and is reputed amongest them as a wicked liuer. And if any vnlawfull attempt be committed, be he assured, he shalbe suspected. And although he be neither priuie or consenting to the fact, yet by mea∣nes of suspicion his name is brought in question. Therefore, in any wise haue respect to thy calling. I knowe a number within these fewe yeares, if I saide an hundred I went within my compasse, ha∣uing large possessions left them, haue prodigally consumed the same: wherein, if they had obserued a ciuil order, they might haue had sufficient enough to haue kept their estates, and besides mainteyned good hospitalitie: But where wisedome wanteth, there followeth decay. A shippe not guided, is sub∣iect to daunger: the braines being distempered, the pate wilbe idle: the rootes being rotten, the trée wil perish. And so thirdly concerning audacitie, whiche may be properly called boldnesse, which being tem∣pered with modestie, setteth foorth a Seruingman Audacitie & boldnesse setteth out a Seruingman in comely or¦der. in comely order: for this worde Boldnesse, hath ma∣nie good vertues in it comprehended. Be bolde to honour God. Be bolde to defend thy Countrie. Be bolde to followe such lawes as thy Prince hath or∣deined. Be bolde to speake trueth. By boldnesse in battaile, great honours haue béene wonne. By boldnesse, meane persons haue inioyed faire La∣dies. By boldnesse the valiant capteine hath disco∣uered many straunge countries. And, as the pro∣uerbe affirmeth: Audaces Fortuna iuuat timidosqué repellit. Fortune much fauoureth the stout and the valiant: but the faint heart, and the coward shée vtterly for∣saketh. And if it chaunce, thou art sent of any mes∣sage, be bolde to doe thy duetie: with humble reue∣rence
let thy talke be tempered, in such modest ma∣ner, that each worde be couched in due order. Haue respect to thy talke, that thou vse comely gesture: thy legges not crooked, but streight as may be: ney∣ther thy hands playing with any of thy garmentes: thy eyes not staring, but alwayes kéeping a mo∣dest countenance. And if vppon courtesie thou art called to any worshipfull table, let not thy tongue be lauish, or runne at libertie: so shalt thou discre∣dite thy selfe, and be accounted simple. Use not of∣ten quaffing at thy meale, but thrée or foure times let be sufficient. Reache not thy handes ouer the table, nor put thy fingers often in the dishe: for it excéedeth good manner. For being a straunger, each one will carue thée. Kéepe not thy knife alwayes in thy hande, but at such time conuenient, as thou hast occasion to cutt thy victuals, but lay it on the cloth along by the trencher. And if thou art asked a question, aunswere him sagely with humble reue∣rence. And so fourthly, concerning diligence, whiche Diligence, what prefer¦ments it pro¦cureth to such as vse it. may be aptly applyed to Painfulnesse. We see no man can atteine to any riches, without greate la∣bour and diligence: as to watch, when other sléepe: to trauell, when other rest: to worke, when other play. Howe many haue we daily séene raised from meane estate, to rule and gouerne Cōmon weales, and onely by their diligence? Haue not diuerse by their industrie béene called to Princes Counsell? Haue we not séene the Lawyers passe by degrées, and determine causes in seate of Iustice? The sim∣ple scholer hath thereby much profited. The vn∣skilfull apprentice, in time hath béene verie cun∣ning in his trade and occupation. By diligence, we may quite alter our wicked liues, and become
Christians. Lastly, haue not many men, seruing their lords and maisters, béene rewarded with liuings, tho∣rough painefulnesse, whereby they haue béen main∣teined during their liues? Therefore, Lillie herein moste wisely affirmeth, saying these wordes: Nil tam difficile est quod non solertia vincat: Nothing is so harde to learne, but by diligence it is brought to passe. Aristotle spent his youth verie Aristotle. Plato. Cato. riottously, and Plato was no lesse addicted to delight in amorous verse. Cato was olde before he learned Latine letters, and yet became one of the greatest Oratours of his time. These examples are suffici∣ent to proue, that by diligence any perfection may be atteined. Let no man stand so much in his owne conceipt, as to say, I will do no more then my co∣uenaunt requireth: Or, if thou art descended of a worshipfull stocke, to growe in stomache by meanes of gentilitie. Neyther, if thou arte borne to any possessions, to thincke it a scorne by meanes of thy riches. For this hinders not so much thy selfe, but doth rather minister yll counsell to a number, and maketh them withdrawe their mindes from doing well, and to followe lewde example. For if thou be neuer so noble of birth, if thou once become a ser∣uaunt, whatsoeuer thou do to thy maister aboue thy promise, if it tende to his profite and commoditie, is but thy bounden duetie. Againe, if such a one which doth his duetie farre beyond his couenaunt, if for his labour he be not considered, in good faith he serues a simple maister. But be he assured, although he finde no rewarde on earth, his maister in hea∣uen shall largely yeld him double recompense. I neuer sawe as yet, any in my life, for too much diligence employed to their maisters, that did euer
want in their aged dayes: but many (the more is the pittie) I do knowe, for slacking their dueties, & vntrustie seruice, haue beggered their maisters, who with a iust plague for their labour, haue béene rewarded according to their desertes: whose estates at this present time are moste miserable to behold: wandering as outcastes amongest the froth and Vntrustie ser¦uaunts, frothe and scomme of the people. scomme of vnhappie people. What if thou diddest acquaint thy selfe to learne or practise all kinde of thinges touching the charge of housekéeping, from the simple plowman vnto the superior seruaunt? were this any disgrace to thy calling? no certeinly, but rather a commoditie: for thou shalt gather ther∣by greate knowledge and vnderstanding. For, what thing is more perfect then that, which we learne by experience? We may not thinke to liue alwayes in seruice, but at the last to haue house and familie of our owne: then the experience which we haue lear∣ned through our diligence, shall instruct vs the bet∣ter, what belongeth to the duetie of our owne ser∣uauntes. And if so be thou art in credite with thy maister, that it pleaseth him to make account of thée aboue Pride & dis∣daine must be auoided. the rest of thy fellowes, be not therefore proude, & disdaine not thine inferiours, for so shalt thou haue manie enimies: but rather the more in credite, the more courteous. For, courtesie, is the only badge of a Gentleman and descendeth from nobilitie. Again, Courtesie the cognisance & badge of a Gentleman. gentle communication and friendly countenaunce, one to another, expelleth all rancour and malice, & purchaseth many friendes. Did not Antonius the lustie gallant preferre Cleopatra the blacke Aegyp∣tian for her incōparable courtesie before all the bla∣sing starres in the citie of Rome? It is the onely pathway to praise, and the brightnesse thereof is e∣clipsed
by pride and arrogancie. What is Honour, Wealth, Beautie, or braue Attire, without courte∣sie? It is assuredly nothing else but a goodly gréene trée, which florisheth with leaues and blossoms, and bringeth foorth no fruite. Some there are, which will stande highly vppon their reputation, for that they haue a reasonable portion to leane vnto, and holdes it great scorne to associate them selues with their fellowes of inferi∣our calling, being not of like abilitie: some againe, for their stocke and kindred. Such persons as will growe hautie by meanes of their wealth (being the giftes of Fortune, which is vncerteine) abuse the Vanitie and follie to brag of kindred or of riches. same. And such which glorie in them selues by mea∣nes of their greate aliaunce, declare to be in them but méere foolishnesse. Assure thy selfe of this, that if thou arte alied to manie, and yet hast but fews friendes, what profiteth thée to boast of thy high birth? For, if thou hast neuer so many kinsmen, and if thou doest not indeuour thy selfe some kinde of way to pleasure them, their friendship towards thée in time of néede will become weake and verie slen∣der, and thou thy selfe little accompted of. But per∣haps, if thou visitest them as a straunger, muche welcome: but if thou accompt it as thy home, they will compare thée to a freshe water fishe, which be∣ing kept long, will sauour and become lothfome: Euen so, if thou burden thy friendes otherwise then a guest ought to do, they will repine at thée. There∣fore, neyther for birth or riches, be not disdainfull, but the more courteous, if thou wilt be well thought of. For, haue we not read of Kings gouerning whole kingdomes, and other Nobles, with large reuenues liuing in all felicitie, haue abandoned their countries, and liued in moste miserable bon∣dage?
Suche is the rewarde of those that growe proude, and are vnthankful for that they haue. For Fortune frau¦dulent and faithlesse. it is commonly séene, that when Fortune smileth moste on any mortall wight, then workes shée grea∣test deceipt. As shée hath pleasure to raise meane persons to credite and dignitie, so likewise taketh shée as great delight to throwe them downe into ad∣uersitie. Delight not to complaine of any of thy fellowes, Complaints must be es¦chewed. to currie fauour and disquiet thy maister: but after a friendly manner vse gentle persuasions, that if a∣ny of thy fellowes haue neglected his duetie, tell him secreatly that it may be reformed. At thy mai∣sters table haue great care and diligence, and espe∣cially Precepts con¦cerning ma¦ners and beha¦uiour. at such time as there are many straungers. Listen not to euery tale that at the boord is recited: and if so be it minister occasion of laughter, yet in any wise do thou refraine and kéepe silence. Let thine eyes be fixed round about the table, lest bread, béere, or cleane trenchers be wanting. Neuer of∣fer to take any dishe from the table, vnlesse thou settest a better in his place, or else when thou séest it almost emptie: but if there be not diuersitie of di∣shes, then take vp the table: notwithstanding, be not so hastie, but vntill such time as they haue tal∣ked awhile after their victuals: but at the court, Quicke Car¦uers in Court. the sooner the better: for there are quicke caruers. Use not often figging in and out with a trencher, more delighting to fill thy paunche, then thou hast care of thy seruice: although thy maister espie thée not, yet straungers will marke thée. Use not any vncomely spéeche at thy meale, which shall excéede the boundes of honestie, amongst thy fellowes, and Chastitie once spotted is ne¦uer reiouered. chiefly before maides: considering their chastitie is a daungerous treasure, which once being spoiled, is
neuer recouered. For, that maide, whose eare is pliant to lasciuious talke, although her chastitie take no dammage, yet suspicion doth grawe amon∣gest the common people. Take heede in any wise of horrible swearing, least that thou incurre Gods Swering may not be vsed. heauie displeasure: for Falsa iuratio est damnosa, ve∣ra iuratio est periculosa, nulla iuratio est secura. A false othe is damnable, a true othe is perilous, & no othe is safe, vnlesse it be before a magistrate: in causes of controuersie. Report not any thing which shalbe spoken at thy maisters table, vnlesse it touche thy Prince and Souereigne, for so shalt thou soone pur∣chase his heauie displeasure: but alwayes haue this saying in thy minde, Video & taceo, I sée and holde my peace: which (no doubt) well obserued, shall further thy quietnesse. Challenge not to thy selfe fi∣ner fare then reason requireth: neither finde often Behauiour at boorde. fault with any of thy victuals, vnlesse thou séest it verie scarce and vnreasonable: reuite not the cooke for the same, vntill thy maister be priuie of his dea∣lings: for some time thy maister may fare but hom∣ly by meanes of foule weather, and other casual∣ties: for many misfortunes be happen in housekee∣ping. Therefore, be content with such fare as thou wouldest giue thine owne seruauntes, if thou hadst a house of thine owne. And if thou happen to tra∣uell Behauiour abroad. to any place, where thou séest any nouelties, which thou art assured thy maister or maistres well liketh of, spare not for the price, although it be deare: but buy somewhat. For, what is better estée∣med then that which is geason? And it is worthie double thankes, then if thou were required. When thou ridest any iorney with thy maister, do not vse to loyter farre behinde, and chiefly when he passeth through any towne or village: but while
thou art in presence of people, kéepe a comely order: for that is commendable, and much for his worship: but if thou be carelesse; then thou challengest an in∣terest amongest the foure and twentie orders. When thou comest at night to thy Inne, haue care of thy maister, that his lodging may in any wise be swéete and cleanly, his shéetes white washed, and verie well ayred, his bootes sée foorthwith made cleane and stuffed with strawe in time of foule we∣ther, and bring them vp to his chamber: sée nothing be wanting when he riseth next morning. Haue care to the Tapsters, what necessaries they bring, and reckon what thinges they set on the table: for Tapsters vse iuggling. they will vse iuggling to mainteine their brauerie. And when thou art abroade in iorney with thy mai∣ster, be not negligent: but at night, when thou go∣est to bed, and quietly art laide, call to minde what things thou hast done all the whole daye, as also what weightie affaires haue béen committed to thy charge, and thou shalt with continuall vse bring thy selfe to a moste quicke and perfecte memorie, and shalt not onely by this meanes haue a good remem∣braunce, but besides, if thou hast spent the daye in the abuse of God, and his glorie, thou maist with a repentant heart call thine owne conscience to reckoning, and aske God mercie, and the sooner prepare thy selfe readie when God shall call thée.
Certeine Letters verie necessa∣rie for Seruingmen. W. B. to his singular good Lord for his captiuitie. RIght honourable, the consideration of my present calamities, causeth mée to make my carefull cōplaintes, with all humble and duetifull sub∣mission, persuading my selfe, that there is no such way to remedie my griefe, and restore againe to it selfe a minde per∣plexed and pittifully plunged through diuerse déepe distresses, then there to vnfolde the same, where iustice with mercie, where seueritie with remorce, where pitie with pardon in the meanest offences ruleth and hath her Souereigntie. And whereas I knowe my selfe guiltles of any grieuous and no∣torious Remedies a¦gainst griefe. crime, I am the more imboldened to write vnto your honour, not doubting, but there I shall find fauour and grace, where God and Nature hath moste aboundantly bestowed the same: and that you will of your excéeding bountie, clemencie, and goodnesse, pardon follie not ioyned with any impie∣tie, I beseeche you, euen for his sake that saued vs all, that you will not suffer mée to be vtterly cast a∣way: A petition opening his present case. for I am destitute of money and all maner of friendship: and vnlesse you speedily shew grace and fauour, I vtterly perishe, being threatened to be throwne downe amongest the froth and scomme of the vnhappie people. I trust your honour remem∣breth well, that more true praise and glorie is at∣teined by pardoning, then by punishing. All the Romane Princes were of this opinion. We holde it (saith the historie) more honourable, to pardon
such as offend vs, then to chasten those which resist our power. And verily, punishment is a thing na∣turall and humane: but to giue pardon and life, is the gifte and blessing of God: by which it commeth to passe, that men estéeme not the greatnesse & ma∣iestie of the immortall God for the punishement where with he correcteth vs, as for the mercie he vseth. Wherefore, I humbly yeld, and moste wil∣lingly submitt my selfe to your honours grace, fa∣uour, and mercie. R. S. to his friend T. D. for his long imprisonment. RIght honourable. If two brutishe creatures, to∣gether long continuing, be separated, they will (according to their kind) shewe foorth a passion: the Lyon will roare, the Cow will yell, the Swine wil grunt, the Dogge cannot but fill the ayre with an intollerable and yrke some howling. If this dis∣position be found in things méere voide of reason & vnderstanding, much more is the condition of man subiect to sorrowe and heauinesse, in whome Na∣ture bréedeth a more quicke and raging sense of fée∣ling: in so muche (I thinke verily) that so many times a man suffereth death, howe often in a day he séeth him selfe shut vp, or diuided from the socie∣tie he dearely and tenderly loueth: or exiled the place which he chiefly liketh. It is (no doubt) right terrible to the fleshe, to die with the sworde: but to To be in per¦petual sorrow and heauines of mind, what it may well be termed. be in perpetuall sorrowe and heauinesse of minde, may not so well be termed a death, as a verie furie and hellishe torment. And better it were for many to suffer without feare, that which they expecte in griefe and pensiuenesse of spirite, then trembling
to be alwayes in martyrdome. Right honourable, I vtter not these spéeches, to shew my guilt, which I trust appeareth not heynous in your eyes: as to manifest my gréefe, which to mée is found most tedi∣ous, and too too excéeding raging: féeling (as it were) my bodie faint and wearied, being pressed with the weightie burthen of your heauie displeasure. Wherfore (most worthie counsellour) exercise vp∣pon mée the plentie of your bountie, that I may li∣uing rather commende your mercie, then in silence complaine of your seueritie. And thus leauing your worthinesse in the handes of your counsell, I wishe you those felicities which your owne heart desireth. H. L. to his singular good maistresse, for procuring his pardon. THis one thing I learned by the instinct and be∣nefite of nature, (my Souereigne good maistres) had I neuer perused learned treatises discoursing manifoldly the selfe same in effecte: that, Happie dayes excéede the heaped summes, and long life, (according to the opinion of all) to them chéefely is found most swéete and plausible, who being daun∣gerously intrapped, haue despaired of pittie, or as Long life, to whome it is most sweete and pleasant. wanderers through want of a skilfull Pilote, haue fallen into the swallowing surge of Silla, readie to be deuoured in that gulfe, and as it were yelding to so greate a miserie and wretchednesse. For this standes in common regarde with all, rather to séeke to prolong our life, then increase our wealth. And the Souereigne delight, and the pleasure of oure dayes, is the solace of life. This being vndoub∣tedly found most true and euident, that there is in vs ingraffed an earnest and ardent affection of life,
and that life to them is founde moste deare & plea∣sant, who haue béene in perill of death: How should I be addressed, or in what manner may I yelde all obseruaunce to her, by whose petition and earnest suite, I haue auoided the terrour of death? Uerily, it is not in my slender capacitie to disclose the due∣tie that aunswers your desert, the insufficiencie and basenesse of the one, is so much inferior to the other, Desert excee¦ding duetie. in the excéeding greatnesse and goodnesse. Where∣fore, sith my skill and abilitie is too simple to expresse liuely a thing of so high a nature, I close my lippes, as one vanquished with the excellencie of your goodnes. Thus rendering imnortall praise for your greate goodnesse, and crauing pardon for my pre∣sumptuous boldnesse, I moste humbly take my leaue, beséeching God to lende you long life with happie dayes. W. S. to his louing father, declaring that the cause why he did not write, was for his vnhappie state. I Haue this long time forborne to write vnto you (deare father) not in any negligent respect, as not remembring with what humilitie I am bounde by the lawe of God to obey you, or with what affecti∣on I am inioyned by the lawe of Nature to reue∣rence The cause of slacking due¦tie. you: but Fortune, since my departure from you, séemeth to haue dealt with mée so frowardly, that I haue béene by no good order induced to giue you intelligence of my estate, lest that percase the opinion of misliking which is alreadie in your ingen∣dered, viewing the continuance of these my so ma∣ny casuall calamities, might to my greate hinde∣raunce confirme in you a iudgement. And yet, what
haue I not to fore painefully abode, which present∣ly I doe not with all patience suffer, reteining al∣wayes a resolute and vnconquerable minde? For this, by perusing wittie and profound discourses of Philosophers, I learne: that albeit aduersitie hath power to vexe and trouble the condition of mortall men: yet it hath no power to chaunge the constancie and courage of a valiant and puissant minde, which in all resolutions and chaunges of times, reteines one firme and vnmoueable vertue: Euen as a trée which being well rooted, although it be shaken with many violent windes, yet in his firme there is no power to supplant him. We through aduersitie be∣come humble, wise, and perfect: and the offender is better reformed by the proofe of afflictions, then by any other meanes: for, knowing them to be the messengers of God, he debateth not the griefes he féeleth, but calleth his owne conscience to a recko∣ning: Afflictions are the messen¦gers of God. he glorifieth him selfe in tribulation, know∣ing that tribulation brings patience, patience brée∣des experience, experience raiseth hope, hope thus wrought and couched, cannot be confounded. In consideration whereof, I déeme him moste vnhap∣pie, which hath not béene infortunate: for he that He is vnhap¦pie that hath not beene in fortunate. hath not béene accussomed with aduerse and crooked Fortune, hath least power ouer his passions. And such as neuer haue felt perplexitie, can little iudge of the worthines of patience. Wherefore (deare father) mislike not of that which in the ende brings true and perfect felicitie. I moste humbly take my leaue, crauing your fatherly fauour & blessing. T. D. to his inconstant wife, for her malicious stomache against him.
WIfe, I do not a litle maruell at your vncourte∣ous dealing towards mée: howbeit, as I haue iust cause to stomache the same, so assure your selfe, I will not be vnmindfull in yelding recompense, as opportunitie and occasion shall serue. In the meane while, I am content to speake little & suffer muche, not for that I stande in awe of you or any of yours, but that I sée you voide of reason and gouernement Women are voide of rea¦son and go¦uernement. belonging to a woman, whose crooked inclination is suche, and in you so déepely rooted, that it can no more chaunge your condition, then the Uiper his poysoning, or the Leopard his spottes. You professe outwardly a maruellous shewe of religion, I much maruell then that such mischiefe can harbour in so godly a creature, whose vndermining pate sought meanes to shorten my dayes. But nowe I finde the olde prouerbe true? Amongest sweete flowers doeth lurke the stinging Snake. It is not the point Latet anguis in herba. of any woman once coupled in the bandes of Marri∣age, to minister any occasion of slaunder, whereby the life of him, whome shée hath peculiarly chosen, may be defamed: but by all meanes possible to in∣deuour her selfe to auoide suspicion, weying that all The glorie of the wife re¦steth in her husband. her glorie resteth in her husbande, and that in the husband is conteined the estimation of the wife. If this be the point of any honest woman to thirste af∣ter bloud, let all the worlde iudge: for mine owne parte, I can but lament your follie. In hurting mée you hinder your selfe: I beare with your infirmitie, for that you are a woman. Wherefore, if you will further your quietnesse, leaue off those slaunderous spéeches, lest the worlde condemne you, & yeld you vp to miserie and shame.
H. W. to M. H. being moued without cause. I Receiued your letters, which when I had read, mée thought they were so darke and obscure vnto mée, that scarce I vnderstoode your style: notwith∣standing, in perusing them ouer, I partly vnder∣stood your meaning. But now to the purpose. Haue I gone about at any time to shorten your dayes? or Speeches ex¦postulatorie. haue I sought mèanes to erect bloudie scaffoldes of murder, whereby you might possesse your vntime∣ly graue? I perceiue for a trifle you can frame complaint, but your wordes vttered without discre∣tion, would moue a Sainct to vse curst language. And whereas you lay an action of vnkindnesse a∣gainst mée that I should deliuer a ring to one which doth professe little friendship or good will towardes Charged with an action of vnkindnesse. you: this is (as it were) a going about the bushe, & (as one would saye) to steale a Goose & stick downe a fether. Well, I feare mée your flattering face wil cost mée a glasse of dissembling water. Thus lea∣uing at this time to trouble you any further, I yeld you vp to your owne follie. A. D. to his friend M. B. that he would procure her fathers good will. I Receiued your letters, giuing you a thousande thankes for your wise and courteous answere: aduertising you, that I meane to procure my frien∣des, which shall (I doubt not) but according to my expectation, moue your father of the excellent loue & Duetie in the one, wisdome in the other. singular affection which I beare towardes you. And for as much as duetie bindeth you to obey your pa∣rents: so likewise wisedome warneth mée, not one∣ly
to obey, but also to indeuour my selfe to be at the will and disposition of my friendes. For sure, your godly bringing vp, and your vertuous disposition, hath so bewitched my vnderstanding, that will I or nill I, my heart honours you. And if all the friends Patheticall phrases. I haue would hinder my desires, yet are they not able to quench the feruent flame which tormenteth my fancie, and vexeth the liuely spirits of my mind. Therefore, I shall desire you from the bottome of my hearte, that when soeuer my suite shalbe heard, or that by the meanes of my friendes, the effecte of my loue shalbe opened vnto your parents, you will remaine a iust and stedfast friend towards mée, who hath alreadie yelded him selfe, his life, and all that he hath into your handes. If you séeme to iudge o∣therwise, vnhappie wretche that I am, you thrust To be thrust downe from the toppe of hope, to the bottome of despaire. mée downe headlong from the topp of all hope and comfort, into the bottomlesse pitt of cruell despaire, where I shall as one bereft of a heauenly ioy, tor∣ment my selfe with a hellishe care. But when I call to mind the sundrie vertues that God and Nature hath indued you withall, I fully persuade my selfe, that such crueltie cannot harbour in so gentle an heart. And thus I ceasse, &c. T. B. to his singular good L. for his libertie, being accused without desert. IN moste humble and dutifull manner sheweth vnto your honour, that whereas it pleased your good Lordship to accept most courteously my former letters, I am the more imboldened at this time to write vnto your Lordships grace and lawfull fa∣uour, desiring your protection no further to ex∣tend it selfe, then the righteousnes of my cause, and
the simplicitie and plainesse of my meaning sheweth foorth it selfe. My cause lawfully and generally is A clause excu¦satorie. this. I am for an attempt lately committed, more lightly accused of some vnknowen crime and tres∣passe, then truely accused and substantially conuin∣ced of any apparent fault. My good Lord, not euery mistie and duskie vapour, but an excéeding heauie & darke cloud well pressed prophesieth raine. Not eue∣ry vaine suspicion so fondly immagined, or lightly His allegorie expounded. fraught, but firmely grounded, bringeth with it vn∣doubted trueth & estimation. The state of my cause, the condition of my accuser, with the particular no∣tes thereof, may fully manifest to your honour the cause to be honest and good. I humbly therefore pray, that your Lordship will, with your helping hand, assist my happlesse happe, giuing you to vn∣derstande, that I haue béene in durance this foure monethes, long destitute of all maner of fauour, & friendship, finding in my selfe no more force remai∣ning, whereby I shalbe able to beare this heauie & intollerable burthen. H. B. to his inconstant and cruell wife. WIfe, I feare mée, lest that you, eyther through too much familiaritie which you haue with some froward and sinister friend of mine, or malicious persuasion of others: or, (to speake the trueth) tho∣rough an extreme ouersight of you, in déede, by de∣tecting a secrete sting of malice in your owne breast long conceiued, and vnto the worlde vnknowen vn∣till this time, haue changed your accustomed qua∣litie, and causeth you to be so malicious and full of enuie. For, howe can that woman bragge of hone∣stie,
which is founde to her owne husbande not so much courteous, as to shewe some sparke of good na∣ture That wife hath litle ho¦nestie which hateth her husbandes but shee none at all that procu¦reth his death. in time of daunger: but moste cruell and full of tyrannie, in procuring his death? When this shall be openly knowen and manifestly published: what countenaunce will all men giue you which defende honestie? I saye, what interteinment, what chéere, what commendation may all suche women yelde to you, who are directed by wisedomes rule and poli∣cie, whose liues are clearely ledd by vertue? Consi∣der that vertue is the onely beautie that carrieth cō∣mendation with it at all times, which maketh men Vertue com∣mendeth such as haue it. to loue those, whome they neuer knewe. It is the onely pathway to praise, and the brightnesse of all beautie is eclipsed by crueltie. E. D. to my L. S. in the behalfe of his kinsman. MY verie good Lorde, I haue an earnest suite to your honour, touching one of my néere kins∣men, who hath a great goodwill to bestowe his time in your Lordships seruice, and of all noble men hath made you his singular choice. Wherefore, if you would of your accustomed goodnesse, viewing the person, to receiue him, you binde mée in triple bon∣des to requite your courtesie. And thus crauing your friendly answere herein, I moste humbly take my leaue. R. S. to a widowe to be circumspect in her choyce. AS my abilitie is not of the greatest to bestowe on you such giftes, as (perhaps) my well mea∣ning
minde pretendeth: yet am I not so spurned of Fortune, but that I enioy an honest portion. As my yeares are young, my wisedome but small to giue counsell: yet, neuerthelesse, if my wordes shall sauour of reason, yeld thankes to the writer, and I rest contented. As God hath blest you with the Wholesome precepts and documents. giftes of Fortune, forget not the giuer, neyther yet abuse them. Leane to such friendes as are wise and of good experience. Ouershoote not your selfe so far, to like without greate deliberation, lest your de∣lightes be tempered with pilles of sorrowe, exchan∣ging your quiet dayes into extreme miserie. And, in your choyce beware of painted brauerie: for, to matche your selfe to suche, bringeth a gnawing re∣pentaunce. Therefore, let your renowme be assu∣red on such a one, which is garnished with honest qualities. Euen as the valiant Capteine, before he A man indued with honest qualities ma¦keth his wife renowmed. buy horses, he runnes them, traines them, makes many trials of them, refusing the vnlikely, & ma∣keth choyce, of what price so euer he buy them: euen so in this short race of life, which you meane to per∣fourme with your husband, in comfort, solace, and pleasure, you must not stande so much vppon con∣templation of wauering loue, which perhaps is professed vnto you for lucre or gaine, but with ad∣uise and consideration wey the manners and condi∣tions of your husband, with whome you pretend that waye: for in him resteth your estimation, and renowme. If thy husband be vnchaste, sharpe in wordes, doubtfull to trust, vaine in life, willfull to be ordered: If lastly he hath no conformitie with thy conditions, then to his owne liking: Will not these things be an occasion of thine vntimely death? Yea alas, they are poisons of them selues, and galles whose bitternesse can neuer be taken away. If you
séeme to diuide the pleasures which you challenge peculiar to your selfe, shall you not then be deceiued in your vaine choice, for whome is reserued a smar∣ting, penaunce? If you marrie more for gredinesse of gaine then any settled affection, it is impossible, To marrie for gaine and not for affection purchaseth an vnquiet life. but you shall purchase to your selfe an vnquiet life. For, Friendship kindled in light heat will soone vanish, by meanes of the small force: where as suche which rest vpon the vnmoueable piller, are neuer subiect to ruine, as long as the bodie is subiect to life. I doe not denie, but wealth doeth well: and where want is, there colde friendship remaineth. Colde friend∣ship where want is. neyther do I counsell you to marrie for méere loue, for diminishing your substance: but as your liuing is able to mainteine an honest porte, so in deuour to matche your selfe to some worthie personage, ex∣changing your solitarie life for a pleasant libertie. Wherefore, sith a pleasaunt libertie is of precious price, make your pleasure priuie to your choice: & when you bende your affection to any creature, be sure to angle with an inchaunted hooke, and this To angle with an inchaunted hooke. being done, you shall liue in safetie. R. D. to a widowe, for absenting her selfe vpon certeine speaches. IF euer fishe desired the sounding and deapth of waters: or woman with childe were desirous to sée her offspring, and to be deliuered: I assure your selfe, none can be more ioyfull of any thing, then I would be to inioy your presence, nor gladder to sée you contented. Wherefore (good widowe) come hither, and passe away the time as you haue done, and thinke of mée according to my meaning, & then assure your selfe, you will not fall into these wo∣manlike
stormes (vndeserued) with your friend, which meaneth but well. I speake not this to flat∣ter you, I protest before God: I thinke you haue reason sufficient to consider, that eyther it booteth or néedeth not: but for that I wold sée you in friend∣ly order, as I haue done, hoping that that quarel∣ling spéeche shall not be vsed. For I haue set downe my rest in this order: if you grieue or be disquiet, it shall nothing content mée: if you laugh, I will doe A mutual con¦dolencie or sufferaunce promised. the like for companie: so that I hope to deale in such order, as shall neyther offend you, God, nor the worlde, if you do me right. And what iniurie as hath béene offered, I haue forgotten, estéeming them vaine, and as womens humors. And thus farewell, wishing to you as well as to my selfe. W. S. to a widowe whose malice was somewhat digested. BEing fully persuaded by some of my friendes, that your choler is somewhat digested, I am by that meanes the more willing to write vnto you these fewe lines, to manifest plainely, that these womanlike stormes, which of late you haue dwelt in, do peraduenture sauour of a selfe willed malice, then any reason that led you to the contrarie. For, I do assure you, behind your backe, in reporte or o∣therwise, I haue not offended you, although per∣haps you will say to my face, I haue more plainely He excuseth him selfe of offence, by charging his widowe with obstinate ma∣lice. then wisely dealt with any thing, otherwise then I should. But for any hurte euer meaning, other then I would should happen to my selfe, then God con∣found mée. For mine owne parte, I am persuaded, that what in malice you will haue, I am content it shall nothing anger mée, vnlesse it hurt your selfe:
the which I would be sorrie to sée. Wherefore, as I am content to treade downe suche iniuries as haue béene offered vnto mée, who neuer offended: so, if you forget such slaunderous spéeche, then I thinke my labour well bestowed, you must thinke I haue béene beholding vnto you. First let me recompense you, and then if I abuse you, blame mée. In the meane while, thinke mée not of so vile a nature, for goodwill to yeld you hatred, &c. T. B. to his louing friend M. D declaring what loue he beareth her. F. S. as one not a little sorrowfull at your soudon departure out of towne, for that I had an ear∣nest occasion to haue spoken with you, hoping to haue renewed the familiaritie of our olde acquain∣tance, Long absence breedeth for∣getfulnesse of familiaritie. which is almost forgotten, by meanes of my long absence, which if I had not come at so vnfortu∣nate a time, might (no doubt) haue béene somwhat renewed. Notwithstanding, sith there is no reme∣die, I will arme my selfe with patience, trusting hereafter we may méete againe, where (no doubt) I may manifest vnto you the good will I beare you, and vtter suche secretes as long time haue lien hid∣den within the secrete closet of my mind vnvttered, which I onely referre to your maidenly iudgement. And surely, for the modestie, courtesie, and honest behauiour which I sée you indued withall, yeldes mée such good liking of you, that if euery pennie I haue were worth a pounde, I coulde vouchsafe to make you the maistresse of it, and as soone choose you He desireth to be dealt with∣all as he deser∣ueth. for a wife and spouse, as any creature on the earthe: whose wordes, if hereafter they be not agréeable to my déedes, then let my good will be rewarded with floutes.
H. D. to her singular good vncle, being an executour. FOrasmuch as the shortnesse of time doeth some∣what Acknowledge¦ment of bene¦fites receiued, as wel corpo∣rall as mental. hinder mée at this time, to doe my duetie, as well of commendations, as of heartie thankes, for your large and innumerable benefites, that is to saye, in finding mée not onely with the giftes of the bodie, but also with the giftes of the minde: by the which all things in this worlde are mainteined and vpholden. Wée sée daily before our eyes, that the Common wealth is mainteined with the giftes of the minde, that is, wisedome, and learning. But nowe to the purpose. If there be any sparke grauen in mée, the which sparke may ingender a great deal, (as this wise and prudent saying doeth affirme: Concitat ingentes flammas scintilla minuta. A little sparke ingendreth a great deale of fire:) then am I bounde with an ardent bonde of loue, to render with all indeuour continuall thankes. But chiefely before I write any further, I ought to pray A conclusion answering to his exordium. to God for your prosperitie and health, and to thank him of his goodnesse, that he hath lefte mée suche a friend, (my father being dead,) that will not grudge to bestowe such large benefits on mée, and to accept mée as I were his owne. W. D. to his louing friend M. G. THE long absence, sithence my departure, can no lesse minister occasion to write, then my wil is apt and agréeable to accomplish the same: not v∣sing any varietie of wordes, but rather a friendly greeting, according to your worthinesse: not doub∣ting, but you will be agréeable to the old saying: To
accept the heart of the giuer more then the value of Not the gifte but the giuer is chiefly to be considered. the gift: the which accepted, I rest contented: and so presuming vppon your courtesie, I thought good to write these fewe lines vnto you, which are the messengers of my well meaning minde towardes you: wherein (I hope) that the long absence, or di∣stance of place, shall not be the occasion of forgetful∣nesse. Thus reposing my selfe wholy in your won∣ted friendship, I committ you to the Almightie. E. S. to his singular good maistres, for redeeming one of his friendes, beeing in durance. MAistresse, I am once againe inforced to write, A letter inter∣cessorie or mediatorie. and not without iust cause, it toucheth so neere my deare friend: wherein, if you further my suite, you binde mée (during life) to rest at your cōmaun∣dement. A matter of some importaunce, the setting frée of one M. L. whose estate my L. knoweth ve∣rie well, and meaneth to reteine him into his ser∣uice. Which person, if you were acquainted with, as I my selfe am, his honest behauiour & wisedome Commendati¦on deriued from maners and behauior. is such, that you would lament his long imprison∣ment, and desolate life, and reioyce againe at his libertie, when you shall enter into the societie and fellowship of so worthie a Gentleman, Wherefore, I moste earnestly desire you, that whin my L. shall be at conuenient leasure, you will put him in mind with daily suite, that this my friende may be relea∣sed. In which doing you bind mée alwayes firme & faithfull to you and your progenie. R. C. to the Iustices of peace, for the S.
RIght worshipfull. These are to require you, in the absence of my husband, who is not in Coun∣trie to aunswere his owne cause, to stand his friend touching the S. and to assesse him at the summe Allegations for the miti∣gation of the S. by non abi¦litie. aforetime payde, which was tenne poundes, & now is twentie: whose abilitie is not so able to beare it, as of him is reported, by meanes he is indebted, and growne to a greater charge. Wherefore, if the trueth were throughly knowen vnto you, either he him selfe present before your worshippes, to aun∣swere his owne case: I doubte not but you woulde beare with his disabilitie, and assesse him at the summe aforetime payde. In which doing, you mi∣nister vnto vs both an acceptable pleasure, and giue vs occasion, according to our power, to requite your courtesie. G. W. answere to his brother, that she would be circumspect in her choyce. I Receiued your letter the xj. of August, the sight Concerning matters of mariage coun¦sel giuen and taken. whereof hath ministred vnto mée no small com∣fort, yelding you most heartie thankes for the great good will you beare mée: whose good counsell, if I should not haue in regarde, in mée might be reputed greate vnthankfulnesse. And whereas you write vnto mée, to be circumspect in my choice, it stan∣deth mée vppon (no doubt) to take great deliberati∣on: it toucheth so much my making, or vndoing. Wherefore, if it be so, that I do marrie againe, (as all is in the will of God,) assure your selfe, I will not couple my selfe in such sorte, but that the life of him whome I take, shall be of credite, and carrie good commendation: neyther spurned of Fortune, neither forsaken of friendes. And vntill such time as you come to L. I will not make any promise. I would haue béene glad, if your affaires had not béene
otherwise, to haue had your aduise in drawing my husbandes will: but your soudeine departure was a let to the contrarie: which did not a little discomfort mée, being at that time déepely distressed, by meanes A necessarie cause to ingen¦der sorrow in the wife. of my husbands sickenes: knowing none, in whome I might repose any such confidence, as in you, being my naturall brother, whome I make dearest ac∣count of. H. S. to his friend. T. D. FRiend D. for that I did not take my leaue of you, I am verie sorrie, and ashamed: neuerthelesse, A letter excu∣satorie for de¦parting from his friend vn∣saluted. time did so fall out, that I coulde not, although wil∣lingly I woulde. Therefore, in recompense of my mishappe, and so souden departure from you, with∣out a farewell, I presume at this time, (by your pa∣tience) to trouble you with a fewe lines of remem∣braunce: although but rude, yet they procéede from a faithfull heart, & suche a one, which wisheth to you as well as to my selfe: trusting, that you, being my friend, will take them in good parte. And thus fare you well. A. F. to his sister H. F. giuing her counsel in pros∣peritie, to be mindfull of aduersitie. RIght welbeloued sister, among many thinges which are incident to this our life, there is none An epistle per¦suasorie. more circumspectly to be considered, then the varia∣blenesse of fortune, and the not so often as souden al∣teration of the best and most souereigne benefites, where with this our transitorie life is blessed and ad∣uaunced. Wisely, and not so wisely as truely sayde a philosopher, that What wee haue, wee haue not: A sage sentēce and what we lacke, we possesse. Meaning hereby the vncerteintie of those thinges, wherevpon our life principally dependeth. For, though we haue this
dayes prosperitie, we may not withstanding tasse to morrowes aduersitie: And though this houre mini∣ster mirthe vnto vs and store of ioyfulnesse, yet may the next peraduenture ouerwhelme vs with heaui∣nesse. Thus much is spoken of me, to put you in mind of the time past, the time present, and the time to The end of his purpose. come: for that you haue bene sometimes a Gentle∣woman vnder obedience, though nowe you haue o∣thers at seruice and commandement, and howe long this libertie will last, he best knoweth, from whose sight nothing is secret: That by conferring time with time, and circumstance with circumstance, you may forget to be ambitious, proude, and insolent: and remember to be lowly, content and indifferent. The best things and the fairest, shall sometimes suf∣fer A clause com∣paratiue. shipwracke: And what is there or hath bene though neuer so precious and amiable, but hath in the ende susteined losse of valure, and lacke of loue? The swéetest perfumes in time giue vp their ver∣tue. The fairest flowers kéepe not continually their colour. A calme followeth a storme, and after a tem∣pest insueth securitie. Finally, there is nothing but it hath a spring and a fal, a Winter and a Summer, an ebbe and a flowe, a day and a night: I meane, a time wherin to be amiable and gratious, and a time to be despighted and counted contemptuous. Wher∣fore (good sister) as your giftes are the more rare and His conclusi∣on exhortato∣rie. excellent, so let your wisedome haue the larger go∣uernement: that in the pearle of your beautie, you remember wrinckled olde age: in health, thinke on sicknesse: in wealth, be mindfull of pouertie: in a∣bundance, consider of scarsitie: in ease, forget not la∣bour: finally, ii: all your prosperitie to account of the contrarie. But leauing you to the gratious guiding of the highest, I bid you farewell. Your louing bro∣ther, A. F.
Certeine inuentions in verse, deuised at sundrie idle times. W. D. to his friends, exhorting them to beware in time. MY secrete griefes bewray my minde, I sigh to thinke on passed youth, Bent so to pleasures of the worlde, Respecting profit vaine forsooth. I serude in hope of Courtly gift, No whitt estéeming crooked age: Gréene youth did hedlong runne so swift, I lamde my selfe in fansies barge. No care I tooke, I sailde on still, (God wott) to hauen of vaine delight: Untill that reason sett vpp saile, Prouoking will to banishe quight. Hence slowly sailde my broken Barke, And waiteth time till Fortune please. The Tackels torne, the Maste emaind, Halfe spoyled in the furging Seas. By Mermaides singing past shée foorth, Inuirond rounde with gaping iawes, Nowe Neptune King helpe thou (quoth witt,) I fall into their gaping iawes. Nowe like to shippe on boyling Seas, Youth compa¦red to a ship sayling at vn¦certeintie. Compare I youth and gadding yeares, On daungers tost a thousand wayes, Unlesse the helme good counsell steares. Regarding sporte, I speilde my youth, Time wild me thinke on withered age: When pinching colde shall nippe thy limmes, Howe wilt thou shunne his angrie rage? Eschewe to drinke on wanton cuppe, Remember yeares do waste away: Eschewe eche mate of Uenus troope, Exhortations full of good counsell. Ne care thou for such wanton play.
And quite detest all fansies fonde, Unfolde the tables of thy life: Giue vp thy right of childish yeares, Haue care to gett for wedded wife. To turne in time is wisedome greate, In wishing when it is too late, Shall cause thée fall in déepe decaye, And bring thy ende to wretched state. Where wealth doeth want, there friendship colde: Example séene by daily proofe, Bought witt is deare, (the Prouerbe sayes:) Unstayed heads will soare aloofe. Trust not thy foe once reconcilde, Unlesse thou séeke thine owne decay, And credite not eche glosing stile, In trust is treason oft (men saye.) Nowe farewell youth and wanton will, Detesting Follir traine, I yeld my selfe to Wisedomes skill, Supposing pleasures to be vaine. Proofe willes mée yelde my selfe with spéede, Once caught in snare to shunne the trappe, Respecting profite wisedome brings, Then shall I sléepe in vertues lappe. W. D. Of one, who thinking to haue wedded a riche widowe, purchased an vnquiet lyfe. I Likt where no loue was, I matcht in hope to gaine, I sought for swéete, and tasted sowre, And wedded proude disdaine. I leade a loathed life, Exild from present ioy.
The yoke of bondage weare I on, Which threatens mine annoy. I sayld in seas of griefe, And washt with waues of woe, I must abide appointed course, My fate ordeines it so. I nowe must weaue the web, Which canckard care hath spun, And réele vp that against my will, Which youth would gladly shun. I sowe my séedes in vaine, I plant on barren stocke, Pretie and pi∣thie. And nought I get but blossome flowres, For wealth is vnder locke. For this by proofe I finde, Not well he often spéedes, A proper allu¦sion. That sowes his corne in such a soyle, Where nothing growes but wéedes. Thus liue I voyde of ioy, And spoyle my youth with age, My life is worser then the birde, Which fast is pent in cage. I leade a sparing life, The daintie fare I shunne, And yet I waste, I know not how: As snowe against the sunne. A iust reuenge (no doubt,) To me for passed life, For that I liue, as I do now, With such a dogged wife. Perforce must be content, Patience per∣force. Though fate on me do frowne, I must content me with my lot, Since fortune kéepes me downe. W. D.
Of one which commended diligence, and despised brauerie. I Serue in hope of that to come, Short and sweete. I passe not for no slauerie, I sée a number are vndone, And all for painted brauerie. I know a number lustie laddes, Which had possessions plentie, And begin streates with pitious mones, And finde rewardes but scantie. Wherefore Ile yelde my scepter vp, And hold my selfe contented, And labour like the busie Ant, For feare my pursse be emptie. W. D. W. D. to his vnconstant friend. AT age of twentie yeares and two, Dame Uenus tolde me on, To fixe my fansie vppon a maide, whose person nowe is gone. I likte her well, shée loude mée deare, I wooed her daye and night: Ill happe was mine to loue her well, And yet to lose her quite. For mischiefe made such meanes, And woorked such debate, That I of force was made to yelde, And loue was turnd to hate. Then right and reasen durst not speake. For might withstoode the same, Her faith they counted but a iest, And termd it Uenus game. For my good will thus haue I gott. Whilest one beats the bush another takes the birdes. Most bitter brall and strife, For shée whome I did fansie best, is nowe a wedded wife.
Nowe lye I drenchte in deadly lake, No mercie may I craue, Her friends for spight haue forste her quite, No comfort I can haue. Nowe doe I wallowe in the woes of Cupide blinded boy: My pleasures all are turnd to paine, My deareling lookes so coy. The great good will betwixt vs twaine, is nowe abandond quite, Shée nought regardes my iourneis cold, nor riding night by night. Perforce must be content, For mourning is but vaine, To like or loue where loue is lost, To loue wher loue is lost is double griefe. increaseth double paine. And thus I ende, fare well, fare well. Farewell, againe I say: I would be sorrie at my heart, to sée thée cast away. W. D. Certeine verses written to a maide, to be cir∣cumspect in her choyce. WIsedome doeth warne all maides that be wise, a héede for to haue, in hearing euery winde, A lesson for maides to learne that are wise. Lest lessons lewde, of such as can deuise, Trim tempered talk, to allure the simple minde: Else may shée through secrete griefe, Repent too late their rashe and lewde beliefe. Delight not in wordes, for they are but winde: Approue him well that shall be thy mate, Remember in shewes is harbourd deceit, Eschewe it in time, lest it be too late. Loue him therefore that loues thée againe, Long else shalt thou loue in dolour and paine. Loue and be¦loued. W. D.
An Epitaph vpon the death of the worshipfull Edward Darell, Clarke of Catrie of the Queenes Maiesties most honora∣ble housholde. IF euer cause constrained man, with shrikes to fill the Skie, If euer woe did will a wight, with teares his tunes to trye: Then cause haue I poore sillie man, to waile with watred eyes, The death of Darell dead and gone, which colde in earth nowe lyes. Whose deth a thousand thousand times I do lament full sore: And whilest my brething ghost remains, I shall do euermore. If plaints or wofull cries at all, Could raise him vp from graue, Then would I wayle in yearnfull sort, The life of him to haue. So godly was his life on earth, Properties praise worthy Euen to the latter end, So patient eke in troubles still, And faithfull to his friend. In court so carefull for his prince, So cleare of iudgement sure, In all his dealings iust of word, Of conscience very pure. So well reported all abroad, So courteous and so milde, Most dearely loued euery where, Of woman man and childe. A Gentleman in euery point, His life declarde the same, Who for his vertues manifold, Hath won immortall fame. W. D.
Of the Deare intoyled in a progresse. THe Deare pursued, him selfe sore turmoyles, Ouer bramble and bryers his bodies rebounds, Good luck yet may chance him, to pas throgh ye toiles, And frée with his life to scape from the hounds. W. D. A dittie of hunting: to the tune of Light of loue, &c. OF all the pleasures in countrie and court, Hunting is healthfull. Hunting with hounds is the gallantest sport, Though painfull it séemeth, yet health it doth bring: It is a pastime for a Duke or a King. Merily chaunts the hounds in the wood, Most men it delightes, the noyse is so good. Hunting expelleth the wanton delight, Hunting ta¦meth the flesh Which often enchaunteth each kind of delight, The pleasures of Uenus with other vaine sport, Hunting preuenteth all such kinde of sport. Merily, &c. If youthes would delight in hunting with hound, Hunting main∣teineth thrifti¦nesse. Unthrifts so many would scarcely be found, House kéeping would neuer so souden decay: Nor gentle would iet it in going so gay. Merily, &c. In hunting is harbourde most pretie conceits, Hunting ma¦kes men ac¦tiue & expert. As writers at large moste trimly intreates: Manhood is prooued, cunning is learnde, Mindes are reuiued, sleightes be discerned. Merily, &c. A King in Newe forest by chasing the Harte, Daunger in hunttig. By Fortuue was slaine of a fethered darte: Diuerse besides in huntiug the Boare, Haue ended their dayes being wounded full sors. Merily, &c. Hunting resembles a battell in field. Hunting com¦pared to a bat¦tell. And pretie conceits of warre it doth yelde:
A pastime truely well worthie of fame, And all that loues it deserueth the same. Merily, &c. The hounds be the battell pitcht very square, The grehounds the wings to followe the hare, Proofe of the premisses. The hornes blows chace and sound the retire, To courage the dogges where game doth appeare. Merily, &c. When game to the couert spéedeth apace, The horsemen giue charge to followe the chace, The proofe continued. Their spurres imbrued, their horse they do strike, Which makes them rebound ouer hedge and dike Merily, &c. Yet some there be certein which hunting do scorne, Hunting foūd faultie. Bicause of their hedges and spoyle of their corte: What pleasure (say they) to heare a dog ball? A labour they count it, no pleasure at all. Merily, &c. In hunting (say they) great charges arise, Discommodi∣ties in hun∣ting. In filling their mawes, to stop their outcries, Stenches most filthie vnséemely to views, In kéeping of dogges besides doth insue. Merily, &c. The dronkard detests it, and hunts for good ale, The leacher doth loath it, and hunts for his taile, What maner of men abhor hunting. The gamster doth shun it, and curseth the same: And hunts after dice and other lewd game. Merily, &c. But those that be honest such pastime will fly, Hunting high¦ly esteemed a¦mong the ho¦nourable. For mischiefes full many ariseth thereby: But hunting with hounds doth carrie such fame, That nobles and Gentles doth honour that game. Merily chaunts the hounds in the wood, Most men it delights, the noyse is so good. FINIS.
The treatise of Master Ihon Della Casa, wherin vnder the person of an old vnlearned man, instructing a youthe of his, he hath talke of the maners and fashions, it behoues a man to vse or eschewe in his familiar conuersation: intituled Galateo, of fashions and maners. FOr as muche as thou doste now enter the iourny, wher∣of I haue allredy ronne forth the better parte (as thou seest) I meane the transitorie waye of this mortall life: I haue de∣termined (such is the Loue I beare thee) to shewe all the daungerous straights thou must passe: For my experience maketh me feare, yt walking that way thou mayst easily eyther fall, or by some meanes or other go astray. To the ende thou maist once, taughte both by my instructions and experience, be able to keepe the right waye, aswell for the helthe of thy Soule, as the commendation and prayse of the Honourable and Noble house thou doest come of. And bycause thy tender Age, is vnfit (as yet) to receaue more principall and higher precepts, reseruing them for fytter time, I will beginn to discourse of such things as many men wyll deeme, perchaūce, but tri∣fles:
I meane what manner of Countenance and grace, behoueth a man to vse, that hee may be able in Communication and familiar acquaintance with mē, to shewe him selfe ple∣sant, courteous, and gentle: which neuerthe∣lesse is either a vertue, or the thing that comes very nere to vertue. And albeit Liberali∣tie, or magnanimitie, of themselues beare a greater prayse, then, to be a well taught or ma¦nored man: yet perchaunce, the courteous behauiour and entertaynement with good maners and words, helpe no lesse, him that hath them: then the high minde and courage, aduaūceth him in whome they be. For these be such things as a mā shall neede alwayes at all hāds to vse, because a man must necessarily be familiar with mē at all times, & euer haue talk & communication with them: But iustice, for∣titude, and the other greater, and more noble vertues, are seldome put in vre. Neyther is ye liberall and noble minded man, caused euery hower to doe bountifull things: for to vse it of∣ten, cannot any man beare the charge, by any meanes. And these valiāt men yt be so full of hyghe minde and courage: are very seldome driuen to trye their valour & vertue by their deeds. Then as muche as these last, doe passe those fyrst, in greatnes (as it were) & in weight: so much do the other surmoūt these in number, & oftē occasiō to vse thē. And, if I could wel in∣tend
it, I could name you many, whoe, (being otherwise of litle account) haue ben & be styll, muche estemed & made of, for their cherefull & plesaunt behauiour alone: which hath byn suche a helpe & aduauncemēt vnto them, that they haue gotten greate preferments, leauing farre behinde them, such men as haue byn en∣dowed with those other noble and better ver∣tues, spoken of before. And as these plesaūt & gētle behauiours, haue power to draw their harts & mynds vnto vs, with whome we liue: so cōtrarywise, grosse and rude maners, pro∣cure mē to hate and despise vs. Wherby albeit the lawes, haue inioyned no payne for vnma∣nerly & grose behauiours, as the fault that is thought but light (& to saye a trueth, it is not greate) yet we see notwithstanding, yt nature herselfe punisheth thē wt sharpe & shrewde cor∣rection, putting them by this meanes, besydes ye cōpanie & fauour of men. And truly euē as greate & foule faults, doe muche harme: so doe these lyght, much hurt, or hurte at least more oftē. For, as mē doe cōmōly fere ye beasts yt be cruell & wild, & haue no maner of feare of som litle ones, as ye gnats and the flyes, & yet by ye cōtinual noiaūce they find by thē, cōplaine thē selues more of thes thē of ye other: so it chaūceth yt most mē do hate in maner asmuche, ye vnma∣nerly & vntaught, as ye wicked, & more. So yt
there is no doubte, but who so disposeth him∣selfe to liue, not in solitarie and deserte pla∣ces, as Heremites, but in fellowship with men, and in populous Cities, will think it a very necessarie thing, to haue skill to put himselfe forth comely and seemely, in his fashions, ges∣tures and maners: the lacke of which parts doth make those other vertues lame, and litle or nothing can they work to good effect, with∣out other helpes: wheare this ciuilitie and courtesie, without other releefe or patrimo∣nie, is riche of it selfe, & hath substance enough, as a thing yt standeth in speache and gestures alone. And that yu mayst now more easily learne the way vnto it, thou must vnderstand, it behoues thee, to frame and order thy maners and doings, not according to thyne owne minde and fashion: but to please those, with whome thou lyuest, and after that sort direct thy doings: And this must be done by Discre∣tion and Measure. For who so applieth himself to much, to feede other mens humors, in his familiar conuersation, and behauiour with men, is rather to be thought a Iester, a Iugler or flatterer, then a gentleman wel taught and nourtured: As contrarywise, whoe so hath no care or mynd to please, or displese, is a rude,
vntaught, and vncourteous fellowe. For as∣muche then, as our maners, haue some plea∣sure in them when we respect other men, and not our owne pleasure: if we diligētly searche forthe what those things be, that most men do generally lyke or dislike: we shall in suche forte wisely and easily finde out, the meanes & wayes, to choose and eschewe, those fashions and maners, we are to leaue or take, to liue a∣mongest men. We say then, that euery act that offendeth any the common senses, or ouer∣thwarteth a mans will and desire, or els presenteth to the Imagination and conceite, matters vnpleasaunt, & that likewyse, which ye mynde doth abhorre, such things I say bee naught, and must not be vsed: for vve must not only refraine from such thinges as be fowle, filthy, lothsome and nastie: but vve must not so muche as name them. And it is not only a fault to dooe such things, but against good maner, by any act or signe to put a man in minde of them. And therefore, it is an ilfauoured fashion, that some men vse, openly to thrust their hands in what parte of their bodye they lyst. Lykwise, I like it as yll to see a Gentlemā fettle him selfe, to do the needes of Nature, in presence of men: And after he hath doone, to trusse him selfe againe before them. Neither
would I haue him (if I may geue him coun∣cell) when he comes from suche an occupatiō, so much as washe his hāds, in the sight of ho∣nest company: for yt the cause of his washing, puts them in minde of some filthy matter that hath bene done aparte. And by the same rea∣son, it is no good maner, when a man chaun∣ceth to see, as he passeth the waye (as many times it happeneth) a lothesome thing, yt wil make a mā to cast his stomacke, to tourne vn∣to the company, & shewe it them. And much worse I like it, to reache some stynking thing vnto a man to smell vnto it: as it is many a mās fashiō to do, wt importunate meanes, yea, thrusting it vnto their nose, saying: Foh, feele I pray you, hovv this doth stink. vvhere they should rather say, smell not vnto it: for it hath an yll sent. And as these and lyke fashions offend the sē∣ses, to which they appertaine: so to grynde the teethe, to whistle, to make pityfull cryes, to rubb sharpe stones together, and to fyle vppon Iron, do muche offend the Eares and would be lefte in any case. Neither must wee refraine those things alone, but we must al∣so beware we do not syng, and specialy alone, if we haue an vntuneable voyce, which is a common fault with moste men: And yet, hee that is of nature least apt vnto it, doth vse it
moste. So there be some kynde of men, that Neesing. in coffyng or neesing, make suche noyse, that they make a man deafe to here them: other some vse in lyke things, so little discretion, that they spyt in mens faces that stand a∣bout them: besydes these there be some, that in yauning, braye and crye out like Asses. And yet such, with open mouth wil euer say and do what they list, and make such noyse, or rather suchroaring, as the dumme man doth, when he striueth with him selfe to speake. All these yllfauoured fashions, a man must leaue, as lothsome to the eare and the eye. And a mā must leaue to yawne muche, not only for the Yawning. respect of the matter I haue saide alreadye, as that it seemes to proceede, of a certaine wery∣nes, that shewes that he that yawneth, could better like to be els where, then there in that place: as wearied with the companie, their talke, and their doings. And sure, albeit a mā be many times disposed to yawne, yet if he be occupied with any delyght, or earnest mat∣ter to think vppon: he shall haue no minde to doe it. But if he be lumpishe & idle: it is an easy matter to fall in to it. And there∣fore, VVhen a man yavvneth, in place vvhere there bee slouthfull and Idle folkes, that haue nothing to doe, the rest, as you may see
many times, yavvne againe for companie by & by: as it he that yawned, had put them in minde to doe it, which of them selues they would haue done first, if hee had not begoone vnto them. And I haue many tymes heard lear∣ned and wise men say, that A yavvner meaneth as much in Latin as a careles and Idle bodie. Let vs then flye these condicions, that loathe (as I sayd) the eyes, the Eares, & the Stomacke. For in vsing these fashyons, we doe not only shewe that we take litle pleasure in the com∣pany, but we geue them occasion withall, to iudge amis of vs: I meane yt we haue a drow∣sye & heuie nowle, which makes vs yll well∣com, to all cōpanies we come vnto. And whē thou hast blowne thy nose, vse not to open thy Blowing of the nose. handkercheif, to glare vppon thy snot, as if yu hadst pearles and Rubies fallen from thy braynes: for these be slouenly parts, ynough to cause men, not so much not to loue vs, as if they did loue vs, to vnloue vs againe. As the Sprite of Labirintho doth testifie (who so∣euer he were that made it) who (to quenche ye Looke in the beginning of Corbaccio. heate wherwith Master Iohn Boccase burned in desyre and Loue of his Lady vnknowne) tells, how she cowred her taile ouer the ashes, sytting vppon her heeles, and coughed and spatte out Collops.
It is also an vnmanerly parte, for a man to lay his nose vppon the cup where another Dropping of the Nose. must drinke: or vppon the meate yt another must eate, to the end to smell vnto it: But rather, I would wish he should not smell at all, no not to that which he himselfe should eate and drinke: because it may chaūce there might fall some droppe frō his nose, that would make a man to loath it: although there fall nothing at all in deede. Neither, by mine aduise, shalt thou reache to any man, that cup of wine wher∣of thy selfe hast fyrst dronke and tasted: wt∣out he be more then a familiar friend vnto thee. And much lesse must thou giue any parte of the peare or the fruite, which thou hast bitten in thy mouth before. And es∣teeme not light of my talke, for that these things be of little account: For euen light stripes (their number may be such) be able to slaye fast ynoughe. Now you shall vnderstād, there was in Giouanni. Matheo. Giberti, bi∣shop of Ve∣rona. Verona, a bishop a wise mā, a learned & of a singular good wit by nature, whose name was Giouāni Matheo Giberti: Amōgst ma∣ny good parts yt were in him, he was ve∣ry courtious & liberall, to all gentlemen & noble men that came vnto him, doing thē all yt honor he could in his house, not with
ouer much pompe and cost, but with con∣uenient entertainement and measure, such as besemed well a man of the Clergie. It chaunced in his time, a noble gentleman called Count Richard, passing that way, to Count Ri∣chard. spend a fewe dayes with the Bishop and his householde together: which was tho∣roughly furnished wt honest gentlemē and very well learned. And bycause they found him a Noble gentleman, courteous and well beseene in all good behauiour, they praysed him muche, and made muche of him, saue that one vnmanerly fashion they muche misliked in him. When the By∣shop was aduertised of it, consulting with some of his familiars about it (as he was a wise man in all his doings) straite they cō∣cluded, it should be necessary to let ye Count haue knowledge of it: albeit they feared, they should offend him. Upon this, ye Count taking his leaue, and redy to ryde away the next morning, the Byshop called one of his seruants vnto him, (a man of good discretion) and gaue him in charge to take his horse, to beare the Count company, some parte of his waye: And when he sawe his time, after an honest sorte, to tell him, that which they had determined betwene them selues. The same gentleman that had
this charge, was a man well strooken in yeares, very lerned, and meruailous plea∣saunt, wel spoken, comely, and had muche frequented in his time, ye Courtes of greate Princes: who was (perhaps) and is, called Galateo: at whose request and councell, I Galateo. first tooke in hand to set forth this present treatise. Ryding with the Count, he found him plesaunt talke ynoughe, and passing frō one matter to another, whē he thought it tyme to returne to Verona, in taking leaue at parting, with a gentle & cherefull coun∣tenaunce, he vsed this speache vnto him. Syr Count, my Lorde yealdeth you many thanks for the honour you haue done him, in that it hath pleased you to vouchesafe his poore house: and that he may not be vnthankfull, for this your greate courtesie shevved vnto him, he hath geuen me in charge, that I must leaue a present vvith you in his behalfe: and he sends it vnto vnto you vvith earnest request, that you please to take it in good vvorthe: and this is the gift. You are a goodly gentleman, and the best manered man my Lorde hath euer seene: So that very heedefully beholding your behauiours, and particularly considering them all, hee findeth no one that is not very
comely and comendable, only one vnsemely trycke alone excepted, vvhich you make vvith your lippes and your mouth together, feeding at your meate vvith a certaine straunge noyes, vnpleasaunt to all men that heare it. This my Lord willed me to tell you, and prayes you to endeuour your selfe to leaue it, and vvithall to accept in levve of a beter present, this louing ad∣monition and councell of his: for he is sure, there is none in the vvorlde, would make you the like present. The Count (that neuer wyst of his fault till now) hearing himselfe reproued, chaunged his countenance a lit∣tle, but (as a mā full of stomacke ynough) taking hart at grasse, he said: Tell your Lorde, that yf all the gifts that men vvont to geue eche other, vvere such as his, men should be muche more riche then they are. And for his greate courtesie and liberalitie to mee, geue him many thanks I pray you, and let him be sure, I will not fayle from henceforthe to mend my fault, and God be vvith you. Now what shal we thinke this Bishop, his modest and honest company about him would say, if they sawe these whome wee Greedy feeding. see other while, (like swyne wt their snouts in the washe, all begroined) neuer lyft vp their heads nor looke vp, and muche lesse keepe their hands from the meate, and wt
both their cheeks blowne (as if they should sound a trumpet, or blowe the fyer) not eate but rauon: whoe, besmearing their hāds, almost vp to their elbowes, so bedawbe Fyling the napkyns. yt napkyns, that ye cloathes in the places of easement, be other while cleaner. And to mend these slouenly maners, be not asha∣med, many tymes with these filthy nap∣kyns, to wype awaye the sweat that trick∣leth and falleth downe their browes, their face and their necke (they be such greedy Sweating with feeding. guts in their feeding) and otherwhile to, (when it comes vppon them) spare not to snot their sniueld nose vppon them. Tru∣ly these beastly behauiours and fashions, deserue not alone, to be thrust out of this noble bishops house, that was so pure and cleane: but to be throughly banished all places, where any honest men should com. Let a man then take hede, hee doe not be∣grease his fyngers so deepe, yt he befyle the napkins to much: for it is an yll sight to see it: neither is it good maner, to rubbe your gresie fingers vppō ye bread you must eate. The seruaunts that bee appointed to waite vppon the table, must not (in any wise) scratche and rubbe their heades, nor Precepts for seruaunts. any parte els in the sight of their Lorde & Master: nor thrust their hāds in any those
partes of their body that be couered, no not so muche as make any proffer: as some careles fellowes doo, holding their hands in their bosome, or cast vnder the flappes of their coates behind them. But they must beare them abroade without any suspicion and keepe them (in any case) washt & cleane without any spot of durt vppon them. And they that cary the dyshes, or reache the cup, must beware at that time, they doe not spit, coughe or neese: for in such doings, Suspiciō is as greate, and offendeth asmuche, as the very deede it selfe: and therefore, seruants must forsee, they geue no cause to Maisters to suspect: For that which might chaunce, a∣noyeth asmuche, as if it had chaunced in∣deede. And if thou do roaste any fruite, or make a toaste at the fyer, thou must not blowe of the ashes, (if there be any) for it is an old saying, that, vvinde vvas neuer vvithout wa∣ter. But yu must lyghtly stryke it vppō the the plate, or after some suche sorte or other beate of ye ashes. Thou shalt not offer thy hādkerchiefe to any mā to vse it, albeit, it be very cleane washed: for he to whome thou doest offer it, can not (perhaps) awaye wt it, and may be to curious to take it. When a man talketh with one, it is no Breithing in a mans face.
good maner to come so neere, that he must needes breathe in his face: for there be ma∣ny that can not abyde to feele the ayer of a∣nother mans breathe, albeit there come no yll fauour from him. These and lyke fa∣shions, be very vnsemely, and would be eschewed, because their senses, wt whome we acquaint our selues, cannot brooke nor beare them. Now, let vs speake of those things which (without any hurt or anoyaūce to the sen∣ses) offende the minds of most men, before whome they be doone. You shall vnder∣stand, that The appetites of men, (throughe a naturall instinct and inclinatiō) be verie strange and diuers: Some be cholerike & hasty, & may not be satifsied with out reuenge: o∣ther doe giue them selues cleane ouer, to pamper the belly: this mā sets his delighte in lust and sensualitie: that man is carried away with his couetous desires: and ma∣ny suche appetites more there are, to which mans mynde is too subiect: but you shall not in any company, easily iudge or discerne betweene them, where and in what, they bee moste affected. For, these matters doe not cōsist in the maners, the fashions and speache of men: but rest in some other point. They seeke to purchase ye
which the benefit of mutuall conferrence may yeald them, & that doe (as I weene) good will, honour, comforte and pleasure, or some other thing lyke vnto these: & ther∣fore we must neither say or doe the thing, that may giue any signe of litle louing or esteming them, we liue withall. So that, it is a rude fashion, (in my cō∣ceipte) yt som men vse, to lye lolling a sleepe in that place, where honest men be met to∣gether, of purpose to talke. For his so do∣ing, shewes that he doth not esteeme the company, and little rekoneth of thē or their talke. And more then that, he that slee∣peth (and specially lying at litle ease, as he must) wonts (for the moste parte) to doe some fowle thing, to beholde, or heare: and many tymes they awake sweating and driueling at the mouth. And in like ma∣ner, to rise vp where other men doe sit and talke, and to walke vp and downe the chā∣ber, it is no poynt of good maner. Also there be some that so buskell them selues, reache, streatch and yawne, writhing now one syde, and then another, that a man would weene, they had some feuer vppon them: A manifest signe, that the compa∣ny they keepe, doth weary them. Likewise doe they very yll, yt now & thē
pull out a letter out of theyr pocket, to reade it: as if they had greate matters of charge, and affaires of the common weale committed vnto thē. But they are much more to bee blamed, that pull out theyr knyues or their scisers, and doe nothing els but pare their nayles, as if they made no account at all of the company, and would seeke some other solace to passe the time a∣waye. Theis fashions to, must be left, ye some men vse, to sing betwene the teeth, or playe the dromme with their fingers, or sho ofle their feete: For these demeanours shewe that a body is carelesse of any man ells. Besides, let not a man so sit that he turne his tayle to him that sitteth next to him: nor lye fottering with one legg so hygh a∣boue the other, that a man may see all bare that his cloathes would couer. For such parts be neuer playde, but amongst those to whome a man needs vse no reuerēce. It is very true, that if a gentleman should vse these fashions before his seruants, or in the presēce of some friende of meaner con∣dition then him selfe: it would betoken no pride, but a loue and familiaritie. Let a man stand vppright of him selfé, and not leane or loll vppon another mans
shoulder: and when he talketh, let him not pounche his fellow with his elbowe, (as many be wont to doe) at euery worde they speake, saying: Did not I say true Sirra. Mas∣ter. N. It is Master. H. And still they be iot∣ting with their elbowe. I would haue euery man well appare∣led, Apparell. meete for his age and calling: for other∣wise, they seeme to haue men in contempt that be better attyred then themselues. And therfore the Citizens of Padua, were woont to take it done of spighte vnto thē, when any gentleman of Venice walked vp & downe their citie in his coate, as though he thought him selfe in the countrey. And a mans apparell, would not be made of fine cloathe alone: but he must frame it, all that he may, to the fashions that other men weare, and suffer him selfe to bee lead by cō∣mon vse: although (perchaunce) it be, and seeme to be lesse commodious, lesse gallant, and lesse faire in shewe, then his oulde. And if all men els, doe weare their heads powled: it shalbe an yll sight for thee alone, to weare a longe bushe of haire. And where other men, make muche of their beardes and weare them longe: thou shalt not doe well to cut thine of, or shaue
it. For that weare to be ouerthwarte in euery thing: which thou must (in any case) beware of, except necessitie require it, as thou shalt heare hereafter. For this sin∣gularitie, beyond all other yll customes, makes vs generally spyted of all mē. Thou must not then go against common cus∣tome in these things, but vse them measure∣ably: that thou maist not bee an odd man a¦lone in a countrey: that shall weare a long Gowne downe to the foote, where other men weare them very shorte, litle beneath the waste. For as it hapens to him, that hath a very crabbed ylfauoured face, (I meane suche, as is more harde and sower thē most mennes be, for nature doth mostly shape them well in moste men) that men will wonder and (with a kinde of admira∣tion) gape most vppon him: So fares it with thē that attire them selues, not as most men doe: but as they are egged by their owne fantasticall heads, with lōg heare spred downe to their shoulders, their beardes short and shauen, and weare quaiues or greate cappes after ye Flaundres fashion: that all men doe gaze vppon them, as wōdering at suche, whome they weene haue taken vppon them, to conquer all
countries wheresoeuer they come. Let your apparell then, be very well made, and fit for your body: for they that weare rich and coastly garments, but so illfauouredly shaped, that a man would weene the mea∣sure had byn taken by another: geue vs to iudge one of these twaine, that eyther they haue no regarde or consideration how to please or displease: or els haue no skill to iudge of measure or grace, or what doth become them. Such maner of people, with their rude behauiours and fashions, make men with whome they liue, suspect, they doe es∣teeme them but light. And that causeth thē worse welcome whersoeuer they com and yll beloued amongest men. But there be some besides these, that de∣serue more then bare suspicion: their deeds and their doings be so intollerable, that a man cannot abide to liue amōgest them by any meanes. For they be euer a let, a hurt and a trouble to all the companie, they be neuer redie: euer a trimming: neuer well dressed to their mindes. But when men be readie to sit downe to the table, the meate at the boorde, and their handes washed: then they must write or make Table.
water, or haue their exercise to doe: saying, It is too early: vve myght haue taryed a vvhile: vvhat haste is this, this morning? And thus they disquiet all the company, as men, caring for them selues alone & theyr owne matters, without consideration in the worlde of other men. Besides this, they will in all things be preferred aboue others: they must haue the best bed, and best chamber: they must take vppon them the highest place at the table, and be first set and serued of all men. And they be so deintie and nice, that nothing pleaseth them, but what they them selues deuise: they make a sower face at any thing ells. And they be so proude minded, that they looke that men should waite vppon them when they dyne, ryde, sporte, or solace them selues. There be other so furious, testie & way∣warde, that nothing you doe can please them: and what soeuer is said they aun∣swer in choler, and neuer leaue brauling wt their seruants, and rayling at them, and continually disturbe the company with their vnquietnes: vsing such speeches: Thou cauledst me vvell vp this morning. Looke heere hovv cleane thou hast made these
pynsons. Thou beaste, thou diddest vvaite vvell vppon me to Churche. It vvere a good deede to breake thy head. These be vnseme∣ly and very fowle fashions: suche as euery honest man will hate to death. For, albeit a mans minde were full fraught with all humilitie, and would vse these maners, not vppon pride or disdaine, but vppon a reche∣lesse care, not heeding his doings, or elles by meanes of yll custome: yet notwithstā∣ding, because his outward doings, woulde make men thinke him proude: it cannot be chosen, but all men woulde hate him for it. For, Pride is none other thinge, then to des∣pise and disdaine another. And as I haue Pryde. saide from the beginning: Eache man desi∣reth to bee vvell thought of, Albeit there bee no valoure or goodnes in hym. It is not long, synce there was in Rome a worthy gentleman, of singular good witt and profound learning, whose name was Vbaldino Bandinelli. This gentleman was Vbaldino Bandinelli. woont to say, that as ofte as hee went or came from the Courte, although the stretes weare euer full of gallant Courtiers, of Prelates and Noble men, and likewise of poore men, and people of meane and base condition: yet he thought he neuer encoun∣tred any, that was eyther better or worse
then himselfe. And without doubte hee could meete with fewe, that might bee compared in goodnes to him: respecting his vertues, that did excel beyond measure. But we must not alwayes in these things measure men by ye Elne: We must rather waye them in the millers scoles, then in the goldsmythes balaunce. And it is a courtious parte, redily to receaue them in to fauour: not bycause they bee woorthe it: but as men doe with coynes, bycause they be currant, To go further, wee must doe nothing in their syght whome wee desire to please, that may shewe wee couet, rather to rule and to reigne, then to liue in a familiar equalitie amongest them. For hautines of harte and ambitious disposition, as it kindleth an yll opinion: so it ministreth muche cause of contempte, which in con∣clusion will so woorke against thee, yt thou shalt bee cleane cast out of honest compa∣ny. But our dooings must rather beare a A lowly minde. signe and shewe of reuerence, meekenes, & respect to ye company, in which wee fellow∣ship our selues. So that, what so euer is doone in meete and conuenient time, may hapely deserue no blame: but yet in res∣pect of the place and the persone, it
may be reproued well: althoughe for it self, ye matter deserue no rebuke. As to brawle and to raile at your seruaunts (which we haue talked of before) but muche more to beate them. Because these partes, are as∣muche as to reigne and to rule: which no honest and ciuil gentlemā wyll vse, in pre∣sence of them he doth respect with any re∣uerence or courtesie. Besydes this, the cō∣pany is muche offended with it, and their meetinges are broken, and especially, if it be done at the table, which is a place of so∣lace and myrthe, and not of brawle and scolding. So that I must nedes cōmend Currado Gianfigliazzi for his ciuil behauiour in yt he multiplied no words with Chichibio Boccaccio. Cior. 6. nouel. 4. fo. 194. to trouble his guests: albeit he deserued to be sharply punished for it, when he would sooner displease his master then Brunetta. And yet if Currado had made lesse adoe a∣bout it then he did: it had byn more his prayse. For then he should neuer haue ne∣ded, to call vppō God, to witnes his threat∣nings so muche as he did. But to returne to our matter: it is not good for a man to chide at the table for any cause. And if thou be angrie, shew it not, Chiding at the Table. nor make no signe of thy greefe, for the rea∣son I haue tolde thee, and specially yf thou
haue straungers with thee: because thou haste called them to be merry, and this wil make them sad. For, as the sharpe and tarte things yt other men doe feede vppō in thy sight, doe set thy teeth likewise on edge: so to see other men vexed and out of quiet, it maketh vs vnquiet too. I call them FROMVVARD people, which will in all∣things Fromewarde. be ouertwhart to other men: as the very worde it selfe doth shewe. For, Fromewarde, signifieth asmuche, as Shorne against the wooll. Now, how fit a thinge this frowardnes is, to wyn the good will Frowardenes. of men, and cause men to wyshe well vnto them: that you your self may easily Iudge, in that it cōsisteth in ouertwharting other mens desiers: which qualitie neuer mayn∣teineth friendship, but maketh friends be∣come foes. And therfor let them that de∣sire to be well thought of and welcome a∣mongst men, endeuour thē selues to shunne this fault: For it breedes no good lyking nor loue, but hatred and hurt. I would councell you rather to measure your plea∣sures by other mens willes: where there shal come no hurt nor shame of it: and ther∣in alwayes to doe & to saye, more to please other mens myndes and fausies, then your owne.
Agayne, you must be neither clownishe Clownishe and Lampishe nor lumpishe: but pleasaunt and familiar. For there should bee no oddes, betweene the Mystell and the Pungitopo: but that the one is wilde: the other growes in gardens. And you must vnderstand, that he is plea∣saunt and courteous: whose manners bee suche in his common behauiour, as practise to keepe, and maintaine him friendeship amongst them: where hee that is solleyne and waywarde, makes him selfe a straū∣ger whersoeuer hee comes: a straunger, I meane, asmuch as a forreigne or aliē borne: where contrariwise, he that is familiar & gentle, in what place so euer he comes: is taken for a familiar and friend with all mē. So that it shalbe necessarie for a man, to vse him selfe to salute, to speake, and to an∣swer after a gentle sorte, and to behaue him selfe wt all men so: as if hee were their countryman borne, & of their olde acquain∣tance. Which some can yll skill to doe, that neither giue a man a good counte∣naunce: easily say, No, to all things: neuer take in good worthe, the honour and cour∣tesie that men doe vnto them (like to the people I spake of before, rude and barba∣rous) neuer take delight in any pleasaunt conceites or other pleasures: but euer re∣fuse
it all, what soeuer is presented or offe∣red vnto them. If a man say: Sir, suche a one willed me to commend him vnto you: They aunswere straite: vvhat haue I too doe vvith his greetings? And if a man say: Sir, suche a one your friend, asked me hovv you did: They aūswer againe in choler: Let him come feele my pulse. These carterlyke and clownishe aunswers and maners, and the men them selues that doe vse them: would bee chased and hūted away, out of all good and honest company. It yll becomes a man when hee is in Muscing. company, to bee sad, musing, and full of contemplation. And albeit, it may bee suffered perchaunce in them that haue long beaten their braines in these Mathematicall studies: which are called (as I take it) the Liberall Artes: yet without doubte it may not be borne in other men. For, euen these studious fellowes, at suche tyme, when they be so ful of their Muses: should be much wyser to get them selues alone. Againe, to bee to nyce or to deyntie: it Nycenes and Deyntines. may not be abiden, and specially in men. For, to liue with suche kinde of people: is rather a slauerie then pleasure. And sure there bee som such, so softe & tender: yt to liue
and deale with such people, it is as daun∣gerous: as to medle with the fynest and bryttelest glasse that may be: So muche they are affrayde of euery light touche. And they wilbe as testy and frowarde, if you doe not quickly and readily salute them, visite them, worship them, and make thē answer: as some other body would be, for the greatest iniurie yt can be donne vnto them. And if you doe not giue them all the due reuerence that may be: they will presently take a thousand occasions to qua∣rell and fall out with you. Yf you chaūce to Master him, and leaue out his title of Ho∣nour or worship: he takes that in dougeon, and thinkes you doe mock him. And if you set him beneath as good a man as him self at the table: that is against his honour. If you doe not visite him at home at his house: then you knowe not your dutie. Theis maner of fashions and behauiours, bring men to such scorne and disdayne of their doings: that there is no man, almost, can abyde to beholde them: for they loue them selues to farre beyonde measure, and busie them selues so much in that, that they fynde litle leysure to bethinke them selues to loue any other: which (as I haue saide from the beginning) men seeke to fynde in
the conditions and maners of those with whome they must liue: I meane, that they should apply them selues to the fansies & mindes of their friendes. But to liue wt suche people, so hard to please: whose loue and friendship once wonne, is as easie lost, as a fyne scarfe is lightly caryed away with the winde: that is no lyfe but a ser∣uice: and, besydes that it yealdeth no plea∣sure, it geues a man greate disdayne and horror. Let vs therefore leaue these softe and wanton behauiours to women. In speach a mā may fault many wayes. And first in the matter it selfe that is in Talke and Communica∣tion. talke, which may not be vayne or filthye. For, they that doe heare it, wyll not abyde it: as ye talk they take no pleasure to heare: but rather scorne the speache and the spea∣ker both. Againe, a man must not moue any question of matters that be to deepe & to subtile: because it is hardly vnderstoode of the moste. And a man must warely foresee, that the matter bee suche, as none of the company may blushe to heare it, or re∣ceaue any shame by the tale. Neyther must he talke of any filthy matter, albeit a man would take a pleasure to heare it: for, it yll becomes an honest gentleman, to seeke to please, but in things that be honest. Nei∣
Neither in sporte nor in earnest, must a man speake any thing against God or Holie thinges muste not bee Ieasted at. Ciccro. Mala & impia est Consuetudo, contra deos disputandi: siue serio fit, siue dissimu∣late. his Saintes, how witty or pleasaunt so e∣uer the matter be. Wherein, the company that Giouan Boccaccio hathe brought to speake in his Nouelles and tales, hath faul∣ted so muche: that me thinkes euery good body, may iustly blame them for it. And you must thinke It is not only a token of great detestation & Impietie in a man, to talke in ies∣tinge wise of God: but hee is a vvicked & sinfull man, that will abyde to heare it. But you shall finde some suche good men, as will flie asmuche as the plague, the company of such as talke so vnreuerently, and without res∣pect, of the incomprehensible Maiestie of God. And vvee must not alone speake reli∣giously of him: but in all our talkes wee must auoyde what vvee may, that our vvordes may not vvitnes against our life and our vvorkes. For mē doe hate their owne faultes other∣while, when they see them in another. Likewise it is vnsauourie, to talke of things out of tyme, not fitting the place Talke out of time. and company: although the matter it selfe, and spoken in tyme, were otherwise both good and godly. We must not then reherse Fryers sermones to young gentlewomen, when they are disposed to sporte thēselues:
as yt good man did, that dwelles not farr hence, nere to S. Brancatio. And in feastes & at table, wee must beware wee doe not re∣hearse any sorowfull tales, nor put then in minde of woundes, of sicknes, of deathes, of Plagues, or of other dolefull matters. But if another man chaunce to moue suche matter: it shalbe good, after an honest and gentell sorte, to exchaunge that talke, and thrust in some other, yt may giue them more delighte and pleasure to heare it. Albeit, not long since I heard it said to a worthy gen∣tleman our neighbour, that Men haue many times more neede to weepe then to laugh. And for that cause hee said, these dolefull tales, which wee call Tragedies, were deuised at first, that when they were plaid in the Theatres (as at that time they were wōt) they might draw fourth teares out of their eyes, that had neede to spēd thē. And so they were by their weeping, healed of their infirmitie. But albeit it bee good to doe so: yet it will il becōe vs to driue men into theyr dumpes: especially where they bee mett to feaste and to solace them∣selues, & not to mourne. For if there be any, yt hath suche weeping disease: it will bee an easie matter to cure it, wt stronge Mustard or a smoaky house. So that, in no wyse,
I can excuse our friend Philostrato, for his Boce. Gior. 4. fol 183. In the beginning. worke that hee made full of dule and of death, to suche a company as desired no∣thing more then myrthe. Wee must the rather vse sylence, then discourse of suche sorrowfull matters. And they doe asmuch amisse too, that ne∣uer haue other thing in their mouthe, then their children, their wife, and their nourse. My litle boy, made mee so laughe yesterday: heare you: you neuer savve a svveeter babe in your life: my wyfe is such a one, Cecchina told mee: of troth you vvould not beleeue vvhat a vvit shee hath: There is none so idle a bo∣dy, that will eyther intend to answer, or abyde to heare suche foolishe pryttle prat∣tle. For it yrcks a mans eares to harken vnto it. There be some againe, so curious in tel∣ling their dreames from point to point, v∣sing such wonder and admiration withall, Dreames. yt it makes a mans hart ake to heare them: & specially because (for ye most parte) they be such kinde of people: as it is but labour lost to heare, euē the very best exployts they doe, when they be most awake, and labour most to shew their best. Wherfore we must not trouble men with so base and absurde matter as dreames bee: especially suche
foolyshe things, as most tymes men haue. Albeit I haue heard say many times, that wisemen in times past, haue leaft in their bookes many sortes of dreames, conteining matters of deepe knowledge and vnderstā∣ding: it followeth not yet, that wee, the vn∣learned and common sorte of people, should vse it in our familiar and common talke. And sure of all the dreames that euer I heard (albeit I hardly listen to any) in my cōceit, I neuer heard any, that was worth the hearing but one alone, which the good Master Flaminio Tomarozzo a gentleman of Rome did see, a man not vnlearned and M. Flaminio Tomarozzo. grosse: but full of knowledge and singular witte. And thus was his dreame, This gētlemā Master Flaminio Tomarozzo, thought he was sitting in a very riche Apothecaries shop, a neere neighbour of his. And after he had byn there a while (what soeuer the occasiō was) the people vvere vp in a rore one a sodayne, and fell to spoilyng of all that vvas in the shoppe. One tooke on Electuarie another a Confectiō, some one thing, some another, and presently eate it vpp all: So that within a while, there was neither vitell glasse, ertherne pot, wodden boxe, nor any pot els of drugges, that was not emptied broken, or ouerthrowne. But amongest them all ther vvas one verye small glasse, full to the
toppe of verie cleare vvater, vvhich many did smell to, but no man vvould taste. He stoode not there long, but there came in a tall man, an aged and very graue man, to looke vnto. This Aged father beholding this vnfortunate Apo∣thecaries boxes and pottes, and finding some emptyed, some ouerthrowne, and the better parte broken: at lenght casting his eye asyde, he chaunced to see the smal glasse I spake of before, and setting the same to his mouthe, hee dranke it vp so cleane: that he leaft not one droppe. And this doone, he went from thence as the rest did before. Master Flaminio vvas abashed and mar∣ueled muche at this matter. And therefore turning to the Apothecarie he sayed vnto him: Syr, whoe is this that came laste? and why did he drinke vp so sauourly, all the vvater in that litle glasse, vvhich all the reast refused. To vvhome the Apothecarie seemed to make this aunsvver. My sonne, this is the Lord God. And the vvater, that hee alone dranke, and all the reast refused & vvould not taste as you savv: vvas discretiō: vvhich, you knovv vvel ynough men vvill not taste of, by any meanes. Such kind of dreames, I hould well a man may rehearse, and heare with much pleasure and profit. Bycause they doe more resemble, the Cogitations & thoughts of an awakened minde: or better, I
shoulde say, the vertue sensitiue: then the visions and syghts of a drowsie head. But those other dreames, without shape, falshiō or sense: (which the moste parte of suche men as we are, bee wont to haue) would be forgotten cleane, and lost with our sleepe. Howbeit, I doe not deny but the dreames of good men and learned, be better and wi∣ser then theires of the wicked and more vnlearned sorte. And albeit a man would weene, there can bee nothing in the worlde more vaine then Dreames: yet there is one thing more light then they, and that are Lyes. For there Lyes. is yet some shadovve, and, as it vvere, a certaine feeling of that vvhich a man hath seene in his dreame. But there is neyther shadovve nor bodye of a trueth in a lye. And therfore we should lesse busie mens eares, and their mindes to harken to lyes, then to dreames, because they bee otherwhile receiued for truethes. But tyme, in the ende, disco∣uers suche pelfe: that lyers, not only doe gayne no credite, but no man vouche∣safes to harken vnto them, in otherwise (as the men that carry no substaunce in their woordes) then if they had sayde no∣thing Men haue a pleasure to lye othervvhile. or blowne a litle wynde. And you shal vnderstād, ther be many yt vse to lye, not
minding any yll purpose in it, or to make their owne peculiar proffit by it, to hurt o∣ther men or shame their neighbour: onely they doe it, for a pleasure they take to tell a lye: as men that drinke not, all for thirst: but for a pleasure they take, to taste of the wine. Other some doe tell lyes, to make a vaine glorious boasting of them selues: vaunting and telling in a brauery, what wonderfull exploits they haue doone, or bearing men in hand, they be greate doc∣tours and learned men. In Silence too, after a sorte, without speache, a mā may tell a lesynge: I meane Lefinges and Countresec∣tinges. with his gestures and grace: as some you shall see, that being of meane, or rather base condition and calling, vse suche a solem∣nitie in all their doings, and marche so stately, and speake with suche a preroga∣tiue, or rather discourse lyke Parleament men, setteling them selues, as it were, in a place of Iudgement, proudly prying about thē like Peacockes: that it is a very death to behold them. And some suche you shall fynde, that all∣though they bee combered with no more wealthe then easily serues their turne: yet will they neuer appeare vnles their neckes be laden with chaines, their fingers full of
rings, their cappes beset with agletts, and euery other parte bespangled, as though they would defie ye King of Castiglio. Whose behauiours be full of follies and vaine glo∣rie, which cometh of pryde, growing of va∣nitie it selfe. So that wee must eschew these faults, as foule and vnseemely things. You shall vnderstand, in many Cities, and those of the best, the lawes doe not suffer, that riche men should go muche more gor∣geously attyred, then the poore. For poore men thinke they haue a wrong: when mē seeme, but in countenaūce alone, as it were Imperiously to reigne ouer them. So that we must carefully beware we fall not in∣to these follies. Neither must a man boaste of his No∣bilitie, his Honour or riches: muche lesse vaunt of his witt, or gloriously reherse to much of his deedes & valiāt Actes, or what Glorious bo∣stinge and braggeing. his Auncestors haue done, nor vppō euery occasion, fall in reherfall of suche thinges, as many men doe. For in suche case, a mā would weene, they seeke, either to contend with the Company, (if they be, or will take vppon them to bee, as good Gentlemen, & of as muche wealthe and worthines, as they bee:) or elles to ouercrowe them, (if they liue in meaner condition and calling,
then they doe) And as it were to vpbraide them, their poore and base condition of life. A man must neither embase, nor exalte him selfe to muche out of measure: but ra∣ther Exalting and embasing. bury in silēce some parte of his merits, then arrogate to muche vnto him. Bycause Goodnes it selfe, vvhen it excedeth muche is e∣uer enuyde of some. And you may be sure, they that embase them selues thus beyond measure, refusing that worship and honour that is but duely their owne of very right: shewe more pryde in this contempte, then they that vsurpe those things, that are not so due vnto them. So yt a man perchaūce, might saye, Giotto hath not deserued those Cōmendatiōs yt some beleue, in yt he refused Bocc. Nouel. 5 Gior. 6. fo. 291 to be called Master: being not only a master but without doubt a singular and cunning master in his art in those daiez. But be it blame, or praise yt he deserued: it is most sure, he that refuseth that which euery mā els doth hunt for: sheweth therin, he repro∣ueth or contemneth the common opinion of men. And, to contemne the honour & renowne, which other mē gape for so much, is but to glorie and magnifie him selfe a∣boue other. For asmuche as there is no man (without he be mad) will refuse and reiect things that be deare and of price: vn∣les
hee be suche, as hathe plenty and store of those deare and deintye things. Wee must not boast of those good things that be in vs, nor set them to lyght: for in yt one, wee doe vpbraide men their faults: In the other, wee scorne to muche their ver∣tues. But it behoueth euery man to speake his owne praise, as litle as hee may. And if occasion driue him vnto it: it shalbe good, modestly to speake the truethe, as I haue told you before. And therefore, they that desire to doe mē a pleasure: must needes leaue one faulte, yt is to common with all men: they must not shewe them selues so afraide and fearefull to speake their mindes, when a man dothe aske their aduise. For, it is a deadly paine to here thē, & specialy if they be mē, in ye Iudge mēt of ye world, of good vnderstanding and wisedōe. What a fetchig about is this, ere they cōe to ye matter? Sir I beseche you pardon mee, if I doe not say vvell. I vvill speake like a gros mā as I am: & grosly according to my pore skil. And Sir, I am sure you vvil but mocke me for it. But yet, to obey you: & they drawe their words forth so lōg, & put thē selues to suche paine: yt, while these ceremonies be a doig, ye hardest questiō yt is, might haue byn deter∣mined with fewer words and shorter time:
bycause they cannot get out of these protes∣tations, when they bee in. They bee also very tedious to men, and their conuersation & maners are very trou∣blesome: whoe shewe too base and abiect a minde in their doings. And where the che∣fest and highest place, is apparantly due Abiecte Minde. vnto them: they will euer creepe downe to the lowest. And it is a spitefull buisynes to thrust them vp: For they will straite iogge backe againe, like a resty Iade, or a Nagge that startleth a side at his sha∣dowe. So that, there is muche a dooe wt them, when wee meete at a doore. For they will not (for all you can dooe) in any case enter before you, but so trauerse their ground, go backe, and so fray and defend with their armes and their handes: that at euery thirde steppe, a man must be rea∣dy to wage battell with them: and thus they breake of, all solace and pleasure, and otherwhile, the buisynes they meete a∣boute. And therfore, Ceremonies, which wee name, as you heare, by a straunge terme, as Ceremonies. lacking a worde of our owne, bycause our elders, hauing no knowledge of those su∣perstitious fashions, coulde not well giue them a proper name. Ceremonies, I saye,
(in my Iudgement,) differ not much from lyes & dreames, for their own very vainesse it selfe. So that wee may couple and ioyne thē together in this our treatise, sithe occasion serues so fytt to speake of them here, As a good man hath often shewed me: those solemnities that church men doe vse at their Altars, and in their diuine ser∣uice bothe to God and his holy things, are properly called Ceremonies: but after, men did begyn, to reuerence eche other with cu∣rious entertaynements, more then were conuenient, and would be called masters and Lords, amōgest them selues, yealding bending, and bowing their bodyes, in tokē of reuerence one to another, vncouering their heads, vsing highe titles and Styles of honour, and kyssing their hands as if they were hollye things: some body, by like considering all these things well, and fin∣ding these newe founde curious follyes without any name: thought good to Chris∣ten and call them Ceremonies, but sure in a iest as I take it: as to be mery and make good cheare, we terme it in sport, a triūph: which custome, no doubt, tooke not his be∣ing at vs, but elles where, as barbarous & straunge: and not long since, from whence I knowe not, transported into Italie:
whose deedes being wretched, and effects base and vile, hath gotten encrease and ho∣nor, in vayne woords alone, and superflu∣ous titles. Ceremonies then, if we cōsider well theie intēts that vse them: are but vaine shewes of honour and reuerence, towardes him to whome they be doone: framed of semblance and wordes touching their titles and cour∣tious offers. I say vaine: In that we ho∣nour mē to their face, whome we reuerence not in deede, but otherwhile cōtemne. And neuertheles, because we may not go agaist custome, wee giue them these titles: The most honorable Lord suche a one: the Noble Lord suche a one. And so otherwhile wee offer them our humble seruice: whome wee could better vnserue then serue, & cōmaund then doe them any duety. Thē not Lesinges alone, but also Treache∣ries and Treasons, shalbe called Ceremonies. But because these wordes and these titles aboue rehersed, haue lost their strēgth: and waste, (as a man may say of Irō) their tē∣per, wt such continuall occupying of it as we doe vse: we must not so precisely way them as other wordes, nor so strictly construe the meaning of them. And, that this is true, that which allwayes happens to all men,
dothe shewe it playne inoughe. For if wee meete with a man, we neuer sawe before: with whome, vppon some occasion, it be∣houes vs to talke: without examining wel his worthines, most commonly, that wee may not offend in to litle, we giue him to much, and call him Gentleman, and other∣while Sir, althoughe he be but some Souter or Barbar, or other suche stuffe: and all by∣cause he is appareled neate, somewhat gen∣tleman lyke. And as men in tymes past, were wont to Titles by Priuilege. haue vnder the Priuilege of the Pope & Em∣perour, peculiar & distinct titles of honour, which might not be vntouched, without doing wrong to the priuileged men: nor a∣gaine attributed & geuen without a scorne, to them that were no such priuileged per∣sones: So at this daie, wee must more freely vse those titles, and the other signi∣fications of honour, like to those titles: by∣cause Custome the mightiest Lorde hathe largely therewith, priuileged men of our time. This vse and custome, though so fayre and gallant without, is altogether vaine within, and consisteth in semblance with∣out effect, & in wordes without meaning.
But this notwithstanding, it is not lawful Custom must not be altered for vs to chaunge it: but rather, bycause it is not our fault, but the fault of our tyme, wee are bounde to followe it: but yet wee must discretely doe it. So that wee are to noate, that Ceremo∣nies The end why ceremonies be vsed. Ceremonies for profit. are vsed, eyther for a Profit, or for a Va∣nitie, or for a Duetie. And euery lye that is told for a mans priuate profit: is a deceite, a sinne, and a dishonest parte: for, in what so euer it bee, A man can neuer honestly lye. And this is a common fault with flatte∣rers, that counterfet them selues to be our friendes, and apply them selues euer to our desiers, what soeuer they be: not bycause wee would haue it so, but to the ende wee should doe them some pleasure, for it. And this is not to please vs, but to deceiue vs. And albeit this kind of fault be, peraduen∣ture, by reason of custome sufferable: yet notwithstanding bycause of it selfe, it is fowle and hurtefull, it yll becomes a gentle man to doe it. For it is no honestie to seeke a pleasure by the hurt of another. And if lyes and false flatteries, may bee termed Cere∣monies (as I haue sayde before:) so oft, as we vse them for respect of our gain & profit: so oft wee doe hazard our good name and credite: so that this consideration alone,
myght moue vs well to leaue all Ceremo∣nies, and vse them no more. It resteth now that I speake of those yt Dutifull cere∣monies. bee done of Dutie, and of those that be done of a Vainesse. As touching ye first, VVe must not leaue them vndone in any wise. For he that faileth to doe them, dothe not onely dis∣please, but doth a wrong to him, to whome they be due. And many times it chaunceth, ye men come to daggers drawing, euē for this occasion alone, that one man hath not done the other, that worship and honour vppon the way, that he ought. For to saye a trueth The power of custome is great & of much force, Custome is a lawe. (as I said) and would be taken for a lawe, in these cases. And that is the cause we say: You: to euery one, that is not a man of ve∣ry base calling, and in suche kinde of speach You. wee yealde such a one, no maner of courte∣sie of our owne. But if wee say: Thou: to suche a one, then wee disgrace him and of∣fer Thou. him outrage and wronge: and by suche speach, seeme to make no better reconing of him, then of a knaue and a clowne. And although the tymes past, and other countryes, haue vsed other maners: let vs yet, keepe our selues to our owne: And let not vs dispute the matter, which is the bet∣ter oftwaine. For wee must obserue, not
those, that we Iudge in our owne conceits to be good: but suche, as be currant by cus∣tome, & vsed in our owne tyme: as lawes, which we be bound to keepe, thoughe they be not all of the best, tyll suche tyme, as the magistrates, the Prince, or they that haue power to amēd them, haue chaunged them to better. So that It behoues vs, hedefully to marke the doings and speache, wherewith daily prac∣tise and custome, wonteth to receaue, salute, & name in our owne country, all sortes and kinds Bocc Nouel. 6 Gior. 5. fo. 259 of people, and in all our familiar communicatiō with men, let vs vse the same. And notwith∣standing Peter the King of Ara∣gon. the Admerall (as peraduēture the maner of his time was suche) in his talke with Peter the King of Aragon, did many times: Thou him: Let vs yet saye to our King: Your maiestie: and your highnes: as∣well in speache as in writing. And if they haue followed the vse of their time: then let not vs breake the fashions of ours. And these doe I call Duetifull Ceremonies, bycause they proceede not, as we would, or of our free willes: but are layde vppō vs by the Lawes: I meane, Common custome. And in suche things, as carry no euill mea∣ning in them, but rather some face of courtesie: reason would and commaundeth, vve shoulde
rather obserue common Custome, then dispute and lay the lawe for them. And albeit, to kisse in shewe of reuerence, of very right appertayneth to the reliques of Saints and there holy matters: yet if it bee the maner of your country, at parting, to say: Signori, Io vi bascio la mano. Or: Io son vostro seruidore: Or els: vostro schiauo in cate∣na: I kisse your hande: I am your seruaūt: your staue in chayne. you must not disdaine it, more then other. But, In farewelles and writings, you must salute and take leaue, not as reason, but as custome will haue you: and not as mē wont in times past, or should doe: but as men vseat this day: for it is a chorlishe maner to say: VVhat greate gentleman is he I pray you, that I must master him: Or: is he becom master parson, that I must kisse his hands, for he that is wont to be (Sird) and likewise (Sirreth) other: may thinke you disdaine him, and vse some out∣rage vnto him, when you call him to his face, by his bare name, and giue him no addition. And these termes of Seignory, seruice, & duetye, and such other like vnto these, as I haue sayde: haue lost a greate parte of their harshnes, and (as hearbes lōg steepte in the water) are sweetened, and made softe and tender, by reason of muche speache in mens mouthes, and cōtinuall vse to speake them.
So that we must not abhorre thē, as some rude and rusticall fellowes, full of foolishe simplicitie, doe: that would fayne beginne the letters we write to Kinges and Empe∣rours after this sort. vz. Yf thou and thy children be in healthe it is well: I am also in healthe: saying, that suche was the begin∣ning of the letters, the Latins did write to the magistrates of Rome. If men should liue by their measure, and go backe to those fashions and maners, our first fathers dyd vse: the worlde thē by litle and litle, would come so about, that we should feede vppon acornes againe. And in these Duetifull Ceremonies, there be also certain rules and precepts, we must obserue: that wee may not bee touched wt Vanitie and plyde. Respect of countrey. Vainesse and Pride. And first of all, wee must consider the country where wee doe liue. For all customes be not currant a lyke in all countreys. And peraduenture that which they vse in Naples, which is a Citye replenished with gentlemen, of good hou∣ses and Lordes of greate power, were not so fitte for Florens and Luke: Which are in∣habited, for the most part, with Merchāts and plaine gentlemē, without any Prince, Marques, or Barone amongest them. So that the braue and Lordelike manners of
the gentlemē of Naples transported to Flo∣rence: should be but waste, and more then needes: like a tall mans gowne cast ouer a dwarfe: as also the manners of Florence shoulde be to pinchinge and straite, for the Noble natures and mindes of the gētlemē of Naples. And although the gētlemē of Ve∣nice, vse great embracings and entertaine∣mentes amongst themselues, and fawne without measure the one on the other, by reasō of their offices, degrees and fauours they looke to finde when they meete and as∣semble and choose their officers: yet for all this, it is not conuenient, that the good men of Rouigo, or the Citizens of Asolo, should vse the lyke solēnities, embraceings and entertainemēts one to another, haue∣ing no such kinde of cause amongst them: Albeit all that same countrie (if I bee not deceiued) is faine a litle, into these kinde of follies, as ouer carelesse and apt inough by nature, or rather learning those maners of Venice their Lady and Mistris: because Euerie man gladly seeketh to tread the steps of his better: although there be no reasō for it. Moreouer we must haue a regarde to Time, age, condicion & calling must be respected. the time, to the age, and the condition of him, to whom we vse these ceremonies, and likewise respect our owne calling: and with
men of credite maintaine them: but wt men of small account cut them of cleane, or at least, abridge them as muche as wee may, & rather giue them a becke thē a due garde: Which the courtiers in Rome can very well skill to doe. But in some cases these Ceremonies be ve∣ry combersome to a mans busines, and ve∣ry In what case Ceremonies be cumber∣lome. tedious: as, Couer your head, sayes the Iudge, yt is busied wt causes, and is scanted of time to dispatche them. And this fellow so full of these Ceremonies, after a number of legges and shuflinge curtesis, aunswers againe: Sir I am very well thus. But sayes the Iudge agayne, Couer your head I say. Yet this good fellow tourning twise or thrise to & fro, making lowe conges downe to the grounde wt muche reuerence and hu∣militie, aunswers him, still: I beseache your worship, let me doe my duetie. This busines and trouble lasteth so long, & so muche tune is trifled: that the Iudge might very nere haue dispatched all his busines within that space. Then, although it be euery honest mans parte, and the duety of euery mea∣ner body, to honour the Iudges, and mē yt be called to worship & honour: yet, where time wyll not beare it: it is a very trouble∣some thing to vse it, and it must be eschew∣ed,
or measured with reason. Neyther be yt self same Ceremonies seme∣ly for young mē, respecting their Age: yt ould mē doe vse together. Nor yet can it becom men of meane and base condition, to vse the very same, yt gētlemē & greate men may vse one to another. And if wee marke it well, we shall find, yt the greatest, ye best men, & mē of most valour, doe not alwayes vse ye most Ceremonies thē selues, nor yet loue nor looke a mā should make many goodly curtsies vnto them, as men that can ill spend their thoughts one matters so vaine. Neither must handy crafts men, nor mē of base condition, buisie thē selues to much, in ouer solemne Ceremonies to greate men, and Lordes: it is not lookt for in suche. For they disdaine them, more then allowe thē: because it seemes that in such, they seeke & looke, rather for obedience and duetie, then honour. And therefore it is a foule faulte in a seruaūt, to offer his master his seruice: for he coūts it his shame, & he thinks the seruāt doth make a doubt, whether he is master or no: as if it were not in him to imploy him, & cōmaūd him too. These kinde of Ceremo∣nies would be vsed frankely. For, VVhat a man dothe of duetie, is taken for a debte, and hee finds him selfe litle beholding to
him that doth it. But he that dothe more, then he is bound to: it seemes he parteth with somewhat, and that makes men to loue him, and to commende him for a libe∣rall man. And I remember mee well, I haue hearde it sayde, that a worthy Graeciā a greate versifier, was euer wont to saye: that He that could skill to entertaine men with a small aduenture, made a greate gayne. You shall then vse youre Ceremonies, as the tailer shapes his garments, rather to large then to litle: but yet not so, that hee cutteth one hose large inough to make a cloke. And if thou doe vse in this point, some litle gentle behauiour, to suche as be meaner then thy selfe: thou shalt be coun∣ted lowly. And if thou doe asmuche to thy betters: thou shalt bee sayde a Gētlemā well taught, and courtious. But hee that dothe her in to muche, and is ouer lauishe, Vanitie. shalbe blamed as vaine and light: and per∣haps worse thought of too: counted a busie body, a fidging fellowe, and in wise mens sight, a flatterer: which vice, our elders haue called, (if I doe not forget me) dowble diligence. And there is no faulte in the worlde, more to bee abhorred, or yt worsse beseemes a gentleman, then this. And this is the thirde maner of Ceremonies, which
simply procedeth of our owne will, and not of custome. Let vs thē remēber, that Ceremonies, (as I haue alwayes sayd) were not so necessa∣rie by nature, but a man might doe well inough without them: As for example, our coūtrie liued (it is not long since) in maner cleane without any. But other mens di∣seases haue infected vs, with these infirmi∣ties and many mo. So that, custome and vse obserued: the rest that is more, is but waste: and such a sufferable leesing, as if it be more in deede then is in vse, it is not only vnsufferable, but forbidden: and so vppon, the matter, a cold and vnsauourie thing to noble mindes, that cannot brouse vppon shrubbes and shewes. And you shall vnderstand, that trusting my owne skill but little, in wryting this present treatise: I thought good to consult with many, and to take the Iudgement of better learned men then my selfe. And this in my reading I finde. There was a King, they call him Oedipus: being bani∣shed Oedipus. and driuen out of his countrie (vppon what occasion I know not) he fled to King Theseus at Athens, the better to saue him selfe and his life, from his enemies, that Theseus. mainely pursued him. This Oedipus now
comming before the presence of Theseus, by good chaūce hearing his daughter speake, (whome he knew by her voice, for he was blind and could not beholde her with his eyes) he was so presently striken with ioy, that, not tarying to doe his allegeaūce and duetie to the King, he did presētly embrace, & make much of his daughter before him: his fatherly affection so led him, and rulde him so. But in the end finding his fault, and better aduising him selfe of his doings: he would needs excuse it to Theseus, & hum∣bly prayd his grace to pardon his folly. The good and wise King, cut of his talke, and bad him leaue his excuses, and thus saide vnto him: Comfort thy selfe Oedipus, and bee not dismayd at that thou hast done. For I will not haue my life honoured with other mens woordes, but with my owne deedes. Which sētēce a man should haue alwaies in mind. And albeit men be well pleased, that mē doe giue them worship & honour: yet when they find them selues cuningly courted, they be soone weary of it, and also disdaine it. For these glauerings, or flatteries I should say, to amend their knaueries & false∣hoodes, haue this fault withall: that these glauering fellowes doe plainly shewe, they count him, whome they court in this sorte,
but a vaine, and arrogant bodie, an asse of grose capacitie, and so simple, yt it should be an easie matter to bayte him and take him too. And these Vaine and Curious Cere∣monies, besides that they be superfluous: so they beare with all a shape of flattery, so slenderly co¦uered, that euery man doth opēly see them, and know them plaine: in suche sorte, that they that doe them, to the end to make a gaine, besides that ill that is in them, wher∣of I spake before: shewe them selues also, gentlemen ill taught, without good maner or any honest fashion. But there is another sorte of Ceremoni∣ous people, who make it an arte and mer∣chandise, and keepe a booke and a reconing of it. One these men (they say) they must smile, on such men they must laughe: and, ye better man shall sit in the chayr, and the o∣ther vppon a lowe stoole: which supersti∣tions Ceremonies, I beleue, were transpor∣ted out of Spaine into Italie. But our country, hath geuen them but colde en∣tertainement, and as yet they haue ta∣ken but slender roote here: for this pre∣cise difference of worship, and gentry, is not liked of, with vs. And therefore it is but ill maner, for a man to make him selfe Iudge, which is the better man.
But it is much worse for a man to make a sale of his Ceremonies and entertainmēts, (after ye maner of harlots) as I haue seene many gentlemen doe in the court, geuing good wordes and faire countenaunces for a rewarde and recompence, of the goods and the tyme, their seruaunts haue spent in their seruice. And sure they that take a pleasure to vse ouer many Ceremonies, more then neede: shewe they doe it vppon a lustines and bra∣uery, as men that haue nothing elles in thē of any valour. And bycause these follies are learned wt ease inough, and carry withall a litle fayre glose in shewe: they bestowe all their whole mindes none other waye. But graue matters they can not abide to weelde, as things to farre aboue their reache: and coulde finde in their harts to dwell in these toyes and tryfles, as men whose capacitie conceiueth nought of Importaunce: like tender mylkesops that can beare no brūt: or that, beside a glorious outside, haue not mettall inough in thē to abide a flea byting. And therfore, they could wishe it worse: that these entertainments and acquaintāce with mē, should go no further then the first sight. And of these there bee an infinite
number. And some againe be to full of words, and abound to muche in curtious gestures to couer and hyde the defects and faults of their treacheries, and their vile & base na¦tures: For they see, if they should be as barē & rude in their woords, as they be in their deeds & their doings, mē would in no case abide them. And to saye a trueth, yow shall finde yt out of these two causes, drawe most men one, to vse these wast and needles Ce∣remonies, and nothing els: which lightly most men cannot away withall, bycause they be hindered by them, & their meanes, to liue as they would, and lose their liber∣tie: whiche a mā dothe preferre aboue any thing ells. Wee must not speake yll of other mē, nor of their doings: althoughe it plainely ap∣pere, that men do willingly bēd good eare to heare it, as easily moued therto, by ye na∣ture of malice and enuy, that pynes at our Neighbours prosperity and rising to worship & honour: for at lēgth mē will es∣chewe the acquayntaūce of Slaūderous Slaundering. people, as much as they shunne the Oxe, ye goreth with his horns, or strikes wt his feete: making their reconing, that what they tell them of vs, asmuche they will tell
vs, of them. And some ther be, that so quarel at eue∣ry Quareling. Wrangling. Ouerthwar∣ing. word, question, and wrangle, that they shew they haue litle skill in other mens natures: for, Euery man desireth the victory should go one his syde: and hates it asmuche, to be mastered in words, as to be vanquished in any other acte that he dothe. So yt, willfully to ouerthvvart a man, it workethe no Loue and good vvill: but rather displeasure, rancoure and malice. And therfore, he that sekes to be well thought of, and would be taken for a plesaunt and good Companion, must not so redily vse these speaches: It was not so: And, Nay: it is as I tell you. I wil lay a vvager vvith you: But he must rather take payns, to apply himself to other mēs mīds cōcerning such things, as haue matter of small importaunce: Bycause the victorye, in such cases, is daungerous: for, the gay∣ninge the cause, in tryfling questions, doth often loose the Loue of a faithfull friend. And men are so farre out of loue & liking, of such hot fellowes: that they will by no meanes growe acquaynted with suche, least they be dryuen euery hower to bralle, to chide, and to fighte with them for it. And suche kinde of people doe
purchase these names: Maister Vniciguer∣ra: Conquerour. Ouerthwaiter. Know all. The subtile Doctour. Or, Sir Contraponi: Or, Sir Tuttessalle: And sometime: il Dottor suttile. And if you chaunce otherwhile, to be in∣treated of the cōpany to speake your mind: I would haue you doe it after a gentle sort, without shewing your selfe so greedie to carry the bucklers away, as if you would eate them vp for haste. But thou must Leaue to euery man his parte: And bee it right or vvronge, consent to the minds of the most, or the most importunate: and so leaue the fielde vnto them: that some other, and not your selfe, may beate and sweat, and chace in the winning of the cause. For these quarelous conten∣tions, bee foule and ill fauoured fashions for gentlemen to vse: and they get them ill will and displeasure of all men for it: and they bee vncomely for their owne vnseemelines, which of it selfe offendeth euery good honest minde, as it may chaūce you shall heare hereafter. But the common fault of men is such, Counceling and reprouing and eche man is so infected with this selfe loue and liking of him selfe: that he hath no respect or care to please any man ells.
And to shewe them selues fine headed, of muche vnderstanding, and wise: they counsell, reproue, dispute, and bralle, to daggers drawing, and allowe nothing els but that they say them selues. To offer aduyse vnrequested: what is it els but to vaunt youre selfe wiser then he is, whom you do counsell: nay rather, it is a playne checke to him, for his Ignoraunce and folly. And therfore, you must not do so, with all your acquaintance generally: but only with your very friendes, or suche whō you are to gouerne & rule: or els, whē a man hapely standes in daunger & perill, how muche a straunger so euer he be. But in our common Acquaintance and conuer∣sation, Let vs not busy our selues, and medle to muche vvith other mens doings. In which fault many doe fall: but most of all, the men of least vnderstanding. For, Men of grose apacities, consider but litle: And they take no longe time to debate with them selues, as men that haue litle busines to doe. But how so euer it be, hee that of∣fereth He that coun∣selleth hath euer a good conceite of him selfe. and geueth his counsell: geues vs to thinke, hee hathe this conceite of him selfe: that all the witt is in him,
and other poore men haue none at all. And sure there bee some, that stand so muche in conceite of their wit: that they will be in maner, at warres, with him, tha: wil not follow the counsell they giue them. And thus they will say. Very vvell: a poore mans counsell vvill not be taken: suche a one vvill doe as he list: suche a one geues no heede to my vvordes. As though there were not more Arrogancie in thee, that sekest to bring a man to followe thy Counsell: then there is in him, that followes his owne aduise. And they doe also make the like fault, yt take vppon them to reproue and correct Reprouing and correc∣ting of faul. mens faults, and to geue a definite sentēce in all things, and lay the lawe to all men. Suche a thing would not be done: You spake suche woordes: Doe not so: say not so: The wine that you drinke is not good for you: but would bered vvine. You should vse suche an Electua∣rie, and suche pilles: And they neuer leaue to reproue and correct. And let vs passe that ouer, that otherwhile, they busy them selues so much, to purge other mēs groūds: that their owne is ouergrowen, and full of thornes and nettles. For it is a meruailous payne vnto them, to heare one that syde. And as there be few or none, whose mids
can frame, to spend their lyfe with a Physi∣tion, a Confessour, and muche lesse a Iudge that hath iurisdiction and power to con∣trowle and correct all criminall faultes: so is ther not one, that can take any plea∣sure to lyue, or make himself familiar with suche Censors: so hard, and seuere. For, eue∣ry man loueth libertye: and they woulde robbe vs of it, and get to be our masters. So that it is no good māner to be so redye to corect and giue rules vnto mē: we must geue Scholemasters and Fathers leaue to do that. And yet that notwithstanding, experience doth shewe, the childeren and scholers both, do often hide them selues frō them, you see. Doe not allow, that a man should scorne Scornes and Scoffes. or scoffe at any man, what so euer he be: no not his very enimy, what displeasure so euer he beare him: for, it is a greater signe of contempt and disdaine, to scorne a man, then to do him an opē vvrōg: forasmuch as vvrongs may be done, eyther of choler, or of som couet∣ous mynde or other. And ther is no mā will take a displeasure with that, or for that, he doth not set by: nor yet couet that thing, he doth altogether contemne. So that, a man doth make some accōpt of
him he dothe wronge: but of him that he scoffes and scornes, he makes no reconing at all, or as litle as may be. And the Nature and effect of a scorne, is properly to take a contentation and pleasure to The Nature of a scorne or a scoffe. do another man shame and villany: thoughe it do our selues no good in the world. So that, good maner & honesty, would vs be∣ware we scorne no man in any case: wher∣in they be much to be blamed, that reproue men those blemishes they haue in their person, eyther in woords, as Master Forese da Rabatta did, laughing at the coūtenaunce of Master Giotta: or in deeds, as many doe, counterfeting those that stutter, haulte, or be crookte shoulderd. And likewyse, they that scoffe at any man, that is defor∣med, ill shapen, leane, litle, or a dwarfe, at much to be blamed for it: or, that make a gybing and iesting at such follyes as an∣other man speaketh, or the woordes that escape him by chaunce: and with all, haue a sporte and a pleasure to make a mā blush: all these spitefull behauiours and fashions, worthely deserue to be hated, and make them that vse them, vnworthy to Boec, Nouel. 5. Gior. 6. fo. 297. beare the name of an honest gentleman. And such as vse to iest at a man, be ve∣ry lyke vnto these: I meane them that
haue a good sport to mocke and beguile mē, Morkes. not in spite or scorne, but on a meriment a∣lone. And you shall vnderstand, There is Difference be¦twen a scorne and a mocke no difference betvveene a scorne and a mocke: but the purpose alone and intent a man hath, in the meaning the one the other. For a man mockes and laughes otherwhile, in a sport and a pastime: but his scorne is euer in a rage and disdaine. Although in common speache and wryting, wee take the one woorde sometyme for the other. But He that doth scorne a man: feeleth a contentation in the shame he hath done him: And hee that dothe mocke, or but laughe: taketh no con∣tentation in that he hath done: but a sport, to be merry & passe the time away: where it would be, both a greefe and a sorrow, per chaunce, vnto him, to see that man receaue any shame, by any thing he said or did vnto him. And althoughe I profited litle, in my Grammar in my youthe: yet I remember that Mitio, who loued Aeschines so muche, that he him selfe had wōder at it: yet other while, toke a sporte & a pleasure to mocke him: as when he said to him selfe: I vvill go to giue him a mocke: so that, I must in∣ferre, that the selfe same thing, done to the very selfe same body: according to the in∣tent
of him that doth it, may be eyther a mocke or scorne. And bycause our purpose, cannot be plainely knowne vnto other men: it shall not be good for vs to vse such parts, as bring men in doubt and suspicion, what our intent and meaning is in them: but rather let vs eschewe them, then seeke to be counted Iesters. For, It many times chaunceth, in boording and Iesting, one tackes in sporte, the other strykes againe in earnest: & thus from playing, they come to fraying. So, he that is familiarly mockte in pas∣time, recons it, otherwhile, to be done to his shame & dishonour, and therat he takes a disdaine. Besides this, A mocke is no bet∣ter, then a deceyte. And naturally, it gre∣ueth euery man to erre and be deceyued. So that, many Reasons ther be to proue, That He that seekes to purchase goodwill, and be well thought of: must not make him selfe to cunning in mockes and Iestes. It is very true, we are not able, in no wise, to leade this paineful lyfe, altogether without some pleasure and solace: And by∣cause Iestes do geue vs some sporte, and make vs merry, and so cōsequētly refreash our spirits: we loue them that be plea∣saunt, merry conceited, and full of solace.
So that a body would thinke, I should ra∣ther persuade the contrarie: I meane, I shoulde say: It is conuenient and meete in company, to vse prety mockes, and otherwhile some Iestes and taunts. And without doubt, they that can slint after a friendly and gē∣tle sort, be muche more made of, and bet∣ter beloued then they that cannot skill or haue no wit to doe it. Howbeit, it is neede∣ful in this, to haue a respect to many thīgs. And forasmuche as it is the intēt of him that doth Iest: to make a sport and pastime at his faulte, whome he doth loue and es∣teeme, and of whom he doth make more thē a commō account: it must be well lookte to, that the fault, wherin his friend hath fal∣len, be suche, as he may sustaine no slaun∣der or shame, or any harme by any talke or Ieste he makes vppon it: otherwise, his skil doth ill serue him, to make a good diffe∣rence betweene a pleasaunt Iest, and a ve∣ry plaine wronge. And there be some men, so short & so testy, that you must, in no wise, be merry, nor vse Bocc. Nouel. 8 Gior. 9. fo. 430 any iesting with them. And that can Bion∣dello well tell, by Mayster Philippo Argenti in the gallery of Cauiccioli. And moreouer, It cannot be good to ieaste No Iesting in matters of weight or of shame. in matters of weite, and muche lesse in matters of shame. For, men will weene that wee haue a good sporte (as the common saying
is) to bragge and boast in our euill: as it is Bocc. Nouel. 7 Gior. 6. fo. 294. said, the Lady Philippe of Prato, tooke a sin∣gular pleasure and contētation in the plea∣saūt & prety aūswer she made, to excuse her Lupo is the proper name of a man as∣well as a wolfe. loose and wanton life. And therefore, I cannot thinke that Lupo of Vberti did any thing extenuat or lessē his shame: but rather increaste it greater, by the Ieste that hee made to excuse his faulte, and qualifie the opinion of his cowardly minde. For, where he might haue kept him selfe safe without daunger in the castle of Laterin, wherein he was besieged round about, and shutte vp: hee thought hee had plaide the man good inoughe, in that hee could say at the yealding it vp: that A wolfe doth not loue to be besieged and shutte vp. For, where it is out of time for to laughe, there to vse any Iestes or daliaunce, it hath a very colde Grace. And further, you shall vnderstād, there be some Iestes yt bite, & some yt bite not at all. For the first sorte: let yt wise counsell that Lauretta gaue for that point, suffice to teach Bocc Nouel. 3 Gior. 6. fo. 288 Iestes and Taunts. you: That Iestes must bite the hearer like a sheepe, but not like a dogge. For if it pinche, as the byte of a dogge: it shalbe no more a Ieste but a vvronge. And the lawes al∣most in all countries, will, that who saith
any villanie vnto a man, shalbe greuously punished for it. And, perchaunce, it were not amisse, to prouide with all, some sharp correction for him, that should byte in way of iesting, beyond all honest measure. But gentlemen should make account, that the lawe that punisheth wronges, extendeth as farre to iestes, and that they should seldome or very easily nyp or taunt any man. And besides all this, you must vnderstād, that a iest, whether it bite, or bite not, if it be not fine & full of wit, men take no plea∣sure at al to heare it, but rather are wearied with it: or at least wise, if they doe laughe, they laughe not at the iest, but at the iester him selfe, that brings it forthe so colde. And bycause, Iestes be no other thing but deceites: and deceite (as a thing that is fra∣med of subtilenes & craft) cannot be wrought but of men, that haue fine and redy wittes, and very present: therefore they haue no grace in men that be rude, and of grose vnderstā∣ding: nor yet in them alwayes, that haue the best and floweing wittes: as, peraduē∣ture, they did not altogether becōe Master Iohn Boccaccio. But taūtes and Iestes be a special redi∣nes and aptnes of wit, and quicken the motions of the minde: wherefore they that
haue discretion, doe not in this point, consi∣der their will, but their disposition of na∣ture: and after they haue once or twise tried their wittes, and finde them vnfit for suche purpose: they leaue to labour them selues any further in that kind of exercise: that it may not chaunce vnto them, that hapt to the knight of the lady Horetta. And if you Bocc. Nouel. 2. Gior. 6. fo. 287. looke in to the maners of many, you shall easily see, this that I tell you is true: I say, that To Iest or to taunt, is not currant with euery man that will, but onely with them that can. And there be many that for euery purpose, haue in their mouth redy, many of these wordes, which wee call Bicticcichi: that haue no maner of sense or meaning in them. And some, that vse very foolishly and fondly to chaunge Sillables into woords. And some you shall heare speake and make answer, otherwise thē a man would light∣ly Bycause these speaches haue no grace in our English toūge, I leaue them in the I∣talian. But our toung hath such ab∣surd iests as plentifully as any other toung. looke for, without any wit or pleasure in the world in their talke. And if you doe aske them, Doue e il signore? they answer a∣gaine. Doue egli ha i piedi: and likewise. Gli frae vnguer le mani con le grascia di signore Giouan Boccadoro. Doue mi manda egli? Ad Arno. Io mi voglio radere, Sarebbe meglio ro∣dere. Va chiama il Barbieri. Et perrhe non il Barbadomanie. Al which be to grose, to rude,
and to stale: and such were almost, all the pleasaunt purposes and iestes of Dioneo. Bocc. Nouel. 10. Gior. 5. fo. 281. But I will not take vppon me at this tyme, to discourse of the best and the worst kinde of iestes, what they be: aswel for that other men haue written treatises therof much more lernedly and better thē I can: as also, bycause iestes & tauntes, haue at first sight, a large and sure proofe of their grace or disgrace: such, as thou canst not do much amisse in this point, wtout thou stand to much in thy owne conceyte, and think to well of thy selfe: for where the iest is prety and pleasaunt, there a man straite is merry, and shewes a liking by laughīg, and makes a kinde of admiration of it. So that, where the company geues foorth no liking of thy sportes and conceites, by their mirthes and their laughing: hould thy selfe still then, and iest no more. For it is thy owne faulte thou must think, and not theirs that do heare the: forasmuch as the hearers, as it were allured, with the redye, pleasaunt, and subtile aunswers or que∣stions (do what they can, will they or nill they) cannot forbeare their laughing, but laughe in spyte of their teeth. From whom as from our right & lawfull Iudges, wee must not appeale to our selues. Neither must a man, to make other men merie, speake foule and filthie wordes, nor
make ilfauoured gestures, distorting his coū¦tenaūce, & disfiguring his bodie. For, No mā should, for other mēs pleasures, dishonest & dis∣honour him self. It is an arte for a Iuggler & iester to vse: it doth not become a gentleman Bocc. Nouel. 10. Gior. 5. fo. 281. It is the begin¦ning of a sōg. to do so. We must not then, imitate ye cōmon and rude behauiours of Dioneo. Madonna Aldruda Alzate La coda. Nor we must not coūterfet our selues to be fooles & vnsauorie doltes: but as time & oc∣casiō serueth, tell sōe pretie tale or sōe news, neuer heard of before, he yt cā: & he yt cānot, let him hold his peace. For, these be ye partes of ye wit: which, if they be sodain & prety, giue a proofe & a shew of ye quicknes of ye wit, & the goodnes of ye maners of him yt speakes thē: which thing doth verie much please men & makes thē our louers & friends. But if they be otherwise, they woorke thē a cōtrary ef∣fect. For, a mā would weene the asse would play his parte: or ye sōe hody dody & louberly lout would friske and daūce in his doublet. There is another plesaūte kind of cōmum∣ratiō: Long talke & discourse. & yt is whē ye pleasure & grace doth not cōsist in one merrie cōceite alone, but in lōg & cōtinued talke: which would be well dis∣posed, wel vttered, & very wel set forth, to shew ye maners, ye fashiōs, ye gestures & beha¦uiours of thē we speke, of so properly & liue∣as
ye hearer should think that he heareth thē not rehearsed, but seeth them with his eyes do those very thigs he heares them to speak of: which be very well obserued by the gen∣tlemen and gentlewomen both, in Boccace: although yet otherwhile (if I be not decei∣ued) they do affect and counterfet, more thē is sightly for a gentleman or gentlewoman to doe, like to these Comedie Players. And to doe this well, you must haue the matter, the tale, or the story, you take vppon you to tell, perfect in your minde: and woordes so redy and fit, that you neede not say in the end: That thing, and tother thing: This man, what doe you call him: That matter, helpe me Bocc. Nouel. 2. Gior. 6. fo. 287. to terme it: And, remember what his name is. For this is iust the trot of the knight of the lady Horetta. And if you doe reherse any chaunce, in which there be many spea∣kers: you must not say: He said and he aun∣swered: bycause this worde (He) serueth for all men. So that the hearer that harkens vnto it, is easily deceiued, and forgets whōe you meane. Then, It behoues them that dis∣course matters at length, to vse proper names, & not to chaunge them after. And more ouer, a mā must beware that he say, not those things, which vnsaide in silence would make ye tale pleasaūt inoughe,
and, peraduenture, geue it a better grace to leaue them out. As to say thus. Such a one, that was the sonne of such a one, that dwelt in Cocomer streete: do you not knowe him? he maried the daughter of Giansigliazzi, the leane scragge, that went so much to Saynt Laraunce. No? do not you know him? why? do you not re∣member the goodly strayght old man that ware long haire dovvne to his shoulders? For if it were nothing materiall to the tale, whether this chaunce befell him, or him: all thys long babble, and fond and folishe questiōs, were but a tale of a Tubbe: to no purpose, more then to weary mens eares that harken to it, and long to vnderstand the end. As peraduenture our Dant hath made this fault otherwhile, where he sayeth: And borne my parents were of yoare in Lūbardie, And eke of Mātuaes soyle they both by coūtry be. For, it was to no purpose, whether his mother were borne at Gazuolo, or ells at Cremona. But I lerned once of a straūger, a Rethori∣cian very lerned, a necessarie lesson cōcern∣ing this point{is}: that Men must dispose and order their tale, first vvith by names, and then
rehearse them (as neede is) that be proper. For, the bynames alwayes beare the respect of the persones qualitie: but the other are to be vsed at the Fathers discretion, or his whome they concerne. And therfore, that bodie whome in your thought and imagination to your selfe, you doe cōceiue, might be Lady Couetousnes her Bocc. Nouel 6 Gior. 1. fo. 41. selfe: in speache you shall call Maister Er∣minio Grimaldie: if suche be the common o∣pinion, the countrie hathe of him. And, if there be no man in place where you dwell, so notoriously knowne as might serue the turne fit for your purpose: you must then imagine the case further of, and set him a name at your pleasure. It is very true, that VVith muche greater pleasure we harken, and better beholde (as it were with our eyes) what soeuer is told vs of mē of our acquaintāce, if the matter be suche as toucheth their maners: then what vve doe heare of straungers and men vnknovvne vnto vs. And the reason is this: when wee doe knowe, that suche a man is woont to doe so: we doe easily beleeue, he hath doone so indeede: and wee take as∣muche knoweledge of him, as if wee were present: where it chaunceth not so with vs, in the case of a straunger.
Our vvordes (be it in longe discourses or other communication) Must be so plaine, that Words would be plaine. all the companie may easily vnderstand them: and withall, for sounde and sense they must be apt and sweete. For if you be to vse one of these two wordes: you shall rather say, Il ventre: then L'Epa. And where your country speache will beare it, you shall ra∣ther The, Bellie. The Lyuer. The Paunche. The Bellie. The Bodie. say: La Pancia, then L'Ventre: Or, il Corpo. For, by these meanes you shalbe vnderstoode, and not misse vnderstoode, as we Florentines say, nor be darke and obscure to the hearers. The which thing our Poet, meaning to eschewe: in this very woorde it selfe (I beleue) sought to fīde out another, not thinking muche of his paynes (bycause it lyked him wel) to seeke farre to borrow it els where. And sayd: Remember hovv the Lorde a man vvas fayne to be, For mans offence and sinne in Cloy∣ster of virginitie. And albeit Dant the learned Poet, did set by suche kinde of rules: I doe not think yet, a mā should allow well of him in doing so. And sure, I would not coūcell you to make
him your Maister in this point, to learne A Grace: forasmuche as he him selfe had none. For, this I finde in a Chronicle of him. This Dant, was somewhat proude for his knowledge, scorne∣full and disdainfull, and muche (as Philosophers be) without any grace or courtesie: hauing no skill to behaue him selfe in company. But to come to our purpose againe: I say, our speache must be plaine: which will be easie inough to doe: if you haue wit to choose those wordes that be naturally bred in our soyle: and with all not so olde wt Age, that they are become rotten and withered: and as ouer worne apparell, leaft of and cast a side. As, Spaldo, and Epa, and Vopo, Old woordes out of vse, and Sezzaio, & Primaio. And moreouer, the wordes you shall vse, must haue no double Gergo is a ve∣ry doubtfull manner of speache, as it were in Rid∣dles: and very ambiguous. vnderstanding, but simple. For by coupling suche wordes together: wee frame that speache that is called Aenigma. And to speake it plainer in our owne language, we call it Gergo. As in this verse: Io vidi vn che da sette passatoi Fu da vn canto all' altro trapassato. Againe, our wordes would be, (as nere Apt wordes and proper. as they myght be) aptly and properly appli∣ed to that thing we go about to deliuer, &
as litle as may be, common to other mat∣ters: for, in so doing, a man shall weene, the matter it selfe is openly laide before him: & that it is not expressed with wordes, but pointed foorthe with the finger. And therefore we may more properly say: A man is knowen by his countenaunce, then by his figure or counterfet. And Dant did better expresse the matter, when he saide. Dant. 23. Infer. The weightes That peize the weight doe make the balāce creeke, Then if he had saide Crie out and make a noise. And it is a more proper and peculiar speache to say, The shiuering of an ague, then to call it The colde. And flesh that is Tidie, to terme it rather, Fatte: then Fulsome. Ther be some woordes more in this place to like effect, which I meane not to stande vppon now: by cause our Englishe toūge canot hansomely deliuer their perfect mea∣ning. For the Italians haue (as we haue, and all other Countries ells as well as wee) certaine peculiar wordes and termes, so naturally and properly their owne, as it is not possible to expresse them aptly and perfectly in any other Language. And therefore the Author him selfe, fearing, or knowing asmuche in the sense of these wordes,
which he hath inferred in this place (as it were preuenting a blame) in maner excuseth and speaketh asmuch as I say, as the matter it selfe that insueth doth shewe. For, the Author him selfe following his purpose saith thus. I am vvell assured, if some straunger should, vnhappely for my credite, hit vppon this tteatise of mine: he vvould laughe mee to scorne, and say that I taught to speake in riddles, or els in Ciphers. For as muche as these vvordes, be almost so properly our ovvne, that other countries haue no ac∣quaintance vvith them: or, if they vvoulde vse them, yet they cannot tell hovv to vn∣derstand them. For, vvho is it that knovves vvhat Dant ment in this verse: Gia veggia per Mezzul perdere o Lulla. Dant. 28. Infer. Sure, I beleeue no man ells but vve that are Florentines can vnderstand it. Notvvith∣standing, for any thing that I haue saide, if there be any fault in this text of Dant: it is not in the vvordes. But, if he haue faulted, it is rather in this: that (as a man somevvhat vvilfull) he vvould take vppon him, a matter harde to be vttered in vvordes, and perad∣uenture vnpleasaunt to heare: then that he hath exprest it ill.
It is not then for a man to vse any talke, Talke in a forreigne Language. with him that vnderstandeth not that lan∣guage you talke vnto him. Nor yet, by∣cause a Douche man vnderstandes not the Italian tounge, must wee (for that cause) breake of our talke, to holde talke with him, to make our selues counterfets, as Maister Brufaldo did, and as some other be woont, that fondly and coldly, without any grace, thrust them selues in to Chat in their lan∣guage with whome they talke, what so e∣uer it be, and chop it out euery worde pre∣posteroufly. And many times it chaunceth, the Spaniard talkes Italian with the Italian, and the Italian babbles againe in a braue∣uery and gallantnes, the Spanishe toung with the Spaniard. And yet, it is an easier thing to know, yt they both talke like stran∣gers: then to forbeare to laugh at the folish follies that scape them both in speache. Let vs not therfore vse our forreigne language, but vvhen it is needefull for vs to be vnderstoode, for some necessitie or other, that appertaineth vn to vs: And in common vse, vse our owne tounge, thoughe not altogether so good: rather then a forreigne language, better then our owne that is naturall vnto vs. For a Lumbarde shall speake his owne
tounge more aptly (which is, notwithstan∣ding, but base and barbarous) then he shall speake the Tuscane, or other language: euen bycause he hath not so redily, so proper and peculiar wordes, althoughe he studie much for them, as wee our selues that be Tus∣canes. But yet, if a man haue a respect to them with whome he talkes: and for that cause forbeare & leaue out those singular wordes, (which I haue spokē of) and in stede of thē vse the generall and common: his talke, by suche meanes, shall haue the lesse pleasure & delight. Besides this, it becometh euerie honest Woordes that haue no honest mea∣ning in them. gentleman, to eschewe those wordes that haue no honest meaning. And, The goodnes of wordes consisteth either in their sound, or pronouncing: or, in their sense and meaning. For a much as som wordes speake an ho∣nest matter, and yet, perchaunce, there is a certaine vnhonest sense perceaued to stand in the pronouncinge of the worde it selfe: as Rinculare: which, notwithstanding, is Rinculare, is to drawe back warde, arse∣longe. daily vsed of all men. But if a man or woman should speake after this sorte, & at that verie warning doe it in fight of any (I meane shuffle backwarde vpon their taile) then would the grosenesse of the worde
plainlie appeare vnto them. But our Pa¦late, throughe Custome and Use, happilie tasteth ye wine (as it were) and the bestnes of the sense of the worde, and not ye Dregges or Leeze. She gaue the Spanish sigge with both her thumbes at once. Dant. 25. infer Saith Dant. Fiche, is the thrusting of the thumbe betvveene the forefinger: vvhiche eyther for the vvorde or the remem∣brance of som¦thinge therby signified, is reputed a∣mongste the Italians as a vvorde of Shame. But our women, would be much asha∣med to speake so: yea to shūne this ambigu∣ous woord, yu signifieth a worse matter, they rather say Le castagne. Albeit yet some of them at vnwares, many times, name that vnaduisedly, which if another man had spoken to trie them, would haue made them blushe to heare that remembred in way of blasphemie, which makes them women. And therefore, suche as be, or would be bet∣ter mannered or taught, take good heede they doe eschewe, not only things vncleane Potta di me and vnhonest, but wordes also: and not so∣muche those that be euill indeede, but those that may be, or doe but seeme to be vnho∣nest, foule & filthie: as some men say these are of Dant. She blewe large blastes of winde Dant. 17. Infer. Both in my face and vnder. Or els these.
I pray thee tell mee vvhere about the hole doth stand. And one of the Spirits said. Then come behinde and vvhere the hole is it may be scand. And you must knowe, that albeit two, or moe wordes, otherwhile chaunce to tell one selfe thinge, yet the one is more cleanly then the other. As for example, to say: She lay vvith him: and she satisfied his desire vvith her person. For this self same speach, if it were in other termes, would be to broad before & to filthie to heare it. And speaking of Endymion, you may more aptly say: Il Va∣go della Luna. then you can say Il Drudo, al∣thoughe both these wordes doe import and signifie A louer, and a Friend. And a much honester speache is it, if you talke of Aurora, to call, her. Tritons prety gerle and louer, then Concubine. And it better becomes a mās and womans mouth, to call Harlots, vvo∣mē of the vvorlde (as Belcolore did, who was more ashamed to speake it then to doe it) then to vse their common name: Thais is a Harlot. And as Boccace declared ye power of whores and boyes. For, if he had ter∣med the males, by their beastly occupation, as he termed the women: his talke would haue byn foule & shamefull. And withall,
A man must not alone bevvare of vnhonest and filthie talke. but also of that vvhiche is base and Base vvords and Vile. vile, and especially vvhere a man talketh & dis∣courseth of greate and highe matters. And for this Cause, perchaunce, woorthely some blame our Beattice, sayeing: To passe throughe Lethes floud, the highest Fates vvould blott, Yf man mighte taste the Viandes suche, Dant. 30. Purgato. as there dooe fall by Lott, And not pay firste a due repentaunce for his scott. For, in my conceite, these base wordes that come out of the Tauernes, bee verie vn∣comely for suche aworthy discourse. And when a man hathe like occasion to speake of ye Sunne, it shall not be good to call it The Candell or the Lampe of the world: bycause such woordes do put vs in minde of ye Oyle, & the stuffe of the kitchyn. Neyther should a man that is well aduised, say that Saincte Dominicke was Il Drudo della Theologia. Drudo, signi∣fiethe a lasci∣uious louer. Nor yet talke, that the glorious Sainctes haue spoken suche base and vile woordes: As for Example to say. Dant. 22. Infer. And leaue to scratche whereas the scabs of sinne breake out, For they sauour of ye dregges, & ye filth of ye cōmō people, as euery man may easily see.
Againe, in your long & large discourses, you must haue yt like cōsideratiōs & cares, & some more: yt which you may more cōmodi∣ously learne of your Maisters yt teache you yt arte, that is commonly called Rhetorike. And amongest other things, You must accustome your selfe, to vse suche gentle and courtious speache to men, and so sweete, that it Gentle wordes in Communi∣cation. may haue no maner of bitter taste. And you shall rather say, I cannot tell how to say it: Thē say: you ar deceiued: Or, it is not true: Or, you know it not. For, it is a courteous and friendly parte to excuse a mans faulte, euen in that very thing, wherein you know how to blame him. And withall, it doth well, to make the proper and peculiar fault of your friend, indifferent and common to you both: and first, to take one piece to your selfe, and then after, to blame and reproue him for it. VVee were deceiued and failed muche: we forgot our selues yesterday to doe so. Although suche negligence & errour, or what soeuer it be: be altogether his fault and not yours. And Restagnone forgat him selfe muche, when he saide to his com∣panions: If your wordes doe not lie. For, A man should not bring another mannes faithe and honestie in question and doubte. But, if a man promise you any thing, and doe not performe it: it shall not doe well, for you to
say vnto him: You haue lost your credite with mee: without some necessarie cause doe driue you to say so, as to saue your owne credite and honestie. But, you shall ra∣ther say: You could not do it: Or, you did not remember to doe it: Thē, you haue cleane for∣gotten mee. For, these kinde of speaches, haue some prickles & stinges of Complaint, Anger and Choler. So that, suche as vse them selues to speake suche churlishe and fuinishe woordes, are taken for sharpe and sower fellowes: & men doe asmuche shunne their acquaintāce: as to thrust them selues vppon thornes and thistles. And bycause I knowe som, of this naugh∣tie cōditiō & qualitie: I meane some yt be so hastie and greedy to speake, yt they take not the sense with them, but ouer passe it and runne before it, as the grehound, that doth not pinche by ouershooting his game: ther¦fore I will not spare to tell you that, which may be thought needeles to touche, as a thing to well knowen: and that is, that You shall neuer speake, before you haue first considered & laide the plot in your minde what it is you haue to saie. For in so doing, your talke shalbe well deliuered and not borne before Parto & non Isconcratura. the time. I trust, straungers will easily beare with this worde: if at least they
vouchsafe to read these trifles of mine. And if you doe not skorne my preceptes: it shall neuer chaunce you to say: vvelcome Maister Agostino, to such a one, whose name is Ag∣nolo, or Bernardo. And you shal neuer need to say, Tell me your name: Nor say againe, I saide not well: Nor, Lorde vvhat doe I call him: Nor to hack and to stutter long toge∣ther, to finde out a worde, Maister Arrigo: no Master Arabico: Tushe, what doe I call him I should say, Maister Agabito. These fonde & foolish behauiours & fashions, paine a man as much to heare thē, as to be drawne and haled with cordes. The voyce would be neither hoarse nor shrill. And, vvhen you laugh and sporte in any Voyce and Tounge. sorte: you must not crye out and criche like the Pullye of a well: nor yet speake in your yavvning. I knowe well it is not in vs, to geue our selues a ready tongue or perfect voyce at our owne will and pleasure. Hee yt doth stutter, or is hoarse: let him not al∣wayes bable and gabbe, and keepe a courte alone: let him rather a mend the defect of his tounge with silence, and hearinge: and withall (if hee can) with studie diminishe the fault of Nature. It is an yll noyse to heare a man rayse his voyce highe, lyke to a common Cryer. And yet I would not
haue him speake so lowe and softly, that he that harkens, shall not heare him. And if he be not heard at ye first time he speaketh, he must speake, the next time, somewhat plainer: but yet, not yoape out aloude, that he make not men thinke he is woode and angry with them: for hee shall doe but well, to rehearse that againe he hath spo∣ken, yt men may vnderstand what he said. Four wordes would be disposed, euen as the common vse of speache doth require Manner of Speache. and not vnsorted, disordered and scattered cōfusedly: as many be woont to doe vppon a brauery, whose maner of talke is more like a Scriuener (me thinke) that readeth in his mother tounge, the Indēture he hath written before in latine: then a man that reasoneth or talketh in his Naturall lan∣guage: as this for example. They drawe by sent of false and fained steps of truth. Or if a man should preposterously place his wordes thus. Those times did blossomes geue before their time of soothe. Which maner of speache, may be other∣while allowed in versifiers: but it is vtter∣ly forbidden in common talke.
And, it behoues a mā, not onely to shūne this versifying maner of speache, in his fa∣miliar and common discourse, or talke: but likewise eschewe ye pompe, brauery, & affec∣tation, that may be suffered and allowed to inriche an Oration, spoken in a publike place. Otherwise, mē that doe heare it, will but spyte it, and laughe him to scorne for it. Albeit perchaunce, a Sermon may shewe a greater cunning and arte, then common talke. But, Euerie thing must haue his time and place. For, he that walkes by the way must not daunce, but goe. For, euery man, hath not the skill to daunce, and yet euery mā cā skill to goe. But, Dauncing is meete for feastes & weddings: it is not to vse in the stretes. You must then take good heede you speake not with a maiestie. It is thought by many Philosophers. And suche is all Filocolo, and the other treatises of Maister Iohn Boccace, except his greater woorke, and litle more per∣chaunce Corbaccio. I would not for al this, that you should vse so base a speache, as yt scum, as it were, and the froth of the meanest and vilest sorte of people, Launderers & Hucksters: but suche
as gentlemen should speake & talke, which I haue partly told you before, in what sorr it may be done: that is, if you talke of mat∣ters that be neither vyle, vaine, fowle, nor lothesome. And if you haue skill to choose amongest the woords of your owne coūtrie speache, the purest and most proper, suche as haue the best sounde, and best sense, touching nor remembring, in no case, no matter that is foule, vile and base: & if you can place your woords in good order, and not shoofle them together at randon, nor yet, with ouer muche Curious studie, file them (as it were) one your beades. More∣ouer, if you do dispose such things as you haue to say with discretion. And take good hede that you couple not vnfit & vnlikely matters together: as for Example. As sure as God is in Heauen: So stands the staffe in the chimny corner. And if you speake not so slowe, as if you were vnlustie: nor so hasty, as if you wer hū¦grie: but as a wise and a temperate man should doe. Likewise, if you pronounce youre woords and your sillables with a certaie grace & sweetnes: not as a Schole∣maister ye teatheth yoūg Childrē to read & to
spell. Neyther must you mumble them nor supp them vp, as if they were glued & pas∣ted together one to another. If you remember these and such other rules and precepts: youre talke will be liked, and heard with pleasure enoughe: and you shall well maintaine the state and counte∣naunce, that well besemeth a gentleman well taught and honest. Besids these, there be some, that neuer Talkatiue Fellovves. hould their tounge. And as the shippe that sayles, doth not presently stand, still, by taking downe the sayles: So doe they runne forward, as caried away with a certaine brayde: and loosing the matter of their talke, yet leaue not to babble, but ei∣ther repeate that againe that is said, or els speake still they cannot tell what. And there be other so full of babble, that they will not suffer another to speake. And as wee doe see otherwhile, vppon the flow∣ers in the countrie where they thresh corne, one Pullet pull the corne out of the others beake: so doe they catche the tale out of his mouth yt beganne it, and tell it themselues. And sure, suche maner of people, induce men to quarell and fight with them for it. For, if you doe marke it wel: Nothing moues
a māsooner to anger: then when he is soudaine∣ly cut short of his will and his pleasure, be it of neuer so little and small importaunce. As whē you gape wide with yawning: another should thrust his hand in your mouth: or when you doe lift your arme redy to hurle a stone: it is soudainly stayde by one that stands behinde you. Euen then, as these doings, and many moe like vnto these, which tend to hinder the will and desire of another (albeit but in way of sporte & of play) are vnseemely, and would be es∣chewed: So in talke and communication with men, wee should rather pull one, and further their desiers, by what meanes we can, then stop them and hinder them in it. And therefore, If any man be in a redines to tell his tale: it is no good maner to interrupte him: nor to say that you doe knowe it vvell. Or, if hee besprinckle his tale here and there, with some prety lye: you must not reproue him for it, neither in wordes nor in gesture, as shaking your hed, or scow∣ling vppon him, as many be wont: gloriously vaunting them selues, that they can, by no meanes, abide the taste of a Lye. But, this is not the
reason of this, it is the sharpenes and sow∣ernes of their owne rusticall & eager Na∣tures, which makes them so venemous & bitter in all companies they come: that no man cares for their acquaintance. Likewise, It is an illfauoured condition to stop another mās tale in his mouth: and it spites him asmuche, as if a mā should take him by the sleeue & hould him backe, euen whē he is redie to runne his course. And when another man is in a tale, it is no good maner for you, by telling the company some newes, & draw∣ing their mindes to other matters, to make them forsake him cleane, and leaue him a∣lone. For, it is an vncourtious parte for you to leade and carry away the cōpany: which the other (not you) hath brought together. And, whē a mā tells his tale, you must geue good eare vnto him: that you may not say otherwhile, O what? Or, how? which is many a mans fashion to doe. And this is asmuch trouble and paine to him that spea∣keth: as to shoofle against ye stones, to him that goeth. All these fashions, and ge∣nerally, that which may stoppe, and that which may trauerse the course of another mans talke, must be shunned. And, if a man tell his tale slowe like a drawe latche: you must not yet hasten him
forwarde, nor lende him woordes, although you be quicker in speache then hee. For, many doe take that ill, and specially suche, as persuade themselues they haue a Ioly grace in telling a tale. For, they doe ima∣gine you thīke not so well of thē, as they thē selues doe: And that you would geue them instructions in their owne Art: as Mer∣chaunts that liue in greate wealth & plen∣tie, would count it a greate reproche vnto them, that a man should proffer them mo∣ney, as if they liued in lacke, & were poore and stoode in neede of releéfe. And you must vnderstād, that, Euery man in his owne conceite, thinkes he can tell his tale well: al∣thoughe for modestie sake he deny it. And I cannot gesse how it cometh to passe, that the veriest foole doth babble most: which ouer muche prattle, I would not haue a gentle∣man to vse, and specially, if his skill be but scant in the matter in talke: Not onely, bycause it is a hard matter: but, He must rū in many faults that talkes muche: but also, by∣cause a man weenes, that, He that talkes all the talke to him selfe, woulde (after a sorte) pre∣ferre him self aboue them all that heare him, as a Mayster would be aboue his scholers. And therfore, It is no good maner for a man to take vppō him a greater state, thē doth become him.
And in this fault, not men alone, but many countryes fall into, so cackling and prat∣ling: that, woe be their eares that geue thē hearing. But, as ouer muche babble makes a mā weary: so doth ouer muche Silence procure Silence as greate disliking. For, To vse silence in place vvhere other men talke to and fro: is in maner, asmuche a fault, as not to pay your share and scot as other men doe. And as speache is a meane to shewe men your minde, to whome you speake: so, doth Silence againe make mē wene, you seke to be vnknowne. So yt, as those people which vse to drinke muche at feastes, and make them selues drunke, are wont to thrust thē out of their companie, that will not take their drinke as they doe: So be these kinde of mute & still fellowes, coldly welcome to pleasaūt and mery companie, that meete to passe the time away in pleasure and talke. So that, It is good maner for a man to speake, and like∣vvise to hold his peace, as it comes to his turne, and occasion requires. As an old Chronicle maketh mention. There was in the parts: of Morea, a very good workmā in ye stone: Who for ye sīgular good skill he had in his Art, was called (as Maestro Chiarissimo. I take it) Maestro Chiarissimo. This man
(now well strooken in yeares) made a cer∣taine treatise, & therin gathered together al ye precepts & rules of his arte: as the man yt had very good skill to doe it: shewing in what sorte the proportions and lineaments of the body, should be duely measured, as well euery one a parte by it selfe, as one res∣pecting another: yt they might iustly & due∣ly be answerable ye one to the other: which treatise of his, he named Regolo. Meaning Regolo. to shewe, that according to that, all the I∣mages and pictures, that from thensforth any workemā should make, should be squa∣red & lined forth: as yt beames, and ye stones, and the walles, are measured by ye rules & precepts of that booke. But, for that it is a muche easier matter to speake it, then to worke it, or doe it: and besides that, The greatest number of men, especially of vs that be prophane and not learned, haue our senses much quicker then our vnderstanding, and conse∣quently, better conceiue particular things and Examples, then the generall propositions and Syllogismes (which I might terme in plai∣ner speache, Reasons) for this cause this worthy man I speake of, hauing regard to the Nature of workemen: whose capacities are vnfit and vnable to weeld the weighte of generall Precepts and
rules: and to declare more plainely, with all his cunning and skill: hauing found out for his purpose, a fine marble stone, with muche labour and paine, he fashioned and shaped an Image of it, as perfectly propor∣tioned in euery parte and member: as the precepts and rules of his treatise had be∣fore deuised. And as he named the booke, so did he name that Image, and called it by name of Regolo. Now, (and it pleased god) I would I could but one parte of those twoe points, which that noble Ingrauer & worckeman I speake of, had perfect skill and knowledge to doe: I meane, that I could gather toge∣ther in this treatise, after a sorte, the due measures of this Art I take vppon me to treate of. For, to perfourme the other, to make the second Regolo: I meane, to vse and obserue in my maners, the measures I speake of, framig and forming, as it were, A Visible Example, and a materiall Image of them: it were now, to muche for me to doe. For asmuch as, It is not inough to haue know¦ledge and Art, in matters concerning maners & fashions of men: But it is needefull withall, to worke them to a perfect effect, to practise and vse them muche: whiche cannot be had vppon the soudaine, nor learned by & by: but it is number
of yeares that must winne it: & ye best parte of mine be runne fourth alredy, you see. But for all this, you must not make ye lesse reconing of these precepts. For, A man may well teache another the way: although he haue gone out of the way himself. And peraduenture, they that haue lost their wayes, do better remember the hard wayes to fynd: then they that neuer went a misse. And, if in mine infancie, when minds be tender and pliable, like a young twigge, they that had ye charge & gouernemēt of me, had had the skill to smoothe my manners, (perhaps of Nature somwhat hard and rude) and would haue polished and wrought them fine: peraduēture I should haue beene such A one, as I trauaile to make thee Nowe, whome I loue no lesse then if thou were my sonne. For albeit, the power of Nature be greate. yet is she many tymes Maistered and Nature must be maystered by Reason. corrected by custome: But, we must in tyme begin to encounter and beate her downe, before she get to muche strēgth and hardi∣nes. But most men will not doe so: but rather yealding to their appetite without any striuing, following it where so euer it leades thē, thinke they must submitte thē∣selues to Nature: As though Reason were not a naturall thing in man. But, Reason
hath (as a Lady and Mistris) povver to chaunge Reason dothe chaunge olde Customes & helpeth Na∣ture. olde customes, and to helpe & hold vp Nature, when she doth at any time decay and fall. But very seldome we harken vnto her. And yt for ye moste parte, maketh vs like vnto thē whome god hath not endued wt Reason: I meane brute beastes, in whome notwith∣standing, something yet worketh: not their owne Reasons (for they haue none of them selues) but ours: as in horses you see it: which by nature would be euer wilde, but yt their ryder makes them tame, and withal, after a sorte, redy & very well paced. For many of them would haue a hard trot, but that the rider makes them haue an easier pace. And some he doth teache to stand still, to galopp, to treade the ringe, and do the carreere: And they learne to doe it all well you see. Then, if the horse, the dog, ye hauke, & many other beastes besides, more wylde then these, be guided and ruled by Reason, and learne that which their owne Nature cannot attaine, but rather repug∣neth: and become after a sorte cunning and skilfull, so farre as their kinde doth beare it, not by Nature, but by custome & vse: how muche then may we thinke wee should ex∣cell them, by the precepts and rules of our Reason, if wee tooke any heede vnto it.
But, The Sēses desire & couet presēt delightes, what soeuer they be: and can abide no paines, but puts them of. And by this meanes, they also shake of Reason, and thinke her vnpleasant, forasmuche as she sets before them, not plea∣sure, many times, hurtfull: but goodnes and vertue, euer paynfull, sower and vnsauoury in taste. For, while we liue according to the Sense, wee are like to the selly sickmā, to whom al cates neuer so deinty & sweete, seeme vntoothsome: and he chideth still with his Cater and Cooke, in whome there is no fault at all for it. For, it is the Nature of his disease, and the Extremitie of his sicknes, and not the fault of his meate, that he doth not sauourly taste what he eates. So Rea¦son, which of it selfe is svveete and sauourie: seemes bitter in taste vnto vs, though it haue no ill taste in dede. And therfore as nice & deitie felowes, we refuse to make any taste of her: & couer our grosnes, wt saying that Nature hath no spurres nor raines yt can pricke her forth, or hold her backe. Where sure, if an Oxe or an Asse, or a Hogge, could speake: I beleeue, they could not lightly tell a more fowle & shamefull tale thē this. VVe should be childrē still all the time of our riper yeares, & in our extreame age: and vvaxe as very fooles vvith gray hoary heads, as vvhen vve vvere very babes: if it vvere not that reasō, vvhich increaseth in vs vvith our yeares, subdueth affections in vs,
and growen to perfection, transformeth vs from beastes in to men. So that it is well seene, shee ruleth our senses and bridleth our wittes. And it is our owne Imperfection and not her faulte, if we doe swarue frō vertue, good∣nes, and good order in life. It is not then true, that there is not a bridell and Master for Nature. Nay, she is guided and ruled by twaine: Custome I Custome & Reason, tvvoe brydles of Nature. meane, and Reason. But, as I haue tould you a litle before: Reason without Custome and vse, cannot make an vnciuile bodie, well taught and courtious: Which custome and vse, is as it were, bred and borne of tyme. And therefore they shall doe well, to harkē betime vnto her, not only for that, by this meanes, a man shall haue more time and leasure to learne to be such as she teacheth, and to become as it were a houshould ser∣uaunt of hers, and one of her traine: but al∣so bycause The tender age, as pure and cleane, doth easily receaue all Impressiōs, and reteineth more liuely, the colours vvherevvith she is dy∣ed: then vvhen a man comes to ryper yeares: And also, bycause The things vvherein vvee haue byn nourished and trained frō our youth, doe ordinarily please vs, aboue all other things. And for this cause, it is said that Diodato, a man that had a singular good gift & grace Piodato.
of vtterance, would euermore bee the first that came fourth vppon the stage to shewe his Comedie: allthoughe they were all but coūterfets vnto him, whosoeuer they were that should haue spoken before him. But he would not his voice should occupie o∣ther mens eares, after they heard another man speake. Although, in respect of his doings, it were a greate deale Inferiour to his. Seing then, I cannot agree my workes and my wordes together, for those causes I haue shewed you before, as Maes∣tro Chiarissimo did: whoe had as good a skil to doe it, as he had knowledge to teache it: let it suffice that I haue tould in some part what must be done, bycause I am not by a∣ny meanes able to doe it in dede. He that li∣ueth in darkenes, may very vvell Iudge vvhat comfort it is to enioy the benefit of light. And by an ouer long silence, vve knovve vvhat plea∣sure it is to speake: so when you beholde my grose and rude maners: you shall better Iudge, what goodnes and vertue there is in courtions behauiours and fashions. To come againe then to this treatise, which growes now to some end: wee say that Those be good maners and fashiōs, which bring a delight, or at least, offend not their sen∣ses, their mynds, and conceits, vvith vvhom vve
liue. And of these, wee haue hitherto spoken inoughe. But you must vnderstand with all this, that, Men be very desirous of bevvtifull things, vvell proportioned and comely. And of coun∣terfet things fovvle and ill shapen, they be as squemish againe, on the other side. And this is a speciall priuilege geuen to vs: that o∣ther creatures haue no capacitie, to skill what bewtie or measure meaneth. And therefore, as things not common wt beastes but proper to our selues: we must embrace them for them selues, and holde them dere: & yet those, much more, yt drawe nerest to ye knowledge of man: as which are most apt and inclined to vnderstand the perfection which Nature hath lefte in men. And albeit, it be a hard matter, to shewe precisely, Bevvtie, what maner of thing it is: Bevvtie. yet yt you may haue sōe marke, to know her by: you must vnderstand, yt VVhere iointly & seuerally, euery parte & the whole hath his due proportion and measure, there is Bevvtie. And that thing may iustly be called fayer, in vvhich the saide proportion and measure is found. And by that I did once learne of a wise & a lear∣ned man: Bevvtie he said, would consist but of one, at the moste. And Deformitie con∣trarywise, measured her selfe, by Many. As Deformitie. you may see by the faces of fayer & goodly
women. For, the euen lineaments and due proportions of euery of them: seeme to haue byn created & framed by the iudge∣ment and sight of one face alone. Which cannot be thought in them that be foule & deformed. For, when you beholde a womā, that hath, peraduenture, bigge and bowle eyes, a little nose, blubbe cheekes, a fsat mouth, an out chinne, & a browne skinne: you thinke straite that that face is not one womans alone: but is moulded of many faces, and made of many peeces. And yet, you shall finde amongest them, some such, whose partes cōsidered alone by thē selues, be very perfect to see to: but all set together, be foule and ill fauoured: not for any other cause, but that they be ye lineaments of ma∣ny fayer women, and not of one: So that a mā would weene, shee had borrowed her partes, of this and that woman. And it may be, that Painter that had all the fayer maides of Calabria, naked before him: had none other intent therein, then to iudge & discerne in many, ye partes yt they haue, as it were, borrowed heere one, & there another, of one, alone: to whome restoring frō eache yt was her right: imagining yt Venus bewty should be such, and so proportioned: he set him selfe to paint her. And, you must not thik, yt this is to be seene
the faces, the partes, and the bodies of wo∣men alone: but it happeneth more or lesse, in speache, in gestures & doings. For, if you should chaunce to see a Noble woman gor∣gius and gallant, washing of cloutes in a Riuer by ye highe waye side: Althoughe if this were not, you might hapely passe away by her, wt little heede to her persō or state: yet this would not brook you nor like you, yt her seruile doings doe shewe her more thē one. For her state should answer her honourable condition and calling. But her woorke is suche, as is meete for women of base and seruile life: & although you shall feele, ney∣ther yll sauour nor sent come from her, nor heare any noyse that should offend you, nor any thing els to trouble your minde: yet the foule and filthy maner of doing it, and the vnseemely act it selfe: will make you muche to loathe it. You must then beware of these fowle and vncomely behauiours, asmuche, nay, more then of those other, I haue spoken all this while. For, it is a har∣der matter a greate deale, to knowe whē a man faulteth in these, then when he faul∣teth in them. Bycause, It is easie much, vve see, to feele then to vnderstande. But yet, it may chaunce otherwhile, that euen that which offendeth the senses, may also offend
the minde: thoughe not altogether af∣ter one sorte, as I haue told you be∣fore: Apparelling according to the Time. shewing you that A man must ap∣parell him selfe, according to the fashions that other men vse: that it may not be thought he doth reproue and correct their doings: The which thing offendeth most men that seeke to be commended: And the wisest mē that be, mislike it too. For, the garments of the olde world, haue lost their date, for men of this age and this season to weare. And it is suche an ill shapen sight, to see a man clad with other mens cloathes: that a man would weene there would be a fray betwene the doublet & ye hose: their cloathes doe sit, vppon them so vnto wardly. So that, many of those matters I haue spoken of allredy, or peraduēture all, might be aptly rehersed here again: forasmuch as this measure I speake of here, is not obser∣ued in these thīgs: nor the time, nor ye place, nor the worke, nor the worker, accorded & fitted together, so well as it should be. For mens minds and fansies doe like it, & take a pleasure and delight in those things. But I thought it good to apply & speake these matters, rather vnder ye badge, as it were, of the Senses and desires: then properly assigne them to the minde: that a man may
the more easily perceiue them: bycause It is a naturall thinge, for euerie man to feele and de∣sire: but euery man cannot so generally vnderstand, and especially that, whiche we call bewtie, gallantnes or entertaine∣ment. It is not inoughe for a man, to doe things that be good: but hee must also haue a care, hee doe them with a good grace. And a good grace is nothing els, but suche a maner of light (as I may A Grace, vvhat it is. call it) as shineth in the aptnes of things set in good order and wel disposed, one with another: and perfectly knit and vnited together. VVith∣out which proportion and measure, euen that which is good is not faire: & the fairenes it self, is not plesaunt. And as meates, though they be good & sauourie will giue men no minde to eate thē, if they haue no pleasaunt relish and taste: So fares it with the maners of men other while (althoughe in them selues in no respect they be ill, but foolishe a lit∣tle, and fond) if a man doe not season them with a certaine sweetenes, which you call (as I take it) Grace, and Comlines. So that, euery vice of it selfe, without any further matter to helpe it (it cannot be chosen) must needes offend a man. For, Vices be things so foule and filthie: that honest and modest mindes, will greeue to see
their shamefull effects. And therefore, it shall behoue them that seeke to be well thought of, with their familiar acquaintāce, aboue all things els to eschewe vices, and especially those, that be foulest and worst: as Leachery, Couetous∣nes, Crueltie, and other. Of which, some be beastly, as Drunkennes, and Gluttonie: some vncleane, as Leacherie: other some horrible, as Murther, and such other: all which for them selues, and for the very naughtines, that is pro∣perly in them al, all men eschewe more, or lesse: But, as earst I said, generally al, as thīgs of greate disorder, make a man misliked muche of all men. But, bycause I haue not taken vppon me to shew vnto you, mēs sinnes, but their Errors: it shalbe no parte of my charge at this time to entreate of ye Nature of vices & vertues: but onely of the seemely & vnseeme¦ly fashions and maners wee vse one with another. One of the which vnseemely Counte Ri∣charde. fashions was, that Coūt Richard did vse: of which I tould you before. Which, as vn∣seemely and vnfitting with those other his good and faire maners hee had besides: that same worthie Bishop (as a skilfull and cunning Mayster in musicke will ea∣easily
here a note out of Tune) had quickly founde out. It shalbe then, necessarie for gentlemen and men of good behauiour, to haue a regard to this measure I speake of: in going, in standing, in sitting, in gesture, in porte, in apparell, in talke, in silence, in rest and in action. For, a man must not apparell him selfe like a woman: that the Attire may not be of one sorte, and the person of another: as I doe see it in some that weare their heads & their beards curled with bodkins, and haue their face, Beardes and Heades cur∣led with bodkins. and their necks, & their hands, so starchte and painted, that it were to muche for a girle, nay harlot, that makes a merchā∣dize of it, and sets her selfe to the sale. Hou must smell, neither of sweete nor of sower: for a gentleman would not sauour Sweete smeles nastily like a begger: nor yet should a man carry a sauour and sent about him, like a harlot or whoore. I doe not by this for∣bid, but you may very well vse some sweete smelles of sweete waters. Your apparell must be shaped according Apparell ac∣cording to the fashion & calling. to the fashion of the time, and your calling, for the causes I haue shewed you before. For, VVe must not take vppon vs to alter cus∣tomes at our will. For time doth beget them, and time doth also weare them out.
Euery mā may applie those fashiōs, that be in common vse, ye moste to his owne ad∣uantage, that he can. For, if perchaunce your legges be very long, and men vse but short garments: you may vse a meane, not to long, nor to short. And if your legges be to small, to greate, or crooked: make not your hosen of to light and garishe a co∣lour, that it may not call men to looke and to gawre vppō your deformitie. Thou must weare no garment that shall be to light, or ouermuche daubde with garding: that mē may not say, thou hast Ganymedes hosen, or wearest Cupides doublet. But, whatsoe∣uer it be thou wearest, let it be fit and well made for thy bodie: least thou seme to braue it, in another mans cloathes. But with all, thou must in any case res∣pect thy condition or estate. For, A man of the Clergie, must not be attired like a Souldier: nor a Souldier goe like a Player. When Cas∣truccio was in Rome with Lodouico Bauero at a greate Pompe, and triumphe: who was both Duke of Lucca and Pistoia, and Count of Palazzo, and Senatour of Rome: this Castruccio, being Lorde greate Mays∣ter of the saide Lodouico Bauero his house∣houlde: for his brauery, made him a coate of crimsin, vppon the brest wherof, there
was this deuise, in letters of Golde It is euen as God will. And vppon the backe behinde. And it shallbe as God will. I beleeue, you thinke this garment, would haue become Castruccio his Trum∣peter better, then it could become him. And although Kings be free frō checke, and may doe what they list: Yet, I could neuer commend King Manfrede, Whoe euer more vsed, to suite him selfe in greene. Wee must then haue a care, that our appa∣rell be not onely wel made for the bodie: but that it be meete for our calling. And with∣all, it be suche, as the countrie doth vse, Apparel acor∣ding to the Countrey where wee liue. For, As in diuers places be diuers measures, and yet bying and selling eue∣ry vvhere vsed. So in sundry landes be sundrie customes, and yet euery vvhere a man may be∣haue him, and apparell him selfe, soberly and comely. These same feathers, which the Neapoli∣tanes and Spaniardes be wont to weare, and braueries and Embroderies: haue but ill place amongest graue gowned men, & the∣attires that Citizens doe weare. But their Armour and weapons become suche place
a greate deale worse. So that, looke what hapely might be allowed in Verona, would not, perchaunce, be suffered in Venice. For as muche as these gallants, all begarded, and huffing in fethers, & warlike fellowes, would not doe well, in this Noble Citie so peacefull & Ciuil. Suche kinde of peo∣ple be rather, in maner, like nettles and burres, amongest good and sweete garden flowers. And therefore, they come out of season to mē that medle with grauer mat∣ters then they doe. I would not haue a gentleman to runne Running and going in the streat and other such gestures. in the streate, nor go to fast: for that is for lackies, and not for gentlemen to doe. Be∣sides that, it makes a man weary, sweate, and puffe: which be very vnsightly things for suche men to doe. I would not yet haue a man go so softe and de∣murely, as a maide or a wife. And when a man walkes, it is no good sight to see a man shake his bodie to muche, nor to hold his hands bare and emptie: nor yet cast & fling his armes vp & downe, in such sort as a man would weene, hee were soweing of Corne in the field: nor Stare in a mans face, as if he had spied a mares nest. Ther be sōe again, in their gate pul vp their fete as high as a horse yt hath ye spauē: yt a mā would thik they did pluck their fete forth of
bushell. Other againe stampe their feete so harde on the ground: that they make all∣moste asmuche noyse as a carte. Another goes as if he were splay footed. And suche a one quiuers with his legges, as he stāds. Some other againe, at euery foote, stoope to stroke vp their hose as they goe. And sōe set their handes to their sides, and iet vp & downe like a Pecocke: which fashions doe muche offend men: not as well, but as ill beseeming a man to vse them. For, if your horse, perchaunce, doe champe and play on the bit, and gape or lill out his tounge, al∣beit this geue little proofe of his goodnes: yet it commends him well to the sale: and you shoulde finde a misse of it, if it were o∣therwise: not bycause ye horse should be ther¦fore the worse: but bycause he should shew the lesse courage and pleasure. Now, if it stand so, that Comelines and Grace, be so much made of in beasts, and also in things without life or sense, as experience doth shewe, that, Two things of equall goodnes & comodities, beare not for all that, a like price, if a man doe beholde a finer proportion & bewtie, more in the one then he sees in the other: How muche then more, should it be estemed and commended in men, capa∣ble of Reason.
It is a rude fashion for a man to clawe Gestures and Fashions, at the Table. or scratche him selfe, when he sitteth at the table. And a man should at such time haue a very greate care yt he spit not at all. But Spytting. if neede inforce him, then let him doe it, af∣ter an honest sorte. I haue heard tell, many times, of suche countries that be so sober: that they doe neuer spitt. And what should then let vs, but we may well forbeare it for suche a little while. We must also beware Greedie Eating. we doe not eate so greedily, that wee get the hicket, or belche withall: as some that feede so fast, that they noy the cōpany with it: they blowe and puffe so loude. Like∣wise, you must not rubbe your teeth with Scovvring of the teethe your napkyn, & much lesse with your fin∣gers. For these be trickes for a slouen. Nei∣ther VVashing the mouthe. must you openly rynce your mouth wt the wine, and then spit it fourthe. Neither is it gentleman like, to carry a sticke in your Carrying a Sticke, in the Mouthe. mouth from the table when you rise, like ye birde that builds her a nest: or put it in your eare, for that is a Barbars tricke. And to weare a toothpicke, about your To vveare a Toothepicke about your Necke. necke: of all fashions that is ye worst. For, besides that it is a bauld Iewell for a gen∣tleman to pull forth of his bosome, and put∣teth mē in mind of those Toothdrawers, that sit one their benche in the stretes: it makes
men also to thinke, that the man loues his belly full well, and is prouided for it. And I see no reason, why they should not aswell carry a spoone, about their neckes, as a toothepicke. It is a rude fashion besides, to leane ouer the table, or to fill your mouth so ful of Chearing at the table. meate, that your cheekes be blowne vp wt∣all: neyther must you by any maner of mea∣nes, giue another man to know what plea∣sure you take, in the meate or the wine. For yt is for Tauerners and Bousers, to vse suche fashions. And to entertaine men ye sit at your table, with these wordes: You eate nothing this morning. There is nothing that likes you. Or, tast you of this or of that: I doe not allowe of these fashions, although they be commonly receiued and vsed of all men. For, albeit by these meanes, they shewe they make much of those they haue inuited vnto them: yet, many tymes, they make mē to leaue to eate wher they would. For, it geues them to thinke, they haue their eyes, allwayes vppon them, and that makes them ashamed to feede. Againe, I doe not like it, that a man shall Carueing. take vppō him to be a caruer of any meate that stands before him: if he be not muche the better mā, that is the caruer: that he to whome he carues, may thinke he receiueth some credite & honour by it. For, Amongest men that be of like cōditiō and calling, it makes
a hart burning: that he that playes the caruer, should take more vppō him then another. And otherwhile, yt which hee carueth, doth not like him to whom it is geuen. And more thē this, by this meanes he sheweth, that the feaste is not sufficiētly furnished, or at least not well disposed in order, when some haue muche, & other none at all. And ye Mayster of the house, may chaunce to take displesure at that, as if it were done to doe him shame. Neuerthelesse in these matters, a man must demeasne him self, as common vse and cus∣tome will allowe, and not as Reason & due∣tie would haue it. And I would wishe a mā rather to erre in these poits with many, thē to be singular in doing well. But whatsoe∣uer good maner there be in this case, thou must not refuse it, whatsoeuer is carued vnto thee. For it may be thought thou doest disdaine it, or grunt at thy caruer. Now, to drink all out euery mā: which is Drincking & Carrovvsing. a fashiō as litle in vse amōgst vs, as ye terme it selfe is barbarous & straūge: I meane, lck bring you, is sure a foule thing of it selfe, & in our countrie so coldly accepted yet: yt we must not go about to bring it in for a fashiō. If a man doe quaffe or carrouse vnto you, you may honestly say nay to pledge him, & geueing him thanke, confesse your weakenesse, that you are not able to beare it: or else, to
doe him a pleasure, you may for curtesie taste it: and thē set downe the cup to them that will, and Drincking, muche vsed in Graecia: and by So∣crates. charge your selfe no further. And although this, Ick bring you, as I haue heard many learned men say, hath beene an auncient custome in Greece: and that the Graecians doe muche commend a goodman of that time, Socrates, by name, for that hee sat out one Socrates. whole night long, drinking a vie with ano∣ther good man, Aristophanes: and yet ye next Aristophanes. morning in the breake of the daye, without any rest vppon his drinking, made suche a cunning Geometricall Instrument, that there was no maner of faulte to be found in the same: And albeit they say besides this, that Euen as it makes a man bould and hardy, to thrust him selfe venterously otherwhile, in to daungerous perils of life: so likewise it brings a man in to good temper and fashion, to enure him selfe otherwhile, with the daūgers of things not euer chauncing: And bycause the drin∣king of wine after this sorte, in a vie, in such excesse and waste, is a shrewde assault to trie the strength of him that quaffes so lus∣tily: these Graecians, would haue vs to vse it for a certaine proofe of our strength and constancie: and to enure vs the better, to resist and master all maner of strong temp∣tations.
All this notwithstanding, I am of a cō∣trary mind: and I doe thinke all their rea∣sons to fond, and to foolishe. But, we see that Learned men haue suche art and cunning to persuade, and such filed wordes to serue their turne: that wrong doth carry the cause away, and Reason cannot preuaile. And therefore let vs giue them no credite in this point. And what can I tell, if they haue a secret drift herein, to excuse and couer the fault of their countrey, that is corrupt with this vice. But it is daungerous, perchaunce, for a man to reproue them for it: least as∣much happen to him, as chaunced to Socra∣tes him selfe, for his ouer lauish controuling and checking of euery mans fault. For, he was so spited of all men for it: that ma∣ny articles of heresies & other foule faultes were put vp against him, and he cōdemned to die in the end: allthough they were false. For in truthe, he was a very good man, & a Chatholike: respecting ye Religion of their false Idolatrie. But suer, in that he drunke so muche wine that same nyght: he deser∣ued no praise in the worlde. For, the hog∣gshead was able to holde & receiue a great deale more, then his companion and hee were able to take: if yt may get any praise. And though it did him no harme, that was
more, the goodnes of his strong braine: thē the continencie of a sober man. And let the Chronicles talke what they list of this mat∣ter, I giue God thankes, that amongest many the Plagues that haue creapt ouer the Alpes, to infect vs: hitherto this worst of all the rest, is not come ouer: that vve should take a pleasure and praise, to be drunke. Neither shall I euer be∣leue, that a man can learne to be temperate, of suche a Mayster as vvine and drounkennes. The Stewarde of a Noble mans house, Inuiting of straungers. may not be so bolde to inuite straungers, vppon his owne head, and set them downe at his Lorde & Maysters table. And there is none that is wise, will be intreated to it, at his request alone. But otherwhile, the seruaunts of the house, be so inalepert and saucie, that they will take vppō them, more then their Maister: of which things wee speake in this place, more by chaunce, then that the order we haue taken from the be∣ginning, doth so require it. A man must not vncase him selfe, in the presence of any assembly. For it is a slo∣uenly A recapitula∣tion of sun∣drie precepts. Vneasing. sight, in place where honest men be met together of good conditiō and calling. And it may chaunce he doth vncouer those parts of his bodie, which work him shame & rebuke to shewe thē: besides yt, it maketh
other mē abashed to looke vpō thē. Againe, Washing of hands and combyng of heades. I wold haue no mā to combe his head, nor washe his hāds before mē. For such things would be done alone in your chamber, and not abrode: without it be, I say, to washe your hands when you sit downe to the ta∣ble. For, there it shall doe well, to washe them in sight, although you haue no neede: that they with whome you feede, may as∣sure them selues you haue done it. A man must not come forthe with his kercheif, or quaife one his head, nor yet stroke vp his hosen vppon his legges in company. Some men there be, that haue a pride or a vse to drawe their mouthes a little awry, Gestures of the face and Countenaūce and other partes. or twinckle vp their eye, & to blow vp their cheekes, and to puffe, and to make, with their countenaunce, sundrie such like foo∣lishe and ilfauoured faces and gestures. I councell men to leaue them cleane. For, Pallas her selfe, the Goddesse, (as I haue hearde Pallas. sōevvise mē say) tooke once a greate pleasure to soūd the flute & the cornet: & therin she vvas verie cūning. It chaūst her, on day, soūding her Cornet for her plesure ouer a fontain, she spide her selfe in the vvater: and vvhē she beheld those strāge gestures she must nedes make vvith her mouth as she plaid: she vvas so much ashāed of it that she brake the cornet in peces & cast it away.
truely she did but well, for it is no instrumēt for a vvoman to vse. And it becomes men as ill, if they be not of yt base conditiō and calling, that they must make it a gaine, & an art to liue vppon it. And looke what I speake, concerning the vnseemely gestures of the countenance and face: concerneth likewise, all the partes and members of man. For it is an ill sight, to lill out ye tounge, to stroke your bearde much vp and downe (as ma∣ny doe vse to doe) to rubbe your hands to∣gether: to sighe, & to sorrowe: to tremble or strike your selfe, which is also a fashiō wt some: to reatche and stretche your selfe, & so retching, to cry out after a nice maner, Alas, Alas: like a coūtry cloune, yt should rouse him selfe in his couche. And he that makes a noyse wt his mouth Mopping or mowing. in a token of wonder, and other while, of cō¦tempte and disdaine: counterfeteth an il∣fauoured grace. And Counterfet things, dif∣fer not muche from truethes. A man must leaue those foolishe maner of laughings, groase and vncomely. And Vnseemely Laughinges. let men laughe vppon occasiō, and not vp∣pon custome. But a man must beware he doe not laughe at his owne gestes, and his doings. For that makes men weene hee Laughing at s owne Gstes. woulde faine praise him selfe. It is for o∣other
men to laughe that heare, and not for him that telles the tale. Now, you must not beare your selfe in hand, that bycause eache of these mat∣ters considered a parte, is but a small fault, ye hole therefore together should be as light: but you must rather persuade your selfe yt Many a litle doth make a mickle, as I tould you from the beginning. And how muche lesse they be, so much the more neede a mā hath to looke well in to thē: bycause they be not easily perceiued a far of, but creepe in to vs by custom, before we be a ware. And, As light expences often vsed, in Continuance of time, doe couertly waste and consume a greate masse of wealth and riches: So doe these light faultes with the multitude and number of thē, in secret ouerthrow all honest and good ciuilitie and maner. So yt we must not make a light reconing of them. Moreouer, it is a nedefull obseruation to bethinke your selfe, how you doe moue Mouinges and gestures of the bodie. your bodie, and specially in talke. For, it many times chaunceth, a man is so ernest in his tale, that hee hath no minde of any thing els. One wagges his head. Another lookes bigg and scowles with his browes. That man pulls his mouth awry. And to∣ther spittes in and vppon their faces with
whome he talkes. And som suche there be that moue their hands in suche a sorte, as if they should chase ye flies as they go: which be very vnhansome & vnseemely maners to vse. And I haue heard it saide (for you knowe I haue byn familiarly acquainted with learned men in my time) that Pinda∣rus that worthy man was wōt to saye: that Pindarus. VVhatsoeuer it were that had a good & sauou∣rie taste: vvas seasoned by the hands of the Gra∣ces. Now, what shall I speake of them ye cōe forthe of their studies with their penne in their care: and nibble their hankercheifs in their mouthe, or ly lolling wt their legge ouer the table, or spit one their fingers, and of a nūber of other blockishe gestures and fashiōs more then these, which cānot be all rehearsed well: nor shal not, I meane, put me to further paines to tel thē al if I could. For, there be manie perchaunce will say this is to muche, that I haue said allredie. FINIS.
