666 S100187 99836037 280
THE APOLOGIE, OR DEFENCE OF A VERITY HERETOFORE PVBLISHED CONCERNING A MEDICINE CALLED AVRVM POTABILE, that is, the pure sub∣stance of Gold, prepared, and made Potable and Medicinable without corrosiues, helpefully giuen for the health of Man in most Diseases, but especially auaile∣able for the strenghning and comforting of the Heart and vitall Spirits the performers of health: AS AN VNIVERSALL MEDICINE. Together with the plaine, and true Reasons, manifold and irrefragable Testimonies of fact, confirming the Vniuersalitie thereof. And lastly, the manner and order of administration or vse of this Medicine in sun∣drie Infirmities. BY FRANCIS ANTHONIE of London, Doctor in Physicke. LONDON Printed by Iohn Legatt, 1616.
THE PREFACE TO THE INDIFFERENT and Iudicious Reader. ALexander the Great, King of Macedon, amongst all other bla∣zons of his honour, hath this not the least: That in hearing of cau∣ses, both his eares were open to both parties, Plaintiffe, and De∣fendant: That being rightly infor∣med, his decision of the controuer∣sie might be vpright, not partiall. As this is the duty of euery learned and iudiciall Reader: so in this question of mine, I cannot entertaine other thought, then expectance of all inte∣grity: Not onely to haue eares, and all other senses auersed from the tongues and quills of idly-learned slanderers, but also reserued vnto a generous equanimitie towards the ne∣cessarie and equable reply of the Defendant. Not doubting therefore (gentle Reader) of this your disposition, I haue written, and dedicated to your hands and hearts, to take, reade, digest and cherish this Apologie of my Prepara∣tion, and administration of my Essence and Liquor of Gold, commonly called Aurum Potabile or Potable Golde: with assurance of censure on my side, though distasting the
A-B-C-darie and Comicall Rayler. If therefore my malicio∣ners haue heretofore seduced you into sinister constructions of this cause, it was not your fault, but their posting malice, an∣ticipating and forestalling that better and true Information, which this Apologie freely now offereth, and earnestly in∣treateth to be so accepted. Many good men haue iustly com∣plained against the Pasquelling libertie of traducing slan∣derers. If a sufficient conclusion should rest therein, yea, or a moouing Inducement: then you with me must needs con∣fesse, that no vertue shall haue his due regard, no man of whatsoeuer desert, shall be secure of his good name. My con∣tentment and satisfaction preseruatiue: my shield and de∣fence against the tainted darts of such aduersaries, shall bee securitie against foule challenge, Impossibilitie of attaint, the warrant of truth: which in her naked simplicitie shall main∣taine me, in the vprightnesse of a good conscience against all their attempts, and by Gods grace, powerfully deliuer me. Vn∣to you therefore (indifferent and sincere Readers) I conse∣crate the protection both of this Treatise, and of the Medi∣cine it selfe therein handled. Because, as no man is created solely for his owne particular, but for the profit and good of o∣thers; (for nature hath made, and charitie commanded a vi∣cinitie and neighbourhood betwixt all men) so this being ma∣terially a kinde of vniuersall Medicine: it ought not to be restrained from the publike tēder of profit to all men. Socrates being demanded what Countriman he was, answered, not only an Athenian but a Cosmopolitane, a Cittizen of that great Commonwealth, the whole world. So ought euery good Physition in the publike profession of his facultie, not to burie his talent in the soyle of one Countrey, but to remember, that the very Character of his calling doth challenge the fruits of his function for all the world, so far as possible capacitie ex∣tendeth; specially of this neerest communitie in Christen∣dome.
Let it not therefore seeme strange vnto you, (worthy Readers) that without exception of Countrey or nation, I doe indefinitely appeale vnto all, and in such generality consigne these fruitions, which long study, labor & chargeable experi∣ence haue confirmed vnto me, in my profession and Practise of Physicke. Arist. saith morally (but the sentēce is diuine) Bonū quo cōmunius, eò melius. The more cōmō a good thing is, the better it is. Of which followeth one reason of this my pre∣sent act: Omne Donū quo melius, eò comunicabilius. The better any gift is, the more cōmunicable also ought it to be. And as it is so in nature it self, so ought it to be in the dispē∣sation of the possessour. I do not herein so propose, and mag∣nifie mine own endeuours, & the perfection of this Medicine by my selfe made, with a solitarie conceit, and ambitious pre∣iudice, as though no person else where were seized of the like (and peraduenture in a higher degree of exaltation) but ac∣knowledging Gods blessings and gifts, to my selfe amongst ma∣ny others, I may not hide my talent in the earth: But beside the present vses hereof in most vrgent causes of health, do also wish the prouoking, and virtuous emulation in others, to incite their industries in the search and labour of excellent necessity for a common good. Also that so generall a Medicine may as generally be knowne to be had, to the intent to be vsed in all places. The opinion of euery excellent, both ancient, and mo∣derne Physitions, concerning the virtue, power, efficacie and vse of Potable gold, is conuested in their owne writings: who do hold firme, that no Physition can well saue the performing honour of his profession, without Potable gold, howsoeuer o∣therwise he be furnished with herball Medicines. In which kind also, God hath stored so many particular adiuments, for the reliefe of mans miserable maladies, that none ought to neglect the indagation of their virtues, the preparation of their parts, and administration of their Remedies. Which as
I gladly and happily vse in fit time and place, so I also com∣mend the like vse to others, euen with this Potable Gold, as is commonly vsed in sundry other Polychresticke, or Panchre∣sticke Medicines: according to euery present requisition of occasions and circumstances, by the aduice of any rationall and experienced Physition. With which profession I offer and submit the respect and acceptance of my Inuentions, de∣siring you all, with like regard and fauour, to re∣ceiue and embrace this my will and desire of doing good, and to be profitable to many.
THE DIVISI∣ON OF THIS TREATISE. ABout fiue yeares past I pub∣lished a short discourse for the Assertion of Chymicall Phy∣sick, and of true Potable gold, containing these heades or Chapters. 1. Whether gold may be so dissolued, that it become truly potable. 2. That the highest and most powerfull excellencie of Medi∣cines is in Mettals. 3. That amongst all Mettals gold hath the prerogatiue, concerning the Physicall vse of Medicine. 4. Of what manner is the Art, and myste∣ry to dissolue gold, and distill it vp: which com∣monly is called, Drawing ouer the helme. 5. That it were requisite by publike question to examine and try this truth of this Magisterie, that so the mouth of all gainsayers might be stopped. 6. That Potable gold deserueth the name of a Generall or vniuersall Medicine: and of the manifold vse, and efficacie of mine owne Potable gold. This Treatise of mine, containing a simple, naked and plaine deliuerie of a simple and naked truth, and
therefore as simply and plainly in words and style set forth, though it really satisfied both here and in for∣raine parts many learned men, Iudiciall louers of truth, yet it wanted not the common lot of all ver∣tues, to finde maleuolent eyes and detracting encom∣berers: such as may seeme either with blinde zeale, or ignorant opinion of omniscience, rather to repine at a fee lost, then desire the true knowledge of that, which they neuer intending to labour for, yet ambiti∣ously desire an imputation of criticall knowledge therein. The sand of this descent was chiefely, if not only in London. The Issue, none haue greater cause to mourne for, then the Printers for want of vtte∣rance, or rather they which bare the charge of prin∣ting: for vnto Iudiciall Readers, those labours of theirs, though they were tedious and nauseous, yet some recreation followed in laughing at so much ob∣stetrication of such mountaines in the parturition of such ridiculous mice. I hope none will expect a cry∣quit answer of me to their most powerfull arguments, being, in the most modest terme, a shamble of impo∣tent and effrenat scolding: but rather truth and mat∣ter against falshood & words, leauing their tongs and goose-quils, to the iudgement and censure of their owne reformed and better aduised hearts: of which my charitie perswades me not wholly to despaire: knowing some learned gentlemen of the same com∣pany, not the same minde, ready to blush at such a publication, which all the learned men of Christen∣dom do laugh: And who can fancy such barking Rhe∣toricke, wherein not only good words, are made the measures of madnes, but precious houres are consu∣med in frothy rablings? If they be still of the same spi∣rits, I wish them thereof full contentment therein:
And that therefore they would in some hollow crag∣gy place stretch out their own straines, that 1000. ex∣change of interest might bountifully returne them their delightfull termes and Syllogismes in this their new Barbara. But this my Apologie shall with much tranquillity, I hope, answer them, defend mine owne reputation and integritie, vindicate this verity que∣stioned; giue estimation to potable gold, and make the vse thereof more common. According to which intentions I haue diuided this Treatise in three parts. In the first shall be proued and maintained that which in my first printed booke was deliuered concerning gold, that it may be made potable and medicinable, and be esteemed for a kinde of generall Medicine, or neere thereto. In the second I will satisfie and suffici∣ently prooue by irrefragable testimonies, and exam∣ples, that this my Medicine so much canuased, both is made and doth consist of gold, and also performeth the true effects, mentioned to be incident vnto pota∣ble gold. In the third part I will shew and teach the way how to vse this Medicine in euery particular dis∣ease. That all pacified and indifferent persons, fauo∣rers of truth, and embracers of Gods blessings, may enioy the fruition thereof. Some circumstances also I haue hereunto annexed, such as are pertinent to this our intent. It is a controuersed question: Whether there bee or may bee made a generall or vniuersall Medicine, good for all Diseases. Many hold the negatiue. If they speake precisely of all Diseases without distincti∣on, I say as they doe, and consent. For there be ma∣ny fatall, mortall and Incurable Diseases, against which all consultation and counsell of Physicke is bootlesse. Therefore that my assertion of a generall
Medicine be rightly vnderstood, I desire my mea∣ning to bee truly and distinctly taken. For I know that some diseases be natiue and hereditarie: some caused by some outward and superuenient chance or accident: some proceeding of simple distemper: some of humors ioyned therewith. Those which are natiue and hereditarie, are generally thought, and for the most part be all incurable, though they may in some kinde receiue alleuiation and ease: And some of them also in the title of those which happen by superueni∣ent accident: As luxations, lamenesse, Impotencies, want or superfluitie of some ioynt, blindnesse, deafe∣nesse, Ambiguitie of sexe, &c. And these so farre as they be restaurable and capable of Cure, are chiefely vnder that part of this facultie which is called Sur∣gerie, and requireth the hand, though not alwaies and in all cases. But those Infirmities and Diseases of the other kinde, proceeding of inward causes within the body, such as, for the most part, be all Maladies whereupon all Rationall Physitions are exercised, if by administration of one Medicine they all (I meane, so long as they are accounted curable by Rationall Physitions) may be eased, mitigated and perhaps per∣fectly cured, surely such Medicine, ought and may be accounted respectiuely a generall Medicine. For as that Physition is to be accounted perfect, and a gene∣rall Master of his Art which knoweth according to his title, facultie and profession, how to cure all dis∣eases, though he leaue and giue ouer some as incura∣ble; not for wnat of fit meanes and skill in all cases of possibilitie, but through ineptitude and indisposition of the subiect being vncapable of redintegration: So also that shall be accounted a Medicine vniuersall, which cureth most and the greatest diseases, though
not all: not through defect of efficacie in the Me∣dicine it selfe, but respectiuely for the inhabilitie of the subiect. This also may be proued by reason deriued from1 The first rea∣son. those Medicines of Rationall Physitians, which for the multiplicitie of their operatiue extent to many intentions, and curing of many diseases, are called Polychresta, that is, of many vses. For if there be a∣mong them such as be helpful not to one only singu∣lar affection, but to many different diseases, why is it not likewise consequent and reasonable that by help of Art, a Medicine may be made much more com∣prehensiue of efficacie vpon diseases? And as it may bee made to exceede in one degree, so in 2. 3. 4. 100. and from Polychreston, of many vses, be Catho∣licon, vniuersall, of all vses. The reason is all one to reasonable men. If obiection be made, that such Polychrest is arti∣ficially made by composition of many things, wher∣in are diuersitie of natures. And this vniuersall of one onely, which implieth an impossibilitie of different and contrary operatiue faculties: to this I answere, that Polychrests are made out of Simples without commixtion: As from Rheubarbe, Vineger, Lead, Niter, Vitriall, Opium, Camphire, and many other, wherof some doe both loose and knit, some do heate and coole, some haue other contrary effects, which appeare in their operations, and are testified by Writers. These things being thus in impure mix∣tures and vnperfect bodies, what doubt can there be made of the high prerogatiue and supreme excellen∣cie of Gold, which all the learned and experienced antiquity, and the continued deriuation from thence vnto this day haue acknowledged and magnified for
the chiefe, if not only Treasurie, and rich Cabinet of vniuersalitie and Panchresticke Medicine: In which all the dowers of all other Medicines, whatsoeuer are written and experimentally found, be vnited and na∣turally inclosed. Secondly, whereas the originall of most diseases2 The second reason. springeth from that, which the Physitions call In∣temperies, that is, a distemperature, being especially in the first qualities, hot, cold, moist or drie; there is no reason to the contrary, but that one Medicine, being without excesse or defect, in equall harmonie of all qualities most temperate, and also powerfull in ope∣ration, may bee sufficient for the collection, qualify∣ing, and rectifying of all and euery such distemper. Such a like body is gold: which notwithstanding it be compounded of the foure Elements, yet is this in prerogatiue aboue all other naturall bodies, en∣dowed with an exact temperament and equalitie of the compounding Elements, and Elementall qualities. Euery one to the other three, and all foure to and among themselues by exact naturall equalitie and perfect mixture, are so compounded to the perfection of this body, that it constantly persisteth in the fire without diminution. From this proportionall mixture of Elements resulteth a temperament of supreme mediocritie: whereupon that our learned and famous countryman Roger Ba∣con, calleth Gold the meane betweene the foure first qualities. Seeing therefore by Gods gift in the crea∣tion it consisteth of so true an adequation and subtile temperament, this must needs appeare and shew it selfe operatiuely in consequent effects vp∣on those first qualities, and be powerfull against all distemperatures, whether hot or cold, moyst or dry, or any their combinations: First allaying and bri∣dling
any excesse therein, and so by degrees and suc∣cession ouercomming the whole discord, and resto∣ring mediocritie of temperament betweene all. So that the generall Axiome or Rule of great Hippo∣crates is here magnified: That Diseases are cured by Medicines contrarie to themselues. For the meane betwixt two extremes is no lesse contrarie to both and either of them, then one extreme to an o∣ther: and more powerfull in reduction, by how much it is more habituall and fixed in the vnspotted me∣diocritie and equalitie. Let this be vnderstood of gold dissolued and made potable, otherwise it is not operatiue vpon those distempered qualities in one kinde or other The third Reason concerneth the temper of the bodie to bee cured. Death (saith Galen) doth al∣waies3 The third reason. follow the vnmeasurable or excessiue distem∣peratures of the Heart. So likewise doe Diseases. For all parts of the bodie languish with the Heart. Let vs therefore consider a little the Emperie of the Heart in mans bodie, how by his owne heate and vitall spirit, it raigneth ouer, and in all parts of the bodie. Let vs also take into consideration the distemperature of other parts making impres∣sion vpon the Heart, and so are causes of languish∣ment and death. VVhich beeing on either side certaine, then it must also bee true, that if golde administred doe restore integritie of temperament to the Heart, the other parts and members of the bodie shall also receiue comfort, strength, restauration, and finally life to the whole bo∣die. VVherefore the first office of euerie good Physition is, to haue speciall regarde, to main∣taine
and vphold the spirituall functions of his disea∣sed patient, which all haue their originall from the heart. For if he suffer them to quaile, and ouer much to bee deiected, all Cordialls will then come vn∣seasonably. That admonition is iust and necessarie First strengthen and comfort the Heart, then apply for the Disease, if neede be: for oft times, the Heart being well corroborated, the Disease imminent vanisheth. But some will aske, how gold, so hard, solide and compact, and therefore indigestable by any strength of mans stomacke, can passe from thence to the heart, and strengthen, comfort, rectifie and restore it; con∣considering that these and such like faculties come to it by the plentie of pure, cleere, and subtill spirits of the blood, which cannot be made of any thing not digested both in the Stomack and Lyuer, and there∣fore not of gold. In answer whereof I say, that long and daily obseruation hath confirmed, that many things naturally are effected by the hidden and spe∣cificall properties of some things, whereof no vnder∣standing of man can giue a certaine and vndisputa∣ble manifest cause or reason. We see the affinitie of natures betweene Iron and the Lode-stone, and the pointing of this to the North Pole. Of which kinde there be infinite exemplarie instances. Neither doe the most learned Physitions and best Philosophers so well agree vpon the reasons of those Purging Medi∣cines which they call Electiue, as appropriate speci∣ally to one humour: and diuers others to some speci∣all part of the bodie, yea and to some speciall diseases: but that a great part of them doe flie to these hidden and specificall properties, some in the same, some in other termes. In which ranke if wee marshall gold, what Lieuetenant will chide? He certainly must be
some ouerweening man, that will question these no∣ble vertues of gold, that hath read so many notable and famous Authors for that affirmatiue assertion, part whereof I haue cited in my other booke, being but one Rank of a whole Armie. Here I will only trouble the Reader with a few lines out of that fa∣mous Physition and excellent Philosopher Arnald. Gold altereth the euill condition of mans body, clenseth and reneweth it. The vertue of many things may come neere the particulars of the operation hereof, but no one performe it all. But potable gold alone is it which worketh these mira∣culous effects: this is not subiect to corruption, but is agreeable to the Complexion and temperament of man. It doth neither heate, nor coole, nor moysten, nor dry: but is temperate in all temperature, and exceedeth all things in durabilitie: It hel∣peth a cold stomacke, and giueth courage to Cowards and fearefull hearts: It helpeth the passions of the Heart: It is good against Melancholy: It comforteth naturall heate and tempereth the same, neither may any thing be compared to it or supply the stead thereof. The vertue thereof is manifest in the substance of it. It clenseth and clarifieth by reason of the naturall heate it hath. It giueth high and supreame tempera∣ment aboue all other things, by reason of the great tempera∣ment of it selfe: and beeing it selfe most durable, it causeth continuance and durabilitie, according to naturall possibility in other things, and preserueth mans body. And because it is like to the Complexion of mens bodie, therefore if it be pre∣pared as it ought, it will ioyne and incorporate thereunto. But all the secret is in the preparation of it, which the wise Phi∣losophers haue concealed. It confirmeth and keepeth sound the substance of the Heart, and preserueth it, and clarifieth the substance of the spirits, and sendeth good blood to the skin, and with a light and easie abstersion preserueth beauty as in youth. Thus he writeth, as also in other places of this
Author you may reade many admirable effects and vertues of gold both solide and potable. How gold is so powerfull a Cordiall and so generall a Medicine, is held a very difficult question to finde the cause and reason thereof. Let euery mans opinion bee free to himselfe. I will without preiudice to any other briefe∣ly shew you my opinion. I take it for granted that gold of all mixed bodies is most equall and tempe∣rate in the Elements and elementall qualities, so that moysture with heat as agent, drinesse with coldnes as patient and subiect to action, are inseparably with na∣turall concordance perfectly ioyned. Wherefore gold is respectiuely a body not only incorruptible in wa∣ter, fire, ayre, and earth, and as it were an earthly i∣mage of eternitie, but also most conuenient, agree∣able, and as it were allied to and with the heart of man, which of his hot moysture doth worke the vi∣tall spirits, and maintaine the arteriall beatings of the pulse in all parts of the bodie. And this tempera∣ment of gold must bee considered two waies. First (as Scholers call it) Arithmetically: hence commeth the equalitie and equabilitie of qualities elementarie in the compact and solide body thereof, not resolued into the permanent forme of potable liquor. In this consideration it were very hard for learned Physiti∣ons that build so much vpon and presse authoritie, to deny that gold hath and actiuely doth shew many great effectiue vertues, seeing the Catalogue is so great of many notable and famous Physitions which extoll the effects thereof, and at this day doe vse it so much; as of gold quenched in wine, boyled in broth, giuen in limell or foyle in Conserues and Electuaries. The hope and end thereof in all their intentions, is to Corroborate and comfort the heart. And this
temperature in and of gold is habituate and coessen∣tiall with the whole substance, matter and forme, in all the Elements both actiue and passiue. And be∣cause not the materiall but the formal Essence is most operatiue and professor of the noble Elements, fire and ayre, from whence resulteth in an indissoluble bond, heate and moysture so friendly agreeable to mans nature. Therefore gold in his naturall coagula∣tion and soliditie, cannot so fully according to the inward power of his naturall efficacie and vertue, shew and performe the effects thereof, as being resol∣ued, opened, and made potable, that the Elements and elementall qualities may more freely both worke and be wrought vpon, and be brought from their po∣tentiality to actiuitie in application to the body of man. For then the agent and formall vertues, fire and ayre be predominant in their exaltation. Whose pro∣pertie, being communicated & applied to & with the spirits of our body, is to refresh, comfort & strengthen the heart: renew, restore, and increase the spirits, by that wonderfull facultie, and neere equalitie as it were brotherhood which it hath to them. And this in the second consideration of the temperament of Gold Geometricall in that different respect, as the other is called Arithmeticall. In which that propor∣tionate qualitie friendly and concordant to the heart and temperament of man, and that complexio∣ned moyst heate or hot moysture, is preualent or predominant. And one chiefe reason why Arnald before cited and very many others of vnreprooue∣able authoritie, doe so much commend, and with a re∣serued secrecie admire the excellent dowers of gold, is, that being made potable, it restoreth, augmenteth and preserueth that our humidum radicale, and calidum
innatum, Naturall heate and moysture, (vnderstand them complexioned not distinct) and so with respe∣ctiue possibilitie, prolongeth life, and keepeth backe old age, I meane the sense of the defects and infirmi∣ties thereof. If it be obiected that this exact temperature and e∣qualityObiection. of mixture in gold being supposed, it cannot actiuely operate or worke any thing in mans bodie, because, as euery action commeth from or by meanes of some predominant qualitie, so equalitie without disparagement keepes all in an vndefeazeable bond of an irresoluble compound. I answer thus. In cases where the intemperature or distemper of the disease (or the degree thereof in some cases) is not yet knowne, the doctrine positiue and counsell of Physi∣tions is, to vse and administer temperate Medicines, which shall not be offensiue manifestly to any quali∣tie, but indifferent and allowable to all. If this be done with good aduise and reason: in such like case, it must needs be far more consonant to reason, and be∣hoouefull to the patient, to giue such a Medicine as is not only temperate by qualification, but so preroga∣tiuely excellent therein, that it cannot lose that tem∣perature and the consequent efficacie thereof, by the force of any thing consonant or dissonant. Which is farre otherwise in all vegetables reputed equall in temperament, because they are apt in some cases to cause dangerous distemperature in mans body. Ex∣amples are plentifull. But for instance take Manna it selfe reputed a very temperate laxatiue, yet very easi∣ly it selfe turning into a hot Cholerick humour, and encreasing the same, and the distemperatures and dis∣eases consequent thereupon according to the dispo∣sition and inclination of the body receiuing it. Of
which there is no feare in the vse of gold, for the rea∣sons aforesaid. Therefore whether the Tenure be: That Contraries be cured by Contraries, hauing re∣spect to the disease and the cause thereof, the qualitie of the Medicine is remedy: Or that like are conserued by their like, with regard to the strength of the pati∣ent and comfort of the heart, according to the do∣ctrine of Hippocrates: Gold (as hath beene prooued) must needs be in both intentions the fittest and most conuenient Medicine and remedy for diseases of what temper or distemper soeuer, being aduisedly gi∣uen: specially being Philosophically opened, resol∣ued and made potable: That there may bee a generall or vniuersall Me∣dicine4 The fourth reason. is also prooued, by consideration taken from the nature of the person diseased, with reference to the disease. For if the disease be strong, like a heauie burden pressing the patient, and the poore patient weake not able to beare out the Critical day of happy iudgement of issue of the maladie; I aske in this case what ought to be done. Certainly, rather enable the body to the end of the Combate, by comforting and strengthning the heart, then vainly attempt to re∣mooue the log, and suffer him to sinke vnder the bur∣den. For, not the Medicine, but nature alone is the true physition, curing all infirmities, if she be not op∣pressed, or that she be so releeued, that strength in her be maintained. It is not vnlike by comparison vnto the charge of sumpter Mules or Pack-horses, which oft times vse to bee fed trauelling that they may en∣dure to carry their burdens to the Inne, not dischar∣ged vntimely of their packes. And by this meanes they neede not be vnloaden at euery bayte; but pro∣uendred vnder their loads for the quicker dispatch.
So no disease is cured, the strength not maintained: but contrarily by perfect Methode the strength and power of the body is by degrees to bee restored and comforted, that the disease may be both resolued, and life maintained. To this purpose did Arnaldus write in these words. The only intention of ancient Physi∣tions was, to giue vigor and strength vnto nature: Who being strengthned, performeth whatsoeuer is expedient. And by this meanes they neuer did ouerthrow any man. Therefore neuer cease to worke with Cordialls in administration of Phy∣sicke. This is the counsell of Arnald. Moreouer, many diseases proceed from obstructi∣onsThe fift rea∣son. of some viscous, slymie and mucilaginous mat∣ter, not separated in the vessels of concoction, by their imbecillity, either naturall, or accidentall. Ther∣fore, if this obstruent matter be subtiliated, the ob∣struction shall thereby be taken away, & consequent∣ly both the disease and accidents of the disease cured. Of such kinds of Obstructions, besides other diseases, many kinds of fevers doe arise, burning, rotten, he∣ctick, pestilent, &c. Also many and dangerous sick∣nesses both hot and cold. Against which though Me∣dicine made of vegetables doe often very much pre∣uaile: yet because for the most part they be too weak, and leaue no solide and lasting impression: or contra∣riwise worke so violently, and seldome without some offence, scarce euer with such temper, gentlenes and sincerity as is requisite. Therefore that Medicine which being most temperate and equally graduated to the Elementall harmonie of mans body, ought iustly to be preferred both before them and all of that kind. For such one cannot by his coldnesse offend the complexioned parts, nor by his heate the hot: but by opening and so promotiuely taking away the Obstru∣ction, be equally & certainly profitable to all. Galen
teacheth that the cause is to be takē away, by finding out, and applying the true contrary of euery alterable nature. As to cure any disease coming of and depen∣ding on Obstruction, is the dissoluing of matter ob∣struent, & opening the Obstruction. This counsell we ought to follow in al such cases, in opening that which is forcibly shut. And then gentle and quiet restitution commeth of temperament to all distempered parts. For, whether the excesse were in heate or cold, the spi∣rits which were shut vp in prison, now set at liberty, are refreshed, recouer their former vigor, and health to the whole body. If the blood (saith Hippocrat.) be stopped in his course, and the spirit with it, it causeth chylnesse, numnesse, giddines, losse or hinderance of speach, heauines & paine of the head & convulsions, after which follow many kinds of the falling sicknes which be accounted cold diseases. In briefe, it is most euident, that only Obstructions be the cause of many and sundry diseases, not only different, but directly contrary each to other. Therfore as one cause brought them in, so may one Medicine expell them. But pause a while. It may be demanded how hu∣morsObiection. so exorbitāt & abounding as they do in the bo∣dies of many men, shal be emptied from thence by the force of any medicine, whose faculty is not to expel or purge by the common passage, and whose intent is to be only strengthning and comforting the heart. To which I answer: It is true, that in many disea∣sesSolution. the abundance of humors are such causes, that except they be purged away in due and conuenient time and order, it is scarse possible to hope for a sound recouerie: in vvhich case if some gentle Purgation, together vvith the administration of this vniuersall Medicine be vsed, both the strength shall be better maintained, sooner recouered, and the disease ouer∣come
Yet though no purgation be giuen, but onely this vniuersall Medicine at times administred, such is the vertue thereof, that Nature it selfe being strength∣ned and comforted aboue the malice of the offending humors and the disease, will expell the burden of those humors by the most conuenient passages which that case may require, whether it be by siege, vomit, vrine, sweate, or other exitures. For the Physition at∣tending, is not directer and Master, but minister and seruant in fit administration vnto nature: which being comforted and strengthned, will helpe her selfe beyond all hope and conceit of man, as hath bin of∣ten found to the admiration of the greatest Do∣ctors which hitherto haue written, and happeneth daily in our owne experience. In all diseases the Phy∣sitions part is, to promote the indeauour of nature to expel the offending humors by those passages, which herselfe sheweth and directeth; with discretion be∣tweene criticall and symptomaticall euacuations, and of the conueniencie of a few circumstances follow∣ing the particularities of the disease: Of this I could easily and plentifully bring many irrefragable and demonstratiue reasons: but they may partly bee vn∣derstood by that which is already said, and partly are written by diuers others graue and learned Authors. Therfore I wil follow breuitie, & only set down a few lines out of that profound and singular Philosopher Raymund Lully: who in the 32. Chapter of the Theo∣rie of his Testament writeth thus. Blessed be our glorious and omnipotent God who hath giuen mankinde knowledge and vnderstanding to ioyne and integrate the confused parti∣cularitie of all Medicines with one reall vniuersalitie, by which all things be and continue rectified. Therefore Sonne I warne thee, if thou desirest to be a perfect Physition, set not
thy Practise on the particularities of Medicine, or the parti∣cular intentions of Physicke, because they be confused, and at this day not sound, nor perfect. For nature cannot endure them, by reason of their too much confusion, but is best plea∣sed or satisfied with and in one only Medicine. Because there is but one Medicine truly curing all Infirmities, and comforting the spirituall vertues and powers of life, &c. And a litttle after in the same. He that knoweth how to re∣duce most particularities or vertues (for the intention of Curing diseases) vnto one vniuersalitie (of subiect) shall bee the most excellent amongst Physitions. In particular Medicines vertues bee confused: but in an vniuersall, they bee reall, vnited, and actiue, as the whole course of nature sheweth. And this is Medicina, Medicinarum, superlatiuely by excellencie and pre∣rogatiue the Medicine of Medicines. And hee that hath such a Medicine, hath a pretious gift of God. For it is an incomparable treasure. Thus far Raymund: who though he there speake of that great and high Philosophicall secret, yet he plainly witnesseth that there is in nature a vniuersall Medicine: which whe∣ther it be made of gold, or gold made of it, It matte∣reth not much, for either way it sufficiently proueth, the excellent properties of gold most agreeable to mans nature; which hauing thus farre prooued, I will here end this first part of this Treatise. Hauing thus, vnto moderate and well tempered Iudgements (for my intent and purpose in this trea∣tise) prooued, that there hath bin, and therefore may be a Panchresticall Medicine, for which very many learned are either searchers themselues, or witnesses of other mens happines in attaining the same: yet be∣cause the peruicacie of some is such, that against ex∣periment and sense it selfe, they will (peraduenture
consciously) pretend the Impossibilitie & maintaine the negatiue: & some againe, though yeelding a possi∣bilitie & maintaining the affirmatiue, wil fight in the shadow of one instance: contending, that thogh they granted it may be; yet this subiect of mine, this my potable gold hath not either the true, or neere pre∣paration of that so renowned and famously mentio∣ned Medicine, powerfull and auaileable in all diseases that may happen to men: I will applie my selfe to their satisfaction. My answer shall be breefe, and of two sorts. First by Reason: secondly, by manifest and cleere demonstration of effects, of manifold experi∣ments and witnesses beyond exception: which be the maine pillers & onely necessary substructions of all knowledg in matter controuertible amongst men. Concerning the proofes of reason, I haue suffi∣ciently satisfied that point in my other booke in the fourth, fift, and sixt chapters. Yet further I pray consider here with me, that there bee many pathes leading to the same Towne, and many waies to one and the same end. Some in their endeauours and pursuite for the attaining of a vniuersall Medicine labour in Minerals and those Mettals which respe∣ctiuely bee called, and are vnperfect: Some in Salts: some in vegetables, some in the Animall kinde: euery one dittying the sound of the bell answerable to his owne tune. Let each of them therefore fol∣low the Issue of his owne labors. I force not against them. But freely professe that in the perswasion of those reasons which haue lead mee, I resolutely set downe my rest for this scrutinie in naturall gold, and therein haue employed my Industry: with what successe and happie Issue, I appeale to the most cer∣taine, true and vncontrollable Iudge and Doctresse,
which is experience. The centonary Fropperies of Alphabetarias, of Aurum non Aurum, shall nothing a∣bate the vindicting of this constant truth, that by my preparation, Aurum non Aurum, gold hath beene so altered in and from the compacture and soliditie of his primitiue body; and in that respect it may bee called, and truly is, non Aurum, not gold, but destroy∣ed, concerning the grosse body, and altered into a sub∣tile, penetrant and volatile nature, and so exalted into the full actiuitie of a most precious Medicine, with all the powerfull explications of healthfull and helpfull mysteries which nature hath sealed in that body, and left to the industrious labour of man to vn∣fold. For gold is the Embleme of a magnificent and most princely Pallace, drawing the beholders of his naturall luster, to search what excellent Iewels bee contained within that outward wall of so rich promi∣ses. Which though they be many and admirable, yet few attaine to the fruition thereof, because by externe apparences, they ayme at the latent and hidden ver∣tues: neither doe they know the right key to vnlock that rich Cabinet. And although I cannot sufficiently declare, nor prize, all the faculties (which be respe∣ctiuely innumerable) of this bountifull treasury: yet I may and doe confidently acknowledge and professe, that I haue found in vse & practise very many of great worth; which as in themselues, for the vse of men they be of great worth, and estimation, so for them, man is reciprocally bound both to ackwowledg & thank∣fully embrace, as Gods large blessing; who comman∣deth vs to knock at these gates of Nature, that they may be opened vnto vs, that so we may finde and en∣ioy the treasures locked therein. What man amongst thousand hath found out and perfected the like
magisteriall secret? Who is he among many, that hath not tyred his teeth in the hard shell, neuer inabled by cracking it, to come to the sweet kernell, in which dwelleth this mellite and gentle liquor of gold? But I will leaue this digression, and returne to the inten∣ded end. There is no question but that a Medicine made of1. Reason. naturall gold, dissolued without things corrosiue, and brought into a substance in forme like hony, and Me∣dicinable, potable, and disperseable into any liquor, is both excellent, and iustly to be reputed potable gold. But this Medicine of mine, made and consisting in it selfe of gold, is such (as I haue before prooued and shall further hereafter proue) therefore it is, and ought to be acknowledged for true potable gold. The pro∣position needeth none other proofe, then the consent of all famous writers of and vpon potable gold: The Assumption, whereupon the Inference and Conclu∣sion dependeth, is prooued in my first published booke, as also out of manifest demonstration, not pri∣uate, to my selfe, but publike in the sight of many, not onely once done, but sundry times iterated: in which proceedings, the demonstratiue tokens mentioned in Art, are apparent: the Instrumentall water which was in the forme of common water before it was put vpon the gold, in few daies becommeth tincted, with a deepe and ruddy colour, also when the Instrumen∣tall water so tincted, shall be distilled away, the soluti∣on of gold remaineth in forme of hony as by Philoso∣phers is specified. In the whole magisterie, Art or pro∣cesse I haue not kept any thing secret, sauing the In∣strumentall water as Raymund testifieth. But some will say, If this be that true Potable gold, why do you make it common to others? Good Sirs, forsooth I an∣swer
because it is such, therefore I make it common, concerning the vse: Which being profitable to all, challengeth the right and law of nature and charitie, to be communicated to al. But that other great secret of the Philosopher, not communicable to others, is onely profitable to the Author himself. And therfore let not this be the lesse precious in it selfe, because in∣numerable men receiue health and comfort thereby? The sunne giueth visible light to the whole world. Is it therefore an inferiour Planet vnto Mercury which seldome appeares in the sight of men? Againe. That Medicine which really performeth2. Reason. the true and proper vnquestioned effects of Aurum po∣tabile, being essentially made of the said subiect, ought and needes must be accounted true potable gold. But this Medicine of mine, hath produced the notable effects, only proper to potable gold. Therfore it must needes be the same. An affirmatiue argument from the effect to the cause is good and strong: as likewise from the cause to the effect. In the holy Scriptures, a Prophet shall be iudged great, by his great workes. As Elias, Elisa, and the Apostles raised the dead, as our Sauiour Christ did. (It being proper only to the power of God) whose doctrine they as forerunners; these as succeeders preached, in one verity, and the same diuine gift. The Analogie and proportionall deduction of Inference, is a like true in Arts and Sci∣ences, and in all workes both of Nature and Art, whether singular or conioyned. So our Potable gold, brought from the potentialitie of natures lock, vnto the actiuitie, which artificiall opening exciteth and manifesteth, is knowne by his owne proper and inse∣parable efficacies and effects, largely affirmed in my other booke. The Assumption of this Argument,
drawing the conclusion, I will further heereafter, by examples confirme. The third Reason may be taken from the extraor∣dinarie3. Reason. and wonderfull manner of working in the na∣ture and resolution of gold, whereby it is brought from fixation, to volatility, and so made potable. Therefore I say thus. Whosoeuer can so dissolue the body of gold, that it shall not by any Art be reduced againe into fixed solide gold, but so persist; doubtles hath made potable gold, medicinable and profitable for the health of man. But by Gods blessings in my endeauours, I haue often times done this, and stil can doe it: therefore doubtlesse I haue often times made, and still can make potable gold, medicinable and pro∣fitable for mans health. The dependence and con∣nexion of this proposition standeth in this: That gold in his primitiue, naturall, hard, compact body, cannot communicate his internall vertues in mans body; and therefore is not medicinable. For then the formalitie of gold is not loosened from the bridle, or freed from the bodily prison, and bonds of coagulati∣on; and therefore not easily worke vpon the subiect whereunto it is applied. But contrariwise, being vlti∣matly and irreducibly solute, it is then apt for action. So that if the substance of gold be exalted in his exu∣berate colour, it is a true token that it is made subtile, attenuate, and therefore Medicinable; and that the aery and fiery parts, or Elementalitie thereof, are pre∣dominant ouer the earthy and watery. And in this manner preseruing the naturall vnitie of the whole compound, doe draw them (not altering the com∣position, but subtiliating the substance) in the exalted symbolisme of the same Elements. The Assumption hath the same proofe and confirmation which the
other before: that is, my very often and almost dai∣ly experience, whereof, if need be I, can produce ma∣ny eye-witnesses of eminent rancke, and amongst them some learned Physitions, against whom no one dare mutter an exception. But as Auicen in his booke de Animá maketh three kinds of proofe. 1. Sophisti∣call. 2. Logicall, and 3. Sensible by sight: of which it is to be vnderstood, that by Sophisticall there he mea∣neth not false or counterfeit cauillings. But leauing that apart, I will content my selfe with the other twaine. The Logicall part of which we haue hitherto discoursed by infe∣rence of reason: And now, will we proceeede to the third, being of sensible and eye-witnessed ex∣periments.
EXPERIMENTS AND OCVLARE TESTIMONIES, A FEVV DRAVVEN OVT OF A GREAT NVMBER, BY WHICH the Wonderfull vertues of this my Pota∣ble gold in the Curing of Diseases are fully shewed, perhibited and auouched, by oculare and sensible testimonies, free from all future challenge and question. A PROTESTATION OF THE Author, to the writers of these Epi∣stles or Letters following. HOnorable, Worshipfull and Worthy persons, I intreate your curtesies, and conside∣rate humanities, not to take in ill part or make sinister constructiō, that I haue with∣out your speciall allowances & warrants, published these your letters written vnto me, concerning the effects and successes in the administration of my Potable
gold. Protesting hereby, that I entertaine not the least thought of wronging any of you; but beeing compulsarily enforced to the necessarie defence of my Integritie and good name, intentiously scandali∣sed in the oppugning of this Medicine, which is the subiect of this Discourse. I pray you all willingly to consent to this auerrment of your owne consciences, and testifying both the Innocencie of mee, and vse∣full necessity of a Medicine prooued by your selues in so many cases of dangers, left and forsaken after all other knowne Remedies rankly attempted: and prognostically reputed desperate. Which your con∣sents, I doubt not shall record an honorable memo∣rie of you, in the maintenance of so necessarie, and healing truth. I shall neuer faile by any my habilities, to be ready in any kinde of seruices of good offices to∣wards you.
TRANSMARINE TESTIMONIES. THE VSE OF THE POTABLE GOLD BROVGHT OVT OF ENGLAND, AND PRESENTED TO HIS SACRED IMPERIALL Maiestie I doe approoue, by the hap∣pie successe in two cases of mine experience. FIrst, I gaue one ounce waight thereof to a yong man naturally strong, but then farre spent with a malignant feuer, being febris inclu∣sa, with Idlenesse of his Braine. After taking thereof he slept, and in his sleepe, auoided through his mouth, foure long and round wormes, liuing and quicke. So was he quit and free both from the feuer, congelation, and distemper of the Braine. Notwithstanding many Remedies had beene before prooued vpon him, and he had lyen in this case foure weekes extremely sicke, in great dan∣ger of death.
AN other also recouered by this potable gold; Who beeing possessed of a Quartane feuer, (which tooke him in the Autumne or fall of the leafe, and held him all winter) and was thereby so weakened, that his strength seemed vtterly decayed, and ready to fall into a Dropsie. This man after ma∣ny Purgations, tooke of me an ounce of this Potable gold, in the distilled water of Carduus Benedictus: whereby hee fell into so strange and vnaccustomed sweat, as I cannot remēber euer to haue read, or heard of the like. For beside that it was naturall, with out o∣ther impulsion, and so abundant that two persons had their hands full in drying him, yet it so continued 3. daies and 3. nights. But the most wonderfull thing of all was, that in this extraordinary sweat, and absti∣nence from meate the time of three daies and nights, he was so farre from fainting, for so much as any per∣son could obserue, that with this naturall and sponta∣neall euacuation, he did euery houre waxe stronger, lustier, and more cheerefull: And at the end of these daies, he was throughly recouered and in perfect health. I doe witnesse this IOHN ATHMESTETT IN Pubemheimb and Weyer, Dr. in Physicke, and Physition to the Sacred Imperiall Maiestie.
Right worshipfull Sir. HAuing read your true Assertion of that high Medicine the Aurum Po∣tabile, and heard relation made of the strange and wonderfull effects of the same, by my Lord Rosse his Maiesties Ambassadour, Sir N. Drury. and Mr. Stafford, with diuers others noble and gentlemen of England that were at this Election & Coronation in Frankforth, I could & would not omit to visit you with these few lines, hum∣ly intreating you, that for my pay, I might be partaker of this so great a gift of God. And hauing vnderstood by the letters of Sir Henery Cary, that 4. ounces of this high medicine are sould for twenty shillings, I haue intreated this gentleman to lay out foure pounds sterling, that I might haue 16. ounces of it. The which, if I may attaine at your hands, as also the dose, the manner and time of exhibiting it (for vnwilling would I erre contrary to your experience) I shall euer hold my selfe bound and behoulding vnto you. Thus humbly beseeching you that for common stu∣dies sake, you would not let me faile of my Intreatie, I rest Your though vnknowne yet euer louing friend IAMES MOSAN, Physition to his Highnesse. CASSELL IN HESSEN THIS 11. Iuli. 1612.
RIght Worshipful Sir, I thank you most highly for your Aurum Potabile which you sent me: which indeede I do neuer vse, but in necessitie, when other Medicines wil shew no help at al. I haue tried the ver∣tue thereof in extreame vomitings: In the passion of the hart: In malicious and contagious Dysenteries or bloody fluxes: In the rising or suffocation of the mo∣ther, and the falling sicknesse by reason thereof: In the Colike. In all which diseases after all other helps inward and outward haue failed, one dose of this Me∣dicine did effect so much, that all these patients after they had taken it, as it were in few houres recouered their health. I haue also tried it, in that disease which is called Melancholia hypocondriaca (in English some call it the Melancholie of the gutts) but haue not found that effect as in the former. Yet it hath com∣forted the party maruellously. From Sleusingen 24. of Febr. 1612. Your euer good friend IAMES MOSAN.
VVOrshipfull Dr. Anthony, you may thinke me either forgetfull, or vnthankfull for your manifold curtesies towards me. But the truth is, I can finde no conuenient meanes as I would, how to shew my thankfulnesse; and therefore constrained to die your debter. Your Aurum Potabile is an admirable Medicine in most Diseases. I haue giuen it in the beginning of a Podagricall fit: Whereupon the patient fell into a sweat, and therewithall his paine ceased, and the pati∣ent walked againe in short space. Also in the bloudy flux I haue vsed it, In the falling sicknesse: In the su∣perfluous Menstruall flux of women: In the wormes of yong children; In the Measels and small Pocks: Al∣most in all the Diseases of the Matrice, it is a most ex∣cellent Remedie. Let all them that haue written a∣gainst it, talke idely & nothing to the purpose. This grant them, that they haue read much, and write learnedly, but nothing to disprooue your Medicine: That little experience that I haue made of it, and o∣thers haue found, is sufficient to shew their vanitie. So I desire to be commended to you, &c. From Cassell this 16. of August. 1614. Your most louing friend Iames Mosanus.
BVt that I may the better ad∣uertise, declare and satisfie this relation by letters sent vnto me from this said wor∣thy, truly learned, and ver∣tuously adorned gentleman Iames Mosan Doctor of Physicke, and primate Phy∣sition in ordinary to the Landsgraue of Hess. I thinke it not amisse here to insert that which came from an English gentleman named Alexander Oldfield, then beeing in Germany; who in the yeare 1613. the 22. of Iuly, in certaine letters sent to Sir Richard Norton Knight, and by him shewed vnto me, amongst other matters writeth thus. One thing I had almost forgotten, which I intreate your Worship to certifie to my Lords, the Lord Bi∣ship of Winchester; that being at Hall the 28. of May, I met with the Landsgraue of Hessen his Doctor of Physicke, which speakes English very well (for he pro∣ceeded his degrees in Oxford.) And talking with him about Physicke, hee asked whether I knew Doctor Anthony. I told him that I had heard of him. He told me, that his Aurum Potabile was excellent Physicke: and the first experience that he had made of it, was on a maide of 21. yeares of age, which was fore troubled with the falling sicknesse, and since that time she was neuer troubled with it, being now aboue a yeare past.
He gaue her one ounce therof at a time, and that selfe same day she fell into the passions of that Disease ele∣uen times, & (as I said before) she neuer fel since into them. Hee gaue it also to a childe not aboue foure monethes old, which was grieuously troubled with that disease, and it helpt the childe presently. Also he gaue it to one that was troubled with the bloudy flux, and was brought so low with it, that no man thought he could haue recouered: he gaue him one ounce at a time, and that but once only, and in∣stantly he recouerd, and is very well. He gaue it also to a woman which was in childe-bed, and was exceeding weake with the scouring, and nothing could stay it but that Aurum Potabile. For as soone as shee tooke that, shee recouered. This himselfe reporteth, and wisheth that he dwelt neere vnto D. Anthony, that he might haue I nough there∣of as neede required. ALEX. OLDFIELD.
SIr. I am perswaded that you admire my long silence, which proceedes from no other then sundrie great businesses, &c. I had occasion to re∣commend some of your Aurum Potabile which I had for my proper vse, to a principall gentleman here in the Emperours Court. By whose meanes I haue bin of late much sent vnto by sundrie principall persons, some dangerously sick, to impart it vnto them; name∣ly the Baron of Cressy, who had two sonnes sicke of the small Poxe: the Eldest of about 19. and the other of 17. yeares of age. The Eldest died without taking any of the Aurum Potabile, because they about him thought it was in vaine, and that they were both too farre spent. The other, beeing as dangerously sicke, tooke it, and is thereupon recouered. The father him∣selfe not being well, hath likewise vsed it, and doth finde himselfe much comforted, and wel againe by it. Many more in like manner. I haue beene so liberall of my store, that it is almost spent. Many doe wish I had such quantitie by me that they might haue a good part of it for their money. Wherefore send me I pray you a good quantitie of the three sorts, with the price therof. Send it either by some of our Marchants that are to come to this next Mart at Frankfurth, or else by some frind of trust in the company of the Count Pala∣tine, or the Lady Elizabeth, &c. VIENNA THIS THIRD OF Feb. 1612. Stile Brit. Your very assured and louing friend Sr. Steph. Leseiur Knight, Em∣bassadour to the Emperour.
VVOrthy and learned friend, I write to you later then I intended, because I thought it not fit to deliuer my opinion before manifold experience made, in a matter of such worth and consequence. Experimentū fallax, as our great ma∣ster Hippocrates teacheth. But now I will breefely shew you the vertue and excellency of your medicine. The first triall that I made of it, was on mine owne daugh∣ter about 16. yeeres old: which for two continuall dayes, was much troubled with vomitings, keeping nothing that she eat or dranke. Also by reason of in∣tollerable inward torments she could not sleepe one winke for the space of two daies and nights. In which her extremities, hauing vsed all other conuenient and commended medicines to no purpose, but altogether without any ease or mitigation of her paines, I be∣tooke my selfe lastly to your medicine, as to a ho∣ly Anchor, and last hope. She tooke the same and kept it, and then slept a litle. But after 2. houres she cast againe in great abundance, and since she hath continued perfectly well. The second triall I made thereof, was vpon a very worshipfull gentleman, Sir William Samuell Knight. He had a burning feauer, with great violence of continu∣all heat, so that he vtterly lost all sleepe: he had withall a weakenesse in his kidneis, and could not make wa∣ter. Sundry glisters were administred vnto him, Pur∣gations, vomits, and he was also let blood: All which (in my obseruation) were so far from giuing him any ease, that the disease did still grow stronger, and all the
symptomes or accidents euery day worse and worse, and more grieuous. I perswaded the giuing of your medicine. But at the first I could not obtaine, that he should take a new and vnknowne thing. At last by the Importunitie of his friends, and the necessity of his disease stil increasing, he yeelded & tooke it. In an instant almost, he felt a gentle remission of his heat, & a milde cooling; his spirits comforted; his kidneis strengthned, so that he made water in a reasonable good quantity. Since which time, he neuer ceased to extoll this Medicine, though in troth, hauing beene long afflicted with a most violent disease, he hath not as yet fully recouered his strength. The third triall I made, was vpon a maid of noble familie, which being taken with dreadfull convulsi∣ons, after some glisters taken, had also this medicine, and was thereby perfectly cured. Lastly, I was desired to send all the store I had of this medicine, to a graue Matrone, a gentlewoman al∣ready spent with old age, and much sicknesse, being then left to Gods mercy as at her last gaspe. She pre∣sently after the taking of this medicine, found much ease and comfortable strength in her spirits, though I thinke there be no possible recouering her, so spent as is aforesaid: farewell. &c. GAYTON the 10. of Sept. 1611. Your louing friend Ioh. Markes.
MAster Doctor Anthony, though I haue no ac∣quaintance with you at all, yet being an eye witnesse of your generall charity extended to the whole world, in bringing to the vse of men the most excellent quintessence for the rectifying of na∣ture, that the world (as I thinke) yet euer had, I am thereby imboldned to presume of your fauour for some sew graines of the same, which (for the seuerall operations that I haue seene thereof, in two speciall friends of mine, both at the point of death) shall in my esteeme for euer be held in most precious ac∣compt. For you shal vnderstand that about a twelue∣moneth since, I came to a brother in lawes house of mine, one Sir William Samuell knight, of Vpton in Nor∣thampton-shire, whom I found in great extremitie of sicknesse, and thereby so weakned with the continuall torment he was in, that all which were about him fea∣red him greatly: he had three Doctors of Phisicke, yet could none of them minister any thing to him to giue him any ease of his torments, but rather tormented him more, vntill at last, himselfe remembred that one Mr. Markes had commended this memorable medi∣cine of yours. Which being brought, hee tooke, and it wrought so miraculous an effect within the com∣passe of two houres, as neither he nor I euer saw be∣fore. For it instantly deliuered him of his paine, which seemed before intollerable: It gaue him rest, which for many daies and nights before he had bin barred of: It drew on an appetite by little and little, all meat be∣fore being loathsome vnto him: And (which is most maruellous) whereas formerly, by his medicines ex∣coriating those passages, he seemed to endure great torture vpon euery prouocation to the stoole: he had now in the day and night fiue stooles, and euery pro∣uocation
was now as delightfull vnto him, as the o∣ther were tormenting. Then did one of his Physiti∣ons aduise, that now he should take some Cordiall, to assist the faculties of nature being very weake. But when this was propounded vnto my brother by his wife, he vtterly refused it. Neuerthelesse, it was so farre forth vrged, as that he tooke it, the Physition bea∣ring him in hand, that it was nothing else but Vni∣cornes horne, Bezoar stone and such like. But after taking thereof, my brother fell againe into his for∣mer tortures, and more vehement then before. Wher∣by he was enforced the selfe same night to send again vnto Mr. Markes; who releeued him as formerly he had done: since which time (by Gods blessing) he hath continued well. After this manner an obstructed body was cured. It hath wrought a great effect in Sir Iohn Hunt Knight, of Leicester-Shire, who lately was very low brought with a fluxe, together with a Bur∣ning feuer: and being neere vnto death, and voyde of all other helpe, he was releeued by the selfe same Me∣dicine only, and perfectly restored. Mr. Doctor Ash∣worth, who partly had seene, and partly heard these miraculous effects of this your Medicine, lying dan∣gerously sick at Oxford this last Sommer, sent his Son in very great hast to Master Markes for some portion of this your Medicine: his said sonne feared that at his returne, he should not finde him liuing But thankes be to God, he liueth, and is well: which is to be attri∣buted vnto your Medicine, although peraduenture he will not acknowledge the same, &c. KNIGHTHORP IN LEICESTER¦Shire, Ianuary 20. 1612. Your Ready and assured friend, Henry Skipwith.
MACTE VIR PROBITATE, et Scientiâ singulari. MY wifes brother Mr. Henry Skipwith, lately told me how friendly mention of me you made to him; He might very well haue reciprocated, and said, how oft mention he hath heard me make of you. Yet howsoeuer, I must euer acknowledge my selfe obliged to you in double bands. For in my last grieuous and long languishing sicknesse, when my then Physition Dr. C. staggered in his Iudgement of my Disease, and in the hope of my recouery he see∣med to quaile: yea when my selfe, and all my behol∣ders did despaire of my life; then by Gods prouidence, a friend (telling the rare vertues of your Aurum Pota∣bile) caused two graines of the same, to be dissolued in fiue spoonfuls of distilled Endiue Water, and so to be ministred vnto me. After receiuing thereof, within one houres space, it is incredible to be spoken, what alleuiation I found of my languishings, and what cor∣roboration of all my vitall parts. In the morning I tooke it, and vntill night I felt a most happy operati∣on thereof. It procured stooles all that day, so plea∣singly as my soule could desire: vntil such time as that my Physition (after he had taken his leaue of me for that night, I that I had now composed my self to rest) came againe vnto me, hauing vpon the point of a knife somewhat which hee did put into my mouth, being then almost asleepe. But about midnight when I did awake, I found my selfe relapsed as before. Then, vtterly despairing of my life, I called (as I
thought my last call) vnto my wife, intreating her to send againe to my foresaid friend, to intreate him to consider, whether in his Iudgement two graines were not too smal a proportion to ouercome the maligni∣tie of so dangerous a Disease. He therefore gaue me this second time three graines, which speedily as be∣fore, and wonderfully did refresh my spirits, and ther∣by my bodie was very soluble for the space of 7. daies after. And notwithstanding sundry euacuations eue∣ry day, my strength daily increased. Then was that Dr. exceedingly angry that I did entertaine his coun∣sell no longer: since which time he hath wrote an English booke, vncharitably defaming me, and cauil∣ling against that famous Medicine, which by the prouidence of God restored vnto me both life and health. Now concerning the chiefe intention of these my letters, I pray you send me 12. graines of your po∣table gold in such forme as my brother Mr. Henry Skipwith lately receiued from you. This bearer my friend shall giue you satisfaction for the same, &c. The Author of health is God, who perpetually preserue you, vnto whome he hath vouchsafed such fauour as to attaine vnto so great a restorer of health, and pro∣longer of life, as this Aurum Potabile appeareth to be. Farewell. Reu. Dr. Vpton, 15. Feb. 1612. Your most louing friend William Samuell.
VVOrthy Sir. I am aduised by that Reue∣rend Doctor, Master Doctor Hunton, in these parts highly accounted, to require in behalfe of our worthy friend, a knight, your helpe and aduice, in a deplored estate, wherein hee now standeth. We desire also some quantity of your Au∣rum Potabile, with direction for the due administrati∣on thereof. This gentleman diseased is neere 80 yeares of age, of Cholericke constitution. The first originall of his Infirmitie (as we coniecture) was by company of his wife being yong. Not long after in a Iourney which he tooke, when he was yet scarse sixe myles from his house, he was constrained oft times for to alight from his horse. Then did he make water, and in his water either blood, or some substance like vnto blood, peraduenture spermaticall, which hath continued now many daies. Also euen to this time he is vnable to retaine his vrine, by the Imbecillitie of his bladder as wee suppose. A Gonorrhe likewise he was subiect vnto. He is not as yet free from any of these Infirmities. We expect some helpe from you. For your charges and counsell, this gentleman will giue you full content. My selfe also will be with you this next Terme, and will not be vnthankfull. Trent the 11. of Sept. 1611. Your most louing friend, N. W. Physition.
MAster Doctor Anthony you may call to minde,This letter came from the Knight himselfe. if you please, that about September last past, you wrote certaine letters vnto me. At which time I also receiued from you fiue ounces of your Au∣rum Potabile, to the praise of God, your commenda∣tion, and my great good. My Diseases were mentio∣ned in the former letters. Besides which I had also a great swelling from my hucchlebone vnto the soles of my feete. But it is without paine: peraduenture it came of cold, or with lying long time vpon my right side. I vnderstand by Master Doctor Hunton, that be∣sides this Aurum Potabile which you sent me, you haue also the substance of gold in forme like hony, I pray you send me thereof, and the manner how to vse the same. I doe feele (I praise God) a mitigation of all my paines and Infirmities throughout all my bo∣dy: the swelling which I mentioned doth daily de∣crease: My vrine also I am able to retaine. This booke of yours Master Doctor Hunton requested of me. Send me an other I pray you, your studies and endeauours God alwaies blesse: farewell. BLYBROVVGH Octob. 10. 1611. Your friend. H. A.
THis gentleman, of whom I shall now next write, and whose letters sent vnto me are extant, being Secretarie to the right ho∣nouable the Earle of Southampton, in his owne words had beene long sicke of a Quartane feuer: for Cure whereof he entertained a most learned Physition, who ministred vnto him a long time such Medicines as were appropriate: Neither yet had he ouermastered the feuer; nor restored any strength vnto the patient. Then did this Phy∣sition perswade this gentleman his patient to vse my Aurum Potabile; which he did, and with good successe. Whereupon, he wrote afterwards vnto me for more thereof, as followeth. Sir, I haue found so much good vse of your Aurum potabile, as makes me desire more. For I must truely say, I haue gotten much strength since I tooke it, and recouered my spirits exceedingly decaied by extremi∣tie of sicknesse: my store is not so spent, but that I haue some left in the Country, but my slay hath bin longer here then I expected; and therfore may be sup∣plied from you with more ease then from thence. Which I desire may be sent by this bearer of the best: So shall I rest, Your very louing friend, Thomas Kisley. SOVTHAMPTON HOVSE THIS 26. of Nouemb. 1611.
MAster Doctor Anthony, I pray you make me so much beholding vnto you as to bestow me this twentie shillings in that soueraigne quin∣tessence which I had of you at my being with you. For (as I told you) I was to haue but one of those glas∣ses my selfe: which, one of my especiall friends hath had of me; so that now, I haue scarcely one graine left. Sir Brian Caue Knight, was taken with a violent burning feuer: but after taking of this Medicine, he had only one fit, and then was perfectly well recoue∣red. Also a seruant of mine, had in like manner so dangerous a Feuer, that at my comming home I found him at point of death. The onely taking of this Medicine hath so purged him by an extraordinary Sweat, (that thankes be to God) he is at this time in a Iourney abroad with me, and finds his bodie in so good temper as it was not of a Twelue moneth be∣fore, &c. Your assured friend to vse Henry Skipwith.
SIr. Some few houres after your departure, Master Doct. Lewknar came hither to my Lord Bishop of Winchester. And at supper, after my Lord had made some relation of the proceedings and benefite he found of your Aurum Potabile, Doctor Lewknar re∣plied in the comendation therof, saying; That on Sa∣turday last past, he being at Cowdry, came to a gen∣tlewoman who was dead to the world, being both speechlesse and knowing no body; he gaue her one spoonfull of your Aurum Potabile, in that case as shee then was. And at the first taking thereof, she fell into strange convulsions, wherein she continued two houres: and after he gaue her as much more, and then she fell into a great sweat: and 2 houres after, he gaue her a spoonfull more, & she fell into a fine sleepe, and waking she said, Giue me more of that: which was done; and she tooke good rest after. And the next day, he went to see how she did, and found her eating of a Chicken. This he told before my Lord Bishop, his bro∣ther, Doctor Steward of the Arches, Sir Thomas Bilson my Lords sonne, and my selfe. WALTHAM THIS 15. of August 1611. Your louing friend Tho. Webbes.
THis Doctor Lewknar, of whom mention is made in these former letters, did after∣wards write vnto me, desiring to haue more of my Potable gold. For this learned Gentleman, had before found and seene the effects thereof in the Cure of his daughter in law by marriage with his Sonne, being strongly taken with the falling sicknesse. The case whereof set downe in a part of his letter to me, which I haue shewed in the end of my first booke. Whereupon the aduersaries both to my selfe and the truth, haue greatly accused (I was about to say slandered him) as may appeare by an other letter of his sent vnto me beginning thus. Good Doctor Anthony, I haue beene bitterly taxed, for giuing testimony of the good successe of your Au∣rum potabile: which doth nothing at all daunt me. For I assure my selfe, that Aurum potabile being rightly made (which few haue attained vnto) is a singular medicine howsoeuer, I thinke yours (as I haue expe∣rienced) to be good. And therefore I pray you send me two ounces by this my kinsman, and write vnto me, what effect it worketh in womens monethly courses, &. And after it foloweth. I doe assuredly promise you, that as I shall find the effect thereof good, all the Societie of the Colledge shall not auert me. So likewise, shall not any priuate re∣gard of friendship, flattery or gaine, induce me at any time, to giue approbation to any dangerous or vncer∣taine medicine, &c. Your louing friend George Lewknar.
I Doubt not (my good Cosen) but you much desire to heare what effects your Aurū Potabile hath per∣formed in these parts. A certaine neere neighbour of mine, the wife of Ro. Downing, lay euen at point of death, after a long languishing sicknesse (for shee was prayed for in the Church.) Whereupon, my Sonne Barners & I, went in the after noone to see her. Short∣ly after our comming, she tooke a potion of a Physiti∣on there present, which sodainly she cast vp: at which I mused. Then did her husband affirme, that for the space of a moneth before, she had not taken downe a spoonfull of any thing, but she did likewise cast it vp. My Son did thē importune me, to giue her a spoonful of your Aurum potabile; which I was very loath to doe, seeing she seemed but a dead woman: and, it might be some discredit to the medicine, & to me. Yet at the last I did yeeld, she being desirous thereof: I gaue her ther∣fore a spoonfull, which staied with her contrary to all our expectations. And within a short time, whereas before she was so cold, that they were forced to lay more cloathes on her, she came to a kind naturall heat. Thē we gaue her some mace-ale with Aurum potabile, which she digested, and afterwards mace-ale alone, which also staied with her. The 3. day after, we sent to visit her, who sent vs word that the same day she had eatē the best part of a Chickē, & did hope to come to vs shortly, &c. You shall also know that Mr. Boswell a Minister & Preacher of Saffron Walden, did greatly im∣portune me for one ounce of Aurum potabile for his wife, being accounted past Cure in a languishing dis∣ease. And she by that onely ounce receiued so much comfort, that he sent vp to Lond. to you for more, &c COVVLING, 21. die Maij. 1611 Your assured louing Cosen Tho. Wolridge, Iustice of peace in Essex.
A Letter sent to Master Edward Smith of the Temple, Counsellor at the common lawes, from Master George Wethery, Se∣cretary to the right honourable the Lord Shef∣field, Lord President of his Maiesties Councell established for the North parts. Good Master Smith, my Lord would haue you send presently to Doctor Anthony, and desire him to send his Lordship (with all possible speed) the like quantity of his Aurum Potabile, as he sent the last time; for that my Lord hath made many trials of it, and will report much good thereof; which will turne greatly to Ma∣ster Doctors aduantage, and the credit of his Medi∣cine. Yorke this 30. of Septemb. 1613. Alwaies yours George Wethery. A True Relation made by me Elias Holmes, of the manifold vertues of Master Do∣ctor Anthonies Aurum Potabile, tryed by the command of the right honourable, Edmund Lord Sheffield, Lord President of Yorke.
THe wife of Iohn Goulsbrough seruant to my Lord, lay very sicke sundry daies before my Lord had knowledge thereof. Then was I sent vnto her, whom I found languishing and in great extremitie. Shee was greatly sweld in her bodie, and had also a loose∣nesse, so that it past from her almost vnknowing to her. And further she was greatly distempered in heat. She had taken no manner sustenance for 4. or 5. daies before, whereby shee was growne so weake, that shee could not mooue her body but as she was helpt by others. Also her eyes were greatly swelled: her speech could not be heard the length of the bed: shee desired nothing but drinke, taking no rest, neither night nor day. The first spoonfull that I gaue her, did shew small effect whilst I was with her, which was some houre: but they which attended her, said, that some two houres after, it made her rist, and to voide a little wa∣ter of her Stomacke. At euening I gaue her one o∣ther spoonfull, and before I could seale vp the glasse, she was in a little slumber, but it continued not long. Neuerthelesse, shee felt so much ease at her Stomack, that she said, What is this that my good Lord hath sent me: for I giue God thankes I feele much ease to∣wards that I did: with that she prayed hartily for my Lord And both her speech and countenance seemed better then before: Then about one of the clock at midnyght, she fell asleepe, and slept two houres. The next morning, I gaue her the third spoonfull; and af∣ter that she cast a little, and in her casting she tooke cold, which caused her to cough, and made her so ill and weake, that I thought my laboure was all lost. Her loosenes also held her still. But it pleased God to giue such a blessing vnto this Medicine, that after the
taking of 4. or 5. spoonfull more, her flux was staide, her strength also recouered in such sort, that she was able to sit vpright in her bed, and to receiue suste∣nance. Also, after three spoonful more, shee could en∣dure to haue her clothes put on, and with a little helpe, to walke vp and downe the Chamber. Shee tooke in all 13. spoonfuls. Then did she acknowledge that shee was perfectly well, giuing God thankes therefore: And to me shee said, Now Master Holmes I pray you spare your further labour, &c. THomas Taylor, one of my Lords houshold ser∣uants, about the same time in the former yeere had an extraordinary Maligne feuer & of longA quotidian maligne feuer. continuance. He was a very able and strong man: Neuerthelesse, it had so weakned him, that he was seantly able to goe vpright: He could endure to take no sustenance for a long time. Often times also as a mad man, he would arise out of his bed in the night season, and lye downe on the floore, and there lie, vntill some body came by chance to helpe him. This yeare he likewise fell into the same Infirmity by all signes and tokens. His first fit continued sixe houres, with such violent paine at his heart, that he was enforced to cry out. My Lord was not willing that I should giue him any thing this first fit. The next day after, when the former passions began to as∣sault him, my Lord sent me vnto him, and I gaue him one spoonfull of this Medicine. After which, he did sundry times cast vp by vomit, a very filthy and euill substance. When he had done casting, I gaue him another spoonfull, and so he rested quietly, ha∣uing an easie fit which continued the space of three
houres. His third fit came also vnto him, then I gaue him one other spoonfull, and within a quarter of an houre, he had a vomit. I gaue him one other spoon∣full, and he had one other vomit. I gaue him then an other, that is, three times one after an other, and three times he vomited: and then he was prouoked to the stoole. Whilst he was there, he had againe a very great vomit, being of diuers colors, and a mucilage or sly∣mie substance. After this vomit, I gaue him one other spoonfull, and then he slept quietly, and had no more fits afterward. HEnry Kickinson one of my Lords seruants, itA continuall maligne feuer. pleased God to visite with an extraordinary Quotidian feuer, hauing a sensible paine in his bones, which made him so sore that he could not abide one to touch him: and with the extremitie thereof, became euen mad and senselesse, not know∣ing any man. Also so weake, that euery one of his friends expected death. He continued in this extrea∣mitie a fortnight, before I was sent to him: In which time, he had taken little sustenance. His body also was extreamely hot, and he tooke no rest. After the first spoonfull that I gaue him, within halfe an houre he fell asleepe, and slept the space of one houre, and when he awoke did cast a little. At night I gaue him one other spoonfull after which he slept two houres, and then spake these words. Will not Master Holmes come againe vnto me? and other such like speaches manifestly approouing that he had found comfort by that which I had giuen him. Then did he giue thankes vnto God. All that I gaue him was eleuen spoonfuls. So by little and little he amen∣ded, and became perfectly recouered.
MAny others I could here set downe, which haue receiued in these parts present re∣leefe by this Medicine. Among the rest, my Lords Children both sonnes and Daughters, who sundry times and in sundry cases being affe∣cted, haue alwaies bene cured with this onely Re∣medy. Also my Lord himselfe by vse thereof, doth preuent many sits of the Stone which heretofore he hath beene subiect vnto, and preserueth his health thereby; So likewise doth my Lady. LAstly for my selfe, being subiect vnto an ex∣treame migrim in my head, as Physitions call it, but my disease is in this manner. Many times in the yeare, being in perfect health, I shall haue my sight sodenly taken away; so shall I continue halfe an houre: then shall I haue a most violent aking in my head, also a sleepinesse; then a kind of stupor first in my lips and tongue, and so it goeth downe to my hands; I stretch them out like vnto the Palsey, andA dead Palsey thus it holds me a good while: Then it will go downe into my legs. All this while I shall haue a great desire to cast, but cannot, vntill I haue beene in this fit some 6. houres: and then with much adoe I shall cast, and af∣ter once or twice casting I shall haue some better ease. As long as I am in that former extremitie, I shall som∣time sarcely be able to fetch my breath, neither to speake, nor vnderstand, nor heare what is spoken. But
at the last I fall asleepe, & then I begin to be wel, & yet not very wel, nor in perfect good health for the space of one whole weeke after. Now it pleased God, that being at Lond. in Decem. last, 1613. being in presence of my Lord, suddenly I felt that my sight failed me, my head aked, and that my fit approached neere. Whereupon I craued pardon of my Lord, being not able to goe forward with his businesse that I had then in hand. My Lord therefore commanded mee pre∣sently to take some Aurum Potabile; for it was then in my custodie. But I made the mixture somewhat more effectuall of the gold, then I was accustomed to doe at other times. And within one quarter of an houre after taking thereof, my spirits and senses were comforted: the cold, which at the first possessed me, became temperate. Also I brake winde both vpward and downward. Likewise I had a desire to vomit, and an inclination to sleepe: But my Lord would not permit me, causing me to bee kept walking vp and downe. Whereby after the space of one houre I felt my selfe very well: only my head did ake a little. But (praised be God) I did not fall into my vsuall fits. Fur∣thermore, by taking that Aurum Potabile, I became loose bodied, whereas vsually I am accustomed to be bound. All these things (if neede require) I will bee ready vpon mine oath to auouch. Thus I doe end. EVER SINCE I TOOKE THIS Medicine I haue continued in good health, praised be God. Feb. 4. 1614. Your louing friend Elias Holmes, atten∣ding my foresaid Lord in his Chamber.
I May not forget here to remember the right Reuerend father in God, whose learning, pietie and vertue be sufficiently knowne, the Lord Bi∣shop of Winchester, my Honourable good Patron: against whose testimonie there can be no excepti∣on. His Lordship is a most autenticke witnesse of this my Potable gold, and testifieth the vertues thereof to all persons: and can (if neede require) maintaine the same to the greatest persons of this Realme: how not onely himselfe in the recouerie and maintenance of his owne bodily health, much weakened with continuall studies, and the late great paines in conference of many copies, for the true translation of the holy Scriptures out of He∣brew into English: but also very many others, re∣ceiuing Aurum Potabile from his pious charitie, haue beene from many and diuers diseases recoue∣red, and restored to their former health by vse thereof. But because the vocall and liuely atte∣station of his Lordship, can more satisfie any that require satisfaction, then any deliuery by his let∣ters sent me, I will be sparing in that point: and trouble the Reader onely with a few of many, shew∣ing how, and to whome, his Lordship in greatest necessities, and dangerous diseases, did liberally bestow this Potable gold, and commanded the ef∣fects thereof to be briefely set downe, as followeth.
SIr, being appointed by my Lord & Mr. to confer with diuers of this coūtry, who haue bin cured of sundry diseases with Aurum potabile, giuen vnto them by his Lordship: I haue accordingly takē the report of those few that were neere this place, and with whom I might conueniently speake. Many more there are, that receiued good by it, which dwell remote from this place, with whom I shall speake as occasion shall be offered, and leisure permit to do it. So hoping to be better furnished with these things against your com∣ming into Hampshire, which is shortly expected, I take leaue, resting, Your assured friend to my power, Antho. Langford Secretary to my Lord Bishop of Winchester. BISHOPS WATHAM THE last of Nouember, 1612. GOod Sir, although it be vnusuall with me to of∣fer exchange of words to strangers, yet since the heauenly prouidence hath designed a part of noble skill, wherein I vnderstand you are sin∣gular, to be some meanes of healthfull vse vnto me, I should hold it a iust forfeit of my recouered estate, if I should silēce any thing that appertaineth to the effe∣cting it. I therefore cannot choose but tell you how
much I am bound to my Honourable good Lord of Winchester, who first of his good fauour vouchsafed me of your Aurum potabile, so well agreeing with my diseased body, as that I shall become a Customer vn∣to you for more of it. I find it very milde aboue all o∣ther Physicke in operation, causing a temperate sweat, and much allaying the violence of the offending hu∣mors. How highly I doe prize it, this my letter shall be hostage: desiring him from whose vnsearchable power the vertue comes, to blesse you for it, to whose further grace I leaue you; and rest Your assured friend Lucy Ieruice, wife vnto Sir Tho. Ieruice knight. I Was sicke of an ague some seuen night or there a∣bouts,A malignant burning feuer. & thē I had two such fits, as I & all that did see me, thought I could not haue escaped death. Then I dranke a spoonfull of Aurum potabile in the middle of mine extreame burning, and within a quar∣ter of one houre after, the extreame paine in my sto∣macke ceased, and I felt my selfe very well. Only the heat remained with me about one houre, which paine of the stomacke was wont to hold me 3. or 4. houres in the former fits. The next day that my Ague should come, it came not all the day, vntill supper time. And sitting at supper, it came very terribly vpon me, so that I was driuen to go to bed. I was extremely sick. Then I called for a spoonfull of Aurum potabile and it wrought with me as it did before. I did also sweat some three houres, and so I thanke God, he tooke his farewell.
SIr, the Disease of my Sonne was in this manner:A long con∣tinuing quo∣tidian with a vomiting. It tooke him once in 24. houres, with a colde shiuering in the likenesse of an Ague. Which colde helde him but a short time. Afterward, he fell into an extreame heate, with a vomiting which con∣tinued about 3. or 4. houres. In this manner he was daily perplexed the space of a Moneth or fiue weekes, before he tooke the Aurum Potabile. Which at the first taking, being at the beginning of his cold, stay∣ed his vomiting, and his fit was not so extreme as it had beene before. And in this manner he tooke it 3. or 4. fits immediately one after another, about the quantitie of a spoonful or somewhat lesse: and still his fits did lesson and decay, and lastly left him altoge∣ther. Durlay Ianuary 10. 1612. Francis Fortescue.
A BRIEFE COL∣LECTION AND RELATION OF THOSE FEW AMONGST MANY, THAT HAVE TAKEN AVRVM POTABILE, IN THIS COVNTY of SOVTHAMPTON, truly related concerning the effect thereof, deliuered from their owne mouthes vnto me Anthony Langford. THomas Wheeler of Waltham hus∣bandman, aged 67. yeares, con∣tinued sicke the space of one moneth of a new disease very common at that time, whereof many died. This man likewise was in so great perill of deathAn aged man at point of death. that the bell tolled for him, and he was prayed for in the Church. In this his desperate case, a spoonfull of Aurum Potabile was giuen vnto him, by which he felt some present releefe, and fell in∣to a gentle Sweat for an houre or twaine: Then ta∣king one other spoonfull, he slept quietly the space of an houre: After that a third spoonfull, by which he had a vomit of a great quantity of slymie humors. And by sensible degrees he recouered health, praised be God, and is yet lyuing being of great yeares.
EDmund Laurence of Bishops Waltham gentle∣man,A continuall burning feuer aged 36. yeares, was perplexed with a bur∣ning feuer continuing two daies, and two nights without intermission; he onely tooke one spoonful or rather lesse in quantity of the Aurum Po∣tabile, and by degrees he soone returned into his for¦mer temper and health againe. GIles Ethericke Yeoman of the same place, 40.A continuall and sharp bur∣ning feuer. yeares of age, had a continuall and sharpe bur∣ning feuer eight daies and nights. In all which time he could take no rest: he tooke two spoonfuls of Aurum Potabile, and slept quietly the space of two houres the same night. The next day towards euening, taking the like quantitie, he slept the whole night quietly, and recouered perfect health. VVIlliam Hilles of Waltham aforesaid, Yeo∣man,A quotidian. aged 55. yeares, hauing had fiue fits of a quotidian, and beeing entred into the sixt, he tooke a spoonfull of Aurum Potabile, which put him out of his colde fit, and made him sweat; and then taking as much more, it gaue him a good vomit and 2. or 3. stooles: and thereupon shortly after hee slept quietly and recouered his stomacke, which both had failed him the former 5. daies, and since he hath beene well.
IOhn Walter of the same, 40. yeares of age, hauingA tertian fe∣uer. had 4. fits of a Tertian, and the fift fit being vpon him, he tooke a good spoonfull of Aurum Potabile. Whereupon within one houre after, his fit left him, and neuer troubled him since. The said Iohn Walter, hauing 2. spoonfuls of Aurum Potabile left, after he himselfe was cured, he gaue the same vnto a maide in Hambleton of 14. yeares, whoA tertian. had languished of a tertian feuer a quarter of a yeare before, and thereby was cured and had no more fits. HEnry Hindle of Waltham, 47. yeares aged, forA continuall feuer with vo∣miting. the space of fiue daies continually had a feuer without intermission. He could not retaine any thing in all that time, that he did either eate or drinke. After the fift day, he tooke a spoonfull of the Aurum Potabile, which he did not cast vp as his other nutriments: but digested it, and it put him into a sweat that continued about 4. houres: Then againe he tooke as much more, and did sweat 3. houres more: After that he arose, and being vp, he did vomit a pint of thicke viscous flegme. Then after the space of two houres, he did eate of a peece of veale, which he retained and digested. And the next day went a∣broad, and in short time recouered his former health which he inioyeth now.
IOhn Cole of Waltham Mercer, 43. yeares aged,A Passion of the heart. was grieued with an extreame paine at his heart, so that for the space of three daies he could neither take foode nor rest, and was growne so weake, that e∣uery man doubted his life. A spoonfull of Aurum Po∣tabile was giuen him by those about him, hee not knowing what they gaue him. And after one houre, an other spoonfull; and a while after the third spoon∣full. By this meanes, he continued long in a sweat, and within two daies after was restored to health. THese also whose names are vnder written, haue all in their extremitie of sicknesse, receiued Aurum Potabile, from my Lord Bishop, and are well recouered: But hetherto I haue had no conference with them. Howbeit it is most cer∣taine, that by meanes thereof, they were recouered from sundry dangerous Infirmities. Robert Moore Master of Arts, of this new feuer. Reuben Hamme gent. the like. The wife of Mr. Armwood in the forest, of the like. The wife of Mr. Cotton of Roche Court. The wife of Iohn Hawkesworth, cured of a strange disease, whereof shee had long before languished. Richard Peckham. Tho. Beale, about one hundred yeares of age, and recouered of this new ague, and is yet liuing. Edward Searle of Northampton gent. hauing long languished of this new ague. Nicholas Prior. Anthony Langford.
I Doubt not but that these Testimonies so war∣ranted, being but a few exemplarie proofes of very many, will satisfie any vnderstanding and honest reader. I intend not with a whole Calender or endlesse Catalogue, and with tedious reading of the same thing often done, to weary the reader. Else I could easily inlarge this Roule: It being certaine, that there is scarce any one Shire or Lordship in England, from whence I haue not bin sent vnto, for my potable gold, with which, Noble∣men, gentlemen, and persons of other rankes haue bin diuersly cured and releeued, in their necessi∣ties of their healths: Apparent it is, that it neuer hurt any, profited all, though all haue not recoue∣red. We must herein euer acknowledge the vnre∣uealed ordinance of God, not to bee controlled by any Art or Industrie of humane Remedies. I desire therefore the patient Indifferencie of all Readers, to consider and fauourably to Interpret these my proceedings. For I acknowledge and con∣fesse, that in ordinary Cures performed, no Ratio∣nall Physition ought to print the Calender of his successes, except in some cure and peculiar case, which seldome happening, may be a light and In∣struction to others (though many haue sought fame thereby) which was farre from my intent and pur∣pose. But the necessitie of vindicating my integri∣tie, and the well knowne truth of the effects of my potable gold, haue made that necessarily volunta∣rie, which before I neuer entertained in priuate consultation. For good wine needs no Bush or
Signe. And these be the motiues why I offer this small assay (I hope not wearisome to be read and obserued) beeing a short mention of some persons and Diseases, which haue receiued present helpe by the vse of this so maligned Medicine: (my po∣table gold) I say, a short mention, not of all, nor the greater part, nor in any neere proportion of num∣ber to the totall. For some will not consent to bee named: and some specialties may not be diuulged. And in some respect I am not very forward of mine owne nature to enlarge the malice of my tra∣ducers, by publishing some Cures which cannot please them to heare of. Thus farre forth concer∣ning other mens testimonies: I will proceede to mine owne practise. AS the brighter the Sunne is, the more apparent be the shadowes caused by solid & thicke duskish bodies: so, the more excellent & famous the glorie is, that is atchieued by things wel & faithfully per∣formed; the more it is spurgald with the kicking heeles of Enuie. As this is true in all actions and commercements of this life, so it hath notoriously and lauishly bin practised against me in my proceedings. At the very first, this corroding spite, sparing no man, this malicious detraction, enemie of truth, set vp their whole rest in such fashi∣on as they could, to demolish my faire buil∣ding. But truth, that precious daughter of time, hath now vndertaken the quarrell,
that will say, nill they, shee must and will preuaile against their furie, and maintaine her quiet nauigation, notwithstanding any gustes or stormes, from their dry, and water∣lesse Clowdes. And to the intent that eue∣ry vnpartiall, vnpreiudiced, and Intelli∣gent reader, may the better vnderstand the cause of these Impressions, and the state and first force of this controuersie, which hath now enforced the publike attestation of the vertues of this Medicine: I will as briefely and sparingly as may be, by one or two Instances, declare the first originall cause. SIr Adolfe Cary a worthy knight, nobly descen∣ded, being not well, sent for a Physition of great name & fame: who gaue him such Medicines as he thought fit, one being a Purgation, which did not only clense the first veines, but wrought somewhat forceably. Within short time after, the disease was dis∣couered to be the small Pocks. But by the vnseasona∣ble revulsion and indraught of that so strong Purga∣tion (as I thinke) and peraduenture by some other neglect, nature failed in the sufficient expulsion of the pustules. Also those exitures which appeared, shortly after sunke againe, or, as we commonly say, went in. Hereupon, the Patient fell into that extremitie, that the eminent perill of his life could not be hid, so that all they that were about him despaired vtterly of his recouery. Wherefore they sent to his brother, to call hastily for the Doctors best accquainted with the
state of his body, which were two: Who missing them both, neither knowing where to seeke either of them, and being very sensible and heauy for his brothers desperate case, by chance met with me in the way, in∣treats me to accompany him to his brother, then ly∣ing dangerously sicke. But I hearing the names of those Doctors, was vnwilling to goe, being loth to giue offence: also that gentleman was at that time vt∣terly vnknowne vnto me, whereby the rather I excu∣sed my selfe. He replied, that I was sufficiently knowne to him by a friend of his whom I had cured, and therefore instantly persisted, that in so honest and necessary and iust a cause I would not refuse him. I consented, went with him; and being then euening I visited the sicke gentleman his brother, and found him in a most deplorable state, without sleepe or any other rest, raging and rauing. He tooke a spoonfull of my Aurum potabile, with which he presently became quiet, of a more cheerefull countenance, and fell into a gentle sleepe. After one houre I gaue him an other spoonfull, after which he spake aduisedly, & said he was much comforted, & so sleept again, & sweat natu∣rally al his body ouer. And (which was the best signe) the Pocks or Pustuls did againe come out plentifully. I attended him all that night, & at fit & seasonable times gaue him my medicine, sometime pure of it selfe, sometimes mixed with broth or other cōuenient liquor. The next morning, one of his first Doctors comming & finding me there with his patient, tooke that for his occasion to raile on me in vnseeming termes. To whom it was answered, that I was vnwil∣lingly and almost compulsiuely brought thither, by the neerest of blood to the sick gentleman, & with no lesse intreaty then others. But these Physitians were
so far from conferring with me cōcerning the further health of this patient, whom they then found in very good case, that they both ioyned, and would not bee quiet, before they had rid me thence; contrary to the will of the patient, and of those that were present. In what case and state I both found and left this gentle∣man, you haue hard. After my departure, what coo∣ling, or astringent, or otherwise qualified Syrupes, or Electuaries, or other forme of medicine they gaue him all that day I know not. But this I know, that the next night he relapsed into the same cruell and despe∣rate accidents, in which I formerly had found him, and from which I had restored him: peraduenture, he fell into this relaps for want of that my medicine, so powrefull in strengthning the heart, and expelling poyson from it. For doubtlesse, the exitures being stopped, and the poyson returning from the outward parts of the body, whither nature had expelled it, to the heart, the same accidents must needes returne. Such relapses are most dangerous, because both the infection is stronger, and the body weaker. And so it appeared in this noble gentleman, by this his vntime∣ly death. Then did these Physitions vnder whose hands he died, bethinke themselues of some strata∣geme, to avoid the imputation imminent. One of them therefore hastneth to the Court, where he pub∣lisheth excuse of himselfe, and accusation of me. And further causeth me to bee cited to the Colledge of London Physitions, and with the eloquence of Ter∣tullus very stoutly accuseth me, as culpable of the death of this gentleman. Where I acquited my selfe, and maintained my innocency by foure lawfull witnesses, seruants and attendants of their late Master the de∣ceased knight: Who with one consent and contesta∣tion
dilated: That I came to their said Master lying in his last and extreame pangs, rauing after the exi∣tures of the small pocks were striken in: That after I had with carefull and diligent attendance all that night administred my potable Gold vnto him, as a∣foresaid, the extremities of his passions, and grieuous∣nesse of accidents were much eased and abated, he more quiet and in better sense, and that the Pustules of his diseafe did againe plentifully breake out, by which meanes he was respectiuely in good temper: And that the next day when the said Physitions had excluded me, and giuen him their mixtures, all things turned to their old course, he to his former extremi∣ties, and so died. His Maiestie also had commanded 4. honourable persons to be present at the Colledge in the hearing and debating of these actions now in question: that is, the right honourable the Lord Kne∣uet, Sir Henry and Sir Philip Cary knights, brethren of Sir Adolph deceased, and Sir William Godolphin knight; who finding it fully proued, how I found him (in the agony of death) how I left him (in good temper) how the other Doctors receiued him (in very good case for that disease) how they left him (dead,) truly reported the whole matter to the Kings Maiestie as indeede it was. What his Maiesties censure then was herein, and on whom he would lay this imputation of his death, may easily be coniectured out of the manifestations of the cause. Also those two worthy brethren, meere strangers to me at that time, liuing in honourable ac∣count and place, so generously and vertuously, that none dare entertaine any sinister thought against their sinceritie; nor opinion that they will for any re∣spect whatsoeuer be induced to report any vntruth for me nor any other: are alwaies ready to giue fur∣ther
satisfaction, if any as yet be not sufficiently per∣swaded of these proceedings. Reason it selfe, in one maine ground of Physicall indications doth teach vs, that, à iuvantibus et nocentibus, from such things as helpe, and such things as hurt, a most inuincible argu∣ment is drawne, and concluded. Is it not a generall rule with all Physitions, to continue the vse of those things which haue manifestly releeued and profited the patient (if there be no necessarie exception) and to fly and for beare the vse of those which haue hurt, or done no good? Nature teacheth brute beasts, to seeke shadowed and coole places, in the heat of sommer, be∣cause their sense findes ease and refreshing by the shaddow, and hurt and annoyance by the parching sunne. Apparant it is, that my Potable gold did euen miraculously refresh, helpe, profite and comfort this diseased gentleman, of whom this question first grew. For his vnderstanding was thereby recouered: quiet∣nesse, rest, and sleepe procured: naturall and health∣full sweating caused: and the poyson of his disease driuen from the center and heart, whereby the pu∣stules and exitures did againe appeare and come forth. All arguments and signes of good estate and temper in that disease did appeare as portending a perfect recouerie. On the other side, whatsoeuer the Medicines administred by these two other Doctors were, before or after my comming, I know not. But, most certaine it is, that whatsoeuer they gaue, or howsoeuer they handled the matter, much hurt suc∣ceeded, euen the greatest mischiefe that may hap∣pen to a languishing patient. For all the concourse of his former grieuous, direfull, and mortall sympto∣maticall accidents returnes with double strength, when his heart and vital spirits were not able to resist.
The striking in againe of the exitures, rauing, wrest∣ling, and (which only remained to conclude the tra∣gedie) Death it selfe, the last of all lines that man can draw: and a true line to draw and direct vnderstan∣ding men to the true cause of his death. These cir∣cumstances compulsarily wrung from me, be suffici∣ent for the euidence of this verity to all men, that will not maliciously spurne against apparant truth. But my traducers doe still spiderlike sucke poyson in stead of hony, and force themselues to an vnnaturall vomit of these humors against this medicine, truly of gold, and truly potable. In which bitternesse if they did not still persist, against their owne science, con∣science, regard of vertue and veritie, wounding ma∣ny honest hearts, with false suggestions against my good name, and the innocuous worthinesse of this Medicine, and defrauding many poore languishing soules of the vse and benefite thereof, I would, and surely gladly would, for their sakes, haue forborne the narration and report of this true storie: Which I am by them compelled to publish for my Apo∣logie. MIstres Cicely Boulstred, a worthie gentlewo∣man,Extreme vo∣miting. and virgine, attending in neere seruice our gracious Queene, in good fauour and ac∣count, fell sicke, and had greiuous passions. Vnto whome diuers of the most famous Physitions of the Colledge were called. Who with great care, and their vtmost skill, sparing no cost (as was fitting in such a place) administred all kinds of conducing Medicines, both Cordials, and other respectiuely to the cause of her disease, and passions: both such as be ready in the
shoppes, as others by some singularitie of Art prepa∣red. Her passions still continued, if not encreased. Continuall vomiting, and reiection of whatsoeuer she tooke, meate, drink, medicines: with swoundings, torture, torments of euery part of her body. A mise∣rable and pitifull spectacle, much lamented of many very honourable persons. Shee could not rest nor sleepe night nor day. So that sinking vnder the bur∣den of this affliction, with the violence and continu∣ance thereof, her strength vtterly failed. Shee could not retaine so much as one drop of any broth or o∣ther nourishment. Her Stomacke by coniecture of all Physitions, was drawen together and shut vp, without any power or faculty to performe the offices of nature. In this miserable estate, this distressed gentlewoman languished two whole monthes, with∣out any ease or releefe by the vse of any the Medi∣cines giuen her by the aduise of the said Physitions: all things tending to a more desperate and Imme∣dicable estate. Whereupon the mother of this gen∣tlewoman demanded of these said Doctors, whether they had any hope to giue helpe, or at least wise ease to her daughter; else she said she would send for Do∣ctor Anthony. Those Doctors hereupon limited them∣selues to a certaine time, which they spent in their vt∣termost habilities to perform, to the intēt I shold not be called. To which purpose they commanded an A∣pothecary to attend in the Chamber of the patient all the next day and night, and euery third houre to giue her a Cordiall. Then voluntarily they said to the mo∣ther, Send for Doct. Anthony if you will, and God send him good successe with your daughter. Then was I sent for, and finding this gentlewoman in so despe∣rate a case, left and giuen ouer by all the Doctors of
the Colledge as not to be recouered, (for besides the aduise of these Six, there had beene publike consulta∣tions in the Colledge, as is requisite in such like cases which sildome come in vse) I desired God to blesse my endeauours, and to continue his blessings in the administration of this my happy medicine. After a small time, vpon due and mature consideration of all things, I gaue her at the first, not a whole spoonfull of my Aurum potabile, as in other cases, but much lesse, scarce a quarter so much; which she cast vp againe with a vehement force and torture of her body. A lit∣tle while after I gaue her as much more, which she cast vp in the same manner as she did the first. Againe I gaue it the third time, some part of which shee also cast vp, but kept some, with a kind of strife or conflict betweene the medicine and the maladie. Then I ad∣uised, that she should not further be troubled for a sea∣son, but to try if shee could now take a little rest or sleepe: So she disposed her selfe thereunto, and slept soundly a whole houre; which diuers of great ac∣count then present can witnesse. For she snored that we all heard: Which seemed strange to all: conside∣ring for a long time before shee had taken no rest. When she waked, she said that she found her selfe somewhat better at ease. Then (which was the fourth time) I gaue her halfe a spoonful, which she kept with∣out any contending or trouble to her body. This gaue me, and many worthy gentlewomen there pre∣sent, great hope of a good recouerie. Wherein (God be praised) we were not deceiued. For in all the other administring of this Medicine, orderly, as she was a∣ble to beare, increasing the quantitie, her spirits were releeued, she daily recouered strength, all the passi∣ons, symptomes and accidents of her diseases ceased,
her sicknesse fully left her, and she recouered perfect health. Thus with the vse of this happy Medicine, this gentlewoman was recouered, and cured of that dangerous disease, wherein those other Doctors had wearied themselues, and forsaken her; at which her friends wondred, mine reioyced, and other malicious aduersaries fretted: for which God be praised. If they will call these the effects of Iugling, and of a corro∣siue Medicine, they will hardly finde any Cordiall a∣mongst all their Dispensatories and Magistrall pre∣scriptions. The cause and effect are Essentiall Rela∣tiues. THe Lady and wife of Sir Francis Leake Knight,Continuall vomiting and destillation of Reume conti∣nuing many moneths. being now conceiued of her first childe, was fallen into many infirmities. Shee had a con∣tinuall and abundant slux at her mouth, caused by collection of phlegmaticke and pituitous hu∣mors: Also a continuall vomiting and casting, euer after any food taken. Her flux ceased not neither day nor night. She was brought to that weaknes & lean∣nesse in her body, that al her friends thought she was in a consumption. During the time of this sicknes (which was fiue moneths) she vsed many medicines in hope of remedy, but found none. And therefore iustly feared eyther miscarying her trauell, or the losse of her owne life. Whereupon, by the perswasion of some friends, which knew right well the efficacie of my Potable gold, she tooke therof the third month before the time of her deliuery, and at seuerall times continued the vse of it. By which meanes, her vomi∣ting, & flux of spitting ceased, she recouered strength
and good habit: and all the rest of the time of her childe bearing, continued in very good health and disposition. And in due time was deliuered of a faire and strong Sonne, which is yet liuing. THe Lady and wife of Sir Edward Barret knight,Perill in childbirth. and sister to the forenamed Lady, being in tra∣uell of childbirth, in such hazard and extremi∣ties of hard labour, that both her Midwiues & all other there present despaired both of safety and life of mother and child; by counsell of a great Ladie then in my chamber tooke of my Potable gold, and beyond the expectation of them all, was presently deliuered of a child in good liking But the after burden stayed, which in that weakenesse made them feare the like danger. Therefore they gaue her the same Medicine againe, by which the after burden fol∣lowed, she recouered, and did well. THis Medicine hath likewise bin happy and succesfull to very many others, Weomen in like cases, euen after the childe hath beene dead in their bodies, and they giuen ouer in their last extremities. So that it is scarse possible to finde any Medicine to match this in such cases, whereof I will set downe a few examples. THe wife of Ioseph Pemberton Haberdasher of Ips∣wichChildbirth. in the Countie of Suffolke, was deliuered by meanes of this Potable gold, being in great extre∣mitie and danger, by reason of her hard labour.
THe wife of Master Oratio Paluasino, was recoueredChildbirth. by the same Medicine, beeing in great danger through hard labour in childe-birth. IN like manner was the wife of Thomas BlackeborneChildbirth. Citizen of London, when she had beene two daies in labour, safely deliuered by this helpe. THe wife of Nicholas Colman in Great Saint Bar∣tholmewes,Childbirth. was euen at the point of Death, and vpon the taking of this Aurum Potabile, was presently deliuered, and her life preserued. MAster Foxton in Red Crosse streete, had his wifeDead birth. in the like case, and in greater danger, by reason of the childe in her body being dead. THe like Foetus mortuus, or dead birth, the wife ofDead birth. Master Castle, of Hatfield Peuerell in Essex, had carried in her body three daies, neither could she be deliuered by any helpe, vntill shee tooke the Aurum Potabile.
THe wife of Master Harde dwelling vpon Saint Peters Hill in London, was deliuered of a deadDead birth. childe, yet neuerthelesse she was still full of in∣tollerable paines. Whereupon the wife of M. Fitzgarret Esquire neere dwelling, gaue vnto her of my Aurum Potabile, the next day after her deliuery of that childe, at 9. of the clocke in the morning. And the same day at 2. of the clocke in the after noone, shee was deliuered of an other dead childe, and then presently recouered. THe wife of Mast. Iohn Bingle of the Exchequer wasPerill of Childbirth. in her trauell in great peril of death, vnto whom a graue gentlewoman there present at her labour, gaue of my Aurum Potabile; with which helpe, both shee and the childe were saued. THe Lady and wife of Sir Iohn Pretiman knight,Burning feuer in Childbirth. being in childe-bed, fell into a burning feuer: al∣so she could take no rest nor sleepe: And other very violent passions she endured. She was not willing to take any manner of Medicine. Only Aurum Pota∣bile shee tooke, and was quickly restored to health. THe wife of Mast. Edmund Kingstone, of GlocesterBurning feuer and bloody flux in Child∣bed. shire, being in childe-bed had a burning feuer, and with it a bloody flux. She was throughly cu∣red by the same meanes which the Lady Pretiman vsed.
AN other gentlewoman of the same Countie,Feuer and scouring in Childbed. the wife of Christopher Blackewell, was by the same meanes cured of a feuer, with an excessiue scouring, lying in childbed. THe wife of Master Iohn Sherington of LondonPreseruation of Aborte. Marchant, being with childe, had many passi∣ons and euident causes, to make her feare abor∣tion or miscarrying. Beeing therefore aduised thereunto, she tooke of my Aurum Potabile, daily a proportionable quantitie, and went out her full time, receiued Gods blessing in the safe deliuery of a faire childe. Whereby it appeareth that this Medicine hath diuers vertues and faculties: As in case, both to promote the birth where it is stayed, be the birth aliue or dead: as also to stay and preuent abortion of miscarrying, vnto the full time and periode of the naturall birth, which in the power of the Me∣dicine is but one: That is, the onely comforting, strenghtning, and enabling of nature, to promote and performe her owne actions, which way soeuer is most fit for the safety & health of the body, as in other cases before hath beene obserued. And not only profitable to each mother in all those former causes, but to the infant also, as shall appeare by one Relation, which here followeth.
THe wife of Master Richard Browne Esquire,Perill in Childbirth. dwelling in the Blacke fryers, was long in la∣bour of childbirth, and in great danger, not∣withstanding she had two midwiues with her. A cer∣taine gentlewoman and neighbour being then pre∣sent, perswaded to send for some of my Aurum Pota∣bile, and to giue it her. One Midwife said, she had bet∣ter meanes to giue her. But when all meanes fayled, and small hope of life remained, then was my Aurum Potabile sent for. And after it was twice administred vnto her, she was safe deliuered of a liuing and well liking childe, God be praised. The next day follow∣ing,The new borne Infant in danger. the same gentlewoman and neighbour, came to visite the mother and childe, finding the childe in the Midwiues lap, not well, but languishing and ill. The Midwife desired of this gentlewoman some of the Aurum Potabile for to giue the childe. It was then asked, whether she, who had denied it vnto the mo∣ther the former day, would now giue it vnto so yong an infant? The Midwife answered, that hauing seene the admirable effect thereof the day before, she doub∣ted not of successe in the childe. She gaue it therefore vnto the childe, mixed with breastmilke, and the childe presently amended. If therefore such yong infants, which skantly haue seene the light of the Sun, and haue brought from the mothers wombe their infirmities, and not taken them by misdiet or misorder, doe finde releefe by this Medicine; as also women in their concep∣tion, and in time of their deliuerie, and afterwards lying in childbed, as is euidently set downe in
particularitie: Euen in this only case, it meriteth that account, that no Lady or gentlewoman of accompt, should at any time bee vnfurnished thereof, for the benefit of themselues, and their in∣fants, in case of necessitie: seeing that no Medicine is more powerfull, more secure, more pleasing to take. SIr Lewis Lewknar knight, in the yeare of our Lord 1611, fell dangerously sicke with a cōtinuall bur∣nīgThe Plague or Pestilence. feuer, & vehement passions. He sent for two famous Physitions of the Citie of London; which followed and plyed him sixe daies with al the condu∣cible remedies they could deuise, but without any successe. For they neither eased his passions, nor aba∣ted the burning heate and furie of the feuer: So that the patiēt euery day waxed worse & worse: at the last, an Aposteme appeared in his groyne, a true token in such a disease, of a pestilent and contagious infection: which at that time, though not since, was very hot in London. Thereupon these Doctors excused them∣selues, in that they were tied to the attendance of di∣uerse noble persons, whom they were loth to infect. And therefore, were compelled to bid him farewell. And accordingly left this worthy gentleman, to wre∣stle with this disease, for the cure of which they were waged, and by conscience thereunto tyed; and his trust in them was reposed. They hauing thus taken their leaues, I was sent for, not knowing the disease, which could not long hide it selfe, hauing such mani∣fest tokens. Yet I thought it, against both charity and honestie, now being with him, to forsake him. And therefore resolued (by the grace of God) with some
powerfull and strong Antidote, to expell the poyson from his heart, and afterwards to proceede for his fur∣ther recouery, as occasion should be ministred. To which purpose, I first gaue him sixe graines of my Es∣sence of gold, mixed appropriatly. After which, in a small time, he began to sweate, which continued all that night, and a great part of the next day. The next night, and so euery day for 4. daies more, I gaue againe the same Medicine, in the same quantity, which caused abundant sweating, whereby both the malignitie of the feuer and the vnnaturall heate was exceedingly a∣bated: the Aposteme, which was risen very great, did daily decrease, and at last quite vanished, only with a certaine sticticke plaster outwardly applied. Thus he was cured of this mortall and contagious disease, be∣fore it was knowne abroad of what he was sicke: which I would not now haue published, but that the Knight himselfe, hath not beene sparing amongst his friends to report both what his sicknesse was, and the story of his Physitions and recouery. THe yeare before, I had likewise cured of the sameThe Plague or Pestilence. disease, with an Aposteme also appearing, the Lady and wife of the same worthy knight. THe Lady Edmonds widdow, about the age of 78.Dropsie and Iaundise in extreame old age. yeares, a Lady well knowne in Court: (so likewise are those that formerly are named) about three yeeres past was fallen into a dropsie, with all the symptomes thereunto belonging. Her belly, face, legs, hands,
greatly swelled: blood wasted and spent: not free from the Iaundise, nor far from a Consumption. How dan∣gerous her case was, is sufficiently knowne. She was perfectly restored (praised be God) in short time, no∣thing being ministred vnto her, but only the Aurum potabile and Essence of Gold. This Lady, spared not either for cost, or due obseruation to preserue life and health, after that she had once found comfort there∣by; for during the space of 12. daies at the first, shee tooke euery morning 3. graines of the Essence, dissol∣ued in a spoonfull of Aurum potabile: and the like pro∣portion was taken at night when she went to rest. Al∣so before dinner and supper, at each time one spoon∣full of the Aurum potabile alone. After 12. daies were spent, and that her stomacke was amended, naturall rest returned, her strength increased, the disease aba∣ted, and all the state of her body bettered, then the Lady tooke of the Essence but once a day. And so by degrees all things in lesser proportion. Needfull it was, that this Lady should take these helpes in greater proportion, then vsuall, partly in regard of the Infir∣mitie, being a capitall disease: partly also in regard of her yeeres, in which nature was not so powerfull to o∣uercome the malady, as in youth. SIr Thomas Parrey knight, Chancelor of the Du∣chy, and of his Maiesties priuy Councell, beingExtreme cough in age and want of sleepe. of the age of 77. yeares, this last winter was much deiected in habilitie and strength of body eue∣ry waies. His appetite abated, his sleepe diminished, tormented with an extreame cough day and night, not able in many weekes together, to goe forth of his
house for execution of his place. He had vsed good helpes of learned Physitions, from time to time all the winter long. In February last I was brought vnto this honourable person; and finding that the best Medicines ordinarily, in vse had nothing auailed, I perswaded him to take of my Aurum Potabile, where∣unto he willingly condescended. I gaue him thereof in the morning in bed fasting, as also one houre be∣fore Dinner and Supper, at each time a spoonfull. Also whereas vsually his sleepe was but two houres euery night, which was after he was first laid in bed, and then afterwards being once awaked, he slept no more all that night, but continually did lie coughing, vn∣till he arose in the morning: my counsell was, that af∣ter his first sleepe, his Honor should take two graines of the Essence of golde, dissolued in one spoonfull of the Aurum Potabile: which doing, he alwaies within halfe an houre, was at good and quiet rest, his Cough ceased, and he slept quietly vntill sixe of the clocke in the morning. This course it pleased him to continue vntill the 12. of Aprill, in which time he daily gathe∣red strength and habilitie of body to vndergoe any seruice of his Maiestie. And thus he continueth still to the praise of God. A Certaine yong gentleman, onely Sonne andDebilitie of retention of sperme. heire vnto his Father being of great possessi∣ons, complained vnto me that his sperme pas∣sed from him vnsensibly both day and night, where∣by his body was much enfeebled, his complexion al∣tered, and a Consumption imminent. A marriage was tendered vnto this yong gentleman, being an heire also. Conditions agreed vpon by Parents on both
sides, both for Dowre and Ioynter. The father of this gentleman being in feare of his sonnes life, was loath to make any perfect Contract, vntill he had found Remedie for his sonne. Hee vsed the best helpe that the Country could afforde, wherein he liued. But finding none, he brought vp his sonne to Lon∣don, vsed my counsell; and with the helpe of Aurum Potabile, the Essence of Golde, and a Solution of Pearle which in such case I doe vse, he hath recouered perfect state of body, is married, and hath Issue. This Gentleman about twelue Moneths since being in London, came to visite me, whome when I beheld I knew not vntill he had manifested himselfe vnto me; so greatly was his body altered euen into a full vigor and perfect constitution. THe wife of Master Robert Dixon, Secretary vn∣to Sir Henry Montague Knight, Recorder of theSpeech and sence lost in Childbed. Citie of London, being deliuered in childbed; was possessed with a most violent burning fe∣uer. Shee had three Physitions of great woorth, who ministred vnto her such helpes, as Art could af∣foard in that case. Not preuailing, they left her being senselesse. Then did the Lady Tanfield send vnto me for some of my Aurū Potabile, which her Ladish. cau∣sed to be giuen vnto this gentlewoman. In short time after sheefell into a sweate, not long after shee slept; and when shee did awake, shee had recouered both sence and speech, her burning feuer was asswaged, and in few daies after by Iudgement of al her friends, shee seemed past all perill and danger of life. But shortly after, rising vp out of her bed, and sitting vp o∣uer long, shee tooke cold, so that all the parts of her
body became colde & were vtterly benummed, and without sense, her speech failed, & her strength & spi∣rits much abated. The former worthy Lady being in∣formed therof, did send againe of my Aurum Potabile vnto her, which instantly put her into a sweat, after she was in bed, and by degrees restored her vnto perfect health. The same gentlewoman being lately deliue∣red of two daughters, fell into the like passions both of heate and colde, and in each of these extremities was releeued with the Essence of Gold, as formerly she had beene, with Aurum Potabile. MAster William Rowden the Kings Maiesties ser∣uantSpeech and sence lost. and Marshall of his Hall, 70. yeares of age, or thereabout, with a continuall Ardent feuer which held him long, he was at the last brought to that debilitie and weakenesse, that he altogether kept his bed, tooke no rest day nor night, but for the most part lay senselesse, not knowing what was said or done vnto him. In this extremitie I was brought, and it pleased God that by these former helpes, he was recouered, and remaineth still in perfect health. MAster William Gore now Alderman & SheriffeAquartane A∣gue. of the citie of London, threescore yeares of age or thereabout, dwelling in Bow lane, for the space of many Moneths languished of a quar∣taine feuer. In which time, by prescript of learned Physitions, he had taken so many Medicines, that he vtterly abhorred all vsuall Physicke. When he was in∣formed
by some of his well wishing friends, that my Aurum Potabile, was very Cordiall, effectuall in opera∣tion, and not loathsome or vnpleasing to take, he was resolued to make vse thereof, although he had resol∣ued neuer to vse any more Physicke. But being dis∣swaded by some of his Physitions, my professed ad∣uersaries, he refrained the space of some weekes, vntill meere necessitie (by reason of his still continuing quartane, and his strength daily abating) enforced him to send for me. I ministred vnto him at returne of his next fit, a small quantitie of my Aurum Potabile with 2. graines of the Essence of golde; which gaue him such contentment during the time of his fit, that his feuer was much more tollerable then formerly it had beene, and himselfe in farre better vigor after his fit. Thē did he much admire what reason his Physiti∣ons could alleadge, for the disabling of that Medi∣cine. To conclude, in very few fittes, this Medicine cleared him of his feuer, it brought him to quiet rest, restored him to appetite, and brought him to good habilitie and strength of body. And vntill this time, it is and hath beene a continuall releefe vnto him, whensoeuer hee findeth himselfe inclining to any manner of debilitie or sicknesse. AS in this case, so haue they dealt with di∣uers of the Nobility of this land & honou∣rable personages, who in extremity of their sickenesse, hauing first vsed (and that fruitlesly) all the course of Physicke which their Physitions in Art could aduise them) haue desired the helpe of my Aurum Potabile. But haue beene diuerted by malicious cauillations of those, who rather
desire their owne lucre and gaine, then the life of their patients. Neuerthelesse some of the right Honourable, not beeing daunted by their terrify∣ings (more fit for children and babes, then for men and women of vnderstanding) haue made happie vse thereof both in Court and Citie; al∣though for causes conuenient, it is not publikely di∣uulged, and yet peraduenture not vtterly silenced. But time, in his due time, will bring the truth to light. MAster Mathew Dale, Iustice of Peace & Iudge in Gilde Hall, 76. yeares of age, hath sundry times beene troubled with an infirmitie inci∣dent to age: that is, want of Retention of his vrine. Whereby sometimes in the night season, he hath bin inforced more then twenty times to make water: whereby his naturall rest (which should haue sustai∣ned nature) was taken from him: and consequently his stomacke failed, & his strength abated. Vpon the vse of Aurum Potabile, these extremities were abated, and he continued vntill the end of his daies, in good state of body, answerable vnto his yeeres. THe wife of Master Mathew Dale, 70. yeares ofConsumpti∣on of the Lungs. age, hauing an infirmitie of the Lungs, altoge∣ther vncurable, was neuerthelesse preserued in good state of body, many yeares with helpe of this Aurum Potabile.
SIr William Hericke Knight, had by his Lady twoFalling ¦nesse. daughters, the one after the other. Each of them being 20. weekes of age, was taken with the Epi∣lepsie or falling sicknes, and died of that disease. After them, he had by his said wife a third daughter; then did they change their Nurse, suspecting that some de∣fect might be in the Nurses milke. When this daugh∣ter came to the age of 16. weeks, the Epileptical fits be∣gan to possesse this infant, and daily the fits increased, vntill the disease came to the height. Then was the Nurse & child sent for hither to London; hauīg heard that I had cured some in the like infirmity. The father vsed my help in this case. It pleased God that with the helpe of my Aurum potabile and Essence of gold (with some helpes giuen to the nurse) I perfectly cured that Child of this dangerous infirmitie. This was done in the spring time. Then I aduised the Lady, that the like should be done at next fall of the leafe: But that being neglected, the child vpon the feast day of All-Saints next following, fell into the same disease againe; which I likewise cured the second time. Since this time, being now foure yeeres past, this child neuer had fit, praised be God. IN like manner, and of the same infirmitie, a SonneFalling sick∣nesse. of Sir George Wright Knight, being a yeare old was cured by me, and many others, whereof some shall be mentioned in this treatise hereafter. IOhn Vnet, belonging to the right honourable SirSpeech and sense lost Henry Hubbard Knight, Lord chiefe Justice of the Common-Pleas, 40. yeeres of age or thereabout, after long sicknesse, was at the last brought to that de∣bilitie and weaknesse, that he lay depriued of speech
and sense. The bell tolled for him: The seruants of the house had taken their leaue of him: no hope of life remained. Being in this manner at point of death, some of my Aurum potabile was put into his mouth: by which he was brought againe to speech, to sense, and lastly restored to perfect health, being formerly by iudgment of all, ordained for death. Of this case, Raymund Lully in his booke of the Quintessence wri∣teth in this manner. We terme them dead men, not those which absolutely are dead, but those of whom by the opinion of Physitions there is vtter despaire, so that they are forsaken by all Physitions, and the actions of life haue relinquished them, and be depriued of sense. If such like men (saith he) reputed thus dead men, shall recouer life and health by a Quintes∣sence, then may they iustly be said to be reuiued from death. IN like manner was there an other, whose name isSpeech and sence lost Robert Brodbottome, a Citizen, 60. yeares of age, neighbour vnto Sir Lewis Lewknar then dwelling in Aldersgate streete; being likewise at deaths doore, the bell hauing tolled for him the space of three houres. The said Knight, when he vnderstood that it tolled for his neighbour whom he well loued, sent him of my Aurum potabile, willing the wife of the said patient by any possible meanes, to put the same into his mouth. Which being done, he shortly after fell in∣to a sleepe, sweating in his sleepe, & after his awaking, his sense and speech returned, and himselfe recouered health, and yet is liuing. THe daughter and heire of Sir Walter Coape knight, now Lady and wife of Sir Henry Rich knight, be∣ing
then dangerously sicke of the small Pocks (where∣ofSmall poxe many worthy Knights, Ladies, and gentlewomen haue miscaried of late) was presently releeued by vse of my Aurum potabile, and the small Pocks expulsed plentifully. IN the small Pocks also, and likewise in the measels, diuers haue beene recouered, whose only names I record, and none haue miscaried to my knowledge which in due time haue embraced the benefite of this medicine. The Lady and wife of Sir Richard Ogle knight. A gentle woman belonging to the Lady and wife of Sir Edward Barret knight. Sir Henry Caries Page. Sir Henry Caries daughter, of the measels. The Sonne and heire of Sir Henry Cary, of the small pox. A young daughter of Sir Richard Norton knight, of the Measels, which were striken in and recoiled by cold taking whereby the child was in great dan∣ger. A Kinswoman of Mistris Browne of Essex, wid∣dow. A Seruant of Master Marsh Esquire, then dwelling in Colman-streete. A Maid seruant, belonging to Ro. Dixon before mentioned. An other maid seruant of Master Iohn Morris Marchant, dwelling neere vnto leaden hall. An Infant of Mr. Price the Kings seruant.
DAily experiēce also hath taught vs of late, that very many both young and old haue miscaried of the Small Pox, euen vnder the hands of the best practised Physitions, although the cure of them be accounted no difficult matter: vnto whom, if this approued Medicine, so secure from danger: so powerfull in corroborating the Heart, and ex∣pelling the venemous malignitie of that Disease, had beene at hand, and had beene administred in due time and forme, no doubt but (the vertue ex∣pulsiue being fortified in the patient, and the ma∣teriall venenositie subtiliated) if not all, yet some of them, might by this only Medicine haue beene recouered. As the vse hereof hath preuented death in many, so likewise very many wanting the benefit thereof, in the flowre of their age perished; which haue vsed purgatiue Medicines, whose propertie is to draw malignant humors from the externall parts, vnto the center of the body, and to the very Heart it selfe. I leaue this matter to bee considered of, by those whom in like case it may concerne hereafter. THe Honorable Lady and widdow Doretie Skot,Vomiting of sustenance in old age. sometime the wife of Sir Thomas Skot Knight of the age of 78. yeares, for the space of many daies could retaine no manner of sustenance, but instantly cast vp by vomit whatsoeuer shee receiued. Neither could this be stayed by any Medicine ministred
vnto her. All meanes failing, my Aurum Potabile stai∣ed this extremitie. And after taking thereof, shee like∣wise tooke any manner of other sustenance, and re∣tained the same. Hereby it may appeare, that this one and the same Medicine, doth sometime procure vo∣mit, when nature would be vnburdened, and at other times it suppresseth vomit, when nature is so infee∣bled, that it would faine retaine nutriment for susten∣tation, but cannot. MAster Napper Esquire, dwelling in Oxford, 60. yeares of age, was long time perplexed with aVomiting and scooring. very strange infirmity. He was diuers times taken with an extreme vomiting, with a scooring likewise, which both continued the space of 2. or 3. daies commonly euery houre without intermission vntill his body was vtterly exhausted. Thē he became so feeble and weake, that he was inforced to keepe his bed many daies, vntill by degrees he recouered some strength againe. But when his body began to be re∣pleate, then did he fall into his former passions. In this manner he continued one whole yeare more. He vsed for Remedie, the counsell and aduise of Physi∣tions both at Oxford and London. When all their meanes auailed not, then did he send vnto me for my Aurum Potabile, which by the helpe of God preuailed in this case, to the great admiration of many. THe wife of Master William Wiseman Counsellor at the Law, after her safe deliuery in Childbirth, was possessed both with a feuer, as also with an extra∣ordinary
and a dangerous flux, tam per Menstrua quàm per sedes. Her sleepe also was thereby vtterly taken from her. By meanes whereof shee was brought vnto great Imbecillitie and despaire of life. In this dange∣rous case, after the fruitlesse helpe of other Physiti∣ons she was recouered and perfectly restored, with the Essence of my golde in few daies. SIr Edward Barret Knight, hauing his abodeEssex Ague. sometime in Essex neere vnto the Marishes (a Country much subiect to Agues) was two seue∣rall times possessed with that kinde of feuer. And each time he was freed from that feuer, by the onely helpe of my Aurum Potabile. Many also of his ser∣uants, more then ten at one seuerall time, haue beene taken with that Country feuer. One especially a∣mongst the rest, a woman, hauing chiefe gouernment ouer the family, was so grieuously afflicted therewith, that her senses were taken from her, and other such like accidents so oppressed her, that there remained small hope of life. Yet it pleased God, that both shee and the rest, in short time were recouered (although the Agues of those parts doe commonly continue long:) as also in one part of Kent, where many haue beene releeued by my Aurum Potabile, after that all o∣ther meanes haue failed. MAster Doctor Sauage, Doctor of the Ciuill Lawes,Essex Ague. 56. yeares of age, lying sicke in Essex of the like feuer, sent for me to come downe vnto him. Beeing
now with him, and before I administred any thing vnto him, hee was strangely taken with convulsions and Crampes, in his hands, feete, legges, face and in all the exterior parts of his body, with extreme tor∣tures, lamentable to beholde. I appeased all these symptomes within the space of one halfe houre, with the Essence of my gold, which in short time brought him into a Sweat, and his Convulsions and Crampes ceased,  feuer also was cured in very short time. THe same Doctor Sauage now lately within these two moneths, was taken with a malignant fe∣uer, a Disease now common in sundry places. He was perfectly cured thereof, only with the Essence of golde. I gaue him thereof three graines, before the beginning of his fit, dissolued in fiue spoonfuls of Endiue water with a little sugar: and the like quantitie in the middest of his hot fit. This I did reiterate euery fit vntill the fourth fit. In which time he was free from his ague. But afterwards he fell into the like feuer againe, as also into those former Con∣vulsions, which could not by any helpe of Medicine be asswaged, vntill he was inforced to send vnto me, 17. miles for the Essence of golde: which being taken gaue him present releefe, admirable vnto them who were eye witnesses of the effect thereof. MAster Thomas Drywood of Northokenden inLong langui∣shing sick∣nesse vpon obstructions. the County of Essex, 30. yeeres of age, by reason of obstructions and other inward cau∣ses, languished a long time, became very leane, and so
into a consumption. Being therewith almost spent, my Aurum potabile was present remedy to him, and he liueth now in good health. THe wife of the said Thomas Drywood, by the sameWeaknesse af∣ter childbirth. medicine recouered from a great weaknesse and decaied estate, caused by hard labour in childbirth, and sicknesse afterwards. A Daughter of theirs being about 4. yeeres old,Obstruct. hauing pined, and decaied long time of an vn∣knowne disease, vpon the taking of my Pota∣ble Gold, vomited vp a great quantity of viscous tough matter, and then recouered presently. A Young daughter of Iohn Fanne Citizen, dwel∣lingObstruct. in Aldersgate streete, being fiue yeeres old, by reason of obstructions in her liuer, splene, and brest, which had long continued, and was thereby much hindred in her breathing, tooke one ounce only of my potable gold, after which she cast vp much slimy stuffe, tough, like molten glasse, that one could scarcely cut with a knife, and presently she amended, and shortly after became perfectly well. MAster William Snelling Fishmonger, dwelling inFalling sick∣nesse. Thamestreete, had a young infant of a yeere old, who was grieuously perplexed with the falling sicknes. His fits were frequent and oft,
sometimes 20. in one day. So that the parents be∣sought God, to take him to his mercy. out of that so great misery: When diuers medicines had beene tried in vaine, he was at the last recouered by my Essence of gold, and neuer since was troubled with any fit, being more then 3. yeeres past. A Maid seruant of the Lady and wife of Sir Tho∣masConvulsions. Smith knight, being 22. yeeres old, was af∣flicted with most violent convulsions, and fits like vnto the falling sicknesse incessantly day and night for a long season: not finding any ease by glis∣ters, and many other medicines giuen her by other Physitions. At last she was by me cured of that feare∣full disease by this my Medicine, and neuer felt it since; three yeeres being past. AN Infant of a yeere and halfe old, daughter vn∣toInward tor∣ments and gripings of an infant. Sir Edward Barret knight, was long grieued with some inward torments and gripings in her belly. The Lady Paget, Baronesse, her grandmo∣ther, gaue her of my Potable Gold, with which she presently cast vp some rawe fleagmaticke matter or humor, and was well for the space of 2. houres: after which time she complained as before, and peraduen∣ture worse. The Lady her grandmother gaue her an other spoonfull, after which she cast againe much viscous matter diuersly coloured, and then slept a whole houre. But waking sodenly, she seemed as one ready to diepresently, hauing many dangerous signes as sowundings, and falling of her iawes &c. So that
the good Lady, holding this Infant all that while in her lap, was faine forcibly to open her mouth, and poured in an other spoonfull mixed with beere or ale. After which she cast againe a blackish and ill sauoured slimy thicke stuffe. Then she was well and recouered. MAster Thomas Allin Esquire, more then 60.Extreame de∣bility. yeeres of age, being lodged in Broad streete, ha∣uing then languished a long time: at last being neere spent, he sent for me: and with my Potable Gold espe∣cially, some other dietary meanes being also prescri∣bed, he was perfectly restored in few daies. MAster Small, gentleman, an Attourney at theA quartane ague. law, and student of Furniualls Inne, 32. yeeres old, had lien sicke of a quartane feuer many moneths, and had also the iaundise. He finding no helpe in o∣ther medicines, was in short time perfectly cured by my Aurum potabile. MAster Thomas Tutteshame gentleman, aged 20.A quartane ague. yeeres, sonne of Master Anthony Tutteshame, both of Staple Inne, was likewise cured of a quartane ague, by my potable gold. A Yong son of Sir Io. Talesburrough knight, aboutEssex ague. 4. yeeres old, lay dangerously sicke in Essex, of the popular and vniuersarie disease, ordinarie in those marish countries, and could not endure to
take any medicines. He tooke my Essence of gold, with the aurum potabile at seuerall times, and was thereby perfectly cured. THe daughter of Sir Anthony Capell knight, a∣boutA Consump∣tion. 14. yeares old, after a long sicknesse fell into a Consumption, with extreme weaknesse. Her father sent vnto me for some of my pota∣ble golde, whereiwth shee was in reasonable time per∣fectly recouered, and restored to her former health. FRancis Wonnam of Darkin in the Countie of Sur∣rey,Palsey of all the body. Yeoman, was taken with a dead Palsey in all parts of his body. To whom Master William Rad∣cliffe Esquire of the same Towne, gaue some of my potable golde which hee had in store for his owne vse, beeing oft times troubled with the Stone; by which meanes the said Wonnam recouered, and had perfect vse both of legs and hands. A Yong gentlemā Io. Studolph, 17. yeares old, be∣ingSpeech lost, and vomiting, then with his mother (a widdow) dwelling neere the foresaid Darkin, was taken with a Palsey in his tongue; his speech was taken from him, and whatsoeuer he did either eate or drinke, he cast it vp. I was sent for, and staied there some three dayes. In which time, by intermissiue administring of my Aurum potabile, and Essence of gold, his vomiting was staied, his speech recouered, and he perfectly cu∣red. But I heard afterwards by some of his friends,
that about a yeare after he fell againe into the same Disease, and died thereof before he could conueni∣ently send for any helpe. MAster Iohn Coles, called Captaine Coles, about 44. yeares old, had long time beene troubledConsumpti∣on of the Lungs. with a dangerous Disease of the Lungs, short∣nesse of breath, coughing and with it, spitting of rot∣ten matter, and seemed to bee in full Consumption. He was perfectly cured with the continued vse of my Potable golde. HEnry Smith seruant to Sir Edward BarretPalsey. Knight, lost his speech by a Palsey, and so some time. Afterwards he perfectly recouered his speech againe, by helpe of my Aurum Potabile. A Seruant of Sir Thomas Smith Knight, hauing beene long troubled with a quartane Ague,Quartane. finding no helpe by other Medicines which had beene giuen vnto him, was cured with my Pota∣ble gold. A Daughter of Master Fitzgarret Esquire, dwel∣ling vpon Saint Peters Hill, was infected withPlague. the Plague or Pestilence, and cured by the on∣ly vse of my Essence of golde, dissolued in my Aurum Potabile with Carduus Water.
ELizabeth Elward, being allied vnto Edward Rug∣ham retainer to the Lord Kneuet, was likewise infected with the Plague, and because the samePlague. Edward Rugham was continually attendant in White Hall vnder the Lord Kneuet, the said Lord therefore perswaded him to vse my Aurum Potabile for his kins∣woman, being then in Edward Rughams house; which he did, and by it recouered his kinswoman. DIuers other were also cured of the Plague at the same time. A maide seruant belonging to Master Iohn Morris, marchant, dwelling neere vnto Lea∣den Hall. A seruant of Sir Edward Conway Knight. Mast. Carre Counsellor at the Law, dwelling in Great Saint Bartholmewes. A man seruant and a maide seruant in the house of Mistris Randall widdow, dwelling on Saint Peters Hill. Three seruants in the house of Sir William He∣ricke Knight. Master Arthur Luson, Citizen in Paternoster Row. THe wife of Master Seabright of London, Esquire,Convulsions with losse of sense. being about 60. yeares old, was often taken with diuers and sundry passions, as Convulsions, and para∣lyticall stupefactions of her sense of feeling; And had
beene sundry times releeued by my Potable gold. But to ouercome, & vtterly to suppresse the great aboun∣dance of those humors or matter, which caused these fits so often to returne, without being perfectly cu∣red, I aduised her to take sometimes of my Essence of gold. Which when shee had taken, shee cast vp a great quantitie of Melancholicke blacke stuffe. Since which time, she hath neuer beene troubled with any of those passions. MAster Iohn Sherington of London, Marchant, had a sonne about three yeares old, long timeObstructions in a childe. deiected and weake, and had receiued many Medicines against the wormes and other causes which were suspected, but to no purpose (for he daily grew worse and worse.) At last therefore, hauing ta∣ken my Potable golde a few daies, he cast vp a great quantity of tough, thicke, and viscous humors. Af∣ter which (the matter of Obstructions being taken a∣way) he presently recouered perfect health. ALso a yong daughter then borne to this MasterA new borne Infant. Sherington, being sixe moneths old, fell dange∣rously sicke, and with the same Medicine was resto∣red. THe wife of Mast. Coles dwelling in ColmanstreetePlague. (after the death of her said husband, who died of the Plague) shee beeing then with childe, was also
infected. And fearing in that case all strong Medi∣cines, vsed only my Potable golde and the Essence, with vse whereof by Gods grace she recouered, & her childe saued, of which shee was after safely deliuered. The husband which tooke other Medicines, not this, died. The wife which refused all other Medi∣cines, and tooke only this, recouered; Notwithstan∣ding the increase of danger by her childbearing. Let the due consideration of this one case, stop the mouth of malice it selfe, and informe the enuious to glorifie God, for his great and good gifts bestowed vpon men. EDmund Nusum dwelling neere Charing-Crosse, fell into a dangerous sicknesse and long time continued therein. In this his distresse he sent for a learned Physition of London, well knowne: who vsed his best skill and endeauours, for recouery of this patient. But failing in his expectation, he tolde the patients wife, that she must shortly be a widdow, A worthy gentleman, their neighbour, pitying this case, sent his man to me in this sicke mans behalfe. I came, and found the Apothecarie at the patients dore, newly come from him, which saluted me with these, or the like words: You come tooo late, there is no good to be done. To whome I answered, that though I could doe no good, yet I would do no hurt. So when I came to the patient, and could not finde any likely signes, nor hopes of life, I vndertooke no∣thing concerning his recouery; neither promised so much as hope. Yet for a triall, I gaue him some of my potable golde, and continued that administration all
that night, once in three houres. It pleased God that hee recouered, to the great admiration of all men. NOt long after, the only sonne of the aforesaid Apothecarie, (whose name was Nathan Dar∣bey) 17. yeares of age, was likewise taken with a violent burning feuer. He had the aduice and coun∣sell not onely of the said Physition before specified, but also of many other of the Colledge. But the pati∣ent grew worse and worse, and at length became speechlesse, and was as it were vpon the threshold, to take death by the hand. The father then, though in despaire of his sonne, yet hauing seene the former ef∣fect, came hastily vnto me, in the Sermon time (being then the Sabbath day) imploring my aide for his sonnes recouerie, if yet it were possible. His com∣plaints preuailed. I gaue his sonne of these materials, iterated by degrees as the case required. God blessed the meanes, and he recouered. MAster William Parkinton gentleman, likewise, dwelling neere vnto Charing-Crosse, and suf∣ficiently well knowne, lay dangerously sicke, vsing the aduice and helpe of the said before mentio∣ned Physition. He neglected no meanes of ordinary course prescribed by Physicke. Neuerthelesse the pa∣tient found small releefe. For the Physition himselfe accounted him a dead man. So likewise did his wife, and other his friends, In this forlorne estate, I was cal∣led vnto him. I only gaue him of the Essence of gold,
and the Aurum Potabile. And that God, who doth wound and heale: who bringeth vs to the brinke of the graue, and raiseth vs vp againe, by this meanes, as his reuealed ordinance, restored him againe vnto per∣fect health. BY these three last instances, all dwelling neere vnto one place, and almost at one time, one Physition being called vnto them all, and they all forsaken by him, as deplored: yet neuerthe∣lesse, they all beeing recouered, by the only helpe of this Aurum Potabile: we must of force acknow∣ledge the same to bee an extraordinary blessing sent from God, for releefe of those, who haue en∣ioyed the benefit thereof. And let no man depraue this Medicine, in that it is administred so diuers∣ly. It ought rather to be had in greater price. The neerer vnto simplicitie, the neerer to veritie. Al∣so, in vaine are many things vsed, when one thing preuaileth. As in all the course of our life this is true, so likewise in administring of Physicke. Ther∣fore Damascen saith: It were a wicked fact to vse a compound Medicine, where a simple profiteth.
CONCLVSION OF THE SECOND PART. BY these euidences, and mani∣fold experience sincerely deli∣uered, partly taken and faith∣fully translated out of Latine letters, sent from seuerall parts beyond the seas; partly in English verbally set downe, as they came to me; any rea∣sonable man, not seduced by vaine oppositions, nor willfully preiudicate, nor peruersly malicious, may ea∣sily iudge, that this medicine, my Potable gold, is the most wholesome, safe, & operatiue medicine, which at this day is knowne to be had in vse: both for the cure of desperate and hopelesse sicknesses, when all helpe of man is accounted vaine: And for the won∣derfull restoring of the decaied strength, and langui∣shing powers of the body, with a singular comforting of the heart: As also, for a Prophylacticke, and preser∣uer of health. Which so being, the greater is their sinne, which contrary to Gods commandement, Christian charitie, the loue of truth, their dutie to∣wards their neighbour, and peraduenture their in∣ward testimony of their owne conscience, haue so vi∣rulently and despitefully inueighed against the true and vncontrollable virtues and effects thereof: And
in their wast papers of impression, haue attempted to shew the power of malicious Rhetoricke, thereby to wrong that good, which they themselues cannot at∣taine vnto. Whereby so farre as their habilitie and cre∣dibilitie could stretch, they haue notoriously iniured, not me only, but all sorts, ranks, and degrees of peo∣ple, subiect to the vnrespectiue tyranny of sicknesse, which maketh no difference betweene the Cottage and Pallace, the King and the Peasant. The wrong to me, is, that for my loue and truth, workes of charitie, good intentions towards all, and good deserts of as many as haue made, or hereafter shall make vse of the fruites of these my labours: they haue rewarded me, with that which is vnder my backbiters tongues, rai∣ling, for reuerence, reproch, for my good deeds, and slander, for a recompence. But the wrong done to o∣thers, hath many branches, and searcheth to the seate of greatest honour. For (though I dare not say that it should haue beene otherwise, by the administring hereof (the length and number of all daies being in Gods hand) yet to shew their warme charitie against all things, not in their owne Apothekes, they would not suffer our late yong Prince, worthy of immortall memorie, to vse this so famously and aboue all excep∣tions approued medicine; notwithstanding in the vse of all other, they found not so much as any hope. In a desperate case, and a prognosticated life, all rules both of learning and charitie allow, yea and require the at∣tempt of any meanes, not noted of ill suspicion: Much more so publikely and manifoldly testified, for the ad∣mirable good effects which it had wrought in diuers persons. But that Rubricke (Propter dignitatem personae &c.) Giue ordinary medicines to great persós, to pre∣serue the honour of the Physition, that he hath done
no hurt, scilicet, though he did no good, is neither Prophylacticke nor Therapeuticke. We say in Eng∣lish: As good neuer a whit as neuer the better. And such is their pious affection towards all others whom it may concerne, that whatsoeuer happen, none of them will make vse of this my potable gold, (which though not properly, yet emphatically may be called a diuine Medicine: and certainly with more merit, then their Gratia Dei, Manus Christi, Benedicta Medi∣camenta, Diuinum Medicamentum) though it would saue a thousand liues. Esteeming (as it seemeth) that good which is so done without the Seplasiasticke pre∣parations, to be their dishonor, and delinement. Let all be soberly vsed, but where greatest need is, the best and most powerfull chosen. But the searcher and iudge of all hearts will recompence according to me∣rit, to them, as to enemies of truth. And to the sincere louers thereof, acknowledging Gods mercies shewed in the administration of his owne guifts, their guer∣don, which is the testimony of a good conscience. If we looke backe, vnto the actions of certaine Physiti∣ons of old time euen before the age of Galen, and the admirable medicines of some of them: we shall find not impertinent to our purpose, that of great Alexan∣der King of Macedon. He (as Quintus Curtius in his third booke reporteth) in the extremitie of a most dangerous and violent disease, desiring either present helpe or death, that he might hold his appointed day of battell with Darius King of Persia; for that purpose, consulted with his friends and counsellors, what re∣medy might be found in this desperate case. The King disliked al ordinary medicines, as too weake for his purpose. The Physitions would allow none such as they called vnknowne. One Physition among the
rest, named Philip, being borne in the country Acar∣nania a part of Greece, offered Alexander to make him a medicine very safe to be taken, which should speedily restore him to health, though the other Phy∣sitions knew not what it was. Parmenio a great Coun∣sellour and fauorite of Alexanders, disswaded his King from this medicine, (for he was vnwilling the King should recouer as the sequell shewed) and laboured to perswade him, that this Philip the Physition was hired by Darius for 1000. talents to poyson him. Yet Alex∣ander tooke that Physicke, and finding the effect an∣swerable to his promise, after his health so suddenly and beyond expectation recouered, did afterwards a∣mong other accusations, lay this for one against Par∣menio, as not wishing him well; which altogether made vp that Iudgment which brought him to his end. And very honorablie, both rewarded and re∣garded Philip, to whom next vnder God, be attribu∣ted and acknowledged the preseruation of his life. The working of that medicine, in the same place is described, not vnlike to this of mine. In this manner, Vt vero Medicamentum, &c. So soone as the Medicine dif∣fused or spred it selfe into the veines, there might leisurely, by little and little recouery and healthfulnesse be perceiued in all the body. First the spirits and heart recouered their vi∣gor, and after the body also, sooner then could be beleeued. For Alexander after he had beene in this case three daies, shewed himselfe to his Armie: which did not more ardently or affectionatly fixe their eyes vpon Alexander, then vpon Philip who had so vnexpectedly restored him to them: Euery one striuing who should first giue him their right hand, em∣brace and thanke him. Thus much Curtius. Semblably it is sufficiently prooued and famously manifest, that very many great, Noble and Honou∣rable
personages, both men and women, sicke either as Alexander was, or taken with other more dange∣rous and violent diseases, forsaken by all other Phy∣sitions, as vncurable, haue beene by the vse of this Medicine, through Gods grace, in very short time re∣couered, and restored to their perfect health. There∣fore vnto you worthy and Honourable gentlemen, who as you are the Inheritors of Nobilitie, so are you of gentle and noble dispositions: to you I say, I turne my selfe, resting assured, that you esteeme these ca∣lumniating bablers, to haue said nothing reall, mate∣riall, and veritable against me, howsoeuer they haue mooued their tongues and quills. They intend not in this case, your health, but my dammage: and would rather you were offered a silent sacrifice in e∣ternall sleepe, then strike one saile, or vnlace one bo∣net blowen with the winde of their malicious breath, or leese the price of a popular Recipe, for a Benedict Medicament, although it doe no good, shall doe no harme, Propter honestatem Medici, that is, for the repu∣tation of the Doctor: though euery day almost doe giue miserable experience, that by want of doing good, the mischiefe increaseth; and so with the repu∣tation of the Doctor, the poore patient is lodged in his grauesend, which is harme enough, and the worst of a maledict Medicine. Therefore as I desire, so I iustly hope, that you will discerne betweene a blacke and a white: falshood, and truth: light and darknesse. That you will patronise, defend and keepe from op∣pression, both me and the truth. If there be any doubt concerning the auouchment of the cures and good effects of this my potable gold, here spoken of, you haue the reports, the particular names and places, and many of their owne hand writings I keepe ready at
all times, to be shewed for your further content∣ments. And I am verily perswaded, that all honest persons which haue beene recouered from their dis∣eases and infirmities by the good vse of this my pota∣ble gold, will be so thankfull to God for that benefit, as to acknowledge the meanes of their recouery, and not imitate those silent 9. Pharises clensed from their Leprosie by our Sauiour: which is little lesse (if not equiualent) then against their owne knowledge and conscience to deny. Of them you may know and be satisfied, that it hath done good to all, hurt to none: That it is a safe, powerfull and pleasing Medi∣cine: euen a Prince amongst all, analogising with principalitie in this. That doing much good, yet of malicious and vnshamefull persons it is ill spoken of as Princes oft times are. Let these worldling slande∣rers, disprooue that I say, or prooue the contrary, if they can. If not, then it is time they would be intrea∣ted, if not for conscience sake, yet at least for shame (if they feare any) to be silent hereafter: though it were more for their honest account, to recant in print. These great cures performed, realities, things of fact, often times, in sundrie and distant places, and sundry and diuers persons, in sundry and different diseases, done and performed to the great good of many, and applaused by common attestation, in all parts of the Realme, and many parts beyond the seas: This (I say) cannot be pocketted as not done, nor so easily vilified by a fine phrase, a little good Latine: Sub∣stance or sence there is none in his writing, it is meere froth, and the deceitfull inside of a rotten Egge, or worm-eaten nut: good for nothing but to befogge the cleere light of a knowne truth, and maintaine the inured practise of learned scolds. Surely, this is not,
White, in any tongue, Latine or Welch, howsoeuer versified. These testimonies for me (which will daily increase) shall lye and remaine to all posterities, as ho∣nourable Trophies, fixed in the hearts of vnderstan∣ding and honest men; when these stagie chartlets of theirs, shall not be vouchsafed an honest eye or eare: but cast by for wast paper, to stop mustard pots, or o∣ther base offices. They are not able, to produce one Instance, of harme receiued by this Medicine. Wher∣as contrary, the chiefest, most polychresticall, and greatest magnified compositions (whereof (to speake truth) at this day the right Ingredients bee not knowne: and against which some learned Doctors haue learnedly written) haue their Imputatiōs, wher∣in the charge must bee either vpon the Medicine it selfe, or vpon the Physitions. Whose errors, if them∣selues will not mend, I will not excuse. If obiection be made, that all haue not recouered, which haue taken this Medicine of mine, but some haue died: I confesse that is true. But what then? Old Age is irreuocable. Many diseases also are either essentially incurable, or preuent all power of Medicines, either by the vehe∣mencie or malignitie Morbi acutissimi, or by the neg∣ligence of timely helpe. Many also being easily to be cured at the first, are made desperate and vncurable, by errors, either of Medicines directly hurtfull, or at the least not helpfull, to the intollerable weakning of the poore patient, and triumph of the disease. Also Hippocrates telleth vs, that all diseases be not curable. For the fatall and predestinate houre is ineuitable. There resteth an vnknowne cause, which is the vn∣searchable counsell of God, which wil not that all dis∣eases shall be cured in al men. Thus much concerning the second part, we will now proceede to the third.
THE THIRD PART SHEWING THE VSE OF THIS POTABLE GOLD. THat which Philip of Macedon, father of Alexander the great said of gold: That with it all Cities, Citadells, Castels, Forts, For∣tresses and Bulwarkes, howsoe∣uer by nature, Art and munition thought impregnable, might be assaulted, laid open and conque∣red: I may as truely, but to better vse, affirme of Au∣rum potabile, that is, of Gold made into medicine and reduced to the forme of a potable liquor, that it doth assaile and oppugne all infirmities and inward disea∣ses of mans body (respectiuely curable, as aforesaid.) That it also doth restore, establish, and confirme, the vigor and strength of mans body, with the naturall and vitall faculties thereof: If it be duely and consi∣derately administred, with such care, caution and iudgement as becommeth the dignitie of a rationall Physition. For as the Captaine of an Army, hauing any peculiar exploite in hand, neglecteth no meanes, either by Military Discipline, or Engines of warre, to accomplish his intended purpose; so is the Physition
likewise bound to doe. And as the clandestine ene∣my which lieth in Ambush, and appeareth not in sight, is much more dangerous, then he that com∣meth in open face; so likewise, many of our internall diseases, whose malignitie lurkes in the inward parts, are more difficultly cured, then those which manisest the vttermost of their malice. And as in this age, both Armour and other Artillery for the seruice of warre, are farre different from those of former times, so that it were ridiculous now, either in offensiue warre or defensiue, to relinquish our Ordnance of all sorts, be∣cause (in comparison) they are but late inuentions, and to trust to the ancient military instruments ser∣uiceable among the Romans in those daies: Euen so, the capitall diseases of this age, being for the most part Complicati Morbi, whereas olim they were simplices, will hardly be extirpate, if we ouercuriously do persist in the prescript rules and method of antiquitie, and tye our selues only to their Medicines: seeing that daily experience doth teach vs, that they performe not the effects promised, and therefore, are for the most part administred fruitlesly. Seeing therefore the indeuours of this age (being inforced thereunto by defect of those medicines) haue likewise added vnto Art, and haue inriched the same with other mate∣rials medicinable, not formerly retained in common vse; or the same, by more artificiall preparation, haue exalted into a higher virtue: Were it not madnesse (the validitie of the same being sufficiently experien∣ced) to relinquish those of a higher nature, and to vse triuiall and fruitlesse medicines? Let the Souldier make conuenient vse of the Sword, Dagger, Helmet, Target, Pike, and such like (for they haue beene of long antiquity) but withall, let not Musket, Saker,
Mineon, Cannon, be neglected, because they are new inuentions, in comparison of the other. And let vs likewise approue, and retaine in vse, Electuaries, Sy∣rups, Pills, Powders, and whatsoeuer else by long ap∣probation is pertinent to the expulsing of malignant humors the causes of maladies: yet, let not the virtues acknowledged by all antiquity to be insident in gold, be least regarded, which virtues do actually appeare in potable gold. Euery graduated Physition is tied by solemne oath, as also by integrity of conscience, not to neglect any thing, tending to the recouery of his patient; But to vse all manner of effectuall medi∣cines, either new or old, whether of their owne inuen∣tions, or of other mens labours, being approued to be secure and not nauseous: not reiecting the same vpon any priuate consideration, either of preiudice or ma∣lice. But leauing this digression, to the intent that e∣uery body whom it shall concerne, may make the best vse, reape the full fruition of all benefits which they can expect by this so profitable and extraordinary gift of God, (although they cannot at all times haue the assistance and directing aduice of a learned Physi∣tion, to prescribe and order the administration there∣of, which were to be wished) I will here in this last part of this Treatise, endeuour to helpe that defect: and teach the method, manner, and rules, how, and in what diseases and passions, it may most profitable be administred. Which though by many the letters sent me, before in this discourse set downe as also by the histories of many cures by my selfe and others there∣with performed, it be reasonable plaine, yet I will draw it into a more distinct and orderly deliuery, ac∣cording to the good will and meaning I haue: That by a generall helping medicine, a most generall and
vniuersall benefite may be reaped. Therefore be it knowne, that the vse of this medi∣cine is generally twofold, answerable to the two ge∣nerall ends of Practicke Physicke. One, to preserue the present health. The other, to recouer it, beeing broken or lost: by curing the Diseases, and rooting out the causes thereof. THE VSE OF POTABLE GOLD in preseruation of health. ALL the Physitions and learned men, both before in my first prin∣ted booke, and here in this alled∣ged, as also almost innumerable o∣thers, whose names I omit to auouch, for breuitie, agree in this: That Aurum Potabile is the best Medicine, and most profitable Instrument for the conseruation of health, in all kinde of complexiona∣ble temperaments; That it partly suppresseth and suffereth not luxuriously to bud, shoot out, and bring their fruit vnto ripenesse, any seedes, or latent rootes of sicknesses, lurking in mans body, whereunto any pronenesse or aptitude hereditarie, or otherwise acci∣dentall, make them obnoxious: That it reduceth to mediocritie, inordinate distemperatures, either in ex∣cesse or defect: That it refresheth, vigorateth, and strengthneth the heart; restoreth, and increaseth the vitall spirits: aduanceth the force and and generation
of good blood, multiplieth geniture seede, and habi∣litie of prolification in both sexes; banishing sterility, preuenting abortions, and prouiding quicke, easy, and safe deliueries in childbed, suppresseth the infirmities of age: preserueth the vigor of youth. It were vnne∣cessary to heape arguments in confirmation hereof, being in it selfe so authentically warranted by famous authors, and manifestly witnessed by many experien∣ces. Particularly, it is a preseruatiue against the Fal∣ling sicknesse,, the Apoplexie, Leprosie, Plague, Drop∣sy, Cancer, Gout, Stone, and all manner of feuers in all ages and sexes. And in some, it expelleth (or rather en∣ableth the body to expell) by conuenient and most naturall passages, the antecedent matter or humors, from and by which any diseases depending vpon such materiall causes might spring, and so by pre∣uention, preserueth health. But it is to be knowne and obserued, that this Me∣dicineThe first forme. of gold, though made of one body, yet is reser∣ued and vsed in three formes and consistences; which not being knowne, there may be much mistaking and errour in the vse and administration thereof. First, when the gold is dissolued in the proper menstruall or instrumentall water, this water is distil∣led away from the dissolued gold, vntill it be in the bottome in the forme or consistence of a liquid gum or hony, deepely coloured (as Raymund Lully cals it) & most vnctuous. To which, the spirit of wine is then put, and by solution thereof, tincted very red and deepe coloured. That tincted spirit of wine is gently decanted, or powred off, and so reserued by it selfe in a glasse. And is called the Physicall Tincture of gold. And may so, in small roome, and with no burden bee caried whither any man please. And this we call the first forme.
Take one ounce of this tincted spirit, mixe it withThe second forme. 16. ounces of generous wine (or if you please, of any other liquor.) And this being so mixed is called that Potable golde, of which so often mention hath beene hitherto made. One, or two spoonfuls of this at one time, and sometimes a whole ounce, I accustome to giue, in such cases and Diseases as aforesaid. The third forme is this, and thus made. That tin∣ctedThe third forme. red spirit of wine, in which the dissolued gold is taken vp from the white feces, or residence, is put in∣to a fit glasse body with a head. And with a gentle heate of a Balneum, the spirit is drawne off, vntill the substance in the bottome of the glasse be dry. Then doe I put on fresh spirit of wine, setting it in digestion certaine daies. In which time it will cast off an other residence. This processe is reiterated, and at euery such solution and distillation, the feculent residence must be separated from the pure, vntill it leaue no re∣sidence at all. Then is it called the Quintessence or Essence of God, which I doe vse to administer in the quantity of 2. or 3. or more graines, and doe dissolue it in some appropriate liquor or other mix∣ture conducent. So that any, that is desirous to make vse of this my Medicine, may haue either the Potable gold, or the Tincture of gold, or the Essence of gold, or all; and apply them in all manner of needfull vses, as occasion shall require. They therefore that shall take it for preseruation, may vse it in the simplest & least curious order & fa∣shion. That is, to take of the Aurū Potabile one or two spoonfuls, together fasting, and in bed, if they may, else in the morning after they be vp; the oftner, the better. Vse giues instruction, from that common In∣dication aforesaid, A Iuuantibus et nocentibus, &c, From
things that helpe and hurt, euery one is directed. Therefore whosoeuer after twice or thrice taking, hath found benefit thereby, he may proportion him∣selfe, in moderate increasing or diminishing the dose or quantitie, according to his owne hability and con∣stitution. For, in increasing the quantitie of this, there is no danger, so it be within any bounds of mediocri∣tie, not exorbitantly exuberatè: which is farre other∣wise in all or most part of other simples and composi∣tions, whether meerely Medicaments, or Midica∣mentall nutriments, as are Oximel, Saffron, Methri∣date, Treacle, all Cordiales and Purges whatsoeuer. Also a conuenient time to take it (especially in those that haue weake stomacks) will be one houre or two before dinner or supper, or after supper, at bed time (for it doth both helpe digestion, and pro∣cure sleepe) according as the circumstances shall re∣quire or suffer. In precaution of Lunarie Diseases, such as haue their exacerbations & fits according to the quarters, changings, & full of the Moone, as Epilepsies, Defluxi∣ons, inordinate Menstruals and such like: The rule is, for this last, to take it neere the time of course: In the other, 3. 4. or 5. daies before the new and full Moone. If it be desired for the more particular appropria∣ting of this Medicine to any particular cause, to take it not so simply of it selfe, but mixed: Then let such, either by their owne knowledge, or the appointment of some experienced Physition, mixe it with some specificall water, decoction, extraction, or otherwise formed Medicine, according to the necessitie of euery particular cause and occasion: Or with some com∣pound water, approoued for that Disease, or Poly∣chrestall to the same, and others, in neighbourhood and linke of causes to it.
THE VSE OF AVRVM POTABILE IN SVNDRY INFIRMITIES. THe diseased person that shall vse this Medicine, may take it in the same proportiō or dose, as formerly is set downe, or somewhat greater or lesse, ac∣cording to the condition of the partie, and state of his Dis∣ease. Commonly one spoon∣full of the Aurum Potabile is giuen at one time: or sixeThe dose. or eight droppes of the Tincture of gold, mixed in some appropriate liquor: and of the Essence of Gold, two or three graines. Where necessitie shall require, these doses may be doubled, or more; as of the Aurum Potabile, two or three spoonfull vnto a full ounce: of the Essence foure graines or sixe: Of the Tincture in like respect. Also in some persons greatly debilitated, and not able well to retaine, a small quantity is first to be attempted, and then by degrees increased, as by former examples may plainly appeare. Also this Es∣sence of gold is very fitting and conuenient for very yong infants but newly borne, in any Disease what∣soeuer, being ordered in this maner. Take one graine of the Essence, dissolue it in one or two spoonfull of brestmilke or in some distilled water as shal be fitting:
giue the childe part of that mixture at the first: after a while giue it more. This is securely giuen, the third or fourth day after the birth; so is likewise the Aurum Po∣tabile in a small quantitie, and mixed with some other liquor, not with milke: neither must the childe sucke within two houres after, lest the wine in the potable gold, should curdle the milke. These administrations are to be giuen intermissiue∣ly,How oft. sometime euery second, third, or fourth houre, as the present case shall require: vntill of the operation appeare with good signes, the abating of the passi∣ons, diminishing of the Disease, and recouerie of strength. It may be giuen at al times, most commonly in theWhen to be giuen. morning fasting, or an houre before repast. Likewise after meate to preuent a surfet. For it helpeth digesti∣on, and preuenteth sicknesses following such repleti∣ons. To procure sleepe it is giuen at bed-time; or if ne∣cessitie vrge, in any other houre of the night or day: being effectually a true Anodine, of contemperation without stupefaction, not narcoticke. The Effects of this Medicine: corroboration ofEffects. the heart: restauration of the vitall spirits decaied and enfeebled: which apparantly is manfest, by quiet and sweete sleepe most commonly following; as also by mitigation of paine, and appeasing of violent passi∣ons: sometime by a milde and gentle sweat ensuing, sometimes by vomit, and reiection of malignant vis∣cous humors: also by plentifull euacation of vrine, as also by restraint thereof, where the retention is weake. And though sildom, yet somtimes by a loose∣nesse of the belly: but very oft, by staying inordinate fluxes. And euery of these functions, though contrary some one to other, are directed and performed by the meere motion of Nature it selfe, being strengthned,
vigorated, and enabled, by the virtue of this Medi∣cine. Let thus much suffice, for the simple, or very sim∣ply mixed vse of this Medicine. But although in this forme taken and vsed, it giueth great furtherance to∣wards the curing of any malady, as by many particu∣lar experiments hath beene related, in which sildome times any addition of peculiar effect hath beene ad∣ministred: yet because of the great varietie, difference and diuersitie of dispositions, natures, places, diseases, times, and countries; and because prescription ought not to preiudicate the skill and iudgement of all men; Therefore to supply these differences, I doe leaue free to the iudgement and discretion of euery rationall experienced Physition, to administer this medicine, with any kind of Waters, Liquors, Syrups, Conserues, Electuaries, or other medicines simple or compound, such as they shall vpon good grounds and experience, know or iudge most appropriate, specificall, conueni∣ent, and agreeing to the present circumstances of the disease, nature, & quality of the patient, & necessity of his state. We giue no prescript of Method, or limitatiō of proceedings vnto Physitions; they being present, know what is needfull, what requisite, in order, time and place: what in each respect is to be done, what to be left vndone. But where a competent Physition is not at hand, as in Country villages, or such like pla∣ces, there some admonition or direction is expedient. It is well knowne among learned men, what effect, efficacy, and force, is attributed to that Medicine which is called Vniuersall, in that high degree where∣of writers make mention, that it performeth great and admirable effect, not only vpon mans body, but also vpon Mettals, as appeareth by these words of Raymund Lully: The quintessence of gold, after distil∣ling
away of the instrumentall water, will remaine in the bottome of the glasse, very pure, and separated from all impurity, thicke in the consistence of hony, or of gumme, deepely coloured and very vnctuous, greatly auaileable, both for Medicine of many body, as also of Mettals. But this Medicine of ours, hath his preparation onely pertinent to the vse of man. Neuer∣theles seeing that, both that Medicine of Raymund Lul∣ly, and this of mine, haue all the virtue incident vnto them deriued from gold, and from the forme thereof, as from one fountaine and foundation; therefore it will not be impertinent, to prescribe the same vse and manner of administring of this medicine of mine, which Raymund doth vnto his. For if the agent cause be one in them both, the manner of vse may also be the same. He prescribeth a speciall vse in these words. Mixe this Essence of gold in a quantity of white wine, when you will giue it to a Phlegmaticke constituti∣on, especially in the Winter season. If to a Cholericke, giue it in faire water: to a Melancholike, in broth, wherein mutton is decocted: If he be of a Sanguine complexion, in cleare white wine: And this shall be a preuention against infirmities, and their bodies shall be rectified against the distemper of the season. If you giue this medicine to those that are sicke, let the mix∣ture be more effectuall of the Medicine. Neither be thou greatly troubled (saith he) to know the perfect state of the disease. For nature it selfe is wise and pro∣uident by her owne instinct, and hath inuested to this stone being dissolued, sufficient virtues, to rectifie that which is amisse in nature. My sonne, this medicine is powerfull, both against hotte diseases, and cold, naturall, and accidentiall, &c. These words and other here∣unto tending Raymund setteth downe, which we out of our experience haue found to be answerable to this
our intent. Neuerthelesse wee acknowledge, that sometimes extraordinary symptomes doe occurre, which threaten present danger of death, if they bee not speedily preuented: As is, extreme heate, extre∣mitie of cold, great thirst, lacke of sleepe, inordinate fluxes, and such like. All which by the good pleasure of God, are mitigated and asswaged by this only Me∣dicine of mine. And yet many things may be appro∣priately added hereunto, & pertinēt for the expulsing of euery Disease. Therfore, if the patiēt haue a repleate body, that necessity require some euacuation to bee made; gentle, & not violēt purges, fitting the humor offending, are to be administred. Sometime the body hath neede by vrine or sweat to be releeued: which both, although this Aurum Potabile doe in sort per∣forme yet in some cases it is to be helped. If a fluxe be caused in the nether ventricle, vnto which a Medicine receiued at the mouth cannot speedily penetrate, then a clensing, and astringent Glister will be expe∣dient. If sleepe be wanting, that necessarily must be regarded. And although this Medicine doth for the most part by a secret proprietie therin procure sleepe, yet if neede be, let other helps be adioyned. Blood letting in conuenient time must not be neg∣lected. Other things pertinent, I referre to the discretion of them, whome it shall concerne.
THE CONCLVSION OF THIS TREATISE. HAuing thus, ingenuously, plain∣ly, and fully (as I hope) satisfied all indifferent and vnpartiable Readers, of the cause of this dis∣course, concerning the generall and extraordinarie effects of this Medicine: and of the three kinds thereof: of my vse in administration thereof, in all Diseases, sexes, ages and circumstances: to∣gether with the libertie and cautions in further ex∣tent, and mixture with other Medicines: I now returne in the Conclusion, vnto such Readers, to whome I haue and euer shall, deuote, consecrate and dedicate all my studies, labours and industrie, commending vnto you the right construction, and generous acceptance, without any sinister detortion, of my good and vnspotted intendements, not retor∣ted against my traducers, with any malicious viru∣lence, but extorted by meere compulsion, for the ne∣cessary challenge, and defence of my good name, op∣pugned by two Doctors, though neuer expugnable by them, nor the laudatorie versifiers, chaunting pro formâ absque materiâ. Let them enioy the glory of their Eloquence, or rather loquence, with ill applyed Phrases. I desire none other contentment in this
question, then the publike testimony of a constant truth. Truth will surely liue, preuaile, flourish. It is like the gentle and sweete Marierome, manifoldly excel∣lent for many vertues. Which but rubbed in the hand, yeeldeth an excellent sent, comfortable to all senses. Of which hearb it is written, that if swine be enforced, with full sent of open nostrels to take the smell, it is mortall to them, and causeth them to die. Surely this is a secret in Nature, that a thing so good in it selfe, and so agreeably helpefull to good men, should by the malice, or brutishnesse of a Swinish na∣ture be accounted poyson. This is a true Embleme of my Medicine, which being helpfull to all, hurtfull to none, yet there are found such, as professe hatred to the very name thereof: and so turne that generall pre∣seruatiue, to their priuate poyson of rancor. But here∣in that common rule of Philosophy, is not vnfitly a∣nalogised vpon them: Nutriens conuertitur in naturam nutriti, et non contra. The nourishment is cōuerted into the nature of the body nourished, but not contrarily. So likewise the enuious man, whatsoeuer hee behol∣deth with his malicious Eye, though extraordinary good of it selfe, yet hee conuerteth it to his owne peruerse disposition, which is euill. As may well ap∣peare in the Bee, and the Spyder, this sucking poy∣son, and the other hony out of the selfe same flower. Let all these things be considered, by the indifferent and Iudicious Reader, and with equall ballance let him peise truth with falsehood, sinceritie with deceit, not inclining either to hatred or adulation, but with free minde and integritie of conscience, let sentence be pronounced. Among good men there ought to be good dealing. It may peraduenture bee that some doubts may bee mooued, or cauilling allegations
against the tract of this Treatise in some point or o∣ther, but surely such as will be vtterly vnprofitable to the sicke patient, who is to be releeued by healthfull Medicine, and not by subtilitie of Argument. Where∣fore if I should endeauour to answer euery friuolous and idle obiection, I should both abuse the Reader, and thinke mine owne time euill spent. Some few things I desire to admonish the Reader: First, fauou∣rablie to construe and interpet the intent of these my proceedings, & not rashly, vpon any mans words or writings, to condemne the verity of this matter now in question. Also, if any thing in this Treatise be con∣tained, which seemeth not answerable vnto euery mans capacitie or iudgement, that such person would be pleased, first, to admonish mee thereof by priuate letters, or otherwise, that I may in those doubts yeeld him satisfaction, before hee doe publikely oppugne the truth. Furthermore, if these things to some, seeme of small moment, I humbly intreate them, to produce better in place for the vse of the languishing patient (prouided alwaies that it bee no lesse approued by time and experience) and in the mean time, whi∣lest wee liue in expectation thereof, let the Common-wealth receiue benefit by this, without their let or preiudice.
AN APPENDIX RESERVED FOR THE IVDICIOVS READER. IT is generally well knowne, that Mathew Gwinne, in the Preface of that his Invectiue booke against me, did, in most instant manner, sollicite the Kings Maiestie, for the suppression of this Medicine my Potable gold. His Induce∣ments, and motiues were in these words. Tolluntur vnà Medici, &c. The Physitions of this Citie, the Chyrurgians, and the Apothecaries will all decay, and in manner be subuerted; if this one vniuersall Medicine of Anthony doe preuaile. He enforceth the same as yet further: Let your Maiestie establish this, least the Ar∣chytectonicall order of the Physitions, (for I doe produce his owne words) the Polychrest all order of the Chyrurgi∣ans: the honest, learned, & wealthy order of the London Apo∣thecaries, be either confused, or vtterly confounded, by the In∣trusion of those who prepare Medicines Chymically. How vniust this petition is, and how preiudiciall vnto ve∣ritie it selfe, and vnto true Art (whereof the Apothe∣caries haue but a shaddow) who seeth not? If God
hath granted vnto this our age, an extraordinary bles∣sing, more seruiceable for the health of man, and much more auaileable then all other Medicaments hitherto retained in cōmon vse, ought it to be explo∣ded by the practitioners in Physicke, or to be reie∣cted of the patient in his vtter distresse, because the like lucre and gaine doth not to them aforesaid re∣dound, as by other drugges ordinarily prescribed? Was that elect Vessel (mentioned in holy writ) iustly scourged and vtterly silenced, because by his words and admonition, the handicraftsmen, employed a∣bout that idoll of Diana, were likely to lose some part of their vsuall lucre and gaine? (I hope it is not vnlawfull in this case, to compare profane with sacred actions.) Nay rather contrariwise. If this vniuersall Medicine, shall approoue it selfe by daily experience to be vniuersally effectuall, then being retained in vse, both Physitions, Chyrurgions, and Apothecaries, will the rather be accepted of, and the more reueren∣ced: Neither will that three-fold order, bee either confused, or confounded herewith but rather confir∣med, and better setled in generall account. For if these three, when they shall be called to the sicke pati∣ent, would at their entrance (as the ancient Ethnick Senators vsed to doe, when they entred the Senate house for consultations of the Weale publike) shake off aemulation, Enuy, and ouermuch desire of filthy lucre: then the Physition should finde in this Me∣dicine, such helpe in desperate Diseases, as both he and his languishing patient should reioyce at the fruites thereof. The Chyrurgians likewise, in some case of theirs, as in Faintings, Swoundings, Convulsi∣ons, Crampes, and where sleepe and rest are wanting, whereby great feeblenesse and deiection of Spirits
doe ensue should then make perfect experience and tryall, of what validitie this Medicine is. Then also the Apothecarie should lose no part of his honestie, of his learning, nor of his substance and riches, hauing by him this Medicine, as a last refuge for the releefe of his forlorne patient. The Apothecarie is carefull, to haue in euery corner of his shoppe, diuers and sundrie contemptible drugges, loathsome to most men, now in this age of ours. My desire is not to detract any thing from them in their gaine or skill, but rather to adde thereunto, and the behalfe of the Com∣mon wealth, vnto whom I doe here dedi∣cate, consecrate and offer, all these my labours; and whatsoeuer else is in my power. FINIS.
