782 99839838 4295
IN this booke is Conteyned the names of ye bay¦lifs Custos ma¦irs and sherefs of the cite of lon¦dō from the ty∣me of king rich¦ard the furst. & also thartycles of the Chartur and libarties of the same Cyte. And of the chartur and liberties off England wyth odur dyuers mats good and necessary for euery Citezē to vndirstond and knowe. Whiche ben shewid ī chaptirs after the four∣me of this kalendir folowing. ¶The Names off Balyes Costose. Mayers schreuys of london ¶ The Articules off the Chaurtour of london C.xij. articles Fo. I ¶The hoell Chaurtour off london wyth C.xij. articles▪ fo. iiij ¶The acte for correciō off erores wr¦onge Iugement{is} in london fo. xv ¶The acte for treys aboue .xx. yere prouyng pay no tythis fo. xvi ¶The charge of euery wardy in london at ayueteen fo. xvi ¶The ordinaunce for asyse of brede in london. fo. xvij ¶The copye of the popys bulle in la¦tyne for offerȳgis in lōdon fo. xix ¶The copye of pope innocentis lete for the same offeryng fo xix ¶The copye of the popis bulle in en¦glysh for offeryngis fo. xxiij ¶The Copye of pope Innocen lett in ynglysh for offeryng fo. xxiiij ¶The composicion for the same of¦feryng made bi arbitermēt fo xxv ¶The ordinaunce for brokers. fo. xxvi. ¶The nombre and names off all  paryche chirchis and all od chyritus in londen and surbarb fo xxvi ¶ The ordynaunce for wollē clothe in london fo. xxviij ¶The articles dishired bi comon̄
of the  of london for reformacyō of thyng is to the same of the mayer aldirmen and comon counsell to be enacted fo. xxviij ¶The charge of the queste of ward∣mote in euery warde in london. fo. xxxij ¶The articules off the good gouer∣naunse of the cety of london fo. xxxij ¶The articles of presture and other noyingis in ye cety of londō fo. xxxiij ¶The articles ayenste perell of fyer fo. xxxiij. ¶ The othe of the bydell of the war∣dis in london fo. xxxiij ¶ The othe of the constabellys in lō¦don. fo. xxxiij ¶ The othe of the shreuys sargeaun¦tis fo. xxxiij ¶ The othe of franke pleagis off fo∣ryners fo. xxxiiij. ¶The othe of the sanageres of the warde fo. xxxiiij ¶The othe euery freman made in london fo. xxxiiij ¶The othe for brokers in london fo. xxxiiij ¶The ordynaunse for the asisse off callwode and bellet ī londō fo. xxxv ¶The marchaundyses wherof  nage owne to be taken in london & how meche fo. xxxv ¶Those thyngis that longeth to to¦nage and pondage of the kyngis in londō fo. xxxv. ¶The forme of makyng of obliga¦sions in dyuerse mane fo. xxxvi ¶The forme of makyng of aquitaū¦ses in dyuerse maner fo. xxxvij ¶The forme of makyng of byllis of paymēt ī dyūse maner fo. xxxviij. ¶The forme of makȳg of letters of atorney. fo. xxxix ¶The forme of makyng of endentu¦res in dyuerse maner. fo. xxxix ¶The forme of makyng off letters of lysens fo. xli
¶ The forme of makyng of letters of sale fo. xlij ¶The forme of makyng lettrs bi ex¦chaunge fo. xliij. ¶The forme of awarde gheuen out by arbyterment fo. xliij ¶ The copy of the kynggis protec∣cyon ryell. fo. xliiij. ¶Item the copye of another protecci¦on fo. xlv ¶The copye of the kyngg{is} chaūtour for all causis fo. xlv ¶The forme of makyng of supplica¦cions fo. xlv ¶The forme of makyng of cōplayn¦tes to ye kyng tother lordis fo xlviij ¶ The ordinaunce of ye cety of londō for tenauntis of liosis What thynggis they shalnot reme¦ne at ther departyng. fo. lij ¶The copye of the othe yeuen to the Mayr and aldermen ye tyme of kȳg harry the vi. fo. lij ¶The nomber of parysh chirchis & townnys in yngland fo. lij ¶The nomber of  and shyers and countteis in yngland fo. lij ¶The longeth and brede of ynglād and the compase fo. lxj ¶The copye of a carte compasyng ye cyrcuyte off the worlde and the cōpa¦se of euery yland comprehēded ī the same fo. liij ¶The hooll pardon of rome graun̄¦ted by dyuerse poopis and stacyns that be there fo. lv ¶The vij agesse of the worlde frō adam forewarde. fo. lxx ¶The vii. ages of man lyuinge in the worlde fo. lx ¶The copye of a letter sent out of the lande of messye into the lande degat¦uade before the conquest therof fo. lxi ¶The copye of a letter sende from ye sowdain of babelone vntoo the pope of Rome fo. lxx ¶ The orasion of the messangere to the pope fo. lxii ¶ The crafce of grassyng and plan∣tyng of tryes and alteryng of frutis as well in colour as in caste fo. lij ¶Aretyse of the iiij elementes and iiij. seasons of ye yere whiche they be  and of what nature and of ye cake¦ler days fo. lxv
¶The crafte to make a water to ha∣ue spottys out of clothe. fo. lxvi ¶The forme and mesure to in mete lande by in ynglande fo. lxvi ¶The copye of ye generall curse too be declared iiij times ī ye yere fo. lxvi ¶The articule for the offeryng out  gylde halle in london fo. lxiij ¶ The prouyssyon by acte of ple∣  bryng kyng Har the vi∣et of ete of CCC lxxxij..li. fo. lxviij ¶The crafte to make corke foredier is fo. lxxij ¶The reet to make ypocrase an declary and braget fo. lxxij ¶The crafte too make gounpoudir fo. lxxij ¶ The crafte to make orchell forei¦ers fo. lxxij ¶To make a pickell too kepe freshe storgion in fo. lxxij ¶To make winnegre shortly if ne∣de be fo. lxxij ¶To make persely too growe in the space of an oure fo. lxxi ¶The rekenȳge for to bycrynyshe wyn at and werpe and dordute ¶The rekenynge of wyn at Sour∣deur fo. lxxiij ¶The weyght and maner of beȳg of yrue & the differense of ye weyght vsid in yngland fo. lxxiij ¶The acte of parlement to compel∣le the Iuges of spūalaw too graunt any parte the copy of the libellor a∣ny cause fo. lxxiij ¶The rate off the kyngis coustum and subside of marchaundise registe¦red in the escheker. fo. lxxiiij. ¶The Composision by twyre The towne of and werpe and the march∣auntes of yngland for costis of ther marchaundyses fo. lxxv ¶Aballade of ye notte browne may¦de fo. lxxvi ¶The rekenyng to bye wares ī fla∣undres fo. lxxviij
¶The offyce that belongeth to a bis¦shop or a preyst fo. lxxix. ¶The Copye of the chaurtor of the forest of yngland fo. lxxx ¶The articles of the chaurtor of yn¦gland and liberteys of the same cal∣led magna carta fo. lxxxi ¶Naracio of them that been shrefō and not contryte fo. lxxxv ¶The valewe and steynte of the be¦nyfice of seint magnus in london fo. lxxxvi ¶The copye of asanecondute fo. lxxxvij ¶The copye of a certificat in diuers manyers fo. lxxxviij ¶The Copye of specery fo. lxxxx ¶ The rekenynge of grocery and weight sobtyll & grosse fo. lxxxxi ¶The crafte for to make inke. fo. lxxxxi ¶The seruysis att stallation of the bishop of Ely morton fo lxxxxi ¶The way fro Calays. to Rome Thrugh fraunce fo. lxxxxij. ¶The Copye of a testamēt fo. lxxxxj ¶The crate for to made soone fo lxxxxiij ¶The crafte for to bue bier fo. lxxxiij ¶In this chapitre is shewed the pa¦trons of all the benyficis in london fo. lxxxxv. ¶The temporaliees off. deauries archideacōs and other places of re¦ligion. fo. lxxxxvij ¶The Corodyes in all thabbeys of England fo lxxxix ¶The weight of Cesser ād suffolke these in England and the weighte of Andwerpe and barough fo. Cij ¶The charge and cost in makyng heryng & sprot at ye coost fo. C.ij.
¶The copy of a letter to mi lorde car¦dinal inclinade fo. Cij ¶The laws and belyue of the Saa syns. fo. Cij ¶The lernīg for to make a cōt by ye yerly rentis of london brygge fo. C.iiij ¶Te articles vpon whiche is to be ī∣querid in the vysitacions of ordyna¦rs of chirchis fo. C vi ¶ The articles founde by the in que¦tours fo. Cviij ¶ A compleynte made to kyng Her¦ry the sext by the Duke of gloceter v∣pon the cardynal of wynchester fo. Cix ¶ The articles that the lord off the kyng counsell conseyd of ye greff that my lorde of gloceter hade sor mi syd vpon my lorde of wynchester fo. C.xij ¶The answere by my lorde of wyn∣chestere onto ye greffe of my lorde off glocetyre fo. C.xiij. ¶The copy of ye reconysanse yt bothe my lordise were boūdyn̄ In to abyde ye arbytyremente of the lordyse of ye kyngys counsele fo. C.xvij
THe names of ye balyfs. Custos. Mayers. and sheres o ye Cite fo London from the tyme of kynge Richard the first called cure de lyon▪ whiche was Crowned y• xxj. daye of septēbre. ye yere of oure lorde god .xi.C.lxxx.ix.Ca. ppi. Herry Cornhyl Richardson reinery ¶Baylyfsye first yere of his regne THis yere began ye ordur of oure lady Saint mary in pruce. & this yere the Iewes were put out of England. Iohan herlion Roger la duke ¶Baylifsthe second yere William hawerell Iohan buknot ¶Baylyfsthe thred yere Nichās duked Petir neuelyn. ¶Baylyfsthe fourth yere Roger la duke Richard fitalyn ¶Baylifs.the fyueth yere. William firt Isabel williāson arnulphy. ¶Custosthe v yere Robert Beysaint Iokell le Iosue ¶Custosthe vij. yere THis yere yt kyng wente in to the holy lande. & toke the Cite of Acres. portchaf & babilon̄ ye yere of our lord M.v.Cx. Garard de anthioch Robert durant ¶Custosthe viij. yere. THis yere was one william wyth the longe berde take  of bowe chirche and put to deth for heresye. Roger blount Nichās duket. ¶Custosthe ix. yere. This yere began the ordur of the trinite. Constantinson Robert la bele ¶Custosthe x yere. This yere ye kyng decessid in fraunce by ye hurt of a quare this was king Iohn̄ crowned vpō ascēō day anno  C.lxxx xix. Arnoldson Arnulphe Richardson barthelinew ye first yere of his reygne. ¶Custos THis yere lost the kinge normandy and Angeo and euery plough land tasked at iij. s̄. for to gete it ageyne. Roger dorset Iacobson barthilmew aldirman ¶Custosthe seconde yere THis yere wer chosen be wise men of the Cite .xxxv. men and sworne to mayntene the assisis in london. Normandy blounde Iohan de Ely ¶Custosthe thirde yere. Simon de aldmābury Willm̄son alis ¶Custosthe fourth yere THis yerefyl gret reynes and grete thondring lnynge & haile stones as gret as an egge that distroyd cornes & fr{is} and foules seen flienge in the eyr bering burning coles and brent many houses and ye land enterdyted. Walter brown̄ William chabirlayn ¶Custosthe fyfthe yere. Thomas hanirhyll amon bronde ¶Custosthe syxthe yere THis yere dare of our lord xij.C.iiij. begā ye drir of frier pre¦chers. & a gret wynter offrost yt durid from newper as  vnto our lady day in ente.
Iohn̄ walgraue Richard de winchester ¶Custosthe vij. yere THis yere all plees longing to the crowne were at ye tour pletyd Iohn̄ felyloud Edmondson gardra ¶Custosthe viij. yere Serle mercer Hugh desaint albos ¶Custosthe ix. yere Rogar winchester Edmond hardell ¶Custosye ix yere also aparte THis yere the land was Interdited & ye same yere was borne Herry the kingis sone. & this yere begā the names of ma∣yers and sherefs in london. Petur dcke Thomas fitnell Sherefs Herryson alwyn̄ ma¦yer.the x. yere. Petir la Iosue Willm̄ blounde Sherefs the xi. yere THis yere the lande was reconciled & the interdiccion relesed Adam whitby Stephan le grase Sherefs the xij. yere. Iocensson petir Iohan derlaunde Sherefs the xiij. yere THis yere was gret descedciō betwene the kynge & his lor∣dis. & lowis the kingis sone of fraūce ded moche harme in England. & southwarke the brigge & moche of the cite & was brēt. Randolfe land Constancele Iosue Sherefs Harrison alw¦yn Mairthe xiiij. yere. Martinson alis Petir bate Sherefs. Aā Mairthe xv yere. THis yere at Candilmas the kinge shippyd at portismoth and sayled to pey too Salmon basing Hugh de basing Sherefs. erle metre  within har¦de mairthe xvi. yere THis yere and dn̄i. xij C.xiiij. bygan the fryt mynors Iohn̄ trauers Andrew newland Sherefs the xvij: yere THe yere folowing ye kinge decessid ye xviij. yere of hys regne and thenne began the regne of kinge herre the iij. anno dn̄i M.ij C.xvi. ¶Iacob aldremā one part mair & Salmon basing ye other part. Benet de centre Williā blountiruers Sherefs Mayerothe first yere THis yere wales was Interdited & lowis offraunce and his company. had a M. marke of siluer fo his reward Thomas bolerell Richard helysond Sherefs Serle mer¦cermair.the ij. yere Iohn̄ vyell Iosuus le spicer Sherefs the iij. yere THis yere the kinge had of euery plough lande C.s̄. And the same yere saint Thomas of cant. was translatid Richard wimbuldeis Iohan vyell Sherefs Serle mer¦cer mair.the iiij. yere Roger renger Iocence le Iosue Sherefs. the v. yere THis yere ye kynge was crowned. & plees lōging to ye crowne pletid in ye ton̄r. & this yere ye castell of Bedford was destro∣yed. & frirs Carims began first. & a gret winde ao. dn̄i. M.ij C.xx. Richard reyner̄ Thomas sibert{is} Sherefs Serle mercer maierthe vi. yere Willm̄ gaynce Thomas lambert Sherefs Richard eu¦e Mairthe vij. yere. THis yere comfrirs minors first into england. & a man of or enford feyned hym to be crist. & was crucefied at addurbury
Iohn̄ trauers Andrew bukrell Sherefs Richard Rēge Andrew buc¦krel Mairthe viij. yere Iohn̄ trauers Roger le duke Sherefs the ix. yere. Martin fit william Herry Cobhm̄ Sherefs Andrew bu¦krel mairthe x. yere Stephan̄ bukrell Robert winchester Sherefs the xi. yere Robert yon̄ Richardson water Sherefs the xij. yere Iohn̄ venborne Michell of saint elins Sherefs the xiij. yere Watir Russell Watir edmondton Sherefs the xiiij. yere Gerard bate Symondson auery Sherefs the xv. yere Reger le blount Rauf Asshby Sherefs the xvi. yere Iohn̄ norman Gerarde bate Sherefs Roger ren / ger mairthe xvij. yere Robert hardell Herry Cobhm̄ Sherefs the xviij yere Iordan gouer Iohn̄ Tholosan Sherefs the xix yere Garard cordwayn Iohn̄ wilhall Sherefs the xx. yere Reymond bongay Raufasby Sherefs willm̄ Ionnorthe xxi. yere Iohn̄ gesours Michell Cony Sherefs Gararde bate Mayrthe xxij yere Iohn̄ vyle Thomas duryson Sherefs the xxiij. yere Iohn̄son Iohn̄ Rauf Asshby Sherefs Reynolde bō. gay mayr.the xxiiij. yere Hugh Blunt Adam Basyng Sherefs anf Asshby.the xxv. yere Rauf spicer Nichās Bate Sherefs Michelconi Iohn̄ Geso¦nes mayrthe xxvi. yere Robert de cornehyll Adam Butlar Sherefs the xxvij yere Symondson mary Laurence frowyk Sherefs the xxviij. yere Iohn̄ wyell Nichās bate Sherefs Per aleyu m Michell Tho¦my. mairthe xxix. yere Nicholasson Iesay Geffrey winchester Sherefs the xxx. yere Rauf hardell Iohn̄ Tholoane Sherefs Richardson ro¦ger. Iohn̄ nor¦man Ada ra∣sin m. Iohn̄ tholorane m.the xxxi. yere Vntfrey basse Williamson Richard Sherefs the xxxij yere Laurence frowick Nichās Bare Sherefs the xxxiij. yere Willm̄ Duresson Thomas wymborne Sherefs the xxxij. yere Iohn̄ norhācton Richard pycard Sherefs the xxxv. yere. Rauf asshwy Robert Lynton Sherefs Richās bate.the xxxvi. yere Stephan doe Herre walmonde Sherefs Richard har¦dell mairthe xxxvij. yere Michell bukrell Iehn̄ moyour Sherefs the xxxviij. yere Richard Ewyll Willm̄ Asshwy Sherefs the xxxix. yere Robert Cattheloyne Thomas firt Richard Sherefs the xl. yere. Iohn̄ Adryan Robert Cornehylle Sherefs Iohn̄ gisones mairthe xli. yere Adam browning Harry Coueutree Sherefs the xlii. yere. Iohn̄ norhm̄ton Richard pycard Sherefs Wylliāson richard m.the xliii. yere Iohn̄ Taylour Richard Wawrock Sherefs the xliiij. yere Robert mounpillers Osbert stokesley Sherefs Thomas firt thomasthe xlv. yere Thomas lafford Edward blount Sherefs the xlvi yere Petir armyger Robert Rokkesley Sherefs ¶Custoos Williāson Richardthe xlvij. yere Iohn̄ Lynde Iohn̄ Walrauyn sherefs the xlviij yere
Iohn̄ ryan Lucas baencot sherefs Custos.the xlix. yere Walter huyn Willm̄ duresine sherefs the l. yere Thomas basing Robert Cornehyll sherefs Herre fizt. Thōs Custosthe li. yere walter plott Phelyp taylor sherefs the lij. yere Gregory rockesley Henry walsh sherefs Iohn̄ adryan mayrthe liij. yere. Iohn̄ bentlee Richard de paris sherefs wal hēn m.the liiij. yere The regne of kinge Edward ye first. callyd longe shankis. Iohn̄ herne walter portar sherefs walter henthe furst yere Nichās winchester Herre couentre sherefs Herr wats ny mayrthe ij. yere Lucas banncour Herry frowyk sherefs the iij. yere Iohn̄ horne Raufblounte sherefs Gregori ro¦kesle mairye iiij. yere Raufharr as Ranffeuir sherefs the v. yere Iohn̄ bryan walter le glisse sherefs the vi. yere Robert basing willm̄ masarar sherefs the vij. yere Thomas Bor Rauf moere Sherefs the viij. yere Willm̄ faringdon Nichās vintener Sherefs the ix. yere Willm̄ malary Richard Chiklywelle Sherefs Harry wa¦leis mayr.the x. yere. Raufblounte Austin Bedill Sherefs the xi. yere Iordan goodchep Martyn bones Sherefs ye xij. yere Stephan Cornhyll Robert rokles Shrefes ¶Gregory Rockesley. Mayrethe xiij. yere. Watkyn Blount Iohn̄ warde Sherefs the xiiij. yere. Thomas grose waltir Awden Sherefs the xv: yere THe xiij. yere aboue wreten Geffrey Rockisley was mayre vnto the feste of saint petir in somer. & than was chosen ran¦dolf de sande Custos vnto candilmas. and thā was chosen Custos Iohn̄ beyton vnto seint margreet{is} day the yere xv▪ ¶Custos Randolf de sandwich willm̄ de harford Thomas stanes Sherefs the xvi. yere willm̄ betayne Iohn̄ santenary Sherefs. the xvij. yere Fulco de soō edmondo Salmon lancfare Sherefs the xviij. yere Thomas Roumayn willm̄ leyer Sherefs the xix. yere Randolf blounte Iohn̄ haruy Sherefs the xx. yere Edmond box Elyas Russell Sherefs the xxi. yere Robert rockesley Martin Aunbury Sherefs. Iohn̄ bretō Mayrethe xxij. yere Herry box Richard glouceter Sherefs the xxiij. yere Iohn̄ dunstable Adam halingbury Sherefs the xxiiij. yere Thomas de southfolke Adam de fulham sherefs the xxv yere Nichās de stortford willm̄ stortford sherefs the xxvi. yere Robert russhm̄ Thomas Coly sherefs Harry wa¦les mayrthe xxvij. yere Iohn̄ armentirs Herrefyngry sherefs the xxviij. yer Lucas aueryll Thomas Compys sherefs Elyas rus∣sell mayrthe xxix. yere
Robert callere Petir bosinge Sherefs Iohn̄ blount M.the xxx. yere Hugh porter Symond paris Sherefs the xxxi. yere Willm̄ combmerton Iohn̄ Sueford Sherefs the xxxij. yere Roger de paris Iohn̄ lyncolne Sherefs the xxxiij. yere Willm̄ colyn Reynold poderell Sherefs Herre waleis mthe xxxiiij. yere Geffrey conditij Symon beker Sherefs the xxxv. yere The regne of kinge Edward the seconde borne at arnarvan. Nichās pigoll Nichās brury Sherefs Iohn̄ bloūt mairthe furst yere Robert basing Iacob buttelar Sherefs Nichās faringhāthe ij. yere Roger palmer Iacob de saint Edon Sherefs Thomas romā.the iij. yere Symon scrope Petir blackeney Sherefs Richard busshm̄the iiij. yere Symon merworth Richard welford Sherefs Ioh crosse mairthe v. yere Iohn̄ lambyne Adam ladkyn Sherefs the vi yere Robert durdeyne Hugh de carton Sherefs Nichās farūdon / the xiij yere Stephan abyngdon Hamond nekylwelle Sherefs Iohn̄ geserue Mthe viij. yere Hamond goodchep Willm̄ botley Sherefs stephā abyngdō.the ix. yere Willm̄ cawston Raufbalaunce Seherefs Iohn̄ wyncrane / Mayrethe x. yere Iohn̄ pryours Willm̄ furner Sherefs the xi. yere Iohn̄ wyell Iohn̄ dalyng Sherefs the xij. yere Symond abyngdon Iohn̄ breston Sherefs hamond chicwelthe xiij. yere Iohn̄ bredhm̄ Reynold condyght Sherefs Nichās farindō.the xiij. yere Richard constantyn Richard hakney sherefs hamond chicwel Mayre / the xv. yere Iohn̄ granthm̄ Roger hely Sherefs the xvi. yere. Benet fulhm̄ Iohn̄ cawston sherefs Nichās faringdōthe xvii. yere Adam salesbury Iohn̄ orenford sherefs hamond chicwelthe xviii. yere Gylbert mordon Iohn̄ condim Sherefs Richard betayn. Mayre.the xix. yere THe regne of kinge Edward the thd borne at windsore in the yere of our lorde god M.CCC.xxvij. Richard rotyng Roger chauncelar Sherefs Richard betaynthe furst yere Harry darcy Iohn̄ hunteyn Sherefs hamond chicwelthe i. yere Symond fransois Herry cumbirton sherefs Iohn̄ grantam.. Mayrethe iij. yere This yere was mortymer Erle of march hangyd & drawe Richard lesar Herry gysours sherefs Symond swan.the iiij. yere Robert Ely Thomas horwoldesherefs Iohn̄ pulteneythe v. yere Iohn̄ mockyng Andrew awbrysherefs Iohn̄ pulteneythe vi. yere Niclas pyke Iohn̄ husbond sherefs Iohn̄ preston Mthe vij. yere Iohn̄ hamond Willm̄ hansard Sherefs Iohn̄ pulteneythe viij. yere Iohn̄ kyngton Water turke Sherefs Roger conduyt Mayrethe ix. yere Walter mordon Richard vpton Sherefs the x. yere Willm̄ brykisworth Iohn̄ northale Sherefs Iohn̄ pulteneythe xi. yere
water nele Niclas graue sherefs Harry darcy Mthe xij. yere willm̄ pountfret Hugh marberer Sherefs the xiij. yere Iohn̄ thornay Roger forshm̄ sherefs Andrew awbrey Mayrethe xiiij. yere. This yere was the batayle in the sluse hauyn wt shyppis. Adam lucas Bartylmew de marcy Sherefs Andrew awbreythe xv. yere Richard berking Iohn̄ rockley Sherefs Iohn̄ oxon M.the xvi. yere Iohn̄ lowkyng Richard kislyngbury Sherefs Symō fraūcesse Mayrethe xvij. yere This yere was a grete erth quaue Richard subbarbe Iohn̄ ayleshm̄ Sherefs Iohn̄ hamond.the xviij. yere. Geffrey wynham Thomas leget Sherefs Iohn̄ hamond.the xix. yere Edmond hamdeuale Iohn̄ glouceter Sherefs Richard laierethe xx. yere / willm̄ clapton Iohn̄ croydon Sherefs Geffrei whiting¦ham Mayre.the xxi. yere This yere the kinge wan caleis. ye yere of our lord M. iij C.xlviij Adam brabson Richard basmstok Sherefs Richard lacere / mayrethe xxij. yere. Herry pycarde Symond colcell Seherefs the xxiij. yere This yere was a grete pestilence in englande Adam bury Rauf lynne Sherefs Richard lacer Mthe xxiiij. yere. Iohn̄ notte Willm̄ worceter Sherefs Ric. killingburythe xxv. yere. Iohn̄ wroth Gylberd sleyndrop Sherefs Andrew awberythe xxvi. yere Iohn̄ petche Iohn̄ stodey sheref the xxvij. yere. Willm̄ welde Iohn̄ lytly Sherefs the xxviij. yere willm̄ tudnam Richard sinet Sherefs Thomas egry.the xxix. yere. walter foster Thomas brandon Sherefs Symond frāces mayrethe xxx. yere This yere the prince Edward toke the kinge of fraunce Richard notynghm̄ Thomas dooelde sherefs Herry pycardthe xxxi. yere. Stephan caundish Bartylmew frestlyng Sherefs Iohn̄ stody mairye xxxij. yere Iohn̄ bures Iohn̄ bernes Sherefs Iohn̄ lewkyn mthe xxxiij. yere Symond benyngton Iahn̄ chichester Sherefs Symon dossley.the xxxiiij. yere Iohn̄ deynes walter Berney. Sherefs Iohn̄ wroth ma.the xxxv. yere. This yere was the ij. grete pestilence willm̄ halberch Iames tame Sherefs Iohn̄ petchee m.the xxxvi. yere. Iames albon Iohn̄ andrew Sherefs Stephā caūdishthe xxxvij. yere This yere on sanit Mauris daye was a greate wynde and dyd moch harme. Richard croydon Iohn̄ hyltoste Sherefs Adam bury ma.the xxxviij. yere Iohn̄ brykelsworth Thomas Irlande sherefs the xxxix. yere. Iohn̄ medford Symon mordon Sherefs the xl. yere THis yere in Ianiuer Adam bury was dischargyd. & Iohn̄ lowken chosen by the kingis comaundement Thomas at lye Iohn̄ warde Sherefs Iohn̄ lowkin Mthe xli. yere Iohn̄ thorngolde willm̄ dikman Sherefs Iohn̄ andrew mthe xl. yere Adam wimondhm̄ Robert gyrdler. Symon mordōthe xliij yere
Iohn̄ pyell Hugh holbech sherefs Iohn̄ winchesterthe xliiij. yere Willm̄ walworh Iohn̄ cayton sherefs Iohn̄ Bremysthe xlv yere Robert hatfeld Niclas brymbar Sherefs the xlvi yere Iohn̄ phylpott Niclas brymbar sherefs Iohn̄ Palle M.the xlvij. yere. Iohn̄ awbry Iohn̄ fisshed sherefs Adam bury M.the xlviij. yere Richard lyons Willm̄ woohous Sherefs willm̄ walworththe xlx. yere Iohn̄ hadley willm̄ newport Sherefs Iohn̄ ward M.the l. yere. Iohn̄ norhampton Robert launde Sherefs Adam stable M.the li. yere THis yere in marche Niclas brembre was chosen Mayr by the kingis writt. and one Iohn̄ mistirworth was drawe & put to deth and this yere began the regne of kinge Richard the ij. sonne of prince edward. Andrew pykman Iohn̄ twyford sherefs Niclas brembyrthe frst. yere Iohn̄ boshm̄ Thomas cornwaleis sherefs Iohn̄ philpot Mthe ij. yere Iohn̄ heldon willm̄ barell sherefs Iohn̄ hadley Mye iij. yere. THis yere galyottis of spayne wt od smale shippis of warre. come a londe at grauesende & brente ye most parte of ye town watir doget willm̄ knygrot Shrefes Iohn̄ hadley Mthe iiij. yere THis yere men of kent brent the sawy & robbet saint iohēs & toke the archbisshop of cant than chauncelar & the prior off saint ions than tresorer▪ wt many od oute of the owr and smote of ther hedis: and slew many flemyngis in london Iohn̄ hynde Iohn̄ rote sherefs Iohn̄ northātonthe v. yere. Iohn̄ cely Adam bamme Sherefs Iohn̄ northātonye vi. yere. Symon winchombe Iohn̄ more sherefs Niclas brembyr Mayre.the vi. yere Niclas exton Iohn̄ fresh Sherefs. the viii. yere Iohn̄ organ Iohn̄ owchman Sherefs the ix. yere willm̄ more willm̄ standon sherefs Niclas exton Mthe x. yere Hugh festoll willm̄ venour Sherefs Niclas exton Mthe xi. yere THis yere the archbisshop of yorke the duke of irlande ye  of souffolk treulion iustice & Niclas brembre knyght wee apeched of treson. & ye sayd duke & erle were exyled wt iiij. od {per}sons and viij. knightis and squyers were put to deth. Adam karlyle Thomas austen sherefs Niclas swinford / the xij yere Iohn̄ walcott Iohn̄ leuey Sherefs willm̄ venour mthe xiij. yere. This yere was another grete pestilence in england Thomas vincent Iohn̄ fraunceys Sherefs Iohn̄ bamme.the xiiij. yere. Herre vanner Iohn̄ shadworth Sherefs Iohn̄ hynde M.the xv. yere THis yere at mydsomer Iohn̄ hinde was discharged by the kyngis councell. & edward derlington knight made Custos and Gilberd maghfeld and Thomas newton chosen sherefs and in Iullij folowyng the sayde Custos was discharged and fo hym
was chosen badwyn raduton and at saint Edwardis tyde after was chosen mayr and sherefs thes persones folowyng by ycen∣ce of the kynge. Gilberd maghfeld Thomas newton sherefs Willm̄ standon / the xvi. yere. Richard whitington Drew barentyn sherefs Iohn̄ hadley Mthe xvij. yere. This yere quene anne decessid and buryed at westm̄ willm̄ beynton Thomas knollis sherefs Iohn̄ fresh Ma.the xviij. yere This yere in August the Irishmen were comaundyd home by ye kinge. Roger Elyas Iohn̄ sheryngton sherefs Willm̄ more M.the xix. yere Thomas wyford willm̄ parker Sherefs Adam bammethe xx. yere THis yere in Iunij decessid the mayre and for hym chosen ri∣chard whitington whō ye lord{is} wold not admytt. tyll on the morowe was admitted be ye king & occupied tyl saint edward da willm̄ afkan Iohn̄ wodcol Sherefs Ric. whitingtonthe xxi. yere Iohn̄ warner Iohn̄ wade sherefs Drew aeyn Mayrethe xxij. yere. THis yere the kige was deposed. & after hym regned herry the fourth that was duke of lancaster William walderne William hyde Sherefs Thomas knollis Mayrethe furst. yere. This yere ewē glēd or squyer of wales made warre ayenst ye king Iohn̄ wackle willm̄ einot Sherefs Iohn̄ fraūces Mthe ij. yere. willm̄ venour willm̄ framynghm̄ sherefs Iohn̄ chadworththe iij. yere. Robert chichester Richard marlow sherefs Iohn̄ valiot M.the iiij. yere. This yere was ye batayl of shrewisbury. & ye quene crowned Thomas polle Thomas faukener Sherefs Willm̄  Mthe v. yere THis yere bisshop scrop & mombrey terle marchal beheded. & ij. yemen of the kingis chambre hanged willm̄ lonthe Steuen spylman sherefs Iohn̄ hynde M.the vi yere willm̄ crowmer Herry barton sherefs Iohn̄ wodcokthe vij. yere Niclas wotton Geffrey broke Sherefs. Ric. whitingtonthe viij. yere Herry pumfret Herry halton sherefs Wilm̄ standon Mayrethe ix. yere. This yere was behedyd therle of northumbirlande wilm̄ norton Thomas duke sherefs Drew braingtō.the x. yere Iohn̄ lane willm̄ chichell Sherefs Ric. marow Mthe xi. yere THis yere was ordeyned. ye alay of golde. & ye guyldē be gon∣ne to make. and the kingis sonnes beten in chepe. Iohn̄ reynwell walter cotton Sherefs. Thomas knollisthe xij. yere. Rauf lubenhm̄ seuȳnok Sherefs Robert chicheleethe xiij. yere. Iohn̄ penne Thomas pyke Sherefs Willm̄ walden. Mayreye xiiij. yere. THis yere decessid the kinge and his sonne herry ye v. crow¦ned in aprill the yere of our lord M.iiij C.xiij Iohn̄ nicoll Iohn̄ sutton sherefs Villiā crowmerthe furst. yere. This yere the lord cobhm̄ made a rysing wt many lollardys
Thomas aleyn Iohn̄ michell sherefs Williā crowmer Mayrethe ij. yere This yere the kynge wan harflew in normandy Aleyn euerarde Thomas chambrege sherefs Niclas wcton Mayreye iij. yere. This yere in octobre ye king had a batayle at agmcourt & wan it Robert whitington Iohn̄ conontre sherefs Herry barton. Mayrethe iiij. yere THis yere th em{per}our came into england. and the duke of hol¦land. and this yere ye kinke wan normandy Herre rode Iohn̄ geduey sherefs Ric. marlow Mthe v. yere This yere the lorde cobham was taken and iuged to deth Iohn̄ bryan Rawlyn barton sherefs Williā sevuinok. Mayrethe vi. yere This yere was the sege of Roene and Cane: and of many other castels and townes Iohn̄ butler Robert whitinghm̄ sherefs Ric. whitinghm̄ Mayrethe vij▪ yere This yere the quene katheryn was crowned Iohn̄ neell Iohn̄ butlar sherefs. williā cambregthe xviij yere. Richard goflyn willm̄ weston sherefs Robert chichelee Mayrethe ix. yere. THis yere mortymer brak out of ye tour & ye same yere ye king decessid. & his son herre ye vi. regned king Adm̄ M. Williā waldern Mayreiiij C.xx. Willm̄ estfelde Robert tatirsale sherefs the furst yere This yere mortymer was hangyd & newgat new made. Niclas Iames Thomas wanford sherefs Williā crowmer Mayrethe ij. yere This yere the prince of portyngale came into england. Symon seman Iohn̄ watir sherefs Iohn̄ michel mathe iij. yere THis yere was gret debate betwene ye cardinal of win. & the duke of glowcet. & v. galeis came to london wt marchaūdyse Williā mylred Iohn̄ brokley sherefs Iohn̄ couentrethe iiij. yere Robert arnold Iohn̄ hegman sherefs Williā rynwell mayrethe v. yere This yere one callyd segewyk was hangyd and quartryd. Herre frowyk Thomas otley sherefs Iohn̄ gedney / mayrethe vi. yere This yere wyll wawe was hanged and quartryd Iohn̄ abkot Iohn̄ dushous sherefs. Herry bartonthe vij yere. Iohn̄ rose Rauf holland sherefs Williā Estfeld mayrethe viij. yere This yere ye kinge was crowned & Iak straw hangyd & q̄tred. Watir chirchsay Robert large Sherefs Niclas wnctonthe ix. yere Stephan brown Iohn̄ adderley sherefs Iohn̄ wellis ma / the x. yere Ths yere ye king was crowned in paris kinge of fraunce Iohn̄ olney Iohn̄ paddisley Sherefs Iohn̄ {per}ues mathe xi. yere This yere was the grete councell at Basill. and many lollardys distroyed in pruce Thomas chalton Iohn̄ lynge sherefs Iohn̄ borcley.the xij. yer THis yere was a grete pestilence and agrete frost▪ & the duke of bedford dyed. and lyeth  roene
Iohn̄ berneuell Symken eyer. Sherefs Mthe xiij. yere Robert clopton Thomas chadworth Sherefs Harry frowykthe xiiij. yere This yere the duke of burgoine layd sege to calei and fayled his purposse Thomas nersted willm̄ gregory sherefs Iohn̄ michell Mthe xv. yere This yere sanke a parte of london bredge Thomas chapman willm̄ hales sherefs williā estfeld M.the xvi. yere This yere fell downe another parte of the brygge. Hugh dyke Nichās yoo sherefs. Stephā brown.the xvij. yere. This yere abusshell where was worth l pens. Robert marchall Phelip malpace sherefs Stephā brown.the xviij. yere. THis yere the duke of yorke was made regend of fraunce & l Richard with and his clark Burned. and debate betwene flete stret and the houses of courte Willm̄ whenale Iohn̄ sutton sherefs Robert Clptonthe xix. yere. This yere was put to deth maister roger bolingbrok & a stryin the yeld halle for chesing of the Mayr by taylours. Richard rich willm̄ combis sherefs Robert Cloptonthe xx. yere This yere Elynor cobhm̄ was put downe & dede open penaunce. Thomas bewmond Richard nordon sherefs Iohn̄ ddirle Mthe xxi. yere. Iohn̄ norman Niclas wyfold sherefs chadworththe xxij. yere. Steuyn foster Hugh wich sherefs. Herre frowik mthe xxiij yere. This yere quene margret was crowned & ye parlemēt at bury. Iohn̄ derby Geffrey feldyng sherefs Symken Eyer. Mayre.the xxiiij. yere This yere poules steple was set on fyr by lyghnyng. Robert horne Geffrey boleyn sherefs Iohn̄ Olney M.the xxv. yere willm̄ abrahm̄ Thomas scott sherefs Iohn̄ geduey Mthe xxvi. yere This yere the kinge made ij dukis of norfolke & suffolke. willm̄ cautlow williā marow sherefs Stephā brown.the xxij. yere. This yere was another dere yere and an erth quane Thomas Canyngis williā hulyn sherefs Thomas chaltō Mayrethe xxviij. yere. THis yere normandy was lost. & iakcade rose in kent wyth moche peopell and made a fray on london bredge williā dere Iohn̄ mydelton sherefs Niclas wyfoldethe xxix. yere This yere was Guyō lost & ye erle of shrewisburi slaī at burdens Mathew phelip Cristofer watirsherefs Williā Gregorythe xxx. yere This yere ye duke of yorke set his felde at brent heth in kent. Richrd lee Richard alley sherefs Geffrey feldyngthe xxxi. yere This yere lordis men made a fray at the wrastlynge. Iohn̄ walden Thomas cooke sherefs Iohn̄ norman. Mayre.the xxxij. yere This yere the Mayr lefte ryding to westm̄ & went be water williā taylour Iohn̄ felde sherefs Stephan foster.the xxxiij. yere
This yere was a felde at saint alvons bytwene the kynge and ye duke of yorke Iohn̄ yonge Thomas walgraue sherefs Willm̄ marowethe xxxiiij. yere Iohn̄ stiward Rauf warney Sherefs Thomas canig. Mayrethe xxxv. yere This yere lord Egremond brake out of new gate willm̄ edward Iohn̄ reynere sherefs Geffrey boleyn. Mayrethe xxxvi. yere This yere the freshmen robbyd sandwich. and the translacion of saint Osmond. Raufiostyn Ricard'nedam Sherefs Thomas scot Mthe xxxvij. yere. THis yere was a felde achidlow and at blore heth. & a fraye betwene men of the kingis hons and men of lawe Iohn̄ plommer willm̄ stockat Sherefs willm̄ hulyn M.the xxxviij. yere THis yere was another felde at saint albons and the feld at northamton. and at walfeld. and at mortimers crosse  dn̄i M.iiij C. and xvi. Robert flemmyng Iohn̄ lambard Sherefs Richard lee M.the xxxix. yere THis yere was a felde beside yorke▪ & kinge herry put down and the dukis of yorke eldest sone toke vpon hym the crown and callyd Edward the forth. Iohn̄ locke George yrlande Sherefs. Hugh wyth M.the furt. yere. THis yere was the Erle of orenford behedyd and other gentilmē willm̄ hampton Sartylmew Iames Sherefs Thomas coke mthe ij. yere. This yere the town diches were new cast. Thomas muschamd Robert basset Sherefs Mathew phelipthe iii. yere. This yere sergean̄tis fest was. & the mayr dyned no there Iohn̄ tate Iohn̄ stone Sherefs Rauf Iostlyn Mthe iiij. yere. This yere the quene was crowned. and king herre take and put into the towre Herry wafur willm̄ constantyne Sherefs Rauf virnay Mthe v. yer This yere came gret lordis from the lande of poole and beame t see this lande Iohn̄ bromer Herry bryce Sherefs Iohn̄ yonge M.the vi. yere THis yere decessid herre bryce & for hym chosen Iohn̄ storon & a batell in smyrfeld betwene the lord scales and the bastard of burgoyne and the lord scales had the worshp of the felde Thom̄s stalbrek Humtffrey heyford sherefs Thomas halgra¦ue Mayrethe vij. yere This yere was ye kingis sus maryed vnto charles duke of bingō willm̄ hariet Symken smyth sherefs willm̄ taylour Mayre.the viij. yere. THis yere was takē ye lord harbard & his brod at hedgrotfeld & bothe beheded & ye lord ryners & his son behedyd. & one staf¦ford of southwick yt was made erle of deumshir also behedyd
Robert drope Richard gardiner Sherefs Richard le mayrthe ix. yere THis yere at ester the duke of Clarens and therle of warwik fledde into fraunce. and steers poynes and alford behedid And at mihelmas the sayd lordis came ageyn into england▪ and ye kinge fledde into holland and kinge herry put ageyn to the crow And the Erle of wurceter behedyd. and the prince borne▪ and a bla¦sing sterre. Iohn̄ crosby Iohn̄ warde Sherefs Iohn̄ stocton Mthe x. yere. THis yere in lente the kinge came ageyn in to england. and ded a batell at barnet on ester daye & there was slayn therle of warwyk and his broder markis montagu. and king herry put ageyn in to the tour. And a batell at tenkisbury. there was slayn kynge herryson and many other lordis and knyghtis. And the bastard fauconbryg came fro the see and wyth his retenew wold haue eueryd the cite▪ but he was mannely defendyd by the citezēs and many of his menslayn. Iohn̄ shelley Iohn̄ aleyn Sherefs willm̄ edward mthe xi. yere. This yere in Iulij was born Richrd the kingis seconde sone. and made duke of yorke. Thomas bledlow Iohn̄ brown Sherefs williā hāptō M.the xij. yere This yere was ordeyned in euery warde a peyr stockis. And xv. wymmen warin rey hodes. Iohn̄ stocker Robert byllesdon Sherefs Iohn̄ tate mayr.the xiii. yere. Afray in chepe on saint petirs euyn betwyne the kingis seruan∣tis and the watche men. Thomas hylle Edmond shaa Sherefs Robert drope Mthe xiiij. yere. THis yere at mydsomer ye king went into fraūce ward & lan¦dyd at caleis wt a gret army & wt his oste went to Amyas. & ther spak wt ye frensh king. & they made pece wtout bataile ye frensh king gyeldyng yerly xi M. li. & so came home ageyn Hugh brice Robert colwich Sherefs Robert basset Mthe xv. yere. Willm̄ horne Richard ranson Sherefs Raufiustlyn M.the xvi. yere. This yere began ye reperacion of the wallis of the Cite Iohn̄ stockar Herre colett Sherefs Hūcfrey heyford Mayrethe xvij. yere This yere ye duke of clarence was put to deth. & ye terme deferryd from ester to michelmas be cause of the grete pestelence Robert hardyng Robert byfelde Sherefs Richard gardine.the xvii. yere. Thomas Ilom Iohn̄ warde Sherefs Bartylmew Ia∣mes Mayre.the xix. yere This yere the kingis suster duches of burgō com into england to see her brodyr. & this yere the kinge tared sore the lande Willm̄ danyell Willm̄ bakon Sherefs Iohn̄ brown M.the xx. yere. Robert tate willm̄ wyking sherefs williā harpot Mthe xxi. yere
THis yere willm̄ wyking decessid & for hym chosen Richar Chawry & ye kinge made a gret army in to scotland. by his brod duke of glouceter in whiche vyage he wan Serwik willm̄ whyte Iohn̄ mathew sherefs Edmond shaa mayrthe xxij. yere THis yere decessid the kinge in aprell entringe in to the xxiij. yere of his regne. and the ij. sonnys of kinge Edward were put to silence. and ye duke of glouceter toke vpon hym the crowne in Iullij. whiche was the first yere of his regne. and he & his que∣ne crowned on one daye in the same moneth of Iullij: Thomas norlond willm̄ martyn sherefs Robert bil lesdon Mathe ij. yere THis yere the duke of bokynghm̄ was be hedid at salisbury and also many other knight{is}. and diuers lordis and kingh¦tis fled in to fraunce. Richard chesir Thomas bretayn sherefs Thomas▪ hylle mairthe iij. yere THis yere in decembre deyd Richard Chester. & for hym cho¦sen Raufastry and ye same yere in august. The erle of Rich¦mond wyth the erle of penprok that longe had ben banysshyd ca¦me in to england and the od gentylmen that fled in to fraūce ma¦de a felde be side leyceter and the kinge there slayn. And the erle of Richmond was crowned the xxx. day of Octibre. And aboute can∣dylmas maried kinge Edward{is} eldest doughter. And this yere in Septembre deyed Thomas hylle. and for hym choson. w stockar And he deyed the third daye after. & than was chosen Iohn̄ ward and ocupyed tyll seint Ed. daye: Iohn̄ tate Iohn̄ swan sherefs Hugh bry¦ce Mayrthe furst yere THis yere was a grete deth and basty callyd thswerynge ∣knes and the crosse in chepe newe made. And a grete taske and dysine grauntyd. Hugh cloptan Iohn̄ percyuall sherefs Herry Co∣let Mayr.the i. yere THis yere the quene was crowned. and the Erle of lyncolne and the lorde lowell. And one Martyn swarte a straunger alle were slayn in a felde yt they made ageynst the kinge Iohn̄ fenkell Iohn̄ remyngton sherefs willim̄ hor∣ne mayrthe iij. yere This yere prince Artur wds borne at wincester Rauf Tylney willm̄ Isaak sherefs. Robert Ta¦te mayrthe iiij yerer THis yere the king sente many knightis into bretayn wyth the nombre of vij M. mē. to defende the ij. ladys that were cyers to the lande. and therle of northn̄byrlande slayn in ye north and the cap of mayntenaūce brought fro Rome. willm̄ Capell Iohn̄ broke sherefs williā whit Mayr.the v. yere This yere crepelgate was new made & edw. frāk & od put to deth Herre Cote Robert reuell sherefs Iohn̄ Ma∣thew mairthe vi. yere
THis yere in seuerel decessid Robert reuel & for hym chosen hugh pemerton. & sir Robert chaberleyn beheded. & in Iu∣nii ye kīg{is} ij. son bor & named herre. & ye cōduit begōne at greschuch Thomas wode Willm̄ brown sherefs Hugh clop¦ton mayr.the vij. yere THis yere in septēbre y• kinge wente to Caleys wt a grete ar∣my ageinst fraūce but ye peas was made wtout batayle & ye quenes mod decessid & the louvers sett vpon gwild halle Willm̄ purchas Willm̄ welbek sherefs willm̄ mar¦tyn mayr.the viij. yere This yere was a rysing of yonge men ayenst ye stileyard. Iohn̄ wyngar Robert fabyan sherefs Rauf astrythe ix. yere Nichās Almyn Iohn̄ warner sherefs m. Richard Chawrithe x. yere THis yere was behedyd sir willm̄ staule. than lorde chamlayn. sir symond monford & his son & many od yt landyd in the downes to ye nombre of viij. skoie. that com from one perkin warbek Cal∣lyng hym self kinge Edwardis sonne Herre somer Thomas lincesworth sherefs Herry Co∣letin. Iohn̄the xi. yere Iohn̄ saa Richard haddon sherefs Tate mairthe xij. yere THis yere the comons of cornewaile arose to ye nombre of xxx M. and the lorde Awdley chyf captayn and one ammok & asmyth callyd Mithel Iosef. and they come to blak heth and ma∣de a felde ageynst the kinge and lost it. ye captayns taken & put to execusion. this felde was in Iunij. and in august after one perkin warbek callyng hym self the ij. sonne of kinge Edward the iiij. lon dyd in Cornewaile and by pursute of sertayn lordis he fled to bew deley seuwary. and by appoyntment com to the kinge and so re∣mayned folowyng the courte Thomas wyndought Barthilmew Reede sherefs Willm̄ pur¦ches mayrthe xiij. yere THis yere in dec▪ was taken downe the weder cok of Powles ye Crosse and the bolle and all newe made. and in may after solēply halowed and set vp ageyne Thomas bradbury Steuen Ianyn sherefs Iohn̄ perci¦al mayr.the xiiij. yere. This yere in Cathedra scī perri was borne at grenewich ye thride son of kinge harry the vij. named Edmond duke of somerset Iames wilford Richard brond sherefs Nichās Al∣wyn maythe xv. yere THis yere in nouēbre perkin warbeck aforenamed was con∣uicte of treson & drawē from ye tour to tyburne & there hāged & beheded. & ye same time was Iuged to dye for treson ye erle of war¦wik son to ye duke of clarēce before reherssed whiche Erle had been kepte in the tour from the age of xi. yere vnto the ende of xiiij. yere after. & ye xxviij. day of nouēbre was behedid at ye tour hyl & ye same yere were gret flodis & wyndis thundring & lyghtnīgis which ded
grete hurte in diuers contreis in England. And the viij. daye of may next after the kinge and the quene wente to Caleis and thed com the duke of burgoyne and spake wt the kynge at saint peters chirche wythout the towne the space of vij. ours wt moche honor and solace and so departid. And the xiiij. day of Iunij after the kin¦ge and the quene come home agayne this was in the yere of oure lorde xv C. And the same moneth decessid the kingis thirde sonne Edmond and buried at westm̄. And thesame yere dyed the arch∣bisshop of yorke ye bisshop of Norwichs the bisshop of Hely and in septē folowing decessed the bisshop of Caunterbury morton̄. car¦dinal. & chaūceler. and this yere was brent ye towne of Baburhm̄ and a grete pestilence through all england. Iohn̄ hawe Willm̄ stede Sherefs ¶Iohn̄ re¦myngton. Mairāno xvi. THis yere the kinge buylded newe his maner at shene. And chaūged the name and named hit Richmond and be buyl∣ded newe his place callid baynard{is} castel in london. and repaired his place at grenwich wt moche newe buylding. Laurence aylemer Herre hed Sherefs Sir Iohn̄ shaa mairAnno xvij. THis yere was sente into Englond the kynge of Spaynes thred doughter named katherin to be maryed to the prince artur & she londed at plȳmothe the viij day of Octobre. & rel into london in the most ryal wyse the xij. daye of nouēbre tha friday And the sonday folowyng mraied at saint poules chirche and an halpace made of tymbre from the west dore to the quere dore of xij fote brod and iiij fote of height. and in the middis of the same ma∣ryed and the fest holden in the bisshops palais. And from london brigge to powles in diuers stretis were made ryal and costlew pa¦gentis. and at the west dore of powles was made a costlew pagēt renning wyn red claret and whit all the day of the mariage and at the same triumphe the kinge made lvij knightis. & the tuysdai▪ after al ye court remeuid to westm̄ by water & ye mair wt al ye craft{is} wt them in barg wt trompet{is} shalmes & taberetis in ther best ma∣ner & there the kinge helde ryal iustis turnais & bankettis vi day∣es after. & than remeuid to richmud & ye same yere ye mair held his fest of mairalte at y• guyld halle. & ye same yere in nouēbre come to ye kinge a noble ambassad on̄t of scotlond for to traite of maryage betwene ye scottish kinge. And our kingis eldest doughter named Margret whiche was accordid & concludid on sint powles cum  conuertiō. And in ester weke next after decessed ye prince Artur at ludlow & buryed at wurcetur & the dich from thamys to holbn̄ brigge newe caste. Herry keble Niclas nynes Sherefs. Bertholmew eed mairAnno xviij.
THe articles of ye charter & liber¦teis of the Cite of london Ca. ij. The sherefs of london and mydelsep lete to ferme to the citeens of london for CCC. pund by yere ye first article That the citezens of theym self make sherefs whan they wylle & put away whan they wyll. and for theym ans∣were. the ij. artycle. That the sherefs be not amercyed o∣uer xx. pond the iij. artycle That the sherefs of {per}ill of lyf of mem∣bris be Iugyng after the lawe of the Citee the iiij. artycle. If ony greef impedimēt or diminuciō of theis whiche to the shyre perteyne graunted by ye kynge so were. it shal∣be acompted in the schequer for aque¦taunce of the ferme the v. artycle. Amocion of kiddell vnder payne of x. pond and the citezens haue thesame amercymentis the vi. artycle. That the kepar of the tour of london take nought of the weres the vij. ar. That noo citezen plete wtout the wal∣les out take &c. the viij. artycle That noo Citezen doo twoo hand ba∣tayle the ix. artycle That noo man take ostage by stren∣gith ne liberaciō of ye marchal ye x. ar. That the citezens be quyte of tolle las∣tage & all od vsage the xi. artycle. That noman of mercy of money bee Iuged but after the olde lawe of the Cite the xij. artycle That the hustingis ones in the weke beholden the xiij. artycle That they haue ther vadymemes & weddes the xiiij artycle That of ther londes and holdes they haue right after the vsage of the Cite the xv. artycle That the deuties of london borowed and of weddis there made. plees bee there holden of borowing at london to be taken the xvi artycle That they haue their fugacions and huntyng{is} lyke as they had the tyme of king harry the second. the xvij ar. That the citezens haue and be quyte of bryghtol and childe wyte yerisgue and scotale the xviij artycle. That ye ctezens haue al ther liberties and free vsag whiche they had the ty¦me of herre graūfader to kig herry the xix. artycle The wareyn of Stanes of the forest ship the xx. artycle. That ye mayre and citezens haue alle their liberties and free vsage vnhurt as they had in the tyme of kynge her¦ry the xxi. artycle. That the kynge not beyng at wes the mayr to his barons of ye schequer be presentyd and of them as Mayre admitted the xxij artycle Allowaūce of ye liberties of saint pou∣le the xxiij. artycle That the citezens of london bee quyte of all toll and vsage aswel on this sde ye see as beyonde {per}petual ye xxii ar That the citezens of Londō of ples to the crowne perteyning within the Ci¦te and subbarbis to them hapnynge may hem discharge after thold vsage of the cite the xxv. artycle That foreyns as od may make at∣nais as wel in askyng as defendyng so as odurwhere in the kingis courte the xxvi. artycle. That noo marchaūt or od go ageinst marchauntis coming by londe or by water wyth ther marchaūdyse or vn¦tailes toward the cite to bey or to selle
vnto they come to the sayde Cytte. And ther waren there haue put to s. le xxvij artycle That noo man put out his wares to sale the whiche owen custum vnto de¦we custū be leuid the xviij artycle That the maye and sheref of londō the kinge wyth ye barons of the sche¦quer at westm̄ or london not beyng. to the constable of the tour of London wythout ye gate of the same tour yer∣ly shalbe presentyd and amytted. So ne thelesse that to the kynge at hys next comyng to westm̄ or London he be presentyd the xxix. artycle That the sherefs of london be a merci¦ed in the kingis courte after the quan¦tie of the trespace as other Sherefs of the reame the xxx. artycle cōfirma∣cion of ye liberties and vsage aforesaid the clausula licet the xxxi artycle That our lord the kynge or his eyers shall not assigne Iusticis wythin the Citefore ony wyth in to Cytee or the subbarbis of the same comyng out other than Iusticis errauntis to the tour of London and Iustices for the gayle of newgate to be deliuered and errours at saint martyns graunt to be correctyd the xxxij. artycle. That the mayre and sherefs of londō bi chosen after the tenour of ye charts of the {pro}genitours of our lord the kyn∣ge and none other wyse the xxxiij Ar. That the sherefs of london haue but ij. clark{is} and ij. sergeānt{is} by reson off ther offyce for whoo they wyl answe∣re the xxxiiij. artycle. That the mayre of london whiles he were mayre. haue none other offyce to the cite belongyng. than the offyce of the mayrshyp of the same. ne afore hym holde shereefs plenor other thā that whiche the mayre ought to hold after y• olde vsage of the cite ye xxxv. ar That talag{is} after they were set in lon¦don by the mayre and aldermen shal not be augmentid but by the comoū assent of ye mayr & comonte ye xxxvi. ar That the money of the talg{is} and hel∣pys growyng. be in the kepynge off iiij. Sad men of the cite the xxxvij. ar. That noo Alyaunt bee amytted in to the lybartye of the Cite but in the hu∣sting{is}. the xxxviij. artycle. That euerich admyttyd in to the ly∣barte of the cite be of certayn crafte or office be the handis of vi. sad men of ye same craft or office the xxxix. artycle. If ony freman of the cite were conuic¦te ayenst his othe afore made or ayen¦ste the state of the cite he shall lyse his fredom the xl. artycle The olde maner and fourme of pren¦tis shalbe obserued the xli. artycle If ony freman of the Cyte auouched goodis of foreyns to be theirs he shal lese the liberte of the Cyte the xlij. Ar. That the citezens of thesame cite. but they be in lot and stot and perteners of all charg{is} of and for the state of the Cyte shall lese ther freddin ye xliij. ar. That cytezens without the lybarte of the sayde cite dwellyng and by theim or theirs excersising marchaundyses in the same and be in lot and stot wt ye citezens vnder peyne of lesyng theyr lybarte. the xliiij. artycle / That the comon seale be vnder ye ke∣pyng of twoo Aldermen and two com¦monner & yt it be not denaied to reso∣nable nedyng folcke and for puttyng to therof nothing be taken the xlv. ar
That weight{is} and benes of marchū¦dises betwene marchaunt and mar∣chaunt to be weyed to be in kepyng of sad men of the cite in that offyce ex∣perte by the comonte to bee chosen. & not to odur be it comytted the xlvi. ar That the sherefs the toll & Custumes of their ferme. {per}teynyng or publyke offic{is} to theym belongyng comytte to them for whom they wyll answer. & trespaces conuicted be put awaye frō that office. and after their demerytis be they punyshed the xlvij. ar. That marchauntis whiche be not off the libarte any wines or odur wares wythin the same cite or the subbarb{is} of it selle not to retayle ye xlviij. ar. That brokers of marchaundyses by chosen by marchauntis and shal ma¦ke othe afore the mayre ye xlix. ar. That cōmen hosters be partyners of all charg{is} so as free hosters ye l. ar. That marchaunt{is} of gascoine and od alyaūt{is}. to ged way lodge so as dir∣to they were wont to do the li. arti. That the kepyng of london bredge wt od rent{is} and profit{is} to two Sad men od than aldermen be the comonte. to be chosen be comytted the which ther of yerly shal answer ye lij. ar. That none sergeaunt of the chambre take fee of the comonte or do execucyō but vnto that by the comonte chosen. the liij. artycle That the chamberleyn comon clerke and comon sergeaunt by the cōmon∣tee. be chosen and at wyll of them bee put awey. ye liiij. ar. That the goodes of aldyrmen in hel∣pis and talag{is} of the cyte by men of ye ward{is} where they haue dwellyng be taxed as the good{is} of the odur citezēs the lv. Article. Confirmacion of the forsayd articles the lvi. artycle. That the mayre aldirmen citezens & cōmoute of the cōmeners of Lonnon. may assise talag{is} or rentis as an od: the lvij. artycle. That money growyng of suche tala∣gis be in the kepyng of iiij. Sad men and trewe▪ and that to be choen and out of their kepyng for necessites and vtylites of the same cite and not odur¦wyse to be spent. ye lviij. ar The clausula licet. ye lix ar. That the mayre and aldyrmen with thassent of the cōmontee maye make ordinaunc{is}. ye lx. ar. That the cite of london haue alle her libartees and free vsagis as wel wre¦tyn as not wretyn as they had the ry¦mes of saint Edward kynge and con¦fessor and of willm̄ cōquerour and o odur their progenitours ye lxi ar. That the mayre of london be Iustice at newgat for gayle of delyueraunce the lxij. artycl The sheres of london and  to ferme for iij C.li. ye lxiij article That the Citezens of London ther te¦nementis wythin the libarte of the ci¦te may be quethe to ded handis or od wyse ye lxiiij. article That the sherefs of london be amer∣ced as odur sherefs for trespace ye lxv. artycle. That the sherefs of london bee amer¦ced for a scape of thefes at C. ō. only. ye lxvi. artycle. That the Cytezens of london bee nt charged of kepyng of them that flee to chirches the lxvij. artycle.
That the citezens of londō put awaye weres and haue the punyshment to the kinge perteynyng ye lxviij. ar. That marchauntis alyaūt{is} coming in to eglond selle ther marchaundy∣ses wythin xl dayes after the coming of them and abyde at the tables offre osters ye lxx ar. That the styward marshall and cler∣ke of the market wythin the libarte syt not. nor ony offyce there excercyse nor citezens wythout the lybarte off thyngis growyng wythin the same cite. Draw plee ony maner wyse. the lxx. artycle ¶That no man excercyse the offyce of excheter wythin the cite but the may∣re so that the make othe to the kynge therof to answer the lxxi. ar. That the cytezens of London bee not dystrayned to goo forth or sende in to warres wythout the Cite ye lxxij. ar. That the constable of london take no preses by londe nor bewater nor ssyp¦pes nor bos he arest or make areste. the lxxiij artycle. That the citezēs of London haue ther kepars in all the feirs of Englonde: the lxxiiij artycle. That the sherefs of london be not dy∣strayned to make othe But vpon yel¦dyng of their acomptis at the scheker the lxxv. artycle. That the citezens of London though ayenst the olde vsage yt were compel∣lyd to clayme ther lybartees and free vsage by vse of custum of olde. yt they haue and vsed theym as they of olde were wont. the lxxvi. ar. That the citezens may recorde ther li¦barteis afore the kingis Iusticis and mynystres what so euer notwythstā¦dyng. Statutis of the wey or domes in the contrey made or shewyd oute▪ the lxxvij. artycle. That on wryt suffyce to the citezens of london as to the alowaunce of theyr charturs in all places of our lorde the kynge for the tyme of on kynge. the lxxviij. artycle. That noo summaunce attachement or execucion be made by ony mynys∣ters of our lord the kynge wythin the lybarte by wrytt or wythout wrytt. but by the mynisters of the same cyte the lxxix artycle. That the sherefs in the helpe of ye fer∣me of the cite haue fully alle forfeturs of vitayles and of other thyngis and of marchaundyses & that therof thei be not agreued. the lxxx ar. That ony thyngis in the leste wey  A∣yenst the libarteis and free vsage off the cite made or were atempted falle not theym in preiudyce but that as of antyquyte they may bee deduced as they were wonte the lxxxij. ar. That the citezens of london in helpis graunt{is} and in contribucions to the kyngis behoue by taxed and contry∣bute wyth the commontee of the Reame as men of the shires and not as men of Citees and boroughs and that they bee quyte of alle talage. the lxxxiij. artycle. That the libarte of the citee be not ta¦ken for the singlar trespace of a myni¦ster of the Cyte. in to the kyngis han∣dis nor the custos of the same by that occasiō shalbe deputed. but suche ma∣ner mynysters for the qualyte of the trespace shalbe punyshed ye lxxxiiij. ar Thar noo offycer taker Puruyour or mynister of the kynge or other make pryce in london or without of the goo¦dis of the citezens ageynst the wyl of
theym but yf he made dew payment or of the wylle of sellars haue therof / respyte. ye lxxxv. ar. That of wynes of the citezens. that is to saye on tonne afore the mast and a∣nother behinde the mast nor ony ma¦ner odur wyse shall pryce be made bi ony mynyster of the kynge or by odur ayenst ther wylle but therof perpetu¦ally to be quyte. lxxxvi. ar. That none offycer nor puruyour of ye kyngis shall marchaundyse by hym self or by odur wythin the cite or with out of thyngis touchyng his offyce ye lxxvij. arti. The wythoutforth landys and tene¦mentis of citezens whiche shalbe my¦nisters of the cite shalbe bounde to cō∣serue theym ageynst the kynge vndā¦maged for there offyc{is} as there tene∣mentis wythin the citee ye lxxxviij. ar That none marquet wythin vij. leg{is} of the cite from hensforth be graūted to ony man. the lxxxix ar. That noo man of the libartee be Im∣pletyd to the schequer nor odur whe∣re. be the towne but it touche the kyn¦ge or his eyers ye lxxxx. arti. That alle Inquysicions by Iusticis & odur mynysters of the kingis of men of the Citee to bee taken at saint mar∣tyns graunte and none odur where excepte questis in the weis and from delyueraunce from newgate ye lxxxxi artycle. That he Citezens of london haue alle theyr libarties and fre vsage vnhurt notwythstondynge the statute made at yorke the yere of the regne of kyng Edward the thred after the conquest ix. the lxxxxij. ar. The towne of suthwarke lete to the se¦tezens of london to ferme ye lxxxiij. Of the keys of the sergaunt{is} of the ci∣te to be borne ye lxxxxiiij. ar. Anmocion of aldermen ye lxxxxv ar. That backers or myllars steyng p∣ste or meie be drawen upon an hyrdel and trespacers be sente to the Tne in cornhylle to be she . ye lxxxxvi. ar. weyng of corne. and a od. of euerych quarter graunted to the mayre of lō∣don ye lxxxxvij. ar. That noo foreen be cumpellyd to we¦ye his corne ye lxxxxviij. ar. The confirmacion of the forwrytten Artycles ye lxxxxix. ar. The clasule licet the C. ar. That noo marchunt straunger selle ony marchaundyses wythin ye lybar¦te to another marchaunt straunger nor ony Marchauat straunger of od marchaunt straunger bey ony mar∣chaundyse vnder forfetur of the mar∣chaundyse ye C.i. ar. Tat the citezens of london be not boū¦de nor be wont to precept{is} or mande∣mentis of ony lorde Cūstable styward admyrall darke of the market nor od offycer or mynyster of the kynge but only to the mandementis and precep¦tis of the self kyng as his names and ytels as his publyk seales or pre∣signetis exepte by our chartour to be exepte the C.ij arti. That of eueriche custumes vsag{is} im¦posicions prepresturis and odur thin∣gis whatso euer within the liberte of the sayd cite growyng out or the com¦monte of the same cite or ony office of the same. belongyng. bee the citezens & none od be it inquyred ye C.iij. arti. Of the kingis peticions to be alowed the C.iiij arti.
That the kyngis wryting go not out of the schequer. to make com the body of the inprysoned and to answere the kynge in his eschequer of the kyngis dettis but it be bounde by examinaci∣on that the det of the kyng were trew and not feyned afore the condempna¦cion. the C.v artycle. If deficultye or ambyguyte and dont were vpon ony artycle in the kyngis chartours or of his progenitours con¦teyned. the king by examinacion & a∣visement of his counsell Therof shall make interpretacion to reson & good fth consowyng the C.vi. artycle. That the citezens of london by colour of ony graunt or vertu or by ony res∣poncious or peticions of them in par¦lement by the kynge made of som ly∣bartyes of theym or free vsage olde & approued any wyse bee not restray∣ned the C.vij. Ar. firmaciō of all libarties ye c.viij. ar That citezens of london ther eyers & executrs of al their libarteis and fre vsage as holly and fully be restored. As them the tyme of ony our progeni¦tours king freyest and fullyest they had the C.ix. ar. The clasle heet the C.x. ar. That alle wynes in the cite to be solde also vytelars aswell fishmongers as od in the same cite in habyting. And to the same cite wyth vitailes ben to com. be onder the reule of the mayre. and aldermen so as of olde they were wont to be. the C.xi. ar. That the mayre from hens forth to come be not compellid at the schequer to make oder othe than the tyme off kynge Edward the thred he was wō¦te to yeue the C.xij. Ar. ¶Thus endeth the chapiturs and ar¦tycles of the lybertes of the Cite of lō∣don. ¶Here folowyth the copy of the hole charter of london of the furst, grannt and of the confirmacion of diuers kin¦gis after. HEnricus dei gracia Rex Anglie. d̄s hid. dux normā & aquitanie com̄ aegē archiepīs epīs &c. Salm̄. Sciatis nos concescisse et ha presenti carta mea confirmasse baronib{us} nr̄is de ciuitate nr̄a london quod eligant si bi mayor de se ipīs singulis an nis qi nobis sit fidelis descretus et ydoneus ad regimen ciuitatis. Ita quod elect{is} fuerit nobis vs Iustic{is} nr̄is si present non fuimus presentetur et nobis in ret fidelitatem Etliceat omnes ipsu; in fine ām am mouere & aliqi subtinere si voluerint vel eūdē retinere. Ita cū quod noais ostēdatur idē vel Iustice. nr̄is si present non fuerimus. ¶Con∣cessimus et eisdm̄ baronibus nr̄is et hac carta nr̄a cōfirmauim{is} quod ha∣beant bene & in pace libere & quiete & integre oēs libertates suas quib{is} ac∣tenus vbi sunt tā in ciuitat londō qin̄ extra et tāin aquis quā in terris & om¦nibus alijs locis salua nobis camber lengeria nr̄a ¶Quare volimus & fir∣miter recipimus qd predcī baron̄ nr̄e ciuitat{is} london eligāt sibi singulis an¦nis de se ipīs predcō mo. Et quod habe∣ant omnes predictas libert bene et in pace integre et plenar̄ cum omnibus ad huius libertat{is} {per}tin̄. Secundum cartā dn̄i patris nostri Iohannis il∣lustris Rer angelorum quam Inspexi¦nius racionab iliter testatur.
Test{is} dn̄s epō london. epō &c. Apud wesm̄ xviij. die meusis Februarij. Anno regni nr̄ ixi ¶A statute for the husing{is} in the ty∣me of saynt Edwarde to be holden in London. SIcut cōtinc in lege stī Edwar¦di. Capitulo xlvi. quod debet in london que capu regni est et legū et semper curia dn̄i regis singulis Sep¦timan{is} die Iune husing{is} sedere et te∣ne refundata em̄ erat oim et edifica∣ta ad istar̄ magne troie et ad modu & in memoria in se continet in qua fu¦it super fuit arda compota et ambi∣gua. plta corone et cur̄ dm̄ regis toci{us} regni predcī. quia vsus et consuetudi∣nes suas vna semper nolabitate conseruat vbi{que} vbicū{que} ipē rer fuerit siue in expedicione siue alibi propter fatigaciones gencium & populorū reg¦ni iuta veteres cōsuetudines bono{rum} pr̄m et predecesso{rum} et oīm principū et procerū et sapientū senio{rum} toci{us}, reg∣ni predcī. &c. ¶The charter of london graunte be willm̄ conquerour & of his son. WIllm̄ kyng griet willm̄ bisshop and godfreg porteren and call the boroughwaren bynnen London franchisce and englisce. & ich kyd eth y• Ick yill yt gret bē ealbra yeara laga yee die yegret yer an en Edwardis dage kinge end ick yill sulke childe be his fader yrnum achter his fader dage and ick nel geyolian that ening man ethe doīg prangbede god yeba helde. Hoc est transcriptū carte regis  conquest or̄ eē cuub londō que ad  dum p̄scripūm vera lingua aroni¦ca in angliā mirabiliter cōa ad mo∣dernam scripturam qu totaliter nūc scribit videl Anno dm̄ M. in C.xiiij. & nota quod ista littera .y. i antiqua lit∣tera poīt pro .w. & ista littera. y. pro d. liquid computatur i.y. ¶Willm̄ kynge gret willm̄ bysshop & godfrey porters and alle the burges wythin london frensh and English. & I graunte yow that I wyl that ye be all your lawe worth that ye were in Edwardis dayes the kynge ¶And I wyll ye ich childe be his fades eyer  nylsufur. ye ony man you any wron∣gs beed. and god you kepe. ¶Hoc est transcriptum in latinum▪ ¶Willm̄s rer salutat willm̄ episcopū et godfridū portegrinū & omne bo∣ghwar̄ infra london francices et anglices amicabiliter. Ego vobis facis quod ego volo qd vos sitis omni leg illa digni qua fuistis diebus Edwar∣di regis. Et uolo quod oīs puer sit pa∣tris sui heres post diem sui patris Et ego nolo pati quod aliquis homo ali∣quam iniuriam vobis inserat Deus vos saluet. ¶The charter of london graunted bi kynge Richard the ij.
RIchard by the grace of god kyn∣ge of england and of fraūce and lorde of Irlonde vnto archbisshops & bisshops abbot{is} priours dukis Erlis barons Iustices Sherefs ywardys mynisters and to balyfs and alle his trewe men gretyng. ¶We haue vn∣dirstonde the chartour of confirmaci∣on of our lorde edward somtyme kin∣ge of englonde oure Ayal in thes wor¦des as folowen ¶Edward by the gra¦ce of god kinge of england and of fraū¦ce & lord of Irland vnto archbisshops bisshops abbott priours erlis barōs Iustices sherefs stiwardis mynistirs and to alle other baylifs. and alle his trew men gretyng. ¶We haue vnd∣stōde the charter of Confirmaciō off our lord Edward somtyme kynge off england our fader in thes wordis. ¶Edward by the grace of god kynge of england lord of Irland and duke of gwyan vnto archbisshops bysshops abbetis priours erlis barōs Iusticis sherefs stywardis mynysters and to alle baylyfs & his rw men gretinge. ¶We haue vnderstande the charter whiche that our lord somtyme kinge of englonde our fader made vnto the citezens of london in theis wordis. ¶Edward by the grace of god kynge of england lorde of Irlond duke of aquytanye. vnto archbisshops bis∣shops abbotis priours erlis barons Iustices sherefs stywardis ministirs and alle baylyfs his trewe men gre∣tyng ¶ We haue vnderstand the char¦ter the whiche the lorde herry somty∣me kynge of england oure fader ma∣de to ye citezens of london in thes wor∣des. ¶Hery by the grace of god king of Enland lorde of Irlond duke of ac¦quytany Erle of Angoy vnto arch∣bisshops bysshops Abbotis prinurs erlis barons Iustices sherefs. and to alle baylifs and to alle his trew men gretyng The furst artycle ¶We teth that we haue graunted and by our charter present confermed to the Citezens of London the Shorefhode of london And of Middelsex wyth all thingis and custumes that fallith to the same sherefhold of london wt in the cite and wythout by lande and bi water to haue and to holde to theym to ther heyers yeldyng therof by yere CCC.lī. of sterlynge of blankis. twoo termes of the yere at the schequer. At ester C.l.li. And at myhelmas C.l.lī. Sauyng to ye same citezens of Londō al her fredoms and herfre custumes ¶The second artycle. ¶And ouer that we haue graūted to the citezens of london. that they of hem self make sherefs whiche that they wyll and re¦meue them whan they wyll. and thē that thy make sherefs present theym to our Iusticis at the chequer of that whiche that fallith to the same sheref¦hod & but they answer & make good sufficiēli ye citezēs of lōdō shal answer & make good of ye mercy & of ye fermesa¦uyng to the same citezens her fraun∣chises as it is aforesayd and sauyng to the same sherefs. the same franchi¦ses that other citezens of london haue ¶The iij. artycle. ¶So yf that they which for the tyme haue ben sherefs any trespace haue done and it maye be preuyd. they shal pay xx.li.. and yt wythout ony harme of any other Ci¦tezen yf that they be sufficient. ¶The iiij. artycle ¶And yf they do any trespace wherof may fall peryll
of lyf and lȳ. bee they demyd as they shuld bee the lawe of ye cite. of tho that falleth to ye fosayd sherefhode ye sheref shall answer at our eschequer before our Iusticis. Sauyng euermore to ye same sherefs the frauncheises which odur citezens haue. This graunte & confirmacion Wee haue made to the citezens of london for amendement of the Cite. and for as moche as it hath ben vsed of olde to bee at the ferme of CCC.lī. We wyll and sadlich bydde yt the citezens of london and ther eyers the forsayd sherefhode of london and mydelsex wyth alle thyngys that fal∣lyth to the same sherefhode to haue & to holde of vs and of our eyers fyny∣aly frely and holi for the same ferme of CCC.li. As the chartour of our fa∣der kynge Iohn̄ of englond which we haue sen̄ wytnessyth. And we defend that none mystake hem to done Any lettyng or greuaunce to the Citezens of london of thyngis that fallyth to ye same Sherefhode of London or were wonte to falle. ¶The v. artycle. We wyll also that yf we or our eyers or ony of our Iusticis haue yeuen or graunt. to ony wyght. of tho that fal¦len to the ferme of the same sherefhod that tho the citezens of london in aqui¦taunce of her ferme▪ be compted bi ye¦re at our exchequer as y• chartour of our lord Iohn̄ our fader kynge of eng¦lande whiche they haue therof Reso∣nable wytnesse. wytnesseth. Eustace of london peter of Wynchester Ioke∣lyn of Bathe Rychard of Salysbury Bisshops Hubert of borough Erle of kent our Iustice Gilbert of clare erle of glouceter and herford. Rauf fii∣col. Richard ardentyne our Stywar¦de. heuen by the hande of our  fader. Rauf bishop of chester our chaū¦celar At westm̄ the xviij day of feuer the yere of our reigne xi. ¶Also we haue vnderstonde. Another chartur whiche that our forsayde fader made for the comon wele of the cite of londō and of alle his reame in theis wordis ¶Hery by the grace of god kynge off england lorde of Irlande duke of nor∣mandy and acquitanye and Erle off Angeop. vnto archbisshops bisshops Abbatt{is} preyours erlis barōs Iustic{is} sherefs stywardis mynysters and to alle baylifs and to all his trewe men gretyng. ¶The vi. Artycle. ¶Wetyth wel that for the wele of our soule and the helthe of the soule of kin∣ge Iohn̄ oure fader. and the soules off our antecessours and also for ye comō profyt of our cite of london. and of alle our Reame haue graunted and sted¦fastly commaunded that alle the wo¦ris that ben in thamis or in medwey by medwey where that euer they be in thamys or in medwey be dō awa¦ye ¶ And that from hensfor¦ward noo weres be sett in Thames not in medwey vpō for fetour of x.lī. ¶Te vij. artycle. ¶Also we clayme quyte to our citezens of londō all that the Constables of our tour of London was wont to take of the same weres Wherfore we wyll and stedfastly cō∣maunde that no constable of the tour ony tyme from hensforward ony thī∣ge are or ony greuaunce doo to ony of the same cite. by encheson of the same weres. It is knowen I nowe to vs. & by our trewe men doo vs to vnderstō¦de that moost prayeng and leste pro∣fyt myght falle to the same cite and to
me and stable to the same cite as the chartour of our lord kynge Iohn̄ our fader wyth our barons of londō ther of haue resonably witnessith▪ witnes ustas of london peter of wynchester Ioklyn of bathe. Richard of Salysbu¦ry bisshops Hubert of borugh erle of kent our Iustice gylbert of clare Erle glouceter & herford▪ fit nicol Richard of Argeneyn oure styward▪ yeue by ye hand of our wurshipful fader Rauf bisshop of chichester our Chauncelar at westm̄ the xviij. day of feuerell the yere of our reigne xi. ¶Also we haue vnderstonde the chartour which our sayd fader made to the same citezens in theis wordis. ¶Herry by the gra∣ce of god kynge of england lorde of Ir¦lande Duke of normandy & of Aquy∣tanye and erle of angeoy. vnto thar∣chbisshops and bisshops abbott{is} pre∣yours erlis barons. Iustices myny∣sters and to alle his trewe mē frensh and englysh gretyng. ¶The viij. artycle. ¶Wetyth wel that we ha¦ue graunted to our citezens of london that none of them pletee othor wyth∣out the wallis of London of ony plee. but of plees of fre holde that ben with out the fraunchesis outake mōmers and our mynstrels. ¶Their arty∣cle. ¶Also we haue graunted aqui¦taunce of murdur wythin the citee & in portsouthe that none of hem make batayle. and also of plees that longen to crowne. We haue grauntyd that ye citezens of london mowe distremie hē after the olde custumes of che cite. ¶The x. artycle. And that no man ta¦ke hostel within ye wallis of londō nor in portsouth by strenghte nor by lyue¦raunce of the marchal. ¶The xi. ar. ¶This also we haue grauntyd that alle the citezens of london be quyt off toll and lastage and of all od custume by alle our landis of this half the see and beyonde. ¶The xij. artykle. And also that noo man of merci of money be demed but after the lawe of the Ci∣te whiche they had of kynge herry A∣yal of kyng herry our ayal. and that in the cite in noo plee be misknowing ¶The xiij. artycle. Also that husing{is} be holden ones in ye weke ¶The xiiij. artycle. Also yf ony man witholde hē of ony lādis free hold{is} wed or any det¦te yt they haue them rightfully ayen. ¶The xv. article. Also of her londis & free holdis yt they haue wythin the ci¦te right be holde to hem after the cus∣tume of the cite ¶The xvi article And of alle her dett{is} that been borowed off hem at london and of weddys there done. be they termyned in the same cite ¶The xvij. articlē. And yf any mā of our landis on this half the see or be¦yonde take any tolle or custume of the citezens of londō other wyse thā they shuld the sherefs of london shall take wed of hem at london. ¶The xviij article. ¶Also we haue I graunted to them that they haue her huntyngys where so euer they had them in tyme of kynge herry Ayal vnto kynge her∣ry our ayal. ¶The xix. artycle. ¶Also moreouer we haue grauntyd hem in amendement of the Cite. that they ben alle quyt of bryrtchel of child∣wyt zeresgen̄ and of stotal.. So that noo Sheref of London neyther none other bayly make stotall in the fraun¦cheis aforesayde.
¶Thes franuches vsagis wee haue graunted and all other liberties and free vsagis and custum whiche they had in the tyme of kynge herry ayall of kynge herry our ayalll whan they had hem more frelyar and more bet∣ter as the charter of kinge Iohn̄ our fader which they haue therof resona¦ble wytnessith. ¶For why we wyl & stedfastly cōmaunde that they & her eyers al thes forsayd fraūcheses that they haue hem and them holde holly of vs and of our eyers by the wytnes∣ses. Eustas of london Iokely of bathe Richard of salysbury & peter of wyn∣chester Bisshops Hubert of borough erle of kent. our Iustice Gilbert of cla¦re erle of glouceter and herford Rauf fitnycol and Richard of argentyne. our stywardis Herry of the chapel & other yeuen be the hand of our wur∣shipful fader Rauf bishop of Chiches and our chauncelar at westm̄ the xvi. daye of marche the yere of our reyg∣ne xi. ¶Also we haue vnderstande a∣nother charter whiche our sayde fad made to the same citezēs in thes wor∣dis. To alle archbisshops bysshops. Abbott{is} priours erles barons knygh¦tis and fre holders and to alle the coū¦te of mydelsex. ¶The xx. artycle Herry by the grace of god kynge off england lorde of Irland. Duke of nor¦mandy and of aquytanye erle of An∣geoy. vnto archebisshops bisshops a∣bott{is} priours Erles Barons Iusticis sherefs stywardis Mynystyrs fores∣ters and to alle baylifs. and to all his trewe men gretyng. ¶Werith wel yt we haue grauntyd and by our char∣tour confermyd for vs & for our eyers to archbisshops bisshops Abbottys priours erles barons knightes and freholders and to alle of the counte of mydelsex That alle the wareyn o  wyth the apertinaunce be  and vnforsted for euermore so that all the forsayd citezens of lo her eyers and her Successours  alle the frauncheses of the  forest vnblemysshyd in thesame wa∣reyn wythin whiche they shulde  we taken her landis. & hewe her wdes and ordeyne therfore right for his owne wele wythout sight or wyth yeng of waryn or forester or of  mynyster. & wythin whiche ware nether waryner ne forester nor  of our forest of her landis and  ne huntynge ne of repynge of romes entermet hem any thinge  hem her eyers or successours. by  somowning or distresse before our Istice of forest or wareyns. doo coencheson of her londis and tenemetis that they haue wythin the same parties. wher furst ther was won  be wardeyne. ¶But ben they  eyers and successours. landis and nementis wythin thoo paties couned free and quyt of alle maner araring & attenemēt{is} & of all maner  that to wareyn or to forest or waryner or forester longen. ¶Wherfo we wylle and stedfastly bydde that a the landis and tenementis holdyng wythin the forsayd parties her eyers and her successours haue the forsayd libarteis and quytaunce. and her lan¦dis and tenementis aforsayd vnwa¦rend been they and vnfoersyd euer more & quyt fro all thing{is} yt to ware or forest or to wareynes or forest{is}  as it is aboue said by thes wytnes Hubert of borugh erle of kent Iustice
of england. Gilbert clare Erle of glou¦ceter and of herford willim̄ marshak erle of penbroke Phelyp of albunak Walter euermere. Osbryght gyfford Richard of argentyne Iohn̄ phelyp∣son Richard fthugh and other yeuen by the handis of the wurshipfull fad Rauf bishop of chichester our chaūce¦lar at wodstok y• xviij day of august ye yere of our reygne xi. ¶Also we haue vnderstond another chartur whiche that oure forsayde fader made to the Mayre and citezens of londō in thes wordis. ¶Herry by the grace of god kynge of england lord of Irlande Du¦ke of normandy and of aquitanye & le of angeoy. vnto archbishops bys¦shops abbot preiours erles barons Iusticis sherefs styward mynystirs and to alle baylifs. and to alle his tre¦we men send gretyng. ¶The xxi. artycle. ¶ Weth wel that we ha∣ue grauntyd. and by our present char¦tur confermyd for vs and oure eyers that the mayre and citezens of londō haue and holde all her fraunchyses & her fre custumes. whiche they had in the tyme of kynge herry ayal of king herry our ayal and whyche they ha∣ue be charturs of antecessours king{is} of england and they hadden theym more better and frear. and that they haue hem and vse hem from hensfor¦ward frely and fully for euer: ¶The xxij. artycle. ¶Also we haue graūtyd to the same citezens of london that e∣che mayre that they chise in our Cite of london wene our eyers not beyng at westm̄ they may present hym eue∣rych yere to our barons of the cheker and of hem as mayre be amytted. So that neuereheles art oure next co∣myng of vs or our eyers to westm̄ or to london to vs or to our eyers. he be presentyd and in to mayre admytyd ¶The xxiij. article ¶Also we wylle and bydde for vs and our eyers. that vij.li. for the fraunches of saint poule of london of the ferme of london be al¦lowed to our sherefs of the Cite yerly in her acompte. to our escheker. ¶The xxiiij. article. ¶And that the same Citens by all our pour as well vpon this syde the see as beyonde be quyt of alle maner tolles and Custu∣mes for euer as it is conteyned in the charturs of the forsayd kyng{is}. And we defend upon our forfeitours that none mystake hȳ from hensforward to don ayenst this fraūches. and our graunte nor presume too greuen or vexen the same citezens by thes oure witnesses Phelyp bysshop of herford Richard erle of cornewale our broder peter of saband Iohn̄ mauncell Pro∣uost of beruley. Maister willm̄ elkē¦ney archdecon of couentree Barrā of cryolle Iohn̄ of lesyngton. Iohn̄ off grey Herry of wynhm̄ Robert Walrand Willm̄ of grey Niclas of Saint maury willm̄ german and other ye∣uen be our hand at wyndsore the .xij. day of Iunij the yere of oure Reygne xxxvij. ¶Also we haue vnderstonde some artycles conteyned in a chartur the whiche our fader made to the Ci¦tezens the xxvi. day of marche the ye∣re of his reygne lij. In theis wordys. ¶The xxv. article ¶We haue graū¦tyd to the same citezens of londō that of plees belongyng to the crwne that of theis whiche most wtin ye cite or the subbarbis therof shalbe falle to be do¦ne that me mowe distreyn hē therof
after the olde custume of the sayd cyte ¶The xxvi. article Also that forens as¦wel as other may make attournays in husttingis as wel the playntyf as the defendaunt as it is done in other court. ¶The xxvij. artycle. Also that none marchaunt ne none other go to mete any marchaundyses by lande or by water wyth her marchaundy¦cis and vitayles comyng toward the cite to bey or to selle ayen tyl they com to the cite. and ther chaffur ther haue put to sale vp the paine of ferfetour of the chaffur so bought & payne of pry∣souyment fro the which they shal not escape wythout greuous chastysmēt ¶The xxviij article And that non put to sale his chaffur of whiche custumo shalbe reysed tyll the custume therof diew. bee reysed▪ vp forfeytour of the chaffer that is so put to sale. Also od artycles in the chartour conteynyd. at the instaūce and preyer of the sayd citezens. for vs and for oure eyers vt∣terlych we adiuille. ¶And we alle the graunt{is} lybarties quytaunce and fre custumes conteyned in the forsayd v. chartours of the furst graunt. & also ye iiij. ar. ī ye forsayd vi. chart specyfyed we conferme theym ferme and stable for vs and our eyers to the same cite∣zens and to ther successours citezens. of the same cite. and hem of our specy¦all grace we newe and graunte hem to holde free euer. to vs sauing and to our eyers the rightis of the common graunt aftirward purchaced. ¶The xxix. article. Morouer that syth our ci¦tezens aforsayd by chartours of oure forsayd progenitours euery mayre yt they had chosen in the forsayd cite out progenytours aforsayd or vs not be∣yng at westm̄ were wōte yerly to pr¦senten̄ to the barons of our eschequer that of hem as mayre shuld be amyt¦ted. So neuertheles that in the next comyng of our forsayd progenytours or our to westm̄ or london to the same our progenytourt or to vs he shulde be representyd. and in to mayr shuld be admytted. Wee wyllyng to the sa∣me citezens in this party to do more plentuous grace. haue graūtyd to hē for vs and our eyers that ye mair of ye same cite. whan by hem citezens shal be chosen and also the Sherefs of the same cite. whan also bi hem in terme vsed ben chosen. we and our eyers or our barons aforsayd at westm̄ or at london not beyng. they shulbe amyt∣tyd and presentyd to the constable off our tour of london that is for the te wythout the gate of the same tour in maner that they wont before to been admyttyd and presented▪ at our esche¦quer. So that in the next comyng off vs or of our eyers be presentyd and ī to mayre amydted. ¶The xxx. article ¶Also we haue grauntyd for vs and for our eyers to our citezens yt they & ther successours Citezens of the same cite be quyt for euer of paage ponta¦ge and murage by al our reame and all our por. and that the same sers of the same Cite as often as it fallyth them to ben amercyed in our courte. for any trespace they shulde been ad∣mercyed after the maner and ye quan¦tyte of the trespace. as other Sherefs of our reame ben amercyd. ¶Why we wyll & stedfastly byd for vs and for our eyers. yt ye same citezens and her successours haue all her fraūcheses q taūc. & fre custumes aforesayd. and
that they vse hem for euer after our confirmacion and graunt afore sayd by the wytnesses. li. of london. w. off Couentre and lichfeld bisshops. Ro. fitwater hugh deuere. Iohn̄ Tregor Roger brabason water beauchim̄pe styward of our houshold. Iohn̄ of me¦tynghm̄ Iohn̄ of Cobhm̄ Eustace off hach. willm̄ of brown peter of cading¦ton and other yeuen by our hand the xvij. day of aprill the yere of our reyg¦ne xxvij. ¶The xxxi article. We sothly the forsayd yestes graunt{is} confirma¦ciens and Innouacions hauing hem free for vs and our eyers in as miche as in vs is to the ceteens of ye forsayd cite and her successours Citezens of ye cite we graunt and conferme as the fosayd chartour o our sayd fader r¦sonably wytnessyth. ¶ More ouer wylling to the forsayd Citezens done moreful grace for remission and par∣don that they dedyn to vs of A.M. marck winche that we borowed of hē in to our wardobe by our clarke Ro∣ger of norwod kepar of the same war¦drobe. for the expencis of oure hostell. We haue grauntyd to them for vs & for oure eyers and this present char∣tour confermed. that thow theme her successours citezens of the same Cite haue not full vsed any tyme any of ye frauncheses quitauncis or of her free custumes as they shuld. Neuertheles they and her successours citezēs of the same cyte. alle the forsayd fraunches quytaūt{is} and her free custumes they vse hem ful from hensorward and re∣yoise hem for euer wythout any lettī¦ge or greuaunce of vs or of our eyers Iustic{is} escheturs Sherefs or ony bay¦lifs or any of our mynistirs The xxxij article. Moreouer we haue grauntid for vs and for our eyers. and this pre∣sent chartur confirmyd to the same ci¦tezens. that we nor our yers. for any thing in the cite fallyng or in ye subar∣bes therof we shall not assygne oure Iustic{is} wt in the same cite. than our ius¦tic{is} that ben goyng to ye tour of lōdon. and the iusticis that ben goyng to the goyle of newgat to delyuer and to a∣mend errors at seint martȳs graūt of londō as it hach ben vsed of olde ty¦me but yf it be anythīg that toucheth vs or our eyers that fallē in the same cyte or within ye subarbis of the same ¶ Why we wil and graunt and sted∣fastly bydde for vs and for our eyers. that the forsayd citezēs her eyers and successors citezens of the same cyte. ha¦ue and vse for euer alle her fraūchesis quitauncis and her free custumes as it is before said by thes witnesses. w. Archbishop of yorke primat of englād Iohn̄ bishop of ely our chauncelar. I. bisshop of norwich iohn̄ bishop of ches¦ter. adomare of valaunce erle of pem¦brock Iohn̄ of bretaigne. erle of Rich∣mōd vmfrey of bochm̄ erle of hertford and esex hugh despēser the yong ba∣thm̄ of badelfmore styward of our hos¦tel & other yeuen by our hand at yorke the viij. day of Iunij ye yere of our rēg¦ne .xij. ¶The .xxxiij. article. Also we ha¦ue vnderstond Sōme articles which yt our said fader ye same viij. day of Iu¦nij grauntid to ye same citezens by his letters patēt{is} to holde & to kepe ī theis wordes yt is to say. yt the mair & ye she¦refs of ye cite aforsaid after ye tenour of the charturs of our progenitors som∣tyme kyng{is} of england to hem therof made by chosen & none other wyse.
¶The xxxiiij article. And that none of the sherefs of the same cite that shalbe for the tyme haue but ij. sergeant and ij. clarkis for that office. And that they taken to hem such clar¦kis and sergaunt for which they shuld wel answer vpon her owne paril. ¶the .xxxv. article And that the mair of the cite afor sayde the whyles yt he is mair haue none other ossce to the same cite belonging but his office of ye mairship of ye same and ye hedraw not before hem ne holde in ye chambre she∣refs plee ne other plees but doo after the olde custumes. of the cite as mair shuld holde. ¶ The .xxxvi. article. Allo that the talyag{is} and subsidies of the ci¦te to our vse & to our eyers. and for the stat & profit of the said cte from this tyme forthe be men of the ward{is} ther to chosen to be set be not augmentid nor arered by ye mayr or adirmen or other but of comoun assent of the gre¦tis partye of comonaltee of the forsaid cite ¶The .xxxvij. article And that the siluer that comethe of such talyag{is} be in the keping of .iiij. comonars of the same cite therto chosen. and that it be not delyuerd but bi witnesse of ye same iiij. men So that ye same iiij men may enforme the forsayd comons to what profight & to whos vse the forsayd sil∣uer fallyth. ¶The xxxviij. arti. ¶Also that none alyen be amytted into the fraunches of the said cite but in hustin¦gis. ¶The xxxix ar. And that exchaun¦ge namly an english marchaunt bee not amytted in to the fraunches of ye cite of any crafte but be mempris of vi good men & sufficyent of the crafte or of the office of the which he shalbe ma¦de freman of. which vi. men shul vn∣dirtake for hym to kepe the forsayde cite wtout harme. and in the same ma¦ner of vndertakyng shalbe don of a∣lyens aforsayd which shulbe  in to the fraunches of ye cite. in hustin¦g yf they bee of any crafte or oe & yf they be of none certayn crate. thei shul not be amund in to the fraches of the same cite. wtout assent of the co∣monalte of the same cite ¶The .l ar. ¶And they that sythen we taken go∣uernaile of owr kyngdom ageyn the fourme aforsayd. beth admitted in to the libarteis of the same cite. ¶The xi article ¶And they that ageyn ther o∣the or ageyn the state of the cite  done and laufulli therof cōiuete  lesen the fraunches of the same  le Sauyng alwey yt of aprenti in the same cite be kepe the olde maner and fourme of ye cite ¶The xij at. ¶ And  euery yere in the forsayde cite as ite as nede be. Be it enqueryd yf any off the fraūches of the same cite. chafur wt other mennys good that be not off the fraunches of the same cite. & seye the same good{is} be her owne ageyne her othe and ageyn the cite and ther∣of ben conuict that they lese the fraū∣ches of the same cite ¶ The xliij. arty. And that alle and euery man in ye for¦sayd fraunches beyng. and the fraū∣ches and fre custumes of the same cy¦te wyllyng to reioyse. be in loue and stott & partiners of alle maner char∣g{is} for the state of the same francher to maytent after her othe. yt they wyl not done as it is aforsayd they shalle∣se her fraūches. ¶The xliiij. ar. And yt all & euery man of the fraunches of ye same cite beīg. & wtout ye sayd cite dwel¦lyng & haūten her marchaūdic{is} in ye
same cite that they be in scotte and lot∣te wt our comonars of ye same citee or ellis yt they lese her fran̄ches. ¶The xlv. article And that ye comon seale of the same cite be ī keping of ij. aldirmē and .ij. comonres of the same cite. by ye comonars of ye same cite therto cho¦sen and yt ye seale be not denaied to rich ne to pour of ye same cite whā they ha¦ue nede therof yf her axiō may be pro∣ued trewe. and yt no thing be take for ye seling of the same seal. ¶The .xlvi ar¦ticle And yt ye balaunc{is} and weight{is} of marchandises betwene marchaūt & marchaūt for to wey of which ye ysnes comyng and knowleg therof lōgen to ye commonaltee of ye forsaid cite yt they be in keping of ye good & sufficiēt men yt ben knowyng in that office & therto chosen by the for sayd comonaltee to ye wille of hem to kepe yt non other be in the same office but that they be chosen ther too. ¶ The .xlvij. article And that the sherefs of the for sayd citee yt shuld be for ye tyme tol or custumes that fal¦le to ther ferme and other knowē offi¦ce that fallyth to hē and be od mē vsed yf they will deliuer thā to any man. yt than they delyuer thē to suche mē. as they wyl answere fore & noon other & yf any man be yt for said sheref be put in office as it is aforsayd take any cus¦tum yt is not dewe or bere him ī his of¦fice other wise than he shuld. & at ye su∣te of any man be cōvicte he shalbe put out of his offyce & after hys doyng he shulbe punyshed. ¶The .xlviij. article And marchaūt{is} yt be not in ye fran̄shes of the for sayd cite yt they selle noo wy∣ne ne noō od marchaundisis to retail¦le wt in ye cite ne ī ye subarbis of ye same ¶The .xlix. article. Also yt ther be noo broker of any maner marchaundyse in the forsaid cite from hensforward but that they be chosen by marchaūt{is} of the same craft{is} of which the brokers haue to hauntē her offyce & therupon they shul taken her othe before ye mare of the forsayd citee. ¶The .l. article Al∣so that comō herburgers in the same cite and in the subbarbes ther of that benot of the frauncheise of the said cite be partyners of alle maner charg{is} yt fallithe in yt same cite for the state the¦rof to maynteyne as wel as od comen harburgers free & of the same fraun∣ches in the cite or subbarbes forsayd. The .li. article. ¶ Sauyng al wey yt ye marchaūtis of Gascoyne and other alyens may dwelle and harborough to geder in ye said citee as they were wont to doo he¦re before ¶The lij. artile And that the keping of ye brydge of the cite aforsayd & ye rent{is} & profyt{is} therof belonging at ye wylle of ye same como∣nalte of the same cite be take .ij. wse & sufficiēt men and to od than to aldir∣men therto chosen by the same como∣nalte which shul answer therof to the comonalte ¶The liij article And that noo sergaunt of ye chambre of ye gwild halle of ye forsayd cite take noo fee of ye comonalte or doo excusion but only be the forsayd comonalte therto chosen. ¶The .liiij. article. And that ye chābur¦leyne the comon darke. and comō ser¦gaunt of ye forsayd citee bechosen by ye comonalte & remeued at yt wille of the sayd comonalte ¶The lv. article And yt ye goodes of aldirmen of ye forsayd ci¦te in helpe of ye talag{is} and od contri∣buciōs fallyng to ye same cite be taxed
by men of the same warde that they dwelle in as wel as the good{is} of other citezens in the same warde ¶The lvi article. Which articles aboue ben she¦wed and the thing{is} in whom contey∣ned. our sayd fader be his forsayd let∣ters. hath excepted preued and ratify¦ed hem for hym and his eyers as wy¦che as was in hym. to the same Cite∣zens and her successours hath graun¦ted and confermed. in the cite and sub¦barbarbz aforsayd to the comon pro∣fyt of hem that ben dwellyng therin▪ and to hem that be comyng therto to haue and to kepe for euer. ¶The lvij. article. And morouer wyllyng to doo moreful grace to the mayre aldermē & citezens of ye same cite at her request to hem by his same lytters for hi for his eyers yt the mayr aldyrmen Cite¦zens and the comonalte of the cōmon¦nars of the forsayd cite her eyres and her successours for the nedys and pro¦fyt of the same cite as wel vpon rent{is} as od and as well vpon craft{is} sa∣der odur wyse they mowe set talages and are renhein wtout any lett of our sayd fa∣der his eyers or any od of his mynys∣ters. ¶The lviij. ar. And that the sil∣uer of suche manor talag{is} comynge. be in the kepyng of iiij. trewe men by the comnalte of the same Cyte therto chosen and that they be not spēdyd od▪ wyse than for the nedis and profit{is} of the sayd cite. ¶The lix. ar. Also we ha∣ue graūtyd and confermed to ye Cite∣zens of ye same cite her eyers and her successours citezens of the same cite. ye forsayd yeft{is} grant{is} & cōfirmacions. & all articles in ye same letters of our fa∣dir cōteyned. to haue hem ferme and stable for vs & our eyers as miche as is in vs. as the chartur and ye letters of our fader resonably wytnessith. Morouer wyllyng to do more plenti¦uous grace to the Cytezens of the for¦sayd Cite we haue graunted hem for vs and for our eyers. and our present chartur confermed that though the neher predecessours citezens of ye for∣sayd cite haue not full vsed any tyme any of her fraunches quintaunc{is} ar∣ticles or of her free custumes as they shulde. as it is in the same chartour & letters conteyned. Neuerthelesse ye a∣me citezens her eyers and her succes¦sours ctiezens of the same cite and ech of hem reioy for euer and vse hem frō hensforward wythout ony lettyng of vs or of any of our eyers Iustic esche¦turs or of any of our baylyfs & mynys¦ters. ¶The lx. article. Moreouer we haue graūtyd for vs and for our eyers and our present chartur confermyd to the mayre aldyrmen of the Cyte. yt yf ony custumes haue been vsed any tyme in the forsayd cite ageyn ye fraū¦ches or things of newe haue fallen in the cite and may not be amendid The Mayre aldirmen her eyers and her successours by assent of all comon¦nalte of the same cite. may sette Con∣grew remedy and ordeyn for the com¦mon proffit of the citezens of the cite & of other trewe men repayring to the same Cyte as ofte as it is nede. So that suche maner ordynaunce be pro¦fytable to vs and to owr people. as it is aforsayde be this wytnesse. The wurshipfull fader Iohn̄ Archbisshop of Caunterbury primat of alle Eng∣lād Ri. of durhā Rauf of lōdō bishops
willm̄ vohū erle of north willm̄ of klin¦ton erle of huntingdon. hewe of awd¦ley erle of glouceter. Thomas Wake of lydel. Rauf basset of braiton. Rauf. of stafford styward of owr hostell and other. yeuen by our hand art westm̄. the xxvi day of may ye yere of our reig¦ne of england xv. and of our reigne of traunce seconde. ¶ Also we haue vnd∣stonde anothr chartour of our forsaid ayall in thes wordis. Edward by the grace of god kynge of england lord off Irland and duke of aquytanye Vnto archbishops bishops abbott{is} preiors Erles barons Iust sherefs stywar∣dis mynysters and to all baylifs and to his trewe men gretyng. ¶ Wetith  that we for the amendement off our cite of london and for the good ser¦ that to vs haue done our welbe∣ld mayre aldermen and the com∣monalte of the sayd cite of londō of as∣sent of prelat Erlis barons Iusticis & of all other com̄onalte of owr Reame beīg in our parlemēt at westm̄ haue grauntyd and oure present chartour confermed for vs and for our eyers to the citezens of the forsayd cite the fraū¦ches that ben suyng to haue to hem & to her eyers and her successourr for e∣uer. ¶The lxi. article. Furst in the gre¦te chartour of the fredoms of Englōd amonge other it is conteyned that ye citezens of London haue alle her olde fraunches. and the same citezens in ye time of ye makīg of ye forsaid chart & ī ye tyme of saint Edward kinge and con¦fessor and of willm̄ conquerour and of other progenitours They had diuers fraunches and custumes as well bee chartours of our progenitours wtout Charturs of olde custom vpon why∣che in dyuers weis and in other Con∣trays of our forsayd progenitours as well be domes as by statutis many tymes they haue been lettyd. And of some of her fraunches forbarred. ¶We wyl and graunte for vs and for oure eyers that the same citezens ha∣ue her fraunches after the fourme off the grete chartour. and alle lettynge and greuaunce in that partye to hem done be the reuoked and anulled. ¶The lxij. article. ¶Moreouer we haue grauntyd for vs and for our eyers to the same Citezens her eyers and her successours. that the Mayre that is for the tyme be one of the Iusti¦cis assigned to the deliueraunce of the gayole of newgate. And that he be na¦med in euery comission therof made And that the same Citezens her eyers and her successours haue infangchief and outfangchif and the goodys and catels of alle hem that before hem be domed wyth in the forsaid fraunches and of alle them that be of the forsaid fraunches at the forsayd gaole to bee demed. ¶The lxiij. artycle. ¶Also for as myche as by chartours of our progenytours it hath ben gra¦untyd to the forsayde Citezens that they shulde holde her Sherefhode off London and myddelsex for .CCC.lī. to yelde yerly at owr exheker and the newe bee charged euery yere off .CCCC.lī. For the same Sherefhodis at the same escheker ageyn the four∣me of the forsayde Chartours. ¶Wee wyll and graunte for vs and owre Eyers. that the same Cytezens her eyers and successours holde from hensforward. The forsayd sherefhod{is} for .ccc.lī. to yeld yerly at our escheker.
After the tenour of the forsayde char∣tours and that of the forsayd .C.lī. fro this tyme forth they be quyt. ¶The lxiiij. article Moreouer we haue graū¦ted for vs and for oure eyers to the sa∣me citezens her eyers and her succes∣sours mowe bequethe her tenemen∣tis wythin the forsayd cite. as well to morimayne as od maner as it hath ben vsed of olde tyme. ¶The lxv. arti¦cle. And for as nuche as in a chartour of Syr Edward kyng of england our fader to the same citezens made amō¦ge other It is conteyned that the sher¦refs of the same cite as often as it fal∣lyth hem to be admercyed for any tre¦space ī her court. that they be amerci¦ed after the quantite of y• trespace as other sherefs of the reame ben wont to be amercyed for lyke trespace. The lxvi artycle. ¶And the sherefs of the forsayd cite. after the making of that chartour for eschape of thefes were a¦mercyed other wyse than other sher∣refs on this behalfe trente which for such maner escape at an. C.s̄. onlych as it is sayd ben amercyed. ¶We wil and graunte for vs and our eyars ye sherefs of the same cite that ben for ye tyme for escape of thefys other wyse than other sherefs on this half trent be not charged nor amerced. ¶The lxvij. artycle. And that the forsayd Ci¦tezens of the kepyng of hem whiche that fleen to chirches within the fran̄¦cheis afore sayd be not charged odur wyse than they were wont of olde to be charged. Notwythstondynge any thyngis done or demyd in the last go∣yng to the tour of london. ¶The lxviij article. ¶And that the same Citezens remeue. and do awey all ye weres in thamys and medwey and that they haue the punishment{is} therof longing to vs. ¶The lxix arty¦cle. Moreouer we wyl and stedfastly bydde that all marchauntis alyens comyng in to englond that they selle her marchaūdyses▪ wyth in xl. dayes after her coming. and that they be at the table of fre men of the forsayd cite and of other cites and townes in eng¦land wythout any Innes of them self holde: ¶The lxx article. Also we wyl & we graunte for vs and oure eyers yt the styward of y• marchalsye ne clar∣ke of market of our houshold or of our eyers. sytte not from hensforward wt in the fraunches or the forsayd cite ne haunte there none office ne drawe bi any maner any of the forsayde Citezens in to plee. wythout the fraūches of thyngis that fallen wythin the sa∣me fraunches. ¶The lxxi. article. ¶And that none escher ne none other mynyster from this tyme forwarde haunte thoffyce of eschet wythin the forsayd fraunches. But that the mai¦re of the forsayd cite that is for the ty∣me do the office of escheter within the forsayd fraunches. So that he swere that office truly to done. and therof to vs or to our eyers as he ought to an∣swere. ¶The lxxij article. ¶And that the forsayd citezens from hensforward be not distreyned to gone or to senden to any ware out of the forsayde Cite. ¶The lxxiij article. And yt the consta∣ble of the tour of london make no pre¦ses by londe ne by wat of vytayle or any other thing{is} what so euer thei bē of mē of ye forsaid cite nor of non od co∣ming to ye cite or going out nor he shal not arestē be ony man wey shipes ne
bot{is} bringing or leding vitayles or od marchaundyses to the Cite or fro the cite forsayd. ¶The lxxiiij ¶And for as myche as the forsayde Citezens were wont to haue wardeins in all ye good feirs of england of hē self to hold plees touching the citezens of the same cite to suche maner feirs comyng. we wil and graunt as myche as in vs is. yt y• same Citezens haue suche wardeins of her owne citezens to holde and ter∣myn such maner plees as it was wōt to ben of olde tyme outake plees of lā∣de or of Ceyme. ¶The lxxv article ¶More ouer we haue graunted for vs and for our eyers that the sherefs of the forsayd cite that been for the ty∣me be not dystreyned to swere but v∣pon the yeldyng of her acompte. ¶The lxxvi article. Also for as myche as the same citezens in the wey to the tour of herry of staūton & his felows Iusticis of Syr Edwarde Somtyme kynge of england our fad at the tour of london laste goyng were constrey∣ned to clayme her fraunchese and her free custumes agayne her olde custum And vpon that the claymed dyuers fraunchese by chartours of our proge¦nytours aforsayd. and other fraūche¦se and her fre custumes by vse & wont of old tyme. which claime thei hange afore vs vndetermyned. ¶The lxxvij article. We wyl & graūt for vs and for our eyers yt ye same citezens her eyers & her successours. that they haue her fraūches & her free custumes & yt they vse hem as they dyd of olde tyme. & yt they mowe recorde her fraūches and her free custumes by our Iustic{is} & our od mynysters. In maner such as thei were wont to done. Notwythstondīg any statutis or domes ther ayen ma¦de. ¶The lxxviij. article. ¶And as to the allowans of her charters. to haue afore vs in our eschequer or in any od places on wrytt suffice in euery place for the tyme of ouer kyng. ¶The lxxix. orticle ¶And yt none summaun¦ce attachment{is} nor execuce▪ on by don by any of our mynystirs or any of ou¦re eyers by writte wythin the fraun∣ches of the forsayd cite. but by mynys∣tirs of the same cite. ¶The lxxx. arty∣cle. ¶And that the sherefs of ye forsaid cite that been for the tyme in helpe off her ferme that they haue ye forfeturs of vitayles and of other marchaundi¦ses after the tenour of the chartours. to the same citezens therof made and that they be nott greuyd fro hensfor∣ward therof ayene the tenour off her chartours. ¶The lxxxi. article ¶And that the forsayd Citezens in the weys of Iustice to the tour of londō frohens¦forward goyng. that they bee not lad by the lawes by which they were led∣dein the weys holden in the tymes of Iohn̄ and herry Somtyme kynge of englande and our progenytours. ¶The lxxxij. article And yf any thing{is} haue ben made in the last wey ayenst ther fraunches and her fre custumes we wolde not that they falle to preiu∣dice of hem but thei mowe be ledde as they were wont to be of olde tyme ¶The lxxxiii. article. ¶Also we ha¦ue graunted for vs and our eyers fro¦hensforward that the same Citezens that they be Itaxed wyth ye cōmunal∣te of our reame. as other men of coū∣theis. and not as men of citees and of borugh townes and that they be quit of alle other tallagis. ¶The lxxxiiij. article.
¶And that the fraunches of the Cyte be not taken in to our hand or ouyr e∣yers for ony maner personall trespa∣ce nor personal dome of any mynys∣ter of the same Cite. Ne the wardeyn of the same Cite be that enchelen bee not greued. but the same mynister be punysshed after the trespace that he hath done. ¶The lxxxv. artycle. And that no puruior officer ne none od my¦nyster of our eyers. ne none other make any price wythin the forsayde fraunches ne wythout of the goodys of the forsayde Citezens ageynste her wylle. But anon be made therof dew payment or ellys that they may ha∣ue respyte therof by the wyll of the sel¦lar. ¶The lxxxvi. arti And that of the wynes of the forsayd Citezens no pry¦ce be takē by any of our mynysters or of our eyers nor be any other ageyn the wylle. that is for to saye. of a tōne before the maste. & another behynde after the made ne in none other ma∣ner. but ther of be they quyt. ¶The lxxxvij. article. Morouer we defende that none officer or puruyor of our or of our eyers Chaffour by hym self or any other wythin the forsayde cite ne wythout of good{is} touchyng her office ¶The lxxxviij. article. Also we haue grauntyd that the foreyn landis and tenement{is} of the forsayd Cite whiche haue ben or shul ben from hēsforward Mynysters of the same cite be boun∣de to kepe the cite wythout harme a∣yense vs and our eyers of thyngys yt fallen to her offyce as her tenement{is} wt in the same cite ¶The lxxxix article▪ And yt noo market fromhensforward be graunted to ony wyght to holde wt¦in vij. myle in the circuyte of the for¦sayd cite. ¶The lxxxx article. And that all the quesus that shulbe take o mē of the forsayd cite. frohensfoward be our Iustic{is} or of any of our mynisters that they be I taken at saint martins the graunt of London and in none od place out take questis in the weys att the tour of london. and for the delyue∣raunce of gay ol at newgate. ¶The lxxxxi. article. And that none of y fra¦ches of the forsayd cite be empleted at our eschequer nor in none other pla∣ce by bye but of the thingis that cou¦chen vs or oure eyers wherfore wee wyl and fermely commaunde for vs and our eyers. that the forsayde Cite∣zens her eyers and her successours ha¦ue alle her fraunchyses and her tree custumes aforsayd. and that they vse hem and reioyse hem for euer. In the fourme aforsayd By thes wytnesses Willm̄ archbisshop of Caunterbury primat of al england Iohn̄ bishop of Hely ource chaunceler A Byssop off harford our tresurere. Willm̄ bishop of norwich Thomas erle of Norfolke and marshall of England. Edmond Erle of kent Herry Erle of lancaster and Roger mortymer of wygmore Thomas wake. Iohn̄ de Roos. Sty∣ward of our housholde and other ye∣uen by oure hande att Westmonster the vi daye of Marche the yere of our Reygne the furste ¶The lxxxxij Artycle. ¶Also we haue vnderstande some let¦ters patentis of oure forsayd Ayall in theys wordys. ¶Edwarde by the grace of god kynge of England Lord of Irlande Duke of aquytanye to all men to whom theys letters shall co∣me gretynge.
¶Wetith well that sithe our welbelo∣uyd citezens of our cite of London by ther peticion before vs and our coun∣cell in our present parlemēt at westm̄ delyuered. Haue yeuen vs to vndyr∣stonde that felons thefes and other e∣uyl doers and disturblers of the pese of our forsaid Cite and in other placis haue done manslauter thefis and od felons dyuers and after suche felons don pryuely from the same Cite de{per}∣ringe flede to the towne of Soutwar¦ke where they mow not ben arestyd by the mynystirs of the sayd cite and there openly they ben ressayned So that for defaute of punyshement thei be the more hardy to do suche felonis And they haue besought vs. that for the conseruyng of our pease in ye for∣sayd cite and the malyce of suche euyll doers to refrayne we wyll graunt to hem the sayde towne to haue and to holde to hem and to her successours. euermore for the ferme therof / dewe. at our escheker yerly yeldyng. We ha¦uyng consideracion to the thingis for sayd of assent of prelat{is} erlis barons an comonalte of our reame in the for¦sayd parlement beyng. haue graun¦ted for vs and our eyers ot the same Citezens the sayd towne of such war∣ke wyth the appertinaunc{is}. to haue & to holde to hem and to her eyers for euermore yelding to vs be yere at our escheker or our eyers in termes con∣swet the ferme therof diew. In wyt∣nesse of whiche thingis theis our let∣ters we haue done be made patent{is} witnesse my self at westm̄ ye .vi. daye of marche the yere of our reigne furst ¶The lxxxxiij. article ¶Also we ha¦ue beholden other letters patentis of our sayd ayal in thes wordis Edwar¦de by the grace of god kynge of Eng∣land lord of Irlande and Duke in A∣quytanye to alle men to whom theis present letters comen gretyng. ¶We¦tith wel that for as myche at our par¦lement holden at yorke the morowe after thassencion of our lord. the yere of our reygne ix. it was ordeynid that alle marchuntis allyaūt{is} and straun¦gers and eche of hem of what condici¦on or estate that he be. that cornes wy¦nes auerde paise flesh fishe or odur vi¦tayles wulles clothes Marchaundy∣ses or odur thingis what so euer they be that they wolde bye or sell. wher yt euer they were od in Citees borughs townes portes of the see feyrs mar∣kettis or odur placis wythin thes ou reame of England or wythin fraun∣cheses or wythout hem. The same vi∣tayles and marchaūdyses frely and wythout letting myght sellen to whō so c thei wolde as wel to foreīs ase to denysins or ony odur wtout any let∣tyng of ony man outake our enemis of our reame. ¶Moreouer it was or∣deyned that none alyen ne none odur straunger shulde be letted that he ne shuld mowe suche maner vytayles & marchaundises in placis forsayd free¦ly to bye. an wheder he wolde shulde mowe cary wynes into our forsayde reame brought. Also not taken notwt∣stonding chartur of frauncheses to o∣ny of the cites or placis forsayd in con¦trary graunted or conswetude or do∣me vpon suche maner charturs yeuē as in the forsayd statutefully is {con}tey∣ned. Neuertheles for as myche as in the statutis as well in our sayd parle¦ment and of our progenytours som∣tyme
kynge of Englande I made by vs and by hem our progenytours of comon assent of prelat erles barons and comnalte of the same Reame. It was graunted and stablysshid that ye grete chartour of the fraunchyses off england. and alle ye singlars Artycles be maintened and stedfastli kepe And in the same chartour amonge other thinges it is conteyned that the Cyte of london haue alle her fraunchises & alle her olde free custumis vnblemis∣shed. and as well it hath ben our en∣tent alwey and our progenitours as wel as of erles and barons. beyng in our forsayd parlement and yet is yt ye forsayd grete chartour in alle his arti¦cles be holden and kepte as it is afore¦sayd. And for encheson that ther was made some thingis in the same statu¦te in preiudice and harme of the same grete chartur and of the fraunchises of olde free custumes of london. Wee wyllyng to declaren our entencion. yt the citezens of the same cite. vpon her fraunchises and fre custumes forsaid ayen suche maner mencion vnduly be greuyd ¶Of assent of prelat{is} erles and barons in our present parlemēt wyth vs beyng. We haue graunted for vs and our eyers that the citezēs of the same Cyte her eyers and succes¦sours haue alle her fraunchyses and free custumes holl and vnblemyshed as they before this tyme haddē hem more free the forsayde statute I made do ayen the forsayd marchauntes in harmyng of the forsayde fraunchises and free Custumes notwithstonding ¶In wytnesse of the whyche thynge theis letters patentis we haue done made wytnesse my self at  the xxvi daye of marche the yere of our Reigne xi. ¶The lxxxxiiij. artycle. ¶We haue also vnderstonde other letters patentis of oure same Ayal in theis wordys. Edwarde by the gra¦ce of god. kynge of Englande and off Fraunce and Lorde of Irlonde to alle men to whom theis present{is} Letters shall come gretyng. Wetyth that we for the Confirmacyon encrese and ke∣pyng of the name and of the wurship of our Cite of London. at the supplica¦cion of the Mayre Sherefs and com¦munalyte of the cite of London to vs mekely I made. We wol and graunt for vs and for oure eyers that the ser∣geauntis that been ordeyned to bere macis in our Cyte forsayd they may ouer gylt Syluer or ellys of Syluer wyth sygnes of our armes. or of other I wrought the maces wythin the for∣sayd Cyte or subbarbis of the fame. ¶The same sergeauntis to bee. and in the contrey of mydelsx or in ony od place apertenaunt to the Fraunches of the same Cyte. And also wythout the forsayde Cyte metyng vs our mo¦der oure wyff oure chyldren. or oure eyrs or other Reyals to the same Cy∣te comyng. and also goyng wyth vs or any of vs whan we shall departe or any of vs shall departe fro the for∣sayd Cite & as ofte as it fallith any of ye forsade sergeaūtis to bee sent by our maundement or of the maundemēt of the Mayre Sherefs forsayde. too forayn Contreys wythout the Cyte to doo Execucyon of her offyce. They mowe bere hem
openly both goyng and comyng Ry∣ght as our owne sergaunt of armes stondynge be oure syde wythout ony lettyng ordynaunce or maundement notwythstondyng into cōtrary ther ageynst made. In wytnesse of which thīge made these our letters we haue done be made patentis wytnesse my self at westm̄ the x. day of Iunij the ye¦re of our regne of england and xxviij. and of our reigne of fraunce xv. ¶The lxxxxv. artycle. ¶ Also we haue be holdē our letters patent{is} of our same ayal in thes wordis. Edward by the grace of god kynge of england and of fraunce and lorde of Irlonde to all mē to whom we sende gretyng. Wetyth Amonge other artycles whiche our lorde Edwarde Somtyme kynge ofe englande our fader the yere of his re∣gne xii. by his letters patentis Hath graunted and confermyd to the cite∣zens of the same cite of London for the amendement and common profyt of them that ben dwellyng in the same cite. And of hem that ben repayryng ther to in the same litters it is contey¦nyd that the aldermen of the forsayd cite that eueri yere they ben remeued and namely the day of saint Gregori by the comonalte of the same cite and that they so remeued be not chosen a∣yen the nex yere suyng but in ye stede of hem that ben remeued odur be cho¦son by the same wardys of whiche su¦che aldermen were remeued as in ye same lytters playnly it is conteyned vp the whiche for the party of ye com∣monalte of the forsayd cite by her peti¦cioon before vs in oure grete councell now newe asked to vs mekly it is be sought. that syth dyuers opynions & dyuers stryues hade ben sprongen betwene thaldermē and the commō∣nalte of the sayd cite vpon ye remeuīg of aldir men for the wrong Interpre∣tacion of wurdus in the forsayd arty∣cle conteyned. that is to saye that the forsayd aldyrmen affermen that by thoo wordis .s. sint amabiles {per}coīta¦tem. &c. be the remeuable. by the com¦mon they owe not to be remeued fro the office of aldyrmanshyp wythout certayn cause or noteri defaute befon¦den in hem. Other citezens of the sa∣me cite felyng the contrary longe ty¦me betwene hem they stryued that it shuld deyne vs that artycle to putt a∣way. and to commaunden all ye dout therof betwene hem. more playnly & openly to ben declared we fauorably more enclined to the supplicacion fore sayd more wylfully in as moche as ye same mayre and aldyrmen and com¦monalte from hensforward shul mo∣we dwelle in tranquilyte and reste ye artycle to the forsaid citezens and her successours wyth assent of oure sayde councell we declare that is to weten. that all and euery aldirman of ye for∣sayd cite euery yexe for euermore in ye feste of saynt Gregery ye pope from ye office of aldyrmanry vtterly and per∣cysly to cessen and therof holych to be remeuyd and ye next yere folowynge to ye office of aldermanry. ne be noug¦ht chosen ayen but in stede of hem to be cessed and to bē remeuyd. ¶Odur discret citezens of good fame and vn∣hurt. by ye same wardis of ye whyche ye odur aldirmen were so remeuyde-euery yere shalbe chosen for euer In witnesse of whiche thinge theis oure letters we haue don be made patētis
witnesse my self at westm̄ the xxij. day of nouembre the yere of our reygne of en̄gland .l. and of our reigne of fraūce xxxvij. ¶The .lxxxxvi. article Also we haue beholden od letters of our sayd ayal in thes wordis Edward by ye gra¦ce of god liyng of ēgland lord of irland & duke of Gian̄ to alle men to whom thes present letters shal com wesende gretyng The mair aldirmen and cō∣monalte of our cite of london bi her pe¦ticion haue shewed byfore vs and our counsel in our last parlement that for as mych that edward the thred after the conquest .ix. somtyme kyng of en∣gland our ayal sent by hys writtes to herry waleys that tyme mair of lōdō and to the sherefs of the same cite that they shuld chastyce bakers millars. & mynstirs by bodyly peine and other chastysement{is} after the distression of the mai sherefs and other good folke of ye forsaid cite bi vertu of whith writ¦te by comon assent of the good folke of the same cite and for comon profyt. It was ordeigned the herdyl for bakers that baken bred ageinst the assise and for myllars that stelē corne at the myl¦le? And the toune for nyght walkers & trespassars ageynst the pece. ¶ The .lxxxxvij. artycle. & for as mych as gret party of cornes sent to the mille to gry¦den was stolen oft tymes by the same myllars to gret damage of ye peple of ye same Cite it was ordeined weight & balaunc to wey ye cornes comyng frō the mylles so that euery man shal ha∣ue hys full and to the weight and ba∣launce we also ordeyned sartayn hou¦ses indyuers plac{is} in the cyte for sayd and that a man that the sayd balaūc{is} and weight hath to kepe shulde take od for euery quarter for the cost{is} of hi that entyrmeten the thyngis abou sayd which od after bi comon assent o the comonalte of the sayd cite was a¦signed to the mair of the cite to take kping{is} and costag{is} of the thing{is} abo said and the same titesens haue requred vs that we wolle approue and  ferme the sayd ordynaunce. ¶We  our pece in the said cite the more feunly to kepen and for the chastisment o evil doers. & for ye comon profyt of o peple for vs and for our eyers the fa ordynunce approuen and conferme ¶ The lxxxxviij article And we wil as mych as yn vs ys that the same ordnaunce be holde and kepte in the sayd cite in alle theis poynt{is} Soo alweys  noo foreyuer be cōstreyned to wey his corne. In witnesse of whych thing we haue don make thes our letter paen¦tis yeuē at westm̄ the xx. day of march the yere of our reygne furst. ¶ The .lxxxxix. we forsothe the yeft{is} graūt con¦firmaciouns īuocacions & ordinaunc abouesayd and also alle the articles & alle odur and singlar thing{is} in alle the charturs and letters aboue sayd con¦teyned hauyng free hem alle and sin¦glar at the peticion of the citezens of ye sayd cite of london. and at the instaūce of the comonalte of the reame of ēglad̄ of the assent of prelatis lordis & peiers ofte same reame in this our present {per}¦lement by vs being for vs & our eyers as mich as is in vs to the citezens of ye forsayd cite and to her eyrs and succes∣sours citezens of the same cytee of our special grace bi ye tenor of thes present letters. we graunt and confirme as ye chartours and letters aboue sayd re¦sonably witnesse▪ ¶The .C. article
Moreouer willing to the citezens of ye forsaid cite to don more plēteuous gra¦ce at the petion and instaūce afor sayd & of assent afoursaid we haue graūted to the same citezens. for vs & our eyers & by the our chartour confermed that though they or her predecessors Cyte∣zēs of the same cite haue not vsed any tyme as they shulde any of her fraun¦thes quytannce grauntis ordinaunc articles free custumes or any other in the same letters and charters contey∣ned that they vse hemfull and reioye hem for euery as it is conteyned in ye charturs and letters afor sayd wtout any lettyng of vs or of our eyers iusti∣c escheturs sherefs or of ani of our bai¦lefs or any odur of our mynysters. ¶ The Ci. article. Morouer for as mych as the same citezens bi the same peticyon in ye same parlemēt haue vs besought. that thought they sertayn her free custumes vnd wreten haue v¦sed and enioyd til now in fewe tymes passed that thei were therof passed re¦strayned wrongfuly. as euydently it shal mow be shewed. yt is to sey yt non estraūg{is} bey or selle wt any od estraūt¦g{is} any maner marthādises wythyn ye fraūches of ye same cie vpon peyne of forfetur of ye same marchādises Neuer the lesse we to pesen and don away ye stryf in this party that to the same cytezens and her successours bi the defen¦dyng of our chartur wil strength bi ex¦persse wordys we of ye assent aforsayd wolde graunt & by this our chartour confermen for vs and our eyers to ye forseyd citezens her eyers and her suc∣cessours that frohens forward. none estrāge marchaūt selle any mōer mar¦chaudises to any other straūge ma¦chaunt wt in the fraūches of the sayd ci¦te▪ nor any Such straūge marchaūt bey not of any od straūge marchaunt such maner marchādises oppayne of forfeytour of the same marchaūc{is} Sa¦ving alwei the preuelegis of our leg men of gascoyn so yt such maner being and sellyng betwene marchaunt and marchaūt of ye forsaid cite. ¶The C.ij article Also ye forsaid citezens haue be sought vs bi her same peticiō yt though they haue hold of vs in mene & of olde tyme they were not holden nor were wont to ben. atendaūt to the precept and maundement{is} of any lourd Con∣stable styward marchal amiral or cler¦ke of market. nor of non other office ne mynysters of our ne of our prededes∣sors. but onli to our precepte and maū¦dement{is} and our progenytors forsayd wt the articles of our names enseled wt our seales. open or preuiou take the cō¦maūdementis of our iusticis after the fourme of the charters of the same cy∣tezens vpon hem to be assigned neuer¦theles to don awei bi all tymes all the stryf therof we wol hoten by our char¦ters theis thing{is} to be made expressed we in in our forsayd parlement more playn delyberacyō I. had of all assent of prelatis lordis & other peris for sayd we maden our answere in the same {per}¦lement to the peticion of the same cite∣zens ī theis wordes be it vsed as hath ben of old tyme. ¶The C.iij. artice. Also they haue besought vs yt for as mich as of her most oldest free Custume of the same cite of alle man custumes vsagis and ympo¦sicions and also prepresturs and other thing{is} what so they bee that fall with in the fraunches of the forsaid cite or to
the comonalte of ye same cite or to any office ther of belonging by the same cy¦tezens and be non other it was wont to be enquered. Neutheles to peysen & don awey the stryf therof fro hensfor¦ward. that we shuld will our for sayd chartur by expresse wordis to exproue we of the assent aforsayd of our special grace wyl and graunt and bi this our chartour conferme for vs and for our eyers that as ofte as any custumes v¦sagis and ympossions and also of pre∣presturs and all other thing what soo they be. wt in the fraunches of the said cite fallyng. or to the comonalte of the same cite or to any office of the same wt in the fraunches of the same cite belon¦ging. that it be enquered bi the citezēs of the same cite and by none odur. ¶The C.iiij. article. Also we wol and graunt and bi this chartur conferme for vs and for our eyers. to the forsaid Cytezens and her successurs. that our {pro}tecciōs or our eyers. to ani persones to be made and graunted wt vs to gon and dwellen in our vage or of our ey∣ers from hensforth shul not be allowed in plees of dett for vytayles. I. bought or to be bought vpon ye vage. wherof in Such {pro}tecciōs mencion befallith to be made. Ne also in plees of trespace or contractis made after the date of such maner {pro}teccions where that the par∣ty playntyf befree man of the same cy¦te. ¶The .C.v. article. And moreouer at the instauns of ye same citezens we haue charged and be this present char¦tur we charge. the tresourer and bar∣nes and other ministers of the cheker that frō this tyme forward our wrytt goo not out of our escheker for sayd to don come the body of any prisoner fro our gayol of newgat or elliswher wt in the fraunches of the for said cite for det¦tis or damagis or ani maner accions to the same citezens there cōdempned to answer to vs or to other in ye forsaid escheker for our dett{is} or for any other mynysters ī ye same escheker. but furst the same barons and mynysters fyn¦de be good and trewe ermynacyon yt the same dett were trewe. and not det feyned byfore yt such a prysoner was condempned. ¶The .C.vi article Wil¦ling moreouer th forsayd cytezēs dō more large grace we haue graūted for vs and for our eyers to the same cyte∣zens and her successours that yf any defeculte be or dout conteyned in any artycle in the chartours made by vs and our progenetors to the same cyte∣zens. I. made wherof Stryf myght a¦ryse and that the same article may be take to dyuers vndirstōdyng we for as mych as be the parti of the same ci¦tezens vpon yt were required bytha¦ce off our cowncel we. Shal don be made therof such Interpreacions as shalbe of good feith & most accedaunt to reson. ¶ The .Cvij. article. Why we wol & stedfastly bydde for vs and for ours as mych as ī vs ys. that the same citezēs her eyers and her successours eumore vse and Inioye all and singlar graūt{is} forsaid ī maner and fourme aboue ex∣pressed. Neuertheles we wol not ne it is not our entent. that by colour & ver¦tu of any graunt or any answere ma¦de to the peticions made to the same ci¦tezens in our forsaid parlemēt as it is aforsayd to the citezens nor her succes¦sours be restrayned of any of her free custumes or other fraunches by any
maner. by thes witnesses. Our wur∣schipful faders S. archbisshop of Caū¦tbury primat of england w. of london W. of wȳchester A. of Menē our chaū¦celar. Thomas of eetur our tresurer Thomas of karlyl and. R. of Salesbu¦ry bysscop: Iohannes kyng of Castel and of Legion. Duke of lancaster Ed∣mond erle of Cambreg{is} our leuest vn¦cles. Edmōd mortymer of the march richard Arundel. Thom̄s beanchm̄p of warwak erles / Guy bryan our chā¦birleyn Richard Scrope Stiward of our hostel. Iohn̄ offerdā clarke of our priuy signet and other. yeuen by our hand at westmȳster the iiij. day of de∣cēbre the yere of our reigne furst. bi hē¦self the kyng and peticion in the parle¦ment. ¶ The .C.viij. article. Afterwardis in another chartur of confirmaciō of the same our lord the kynge. ye yere of his reigne vij. in the ende of the same char¦tur it is conteyned thus. we for sothe ye graunt{is} yestis cōfirmatiōs newyng and ordinauncis aboue sayd and also all articles and other thing in alle the charturs and letts aboue sayd as wel ours as of our progenitours aforsaid what so euer be contentid rehessid and opeyned. hauyng free hem all and sin¦gler. at the Instaunce and request of ye comonalte of our Reame of England in our present parlement for the more quyet and pese betwene our legis to be norisshed. and for the good publyk of the assent of prelatis lordis and pe∣ris by vs beyng in ye same parlement for vs and our eyers as mych, as is in vs. To the citezens of the same cite her eyers and her successours Citezens of the same cite of our special grace bi the tenor of thes present letters. we graūt and conferme as the charturs and let¦turs abouesaid playnly witnessen. ¶The .C.ix. article. Willing therupō and grauntyng at the Instaunce and request forsaid with the assent forsad and also by this chartur confermyng for vs and our ayers forsayd to the cy∣tezens her eyers and her successours ci¦tezens of the same cite to alle her fraū∣ches and free vsagis as hoely and ful∣ly be they restututed as thei or her pre¦decessors the tyme of other our proge∣nitors more fre & moreful haddēhem ¶ The .C.x. article. And thought the same citezens or her predecessors cyte∣zens of the same cite. any of the fraun∣ches quytaunce grauntis ordinaūcis artycles or free vsagis or of any other thing{is} in the same charters or letters conteyned any case fallyng sithens ha¦ue nought ful vsed or any quytauncis grauntis ordinauncis articles or free vsagis or other in the fame charturs or letters as it is beforsaid conteyned Haply they haue mysse vsed. Neuer∣theles the same citezēs her eyers and Successours citezens of the forsaid cite alle and Singlar fraunches quytaū¦cis grauntis ordinauncis articles free vsagis and alle maner other thing is the forsayd charters and letters cōtey¦ned soo not vsed or also mysused & eche of hem from hens forthefully and free¦ly they mowe en Ioye and vsen with outē occasion or lettyng of vs. or of one eyers of iusticis escheters sherefs or o¦dur our baylyfs or mynisters what so they ben any statutis or ordynauncis made or domes yewen or any of our charters or of our progenitors forsaid in tymes passed made and graunted
in to the contrary not with stondyng. ¶The. C.xi. article Moreouer at the instaunce and request forsaid We wol and bi this our chartur cōferme that alle maner wynes ī ye forsaid cite to be solde. and also vitalars as wel fish mō∣gers as other in the same cite dwellȳg and to the same cyte fro nowe forth wt vitayles to com. that fro hens forth yt he be vnd the regement and gounaū∣ceof the mayr and aldirmen of the sa∣me cite as they were wōt to be of olde tyme. ¶The .C.xij. article Furthermore not willȳg that any mayers of the cite for said fro now forth to make any other othe. thā in the tyme of our lord kyng edward ye thred our ayal he was wot to make at our escheker or of our eyers or other placis in any maner be com∣ellid to dō or make any statutis or or∣dinauncis in contrari made notwith¦stondyng. by thes witnesse. wurship∣ful faders william archbishop of caūt¦bury prymat of all England. Robert of london willm̄ winchester Thomas of Ely bisshops Edmond of cambreg Thomas of bokynghm̄. our alther he¦uest vncles hugh Stafford and willm̄ of montagew. of Salesbury. Herry percy of northumbirland erles. Iohn̄ neuel of Rabi mihel of ye pole our chaū¦celar. Hugh of Segraue our tresurer Iohn̄ of montegeew. Styward of our hostel and other yeuen by our hande at westmynster the .xxvi. day of nouībre the yers of our reigne .vij. Explicit libertas London. ¶The. acte for correciō of the errours and wrong Iugementis. in london By a statute made in the tyme of  noble kyng Edward ay al toour¦ld the kyng that now ys. the yere of his reigne the .xxviij. It was ordeined and establyshid that for this. that the Errows defantis and mystakyng y• be naturally taken. and vesed in the ci¦te of london for defant of good gounaū¦ce of the mair sherefs and aldirmen yt haue the gouernaunce of the said Cy¦te. They to correcte and redresse the de¦fantis Errours & mystakyng aboue named. and them duly to punyshe from tyme to tyme vpō certayne pey¦ne. That is to wer at the urst defant Mo. marke vnto the kyng. and at the ij. tyme .ij. Mo. mar and at threed de∣fant. that the fraunches of the sad c¦te of london be take in to the kyng{is} hā¦dis. and be to enquere vpon them a¦fest of Saint mychael nere comyng. Soo that they nede dewe redresse as is abouesayd ¶Be it equered of ther defantis bi en¦quest of mē of foreyn shires. that is to sey kent. Eser Southser. herr. buck{is} barkshire. as wel at the kyng{is} sue as of other which that playne wille. And yf the mair Sherefs and aldmē be by such enquestis indyted bi thei mad comen by dew processe bifore ye kyng{is} Iustic{is} that shalbe to this assigned out of ye said citee. by fore whom haue thei ther answer as wel to the kȳg as to ye party and yf they put them self In en∣quest{is} taken bi mē forayns as is aboue sayd. and yf they be attanted. be the
said peyne renne and leuyed of a▪ M. mare of the mayr Sherefs and aldir∣men for defant of good gouernaunce & neuertheles the playntyf shal recouer ther treble damagis ayenst the sayd mair sherefs and aldirmen for ther de¦fant. and by cause that the said sherefs of london ben partyes to the same be synes or nede. by the constable of the tour of london or hys lyeftenaūt my∣nyster in place and stede of the said she¦refs receyue writtes aswel oryginal of the chauncery as Iudicial vnd the scales of Iusticis. to doo therof execu∣cyon in the said cite and bi processe ma¦de by attachment and distresse. and bi exigent yf nede be. So that he said su¦te of the kyng be exigent awarde after the furst capas retourned at sute of {per}∣tye. And yf the mair sherefs and aldir¦men haue landis and teūtis out off ye cite be processe made ayenst hem bi at¦tachment and distresse in the same shi¦res where the land{is} and teūtis ben & that euerych of the said mayr and she¦refs and aldirmen that cometh to fo∣re the Iusticis. answer euery for hem self. aswel bi him as bi other which bē absent as of him self. and this ordinaū¦cis be holde ferme and stable notwtstō¦ding fraunchises preuylag{is} or other cus¦tumes what so euer they bee. and extē¦de this ordinaunce as wel to other cy∣tees and borughs of the reame where such defant and mystakyng shalbe dō and vsed and not duly correcte. nor re¦dressed. as of the sayd cite of london sa∣uing that the sayd enquestis ben takē be men foreyns of the same shires w∣her such citees and boroughs and of to¦wnes that of thys shalbe attaynte be adinged by the discression of iustitis yt to this shalbe assingned. ¶ Our lord the kyng consideryng the good and trewe beryng of ye mair she¦refs and aldirmen and of all the como¦nalte of the same cite of londō. ayenste our lorde the kyng. and biso mych thei willyng to doo ease and mytigacion of the peynes aforsayd. Of the assent of lordis spūall and temperal and the co∣mons aforsaid. hath ordeyned and en¦stablisshid. that the peynes aswel of ye M. mark as of ye ij.m. marc & of ye said fyne of fraunches comprised in the sa¦me statute. ne be not lymyted īcertaȳ but that the peine in this case be ye wis¦doms and discrescion of iusticis to this assgned as of other cytees & borughs with In the reame and that the reme¦nan̄t of the statute and processe of the same be in ther force and strengeth ¶The acte of parlemēt for tynthing{is} of trees aboue .xx. yere growing{is}. &. ce Also at ye parlemēt of ye grete comons shewynge be their peticion that how thei shuld selle their gret wode of age of .xx. yere or .xl yere or of gretter age to marchaūt{is} to theyr profyte in helpe of the kynge in his warre. persuns vy¦cars of holi chirche ye said marchaūt{is} enpledē & trauaillī crystē Court for ye dymes of ye said worde in name of this worde silue cedue wherfore they may not selle ther woode to vri value to gret harme to hē & of ye reame It is ordeȳg¦ned ye {pro}hibiciō ī this case graūtid & vp¦pō attachemē. as hathe bē vsed afore this tyme. ¶Wherbi it apperithe be this statute yt no mā shulde haue no ti¦the for noo trees past .xx. yere of age yf any persuns or vicars of holy chirche
trouble any man for suche tythes. he to haue a good accion ayens thē ī the kyng{is} benche or in ye comō place. ¶ And also it aperethe another statu∣te made at wynchester ī ye .xvi. yere of kynge Richard the seconde ¶The charg of euiri ward ī lōdō at xv ¶The ward{is} ī ye west syde of walbrok T warde of chepe tasked ī lōdō at lxxij.li.xvi l. & in thescheker alowed lxxij.lī. The ward of the vȳtre in lōdō at xxxvi lī. & ī ye cheker acōpted for .xxxv.lī.v. s̄ ¶The warde of quenehith In lōdō ta¦ked .xx.lī. & in ye cheker acōpted or .xx.lī ¶The warde of baȳard{is} castell taxed ī lōdō xij lī. & ī y• cheker acopted for xij.lī Tward of Cordwayners stret ī lōdō .lxxij.lī xvi l &. ī ye cheker acōpted lxxij.lī Tward of breedstret taxed ī lōdo xxxvij.lī. & ī ye cheker acōp for .xxxvi lī x.l ¶ The ward of faringdon. without in london .xxxv.lī. and in the scheker acompted for .xxxiiij.lī.x.l. Tward of farȳgdō with ī lōdō at .liiijlī. & ī ye scheker acōpted liij.līvi.l viij.d Tward of aldrichgat tax ī lōdō vij.lī ī the escheker acompted for .vij.lī. The ward of Crepilgat ta in lōdō .xl.lī. & in ye scheker acōpted for .xxxix lī.x s̄ The warde of crepilgate wt out in lō¦dō at .x.lī and ī the cheker acōpted .x.lī The ward of bassing{is} hawe ī lōdō vij. .lī. and in the cheker acōpted for .vij.lī The warde of Colmanstret in lōdō at xix.lī. & ī the scheker acōpted for .xix.lī. The wardis in ye est side of walbroke The ward of walbrok taxed in lōdō at xl.lī & ī ye scheker acōpted for xxxix.lī The ward of dowgate in lōdō at xxxvlī. & in the scheker acomted xxxiiij.lī.x. s̄ The warde of ye brge taxed in lōdon. l.lī ye in the scheker acōted for xlix lī.x l The ward of billȳg gate taxed in lōdō xxxij.lī. in ye cheker cōpted for xxxli x. l The warde of ye towr taxed in londō at xlvi lī. & acōpted in ye scheker xlvlix. l The ward of porsokē taxed in lōdō at ix lī. and in ye scheker acōped for .ix.lī The ward of algate taxed in ldō at vilī and in the scheker acōpted for v.i The warde of ymestret taxed in lōdō xl l & acōpted in the scheker fr xl s̄ The ward of bysshop  in lō¦dō xxijli & acpted in y• cheker for xxil.x s̄ ¶ The ward of braedstred taxed in london at xxvijlī and acompted in the scheker for xxvli. The warde of cornehille taxed in lon¦dō xvilī acōpted my  The ward of langborne  in lōdō xxi.lī & in ye scheker acōpted xxli s̄ The ward of cādilwik ret ta in lōdō xvilī and acomped in y• scheker  The Sōme of ye hole xv. taxed in lōdō xiC.xvi marke v s̄.iii d and in the scherker acompte. for xiC mark The particion of ye brydg ward a xv. Greschirchstret qrt at a xv is xilxii d brydgstret qrt at a xv is xilī v r̄ viii d. Thamestret quarter at a xv is xiii.lī.xi s̄ viij.d The brydge qrt at a xv. is  iiij lī in s̄. iiij.d. Sōme llī. The fourme of the iiij part & the half & also the hole part of a xv in london as aper is ye cheker. The hole Som̄ of the iiij part is Clxxx in lī vi l viij d. therof deducte xix lī iij l xd ob rest C
xiiij.līij. l i d ob The hole Sm̄ of half a xv. is iij C.lxv līxiij. l iiij.d therof deduct xxxviij lī.vij l xx d rest i. C.xxviij.lī.v l vij d The Som̄ of ye hole xv is vij C.xxxiij lī vi s̄ viij.d therof deducte lxxvi lī xv l vi.d rest .C. lvi.lixi l ij d The fourme of the same particion as aperith in gwilehalle. The hole Som̄ of the fourth part is C lxxx.vi lī viij l therof deduct. xixlīiij l x d ob rest .Clxvij▪ li iiij.l  d. ob The hole Some of the half xv is iij.C lxxij.līxvi s̄ therof deducte .xxxviij lī vij l ix d rest in Cxxxviij līviij l iij d The Some of the hole .xv is vij C.xlv līxij l therof deducte lxxvilīxv l vi. d. rest viCxviijlīxvi s̄ vid. The Some of a xv in ynglādis xxxviij MixCxxxlī ix l ob ¶ The Ordinaunce for the assise and weight of bred In the Cite of london The price af a quarer wher ij l The ferthing Symuell poise xv vuncis & dī q The ferthing whit loof coket poise xvij vunc{is} dī & o The ob whit loof poise xxxv vuncis & a peny. The ob whet loof poise lij vuncis dī & peny ob The peny whet loof poise Cv vuncis & dī qter & ob The halfpeny whet loof of all greynes poise lxx vun∣cis and ij peny The quart wher at iij s̄ vid The ferthing Simuell xix vuncis dī & dī q & qter the quart whit loof coket xvi vūcis and half peni the half id whit loof xxxij vuncis id ob The halfpeny whet loff xlviij vunc{is} ij d q ye peny whet loof lxxxxvi vūc{is} & half a q & ij peni wheit the o loof of all greyues lxiiij vuncis and iij d The qr wher at iiij l The q̄ Symnell xij vūcis qr̄ iij pene the q whit loof coket xiiij vuncis iij qr̄ id the ob whit loof xxix vuncis dī ij d the half peny whet loof xliiij vunc{is} qr̄ dī & ob the id whet loof lxxx viij vuncis iij bi d the ob loof of all greyn lix vuncis & a q̄ id ob
¶The qt whete at iiij l. vi d The q̄ symnell. xi vunc is qr and ijd the q whyt loofcoket xiij. vuncis dī and iij qr̄ the ob white loff xxvij. vuncis and half the ob whete loof xli vuncis and a qt the peny whete loff lxxxij vuncis & half. ye ob loof of all gracynis lv vuncis ¶The qt whete at v.l. ¶The q synmell x vuncis qt dī id ob the q whyt loof coket xij. vuncis in qt & ij d the ob whit loof xxv vuncis dī & half q id ob the ob whete loof xxxviij vuncis dī & id the peny whete loof lxxvij vuncis ii d dī & ob. ye ob loff of all gracynis li. vuncis qt dī & ob ¶The qt whete at v l vi d ¶The q symnell ix vuncis dī. dī qt id ix vunc{is} the q whyte loff coket xij. vuncis id ob the ob white loff xxiiij. vuncis dī q & d the ob whete loff xxxvi vunc{is} dī qt & ob the peny whete loff lxxij vuncis qt dī id ob ye ob lof of all gracynis xlviij vuncis qt and id. ¶The quarter whete at vi. s̄. ¶The q symnell ix vuncis ye ferthīg white lof coket xi. vuncis qt and dī ob. the ob white loof xx vuncis in qt id. the halfpeny whete loof xxxiii vuncis dī qt and ob. the peny whete loof lxviii. vuncis qt dī and . ye half peny loof of al gracynis lxv vunc dī  weght ¶The quarter whete at vi. s̄ .vi d. ¶The ferthing symnell v iij. vuncis q  dī & ob the ferthing whitlof coket x. vuncis in t and a id. the ob whit loof xxi vuncis di and i d the ob whete loof xxxij vuncis qt dī & ob the peny whete loof lxiiij vuncis in q & id the ob loof of all graynis xlii vuncis dī qt id ob ¶The quarter where at vij s̄. ¶The ferthing symnell vij. vuncis in qt ij d q. the ferthing whit loof coket x vuncis qt and q the ob whit loof xxi vuncis dī ob weight. the ob whete loof xxx vuncis in q & ob q the peny whete loof lxi vuncis and half id ob the ob loof of all gracynis xli vuncis id
¶The quarter where at xij s̄. vi d ¶The ferthing symnell vij.vunc{is} qt dī & q the ferthing whit lof coket ix vunc{is} iij qt ob q the ob whit lof xix. vunc{is} & dī & i d ob the halfpeny whete lof xxix vun qt ij d q the peny whete lof lviij vuncis and half and dī qt ij d the ob lof of all grenys xxxix vuncis dī qt & ob ¶The quarter whete at viij s̄. The ferthyng symnell vi vuncis iij qt dī i d ob q. the ferthyng whit loff coket ix vuncis qt ij d q the half peny whyte loffe xviij vuncis dī qt ij d the half peny whete loffe xxviij vuncis i d ob q the peny whete loffe. lvi vuncis dī & qt i d the ob lof of all greynes. xxxvij vuncis qt dī i d ob ¶The quarter whete  vii l. vi d. The ferthing symnell vi vuncis dī & i d ob the ferthing white loffe coket viij. vuncis iij qt dī ij d the ob whyte loffe xvij vuncis iij q dī id. ob the ob whete loof xxvi vuncis iij qt dī i d the peny whete loff liij vuncis iij qt ijd. the ob loff of all greynis xxxv vnncis iij qt dī ob ¶The quarter whete at ix.l. The ferthing simnell vi vuncis. and dī qt i d q the ferthing whit loff coket viij vuncis dī ij d q. the ob whit loff xvij vuncis dī qt ij d the halfpeny whete loff xxv. vuncis. iij qt i d ob q the peny whete loff li vuncis dī and half q id. the ob loff of all greynis xxxiiij. vuncis qt z i d ob ¶The quarter whete at ix. s̄. vi d ¶The ferthing symnell v vuncis iij qt z q the ferthing whit loff coket viij. vuncis qt q the ob whit loof xvi. vuncis z. and i d the ob whete loof xxiiij. vuncis iij qt ii d q the peny whete loof xlix vuncis z & dī qt ij d the ob loof of all greynis xxxiij vuncis dī qt & ob The quarter whete at x. s̄. ¶The ferthing symnell v. vuncis z and ij d in weyght the frthing whit lof coket viij. vuncis the ob whit loof xvi. vuucis the ob whete loof xxiiij. vuncis the peny whete lof xlviij vuncis the ob loof of all greynes xxxij vuncis
¶The qt whet ¦ x l. vi d The q symnell v. vuncis qt and id ob weght the q whyt loofcoket vij. vuncis di and q ijd the ob white loff xv. vuncis qt  id ob the ob whete loof xxiij vuncis half qt id the peny whete loff xlvi vuncis qt ijd. ye ob loof of all graeynis xxx vuncis iij q o ¶The qt whete at xi.l. ¶The q symnell v vuncis i d ob weight the q whyt loof coket vij. vuncis qt z ij d the ob whit loof xiiij vuncis iij qt  id ob. the ob whete loof xxij vuncis qt  id the peny whete loof xliiij vuncis iij qt ijd ye ob loff of all graeynis xxix. vuncis iij qt ijd. ¶The qt whete at xi l vi d ¶The q symnell ijii vuncis iij qt z & ob. the q whyte loff coket vij. vuncis qt the ob white loff xiiij. vuncis the ob whete loff xxi vunc{is} iij qt the peny whete loff xliij vuncis ye ob lof of all graeynis xxix vuncis ¶The quarter whete at xij. s̄. ¶The q symnell iiij vuncis z & half qt ye ferthīg white lof coket vij. vuncis and ob the ob white loof xiiij vuncis and id the halfpeny whete loof xxi vuncis id ob the peny whete loof xlii. vuncis z and half qt od ye half peny loof of al graeynis xxviij vuncis ij d weght ¶The quarter whete at xij. s̄. vi d ¶The ferthing symnell iiij. vuncis qt z and id the ferthing whit lof coket vi. vuncis iij qid od the ob whit loof xiij vuncis: and dī q the ob whete loof xx vuncis qt  and ijd the peny whete loof xl vuncis in q z id ob the ob loof of all graeynis xxvij vuncis q i d ¶The quarter whete at xiij s̄. ¶The ferthing symnell iiii. vuncis  dī qt ijd q. the ferthing whit loof coket vi. vuncis  and dī qt q the ob whit loof xiij vuncis qt and od the ob whete loof xix vuncis ii q z ob q the peny whete loof xxxix vuncis iij q id o the ob loof of all graeynis xxvi vuncis  and id
¶The quarter whete at xij s̄.vi d The ferthing symnell vij. vunc{is} qt dī z q the ferthing whit lof coket ix vunc{is} iij qt ob q the ob whit lof xix. vunc{is} & dī & id ob the halfpeny whete lof xxix vunc qt ij d q the peny whete lof lviij vuncis and half and dī qt ijd the ob lof of all grenys xxxix vuncis dī qt & ob ¶The quarter whete at viij s̄. The ferthyng symnell vi vuncis iij qt dī id ob q. the ferthyng whit loff coket ix vuncis qt ijd q the halfpeny whyte loffe xviij vuncis dī qt ijd the half peny whete loffe xxviij vuncis id ob q the peny whete loffe. lvi vuncis dī & qt id the ob lof of all greynes. xxxvij vuncis qt dī id ob ¶The quarter whete at vii l. vi d. The ferthing symnell vi vuncis dī & id ob the ferthing white loffe coket viij. vuncis iij qt dī ijd the ob whyte loffe xvij vuncis iij q dī id. ob the ob whete loof xxvi vuncis iij qt dī id the peny whete loff liij vuncis iij qt ijd. the ob loff of all greynis xxxv vuncis iij qt dī ob ¶The quarter whete at ix. l. The ferthing simnell vi vuncis. and dī qt id q the ferthing whit loff coket viij vuncis dī ijd q. the ob whit loff xvij vuncis dī qt ij d the halfpeny whete loff xxv. vuncis. iij qt i d ob q the peny whete loff li vuncis dī and half q i d. the ob loff of all greynis xxxiiij. vuncis qt z i d ob ¶The quarter whete at ix. s̄. vi d ¶The ferthing symnell v vuncis iij qt & q the ferthing whit loff coket viij. vuncis qt q the ob whit loof xvi. vuncis z. and i d the ob whete loof xxiiij. vuncis iij qt ij d q the peny whete loof xlix vuncis z & dī qt ij d the ob loof of all greynis xxxiij vuncis dī qt z ob ¶The quarter whete at x. s̄. ¶The ferthing symnell v. vuncis z and ij d in weyght the ferthing whit lof coket viij. vuncis the ob whit loof xvi. vuncis the ob whete loof xxiiij. vuncis the peny whete lof xlviij vuncis the ob loof of all greynis xxxij vuncis
¶The qt whete at x.l. vi d The q symnell v. vuncis qt and i d ob weght the q whyt loofcoket vij. vuncis dī and q ij d the ob white loff xv. vuncis qt z i d ob the ob whete loof xxiij vuncis half qt i d the peny whete loff xlvi vuncis qt ij d. ye ob loof of all graeynis xxx vuncis iij q ob ¶The qt whete at xi.l. ¶The q symnell v vuncis i d ob weight the q whyt loof coket vij. vuncis qt z ij d the ob whit loof xiiij vuncis iij qt z i d ob. the ob whete loof xxij vuncis qt z i d the peny whete loof xliq̄ vuncis iij qt ij d ye ob loff of all graeynis xxix. vuncis iij qt ij d. ¶The qt whete at xi l vi d ¶The q symnell ijii vuncis iij qt z & ob. the q whyte loff coket vij. vuncis qt the ob white loff xiiij. vuncis z the ob whete loff xxi vunc{is} iij qt the peny whete loff xliij vuncis z ye ob lof of all graeynis xxix vuncis ¶The quarter whete at xij. s̄. ¶The q symnell iiij vuncis z & half qt ye ferthīg white lof coket vij. vuncis and ob the ob white loof xiiij vuncis and i d the halfpeny whete loof xxi vuncis i d ob the peny whete loof xlii. vuncis z and half qt od. ye half peny loof of al graeynis xxviij vuncis ij d weght ¶The quarter whete at xij. s̄. vi d ¶The ferthing symnell iiij. vuncis qt z and i d the ferthing whit lof coket vi. vuncis in qid od the ob whit loof xiij vuncis and dī q the ob whete loof xx vuncis qt  and ij d the peny whete loof xl vuncis in q i d ob the ob loof of all graeynis xxvij vuncis q i d ¶The quarter whete at xiij s̄. ¶The ferthing symnell iiij. vuncis & dī qt ij d q. the ferthing whit loof coket vi. vuncis  and dī qt q the ob whit loof xiij vuncis qt and ob the ob whete loof xix vuncis iij q z ob q the peny whete loof xxxix vuncis iij q i d ob the ob loof of all graeynis xxvi vuncis z and id
¶The quarter whete at xiij s̄.vi d ¶The ferthing symnell iiij. vunc{is} and id q̄ the ferthing whit lof coket vi vunc{is} q̄t z id ob q̄ the ob whit lof xij. vunc{is} iij q̄t z id the halfpeny whete lof xix vunc{is} q̄t z q̄ the peny whete lof xxxvi vuncis iij q̄t ijd the ob lof of all grenys xxv vuncis iij q̄ ijd. ¶The quarter whete at xiiij s̄. The ferthing symnell. iij vuncis iij q̄ z and ob the ferthyng whit loff coket vi vuncis q̄t and id the half peny whyte loffe xij vuncis z and ijd the half peny whete loffe xviij vuncis iij q̄t z and ob the peny whete loffe. xxxvij vuncis iij q̄ and id the ob lof of all greynes. xxv vuncis and dī q̄ id ob. ¶The quarter whete at xiiij l. vid. The ferthing symnell iij vuncis iij q̄t the ferthing white loffe coket vi. vuncis & dī q̄ & ob the ob whyte loffe xij vuncis q̄ and id. the ob whete loof xviij vuncis q̄ z id ob the peny whete loff xxxvi vuncis iij q̄ z and ob the ob loff of all greynis xxiiij vuncis z and ijd. ¶The quarter whete at xv.l. The ferthing simnell iij vuncis z. and ijd the ferthing whit loff coket vi vuncis in weyght the ob whit loff xij vuncis the half peny whete loff xviij. vuncis. the peny whete loff xxxvi vuncis the ob loff of all greynis xxiiij. vuncis ¶The quarter whete at xv. s̄. vid. ¶The ferthing symnell iij. vuncis q̄t z & id ob q̄ the ferthing whit loff coket v. vuncis iij q̄t ijd. the ob whit loof xi. vuncis z. and dī q̄t and ijd the ob whete loof xvij. vuncis z and id ob q̄ the peny whete loof xxxv vuncis & dī q̄t and id the ob loof of all greynis xxiij vuncis q̄t z & id ob ¶The quarter whete at xvi. s̄. ¶The ferthing symnell iij. vuncis q̄t and id ob q̄ the ferthing whit lof coket v. vuncis & half & dī q̄t ijd q̄. the ob whit loof xi. vuncis q̄t z and ijd the ob whete loof xvij. vuncis and dī q̄t id ob q̄ the peny whete lof xxxiiij vuncis q̄t z and id the ob loof of all greynes xxij vuncis q̄t z and id ob.
¶The q̄t whete at xvi l. vi d The q̄ symnell .iij. vuncis and half q̄t id ob q̄ the q̄ whyt loof coket v. vuncis and z and ijd q̄ the ob white loff xi. vuncis & half q̄ ijd the ob whete loof xvi vuncis iij q̄t id ob q̄ the peny whete loff xxxiij vuncis z and half q̄t id. yt ob loof of all graeynis xxij vuncis q̄t z id ob. ¶The q̄t whete at xvij.l. ¶The q̄ symnell iij vuncis ijd weight the q̄ whyt loof coket v. vuncis and half the ob whit loof xi vuncis. the ob whete loof xvi vuncis and half the peny whete loof xxiij vuncis ye ob loff of all graeynis xxij. vuncis ¶The q̄t whete at xvij l vi d ¶The q̄ symnell ij vuncis iij q̄t z ijd q̄. the q̄ whyte loff coket v. vuncis q̄t z and q̄ the ob white loff x. vuncis iij q̄t and ob the ob whete loff xvi vunc{is} and half q̄t ob q̄ the peny whete loff xxxij vuncis q̄t and id ob ye ob lof of all graeynis xxi vuncis and half id ¶The quarter whete at xviij s̄. ¶The q̄ symnell ij vuncis iij q̄t z and q̄ ye ferthīg white lof coket v. vuncis and q̄t ob q̄ the ob white loof x vuncis z and id the halfpeny whete loof xv vuncis iij q̄t ijd q̄ the peny whete loof xxxi. vuncis z and dī q̄t ijd. ye half peny loof of all graeynis xxi vuncis & dī id ¶The quarter whete at xviij s̄. vid ¶The ferthing symnell ij. vuncis iij q̄t ob q̄ the ferthing whit lof coket v. vuncis and dī q̄t id q̄ the ob whit loof x vuncis q̄t and dī the ob whete loof xv vuncis dī and id q̄ the peny whete loof xxxi vuncis and dī q̄. the ob loof of all graeynis .xx vuncis iij q̄t ¶The quarter whete at xix s̄. ¶The ferthing symnell ii. vuncis z & dī q̄t & id q̄ the ferthing whit loof coket v. vuncis and id ob q̄ the ob whit loof x vuncis and dī q̄t and id the ob whete loof xv vuncis q̄t and q̄ the peny whete loof xxx vuncis z and ob the ob loof of all graeynis xx vuncis q̄t and ijd
¶The q̄t whete at xix s. vi. d The q̄ smnell. ij. vūc{is} z ād ij. peny wyght the ferthing whyt lof coket. v. vunc{is} the ob whyte loff x. vunc{is} the ob whet loffe xv. vunc{is} the peny whet loffe. xxx. vunc{is} the ob lof of all granes. xx. vunc{is} ¶The q̄t whete at xx. s̄. The ferthyng symnell. ij. vunc{is} z and a quarter. the ferthyng whit loff coket iiij. vunc{is} iij q̄t z ob q̄ the halpeny whyte loffe ix. vunc{is} iij quarter id ob the halpeny whete loffe xiiij vunc{is} z and dī q̄t ijd q̄ the peny whete lof xxix vunc{is} q̄t z ijd. the halpeny lof of all grenys xix. vunc{is} z and dī q̄ ob. ¶Item the half peny loffe whyte of stratford muste weye ij vunc{is} more than̄e the half peny whit lof of Londō. ¶Item the half peny whete loff of stratford muste weye in vunc{is} more thanne the half peny whete loof of london. Item the peny whete lof of stratford muste weye vi. vunc{is} more than̄e ye peny whete loof of london ¶Item in half peny white lofes of stratford muste wey as myche as the peny whete loof ¶Item the loof of all greynes that is to saye the whete loof muste wey as miche as the peny whete loof. And the half pe¦ny whyte looffe ¶ The copy of the bulle for the offring to ye curatt{is} of the {per}ishens of the Cite of london in latin and in english & of ye cōpoūciō of the same Cap̄. lxxxvi. Ichola{us} epūs suus suo{rum} dei ad {per}¦petuā rei memoriā ad oīs aplīce seruitut su{per}na dispositōe vocati am∣biguitates {per} q̄s ecclijs p̄stim  curā aīa{rum} hūtib{us} illa{rum}{que} rectorib{us} dispēdia ac in∣ter eos necnō {per}ochianos suos discētō∣nes lites & scādala suboriri posse timē¦tur sequestrare cupim{us} ne illarū {pro}pa¦gat{is} laq̄is rectorib{us} et {per}ochiāis p̄dictis gramora in spūalib{us} & tēporalib{us} {pro} tē¦pore resultēt detrimēta udū siqidē p{us} {quam} bo. memorie Thomas archiepī Cā¦tuarien̄ asserēs qd {pro}utī sua pisitatōe reparer at olim recolēde memorie ro∣ger{us} epn̄s lōdonien̄ su{per} oblaōtib{us} ī die b{us} dūicis & solēpnib{us} acfest{is} duplicib{us} & p̄seruatim aplō{rum} quo{rum} vigilie ieimā¦tur {per}ihabitātes domos hospicia siue shoppas quōlibet occupātes īfra cīta∣tē lōdō fanēd as quādā ediderat {con}stitu¦tōem {per} {quam} ītcetera statuet at & ordinaue rat qd oīs & singuli īhītātes & occupā¦tes hm̄oi domos hospīa siue shoppas {per}ānū {per} domo hospicio siue shoppa cu¦i{us} pēsio ad x. solidos sterlīgo{rum} ānua se extēderet q̄drātē si ad vigiti solid {per} an¦nū obolū. si ad q̄dragīta solid {per} ānsi de nar̄ & sic assensiue {pro} rata pēslōis vla deār sūmā q̄ dragīta solid ad quātūcū∣{que} sū. pēsio hm̄oi ānua se extēderet of ferre reuerēt {pro}ut eciā eatemis lōge re¦tractis t{per}orib{us} & t{per}e p̄scriptibili {per}oc∣hianos ecclīa{rum} birte cītat{is} cōsuetū erri terat qd{que} {con}steutōem hm̄oi ut pote laudabilem nōnulli ei{us} predecessor archiepī
Cantuarien̄ expresse Confirmauer āt constitucionem ipām {per}, quasdam suas litter as excerta sua scientia confirma¦ner at et approbauerat: Et cum non iudli ex {per}ochianis dicta{rum} ecclia{rum} suo {per}∣uerso sensu constitucionem ipām & sa∣nū ipīus intellectū subuertere terē¦tur certam desup{per} declarationem fece¦rat ac maiorem vicicountes{que} et ald∣mannos dicte ciuitat{is} necnon oīs et singulos Ciues seu inhabitantes in ea sub pena maiois excommicatōis cui non patentes et rebelles ipso facto decreuerat. subiacere et interminaci one maledictiōis eterne monuit qua∣tenus constitucionem et declarationē predictas de cetero abs{que} sensu peruiso seu corta exposicione inuiolabiliter ob¦seruarent et facerent quantū in eis es secitin futurū ab alijs obseruari. non nulla quo{que} alia tunc expressa precepe¦rat voluerat et ordinauerat felicis re¦cordatōis In∣nocencius vij. predecessor ur̄ lr̄as the∣me archiepī predict et quetū{que} inde se∣cuta rata habens etgrata per quasdā suas lr̄as ex certa sua scientia confir∣manit et sui scripti patrocinio cōmu∣niuit suppliens oīs defectus sequi for∣san interuenissent in eisdem prout in¦dictis Innocencij lr̄is in quibus prefa¦te archiepī littere inferte fuerūtet q̄s cū sic in sertis inferius de vbo ad vbuz inferifetimus plenuis cōtinetur post modū vo nonnullo{rum} fide digna relatō ne{per} nos accepto qd licet. Maior vice∣countes aldermanni ciues et inhabi∣tantes predicti. seu maior {per}s eo{rum} ab ā∣tiqua et laud abili legitime{que} prescrip∣ta consuetudine constitucionem prefa¦tam obseruantes oblationes ip ās di dieb{us} dn̄ie{is} et solēpnib{us} at festis dupli¦ribus et preseruatim aplō{rum} quo{rum} vigi¦lie ieiumāur feissēt tamē a qua∣ve circatūr annus cura quidā et eos {pro}prie salut{is} in memores erga ipōtum matrē eccstam que non abs{que} marimus studio & labore eos dietu spūalib{us} enu∣cris alimēt plurimūse ingratos red∣dences ac cupientes oblatōes hm̄oi di mittere et paulatun ip ecclie subtra∣here. quas si ea que dei sūt sa{per}ent poti¦us ad angerent et vltro offerrēt dictas oblatōes non nisi in dn̄ic{is} diebm et fest{is} solempnib{us} aplō{rum} quo vigilie inā∣tur facerant et faciebant in alis solēp¦nib{us} dieb{us} qui quā plures fore noscebā¦tur eas facere iemere recusātes et ad paliatōem temeritat siue hm̄oi assere battani ex cōstitute Rogeri epī hm̄oi quā etiā ex cōfuemdīe ātiqua in cuuta te londn hm̄oi legitime preseripta. &  {con}tradictorio iudicio obtēta dūtarat de quost domicilis conducto {per} detem soli¦dis qualiter die dn̄a & alia die festiss lemnis aplō{rum} quo{rum} vigilie Ieiunātur annum ab inhabitante in eader qua∣drās deo & ecclīe noīe oblationis in c¦ius {per}ochia situabatur dicta doin{us} at consistebat et de doīcilio conducto pro viginti solidis obulus et de donis n¦ducta pro quadraginta solidis denari us et de domo conducta pro maiorisū¦ma plus srdin proportionē prepositat abīhabitātib{us} ī eadē qiubuscū{que} & ∣i{us}cū{que} cōditionis status serus vel gra∣dus {per}sone īhabitātes existerent racōe domo{rum} q̄s īhītaqāt offerri debebāt. Et qd si quis ī vna & eadē {per}ochia duo vel¦tria ocu{per}et domilia ocupās satisface¦ret deo & ecclīe de eisdē oblatōib{us} debit{is} {con}suet{is} proportionalit scdz qd ecclīa {per}oc∣hialde eisdē ātiquit{us} {per}i{per}e {con}sueuerat qd{que} nullo alio modo quā ep̄fert aut scdm qd in litteris Innocencites Tho∣archiepī predictis offerri tenebantur
remsantes predicti affirmare nie∣bantur qd in lr̄is Thome Archiepī et innocencij predecessoris nostri prefar{is} verus ipiūs constitucionis tenor su effectus iuxta quem pretendebant se in diebus n̄icis et solemnibus aplō{rum} quo{rum} vigie ieinnantur vt prefertur dumtarat ad m̄oi faciendas oblacio¦nes tenen expressus non esset qd{que} {pro}p¦teria ipē archiepī et Innocencij lr̄esur reptice nullius{que} roboris vel momē∣ti existebant percepto insuper per nos quod nu{per} tres difinitie sentēcie vna in parabus et due in roman̄ Cur̄ per quas inter cetera dilectus filuis Roī∣tus wright cuus Londoneiet tunc in habitator einsdem domus site infra limites {per}ochie {per}ochialis ecclie Sancti Edmundi in lumbard stret londone ad faciendam oblaciones iuxta rata: predictā in quibusdā alijs diebus solē∣nibus et festiuis quā in dominicis et festuus solemnibus aplō{rum} quo{rum} vigili ereniuātur videlt in tribus in natiui¦tate sal scō{rum} stephani Iohīs īnocēci ac in cotidiam in Resurrecionis domi¦ni nr̄i ihū rpī necnon in tribus in pen¦tecostes ebdomada{rum} festiuis dieb{is} ac Circumcicionis Epiphanye et ascen∣cionis euide dn̄i nēi Ihū rpī nec non corporis rpīet quatuor bē marie vgi∣nis acscō{rum} philippi et Iacobi aplō{rum} fes¦tiuis diebus nec non in festo Tn̄sscī patroni Ecclīe sancti Edmundi predic¦to in quibus illas facere denegaite  seu neglererat condemnatus eritit cō¦tra ipm̄ Robertum pronulgate fuer at et quod graue et deficile plurimum es set rectoribus et vicarijs ecclīa{rum} pero∣chialm̄ hm̄oi ac alijs ad quos oblacio¦nes hm̄oi {per}tinent contra singulos il∣las soluere recusantes litigare et in iu¦dicīo experiritum fleforsan  derent quā hm̄oi oblatione▪ in{per}pem̄ forēt nalitur̄ intellecto quo{que}  nos ex nonnullis carissinu in epō  nr̄ihen rici Regis anglie Illustris ad nos di∣rectis lr̄is Regem ipm̄ fliū o{per}e asserta reper nos super premissis taliter pro∣iu deri qd oīs ambiguitatis dubiur de¦fencionū{que} acligio{rum} materia nec nō¦lites et rancores que inter ipōs recio∣res & {per}ochianos expremissis oriri pos sent de medio penitus auferātur nos{que} cuncto{rum} crilifilm̄ pacem et quiete intensis desiderijs affectantes illo{rum} li∣tibus difencionibus et scandalis quā∣tū cum deo possumns obuiamus cu∣pientes super premissis tali prouidere remedio {per} qd sublato cūsuis ambigui¦tatis ecclie predicte illa{rum}{que} rectores cū pacis et ūnetis dulcedine Iura eis de vita asuis {per}ochianis percipiant sic{que} percipientes Rectores ipō{rum} {per}ochiano rū anima{rum} cure ex regimini studie su∣is et libentius insistere valerent non∣nullis ex venerabilis fr̄i nr̄is Epīs¦tuncin Romana curia presentibus o∣raculo viue vocis cōmissimus vt{per} in∣spectione acto{rum} actitaroū in causa ipā super premissis omnibus et singulis se alicte nr̄a diligenter informarent & que per informationem hm̄oi reperi∣rent nobis fideliter referre▪ curarent cū autē perfidelem eo{rum} quibus infor∣mationem hm̄oi cōmisimus quibus attitata predicta et gesta in dā causa ipsius{que} cause et illius processimi ac sē¦tencias diligenter inspererūt relacio∣nem nobis de super fractam dicte pre¦missis et quod consuetudo generalis ī predicta ciuitate Londonen̄ offerendi iuxta dictam ratam tam in ūic{is} quā alijs festis et festiuis diebus superius
noīati expressis sufficienter in pma probata extitit ac in secundo exstcijs pretensa copia constitutionis Rogeri Ēih̄i in quacaneri dicitur qd sin∣gulis dib dn̄icis et alia die festi solēp∣nis aplō{rum} quo{rum} vigilie ieantur of∣ferri debeat in dicta causa {pro}ducta fuit quod{que} p̄fatus Robertus tam vigo∣re constitucōis et {con}suetudinis p̄dicta{rum} in dn̄ic{is} et fest{is} aplō{rum} quo{rum} vigilie em∣nātur offerre debere iuxta ratā ante dc̄am concessus est ac venerabilis fra¦ter r̄ guillelmus epūs tūc electus ole reū et locū vnius ex causa{rum} palacij ap¦postolici auditoribus de mandato no¦tenens secundam & dilectus filnis ma¦gister ludowicus de ludomsijs cappel lanus nr̄ et causa{rum} deī palacij auditor consuetudine sic deducee & probate ac Innocencij predecessoris et chome arc hiepī lr̄is constitucōem predcā Rogeri continentibus iam diu in obseruanci ā deduct{is} & hit{is} īherētes p̄tensa copia prefate constitutōis rogeri {per} dan̄ Ro¦bertum in iudicio coram eis {pro}ducta vt minus autentica seu legituna non at tenta. tertiam sentencias hm̄oi {pro}uul∣garēt simus plenissime īformati motu {pro}prio aūcte aplīca et ex certa sciēcia tenore presenciū Innocētij et archiepī lr̄as ac constitutōem Rogeri epī {pro}ut in ipīus archiepilr̄is de vbo ad vbū ī dic¦tis Innocencij lr̄is in sextis exprimit seu narratur probatum {que} offerendi psuenidinē et sentencias predcās nec non oīa et singula in eis contenta ap∣{pro}bam{is} & {con}firām{us}, ac p̄sēt{is} scripti prōcīo {con}nurīmus ca{que} {pro}leno & {per}petuo firmi¦tatis robore subsistere ac {per}petuis fu∣turis temporibus īmolabilit obserua¦ri debere deceruimus ac mandantes ha{rum}serie distructōis et singulis quia quatuor annis proxime preteriti in habauer̄t et quomodo occupan ac inhabitant et ocpupant inbita bunt {que} ocupabunt quomodo ī futu∣rum domos hospicia siue shoppas in ciuitate predcā auits al{que} gradus or di¦rus status serus vel condicōis fuerint quatinus tain ratione prerin a qua¦tuor ānis ctia decurstin {que} presentis & futuri temporum sedm dim ratani pensionem {per} quibus domus hospicia siue shoppe inhabitante seu occupae aut Inhabitata vel occupara hm̄oi {pro} tempore cōmuni et vera crumacione locari potuerint videl oblatōes p̄dcās in tribus in natiuitatis vis sancti ste∣phani sancti Iohīs et scō{rum} Innocentiū ac tondem in resurrettōis  Cristi nec non silr̄ in tribus in pente¦costes ebdomada{rum} festiuis drebus ac circūcisionis Ephīe et assentōis eiusdē dm̄ nr̄i nec non corporis rpī & quatuor btē marie virginis ac sanctorū  piet Iacobi aplō{rum} festiuitatibr predcis necnon in singulo{rum} sanctorum patro¦norum {per}ochialium ecclīa{rum} Londoneū predicta{rum} festis ac omnibus dūicis & festinis solemnibus aplō{rum} quorum i gilie ieuinantur alijs {que} fest{is}solomni∣bus et duplicibus iuxta tenem & for ma lr̄a{rum} Innocencij et archiepi pre¦dicta{rum} at in oībus et singulis alijs die bus in quibus ratam predcām ante quatuor annos predcōs offerre cōsue  {per}ochiali enlīe infra cuius  domus hospicia et shoppe sup̄dā fueruit etiam sub errō tōs pea in prefati archiepī lr̄is contenta. {que} seus facientes iuxta ip̄a{rum} lr̄a{rum} tenorem con¦tinentiā at{que} formam incurrere volui¦mus ipō fō et qua illo ligatus nō ni¦si primitus {per} cum de tunc debic{is} obla∣sionibus
ecclis cuidebite fuerīt rer in regre & cū effectusatisfacto aut desuper amicabir concordato quaus aūcte p̄∣terqm̄ ī mort{is} artico cōstitutus absol∣ui non pesst. Ita tū quod ipse sic asolu¦tus si supiure erit alioquin ilius here∣des satisfactis m mōi facere enean soluant sen offerant & rear integre et et cū effectu volentes insu{per} parir & de∣ceruentes ipsos omīs et sīngos, adso∣lucōem vel oblaciōes faciendas hmōi per ordinarios loci & cōmissarios co{rum}∣dem quibus ī causis quas sup{per} premis∣sis vse or occasiē {pro} tempore moneri {con}tigerit {per} se v aliū seu alies etiam ersu o mero officio iquir̄edi ac alias sūma∣e simpliat & deplane sine strepini & fi¦gura Iudicij sola facti veritate īspecta precedēdi & iuxta approbacioz ofirma¦ciōem decretū et mandatū nr̄a hmōi decendend condictores quo{que} {per} censu¦rā cedesisticā et alia uir remedia cōpes scendi ac dia alia & singula īpremissis et crca ea necessaria seu quomod  portuna faciendi et ecequendi plena et liberam tenore presenciū cōcedun{is} facultatem cogi et compelli posse et de bere necnon {per} loci ordinarios et causa rū palacij aplīci auditores ac quoscū∣{que} alios quis an̄cte Iudices seu cōmis∣sarios in causis etiam {per} appeslationē seu alias in q̄cū{que} instancia int qua su∣is {per}sonis et coram quibuscū{que} eciam ī Romana curia vel extra eam occasio¦ne oblationū hm̄oi indecisis pendenti : qua{rum} quidem {per}sona{rum} necnon audi¦to{rum} et uidiciū hm̄oi oīa et cognomīa c qualitates necnon causa{rum} status & sentenciaru hnic inde habita{rum} acoī supra narrato{rum} tenores presentibus haberi volumus pro expressis seu q̄s imposterū quandocū{que} moueri et pē∣dere contigerit iuxta approbatem cō∣firmatōem decretum et mandatum predcā Iudicandum et senteciandum fore ac Iudicari et sentenciari debere et quicquid secus per supracōs seu q̄s cū{que} alios scient et ignoranter quauis aūcte sententianum forsan est hacten{is} vel imposterū sentennar Iudicariseu attemptari contigerit irritum et ina ne nullius{que} fore roboris vel momenti non obstantib{is} oībus premissis et pre¦sertim supradīs ac alijs libris seu scrip¦tur isetiam antiquis et nistr̄is quan∣tumcū{que} publicis et in archinis sen a∣lijs etiam publicis locis repert{is} & que in posterū forsan reperiri contigerti ī qbus tenor dicte constitucōis Rogeri epī hm̄oi alteri{us} continentie tenoris at{que} for me reperiatur {que} in deis Tho∣me archiepī & Innocencij lr̄is contine¦tur necnon aplīcis ac in pronunciali∣bus et somadalibus consalis edit{is} ge¦neralibus vel specialibus constitucōi¦bus et ordinacōibus statutis quo{que} et consuetudinibus ecclīa{rum} et ciuitat{is} pre dcā{rum} etiā Iuramento confirmacōe a∣plīca vel quanis alia firmitate robo∣ratis necnon preuilegijs indultis Et lr̄is aplīcis generalibus vel specialib{is} quorūcū{que} tenorum existant per que presentibus nō expressa vl totalit nō inserta effect{is} earum impediri valeat quomodol't vel deferri et de quib{is} quo¦rum de tot{is} tenribus habenda sit in nr̄io lr̄is mentiospālis ceterisqr contra¦rijs quibuscūbr tenores vero lra{rum} In∣nocencij et archiepīin illis inserta{rum} et sententia{rum} predcā{rum} sequitur et sunt isti Innocenci{is} epūs seru{is} seruo{rum} dei ad futuram rei memoriā. Eaque {pro} vtili∣tate ecclia{rum} et eccliastica{rum} {per}sona{rum} fac∣ta sunt et aīa{rum} salutē respiciūt vt illiba
talibenter cū a nobis petitur aplīce {con}firmatōis p̄sidio cōmuninimus ane peticio pro {per}te dilecto{rum} filio{rum} vniuer∣so{rum} recto{rum} pochialiū ecclīa{rum} ciuitat{is} lō¦doneū nobis nu{per} exhibita continer qd olim bone memorie Rogerus Epūs londoneū ad earfidem ecclia{rum} & ip̄o{rum} {per}ochiano{rum} qui essent {pro} tempore {per}fec∣nun {pro}uid et salubriter intendēs quā dā cōstitutōem auctoritate ordinaria fe¦cit in lr̄is vener abilis r̄is nr̄i Thome archiepī Cantuariē loci Metropo∣litan̄ qua{rum} tenor de vbo ad vbū inferi{is} describitur insertam et quā quidē cō∣stitutōem nōnulli archiepī cantuarieū p̄dcī Thome archiepī p̄decessores qui fuerunt {pro} tempore et etiam idm̄ Tho¦mas archiepūs aūcte Metropolytā approbar̄t et confirmar̄t et {que} qdē con∣stitutōem licet ar{per} cuius contrarij bo∣nur memoria nō existum eadem ciui¦tate obseruata fuisset cū postea non∣nulli eam adeo{rum} sensium in preiudiciū ecclia{rum} et recto{rum} predcō{rum} interpretarē¦tur de facto candē aūcte metropolity∣ca {per} amplius cōmuniendo et declarā∣do declarando{que} ex predcīs tunc abs{que} sensu {per}uiso seu torta expositōe imnola bilē obseruarent et facernt anātum in eis essent ab alijs obseruari et alia fecit in premissis & circa ea put in deīs lr̄is eiusdē ome archiepi sigillo mu∣nitis plenius continetur. quare {pro} {per}te dcō{rum} rectorū nobis fuit humiliter sup∣plicatum vt pro subsistencia firmiori e∣arundē lr̄a{rum} robor ip̄is aplīce cōfirma tōis adijcere despāli gr̄a digna remur Nos igitur hm̄oi supplicatōibus incli¦nati lr̄as predcās et queam{que} inde se∣cuta rata habentes et graca de aucto¦ritate aplīca er certa sciencia cōfirme∣mus et present{is} scripti patrocine cō∣muniuimus supplentes oīs defectus si qui interuenerint in eisdē tenor vero dicta{rum} lr̄a{rum} sequitur et est tales. Thomas. {per}missione diuina Cantu¦arien̄ archiepp̄s tocius angepmas et aplīce sedis egatus ciuitate; & dro∣cet{is} londonen̄ r̄e cantuarien̄ proum¦cie uire nr̄o metropolico actualit vi¦sitances dilect{is} filijs maiu vicecoun∣tibus et aldirmandus ciuitatis Lon∣donieū oib alijs et singulis cuab{us} seu inhītantibus in eadem saltm̄ gr̄ain & būdixioner ops̄ dūs cuius est terta et plenitudo eius et vniuersi q habitant in ea decimas in signum vniuersalis dn̄isibi reddi precepit oblatōes nobut vt in mimstro{rum} suo{rum} personis oblatio num libamine spuāli honorari soleret et pro ide attendens recolēde memo¦rie Rogerus niger dudum epūs Lon¦donen̄ quandam constitutōer vt ī inr̄a re{per}nn{is} visitatōe de et su{per} oblarōibus in diebus dūicis et solemnibus ac fes∣tis duplicibus et presertim aplō{rum} quo¦rum vigilie emantur {per} inhabitan¦tes domos hospiciasine shoppas quo modos occupantes infra Ciuitatem predictani faciendas matura delibe∣ratione edidit videlicet quodomnes & singuli inhabitantes et occupantes. hm̄oi domos hosptela sie shoppas {per} amuun domo pro domo hospicio siue shoppa cuius pensid ad deem solid. {per} annum obolum Si ad quadr aginta solid per annum denarium et  pro rata pensionis vltra dcānt sū¦mam quadraginta solid at quantam cū{que} summam pensio hm̄oi anima se extendat offerre teneantur. prout eti∣am hactenus longis retractis tempo¦ribus et tempore prescriptibili per {per}∣ochianos eccliarum Ciuitatis predtē
offerri exsticit consuetū q̄r quidem con¦stuōem nonnulli predecessores nr̄i at chiepi ecclie Cantuarien̄ vpore lau dabilem expresse confirmarūt q̄rdar tamen {per}ehiam ecclia{rum} citatis pre∣deē {pro}priesaturis in memores sue aslu¦cie nimis imitentes  {per}uerso sensu constitucōem eandem ersanum intel∣lectum euisdem subuertere molimnir assertentes qd si pensio annua hospi∣ci domo{rum} et shoppa m̄oi quadragī∣ta solides ercedat vel oro oblatōis āt decima{rum} deo et ecclie preter vnū sohi denariū vt prefertur offerri se dare debere diebus dūicis et festiuis su{per}i{is} expressatis. Nos igitur Thomas art pūs antedeūs amuia{rum} salun etec∣desia{rum} Iuribus armde mutan diligē¦cia qua possimus eroffich nr̄id ebito {pro}¦spicere cupientes constitutōem predcām et certa nr̄ ascientia cōfirmain{us} et ap∣pre bamus {per}presentes at ad tollendū et iopiendū dubitatōis et ois alterati nis materiā int rectores et curatos ecclia{rum} ciuitatis predcē et {per}ochianos rn̄dē de et super interpretatōe sinistra constitutōis predē supradcorta ac {per}¦petua quiete corūdē volum{us} et decla∣ramus {per}presentes quod si annua pen¦sio domo{rum} hospitio{rum} et shoppa{rum} hm̄oi vltra quadraginta solid sterlingo{rum} e∣cedat et summā quinq̄ ginta solid attī gat tunc denarium et quadrantem. Si vero vltra quadragīta solidos ad seraginta solidos attingat denarium obolum. Si autem ad septuaginta solidos atringat denarium obolum & quadrantem. Etsi adoctuaginta solid attigat tunc duos denarios et sic sē{per} per decem solidos ascendendo per ra∣tam pensiōis hm̄oi inhītātes domos hospicia slue shoppas hm̄oi rectorib{us} seu curatis eccsia{rum} in qua{rum} {per}ochs d¦mus hospicia siue shoppe hm̄oi situāt offerre trucantur. Quo circa nos is et singulos iues dcē ciuitatis Londo∣nen̄ in visceribus xpīihū requirim{is} & rogamus ac primoscdo tertio et {per}em¦torie et subpena excomunicatōio ma¦ioris & inminatōis maledcōis eterne tenore presencium monem{is} quarin{is} cōstitutōem peedcām et declaratōem rir̄ar cuisdem de cetero absqr sensu peruerso seu torta expositōem inuiolabiliter ob{ser}uatis et facietis q̄r tū in vobis est sic in∣futurum ab alijs obsernari alioquin rebellis vestrum et non parentes cō∣stitutionum predicte et eius nostr de¦clarationi si quis vr̄m in presentisunt aut infuturum erunt sententie excō∣municatōis maioris ipō facto extunc prouter tunc decernimus subiacere et neignorantia constitutōis predicte et declarationis nostre eusdem ab ip∣sius obseruantia quemq̄ posūit auer tere seu quōlibet excusare precipim{is} vniuersis & singulis rettoribr vicarijs et curatis ciuitatis Londonen̄ predcē ac virtute obedientie mandamus eis¦dam vt predictam constitucionē et de¦clarationem nostram eiusdem subfor¦ma su{per}i{is} {pro}uulgata inscriptis habeāt et eam singulis annis in ecclīs suis q̄ tuor in anno palam et publice inter. missarum solemnia suis {per}ochianis {per} legifaciant de verbo ad verbum etex¦ponat ac volumus & per presentes or¦dinamus quod quilibet rector seu vi∣carius dicte ciuitatis londonen̄ habet plenam potestatem insua propria po¦chia suos {per}ochianos hm̄oi constitutio¦nis & nostre declarationis eiusdem re¦belles et contradictores citare siue alio quoalio mandato ad comparādis le∣gitime
coram nobis vs officiali nr̄ocu retantuarien̄ qui pro {per}efuerit respō¦suros & recepturos pro eo{rum} in hac par¦te demeritis qd Iuris fuerit et eciam racionis cui quidem officiali pro tem∣pore existenti cōmittim{is} vices r̄as {per} presentes cūcbet cohertōis cano¦nice potestate In qu{rum} oim testimoni¦um et perpetuam fidem sigillum nr̄m p̄utibus apposuim{us} data  manerio nr̄o de lamechigth serto die mēsis a gusti anno dīn Milesimo Tricentesi{us} nonagesimo septimo et nr̄e translati∣onis p̄mo. Nulli ergo omnino hoim̄ licet hanc dignam nr̄e confirmatiōis cōmmunionis et supplectionis infrin¦gere velei ausit temerai o contraire si quis autem hoc attemptare p̄iump serit indignationem op̄otentis dei et beato{rum} petri et pauli aplō{rum} et{us} se noue rit in cursurū date rome apud sm̄ pe¦trum decimo serto kall. Man pont catus nr̄i anno secundo. In dei noīe Amen. Auditis et plenus intellectus per nos Willm̄ freston legū doctorem venerabilis viri magistri Thomele senr decani canonice ecclīe cathedralis sanctipauli Londonen̄ officialis et cus¦todis spiritualitat{is} ep̄anis euisdemse de ep̄ali ibidm̄ vacante cōmissarium generalem meritis et circumstancijs negocij detectōis & quisicionis qd oc¦casione subtractionis oblationum in festis solemnibus et festiuis scō{rum} Ste¦phani Iohīs et Innocentum post fes∣tum natalis dm̄ festis circumcisionis etephīe dm̄ tribus diebus solemnibr et festis in ebdomada pasche tribr di ebus solemnibus et festiuis in septīa∣na penthecostes in festo Corporis rpī assentionis dm̄ aplō{rum} philippi et Iaco¦bi ac in quin{que} festis beate Marie vir¦ginis et festo translationis sī patroni ecclie per inhabitantes cuutatem Lōdonen̄ fieri consitetis per qudam Ro¦bertum wright {per}ochianu {per}ocinal ecclīescī Edmundi in lumbardiret ∣uitatis predicte sub acta{rum} coram no∣bis ex officio nr̄o anr̄im verteb Ipius {que} per nos matura debucano ne diligenter recensitis {que} per acta ac titata lr̄as {que} aplicas et alia exhibita probata et concessata in negocio pre∣dicto com{per}imus euidenter dem̄ ti∣tum wright ad offerendum  tam pensionis domus sue quam iha¦bitat singulis diebus dominicis i f tuus et diebus prefatis efficaciter te∣neri ipm̄{que}sine causa oblationes  in dictis diebus & festis miuste ac teme resubtrarisse parco nos willm̄s ires∣ton cōmissarius antedictus rpi no muocato et ipm̄ solum deū  preponentes de consilio niris prito{rum} quib communicaumus in hac par∣te prefatū Robertum wryght ad offe¦rendum dictis diebus etfestis secun∣dum ratam pensiōis sue domus quā inhabitat reueri et olgaum fuisse et esse pronunciamus decernmius  de¦clarami et ipm̄ moblationibus per eum in hac parte subtractio  sicionum per nos in hac parte capicu¦dum estunandis et declarandis de dc¦te Ecclesie {per}ochian et rectou euisdem soluendis condeinaus & ipsum ro¦bertum ad offerendum in futuru: di∣ebus et festis perdictis  pensionis domus sue canonice cogen¦dum et compellendum fore decerm¦mus et precipimus per ha nr̄asen tentiam diffinicinam quam  et proulgamus in his scriptis. Cris¦ti nomine inuocato pro tribunali sedē
te ersolum deum pre oculis habentes de dnō{rum} nr̄o{rum} coandito{rum} cōsio & assen¦su per hat nr̄am diffinicinam sentē∣ciam quam ferrim{us} in his scriptis {pro}∣nimciamus discermus et declara∣mus per veuerabilem virum dn̄m wil¦helmū freston tōmissaruim in hm̄oi causa que tune coram eo vereebatur. inter eundem willm̄ inqiurentem ex vna et quēdam Robertum wright {per}∣ochianū {per}ochialis ecclīe sancti Edmū¦dum lumbard sret emitans London inquisitum de et super subtractōe ob∣lationum per eundem Robertū wry¦ght in diebus in quibus in articulis ipius inquisicionis habetur per inha¦bitantes ciuitatem Londo secundum ratam pensious domo{rum} quas inha∣bitabant et inhabitant in dicta {per}oci∣a ecclīa sancti Edmondi Londonen̄▪ offerri solita{rum} et per eundem Rober¦tum subtract{rum} et rebus alijs in act{is} cause deductis et ea{rum} occasione parti∣bus et altera bene fuisse et esse proces∣sum sententiatum et definitum ipi{is} {que} dn̄l Villi freston cōmissarij diffiniti nā sententiam confirmandam fore et confirmamus nernon pro parte dicti Roberti aduersarij ab eodem dn̄o Wil¦helmo cōmissario ius{que} diffinitiua sē¦tentia hm̄oi male fuisse et esse prouo∣catum et appellatū ipm̄ {que} Robertum aduersarium in oblationibus per eū in dictis diebus a tempore late dicte sē¦tentie circa sub tractis condemnandū sore et condemnamus saluo quod in eo vbide quin{que} festis virginis mari ementionem fecit eū in articulo de q̄∣tuor expressum sic vt confirmetur sen∣tentia peticioni emendamus de qua∣tuor dirise debuisse et pronunciamus quo ad hoc male pronuntiatū et ben appellatū et ides erpensa{rum} condemp¦nationū ex his & alijs causis hinc inde obmimus rpī noīe Inuocao {pro} tri∣bunali sedentes et solum dempte ocu∣lis habentes de dn̄o{rum} coandito{rum} r̄ouī consilio et assensuper hanc nr̄am diffi¦nitiuā sententiam qua ferimus in hijs scriptis pronunciamus decerni∣mus et declaramus per reuerendurī xpō patrem dn̄m wilhelmum defonde∣ra tunc vero electum nūc epm̄ oloren̄. coanditorem nr̄m in hm̄oi causa que tunc coram eo in secunda vertebatur et nunc coram nobis itercia vertitur instancijs inter prefatūdūm Wilhel∣mur tunc cōmissarium et se ocialem inquirentem et nunc processum suum in causam hm̄oi defendentem ex vna et predictum Robertum wright aduer∣sarium de et super subtractione obla∣nonū per eundem Robertū in diebus de quibus tam in articulis ī hm̄oi cau¦sa in prima instantia datis {que} in {pro}ces∣su et sententia prefati dm̄ hm̄oi Epī¦mentio habetur tam perip̄m Rober∣tum quā per alios inhabitantes Ciui¦tatem Londonen̄ scd̄m ratam pensio¦nis dous seu domorū quas inhabi∣tabant et inhabitant in dc̄ ecclīa sctī Edmondi Londonen̄ offerri solitarur et rebus altis inactis cause hm̄oi de∣ductis etea{rum} occasione parte ex altera bene fuisse et esse processiun̄ et senten∣tiatum et definitū ipius {que} dn̄i Wilhel¦mi defundera codito isni diffini∣ti uā sentenciā edc̄t confirmādū fo∣re et confirmam{us} necnon {pro} {per}e dcī ro∣berti aduersarij ab eodem reuerēdo patre d̄o guillelmo coauditori nr̄o e∣iusdem diffinitiua sentētia hm̄oi ma∣le fuisse et esse prouocati et appella¦tiuū ip̄m{que} Robertum aduersarium
īoblatōib{us} in dcīs dieb{us} a t{per}e aedcē sententias titra subtractis at inexpē∣sis in hm̄oi causa coram nobis legiti∣me factis condempnandum fore & cō∣demnamus qua{rum} expensa{rum} taratiōe nobis imposterū reseruam{us} nulli er∣go omnino hm̄oi ce at hanc pagina ur̄e approba confriatōis cōmunica∣tōis mandati voluntatis et concessio¦nis infringere vel ei ausu temerario. contrarie Siquis autem hoc attemp¦tare presumpserit īdignatōe oipotē∣tis dei ei beato{rum} petri et pauli aplōrū eorum se nouerit in cursurur date Ro¦me apud scm̄ petrum Anno incarna∣tiois dn̄ice lesimo CCCC. qum∣quagesimo tercio. Septimo Id{us} Au∣gusti. pontificatus nr̄i Anno septuno ¶The copy of the bue of pope Nicho¦las for the same mater afore wyto. OVr holy fader pope Nicholas for perpetuall memory wyl∣lyth to sequester & auoyd alle doughtis by the whiche stryfes discor¦dys and greate lossys that is feryd to haphen to curatys and theyr {per}ishēs lest yt if it be not remedyid greter hurt myght happen bothe to the curates & {per}ishens as well in thingis temporel as spirituall. So it is that nowe of la¦te after that the right honorable tho¦mas archbishop of caunterbury had shewed that he had founde as he Ro∣de in his visitation that one Roger bi¦shop of london had made a constitu∣tion vpon offringis on hooly dayes & solemp and doble festis and namly t the apples whoos vigilis been fastyd by the Inhabitantis of houses hostri¦es shoppis how so euer they bee occu∣pyed wythin the Cite of London that is to saye that all thinbytan and euery off they in and occupyenge the sayd houses hostres or shoppys and paye for the yerly rente of theym  s shall offer a q. And yf his rente berr s ob. and so vpward as it hath been v∣sed to be payd by the sayd {per}isshens ty¦me out of mynde of man And that ye same constitucion was good and law∣full it apperyth by that. that dyuers of the predecessours of archbishops of Caūtebury by their lr̄s patent hath it confermed and approuid and whā som euyl disposed of the {per}isshens wol¦de labour and study to constrwe this constitucion to other sensis thanne it was made fore. They made explana∣cions of the same and ordeyned that the Mayre and thaldumen of the sai¦de Cite and all the Inhabitantis that wolde be rebell therunto shulde stond acursyd by the same dede and many other things than expressed ordened our holy fader. And predecessour I∣nocencius vij. rateeng and confer∣myng the lr̄es of the sayde Thomas Archbishop addyng and amendyng defautis yf any were as more plaȳ apperyth by the lettres off the sayde Innocent wherin been conteyned  lettres of the sayde Thomas. And af¦ter as it hath ben shewid vs of diuers Credyble persones that thought the Mayr Sherefs Aldrmen the Cite∣zens and the Inhabitantes aforsayd or the more parte of theym afyr the
olde and laudable Custume in theire offryngs on sondayes and other so∣lemyne and double festys of the ap∣postles namly whoos eyns been fa¦styd yet wythin foure yeres or there aboute Dyuers hauynge lytell rega¦rde to the wele of theyr Soules and vnkynde to theyr modyr of the holy chirche couetynge lytell. and lytell to mynyshe and take away the sayd of∣fryngis The whiche yf they were dei¦re they shulde encrese and freely gyue refuse to offyr but onely on sondayes and on the solempne festys of the Ap∣postles whoos euyn been fastyd. ¶ And as for other solempne dayes whiche bee many they sayde that yt was not expressyd in the Lettres off Roger Bishop nor in the sayde con∣stytucion that they ought to offyr on theym neyther in the lettres of Inno¦cent nor Thomas Bisshop ther was noo parfyght sense wherfore they th∣ought they were but voyde. And also where wee vnnyrstonde. that iij sentensys haue been gyuen ageynste one Robert wright that is to saye one in thoos partyes and in the Court of Rome for as myche as he refused to offer accordyng to the rate aforosayde As on sondayes festis of thappstles whoos vigils been fastyd. But as for theis thre Natiuitees. of Saint Ste∣phen saint Iohan and the Innocen∣tis he vterly refused and as many da∣yes in Ester and as many dayes In wytsontyd and the Circumcision E∣pyphanye and Ascencion of our Lord and Corpus christi and foure vigyles of our lady. Philyp and Iacob. and ye translacion of sanit Edmondi. ¶And for as myche as it were peyn∣full to all Curatis yf they shulde sue. For euery partyculer cause yf theyr parisshens wolde bee froward. And for as myche as we vndirstonde that oure welbelouyd Herry kyng of En∣gland wolde that alle stryfs and dew¦te touching the sayde offringis shuld be auoyded. wee wyll. And by oure poure appostolyck Conferme the let∣tres off the sayde Innocent predeces∣sour and Thomas Archbishop contey¦nyng the constitucion of the sayde Ro¦bert to be obserued and kept for euer And ouer that by theis presentys wee wyll and ordeyne that alle inha¦bitantis houses hoostryes shoppys foure yerys paste and that aftyr this shall inhabyte paye theyr offryngis accordyng to the rate afore sayde in ye thre Natiuitees. of Saynt Stephen Saynt Iohan and the Innocentys And as many dayes in Ester and wit¦sontyde Circumcision Epyphanye & ascencion of oure lorde Corpus Chry∣sty. Foure of our lady and Philip and Iacob. And euery dedycacion daye & euery sondaye and the festis of the ap¦postles whoos vigils ben fastyd and other double and solemne festis. ¶And more playnly apperith in the lettres of Innocent and Thmas arch¦bisshop aforesayde. And in alle dayes they haue vsed to offyr. foure yeres paste too the parisshe Chirche. Wyth in the bondys wherof the sayde hou∣ses hostryes or shoppes been sette v∣pon ye peyne of excōunicatiō cōteyned
in the letters of the sayd archbishop & of the whiche he shall not be assoyled but yf he satifye the sayd offryngis or ellis frendly agree wythe hys Curat but of it be ī the point of dethe So that yf it happen hem to lyue or hys heir & make dew satisfaccion And also we ge¦ue power to the ordenarijs of the sayd Chirches where Such offryngis be not payd that they may witheout cy∣tacion sumnarili enquere of the sayd offryngis▪ and if they fynd that be vn¦paid to a cursse the offendars & theym to punysshe according to this ordinaun¦ce any maner bulle grauntid writing generall or specy all now knowen or heraftir to be knowen not withestan¦ding. ¶ The letters of Innocent Bisshop{is}. There fore for the parte the Curatis of the cite of Londō a petision was made to vs that a constituciō the which was made by one Roger Bisshop of London for the wele bothe of the peris¦shens and the Curattys the whyche was vsed tyme out of mynde yet Sū∣mer sed to constrew the sayd constitu∣cion other wise than it ought to be af∣tir theyr froward mynde and the w∣hiche constitucion the sayd. Thom̄s archbisshop of Cantirbury & in any hys predecessors hath appro∣uid and confermed that the same con¦stitucion by vs shuld be confermed. I. Inclyned by theyr peticion conferme alle the said Constitucion by thano∣te appostolik and fulfille ad▪ fantys yf any  the ten of the said lets folo¦withe. Thom̄s archbisshop of Cantyrbury primat of England to the mair She∣refs oldirmen. and Cytezens of londō greting{is}. ¶Almyghti god to whom belongith herhe and all that is theryn cōmaū∣dithe that tenthis shulde be gyuen hē and wolde be honowred spn̄alli withe offryngis. and therfore the Reuend fa¦dir Roger nger late Bishop of Lon∣don made a constitucion as we fynde in our visitacion vpon ofrynge on sō∣dayes and Solempne and doubly fes∣tis and nambly of ye appostils whoes vigils ben fastid by the inhabytantis of houses hostues and Shoppis with in the Cyte of London. That is to sey that alle & euery Inhabitātis houses hostries or Shoppes for an house hos¦trie or shoppes. Whoos pension is. x l by yere. a ferthing and So forthe  it assende to .xl. s̄. i.d. Summe yet ha∣ueng litell regard to their Soules cō∣strued that yf the sayd pension neuer so mȳche excedid. xl.l that he shul pay but one peny We therfore wyllyng that alle▪ alteracion as touching that shuld be remoued Wille by thautorite of theys letters. that if the sayd pensiō excede .xl. s̄. by .x.l. that he shal pay. i d q̄ and for euery .x.l. astendinge. q̄ and for as mȳche as we will not herafter any froward exposicion of this confir∣maciō to be had, we will that all thoo that her aftir will not obey and folow this out exposiciō stōde a cursed bi e gret sentēce by ye same dede. & for as miche
as noo mā shal excuse himself bicause of Ignoraunce we will and ordeigne that all curatt{is} wtin the sayd  unty¦mes in the yere in the masse tyme pu∣blish and epowne and more ouer we ordeigne and gyue power to all perso∣nes and vicars of the said cite to sight all the offenders of the said constituciō to appere afore vs or our officiall the∣re to obbey the lawe as reson will to ye whiche officyall by this presentis we giue our power. ī witnesse wherof & c{is} No mā therfore offende this or dinaū∣ce for if he doo he shall ronne in the In¦dignaciō of god and his holi appostils pe and powle yeuen at rome at seīt perits the .xvi. kalendas of may Mastir willin̄ freste it officall to the de¦ane of powles aftir that he had bigret deliberacion examyned acanse of wit∣holding of tenthis. By me robert wright of the {per}ishe of saint Ed. mend In lumberstret in the Solemp¦ne and denble fest{is} and the fest{is} of seīt Sheen Iohn̄ and Innocentys aftir rysties. Circutision Ephye of our lord. iij holy daies in estir weke iij holi daies in witsonwike Curpus rp̄i ascē¦cion of our lord phelip and Iacob and v festis of our lady and eueri dedicaciō day. by his sentence cōtempned the sa¦me Robert wryte the whiche appeled to rome where the same sentēce in all thīg was affermed bi one willm̄ of fūdera Bishop of Olerū and cōmyssary to the pope saue that he shuld haue seid in iiij festis of our lady and not in fyue and therin the sentence was reuersed and for that cause the said robert was not condempned in the expensis And aftir the same robert appelid to the po¦pe him self the whiche affermyd In e∣uery thing the sentence of the sayd wil∣lm̄ de fundera and cōdempned the de¦fendaunt In expencis ī the last appele ¶The composicion of alle offryng{is} wt∣in the cyte of london and Subirbis of the same FVrst that eueri persone duel¦ler and Inhabitāt in ani hou¦ses in london or Subarbis of the same hired & ocupied as for a duel∣ling place for the full rent and pensyō of .x l yerly. shal offir to god and to the chirche in whoes perish such place stā∣dith. oon ferthing euery day in the fes¦tis that folowyn̄. that is to sey in eueri sonday in the yere cristm̄s day Circū∣cision Ephye purificacion of our lady Mathi appostle anūnciaciō of our la∣dy the assencion of our lord Corp{is} chris¦ti seint Mathew appostle Symond and Iude alhalowen Andrew appost¦le concepciō of our lady Thom̄s aple Iohn̄ Baptist Pet & Powle Iames aple bartilmew aple assūpciō & natū¦te of our ladi dediciō day which frō the dai forward shalbe the ronght all Lon¦don
and for the {per}ish chirches in londō that be halowid the iij. day of octobre also on dai of ye prīcipall fest{is} of ye patiō of eueri chirche thorought londō and subarbis of the same yerely withoute cōtradiriō & yf such īhabited houses be letē for .xx. s̄ ob & of for .xxx. s̄ ob q̄ & yf for .xl. s̄ id and if for ll i d q̄ and so eueri assending & disendīg by xl into what Som̄ yt euery it be shall alwey offer q̄ aftir ye rate of .x s̄ in ye fest{is} abouesaid & ifsuche duelling ocupied & inhabited houseis be not letē but {per}auēt the ow∣ner yt duelle therin or frely lent or other wise ocupied as for a duellyng{is} yt than ye offryng{is} shalbe as it was lete befo∣re or ellis afar a comē value. & indow¦te therof ye rēt to beertemyd bi yt chirch wardeins for ye tyme beyng. and yf a man duelle and inhabite dyuers pla∣ces and housis within ye said cite in oo∣ne or diuers perishes he thā shal aftir ye rate & daies aforsaid offir euery hou¦se to ye Chirch in whoes {per}ish they ston¦de. {pro}uided alwey yt when ij of ye festis a forsayd falle vpon oone day thā the offryng shalbe for one day. Itm̄ whe∣re any duellar in ye said cite inhabitith or ocupieth for a duellīg place an how¦se vnd yt prys rent or pensiō of vi l viij d. yt than he shalbe bounde to offer iiij days ī ye yere ī ye .iiij prīcipall festis of ye chirch there as he is {per}ishen off & if such pensiō or rent extende to the full Som̄ of .vi l viij d or aboue and not fully to the Som̄ of x. s̄ that than thē habitant for eueri shelȳg{is} shall pay to ye chirche id ob onys in ye yere. Prouided alwey that if the said dweller cum bifore his curat & sei vpon his feithe and trouth that he may not pay his sayd money according{is} to the ordinaunce aforsaid be nether xl that then the said curat shall hold hem content with such as he will geue hem awght or naught and the dwell at therupon shalbe quyte Also & the pension of rent of any Such inha∣bitant houses extende aboue ye Som̄ of x.l. and not fully to the some of .xxx. s̄. and so to any som̄ beyng betwene x. and .x. than the Inhabitāt, shall pay ones a yere to the Curat for eueri she lyng{is} of the said Som̄ beyng bytwe∣ne .x. and .x. id ob yerly. Itm̄ where as a duellīg{is} hous is hired of gret and af∣tir leten out by perties to sondry folk{is} that than the hirer in gret yf that he duelle in the principall parte of the sa∣me house shall offir to god and to the chirche ī the daies aforsaid for the rēt of all the hole rent yf the sayd house be In habited and ocupyed as duellyng placis and ellis after the rule that fold withe and if the said hirer in gret duel¦le not ī any parte therof but lete it out ageyn. that than he that duellith in ye principall parte shal offir alle and the remenāt .iiij. d by yere Itm̄ all thoo in the said cite or subbarbis that ocupye houses not inhabited as shoppis Ce∣lars shaddys warehouses stables w∣harfes kraues tymbre hawes teynt placys for fullers or other plans gar∣deyns shal ones in the yere for euery pound that they be en fore if thei be hired or aftir acomen value yf thei be not hired gyue vnto the Curat of the chirche there as such houses ben. vid. wtout any other offryng{is} for the sayd houses assending{is} and dissending{is} aft the rate of vid of the pounde and for x l .iij.d & so after the race assendīg & des¦sēdīg{is} wtout more charge of offrīg{is} for it Itm̄ yt all apprētie{is} lnūt{is} and hired
men within the sayd cyte not carged withe Such rent & housinges whiche shabe houslde at estir or a bought es¦tir shall ii tymes ī ye yere at iii.  ofir to god & to the churche. Also as for {per}sonall tukes y• perisshis by this ordinaūce shal neither be char¦ged no discharged Sauīg yt her after shal noo curat ver Trouble or dy∣ne sacramentis or ince for noo py¦mēt of ye same. butene them to good deuos̄ & conscience of ye {per}ishens. Itm̄ all offring vndone before this day or any other attemptid cōtrarie besyde or aycust this present writing by any  or persenes shal stonde quite &  as vnto any sute  all such thing byfore this day don  al cleue be remeett & forge∣uen on bothe peres. Be ye in mynde that thys bōde & arbitrement ys made ye xvij day of decembre ye yere of the incarnaciō of our lorde. M.iiij.C.lvij. by mastir laurence bothe Mastir wil¦lm̄ radclyff mastir lucas lancok mast Iohn̄ aleyn mastir Iohn̄ lyleford Gef¦frey ffolding willm̄ taylour mastir ro∣bert kēt Arbitratour Chosen vpon ye p̄misses as in ye tenor of ye compremise therupon made openly made it may appere. ¶The ordinaūce for brokers ocupiēg in london. urst of alle maner clothes sold bi the roker shal haue for brokerage of eue∣ clothe xx.l.iij.d Itm̄ of carde bokrm̄ fustian clothes of gold & of Silke veluet damask Sateȳ taffata tarterus couerchis and for all maner of Suche mercery Sold be the broker the same brokar shal haue for the valur of euery xx. s̄ iij.d Itm̄ of al man̄ inellis precyous stones and perles sold bi ye broker he shal ha∣ue of euery. .xxl.vi.d. Atm̄ of syn molē clothes of londō ma∣kyng that ys to wee Scarlet{is} clothes ingreyned and fyn whit{is} of .xviij.xx or xxij. marke the clothe the broker shal haue for Sale of euery such clothe for brokerage iij.l iiij.d Itm̄ for lasse clothes called mydel clo∣thes of makyng of london for euery such clothe ye braka shal haue for bro∣kerag by him Sold xij.d. and of de∣nesyis and alyens xx d Itm̄ for the clothes of makyng of lud∣low and northātō and for clothes cal∣led fyn brodes of the makyng of Essex of euery such cloth sold bi the broker he shal haue vi.d And of denesyus & a yere he shal xij.d Itm̄ for strait{is} of the makyng of essex tawnton and brygwater of euery dos¦sen Sold bi the broker he shal haue for brok{is} i. d Itm̄ for alle maner clothes called bro¦des of the makyng of the west cōtrey as wel for colos as whit{is} and bastar¦dis Sold by the broker he shal haue for brokrag iiij.d. Itm̄ for euery cloth of gilford Sold by the broker ij.d ¶And of all other marchaundic{is} the brokar shal haue as folowithe
Peper the bale. xij d Gynger the bale xij d Safron the ll weight q Cloues for the ll. weight q Massys for the ll weight q Galyngale the ll weight q Grenes the ll weight q Nutmug{is} the ll weight q Synamon the ll weight q Canell the bale in grosse xij d Suger in case the case xijd Suger for the bale iiij.d. Verdgrese for the sat vi.d. Reysyus the barel xij.d. Pinnes the barell vi.d. Pynnes the barell vi.d Datis the barell iiij d Oynet the bale iiij.d Woode in tonne the tonne ij.l Woode in bales the bale iiij.d. Wood asshes for the last xii.d Oyle for the tonne xx.d Canuas of normandy of bretayngne the C iiijd. Salt smolt for the brel iij.d. Coper red coper grey of the. v.d Valur of euery .xx.l. in mony ij. Wine of gascon & of rochell ye tōne. xij d Swete wyne the butte xijd. Tynne for the pece ij.d Batery for the bale xij.d Pych for the last iiij.d Arsuk the barell vi.d. Cotton for the bale xij.d. Cotton in thred for the bale xij.d Bugg{is} for ye ll in valour iij.d. Grene ginger the barell xij.d Pa{per} seribabil the bale vi d Pa{per} Spendable the reme q̄. brasill the bale ij.l. Greyne for dyars the pipe ij.l aw silke and colours. xxvi For the pound in weight iij.d Mader for the bale iij.d Alom for the bale iij.d Sope for the case iij.d. Sope for the barell ij.d Poleyn ex for the pece iiij.d War in balis for the bale .viij.d Comyn for the bale. iiij.d Auneys for the bale iiij.d Almandis for the bale iiij.d Rise for the bale iiij.d Tarre for the last iiij.d. Heryng red & whit ye laste viij.d Elys salted for the barell in grosse. iiij.d. Sturgeon for the barell vi.d Iren for the .M.ll iij.d. Sele for the barell xi.d. Osmond for the laste vid Iede for the fonther vid Salt for the wey vid. Rydes of Irland of Spayne and of yorke ij.d Cordwayne the dossen ij.d Bayseyn for the dossen ij.d Flar for the pipe vi.d. Flar for the bale i.d Wulle for the sarplar xij.d. Shepfell for the .C. iiij d. Tambefelle for the .C. i.d Passe large for the .C. ij.d Explicit brokers ¶ The nombre and the names of the perishe chirches and of alle odur chir∣ches within london and the suberbis The cathedral chirch of paulus Seint martins grallure ryst chirche The charirhous Elsyng spitel
Seynt barthū priory seynt barthū spitel seynt thom̄s of acres seint Antonis seynt Iohēs in smythfeld. Clerkenwelle nonry Halywelle nonry seynt Helens nonry seynt mary spitel seint mary at beethelem The meiuires nonry. seynt anne at the tourhil seynt katerins The cronched fryers The friers augustines The fryours mynors The fryours pchars The whit fryers seint peter at westm̄ abbey. barmondsay abbey. seint mary ouerey priory. seint Thom̄s spitel seint giles in the felde seint Iames in the felde seint mary rouncyuale seint mary magdalen yeldhal seint ursula chapel in the pultry seint Iames in the temple seint Iames in the walle seint stephenys at westm̄. seint Thom̄s chapel of the breg. Som̄ of al theis chirches that is to say. Mynstirs abbeis collag{is} chapele and the other placis of relygion. amount. ¶The names and nombre of the perishe chirches in London Seint mary at the bowe Mary aldirmary Mary Colchirch. Mary stanyng Mary wolnore Mary apchirch. Mary wulchirch Mary bothawe Mary somercet Mary at the hil Mary at naxe. Mary mounthant. Mary whitchapel Mary stronde Alhalwys in bredstret. Alhalwys in greschirstret Alhalwis in the walle Alhalwis the more. Alhalwis the lesse Alhalwys berkyng Alhalwys honylane Alhalwys stanyng. Seint peter in the tour Seint peter in cornehille Seint peter in west chep Seint peter the power Seint peter at poules warf Seint botholf at aldrichgat Seint botholf at bisshopgat seint botholf at algat seint botholf at billyng{is} gat Seint michael in cornhil seint michael in crokedlane seint michael in bassing{is} hawe seint michael at quenehith Seint michael at the quern
seint michael in wodstret. seint michael pater noster Seint martyns ocirwich Seint martyns in the vintre seint martyns in yruemougarlane seint martyns at hidgat Seint martyns in candilwikstret. seint martyns at charyncros Seint Olof in siluerstret seint olof in the iury seint olof at crouchid frier Seint olof in southwarke Seint margaret in lothbury seint margaret patens. Seint margaret in brygstret seint margaret moyses Seint margaret southwarke seint margaret at westm̄ Seint stephan in walbrok seint stephan in colmanstret. Seint mary magdalē in mylkstret seint mary magdalen in oldfishestret seint mary magdalen at barmsay Seint mary magdalē in southwark{is} Seint benett{is} at grasschirch. Seint benett{is} at poules wharf seint benett{is} fynke Seint benett{is} shorehog{is} Seint laurence pounteney Seint laurence in the iury Seint nicholas coldabbey Sient Nicholas acon Seint nickolas olof. Seint nicholas fleshamels Seint Mildredis in bredstret seint mildredis in the pultry Seint dunstons in theest seint dunston in the west Seint Andrew in cornhil Seint andrew hubbard seint andrew in baynardcastel seint andrew in holborne Seint Iohēs in seint Iohn̄ zacary Seint iohn̄ in fridaystret. Seint Clement in humbardstret seynt clement{is} at tēpilbar. Seint George at estshep seint george in southwark Seint augustyn in wartyngstret. seynt augustyn pappay. Seint katerne colman. seint kateryne crystchirch Seint Leonard i estchep seint lenard in fasterlane seint leonard in shordich Seint Edmond in lumbardstret seint edmōd or sepultur wtout newgat Seint bartilmew the litel. Sient Iames garlykiyth Seint Thom̄s apposhl seint Ethelborugh Sient Alphay at crepilgat. seint Giles at crepilgat seint helen be the nunry. seint faster seint Albon. seint Ewen seint swithyne seint magnus seint denis by greschirch seynt chrystoferre seint fithes seynt Gregory sient feithes seint pancrace seynt bryde seynt mathew seynt agnes seynt Antolyns The trinite chirch. seynt gabriel in fanchirch stret Som̄ of ye nom̄bre of {per}ish chirches. amount .C.xviij.
¶The ordynaūce for ullē cloth in  london The tyme of wyllm̄ Edward mayr ye xij. yeyre of the reigne of king edward the iiij For to eschewe the vntrouth fal¦shed and desept in late daies begonne and now daily vsed. in the fullyng teȳ¦teryng or settyng and sheryng of wul¦len o'oth with in the reame of englād and beyng and sellyng of the same clo¦thes as wel with in the cite of london as ellis wher with in the sayd reame. Of y• whith clothes many ofte tymes ben shorne and not fully wet before. Som of them also after thei ben fully wet and shorme. ben than teyntered sett and drawen out in lengenth & bre¦de the which after ward whā they res¦sayne any wet. of very necessite must shrynke. in to the gret hurte & disceyt aswel of ye kȳg{is} trew lege pepull as of alle other straungers whith in other landis and contreis vse to bey of ye sa∣me to the gret rebuke & dyshonor of this reame of england. wherupon of veri lyklyhod but yf rathar a remedi behad and purueid shal necessary en∣sue the distrucyon of the drapery of ye sayd lande. ¶ Therfore in the comon councel holden. the xxi day of ully last passid it is establisshed ordened & enac¦ted. that noo wullen cloth from thens∣forth beshorne excepte cancellyng but yf it be fully wet opon peine of forfetur of the said cloth in whoes handis straū¦ger or other so euery it shalbe founde. The sherar therof shal lese his sherei and pay xx.l for euery pece cloth. to ye vse of ye comonaltee as ofte as he shal shere any cloth or clothes not before fully wet. ¶Also yt no mā put or doo to be put ani wullē cloye after it beshorne v¦pō ye tētor to be sett or drawen out in len¦geth and brede vpō peyne of forfectur of the same cloth or clothes and he that shal soo sett it shal pay for hys gret fal∣shed for eueri cloye xl. s̄ to ye vse aforsayd ¶ Also that noo freman foreyn nor od put any clothes to sale within the cite of london which ben shorne without thei bi before fully wet & shorne ī no wi¦se to be put vpō ye teȳt or sett vpō payne of forfectur of ye same clothes & ye ownar ye rof to be punyshed bi ye discression of the mayr and aldirmen. acordyng to an acte made in the tyme of adam bu¦ry the .xxxix. yere of kyng Edward the .iij. entred in the booke of G the leef C xxxv ¶ Also that noo man shal retaile any wullen cloth or clothes lynyng nor od but it be ully wet vpon peyne of forfec¦tur therof or the valur of the same to ronne vpon the sellar. ¶ Also for to esschyewe the gret vn∣trouth and falshed for fullyng tēterȳg and sheryng of wullē clothes in plac{is} without The fraunches of this cite w∣her by the autorite of the same cyte is noo coreccion and to then tēt that this cite myght be the bett in habyted. It is establyshid ordeyned and enacted yt noo mā dwelling within the sayd cite free neforeyn put or cause to be put a∣ny wullen clothe to any {per}sones dwel∣lyng out of the fraunches of the same to be teyntred or shorne. and yf thei be put to fullyng that they be put to free men of this cite vpon peyne of .xl.l. of euery clothe soo put out ¶Wherfore the mair & thaldirmen of this cite stratli charge and comaunde that noo maner persone in habited wt in this cite of london put or cause to be
put ani cloth or clothes wt in this cite or wt out to be shorne tentred or fulled or put too sale any cloth or clothes other wise than as aboue ordeyned vō pei∣ne afore rehessed. And he yt sh espye ani cloth or clothes put to be shorne teȳ¦tred fullid or to be solde other wise. thā is a boue sayd. and that dewly {pro}ued he shal haue for euery cloth so be him aspied. vi.l.viij.d ¶ The Articles desired by the comēs of the Cyte for reformacion of thing{is} p̄iudiciall to the same off the mayer al¦dirmen and comen councell to be enac¦ted. Plese it my lord the mair and. Aldirmen and comen coūcell in consideracion that the cite is brought to gret ruyne and decaie bi reason that So gret nombre of fermē dwelle and abyde out of the liberties and fraūcheis of the cite that bere lot∣te nother slotte contribuciōs officis nor other charges withe fremen Reseant wtin the cite as bi solempne othe eueri freman is bounde to doo wheryn if re¦medy be not prouided the citee is lyke to be brought into desolaion & vttirly fordoon. To enacte that all fremen of this cite now beyng free or hereafter to be free fromhēseforthe abyde dwel¦le and kepe their prīcipall resedent en∣habitacion and howsold wtin this Ci∣tee. or fraunches therof berīg euerych aftir his abilite all maner charges as other fremē reseant do bere vpō pay∣ne to be dissaunchised. outake and ex∣cepte all maner lord{is} knyght{is} squeres men of lawe Aso that all maner perso¦nes pretending out of the cite and fraū¦chise therof Shall resorte vnto the chā¦breleyn of london wtin iij. monyths af¦tir publicacion of thys acte and fynde sufficient sewerte of a C.li. that they & euery of them Shall resorte vnto the citee wtin .xij. monythis next folowīg the sayd proclamacion and there kepe theyr contenuall and principall dwel¦lyng and enhabitaciō withe wyf and how sold or ell{is} vtterly to be diffraun¦chised ¶Prouided that this acte extende not to any fremen Such as for a season y• is to sey for recreaciō or fere of seknese absent them self out of the Citee Soo that all suche fremē resort with theyr howsold to the cite ageyn wtin ayere af¦tir theyr departur ¶Prouided also that all maner free∣men ocupied a bowie the faite of marchanddise in ferre contreis. after their byynes don may resorte vnto the cy∣te and enioye the liberte therof alle co∣lours offrandes excuyng their absen¦ce to stonde in noon effecte. ¶Also whan so eny person now fre or her aft to be free bi redempcion ha¦ue forfeited or shal happen to forfaite his recognisaunce by reson of noon re¦sedence wtin the cytee than that perso∣ne that aftir the furst dai of may tt comyng presentith the said cause of for¦feitour to the chamberleyn of london for the tyme beyng vpō dew prouf by the presenter made Shal haue and en¦ioye the fourthparte of the said forfac∣tur for his labor the chamberleyn too bere the charge af the Sute /
¶ Also it is thought by the comens of ye ote that' M: recorder hath not yeuē his dew attenaūce vpō the mayers nor hath not ben p̄sēt at all tymes re∣quisite when maners touching the co¦men wele haue happenned to be trea¦ted. More ouer the said comens thīke that it is not conuenyent that. M. re¦corder Shold be feed or retayned of Councell wt any other {per}sones sauf on∣ly wt the cite. consideryng that hys fee is competent for a substanciall lerned man. ¶ Also that the comen sergeant comē clarke nor vnder sheref shuld be feed wt Any other persones saff only wt ye cytee duryng the tyme they be retay∣ned in office. ¶Also it is thought that the vndirshe refs attende not duely to the kepyng{is} of their courtes sitting in their plces to be Ing somtyme such a persone as hathe be retained wt oon of thi {per}tyes contrarye to all good ordur please it therfore my lord the mayr aldyrmē & comō counsaile to enacte that the sayd vndirsherefs ocupye from hensforth theyr romes in their owene persones & kepe their howres of old custumed al soo be reseant wtin the cite. to thentent they may be redy at all conuenyēt ty¦mes to geue their counseile in all thīg touchīge ye comō wele accordȳg as to ye dutye of their office it apperteyneth ¶Also for the reformacion of the mis∣chief growyng to the citee by goynge to feries. Please it my lord mayr Aldir¦mē and comē coūcell to prouide yt ye old moued and begonne before. M. pur∣chace late mayr and other his predeces¦sours may be put in effecte that Such {per}sones which were difficultie ageȳst the sayd ordre be callid afore my lorde mayr and aldirmen to be reformed bi their wise exortacōns vnd Such four∣me as such obstynate persones be not noted aboue all other as brekers and distroiers of the comon wele and if the said persones wyl not be conformable in this pertie to leue the friers yt then It may please my lorde mayr & aldir∣men to calle a comon counsaile and bi their autorite. to appoynt certayn per¦sones wt the counsaile to sue ye to kȳg{is} grace for a dispencion of the acte of par¦lement late made to the contrarie. ¶Also please it my lord mair aldirmē and comon coūsaile to enacte that noo comon officer of this citehawyng any comen office to ferme or not to ferme as officer of ye grete beame ke{per} of blak¦wel hall shalbe met of wollē cloth of hī n clothe gawg{is} meters of corne salt coles or any other comē officer bie nor sele in wey of marchaundise but only to the vse of them self or of ther housold any maner wares belōgyng to their office yt is to sei that kepar of blakwel halle. shal not bye nor selle any maner of wullen cloth. The comō meter shall by nor selle any of wullē clothe the me∣ter of lynnen cloth shall bye nor selle a¦ny maner of lynnen clothe The ferme of the grete Beame shall bye nor selle any wares or marchaundises peysed or poysable at ye grete bea The fer¦mer of the litell beame shal bye nor sel¦le any wares or marchaundises pey∣sed or poysable at the litell beame. the corne meters the salt meters and coo¦le mets shal not bye nor selle any ma¦ner of greynes Salt or coles But all
Such comon officers aforsayd to vse & ocupie their offic{is} truli wt out beyng or sellyng any wares or marchaundises met weyed or mesured vpon peine of forfeitour of their officis and .x.lī. half therof to be employed to the vse of the Chambre and that other half to ye fyn¦der ¶ Aso that william Norton comō me∣ter of wullen clothe may be sworne to ocupie his office of mesurage truli and indifferently betwene party & party and that from hensforth he bye nor sel¦le any maner of wollen clothe as befo¦re tyme he hath don vpon {pro}eyne ī the last article expressed. ¶Also for to eschiewe the gret damag{is} and hurt{is} growyng to the Cyte aswel bi frenshmen as bi forayn engishmē whiche be a custumed to bryng theyr wares and marchaundises In to In∣nes and pryuy hostries there kepyng theyr markett{is} & vttherȳg their good{is} to foryns & com not to ye comō market places of old apoynted. Please it my lord the mair aldirmen and comē coū¦seile to enacte that alle frenshmē bryn¦ging Canuas lynnen clothe or other wares to be sold & alle foryns brȳging worsted sayes stamyns couerlyt{is} nay lys yern werke or any other wares: And also alle maner foryns bryngȳg led to this cyte to besold shall brȳge all Such their wares aforsaid to the vpō market at ledē halle / there and noow∣here ellis to be sheued sold & utteryd ly¦ke as of olde tyme it hathe ben vsed v∣oupeyne of forfectour of all the sayd waies shewed or solde in ani other pla¦ce then aforesaid. The shewe of ye said wares to be made iij. daies in the w¦ke that is to sey monday tuysday and wednysday ¶ And where as the Coloryng of for¦reyns byeng and sellyng and pryuce markett{is} be maȳtened by suffrans of vntrewe fremen such as kepe Innes lodgyng{is} and herborowyng of foreȳs and straungers to the hurt & enporys∣shing of fremen. Please it my lord the mayr aldirmen and comon counsaile to enacte that yf any freman In holdi keper of ostry or lodging of foreyns or straungers suffer any byeng or sellȳg or bargeynȳg of any maner of wares wyth in his hose or suffer ony wares or marchaundises brought to this cy∣te to be solde to be kepte or her bowryd in his house yf it happen to com to late as that it may not com too the comon market placis aboue or more thā one nyght. Then euery Such inholder or keper of otrye and lodgyng to forfait at eny tyme when ani of thē shall hap¦pen to doo cōtrary to this acte .xlī half therof to remayne to the vse of the chā¦bre and that other half to the fynder Also plese it my lord mair. aldirmen and comō counsayle to enacte that no maner {per}sones as officers porters ser∣uauntis and apprenticis from hens¦forthe goo abowte for offryng to any mannis house or od placis in rp̄eins tyme or ani other tyme of the yer vpō peyne therfore to be ordeigned Also that in auoyding the corupte sa∣uours and lothsom innoyaunc{is} cau∣sed by slaughter of best{is} wtin the Cyte
wherby moche people is corupte and infecte It may plese my lord mayr al∣dirmen and comen counsaile to put in excecucin a certaine acte of parlemēt by whiche it is ordeigned yt noo Such slaughter of best{is} shuld be vsed or had within this cite. and that suche penal∣tees be leuyed vpō the contrary doers as in the said acte of parlement ben ex¦pressed ¶ Also in auoydyng of lyke annoyaū∣ce. Plese it my lord mair aldirmē and comō councell. to enacte that noo ma∣ner pulr or any other persone ī this ytee kepe fromhensforth with in his hous. Swannes gres or dowk{is} vpon pyn therfore to be ordeigned ¶ Also it is thought resonable that ye comen beame be kepte from hēsforth in leden halle the frmor to pay therfo¦re resonable rent yerli to the chambre for better it is that the chambre haue auauntage then aforyn persone. And also the said leden halle whiche is mor chargeable now be half than profita∣ble it shall better bere his charge. ¶Also that the comon beame for wol¦le at ledyn halle may pay yerly a rēt∣to that Chambre of London toward supportacon and charg{is} of the Same place for reason it is that a comē office ocupied vpon a comen grownde bere a charge to the vse of the comenaltee ¶ Also that foryns bryngyng wolles felles lether or any other marchaun∣dises or wares to leden halle to be kept ther for the Sale and markett may pay more largely for keping{is} of theyr good{is} then fremēn ALso where as diuers periured fremen of smale abylite haue vsed & daily vse. to bye clothe & other marchaundises of England for straungers not with theyr owin but with straungers money and morouer haue vsed to ryde with straungers in the contreis and there bye for them ye Comoditees of the lande atte most a∣uauntage to the hut and distrucion of the marchauntis and marchaūdises aswell of ye reame as of the Cite Plese it my lord mair aldirmen and co¦men counsaill to enacte that all Such fremen as here after Shall bye any good{is} or marchaūdises vnder Color for straungers or strang{is} or shall ride with any straunger or straungers in to the contrey for te bye the marchaū∣dises and cōmodytees of the londe as is aforesaid and therupon by inquisi∣cion be conuicte comytted to newgate there to remayn vnto the tyme they haue besett vpon the pilleri openly iij market dais and after diffraunchised for euery. ¶ Also for as meche as by the Infini∣te nombre of marchauntis stren̄gers here contennally abyding and ocupi∣eng the faitis of marchaundise beyēg
ellyng cuttyng and retaylȳg aswel wollen clothe and al other comoditees of the lande as lynnen clothe silk{is} spe∣ceri wynes and dllord marchaūdises this cite and citezens be brought Into great deay. Please it my lord mair al¦dirmen and comen counsaile callyng to remembraunce how that in euery honorable Cyte, of the worlde No ma¦ner straunger shalbe so hardy peyne of dethe to attempte or doo any thing preiudiciall to the comen wele of Cyte¦zens or sownȳg to the breche of theyr lawes custumes opproued to prouide that all maner straungers may be or¦dred In this honorable cite accordyng as straungers be ordred in all other ci∣tees. And lyke as by the lawes of the cite. in tyme passed thei haue be ordred ¶ Also for a meane & remedie to put a¦wey and a voyde the gret nombre off straungers artificers whiche haue al most distroied the fremen artificers of this citee Pleas it my lord mayr aldir∣men and comen counsaile to enacte yt two persone free of this citee bye from hensforth any maner of wares made by a straunger within this londe nor put any thing to make to any straun∣ger artyficer as fere as the Englishe artificer haue to serue or can serue the Citezens. And that all felowshipps of hand craftis of this cytee corperate be bounde to the chamberleyn euerych ī C.li. that they and euerych of thē shal serue the kyng{is} liege people as wel as truly and as good chepe as the straū∣gers artificers wtout enhaunsing of any pryses & yt ye felowships of craft{is} not cor{per}ate euy crafte seallyfȳd fuer∣te & be bounde to the Chamberleyn frō yere to yere yt they shall fe ye kȳg{is} siege people as truly as is aforsayd {pro}∣vided that this acte extende not to the bere brewares ¶Also please it mi lord mayr aldirmē and comen counseile to enacte tha no maner persone free of this Cyte set a∣werke fromhēsforth any alyē or straū¦ger within his hous or without ī any maner ocupacion craft or shence vpō a penaltee therupon to be lymytted ¶ Also to enacte that euery vessell ba∣rell kilderkyn and feken of ale and be¦re kepe ther full mesur gawge and as∣sise and that the brewars bothe of ale and biere sende with their cariage to fill vp the vessels after thei be lende on the gyest for by reason that the vessels haue not ben full afore tyme the ocu∣piers haue had gret losse and also the ale and byere haue palled and were nought by cause such ale and bierr ha∣the taken wynde in spurgyng ¶Also to enacte that all maner ordy∣nanncis made or to be made wherby any persone free of one ocupaciō may not bye and selle withe a freman of a∣nother ocupacion be annulled voyde and of oon effecte and that euery fremā be at liberte to bye and selle eueri
wt other notwtstondyng any acte or ac¦tis pryly or openly made be any fe∣lowship or cor{per}r crafte of this citee v∣pon peyne of C.li. to be leuied vpon e∣uery felowship cor{per}ate or other as of¦ten as shall happen any of thē to ma∣ke or put any such ordinaunce in execu¦cion Also please it my lord mayr aldirmen and comen councell to pute in execucy¦on the actis and ordynaūcis made for the false mesurs of coles and that the serch may be vsed vpō coles and sack{is} acordyng to the old custume. and whe¦re as the Colyers be founde false that they may be punessed & theyr sackes brent ¶Also where as the curatis of the cy∣te haue vsed often tyme herebefore to selle their offryng{is} at maryag{is} wher∣by the {per}isshēs where such sales be ma¦de comenly be lettid fro messe or ma∣ryns and other whiles from bothe by somoch as the frendis of the {per}ties ma¦ryed vsen to goo aowte .vij.  viij da¦yes before and desiuȳg men to offrȳg at such tymes as more conuenyent it were to be at dyuyne seruice. Please it  lord mair aldirmē and comē coū¦seile to {pro}uyde remedy so that the sayd custume be fordone and leid aparte ¶Also where as marchaunt{is} haue v∣sed moche false pakyng of ther wood medlyng ye bett wt ye worse & marking ye worse wood wt yt marke of ye bett sor∣te & somtyme ye wood is so wett yt after a bale hath restid by an english mar¦chaūte a certaȳ space it shall wey ligh¦ter by .xxviij. or .xxx.ll of all whiche los∣ses & dessait notwtstonding any chart or warātise or dew proff made by the dyar yt englsh marchaūt shal haue no recōpēce Plese my lord mari aldirmē & comē coūseil to assygne .iiij. honest {per}¦sones to be packers of al maner wood brought to this cyte the same {per}sones to be sworne for indefferētly & truly to pakke all such wood vpō penaltees e vpon to be ordeigned & they to take for their salarye acordȳg as this counseil shall lymytte and award. ¶ Also in avoydīg ye obhomynable sa¦vours causid by ye kepīg of y• keuell in ye more & ye diches there & ī especiall by sethīg{is} of ye houndes mete wt roten bo∣nes & vnclenly keping of ye hoūdes w∣herof moche people is anoyed soo y• w¦hen the wynde is in any poyte of the northe all the fowle stynke is blowen ouer the citee Please it mi lord mair al¦dermen and comen coūcell to ordeigne that the sayd keuell be amoued & sett in sō other cōuenient place where as best shall se me them And also that the said diches mai be clensed from yere to yere & so kepte yt therof folowe non a∣noyaunce. ¶Also where as dyuers marchauet{is} straungers haue vsed and acostomed to bryng into this cytee greyne of sou∣dry growyng{is} which of old tyme was wonte to be good & clene and sold for re¦sonable price wherof the dyars made as faire suer and perfyte Colours as were made In any regyon to ye gr
profyte of the citezens sellers and re∣taylers of suche greyned Clothe the marchauntis straungers Nowe vse as sone as the marchaundyse of grei¦ne is brought in to their houses to sar¦se syfte and trye out the beste greyne and ther wyth dye and greyne their owne Clothes and the same sende o in to their owne Countrees and sum they cutte and retayle heire wythin their owne houses. and the refuse gre¦y they vtter and selle to citezens. Pease my lorde the Mayre aldirmē and comon coūceyl to enacte that no maner persone beyng free of this Ci¦te vsyng ye crafte of dyars from hens∣forth dye or cause to bee dyed ony Co∣lours in greyne to ony maner alyen o marchaunte straunger vpon a cer¦tayn peyne ther vpon to be lymytted ¶Also please it my Lorde Mayre aldiren and comen counseil to enac¦te that al maner constables of this ci∣tee may bee exempte and discharged from all enquestis Iuries and inquisi¦cions during the tyme and as longe as ony of them shal stonde in office. ALso where as the Byere bre∣wars straungers wyl not o∣bey the wardeyns of the craf¦te of brewers nor suffer theym to ser∣che as englishe brewers doo: And where also as the sayd byer brewers make Congregacions off theyr selfe and there make retaynders of straun¦gers flemyngis duche men contrary to certeyn ordynauncis made and a∣proued bee my lorde Mayre and al∣dirmen wherin is contryed that no straunger byere brewer shal retayn or sette a werke ony straungers vn∣to tyme euery suche straunge had pre¦sentyd aswel afore the Chamberleyn as afore the wardens of the crafte for the tyme beyng and at theyr p̄sente∣ment a fyne hadde be made for euery straunger so sette a werke. Please it my Lorde Mayre aldirmen and comen counseil considered that ye prince of noble Memorye kynge Ed∣ward the iiij. by his lettres patentis graūtyd to the wardeyns of brewers and theyr successours the serche alle manner lycour made wyth malte to enacte that the wardeins of brewers may haue auctoryte and power to ser¦che al maner biere brewers acording to the sayde graunte. Also that all congregacions of straun¦gers bere brewers be fordone and no more vsed and that the presentement of byere brewers seruauntis may be made afore the chamberleyn & war∣deyns and their fynes of their presen¦tacion bee had and leuyd accordynge to the sayde acte vpon certeyn penal∣tees therfore by yow to be ordeyned. ALso for as moche as many in conuenience and harmes dai¦ly growe to this citee ageynst the comon wele therof for lacke of {pro}∣uision whiche myght bee made ther ayenst by the good aduyce delyberaci∣on and counseil of sad mē & discret cite¦zens of ye assemble suche persones en∣tendyng the Comon wele were vsed at certeyn cōuenient tymes in ye yere
Please my lorde Mayre aldyrmen & comen counsel to enacte that viij. or x honest persones acte nomynacion & election of the same Counseyll assem∣ble at yelde halle two tymes of the ye∣re at terme of euery half yere there to contynewe and kepe residence by the space of viij dayes and dilygently hie¦re and enquire and examyne all such thingis as sowne wyth or ayenst the Comon wele. And as ferre as in thē is to studye the remedyes of all man∣ner thingis preiudiciall to the Cytee And as they shall fynde here pertey∣ne and doo in this partye to certefye my lorde Mayre and aldirmen from tyme to tyme. to thentent that ther v¦pon suche thingis may be folowed as to they in shalbe thought good and {pro}¦fytable. ALso wher as the cowps of his Cite haue vsed and dayly vse to colour straungers goodis as in taking vpon them Malmeseis and other wynes belongyng to strā∣gers to bee their owne propre and as their owne vtter suche maner of wy∣nes to foreyns to the grete hurte of ci∣tezens and proferment of straūgers Please it my lorde Mayer aldyrmen and comen counseyll to prouide a re∣medye that no cowper take vpon hȳ from hensforth to colour ony straun∣gers wynes or presume to vtter or sel¦ony manner wynes for ony manner straunger vpon a peyne therfore bee you to be lymytted. Also to fynde a remedy to putt & dry∣ue awey the grete nombre of beggers haunting aboute the Cytee and for ye same entent that a certeyn acte of par¦lement concernyng beggers may be put in execucion wherin it is ordeined for beggers aswell as can be deuised. Also to thentent that the ordre of prie¦sthod be had in dew reuerence accor∣ding to the dignite therof & that none occasions of Incontinence growe bee the famyly arite of seculer people. Ple¦se it my lorde Mayre. Aldirmen and Comon counseyll to enacte that noo maner persone beyng free of this Ci¦tee take receyue and kepe from hens∣forth ony priest in comons or to borde by the day weke Moneth or yere or o¦ny other terme more or lesse vp on pei¦ne ther vpon to be lymytyd prouided that this acte extēde not to ony prieste retayned wyth a citezen in famyliar housolde. ALso please it my lorde Mayre aldyrmen and comon Coun¦seylle that a communication may be had wyth the Curatis of this Citee for oblacions whiche they clay∣me to haue of citezens ageynst the te∣nour of the Bulle purchased att their owne Instance and that it maye bee determined and an ende taken wher¦vpon the citezens shall rest. ALso that noo man com in to bee made free of this citee by redempcion wythout he bee bore vnder the dominacion of our so∣ueraigne lorde the kyng and that he paye for his comynge in .x. ponde or euer he take his othe. And that he
occupd none other crafte but that he by hym self free of vpon payne of for∣feytuor of his Requynesaunce to bee payd wythout redempcion to ye chā¦bre of london. ¶The charge of the queste of war∣mot in euery warde. FYrst ye shal enquyre yf ye pea¦ce of our souerayn lorde ye kin¦ge be kepte as it ought to bee and in whoos defaute it hath ben bro¦ke. And yf ther bee ony persone wyth in the warde that is not vnder franc pledge that is to saye vndir loue and lawe And yf ther be ony persone that is outlawed or endyted of felonye or treason be dwelling wythin the war∣de. Also yf there be ony persone or per¦sones wythin the warde that make ony sculke or be a receyuer or a gede∣rar of euyl company. or yf ther be o∣ny comon Ryator Sarratur or ony comon nyght walker wythout lyght contrary to the ordynaunce of the cy¦te be dwellyng wythin the warde. Also yf ther be ony man that hangith not out a lanterne with a candel brē¦nyng therin acordyng to the mayrs crye. Also yf there bee ony persone dwellyng wythin ye warde. that wyll not helpe Constable sergeauntis and other officers in doyng of ther officis when hue and Crye is made ī keping of the kyngis peas and resting of thē that be mysdoers. ¶Also yf ther bee ony Tauernar oft¦ler or Brewar holde open his dore af¦ter the oure lymytted be the Mayr Also yf ther bee any parishe darke ye Ringyth Curfew. after the turue be onge at bowe chirche Serkyng chir¦che or saint Brides chirche or Saint Byles wythout crepelgate. All such to bee presentyd. ¶The articles of the good gouernaū¦ce of the Cite of London. ALso ye shall enquyre yf there bee putrer Comon hasurdur contrary mayntener of qua∣rels Champertour Enbracer of ques∣tis or other comon mysdoers be dwel¦lyng wythin the warde. Also yf ony stewe of men drawe ony Comon wo∣men of euyl name or to ony woman stewe be drawyng any suspecious mē or yonge men or ony mannes prent{is} is of euyll name or condycion. ¶Also yf ony persone caste or put ony Rubyes dunge or Rysshes or ony o∣ther noyos thinge in thainys at wal brok or at the flete or other diches in ye Citee or in opyn stretis in lanes off ye warde. Also yf ony persone kepe or norysh hoggis oren kyen or mallardis with in the warde In noyng of ther neyh∣bours ¶Also yf ther bee ony vsurers of false cheysaunce maker or ony co∣mon broker wythin the warde ¶Also yf there bee ony persone wythin the warde that bee fortyme
hathe be for his in honest endyted out of this warde or wardis for suche dis∣honeste be dwellyng wythin ye warde ¶Also yf ther be ony persone Com in to the warde that hath not broug¦hte a byll fro his aldirman where he dwellyd before vnder his seale of his good name and fame in this wyse. re¦putaris I awarde. ¶Vt virum vel mutherem de honest a fama &c. ¶Also yf ther be ony chaūtry or ann¦well seruyce in ony chirche in yt war∣de whiche be the deuise of ony person longyth vnto the presentacion off the Mayre aldirmen recorder Chambir¦leyn or sherefs or to ony other perso∣ne.  is and of what valure it is▪ and who occupyeth it. ¶Also yf the sayde chauntry or annwel seruice bee duly mayntened and susteyned after the wylle of the deuisers or noo ¶Also yf ony persone counceyll ony foreyns goodis of whom ye warde and kepin∣ge belengyth vnto the Suylde halle ¶Also yf ony from an cōme or coloure ony foreyns goodis ageyn his othe. Wherby the kyng myght lese his cu∣stum▪ or ellis the fraunches of the cy∣tee myght be knit. Also yf ony fremā be dwellyng wythout the Cytee and bereth noo stott and lotte and other chargis as a freman shuld do whan he is duly requyred. Also yf ony perso¦ne officer by colour of his office do any suche colour to take ony suche Carya∣ge or arrest ony suche maner thynge or vitayle vndely. ¶Also yf ony Borman or fremā that takyth more for a bote hyre or fering than is acustumed of olde tyme bee dwellyng in the warde. Also yf ther be ony priest in seruice within the war¦de. whiche afore tyme hath been sette in the Tonne in Cornhyll for his dis∣honeste and hathe for sworne the cyte alle suche shulde bee presentyd. ¶Artycles of prestur and other noy¦eng{is} in the Citee of London. ALso ye shall enquyre yf ony {per}¦sone within the warde make ony encroching or take in ony of the comon grounde by lande or by water. or in settyng of stallys stulpis steiers pentice dores or sellers or ony other thinge. Also yf ony pentice poche or gate be onyr lowe lettynge the people coming or ryding. Also yf ony cōmon were or ony cōmon Cours off water be stoppyd or let noyeng of wa¦ter and by whom it is don Also yf ony pauement be fauty in the warde that is to saye. to hye mone place & to lowe in another letting the people all suche thinge ye muste presente. ¶Articles ageynst the parell of fyre. Also ye shall enquire yf ther be o-house in ye warde yt is hylled wt ony o¦ther thing than tyle or slat or lede for {per}il of fire. Also yf ther be ony chemen yt hath a rerdoes made vncumly od wise than it ought to be for {per}ill of fire ¶Also yf ony baker or brewar. hete ther ouenis or ther furneise. wt stuble strawe or riede or ony other thinge yt might cause {per}ill of fire. Also yf ony le{per} fayt or myghty beggar be wtin ye war¦de. Also ye warde must haue a racke wt ij. lōge cheynes of yrne & ij. ladders re¦dy for {per}ill of fire. Also euery house mu∣ste haue a tubbe wt water redy wyth in for {per}ill of fire &c.
¶The othe of the bedel of the warde & of the cunstables and sherefs sergeā∣tis and francpledge and the othe of ye skauegers in euery warde. Ye shal swere that ye shal well & ho∣nestly kepe the warde that ye be bedil in. And ye shal suffer o maner Ry∣baudis nor none of euyll lyuing nor hurster of als nor noo men holdynge brothles nor none other noyous od women slaundred of euyll name and of euyll lyf dwellyng wythin the war¦de but you shal certefie the names oftheym vnto the aldirman. to that en¦tent that he shall haue theym out wt in xv. dayes And yf the aldyrman do it not. ye shall anon after the .xv. da∣yes endyd. doo the Mayre to wete. & yf ony man make afray or drawe o∣ny wepen agayn the kyngis pe as ye shall doo the sherefs to were. that thei may make leuy by ther sergeauntis of suche mysdoers. Also ye shall recor∣ne good and lauful men in the hustin¦gs afore the sherefs and the kyngis crowner to the quest and not men off suspecious and mayntenars of perso¦nes of euyll name. and the retorne yt ye make. ye shall shewe theym .iij. or iiij. dayes before the husting{is}. that ye may see the retourne wheter it be suf∣ficient or noo. Also ye shall see that no pulter nor none other vitayler make noo sale of pultry corne or mele or ony odur vitayle in noo preuy place ayen the ordynaunce of the mayre. But ye shall warne the mayre and ye sherefs therof. ¶Ye shalbe none officer in Courte expedient duryng your office of bedelship. Also ye shal brewe none ale nor none for yow. to be none  grater. ye shal kepe oo bathous. Al¦so ye shalbe no regrater of vitayle no none hurter of ale nor partiner with none of theym. and other thingis too your office belongyng ye shall wele & lawfully kep. So helpe you god and holydom and by this boke. ¶The oth of Constables. Ye shal swere that ye shall kepe ye peas of our souerayn lorde the kynge well and laufully after your power. Also ye shal arrest al them that made any ryott debate or fray in brekinge of the sayde peas and ye shall brynge theym to one of the sherefs house or to the counters of the sayde sherefs. And yf ye be wyth stonde wyth stren∣gyth of any suche mysdoers. ye shall rere vp hue and crye and ye shall folo¦we theym fro strete to strete and fro¦warde to warde tyll ye maye arreste theym. ¶Also ye shall serche ar alle tymes whan ye shalbe requyred by Scaua∣gers or Bedyll for the Common noy¦aunce of the warde. ¶Also yf ther be any thynge done wythin the war¦de contrary to the ordenaunce off the Cytee. ¶Also suche fatys as ye fynde ye shall presente theym to the Mayre & to the mynisters of the Cyte. And yf ye be wythstande wyth persone or persones that ye maye not doo your office ye shall present hē to ye mayre and to the common
Couwcell of the cite of the names off theym that soo trouble yow. and this ye shall not leue. So helpe yow god & holydom and by this boke ¶The othe of the sherefs sergainit{is} Ye shall swere that ye shall well & trewely serue the sherefs of london in your office of sergaūtship. and ye fraū∣ches of London ye shall swere & main¦teyne to your pour and all maner {per}∣sones that ye shall arreste. by playnt wrytt or by fray or by any other lau∣full Cause ye shall brynge. theym vn¦to the counter yf ye bee of power. ¶Al¦so ye shall warne noo persone to agre wyth the credyter of ther dettis. butt that a playnt of suche dettis be lauful¦ly made. Also ye shall warne noo per∣sone on whom a playnt or a wryt is on in the counter. and ye shall wele & truly entre such playnt{is} as ye shal ha¦ue of your cleauntis or any other per¦sones Also al maner mercymentys & fynes that ye shall essayue ye shall well and truly bringe theym to ye toū¦ter. and there to delyuer theim to the sherefs or to hys depute. Also ye shal not tary nor delay noon occasion nor make noon vntrewe {pro}cesse. yt ye shal∣be vertu of your office for fraude or ha¦te or promyse for your synglar availe Also ye shalbe noo loeday maker nor mayntenar of noon occasion Also ī all maner of playntis that ye shal retor∣ne good and honest persones and tre∣we and not suspecions nor {pro}aired by yow nor by your assent Also you shal Counceil nothing wherbi the sherefs or any of their Curtis or officers may be hurt in ther availes Also the comon of the cite pesybly and gentlly ye shal entrete And also to alle other persones that haue hys patent{is} of exempciō yf any office or other charg{is} wtin the Cy∣te of the kyng{is} graunt ye shal doo So∣mē them lyke as ye doo other free mē enquest{is}. Also ye shal take noo yeman Into your gouernaunce whiles ye be officer wt the said Sherefs vnto the ty¦me that ye shewe the said ieman vnto the sayd sherefs and by hem soo to be accepte. and also ye shal not doo awey the sayd yeman in that beyng wtout a lawful Cause certefieng & knowing to the said Sherefs. and yf that yemā be from you soo voyded ye shal take a¦wey the lyueri of the said sherefs excep¦te and ī alle odur thing{is} your office ye shal wele and truli kepe and bere you So helpe you god and by this boke. ¶ The othe of frankpledg as of forȳs Ye shal swere that ye shalbe good and trewe to our souerayn lord ye kȳg of England and to his heyrs kyng{is} & the king{is} peas ye shal kepe and se that hit be kepte. and to alle the mynistres of the cite ye shal be obedient and at al∣le tymes ye shalbe redy to helpe the of∣ficers of the cite In doyng of ther offic{is} for resting of mysdoers In kepyng of the kyng{is} peas and for to folow them from stret to stret & ward to warde vn¦to ye tyme they bee arrestid & brouhgt to oon of the Countours and if ye kno¦we any congregacion or conuenticu¦lis of ani mysdoers wtin the warde  shal doo thaldirman to wete therof. & alle other poynt{is} withein the warde∣mot ye shal wel and truly kepe so hel∣pe you good and by this boke.
¶The othe of ye scauagers of ye war¦de Ye shall swere that ye shal wel and diligētly ouersee that the pauemēt{is} in eueri warde be wele and rightful¦li repayred and not haūsed to ye noy¦aunce of the neybourghs and that ye weis stretis and lanes be kepid Cle∣ne frodong & other filthe for honeste of the Cyte. and that alle the Cheme¦nis redossis & furnessis be made of stone for desente offyr. and if ye kno¦we ani such ye shal shewe it to the al¦dirman yt he maȳ make dew redres∣se therfore. and this ye shal not leue so hehoe you god. &c{is} ¶The othe of euery fremā made in the cite Ye shall swere that ye shalbe good and trewe to our souerayn lord the kyng and to his heirs kyng{is} of En∣gland and ye shalbe obediēce to the mayr of the cite of londō and ye shal maynteyne the fraunches fredom & custume of the cite to your power Al∣so the same cite in all that is in you wt out daūger ye shalkepe. and ye shal∣be partyuer of all chargis tonchēge the cyte and in Sōmaunce Corma∣byng watching{is} talages and other charg{is} as other fremē of the cite doo and ye shall not auowe the good{is} off foreyns as for yours wherbi ye kȳg shudle lose his custum. And ye shall take noo prētis for lasse thā. vij yet is and ye shall enrolle him wtin ye furst yere of his terme at the yeld halle in the Chambre. And at the en∣de of hys terme ye shall enrolle his goyng out. and ye shal take noo prī∣tys but yf he be free. borne and not bonde And yf ye knowe any forayn vse any marchaūdise in the Cyte ye shall warne the chambirleyn or the officers of the chambre. and ye shal not pleete wt noo freman of the Cite wtout the cite. yf ye may haue right of the mair and yf ye knowe any cō∣gregacyon or any assemblee made agayn the peas. ye shall warne the mair therof All these poynt{is} ye shal wele and tru kepe so helpe you god and alle sayntis ¶The othe for brokers in london. Ye shal swere that ye shal neyther bye nor selle nor none other for you any maner marchaundise by fran¦de or colusion to your owne {pro}pre v∣se within the fraunches of this Cite ne without and that yee nether ma¦ke nor doo to be made Any maner bargayn bytwene for ayn & forayn or forayn and straunger within the fraunches of this cite nor without v¦pon peyne of forfectur of C.lī. to the chambre of london & losing of your office for euery Also that ye bye no∣maner marchaundise of any perso∣ne within the fraunches of this Cite ne without to no persones vse but ye ye brynge the seller and the beyar to¦geder making a rightful bargaȳ be¦twene them yf you be requyre and
that ye shal nether suffre ne counsey¦le any other persone to vse brokage wtin the said cice or the fraunches of the saine but if he be admittid & swor¦ne and hath found sufficient suertee to do wel and truly and to kepe and obserue all theys articles and ordy∣naunceis. And if ye knowe any per¦sone so doȳg ye shal opyn it to ye mair and aldirmen and ellis ye shalbe de∣pryued of your office for euery Also yee shalbe in noo lyuery wt any persone noor hoft any maner straū¦ger or alyen vpon peyne of lesing of your office for euery Also ye shal doo all your bargayns that ye shall ma∣ke betwene any maner of persones to be wreten in a bock and yt ye shall haue the same boke redy be fore the marr and aldirmen for the tyme be∣yng at all tymes when ye by them shalbe requyred to testefye the bar∣gayns aforsaid Also that ye shall not be dwellyng harborwed nor lod¦ged with any marhaunt straunger nor with none other straunger with in the cite of london or liberte therof Also ye shal make nomaner bargaȳ of vsery ne exchaung of vsery nor a∣ni other false cheuisaūce nor vtrew bargayn ne contract nor medil ne concent to the same in any wyse. no such Bargayn fauour ne concele or hyde but them dysclose to the mayr and aldirmē of the same cite for the tyme beyng. and this you shall not leue so god you helpe. ¶The ordinaunce for the assise of ta¦lewod and belet in the cyte of london by the mair and aldirmen FIrst that talewode shuld hed¦de and conteyne in lēgiht iiij fote of assise be syde the carf. Itm̄ euery taleshide of one be in gre¦tnes ī the middis .xx. ynches of assise Itm̄ euery taleshide named of ij con¦tayne in gretnes in the middis xxvi yneges of assise Itm̄ euery taleshide named of iij. cō∣tayn in gretnes in the middis .xxxij. ynches of assise. Itm̄ euery taleshide named of iiij cō∣tayn in gratues in ye middis .xxxviij. ynches. Itm̄ euery taleshide named of v con¦tayne in gretnes in the middis xliiij ynches of the assise And that noo pece of talewod hereaf¦ter be made ony moo only of hēself & in nowyse be markid with a nother et cetera Itm̄ that euery eser belet of one con∣tayn in lengith with the carf iij. fore and half of assise and in gretnes in ye middes .xv. ynthes. and that euery essex belet of more than one shide be of resonable proporciō. and gretnes after the nombre of shyde that it be tolde fore also the rate of the sayd be∣let of one shyde. &c{is}. ¶ The marchaundises wherof sca∣uage ought to taken in london and how wyche.
It is conteyned of such marchaundi¦ses comyng to london wherof scaua∣ge aught to betakē and how mych ought to be taken of yh. Of which custume ye halfendel appartayneth vnto the sherefs. and ye other halfen¦dell vnto the hostis in whoes houses where that the marchaunt{is} ben lod¦ged or herboured. that bryngē mar∣chaūdises wherof Scauage cometh But be it prouided. that those hostis ben of the fraunches of the Cite And it is to wet that scauage is the shewe by cause that marchauntis shewen vnto the sherefs marchaundises of the which custumes ought to be ta∣ken or that any thing therof be sold. And it is to knowe that alle the wa∣res wherof shalbe taken custume bi Cayk or cark shall wey .iiij.C. owta∣ke greyne The kark therof shal wey iij.C. Peper the cark therof shal wey iij.C di. Carke of greyn iij.C. all on∣ly shalyene dī a mark karke of alom of ye weyght of iiij.C. shal yeuē xvi d ¶Karke of Peper. xij d kark of gynger xij d kark of Suger xij d kark of Comyn xij d kark of almand{is}. xij d kark of brasile xij d kark of quyksiluer xij d kark of cetwale xii d kark of brymston xij d kark of lycorys xij d kark of lake linin cloth xij d kark of vermelon xij d kark of glasse xij d kark of figges xij d kark of reysyns xij d kark symak xij d kark of yuory xij d kark of canell xij d kark of prune xij d kark of anneis. xij d kark of datis xij d kark of chesten. xij d kark of orpement xij d kark of oyle olyue xij d kark of grene ginger xij d kark of sope. xij d kark of termenteyne. xij d kark of cotton xij d kark of baleyne xij d kark of auri puri. xij d kark of cluoes xij d kark of greynes of {per}adise and of all other spiceris socil. xij d kark of canuas xij d kark of bale woed xij d kark of madir xij d The skyue casels xij d The ponntell wolde The karke of greyn iij.C.lliijliiijd ¶ And whooso leeste haue of oon charge shal gyue after the quantite of the thinge. And it is to remembre that oonly of marchaūdises comȳg from beyond the see. ought to be ta∣ke the aboue said scauag. But of the marchaundises here vnder wreten nothing ought to be takē os of war of argoile of brasse co{per} Tyme of grey wrought nor of other marchaundy∣ses yt marchaunt{is} of almayne Brin∣gen without they Gryngen thoose
aboue wreten. that is to wet yt owen scauage as it is aboue noted. And it is to wet that scauage aught to be ta¦ke of the marchaundises that comē in to the Cite by the marchauntis yt owen custume. ¶ Cimiterij quod vocat noī: cimitam̄ Caput ille qi colligit scaa∣ge ad op{is} vicicom̄ I. marc {per} anū ad quatuor aniu terminos. De firma salamensum capitur {per} ā∣num .rl. s̄ scil: ad festa pasche & sanc∣ti michalis ¶Thoos thing that longith to tro∣nage and poūdage of our soueraine lord the kynge in the cite of london. HEre bethe specified tho¦ thing{is} whiche ap{per}∣teynen to poundage & Tronage Of our lord kyng in the cite of lon∣don To poundage {per}teynen that eue¦ry marchaundise that shalbe sold be weight brought in to london i mar¦chauntis straungers yf it be solde in gret by the Cor by the half Cought to be weyed bi the kyng{is} beame and than shall the byar geue vnto ye she∣refs. for ye tweyght. ob. & of dyuers hunderd{is} weyght moo. shall no mo¦re geue. vnto AM and than shal he geue of that M i d. and of .xi.C. shall geue. id. ob and noo more vnto ij M & thā shall he geue for tho ij M ij d & so from thens forward. And it is to wet that the beyar shall alwey vpō his cost{is} to bryng the kyng{is} beame & the weight{is} vnto the hous where as the sellar is herbored. so that the sel¦lar shall noo thing geue vnto no bo¦dy by thenchesson. aboue said. To tronage perteinen thoos thing{is} that shalbe weyen by the trone of ye kyng{is} and many of thoo thing{is} that shall not be weyen . hit is to wet cus∣tumes of wyne wode & other thing{is} that is to wet of the sac wulle goyng out of london of iij. weys. toward ye parties beyonde the see marchaūt{is} that owen custumes. the sheref o to haue xi.d and yf more wulle bee cō∣teyned in the sac than iij. weies and dī of iiij. weies the sherefs shall no take neuerthe lasse of the sac than xi d And if the marchaūtis haue dys sack{is} of the said weight goyng out of the Cite the sheref shall take of ye furst sacrid and of euery of ye other sakk{is}. x.d of ij weis goyng out of the cite be marchauntis that owē custum the sheref shal tak{is} vi d & if the marchaūt haue diuers sack{is} than he shall take of the furst sac. vi.d in the maner a∣bouesaid and of euery of the other  d And if in oon sac ben conteined mo¦re than ij wey he shall take noo mo∣re and it conteine xij naile but and it conteyne more thā xij naile thā shal the sheref take therfore as miche as of a sac of iij weis it is to wet xid and doth to wet that of sent in
the sackes the sheref ought no thing to take therfore but in the maner a∣boue wreten hit is tower if in a sac of ij. thencrese more thā. xij naile. than shall he take therfore xid as afore is said The marchaūt may make his wolle To be weyen at the kyng{is} trone yf he will and shal geue noo more than is said and if his wul¦le haue not be weih he shall not ge∣ue nolesse than the aboue said custu∣me of wulle that shalbe solde in ye cite soo that it be brought by marchaun¦tis that owen custume. The sheref owith not to haue tronage other of led. nor of nor of other thīg{is} that shalbe weyen by trone but at ye wille of ye sellar & of ye beiarhe shull mowe by other trones of the cyte be weyen by what so euer trone yt they woll & ye marchaūtis straūgers shal pay for y• coke ij.d Of euery tonne of wyne comyng ī to the cite by marchauntis that owē custume the sheref takith ijd of eueri qt{is} of woode goyng out of ye cite the shef takith o whyinge appar∣tayneth not vnto tronage. & it is to wet yt of old tyme it was not wout a∣ny wood to be harbored in ye cite but all to be solde wtin ye shippis. for in ty¦me past marchauntis herbored thee wodes by leue hired of y• sherefs Aft that ī tyme yt Andrew bokerell was mair by assent of ye grettest of ye Cite The marchauntie of ampas of nee∣le & of corby purchaced a letts enfea∣led wt ye ōmō seal of ye cite by ye which it is graund them yt they anoon and whā they co mowe her borought her wodes & therfore skull yee vn∣to  y• is to wete. at ye felle ofeint e xxv marc & at ye fair of wȳchest xxv mar¦ke & at ye last they shulde geue ob of e∣uery quart of wode as is aboue said Marchauntis of normādy shull ma¦ke fyn vnto ye sherefs for licēce to her borought their wodes but neuerthe¦les it was purueid ī ye tyme y• T.  Thom̄s ¶The fourme of making of obliga∣ciōs in dyuers maus. BE it knowē to all men. me A B. de ciuit{is} . in coūtee of M marchaunt. to be boūde e thes present obligacioō to F.G. of C in ye coūte of K. ī xij. lī lawful money of England to be paid to ye said F.S or to his certeyne atturnai his eiers or exetuturs at the fest of sanct. M. thachaungel next comȳg afr ye date of this present wtout further delai to ye which paimēt wel & truli to be ma¦de. I bynde me my eyers & myn er¦tutors be theis present{is} sealed with my seale yeuē ye furst day of ye mone∣the of M. ye yere of ye regne of. k. H. y• vij. after ye cōquest ye furst BE it knowē to all mē be these prisentis yt we I.. of Ch bourgesse T. of wygā in ye counte of lancaster bynde vs to N T. of new salesbury chapman in .x. marke  to be paid to ye said N.T or to his certayne anirnay eyers or ex¦ecuts at fest of ye natiuite of our lord hū criste next comȳg after ye date of this present to which paiment wel & cruly to be made we bynd vs & euer ych of vs bi hēself for all ye hole pay∣ment our eyers & executurs bi thees presentis seale wt our seales yeuē the
secōd day of the moneth of april. The yere of the reigne of kyng H. ye vij. ¶Be it knowen to al men be this p̄∣sentis me M of presten in ādeues squer bynde me by this present obli¦gacion to I.B. of couentre vintenat in xlli. st{is} lawful money of england to be payd to the sayd I.B. or to his certeyn atturney his eyers & execu∣tours at iiij tymes of the yere than next suyng after the date of this pre¦sente by euyn porcions yt the fest off seint helyn next after the date of this present x.li. and at the feste of lāmas then next folowyng xli. and art feste of saint martyn in wynter thē next ensuynge xli. and at the fest of ye puri¦ficatiō of our lady saint mary then̄e next ensyng xli. wtout lenger delay to the whiche payment{is} as is afore sayd I bynde me fully at the termes as is afore written. myn eyers and myn executours and all my goodis and cattellis meuable and vnmeua¦ble aswel on this syde the see as bee ponde whersoeuer they may be foū¦de by thes present{is} sealed wt my sea∣le. yeuen the iij. day of the mouethe of may the yere of the reigne of kin∣ge H. the vij. after ye conquest. ¶Be it knowen to all men by these present{is} me E.R. dew. in the coūtee of B. fuller bynde me be this presen¦te obligacion to N.E. in C.li. st{is} law¦ful money of england to be payd to the sayd N. or to his certayne attur∣nay his eyers & executurs at yeres & termes next folowyng after date of this present by euyn porcions. That is to say at the feste of saint I. bapt{is} then next folowyng yt shalbe in ye ye¦re of our lorde M.CCCC.lvi. & a. y• fest of saint I. baptist yt shalbe in the yere of our lord M.CCCC.lvii.xxv li. and at fest of saint I. baptist y• shal be in the yere of our lord M.CCCC lviij.xxv.li. and at fest of saint I. bap¦tist then next ensuyng yt shalbe in ye yere of our lord M.CCCC.lix.xxv. li. wtout ony lenger delay to the whi¦che payment{is} aforsayd holy I byn∣de me wel and truly at yere and ter¦mes. as is afore writen I bynde me myn eyers myn executurs by thes present{is} sealed wt my seale yeuen the iiij. day of the moneth of Iunij ye ye∣re of the reigne of king H. the vij. af¦ter the conquest. ¶The indifferences of theis obliga¦cions is made of iiij. payment{is} in ye yere at fest of saint helyn Laminas Marcinmas & candilmas and at e∣ueri fest like mych paimēt yt is called euyn porcions The ij. is made off dy¦ners yeris chaūged after the date of our lord chaūgeth and at euery day of payment lichmas payment that is by euyn porcions. NOuerunt vniūst perpresentes nos E.S. Irnemonger & hen¦ricum Bunsted mercen̄cenes Ion∣don. teneri et firmiter obligari T.E et R. A ciuib et haburd asshers lon∣don in C.li. monete anglie Soluen∣dum eiusdem Tho. et Ri. āteorum al¦teri vel corum certo atnahered se execut{is} suis ī festo scī petri aduīcula {pro}rī futur̄ post dat presenciū ad qua qidē soluc{is} ū et fidelit faciēd oblaga∣mus
nos & vtrū{que} nr̄m {per} se {pro} toto et in sold{is} hered{is} & execut nos {per}presen∣tes igillis nris sigillar dac xij die in ij anno regis. E. iiij. post conquestū qiutodecimo. THe cōdycon of this obligat{is} a¦boue wreten is suche yt where as T. yloue of londō Gentilman & also T. Ebmede and R.A. aboue na∣med at in staūce & for ye dentee of the said T.. by ther obligac{is} beyng da∣te ye xxx. day of octobre ye xiij. yere of ye reigne of kyng E. ye iiij. stondē boun¦de to E. & H aboue beside in Cli{is} of lawful money of englād to haue hē paid in ye fest of ye naruite of our lord than next sliyng as by y^ said obliga∣ciō it may appere and where as the said E. and herry bither lett of atur∣nay vnd ther seales haue assigned & ordeyned T. sherwod gentilmā and Ihsampson cardwaner ther atur∣nays Ioyntly and seūalli for to aske leue recouer & recayue for thē & ī ther names of the said T. alone ye said  lī conteyned in the said obligac{is} and for defaunt of payment to sue ye said T. ayloue in alle maner courtes and before all Iug{is} & iustic{is} as ferthforth as ye lawe shal require. In caas the sayd Ed & herry and other of them at cost{is} of y• said T. Ebede & R.A or of on thē aduowe ye sayd aturnays for their aturnais in this behalue & also all maner accions sut{is} and {pro}ces∣sis the which ye said aturnays or ay of them in the names of ye names of the said E. and H or of  of thē att all tymes herafter shall cōmence & sue in any maner courtes ageis ye said T. A and ageyns his eyers and his executurs of and for ye recoure & reaite of ye said C.lī. conteyned ī the said obligaion and of euery percell therof wtout any reuocacion therof to be made in any wise and also that ye said E. and H. nor ani of them nor their executurs nor thexecuters of e∣ny of them her after geue nor ensea¦le any aquitaunce or other discharge To said T. aylone ner to his executs ner to any, other in his name ner a∣ny other thinge doo of them self that may lette stoppe or barre in ye lawe. the said aturnais or ani of thē of the recouer or recait of the said C.lī. or of any parte therof and also ye nether the said E. and H ner eny of thē no noon other for thē ressawe ye said C lī ner eny parte therof in eni maner wise exepte oonly the said aturnays or on of thē whous receit oweth too growe to the vse and behof of ye said T. ebmede and R.A. yt than the sayd obligacion of ye said E. and herry be voyde and had for nought and ellis that it stōde in ful strēgeth and vtue ¶The fourme of makȳg of qasi∣in dyuers maner ¶ Be it knowē to all mē bi these pre¦sent{is} me I.B. de C. in coūty lynolite chapman haue reved ye day of ye makȳge of thes presēt{is} of R and M of D ī ye coūte offuff ye mā v lī of law¦full, in ony of englād in parte of pay∣mēt of xl lī ī which the same R M to me his boūde by his wrytȳg of obli∣gaciō of y• which v lī to me holly paid and satisfied to ye said I.B his eyers and to his executurs I aquitaunce & freely discharge for eumore by thes present{is}  wt miseale yenē the vi day of Iuly anno
BE it knowen to al men by thes presentis me W. N. of Craftre in the coūte off  haue receyued at day off makyng of this presentis of I. R. of redyng canlour x.lī. of lawfull mo∣ney of england in ful payment of xl li. in whiche the same I. to me is bo∣unden. be his writing of obligacion of whiche x.li. to me fully payd and satisfyed the whiche. I. his eyers & his executurs I frely discharge and aquyte for euer by this presentis se∣aled my seale. yeuen the viij. day off the moneth of august. Anno▪ ¶Be it knowen to all men by theis presentis me R. S. of Chester dra{per} aturnay of H. N. of the same towne spicer in that partye lawful depure haue receyued the day of makynge of thes present{is} of I. starkey of man¦ter chapman xl.l. lauful money off england the whiche the said I.S. bi his writing of his obligacion to me is bounden of the whiche xl.l. to me fully in the name of the forsayd Her¦ry to be payd and satisfyed ye sayd I his eyers and his executours I free¦ly discharge and aquyte for euermo¦re by this present is sealed wt my sea∣le yeuen the vi day of ye moneth of semtēbre ye yere of ye reigne of king. THeis ben the Indiffrence of ye aquitaūt{is} the furst is one {per}ty of payment. The ij. is of ful paymēt The iij. is made by hym that is a la¦wful depute and atturnay for ano¦ther persone. And here after folo a general aquitaūce of al maner off accions as well real as personal. ¶Be it knowen to alle men by this presentis me R.B. of W. in the coū∣tee of H. gen. remyse and relece & al for me myn eyers and executour  quyte clayme to W. P. de Londō . of and for all aner accions dett{is} de bat{is} trespace and alle other accions or causes aswel {per}sonal as real what so euer they be. from the begȳnyng of the world. vnto the day of makīg of thes present{is}. In wytnesse wher∣of I haue put to my seale the iij. day of octobre the yere of the reigne of  herry the vij &c. Or ellys thus from the begynnyng of the world vnto ye day of makyng herof by this presen¦tis sealed wt my seale yeuen y• xx day of the moneth of M. the yere &c. ¶Item billis of payment. ¶Md that this byll made the vi day of february in the xviij. yere  the reigne of kyng E. the  herith wytnesse that we R. shirldy of Lon¦don grocer & T.S. of london haburd owen vnto M.w. of london haburd liij. s̄. iiij d.st{is}. to be payd to the sad W. or to his certayn atturay att ye feste of mydsomer next comynge wt∣out ony delay To the which paimēt wel and truly to be made. we binde vs our eyers and our executours. & eche of vs in the hole In wytnesse wherof we set to our seales the daye and tyme before rehersyd.
¶Item a byll a payment. MEmerand this byll made the v. day of februarij in ye xviij yere of ye regne of kin∣ge E. the iiij beryth wytnes that w. clark haburd and Ioue his wyf. o∣we vnto w. warboys haburd xx. s̄. st{is}. to be payd to he sayd w. or to his certayn atturnay at the fest of ester cum xij. moneth. the whiche shalbe in ye yere of our ord god M.CCCC lxxx. to the whiche payment well & truly to be done. I bynde me myne yers & myn executurs. In wytnes∣se herof. I set to myn seale the daye & tyme aboue rehersed. ¶Item a byll of payment. MEmerand this byll made the iiij. day of Iul in ye xix. yere of the reigne of kyng Edward the iiij. beryth wytnesse ye we Ric. shirlee of london grocer and Thomas shirlee of london haburd. owen vnto W. warboys and Iohn̄ benson of london haburd xxxviij. s̄. ijd.st{is}. to be payd to the sayd W. & I or to ether of thē to their eyers ther executors or to ther assignes. ye furst day of Iullij next comyng wythout ony delay. to the whiche payment wel and truly to be made. we binde vs our eyers executors and our assi¦gnes. and eche of vs in the hoole. In wytnesse wherof we setto oure sea∣les the day and tyme afore rehersed ¶Item abylle of payment. Memerand that ths byll made the xviij. day of februarij the xviij. yere of the reigne of kynge E the iiij. be∣ryth wytnesse that we Ri. shirlee of london grocer and T. shirlee of Lon¦don haburd owen vnto W. warbois of london haburd liij.l.iiij d st{is} to be payd to the sayd W. or to his certein atturnay att the feste of mydsomer next comyng wythout ony delay to the whiche payment wele and truli to be made we bynde vs and our ex¦ecutors and eche of vs in the hole. In wytnesse herof we set to oure sea¦les the daye and tyme a boue reher¦sed. THe condiciō of this bil is ths yf the sayd R. & . or onno  hem pay or do to be payd to the said W. or to his certayn atturnay at the feste of mydsomer next comyng xiij l.iiij. and at the feste of Michelmas next after xiij.l.iiijd. and at the feste of Cristmas next after that xiil.iiij d and at the fest of esier next after y• xiijl iiijd. in ful payment of this byl than this byl stondith voyde & of no strengeth and yf faute be made of o¦ny payment in the parte or in alle than this bill stondith in full power and strenthe. ¶Item a byl of payment. Memerād yt this bil made  xxvi day of May in ye xviij. yere of the re¦gne of king E. ye iiij berit wytnesse ye R.S. citezen & haburd of Londō o wt vnto w.w. citezen & haburd of the sa¦me cite vij lī.xl.st{is} to bee payde too
the W. or to his laful atturny at the feste of the natuure of seint Iohn̄ aptist the whiche shalbe in the ye¦re of our lord: god M.CCCC.lxxix. wythout ony delaye to the whiche payment wel and truly to be made I bynde me myn eyers myn execu∣tours and al my goodis. be this pre¦sentis. In witnesse herof I sette my seale the day and tyme before reher∣syd. ¶The fourme of a quytance. TO all peple this present wryt¦tyng seyng or heryng. Iohn̄ whapey citezen and hurar of Lon∣don greting in god euerlasting. kno¦we ye me the sayd I. for the some off xl. s̄ st. by willm̄ warboys citezen & haburd asher of london to me ye day of makyng herof content and paid wher wyth I holde me fully agreed to haue bargeyned solde and deliue¦ryd and bee this presentis cōfermid vnto the sayd W. the Iuels folowin¦ge that is to saye▪ furst a paris pece of syluer weyng bee the weyght off troye viij. vuncis. Item a pece of syl¦uer weyng be the same weyght vi. vuncis and dī. to haue and to holde the sayd ij. peris vnto the sayd. willi¦am to his executours and assignes for euermore ther wt to dispose their owne free wylle. ¶The fourme of makyng of▪ lettres of atturnay BE it knowen to al men by theis presentis me. T. H. of oxenford glouar. ordey∣ and in my plce putt myn attur∣nay and depute I. B. or W. in ye coū∣te of B.gent. as in this parte of my ryght to aske or demaunde leuee & restaine in myn name of R.C. of A. mercer xx.lī.st{is}. whiche to me he o∣wyth. and in the same to me is boū∣de be his wrytting of obligaciō. and yf nede shal be that the sayd R.  bi playnt arest that in all Courtes and placis before whatsoeuer Iuge or Iu¦stic{is} it shal happe to bee to make sure & so recou to reseue relese & make a q̄¦taunce of and vppon the premysses In wytnesse wherof I put to my sea∣le. her. day of the maneth of Septē¦bre the yere of the reigne of king &c. BE it knowen to alle men by thes presentis me T.S. of ox¦ford draper ordeyne. And in my strengeth put my deputees and atturnais I. B. of W. in the Counte of B. gent and W. watle of L. in the Counte of S. marchaunt Ioyntly to geders to demaunde aske leuee & to receue for me and in my name of N.N. of oxford brewar xx.l. whiche he owyth to me and vntruly it with holdyth of. W.W. xxx.l. whiche he ought to me for Clothe yt he bought of me and of T. at D. of oxford man∣ciple xxxv.l whiche he owyth to me for red cloth that he bought of me I geue and graunte to my sayd attur∣nays Ioyntly my ful strēgeth to mi sayd detrours & euerich of my dets yf nede shalbe to take playnt & arest in all court{is} & to relece & quitaūce &c.
The fourme of makyng of Indētors THis bylendentyd made ye viij daye of februarij in the xix ye∣re of the regne of kynge Edwarde yt the iiij. eryth wytnesse that. R. B. of London taylor hath receyued off W. war̄ haburd. be the auice & gre∣ment of. I.T. of london skynnar in pledge for suerte of xxx.lī. st{is}. the whi¦che the sayde I.T. owyth vnto ye sai¦de R.B. a hoole clothe of blonket a hole cloth of rede. a hole cloth of ble∣we a cloth of tawny. a longe Clothe of white two. short clothes of white and he for to kepe stille thes clothes tyll Mihelmas next coming in pled¦ge of xxx.lī. that he be payd his xxx lī in money be fortie that day. In wyt¦nesse herof both partyes hath chaū¦geably sette their seales the day & ty¦me before reherssed. THis Indentur made betwixt T.D of oxford aldirman on ye one {per}ty. and Iohn̄ Telme of the sa∣me Brewar on the other party wyt¦nysseth that the forsayde Thomas hath graunted dimised and let to fer¦me to the forsayde I. alle his tenemē¦tis of Brewhous oon wyth alle the appartynentis called the horne ly∣eng in Castre in the parish of our la¦dy seint mary in the towne of oxford betwix the tenement &c. wyth al ves¦sels and necessaryes. annerid or the {per}tyuencis that is to saye ij. Mylles ij. grete ledis and a fornace and one trough &c. And what so euer it be in thes Indenturs annext cōtent and specifyed. To haue and to holde the forsayd tenement of a brewhous wt all thappertinannces oon wyth all the appertenauncis as is aforesayd to the forsayd Iohn̄ and to hys assy∣gnes from the feste of Ester next co∣myng vnto ye ende of vij. yeres then̄ nexte suing be fully complet geuing therfore yerly to the forsayde T. his eyers and assignes x.lī. st{is}. at the fes¦te of then atyuite of saint Iohn̄ Bap¦tist Saint Michel tharchangel the natiuite of our lord hū crist and ese by euyn porcions and the forsayd I. the forsayde tenement as in his par¦tye shal couer and close and susteine and the forsayd vessels and necessari¦es wele and competently repair du¦ryng the forsayde terme. Prouyded alwey that yf ony of the forsayd ves¦sels or necessaryes for febulnes bee wast and spent wythin the sayd ter¦me and nedyth to haue newe Then¦ne the forsayd T. of his propur Cost and expencis shal as often. as nede is renewe them during ye terme afo¦resayd Also it is to say yf noo defac befonde or neglience of the sayd I. or his seruauntis brekynge or dystro∣yng of ony of the sayd vessels or ne∣cessaryes. And the sayde T. and his eyers ye forsayd tenement wt the ap∣pertynauntis and the vessels & ne∣cessaryes aforesayd to the forsayd I. his eyers and assignes ayenst al pe¦ple warrat to the ende of the forsaid terme In witnesse wherof I put my seale yeuen ye x. daye of ye moneth of I. the yere of the regne of kynge &c. After the conquest.
THis endentur made bee twe¦ne W. nightyngale Cytezen and draper of London on that one parte and R.A. citezen and haburd. of london on that other parte wyt∣nesseth that the sayde Richard pro∣mytteh and hym and his cyers bī∣dyth by this Endenture wele and ruely to delyuer. or do to bee delyue¦red vnto the sayd w. his executours or assines franke and free wythin the Cite of London before the fest of the natiuyte of Saint Iohn̄ Bap∣tiste next comyng after the date her of ix. tenne of good Ciuill Oyle. ves∣sels fylled the gauge payde and Re∣bated or ellis that for defaute of such deliuere of the sayde oyle before the aforesayde feste not performed. and done. the sayd Richard. Shall well and truly pay or doo to paye vnto ye sayd willim̄. his executours or assig¦nes lxxij lī. st{is}. in ye forme folowyng That is to saye the lastee daye of Iu¦ni ner comyng after the date herof xxxvi.lī. st{is}. in redy mony and in the feste of Saint Michel tharchangel thenne next folowyng other .xxxvi. lī. st. in redy money. For more surre of the whiche two paymentis. And ether of them wel and truly to be ma¦de yf the sayde oyle bee not delyuerd in the fourme aforesayde. The sayd Richard by his two seuerall obliga∣cions of the date off this Indenture stondyth bounde to the sayd willm̄. in the sayde some of .lxxij.lī. payable seuerally at two dayes of payment before specifyed. Prouyded alweye yt it is couenaunt beetwene the sayde partyes. And the sayde willm̄ graū¦tyd that he shall bere that auentur̄ of xx.lī. {per}cell of the lxxij.lī. in A shipe called the Anne of hampton. wher∣of oon Cristofer Ambrose is maister in the ner viage. Whiche the sayde ship wyth godis grace shall make to the porte of Saint Lucard Bara∣med in the Ryuer of Syuill. That is to saye yf the sayde shyp̄ in the sa∣yde nex viage. cum and arryue in sa¦uytee in the sayde porte of Saint lu∣card. that thenne the sayde Ri. shal∣be chargeable. for the hoole somme afore rehersyd. wythot ony deduxi∣on. And yf the sayde cum not in saui∣cee to the sayde porte as god defende That than the sayde Ri. shal quyte and discharge ayenst the said willim̄ of the sayd xx.lī. parcell of the lxxij.lī afore rehersyd. In wytnesse wher∣of the partyes aforsayde to this En¦denturs. Sunderly hath sett ther se¦ales. yeuen the xx. daye of Septem∣bre. the vi. yere of the regne &c. THis Indentur made betwen̄ Iohn̄ bolle thelder armerer. and I. bolle the yonger grocer Cite¦zens of london. of that one partye. & Iohn̄ de castro and alonson de com∣pledo Marchauncis of Spayne on that other partye wytnesseth that ye same partyes been couenauntyd a∣greed and acorded to gyder the day makyng of theis presentis in ye ma∣ner and fourme folowynge. That is to saye the forsayde Iohn̄ de castro
and alonson protten and graunten and them be thes presentis bynden to delyuer or do to be delyuerned in the Cite of burdeu vnto the for said Iohn̄ Solle the yōger wtin viij day¦es next and inmedyatly folowynge after the comyng of the said Iohn̄ S vnto the said tite of burdeux at this next vyntage v. hūdred frank{is} Bur¦delesse and the forsayd Iohn̄ B. the yongar promytten and grauntē by these presētis yt ye said I. bolle ye yōger in all goodli haste after ye date of thes presentis shall departe out of englād by ship toward burdeux and withī viij daies next inmediatly folowȳg after his comyng too burdeux shall ressayue the said v C frank{is} of ye said Ide castro and alonso or of any of thē or of theyr factors & at ressait therof shall apere there afore a notari and witnesse and shall knowlege the res∣sait of the v.C. frank{is} and in al good¦ly haste after shalbe stowe the same. v.C. franck{is} vpon gascoyn wynes. the said I de castro and alonso coue∣nauetē promytten and graunted bi¦thes presentis to puruey and ordey∣ne in the ryuer of gerande before ye cite of burdeux sufficient shipping of shipp or shippes of spayne. wherin ye same Iohn̄ bolle ye yonger shal char¦ge and lade all the same gascoyn wi¦nes that is to say as mych as shalbe bought with the said v C frank{is} and the same shippyng shall tary and a¦byde in the same ryuer of gerāde by all the moneth of Octobre next Co∣myng after the date of thes present{is} and the said Iohn̄bolle thelder and. I. bolle the yonger couenauntē and promitten and graunten by these p̄∣sentis that the said Iohn̄ bolle the yō¦ger by fore thēde of the said moneth of octobre next comyng shall shipp & lade in the same shipp or shippes as mych wyne as shall be bought ī bur¦deux with the said v C frankes ī the names of the for said I de castro and alonso and shall marke euery vesell therof with the marke of the said Io¦hn̄ de castro and the Countirwarke of the same. I. bolle the yonger to be conuoyed from thense by godis gra∣ce vnto the porte of London too ther right discharge. Prouided alwey that the factours of the said I. de cas∣tro and A shalbe in ther librarie to ha¦ue the said wynes ladē in the forsaid Ryuer of gerande in on ship of iii.ii. shippis and the said I. de castro an alonso couenaunten promitten and by thes presentis them binden to be¦re in the shipp or shppis alle maner auenturs fortunes {per}ill{is} and io{per}dies of alle the sayd wynes leage forst & e¦girnesse of the same oonly crepte frō the tyme and sason yt the Same my¦nns be shippid and laden in the Ry∣uer of Gerandem the same shipp or shippis til the said ship or shippis wt wynes be aryuē at anker or ankers in Sanstee at blak wallin the riuer of Thamys and the said I bolle and Iohn̄ bolle couenaunten and {per}mit∣ten and graunten by thes presentis to pay or doo to pay vnto the Sayd I. de castro and A. or to on of them or ther assignes for euery franke of the for said v.C frank{is} ij.l iiij  st{is} in
the maner & fourme folowyng that is to say oon half therof wtin iij mo∣nethes next ensuyng after ye comȳg of the said shipp or shippis with wy∣nes to blakwal aforsaid in saufte. & that other half therof wtin other iij. monethes then next ensuyng and ī the same ij. paymentis the said I. bol¦le and I. bolle and sufficient suertyes with them shalbe bounde before the vnlayding of any vessell or vessels of the said wynes out of the said ship or shippis vnto the said I. de castro & alonso or to ther assignes by ij. law∣ful obligacions to be paid and also ye said Iohn̄ B and I. bolle couenaun∣ten promitten and graunten by the presentis to pay or doo to pay vnto ye said Iohn̄ de castro and alonso or too oon of them or to ther assignes with in xxi daies next ensuyng after the ar¦ryuing of the said ship or shippis wt wynes at blakwall aforsaid ī saftee for the freight and lycēce of euery cō∣ne of the same wynes xxij. l st{is} and o∣uer that to pai or doo pay all maner auerays aswel for Burdeux as for hamys after ye vse of spaynysh ship¦pis also the same Iohn̄ B and I boll couenaunten promytten and graū∣ten by thes presentis to aqte dischar¦ge and saue harmeles the forsaid. I. de castro and A. and eyther of thē the executurs factors and goodis ayēst alle maner {per}sones what soeuer thei be of and for all maner other dutees botelarage costis and chargis what so euer they bee touching and cōcer∣nyng the said wynes soo that the sa¦me I. de castro and alons shal not be charged with any thing in yt behal∣ue but only with ther forsaid auēnie by thē to be born in fourme aforsaid Prouyded alwey that notwith ston¦dyng the promysses of the said Iohn̄ de castro and alonso shal not be boū∣de to delyuer nor doo to be delyūed ye forsaid v.C frāk{is} vnto the said Iohn̄ bolle ye yonger in bourdeux aforsaid before the xv day of octobre next co∣myng aftir the date of these present{is} and that the same Iohn̄ bolle at alle tymes after the same day shalbe re∣dy to resayue the same v C. frank{is} & them shall bestowe vpon gaskoȳ wi¦nes ī the maner and fourme aboue declared and the same shall shipp. & lade ī shipp or shippis as is aforsaid with in the said moneth of octobre in witnesse wherof the parties afosaid to thes Indenturs Sundirly haue set their seales yeuē the xx day of au∣gust in the yere of our lord god. M. iiij.C.lxxxxi &c{is} THis endentur witnessith that Iohn̄ alman citezen and vin. of london for a certeyn Some of mo¦ney to him in hand paid and contēt wher with he holdith him fully satis¦fie and agreede hath bargened and sold vnto R.A. citezen and haburd as∣shar of London a tonne of red wyne of gaskoyn of the growing of his pre¦sent yere which tonne wyne wele re¦batid ful and gawge I. alman byn∣dich him by this Indēture wele and truly to delyuer or doo to be delyūed to the said R. or to his assignes wtin ye
cite of london at the next vyntage co¦myng from bourdeux and the sayd. I.A. grauntith be thes p̄sentis that the said R.A. shall haue free choise wt out any geynsaieng for the said tōne wyne to be takē in the lighter at his plesur in and among .x. tōne gascoȳ wyne comyng at the said next vinta¦ge and it is a greed betwene the said parties that the sayd R. shall bere & pay the freight of the said tonne wy∣ne and the custum of the same and yt the same I. shall bere all maner ad∣uenturs cōmyng or belonge to the sa¦me in witnesse wherof the parties a forsaid to thees indenturs Sundirli hath sett ther seales yeuen the xx. dai of Septembre the iij. yere of the reig¦ne of .li lj the vij. ¶The fourme of makyng of lettres of lycence. TO alle cristen pople to whom this present writting shal com A.B.C.D. &c{is}. Crediturs of R.A. citesen and hab of london send greting ī god euerlastīg knoweye vs the forsaid A.B.C.D &. And euery of vs bi him self to ha∣ue graunted and yeuen vnto ye sayd R.A. or by what soo euery other na∣me he be callid and to alle thē which for him to vs or eni of vs stōdith boū¦den and charged ful hole and free ly∣cence and sure faf conduyt So that the same R A. and alle thei whiche for him to vs or eny of vs stondith boū∣de or charged may freely suerly and pesebly at ther large and libartie bo¦the be day and be nyght goo and cō¦tary soiourne and dwell bey and sel¦le and alle other ther prophyt doo & make and all their good{is} and catall{is} thing{is} and marchaundic{is} whatsoer they be to leede dryue bere cary or re¦tary at ther wille from place to place within the reame of england and in the partie of wales and ī the parties beyonde the see and ellis where whē soeuer and as often as it shall please the said R.A. and alle them which for him to vs or any of vs stondeth boū¦den or charged from the day of ma∣kyng herof vnto the feste of M. net Suyng and from the same fest vnto the terme of v yeris than next suȳg and fully to be complete wtout ani at¦tachement arrestinge impresonmēt wtholding inpleting pursute veraciō hurt or gref what soeuer it be by vs the forsaid A.B.C.D. &c{is} Or eny of vs or be any other in the name or names of vs or ani of vs or by the cōmandement autorite or pro¦curing of vs or any of vs to the sayd R.A. or to theym whiche for hym to vs or any of stondith bounde or char¦ged in the rowne persones or theyr good{is} catall{is} thing{is} or marchaundi∣ses or of Any of them duryng the ter¦me aforsaid in any wise to be made or don bi reson of any actiō pursute playnt cōdempnaciō dert or acompt{is} couenaunt contracte beyng sellyng trespace skif or discorde or of any od mat thing or cause whatsoeuer it be betwene vs & forsaid .A.B.C D. &c{is}
or any of vs and the forsayd. R.A. & them which for him to vs or any off vs stondith bounde or charged or a∣ny of them in any maner wise befo∣re ye date herof had made moued or depending and we the forsaid A.B. CD &c. Wille and graunte that is to say euery of vs of his owne parte willith and grauntich to the forsayd R.A. by thees presentis that we the Same A.B.C.D. &c{is} Duryng alle the tyme and terme of theise our pre¦sentis sauf conduyte shal not sue nor vet nor cause to be suyd nor vered in any courte of our soueraigne lorde ye kyng within the cite of london afrix the custum of the Same cytecor ell{is} what so euer it be the said R.A. or a∣ny of them which for him to vs or a∣ny of stondith bounde or charged for to fynde to vs or any of vs bett or od suertes for the payment and contē∣tacion of the dett{is} and somes of mo∣ny the said R.A. and by them which for him to vs or any of vs due than oonly souch suertee or suertes which we and euery of vs haue therof of hī at this day and furthermore we the forsaid a.b.c.d.&c{is}. wil graunt and {pro}¦mytte y• is to say euery of vs for his owne partie willeth grauntith and promitteth to the sayd. R.a. be thes presentis that duryng all the Tyme of this our present sauf conduyt. We nor any of vs shall not doo pour nor make any good{is} or somes of money by the the sayd. R.A. to vs or any of vs now due vpon any persone or per¦sones which for him to vs or any of vs stondith bounde or charged to be attached in the handis or keping of the said R.A. and of them which for him to vs or any of vs stondith boū∣de or charged or of any of them by vtu of any origenall bill or playnt or origenall billes or playntis by vs or any of vs taken or affermed in any courte of our Souerayne lorde the kyng within the citee of london aftir the custum of the same cite & if it hap by any persone or persones what so euer thei be any such good{is} or sōmes of money before of any originall bil∣le or plaȳt or origenall billes or plaȳ¦tis in any courte of our sauerayn lor¦de the kynge within the sayd cite in the name of vs or any of vs to be ta∣ken or affermed to be tached in ye hā¦dis or kepyng of the R.A. and of thē which for him to vs or any of vs stō∣dith bounde or charged or of any off them that thēne we they or he of vs by any such original billes or playn∣tis or original bille or playnt shalbe taken or affermed shall dissolue and lose the said attachmentis or attach∣ment bi putting in of suerte to ye said originall billes or plaint{is} or original bil or playnt assono and as often as thertoo we or any of vs shalbe law∣fully required by the sayd R.A. & by the which for hē to vs or any of vs stōdith bounde or charged of bi any of them and therfore we and euery of vs shall discharge and saue harm¦les the sayd R.A. and alle thē which for hem stonde bounde or charged as is aforsaid with out delay or colu¦syon furthermore we the forsaad A. B.C.D.&c{is} Wille and graunte that
is to sey. euery of vs for his owne {per}¦te willeth and graunteth to the sayd  R A. by thees present{is} that if it happ the same. R.A. and them which for hem to vs or any of vs standith boū¦de or charged in their owne {per}sones or of any of them or ī ther goodis ca∣talls thing{is} or marchaundises or f any of them at any tyme wtin the ter¦me aforsaid by vs or any of vs be a∣ny other in the name of vs or ani of vs or be the wil cōmaundement pro¦curing autorite concent or knowleg of vs or any of vs stondith ayenst ye fourme tenor and effect of these our present leccres of lycence in any wise too be attempted vexed sued hurt or hyndred and therof aftir the fourme a boue said be not releued and holpē that than the sayd R.A. and alle thei which for hī stondith bon̄de or char∣ged as is aforsayd and ther eyers & executurs shalbe quyte and dischar∣ged be thees presentis and euery of them shalbe quyte and discharged bi thes presentis euery of them shalbe quyte and discharged ayenst hem or them of vs by whom the said R.A. & they which for him to vs or ani of vs stondith bounde oscharged shalbe so attempted vexed sued hurte and hin¦dred. A. yenst the fourme tenor and effecte of theis our present lettres off Saufcōduyt and not elimd nor hol¦pen therof in the fourme aforsaid of all maner accions sutis quarels det∣tis chaleng{is} and demaund{is} whatso euer they be from the begynnynge of the worlde vnto the day of suh at¦tempting{is} vexingsuyng hurte or hī dryng ayenst the fourme tenor and effecte of thees our presentis lettres of saufconduyt without rece or hepe therof made in witnesse wherof. & cetera ¶The fourme of makyng of lettres of Sale BE it knowen to alle mē by thees present{is} that I. Iohn̄ B. citesen and dra{per} of lon∣don the day of the date of thes presen¦tis haue bargyned solde &  to R.A. citesen and haburd of londō the {per}cels folowing tha is to we. A dymysen with aredosse harnosid with siluer wrought with golde we∣yng vnc Itm̄ a purple corse harnes¦sid wt Sluer and gilt wt  bars and enameled in the bukkel with ij yma¦gis oon of saint kaeryn a nother of saint barbara weyng vr vnc q̄ic dī Itm̄ a gree corse harnassid with sil¦uer with viij. barres weyng vi. vn¦cis dī ql Itm̄ a corse of crȳsyn of damask wer¦ke harnesschid with silu with vi bar∣res and grauen in the bukkel Iohn̄ mercy weyng viij vn{is} Itm̄ a litel stonding masar weyng iij. vnc{is} Itm̄ a masar with A prynt weyng vi. vncis dī. Itm̄ a masar without a make weyng v vnc Itm̄ a peir of co¦ral beedis the gawdies gilt wrythen weyng I. vnce ql dī Itm̄ a peir of smale corall bedis with rownde gau¦dies weyng iij. q̄l of a vnce. Itm̄ a
peyre of corall bed gaudied wt golde weyng an vnce ql dī. for the Sōme of iii.lixiii. l ij. d st{is}. to haue & to hold all the forsaid percels to the said R. to his executurs and assignes for euer more ther with to doo ordeyne and dispose his free wille as of his owne. {pro}pur goodis and catals without a∣ny agayn sayēg of any persone. Ne∣uertheles the sayd R. for hem & hys executurs willeth an grauntith by thees presentis that yf the said Iohn̄ content or pay or doo to be contēt or paid to the said R. to his certayne at∣turnay or executurs any tyme. On this fyde the vij. day of August next comyng after the date of these presen¦tis the laid Som̄ of iij. lī xiij. s̄ ij.d. st{is} to delyuer or doo to be delyuerd Co∣me the said Iohn̄ to my certayne at∣turnay or executurs so making the said payment the same percels in ly∣ke as he ressayed them without a∣ny agayne sayeng and yf defat be made off And in the payment of the said iiij.lī.xiij.l.ij.d st{is} or in any {per}cell therof at the vij. day of august Than I. the sayd Iohn̄ graunte too warrant the forsaid bargayn and sa¦le of all the forsaid percels to the said Richard to his executurs & assiges a¦geinst all pepull for euermore bi the¦se presēt{is} In witnesse wherof to thes presentis I haue sett miseale yeuen the vij. day of apriell in the furst yere of kyng Richarde the iij. ¶ Itm̄ a Lettres of Seale TO alle trewe cristen pepull to whom thys present wrytting shalbe come alexander Andrewson citezē and haburd of londō sen deth gretyng in oure lorde euerlastyng. knowe ye me the forsaid alexaunder for .li. st{is}. By Richard. A. Citezē and haberdassher of london to me before hād payde wherof I knowlage my self by these presentis wele and truly contented and satisfied To haue bargayned solde and dely∣uerd to the same Richard in the Ci∣te of london the day of the date of the¦se presentes the goodes and stuf here vndre written. that is towete furst a brasen morer. Itm̄ ij. bras pannes Itm̄ aketell of bras Itm̄ a peyr of bugandynes Itm̄ a salt Itm̄ a peyre of Gauntelett{is}. Itm̄ ij. baggis with alume Itm̄ a ioyned cheste with all maner stuf therin. that is to sey lȳcloth latō pewter & gownes to haue and too holde alle the forsaid goodes and stuf to the sayd richard to his executours assignes for euermore as his owyn propre goodes withoute eny chalaū¦ge clayme interrupcion or or geynsa¦yng of me the said alexāder or of my¦ne heyres or executours in tyme to come. ande I. the saide alexāder and myn executurs all the forsaid gredes and stuff to the said richard to his exe¦cutours and assignes ageyns alma¦ner persons shalle warant ande de¦fende for euermore In witnesse whe¦rof to these presentis haue sett my se∣all yeuen the furst day of Iuyll the viij. yere of reigne of kȳg. E. the iiij.
¶The fourme of making of lettres of payment for mony made bee ex∣chaūge from london to the martis ī braband. BEe it knowen to all men by thes presentis that. I.R.A. citezen and haburd of londō haue taken vp by exchunge in Lon∣don the day of makyng of herof. off T.w. citezen and mercer of London lx.iij.li.xiij.l.iiij d.st{is} to be payde in Anwarp in brabant the xiij day off Iunij next comyng after ye date her∣of vnto T. balde in good moneye of brabant as was there proclamed. Be the kynge of Romaynes in the yere of oure Lorde god. M.CCCC. l.xxix. to whiche payment well and truly to be made and also content. & make good alle maner costis lossis and damagis whiche shall happen too falle for lac of payment at the da¦ye aforesayde of the principall som̄e aboue sayde be it bee exchaunge re∣chaunge or other wyse I bynde me myn eyers myn executors and alle my goodis be this my furst lettour of payment yf it be not payd be the ij. sealed wyth my seale wryten the xvij. day of may in the yere of oure lorde god M.CCCC.lxxxxij. ¶Another lettre of exchaunge. BEe it knowen to alle me ye I.R.A. Citezen and hab of londen haue re by ex¦chaunge of R.A. mercer of the same ce xx.l.st. Whiche twenty yonde st{is}. to be payd to the sayd N. or to the bringer of this vyll in syncten marte next comyng for. vi. s̄. viij. d st{is}. ix l.iiij. g. fll. money currant in the said mart and yf ony defant of payment be at the day make or ony parte ye  of that I promyse to mae good all costis and scathes that may growe therby for defaute off payment as well as the principal Som̄e bee this my furst and seconde lettur of paye∣ment and herto I bynde me myn ex¦ecuturs and alle my goodis wher∣soeuer they may be founde In wyt∣nesse wherof I haue written and sea lyd this byll the x day of marche. A▪ dm̄ M.CCCC. &c. ¶The fourme of award geuen out by arbytroment. TO alle trewe crysten peo∣ple that this presente res¦al here or see R. A. had V. leyfeld outler Iohn̄   And Robert Buc. skin∣ner sendyth gretyng &c. ¶That for as moche as the ij. day of the mone the of Maye the yere of the kyngs &c. R.E. and I.V. on that one parti groscer on that other party Them putten and submytten in to tharby troment ordinaunce and Iugemen no of vs the sayde R.A &c. and arbi¦tres betwene them īdefferētly cho∣sē of & vpō al & singules causes acciōs
irtis quarels debatis & demanndis betwene the forsayd parties before the sayde ii. day of M. In eny man¦ner wyse had moued or hanginge. Wherupon the sayd R.E. and I.H by ther seueral obligaciō were boū∣de eyther of them to other in xx.li. st{is} to stonde and obey our awarde or∣denauncis and Iugementis of and upon the premuses to be made and yeuen vp byfore the x. day of the mo¦neth of A. thenne nexte ensuyng by force of whiche submysshion. we the sayd arbyrors takyng vpon vs ye charge of the sayd promyse wylling and desyryng as moche as in vs is to set the sayd partyes at vnyte and rest and good accorde callyng before vs the same partyes and theym be vs duly cramyned and clerly vndi¦stonde felt and herd their complayn s contrauersies allegauncis and greuauncis in this behalf and ther vpon by good delyberacion and ry¦pe aduice yeue in Iugement and a∣warde ordeyne and deme betwene the sayd partyes the v. daye of Au. aforesayd wythin the tyme to vs a∣boue lymyted in maner and four∣me ensuyng that is to wet. ¶Fyrst we awarde that ether off ye sayd R.E. and I.H. make enseale & deliuer for his dede to other in aqui¦taunce general of alle maner aiōs And that done wee awarde yt ether of theym by his obligacion be boun¦de to other .x.li. st{is}. wyth condycion. endoced. and yf they be of good and honest bering and behauyng the o∣ne ayenste the other as in the sayde obligacions more pleynly cēteyned whiche obligacion we awarde that they shal remayne and abyde in ye custody of R. E. lether̄. and W. w. ha¦burd. and citezen of London to kepe in meane hande vnto ye fest of cryst∣mas whiche shalbe in ye yere of our lorde god &c. On lesse yt ony tyme on this behalf the same feste yf the said R.E. & I H. charitably and frendly and as frendis Iontly come to gyd to ye sayd Ro. E.W.w. Wyllīg them to haue the sayd obligaciō cancelyd Than we awarde yt the sayd obliga¦ciōs be then delyured to the sayd R. E. and I. H. by them to be cancellyd ¶Also we awardo yt the fader of the said I. H. at eny tyme on this halue the last day of payment of the sayd som̄ com to london and than wylen seale & delyyer for his dede to ye sayd I.H. an obligaciō of the sayd som̄e. of &c. or of as moche therof as than shalbe vnpayd. than the sayd I.H. shal take his obligaciō for payment and discharge the sayd E. of ye sayde som̄ &c. and eny {per}cel therof. Also whe¦re as the sayd I.H. claymeth of the sayd R.E.li.l.d. wherof we ye sayde aribytrōs by dew examinaciō fyn∣de yt ther is no more dew to the soyd I.H. of ye sayde som̄e But only iij.li. wherof we awarde yt the R.E. shall content and pay to ye sayd I.H. for wt at ye euyng out of this awarde xx.l and also than to be boūde to the said I. by his obligaciō &c. to be payd att dyuers day as in the same obligaci¦on may appere.
¶The copy of the kingis protection Ryal and protection graūtyd othe wyse than Ryall. HEnribe ye grace of god ynge of Englande & of fraunce & Lorde off Irlande. to all to whom thes presen¦tis shal com greting knowe ye that for certayne causis vs mouyng by reason of our prerogatyues ye suer∣te of our welbeloued and feythfull. W. H. of the cite of london grocer ta¦kynge hede of our speciall grace & of oure certayne knowlege and mere mocion that vnto hym by ony ma∣ner of violence arest distrsse or imp̄¦sonment or ony other maner of hu¦ce by occasion off ony dette trespace conspiracy or of ony other occasion of plee real or personell or condemp¦nacion of the same W. for eny occasi¦on of thingis before sayde or of ony other thing ageinst the same W. at the sute of eny man beefore this ty∣me had moued or herafter duryng this present protection and sauegade to be had or to be moued to bee in brought for the indepuite of the said W. wyllyng to take hede haue resse¦uyd of the same W. his seruauntis factours and deputyes londis tene∣mentis and rentis al his possessiōs goodis and catels meuable and on∣meuable in to our protection tucī defence and specyal sauegarde. Not wyllinge the same the same W. art the sute of ony man for ony occasion of trespace conspiracy accion plee cō¦tracte real or personel or of condem¦ynacion of the same w. at the sue of ony man or of ony sentēce or pleint by the same W. vnto ony mā ought or done by theis our proteccion and sauegarde by our Iustic{is} dycountis Mayers eftenauntis Salnus sty¦wardis constables Castellanes pro¦uostis officero wher so euer they be or be ony of them aswel within this our reame of england as other our lordship. whersoeuer they be or dey∣ned or set. and ether of theyr lyefte∣nauntis be arestyd inquieted verid troubled or holde in prison. or by the forsayd thyngis rentis or goodis & catayll or ony other maner thinge in ye meane tyme ony maner of wy¦se be distrayned ony statute acte or ordynaunce contrary to this made not wythstondyng we gyue to alle and euerich of our Iusticis. mayers lyeftenauntis baliues Stywardis constables and castellan{us} {pro}uost offi¦cers and all other our seruaūtis bee forsayd aswel wythin our sayd rea∣me of englād as other our lordships whersoeuer they be ordeyned or see and to eyther of their lieftenauntis aswel wythin frauncheses as with out to whom thes presentis shal co∣me by tenour off the same straytly in commaundement that the same W. his seruauntis factor and depit¦tes aforesaid fro euer accion during this our proteccion & sauegarde wt∣out let arrest veratiō {per}tbaūce sau & surly suffer to go. a bide go to and comfro. And furthermore we haue grauntid to the same w. that if thes oure presentis Lettres patenns as vnto oure graunte bee foresayde.
be not balable that then our chaū∣celar for tyme beyng soo many and ofte tymes our lettres patent good and effectuell in the lawe to ye same w. be made and delyuered as mani and ofte tymes. as the sayd w. shal∣be necessarye and behoueful wyth¦out ony maner of sute to vs and our eyers. ony maner of wyse for thens to be made or {pro}secuted In witnesse. ¶Another proteccion HErry be the grace off god kinge of england and of fraunce & Lorde of Irlande. To all his ballines and feythful subgetis to whom this present wri¦tyng shall com gretyng knowe ye that yf our speciall grace wee haue receyued in to our specyall protectiō tuition and defencion Ric. A. mar∣chaunt other wyse callyd R.A. of lon¦don haburd. or what so euer name he be callyd by wyth his men lond{is} thingis rentis and alle the possessi∣ons of the same R. the whiche shall goo in to our seruise in the compani of our welbelouyd and feytfull coū∣cellar Reynold bray knight and tre¦sorer of our wares aboute the vitai¦lyng of our armye the whiche wee purpose wyth the helpe of god to le∣de wyth vs to the partyes of fraun¦ce for our right there to be recouerid and therfore wee commaunde yow that the same Ric. his men landys thingis rentis and alle his processi∣ons ye mayntene and defende. Not doyng to hym Iniury hurt dissease of grief to be done vnto hym. And yf ony thingis be done vnto hym yt ye see it amendyd wythouten ony delaye In wytnesse wherof wee ha¦ue caused to be made these our lr̄ers patentis to endure by one yere. we wyll also that the same R. in the me¦ane whyle be quyte of alle playntis of dutee bee writte pleintis or dur. Vnde nichel hēt or quere impedet. And writt{is} of assise of the last presen∣tacion witnesse miself at westm̄ the iiij. yere of our reigne. ¶The copy of the kyngis chartour grauntyd for offencis of treson. THe kynge to his bailliis and trewe liege men too whō &c. knowe ye that of our speciall grace and cer¦tayne knowlege and mere mocion we haue perdoned foryenen and re¦leaced to R.A. late of london haburd or ony other name or addicion of na¦me he be callyd. alle maner of trea∣sons rauishing of womē rebellious insurrections feloneys and knowe¦lege of felonis conspiracious mayn¦tenyng consideracions ryattis vn∣lawfull conuentyculis transgressi∣ons offencis negliencis mesprisiōs ignorāt{is} cōtēpt{is} kepīge of coūcell de∣cepciōs & ony maner of trespac{is} be ye same R. afore ye date of thes present{is}
Any maner wey don or made thow therof he were indyted reyned ape∣lid atteynt or Iuged or her after hap¦pen to bee indyted reyned appealed or Iuged and also of outlawry yf o∣ny ayenst thesame Ri. by theis occa¦sions or ony other be shewyd Also yf ony thing by informacion in our escheker or for ye pease afore vs wher¦soeuer we bee wythin our reame of Englande be taken or be to be taken we graūt hym therof our suer. and stedfast peace. Moreouer we haue perdoned foryeuen and releaced too the sayd Richard. all maner execuci¦ons paynes punysshement and los∣ses the whiche the sayde Ric. ayenst vs or to vs hath ronne in. or lost or shall ronne in or losse by the occasiō of the premisses or ony of theym In witnesse &c. ¶The fourme of makyng of suppli¦cacions to ye king & to other lordis & estatis. ¶To the kynge our most drad lorde SHewen vnto our highnes. and mercyfull grace in the most humble wyse your ful humble and trewe subgettis. A.B. &c. Citezen of your cite of londō that where as late they caused certayne bookis to be made ayenst the mar∣chauntis Italiens yt whiche to their greate heuyness and Desolacion as they conceyne haue founde to ye gre¦uous displesure of your highnes to the whiche they neuer Intendyd in ther myndes to haue soo attempted but only procedyd of Ingnoraunce and symplenesse so done they be as sory and as heuy Therfore as euer poure subgems may bee. And crye youre grace hertely mercy. Neuer while they lyue as nye as god wyll put in their mynde to do eny thyng that in ther conceytes may redou¦de to the displesur of your highnesse In consideraciō that they haue ben your trewe lyegemen as they dare be reported by ther neybours being your trewe ege people & at this da¦ye bethe and entende to bee to their vttermest power to their lyues en∣de. Hit plesyth your highnes to bee so gracious an so merciable lorde vn¦to theym to pardon theym ther of∣fence aforesayde So ignorantly do∣ne and semply. And doo dismisse thē out of the duresse whiche they be in And to assigne theym to bee at their libarte lyke as your other subgett{is} bee. And they shalbe your concu∣nuallo a tours and preye to god for the preseruacion of your Royall per¦sone. and moost excellent estate alle the dayes of ther lyues. ¶Another supplicacion. ¶The moost reuerent fader in god My lorde of Caunturbery.
MEkly besecheth youre good and gracious lordship ten∣dirly to coūsydre ye humbli cōplayne and also ye trewe entent of me R.A. your dayly and vnfeyned bedman now abeyding in the seint wary of westmynster. yt for as my∣che as xij monethes past I consyde¦red well that by the meane of moni and dyuers greate losses I was co∣me to that decay that I hadde no wherof to pay my dettis. wherfore in discharging of my conscience I dis¦closed my mynde ī that behalue vn∣to mayster Iohn̄ foster archedeken of london and deliuered to hym bo¦the my testement and Inuentory of all my goodis and dett▪ and also de∣lyuered vnto hym .xl. fyn Clothes & xij. clothes engreyned wyllyng and desyring hym as myn excecutur & ordynary to do therin as he wolde if I were dede. & specially that aswell the sayd clothes as alle other good{is} that I had in erth myght bee retay∣led deuyded and distributed amon¦ge my creditours yf they wold so be contentyd. and for the execucion of ye same I valured my grened clothes at xv. s̄. the yarde and myn other fy¦ne clothes at xij.l. the yarde. So as my sayd creditors wolde haue been well content. Fro the whiche my trewe entent and purpose to the sai∣de mayster foster. many wayes de∣clyned and varieth kepyng styl my sayde goodis in his handes. and ne∣ther wyll delyuer the sayde goodis to me or to ony other Indifferēt mā to the entent aforesayd. nor yet vn∣to my creditors after the are ut bi many crafty and subtyll meanes {per}¦suady thaswll to me as to myn say∣de credytors. In suche as he enten∣dyd to haue greate lucre and auaū∣tage be his occupacion in this beha∣ue. And rather than he wyl dely¦uer my sayd goodis vnto ony other man to thentent aforesayd. he saith to me greate fere and Ioperdy that he wyll after his owne wyl and ple¦sure pay some of my creditors their hole dewtes though the remenaūt bee neuer payd or ellis that he will cause or suffer the sayd goodis to be attached in his handis by suche off my crediturs as he fauoreth for me¦de and greate rewardis promysed vnto hym on their behalue wherfo¦re I beseche your good and gracio{us} lordship. In my must humble and herty wyse to sende A commaunde∣ment vnto the same master foster bi your letter mysylf or other wyse to delyuer the sayde goodis Into ye hā¦dis of suche one. as by ye fauour and auctorite of your lordship maye dys∣pose theym amonge my sayde Cre∣ditours as shal be thought best to ye pleasur of god and moost acordyng to right and good conscience. And this at the reuerence of god & ī the waye of charitee and pytee And ellis your sayd besecher is wythout remedy for the reformacion of the p̄¦mysses by the cours off the Comon lawe or otherwyse. onlesse your goo¦de and gracious Lordship to hym be shewyd in the premysses wherfore the premysses consyderyd and in es∣peciall
the Vyolēce dispocyon of the said archdecon his singlar and Sub¦til opynyon for lucre of money to ha¦ue the said good{is} attached in his hā∣dis as my goodes by ij. or iij. of such {per}sones as he ought specyall favour too and so wolde leue dyuers {per}sones that I am in dett to vncontēt bi hys owne wille not hauyng ani parte of ther dutee acordīg. of my said good{is} to my will and entēt cōtrary to god is lawe and mannys and contrary myn entent that I made a lett of sa∣le of. beseching yon too dirett a writt subpena vnto the said archdekon cō¦maunding him be the same to appe¦re afore the kyng our souerayne or¦de in his courte of chauncery at a cer¦tayne day by your good lordship to him be hyttid bi the same ther to answere vnto your sayd besechar & to the primisses and there to obey & receyue as the said courte of the chaū¦cery him shall awarde and deme ¶Another suplicacion ¶To the most reūent fadir in god tharchbishop of Cantirbury chaun¦celar and primate of england MEkly besecheth your good & gracious lordship your coti¦dial oratur. R.A. haburde of london that where he was in det∣rid to oon willam harris in yt sōme of lī. and were the said william herris sued a plee from the courtexp̄ian too the court of rome ī a cause of deuors hanging he twixt oon alis doughtir laue of R.S. and the said wiā foe y• ute wherof the sayd within H. de so¦red your said besechar and other to be bounde for him in this enter that the said williā shulde sue thes▪ id. ap∣pele with effecte and also to appere ī the kyng{is} courte of chauncery at  certayne day as more playnly doth apere by a recognisaunce therof ma¦de and therupon your said besechar and other were bounden by reconi¦saunce in the same of .lī for ye said W. H. in fourme aforsaid and it is so gra¦cious lorde that nowe of late the said R.D. beyng of gret trust and amite with ye said S. H. shewid vnto your sayd besecher that he was endettid vnto the said R. H. in the some of .li. willyng exortyng and steryng your said besecher to be bounde by his ob∣ligacions in said sōme of. to ye said R. S in recompence of such dett as the said W. H. owed vnto the said R.S. {pro}mysing feithfully in the presence of credyble persones that y your sayd besecher be bounde to him in the so∣me of .li that than he wold dscharge your said besechar of the said recony¦saunce and for euery peny yt he lost by reson of ye said reconisaūce he wol¦de recompence him at all times acor¦ding to his lossis your said besechar trusting the promyse aforsayd. and alweys intēding ye contētacyon of ye said Som̄ of .li. and that ye said W. had kepte his day of apparaunce in ye courte of chauncery acordīg to the promyse aforsaid bounde himself be his deede obligacy to the sayd R.S. in the Some of .lī. and for as myche
as the said willm̄ H. kepte not hys day the which he had by the said re∣conysaunce your sayd besechar and other forfet the said Sōme cōteyned in the said reconysaunce the whiche was conceue and paid by the awar¦de of this courte to diuers of the kȳg{is} seruaūtis of yt which forfeture your said besechar paid. lī. as your lord¦ship know wel trusting that he shul¦de haue ben discharged therof accor∣ding to the said R. {pro}myse. Please it therfore your good lordship the promysses tendirly considered to graunte a watt sub pena to be direc¦te to the said R.S. cōmaūding hem be the same to apere be fore the kyn¦ge in his chaūcery at a certayne day and vndir a certayne peyne there to answere ye promyssis and ouer that to brynge ī the said obligaciō which he hath of your sayd besechar and to answere why the said obligaciō shal not be cancellid acordyng too right & good conscience And this in ye loue of god & in the way of charitee. &c{is} ¶Another Supplicat{is} ¶To the right honorable lorde the mair and the right wurshipfull soū¦rayns the aldirmen of the cite of lon¦don. MEkly besecheth vnto your gracious lordship and mas∣tirships R.A. Cytezē & hab of london and alis his wif{is} that whe¦re the. day of Sept the. yere of the regne of the kyng our souerayne lor¦de that now is Petir calcot & willi∣am galle thē wardeins of the bridg{is} of londō lete and dymised to your be∣secher a tent sett in the perish of seint magnus of london. belongyng to ye mair and comonaltie of the said cyte being in the gouernaūce of thoo said brydge to haue And to holde to the sayd R.A. and A. his wif from ye fest of syent mychaell tharchangell then next folowyng vnto thende of xl. yeris than next ensuyng yelding therfore yerly to the sayd wardens and to their Successours wardeyns of the said brugen ij. marke at iiij. ter¦mes of the yere in the cite of London vsuels by euyn porcyons as it appe¦rith by certayn endenturs made be¦twene the sayd. P.C. and W.G. as wardeins of the said brydge on that oon party and the said R. and A. his wif on that other partye The which wardens grauntid by the said indēnturs that they shuld doo make vpō auoyde ground adioynīg to the sad tent A. crane sufficient and able i ta¦ke vp from the water of thamies the weight of a tonne tight and to haue and to ocupie ye same krane too your besechers duryng the sayd terme vp¦pon trust of makȳg of which krane your said bysechars haue taken the same tēt for iiij. marke by yere whe¦re it stod woyde without ani tenan̄t many yeres afore And where your Sayd besechar at the haue for half the rente a tēt next adioyng to the sayd tenement more
and auayleable to them than is the said rent and vpon trust to haue had the said crane made acording to the said couenaunt your sayd besechers haue don gret cost{is} in makyng dius necessaries in the said tent Soo as it is aforsayd to them leuer thā the va∣lure of .xx.li▪ and it is so that the said wardens of the brydge haue made noo crane in the said voyde grounde but they haue made in the stede of ye said crane a gibet hanging on a wall not able to take any thing{is} out of the watir of thamyse nor too doo ani ser¦uice wherfore your said besechers al¦le ther auauntage of ther kranage euer sithe the said lees was made ha¦ue vtterly lost. to the very gret hurt and damage of your said besechers Wherfore in as muche as the sayd tent So to your said besechers leten longeth to the mayr and comonalte of this cite and not to the wardens a¦yainst which mayr and cōmonalte your said besechers haue noo reme¦dy by the course of the comō lawe to doo com before you the sayd. P.C. & W.G. And thē examyn of the {pro}mis¦ses and to sett direxion therī as mai be acording to right and good cōsciē∣ce and that for the loue of god &c{is} ¶Another supplicat{is} ¶ To the right honorable lord the mayr and his bretherne the ridirmē MEkly besecheth your hum∣ble suppliant R.A. citesen & habur of the cite of london & where on Ihū derby citezē and dra{per} and late aldirman of the said cite the xxiij. day of Iunij now late past bar∣geyned with iour said suppliant and sold vnto him xij. bales of peper then beyng within the mansion place off the said Iohn̄ set in the perish of seint denys bakchirch of london which xij bales than and there weied grose be his weight{is} iij.M.C.xxvi. lliote iij.M.iiij.C.xxxxviii ll wherof by coue¦naunt made betwixt the said I.D. & your said suppliāt shulde be rebated for the tare of euery of the said xij. ba¦les iiij.ll. and for the cloff of euery off the said xij. bales ij.ll Som̄ lxxij.ll. & for the tret of ye same peper C.xxxvii ll and also rest in. M.ij Cxxxxix llp̄ce of euery pounde of the same rest xv. d Som̄ in money CC.li.xi.l iij. d too be paid at iij. payment{is} that is to sai yerly dueing iij. yeris than next folo¦wing at euery xij. monethes ende ye iij. part therof the which I.O. at the tyme of ye same bargeyne affermid promysed and warantid vnto your sayd suppliāt that the sayd pe{per} was as good as any in the worlde & mar∣chauntable and therupon your said suppliant yeuing credence and trust vnto the saieng of the said Iohn̄ D. ī the promysses made and delied vn¦to him iij. obligations for the Som̄ aforsaid payable aftir the fourme as is aboue rehessed and retayned of ye said I.O. the said xij. bales and cary¦ed thē vnto the dwellȳg place of oon william war in the {per}ish of seint mar¦gret in lothbury of london which is bounde with your sayd suppliant
the said obligac vnto the sayd. I. D. trusting verily the said peper had bē good and marchauntable lyke as ye said Iohn̄ affermid promysed & war haūnd. where in dede the said bales had taken gret moystir. and by occa¦sion therof were myche heuyar. In weight than they shulde naturally haue bē and the same peper was cor¦hupt and musty and not marchaun¦table which your suppliāt then kne∣we noo thing of and than aftir whā the said bales had stonde in dry place within the said dwelling place of the said W. war by the space of .iiij. or v. dais the sayd bales were lightir thē they were at tyme of ye said bargaȳ by xxiiij. ll in oon bale and alle the re¦menaunt of the same bales by verri lyklyhod laked of ther weight in ly¦ke wyse which lak also the said I. D. rekeneth to tret of the said xij. bales. but C.xxxij ll where in trouthe yt is. Cxxxvij ll wherbi your said suppliāt shulde lese vi. s̄ ix. d. of weight in alle the said bales tamountith in money to xviij. ll. and by cause of ye gret trust that your said supplyant had in the said Iohn̄ D. he bought the said pe{per} at derrar price trustyng to haue had than forth with daily good and redi vtteraunce therof and Sithen that tyme peper is fallen too a lesse pryce which if the said peper shulde abyde wythe your said suppliāt as his char¦ge wolde be his gret hurte also if the said peper had ben good & marchan̄¦table acording to the sayd promyse warant of ye said I. D. your said sup∣pliant might haue solde all the same peper on sint Ions euyn last past. xv.lī. derar in the C.lī. then the price of peper was at that Tyme to haue geuen xij. moneth day of paymēt. & he to haue had good siluer plate and Iron for his suerte bounde be a let∣tres of sale as he cā euydently proue how be it because the said peper is so usty & corupte your said suppliāt as yet can haue non vttraunce the∣rof And by that occasion he is put in gret losse to prouid for the contentaci¦on of other his crediturs & odur wise and ouir this to his vndirstondyng he is neuer lyke to haue ani vttiraū¦ce of the said peper heraftir which yf he shulde so fortune wolde be his vt distruxion for euer Please it your good lordship & mas∣shippis the promissis tendirly consi∣dered and also how the daies of respi¦te of payment of your suppliant Rē∣ne daily and he cā haue non vttraū∣ce of the said peper for ye causes aboue said to do calle ye said I. D afore your lordship and gret wisdoms to be exa¦myned of and vpon the promisses & therupon to sett such direxion & rule as shall Seme vnto your lordship & gret wisdoms to be acording to feith and good conscyence and this in the reuerēce of god and in way of chari¦tee. &c{is}
¶The fourme of complayntis mad to the kynge and to odur lordis. ¶To the kyng our souerayn lord PYtyonsly complaynt shewt vnto your most noble gra∣ce your pour and trewe lie∣ge man. I. G. of london marchar yt where as your gracyous highnes. was ones enformed bi Thom̄s colte of the most greuōs orous losses Im¦prisonment and troubles And gret and importable charges and expēc{is} that he hath suffred for the trew and herteli loue that he had alway vnto your most noble excellent grace and also in lykewise to your noble prege¦nitor. and fadir the duke of yorke hit plesed your gracious highnes in cō∣sideracion and recompence of the sa∣me to assigne him certayn liuelod of sir T. Tudnam which is callid want ford in norfolke which lyeld cost y• said Iohn̄ Secle more than euer he had therof for withī short tyme that he had it hit was taken a geyn from him and in recompence therof than was yeuen to him the custumshipp of brystow. which too his vndirston¦ding was for terme of lyf and ye cau∣sed him to bynd himself for your det¦tis in so gret Sōmes which is now his vtterest confucion and vndoyng without aide and soor of your most gracyous highnes for at this day y• said Iohn̄ is vnpaid of hys wages & fees of the said office and also put frō the same custumership and stondith so charged and bounde in so gret so∣mes for your said dett that he ferth dayly to be īpresoned dare not pas¦se his house for the Plese it therfore your most habeun∣daunt and benygne grace the primis¦ses tendirly considerd. & thorought your noble reame to restore ageyne the same Iohn̄ vnto ye said custumer ship and therupō your gracious let∣tres patentis ī dew forme to be ma∣de that he may haue and ocupye the said office by him self or by his sffci¦ent deputee for terme of his lyf with all maner wages fees prosytis and Comoditys therto due and acust∣med in the way of charyte & he shall prey god for your most noble and ry¦all estat. ¶Another complaynt to the kynge LAmentably sheuen and Cō∣playne vnto your most excel¦lent highnes your humble subgettis your pour marchauntis auentures yt where the had feigh∣ted dyuers shippis of cyuill with dy∣uers marchaundicis to haue be b¦ght vnto your cite of london en estir euē now last. Estirng as it is sayd callyng them self danes. Toke oon of the rsaid shippis ī the
downes and haue conueid the same ship and goodis as it is sayd to sluce. which goodis amount to the value of .M.lī more that it may therfo∣re plese your said highnes the premis¦sis tendyrly consider to adresse your gracious lrē mssiues vnto the goū¦nors of flanders and to the compa∣ni of Sluse willing and desering thē by the same to see the sayd goodis to be restored to your besechers at the reuerence of god and in the way off charyte and they shall euer prey for the long preseruacion of your most noble and riall estate. ¶Another complaynt to the kynge and the councel. In ful humble wise shewith and be∣sethe vnto your highnes and noble lordships your humble supplyant and trewe liege man R. A. of london hab. that where on mychelm̄s day the yere of l. H. he vij. A ship of this your reame callid the xp̄ofur A. wherof your said besecher was thā owner and possessour ladin with dy¦uers maredaundise sailing vpon y• the see from Selande towarde this your eeame. Ther com vpon her oō hans van alton Estirlyng than cap¦teyn and reular of a ship callid ye par¦trich replenshed with men of ware which hans van alton and his com¦pany toke the said ship of your sayd besechar and alle the marȳs in her beyng and the ship brought and con¦ueied vnto Camfere in seland & the∣rof than and there made sale vnto the factour of oon Ihn̄ W. the Elder marchaunt of your cite of london Which factor was than at canfere aforsaid. and for a certayne Som̄ of money betwene the said hans. and the said factor than appoyntyd and paid wherupon your besecher ma∣de meanes & labor vnto your Sayd highnes for aprouision of restituciō to him to be made of ye said ship ther vpon your noble grace amonge od thingis entending restitucion of the said ship to be made to your sayd be¦secher Sent Gartar your kynge off Armes. with dyuers marchauntis in missage too the kyng of Ramaȳs for restitucion to be had in that par∣tie. the which kyng of Romayns as your said supplyant vndirstondith hath geuen Answere vnto your said messagers that restituciō of the said shipp to your Said besecher in thoo partyes may not be made for that the said Shypp was bought by the factor of the said warū Which is subget vnto your highnes∣se. and ondir your obeysan̄s So that as now your sayd besechar is without remedy in this behalue. without your graciōs highnes the∣rin to him be shewed. That it may therfore Please your highnesse of your most noble grace. & honorable lordshippis the premis¦ses
tenderly consydered to calle the sayd Iohn̄ W. befor you in examina¦cion vpon the premisses. and ther v∣pon o. deynue cōmaunde and direc∣te that youre besecher maye in this behalue. a deuly recompensed and restored for the loue of god. and in ye waye o charite and your besecher. shal dayly prey for the conseruacion o your highnes and of your ful no¦ble lordshippis. ¶The answer of I. W. to this byll WHere as the sayde R. A. by his sayd bille alledgith ageȳst your sayd suppliaūt that the ship comprised ī his said bile cōehyd as he alledgith in to cāfere in Seland by oon hans vā alton was solde bi thesame hans vnto the factor your sayd suppliant thā as the sayd Ric. Alledgeth be his sayd bille his sayd supplyant for his answere sayth that nether he nor his factor be yonde the see was not at cā∣fere nor at any other place be yonde the see nor athysside the see to by the sayd ship of the sayd hās nor off non odir man for redy money as the Ri hath alledged be his sayd byll nor o∣ther wise and wtout that the factor of your sayd Suppliaunt at tyme of ye sayd sale made of the said shipp at cā¦fere in euy wyse was there. & wtout that ye said hans made any sale ther¦of there to the said factor of your said Suppliaunt for A certayne Som of mondy betwene them thā appoyn¦ted or paid in maner and forme as ye Ric. by his sayd bill hath Aleged▪ And that your said Suppliaūt and his said factor wil doo it good and bo¦the redy to auerify it. as your sayde hygnesse by the auyse of your noble lordis wll awarde And he humbly besecheth your good grace to be cler¦ly dimissed out of this your excellent Courte. ¶The prouis and wytnesse of the sayde Ric. FVrst as it hath ben shewed whan Garter kynge of ar∣mes and Thomas wynhm̄ marchaunt were withe the kynge of Rmayns on the behalue of our souerayne lorde the king. and there amonge other thingys desyred re∣stitucion of the said shippe the sayde kynge of Romayns. answered vn∣to hym that belonged noo restituciō by hym therof to be made by cause the ship was bright by the subgt{is} of the kyng our souerayne lorde the whiche answere to the kynge of tis mayns the sayd garter & Thomas wynhm̄ can testefie yf they be callid and dewly sworne & examyned of ye same. ¶Also the sayde garter vpon his comyng from the kynge of Ro∣mayns com vnto ye sayd Ri. shewig yt he oweth good wyl vnto ye sayd I. war̄. and therupon prayd th sayde Ric. to shewe for his sake fauour vn∣to the sayd war̄. For he sayde he knewe well the processe of ye lawe
wolde passe ayenst the sayde war̄. ¶Also Richard cloos of london mar¦chaūt. yf he be callyd sworne and exa¦myned can testifye how that afore Cristmas last passyd he beynge att And warpe in Brabant had comu∣nicacion wyth one W. uādr wowe whiche as war̄. Algedgyth vnoght the sayd shyp in eland of hans van alton that toke her. In whiche com¦municacion the sayde w. fad that w was sn and factor of I.W. thelder o london armerer. ¶ Also the sayde willm̄ war̄. son of ye sayd Iohn̄ war̄ wrote a Lettur to his fader on tyme whiche lettur the sayde R.A. sawe & amonge other thyngys therin mo∣ued. that yf the sayd R.A. wolde pa∣ye for the sayde shyp the mony that was payd to the ouer. wyth a pot of wyne ouyr that than he shulde haue ageyn the ship And ther vpon your sayde besecher offred the sayd I. W the hole price as the ship coste to haue the ship ageyn but that soo to doo the sayde Iohn̄ warn̄ refused and to proue this trewe the sayd I. W. yf he bee caliyd sworne and exa∣myned can shewe wheder he hadde suche lettre or not. ¶ Also the sayd I. W. grauntyd vnto willm̄ warbois of london haburd. whiche hadd the mater in communication betwene your sayde besecher and the sayd w. that yf youre sayde besecher wolde paye half the price that was payde for the ship to the sayde Rouer. and haue half the ship. and suffer the sai¦de Iohn̄ w. or his son W.w. to kepe stylle the other halfe. that than he wolde be agreable to take that wey and to make it a bargeyne. whiche to doo your sayde besecher refused: And after the sayd Iohn̄ denyed his sayde ofur made to the sayd Williā warbois of half the ship as it is afo¦re sayde. Than the sayde W. war∣bois yf he be callyd sworne and exa∣myned can testifye the same. ¶ Also the sayd Iohn̄ war̄ yf he bee sworne and examyned can telle where the gables ankyrs and takelyng of the sayd ship becom after tyme she was weyed and toued to the hauyn at ca¦leis: ¶ Also it is of trouthe that one willm̄ sege seruaunt of the sayd I. yf he were called sworne and exami¦ned coude not of ryght denay but yt he was of councell of beyng of the sa¦yde ship and of vitayling & rigging of her to the see after the sayd being ¶ Also your besecher hath due know¦lege from bee yonde the see as well bee writtyng as other wyse that ge∣nerally the marchauntis there ha∣ue sayd that the ship was warners ship. How bee it the towne of And∣werp wyl nothīg certefy ayenste hȳ bee cause he is Sworne. The sayde kynge of Romayns subget and fre¦man of Andwerpe and hath labou∣red for theym of Andwerp in Nor∣mandy to gete ageyn suche goodis as they late lost in the zelād shippis ¶Also it is of trouthe that the sai¦de william W. occupyed the Sayde shyppe and spent her att Caleys in soo moche that alle the Gables say¦les. And other takell that
belongyd to the sayde shyp ether he solde them at caleis or ellis conueyd them by water vnto deepe for to ser¦ue a duche shyp whiche the sayde I ware had bought there. ¶Item the sayd R. A. sayth that yf the sayd W. ware. were councellyng to the ryg∣gyng or vitalyng of the sayde shyp in to fraunce than the same shyppe muste apperteyn to the same willm̄ for at that seson it was open warre betwene the frenshe kynge and the kynge of romaynes. And no perso∣ne of the Iuridiion of the same kin¦ge of Romains auentured hemself in to fraunce. Beseching this ful ho¦norable and excellent courte. that ye persones for wytnesse afore named maye becallyd by auctorite of the sa¦me courte and of the articles afore sayd duly examyned and therupon according to trouthe and good conci¦ence to procede in Iugement for the loue of god and in ye way of charite. ¶Another complaynt ¶To the right honorable Lord the Mayre of this cite and to his right worshipful and discret Bretherne. the aldirmen of the same MEkely shewyth vnto your lordship & discret wydoms youre humble oratour Richard A. haburd of the sayd cite how that in Midsomer terme was twelf mone¦thes by the name of one Iohn̄ sam∣welle late rent gaderer of the bryd∣ge rentis there was a wrytt pursu∣ed ayenst your sayde supplaunt in ye comen place att westmynster in the names of the brydge maystirs that is to saye W. G. and H. G. contrary to ther othes. and to the Lybaryes of the Cite supposynge bee the same wrytt that your sayde Suppliaunt shulde owe vnto theym mare. Where in trouthe he owyth therof noo peny. And where your sayde suppliaunt had ordeyned appoyn∣ted and determyned hym self to bee att lymster to bye wlles and other fellis for his occupacion ther to doo in the sayde Mydsomer terme whi¦che is the seesenable tyme therof. Your sayde Supplyaunt by force of the sayde wrytte was arrestyd and muste fynde suertee to kepe his ap∣paraunce in the sayde commen pla¦ce. Att suche tyme as he shulde bee att the sayde market. Wherfore he entredyd the sayde Brydge Mays¦ters of Respyte in the mater tyll he myght come home ageyn. ¶How bee it notwythstondyng many resonable offirs to them ma¦de in that behalue he myght not be easyd. tyll he hadde leyde downe in pledge for the sayde marke in accion Crownes of golde in too the handis of Herry A. To ke¦pe as in meane hande. tyll the sayd
mater myght be duli examened and vndirstond wherupon your said sup¦pliant vpon his comyng hem from lemstir aforsayd made diligent sute vnto the sayd brydg mastyrs for the trouth to be knowen in the sayd ma¦tir ī so miche at laste they named & chose H.W. to examyn and fynde ye truth of the said mater wherto your said besecher was wel agreable and so he laboreth continually to the said H. W. for his ende in this behalue. but the said brigmastirs referred all ther maters to the said Samwell. yt which Samwell vpon examinaciō made by the said. H.W. was so fer from reson and trouth in that bihal¦ue that the said H.W. wolde noō en¦de make ī that behalf So that your said besecher can in noo wise hither∣to haue delyueraunce of the said cro¦wnes of golde out of the hand{is} of ye said H.A. Plese it therfore your god lordship and discrete wisdoms consi¦deryng that your said besecher was wrōged to besued at cōmē lawe in ye names of the said bridgmastirs whe¦re he hathe bē and is alwey forth co¦myng within the cite redi to answer to all accions that cā be leyde ageȳst him of trouth to comaunde the said budgmastirs to cause the said H.A. to delyuer him ayen the sayd Crow¦nes of golde and what soeuer accion that the said brydgmastirs or ye said Samwell will ley ayenst your sayd besecher bi the lawe and custume of the cite or any other direccon that cā be had for ther deman̄de afore your said besecher shalbe redi to answere and obeye att alle tymes wyth the grace of god to whom he shall dayli praye for your god Lordshyp & oue∣shipfull reuerence. ¶Another compleynt. ¶To the Mayre and his wurship∣ful Brethern thaldermen. HVmbly besechth your good Lordshyp and. your honorable Bre∣thern your orator R. A. to consider ye beha∣uiour and demenur of M. R. F now sheref of this Cite o of lūdon yt wher as your sayd besecher after his po∣wer hath employed hym self to sa∣satisfye the sayde M.F. the dutee yt your sayd orator owyth vnto ye said M. F. he neyther moued wyth pite neyther wyth good conscience. toke an accion of dette ayenst your sayde besecher. and your sayde orator not denyeng the dutee was condemned and Iugement passyd. After whi∣che Iugement the sayde mayster F. had awardyd a fiery fecias. for the execucion of the goodis of your ore¦tor. and thus regurously he delyra But other his crediturs knowinge trewe entent and purpose off  Orator. that is to pay euery man
Resonably as ferre as hys goddys maye extende wyth dreu ther acci∣ons of whom mayster W. was one to this entent that your oratour be¦ynge at libartye shulde make ye ha∣styer expedicion for the contacion of his dettis. But than the sayde may¦ster fabyan perceyued that the sayd accyons were wythdrawen and yt of right your sayd oratour shuld bee dischargyd from prison entryd ser∣teyn accions of dette ayenst your sa¦yde oratour in ther names to wh̄ he ought noo maner dutee & in ther names whiche were not a knowen nor wylling to the trouble of youre sayde oratour. Wherby your sayde oratur longe tyme hath contynued wrongfully Inprysonment by the occasion of the sayde M. ff{is}. Ageyn right and good consience and cōtra¦ry to the laudable of honour & wor∣ship. Wherfore besechythr your good lordship & your honorable bre¦therī your said besecher in this ma∣ter. it wyll please your lordship and your honoarble brethern your said besecher in this mater. it plese yuor lorship and your wurshipful brethe¦ren. to take a direccion for the refor∣macion of ye wrongis don vnto you∣re orator be the sayd mayster fab∣an. for by the occasions of suche acci¦ons as he vntruly hath com ēsyd a¦yenst your besecher other acciō hath ben taken ayenst hym to his Vtter vndoynge and distriuion onlesse ye Iustice and equyte be to hym reme¦dy by the ayde of your Lordship and your wurshipfull Brethern wher∣fore your sayd orator humbly bese¦che you herin to haue a consideraci¦on as right and equite requireth. & this at the reuerence of god and you resayd orator shal euer pray for the prosperyte of your noble estate. ¶Another compleint ¶To ther wurshipful maystirs the auditours of the bredge of London. Where Thomas obmede and R. A. be condempnyd to Edward S. & H.S. in  li. st of the whiche mo¦ney ther is in tenauntis handys.  whiche money we haue none aucto¦rite to geder it. wherfore we beseche your maystership to charge theym wyth this money For the grettest {per}¦cel of this is in your tenauntis han¦dis that we can not recouer it. And that is thorow their defence for wee had founde a tenaunte and profurd hym to theym that wolde haue pa∣yed all the hole dett and foūde them sufficient suerre for the rente yt was to come Moreouer we ase alowaū¦ce of  li. that E.. hath res∣seyuyd of the tenauntis for the whi¦che we stonde chargeable. that is to saye of the baker in crokyd ane. in bred .xv.l. of thabbot of the Tourhil for quyt rente. l. of the chain byrlayne of Poules.
and of R. S. som̄ li.l. so thees deducted of ye som̄ aboue. li.l. For the whiche R. A. besechith you that it may bee departyd. that euery of vs may bee chargeable for his part. and so that it be deseuyrd. I wyll charge me wt more than half by li.l. and E. S. owyth hym that is boū¦de aswell as I li.l. and soo shall they not be charged wyth Edmede but right lytel whiche dra¦wyh l. Item we beseche your maystershyp that E. S. and H. B. may be bounye to auowe alle man∣ner accions and suris that we shall take in the names ayenst the same rerag{is} for we haue noo specyalte to shewe therfore. ¶The ordynaunce of the Cite for tenaunt{is} of houses what thin∣gis they shall not remeue att theyr departinge. INtrat in libro cum littera G. folio C. lxxiiij tempore a dede bury tunc amoris A•. reg{is} Edwardi ter cij.xxxix. ¶Ordinatum est quod si aliquis cō∣dicat ten̄tm vel domoo in Ciuitate Londen vel in subbarbijs eiusdem Ciuitatis tenendum ad terminum vite vel annorum vel de anno in an¦num vel de q̄rterio in q̄rteriū. si h∣ius inteneus aliqua appenciaseu a¦lia asiamenta in huiusmodi  vel in domibus fecerit. eiam ad me reniu dō{rum} tūto{rum} vel domos clau ferios aut ligne attachamēt nō licebit tali tenēnti huiusmodi appē∣cicia seu asiamenta in fiue terminū vel aliquo alio tempore abradicare sed semper permanebūt d̄o soli vt percelli eiusdem. ¶A confirmacion of the same a¦te be the Mayre and aldermen. Where as nowe of late amonge dyuers people was sprongen a ma¦ter of dowt vpon the most olde custu¦me had and vsed in this Cyte of Lō∣don of suche thingis which by tenā∣tis terme of lyf or yeris ben affixed vnto houses wythout speciall licen∣ce of the ownar of the soyle. whether hey owe ro remayne vnto the ow¦nar of the soyle as percell of ye same or ellis wheder it shalbe lefull vnto suche tenauntis n thende of her ter¦me. all suche thingis affixed to reme¦ue. Wherupon olde bokis seen. and many recordis olde processis and in gemeutis of the sayde Cyte. it was declared by the Mayre and thader men for an olde prescribed Custum of the Cyte aforesayde. That alle su∣che easmentis fixed vnto houses or to soile by suche tenement{is} wythout special and expresse lycence of the ow¦nar of the soile. Yf they be affixed wt nayles of Irne or of tree an  glasse lockis benchis or ony suche o¦ther.
or of ellis yf they bee affixed wt morter or lyme or of erther or ani o∣ther morter as forneis leedis cando¦rus chemyneis corbes pauemettis or such other. or ellis yf plant{is} be roe¦nd in the groūd as vynes trees graf¦fe stoūk{is} trees of frute &c. yt shal not be leeful vnto such tenauntis in yt en¦de of her terme or any other Tyme therin nor any of them to put away moue or pluk vp in any wyse. but yt they shall alwey remayn to the ow∣ner of the soyle as percels of ye same soyle or tenement. ¶ Te copy of ye othe yeuē to ye mayr and aldirmen ye tyme of kyng herre the vi. The frst day of may in the xij. yere of the reigne of kyng her¦re the vi. The othe was yeuen to the mair and aldirmen of the cyte of london bi the kyng{is} councel i this maner folowing and the same othe was yeuen to ale the lordis and ea¦tis of the lōde spiritual and tempall. ¶In eschewing of ryatttis excessis and mysgouernaunce ayenst the kȳ¦gis estate and ayenst his lawes and in example yeuing of restfull rule & good gouernaile here aftir to all his subgettis It is aduised appoȳted and agreed. that noo lord of the sayd councel. nor non odiu of what estate degree or condicion he be. Shall ¦tȳgly ressayue cheryshe holde in hou solde ne maȳteine pelers oppressuis of the peple manslears felons outla∣wes rauishars of women aienst the lawe vnlawfull hunters of forestis park{is} or wareyns or any other opē euil doers or any od openly named or famed for such to his Innocence be declared and that non other bi co∣lour or occasion of  of the yese of good meeable passed by de∣de nor other wyse any of the said lor¦dis or other shal take any other me∣nye causes or quarels. In fauour supportacion mayntenaunce as by wordis by messagis by wepyng of officers Iuge sure nor party by yef¦tis of his clothing lyuery or takyng in to seruise the payned councellid ayenst any Iuge or officer īdingna∣cion or displesaunce for doyng of his office ī fourme of lawe and that they shal kepe this not ony in her perso∣nes but that they see that alle other in her contreys as myche as in hem is and their nātis all other as be vnder hē of lesse estate doo the same And they that doo the contrary ma∣ke hem i wtout delay leeue it or ellis put hem awey from hem ¶The nombre of {per}ish chirches. tow¦nes and bisshopriches and sherys in England & ye cōpasse of the lande. ¶The nombre of ye parishe chirchy∣se and towwnyse in England. THer ben in England of perish chirches the nombre of .xlviij.M.viij.C.xxij.
¶Also ther ben in England of tow∣nes besyde citees and Castels to the nombre of lij.M.lxxx ¶The nombre of bishopriche schyre¦se in Englande. ¶Also ther ben of byshopriches In England. xvij. Itm̄ ther ben of shires or countees ī England the nombre xxxvi.dī ¶The lengeth and the brede of En∣gland ¶ The lengeth of england is from tateney in the marche of scotland to totnes in deunshir .iiij.C. myles ¶And the brede from seint danys in wales vnto donir .iij.C. mylen ¶ And England is ī compace roūd aboute .iiij.M.iij.C.lx. mylis. ¶The copye of acarete cumpasyng the circuet of the wolde and the com∣pace of euery yland comprehendid ī the same IN the generall hystories of rome & cronycles maketh mencyon of alle Cronycles of the worlde and specially of the vij. bookes hystoryall that se alpheg{is} off castel that was chosen Em{per}sone for his gret wisdom. Compiled out of ye ij. bok{is} all the lyf of hercules with ye councell of claudeo tholomeo that cō¦piled out .C.xxxvij. book{is} This arcu∣les was ye son of Iupiter kyng fogre¦ce and of Almena by ye quene of the∣bes Also titoleno that hath breuied all ye annuell storys of rome makȳg mencion of the .iiij powers emyell that ben in the worlde. ¶And in that partye. that is to say In the Este party of the worlde that was the furst empire In pertya in ye tyme of Nyu{is} & of gynus and of ser∣fes and of sarys and of antyocs & many odur gret kyng{is} reynyng in the Este ¶The second Empire was in ye nor¦the party of the worlde. that is to sey in grecya. In the tyme of herkules & of phelip of messedon and of alexan∣der and of pierus kynge of pyrotis & of many other gret kyng{is} reynyng in grecya. ¶ The thredde empyre was in the southe that is to sey in anfry. in the tyme of cola king of lybya and of ase rewball and of Amylkare and of an¦cy and of amylkare the yonger ye fa∣der of grete hanyball and of asdrew∣bal his brod and of mani gret kyng{is} reynyng in anfryk{is} ¶The iiij. empere was in the weste that is to sey at Rome and of Italye in the tyme of romalus yt made Ro∣me and of marco furtallo and of marco Coriliano and of gret Sypiō affrecano and of Sypyon humanty no and of gret Silla and of gret po¦pio and Iulyūs Cesar. was the furst tyrant and of occanyan that was ye
furst crowned em{per}our. and of Cons∣tantyno the son of seint helyn and of many other kyng{is} in ye weste partie ¶Iulyus cezar was on of ye ix. wor∣thies of the worlde in armes and cō∣quest{is} that he made and wond wise in all thing that tyme vsed he in his tyme to enserche & mesured the worl¦de in lēgeth and breede and ded ma∣ke therof gret bok. and of all the par¦ties cōtrais and {pro}uinc{is} and wōdres in hem conteyned And that booke a¦corded to barti new. and to marus paulus and to claudens tholomeus and to the gret arystotell that went with kynge stondīg and ben proued trewe be mani diuers resonable pro¦uingis but I. haue n dur lust ne ley∣sour to copy alle tho. bok{is}. but of all the substaūce that me lyked best to le∣re and to knowe for to make shortly menciō of all the parties of the worl∣de as I. vndirstond aftir mi auctres that the worlde is rounde aboute bi the occyan see xxiiij.M. myle of assi∣ce of rome and viij.M. myle thwar¦te ouer and iiij M. myle to the midel there Ierlm̄ stondith. and there de{per}∣tith the worlde in iiij. parties. Est West North. and South ¶Furst the party of the worlde is to vndirstond frothe north to the south est all aboute by the cost{is} of the occyā see by the Est party and theis be na¦mes and prouinc{is} of the Est quater of the worlde ynde maior ynde Me∣dyan and the most part of ynde my¦nor and Sanre cornerd Ethopia a¦nas grecia aponya mesapotanc sa¦kas Confides Mede ye more amaso¦na Alonia and a gret parte of perti¦a. the contray of babel ¶The sothe quartir of the worlde is from the south est to the southe west. by ye costis of the oryā see on ye southe partye and thes by the names. and prouincis in the Southe party of ye worlde. ynde mynor there the most maruelous ben of dyuers shap of pe¦pull and many other gret wonders and therr it is so hot burnyng yt noo mā may duelle there for the gret he¦te of the Sonne and enophi and there be trees of the Sonne and off the mone and brakana meres he∣bucos yson as merds bubogra there they growith and the yle of ∣ophas the peple haue no hedis. and affricabtha babilonia Nenbra aria∣bia ethiop and parte of barbary and parte of Sury. ¶The west quartir of the worlde is from the South west to the. North west al aboute the costis of the Ocyā see in the west party and thes bi the names. and prouincis of the west {per}∣te of the worlde and the mae mediā that Some men callen the grek{is} see and that is in the west quartir of the worlde a parte of mare mayor that lyeth betwix. Turkye and tartary & there lyeth a gret parte of barbari &
of elmere that is be south yt heir Ie¦valter be noth y• streit{is} Iebalt thers bē ye {pro}uie Fur hyspania yt to see ye rea¦me of castel & lyōo Dragone Catalay¦ne Garnate Portigale algarne Ga¦les byskay and nauerne and gallya is to vndirstond fraunce guy an pro¦uince amorous Bretayne norman∣dy picardy. Turayne lorayn Buor¦gon Sauoy almayne that is to vn∣dirstond alle the honor of the empire from the oran see to the mount ga∣darde on bothe the parnes of the wa¦tir of ryne. The citees of thempire a¦forsaid ben theis Acon Coeyn Mēs Tryre frankforth strawisborught. basyle and constans And so forthe to the mountaȳs of almayne and bay¦er Sweuen Ostrich Dēmarke bo¦me norwey Swe. y pomar Puice. Sar on rise and Holland Geller∣land Brabant flaunders England wales Scotland Irland and the out Iles of Orbenay Gutland Seland. Iseland Fryseland and many other smale Ilādis. yt be ī yt party of the Or¦cyan see and Italya is to vndirston∣de Pymond lumbardy fryol and ye markis of Trenisane Romayne cus¦ane de partrimon of Rome The duke of splate ye marke of acon. The reame of Naples and Poyle▪ Tarā∣ Calabre the Ile of Serle and ye Ile of Sardyne and grecia is to vndir∣stonde omenay Tracia Tessalya Athen as sallydon Thobas aquaya. that now is called the principalite of mure albania and all the Ile of the archpelago the Ile of Sypre Rodes grece that now is callid candy. Cur∣su Chiffolonia Iacento Nygreposit lango Calanyo Palamose nyporey Ireo methlonie Andre stalan̄to and many other Iles within the archpe¦lago that is ye gulf be twix grese and turkye that cometh from the gees see In to the grete see before constan∣tynople. thorow the brace of seynt george And theis ben the names and pronincis be twixte grece and ye Orcian see. Toward the north west parte that is too say hungary Polo¦ny Russe Rainy Gallacy Iudiary Comeny blylgary blagy. Cernysla¦wny and a parte of turky and a par¦te of Sur and the west parte of the worlde ¶ The northe nartar of the worlde s for to vndirstande from ye northe west to the north Est by the Orcyan see on the northe partye and thes be the names and prouincis in ye north quatir of the worlde a parte of Russi letony Tartary parcy the lesse me∣dia Ermenya ye more there stondith yet the arke of no vpon the moūt arake and Germynia the lesse that gothe to the grek{is} see ī the north qua¦ter of the wilde that ye most parte off Turky is ī That is to sey the reame of frygy there that grete citee of troy stondith and the reame of lydia and pompsilia Cilia ponto There now duellis the em{per}our of tripasand yt is a greke and kinge George Sansto poly that is a crystē mā and holdit of the pope of rome. And his landis Ioyneth Tartarion the on syde and with thempor of trapasond on the ¦her at the Est ende of the greg{is} see
also in the north quartir is ya asary a lismaco and a gret parte of sre. ther was antioche the grete cite th¦re the prince of antyoch dwellid ¶ Denys stondith from flaunders Est and be south .viij.C. myle.  ner cours by the see from flaunders ī to Iaf is this fro Sluse to caleis lx. my¦les fro Caleis to bewchef .lxxx. myle from bewchef to lezarde .CC.lx. my¦les fro leard to Cape fenestir .vi.C myles fro Cape fenestir to lysbone CC.lxxx. myles. fro Lysbone too Ca¦pe seint Uincent to the stract{is} CC.xl. myles from ye street{is} of Iebalt to the Ile of Sardyn xi.C. myles for malfitanam Sardȳ to Ialta iiij.C. & lx. myle fro Inalta. by the cours of Sa¦rogogora and Sysil to saile to Iaf in Surry is. M.viij.C. Myles. frm. Iaf to Baffa in Sipre to ye castel Ro∣ge CC.xx. myles from ye castel Roge of Rodes .C. myle fro Rodis to candi CC.l. myles fro candy to modō C.C C. myles fro modō to corsu .iij.C my¦les fro carsu to venss vij.C myles. ¶ The lengeth of coost{is} of Surre by the see coeste. is from the gulf of Er¦mony to the gulf dalaryse nete the Southe and bewest fro lasary to ry∣se is .vC.xx. myles yt is to vndirston∣de from laay in Ermony to sadyn yt cometh frō ye ryuer comyng from Antioch lxx. myles. And fro Saldy∣ne to ye porte of lycha nexte ye south.  myles fro lycha to ye porte of tortosa southe L. myle frotortosa to ye porte of rypol southe xl. myles fro barne to acres southe and by west lxx. my∣les fro acres to port Iaf south and be west lxx. myle fro porte Iaf to yon de larysa south south west C.xx. myle fro damyat  in surre to damy∣at in Egipte C.lxxx myles fro damy¦at to babylone alchaier lxxx. miles & fro damyat to alexander C.l. myles The lengeth of ye mare mae. is fro ye gulf seint george ī middes of ye gulf that is be twixt trapazad sana o∣poly vnto ye porte of mesembre west fro seint george M.lx. myles ¶The breed of ye west ende is fro the brase Saint george at constantino¦ple vpon ye reuer of danabes err ye north fro saint georges bare is v C. lx. myles from pero to caffa in carta¦ry north est vi.C. myles frō caffa to ye sract of ye tane north est .C. myles The gulf of ye tane is aboute vi C mi¦les The tape of caffo is aboute vi.C. myles fro ye hed of ye tae to sanasto¦poly iij.C myles fro auastopoly to trapasond & by west .CC.l Myles. fro Tapasond to Synopya next the southe iii..xxx myles frō Synopya to pero next ye west & south west . & xxx myles from pero to messembre next ye north west cc.xxx. fro messem¦bre to mantro north north est .lx. inylec fro maners castro to danobi  north est, c xxx myles fro danobeo too ye stract{is} of caffa next ye est ijc myles The Ile of Sypre is aboute v c mi¦les. ye Ile of rodes is aboute clxxx my¦les The Ile of lāge is aboute lxxx my¦les The Ile of negrepount is aboute iij c myle The Ile of cecilia is aboute vij c mile The Ile of sardyne is abou¦te vij c myle The Ile of mayorke s aboute cc myle The Ile of gret rs
raynis aboute ii M myle The Ile of land is aboute M vij C myle The principalite of murte is aboute vij c myles ¶ The hoole pardon of rome gran̄¦ted be dyuers popes and the staciōs that ben there FRom ye begynyng of ye worl∣de vnto ye tyme yt rome was furst made was n Mun c li yeres & fro ye tyme yt Rome was made into ye nature of our lorde ihū cryste vn el yeres ¶ In ye cite of Rome bē iiij.c chirches in which is mass dayly don but th ben vn of the same priueleged aboue all the other which gret holines par¦don as is here aftir shewid ¶ he furst is called saīt Petr• chirch thappostel & is set vpō ye fot of an hill and men goo vpward thertoo a stey¦re of xxix steppes high and as oft as a mā goth vp and downe yt steyer he is relsid of ye seuenth parte of penas¦te in ioyned graūted by pope alysād ¶ Itm̄ as ye com before the chirche ther ye well sporyngeth so may ye see aboue ye dore an ymage of our lorde & btewene his feet stondith on of ye pē∣ce that god was solde for and as ofte as ye loke vpon that peny ye haue. xiiij c yeris of pardon ¶Itm in ye same chirge on the right side is ap our that was Somtyme off Salamons temple at which py∣lour our lord was wont too rest him whan he preched to ye peple at which pelour if ther any bereny for made or troubled with spyritt{is} they be deli¦uered and made hoole. And in that chirch be .xi. aulters. & at / euery aulter is .xlviij. yere par∣don and as many lentēs or quarȳs and vij. of thoo aulters ben seueral∣ly priuelegth wth grace and {per}don At the furst aulter is ye vysage of our lorde who loketh vpō that hathe vij C. ere of pardon. Itm at the fame aulter is the spere yt crist was parced with whiche was brought from Cōstātyne nople sent frō the gret turke to pope Innocent the viij. The second aulter is of saint andrew there ye haue v C yerr o pardon The iij aulter is of saint gregory the¦re ye haue iiij C. yere of pardon yt iiij. ault is of our lady ther is vij.c. yere pardon The v aulter is of saint leoo there he ressaiued the absolucion in his mass fro heuyn and there is vij C yere o pardon. The vi. aulter of all Soules and the¦re is v C yere of pardon. And euery hight fest an soule out of purgatory The vij aulter is of Saint Simond and Iude there is vi C. yere of pardō ¶ And before the quyer dore stand. ij. yrnē crosse whoo kysseth thoo cros¦ses hathe v C yere of pardon Itm̄ vpō our lady day in lēte is han¦ged a fore ye quyer a clothe yt our lady made her self and it hangeth stille til our lady day assumpciō and as ma¦ny tymes as a man be holdith it ha¦the iiij.C. yere of pardon
Also as many tymes as a man go∣the thorow the Croudes at saint pe∣ters chirche hath iiijC. yeres of par¦don. And as often as a man folow. the sacrament to the syke bodies ha¦the xiiij C. yere of pardon. Alo pope Siluester grauntyd to all theym yt dayly gothe to the chirche of Saint peter the iij. parte of ae his synnes releced. and all adowes and promyse releced and all synnes forgetē releced and forgeuen except leynge hande vpon fader and moder violēt¦ly. and aboue this is graūtyd xxviij C. yere of pardon. an the merytis of as many lentis or karyns. The knowlege of a karyn ye shal fynde it in the ende of this bocke. And in ye feste of Saint peter a M. yere of {per}∣don and so many karyns. And the threddendel of penaunce enioyned releced And from thassencion day of our Lorde into thassumption of our Lady ye haue xiiij C. yere of pardon and as many karyns and foryefe ues of the iij. parte of alle synnes. And vpon the one syde of saīt peters chirche lyeth a chirchyard and that is called godis felde and there bthe buryed poure pylgryms and none other and it is the lande that was bought wyth the xxx. pens that our lorde was solde fore as ofte as a mā goth vpon that grounde he hath xv yere of pardon. ¶Item in the chirche of saint poule wythout the walles ye haue xlviij.M. yere of pardon. ¶ Item in the day of his conuercion C. yere of pardon. ¶ Item on Childermesse day iiij M yere of pardon. ¶ Item on the as of saint Martyn whan the chyrche was holowed run M yere of pardō and as many harms and the thred parte of all synnes releced. so whoo that visite the chirche of saint poule two sondayes doth as moche as he wente to saint Iames & come ageyne. ¶ Item in the chirche of saint laurē¦ce wythout the walles there lyeth ye body of saint laurence and of saint stephan and art the hygh auler ye haue .xviij M yere o pardon and as many karyns. And who that vi¦syte the other aulters hath a eche aulter vij M. yere of pardō. and as many kareyns. Also the pope pe∣gius graunted there att an fe of the yere at eche feste vij C. yere o {per}∣don and as many karyns and who that goth thether euery wedi.  he delyueryd a soule out of purgato¦ry. and hym self quyte of a synnes ¶ Item in the chirche of saint crue ther is a chambre or a chappel wi that pope siluestre named herusa∣lem there is the bonde that Cryste was led wt to his crucifyeng and the¦re ben  sausers the one is ful of th̄ bloode and the other is full of oure ladyes mylke and the sponge wher¦in was mengyd ysell and galle. And one of the ayles that thē was nayled wyth on the crosse and a par¦te of the blocke that saynt Iohn̄ his hed was smeten of vpon and two ar¦mes the one of saint peter the od off saint poule. Itē ther stondyd a cheir
In whiche pope accensius was mar¦tred▪ and to all theym that Sitte in that cheir he aue CM yere of par¦don and as many karnys and eue∣ry sonday a soule out of purgatory. and the tredden dele of al synnes re¦leced. ¶ Item in the same chirche is a grete parte of one of the crosses. yt one of the theuis was put on yt was crucifyed wyth Cryste. ¶ Item in ye same chirche is ye tytell of cryst whi∣che that was in latyn Ebrewe and greke. whiche was founde in the ty¦me of pope Innocent. In the same chirche the viij. pope of his name in the vij yere of his regne to the whi∣che the same pope hath graūted gre¦te pardon. ¶ Item in the chirche of saint mari Mayor there stondyth on the kygh auter the hed of saint I heronimus. and there ye haue xiiij M. yere of {per}¦don as many karynes. And on the other auter on the ryght hand ther is the cradell that th̄ laye in and of oure Ladyee mylke and a grete par¦te of the holy crosse. and of many od bodyes seintis. And there ye haue xix M. yere of pardon and as mani karyns. And pope Nicholas the iiij and saint gregory eche of them grā∣ted therto r M. yere of pardon. and as many karyns. and from thascē∣cion of oure lorde. into Cristmas ye haue there xiiij M. yeres of pardon and as many kareyns. and ye thred parte of all synnes releced. ¶Item in the chirche of saint seba∣stian wythout the towne. there in a place that pope Calixt named ta∣lund as there the aungell appered & spach to Gregory the pope. In that place to forgefnes of all synnes and all penaunce. Art the hygh auter is graunted xxviij C yere of pardon. & as many karyns. And who that co¦meth too the fyrste aulter that ston∣dith in the chirce hath xxiiij C. yere of pardon and there is a sellare or a vaute. there lyeth buried xlix popes that deyd alle martyrs. whoo so co∣myth fyrste in to that place delyue∣ryth viij. soules out of purgatory of suche as he moste desyreth & as mo∣che pardon therto that all the worl∣de can not nombre nor reken. and e∣uery sonday ye delyuer there a sou∣le out of purgatory. And in that sel∣lar stondyth a pyet there saint peter and saynt poule were hyd in. CC.l. yere that noo man wyst where thei were be com. And who that puttith his hed in to that pytt and takyth it out ageyne is clene of all synnes. Pope gregory and siluester and po∣pe nicholas and pope pelagius and pope honou{is} eche of hem graūted to the same place M. yere of pardon & as many karyns. Also there lyeth the bodys of dyuers od holy {per}sones whiche were to lōge to write of. And so the grace yt is at saint sebastiās is groūded yt it can not be taken away ¶Itē in ye chirche of saint mary ma¦yor afore written. afore the quyer is the ymage of our lady whiche seint luke dyd peynte whiche ymage seīt gregory dyd bere from saint mary mayor to saint peters the appostle & so comyng afore the castel of saint aūgel he see an an̄gell ī ye hyght of ye castel hauīg ī his hande a burninge
And wych hym a greate multitude of aungels. whiche songe afore that ymage. ¶Regina celi letare &c. Ans¦wering saint gregory. Ora pro noi deumallīa ¶ Item in the chirche of saint Iohn̄. Latrynens the pope Siluester yaf therto as many yere of pardon. as it reyned droppes of water the day that he halowed the same chirche. And that tyme it reyned so sore that that noo man had seen a gret∣ter rayne before that daye. And whan he had graunted this. he thought in hym selfe whedyr he had soo moche power or not. ¶Thenne ther came a voyce from heuen. and sayd pope siluester thou hast power I nough to yeue that {per}¦don and god graunted thus moche therto. That and a man had made auowe too Iherusalem and lacked good to doo his pilgrimage yf he go from saint peters chirche to saint I. Latrynes he shalbe dischargid and haue absolution of that promise. And ony tyme that a man cometh to saint Iohn̄ latrynes. He is quye of all synnes and of all penaunce wt that. that he be penytent for s sin¦nes Blyssed is the moder that be∣reth the chylde that heryth masse. on saterdayes at saint Iohn̄ Latry∣nes for he delyuaryd all them that he desyreth out of purgatory too the nombre of lxxvij. soules. ¶Item vpon the on tour of the chir∣che stondyth a double Crosse yt was made of the swerde that saint Iohn̄ was beheded wyth. and at euery ty¦me that a man beholdith that crosse he hath. xiiij.M. yere of pardō and as many karynes. of all penaūce. and at ye high. aulter ye haue remis¦shion of all Sines and of all penūce & inumerable {per}dō. more tha he ne∣deth for hym self There is the gra¦ue that seint Iohn̄ laide him self yn. whan he hath sayd masse And than com a gret light ouer the graue and whan that light was god than fun∣de they noo tyng there but heuynly bred In that graue cometh euery good fryday in the nyght yt holy tre¦ine and oyle. & he yt putteth theryn his hed he hath an C.M. yer of par¦dō and as many karynes. And be kynde the hygh auler ston∣dith a cheyr which that god Satyr and whoo that Sitteth therin hath the in{is}{per}te of all hys Synnes releced ¶And who that visite the alle yt oir aulters hath at eche aulter. xliiij.C. yer of pardō. and as mani karynes and on the oonside of the chirch ther is a sacryfice yt is at seynt Iohn̄ bap¦tist. aultar there is the table that our lorde ee a vpon mādi thurrysday and also the tables of stone wt the .x. comandemētis that our lord yaf to Moyses vpon the mount of Synai and many other relyques that belō¦ged to our Lorde out of heuyn .iii. Square ther is in that of ye v barly loues and of the twoo ythes. and al so there is our ladyes keuyrche
Also ther is ye heuynly bred that was funde in seint Iohn̄ graue. In that offrig you haue relece of alle sinnes and of alle penance Item in ye same chirch on the high Aulter be ye hedis of saint Peter & Pauli and the hed of zacharie the {pro}phet fader of ō Iohn̄ Baptiste. wt dyuers odyr reli∣quys Itē in the same chyrch yard standith a chapel that is calid Setā¦se ther is ye face of our lorde there may ye haue run M yere of {per}dō & as many karynes. and whan the Em∣perour Constātyn{is} was Crystened tho spake he to pope Siluester. In yt that I haue geuē my hous to ye ur ship of god graunte you mekly hys grace to all them that w yg co∣meth to thys towne ho answerd the pope Siluester our d Ihū Cri¦se that be his gret mercy hath pur∣ged ō os. our gre laarye e mut purge ale thē yt visiteth this chyrch of all her sinne and of all ther penaū¦ce he that wil not beleue This may goo to seint Iohn̄ Latrynes before ye quyer dore. and there he may see in Amarbil Stō all yt vs wrhten here From seint Ihēs day ī to schorouetid all this pardō is doubled. & fro schro¦uetyd vnto ester yt pardō is there fol¦de double. blhssid ys he that may de∣serue to haue this {per}don. and in the same chapel aboue sayd may com¦nes women Item aboue that cha¦pel on the lefte syde ar steppis wich somtyme ware at Ierm and who soo goth op tho steppis on his knees he delyuereth oō soule out of purga¦tory Item in the chirch of Saint Eustace there ye may haue relece  pardō of alle sinne and that ys she¦uen and repēta of his sinne he hath a .M. yere pardō. and as many ka∣rynes Here folowt the knowelege what a karyneys IT is too good wulward and barfort vij. yere. Item to fasten bred & watter the fryday vij. yere. Item in vij. yere not too slepe oon nyght there he sle∣pith a nother Itē in vij. yere. nott to com vndir noo couered place but fit bee too here masse in the chyrch dore or porche Iē in vij. yere nott to Ete nor dryncke out of noo vessel but in the same that he made hys a∣row In. Item he that fuflleth al¦le thes poyntis vij. yere duryng do¦the and wynnethe. A. karyne that ys to sey Alenton Thus may man haue at Rome gret pardō and Soule helth blessed bē thoos pepul and yn good tyme borne that ressay¦veth thes graces & wel kepith them of the which pardō and grace Our lord ihesu Crysti mor grant to eueri good crystē man Amen. ¶Here folowt ye īdulgēte yt is graunt to other lowar chyrches in Rome ¶In ye chirch of saint Peter ad vīcu∣la the wich pope Pelagius cōsecrat & ther to graūted remissiōs of all sin. yt furst day of August be ye prayer of ye Son of theodorus ēperour which brought ye Chayne from h rin yt ā peter ye apostel wasse bounden wt
¶Item in the chirche of saint Viti & Modesti and Cressencie and Mar∣cello and other of ye nombre of v M. martirs the bodyes of whom were slayne in the same place in the tyme of Antonius Emperour and there is graunted C. yere of pardon. and as many karyns and foryesnes off the iiij parte of all synnes. and there is aplace that is auawte there lyed the body of saynt siluester the Pope and is graunted viij C. yere of par∣don. and as many karynes and re∣mission of the iij. parte of all sinnes ¶Item in the chirche of all thappo¦stles is euery day a yere of pardon. and euery feste of on of thappostles iij C. yere of pardon. ¶Item in the chirche de quatuor co¦ronato{rum} is xl. yere Indulgence. and in the test of seint Iuliane is C. yere of pardon ¶Item in the chirche of Saint felix is a M. yere of pardon ¶Item in the chirche of saint Brsy¦is a C. yere of pardon. ¶Item in the chirche of saint Mar¦cellyn and peter is a M. yere of par¦don. ¶ Itm̄ in the chirche of saint Marcelliu is a M. yere of pardon. ¶Item in the chirche of saint Cire & Iohn̄es is remission of the iiij. par∣te of all synnes. ¶ Item in the chirche of saint Iohn̄ and Paule is M. yere of pardon. ¶Item in the chirche of saynt Eustace where his body lythe his wyf and his two sonnes is M. yere of pardon. ¶Item in the chirche of saint Bar∣tylmew. where his body lyeth. and the body of saint Pawlyn is M. ye¦re of pardon. ¶Item in the chirche of saint Aun¦gell is a M. yere of pardon. ¶Item in the chirche of saint Gre∣gory is in C. yere of pardon and in the same chirche who so euer be bu∣ryed therin shal neuer be dampned ¶Item in the chirche of seint Augu∣stin is M. yere of pardon. ¶Item in the chirche of Saynt Ie∣ronimus to M yere of pardon. ¶Item in the chirche of saint Alei¦us there his body lyhe is  M. yere of pardon. ¶ Item in the chir∣che of saint saluator decline is .C. yere of pardon and l. dayes. ¶Item in ye chappel of in wellis the¦re as Saint poule was beheded is M. yere of pardō and as many ka∣rynes and the in parte of al synnes releced. ¶ Item att saint saluator in the way to saint poules is C. yere of pardon. ¶Item in the chirche of saint siluester is M. yere off par∣don. and there is the hed of saint I. Baptiste. ¶Item in the chirche of sant Iacob de singnam is in. yere of {per}dō & ye iiij. {per}te of all synnes relec and ther is the hed of saint Iames ye appostel. ¶Item in the chirche of saint Nicholas de carceril. is C. yere of pardon. ¶Item in the chirche of saint Iames in {per}a in C yere of {per}dō. & as many lentis. ¶ Itē in the hospital of spiritis vn C. yere of {per}don. and ye vii. {per}te of all synnes. releced. ¶Itē in ye chirche of same m¦chael is ij M. yere of {per}dō. ¶Itē in ye chirche of saint mathew is ij C. yere of pardon. and there is his arme & the arme of Saint Cristofere.
¶Item in the chirche of seīt Celoy is C. yere of pardon and there is ye fin¦ger of saint Nicholas the Bisshop & the fote of mary magdalene ¶Item in the chirche of seint simpli¦ci and faustinus is v.M. yere of {per}∣don. ¶Item in the chirche of Saint Anastacius in the way to saint pou¦les is M. yere of pardon. ¶Item in the chirche of saint Thomas is M. yere of pardon. And there is solen¦esse the stoles of the Romaynes. ¶Item in the chirche of saint Iohn̄ potlatyne is one soule delyuerd out of purgatory. ¶Item in the chirche of saint pōfur is C. yere of pardon ¶Item in the chirche of saint Appo∣lynaris is C. yere of pardon. ¶Item in the chirche of saint benet is C. yere of pardon. ¶Item in ye chirche of saint Andrew is M. yere of pardon ¶Item in the chirche off saint Cosma is M. yere of pardon. ¶Item in the chirche of Saint Sy∣mond and Iude is M. yere off par∣don. ¶Item in the chapel that is called. Dn̄e quo vadis. be ye steppys of the fot of oure lord hū Criste and there is M. yere of pardon. ¶Itm̄ in the chirche of saint Iohn̄ & Iames is M yere of pardon. ¶Item in the chirche of saint Ber∣nardis CCC. yere of pardon. ¶Item in the chirche of saint Luke is M. yere of pardon. ¶Item in the chirche of saint marke is M. ye¦re of pardon. ¶Item in the chir¦che of seint pantheleon is xlviij. yere of pardon. ¶Item in the chirche / of saint Panrace. is C. yere of {per}dō. ¶In the chirches of oure Lady cal∣led minoris ecclesie IN the chirche of oure Lady Called ocunda is euery frydaye in the yere. and in the feste of alholowyn remission off alle synnes. Whiche chirche was E¦defyed by one called Agryppa in the wurship of Cibylla and venus and neptym that tymes called goddes & al od thā called goddes and ye tyme y• tyme was named Pantheon. and made there the Ymage of Cibylles in golde. And after that in the tyme of pope boniface he seeng ye temple e¦defyed in the name of thoos goddis He desyred of themperour than be∣yng the yefte of the tēple the which / graūted it to ye pope thā ye pope wt gre¦te multytude of the people of Rome dedicat that place the Fyrste kalen∣das of nouembre in the wurship off our lady and alle saintis. an made and auter. and sayd masse there him sef and mynistred the sacrament to the people. and the morow after sa¦yde masse in the same place for alle soules past: ¶Item in the chirche off oure Lady called Trsciberimo. Whereas the welle of oyle breketh vp in the nati∣uite of oure lady. is vij C. yere of par¦don. And in lente iiij C. yere. ¶Item in the same Chirche are the steppes of Odraphyn prented in the stone whiche was founden vpon ye castell of saint Aungell. ¶Item in the same Chirche is one
of & ymag of our lady which seint Luke ded paynte ¶Itm̄ ī the chirch of our lady called Aracely the which Somtyme was the thambe of Octanian{is} and the∣re he saw in his visiō a fair virgine ī heuen stondyng vpon an aultir hol∣ding a childe ī her armes of yt whech he marueled ore and than he herde a voyce from heuin Sayng Hec araceli fiij dei est And a non he fel to the grounde and wurshipped cryste. & beleued in hys comyng this vision he had ī his chā¦bre where is now the chirch of saint mary ī araceli nyhe to the chapel of Sibilla and therfore it is callid saint Mary in Aracely where is now a chirch of friers mynors and there is iij.M. yere of pardon and as many lentes Itm̄ vndir the same chirch is a pson where saint Peter was in prysoned where is now a fair chapel in ye cha∣pel is a pitte in which pitte seint pet ded baptyse many marters & Seint Peter was led ou of that prison bi ye aungel and there is gret pardon ¶Itm̄ in the chirch of seint mary ye newe is on of the v ymagis of our la¦dy that seint Luke ded paynte and ī that chirch is .M. yere of pardon. & in lente ij.C yeres. Itm̄ in the chirch of saint mary trās padine at ye ij pylours to which was bounden Saint peter and seint pau¦le is iij C. yere of pardon ¶Itm̄ in the chirch called seint ma∣yde campe is xl yere of pardon ¶Itm in the cherch of seint mary in partias is ijC. yere of pardon &c{is} ¶Itm̄ in the chirch of our lady de a∣quasalina is M yere of pardon & ī ye day of cōsecracion of ye same is remis¦sion of alle synnes Itm̄ in ye chirch of our lady de apso is ij.C. yere of {per}∣don Itm̄ in ye chirch of saint mary called scala greta is C. yere of pardō Chirches of other saint{is} ¶In the chirch of saint agnes is eue¦ry day xlviij. yere of pardon ande ī the feste of ye same saint ij C yere of {per}¦don Itm̄ in the chirch of saīt susan¦ne is iij C yere of pardō. Itm̄ ī the chirche of saint Tabyne the wyf off seint aex{us} is ij.M. yere of pardon & as many karynes Itm̄ in ye chir∣che of saint praredis is remission off the iiij parte of all Synnes. & there is the pelour that cryst was boūde to & that beten Itm̄ in ye chirch of seit kateryne is ij.C. yeris of pardon Itm̄ in the chirch of saint felicis is xl yeris of {per}dō Itm̄ in ye chirch of saīt barbara is c. yere of pardon Itm̄ in the chirch of saint lucie is c yere o pardon and as many lentes. and ye iij. parte all synnes foryeuen Itm̄ in the chirch of saint elizabeth is c ye¦re of pardon Itm̄ in the chirch of saint {per}ille is a M yere of pardon Itm̄ in the chirch of seint mary mag¦dalen is c yere of pardon and as ma∣ny karynes Itm̄ in ye chirch of seīt clare is c yere of pardon Itm̄ in ye chirch of seint vinine is in M. ye¦re of pardon and in lente v M yere of pardon Itm̄ in the chirch of seīt agathe is xxviij yeris of pardon Itm̄ in the chirch of seint margeri is ij.c yere of pardō Itm̄ in ye chirch
of saint cristian is xl. yere of pardon. ¶Itm̄ all the indulgence of rome is in lente doubled. and yf ani persone falle in the case of dethe ī the way of his pilgrȳmage he is truly assoiled of alle dedly Synes and of all other whatso euer they be. Itē in ye chirch of seint mary minarua otherwyse called mynarba is a M. yere of par¦don Itē in ye chirch of saīt mari de pssebola is C yere of pardō & as ma¦ny karynes or lentes ¶ Herefo with ye stacions at Rome ¶ In the circumsicion of our lorde is stacions to saint mari transuberme Itm̄ in the epiphanye of our lord is staciōs to seīt peter ye appostel. Itm̄ in ye sonday in septuag sua. is staci¦ons to sat laurence wtout ye wales Itm̄ in ye sonday sexagekma is staci∣ons to saīt paule appostel Itm̄ in ye sonday in v. is stacyōs to seīt peter thappostel Itm̄ on ashwednysdai is staciōs to seyt sabin{is}. Itm̄ the thursday ne is staciōs to seīt Geor∣geus Itm̄ the friday folowyng is stacions to seint oir & paule Itm̄ the satterday after is staciōs to seint triphonē ¶ Itm̄ the furst sonday in lente is sta¦ciōs to seint iohn̄ latrine Itm̄ ye mō¦day is staciōs to seint peter adītula Itm̄ the tuysday is staciōs to seīt ens¦tathium Itm̄ y• wednysday is sta∣cions to seint mary maior Itē the thursday is staciōs to seint laurence called panis {per}ue Itē the fryday is staciōs to ye xij. appostels Itē ye san¦day is stacions to seīt pet thappostel ¶Itē the second sonday in lēte is sta∣ciōs to seīt mary idonicā Itē ye mō∣day is staciōs to seīt clemēt{is} Itē ye tuysday is staciōs to seint Sabia & saluia Itē ye weysday is staciōs to seīt cecilie Itē ye thursday is sta∣ciōs to seint mary transciberini. Itē ye friday is staciōs to saīt vital Itē ye Satterday is staciōs to seīt marcel¦lini & peeri ¶Itē ye iij. sonday in lēte is staciōs to seīt laurēce wtout ye walles Itē ye monday is staciōs to saīt marke. Itē ye tuysday is stacy∣on to seīt potenciani Itē ye wednis∣day is staciōs to seīt Sirte Itē the thursday is stacions to seint Cosina and damyan Itē ye friday is staci∣ons to seīt launrence in lucina Itē ye satterday is staciōs to seīt susanne ¶Itē ye iiij. sondy of lēte is stions to seint cruc{is} in ir̄lin Itē ye monday is stacions to ye iiij. coronato{rum}. Itē ye stacions on myshap is to saīt laurēce is damaso Itē ye wednysday is sta∣cions to seint poules Itē the thurs¦day is stacions to seint martine and siluester Itē ye friday is stacions to seīt ensebius Itē ye satterday is sta¦cions to seīt nicholas in carcerem ¶The v sonday passiō sonday is sta¦cions to seint peter thappostel. Itē ye monday is stacions to saint Greso∣gono. Itē the tuysday is stacions to seint Ciriacum Itē the wednys¦day is stacions to Sient marcelline The thursday is stacions too Sient appolinaris Itē the fryday is staciōs to seīt steuē ī cilio mōte. Itē ye sattdai is staciōs to seīt I. le porte liue
¶Itm̄ the v. sonday lēte palme son¦day is stacions to seīt Iohn̄ latranē∣ce Itm̄ the monday aftir is stacy∣ons to seint axedis. Itm̄ the tuys¦day is stacions to seint pristinus Itm̄ the wednysday is stacyons too seint mari maior Itm̄ ye thursday is stacions to seynt iohn̄ latranencis Itm̄ the friday good friday is stacy∣ons ad stm̄  Itm̄ the sattday is stacions to seint iohn̄ latranencis ¶Itm̄ the vij sonday called es is sta¦cions to seint mary maior Itm̄ ye monday is stacions to seint peter ye appostel Itm̄ the tewsday is stacy¦ons to seint paule Itm̄ ye wednys∣day is stacions to seint laurēce with out the walles. Itm̄ the thursday is stacions to the  appostels Itm̄ the friday is stacions to seint mary retundam. Itm̄ the satrday is sta¦cions to seint Iohn̄ latranencis ¶ Itm̄ ther be other chirches Ede∣fied in the honor of our Lady that is to sey oō chirch of our lady called mi∣norua which chirch ded make iohēs de urre emata cardinal and doctor of diuinite where he put in frier pri∣ches of the ordor of seint domynyk in which chirch the sayd doctor is bury∣ed Itm̄ there is buryed the bodi of Seint kateryn de seys Itm̄ to ye same chirih yus popes hath graū∣ted gret indulgences ¶ Itm̄ ther is another chirch. w∣hich pope Syxte the iiij. ded edefie. & callid it Seī in aia de pyso. and there he ded make friers of ye Obseru c and in the sayd chirch is oō of the v ymagis of our lady that seint inke ded paynte and to the sayd chirch is gret indulgence graunted ¶ Expliciunt indulgencie & stacions ctatis Rome. ¶ They ij. ages of the worlde from adam forward IN the begynnyng god ma∣de heuyn and erthe and all that in hem is comprehen∣ded The Syxte day of the creaciō off the worlde was made our forne fad adam. ¶The furst age of the worlde from Adam vnto noe .ij.M.Cxl. yere. ¶ The seconde age of the worlde frō noe vnto abraham. M.lx. yere ¶The thredde age of the worlde frō abraham vnto moyses CCC xx. ye¦re ¶The iiij. age of the worde frō moy¦ses vnto kynge dauid iiij.C.lxx. yere ¶ The v. age of the worlde from da∣uid vnto the transmigracion o babi¦lon v.C. yere. ¶ The .vi. age from the transmiga∣cion of babilon vnto ye comȳg of hū cryste our sauyour v.C lxxxix. ¶The vij. age of of worlde from hū
tryst nto thēde of ye worlde wherof ye  be not nombred ¶The ye∣s from the begynnȳg of ye worlde vnto ye natiuite of our lorde. v.M.C lxxxix. From ye natiuite of our lor∣de vnto his passion .xxxiij. yere ¶ Adam lyued here ouerthe ī this worlde ix.C.xxx. yere ¶Itē adam was ī lȳbo patrū .iiij.M. ii C.lxxv. yere ¶The yeris from ye natiuite of ihū Criste vnto thassupcion of our lady saīt mary .xlv. yere. ¶Frō ye na¦tiuite of ihū Cryste vnto ye passion of seit et paule .lix. yere ¶Frō the natiuite of Cryste vnto ye fyndȳg of ye holy crosse in ye mounte of Calueri by saint Elyn. quene of ye bretaygne now callid Englād. CCC.xv. yere Frō ye natiuite of our lorde hū Cryst v to ye ondacion of ye chirch of sint paulus in Londō by kyng helbert C. yere Our lady leueid in this worl¦de .lxiij yere. Therof before her ma∣riage to ioseph .xiiij. yere. And wt her blessid son our lord hū crist .xxxiii yere And after ye passiō of her bles∣sid son our sauyor she lyued .xvi. yere ¶The .vij. ages of mā lyuyng ī the worlde. THe furst age is infancie and la∣tith from ye byrth vnto vij. ye∣re of age The ij. is Childhod & en∣durith vnto xv. yere age The .iij. a∣ge is adholocencye & endurith vnto xxv. yere age The iiij. age. is you∣the and Endurith vnto .xxxv. yere a¦ge The v. age is manhod & endu¦rith vnto .l. yere age The vi. age is & lasteth vnto lxx. yere age The vij age of mā is crepill and endurith vn¦to dethe ¶The copy of a letter sent out of the lande of messys in to ye lande of Gar¦nade before ye cōquest therof. THis is which in effecte was ∣teyned in ale which the gret Capeteyne of the Reame of meye. writeh to the Reame of garnade In especialle to a gret alfayke which is called Maamet vengalip take out of Arabye language in to Castilian. ¶Preised be god only in vnite. and the grate of god and his saluaciō wt machomet his prophet seruaūt and messanger to the lord whom beeue to be of creacion we honor the igh almyghty exalted and to geder pre∣se we his maruailes The honorable auncient alfayques predicatores. in especial the honorable vertuous wi¦se & discret abnadaly almifiky mach¦met vengalip auen aladep̄ emele god almyghty mor prosper your ho¦nor and the honor of alle the honora∣ble aunciēt of realme and cōteinew your suerte and peas I. send to gree¦te you as he that loueth you. and is your neybour and beleuith in the la¦we of god and his {pro}phet machamet as ye doo areuandegh almynyk{is} ye god mot remedy writith this leter & bryng it good euer preyng god to cō¦ty your suerte for the suernesse of the contynual keping of this holy la¦we for therby you haue to belauf. & ther with that god kepe you aye de free ¶ Here we haue vndirstond what
hathe behappd of the modes of that Reame of ye gret euil which they ha∣ue had by the meane of ye enemi fals beleuyng▪ and how mani plac{is} and fortressis he roe. And caste out the duellers of tham out of ye castels tow¦nes and citees and we knowe ye gret necessite and streytnes that ye be in god knoweth the gret sorow. and dis¦plesur whiche therof cometh to all ye moors Therfore we may noo more doe for that is sentenced vpō that re¦ame that this enemy hath to wȳne It without any witholdyng. & thus we fynde in the scriptus and book{is} of god and so say alle the aunciōt wy¦se mē & yt which must be must be so it is sentenced that he hathe to wyn∣ne that reame and paite of this ther is noo more but put all in the hand{is} of god and resaiwe all his sentences for wel and a byde his mercy and to holde vp your hādis to him for they may not doo any thing & make prey and fasting for. ther is noo necessite but sone comyth remedy. And to prey him too with drawe the will of this enemy fals beleuyng of that cō¦quest and trouble to yt which he put∣teth you. for the lenger he pursueth. to the more necessite he shal put you til he hath wonne that reame. And from henforth we may not any more remedy you but whā we sawe the messanger of your kynge. Our kyng whom god exalte & yeue mych more than the pepul may thinke for he promysed him of where and bar∣ly xxv. Fanegas and v.C. Horses and he ppower to get this to the wurshipfull marchaunt  alazar. Which laboreth very well and puttith good diligence ther too and in alle thinges which be too the wele and prophyte of the reame to ye which mess̄ger he yth mych honor. and euer uch him wel more than ye an thinke & to his hādis is reoued all this almes & in lyke the∣re we haue resayued a letter from ye right honorable lord alphaky the al¦kayde in the which he preieth vs o helpe in the necessite and trouble w∣hich that Reame is In and ī wy to be wonne. Of the which gret sorow and trouble hath ben to all the moo∣ris yeue we alle vs to god sith that ī god is all In him must you yede yo∣ur truste. Salme highly with honorable sa∣lutacions to the honorable lordis Alfak{is} studyeng in the lawe of god and of his prophete machamet. In especiall to the lorde alphake eueas rgy and to the lord alphaky alcaī¦de and to all the lordis Sustiners off the lawe of mahamet god almygh¦ty yeue you parte of his saluacion & make you lukky and kepe that Rea¦me and alle the mos therin and so¦ne sende his remedy and the salua∣cion of god and pite and his blessing be with you generally. Fro the cite offesse ye .x. day of march lxxxx. yeris machomen that is to  M.iiij.C.lxxxvi
¶ The Copy of a letter sent frō the Dowdan of Babilon vnto the pope of Rome UNto the most holyest and fa∣uorablist price in erthe vica∣ry and lieftenaunt oft Cryst euermore during lord innocence the viij. the grettist bishop of the Cite of rome and conseruator of the Cryste feith and religion prince of alle lord{is}. and princes of Cristedom lord of the lande and see and fdis mayntener of right moderator and encresar off all goodnes. Etir{per} of synners and grettest interpiter of dew lauwe The stede of god vsing in erthe ¶ Abdalazus Soldan of babilon. ye disposer of equite and of right em{per}∣or of the worlde and of ye feith of ma¦hamet chief prince of dyuyne precep¦tis seruator and deensor of the lord{is} of assia ye grettest lord bothe of good and euyll most iust arbiter. and Iu∣ge of trouth and most wurshypfull wurshipper of peas and Iustice The most right wisnes lyuylly descē¦did from the stirp of prophettis aboue alle princes and lordis not oonly of moores but alsoo emptyng vpon ful many cristen lordis and holy hou¦ses beluing and firmly hopiyg in on very god sendith full gret saluting{is} in ye name of god the which euermo∣re duere thi mynde ī wel doyng for in as mych as thou art a boe cardi¦nals patriarkis archbishops abbot¦tis priest{is} monkes and Nonnes ru∣lying and gouernyng the vniuersal clargie of crystendom thou maist ne¦uer auoyde from the tryall of trou∣the and the right pathe of goodly ar¦kis as in a maner a god ī erthe and the sacred brethe of cryst. we notifye vnto the. that oon which is callid gē¦gemyon of the gret Turk{is} Sonnes the which turk{is} now late the dyuine burnes for his ineffable Iustice hathe taken to his grace where that the said Gēgemy as in the last yere past hapned to com from Cicilia too rhodis how be it the gret mastir off the rhodis and religyon had yeuen be hem before tyme the faith of suer¦tee and sauf conduyt. neuertheles a∣geynst the promisse and feith yeuen the said gēgemi was takē & to prison mancipate ageynst alle office of hu∣manite and ageinst all right. how be it of tymes without nōbre it hath ben desired that he myght be resto∣red vnto his furst libartee but that myght not be opteyned Form as myght as the forsaid mastir of ye rho¦dis Did send the said gēgemy vnto the ferther placys and kyngdomes to be kepte Wherfore whan the moder and the children of this gengemy be vnd our power bothe nyght and day in our presence for his mysse fortue they we¦pe and waile and neuer cease desirīg to see and enbrace him they deman̄∣de of vs with instant priers that we shulde treate with thy holynesse for his delyberacion for as mych as the forsayd mastir of ye rhodes and a no∣ther gretter than he ī whoes power he is kepte as a haytyf in myserable seruitude vnd the obedyence of thy blessidnes. In all good maner we
prey thy holynesse as thou arte mo∣ste Iuste and {per}petual name of good¦nes to compelle ye forsayde mayster to restore the sayde gegey to his lybartee so wronfully wyth holden and delyuer hym from so wranful∣seruytude Also this dede so declyned from all equyte and honeste that yt maye not be wtout a grete note and reprise of the cristen name and whō for the most hygh god shal wee calle them that haue noo feyth they wt a bek on thinge wyl afferme. and the same streit wyl denye. and that thei wt other promyse at one tyme at ano¦ther tyme vnfeythfully they wylle▪ deney. We must take hede most ho∣ly fader lest whan we wolde bee cale¦lyd feythfull that we lacke feyth the whiche or promysse as well ought to be kepte to an enemy or an Iniust or cruel man. Certs yf we shulde breke our promesse we were not bet¦ter than vnfeythful men. But mo∣che more dete stable thy Hoolnes knoweth yt many deuout placys off thy feyth ben ender our cōmaunde¦ment as Ihrm and bedlem where thū Crist the son of the virgine mari was borne prayd vnto and saluted Saint katheryne also the Spose of crist is buried in the monte of synai wt fulle greate reuerence and voyce ye place is vsed and many od Innu∣merable placis of deuociō ben vnd our protecion to the whiche placis. cometh euery yere so grete multitu∣de of cristen men of all maner of or∣durs of priueis dukes Ientylmen and comnte yt is incredyble to be sa∣yde and so grete a multitude off cris¦ten men yerly passyng by our king¦domse to fulfylle their voywys and pylgrimagis sawt{is} ne wrong wee sufy not to be done but wee wyll yt they haue free comyng and goyng for wyl not suffer our intemer at & ī¦violat feyth in no maner o promes∣se to be corrupte or defilled. ¶O tho most noble bishop it belon∣geth to thy dewte of dignite & thy cri¦sten feith in ye whiche worthily thou holdest the primacie to haue remem¦braunce and cure of thy most clerest name and glorie for thou art ye clere lyght of thy feyth  ye serten of ye crys¦ten relygion for thou suffrest no sa∣crelege of thy subgect{is} to be comyete in thy feyth thou mayst yf thou wil¦te lyghtly put a way yt gret spot and infamy of thy cristē name Serteyn∣ly yf thou so do thou doeste a thinge worthy preysing for the which wee shal more ben volent vnto thy holy¦nesse & to all yt wyl visit ye holy lande we shal hybite our self more graci¦ously & more burne & what so euer thou aske we shall study to oure po∣wer ye whiche is ferme. & stable it to racyfye. & fulfylle but for as moche as this thinge is gretly inpread in our hert a lyghtly all thingis maye not be sent in writting we haue put ye charge herof vnto our oato and messanger Marfote yt whiche ans∣weh our wyl & mynd in this behalf wherfore more playnly he shal certi¦fye thy hoolynesse ye whiche I praye god may fare wel in his feyth & sou∣le from Cair .xxi. day of rouē. . M CCCClxxxviij.
¶The  of the messenger to the pope. BEarissime. Moost blessed fa∣der primate and chefedome of Cristen men. whom almi¦ghty god by hys Ineffable uruin∣nes to the moderacion of rightwys∣nes. and to the Rule of good lyf in er¦the to be kepte hath creat and erecte god the yeuar of all goodnes gran̄∣te the prosperaūce and happy encre¦ses. whan my noble prince the Sou¦dan of babilone had decerned to sen¦de me his oratour to fraunce and to Naples he commaundyd me in oni wyse in this my iournay that I shul¦de present my selfe before thyn holy∣nes how be it he hath not sente opin¦ly comō orotour & presentis off ple∣sure as it longyth to thy pontificall dignyte. and as his greate and In∣warde loue towarde thyn holynes askyth. for that had he done yf the greate Turke wyth whom my lord hath batayll and grete Enmyte. shulde not suppose that the Sonda∣ne send an oratour or a messanger vnto the grettest bysshop of Cristen¦dome for to ask helpe of hym. whan that my lord by hym self is able nor only to ut done the Malyce off the Turke but also to auenge the Iniu∣ry as it hath ben ofte tyme sene that hath ben done to hym Serteynly ye cause chief Hostylyte and Enmyte yt is betwene my lorde the Soudane and the grete turke be namly ij. the whiche my lorde hath commaūdyd the too shewe to thyn hyghns  cause as breueli as we may we shal shewe thyn hyghnes Soo it is that whyle this Turkes fader a lytell be¦fore his deth sent a messanger vnto the soudane bostyng hym selfe that he had subduwed the one half of cris¦tendome and shewyd that he wold prouyde to subdewe the other halfe to his Empire wherfore he prayed the Soudane that he oon his parte shulde destroye the holy lande and yt he shulde prohibyte the passage frō all cristen pylgrymes promysynge hym sef feythfully to paye .xxx.M. ducatis yerly to ye Soudane ye whi∣che somme the soudane Ressayueth yerly for tribut of cristen men more ouer ther be aboue CCM. of men & wymen cristened to whom we my∣nyster iustice and shewe our self mo¦re fauorably to theym than we do to our other subgettis people of mo∣ris. for in noo maner wyse he wyll goo from the ordenaunce and lawe stabled by whiche his grete for fadir had ordeyned and cōmaunded whā the Turke had harde this answer-he dismayed grtly herof & mae h̄ redy anon wt a gret army of knigh¦tes redy to distroy ihr̄m. Whan the soudā vnderstode his malice he cau¦sed the holy lande to be better repa¦red and more suerly kept for ye more displesur of the turke the whiche de∣de the turke toke so greuously in so miche yt whā he shulde dey he cōma¦undyd his son yt he shuld distroye b strengeth & myghty power the ho lande and make it desolate.
¶The seconde of yte is this. for whan that the Turke had beseged the Rodes by lande and by water. he it oppressyd wyh a greate nauy of shippes In this tyme the Souda¦ne sent to the grete mayster of ye Ro∣des confortyng hym offeryng hym self to gyue hym ayde and helpe yff he had nede of men or money to de∣fende hym ayenst the Turke. The whiche the turke greuoysly toke to hs her wherfore he sayd why shul¦de the Soudane bee so redy to gyue ayde or socour to Cristen men I swe¦re by machmetehe shal for euer suf∣fer the Indignacion of my Sonnes Than O holy fader theis ben the ij. causes grettest that bee off Enmyte betwene the Soudane and the Tur¦ke. Furthermore my mooste excellēt prince cōmaunded me in hys name Incessauntly to praye thyn holynes that thou wylt vouthsaf to entretee wyth the grete mayster of the rodes wyth whoom the one of the greate turke Sonnes callyd gengemy the whiche vnder colour of feyth & sauf-conduite is wrongfully taken. And wytholden. Maye be  vn∣to his fyrst lybarte. for whiche hys moder and his children bee there o∣wne free wyll hath put theym self in to our warde. and so the be Redae vnder the pour of the soudane. And they neuer ceasse of preyers and tee¦ris humbly to beseche his hyghnes too procure the delyueraunce of the sayde gengemy the whiche he hath graunted hem to procure and with all his power it to doo Srely hi holines in this behalf might shewe ful grete kyndnes vnto the sayd sou¦dan as I shall more largely shewe vnto the. Whan it shall the to assig¦ne the tyme daye and place wherby al cristen men that wyl visyt the ho¦ly lande shall haue more fauor as it shalbe opynly knowen ¶The crat of grffyng and plantin¦ge of trees and altering of frutis as well in colours as in taste. TO graf frute that shal ha¦e no Core. Take a graf nd bowe it in bothe ended combyng and yt bo¦the ends graf wyse and So fasten theym in the stoke. And yf it growe soo wyth the tree. kyt away the gre∣te ende and lete the smaller ende gro¦we and his frute shall haue no core. Yf thou wyl make apls redd take a graf of an apyll tree and graf it in a stoke of elme or aller and it shal be¦re redde aplys. ¶Item another for the same bore an hole in an apl tree to the ithe & tempir in waer what colour tho wylt and then put it in the hole and stop it wt a pynne & ye appil shalbe of ye same colour yt then puttist into the tree.
¶It is to be noted that euery tree yt is planeyd and set on saint lambert{is} daye in to the erthe shall not perish but proue and come to profght ¶Yf thou wyl haue a pere tree fulle of frute or ellis as moche as it hath ben wote to bere before. Tempyr Samony wyth water and putt it in to an hole that is percyd to the pi∣he of the tre. and stoppe the hole wt a prune of the same tree or off an o∣ther and it shal bere as it was won¦te or moche more. ¶Yf thou wyl haue ye frute to smell lyke spyces of rygh other as muske bawme or other spycis. Make on hole in lyke wyse in the tre and stop¦pe it ageyne and the frute shal smel¦le ad suour aftere the spycis that thou puttest in to the tree. ¶Yf an olde tree begynne to wae drye. In this wyse quytchen hym a¦geyne. See that the erthe that is a¦boute the rons be done away and cleue two or iij of the grettest roetis wyth an Axe and putte a wedge off tree in to the cliuing and hele the ro∣tis ageyn wyth the same erthe. ¶Another for the same perte ye tree thorugh wyth a percer Crosse wyse or wyth a wymble and ye strengeth of the tree shal begynne to waxe yō∣ge. Yf thou wyl haue a frute tree that is our. to bee made to bee swete fru¦te delf the tree rounde aboute. And donge the rootis wyth pyggis don¦ge and so the frute shalbe made swe¦te. ¶Item another for the same make an hole in the sour tree wyth a per∣cer to the pyth and in to the hole put water tempred with hony and stop¦pe the hole ageyne wyth a pynne of the same tree Yf thou wylt plante an Almaunde tree or a walsh nott tree or a Chery tree or a peche tree. put the kyrnels of whiche thou wylt in water in da∣yes and than putte many kyrnels to gyder in the erth or seuerelly and and whan the sprynge is growen oute and hath stonde soo an hole ye¦re. than take hym out of the grun¦de and sette them where thou wylt And it is to be noted that euery tree the braūches must be cutt in setting tyme sauf the peche tree whiche mu¦ste haue his dry braunches kit onely ¶yf the peche tree begynne to dron¦ke let hym be wel moysted at the ro∣te wt drest{is} of wyne & the same mon∣styng shal kepe hym from shedyng of his frute. and some seyn̄ that and the roet{is} be moysted wt water of the decokcien of benes. it shall quyk the tree gretly and yf he cast his frute or they be rype. make holes wt a wym¦yl in the roet{is} & make pin̄ys of w¦lowe and smyte them faste in. and ye frute shal abyde on faste Inough.
¶Yf an appyl tree begynne to rotē or yf the aplus begynne to wex rus∣ty. than ye barke of hym is syke. thā kyt it wyth a knyf and late it be ope¦ned and whan the humour therof is some what flowen out. Lette donge hym wel and stoppe dilygently his wounde wyth klep. ¶The quence tree all the tyme that he is abill to be tranlatyd. he wolde be remeued euery iiij yere and that shal make hym bere grete plente of frute afterwarde. ¶The chery tree loueth colde eyer & moyst grounde. but somme Chery trees ben full lykyng in hylly plac{is} the best settyng of chery tres is in ye moneth of Nouembre and yf neede bee in the ende of Ianiuer. And yf a chery tree Roote in ony wyse make an hole wyth a grete persour vnder that roteh. that the water that cau∣seth the rottynge maye haue yssue out and it is to suppose this medecin is good for all maner of tres that be¦gynne to rotte. ¶Also it good for all maner of trees than whan a bough is kyt away yt the place that is cutt by heled & coue¦red wyth clay or some other defen¦sable plaster for defence of the regne that it make not the tree to rotte▪ ¶The plantyng of prunes. in colde and moyste placis is best in euerll and Marche. and the stones muste bee sette a hande breede in the erthe and whan they haue stonde soo an hole yere take vp the springis of thē and sette them depper in the groun¦de. and the stones must lye in water iij. dayes or they bee sett. ¶The medlar wyl bere welle yf he bee plantyd. but graf hym in a whi¦te thorne called an hawthorne. and they myll bere the more plentuosy Yf thou wyll haue many rooses in arberer. thou muste take the harde pepyns of the same rooses that bee right rype and sowe hem in ye erthe in seuerell or in march. And whan they springe dew them wyth water & after the space of a yere thou must Translate theym departed further from other. In what od place. thou wilt Yf thou wyl that  bere whit grapes. and on the other syde redde puruey that a wh vyne and a rede be sette nye to gyder. And whan they bee Rotted mesur of eche both lyy moche. And of eyher pae a∣waye half endlang vnto the pth & Ioyne hem to gyder & bynd thē so yt
ether sap mete wythout disioyning and warppe it to gdyr wyth a sou∣ple lynnen cloth and at euery thred dayes and moyste it wyth water  hi borgeon and after yt they begro¦wen to geder thou mayst kitt a wey¦che oon roete and the odir may bere it and that wyne shel bere bothe re∣de grapes and white not wt stondig the oon roete be don a wey and also then mayst doo wt twoo pere trees or ij. appull tre braunces. If thu will haue grapis growe on A plointeree or on A Cherytree Set a vine vndir oon of theis trees which thou wilte and whan the vy¦ne begynneth to growe bore that o∣dir tre thorough wt an Awgne accor∣ding to gretnysse of the vine thā dra¦we the thorugh the tree an pare A wey the vppar Rynde of ye same vy¦ne as fer as shalbe in the hold & soo sffr it growe & whan bothe be Ioy∣ned to gedir Cut A wey the roete en¦de of the vyne by the tree and Sow¦de the place weel of the cuttinge and drawing of ye vyne thorugh the hold and the kyttyng A wey of the Rote of the vyne must be don in marche and Som men wil Say it must be doon or the knottis begynne to bur∣geon. yt for the streit drauing the bur¦geons be not huet and thō maist do ye same wt dyuers trees and dyuers frutis and make oon tree to bere di∣uers frutis of dyuers colores ¶Item it is to wet that A vyne be ī good erthe. and Sprede it Selff of mykel in many scourges it is good to kyt hem of wt a knyff & yf it lache yet ouer mych delue the stock a bou¦te and fille ye it ful of grauel of a flo∣de medled wt asshes Also Som men in to the pit a good quāttee of smale stones and Say that it is good ther¦fore. ¶Item it is te wet than wan ye mo∣ne is in tauro it is good tyme to plā∣te trees of greynes and pepins and whan she is in cākro Leone or Libra it is good wurch in trees that bethe newe sprongen. And whan the mo∣ne is in vrgine it is good tyme to so∣we alle maner thingis. And from ye Middes of septembre in to the myd¦des of Decembre is opene tyme off plantynge. and ryght oo from the myddes of Ianiuer to the Myddes of marche but yet in theis tymes it is good to these whan the mone  vi.vij.viij or ix. dayes befor the fall Mone. Also after ye full Mone whā she is xxixxij xxiijxxiiij or xxv. dayes olde for in thes quarters of the Mo¦ne is moste temperat. ¶Item euery plantyng it is to dys∣pose it so that the sonne beames mo¦we come to the rote or to the erth frō the oure of terce vnto noon. and thā ben they plantyd in the best maner And that thoo trees that be beryng and of grete height that party that stoode toward the north he bee sette ageynste the north wynde. and the north west wynde. For the heyghts north wynde. and the north weeste
wynde haue kynde to kiele and drye too mych trees that be newe sett for her vnmesurable gretnesse. ye erthe muste be ordeyned soo that it be ney¦ther too fat ne to grauelly but {pro}por¦cionably. ¶ Alle maner pepius cornellis and and greynes must be set in ye erth in depnes of iiij. or v. fingers brede Do that eche be from odur half a fote. Al¦wey keping this speciall rule that ye ende or greyne of the pepin that sto∣de next the Roere be northest ī the set¦tinge and that other ende vpward. toward heuyn Thā thō most moyst thē twyes or thries ī the day not ye∣ting but dewyng or springling. this is a preuitee. Among cunnyng men that in vere is most cōuenable tyme for seedis greynes and pepius and in autumpne of springis and plant{is} ¶ Whan thou wilt take a setlyng yt spryngeth out of a nother trees Roe¦te make a delf ther aboute aftir quā∣tite therof and so deepe l thou com to the gret rote that the spring growt out of than thou most cut it holding the edge of the knyf toward the tree grounde. and kirt it soo with a slope draught. and leue as mych of the er∣the a boute the roote and stok of the setlynge as thou may and Set it in a good grounde ordeyned therfore & in aconuenyēt tyme as is be forsayd and so yf any sprȳg that growt out of any tree hese it that growith right out that be not ouir lōge but euin wt out any smale braunches holdyng ye knyf in the cuttynge alwey towar¦de the tree, as is aboue said. Yf thou will remeue a tree that is gret or beryng frute Chese thee a ful moone from the middis of Octobre to the middis of decembre hauȳg vp the roens as hole as thou best may leuyng as myche of his owne erthe a boute the roetis as thou may with the same Maner and ordur as thou doest with setlȳg o smale trees and setlyng it is noo fors though the mo¦ne be not euyn in the fulle soo she bee in the .ij. or iij. quartir the gouernai¦le of thes plantis is dowblyng of be¦ryng of frute Yf thou wil kepe late set plantis ke∣pe hem from from es{per}tyn  and from wyndis nameli in heruest for it is not so gret defeula in vere. ageynst the comyng of wynter set or steke a boute the setlyng many bo¦wes that ye northerne winde of get∣nes of odur wȳdis distrot not. doo donge medlide with strawe aboute the stoke toward the roete of a good thiknes that frost and snowe cougei¦le not on the roete and make a depe valey a boute the roete the Space of vi. or vij fote that ye water abyde not and freese a boute ye roete in haruest that is betwene Somer and wȳter that whan wȳter cometh it may be
fillid with donge and soo late it ston∣de all the wynter and in vere put vn¦der the dong new erthe & cut alwey alle the vnprfitable braunches and make it clene a boute the stok & the roetis from wormes sufus. And mosses and euil wyndis goȳg abou¦te the braunches alle the closse of thȳ orcharde wolde be set a bout with o∣ther highe trees that bere noo frute that the flours myght be kepe Sauf from wyndis And be ware that noo frute begadired of noo tree befo¦re the tyme for that is right a gret & a priuy harmyng to the tree. ¶ The maner of graffing. The graff stoke must be chosen in a good groūde and it must be smothe and euyn and cut it without the Er¦the the lengith of a fote or more yf it be as gret as thy thombe or more if it be gret and se that the cuttyng be euin ouer thwarte the stok and a sy∣den and it muste be clouen aboue in the middis of the pithe the lengith of i. fynger brede and in the clyfte Set thy graf which must be choseen of ye best tree the stok is of Chese ye graf yt stōdith right vp toward heuȳ that hath a knot of the forneyere and an ynche benethe ye said knott kytte thi graf and thwyte it on bothe sydes e∣uȳ ī maner of a wedge as fere as it shall goo into the clyfte of the stokke it must be so euen thwetē that the ey¦er may not com bytwene the clyfte and the graf & thā close it with good tem{per}at erthe a boute ye greffe for de∣fens of rayne and wedur. Yf thou will greff dyuers frutis v∣pon ē stok that hath as many braū∣chis as thou will haue graffes on & in euery braunche sett a graf in ma∣ner and fourme as said before and e¦uermore chese thy graf on the son ye syde of the tree that berith it and nex¦te the toppe yf thō may & thō mayst gref dyuers frutis in oon clyfte but non of them may be thykkar than odur as thy reson will telle thee in ye workyng ¶ To haue frute without cores loke thou haue a sufficient graff stok and doo therwith as I. said before. Che∣se a graf of a good merle tree and cut it on this maner that the ende of the graff that was vpward next the fir¦mamēt must bethweten lyke the ne¦der of a comon graffe and the nedur ende turned vpward it is too be don sleely this rule is trewe in alle trees that haue stones and kyrnels but a vyne it behouith too cutt yt is down∣warde next the Erthe with gret cu∣nyng and sleight Yf thō will haue a vyne growe on a chery tree & haue ye taste of cherys Sett a vyne by a cherytree till it gro¦we & in ye begynȳg of feuell whan ty¦meys make an hole thorough ye che¦rytree in wat heiggt thou will & as oftē as thō will & drawe thorugh the ye hole a braunche of ye vyne so yt it fil∣le the hole
And shaue awey the olde barke off the vyne as myche as shalbe in the hoole and shaue it in soo that the sha¦uen place of the braūche stopp full ye hole of the chiritree. and than cut a∣way the Roete end of the vyne. and wrapp it wel aboute with good er∣the and bynde it well with lynnē clo¦the and kepe it wel in all thing as is said modur graffyng but som men late the roete ende of the vyne be vn¦cutt a yere til it be Sowded with the chiritee and than cut it a way and yt is a good maner and asure and soo it may be doo with dyuers trees off dyuers frut and the grape and the vyne shall haue sauour of hem. and soo of euery tree may be grraffid in other and it is a meruelous graffȳg Yf thou will haue a tree bere dūs frutis and of dyuers colours and di¦uers sauaure. In the furst yere graf in dyuers braūches of a cheritree dy¦uers aples to thy lykyng and leue sō of the braunches vngraffed the ij. ye¦re make holes thorow the chirytree and drawe thorught yt hole a vyne braunches the vtter rinde shauē off as is be foresaid and ī the same ma∣ner thorow another hole. a red rosar and doo ther with as is beforsaid off the vyne & this diuersitee thou may doo aftir thyn owne lykyng Yf thou will haue frute of diuers co¦lours thou shalt make an hole in a∣tree up the roete euyn to the pithe of the tree and a non doo in ye hole good asure of almayne so that it be ny full and stoppe the hole wel and iuste wt a short pynne and wrapp it well wt tempred erthe and bynde it wel as thou doest agraff and the frute shal∣be blew colour and this may be doo wt alle colours ¶ A tretise of the iiij. sesons of the ye¦re and of the iiij. element{is} which the be and of what nature and ef the ca¦ruculare daies THe .iiij. Elementis ben theis. Eyer fyre erthe and want al¦so ther be the .iiij. humors in mā and they bē theis. blood red color blakis color. and flewme ¶ Also ther be the .iiij. sesons ī the ye∣re. In which a mā owt  behouith to be gouerned The furst is vere and yt begynneth the vij. Ide of feuerell. & endurith to the vij. Ide of may ī this tyme wereth bloed that is ī the furst humor of mā and acordith with the. Eyer that is the furst element for is wafy and hote as is vere that is the furst tyme of the yere. In that tyme bok{is} of medecyn lerneth vs to take. drynk solyble for to purgen the bodi of euyll humors and to ete flesh and drynke drynkes that ben holsum for mannys bodi as yong porke and de¦ne motō and lambis fleshe and kyd∣dis and fowles that ben of the lande but noo watir fowles And fresh watir fish porett{is} tame ne¦pis and partely. and other erbis off medecyn and to drinke good clene a  and noo stronge Ale & theis thȳg{is}
make clene blod so thei be not surfet∣ly taken ¶ Then. tyme and seson of the yere is Estas or so iii and be ginnithe the vij. Ide of may and lastith vnto the vij. Ide of august. In ye tyme werith reed colour and that is the ij. humor in man and acordith to the ij. clemēt that is fir for it is hot and drye In yt tyme men shulde not drynk{is} Erbis. nor lete blode but if it were for gret nede nor myche faste. It's good in that tyme to ete welso¦den fleshe of all maner bestis and all maner fowles Saufporke ī may is good too forbere and ete alle maner fishe wt vynegre or ense of grapys or vergews made with good erbis sawge and sauery and seed of anneis fenelsed and comyn and it is good to drynke wurmod iii. tyme in the we∣ke tempred with wine it is good also to tempir it with water and drynke noo stronge ale and vse louach see. & letews and they shall tem{per} wel the red color and kepe the from syknes ¶The .iii tyme of ye yere is ant̄y¦n or haruest and it begynnyth the vii. Ide of august and lastith into the vii. Ide of nouēbre and in that tyme wereth blak color that is the .iij. hu∣mor in man and accordith to the .ii element that is erthe and that is col∣de and due In that tyme is good too take drynke Solyble that purgithe the bodye of euill and blak color that mych is in a man and he may som∣tyme late him blood in that seson. & ete litel fresh fleshe and namly fresh bef and mylke is good to drȳke and good wyne mesurably and good sta¦le ale and noo newe ale. and ete sca∣led fish with peper and wyth ginger and galingale and ete baies and stā¦march seede and comȳ and browort roet{is} wyth wyne or with other licor fasting and ete not an own or ij. aft. ¶ The iiij. tyme and seson of the yere is Iems or winter and beginnith ye vij. Ide of nouembre and lastith to ye vij. Ide of feuell and in that tyme en¦troth flewme. and that is the iiij. hu¦mor in man and accordith to the iiij. Element that is water for that cold and moyste as is wyntir. and ī that tyme men shulde lete them bloode ī ther bodys by garsinge. but not on veynes but if it be the more neede. & a mā must kepe him from drȳkyng of to mych stronge drink{is} Also pow¦dred flesh is good to ete & for as mych as all fisshes aftir water bēflewma¦tike therfore they be better rost than so{is}en. and vse mustard and pe{per} and ofte tymes chewe in thy mouthe pel¦leter of spayne and such other thing{is} as wil cause the flewme to voyde. & also ete feuel sede comy and ache for theis seed{is} destroyen flewme that al¦le the euellis in a mānys body begȳ∣nith of ¶ The Canycular daies be gynne xv kalendas of august and endiue to the iiij. nonas of septembre ī which seson is gret {per}ill to take syknesse and
it is perillus to take drynk{is} or mede∣cyns or too be lat blod but if it be for gret nede. and that must be aftir the middis of the day. ¶ The crafte to make a watir to ha∣ue spottis out of wullen cloth TAke a galon of rennyng watir a pynte of aqua vite .ij. vnc{is} of alom .ij. vncis white oprose .ij. vnc{is} of woed asshes at of all. white so∣pe. and putt all this in a vessell till it take restnes all a nyght. ¶ The fourme and the mesur to me¦te lad by THe lengith of a barly corne iij tymes make an ynche Soo that the barly growe in comon soyle not to leuene too mych cōposti. and xij. ynches make a fote & .iij▪ fote ma∣ke a yarde and v. quatirs of the yar¦de make an elle .v. fote make a pace. C.xxv. pace make a furlong and viij furlong make an english myle. & xvi furlong make a frensh lenge v. yar∣dis dī. make a perche in londō to me¦te lande by and that perch is xvi. fo∣te dī. longe Indyuers odur placis in this lande they mete grounde by po¦lis gaddis and roddis som be of xviij foote om of .xx. fote and som xxi. fote in lengith. but of what lengith Soo euer they be C.lx. perches make an alur for as a mark of english monei conteyneth an C.lx. pence soo euery akir lande conteyneth C.lx. perchies and as a noble cōteyneth .lxxx pse soo half an aker lāde conteyneth lxxx perchis &c. And as the half a noble conteyneth xl. d soo a roede lande cō∣teyneth .xl. perchis &c. and a perche of grounde shal cōteyngne ī lengith of the perche euery wey ī the maner of a cheker soo yt it be as lōge as bro¦de. ¶ Xvi. fote and half makith a perch as is aboue said that is .v▪ yardis & half .v.C. foote by ffe score to the .C. markith a furlōg that is xxxviij per¦chis sauf .ij. fote viij. furlong. make an english myle that is v M. fote & so iij.C. and iij. perchis also an engli∣se myle. ¶ The generall cursse to be declared iiij. tymes in the yere As in the coūcel of Oxenford it is prouided and decreed that the sentence of excom∣municacion whiche is sayd me de∣nall iiij. tymes in the yere to be pro∣noūced that is to sey the first sonday of aduent or comyng of our lord Ihū Cryst the first sonday of lenten The sonady ī the feste of the Trinite. and the sonday within ye vas of the bles∣sid virgine our lady saint mary
¶ Articulo. I. Alle they ben acurssed the rightis of holy chirch as in londis teūtts rent possessions marices lesurs pasturs weies pathes wetingli and vniustli or maliciously defenlen and withol∣den concelen huyden or to witholde or to auoide procuren. ¶ The ij. articule Also all they that entenden māliciou¦sly to depriue the good pees and trā¦quillite of our Soueraȳ lorde the kȳ¦ge and of the reame presumen to per¦turbe and trouble ¶ The iij. articule Also althey whiche fraudelently and wetingly false witnesse bere or {pro}curē to be borne or alsoo whiche such false witnesse in bryng or vnder arerē  cause of matrimony that is to sey w∣here it is don ageinst matrimony or to the disenheritaunce of any other. ¶ The iiij. articule Also alle aduocatis whiche in causis of testamentis or matrimony settē or puttē malicously false excepcioūs or to be sett and put procurē on that ye due effecte of very trew matrimo∣ny be not strengthed or that agenst the rightwis processe and cause is lō¦gere suspendid ¶ The .v. articule. Also alle they whiche for desire or gra¦ce of lucre or foule wynyng of cursed malice. and hate putten cryme and blame vpō other and them falsli de∣ame so good folkis ben only driuen to their purgacions or in other ma¦tretly greuid ¶The .vi. aricule Also alle they which in the vacacion of chirches malisciously setten & put∣ten or procur to be put or set the ques¦tion of patrimony so the verry true patron only at that tyme they defrē¦den him of the collacion of his chirch ¶ The .vij. articule Als alle they that falsly and malici∣ously caften any out or many from their lawfull and trew patrimony. ¶ The viij. articule Also alle they that taken any thyng of howses of religion persones vica∣ris grauntges of chirches wythout the free will of theym or of the war∣deyns ¶ The .ix. articule. Alsoo alle they whiche noterye and knowen fornicatours or auonteres or strompettes openli knowen witī¦gly and wilfully defenden which at the leste by the lawe of holy chirche ben they punyssed vndir peyne of ex¦cōmunicacion and curs stedfastly in¦hibiting that noon of the sayd perso¦nes them witingly restayne or her∣borugh. ¶ The .x. article. Also al they what someuer they byē whiche violently drawen out of chir¦the cloyster or cherche hawe any fu∣gitif thider fled for socur or which ye forbeden him necssary liflode. ¶ The .xi. article Also all they that violently leyn han∣de on religion maner priest or clarke
¶The xij article ¶Also all they ben acursed ones in ye yere in the generall sentee and cha¦piter of al persones vicars chapleis {per}ochials al tho which ye pitant{is} of {per}∣sōs vicars chapleīs {per}ochials ī ye cite of lōdō ye charitable biquest{is} defraudē or to defraude {pro}curren or Rentis in their laste wyllis of this mekly to be done their deputes alien & enstraun¦gen or procuren to be aliende and o¦the wyl of the testatur is lettyd & the forsayne persones of their pytaunt{is} dep̄uid. ¶The xiij. article. ¶Also all sacrelegers whiche good{is} of chirchis perteyning and the thin¦gis in the same deposed from Chir∣ches chirhawes or other holy plac{is} wythout lycence of person or Curat of the same chirches they aeye ta∣ken beryn rauysshen or violently & wyth strength awey beren or do to be born. or who that suche a sport aci¦on or awey berynge in their name or in their seruauntis or meyne ful∣ly han or whiche to that preuy or a¦pert counceile helpe yeuen or consen¦ter. ¶The xiiij. article. ¶Also all they that falsen the popes bulles and the seale of our Lorde the kynge or of ony other seale autentik ¶The xv. artycle. ¶Also all they whiche vsen false me¦surs and weyghtis what some euer they be more or lesse. ¶The xvi. article. ¶Also alle they that drinken potaci¦ons or potacions do depresse or with¦draw the nurisshing of the byrth wt in the body. ¶ The xvij. article. ¶Also all they settyng to hande too Baptyme the childe of whom sume¦uer or husumeuer wherof they kno¦wen not who is fader nor moder. ¶The xviij. article. ¶Al that ben euyn helpers of sara¦zyns ayenst cristen men. ¶The xix. article. ¶Also all brenners of houses & chir∣ches in the tyme of tranquillite and ageinst the institucion and ordinaū∣ce of the kynge and kingis. ¶ The xx. article. ¶Also all rauisshers open theues. & menslaers. ¶The xxi. article. ¶Also all {per}turbars ageyn sayers ye last wylles of them yt been discesed & their good wetingly wytholde ¶The xxij. article ¶Also fals money makers & clepars of maney. ¶The xxiij. article ¶Also al they ben acurssed that com¦munith wyth eny man or woman that is opynly acurste wetyngly but yf it bee in cause suffred of the lawe. ¶ The xxiiij article ¶Also all they whiche in lowful de¦nunciacions in chirches had of thin¦gis awey taken from the laste Sen¦tence in this chirche done vnto now
And vpon this of ded mennis dett{is} and deutees shewed to the satisfacti¦on of suche chargen̄ not to com kno¦wyng theym self suche Cursednes done in this present sentence worthi and merytoryly they fallen in this sentence of corsyng ¶ The xxv. arti. ¶Also all they ben acursed that let∣enthe Iurediction of hooly chirche by the kyngis lettres and prohibys∣shions bryngen in causes of Hooly chirche where they haue noo place whiche mowen not ben assoiled tyl they haue satysfyed to ye Iuges and partyes of their damagys and In∣iuries and expensis and Interesse. As in the Chapitor. Qm̄ intellexim{us} de in muet lio.vi. ¶The xxvi. article ¶Also all they bē acursed more and lesse whiche wyt∣tyngly wylfully or maliciously and vnwysly for ony mā hathe had vt∣tirly the seruaunt{is} of god. that is to seye their persoes vicars chapleis parochials what someuer condiciō that they ben or fame. the tythes {pro}∣uent{is} profitis oblations of Custum and consuetude vsed lasse or more wt holden or done to be wytholden or ye sayd tithes or oblacions chaungen∣or turnen into other vse thā it was prouyded in holy chirche lawe. ¶The xxvij. article ¶ Also alle the whiche done asken or byleuen in whichcrafte and sorsery of what sumeuer kinde that they bē and their facturs and felowis. ¶ The xxviij. article. ¶ Also alle the hurtyng the ryghtes of holy chirche harme or grief ī their goodis or {per}sones for why they brin¦gen forth the sentensis of excommu∣nicacion ageinst any or many deser¦uen the same peyne. But yf they maken satisfaction wythin ij. Mo∣nethes they mowen not been assoy¦led but only of the pope or of his vi¦kar geerall as it is conteyned in C. Quicū{que} de sentencijs libro vi. ¶The xxix article. ¶Also they ben a cursed of all ye arch¦bisshops and bisshops of Englande alle ey whiche Comen or done a∣geynste the grete Charters whiche conteynen xxxvi. chapiters or arty∣cles whiche sentenc and many m been confermed by the Apostolicall seete that is to saye of the lybartyes and of forest and theis thingis ben done and made of the Consent and wyl of oure Lorde the kynge. ¶The xxx. article. ¶Also alle they whiche awayten Clerkis to endyght or to dente & Iu∣ge vnto the dethe in seculer courtis. ageynst the libartees and fraunchi∣ses of holy chirche.
¶The article conteyned in the byll  Nicholas purchached by the curati of the same cite of oblacions IN the bul of pope nicholas purchaced by the Curatis of ye Cite of london for their oblacions the vi. daye of August the yere of our lorde god M.CCCC.liij amonge other is it conteyned this. that euery inhabytant and hosho¦der wythin the same Cite of london and lybar therof that is in the rēt of x.s̄. by the yere shall peye to god and his Curat euery offeryng daye in the yere aferthing. And he that is of the rente of .xx.l. shall paye an halfpeny. and he that is of the rent of xxx.s̄. by the yere shall paye thre ferthingis. And he that is of the rēt of xl.l. shall paye a peny euery offe¦ryng day. And soo alwey assending by x. after the rate of a fertting of E∣uery x.s̄. ¶This is the very content of the sai¦de bull the whiche sayde bul all com∣positions leyd a parte the inhabytā¦tis and housholders of the Cytee of london and of the lybartees off ye sa∣me been bounde to obey the acte of comon councell holden the frydaye the iij. daye of Marche the xiiij yere of the Reygne of kynge Edward ye iiij. And as for the Meane sommes bytwene x. and x. there is no menci¦on made therof in the sayde Bulle But the men that ben of the rent of vi.s̄.viij d. or of ony hygher somme vnder x.l. vse to pay ther iiij offrīg dayes and nombre Accordynge too their dewte as euery body is boun∣de to do that hath hys communion and he that is of the rent of a mark or of ony hygher somme vnder xxl. most paye but after the Rate of x.s̄. That is to saye euery offryng daye aferthyng as is aforesayde. and as for the odde money he is not charge¦able by the Bulle. and he that is off the rente of xxvi.l.viijd. or of ony hi¦gher somme vnder xxx.l. shall paye but after the rate of xxl. and nothīg for the meane sommes. And euery Curat of the same Cytee is bounde by ver of Obedience by Expresse wordis in the sayde Bulle to shewe & declare the forsayde bulle to his {per}is∣shons iiij. tymes in the yere as in ye same bull more playnly it dothe ap¦pere. ¶A prouision by acte of parlement to brynge kynge Herry the vi. oute of the dett CCC.lxxx.ij.M.li. Payen the comons in this your present parlement as¦sembled to consider yt wher your chauncelar of your Reame off england your tresorer of england & many other lordis of youre councell by your hygh cōmaūdemēt to your sayd comons at your parlement hol¦den at Westm̄ and ended at winche¦ster shewed and declared the state of this youre Reame. Whiche was
that ye were Indetted in CCClxxij M.li. whiche is grete and greuous and that youre lyuelod in yerly va∣lue was but v M.li. and for as mo∣che as this v M.li. to youre hygh & noble estate to be kepte & pay your sayde dettis wolde not suffice. Therfore that your hygh estate my¦ght be relyeued and furthermore it was shewed that your expencis ne¦cessaryes to your houshold ythou¦ten any other ordenary charges cō to xxiiij.M.li. yerly whiche eredith yerly in expencis necessary ouyr yo¦ur lyuelod xix.M.li. ¶ Also please your hyghnes to consi¦der that your comons of your sayde Reame ben as wel wylled to theyr▪ power to the releuynge of your hy¦ghnes as euer were people too ony kynge of your progenytours yt euer Regned in your sayd reame of eng¦land but your comons by som pow¦ryshed that by taking of vitayle for your houshold and other things in your sayd Reame and noght payde fore. and the quynrysne by your sai¦de commons afore this tyme so oftē graunted and by graunt of onnag and poundage. and by the graunte of the subsidye vpon the wulles and other granntis too youre hyghnes made. and for lak of execucion of Iu¦stice of that your power comons bē ful nye dystroyed. and yf it shuld len¦ger contynew in suche grete charg{is} It coude in noo wise be had and bor¦ne Wherfore plese it your hyghnes the premysses gracyously to consi∣der. & by the aduyse and assent of yo¦ur lordis spirituell and temporal & by the auctorite of this your present parlement for the conseruacyon off youre hygh state in comfort and ese of your pour comons. wold take re¦sume sease and retaygne in your hā¦des and possessyon all honours Ca∣stels Lordships townships Maners Londis tenementis Wastis Rentis Reuercions fees feefermes and ser¦uicis wyh alle other apertinauncis in the whiche you had estat in fee in England Wales and in ye marches there. Of Irlande Caleice gwynes and in the marches therof. yt whiche you had graunted by youre lettres patentis or other wyse Sythe ye fust daye of your regne. and alle the ho∣nours Castels Lordhips Townes townships Manners Landis tene¦mentis Wastis rentis Reuersions fees fefermes and seruice wyth her appertynauncis the whiche were of the Duchy of Lancaster and passyd from it by your graunte. & ye to ha¦ue holde and retenew all premisses in and of lyke estate as ye had them At the tyme of suche graunt{is} by you of them made and that alle Lettres patentis or grauntis by you or by ony other persone or persones atte youre requeste or desire made to a∣ny persone or persones of ye primys∣ses be voyde and of noo for. ¶And ouer that alle maner of graū¦tis of rentis charges & Anuyte ma∣de
by you of astate of Enheritaunce for terme of lyf or termes of yeres. or at wylle of wylle of ony persone. or persones to be takē of ony of thes premisses or off ony other of youre possessyons or of youre custumes or subsidyes or auerage or of your hā{per} or acte or in your ressayt or in other wyse or mony place or in ony of thē or of the profyt comyng of them wt in this your Reame Irland Wales Caleis guynes and the marches of the same be voyd and in none effecte ¶ And that all maner graunt{is} ma¦de by you to ony persone or persones of estate of Enheritaunce terme off lyf or terme of yeres or att wylle. of ony her bage or pannage fisshīg pa¦sure or common or pastur wareyn wood wyne clothing furres to none office longing nor perteyning Sith the sayd furst day of youre Reygne nor afore not yeldynge to yeue veri value thei of doing no charger to yeue therfore and the value thero. to be voyde and of none effecte. ¶And that alle lettres patentis by you made or in ony of the premisses to ony persone of the whiche ony re∣couer hath ben had ayenst the sayd patentis or ony other by Couen. or colusion. that as well the recouerer therof as the lettres patent{is} be voy¦de and of none effecte. ¶And ouer that lykyt youre hygh∣nes to take resume sease and retay∣gne in your sayd handis and posses∣sion all maner preylegis fraunche¦ses hundredis wapentakes letr{is} Ra¦pis vyew of frankyledge sherefs tur¦nays sheref gyldes Amerciament{is} Issues and profytes of the same bee yeue and grauntyd Syth the furste daye of your reygne to ony persone or persones or abbot puyour deane chapiter mayster or Wardeyne off collage fraternyte crafte or gwylde and all maner Suche grauntys be voyde and of none effecte. Except su¦che Libartes preuylegis fraunches hundredis wapentakes letis Rapis vyew of franpledgis sheref turneis sheref gwyldes fynes amerciamen¦tis Issues and profytes off the ame and all other lybartyes fraunches preuylegs and amytees as you ha¦ue graunted to the prouostis & Sco¦les of your Collage Ryall of our la¦dy and saint Nicholas in Chambrie¦ge or to your prouoste and colege ry¦all of our lady of Eton. and to there successours. ¶And for as moche as it is thought to vs your humble and leege people of this your noble Reame comen to this your hygh courte of parlement by your auctoute Ryall that certey∣ne diuers lybartees preuylegis fre∣doms fraūches and ony tees be you to the prouost scolars and to the pro¦uostes college and their successours of your collegis of Eton and cham∣brege graunted. ben to youre hygh¦nes preiudicial and ouer chargfull and noyouse to your leege people of this your Reame.
¶Please it therfore your moost hy∣ghe and Reall mageste to ordeyne¦ne and appoynte by your hygh wis¦dom and discrecion that all graun∣tis and actis of suche lybartees pre∣uylegis and fredoms fraunchees & amytees as ben toyou preiudicial & ouerchargefull. and Noyos vnto your people of this your Reame be voyde and of none effecte. Wherof we your trewe comons in the most lowly wyse that we can thinke. Be esche your moste habundant grace to haue knowlege during this your sayd courte of parlement for youre speciall relece and comfort. ¶ And ouer that all the grauntis or releces made by you sythe the fyrst daye of your regne to ony abbot p∣yor Conene or to ony other perso∣sone or persones of discharge of quit clame of any corrydies coride penci¦on or pencions dysmes Quynsyms or dysmes tempals or off dyscharge or quyte clayme of ony rentis of fee or seruyce of fee. be voyde and of no∣ne effecte. ¶This acte and peticion of resump∣cion to begyn and take effecte the fyrst daye off youre parlement hol∣den at westmynster the xxviij. yere of your regne. and that alle maner of grauntis bee you made of ony of ye sayde honours Castels Lordships townes townships Maners Land{is} tenementis wastes Rentis Reuerci¦ons fees feefermes and Seruice or discharge of quyt clayme as is abo∣ue reherssed. wyth all other appar∣tynauncis from the fyrst day of the parlement holden at Westmynster the xxviij. yere of your reygne vnto the laste daye of this present parle∣ment be voyde and of none effecte. ¶And yf ony persone or persones at ony tyme after the fyrst daye of this present parlement accepte or Pur∣chace your lettres patent{is} of ony off ye sayde honours Castels Lordships Townes townships Manner Lan¦dis tenementis Wastis rentis Reū∣cions fees feefermes and seruic{is} wt all other appertinaunce or ony dys∣charge or quyt clayme as is aboue reherssed or ony of the premisses or ony other possessions of fee or of fre∣holde that shulde growe vnto yow in the tyme comynge bee the wey of forfeytour or other wyse but yf it so e that this lettres patentis passe be aduyse and assent of your chaunce∣lar and tresorer of England preuy∣seale and vi. Lordis of youre greate councel for the tyme being and that they and eche of them. Subscribe in suche lettres patentis there names and that theis lettres patentis Soo subscribed wyth the sayd names be Inrolled in youre chauncery of Re∣cord. ¶And yf ony persone or persones. Accep or puch as your lettres paten¦tis of ony of the premisses otherwy¦se forfeyte vnto you our Souerayn Lorde all his landis or tenementis yt he or ony persone or pesones haue to his vse at the tyme of such lettres Patentis made or ony tyme after▪
shal haue in fee semple holdē of you in mediatly to you and all other lan¦dis and ten̄es that they Soo shall holde off other {per}sones to them that they shal holde in medyatly and the same letters patent{is} to be voyd and to non effecte. ¶ And that noo persone or persnes that had any thing of the premisses afore the tyme of the said resumpciē be not charge alle b the wey of acōp¦te odurwise for the same ayenst you your eyers or Successours excepte thoos that be your graūt{is} afore the sayd resumpcion were acomptable And that by autorite of this your pre¦sent parlement euery of your lyege men that hath yeuen or grauntid a¦ny landis tenentis rentis aduousōs or other poscessions to you or to ani other by your desire for any other lā¦dis tenentis rentis aduousons or o∣ther posessessions by you graunted or by any other bi your desire sith ye said furst day of your regne yt they yt be new on lyue and their eyes. and to the eyers and successors of them yt be dede may entir haue and Ioy all Such landis ten̄tis Henrys aduou¦sons or other poscessions so yeuē and graunted in lyke wyse as they. ther auncestres or predicessors had them afore Such graunte or a state made and that amercymēt in case may be had admytted and ressained bi this sayd autorite for eueri partie that so shall entre In haue or en Ioye ani of the promisses by their seruyce that ye said landis tenentis rētis aduousōs or odur poscessions that they so shal entre Inne haue or en Ioy were ye∣uen or graunted for other landes te¦nemēt{is} rēt{is} aduousons or other posessyons that they graunted to yeue or to Any other at your desire mencyon be made therof Soo that Such landis tenemētis rētis aduou¦sons or other poscessions Were not rightfully in your possescions in fee aftir such yeftes or grauntis as is a¦boue rehessid. sauing to euery perso∣ne ther right tytel and enterest in a∣ny of the primisses other than they their auncestres or pridecessors had be forsse of your lettres patentis So that therof hath ben had noo reco∣ry by couyn or collusion ¶ Prouided alwey yt thys acte shall not etende to the puidce of our so∣ueryn lady the quene of her dower Ioȳter or freholde to her be you gra¦unted nor to any acte of parlement for her made Prouided alwey yt this acte shal not extēde to ani priones aliens penciōs or any other poscessions. alyens be longing to the same priorys graun∣tid by you to any of your prouostis & college and ther successours or your collegis ryall of our lady of on and seint nycholas of Cambrege or any of them to the vse of the said collegis ¶ Prouided alwey that this acte ex∣tende not. any free holdes and tenē∣tis. that the prouostis scolars and {pro}∣ostis and collegis of your Collagis shal of etō and cambrege that they or any of the forsaid {pro}uostis scolars or collegis haue too thē and then suc∣cessors
seuerally or Ioyntly to the vse of the said collegis in the towne of E∣ton and Cambge aforsayd or any of them ¶ Prouyded alwey that this acte & ordynaunce of resumpcion extende not to any graunt made by you to ye prouostis and coliege and their succes¦sours your collegis ryall of Cambre¦ge and Eton or any of them or any purcage made by your said prouos¦tis scolars and prouost and college & college and their successors or any of the or any other persone or {per}sones of any landis tenementis rentis or poscessions purchased by them or a¦ni of them to the vse of ani of the said collegis payng for the sayd landes & tenementis as conscyens and right requireth Of the which landis and ten̄tis rentis or possescions ye were Infoffed of bi the said persones or {per}¦sone to thentent to feot the said {pro}uos∣tis or any them In the whiche land{is} and tenementis rentis were not yo∣urs before the said offement & ma∣de to you be not cōprehendid and cō∣teyned in this acte ¶ Prouided also yt this acte extende not ne be not prediciall to any gra¦unt made by you to the wardeyn or mastir scolars and ther successours of the college valeys marie pēbrok¦halle Comonly called wythin your vnyuersite of cambrege of the priory aleyn of lyntō wyth alle the rightis and the appartinauncis therto lon∣gyng and the aduouson of the vicari¦age of the same ne to denay any gra¦unt by you made to the said wardeȳ mastir scolars. and ther successor of a pencyon the which the abbot of ryall lien late paid vnto the abbot of pryne odur wise called pynne alyen ¶ Prouided alwey that this acte ex∣tende not to cherches keyng in spiri¦tuel mennys handis ne to gleuis of the same dismes percions of desines obligacions of pencyons goyng out of chirches and gleuis alonly which were parte or percel of any priors a¦lyen nor to any ryches or offryngis being inspiriel men handis in ye coū¦tie of Guynes or the marches of ca∣leys So that the same spirituel men dwellyn vpon ther benefices wythī the countee and marches forsaid ¶Prouided also that this acte eten¦de not to any lettres patent{is} here af¦ter to be graunted by force of the tre∣soreys bille of england for the tyme beyng and that in In euery patent. So to be made be cōteined that who wil geue more thā the graunt or gra¦untis in the said letters patentis wt∣outen frande or malengynes if the sayd graūt or grauntis wil not yeue so myche as so is offred off encrese. yt than he that soo offerth encrese haue it by letters patentis conteynyng ye wordis aforsaid and if ani letters pa¦tentis heraftir be made ī other four∣me than is afore rehessed that they be voyde and non effecte ¶Prouided alwei that noo persone or {per}sones that hath paid by any wa¦rant that were Sufficient any of ye premysses or of profeitis and Isses
of them be not hurt for any such pai∣ment be this acte ¶ Prouyded alsoo that thys acte be not piudicial to your chaūcelar and tresorer of englād priuesel Iustice ba∣rons of the sheker your sergeant of lawe your atturnay nor to ani other of your officers in the curtis of recor¦de of any wagis rewardis or clothīg dew or accustmed vnto such officers as in the dayes of any of your noble progenitors be cause of this said offi∣cis ne too any acte of parlement for them made ¶ Prouided also that this acte ordy∣naunce made in your last parlemēt for paimentis of the areragis of wa¦gis and rewardis dew to vmfrey du¦ke of bokynghm̄ than cpten of the castel and towne of calis and of the towne of rise banke for him his lief tenauntes and sowdiars. Etendīg for the saufgarde of the same towne castel and tour for the tyme that the said duke was capteyne there Ne that the sayd acte or ordinaunce so made ī your last parlemēt be not cumprised and comprehēdid in this acte. ¶ And that this acte extende not too any parsone or {per}sones hauȳg right¦full and lawful restituciō of any pos∣scessiōs of fee or of free holdes beyo vpon his tytle to yow dewly shewid as for the sayd possessions in ther let¦tres patentis of restitucion cōteyned nor to any grauntis in ani wise ma¦de for disharge of any townships or men of the same by ther ferme of the same townes whiche they were too gretly charged yf soo that it hath bē dewly enquerid and certefied. ¶ Prouided also that any letters pa∣tentis made to the mayr counlte or baylif and burges of any cite towne or borught. or to citezens and or bur¦ges of the same to be exemple for the power autorite or Iurdi on of the admyral of England. Clarke of the market for the tyme beȳge or for the power of the wardeyns of your marches of england toward scotlād be vtturly for prised and excepte out of this acte and noon of such letis pa¦tentis comprised in the same. ¶ Prouided also that this acte exten¦de not to any maner of graunte mir¦age or any thing graunted for the sa¦me made by you to any mayr comu¦naltee or to baylyf and cominalte or Citezēs or burges of any cite towne or porte of this your Reame of En∣gland ¶ Prouided also that noo parso¦ne that hathe paid be warant suffici¦ent at the tyme of such paymēt any of the primysses of the profeytis and Issues of hē be not hurte of any such payment be this acte ¶ And for as myche as it is playnk and vniuersally conceyued thorugh al this your reame that the good spe¦de of this acte of resumpciō is to you full honrable necessary and behoue∣full and to alle your liege peple cōfor¦table
and gret relyf of yer pouertee yt whiche they ben in ful in an importa¦ble charges leyd vpon thē afore this tyme for that the said resumpcyō a∣fore this tyme hathe not ben effectu∣ally had ¶ We your trewe humble obeysaūt and feithful liege peple Comen for ye Comons of this your noble Reame to this your high courte of parlemēt be your autoryte ryal. In the moste homble wyse to vs possible besechen your most noble grace graciousi and tendirly to consider the gret benefet∣tis that shulde growe vnto you and to this your reame be the meane off the resumpcion that it plese therfore your most habundaunt grace That the said resumpcyon may take good and effectuall conclusion wherof we your said hamble and liege peple vn¦dir the fauour of your hygh & most noble grace may haue knowlege du¦rīg this your said parlemēt for your singlar and speciall comfort and con¦solaciō of vs and all thoo that we cō∣fore &c{is} ¶ The crafte to make corke for diar TAke an .C. and a qt of lyztmo¦se and ley it half a day in stale pisse and thā put vnto hitt xiiij. ll pot asshes and xx. galons stale pisse thē doo it in pott{is} and hete and ouyn wt iij. fagott{is} the furst tyme the ij. tyme wyth .iiij. fagottis and so forth wy moo fagottis .iiij. tymes at ye lest &c{is} ¶ The ressaite to make ypocras. ¶ For a galon and a pynt of red wȳ take Synamon .iij. vncis. Gynger tryed an vncis Greynes and longe peper dī. vnce Cloues and masys a q̄rt of an vnce Spignard a quatir of an vnce Suger .ij.ll ¶ Clarey For .xviij. galons Synamō dī. apū∣te Gynger q̄rt of all Pepir a q̄rt of a ll Greynes an vnce safron a quatir of an vnce Colyaundir ij. vnce Cala¦mose aromaticus. ¶ The crafte to make ypocras and braket and clare TAke a quarte of red wyne an vnce of Synamō and half an vnce of Gynger and a quartir of an vnce of greynes and half all off Su¦ger and brose alle thes not to small & than putt them in a bage of wullen clothe made therfore with the wyne and late it hange ouir a vessell till ye wyn berune thorw.
And aftir thou mayst breke the spic{is} smaller and putt new wyne ther to and make more wyth the same stuff but it can not be so good as the furst. & thus if thow wilt haue more quan¦tyte of poras make thi quantite of spicis ther aftir as is bouesaid ¶ For darre. Take cloues and Gilofre quibible & ma{is} Caull gynger and spigale off all in pondre and temper hem wich good wyne and the iij. parte as mich of fyn honi that is clarefied and strei¦ne hem thorugh a cloth and doo it in to a clene vessel and it may be made wyth ale &c{is}. ¶For braket Take a pott of good ale and put ther to a porcion of hony and peperī this maner when thou hast good ale lete it stonde in a pot ij. daies and thā dra¦we out a quarte or a potell of that a∣le and put to the hony and set it ouer the fire and lete it sethe. well and ta∣ke it of the fire and scinne it clene and than set it ouer the fire and scinne it ayen and then lete it keele a while & put thertoo the peper and thē set hē on the fire and lete hem boyle wel to¦gedur with esy fir but peper take iiij galons of good ale a pynte of fyn try∣ed hony and the mountenaunce off saucer full of pond of peper. &c.{is} ¶ The crafte to make gune poudir. TAke as myche weight as thou wili of salt pet & half as myche weyght of brymston and half Soo myche of coles of salow or of wylow tree and yf thou wilt a litel of quy siluer and bete hē in a mortir to smal powdir and sarce hem and put hem in a hote drye place as in thy bed sira¦we ¶ The crafte to make orchell TAke .iij. C. weight orchell drye grounde & doe it in a trouthe & put therto .xvi or xx. galōs of stale pis¦se and medell it wel to gedir and so le¦te it lye ij. or iij. daes and than fede it wyth pisse and wood asshes too this proporcions for eueri .C. of the orchel x. ll. wood asshes and to this iij. C. or chell in all ij. barels of stale pisse and for to doo it wel it wilbe xiiij. daies ī makyng &c{is}. ¶ To make a pigell to kepe fresh & sturgen in TAke of the same brothe it was sodein and for half the hed of sturgeon take a pynte of whit wyne and a pynte of white venegre and fe¦nell sede broken and bounde in a clo∣the and ley it in the same souse for ō day but yf it shalbe lenger or packed in a barell and caried take only whi¦te wyne and white veneger and a li∣tel salte and soo it shall contynu well ij. monthes
¶ The make veneger shortli if haue nede CAaste beuys in the fire a quan¦tite as thou shalt seme good. & here put them in to wine and it shal be shortly turned to venegre ¶ To make percely to growe in an or space TAke a quantit of Erthe. and put therto lyes of swete wyne that is dried and medull the erthe & that to gedir and than sowe thy per∣cand medell the seed and ye Erthe to gedir and were it wyth aquanite and th yor turfe or your erthe ayen the yre and fet it shoring ayen the  and wythin an our ye shal haue the repercely abll to cutte wt a knyf and wt the prouf ye shal knowe the trouthe herof. ¶ The mesurs of reynysh wyne too be bought by in and warpe and do∣dreight and aso the mesurs and reke¦nyng of wyne to be bought at Bur∣deux and gawge of the same THe rood of remysh wyne. of Dordreight is x. awames and euery awme is. . galons ¶Iun̄ the rood of and war is xiiii. awmes and eueri awme is xxxv ga¦lons ¶ The rekenȳg of wyne at burdeur ¶ The tonne of burdeur holdith me¦sur xij. score and xij galons The pipe vi. share and vi. galons The hogg{is} hed lxiij. galōs. ye tōne holdith ī seer¦nes lxiij. sesternes The pipe xxxi. l dī The hogg{is} hed .xv.s. di & a q̄rt sester¦ne iiij galons ¶Itm̄ xv. sous of burdeur makithe a franke whiche is ijl This is the rekenyg to bytwyne by the frankes that is to wet in frākes makith a nobill Soo yf yow bye a∣oune wyne for xl frankis. that is af∣tir the maner of burdur xiij. noble & a franke So if ye will make a Iuste rekenag of wyne ye must loke how many Poundis ye pay for a ronne wyne Soo many pence stondith yō in a galon Iust for in a poundis ster∣lyng ben xii. share pence and so ma∣ny galons holdith a tōne and looke how many poundis ye pay for a pi∣pe Soo many ij. d. drawyth a galon And how many poundis ye pay for an hogg{is} hed So many iiij. d the ga∣lon
¶The weight and maner of beyng of Irne and the difference of ye wey¦ghtes, vsed in England. IT is to wett that xx C. wey¦gt is a Tonne Irne. And to rescayue it .CCC. q̄ter a xxvli. at a draught or be the endys as the marchauntis can a gree ¶Item ye shal vnderstande that  kyntayls yron of the weyght of este spayne weyed xx C. English wyght and more the pryce of a kyntayl the∣re is ij l. and viij d. And lesse by xx. d. or ij l. in the tonne &c. ¶ The difference of the weyghtis THer beth iij. maner weyght{is} that is to wete. crop weyght. Auncell weyghtis. And lyggynge weyght y troy weyght is bought and solde golde syluer perlys gette. That is to saye of this weyght xxxij. d. st{is}. maketh an vunce. and viij. vū¦is makyth a marke and xij. vunc{is} makyth a pounde. of this troye wei¦ght. ¶Another weyght Ys called auncels. shafte and this weyght is forboden in England by staute of parlement and also hooly chirche. hath cursed in england. alle thoo that beyen or sellen by that aū¦cel weyght. For it is a disseuable weyght yf a man cast hym to decey¦ue the people and for to be false. ¶ The Lygginge weyght ANd therby is boughte and solde alle maner of marcha¦undise. as tye ledde Irne coper ele ware woode mader and al maner of specery corsis lac{is} hem∣pe ropis and talow and suche other as is vsed to be solde be weyght and of this weyght xvi. vunis make A. pound and C. and xij li is an C. and x. C. marke a M. of all suche Mar∣chaundises that is solde be this wey¦ght. and rekenynge made by the sa¦me excepte wulle only. for wulle is weyed by the weyght aforsayd. but not ecoued after that maner Wul¦le is bought by the sacke by the rod. by the stone and by the mayle. as is aforee sayd. but in the contree amō∣ge the husbandis it is moste vsed to be bought by the stone and by ye rod and by twene gader as of the coun∣tree and marchauntis it is moste v¦sed to be bought be the sacke. ¶ The acte of parlement to compel∣le the Iugis of sp̄all lawe to graunt ony pary the copy of the lebel for a∣ny cause. Dward by the grace of god kȳg of englād & of fraūce and lord of Irlāde To ye wurshipful fad in god . archbishop of Caunbuy pri∣mat of alle englande  auditor of his causes & to ther comyssaries & depu∣tees what so euer they be & to euery of them gretyng
Syns it is so that in the statute in ye parlement of kynge Henry the .iiij. lately of the deede and not off the la∣we. at leyceter the secōde yere of his reygne. A crye holden among other thingis was conteyned that whan so euer. the copey of the lybell or the articles by lawe of the cause is to be graunted and bee delyuered vnto ye party wythout dificulty. and nowe of the compleynt of Ric. A. We haue harde that thow he often tymes ha¦the desyred the copy of the lebel or ar¦tycles of the cause ayenst hym befo∣re you in the courte of cristiante mo¦ued and hanging to be deliuered vn¦to hym the wice Copye by the la∣we is to be graunted as it is sayde And ye neuerthelesse haue deferred and now ddefferre to do it. In despy¦te of vs and greuous hurt of the sa∣me Ric. and ayenst ye strengeth four¦me and effecte of the forsayde statu¦te. We wyllinge the same statute in euery of his articles vndefyled to be kepte commaunde you▪ yt ye graunt to the sayd ci. the copy of the lybell or articles of the cause aforesayd. be¦fore you as it is sayd moed and hā¦ging yf it be to be graūted by the la∣we. and delyuer to the same Ric. the same copy wythout any dificulte af¦tir the strengeth fourme and effecte of the forsayde statute wytnesse my self art westm̄. ¶The rate of the kyngis Custum & subside of marchaundises registred in the escheker. ¶The custum of clothe wythout greyn. THe kingis subgettis pa for custum of a cloth xiiij d The spaynardis paye for custum of a cloth xiiij d. The hause payth xij d. And aliaunt{is} pay for a cloth ij. s̄. ix d. ¶The Custum of cloth in greyn. ¶The kyngis subgettis payeth for euery cloth ij s̄. iiij. d. The spaynard{is} pay ij s̄. iiij d. The hause payeth ij l. Other straungers paye v l. vi d. ¶The custum of cloth half grayed. ¶The kyngis subgettis pay for sit∣che cloth xxi d. The spaynardis pay xxi d. The marchaunt of the hau¦se paye .xviij. d. Other straungers pa¦ye iiij s̄. i d. ¶The subside of cloth as wel in grei¦ne as vngreyned. After the valuore of euery pounde▪ ¶The kyngis subgettis for subside pay not thinge. The spaynardis pay not thinge. The hausepaye no¦thinge. Other straun∣gers paye for subside of euery li.xij pens. ¶Custum of sengle wursted.
¶The kyngis subgettis. The spay∣yardis and marchaūtis of the hāse pay for custum of euery pece i d and all other straungers payd for custū i d ob. ¶The custum of the doubll worsted The kyngis subgettis the spaynar¦dis and marchaūtis of the hās pay for euery pece custum ij d. and all od straungers pay iij d. ¶The Custum of euery bed sengle wursted. The subgettis of englnad the spayn¦yardis and the marchauntis of the haus pay for custum of euery pece. v d. and all other straungers paye vij d. ob. ¶The custum of bedd{is} double wur∣sted. ¶The kyngis subgettis the Mar¦chauntis of the Hause and the spay¦nardis pay for custum of euery su∣che pece ix d. and all other marcha∣untis straungers pay xiij d. ob. ¶The subsidie of euery poūd value of wursted sengle and double and of the wursted beddis sengle and dou∣ble. The kyngis subgettis. the spaynar¦dis and marchaunts of the Hause pay for subsidie of the ponde i d. Alle other straungers pay xij d. ¶Custum of waxe. and subside ¶For euery C. waxe alle marchaū∣tis paye for Custum xij d. The kyngis subgettis the marcha¦untis of spayne and of the hause pa¦ye nothynge for subsidie of noo ma¦ner waxe. ¶Alle other Marchauntis straun∣gers paye for subsidie xij d. ¶ Custum and subsidie of wynes ¶The Marchauntis off England and of spayne pay tomage for euery tonne iij s̄. ¶The marchauntis of the hause & other marchauntis straungers pa¦ye for custum of euery tonne ij l. And the other marchauntis straū∣gers paye for subside iij l. ¶The Custum and subside of euery tonne swete wyne. ¶The marchauntis of england and of spayne paye for tonnage in l The Marchauntis of the hause and alle marchauntis straungers paye for custum ij l. And the marchauntis straungers▪ paye for subside iij l. ¶Custum and subside of tyne be ye li. value. ¶The Marchauntis of England & of Spayne paye for subde xij d The hause and marchauntis straū¦gers paye for Custum iii d. And the Marchauntis straungers for subside paye ij d. ¶Custum of pewter and subside be the li. value. ¶The Marchauntis of England & of spayne paye for subside xij d. And the Marchauntis straungers pay for subside ij s̄. And the same Marchaunt straungers paye for Custum iij d.
¶The custum and subside off wulle and felle shipped to caleis. ¶The marchaunt of the stapil pay¦eth for custum of a sac. vi.l.viij. Itē he payed for subside xxxiij s̄. iiij.d. ¶Itē for euery CC.xl. wulle fellis for custum vi l. viii d. ¶Item for subside of ye same. xxxiij▪ l.iiij d. Custum and subside shyp∣pyd in to other parties of wulle & fell ¶Euery marchaūt payeth for cus¦tum of a sac x s̄. ¶Item for subside iij.li.vi l viij d. ¶Item for ye comyng to caleis viij d ¶Item of euery CCxl. skynnes off wull fel  marchaūt payth for cus∣tum x l. and euery marchaūt {pro}aith for subside in li.vi s̄. viij d. ¶Item for deuerū they pay viij d. Custum and subside of ledur. ¶The marchaūt of england payth for euery last ledur tanned for custū xiij s̄. iiij d. ¶Item for the subside iij li.vi.viij d. ¶Item fo deuerȳ to caleis xvi d. ¶The marchaunt of spayne payed for custum xiij s̄. iiij d. ¶Item for subside iij li.vi l.viij d. ¶Itē deuerȳ caleis viij d. ¶The marchaūt straūgers pay for custum xx s̄. ¶Itē for suaside iij li.xiij s̄. iiij d. ¶Itē denerȳ caleis xvi d ¶The charge for the coken{is} of mar¦chaūdic{is}. All maner of marchaū∣tis shal pay for his covet ij d ¶The custum and subside of euery. li. value of alle other marchaundise ¶The english in archaūt payde for subside xij.d. & the marchaūt of spay∣ne xij d. The marchaūt{is} of the haus paye for subside ij.d. the same mar∣chasit{is} pay for custum iij d All other marchaūtis paye for custū iij d. and for subside xij d. ¶The composicion be twene the marchauntis of england and ye tow¦ne of and warp for the costis of ther marchaundicis brought to the said towne. and hauing thens. ¶The Tolle FVrst to paye for the tolle off C. ferendel corne of our me¦sure. CC. busshels xx d. eni¦m. ¶Item for a grete packe the tolle ij. s̄. g. ¶Item for a myddel packe the tolle xviij. gret. ¶Item for a terlyng the tolle .xij. g{is} ¶Item for a fardel the tolle vi g{is}. kranage ¶For a grete packe slō∣gen wt the cheynes x g{is}. ¶Item for a Myddel packe in the krane vi g{is}. ¶Itē for a terling in ye krane iiij. g{is}. ¶Itē for a dell in the krane ij. g{is}. Excise ¶Thexcise of euery clothe is viij my g{is}. Rolle waynes. For a grete packe for the Rolle wayne. iiij gret. ¶Item for a lytill packe. the Rolle wayne iij g{is}. ¶Item a terlyng payth for the Rol∣le wayne ij g{is}. Costis at the ferp.
¶To pay at the fery for a man and his bagage .iiij. mit{is} ¶Item a hors the man and his bagage .i. g{is}. ¶Item an eny hors only i d. Brokers to pay for a cloth vnder xl. ō. the broker shal haue ij. g{is}. ¶Item for a cloth aboue xl.l. the broker hath iiij g{is}. ¶Item C. ellis Cotton cloth payth lyke a clothe iiij. g{is}. &c. BE it right or wrōg. these mē among. on womē do cōplaine Affermyng this. how that it is. a labour spent in vaine To loue thē wele. for neuer a dele. they loue a man agayne For lete a man do. what he can. ther fouour to attayne Yet yf a newe. to them pursue. ther furst trew louer than Laboureth for nought. and from her though. he is a bannisshed mā I Say not nay. bat that all day. it is bothe writ and sayde That womans fayth. is as who saythe. all vtterly decayed But netheles. right good witnes. ī this case might be lay That they loue trewe. & cōtynew. recorde ye Ntbroone maide de Whiche from her loue. whā her to proue. he cam to make his moe Wolde not departe. for in her herte. she louyd but hym allone THan betwene vs. lete vs discusse. what was all the maner. Betwene them too. we wyl also. telle all they peyne in fere That she was in. now I begynne. soo tharye me answere. Wherfore ye. that present be. I pray you geue an eare I am the knyght. I cum be nyght. as secret as I can Sayng alas. thus slondyth the cause. I am a bannisshed man ANd I your wylle. for to fulfylle. in this wyl not refuse Trusting to shewe. in wordis fewe. yt men haue amie vse Tother owne shame wymē. to blame. & causeles thē accuse. Therfore to you. I answere now. alle wymen to excuse. yn owne hert dere. wt you what chiere. I prey you telle a noon For in my mynde. of all mankynde I loue but you allon iT stōdith so. a dede is do. wherfore moche harme shal growe My desteny. is for to dey. a shamful dethe I trowe Or ellis to flee. the ton must bee. none other wey I knowe. But to wt drawe. as an outlaw. and take me to my
Wherfore  dew▪ my owne her ttrewe none other rd I can For I muste to the grene wode goo alone a bannysshed man O Lorde what is this world is blisse that chaungeth as ye moue My somers day. ī lusty may. is derked before the none I here you saye farwel nay. nay. we departe not soo sone Why say ye so. wheder wyl ye goo. alas what haue ye done Alle my welfare. to sorow and care. shulde chaunge yf ye were gon. For in mynde. of all mankynde. I loue but you alone. I Can beleue. it shal you greue. & shomwhat you distrayne But aftrwarde your paynes harde wt in a day or tweyne Shal sone a slake▪ and ye shal take▪ confort to you agayne. Why shuld ye nought for to make thought your labur were in vay¦ne And thus I do. & pray you oo. as hertely as I can. For I mulle too yt grene wode goo. alone abanysshed man. NOw syth that ye haue shewed to me ye secret of your mynde I shalbe playne to you agayne lyke as y shal ne fynde Syth it is so. that ye wyll goo. I wol not leue ehude Shal never be sayd. the Nutbrowne mayd.  to her loue vnkind Make you redy. for soo am I. all though it were anoon For in my mynde of all man kynde. I loue but you a lone yEt I you rede. take good hede whan men wyl thinke & sey Of yonge and olde. it shalbe tolde. that ye be gone away Your wanton wylle. for to fulfylle. In grene wood you to play And that ye myght. from your delyte. noo lenger make delay. Rather than ye. shuld thus for me. be called an ylle woman Yet wolde I to. the grenewodde goo. alone abanyshed man THough it be songe. of olde and yonge. that I shuld be to blame Theirs be the charge. yt speke so large in hurting of my name. For I wyl proue. that feythful loe. it is denoyd of shame
In your distresse. and heuynesse. to parte wyth you the same And sure all thoo. that doo not so. trewe louers ar they noon But in my mynde of all man kynde. I loue but you alone i Councel yow. remembre how. it is noo maydens lawe Nothing to dought. but to rēne out. to wod wt an out lawe. For ye must there. In your hande bere. a bowe to bere and drawe And as a theef. thus must ye lyeue. euer in deede and awe By whiche to yow. gret harme myght grow. yet had I leuer than That I had too. the grenewod goo. Alone a banysshyd man i Thinke not nay. but as ye saye. it is noo maydens lore. but loue may make. me for your sake. as ye haue said before To com on fote. to hute and shote to gete vs mete and store For soo that I. your company may haue I ase noo more From whiche to parte. it makith myn herte. as colde as ony ston. For in my mynde. of all man kynde. I loue but you alone. FOr an out lawe this is the lawe. that men hym take & binde Wythout pytee. hanged to bee. and wauer wt the wynde. Yf I had neede. as god for bede. what rescous coude ye finde For sothe I trowe you. and your bowe. shul drawe for fere be kynde And noo merueyle. for lytel auayle. were in your councel than wherfore I too. the woode wyl goo. alone a banysshd man. fVl wel knowe ye. that wyme bee. ful febyl for to fiyght Noo womanhed. is it in deede. to bee bolde as a knight Yet in suche fere. yf that ye were. amonge enemys day and nyght I wolde wythstonde. wt bowe in hande▪ to greue them as I myght. And you to saue. as wymen haue. from deth many oe For in my mynde. of all man kynde. I loue but you alone yEt take good hede. for euer. I drede. that ye coude not sustein The thorney wayes. yt depe valeis. the snowe ye frost ye reyn The colde the hete. for drye or wete. we must lodge on the playn And vs a bowe. noon other roue. but a brake bussh or twayne Whiche sone shulde greue. you I beleue. and ye wolde gladly than That I had too. the grenewode goo. alone a banysshyd man
Syth I haue here▪ ben partynere. wt you of Ioy & blysse I muste also. parte of your woo. endure as reason is yet am I sure. of oo plesure and shortly it is this That where ye bee. me semeh erde. I coude not fare a mysse Wythout more speche. I you beseche. that we were soon a gone For in my mynde. of all man kynde. I loue but you alone yEf ye goo thdyr. ye must cōsider. whan ye haue lust to dyne Ther shal no mete. before to gete. nor duke bere ale ne we Ne shetis clene. to lye be twene. made of chred and twyne. Noon other house. but leuys and bowes to euer your hed & myn Loo myn herte swete. this ylle dyet. shuld make you pale & wan Wherfore I to the wood wyl goo. alone a banysshid man AMonge the wylde dere suche an archier. as mē say yt ye bee Ne may not fayle. of good vitayle. where is so grete plee And watir cleere. of the cyuere shalbe ful swete to me Wyth whiche in hele. I shal rig it wele. endure as ye shal see. And er we goo abed or twoo I can prouide a noon. For in my mynde. of all man kynde. I loue but you alone LOo yet before ye must doo more of ye wyl goo wt me As tte you there. vp by your ere. your kirtel by ye knee Wyth bowe in hāde. for to wt ōde. your enmys yf nede bee And this same nyght. before day lyght. to wood ward wyl I flee. And ye wyl all ths fulfylle doo it shortely as ye can Ellis wi I to the grenewode goo. alone a banysshyd man I Shal as now. do more for you. yt logeth to womanhod To short my here. a bowe to bere. to shote in tyme of nede. O my swete mod. be fore all other. for you haue I most drede But now a diew. I mut ensue wher fortune duch me leede All this make ye. now lete vs flee. the day cum fast vpon For in my mynde. of all man kynde. I loue but you alone. Day nay not soo. ye shal not goo. & I shal telle you why. Your appetyte. is to be lyght. of loue I wele aspie For right as ye. haue sayd to me. in lyke wyse hardely Ye wolde answere. who so euer it were. in way of company. It is sayd of olde. sone hote sone colde. and so is a moman wherfore I too. the woode wyl goo. alone a banysshid man.
yEt ye take hede. yet is noo nede. suche wordis to say be For ofte ye preyd. and longe assayed. or I you lomd {per}d. And though that I of auncestry. a barons doughter bee yet haue you proued. how I you loued asquyer of lowe degree And euer shal. what so befalle. to dey therfore a noon For in my mynde. of al mankynde. I loue but you alone A Barons childe. to be begyled. it were a curssed dede To befelow. wt an out lawe. almyghty god for bede yet bettyr were. the power squyer. alone to farest yede Than ye shal saye. another day. that be wyked dede ye were betrayed. wherfore good maide. the best red yt I can. Is that I too. the grenewode goo. alone abanysshed man wHatso euer be falle. I neuer shal. of this thing you vp braid But yf ye goo. and leue me soo▪ than haue yeme be traied Remembre you wele. how that ye dele. for yf ye as the sayde Be so vnkynde. to leue behynde. your loue the notbrowne maide. Trust me truly. that I dey sone after ye be gone For in my mynde. of all man kynde. I loue but you alone yEf that ye went. ye shulde repent. for in the forest now I haue purueid. me of a maide. whom I loue more thā you. Another fayrer. than euer ye were. I dare it wel auowe And of you bothe. eche shulde be wrothe. wt other as I trowe It were myn case. to lyue in pease. so wyl I yf I can wherfore I to the wode wyl goo. alone a banysshid man THough in the wood. I vndirstode ye had a paramour All this ma nought remeue my thought. but yt I wil be your And she shal fynde. me softe and kynde. and curteis euery our Glad to fulfylle. all that she wylle. cōmaunde me to my power For had ye loo. an hondred moo. yet wolde I be that one For in my mynde. of all man kynde. I loue but you alone
Myn owne dere loue. I see the proue▪ that ye be kynde & rewe Of mayde and wyf. in al my lyf. the best yt euer I knewe Be mery and glad. be nomoresad. the case is chaūged newe For it were ruthe. that for your trouth you shuld haue cause torewe Be not dismayed. what soeuer I sayd. to you whan I began I wyl not too. the grene wod go. I am noo banysshyd man THeis tidingis be. more glad to me. than to be made a quene. yf I were sure. they shuld endure. but it is often seen. When men wyl breke. promyse they speke. the wordis on the splene. Ye shape some wyle me to begyle. and stele fro me I wene Then were the case▪ wurs than it was. & I more▪ woo begone For in my mynde. of al mankynde. I loue but you alone. yE shal not nede futher to drede. I wyl not dis{per}age You god defende. sith you destende. of so grete a lynage Now vnderstonde. to westmerlande. whiche is my herytage. I wyl you bringe. and wyth a rynge. be wey of maryage I wyl you take. and lady make. as shortly as I can Thus haue ye wone. an rles son. and not a banysshyd man hEre may ye see. that wymen be. in loue meke kinde & stable Late neuer man. repreue them than. or calle them variable But rather prey. god that we may. to them be confortable Whiche somtyme prouyth. suche as loueth. yf they be charitable. For sith men wolde. that wymen sholde. be meke to them eche on Moche more ought they to god obey. and serue but hym alone ¶The rekenyng to bey waris in flaundres. FIrst ye shal vnderstōde. yt xxiiij mit{is} makith a pe & viij my t makith an eng{is} d iij eng{is} makith a peny Itē a ll. ell cō∣teyneth iij qts of an eng{is}yarde. & v qts of ye ll. ell makith an eng{is} ell & so rekin aft this maner wyse yt ij fll ell makith an eng{is} ell. & a qt off a yarde & so reken for vell fll makē iij eng{is} ll. & x make vi. & xx make xij. so ye maye reken eumore what cōtent so eu it be. ¶To reken what a dosen fll stondith you in eng{is}. yf ye bye a pece hollād cloth or braban or ony lynen cloth in ye cōtrey yt shal cost you ii g. yt ell for euy grete ley xx g. as thus ij g. take xx pens yt is iij s̄. & stōdith you ye dosen in eng{is}. & ī likewise for euy eng{is} xx eng{is} & for euery mite xx. mytis. As thus. your cloth cost you ij. grete a english and a myte take for eue∣ry grete xx. grete for euery english xx. english.
and for euery myght xx mit{is} as th{is} xx g. and xx g. is iij  iiij g. than take xx. eng{is} and xx. eng{is} that is xl eng{is} & take ix mit{is} and xx. mit{is} that is xi mi¦tis whiche drawyth all iiij. s̄. vij d a dossen. and so you may reken what so euer your cloth cost. ¶To knowe how you shal deuyde. and knowe your gretis your eng{is}. and your mit{is} from an ell to the dos¦sen and to the C. ¶Fyrst for a myte take xx mytis. of xx ell fll{is} make but xij ell eng{is}. And therfore ye must take as ye shall see after folowyng as wel in  men¦g{is} as in gret{is}. as thus. ¶Fyrst for oon myte take xx mytis that is ij eng{is} and iiij the dossen. ¶Item ij mytis is xl. mytis that is v. eng{is} the dosen. ¶Item iiij mitis is lxxx. mytis that is in g. and a eng{is}. ¶Item vi mytis is C. and xx mytis that is v g. ye dosen Itē vij mit{is} is Cxx mit{is} yt is v g. ij eng{is} and iiij. ¶Item ij eng{is} is xl eng{is} that is xiij. grete and a eng{is}. ¶Item iiij eng{is} is lxxx eng{is} that is ij l. ij g. ij eng{is}. ¶Item vi eng{is} is C. & xx that is iij l. iiij g. ¶The dossen. furste for a grete take xx. gret. ¶Item for ij gret .xl. gt. that is iij l. iiij d. ¶Item for iii grete xl. gt that is v l. ¶Item for iiij gt. take lxxx g. that is vi s̄. viii g. ¶Item for v g. C. g{is} that is viij l. iiij gt.. ¶To reken thy myt{is} into eng{is} and into gretis. fyrste a myte is the C. iiij. g. mit{is}. ¶Item ij mytis is the C.viij g. a en¦g{is}. ¶Item iij mytis is the C.xij g. dī. ¶Item iiij. is the C.xvi g. ij eng{is}. ¶Item vi mitis is the C.ii l. i g. ¶Item vij mitis is the C.iil. v g. iijt ¶Item oon eng{is} is the C.ij l ix. g. a eng{is}. ¶Item ij eng{is} is the C.v s̄ vi. g. ij en¦g{is} ¶Item iij eng{is} is the C.viij s̄ iiij g. ¶Item iiij eng{is} is the C.xi s̄ i g. i en∣g{is} ¶Item oon grete is the C.viij s̄ iiij g. ¶Item ij grete and iiijt is ye C.xviij. l.ii eng{is} ¶Item iii g. is the C.xxv s̄. ¶Item iij g. ijt is the C.xxv l. viij g. i eng{is} ¶Item iij g. dī is the C.xxix l ij g. ¶Item iiij grete is the C.xxiij s̄ iiij g ¶To knowe what a pece lawne stō¦dyth. A plyt in. ¶A pece lawne conteynethe xvi plit and a plyte is a yerde and a qt. And yf ye bey a pete lawne for viij s̄ take for euery xij d iii q and so stōdith you a plyt in Or ellis thus for euery no∣ble v d or of euery xx s̄. xv d. and soo stondith you euery plyt iii. A sorte la¦wne conteyned xxiiij. pecis. and yf you by a sorte lawne for x.li. or xij li reken thus for as many poūdys as many half score pence. as xii li. take therfore xij halfscore pens that is vi score pence that is xl. And so stondith yt a pece in one wyth
Another ¶Or ellis thus for as many pondis as the sor∣the lawne cost yt as mani g{is}. & as ma∣ny grot{is} and ae many pence of ij pē¦ce as thus xij li. the sorte Reken xi d and xi d and xij grotis and xij grot{is} that is x s̄. Soo stondyth the a pece mor thus. As many poundis take as many shelyngis as thus a sorte coste vii, poūd take therof viij l and thenne abate of euery shelyng ijd & there remayneth vi l viij d. and soo stondyth you a pece oon wyth ano∣ther ¶Item a balle bolirom conteyneth li pecis And yf you bye a balle for x li or for xv li take for euery poūd iiii d As thus xv grotis that is v shelin∣lingis and soo stondith the a pece in one wyth another And so reken for euer more what soo euer it cost ¶Item a balle fushan̄ conteyneth xlv half peces that is xxij peces and half and yf a balle coste xv. pound. reken thus for as many grotis and as many pens & as many englishe as thus xv pound take xv grotis. & xv pens and xv englishe that is alle vi shenlingis viij pens and soo ston¦dyth the in the half pece and the ho∣le doble. And soo reken euermore what so euer the balle coste. ¶Item a balle bultell conteyneth xxxvi half pecis that is xviij pec{is} & yf the bale coste xl. s̄. or l.l. take for eue¦ry xij. an englishe as thus the balle coste xlviij l. take therfore xlviij eng{is} that is xvi pens and that stondith yt the half pece in. and double the pece and so forth what so euer it cost. ¶Item a pece holland or ony other lynnen cloth conteyneth lx ell{is}. fll. ye cost viij eng{is} dī. the somme is xiiij s̄. iij. pens x. mit{is}. ¶Item iij pece holland conteyneth hz hz. lx. at iij g. the ell. somme xl. l. ix g. ¶Item a pece holland marked t g. that conteyneth lviij ell ll. att iij. g. that somme xv s̄. viij. g. ¶Item ij pecis holland de t g. attis. conteyneth lxi.z.lx z att iij. g. iiij mit{is} somme xxxij s̄. ij pens ij ell{is}. ¶Item a pece holland markithe cō¦teyned lviij. ell fll. at iij g. z. Somme xvi l. xi g. ¶Item ij pecis holland conteyneth lxi z lxi at iij g. z somme. xxxv l. viij. d xviij. mitis ¶Item one pece holland conteyned lviij ell at x. eng{is}. ij mitis somme xvi. l.vi g. iiij. mit{is}. ¶Item ij pece holland marketh de∣eng{is}. conteyned lxvij at xi eng{is}. som∣me C.xxvi ell. fll. at xi eng{is} Somme xli s̄. iiij g. z viij. mitis.
¶The office that belongithe to a bis∣shop or to a prist{is} IT is to be noted that the of∣fice of a bisshop or a priste is ī v maners. The first is tru¦ly to preche cristis gospell. The secon¦de is to prey god contynually for his chirch. The thred is the sacramētis freely to make and bere to whom it behouythe. The iiij. is only to study in holy scripture The v. is to preue and yeue ensample of {per}feccyon ūtoo other liuars and weyfaringmē ¶Isodorus tercis Priestis shulū be dampned For the wykidnes of the peple if they ne teche and lerne yt ig∣norauot and vncunyng. ¶Augustinus all ye wrke of a priest stant in pryer and perching ¶Guso{us} But if priestis shewyn to the peple all ye treuthe thei shulū ye∣ue rekenyng therof in the day of do∣me and Ingement ¶Augustius fewe priestis ther ben that Iustly and truly perchē ye wor∣de of god but many whiche dampna∣bly bien still and other of ignoraun∣ce and vncunnyng refusen to be tau∣ght ¶Apl{us} ignoraunt shalbe ignoraūt to mowe excuse he another ignorāt from peyne. ¶Augusti{us} who wil not for shame a short tyme suffir lore and lerne ī al tyme in shame and vn witty shal he abide. No man for ignoraunce shal∣be excused. ¶Griso{us} euery man cum he to good conuersacion ¶Alp{us} Bethon a feithfull ensample in worde cōuersaciō Charite. feithe and Chastite ¶Apl{us} In al thīges proue thi self ex∣emplan of good werkis ¶Apl{us} a priest ought to be power as to aueryce or couetise freely wt voice be he chastised also a priest ought too be sighyng and wailynge his owne synne & other mēnys A priest ought to be hungry and thirsty A priest ou¦ght to be swete and sotte more rather to foryeue than to vengy. A priest ought to be mercifull to another Also he ought too be clene off herte & not only to medil him self a bought wordly bisynes nother to thinke on the worlde Also him ought to be re∣dy to desirōs passioun and not with vayne glorie. ¶Zero{us} the office of a priest diewli to answere him that a rich the lawe off the lorde yf he be the priest of god and knowith the lawe of his lord If other¦wise he can not the lawe of the lorde he reproueth and vndnymeth him¦self to be noo priest of his lorde. ¶Apl{us} wake thou in praiers and in bokis of holy scripture contynually ¶Here folowt the chartur of forest
Dward be ye grace of god kȳg of Englād lord of Irland and duke of Guyan To alle to whō thes prisent letters shal com greting We haue beholden the chartur of herin Sōtyme kȳg of angl̄d our fadir off the forest in thes wordis Herry by ye grace of god kyng of england lord of Irlād ducke of normādi & of guy &c{is} ¶ As in the precedent chartur furst we graunte yt all ye forestis yt whiche kyng herry our graundfadir afores∣ted buewed by good & laufull men And yf any wood other than ye lord{is} weed his owne he aforestid to ye  of hȳ of whō ye wood were It shal∣be disforestid and yf he afforested his owne {per}pur wood remayne iforest Sauf the comon of her bage & odur in ye same forest to thē yt whiche were furst to haue it ¶ Of mē duellyng wtout ye foreste Men forsoth which duellē wtout the forest ne com they not frohen forthe afore eyr Iushas off the forest by co∣mon ōmaūce but yf thei were Im¦pleed or pledg{is} of any odur yt which were attached for our forest ¶ Of woodes to be aforested Also the wode which were aforestid by kyng richard our vncle or kynge Iohn̄ our fader vnto our furst coro∣nacion anon shalbe disaforestid but yf they were our woodes ¶ Of wastis and ppresturis Archbisshops bisshops abbott{is} pri∣urs Erles baros knyght{is} and free holders yt whiche were wont to ha∣ue ther wodes the tyme of ye furst co∣ronacion of kyng herry our graūd∣ser So that they be quyte {per}petutuly of all pripresturs wast{is} & of all ma¦de in the woode aftir that tyme vn¦to the begynnyng of the Second ye¦re of our coronacion. And we frō hēs forth made waste pripresture or kyn̄¦gis of in thē wythout our licence off thoo same wastis ppresturis & awey kyttyngis or carieng{is} to vs shal thei answer. ¶ For inquisiciō and regarde Our raungers shall goo by our fo∣rest too make regarde as they were wont to doo the tyme of the furst coro∣nacion of the forsaid kyng herry our graundsir and noon odur wyse. In quisiciō or vyew of chasing{is} off hun∣dis beyng in the forest frohensforthe shalbe made whan it so aught to be made regarde yt is to sey frō thredde yere to thredde yere & thā be it made by sighte wtnesse of sad and trewe men and non other wise. And he of whom the hounde were not expedi∣tate So he shal pay for his mercy iij l. And frohensforth bether no ore taken for expetitacion of houndis. Expeditacion of houndis is suche be assice comōly vsed that iij. toes of an hounde be cut awey of y• for met fee¦te wythout forthe nor be not hound{is} expeditate Soo from hensforth but in thoo placis in yt whiche they were wont to be expeditate in the tyme of the furst coronation of kȳg hery our graundsir.
¶ Forscotale and gadur garbe. Noo forestir frohēforth or bayli ma¦ke scotal of gadir garbe or otes or a∣ny corne or lambis or piggis. or ma¦ke any gaderyng but be the sight & othe of xij regarders whan they ma¦ke regard. Soo many foresters be ther put to kepe it resonably they se∣men to lufice ¶For the keping of Swanmot Noo Swanmot frohēsforth be hol∣de in our reame but thryes in ye yere that is to sey In the begynnȳg of xv daies afore the fest of saint mychael whan that our wood walkers cō too gedurs for serch a bought our lord∣ships woodes and ayen a bought ye feste of saint martin whan our wood walkers comen togeder to ressayne our pānage and to theis twoo swan¦motis shall com to gedurs our fores¦ters grasyers and weed walkers. & not other by distraint And the .iiji Swan mot shalbe holde in the begȳ¦nyng of xv. daies afore thefest of saīt Iohn̄ baptist for the fedyng there off our bestis and to this Swanmot to be holde shall cō to gedurs foresturs and vierdours and non other be dis¦raint. ¶ And moreouer euerych xl daies bi al the yere forestirs and viry daries shall com to gedurs to see the at¦tachmentis of the forest aswel of gra¦singis as of venery by the presenta∣cion of the foresters. And afore them the forsaid attachmēns to be attach¦ed and the forsaid Swanmotis shal not beholden but in shires in the wh¦iche they were wont to be holden Euerych free mā shal may see a bou¦ght his owne prop woode in the fo¦rest for his wille and shall haue hys pannage ¶ Also we graunte that eueych free man may eede es Swyne by our lordship free and wythout Impedy∣ment for to serch them in his propur woodis. or odur where as he will. & yf the Swyne of any free man abo¦de on nyght ī our forest thei shal not therfor be occasion so that any thīge of his he lese ¶ For vnlefull takyng of venery. Noo man frohensforth shall lese yf or membre for our venery that is to say yf any man wertake & conuicte of takyng of veneri he shal be greuously redemed if he haue w herof he may be redemed if he haue not wherwyth he may be redemed he shall lye in our prison by on yere and on day and aftir the yere & a dai pledge may bee founde than goo he out frō our pryson and for swere he our Reame of england
¶ Lybarte for lordis in the forestis Whosoeuer Archbisshop bisshop er∣le or baron comyng vnto vs at our maundement goyng by our forest. be it lful to hym to take oon beste or tweyne be the syght of our foresters yf they were present or ellis lete them do make blowe an home that thei be not seid to doo that stelyngli Itm̄ be ueful to them ī ther comȳg ayen to doo as it is aforesaid ¶ The liberte of free men in ther ow¦ne woodis Eūyche free man from hens for the wythout ocasion make in his wod{is} or in his lande whiche he hath ī the forest a mille a vyne yard a ponde a dice a marlepit or other rable lan¦de wythout couert in erable lande. So that it be not to the noymēt of a∣ny neybur. Eych free mā may ha∣ue in his woodis midues of goshan his sparhākis farous egles and ha∣ue also the hony that is founde ī his woodes. ¶ For chymynage takyng Noo forester from hensforthe which is not forester of the fee yeldīg ferme to vs for his bayliwik shall not take chymynage ī his baylywik a forest of the fee yelding ferme to vs for his ferme may take chymynage that is to sey for a carte by the half yere ij. d and for an hors beryng Sōmage be the half yere od and not but of them which out of his baylyship comē as marchauntis to bey and too selle be his licence in to his baylyship for too Cary barke lathes also to bere coles & other whar to selle where they wol¦de & of noo other carte or of hors be∣ring Sōnage ani chemynage be ta¦ken but in thoo placis where as of ol¦de it was wont to be takē & agh.. They forsothe whiche vpon ther ba¦ke beren wood barke and cole to sel∣le thought they bere wyth lyuen frō hensforth shall yef noo chymynage to our foresters ontake them in our lordships woodes. ¶ For pepull outlawed for cause off forest Alle outlawed for our forest only frō the tyme of kyng hery our graund sir vnto the furst coronacion of vs cō to our pose without impedymēt and fynde sauf pledge that from hēforth they forfeit not to vs of our forest. ¶ For plees holding or grasing{is}. Noo cōstable casteleȳ or other bayli holde plees of our forest owther of our grasing{is} or of venery that is to sey e∣uerych forest of our fee frō hēsforth. attache plees of forest as wele of gra¦sing{is} as of our veneri & thē p̄sente to ye virydour of ye {pro}uinc{is}. & whā they were Iurelled vndur the seale of our virydon inclosed they shalbe presen∣tid to ye chief or Iustice whā he cō In¦to thoo {per}ties to holde plees or ye forest & afore thē they shalbe determyned▪ ¶For confirmaciō of this thartu
Theis libarties of the forest we haue graunted to all saufly archbisshops bisshops abbottis priours er ba∣rons knight{is} and other free holders aswel to parsones of the chirch as to seculars tēplars ther libartees and fee vsagis in the forest and without wareynship also in alle other placis forsothe all the liberties and vsagis forsaid the whiche we haue graun∣ted to be holdē in our reame as myc¦he as too vs parteyneth and ayenst ours and alle of our reame aswel clar¦kis as lay felle they shall obserue as myche as to them parteynethe and ayenst theirs forsothe for this dona¦cion and concession of thes lybaces and of odur conteyned in the moore chartur of libertees of england The archbisshop &c{is} as aboue ī the gret chartur the witnesse aforsaid Explicit carta forest ¶ The articles of the chartur and li¦barties of englād called magna car∣ta that is to sey the gret chartur EDward bi the grace of god kȳg of england lord of irland & duke of Guyan To alle to whom ther pre¦sent lettery shal com Gretyng. We haue beholde the gret chartur of the lord herry Sōtyme kyng of Englād our fader of the lybartees of englād in theis wordis ¶Herri by the grace of god kyng of England lord of Irland duke of nor∣mandy and Guyan and erle of Au∣geoy. To archbisshops bisshops ab∣bottis priours erles barons vicoun¦tis ppositis mynystirs & alle bayls and his feithfull pepull this present chratur to be holde gretyng Wt ye that we in ye behalue of god and for helth of our soule and for the soules of our antetessurs and successours & of our good will. We haue yuē and graunted and to the ealtacyō of ho¦ly chirche and the amending of our reame wyth our free and good will We haue yeuen and graūted to ach¦bisshops bisshops abbottis priours erles barons and to alle of our Rea∣me the libertees vnd wreten to holde in our reame of england {per}petually ¶ The furst article for liberte of the chirche. Furst we haue graunted to god and blessid mary and too alle seintis and wyth this our p̄sent chartur we ha∣ue confermed for vs and our eyers perpetually yt ye chirch of England be free and haue alle her rightis hol and her libertees vnhurte ¶ We haue graunted and yeuen to alle free men of our Reame for vs & for our eyrs perpetually theis liberties vnd wreten to haue & to holde to thē & ther eyers of vs and our eyers perpetually ¶The second arcle of ers and ba¦rons holdyng be knyghtis fee
Yf any of our erles or barons of our other holders of vs in ye hede bi kny∣ghty seruice werre dede and whan thei decessed ye heir of hȳ were of full age and our releny haue he his heri∣tage by olde releuy that is for to sey the eyer or the eyers of an erle of an hole counte by C.li. the yer or eyers of barons of an hole barōny by C. marke The eyer or eyers of knyght{is} of an hole knyghtis fee by .C.s̄. and to more and whoo lesse helde lesse ge¦ue aftir the olde vsage of fees ¶ The the lorde haue the kepyng of any eyr Yf for sothe yt eyer of any suche we∣re withī age the lord of him shal not haue the kepyng of him nor of his lā¦de afore that he take of him homage aftir that suche an eyer were ī kepīg whan he com to age that is to sey of xxi yere he must haue his heritage wt out releuy or wyth out fyne so nethe∣les that yef he whiles he were withī age be made knyght natheles hys land to abide in the keping of his lor¦de vnto the forsaid terme ¶ That the ke{per} take but resonable Issues. The keper forsothe of ye lād of such maner eyer whiche were within a∣gene take he not of the lāde of ye eyer but resonable Issues and resonable seruicis and that without distecī of men and goodis and vast and we comytted the custodye of any such lā¦de to the vndir therefor to any other whiche of ye Issues of that lande out to answere vs and he of the kepyng made distrucyon or wast we of him shal take amēdis. And the lande shalbe cōmytted to twoo laufull and discret men of that fee whiche off the Issues of that lande shall answer to vs or to him to whan we cōmyttid it or assigned and yf we yaf or solde to any man the keping of any such lan¦de and he therof made distruxion or wast he shall lese the kepyng and it shalbe taken to twoo lawfull and dis¦scret men of that fee the whiche also lyke wyse shall answere vs as it is a forsaid ¶That the keper shall sustoȳne the landis of the eyer ¶ The keper for soche as longe as he hathe the keping of this lōde he shal susteyne ye houses parkes vyneyar¦dis pondis milles and other o that land belonging and parteynyng of the yssues of the same lande and he shall yelde to the eyer whan so he cō to ful age all his lāde Iustored of hus¦bondry and of all other thing{is} at the leste as he ressayued it Alle theys shalbe obsered of the kepīg{is} of arch¦bisshopriches bisshoprichs abeys p¦orys chirches & dignitees soo vacai¦tis the whiche to vs parteyne excep∣te this that the keping of such ought not to be solde The eyers shalbe ma∣ryed without dis{per}aging
¶ The dowar of wyddōs after the deth of her husbondis wydon after ye deth of her husbōd Anon & wythout any defeculte must haue maritage & her herytage whi∣che that her husbond and she helde ye day of the obyt of him her husbond & a byde she in the chief hous and mā∣sion of her husbond by xl. daies aftir the obyte of her husbond within the whiche she shalbe assigned to her do∣war but it were furst to her assigned or but if that house be hers and that she wente from the castel and a com¦petent hous to her a noon muste be prouided In the whiche she may ho∣nestly abyde vnto her dower. be too her assigned after that it is aforsayd & she shall haue Resonable her dew mouenere ther shalbe assigned too her for her dowar of comō the thred parte of alle ye land of her husband yt wiche was his but yf she were of les∣se dowayred at the chirche dore ¶ Noo wydow be distrayned to ma¦ry her while she wold lyue wythout husbond So netheles that she fynd suerte to vs. yt she shal not mary her wythout thassent of vs yf she holde of vs or without thassent of her lorde of another ¶ That noo land ne rente shalbe distrayned for dette. We for soche or our baylifs shall not sease any lāde or rent for any det as longe as the catels of the dett pre¦sent Suffisen to yelde the rente and the detter therof be redy to satifye. Nor ye pledges of the dett be disray¦ned as longe as ye chyef dett̄ suffice ye payment of the dett and yf the chyef dett failed in payment of ye dette not hauȳg wherof he may yelde or wol∣de yelde whiles he may than ye sue¦tees muste answere of the dette. and yf they wolde not they too haue the landes and rentis of the dette vnto hit be satesfied to hem of the dette yt whiche a fore they paid for him but yf the chyef dett shewed for hem too be quyte ayenst thoo suerties ¶For ye Cite of london and alle od citees boroughs and townes and ye v. portis to bronke ther libarties The cyte of London mote haue Alle her olde libarties and fre vsag Mo¦reouer we will and graunte that al¦le other citees boroughs and nes and the barōs of the v. portis and all other portes haue all ther libarees and free vsagis ¶ Of vniuste distreynt and of Co¦mon plees to be holden No mā shalbe distrained to doo mo¦re seruice of kynght{is} fee nor of other free tenemētis than therof is owed comō plees shal not be sued or folow our courte but be holden in Som̄ ser¦taine place recognyssaūcis of newe discesme and of deth of ye Auncet but in his shires and this wyse we forso¦the yf we were out of the Reame ou chief Iusticis shal sende our Iusticis by eueryh contrey ones in the yers
the whiche with the knyghtis of the shirs shall take in the shires the for∣said assises and thoo whiche in that shire comyng in the sheir bi oure for said Iusticis at the forsaid assises too be taken Sute may not be determy¦ned odur where ī ther wey and they whiche by thoo same for deficulte of Som̄ articles may not be determy∣ned shalbe referred to our Iusticis of the benche & there shalbe endid. ¶ Of the last presentacion & of marc¦hauntis Assises of the last presentacion alwei shalbe taken afore our Iusticis of ye benche & there shalbe determyned A free man shal not be amercyed for a litel trespace but after ye maner off the trespace Saue his contenemēt And a marchaunt the same wyse sa∣ue his marchaūdyse and a villayne other than ours the same wise shal∣be amercyed Sauyng his wayna∣ge yf he falle into our handis And non of ye forsaid mercyes shalbe put but be othe of sad and honest men of neyborhod Erles and barons shall not be amercyed but be ther peeres and not but after the maner off the trespace Noo mā of the chirche shal∣be amercyd aftir the quantite of his chirchly benefyce but after hys lay tenement and after the quantite off his trespace ¶ That noo man be distreyned too make biggis ne ryuals Noo vylayne nefree man be dys∣treyned to make brudg{is} nor ryuals but whiche of olde and of right shuld make them Noo bankis or ryuals shalbe deffendid from hensforth off the Ile which were in defence the ty¦me of kyng Hery our grauncer bi ye Sam placis and thoo same termes as they were wout to be ī tyme pas∣te ¶ Of dettis ressaiued to be leuid Noo sheref Constable Crownar or any other holde plees of our crow¦ne. yf any man holding of volay fe dey and our sheref or baylyf shewe our letters patentis of our Sōmoni¦ciō of the dett that the deed owed vn∣to vs It shalbe lefull to our sheref or baylyf to attache and Inbrief all the goodis and cattels of the ded founde in the lay fee to the value of that de∣te be the sight of lawfull men of the same Soo nothing therof be had a∣wey vnto the dette be to vs paid whi¦che were clere and ye resedewe too be lefte te therecuturs to make ye testa∣ment of of the dede and yf nothinge be to vs owed of hym alle the catels shall falle to the dede. Sauȳg to the wif of hym and their children their Resonable partis. And yf ani free mā decessed Intestat by the handis of his kynnesfolk and of his next frendis be the sight of ho∣y chirch. His goodis shalbe destribute yt whi∣che he had Sauyng to euery mā his dettis the whiche he ded owe ¶ Noo Constable or his baylyf take cornes ne catellis. &c{is}
Noo Constable or his baylife take the cornes or other catallis of ani mā whiche be not of ther owne where ye cattelis set but he anon yelde the mo¦ney therof or may haue ye respyt the¦rof by ye wille of the sellar yf forsothe he ware off the twone he muste wtin xl. daies yelde the price. ¶ That noo Constabil distrayne or keping of any castel. Noo cōstable nor his baylif distrai¦ne ani knyght for to yeue money for the keping of ye castel yf he wold doo it in his propur {per}sone or bi another honest mā doo he it and if lad or sent him into any army be he quyte of ye kepyng after the quantite of the ty∣me whiche he were by vs in armey of the see for whiche he did seruice in the army ¶ For takyng of hors or cartis &c Noo shere for baylif or any other take horses or cartis of any man for carag to me made but he yelde delli¦ueraunce of antiquite statuted that is to say for a carte with .ij. horses x. d. by the day and for a carteat iiij. horses xiiij.d. be ye day noo lordis car∣ris of any persone of ye chirch of kny¦ght or of any ladi bi our bailifs shal not be taken Nor we nor our od shall take woode of other mennys to the makyng of our castels or any od but bi the wille of him of whom that wood were ¶ For the landes of felons We shall not holde the landis of hē whiche were cōuicte of felony but by on yere and on day and than by tho landis yeldid to the lorde of the fees. ¶ For the weres in thamyse Also weris in thamys shalbe put awey from hensforth vtterly and in midway and by all England but bi the coste of the see. ¶ For a wryte called pricipe A wrytte whiche is called p̄cipe from hensforth shall not be made too any mā of ani free holde wher orght a free man lese his courte ¶ For mesurs of wyne & odur One mesur of wyne shalbe made bi all our reame and mesur of ale & on mesur of corne that is to say ye quar∣te of london. And on largenes dyed thothes & of russens & of hanberie{is}
that is to sey two ell{is} be twyxt the lis¦s Of weightis forsothe be it as off mesurs ¶ Of Inquysssions Noo thing be geuen from hēsforth for a wrytte of inquisicion of him w∣hiche asketh inquisiciō of lyf or of mē¦bres but frely be it graūted and not denaied ¶ Of holders of free ferme f am holde of vs bi  ferme or bi socage or burgage. and off another land by knyghtis seruice. We haue not the keping of the eyrs ne of his lande the which is of the fee of ano∣ther ferme or socage or burgage Nor we haue not the keping of that fee ferme or socage or burgage. but yf that fee ferme owe to vs knyght{is} seruice we forsothe haue not the ke∣pyng of an heir or any lande the w∣hiche he holdeth of any other bi kny¦ghtis seruice by occasion of any lyt∣tel serge auntship the whiche he hol∣deth of vs by seruice too yelde too vs knyues or arons or a Such man̄ ¶ That a free mā be not inprisoned Noo baylif from hensforth put a¦ni man to vpon lawe nor to an othe be hs only speche wythoutē trewe and feithfull witnes to that brought in. Noo fre man shalbe taken or in prisoned or be decessed off his free tenemēteis or libarties or of his fre vsagis or be outlawed or exiled or od wise be bistraynet nor vpō him shal we goo nor vpon him shal we sende but by lawfull dome of peeres or by the law of the lande To noo mā shal we denay or deserre right or Iustice Of marchauntis alyens Alle marchauntis but yf they wer openly afore forboden shall haue sauf and suer conduyte to goo fro en¦gl̄d and to com Into England and dwelle and goo bi england as wel bi lande as by water to bey and to selle without all euil tollis and by olde & right vsagis On take that ī tyme of warre and yf they be of lande of war¦re ageinst vs and such be founde in our land in the begynnyng of ware by atached without harme of body or goodis til it be knownen of vs or of our chief Iusticis how ye marchaū¦tis be euereted the whiche be founde in the lande and ayenst vs in the lād of warre and yf our folke be sauf the¦re Sauf by other in our lande ¶ Of eschetis to beholden Yf any mā held of any eschete as off the honor of wallȳgford bolloyn no∣tynghm̄ lancaster or of other eschetis the whiche be in our handis and be baronyes and deyd the eyer off him shal not yeue other releuye nor shal doo to vs other seruice thā he shulde doo to the baronu yf that lande were in the hand of a baronu and we in ye same wise shall holde it as the baron helde it Nor we by occasiō of such ba∣roni or eschet shal haue ani eschet or keping of any of our men but yf thei helde of vs other where in the hed to him which helde ye barony or eschet
¶ Of land to be solde or alyend Noo fre man from hensforth ge mo¦re of or selle to any man Of his lan¦de than as for the resedew of his lan¦de he may make to the lord of the ee sufficiēt seruice to him dew and vsed than parteyned to the fee ¶ Of patrons of chirches Also patrons of abbeys of chirches hauing the kyngis charturs of En∣glād off anoson or other olde tenur of possession haue thei the keping of them whiles they were vacaunt as they aught to haue and as aboue is declared ¶ Of apele of women Noo man be taken or Inp̄soned for the apele of a womē for the dethe off another than of her husbonde ¶For shires to be holde and of retor to be made o shire from hensforth shalbe hol∣den in our reame but from moneth to moneth and there as the more ter¦me is wo too be there be the more  noo sheref or baylif make his tur¦ne by the hunderd but twyes in the yere and not but ī diew place & wou¦r that ys to sey aftir erones and a¦yen after the ende of seint michael And the vyew of franke pledge must be made at the terme of Sient Mic∣hael wythout occasion So that is to sey that eche mā haue his libartees and free vsagis the which he had or was wou to haue the tyme of king Here our graundsure whiche  be purchesed ¶ Be ther forsothe made a yew of frankpleg So that is to sey that our pees be holden and that y• he ohȳg be holden holli as it was wonte and that the sheref Seche no occasions. and that he be contēt of that the sher¦ref was wout too haue of his vyew made ye tyme of kyghery our graūd¦sur ¶Of land yeuyn to religion Be it liefull fro hensforth to any mā to yeue or to selle his lande to any re¦ligions lorde. Soo that he resume it from the same hous nor be it  to any religions lorde to take the lā¦de of any man So that after he yeue it him of whom he ressaed it to hol¦de ¶ Yf any man from hensforth to a∣ny religiouse lady yaf So his lande and ther upon be conuicte His yef vtterly shalbe put away and the lā∣de shall renne to the lorde of the fee. ¶Of age to be taken Scutage from hēsforth shalbe takē as it was wonte in the tyme of here our graundsir and be ther sauf arch¦bishops bisshops abbbottis priours Templars hospitales Erles barōs knyghtis and all odur aswel chrch persones as secular Alle theis libar¦tees and her free vasagis the which furst they had Alle thes lybartess & vsagis the whiche we haue grasited in our reame to holde as myche as to vs {per}teynethe and ayenst alloure
of our Reame as wel clarkis as lay foll{is} they obserue as to them pertey¦nen aginst theirs ¶ The confirmacyon of the forsayd libartees. For sothe for this donacion and con¦cession of thees libarties and of odur libartees conteyned in the chartur of liberties of the forest Archbisshops bisshops abbottis priours Erles ba¦r̄s knyghtis and free holders and all of our reame haue yeuen to vs ye xv. parte off alle her godes & menea¦bles we haue graunted to them for vs and our eyers that nether we ne our eyers Shall purchas ani thīg{is} by the whiche the libarties. In this chartur conteyned by brokē or lessed And yf any thing be sought nought be it worth and for no thīg be it had Theis witness is sir. S. archbisshop of caaunterbury . bisshop of londō I. bisshop of bathe P. of wyochest H of lyncolne R. of salesbury. W. of Ro¦wchest W. of worcet I. off Ely H. off. herford. R. of chicestur willm of Er¦cetur bysshops and other yeuyn at winchestur the xi. day of feuerell the ix. yere of our reigne ¶ We forsothe the donacions and grauntis aforsaid hauyng rate and a worthem for vs and our eyers we do graunt and haue confermed and them be tenor of theis presentis we In newe willing and graunting for vs and our eyers that the chartur a forsaid in alle and euerych her arti∣cles parpetually fermly and Inui¦atly be obserued and if so were that Som̄e articles in ye same chart con∣teyned hyder haly we not obser¦ued In witnesse wherof thes our let¦ters haue done make paentis wit∣nes edward our Son at wesū the xij. day of octobre the xxv yere of our reigne. Explicit the chartur of the libartees of England. ¶ Narracio of thē that bien shreuen an not contrice Esarons the gret clerk tellith that ther was a man in {per}is a yonge man that yaf all to lecchery & to othrr dyuers Synnes and the fil vpon him a gret feruent lykenesse & anon he was shreuē and wepte his synnes and bethught hī that he wol¦de amend his lif but yt was a feȳt biest as ye shuln̄ here hereafter he was howsled & anelid and Soo died and a fewe daies after he apiered to one of his seruauntis & seid yt he was dāpned for he had will if he mytght haue lyued to haue turned to his sȳ¦ne ageyne & he sayd by cause. I. had not a stable purpose & a trewe wylle to forsake all my liuȳg therfore alle my confession & all that I. did ī ressa∣uyng my sacrament{is} it auayled me not but I. am perpetualli & wythut tē ende dāpned as I am wel worthy for our lord seyth ī the gospel of Iohn̄ qui manducat et bibit indigne  cisi sibi manducat & bibit &c{is}.
¶The valew and stynt of the benefyce of saint Magnus at lond Brydge yerly to the person. ¶The rekenyng of the same the fyest day of decembre anno dn̄i M CCCC lxxxxiiij. Edward bellowe his rent iiij li. the offrine xiiij s Herry somer his rent viij li. the offryng xxviij l Thomas cuwper iiij li.vi l viij d xv l ij d Heyman xxxiij l iiij d v l x d. Richard Arnod x li. xxxv l. Iohn̄ ball xl l vij l. Herry can liij l.iiij d ixl iiij d. Iames rustdon iij li.iij liiij d. xi lviij d. Willm̄ gardiner xl l ij s̄. Roger mayde v li. xvij l.vi d Thomas faring xlvi l.viij d. viij l.ij d. Huntley liij l.iiij d ix l.iiij d. Iohn̄ yonge xlvi l.viij d. viij l.ij d. Willm̄ motte liij l iiij d. ix l.iiij d. Per stte iiij li.iij l iiij d xiiij l vij d Robert vincent xlvi l.viij d viij l ij d. Iohn̄ vmfrey vi li.vi l viij d xviij l.vij d. Tokar xiij s̄.iiij d ijl.iiij d Thomas blounte liij l iiij d ix l iiij d Symken newnon iij li.iij s̄.iiij d xi s̄ i d Iohn̄ tempill xl l. vij s̄. Iohn̄ wylford xxxiij l.iiij d. v l.x d. Iohn̄ palmer xxxv l. vi l.i d od. Willm̄ clarke xxvi l. viij d. iiij s̄ viij d Thomas horwod xxvi s̄ viij d iiij s̄ viij d. Willm̄ alye xxxiij l. iiij d v l.x d▪ Thomas knollyng xxvi l.viij d iiij s̄.viij d. Thomas dauy xl l vij d. Moter bylle xx l. iij l.vid Robert seton xlvi s̄.viij d. viij l.ij d. Willm̄ harowelel lvi s̄.viij d. x l ij d. Mayster stokton xxvi s̄.viij d. iiij .viij d Iohn̄ gregory xl s̄ vij s̄. Thomas brytt xxx s̄. v l.iij
Thomas maer xxvi s̄. viij d iij viij d. Gilbert forman xxvi s̄. viij d. iiij s̄.viij d. Water boswelle xl l vij l. Richard white v li. xvij s̄ vid. Wellm̄ stde. xi li. xxxviij l.vi d. Iohn̄ hastelar iiij li. xiiij l. Richard berne v li. xvij l.vi d. Richard warton xl l. vij l. Richard franclyn xxvi s̄.viij d. iiij l vii d. Richarn alyf xxxiij l. iiij d. v l xd. Reynold Iames xx l. iij s̄.vi d. Willm̄ romyng xx l. iij l. vi d Richard gareyner. xxvi l.viij d. iiij s̄ vij d Richard gardyner xl l. v s̄. Herry tomson xxvi l. viij d iiij s̄ viij d Thomas morton iij li. vi s̄. viij d xi l viij d. Richard Iames xxxvi s̄. viij d. vi l. v d Iohn̄ robchnut iij li. x s̄. xij l. iij d. Willm̄ weller xxx l. v s̄. iij d. Iohn̄ forde xxvi s̄ viij d iiij l. viij d. Iohn̄ adam xxvi l. viij d. iiij l viij d. Willm̄ blank xxx s̄. v l. iij d. Iohn̄ browne xxvi s̄.viij d iiij l viij d. Holmeby iij li x s̄ vi d Iohn̄ calker xxxvi l viij d vi l v d Iohn̄ Etton xxxiij s̄ iiij d. v l. x d. Syinken motte xlvi l. viij d. viij l.ij d. Hew aundir xxxiij l iiij d. v l.x d. Roger slyngisby xl l. vij l. Iames walker xl l. vij l. Nicholas hylle xxxiij l iiij d v l xd. Andrew austen iiij li. xiiij l Bartilmew dwale xlvi l viij d viij iiij d Willm̄ sheringfold xl l vij l. Willm̄ gryn iiij li. x l xv s̄ ix d Iohn̄ hastelar xxxiij l iiij d v l xd. Iohn̄ turrett iiij li. xiiij l Richard clarke iij li. x l vi d Robert lanne v li.vi l viij d. xviij l viij d. Steuen wibne iiij li. xiiij l.
Iohn̄ askyn liij l.iiij d lx l.iiij d Richard hayell iij li.iij l.iiij d xi l id. Thomas petite x li.xiij l iiij d. xxxvij l iiij d. Willm̄ dekon liij l iiij d ix l iiij d Hew creshīn. xxvi s̄ viij d iiij l viij d. Thomas burga v li.vi l viij d xviij l viij d Iohn̄ former v li.vi s̄ viij d xviij l viij d Richard Ieffrey xi li.vi l viij d xxxix l viij d. Thomas ewen vi li.xiij l iiij d xxiij l iiij d Herry bube iij li.vi s̄ v ij d xi l viij d Iohn̄ chankis xlvi s̄ viij d viij l ij d Robert blake iij li. x l vid Eche wyf xx l iij l vi d Eche wyf xxx l v l iij d. aldwyn hawkins xlvi l viij d viij l ij d Iohn̄ austen v li.vi l viij d xviij l viijd Thomas ladll v li.x l x iij d Thomas broke iiij li. xiiij l Willm̄ pawley xxxiij l iiij d v l x d. Wilm̄ bowar iij li vi l viij d xi l viij d Willm̄ bowar xix l iij l iiij d Delby wyf xiij l iiij d ij l iiij d Willm̄ barre x l xxi d. Ihon̄ peirson x l xxi d. Iohn̄ barbor x l xxi d Mary on gregory x l xxi d. obert batilo v li vi l viij d xviij l viij d Maystres newmā xlvi l viij d viij l ij d Richard hyl vij li. xxiiij l xi d Willm̄ laurens liij l iiij d ix l iiij d Willm̄ laurēs for a hous of I R. xiij l iiij d ij l. iiij d Roger middelton v li. xvij l vi d The same R. for a flax shop xx l iij l vi d. Ion̄ pye xiij l iiij d ij l iiij d. Richard nyt vi li.xiij l iiij xxiij l iiij d Richard gwhe vili.vi l viij d xxij l ij d. Richard mathewe iij li.vi l viij d xi l viij d regon sott iiij li.vi l viij d xv l ij d
Alisannder {per}poynter. v li.xiijl iiij d. xix s̄.x d. Iohn̄ ben iiij li. xiiij s̄. Iohn̄ ben for a watering place x l. xxi d Item the same a seler̄ vi s̄.viij d xiiij d Iohn̄ trowths xili.xiij l. iiij d. xl s̄.x d Iohn̄ alman xij li. xlij l Iohn̄ Turke iiij li. xiiij l. Iohn̄ kirkby xvi li. lvi l. Phelip semer vi li. xxi s̄. Edmone garard xxvi l. viij d. iiij s̄. viij d. The lyon iiij li. xiiij s̄ Nicholas morton iij li. x l vi d Willm̄ ramsey v li. xvij l. vi d. The dolfyn viij li. xxviij l. Willm̄ adkynson iij li.xvi l. xiij s̄ v d. Iohn̄ smythe iiij li.xiij l. iiij d xvi s̄ iiij d Iustyn wyf xlvi s̄. viij s̄ ij d. Willm̄ hoppy vij li vi l viij d xxv s̄ viij d Richard cockis iij li.vi l viij d xi l viij d. ¶ Somme of all this redtis CCCC.xxxiiij li.xij l.viij d. ¶ The somme of the offringis lxxv li.viij l.viij d. o. ¶The shoppis in brigsteet Thomas lydale for ij shoppis ix li.vi s̄.viij d. xxxij l. viij d Iohn̄ thorneton l l. viij l.ix d. Gregory stoll liij l.iiij d ixl iiij d Willm̄ pauley iiij li. xiiij.l. Richard knyght vi li.xiij s̄.iiij d. xxiij s̄ iiij d Thomas leg v li.vi s̄.viij d. xviij l viij d. Herry shotford iij li. x s̄.vi d. Iohn̄ palmer v li. xvij s̄.vi d Thomas gasley lvi l viij d. ix l.xi d. Richard cockis iiij li.iij s̄ iiij d xiiij s̄ vij d Iohn̄ austen iiij li. xiiij l Iohn̄ turke iij li.xiij l.iiij d xij l x d Iohn̄ sepman liij s̄ iiij d. ix l. iiij d Willm̄ ramsey v li. xvij l. vi d.
The same willm̄ iij li.vi s̄. viij d xi l viij d Thomas broke vi li. xviij l.viij d. ¶The somme of rent of shoppis .lxx li.iij l. iiij d ¶The somme of the offring for them xij li.iij l. iij d ¶Item the ymage of our lady on the brydge valet iiij marke ¶Item the personage valet xxxiij l iiij d ¶Weddidingis buryeng{is} puryficacions xj li xiij l. iiij d. ¶ Cresoms and preuy tythes ¶ Somme of this parte xvj li. ¶Somme of the hole reuennes C.v.li.xxiij d. o. ¶This ben the costs and chargis longyng to the same chirche of saint Mangnus. First the pristis wagis x li. Item for ware to the hygh aulter xx l. Item for the pension of the same xl l. Item for wasshing of the auters on mandy thursday v l. Item for frankensence x d. ¶Somme of this charge xiij li.v l. x d. ¶ Soo the somme of the clere value of the benefice was this yere. lxxxi li.xvi l. i d o ¶The copy of saue conduyte. MAximilian and Philyp by the grace of god Duke of Austry of burgoyn of lotryke of Lymburgh of lucenburgh and off Gelder Erle of flaundres of artoys of Burgoyn Palatyine of henawd of holland of zeland of Namen and of utson Marques of the hole Ryke Lord of Frezeland of salynen and of Mechlen vnto alle our lieutenauntis marchauntis admirallis and other capteis of our people of warre Iusticis and officers or ellis their leuitenaun¦tis and to eueriche of hem the whiche these present letters shalbe she¦wen. And we doo you to vnderstonde that we at the prayer of certeyn our speciall seruauntis the whiche haue desyred this off vs we haue gyuen graunted and accorded by theise presentis Io∣han Pykton Thomas Bradbery Thomas Ryche. And
pasquer yerford of the kyngdom off England good trewe and sure sauf∣conduyt to endure from the daye of makyng hrof vnto thende of x mo¦ne. is to the behof of theym that ty¦me durynge or ellis by one named Thomas nules and in other of ther sayde factours bering these present letters or the vidimus ther of that they may brynge or do to bee brou∣ght and caryed out of the forsaid lan¦de of the kyngdom off england in to our landis and lorshippis by the see fresshe waters or by Lande in one shippe or dyuers shippis alle suche marchaundyses and wares as too them please. therfore to selle barter and occupye in our sayd landis and lordships. And to do their moste a∣uayle and profyte in the beste than they can or may and that they may be in our sayde Landis and lordship¦pys for too bye and gader lade and freith and cary awaye. or doo to bee caryed awey and conueed in to the sayde kyngdom of england in to su¦che plis as shal please theym vpon the sayde ship̄s all suche wares goo∣dis and marcaundises profytable. Like as to them shalbe thought mo¦ste profytable. Excep bolion harnes bowes arowes artillary and other thingis whiche is forboden. habile∣mentis of werre and none but suche harneys and wepens as they shall bringe wyth them for theyr defence and saufgarde of their goodis so we do you to vnderstonde. And charge you precisely that the for sayd Iohn̄ pykton. Thomas Bradbury. Tho¦mas Riche Pasquer perford & their sayd iiij. faccours wyth their shyp̄s freight wyth suche marchanndises as it is aboue sayde and wyth ye ma¦ryners of the same ye suffer and let go passe and repasse and thorough passag{is} lorships and landis and pla¦cis as ye be comytted vnto and of ye whiche ye haue abyding and kepīg of to cary and to come ayen wyth ye sayd ship and Marchaundises by daye and by nyght suerly free pease¦bly. wythout to them to do or to gy∣ue or not suffre to bee done or gyuen to be in body nor in goodis arrestid letted nor wythstand on ayens n p̄¦iudicial of our forsayd saufconduyt And that they whiche haue desired letters of Marke countremarke or graūte taking ayen nether for what werre or for what cause it be. Butt yet that ye wyll see and make to be seen their saufconduyt & other cau¦ses yt they haue nede of yf they disy¦re it of you vpon their resonable co¦stis out cepte euer the goodis Mar∣chaundises or dette yf they haue oni in your forsayde landis arrested or tached afore the date of this writtīg and ouerseen that during our fore∣sayd saufcondut and wythin the ty∣me of the same that they nor theyr factours shal not doo thinge preiu∣diciall or lettyng vs or our landis or subiettis and that whyche is theyr {pro}pre dette their. that the lawes and Iustice shall passe ther vpon as be∣houith
therunto and for bicause that this sayd saufconduyt must be occu∣pied in diuers placis We will the vi∣dimus or copy auctētike take effect and strenght as this present saufcō∣duyt after tē monethis past and goo stonde to noon effect yeuen in our to¦wne of andwerp the x. day of octo∣ber in the yere off our lord god. M. CCCC.lxxxv. This subscribed bi mi lord thed duke. Certificat TO alle them that these presen∣tis ower letters shall see or he¦re And in especyall too the noble and puissaūt our right dere welbeloued lord my lord Chauntreyne borogh-maistres shepyns and counseyle off the towne of barone vpon the some send gretyng and loue. We late you weten in berȳg witnesse and certifi¦yng for troueth that ye day of the da∣te of these presentis before oure scou∣te and vs and appered thesse perso∣nes anthony bastard of Ghymes & Iohn̄ bussh man both abidyng and dwellyng in the said towne Swere naghell our secretary The which bi their oothis yt is to say the sayd anto¦ny and ohn̄ by the oothis to them solēply esstablisshed by our said scou∣te & yt sayd swere naghel bi ye oothe yt he hath made to vs and to oure said towne for his office of secretari haue testyfied sayd affirmed and declared fyrst the said antony and Iohn̄ that they be well remenbred and in mȳ∣de that ye free passe marte of this said towne of barowe last passed richard arnolde marchaūt of England and oon anthony hosted at the lion ī mid∣dilborought lūbard sittȳg at tabyll wyth the sayd āthony bastard ī his house called ye horse showe ī this said towne had many wordis and argu∣mentis the oon ageynst ye other tou∣ching the valeure and puissan̄ce of ye realme of England and the contry of Italy in prysing and enhaunsing eueryche of the puissaunce valure & bountye of his contray wherȳ final¦ly they chauffyd thē sef bothe ī suche wise that the sayd Richard amonge other sayd these wordis. Yf ynglissh mē where not the lum∣bard{is} shulde haue nothȳg to ere but saladis and hese and after they lye¦de yche other hoei suche wise that anthony lumbard roose from the ta¦bill sayng to the said richard that e wolde do hym atome with many o¦ther hote word & at that Tyme nor neuer to fore nor neuer after thay ne¦uer hard that the sayd richard hade spoken or sayed ony maner of worde touching the kyng of romayns that were or myght in oni wise corne too the prem dice or dishonor of his riall magiste or any of his seruauntis ¶ Moreouer the same anthony bas¦trad off Glyues sayed and declared that oftē tymes he hathe harde the said R. spoke and cōmē touching the kyng of romayns and the kyng off englond prayng too god that he wol¦de saue them bothe of his grase and saȳg that as longe as they were frē¦dis this contray and the contray of
England shulde haue welthe and {pro}¦sperite And the sayd swere Naghell our secretary sayed declered and af∣fermed by his sayd othe that the sat∣terday yt xvij. day of this present mo¦neth of may sir Nycholas off werue knyght senestial of the contray of ba¦row and the sayd secretary as therī on our behalf charged spak in the to¦wne of re wyth oure redoubtyd la∣dy the danagere sayng too her that our lord of barw & the towne off ba¦row had vndirstandyng that by cer¦tayn her letters sent to the sayd lord chauntreyne she shulde haue accu∣sed the sayd Rychard for a spyse and for hym that shulde haue sayed and spoken many dishonest wordis vpō and touchyng the sayd kynge of Ro¦mayne and thā our sayd redoubtyd lady ther vpon said ande answerde that she neuer thought yt so too doo Sayng also that she know well the sayd richarde & that she knewe of hȳ noō other thȳg but yt he was a good & an honest marchaunt without frā¦de or malegyne in witnesse of which thyng we haue doon to be sett the se∣all of causys of ye said towne of barow to these presentis the xxviij. day may the yere of our lord god M.CCCC. lxxxviij Certifycat. IN the towne of osseynt Lu∣cas off berrameda saterday the .xxix. day of the moneth of may the yere of the byrthe of our sauiour Ihū crist of M.CCCC.lxxxx in this day aboue sayd before the ho∣norable Peter gracia carnayl alcay∣dy ordinary of this sayd towne for ye worthy and right noble lord mi lord Lord henry de Busmanys duk of ye Citye of medena Sydonya Erle off Niebla lord of the noble citee of gibre altare and ī the presence of me Iohn̄ de Oraga seryuā puplico of this said towne for the sayd lord duk apiered present Nicolas arnolde englissh a∣byder in this towne and saied to the sayd alcayde in the presens of me the sayd scryuā Publico and the witnes∣ses vndir wreton That for asmoche as it myght be ij. monethes litel mo¦re or lesse that Nicholas warbaoys marchaunt Englissh had laden and laded in ye ship of Iohn̄ Mychels Bi¦scayn neyghboure of matrico xv. tō∣ne of Gyle consigned the oon half to Richard arnolde marchaūt englissh his fadre neyghboure of the cite of lō¦don and the other of the sayd xv. ton¦ne at the charge and aduenture of ye sayd nicolas warboys and for hym and for asmoche as it behoued hym and to hym was conuenyent to she∣ue by trouth & wytnesse ye aforesayd in some parties and places to hȳ con¦uenyent he disired and hasked the sa¦me alcaydy that he cōmaunde to re¦ceyue and he wolde Receyue ye sayd deposicion of willyam holibrād mar¦chaunt English bider in this towne and that he shulde make to be asked what it is that he knoweth of the foe sayd for the sayng afore sayd
And that he shulde say and depose bi his seyng and deposiciō that he wol¦de cōmaund to geue ande shulde ge∣ue ferme of his name and of myn the sayd Seryuan publice And the sayd alcayde caused too be receyued and receyued the oothe of ye sayd wil¦lyam hokrande marchaunt englis∣she By the name of god and mary & by the wordis of holy Gospell accor∣dyng to the forms of right And vpō the sayd othe made he was asked for that he knowe of the foresayd And he sayed that. that he knewe was that it myght be xv. dayes litell more or lesse that goyng be the same witnes∣se walkyng with the said Nycholas warbeys and Nicholas arnolde by the pley of the ryuer of this said tow¦ne that ye sayd nicholas arnolde said to the said nicholas warboys Nicho¦las those xv. tonne of oyle that ye la∣ded in the ship of Iohn̄ Mighels we¦re they the oon half yours and the other half my faders and laded you them for him and for you and that ye said Nicholas sayd well and that the sayd Nycholas arnolde sayd ageyn what thing is wel Say ye or nay And thā ye sayd Nicholas warboys sayed ye he had laden the sayd xv. tō¦ne of Gyle the oon half for hym and the half for the fader of the said Ny∣cholas arnolde and that he had nat laden them in noon other maner & that this that he knewe and past v∣pon his sayd othe that he made And the sayd alcayde said and cōman̄ded me the sayd Seryuā publico that I. shuld gyue of all witnee to the said Nicholas arnolde And I. haue gyuē hym therof this waryng accordyng as it passed fermed of the sayd alcay∣dy and my name and signe that is made and past the day moneth and yere Aboue sayd wytnesses off thys towne And peter Serono sermans neigh∣bores Certificat Willyam the hare leuetenaunt to Sir philyp af leuis off the castell off sluse Certyfie to all thē that this shal be holde that I. haue by the ordinaū¦ce of my lord chauntryne do sett priso¦ner oon named richard arnolde En¦glissh man and by the inhortacyon & aduertisment of a chapleyne off my lady the gret that wolde impose the sayd Richard certayē thing{is} wherof he hath not be foūde culpabill ne gil∣tye as yt aperith by an informacyō ther vpon made at barowe vpon & the room wherfor I haue sett ye said richard to the lyueraunce This that I. Certyfie aboue witnessith my na¦me and signe manuell hereto sett ye xxiij. day of Iuyne Anno lxxxviij. Spycery.
PEper at xviijd Burunkatsafraen at vij s̄ Clewes at ijl iiijd Mases large at iijl iiijd The garbyll of matis at, Gynger at ijl Synamon at xviijd Long peer at vil Greynes at xvl Notinyggis at ijl Gallyngale at xvid Corautice at id o Saunders at xid Suger candy at. viijd Suger portyngale. iiijd o Suger vallauncis at viijd Suger ca at. ijd Gynger vert at vd Sotate at iiijd Lmondis at iiijd Prunys at id o the Cxiiijl Tornesott at vid Comfectis. vd Wormsde ijlvid Almandis at xviijl Ryce at. xl Gallis rowe at. xviij s̄ Gum at xiiijl Coporose vert at vi.lviijd Coporose blan ij d White lede at x s̄ Rede lede at xl Generall at ijd ye ll Orpinent at ijd ye ll Vermelon at xvd Vert grete at vijd Rosset at xijd Grafyll at xijd Gyse Golde paper siluer paper syma{per} pa{per} grene pa{per} ye grose viijl Paynters ople rape oyle. the barell xxvilviijd fyne golde at iijliiij.d the C Party golde at xiiij d ye C Siluer at viijd the C Taynte at. xviij the ll Vernysh at ijd the ll Golde foyle at iij.l the grose Orsady at. xd the ll Totty at xvid the ll Terra sygyllata iijd Arafedida at. xvid Galbum at. xvid Candarides Rosyn de burdeus th. Cijlviijd Alees cycatrine at xvid Lapdaunū at vid Aspalton ffranlike. vid Parosyn the Ciiij s olsbanum mastik xvid Mure vid Borras. vilviijd Salt peter iijd Sall armonyake ijd Sell gem Sall alkaly Termenet at iijd Setuall xvid Spekenerd ijlviijd Arluyk iijd Resalgere iijd Annesche Cxxl Comyn the Cxx s Goll fyne Ynbawdias at ijl
Colyander the C.iiij s Lykeryse the bale v. s Alym foyle the. C.vi.lviijd Gumlake. xxd Carbite iijl Rubarb fyne xxvilviijd Appolic Scamony. vl Camfere at xl stainsaker at xiijd Sangins dracons at viijd all Datis the C.xxl Cotyn woll at iiij.d ob Cotenyerne at vid bays at iij s iiijd the C Calmus aromaticus at ijd Essustom at xvid ye ll Ayshull. Spongis the llvid Gome armonyak xd Seueleuis at xid Glew the Ciiij.l Serule xxl Brymstone the Ciijliiijd Fulfer the Ciijliiijd Sope castell the Ciijliiij.d Sope seuyle xvl Sope negar the barell Trytayll id ob S{per}matete the llvilviijd Fenycrete xl the C quyksiluer at xvd the ll Cardanum̄ maior ijlviijd Cardanum̄ minor. ijl Storar liquida. Storar calaunda xvid Tamerendus Aute mony Bongowme the lliijliiijd Scriuabill pa{per} at xxiiijliiijd Pa{per} ryall the reme vilviiid Browne pa{per} at xijd Wex the Ciijli Monche were the Cll Prunes of damaske the Cxiiijl Portyngale greyne the Cviijli Spanyshe greue the Cvili Woll oyle the tonne viixl Spanyske yrē y• tne. iijli.vi s̄ viijd Mader croppe at xviijl Mader onberoued at xvi s Mader ghemene fayer at. x s Mull mader at. iijliiijd Corse wede of theyllis iij s̄ iiijd Amyas woode the pype xxv viijd Geue wolde after yt is y• C Venise woode the Cv s̄ Hoppis the Cxvl Flar the last. vili y• Cviijl Pyche the last ll Terre the last xlvi s̄ viijd Osemonde the last iijlivilviijd Faget yerne the Ciijl waynskot the Cll Regale the Cvli Clapholde the. C Tabyll ioyned the nest Playing abill Bastis the. C Mastis Owris Coper grey Coper spletter the Cxvil Trayne oyle the barell. Stele the burden. Fatyn nayle the some iiijl Tarden̄ the some. iijl Bragotn̄ the some ljlviijd Roffn̄ the some vil
Spryge the some ljlviijd Rollys of wadmoll the been fyne xiijliiijd Curse wadmoll the pe Spruse cannas the Cxxvlviijd Pytelyng. xxxl. Harfrodis lymogors & osyngbrygis Vlsomys. Mynsteris boles Hannouer Soltwhiche. Buske clothe Werkyn N{per}nildis Guttynggis oen caruase. Browswekis Ghentyse clothe. Holondis clothe. Brabaunt clothe Henegoes clothe uenardis clothe Busll clothe Cotyns Cypres Lombrdis Voylys for nunys. Holmus fustian. Osborowis fustian. ustian of all sortis Pakkyng shetis. Ounarde threde Collen threde, Collen hemp at. xxviij s̄ Tukkyng hemp at xvil Rede hidis at. iii s Rede lashe large at iijl Goldeskȳnes at xxiijliiijd Bultell fyne and Course Pynnes of all sortis at iijliiijd Brug{is} clothis at xxiiijl Anlettis of all sortis. Ieder lasys Wire girdill{is}. vijl Latyn basyns at xxviijl Latyn plate Dowbill plate xvil white plate at. xijl Sengyll plate at vijlvid Sakbett at xiiijd. Auto nybell large at iiij Fyne harp̄ stryngis fyne at vil Course harp̄ stryngis at iiijl Fyne swanishe nedill{is} at xxiijl Fyne qurell at xxiiijl Sryngyng threde at ixd Ballis xvd Small pragys at iiijl Large cushyn clothis at iiij.l Small cushen clothis at ijl Long skyne threde & Iukyll at viijd Pakke threde of all sortis Bor combis large and small Fyne pykyd here Albladis mynlyn at viij s̄ Al hastis at iij s Pynwyer at Yere wyer of all sortis Knwes peers at vil Aumbyr at xxl the ll Ballanses of all sortis worstede girdell{is} Maystell bedis Fullis off ketellis redy bownde the full at iijliiijd Batery trople C Rollis of golde gret at vil Rollis of golde small at iijl Paknedillis at vid ye C Brugis threde at xvil Guttynggis Thymbili{is} of all sortis
velueris dobbyll at ixl the yerde syngel veluett at vi s̄ vij d the yerde Damaske saten and taffata Sarseuet chabelot tukis. Bokerames f all sortis. Rede threde Grene threde yne corall the ll. xxxij s ¶Item a rekening for grocery ware. I C.q̄ xxiiijll for . vill. iij q xll. for  iiijll iij q̄ xxll. for l iiijll. iiij C.q̄ xxll. for  vill. ¶Som̄ gret iiij C.iij q̄. ¶Som̄ sotill v C.xxxijll Rebate for tare xijll Rebate for trete xxll. ¶ Rest n̄ v C.ll at xxd. the pound Som̄ in argent xlvij li.xviijl.iiijd ¶ Caste thy som grete in grosse ye C. as it is ye half C.q̄ make it sotil after v score to ye C. & ye odde xij.li. & di.q̄t & odde ll aft v score xij li. to ye C. yt is v. score to ye C. sotil rebate in euy v sco∣re iiij li. yt is trete & also in ye half C ij ll in ye q̄.i ll in ye half q̄ half a ll. ¶The maner to make yuke TAke a pottel of reyne wat and breke half a ll of galle eche gal¦le in iij or iiij peer & lete this galle stō∣de in ye forsayd water iiij or v dayes. & than poure out ye vpermost of the water & put therto dī.ll. weyght off vitryol in pouder & put chermin an erthen vessel & stere hem well to gyd And stoppe the potte that none eyer cum therto. and lete it stonde a daye and a nyght and then take di.ll off gom̄e of stryter weyghtthan was yt vitryoll and put it the o. and stop∣pe ayen the pott. and stere it aboute and at in or iiij dayes ende then ta∣ke the orsayd gallis and drye them. in the sonne. and breke them smal er¦then they were. & put ther to a quar¦ter and dī of water and lete hem stō¦de vn nyghtes and pure out the cler water. and put ther to lesse than a q̄ of vitrioll in small pouder. and doo as is before sayde. and put therto los¦se weight of gom̄e then of the vyriol and wyth that later ynke temper ye fyrst ynke when nede is. and yf thā tempre good ynke wyth semple wa¦ter. it wyl turne to corrupcion. And the iij. tyme sethe the galle in water tyl the be softe and porcion the reme¦nant as is before sayde. vse and craf¦te shal teche the better &c.
¶Le premere course pur lestates ¶ Vn sotelte de lyon blāke rehersal Thinke and thanke prelate of grete prise That it hath pleasid the habūdant grace. Of king Edward in al his act wise Th to promote nyder to his please. This lytil yle whyle thou hast tyme and space. For to repaye do ay thy besy cure For thy rewarde of heuē thou shalt be sure ¶Purpotage. Frumenty and venyson Syngnet rosted Graunt luce in sarrs Red roested regadaunt. eusaunt roosted Venison in paste custarde porpul ¶Vn sotelte de natiuite saint Iohn̄ rehersall Iohn̄ baptist for thy name so preciouse. Gracia dei be thy true interpretaciō Pray euer to god yt in thy lyue ver∣tuouse Iohn̄ nowe of this see thorough thy meditacion. Preserued be which be this stallaciō Thus is entred in to his chirche Ther longe to endure many goode dedis to worche ¶The seconde course. ¶Vn sotelte le Ile de ely rehersall. O mortal marital to remembraūce This text de terra tu plamasti me What than auayleth al worldly ple¦saunce. Sythe to the erthe thou shalt reite De lune terre. how god hath ordey∣ned the. Lodesterre of ely. loo suche is godys myght Hym therfore to serue thou art bou¦den of right Gely to potage Storke roosted Pecokloshed Carpe in oppis Rabett roosted Gremefresshe water. Freature semea. Orenge in paste Tarte borboyne Leche damaske ¶Vn sotelte de dieu. schepard. Egosum pastor bonus rehersall Iohn̄ ofte reuolue ī thy remēbeārce That of my grace haue made the he¦re protector And of this folde I geue the gounāce Frō rauenors to be ther true defēsor Them to preserue euy tyme & ower Lerne of me & do thy besy deuor Frō my folke al rauen to disscuor ¶Respocio ep̄i Fayn I wolde blissed lorde yf it like ye This cure of thy diuine purmaūce And special most grace hast giue me To gyde & rewle after thy plesan̄ce & to expel al rebel wt thy maintence
From ye chirche good lorde geue me that grace. And so me to rewle wyth theto ha∣ue a place ¶The thirde course ¶Vn sotelte le sentis petre paule. & Andrewe rehersall Remēbre iohn̄ this yt shineth bright wt gret abūdaūce al is but vayngse Lerne for to die and welcome m ȳon we knight Welcome my preist & bishop verily The holy peter blissed poule & I Of this our chirche make ye {pro}tector And of this yle ye vertuose gouernor ¶Creme of almondes to potage oetour roosted Perche in gelye curlew Plouer roosted Vn caste de gely florisshyd Creues deudose Larkes roosted Fresshe storgion quynces in paste Tarte poleyn ffritour bounce Leche Reiall ¶Vn sotelte de le Eglesure letone rehersall. Now hertely ye bee Welcome into this hal ffrō ye highest vnto ye lowest degree. Requiring & specialy praing you al old to god yt louing{is} not to me And ferthermore of your benīgnite n̄o deo nostro grās agamus And prayse his name wt te deū lau∣damus Syttyng at the hygh dees. My lord of Ely in the myddes On the right hande The abbot of berye The abbot of ram̄esey The prior of Ely The mayster of the rollis The priour of braunwell The priour of anglesheye ¶On the other hande Syr Thomas howard. Syr Iohn̄ doune Syr Iohn̄ wyngelfeld Syr harry wentworthe Iohn̄ sapcote Syr Edward woodhous Syr robert chamberleyn Syr Iohn̄ Cheyne Syr willm̄ branden Syr Robert fynes Iohn̄ fortescu. The abbot of thorner. and my Lady brandon and other estats in the chā¦bre ¶The waye from Calice to Rome. thorough fraunce. ¶From calice to bollyn legis vij. From bollen to motrell vij. From motrell sanrogers vij. From sanrogers to viyns viij. from viyns to paylard vi from paylard to clermont viij. from cleremont to lesarchers vij. from lesarchers to saint denyse v from saint denyse to parise ij ¶Somma lvij. legys
From paris to kerbel vij From kerbel to antemes x From antemors montarges vij From montarres to bony xij From bony to lecheriter xij From lecheriter to portetis xi from portetis to banlon vij from banlon to perefetter iij. fro perefett to mercelines nouēs vij from nouens to saint clement ix from saint clement to arberel iij from arbeel to lyons iij ¶Somma from paris lxxxxi legis. ¶Ite from caleis to lyons C.xlviij legis. ¶The dukedom of sayuoye. From lyons to volipera. Mile xv from volipera to borgoyd vi from borgoyd to tore delpyne vi. frō tore delpine to pot beluisme xi from beluisme to gabiletta vi from gabiletta to cambelle vi. from cambella to momekane vi. from momekano to aqua bella ix from aqua bella to cambella xij. frō c̄bella to saīt iohn̄ de moriāa vi frō moiana to saīt michel vi. frō saīt michel to saint adrea ix. from saint adrea to borgetto vi from borgetto to vlzexa iij. from vlzexa to Iubgo ix. from Iubgo to nolalexa xv from nolalexa to susa ij. from susa to vilrana xv from vilrana to riuole iiij. from riuole to torino vi from torino to septuno v from septuno a kemasse vi. from kemasse to ligorin ix from ligorin to salaske ix from salaske to versika vij vij ¶Somma from lyons C.lxxxxij myle. ¶The dukedom of Myllaen lombardy. From versilia to nouara x myle x. from nonara to margent{is} x. from argent{is} to millano xiiij. from Millano to maryniano x. from Moryniano to lody x. from lody to caxale viij from carale to piesonza xij from piesenza to ferenzola. xij frō piesenza to borgo saint dn̄o viij from borgo to parma xv from parma to rego xv from rega to Modena xv from Modena to castelo francho v from castelo francho to bonoma xv. from bonoma a pianora viij from pianora to lorana viij frō lorana to discariga lasmo iiij frō discarga lasmo to firensola xij frō firensola to skaparia x frō skaparia to pontis saint piro ij frō pontis saint piro to florens xij ¶Somma from Nouara to florēs CC.xv Mile.
Frō florens to sancaxano viij. frō sancaxano to tauernelle vij frō tauernelle to poge bonze v. frō poge bonze to sena xij frō sena to bonconuento xij frō bonconuento to san quilito viij frō san quilito to ricorse viij frō ricorse to lapalia vij frō lapalia to pontis sentino vij. frō pontis sentino to aqua pendent{is} mile iiij frō aqua pendētis to sanlorenzo iiij frō sanlorenzo to bolzena iiij frō bolzena to Montflascone vi frō Montflascone to viterba viij frō viterba to ronsilyone ix frō ronsilione to bacano xiij frō bacano to rome xiiij. ¶Sōma frō florens to rome C.xxxvi. Mile. ¶Frō Rome to naples. Frō Rome to Marino xij. frō Marino to bellitera x. frō bellitera to sarmoneta frō sermonetta to casa noua xij. frō casa noua to Moreffa ix frō Moreffa to terrazena viij frō terrazena to fonda xi frō fonda to Molla x frō Molla to sessa xiij. frō sessa to chapolia xviij frō chapolia to Napele xviij. ¶Et sic est finis ¶In dei nomine Amen. The xviij. day of he moneth of Auguste the ye∣re of our lorde M.CCCC.lxxiij. & ye yere of the reigne of king Edward ye forth after the conquest xiij. I Iohn̄ Amell the elder citezen & Cotteler off London beyng of hool mynde and in good memory lande bee to almy¦ghty god make and orden this my-present restament conteyning ther∣in my last wyl in maner and forme that foloweth. ¶First I bequethe and Recōmende my soule too almighty god my ma∣ker and my redemer to the most glo¦rious virgine his moder our Lady saint mary and to all the holy com∣pany of heuen. and my body to bee beryed in the myddes of the parise chirche or colage of saint michel cal∣led whittyngton collage of London. or as nye ther vnto as it may good∣ly be done after the wyse discrecion of my executors. Itē I bequethe to ye high auter of saint magne ye mar∣ter beside ye bridge of lōdon wher of now I am a parisson for my tythis & oblacions by me forgetten or with poldē yf ony suche be in my dischar∣ge of my soule & ye curat their praye specyaly for my soule iij l. iiij d. Itē I bequethe to ye werkis of ye body of ye {per}ise chirche of saint michel aforsai¦de for my berieng to be had wt me ye same vis̄.v ij d. & aft this done & my¦ne faual expēsis payd first & formest & bifore al other ligacis I wil yt al mi dett{is} ye which of right & cōsiēce I owe to oni maner {per}sone be wel & trul pa¦yed bi my executors or ellis ordeined or to bee payed.
¶Item I bequethe to the werkis of the cathederal chirche of saint poule of London rij d. ¶Item I bequethe to the Charte house beside London to the entent yt the prior and couet ther pray speci for my soule and for the soule off Iane late my wyf. r.s̄ ¶Item I bequethe to margrete my suster my goodes here vnder wryt¦ten that is to wete the hangyng bā¦kers and cussyons in my halle hole no they bee▪ my bedde in my cham∣ber hoole as it is that is to saye fed bedde matras bolster pyllowes blā¦kettis skettis couerlet quylee tester and in curtyns and iiij. peyer of my beste sheeis and ij. couerietts besy¦de that▪ that lyeth on my bedde and . siluer spottes beyng in my bore. all my pewter vessel goyng abrode alle my pottis of pewter a saltselar of pewter an holy water stope of pe¦wter a borde cloth of da{per} a towell of dyaper two candelys of latt a chafyngdysshe of laton in braspot¦s that is to saye a greate Potte a myddel potte and a lytel ot and iij brasse p̄anni after the same sortin¦ge aspet of yron atreued and a la∣dyl. ¶Item I bequethe to Iohn̄ Amell of greewiche my cosyn all my bed∣dyng beyng in the chamer att wal¦worthe and all my weryng clothes as well wollen as lynnē belongīge to my body excepte my beste blewe Gowne and my morey gowne en∣greyned the whiche I reserue to the performyng of the remenaunt off of my legates conteyned in this  testament ¶Item bequethe to the sayde Iohn̄ Amell my cosyne all my stuf beyng in my shoppe that is to saye yner dog can horn▪ mapyll and the toe yt belongeth to my crafte as Saues. anfeldis hameres rapis▪ filis and other to werke wythal and x. of bor¦sis bein in my shoppe to lay his wa¦re in. all my wares redy wriuighte excepted. ¶Item I wyl that my executours redeme and bye the dett that he say¦de Iohn̄ Amell my Cosyne oweth▪ they yf they can compounde wyth his credytours to gyue amonges theym for the same dett the some of v.li. of my good{is} or lesse yf they may soo that the same Iohn̄ by that mea¦ne goo quyte and be at his liberte. But I wyll not that my executours ece de the sayde some of v.li. att the moost. ¶Item I quethe to Richard A. ha∣burdassh to the entent that he ta∣ke vpon hym the execucion off this my present testament xl s. ¶Item I bequethe to Thomas ma¦rit steynor in ye lyke maner for me xl. s. The residew of alle my goodis catellis and dettis what so euer thei bee after my dettis payed my fynal expensis doon and my sayd legatis performyd I wolde that it beesole be my sayd executours at the moste auayle that they maye selle it for re∣dy money. and the money comyn∣ge of the saell therof to be disposed bi my sayde executours for my soule
for all cristen soulis in doyng of mas∣si aquytyng of poer prysoners out of prisone releuyng of inpotēt pepul blynde lame. and febul and in other dedis of mercy and charite. as they shal thinke best to the pleasure of al∣myghty god and ye helthe of my sou∣le and of ye soule of Iane late my wife I yt is the full entēt and last will off me the said Iohn̄ Amell that my¦ne executores namyd in this my p̄∣sent testament as sone as they shall seme tyme expedient after my diss∣se sell alle my landes and tenement{is} the whiche that I or any other perso¦nes to myne vse haue in the townes parisshynnes & fildes off wynbyshe and tharsted in the Counte of ferser and in walworthe in ye counte of sow they atthe best that they shall coun∣sel them for redy money and the mo¦ney comyng of the same sale mi said executores to dispose for mi soule and for the soules aforesayd in good wer∣kys off charite leke as I haue aboue asyned the money comyng of the sa∣le of the resedewe of my sayd goodes catellis andeuly to be disposed and I wyll and charge alle seche {per}sones as stonde in enseoffed by my and to mi vse and in milandes and tenemētis aboue sayd whan they shalbe reaso∣nably required by myne executores or by any of them make a sufficient astate in the lawe of and in alle ye said landis and tenementis wyth ye por∣tenauntes to that parsone or too the parses too whō my sayd excutores shal make the sayd sale of the sayd lā¦des and tenement{is} vnto as the sayd parsones soo by me infeffed haue off my testoment wythout any maner excuse or delay And this my present testamēt and last wylle I make and ordeme myne excutores the sayd . Arnolde haberdassher & Thomas maret steynor citezens of london in witnesse wherof this my p̄sent testa¦ment conteynȳg theryn my last wil I haue see to my seale peuē the daye and yere aboue sayd. The coestes to make Sop. To make iij. last soep ij. tonne of seuyll oyle. iij. laste soep hashis iij lode talwode A lode on sleked lyme iij. laste of barell{is} Mennys laboer mete and drynke The barell of soep xxx. galones. The barell of aell xxxij. galones The barell of beer xxxvi galones To brewe beer x. quarters malte. ij. quarters whee ij. quarters ooos xl.ll weight of hoppys▪ To make lx. barell of seg yll beer Finis
¶In this Chapiter is shewid the patrons of alle the Geneicis in London. ANne on the towr hill and abbey of whit monkys Ne wythin adrichgate diocis london Patron Deane of seynt Martyn the graunde the desine Augustin in bradstretward ye pryour of friers august Anchos in bredstretwarde a college the kyng patron Augustin by london wall prior of chirch in londo patron Augustin in waching strete bi poules gae patrone Anelyne in bogerowe diocis london Patrone deane and Chapiter of poules The decis ..l Albon in woodstret diocis london Prouost of Eon patron decis xx.s̄ Alphey wythin Crepilgate docis london Patron deane of Seint martyn The graunte. The Alborught wythout Bisshoppisgate Alhalwyn in bredstret diocis Canter Patron bishop of Canter. Alhalwyn lumbardstret deocis Canter Patron pryor of Circhirch in Can¦curbry the desine. Alhalwyn by london walle diocis london Patron prior of Circhirch in Lon∣don The desine Alhalwyn the more diocis London the kyng Patron the decis xiij l iiij d Alhalwyn the lesse diocis london. Patrone the master of Laurence pulte¦ney The sine. Ahalwyn be thing chirch diocis london Patron Abbas of berkyng. The desiner. l viij.d Alhalwyn Stanyngis diocis London Patron thabbot off Tourhill The de∣cis xvij l iiij.d. Alhalwyn in honylane London patron the wardeyns of groers The decis xv. liiij.d Andrew in Cornehill diocis london. Patron bisshop of london The dicis xvij. l.ij.d Andrew linbert in Estchep diocis London Erle of shrewisbury patron The decis xvij.l iiij.d. Andrw at aynard Castell diocis London Patron bisshop off London The desine xx.l Andrew in holborne diocis londō Patro Abbot off armonsey The decis xiij.l. iiij d ¶otulfbi billȳg gate dio ōdō patrō deane & chapit of pōles ye dec{is} x l iiij d
Botulf without algate dicis london Patron the pryor of Crichirch In London The decis. Botulf wythout bisshoppisgate diocis london patron the bisshop of london. The decis .xvij.xiiij d Botulf wythout aldrichgate diocis london patron deane off Seint martyns graunt the decis Benet at Breshirch diocis london patrone deane and Chapit of pō¦lis the dec .xxiiij.l Benet at poules wharf diocis london deane and Chapit of Poulis Patron the dec{is} .xvij l iiij.d Benet sherehog callid seint Sithes diocis london Patrō Prior of seīt mary oirthere the dec{is} xx.l. Benet fynke diocis london Patron the master of seint Anthony the dec{is} xvij.l iiij.d Bryde in fletstre diocis londō Patrons ye kyng & thabbot of  dec{is} xx.l Barthilmew the litell dioc{is} londō. Patrone thabbot on the towhill The dec{is} xvij.l iiij.d Barthilmew in Smythfelde priory tem{per}altes lxxxx.li.xiiij.l iiij.d desine. viiij.li xvij.l.q̄. Barthilmew in Smythfelde spitill a master and a colage ¶Clement beside Estchep dioc{is} london Patron Abbot of westm̄ de∣c{is} .xx.l Clement wythout temple Barre diocis london patron The bisshop of excester de{is} Clare Sistres minores wythout algate in the Subarbz of london. Dominck frier pochers of london at ludgate Dunstan in the Est diocis Canter Patron ior of crychirch in Caū¦turbury the dec{is} Dunstan the west diocis london Patron the abbot of alnewik The dec{is} xx.l Deonise in fanchirch stret diocis Caunter Patron the bisshop of caū¦ter and the prior of Crychirch of caunter dec{is} ¶Edmond wythout new gate callid seīt sepulcre diocis london pa∣tron prior of seint Bartilmews dec x l Edmond in lumbard{is} stret diocis london Patron prior of crichirch in london dec{is} x l
Ethelbourgh wythin bishops gate distis london patron prioresse of seynt helyne the de{is} ¶Fyth wythin powles diocis london patrons dene and Chapitur of london the decis xx. Faster in fasterlane dions Canter patron bishop of canter the dec{is} Fraunces wythin new gate frees ¶ Gregory by pos dio london. apropred to the peti Chanous of powles the decis xxl Ges wythoute repilgated diocis londō Patrons deane and Chapit of powies the decis. xx l George in pddinglane diocis london patron abbot of Bermonsey he decis George in Southwerke diocis winchester patron abbot of Bermō¦sey the desine an hospitall beyond holborne. ¶  of unnes wythin bisshops gat y• decī xvijl iiij d. Heleyn perischirch wythin bisshops gate diocis london the priores of seynt heleyn person Heleyn beside martlane a priory of crossed frees ¶ Iohīs an hospital beside west smythfelde of london oīs his acharie diocis london patrons deane and chapit of powles The decī xxl. Iohīs Ewangelist in friday stret diocis canter Patron prior of Cry¦chirch of Cauter the dec{is} Iohīs in walbroke diocis london patron priores of seynt heleyn the  x. s̄ viij.d Iames at garlik ith diocis london patron abbot of westmyster the decis ixl iiij d Iames an her mytage wythin Crepilgate. Iames an hospitale beside charingcrosse. Iames perishe chirche wythin the priory of haliwell Iohīs of haliwell wtout bishopsgate a priores of nōnes ¶ Kateryn on the towurhill master and colage the kyng. patron kateryne Chapell beside Charencrosse and hermytage kateryne Crichirch wythin algate diocis london patrone priour of Crichirch in london the dec{is}. kateryn Colman wythin algate
¶ Lenard in Eschep diocis Cauter. patron the priour off Crichirch in Caunturbury. the dec{is} Leonard in fastirlane diocis london patron deane of seynt martins graunt the decis xvij d iiij d. Leonard in shordich diocis london belonging to the Archdeken of lō¦don the dec{is} Laurence pultendy dioc{is} london patron duke of Suffolke The dec{is} xx l Laurence in the Iury diocis london patron Bayly Colage of Oxen¦ford. The dec{is} ¶ Mary at bowe dio{is} Canter patrone bisshop of canter dec{is}. Mary aldir mary chirch in watlyngstret diocis Canter. patron bis¦shop of canter the decis Mary bothhawe by the Erbar diocis canter patrone priour of Cri¦chirch of canter the decis Mary colchirch diocis london patron master of seynt Thomas off Aeres The decis. Mary Stanynglane diocis london Patron priores of clerkenwell Mary in Aldirmanbury diocis london Patron priour of elsyng spi¦tell decis. xvij.l.iiij.d Mary wolothe in lumbardstret diocis london patrone priores off seynt heleyn the dec{is} xxiiij.l Mary abchirch diocis london patron master of seynt laurence pul∣teney the decis v.l.iiij.d Mary wulchirch diocis london the abbot of seynt Iohīs Colchester patron. the decis xxiiij. s̄. Mary Foundchirch diocis london prior of Crichirch patron in lon∣don the decis xvij l iiij d. Mary Somerset diocis lōdon patrō deane & chapi of pōles the de Mary on the hill diocis london patron page of dorford in kent gen¦tilman the decis xxiiij.l. Mary at ar diocis london patron priores of seynt helyns de Mary mownthawe diocis london patrō bisshop of herford the dec{is} Mary matfelow diocis london patron bisshop of london the decis Mary at the stronde crosse diocis london patron bisshop of wurce The dec{is}. Mary in fletstrete āpriory of whit freers Mary chapell by berking chirch Mary de grace an abbey of monkis by the towur of london
Mary priorie of Elsingspitill wtin crepelgate. Mary the newe hospitall wythout Bisshopsgate Mary salutacion chartirhous by west smytfelde in london Mary hospitall of bedleem wythout bisshops gate Mary ouer the r in Southwerke a priorye of chanons Mary callid seynt mary spiel wythout bisshopisgate Mary magdalen in milkstret diocis london patron Deane and cha¦piter of powles the decis xx.l. Mary madalen in olde fishstret diocis london ptrone deane & cha∣piter of powles dec{is} xiij l iiij.d Mary madalen by Bermonsey diocis winchester patron abbot of Germonsey Mary madalen by seint mary ouer the ree. diocis winchester. Pa∣tron the prior of seynt mary ouerthe ree the dec{is} Mary madalen at Tutll callid lawles chirch. Martyn otirwich diocis london patrons wardens of Taylours ye dec{is} xvij.liiij.d Martyn pomers in Irmonger lane diocis london patrone priour of seynt Bartilmews the dec xvij l iiij.d. Martyn in the vnitie diocis london patron thabbot off Glonceter patron the dec xxvi l viij.d Martȳ by ludgar dioc londō patrō abbot of westm̄ dec{is} xxvi l viij d Martyn Ogar in Candilikstrete diocis london Patron deane & Chapiter of powles the dec{is} xvij l iiij d. Martyn in the felde besyde charyngcrosse Mage by london brydge diocis london patron the abbot{is} of west∣myster and bermonsey the dec{is} xxv l viij.d Mathew in fridaystrete diocis london patron the abbot of westm̄. The dec{is} xx l Margret in lothbury diocis london patrons abbeis of Berking in Essex the dec{is}. Margret in bridgstret diocis london patrō abbot of winchester dec{is} Margret moyses in friday strete diocis london the kyng Patron y• dec{is} xxvi l viij.d Margret patens diocis london patron mair and aldirmen off lon∣don the dec{is} Margret in Southwerke diocis winchester patron the prior of seīt mary ouer the ree the desine Margret at westm̄
Mildred is in bredstret diocis london patron the prior of seīt mary ouer the ree the decis xvij s̄ iiij.d Mildrede in the pultry diocis london patron prior of seīt mary ouer the ree the dec{is} xvij l iiij.d Mihell in cornehill diocis london Patron abbot off Eyueshin̄ The decis. liij l iiij.d. Michell in bassingis hawe diocis london patron deane and chapit of poules the decis xiij l. iiij d Mighell by quenchith diocis london Patron Deane and chapit off poules the dec{is} xx.d Michell querene by powles gate diocis london patrone deane and chapiter of poules the dec{is} Mighell in woodstret diocis london Mighell in Crokelane diocis Canter patron bisshop of canter decis Mighell pat noster whittyngton College dioc{is} Canter patrōs wer deus of mercers the dec ¶ Nicholas Colde abbey diocis london Nicholas Oluf in bredstret diocis london patron deane and Chapit of powles the decis. xvij.l iiij.d Nicholas acon by lumbardstret diocis london patron abbot of mal∣mesbury the dec{is} xx.l Nicholas in fleshhamels diocis london patrons the kyng and ye ab∣bot of westm̄ the dec{is} xl.l ¶ Oluf in Siluerstret dioc{is} london. Oluf in the olde Iury dioc{is} londō patrone priour of Bottlee in suffol∣ke the de{is} xl. Oluf by the crossed friers diocis london patron Cely in martlane ye decis xx.l. Oluf in Southwarke dioc{is} winchester patron Priour of lews in Southser the dec{is} Owyn wtin newgate dioc{is} lōdon patrō lord of seīt Iones Ierlm̄ ye dec{is} Ponlis the cathedrall chirch of london deane and recidences Petir in cornehill diocis london patrons mair and aldirmen of lon∣don the dec{is} xxvi l viij d. Petre in west chepe diocis london patron abbot of seȳt albons The dec{is} xx.l. Petir the poure diocis london Peter the litell at powles warf dioc{is} london patrons deane & chapit of poles the decis xvij.l iiij.d.
Pancras in nedeler lane diocis Canterpa tron bisshop of cant dec{is} Pancras in the felde. Petir wythin the rowr of london Petir of westm̄ abbey of blak monkes ¶ Stephan in walbrok diocis london master lee of the same perish Patrone the dec{is} xiij.l iiij d Stephan in Colmanstret diocis london patron priour of Botlecī Suffelde the dec{is} xl Stephan a College and the king chapell at westim̄. Stephan in candilwikstret diocis london patron prior of Corting∣ton the dec{is} xxl Saluator of Bermonsey an abbey of blak monkes ¶ Trinite callth Crichirch wtin alnate of london a priorye Trinite in knight riders strete diocis london Patron deane & Cha∣piter of powles the dec{is} xxl ¶ p̄ofore by the sokkis diocis london patron the bisshop of londō the dec xxix l viij d ¶ Thom̄s of acres a college in westchepe Thom̄s appostill {per}ishchirch in the ryall. Thom̄s a spitall in Southwerke Thom̄s martir a Chapell on london bridge ¶ Corpus cristi Chapell in the pultry of london Corpus cristi chapell in the college of seīt laurence pubteney Trinite Chapell vpon the Charnehell in the chirch hawe of Seynt Mighell in crokidlane The Chapell vpon ye charnell ī the chirch hawe of seīt poules ī Lōdō The chapell of seint Thom̄s in pardon chirchawe london The chapell vpon the charnell in the chirch haue of seint dunstan in the Est The chapell of the Guylde halle in london callid seint Nichās The Chapell vpon the charnell at seint mary Spitall wythout Bis¦shops gate The litell chapell of Beelem▪ wythout bisshops gate The chapell vpon the charnell in the chirch hawe of Seint Thom̄s in Southwerke. The chapell in the chirch hawe at chartirhous The frary chapell beside seint Iohīs Ierlm̄ callid vrsuld. The chapell wythout tempelbarre callid seynt spirite The chapell at our lady at Rounceuale. The chapell wythin Barthelmew Spitell
¶ And here begyneth the tem{per}alities of diuers archedekenys and other placis of religion ARchidiacon{is} londō hēt tem{per}alt xx marcide dec. xxvi l viij d vicar. de Iseldon habent tem{per}alties xx. mar. inde decima xxvi l. viij d. Fratres autonim hēt tem{per}alt viijl inde dec. ixd ob. Fratres hospitales de warwik hēnt tem{per}alt xij.d inde dec. i d q. Magist seint Thome de acon hēnt tem{per}alt lxij.lī inde dec xiiij.l iiijd Decanus and capiter seint pauli lōdō hēt tē{per}alt lxxx.xij.li. inde dec. ix li.iiij.l iiij d. tem{per}alt xxxiiij.li iij l iiij. d dec. iij lī viij.l iiij d Canonici cicestri hēt tem{per}alt xl l. inde dec. iiij.l Canonici de hastingis hēt tem{per}alt xxiij l iiij d dec. iij l iiij d Archbisshop of cant tem{per}t xxxv.l iij d dec. iij l vi d q Ep̄us Cicestre hēt tem{per}alt iij li.xl dec{is} vij s̄ Ep̄us Sarū hēt tem{per}alt xijli.viij.l inde dec{is} xxiiij.l x d q̄ Ep̄us wigorū hēt tem{per}alt ij l x d ob q dec{is} iij d ob ¶ Prebende of Brounsbury tem{per}alt xl l the dec iiij.l Prebende of Brunsbury hath tem{per}alt iij lī.xiij l iiij d The dec{is} vij l iiij.d Prebende of Cheswik hath tem{per}alt ix mark the dec{is} xij l Prebende consumpter bi the see the tem{per}alt xiij.l iiij.d dec{is} x vi d Prebende of Eldlonde tem{per}alt xl l dec{is} iiij.l. Prebende of Eldstrete tem{per}alt l l dec{is} inde v l. Prebende of holborne. liij l iiij d dec{is} v s̄ iiij d Prebende of haliwell tem{per}alt xx mark. dec{is} xxvil iiij.d Prebende of hokston tem{per}alt v mark the dec{is} vil iiijd Prebende of herlisden tem{per}alt v mark. the dec{is} vi s̄ viij d Prebende of Iseldon tem{per}alt viij mark the dec{is} xl viij d Prebende of kentishronū tem{per}alt x mark dec{is} xiij l iiij d Prebende of mapisbury tem{per}alt v mark dec{is} vil viij d Prebende of mora tem{per}alt viij mark the dec{is} x viij d. Prebende of nesden tem{per}alt iij lī.ij l the dec{is} vil ij d ob Prebende of newinhton tem{per}alt ix mark the dec{is} xij l Prebende of oxgate tem{per}alt xlviij.s̄ dec{is} iiij l ix d ob Prebende of portpole tem{per}alt vij mark dec{is} ix l iiij d Prebende of seynt pancrace tem{per}alt xlij l xi d dec{is} iiij l iiij d ob Prebende of rokonslond tem{per}alt v mark dec{is} vi l viij d
Prebend of rogemore tem{per}alt. iiij mark. dec vi l iiiid Prebend of swetyng tem{per}alt v marc. dec. vi l viij d. Preben of totenbal tem{per}alt. xvi marc. dec. xxi l iiij d. Prebend of twyford tem{per}alt lix. s̄ xi d. dec. v.l x d od. Prebende of wyldland tem{per}alt. xl l the dec iiij s̄. Prebende of wyllesden tem{per}alt vi marc the dec. vij s̄ Prebende of wenlok{is} tem{per}alt. v li. dec. x l. ¶ Here begynith the corodise in all the abbeyes in en englande. Prior of awmesbury I corodie. Prior of saint andrew in northm̄ton I corodie and I pencion Priour of blakamor in essex Priour of saint barthilmew in smithfild lxxxli.xiiij l iiij d the dec. viij li.xvij l. q̄. Priour of Bernewel by cambrige tem{per}t. xiij l iiij d. the dec. xvi d and I corodie. Priour of Butle. tem{per}alt xxvi l viij d dec. ij s̄ viij d Priour of Brodisbym̄ I corodie Priour of Bathe I corodie Priour of Bradstok or Bradstow I pencion Priour of Bustlishm̄ in Oxford shire I pencion. Prioue of Blithe in notinghm̄ shire I corodie. Priour of Buthulphes in colchester. Priour of crichirch in london. C.xxix li.iij l ij d the dec. xviij s̄. iij d ob. I corodie. Priour of chiksond in Bedford shir ixli.vi l viij d. the dec. xviij s̄. viij d. Priour of crichirche in caunterbury I corodie and a pencion. Priour of couentree I corodie of viij marc Priour of dunmowe in esset v. marc. xx d dec. vij s̄. ijd Priour of dauntrie in norhm̄ton shire I corodie. Priour of douer in kent blakmonkis Prioar of dunstable I corodie. Priour of durhm̄ beyonde porke I corodie I pencion
Priour of dorcheter in Oxenford shire I corodie. Priour of ely in chambredshire tem{per}alt vi l viij d the dec. viij d. I corodie Priour of episwych in suffolke I corodie and I pencion Priour of saint feith in norfolke tem{per}alt. xxxi l. the dec. iij s̄ id q. Priour of saint friswich within oxenford I corodie I pencion Priour of gaunt in flaunders tem{per}alt xvi s̄ xd ye dec. xx d q. Priour of the newe place by gylford v li.xvi l iij d. dec. xi s̄ viij d ob Priour of herfeld penerell ix s̄ iiij d the dec. xi d ob. Priour of kenelworth in warwyk shire xxv l dec. ij l vi d I corodie Priour of kokersand in lancaster shire Priour of lews in southsex tem{per}alt v.li. dec. x. l. Priour of lancaster I corodie. Priour of Lantony in gloceter shire I pencion Priour of lawn de in I corodie. Priour of lenton in I corodie. Priour of ledis in kent I corodie Priour of saint mary outheree lxx.li.xvij l ix d ob. the dec. iij li.xviij l vi d ob q. I corodie. I pencion. Priour of montagu I corodie. Priour of marky at tem{per}alt xi l. the dec. ij l. Prior of newenhm̄ tem{per}alt. xxix l iiij d dec. ij. lxi d ob. Prior of norwich I corodie. Prior of okeborne tem{per}alt xvi l. iiij d dec. xix d ob q̄. Prior of saint Oswold in york shire I corode Prior of pritwel tem{per}alt xiij l iiij d dec. xvi d Prior of panfield tem{per}alt xxx l dec. iij l Prior of reiston tem{per}al. xxxv l. dec. iijl vid and I corodie Prior of rewchester in kent xxvij s̄ iiij d dec. ij l viii d ob q̄. Prior of shuldhm̄ in norhfolke vij.li.x l viij d dec. xv l ob q̄
Prior of sympringhm̄ in york shir xxxiij l viij d dec. iij l. Prior of sopwelle in herford shir vi l the dec. vij d q̄. Prior of sandgate I corodie Prior of tortington in southsex xv li.v. l iiij d dec. xxx l vi d ob. Prior of auistoke in deuen shir I corodie Prior of tudbury I corodie Prior of tedford in northfolke blak monkis. I corodie. Prior of tunbredge inkent Prior of wrarton in xxiij l vi d dec. ij l iiij d q̄. Prior of ware in hertford shire xx l dec. ij ̄ Prior of walericein xxix l ij d. dec. xxiij d Prior of wincester in hamshire I corodie. Prior of wurcheter I corodie Prior of wenlok I corodie. Prior of walingford I corode. Prior of wedoroll in combland chanons Abbey of saint albans in hertford shire blak monkis xviij li. x l vi d. the dec. xxxvi l ob ij. I corodie and I pencion Abbey of saint augustines in cau. blak mankis. tem{per}l{is} xliiij l ix d. the dec. iiij l. v ij q̄. Abbey of saint augustines in bristw I corodie & I enccō. Abbey of abbanary in I corodie and I pencion. Abbey of abyngdon in oxenford shire blak monkis ij corod I pēcion Abbey of aureoll Abbey of saint anne on the tour hyll whit monkis I corodie. Abbey of berking in esser nonnes xxx l. x d. dec. iij l id q̄. & a pencion. Abbey of borle inkent. xxx viij l viij d dec iij l iiij d ob. q̄. Abbey of butlesden tem{per}al. xxv l dec. ij l vi d. Abbey of beggeshm̄ in southsex xx l the dec. ij l Abbey of eyle messer. xxiij l. dec. inde ij s̄ iij d ob q̄. Abbey of bukfastin ij corodis Abbey of bewleyin I corodie & a pencion Abbey of batell in susse I corodie and I pencion Abbey of bensalem I corodie. Abbey of burtonin I coronie & apencion
Abbey of saint Benet in norfolke. I corodie and I pencion. Abbey of bermonsey besyde london blak monkis I corodie I penciō Abbey of bardeney in I corodie Abbey of boyped I corodie. Abbey of bradstowe in I pēcion Abbey of byln in Abbey of bury in suthfolke blak monkis I corode. Abbey of saint bees of cupland in combirland I pencion Abbey of chirchsey insurey blak monkis vi li.xv l. vij d the dec. xiij ̄. vi d ob q̄. I corodie &  pencion Abbey of circester in iiij li.vij d. dec. viij l. ob q̄. Abbey of colchester in esser xxi l the dec. ij l id ob Abbey of chester in chesshire I corodie. Abbey of crowland in lincolnshire I corodie and I pencion Abbey of cleue in I coronie & a pencion Abbey of cleborne in I pencion. Abbey of cristhonde in I corodie I pencion Abbey of coggiale in esser I corodie. Abbey of cristal in york shire. I corodie Abbey of dorseley. I corodie. Abbey of eveshm̄ in xxvi l viij d dec. ij l viij d I corodie I pencion. Abbey of eueshm̄ in I corodie and a pencion. Abbey of feuershm̄ in kent xxij l viij d. dec. ij l. iij d q̄. I corodie. Abbas of fisthm̄ in xvi l. dec. xix d q̄. Abbey of forde in I corodie Abbey of fonteyn in yorkshire. Abbey of of goodstowe in v l the dec. vi d I pencion Abbey of glascenbury insomerset shire xvi l. dec. xx d I corodie. and a pencion. Abbey of saintaris in york shire Abbey of gisborne in yorkshire Abbey of grymmesby in lyncoln shire Abbey of gloucester blak monkis xl l dec. iiij l. Abbey of hayles whit monkis
Abbey of hyde in I corodie I pencion Abb of holme in combirland blak monkis Abbey of saint Iames of northm̄ton I corodie Abbey of kired in iiij li.vii l iiij d. dec. ix l. viij d ob q̄ Abbey of kokirsande in lancaster shir chanons. Abbey of lyeshull in xiij l iiij d dec. xvi d. I corodie I pencion. Abbey of lysses in kent chanons xx s̄ de.  s̄. Abbey of leycester blak monkis xl l. dec. iij l Abbey of langton in yorck shir I corodie. Abbey of mamesbury in vi l. iij d dec. vij d ob Abbey of mesenden in xxv l vi d dec. ij l vi ob q̄. Abbey of motheley in ij corodies I pencion Abbey of saint mary in yorke a pencion of v.li. Abbey of momnoh in wales I corodie Abbey of mews in I corodie Abbey of notley in I corodie Abbey of nenshed of newsted in I corodie. Abbey of newynton in I pencion. Abbey of osuey besyde Oxenford chanons xxv s̄. iii d the dec. iij s̄. vi d. ob. I corodie of v. Marcke Abbey of saint Osies in essex chanons xij d. the dec. i d. Abbey of peter borught in lyncoln shir bla monkis l the dec. ij s̄. Abbey of prehore in I corodie and a pencion. Abbey of pypwelle in I corodie Abbey of reding black monkis vi.li.ij l. dec. xiiij l ij d o. Abbey of ramsey in huntingdon shir tem{per}ate vij li. ij d. Dec. iiij l. ij d and I corodie Abbey of regali loco in vili.xiij s̄. iiij d. dec. iij l. iiij d. Abbey of rumsey I corodie and I pencion Abbey of redyngton. Abbey of reymans in
Abbey of stratford in essex whit monkis i. l▪ xid. dec. x d. Abbey of stoneley in xxx l the dec. iij l Abbey of sawtry in hūtindonshir ij li.xvij l. dec. vij l viij d ob q̄ Abbey of shirborne in I corodie and I pencion Abbey of shaftisbury in I corodie & I penciō Abbey of stanley in glouceter shir blak monkis I corodie Abbey of shrewisbury I corodie & I pencion Abbey of spalding in lincoln shir I corode Abbey of seist wolde in I corodie Abbey of suthwyke in I pencion Abbey of sutham in I corode and I pencion Abbey of salley in york shir I corodie Abbey of swynshed in Lyncolne shir. Abbey of shap in westmerland whit channs Abbey of tiltey in xiij l. iiij d the .vi d Abbey of tame in ij l the dec. ij d ob  corodie Abbey of thewsbury in gloucester shir xxx ̄. dec iij l. Abbey of thowey in chambredg shir I corodie and I pencion. Abbey of saint thomas of pounord I corodie I pencion. Abbey of thimmothe in I pencion Abbey of thaderhyl I corodie. Abbey of wierdrage in I corodie. Abbey of thornten in I corodie. Abbey of tawnton in lincoln shir Abbey of walden in essex blak mōkes iiij li.viij l iiij d. ye dec. viij d  d Abbey of woburne iij l iiij d dec. vi d Abbey of wandeley xx d the dec. ij d. I corodie Abbey of wardon in xiij l iiij the dec. vi d ij corode Abbey of wylton in I corodie I pencion Abbey of warwell in I pencion Abbey of winchcombe I corode of v li. a pencion of iiij marck Abbey of vawriall I corody and I pencion Abbey of worshop in notinghm̄ shir I corodie Abbey of westm̄ in mydelsex blak monkis I pencion Abbey of whyty in I corodie. Abbey of walle in lancaster shir
¶The weyght of esser these and of suffolke in england and the wey∣ght in and warpe and in barough. ¶The weyght of esser chese is in england CCC. weyght fyue score xij.li. for the C. The weyght of suffolke chese is xij score and xvi.li. ¶The weyght of these in anwerpe & in barough is viij score vli. ¶The costis for to make hering and sprottis at the coeste ¶Ye shal bye fresh hering out of the ship x.M.vi score and iiij herin¦gis for the C. And that wyl coste xxvi. s̄. viij d. or xxxiij l. iiij d. more or lesse as it happeth. And this wyl make a laste white or rede heringe salt barellis and menrus labur wyll coste xviij l. or xx. s̄. xij. barellis¦ful packed is a last of white hering and xx cadis rede hering is a last v C. in a cade viscore iiij heringis for the C ¶To make rede sprottis at the coste. ¶The drifte sprottis is the best reades maketh a iast xij c. in eūy cade the last wyl stande a man redy made at the coste v l. vi d. And a last of the were sprottts wyl stande a man in ij l. viij d. ¶Most reuerend & myne especial good lord as humbly as I can or may I beseche your grace to haue me your true and feythfull seruā¦te as recommend and that it may please your good lordship to vn¦derstonde that very necessyte hath causeth me to writte this Lettre vnto your grace for as moche as I knowe my self so ferdful for defau¦te of comyng. And by cause I knowe my self vnworthy to haue ony word is in your presence that though I haue neuer so good mater I neyther dare nor can shewe it. Wherfore I beseche your grace to re¦de thise lettre wherby your grace shal vnderstonde the very trouth of the mater betwene me and mayster foster, yet hanging in Iuge∣ment afore your grace to myne Intollerable cost and charge. Onles¦se that by your grace it be hastely remedyed And yf ony thing in this lettre be vntrue I am contente that your grace giue vnto me ther∣fore perpetuell prison. First I delyuerd my clothes engrened to may¦ster foster to delyuer ouer to my creditours at xv l. a yarde as appe¦rith by the deposicion of robert Odyam for the parte of mayster fos∣ter wher he sayth yt he sawe in mayster fosters house a lettre of my hā¦de wherin was conteyned that he shulde so delyuere them. And the
sayd foster sold iij. scarlett{is} wythout ony assent or wyl vnder the prise off vi l. a yarde wherupō my feith thei cost me of on Iohn̄ peyco of cogsale that wyl depose the same I dog it no viij s̄ euery yarde white. And I might haue had for the greyne that euery yarde was grayued wyth v. l. and the fuller sherman and the di¦er had for euery yarde for ther labor xij d. And so they cost me euery yard xiiij s̄. in redy money. And mayster foster wyl alowe but lityl aboue v s̄ for a yarde to myne vtter vndoyng onles that your wyll accordynge to good conscience be myne helpe▪ and socoure And therfore I humbly I be¦seche youre grace as I am and euer haue ben your true seruaunt to my power that ye suffer me nott by the vntrue dealing of the sayde foster to bee thus vndone. and as I euer ha∣ue bene ye shal finde me youre true and feythful seruaunt And Ihesus kepe your grace in prosperite amen ¶The lawes and beleue of the Sarasyns. MAunduyle wryttyth in his booke of pylgrymage and trauayle▪ of the lawes and beleue of the sarasyns After her bo∣ke that they callen Alcarom and sō¦me callend that boke Mesaap. Sō¦me of hem be of diuers langage and of dyuers countreys▪ the whiche bo¦ke machemet made and gaue hem In the whiche he wrote amonge o¦ther thingis as I Iohn̄ Mandee haue often red and seyn. The that ben good shal goon to {per}radyse and tho that been euyl to helle. and that trowen all the sarasyns. And yf a man aske hem what paradyse bee∣meneth. they sayn it is a place of de¦lytis. where a man shall fynde alle maner delytis and all maner of fru¦tis in al tymes. and the yuer ren∣nyng mylke wyn ed hony & freshe water▪ and they shal haue fayr hou¦ses after that they haue deserued . the houses ben made of precious sto¦nes of gold and syluer and eche mā shal haue x. wynes and all maydes and also they speken and nowen on the virgin mary. and also of the in∣carnacion of our lord Ihesu Cryste. and how that mary was lernyd off the angel and that gabryel sayde to her. that she was chosen beforne al other fro the begyn̄yng of the worl∣de. and that wytnesse ther booke yt tolde of her and of the Incarnacion of Ihesu Cryst. and that she concey¦ued and bare childe. and yet she was mayde. & they sayne that thū cryste spac as sone as he was borne. And he was very god and very {pro}phere.
in worde and dede meke & right wis to all wt onn any vice and they say¦ne whan the aungell colde her of the īcarnaciō she had  drede she was yong and ther was  that delyd myche wt soy and men callid  that wyth enchaun¦tement owde make him lyke an aū¦gell and he rede oftē and lay be may¦dens & therfore was our lady aferd of him for she wende haungell had ben  that wēt So to maydēs and therfore was our lady ferd of hī and she  him and bad hȳ  were  and the an∣gell  for he was ver¦ry aungell and messanger of our lor¦de  criste? And also her booke  that she had childe vndir  and than was she shamed and wepte &  she wolde bendede and ye childe  her and sayd Nerimeas maria. That is to say a drede the not mari. & mother in my plas the booke sath e spak as sone as he was borne. & the boke sak that he was sent from our lord almyghty too ye  exāple to alle men. and yt god shal deme all good to heuyn and all euill to helle. & that crist is ye best profight and next to god and that he was verry {pro}phet and yaf sight to blinde and helid me sels and reysed de men and steied all quyk to he and yf they may fyn∣de a booke of gospels and namly of ye gospell Missus est angelus gabriell They don gret wurship therto and they fasten vij. monthes in the yere and they etē nought but on nyght{is} and then they kepen hem from ther wyues and that they ben lyke they be not cōstryned to that fast and the booke spekith oft Iewes and sayth yt they bē wyked folke for they trowe not that ihū crist is oon wyth good. and they seyn that Iuwes lyē ō our lady and on her son ihū crist whan ye seyne that they dedyn him not on ye crosse. and for Sarens trowen soo myche our feith they be lyghtly to cō¦uere whan men p̄chen to hem the a¦we of crist and they seȳ that they we ten well that the lawe of machemet shall faylen as dothe the lawe of the Iawes and that crist{is} lawe shal last in to the wordis ende and if a mā as∣ke hem wheryn they trowen yt saȳ in god almaghty maker off heuyn and of erth and off all other thing{is} & wythouten him is nothing doon. & at the day of doine all thing shalbe re¦warid after her deseruyng and all thing is sothe yt crist sayd by the mou¦thes of prophetis and alsoo mache∣me bad in his alcoron that ech mā shulde haue .ij. wyues or .iij. & now they taken x. or xij. or a many lem∣mās as they may geten and yf any of her wyues doō a misse to her hus∣bondis they may dryuen hē a way and take another but he must yeuī hem of his goodis
Also when men speke of the fader so¦ne and holy gost. they say that they arne iij. {per}sons and not one god but they scornē it and speke nought ther of but of the trinite. but they sayn yt god spak or ellis he was dom̄. & god is a goost or he were on lyue. And they sayn that goddis worde hath grete strenthe. And so seyne they in scorne. and they seyn that abraham and Machemet weren well wt god for they spaken wyth hym and ma¦chemet thei seyn was the right mes¦senger of god. and they haue many good articles of oure feyth and alle they vndirstondin ye Scripture and the prophetis for they haue theym written in the gospels and in the by bill in her langage and so they kno∣we moche of holy writte. But they vnderstande it not but after the let∣ter of the gospel and therfore saythe sainte poule. ¶Litera occidit spūs aūt vinificat. ¶That is to sayn the letter sleithe & the goost quykeuth. and the Sara∣syns sayne that Iuwes kepen not ye lawe that moyses toke hem. and al so cristen men done euyll for they ke¦pen nought the x. commaundemen¦tis of the gospel that ihesu crist sayd to hem and therfore I shal telle yow what the soud an tolde me on a day in his chambre. He lete voyde out of his chambre lordis and all other that were therin for he wolde speke wyth me in councell. And he asked me how cristen men gouerned thē and I sayde right welle blessyd bee god. and he sayde sekirly nay for he sayd that our priestis sayde nought her seruyse as tey shulden do. nor yeuen not eample of good lyuinge to the peple. and the folke that shul∣den on the haliday seruen her god. they goo to the tauerne and lyen there in gloteny all they day and al the night. and cryn and drinken as beestis that ween not whan they haue Inough and also he sayd that cristen men enforced hem to fyghtē to gyder & eche one too begyle other and they be so proude that they wo not how they may o them, e how longe ne how shorte but now longe now shorte. now short now wyde in all maner guyses. and sayde yt they shulde be meke semple and oth  and done almes as crist ded in whō they trowen. and they be soo cou¦tous that for a lytill siluer they self her trouth and her children and her susters and her wyues. And one ta∣kyth anothers wyf and fewe holdē ther trouth. and therfore he sayde. for theis synnes cristen men haue lo¦ste all the landis that we holden for thorow synne hath god put hes lā¦dis in to our handis and not thorou strengh but thorou your synnes. But we woten wel for southe. whā you seruen well youre god that he wyll helpe you. Soo that noo man shall doo ayenst yow. And that we knowen well by oure prophecies yt cristen men shall wynne ayen these landis whan they Seruen wel her god but whyle they lyuen soo foule
as they don we haue noo drede of hē and than I asked him how he wist so the state of cristē and he sayd that he knewe bothe of lordis and of comōs By his messangers whiche he sent through alle contreis as they were marchauntis wyth pricious stones and other marchaundisis to knowe the maner of alle contreis. and than he clepid ī the lordis againe and thā he shewed me the grettest lordis of ye contray and they spokē frensh right well and the Sowdan also and thā I had gret maruell of the disclaūdir of our feith and so theis that shuden be turned to i crist by good exam∣ple they ben drawen a wey thorugh our euill lyuing & therfore they seyn soche but the sarefins ben trewe for they kepen wel the lawe off alkeon that god sent hem by his messanger machemet to whom they saȳ. seynt gabriel sp ofte wyth and seyd him the wille of god and this machemet was borne in arabie & he was furst a knaue and kepte horsseis and wēt after marchuntis So he com ones in to egipte wyth a marchaunt and egipte was that tyme crysten. and there was a chapell be sides Arabie and there wonned and heremyte & whan he entred in too the chapell yt was a litell hous and a lowe. anon it begā to werē as gret as a palays yate and the sarasins sayn yt it was the furst myrakele that machamet ded in his youthe and aftir ward by¦gan machamet to ben right wys. & he was a gret astromyar and Sithē he was keper off all the golde off the princes of corydan and gouerned in ful wisly and whan the prynce was dede he weddid his wife the lady that mē clepē quadryge and mache¦met fell often in too the falling euill wherfore ye lady was wroth for that she had taken him too her husband. but he made her to beleue that euer whan he fell soo. that gabriel the an¦gel spake wyth him and for the gret bryghtnes of the angell he fell dow¦ne. this machemet regned in arabie the yere of our lord vi C.xx. and was of the kynred of Ismael that was a brahm̄ is son and he begat him of a∣gare his chambirer and therfore ye sareons ben clepid Ismaelites and Some agarens of aga. and Some ther be that bē clepid moabites and Sōme amonytis after ij. Sōnes of loth and alsoo machemet loued wel and holy man that duellid in wildir¦nes a myle fro mount synay in the vale as men goon fro arabie to Cal∣das and a dayes Iurney fro the see whan marchaunt{is} comē fro venys machamet went often into that her mytage. And alle his men weren wroth and for sothe he wolde gladly here the heremet prieche and made his mē wakē all nyght therfore thei wolde fayn a haue had the heremet dede. and so it be fell on a nyght that machemet had well dronken wyne and fill on slepe and his mē toke out his swerd off his shethe whyes he lay and slepe and slought ther with this heremet and thē put it vp age
in the shethe al blody and on the mo¦row whā he founde the heremyt de∣de. hee was wrothe and wolde haue slayne his men. but they all with oō accorde said that he him self had slay¦ne him whan he was dronken▪ and shewid him his swarde alle blody & than he trowed that they had sayd soth and this is the second myracle yt machamet dede and than he cursed the wyne and alle him that dronkē the wyne and there the sarasens yt ben deuout drynken noo wyne. but som drynken it preuely for and they dronken opinly they shulde bē repro¦uid but they drynken good beage and norishīg that is made of camamele and therof is suger made Also it be fallith somtyme cristen men be¦com saraens outhir thorugh pouer¦tee or thorugh som wikidnes & ther¦fore lerth he his beleue whan they ressayuen him he saith thus. La oles ella machamet roses alla That is to sayn ther is noo god but oon and makamet is his messager Now haue I tolde you a parti of her lawes & custumes I shall telle you. of her letters wyth her names and the maner of figuris what they ben Al moy vthat cathi delphor photi ca¦rophy hethom iosehi caythy tochū marache nabilot. orthi. coriry soth Ruthalot Riowhi Salathi thatu mis Iethom azazot arothy. zotipȳ Ichetus. Thes ben ye names Now shall yow knowe the figuris Three letters they haue more for di¦uersite of her langage and her spech for as mych as they spekē ī her thro¦tis and we hauen in our langage in Englande ij. letters moo than other men hauen in her a b c. that is to  z. and y. This is the chapitur  lawis and bileue of the sareens she¦wid by Iohn̄ maunduyle knyght ī his boke which is autorised at rome that he made off his Iurnays as is specified ī ye ende of the same boke. & god haue mercy vpon his soule Amen ¶The yerely stint of the lyuelod be¦longing to london brydge. Fyrst for all maner ressaitis in ye ye¦re vij.C.li. or therabout The chargis goyng out
¶ For wagis and fees of thē officers lxix lī vil viij.d Item for rewardis of the officers xxiij.lī vil viij d Itm̄ paid out for quyt rentis xxxlī iiij.l vi.d Itm̄ forquyt rentis dekayed ixlī iij l viij d Itm̄ for vacacions. xxxlī Itm̄ for costis of the Chapell xxxiiij lī vl iij d Itm̄ the expencis vpon the auditors. xls̄ Som̄ of this parte and. C.lxxxxviij.lī xvilixd Rest cler v Cli lī iij l iij d. ¶ The acompte of Wishn̄ galle and hery. Sumpsted wardeyns of london bredge from helm̄s A.ij..iiij. Into myhelm̄s after and ij yeres folownge The charge. ¶ First the areragis of the last acompte. ij Cirvij lī xiiij l o Itm̄ all maner ryris the same yere vij Cxlvi lī xvi l od Som̄ M.xiiij.līxlid Allowans and paymentis the same yere vij Cxliij līx l ij d od Rest that is owyng ij.Clxxlīxixs̄xd od Wherof is dew by Edward stone and odur Of then arearagis in then tyme liij lī vi l vi d od Itm̄ ther is diew by the sayd willin̄galle. And hery Bumpstede Som̄ ij C.xvij lī xiij iiij d ¶ The acompte the next yere suyng from mihelm̄s in the first yere of king richard the iij vnto michelm̄s next folowyng the space of an hoole yere ¶ The charge ¶ First the arreagis of the last acompter ij.C.xvij.lī.xiij l.iiij.d Itm̄ proper rentis v Clxviij lī xij iiij d
Item foreine rente lix li.xi l v d ōd Item ferme of the stockis lix li.ix l xi d. Item quite rente xxxi li.xij l vi Item passage of cartis xx li.xij l vij d. Item merementis of rentis v l vi d. Item casuell ressaitis vili. ¶Somma of all their charge ix C.lxiij li.vij l ix d od. Allouaunce and dischargis the same yere. Fyrst in quyt rentis xxxli.xiiij l vi d To saint mary spytell wannuities l l. viij d Item decay of quyt reute ix li. in l viij d od Item allowaunce for store houses xxxv l iiij d. Item in vacacions xxxiiij li.xvij s̄ iij d Item in decrementis iij li.vij l i d. Item allowaunce for money delyuerd to the mayre l li. Item for beyng of stone xvij li.xiij s̄ iiij d. Item for beyng of tymbre lath and ord li li.xi l v d Item for beyng of tyle and brik xiij li i l iij d Item for beyng of chalke lyme and sond xxiiij li.il i d. Item for yren werke xxxij li.viij l iij d q̄. Item necessaries bought xviij li.v.ii l iiij d Item in necessaries expencis viij li.xviij l i d Item more necessarie expencis Item costis of cariage xij li.xix s̄ vi d Item led and sowder xiij li.viij l Item for glasyng xxxvij l i d Item costis of the ram̄e xxxiij li.vil i d Itē Masons wagis xlviij li.xviij l. iiij d od. Item carpenters wages C.xiiij li vl Item laborers wages xxij li.i d od. Item costis of the chapel xxxiij li vl. iij d Item the wagis of the tylers xijli.xij l vi d Item for wagis of the dawbir xij li.vi l. Item for sawiars xii li.xv l vi d Item for wagis of pauiours xviij s̄ viij d Item to the baker at the cok ll Item for fees and vagis of officers lxix li.vi l vi d
Rewardis of officers xxiij li.vi l viij d. Item expencis vpon the auditours xlij s̄ viij d. ¶Somme of all the paymentis and allowaūce vij C.xx li.ix l iiij d q̄ ¶Reste CC.xlij li.xviijl vi d q̄ ¶Wherof is owynge and dieu by edward stone for arereage in his tyme somma liij li.vi l vi d ¶Item by W. galle and H. Bumpsted C.lxxxix li.xi s̄ xi d od q̄. ¶Ther acompte Anno ij ic. Tercij ¶The charge. ¶First the arreragis of ther last acompte C.lxxxix li.xi l xi d od q̄. ¶Item all maner ressains vij C.xliiij li.x l v d q̄. ¶Somma of the charge ix C.xxxiiij li.ij l iiij d. ¶Discharge. ¶Fyrst allowaūce of paymētis the same yere vi C.xxiij li.iiij l x d Soo there remayneth the somme CCC.x li.xvij l v d ob. ¶Wherof is dieu by Edward stone and other of their arrerage in ther tyme. liij li.vi l vi d ob. And soo remayneth clerly dieu by Willm̄ Salle and Herry Boun∣sted. CC.lvij li.x l xi d ¶The articles vpon whiche is to Inquyre in the visitacions of ordi¦naries of chirches. FYrst whether the body of criste bee kepte in an honest place & aboue all thingis priuily. and that it be deputed vnder ye ke∣ping of a locke wych kepe. ¶Item whether vestimentis and other ornamentis bylonginge to the auter namly corporassys. vpon whiche the body of crist restyd. yt be halowed ben cleen wasshen
¶Item whether the crissmatory and the fonte of baptym bi en kep¦te vnder locke and key ¶Item whether the kreme and oyle be newe and euery yere nwe halowyd. thoolde clarefied nyew had ¶Item whether the canons of masse bokis be clier and opyn. ¶Item whether priestis can profore the wordis off the canon and Baptym ¶Item whether the curat teche his parisshens the fourme of bapty¦me in tyme of necessyte in the modirtunge ¶Item whether the water of baptyme bee not kepte in the fonte o∣uir viij dayes ¶Item yf the old corporassys that be no worthy to be occupyed bien burnyd and put in the place of relyclus ¶Item whether they that mynister aboute ye aulter haue on cleue. surplisses ¶Item whether the parson parish priest or any other clerke goo out of acording vesture Andonest or that he be not shauen & utte com¦petently as it accodeth to the ordour of clergye ¶Item the chauncel or the body of the body of the chirche wythin or wythout the wyndous be glased ¶Item whether the roffe coueringe or ony ornamentis lacke repa∣racion. ¶Item whether the parson and alle other chapleins off the chirche bien of honest conuersacion ¶Item whether ther be a playn and a ful Inuentory made of ye goo¦dis of the chirche ¶Item whether god be diewly soruyd by the curat and othir My∣nysters of the quyer in diuinis or not ¶Item whether the parson vicar or chapleyn of the parisshe beha∣ue them as they ought in gowerning of soulis yf they say masses ac¦cording yf they bee redy to visite sicke people namly whan they ben requyred. ¶If ony of the parisshens deceasse wythout the sacramentis off the chirche ¶Yf ony of the parishens deceasse wythout baptyme in the defa of the prieste ¶Item whether the curat refuse to doo the solemnisacion of laufull matrimonye by fore he haue ayefte of money hoses or gloues
¶Itē whether ye {per}son vicar or chapleīs biē cōmune visiters & haun¦ters of tauernes or moche drōkē or bere wepē cōtrarye to ye peace ¶Item whether they be vserers or comen byars or sellers ¶Item whether they be in contynent or defamed wyth ony womā namly wyth ony weddyd woman or haue in {per}sonage or ony other house woman suspect ¶ Item whether they aske their tythes or ryghtis of the chyrche as well of right diewe as of custume or yf they dare not aske their thy∣thes for fere of ony slaundyr of their owne gylte Whether they be displeyers Iuglers or intending to them or ō ho∣nest bosters ¶ Item yf they haue ony longe here and norishe them ¶ Item and the haue leyd to pledge chaleys vestementis booke or o∣ther thingis perteyning to the parishe ¶ Item yf the person vicar or their debyte wyhdrawe lyght or ony other thinge in the chauncell that he is bounde to fynde or yf he cha¦unge or misuse them that perteyneth to the parisshens. ¶ Item wher the chapleins Inioyne to the parisshens that ben cō∣fessyd that they cause masses to be songe other animal or trental for couetise ¶ Item yf rentis assyned to a lyght bee conuerted into other vses a∣geyn the wyll of the yevar or byquyether ¶ Item yf ther lac any lyght or fraternytees indewed by ony land{is} or tenementis Iuellis or sommes of mony of the deuocion of the pe∣ple or by legacies of dede people after their last wylles ¶ Item whether suche last wylles of ded people bien fulfylled in all thinges and bien obserued to theffect of the same ¶ Item whether ther be an Inuentory made of suche landis and te¦nementis iuellis and sommes of money. ¶ Item whether the wardeins of the lightis or Fraternitees bien newe chosen. euery yere after the maner of the chirche. ¶ Item whether suche maner wardens make a ful and a playn a∣compte euery yere of the receptis and paymentis by them in the ty¦me of chesynge other wardeins to them that they shulde doo ¶Item whether after suche manner of Counpte made they kepe in their owne handis ony of the landis tenementis Iuellis or money
longing to the lyghtes or fraternitees and be conuertid into theyr owne wydked vsys ¶ Item whether they wyll not yeue and restore hem to the lyghtis or fraternitees or to ye wardeyns of them beyng. or make ony de∣layes ¶Item whether the wardeins lete to ferme and graunt ony londis or tenementis aboue said in the tyme of ther wardeinship to certen persones frendis or kynnesfolke for lesse somme than they be worth yerly or may be set ¶Item whether the chapleins of the parish solempnise marry mo∣ny the banes not asayd or out of the chirche or other straunge pari¦shens wythout licence of the curat ¶Item whether the laymen paye ther tithys of right diewe or by custum ¶ Item whether ony weddyd man bee auouterer or kepe ony wo∣man besyde his lawfull wyf or yf ony weddyd woman bee aduou¦trice. ¶Item whether they be Ioyned to guyder in consanguinite or af∣finite or laufully bien cowpled to guyder or yf they behaue them yl or yf they be causers of struns and debatis. ¶Item whether ony chapleyn haunte ony houses of suspect wym¦men ¶Item whether ony sengyll man kepe ony womman in fornicati¦on wherof ony fame is sprongen in the parishe or ellis where ¶Item whether ony Layman ressayue in his house auouterers or concubynes or norishe them in synne ¶Item whether ony ded man hath made his testament that is not competently {pro}uid byfore the ordenary by his executours mynyster wythout ony auctorite of the ordenary ¶Item yf ony man let. the last wyl of ony ded man or woman whe¦ther it be of his owne wyf or ony other ded body Itē whether ony mā {pro}ue a mā or womā ī his deth bed to his good{is} amōge peple to defraude ye king ye chirche & his creditours yt whiche
procurers be excommunicat by the same dede and the body of the de¦de shall lacke hooly sepulture ¶ Item whether ony executor of a testamen applye or appropir ony thing of the goodis of the deed man wythout it be gyuen to hym a¦monge lyf people or it be left to hym in the testament of the ded body or it be dew to hym of the ded bodye ¶ Item wher ther bee ony vserers wytches or wymmen that vsen Incantacions ¶ Item wheyr ther be ony comon Laborers on sandayes or other halydayes in the parishe ¶ Item whether ther be ony comen Iangulers in the chirche lettyn¦ge ye seruyce of god ¶Item whether there bee ony comen dyffamours of theyr neygh∣bours. ¶ Item whether ony men attache men of the chirche or bryngen to be attached or procured to bee greuyd for that thinge that they ha∣ue bien sued byfore in holy chirche lawne ¶ Item wheder ony man or woman haue leyde violently handys on a darke or haue smyten hym or dyspised hym or cast ayen hym or yf ony man or woman haue smytten a lay man or woman in ho¦ly chirche or chircheyarde ¶ Item whether ony man or woman detayne the lyght of a lampe or ony other right perteyning to the chirche ¶ Item whether ony lay man or woman presume to syt in the chaū¦cel while the masse is songen a geyne the persons wyll vicar or pa¦rish prieste ¶ Item whether ther be any other Notary and open causes vpon the whiche ony subget clerke or leyman be diffamyd ¶ Explicit ¶Tharticles founde by the Inquisitours at the visitacion last done in the chirche of saint magnus.
FIrst that the hirche and the channcel is nat repaired in glasnge in dyuers placis Item that the bookis and vestmentis bien broken and vnhonest for dyuine seruice Item that many of the priestis and clerstis often were foule and vnclenly surplesis. Item we fynde nat that any cliere Inuentory is made of the goodis and landis of the chirche Item that the londis and tenementis of the chirch by fauour of the chirchewardeyns afore tyme ben late vndir the very value by xx lī yerly and more Item we fynde that for defaute of good prouision bothe of the chirche wardeyns and also of the mastirs of the salue neither the priestis nor clarkis that ben retayned for the chirche wil nat com to our lady masse nor salue. nor the clarkis and priestis that bien retayned by the mastirs of the salue wil com to masse or matyns. in the quyer. were it myght be wele brought abowte of the maystirs of the salue and the wardeyns of the. Chirch wolde for the maytenyng of goddis seruice at the tyme of ressayuing of such priestis and clarkis gif theim charge For asmoch as they haue so profitable and resonable Salery. That they all Sulde aswel attedde. vpon masse mateyns and euynsong as vnto oure lady masse and salue and other seruice. the whiche to doo shulde encrease in the priestis and clerkys good custum of vertu and grete encrease of dyuyne seruice Item that Chirch wardeyns wil nat shewe vs The willes of theim that haue geuen goodis or londis vnto the parish wherby we shulde further Inquyre whethyr the willes be perfurmed or nat for wythout them we can¦nat haue therof vndirstonding Item that ye wardeyns of the chirch and of the brodirhed haue nat gyuen ther acomptis. Item that a fortymes for defawte of good and diligent autoryte of the acomptis of the wardeyns ther hath bien many and gret Somes of money taken from the chirche the which myght wel cum to light yf the olde acomptis were wele examnyed.
Itm̄ ther is in the handis of dyuers of the perishe Restis of money of the beame light and of the almes gaderyng to the Sōme of xij. or xvi.lī. and that Can oon palmer shewe the trow the. Item that the chircheyard is vnhonstly kepte Item that dyuers of the priestis and clarkes in tyme of dyuyne seruice be at tauerns and alehowsis at yshing and other trifils wherby dyuyne seruyce is let Itm̄ that bifauour of the wardeyns ther bith admyttid. bothe priestis beneficed and religyons where. ther myght bee more conuenyent and expedient. and that aue more nede to be receyuid in ther placis and theyse bien the names. Sir Robert smyth beneficed. And a moue Sir Ihn̄ botel beneficed Sir Ihū bate hath a thinge that we can nat vndirstonde ¶ The names of the inquisitours of the sayd articles at the same visitacions ¶ Iohn̄ halmon Symon mott Iohn̄ Robchaunt Iohn̄ yonge Willm̄ dicons Richard Iohn̄ Eton Iohn̄ Turke Thom̄s broke Willm̄ hertwell Thom̄s dauy. Willm̄ Creue parishens Robert vyncent. Baronys Symon neuyngton. ¶ A Complaynte made to kyng herry the vi. by the duke of gloue∣ter vpon the cardynal of wynchesteri THes ben In partye the poyntis and articles whiche. I. vm∣frey duke of glouceter for my trouth and aquytal Sayd late. I. wolde yeue In wryting my right doulted lord vnto your highnes aduertising your exellence of Such thing{is} in party as haue ben don in your tendir age in derogaciō of your noble estate and hurte of bo∣the your reames and yet ben don & vsed dayly ¶ Furst ye cardynal thoo beyng bishop of winchester toke vpō him ye state of cardynal whiche was naied and denayed hȳ by ye kȳg off most noble memorye my lord your fadir whō god assoyle. Sayng yt he had as lee sett his Crowne besyde him as to see hī were a cardy∣nal hatte he beyng a cardinal
For he knew full wel the pryde and thambusyon that was in his parso¦ne thoo being but a biship shulde ha¦ue loo gretly extolled him into more intollerable pride whan that he wer cardynal. and also him thought it a∣yenst his fredom off the chief chirche of this reame whiche that he wurs∣shipped as duly as euyrded prīce. yt blessid be his soule. And how be it that my sayd lord your fadir whom god assoyle wolde haue agreed him to haue had certayn darkes off this lande cardynall{is} haue noo bysshop∣rich in England yet his entent was neuer to doo so gret derogacion to ye chirch of Canturbury to make him that were his suffraganys to syt a∣boue ther ordynary and metropoli∣tan. But the cause was that in gene¦ral & in alle maters whyche myght concerne the wele of him and of his reame he shulde haue promoters of his nacyon as all odur kyng cristen had in the courte of rome and not to a byde in this lande any parte of his councel as ben all the sp̄al and tem¦peral at parlementis and other gret councels whan you lyste to calle hē & therfore though it lyst you to doo hȳ that worship to sett him in your preuy councel after your plesur yett in your parlemēt where euery lorde spīal and temperal hathe his place hym ought too ocupie but his place as bishop ¶ Itm̄ the sayd bysshop now beyng cardynal was assoiled of his bishop rich of wynchester wherupō he sued to our holy fadir too haue a bulle de∣claratorye that not withe stondīge was assumpte to & state of cardynal that the see was not voyde where in dede it stood voyde by a certayn ty∣me or the sayd blle were graunted and so he was exempte from his or∣dynary by the takynge on hym the state of cardynal and the chirche bis∣shoprich of wynchester So stondȳg voyde. he tooke a yen off the pope ye not lerned therof e knowyng wher¦by he was falle in the case of prouicy¦on So that all his good was lafl¦ly & clerly forfeyted to you my right doulted lorde wyth more as the ∣tute declareth plaȳly for your auaū¦tage. Itē it is not vnknowē to you dou¦ted lord how thogh your landis it is noysed the sayd cardynal & thach¦bishop of yorke had and haue the go¦uernaūce of on and all your lande the whiche noon of your trewe liee men ought to vsurpe nor take  hem And haue also estraunged me your soole vncle my cosyn off  my cosyn of huntyng dō and many other lordis of your . to haue any knowlege of any gret mater yt myght touche your hygh estate or eyther of your reames and of lordis spūal. of right. tharchbisshop of can¦turbury shulde be your cheef coūcel∣lar the whiche is also enstraunged & sett a syde. & so be many other right sad lordis & wel aduised aswel spūal as temperal to gret hurt of you my right doulted lorde & of yur reames lyke as thexperyēce and workes she wē clerly & euydētly more harme is
¶ Itm̄ in the tendir age off you nay right doulted lorde for the necessite of an armee the said cardynal leue you iiij.M.li vpon certayne Iuels prey¦sed at xxij M. marke wyth a lett off sale that and they were not quyttid at a certayne day ye shulde lese hem The sayd cardynal seynge your mo∣ney redy too haue quytt wyth your Iuels Caused the tresorer of englād at that day beyng to pay that same mony for parte of a nother armee. ī defrandyng you my ryght doulted lorde of your sayd Iuells kepyng hē yett alwey stille to his owne vse. too your right gret losse and his singlar  and avayle ¶ Item the sayd Cardynal thoo be¦yng byshop of wynchester and chaū¦celar of engand delyuered the kyng of scottis vpon certayne appoynte∣mentis as may be shewed and hys presumyng be autoryte of parlemēt were noo dede. I haue herd notable men of the lawe sey that they neuer herd of yt among hem whiche was to gret a defamation to your hygh¦nes and all to wedde his nece to the sayd kyng whom that my lorde off notable memory your fadir whom god assoyle wolde neuer haue soo de¦lyuered And there as he shulde ha¦ue paid for his cost xl.M lī. the sayd cardynal chauncelar of Englād cau∣sed you to pardon him therof .M. marke where of the gretter sōme he payd you right a litel what I repor∣te me to your highnes. ¶Item where the sayd cardinal lēt you my redoulted lorde gret and no∣table sōmes he hath had and his as¦signementis vpō the porte of hamp¦ton where the custumers ben his {ser}¦uantis where bee lyklynes it is too sopose he stōding the chief marchaūt of wulles of your lāde that ye be gret¦ly defrauded. and vndir that rule w¦hat wulles and other marchaundi∣cis haue ben shippid and may be frō tyme too tyme hard is too esteme to gret an hurte & priudyce off you my right douthted lorde and of alle your pepul ¶ Itm̄ how beit that the sayd cardi¦nal hath dyuers tymes lēt you gret Sōmes sithe ye tyme off your regue yet his aloene hathe be soo defferred and delaied that for ye most part the conuenable seson of themploynge of the good lente was passed. Soo that litel frute or noon com the¦rof as by experience bothe your rea¦mes haue sufficiently in knowlege. ¶ Item where ther was Iuels and place preysed at xi M.ll in weight of ye sayd cardynal forfeited to you my right doulted lord he gat him aresto¦rement therof for alone of a litel par¦cel of the same and so defrauded you holly of them to your gret hurt and his a vayle the whiche good myght gretly eased your highnes īsparȳg as myche of your power Comons. ¶ Itm̄ the cardynal beyng feoff of
my sayd lorde your fadir whom god assoyle ayenst his enient yaf Elysa∣bethe bechampe ..iij. marke of ly∣uelod where that his will was that and she were weddid wyth in a yere than, to haue it and elles not where indede it was ij. or iij yere after to yo¦ur gret hurte and aminyshīg of yo¦ur enheritaunce. ¶Item not wyth stonding that the sayd cardynal hath noo maner of au¦toryte nor interesse in to the crowne nor noon may haue be any possiby∣litee yet he presumeth and taketh v¦pon hyn in party your estate ryalle in cleping afore him in to geet abusi∣on and of alle your land and deroga¦ciō of your highnes whiche hath not ben seen nor vsed in noo dayes here afore in gretter estate than he is wt out your expresse ordynaunce & com¦aundement ¶Item the sayd cardynall noothīg consideryng the necessite of you mi right. doulted lorde hath sued a {per}∣don of dysines that he shulde pay for the chirche of wynchester for terme of his lyfeing ther by occasion. to alle other lordis spn̄al to drawe ther good will for any necessite to graūt any dysine and so to ley alle the char¦ge vpon the temperaltee and the po¦wer peple. ¶Item be the gouernaunce and la∣bour of the sayd cardynall and arch¦byshop off yorke ther hath bee lost & dyspendid to notable & too gret a go∣od by dyuers ambassas sn out of this reame. Furst to aras for a fe∣ned colourable peas where as bi ly¦lynes yt was thought and soposed yt hit shulde neuer turne to effectual a∣uayle of you my right doulted lorde. nor off your sayd reames but vndr colour therof was made the peas of your aduysary. and of the duke of Bourgoene for ellis your party ad¦uerse and the sayd duke myght not goodly haue founde meanes nor we is to haue comēned to geder to haue concluded to oder they considracy∣ons. and consperacyous made and wrought there at that tyme ayenst your hyghnes. Wherby ye myght right doulted lord the gretter pr of your obeysaunce as wel my  of fraunce as in your duchy off normandy and mych other thynge gon gretly as thorough the sayd co∣lourable tretee, and other wyse sith the dee of my broder of bedford w∣hom god assoylle. ¶ Item now late was sent a other ensabassade to caleis by the labour & counsayle of the sayd cardinal & arch¦byshop of yorke the cause why of the begynnyng to me your sele vncle. & other lordis of your kyn and coūcell vnknowen to your gret charge and ageynst the good publyk of your re∣me as it openly apereth the whiche good yf it bn enployd for the defen∣ce of your lādis the marchaundyses
of the same myghtē haue had other course and your syd landis not too haue stonden in soo gret my chief as they doo ¶Item after that to your gret char¦ge and hurte of bothe your reames the sayd Cardynal and archbis¦shop of yorke went to your sayd o∣wne of calis and dyuers lordis off your kynne and of your counsayle ī ther felouship & there as ther was na¦tural warre betwix the duke of orly∣aunce and the duke of bourgoen for murdur of ther faders and a capital enymyte lyke to haue endured for e¦uer. The sayd cardynal and archbis∣shop of yorke lycenced and suffred ye sayd duke of orlyaūce to entrete and common aparte wyth the coūcel of your sayd aduersaries aswel as wt the duches of burgoene by whyche meane the peas and aliāce was ma¦de betwix the ij. dukis to the grettest fortefienge of your sayd capital ad∣saries that cowde be thought. And consequently my dere doulted lorde to your grettest charge and hurte to bothe your reames vndir colour of which tretye your sayd aduersaries in meane tyme wan your Cytee off mlx and the contrey there aboute and many dyuers roodes made to your duchy off normandy too gret noye and distruxiō of your peple as it shewt openly ¶ Item the sayd archbishop off yor∣ke sent wyth other Into thys your reame from the sayd cardynal after cōmunicaciō had with your ad¦uerse {per}ty at your sayd towne of Ca∣leys made at his comȳg In to your notable presence at wyndsore alle ye suasicions and colour alle mocyon  in the most aparent wyse yt he cowd too enduce your hyghnes to your a∣grement to the destres of your capi∣tal adusary as I sawe there in your noble presence of his wryting at whi¦ch tyme my vndirstondyng it was his singlar openyon that is to sey yt ye shulde leue your right your tytle and your honor of your crouone and noacion of you kyng of fraunce du∣ryng certayne yeris ye shulde vtter¦ly absteyne you and be content only In wryting wyth rex anglie &c{is} to ye grettest note of Infame that euer fel to you or any of your noble progeni¦tors sithe the takyng off hem furst ye sayd tytle and right of your Reame and crowne of fraunce to which in a ter ī your presence ther after that yt had lyked your sayd highnes to aske my aduice therupon wyth other off your blod and counsayle I answerd and sayd that I wolde neuer agree me therto to dye therfore and of the same disposicion I am yet and wil be while I lyeue in conseruacion of yo∣ur honor and of your othe made vn∣to your sayd crowne in tyme of your coronacion there ¶ Item the sayd Cardinal and arch¦bishop of yorke haue so laboured to your highnes that ye shulde entēde to a new day of conuenciō. in march or aprill next comȳg where it is now eyd to be ageynst your wurship thā wyth it and where it was euydent
to alle the worlde That the rup¦ture and brekyng off the sayd peas shulde haue falle here afore of your aduerse partye by cause of ther gret vntrowthes. Now by that mea¦ne it is lyke parauenter to be leyde vpon you to too greet a disclaunder of you my doulted lorde lyke to com to noō other purpose nor effecte thā other conuencyons haue don afore tyme and soo bi subtilitees and coun¦sayle of your sayd enymys your lan¦de they ī hope and trust of ye sayd tre¦tye not myghtyly nor puyssaū∣tly purueid fore shalbe lyke vndir ye colour of the same tretye to be brent vp & distroyed lost & vtterly turned from your obeysaunce ¶ Item it is sayd that the deliueraū¦ce of the sayd duke of orlyaunce it vt¦ly appoynted by the mediacion coon¦cel and steryng of the sayd cardinal & archbisshop off yorke and for that cause dyuers parsones ben com frō your aduersaries Into this your re¦ame and the sayd duke also brought in to your cite of londō where as my lorde your fadir whom god assoyle peysȳg so gretly the in conuenyent{is} & harme yt myght falle only be his delyueraunce concludid ordeyned in his last will and determyned vtter∣ly in his wisdom his conquest in his reame of fraunce and yet than it to be don by as gret delyberacion solēp¦nite and suertee as coude be deuysed or thought and seynge now the dispo¦sicion of your reame off fraunce the puyssaunce and myght of your ene¦myes and what sett they haue getē aynst you there aswel vndir the co∣lour of the sayd trater as other wyse what may or aught bee thought or sayd for that labouryng the sayd du¦ke alle thing{is} consideryd by such par¦ticular parsones the lordis off your blod not called thertoo I. reporte me vnto your noble grace  excllēce and vnto the seyd wile crewe mē off this your reame. ¶ Item where that euery trw co∣unceler specially vnto any kyng or prince ought of trouth and off dewte to councel promote encrece proferre and auaunce the wele and prosper∣te of his lorde. The sayd cardynal be¦yng of your coūcel my right doulted lord hath late purchased of your hyg¦hnesse certayne gret lōdes and lyue¦lod as the castell and lordship of chir¦ke in wales and other landis in this your reame vnto whiche I was cal∣led sodenly and so in eschewing ye bre∣kyng and losse of your armes thā in to agayn seyng noon odur remedy yaf ther vnto my assent thin kynge that who that euer moued laboured or stered the mater furst vnto your lordship counceled yow nedir for yo wurship ne profite ¶ Moreouer the sayd crdinall hath yow bounde aparte to make him as¦sure astate off alle the said landes by ster next comȳg as cowde be deuy∣sed bi any lerned councel and ellis yt suertee not made.
The sayd Cardynal to haue and re∣ioyse to hī and hys eyens for eurmo¦re the landis of the duchi of lancastir in northfolke to ye value of vij. or viij marke by yere whiche thȳg seme ye right straunge and vnsayn and vn∣herd weyes of any ege man o seke vpon his soueraȳg lord bothe ī his enheritaunce and in his Iuelr. and good for it is thought but yf ryght & extreme necessite caused it ther shul∣de nor ought noo Suche thȳg be dō the whiche necessite god for his mar¦cy euer preserue and kepe your no∣ble parsone wherfore my redoulted lrd seeyng that ye shulde be so coun¦clld or stured to lue your Crowne enheritaunce in England and alsoo by fraude and Subtelmenes as is afore reherssed So to lese your Inelr In my trouth and In myn aquitall as me semeth I. may noght nor ou∣ght not councell so gret an hurte too you and all your lande ¶ Item it is not vnknowen to you my right douhted lorde how oftē ty∣mes that I. haue offerd my seruyce to and for ye deffence of your reame of fraunce and duchy of normandy where I. haue be put therfroo bi the labour of the sayd cardinall In prefer¦ryng other after his singlar afficion whiche hathe Caused gret parte off the duchy of normandye as wel as your reame of fraunce to be loste as it is wel knowen and what goodye my right doulted lorde loste on that armee. that was laste sent theder whiche therle of morten your coūcel of fraunce hathe wel and clerly decla¦red vnto your hyghnes hereaforne ¶ Item my redoulted lorde it is not vnknowen that it had not ben possi¦ble to the sayd cardynal too haue co∣mē to the gret riches but bi such me∣anes for of his chyrche it myght not rise and enheritaunce he hath non. wherfore my right doultel lord sith ther is gret good behoueful at thys tyme for the wele and saufgard off your reames the pouertee necessite and indigence of your iege peple in hyghnes vndstōd lyke it vnto youir noble grace to consedur ye gret lucur of the sayd cardinal and the gret dis¦saitis that ye be desceyued in by the labour of him and of tharchbysshop as wele as thi your reame as in yo¦ur reame of fraunce and duchy of normandy where neder office lyue∣lod nor capytayne may be had with ut to gret a good yeuen vnto hym. wherby gret parte off alle the losse yt is lost they haue ben the cannsars of For whoo yt wolde yef most his was the pricce not consideryng the meri∣ris seruice nor suffisaūce of parsones Furthermore it is gretly to be consi∣dered how whan the sayd cardynal had forfeited all his good bycause of prouysion off the statute therupon. made more plainly declarethe bi ha¦uing the rule of yow my right doul∣red lorde porchased hȳ self in gret def¦frādaciō of your hyghnes a chart of {per}don ye whiche good & it had be well gouerned myght mani yeres haue susteyned your wares wtout any ta∣lage of your pour peple
A charter of pardon. yt whiche good and it had be wel gouerned. myght many yeres haue susteyned youre warres wtout ony talage off youre people ¶Item my right doubted lord whe¦re as I witte moche thinge for the wele of you and of your reames per reuentur Somme wolde seyne and vnderstode that I wolde or had wri¦ten it by weye of accusament of alle your councell whiche god knowith I doo not. for your hyghnes maye well see that I name hem that been causars of the sayde ordynate Rule wherfore considering that the sayd cardynall and archibisshop of york ben they that pretende the gouerna¦unce of you and of your Reames & lordships. Please it vnto your hygh¦nes of your right wilnesse to estraū¦ge hem of your councel to that entēt that men may be at ther fredom to saye what they thinke of trouthe. ¶For trouthe I dare speke off myn trouthe. the power dare not so. And yf the sayd Cardynall and archbis∣shop of yorke may aftirwarde decla¦re them selff of that is and shalbe sa¦yde of hem Ye my right doubted lor¦de may than restore theym ayen to your councel at your noble plesure. ¶Explcit ¶Here ensuen the articles as the / kyngis councell haue conceyued yt whiche ye hygh and myghty prince my Lorde of glouceter hath surmy¦syd vpon my Lorde off Wynchester chauncheler of England. FYrst as there he beynge {pro}¦tector and defendour of this lande desirith the tour to be opynd vnto hym and to logge hym therin. ichard woele squire ha∣uing at that tyme  keping of the sayd Tour refusyd hȳ his desire and kepte the sayde tour ayenst hym vn¦duly and ayenst reason by the com¦maundemen of my sayd lod of win¦chester. And afterwarde in  of ye sayde  ye sayd wodeuile and cherisyd hym ayenst the state and worship of the kynge & of my sayd lorde of gloucester. ¶Item my sayd lord of Winchster wythout ye aduise and assent of my sayd Lorde of Gloucester and off the kingis councel purposyd and dispo∣syd hym to sett hand on the kingys person and to haue remouyd hym from Eltham the place that he was in to thentēt to put hym in suche go∣uernaunce as hym lust. ¶Item where that my sayd lorde of glocheter to whom of al persons or that sholde bee. beyng Wthin the
lond by ye waye of nature and bith it belongith to see the gouernaunce of the kyngis person. enformed of ye sayde vndue purpose of My sayde Lorde of Wincheer declared in the article next aboue sayd deposed ther¦fore and in lettynge therof too haue gono to Eltham vnto the kynge to haue prouyded as the cause requy∣red. My sayde lorde of Winchester fauorably and ayenst the kingis pe∣se to the entent to disturbe my sayd lord of glouceter goyng to the kyng purposyng his deth in cause that he had gone that weye sette men of ar∣mys and archiers at the ende of lon¦don bridge next suh werke. And in forbrring of the kyngis hygh wa∣ye lete drawy the chayne of the stul¦pis there and set vp pipes and hur∣dyllis in maner and fourme of bul∣werkis and set men in chambirs so leres and wyndewes wyth bowys and arowys. and other wepyn to ye entent of fynall distruction off My sayde Lorde of Glouceter person as well as of ths that then had come wyth hym. ¶Item my sayde lorde of glouceter sayeth and affermeth that our soue¦rayn lord his brother that was kin∣ge Henry the v. tolde hym on a ty∣me that whe when oure souereyn lorde beyng prince was lodgyd in ye palace of westn the gryne cham∣bre. by the ece of a spaynell there was on a nyght a man aspyed and taken behynde a tape of the sayde chambre whiche mā was delyuerd to the erle of Arundell to bee exam∣ned on the cause of his beyng there att that tyme. the whiche so examy∣ned att that tyme confessyd that he was there by the excitacion and pro¦curyng of my sayd lorde of wynches¦ter ordeyned to haue slayne the said prince there in his bedde Wherfore the sayd erle of Arundell lete sak hā forthwyth and drowned him in the temmes. ¶Item our sayd souerayn Lorde yt was kyng Henry the v. sayd to my sayd lord of glouceter that his fader kynge Henry the iiij lyeuyng and visited gretely then wyth sikenesse of the ond of god my sayde Lorde of winchester sayde vnto kynge Hen∣ry the v. then beynge Prince that ye kynge his fader so visetyd wyth sy∣kenes was not personable and ther¦fore not disposyd to comen conuersa¦cion and gouernaunce of the people and for so moche counsellyd hym to take the crown and gouernaunce of this land on hym.
¶Here enswen the ansuer is and ex¦cusaciōs made by mi lord of wīchest chauncelar of englōd vnto ye causis & materis of heuynes declarid in arti¦clis ayenst hym by my lorde of glou¦seter ¶ First as of the resuse made vntoo my lorde of gloucet as of the opoyn∣nyng off the toure vnto hym of his logging therin by the cōmaundmēt of my sayd lorde of winchestir he an¦suerith that ī the presence of my said lorde of gloucet before his comȳg ou¦te of his contre of henawde for cau∣sis such as were thought resonable seme yt le full that the toure shulde ha¦ue be notably stuffid and kept wyth vitayle how where it was not forth wt executed. & in semblable wyse aft that my sayd lorde of glouceter was gone into the sayd contre of he naw∣de for cediciouse and odiōs bilis and langage cast and vsid in the cite of lō¦don sowing of insureccion and rebel¦lyon ayenst the kingis pease and dis¦struccion aswell of dyuers estate off this londe as of strāgeris beyng vn∣dir the proteccion insomoch yt in dou¦te therof strangiers in grete nombre fled the londe and for the more sure beyng of the sayd Toure richard wo deuile squier so trusid with the kȳg our souereing lorde ye dede is as wel ye know and also chambirlayn and counselling vnto my lorde of bedfor¦de wyth certayn nombre off defensi∣ble parsones assygned vnto hī was depute by hem and by assent off the kyngis counsell beyng that time at london for to abide therin for the sa¦garde therof and straity chargid bi the sayd counsel that during yt tyme of his sayd charge he ne shulde suffir no man to be wyth ī the Toure strē¦ger then he wythoute especyal char∣ge or cōmaundement of the kyng by the aduyse of his counsell ¶Itm that aftir sone vpō the comȳg of mi sayd of lorde glouceter īto thys londe from his contre of henawde ye sayd lordis of the kingis Counsell were enformyd yt my sayd lorde of gloceter grucchid wyth the sayd maer off enforsing the Toure and lete say to hem of london that the had well vndirstonde that they had bene heuyly thretynde for ye tyme of his absence and other wise then they shulde haue ben if he had ben in this londe wherfore he was right euyll payd and especiall the sayd enforcȳg of the Toure set vpō hem in maner of achastinleyn considering  goode acquitall and trouth that they ad al¦le way is kept vnto the king offrȳg hem ther opō remedy yf they wolde ¶Itm that aftir this richard Scot¦line tenant of the toure by the cōmā¦demēt of my sayd lorde of glouceter brought vnto hȳ freire randolf whi¦che had long befor counfessid treson done by hym ayenst the kyngis per¦son that dede is for whiche knowlea¦ge he was put to be kept ī ye sayd toure
and straitly cōmaundid vndir gre¦te payne yeuen to the sayd scot to ke∣pe him streitly and snerely and nott to lete hymoute the of sayd Toure wt oute commaundement of the kyng bi the aduise of his coūcell the which freer randelf mis and lorde of glouce¦ter kept then full with hī self not we∣ting the said scot as he declared vnto my sayd lorde of winchester sone af that he had brought ye sayd freeir ran¦dolf vnto my sayd lorde of glouceter. saying vnto my sayd lorde of wīches¦ter that he was vndone but he help to him and expressid as for cause of ye sad wytholding of freer randolf And saying moreouer that whē he desired of mi lorde of glouceter the de¦liueraunce of the sayd freer raudolf to lede him ayeue to the toure or suficent warāt for his discharge mi sayd lorde of glouceter ansurred hȳ that his cōmaundement was suffici¦ent warant and discharge to hȳ In the whiche thing aboue sayd it was thought my lorde of wīchester that my sayd lorde off glouceter toke on hym self ferther then his autorytee strecchid and causid hym for doute & drede lest that he wolde haue {pro}cedid ferthir and monyd hym at suche ty∣me as the sayd modeuile come onto hym to ar his aduice and councell of logging of my sayd lorde off gloucet in the toure to aduise him and char¦ge hȳ that before he suffrid my sayd lorde of glouceter or any parson log∣ge therin strenger yeu he. he shulde prouyd hym a sufficient warant the of of the kȳg bi the aduise of his coū¦sell. ¶ Item as to the sayd artycle of the forsayd causis and heuynessis mi lor¦de the chaunceler ansuerith that he ne purposid to set hande on the kyn∣g{is} person ne to remoue hym or that he shulde be remouyd or put in any maner gouernaunce but by the ad∣uise of the kyngis councell for he ne couth conseyue any maner of goode or of aduauntage that myght haue grow vnto hym theroff but rathir grete parile and charge and heryn my sayd lorde of winchester is redy to make proff in tyme and place coue∣nable Itm̄ as to the iij. article of the forsaid causis and heuynessis my sayd lorde the chaūceler ansuerith that he was ofn and dyuers tymes warned bi¦diuers and credible persones as wel at the tyme of the kingis last parle∣ment holdin at westm̄ as before and sith that my sayd lorde of glōcer pur¦posid hym bodyly harme and was warned therof and counsellid bi the sayd parsons and that dyuers to ab¦steyne hym of cumyng to westm̄ as my sayd lorde of winchester declarid vnto my sayd lorde of glouceter. Item that in ye tyme of the parlemēt byuers parsons of lowe estate of the cite of londō in grete nombre assam∣blid on a day vpon the wharf at the crane in the vintry and wishid and
desired that they had. had ye parsoō of my lorde of wichester sayng that they wolde haue throw hym in the tymes to haue taught hȳ to swyme for which billis and langge of slaū¦der and manace cast and spoken in the sayd Cite by my sayd lorde the chauncelere causid hym to suppose yt they that soo sayd and did willid and desirid his destruccyon how were it that they had no cause. ¶Item that after the comyng to lon¦don of sir raaf Butler and mayster sent fro my lorde of bedford the reme¦naunt of the lordis of the counsell en¦formed that my sayd lorde of glouce¦ter bare heuynes vnto my lorde off wīchesterke cmyge to misayd lorde of glouceter too his ynne the sonday next before all halhw day and there opend vnto hym that they had kno¦wleage and vndirstonding of ye said heuynessis prayīg hym to lete hem wete that if he bare such heuynes a¦yenst my sayd lorde of winchestre and also the causis therof at whiche tyme as mysayd lorde of winchester was after wardis enformed that mi sayd lorde of glouceter affermed that he was heuy touard hym and not withoute causis that paranētu¦re he wolde put in writyng ¶ Item that aftir the monday next. before all halow day last passid ī the nyght the peple in ye sayd cite of lon∣don by the cōmaundemēt of my say¦de lorde of glouceter as it was sayd. for what cause mi lorde the chaunce¦ler wist not assemblid in in the cytee armyd and a raid and so cōtynewid all that nyght. And many dyuers of the whiche the same night by what excetacion my sayd lorde the Chaū∣celere wist not had sedicions &  langage that was vsid ayenst ye par¦son of my sayd lorde the chauncelere ¶Item the same monday at nyght my sayd lorde of glouceter sent into the ynnes of courte at londō chargīg them of court dwelling in the same to be with hym on the mone at  of ye clok in ther best aray. ¶Item thāt on the morow y• tusday next folowing erly my sayd lorde off glouceter sent vnto the meyre and  aldirmen of the sayd cyte of london to ordeyne hym vnto the nomber of CCC. persons on horsbak to acom∣payne hym to such a place as he disposid hym to ryde the whiche as it was sayd was vnto the kyng to ye entent to haue his person and to re∣moue hym frō ye place that he was in wythoute assent & aduyse of ye kȳ∣gis counsell. Whiche thing was thought vnto my sayd lorde chaun∣cleere ne owid in no wyse to haue be done had not be sene so do before
¶ Item that my sayd lorde the chaū¦celer considiryng in thingis a boue sayd and doubing yerfor of perillis that myght haue swed therof enten¦dyng to puruey there ayenst and na¦mely to his own surte and defte ac∣cordyng to lawe of nature ordeynyd to let that no force of peple shulde co∣me ouir the brigge of london towar¦de hym by whiche he or his myght haue ben endangered or uoyed not entendyng in any wise bodely har¦me vnto mi sayd lorde of Gloucester or to any other parson but only hys own defence and eshwing of the pe∣rile abouesayd ¶ Item as touarde the .iiij. and the v. of the sayd artilis my sayde lorde the Chauncelere ansuerith that he was euir true too alle tho that were his souergū lordis and reygned v∣pon hym and that he neuer purpo∣sid treson ne vntrouth ayenst any of hir parsons & ī speciall ayēst ye parsō of wyrsayd souereigū lorde kyng henry the v. the whiche considering the grete wysdom trouth and man∣hod that all mē knew in hȳ ne wold not for that tyme that he was kyng haue set on my sayd lorde the chaun¦celer so grete trust as he did yf he had founde or I trowed in hym such vn∣trouth. the which thing mi sayd lor¦de the chauncelere offrid to declare & shew as it longith for a man off his estate to do requiring therupon my lorde of bedforde and all the Lordis spn̄all and tēporall in thys present parlemēt that it myght besene that there were iugis couenable in this case yat they wold do hym right or elles that he myght haue leue off the kyng by ther aduyse too goosue his right before hȳ that ought to be his iuge. ¶ And as touard the letter sent by my lorde of winchester vnto my lor¦de of Bedford of whiche the tenure here folowith. ¶ Right hight. and myghty prince and my right noble after one leuest lorde I recōmaunde me vntoyone wyth all my hert and seruise. And as ye desire ye welfare of ye kyng our souereigū lorde and of his realmes of england and of fraunce and your own wele And owris also hast you hithir for by my trouth and ye tary we shall put this lond in auēture wt a felde suche a brothir ye haue here god make hym a good man &c{is} Of the whiche my lorde of glouceter complayneth off the malice and vn∣true purpose of my sayd lorde of wī∣chester of touarde assembling of the peple and gadering of a felde in the kyngis londe in troubeling therof & ayenst the kyngis pease My sayd lorde of wynchester ansue¦rith that of his sayd letters duly vn¦dirstonde
And in wyse as he vndirstode ande mene in the wryting off hem it may not resonably be gadrid or takȳ that my sayd lorde of winchestir entēdid to gadir any feld or assemble peple in troublyng of the kyngis lōde and ayenst the kyngis pease but rar thir he purposid to acquite hȳ to the kȳg in his trouth and kepe the rest and ye pele in the kȳgis londe and to eschue rebellion or disobeysaunce and all troble ¶ For by that. that in the beginnȳg of the sayd letter he callith my sayd lorde of bedforde his leuyst lorde aft our that is the kyng. Whom hym o¦weth to except of dute of his trouch the whiche he had euer kept and wil kepe. ¶ Secundly by y•. in the sayd letty he desireth the comyng home of my sayd lorde of bedford for the welfare of the kyng and of his reines of En∣gland and of fraunce whiche stonde principally in his kepyng of rest and pease and praeth my sayde lorde of bedforth to his comyng into eyglād in eshewing the inpartye of the lond and of a felde the whyche he dred hȳ myght haue folowed yf he had long taryd. ¶ And as touarde the wordes. and ye tary we shall put this londe in a∣uenture with afeled such a brotir ye haue &c. My sayd lorde off wynchester sayd. The soth is that be fore that he wro∣te the Sayde lettir by occasion of cer¦tayn ordinaunce made by the mayr and aldirmen of london and ayenst the excessis takȳg of masons carpē∣ters tylers dawbers & other labo∣rers for her dayly iorneys And ap∣prouyd bi the kyngis aduyse off s councell there were  and cedicious billis vndir the na¦mys of such laborers thretyg and rising wyth many. M. and ma∣sing the stans of the londe and in sē∣blable wyse sedicious langage sowē and so continewed And  to haue sewid of purpose and entent of disobeysaunce And rebellion too redressing of the whych it se mee t  my sayd lorde the chaūceler that mi sayd lorde of glouceter did not the de¦uoir nor diligence that he myght ha shewd for lak of which diligēce they that were disposid to do disobeysaū∣ce were encoragid and enboldishide so that it was lyke that they shulde haue made a gaderyng and that the kyng and his true subgettis shulde haue be compellid too haue made a feled to haue withstōde hem ye wln∣chefelde makyng had ben auentu∣ryng of the londe and in okyunyng that it was ner my sand lorde chaunceleris entent to gadir no feld but as trouth most stirid hym ayēst such as rioutously wolde make
assemble ayenst our souereign̄ lorde and the wele of this lond. he desirith so hastily the comyng of my sayd lor of bedforde the whiche he wold in no wise haue so gretely desired if he wol¦de haue purposid hȳ too any vnlaw¦full makȳg of a felde for he wist well that my sayd lorde of bedford wolde most sharply haue chastisid and pu∣nyshid all tho that so wolde any rio∣rouse assemble make ¶ So that it be knowen to all folkis that it is the entēr of my lorde of bed¦fod and off all the lordis spūall and temporll assembled ī thys present parlement to aquite hym and to pro¦cede truly iustly and and indifferen∣tly wythoute any parcialte in al ma¦ner of materis or quarellis menyd or to be menede ber my lorde off glouceter on that one parte and my lorde of winchester chaunceler of en¦glande on that other partye and for sure kepyng of the kyngis pease it is accordid by my sayd. lorde of bedford and by my sayd lordis spūall and tē¦porall an othe to be made in furme that folowyth that is to say ¶ That mi sayd lorde of bedford and my sayd lordis spūall and temporal eche of hē shall as ferforth as hir kȳ∣nyng and discrecion suffisent truly ī¦stāly and indifferently coūsel and ad¦uise the kyng and also procede and a quite hemself in all the sayd mater{is} and quarellis wytoute that they or any off hem shall pryuily or aperte make or shew hym self too be party or parciall therin not leuing or eshe¦wyng so to do for effeccyō loue mede dute or drede off any {per}son or parsōs and that they shall in all wyse kepe secrete all that shall bee counmed bi way of counsell in the materis and quarelle aboue sayd in the sayd par¦lement wyhtoute that yet or auy of hem shall by worde writynge off ye kyng or in any wyse opin it or disco∣uer it to any of ye sayd parties or to any other parson that is not off the sayd counsell but if he ane speciall cō∣maundement or leue therto off the kyng or mysayd lorde of bedford. & that eche off hem shall wyth all his myght and pouer assist by way off counsell and ellis shew it vnto the ky¦ng mi sayd lorde of bedforde and to ye remeunt of my sayd lordis to putt ye sayd parties to reason and not suffir that any of the sayd parties by them or by theyre assistauntis procede or attempt by way of feete or ayenst ye kingis Pease nor help assist or conforte any of hem therto but let them wyth all hir myght and pouer and wythstō∣de hem and assist vnto the king and my sayd lorde of bedforde in kepīg of the kingis pease and redressing of all such maner of proceding by way offere and force
¶I stud sacramentū fideliter custodi ende infra scripta. quilibet dn̄onm spūaliū & temporaliū infrascriptorū in plene parliamēto existenc{is} apud leycester .iiij. die marcy anno quar∣to promisit publice in persona propri a perfidē & diligenciā & lignēcia quas debent dn̄o regi vidlt in primis Dn̄s de hungieford Dn̄s de Tipost Dn̄s de pouyngis Dn̄s de Cornwaile Dns de buregh. Dn̄s de lonell Iur̄ Dn̄s de betreux Dn̄s clynton. Dn̄s de sonche. Dn̄s de andeley Dn̄s ferers de groby Dn̄s de talbot Abbas de walthin̄ Abbas de glastynbury. Iur̄ Abbas stī angustini Cantur Abbas westim̄ Epūs wigorū. Epūs menen Epūs london Iur̄. Epūs Sinuolū Comes northūblonde Comes Stafford. Iur̄ Eeux Bedford Iur̄ Comes Oxon. Dn̄s de roos Iur̄. infractatem Abbae bothen Abbas loudannē Epūs Gossen. Iur̄ Epus Cici Epūs carliolens Iur̄ Archiepūs Caner Dn̄s de grey Dn̄s de grey riten Dn̄s fu walter Dn̄s balkele Abbas beate marie eborū Abbas sanc albam. Epūs herford non mr̄ quia non presens ¶ In the name of god we henry arc¦hbyshop of Canter Thomas Duke of exceter Iohn̄. Duke of nortfolke. Thom̄s bishop of Duchm̄ plilip bys∣shop of worcet Iohn̄ bishop of bathe froy Erle of Safford willm̄ al∣newik keper of the kyngis pe se a∣le & ranflorde Crūwell arbitrours ī all maniers of causis materis and quarellis of heuynessis or grenūces wyth all incidentis circumstauncis and dependaūtis or conneris beȳg and hangyng betuir the hygh. and worth prince humfrey duke of glou¦ceter on that one parrie and the wor¦shiofull fadir ī god henry bishop wī∣chester and chaunceler of Englande
on that other party bienther of hem for the pesing off the sayd quarelle & debatis takyn and chosyn in maner and fourme as it is conteyned more playnly in a comprimise made ther∣vpō of the whiche the tendere sweth in this fourme e that in the vij. day of marche in . yere of the raign̄ of our souereign̄ lorde kȳg hery the vi. the hight and mighty Prince hunfrey duke of glor at the reuerence of god and for  of the kyng our souereign̄  in this end▪ and namely a ye  and specially at the request and prayer of the right myghty and hie pri my lorde of bedforde his bro¦thir agreed hym to put and puttith al maner of materis and quareles ī  wyth all hir modentis circum∣stayncis dependauntis and connex¦is that thouchen hym and his persō that he hath in any wyse do or felth hym grened or heny ayenst my lor¦de his  my lorde of winchester. or  that my lorde of winchester fe¦lith hym grened acyenst hym in as¦moch as they thouche hym or his {per}¦son fro the beginnyng of the worlde vnto this day in the aduise ordinaū∣ce and arbitrement of the worthi fa∣dir in god henry archbishop of caun¦ntrbury the high and noble princis Thomas duke of exceter and Iohn̄ duke ol northfolke the wirshipfull fa¦dire in god Thomas byshop of dur∣hm̄. Philip bishop of worcester and Bishop of bath the noble lorde hum¦frey Erle of Stafforde the wurship∣ful parsonis maister willm̄ alnewi∣keper off the kyngis priue seale and auf lorde crumwell Promyttynge and behotynge by ye fayth of his body worde of his Princehode and kgngis sonne to do kepe obserue and fulfill for hym and in his behalf all that shalbe decreid ordeigned and arbitred by ye forsaid Archbishop dukis Bishopys Erle keper of the kyngis pryue seale and the lorde crumwell in all mate∣ris & quarellis aboue sayd grātȳg also and promytyng euir that to be comprehendid in the forsayde arbi∣trement as tonarde puttyng awey all heuynessis or displesaunce in any wyse conteyned by my lorde of glou¦ceter ayēst all tho that haue assisted counsellid or fauoured vnto his said vncle of wincester And as tonarde any matere that is touching mi lorde of glouceter remit¦tith it and the gouernaunce theroff vnto the kȳg and his counsele. they to deme it by the aduyse of his coun∣sell as hym thinkith it is to be done. ¶In wines of whiche thyng to this present compromise my sayd lorde of glouceter hath sub stribid his name wyth his owne hand Hunfroy glouceter And in sem∣blable forme my lorde of winchester in a nother compromise substribid wt
his hand vndir the worde of prestho¦de to stond at the aduyse ordinaunce and arbitrement of ye parsons abo∣ue sayd. Mutaris mutādis The causis before sayd & quarelles by vs sene and diligently cramined and decreed and by the assent of the sayd parties ordeine and awarde yt my lordis of glouceter and of wīches¦ter for any thing done or spokyn by that one party apenst that other or by any of theyris or any other per∣sone or persons afore the vij. day off this present moneth off marche no¦ne her after take causis quarellis dis¦plesaunt or heuynes that one ayēst that other ne neyther ayenst the counsellours adherent or fanorers off that others for all thes thyngis them not wyth stondyng my sayd lorde of glocet bee goode lorde vnto my sayd lorde of winchester and ha¦ue hym in loue and affeccion as his kynnesman and vncle And my sayd lorde of winchester haue too my sayd lorde off gloceer true and sad loue and affeccion Doo and be redy to do vnto hym such ser∣uise as ap{per}teyneth of honeste to my sayd lorde of winchester and his esta¦te to do and that eche of them be goo∣de lorde to all the adherentis counsel∣lers and fauorers of that other and shew hem at all times fauoure loue and affection as for any thing done by them or sayd before the forsayde day of marche ¶Also we dere ordeigū and award that my sayd lorde of winchester in the presence of the kyng our souery∣gn̄ lorde my lorde of bedford and i lorde of glouceter and the remenaū of the lordis spn̄all and temporall & comens beyng in this present parle∣ment say and declare in maner and ourme that folowith My souereign̄ lorde I. haue well vn¦dirstond that I am noysid amonge the stans of your lond how that the kyng our souerign̄ lorde that was ye tymes beyng Prince and leggid in the grene chā∣bre at westmynster by the reere of a spayne there was on a nyght takē behind a apet in the same chambe a man that shulde haue cōfesde that he was there by myn cranon and procurȳg to haue slayne the seyd prī¦ce in his bed. Wherupon the sayd. Erle lete sak hym forth wyth and drowned hym in the tēmys, and ferhumore I am accusid how that I shuld haue stired the kyng that last died the tyme also that he was prince to haue takyn ye gouirnaunce of this Reame and the crown vpon hym leuing his fadir ye same tyme beyng kyng horon whi¦che langage and noysing I fele my name.
And fame gretely nbleshid in  mennys oppinions wherupon I ta¦ke first god to witnes and after war¦de all the worlde that I. haue be at al tymes and am true louer and true mā to you my souereign̄ lorde and shalbe all my lif and also I haue bee to my souerign̄ lorde that was you¦re fadir all tymes off his reign̄ true man and for such he toke trust and cherisid me to his lifis ende and as I trust no man wyll affrme the con∣crayne neuer my lif procuryng nor ymaginyng deth nor distrucion off his personne acucyng to any such thyng or like thertoo the tyme yt he  either kyng or prīce or in odues∣e and in lyke I was true mā vn∣to the kyng henry the . all the ty∣me that he was my souereign̄ lorde and reigned vpon me in whiche ma¦teris in al maner of ani wyse that it  to you my souereign̄ lorde too cōmaund me I am redy to declare me and fertlar more where how & when it shall lyke you by the aduise of your counsell to assign̄ me where∣fore I beseche you my souerign̄ lor¦de as humbly as I can considering that there be no groundid processes by the whiche I myght lawfully in the maters aboue sayd bee connyct blessid be god to hold me and declare me bee the aduise of the lordis syn̄∣ll and emper all beyng in this p̄¦sent palement true man to you mi¦souereign̄ lorde and so too haue ben vnto my souerign in lorde that was your fadir and ayell and true man also too haue be vnto his sayd fadir while he was prince or ells in other estate ye sayd slaundir and noysyng not withstonding and this same de∣claracion to be enact in this your {per}̄∣sent parlement. The which wordis declarid in maner as it is abouesayd  said lorde of winchester it semeth too my sayd lordis the arbitrours that it is sitting that my sayd lorde of winche¦ter draw hym aparte and in the me¦ne tyme the lordis beyng present bē singulerly examyned therupō and sayne ther aduise and if it be  bi hem in maner as unsayd lorde of winchester desirith hym callid ayen that my lorde of bedfortd then haue thes wordis in effect that folowe. ¶ Beale vncle milorde by the aduy¦se of his coūsell hath cōmaundid me to say vnto you that he hath well vn¦dirstonde and cōsidred all the mate∣ris whiche ye haue here opynly de∣clared in his presence and therupon ye desire a peticion that he will decla¦re you and by the aduyse and assent of the lordis spn̄all and tempor¦all beyng in thes present parlemēt he declarith you a true mā vnto hȳ and that ye haue so be too my lorde his fadir and ayell and also true mā too my lorde his fadir while he was prince or ellse in od estate the sayd dy¦slaundir
and noysing not withston¦dyng and woll that the sayd declara∣cion be so enact in this present parle∣ment After the whiche wordis thus sayd as before is declared by the sayd lor¦dis arbirrouris. that my sayd lorde of winchester shulde haue thes wor∣dis that folowe to my sayd lorde of glouceter Mylord of glocet I haue conceyued to grete heuynes. that ye shulde ha∣ue receyued bi diuers reportis that I shulde haue purposid & ymagined ayenst your parson honure and esta¦te dyuers maners for the whiche ye haue takȳ ayenst me grete disple¦saunce Sir I take god to my witnes that what reportis soo euer haue be made vnto you of me parauenture of such as haue not had grete affecci¦on to me god foryeneit them I neuir ymagindene purposid thȳg that myght be hyndryng or preindi¦ce to your person honour or estate & for so moche I pray yone that ye be goode lorde vnto me fro thys tyme forth for by my wyll I yaue you ne∣uir other occasion ne purpose not to do heraftir by goddis grace ¶ The whiche wordis so by hȳ said it was decreed by ye sayd arbitrours that my lorde of glonceter shulde an¦suere and say ¶Beale vncle sith ye so declare you suche a man as ye say I am right glad that it is so and forch a man I take you ¶ And when thys was done it was decreed by the sayd arbitrours that eueryche off my lordis of glonceer and of winchester shulde take enth other by the hand in presence of the kyng and all the parlament in sigū and tokyn off good loue and accorde whiche was done.
