938 99836171 426
S. AVGVSTINES MANVEL. Conteining special, and piked meditations, and godlie praiers: Drawne out of the Word of God, and writings of the holie Fa∣thers, for the exercise of the soule. Corrected, translated, and adorned, by THOMAS ROGERS. 1. Thes. 5.17. PRAIE CONTINVALIE. ¶Imprinted at London by Henrie Denham, dwelling in Pater noster rowe, at the signe of the Starre. Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis. 1581.
¶ A Preface vnto the Reader. THis Manuel so liked me, and the wel accepting of other bookes whi∣che I haue publi∣shed to the same purpose, so pricked me forward, that I thought it requisite to set foorth the same in such order as I haue done. The rather I tooke this in hand before anie other in the workes of S. Augustine, because this com∣monlie hath bene annexed in our English tong vnto those of S. Au∣gustine, which alreadie I haue translated; and therefore that, as hetherto they haue ben ioined to∣gether, so hencefoorth they may be, if it so like the owners, I thought good to do this afore anie other. Againe, who so wil dulie compare this with the other, especialie with S. Augustines praiers, shal find this to be euen an abstract in a maner of the rest, containing special and piked meditations in few words,
which in other bookes be more at large. Finalie, had this booke nei∣ther ben ioined, nor yet had such affinitie with the other of S. Augu∣stine alreadie in English: yet, so singularlie diuine are the praiers comprised in the same, that wel I could not publish anie other, be∣fore this were finished. 1 This Booke why called a Manuel.I do cal this booke, as also the author doth, a Manuel, because my wish is, that Christians would vse, and haue it in their hands, not on∣lie when they are at home in their chambers, and studies priuatelie, but also when they are abroade in the fields, gardens, and else-where idlelie: and that not to dandle, and to handle onlie, but diligentlie, and zealouslie, as the part of Chri∣stians is, to reade the same for their spiritual exercise. 2 Author of this Booke, who.Touching the Author, who hee was, I dare not directlie set downe. For in some copies I finde, that S. Augustine made the same, in others it is flatlie denied. Therefore, although it be enti∣tuled S. Augustines Manuel: yet is it in none other sense applied vnto him, than are diuers Psalmes
in the Psalter, entituled Dauid his Psalmes, which happelie Dauid neuer sawe, much lesse endited. Notwithstanding, were S. Augu∣stine the Author of the same, or were he not, it skilleth not great∣lie. For the matter it conteineth, is verie spiritual, godlie, and ne∣cessarie: and wise men either do not respect the Author, or not the Author so much as the matter; nor so much who writeth, as what is set downe. The Argument of this booke is doubtles verie good,3 The Argu∣ment of this Booke. either ho∣lie meditations, or praiers: the one whereof, which is meditation (as Bernard noteth D. Bern. in die S. An∣dreae serm. 1.,) teacheth vs what is wanting, the other, to wit, praier, obteineth that which wee want; Praier bringeth vnto the ende of our iournie, meditation sheweth the waie; to conclude, by meditation wee confesse the dan∣gers hanging ouer our heads, and by praier wee escape them, through the grace of our Lord Iesus Christ, Of these this whole booke doth consist. The occasion of making this treatise was this.4 The occasi∣on why this Booke was made. The Author con∣sidering
the frailtie of al men in general, and especialie his owne weakenes in particular; and see∣king some prop to staie himselfe from falling, found none so sure à staie against the engins of Satan and his limmes, as continual me∣ditation, and praier. And therefore out of the meditations and prai∣ers of the fathers (for so he saith) he gathered this booke, as à pre∣tious iewel alwaie to be carried a∣bout him, both to keepe him from securitie, and to enflame the zeale of godlines within him when he waxed colde. 5 Methode of this Booke.The methode (for that is ano∣ther circumstance to be noted in anie booke) is verie exquisite: for neuer did Goldsmith more cun∣ninglie dispose either pretious stones in à iewel, or linkes in à golden chaine, than are both the meditations in this Manuel, and the sentences in each meditation, and each phraze wel-nigh in eue∣rie sentence. 6 Vse of this Booke.Last of al, how necessarie this, and such like bookes are for this present time, he wil confesse that calleth into remembrance the
great and general corruption of al mankinde; and waieth by what sleightes and subtelties both the Diuel seeketh to deuoure, the flesh to entangle, and the world to drawe vs headlong vnto perdition: which to auoide, we haue none o∣ther remedie, beside earnest, god∣lie, and continual praier. This made both our Sauiour to com∣maund vs to Watch and praie Mark. 13, verse. 33.; and S. Paule to bid vs, Praie conti∣nualie 1. Thes. 5. verse. 17.; and Cyril to breake in∣to these words Cyril, prae∣fat. Catech., Bee thou ydle neither in the daie time, nor in the night; and when sleepe is gone from thine eies, euen then let thy minde bee occupied in praier. He∣therto agreeth that of Hierome Hierome in Epist., When you go abroade, praie; when you returne home, praie; before meate, praie; and before you go to rest, praie. The reason Augustine doth yeeld. For praier is, as à sacrifice vnto God: so à scourge vnto Satan August. in serm.. August. in serm.. Vse therefore that which God delighteth in, but neuer do that which liketh Satan, that is, neglect not praier. One Chapter you shal find in this booke, lesse than is in the Latine
copie: and yet moe by two, than hetherto hath bene in English. The addition, I doubt not, wil like you, but the omission of a Chapter some perhaps wil mislike, which not∣withstanding was done, neither of negligence vnwittinglie, nor hed∣dilie of presumption, but with good aduisement, that thy zeale might not be cooled by the rea∣ding thereof. For it containeth strange, that I saie not erroneous doctrine: as that Vnicuique Manuel cap. 25. propria voluntas est causa suae damnationis vel saluationis; that, Bona voluntas Deum ad nos deducit, & nos in eum dirigit; that, Per bonam voluntatem Deum diligimus, Deum eligimus, ad Deum currimus, ad Deum peruenimus, & e∣um possidemus, &c. which sentences being contrarie vnto the truth, and sauoring of a superstitious time, were better quite omitted, than translated to the infecting of some,Manuel cap. 11. or offence of anie. Againe, another Chapter there is, though not cleane left out, yet applied from an il, vnto a good purpose, as the eleuenth Chapter, where that which was spoken ei∣ther of the sacrifice of the altar, is
applied vnto our Sacrament of thankesgiuing, or of the real and carnal presence of Christ, vnto his spiritual being at the Communi∣on. And these are the things cor∣rected in this booke. To conclude, whatsoeuer is done either in translating, correcting, quoting, or publishing this booke, is al done for thy edification, and to prouoke thee vnto this godlie exercise of praier. For a better meanes thou hast not to keepe thy selfe in the feare of God than it is. Therefore the more zealous, godlie, and learned bookes to this purpose are publi∣shed, the more thou hast to praise God, and be thanke∣ful. The 15. of Iulie, Anno. 1581. Yours in Christ, THO. ROGERS.
The Authors Preface. FOr so much as we are placed among mani∣fold snares, our desire of heauenlie things soone vvaxeth cold, & there∣fore vve do stand con∣tinualie in neede of help, that so often as vve slip aside, vve may, beeing vvakened out of securi∣tie, run backe vnto our God, vvho is the true, and the soueraigne hap∣pines.
Jn cōsideratiō vvher∣of, not of rash presump∣tion, but through the great loue J beare vnto my God, J haue taken in hand this treatise for the aduancement of his glorie, to the ende J might alvvaies haue a∣bout me à short abridge∣ment of such things as concerne my God, colle∣cted out of the most pi∣ked sentēces of the holie fathers, that so often as J vvaxe colde, J might be enflamed againe with
an hote burning desire of him, through the fire vvhich the reading thereof shuld minister. Novv, O my GOD, whom J do seke, whom J do loue, & vvhom both vvith hart, and vvith mouth, and vvith al my strength, J both glorifie and vvorship, assist me. Truelie, my minde consecrated to thy ser∣uice, inflamed vvith thy loue, coueting, sigh∣ing, desiring onlie to set thee, hath none other
delight, but to talke of thee, to heare of thee, to vvright of thee, to con∣fer of thee, to meditate oftentimes of thy fame, and glorious estate, that thy svveete remēbrance may be some refreshing for my soule amidst the raging stormes of this vvretched vvorld. Vnto thee therefore do J cal most earnestlie, vnto thee do J crie a∣lovvd from the bottome of mine hart. And vvhē J cal vnto
thee, J cal vnto thee in my selfe: for vnlesse thou wert within me, J shuld not be at al; and were J not in thee, thou shoul∣dest not be vvithin me. Thou art in mee, be∣cause thou remainest in my memorie, through it J haue knovvne thee, and therein J find thee, vvhen J doe remember thee, and take delight both in thee, & of thee, of vvhome, through vvhom, and in vvhome are al things.
A godlie Booke, con∣teining special, and pi∣ked meditations, and praiers. Chap. 1. Of the wonderful essence, or being which God hath. O Lord, thou fillest heauen and earth Iere. 23, verse. 24.: bearing vp all things Heb. 1, 3., and yet not burthened; filling al things Eccle. 23, verse. 18.19., and yet not inclu∣ded; alwaies working Ioh. 5, 17., and yet euer quiet; gathering, and yet lacking naught Psal. 50, 8.9, &c.; seking Luk. 15, 4.5, &c., and yet wanting naught; Thou louest entirelie Wis. 11, 23. Iohn. 3, 16. Iohn. 13, 1., yet thou burnest not; thou art ge∣lous,Exo. 20, 5.
and yet secure: Thou repentest Ier. 26, 3., and art not greeued; thou art angrie Psal. 79, 5., but neuer impatient; Thou changest thy works Wis. 7, 27., but not thy counsel Mal. 3, 6.: Thou receauest what thou findest, and yet neuer didst lose the same: Thou art neuer needie Psal. 50, 8.9.10, &c., and yet glad when thou gainest; at no time couetous, and yet exactest vsurie: Thou art bountiful, to whom thou owest nought; and ma∣nie are bountiful, to binde thee vnto them: Yet who hath aught which is not thine 1. Cor. 7, verse. 4. Iam. 1, 17.? Thou paiest debts 1. Pet. 2, verse. 24. Isai. 53, 5.6, &c., owing naught; thou forgiuest debts Matth. 18, verse. 23.27, &c. 35. and yet forgoest naught: Thou art euerie-where Iob. 23, 8.9. and euerie-where al whole: Thou maist be vnderstood,
but not seene Ioh. 1, 18. 1. Tim. 6, 16.; and art no where absent Eccles. 23, verse. 18.19., yet far thou art from the cogitations of the wicked Prou. 15, verse. 29.: Yet art thou not absent there, where thou art far off; For where thou art not to shew fauour, thou art to exe∣cute vengeance: Thou art euerie-where pre∣sent Eccl. 23, verse. 18.19.; and yet maist hardlie be founde: Thou standest stil when we followe thee; yet can we not lay hold vpon thee: Thou possessest al things Psa. 50, 8.9, &c.; fillest al things Ier. 23, 24.; enuironest al things Ier. 32, 18.19.; ouerpassest al things Psa. 139, 7.8; and bearest vp al things Heb. 1, 3.. Thou teachest the harts of the faithful Isa. 54, 13. Iohn. 6, 44.45., without noise of words: Thou art neither strough∣ted out by places Eccl. 16, 18 19.; nor chan∣ged
by time Psa. 102, 24.25, &c.; nor hast accesse and recesse: Thou dwellest in the light that none can attaine vnto 1. Tim. 6, verse. 16., whome neuer man saw, nei∣ther can see: Abiding quiet in thy selfe, thou goest euerie-where a∣bout the whole world: For thou canst not be cut, and deuided, because thou trulie art one Deut. 6, 4. 2. Kings. 19, verse. 15.19.; nor yet be brought into partes: but be∣ing whole, thou possessest, fil∣lest, lightenest, and enioiest the whole. Chap. 2. Of God his vnspeakeable knowledge. WEre ye whole world replenished with Bookes: yet could not thine vnspea∣keable knowledge be vttered
foorth. For, because thou art in deede vnutterable, thou canst by no meanes be either written, or concluded. Thou art the fountaine of heauenlie light; & the Sunne of eternal brightnes. Thou art great without quantitie, and therefore vn∣measurable Iob. 23, 8.9. Psal. 139, 7.8.; and good with∣out qualitie, and therefore in deede & soueraignelie good Iam. 1, 17.: yea, to saie the truth, there is none good, but thou alone Mar. 10, verse. 18. Luk. 18, 18.: whose wil is à worke, and whose wil is habilitie: Who, euen because it was thy pleasure, didest make al things, which thou hast crea∣ted of nothing Gen. 1, 1.2. Heb. 1, 1.2.: Who possessest al the crea∣tures Psal. 50, 8.9.10, &c. without anie lacke; and gouernest them Iohn. 5, 17., without paine; and rulest them Matth. 11, verse. 25. Luk. 10, 21. with∣out wearines; for there is no∣thing,
either of things on high, or of things belowe, that can disturbe the order of thy gouernement: Who art in al places with∣out anie place; and containest al things without inclosure; and art present euerie-where Ier. 32, 19. without seate or motion: Who neither art the author of sinne Eccles. 15, verse. 20., which thing onlie thou canst not doo Psal. 11, 5.6.7., who canst doo al things Exod. 6, 3. Gen. 35, 11.; neithe hast thou bin sorie for aught thou hast done: Of whose goodnes we were created Gen. 1, 26.27. Psal. 100, 3. Psal. 119, 73.; of whose iustice we are punished Dan. 9, 4.5.6, &c.; of whose mercie we are saued Gal. 3, 13. 1. Tim. 2, 6. Psal. 103, 1.2.3.4, &c.; Whose almightines doth gouerne, rule, and fil al things Ier. 23, 24., which it hath created: Neither in saieng, thou fil∣lest al things, meane we that they conteine thee; but how
they rather be conteined of thee, neither by partes fillest thou al things, nor yet may it be thought, that euerie thing according to the greatnes of the quantitie it hath, recea∣ueth thee, that is, the greatest thing more, and the smal∣lest thing lesse; thou rather being in al things, or more trulie al things in thee Act. 17, 28.: Whose omnipotencie en∣closeth al things;Psa. 139, 7.8, &c. whose po∣wer none may escape. For whosoeuer hath not thy fauor, can by no meanes auoide thy displeasure Reu. 6, 15.16.17.. Chap. 3. The desire of that soule which hath a feeling of God. FOR thee then I doe cal into my soule, ô most gra∣tious God, which
thou preparest to receaue thee through the desire which thou enspirest into the same. Oh, enter thereinto, I be∣seech thee, ioine it to thy selfe, that both thou maist possesse that which thou hast not onlie made Gen. 1, 26.27. Colos. 3, 10., but also re∣newedRom. 5, 15 16, &c.; & I may enioie the as à seale vpon mine hart. Merciful God, I beseec thee, forsake him not whic calleth vpon thee now: fo before euer I could cal vpon thee, thou didest not cal m onlie Rom. 8, 30, but also seeke me Luk. 15, 4.5, &c., t the end that I thy seruan might seeke thee, & throug seeking finde thee, and bein found, loue thee. I haue sought, and I hau found thee, ô Lord, graun that I may loue thee. Increase my desire, & gra my request: for though tho
giue me al things which thou hast made, yet vnles thou giue thy selfe withal, I thy ser∣uant shal neuer be satisfied. Wherefore bestowe thy selfe vpon me, ô my God, be∣stowe thy selfe vpon me. Lo, I do loue thee; and if too little I loue thee, my desire is to loue yet more entirelie. I loue thee I saie, I long for thee, I am much delighted to thinke vpon thee. Behold, while fro mine hart I do sigh, and cal into my re∣membrance thine vnspeake∣able kindnes, ye burthen of my flesh ye lesse greeueth; trouble∣some cogitations the lesse in∣uade; ye waight of mortalitie, & miseries do not so loade me as they were wont; al things are hush, euerie thing is quiet. Mine hart burneth; my mind is iocund; my memorie fresh;
mine vnderstanding cleere; and al my spirit, enflamed through the desire of thy sight, perceaueth how it is ra∣uished with the loue of things vnseene. Let the same my spirit take the wings as the Eagles Isai. 40, 31., let it flee, and not be wearie; let it flee, and neuer faint, vntil it come vnto the place where thine honor dwelleth Psal. 26, 8., euen vnto the throne of grace▪ there at the table, where ye su∣pernal Citizens do repast, to be fed frō thine eies in green pasture Psal. 23, 2., by the stil waters. Be thou our ioie Reu. 7, 15.16.17., our hope1. Tim. 1, 1. our saluation Hos. 13, 9., & redēptionIsa. 41, 14. Isa. 44, 24.▪ Thou which hereafter wil be our reward, be thou ou comfort. Let my soule euermore sek thee; and graunt that neue it may ceasse to seeke, Amen▪
Chap. 4. The miserable state of that soule which neither loueth our Lord and Sauior Christ, nor seeketh after him. WO to the wretched soule, which neither seeketh, nor loueth Christ: such à soule abideth both drie, & miserable. He looseth his life time, that loueth not thee, ô God. And he that would liue, but not to serue thee, is doubtles nothing, and so to be accounted. He which refuseth to liue to thee, is alredie dead: and he that sauoreth not of heauenlie wise∣dome, is à verie foole 1. Cor. 1, 17.18.19, &c.. O most gratious God into thine hand I do commend, ren∣der, and yeeld my selfe, through whome I both am Gen. 1, 26.27. Psal. 119, 73., liue Act. 17, 28, and haue vnderstanding Iam. 1, 17..
In thee I doe repose mine whole trust, confidence, and hope, through whom I shal rise againe Ioh. 11, 25., liue Iohn. 14, 6, and rest. Thee doe I long for, thee doe I loue, thee doe I worship, with whome I shal euerlastinglie a∣bide, raigne, and be blessed Reu. 21, 4. Reu. 22, 5.. The soule which neither see∣keth, nor loueth thee, is à friend of the worldMat. 6, 24. Luk. 16, 13., the slaue of sinne, subiect to al maner wickednes; neuer quiet, at no time secure. Therefore, merciful Sauior, as for my mind let it attend on thee; my pilgrimage let it be toward thee; and mine hart let it euen burne with the loue of thee. Let my soule rest on thee, my God; let it, I saie, deepelie me∣ditate of thee; let it sing-out thy praises with ioie; & let this be al my comfort in this mine exile. Let the shadowe of thy wings
be à refuge for my soule from the parching heate of worldlie cogitations. Let mine hart, à verie great sea, swelling with waues trust in thee. Thou which aboundest with al good dainties, and art a most li∣beral bestower of supernal sati∣etie, ô God, giue thou food to the wearied; gather the dispersed; deliuer the captiued; amend the parted. Lo, he standeth at the doore, & knocketh: I therfore euen by the bowels of thy mercie, wher∣by thou, the daie spring from on high hath visited vsLuk. 1, 78., besech thee command the doore to be ope∣ned to him which knocketh, that boldlie he may enter-in to thee, and rest in thee, and be refresh∣ed of thee, the heauenlie bread. For thou art the breadIoh. 6, 35.48.50, &c., and the wel of life Iohn. 4, 13 14.; thou art the light of euerlasting cleerenesReu. 21, 23; to con∣clude
thou art al things, whereof the righteous do liue, which loue thee. Chap. 5. A verie Christian desire of the soule after God. O God, thou who art both the light of the harts Iohn. 1, 9. that see thee; and the life of the soules Iohn. 4, 13 14. that loue thee; and the strength of the minds that seeke thee, giue me grace euer∣more to cleaue vnto thine holie loue. O come, I praie thee, into mine hart, and make me drunke with the riuer of thy plea∣suresPsal. 36, 8.. It shameth, and it irketh me at the very hart euen to suffer those things which are done in this wretched world. The verie sight of worldlie va∣nities
is à griefe vnto me; and to heare of these transitorie things it doth troble me much. Helpe me, ô Lord my God, and cause mine hart to reioice in thee; come thou vnto me, that I may behold thee. I am penned in this house of my soule, vntil thou come ther∣into, and make it wider. It is rui∣nous, ô repaire the same! Manie things, I acknowledge and knowe are in it, which may offend thine eies; but alas who can make it cleane; or vnto whom else beside thee should I crie for helpe? Clense me, ô Lord, fro my secret faultes Psal. 19, 12 13.; keepe thy ser∣uant also from presumptuous sinnes. Giue me grace, ô sweet Christ, ô good Iesu, giue me grace, I be∣seech thee, for thy loue & desire sake to laie-off the heauie bur∣den
of carnal desires, and earth∣lie lust . Ioh. 2, 15. Let the soule ouer the flesh; let reason ouer the soule; let thy grace ouer reason beare swaie; and make mee both in bodie and soule euermore to obey thy wil Matt. 6, 10. Grant that both mine hart, and my tongue, and al my strength may extol thy goodnes. Enlarge mine vnderstanding, and lift vp the eies of mine hart, that my spirit with swift cogi∣tation may attaine vnto thee the euerlasting wisedomeHeb. 1, 1.2, &c., abiding aboue al things. Loase me, I beseech thee, from the fetters wherewithal I am fast bound, that leauing al these worldlie things, I may ha∣sten vnto thee, cleaue to thee alone, and thinke onelie vpon thee.
Chap. 6. The happines of that soule which is deliuered out of the earthlie prison of the bodie. O Happie is the soule, which loased from ye earthlie prison Phil. 1, 23., soareth without let vnto heauen; which face to face beholdeth thee 1. Cor. 13, verse. 12. Reue. 22, 4., the most gra∣tious Lord; which is touched with no feare of death at al Reu. 7, 15.16., but triumpheth with an incorrup∣tible crowne of perpetual glo∣rie! O quiet and secure is such à soule; and feareth now neither enimie, nor death Reu. 21, 4.! She enioieth thee her good Lord, whome long she sought, and alwaie loued; Now ioined to the singing quires, she soundeth-out with∣out cessing vnto the praise of thy
glorie, ô Christ, her King, ô sweete Iesu, most melodious Psalmes she singeth of aie la∣sting ioifulnes. For she is satisfied with thy fatnes Psal. 36, 8.; thou doest giue her drinke out of the riuer of thy pleasures. Happie is the felowship of su∣pernal Citizens, and glorious is the solemnitie of such as returne vnto thee from the paineful toile of this pilgrimage Heb. 11, 13. Heb. 13, 14., vnto the wonderful beautie, vnto the sur∣passing glorie, vnto the excel∣lencie of al comelines, where continualie thy Citizens, ô Lord, behold thy face Reu. 22, 4.. There nothing is heard to troble the minde Reu. 21, 4.. What mirth Reu. 5, 8.! what melodie! what singing! what Psalmes be there soong without ceassing! There the pleasant organes do sounde-out most heauenlie
hymnes; the blessed Angels most sweetelie do sing; & songs of rare excellencie are vttered out by the supernal Citizens, vnto the praise and glorie of thy Name. There is neither gal, nor anie bitternes in that blessed regi∣onReu. 21, 4.. For there is no wicked per∣son Reu. 21, verse. 27., nor anie wickednes at al. There is neither enimie to im∣pugne, nor anie enticement to offend. There is no lacke1. Cor. 2, verse. 9., no shame, no contention, no vpbraiding, no blaming, no feare, no vnqui∣etnes, no punishment; doubt∣fulnes, violence, discord there is none. But singular peace, and per∣fect loue, and lasting triumphes, and praising of God, and secure quietnes, which neuer shal haue end, and continual ioie in the holie spirit there is.
Oh, how happie should I be, did I heare those most comfor∣table songs of thy Citizens, and the sugred verses vttering foorth with due reuerence the praises of the sacred Trinitie! But most singularlie blessed should I be, might I also with them sing to my Lord Iesus Christ one of the pleasant songs of Zion Psa. 137, 3. Chap. 7. The blessed ioie of the heauen∣lie Paradise. O Liuelie life! ô euer∣lasting life, and e∣uerlastinglie bles∣sed! whereas ioie is and no sorowe Reu. 7, 16, 17. Reue. 21, 4.; rest is and no labour; honor is and no feare; wealth is and no losse; health is and no sicknes; abundance and no want; life and no death; im∣mortalitie and no corruption;
happines, & no miserie at al is! Whereas al good things are in perfect loue; where sight is face vnto faceReu. 22, 4.; where perfect know∣ledge is in al men 1. Cor. 13, verse. 12.13., & al things are knowne; whereas Gods so∣ueraigne goodnes is perceaued, and the light enlightening, is glorified of the saincts; Where the present maiestie of God is beholden, and the minde of the beholders is filled conti∣nualie with this meate of life: They see continualie, and yet they desire to see; they desire without griefe, and without loa∣thing they be satisfied: Where the true sonne of righ∣teousnes Reue. 21, verse. 23.24. Reue. 22, 5., with the wonderful show of his beautiful beames, doth refresh al beholders, and so inlighteneth al the Citizens of the celestial countrie, that they do giue light, to wit, à light in∣lightened through God, à light
shining more cleerelie, than doth either the Sunne at anie time, or the Starres. They do cleaue vnto the im∣mortal God-head, and thereby they become immortal, and vn∣corruptible, according to the promise of our Lord and Saui∣our Ioh. 17, 24., Father, I wil that they which thou hast giuen me, be with me euen where I am, that they may behold my glorie; that they al may be one,21. as thou, ô Father, art in me, and I in thee, e∣uen that they also may be one in vs. Chap. 8. The glorious condition of the kingdome of Heauen. THE kingdome of heauen, is à most happie kingdome, à kingdome both im∣mortal Reu. 21, 4., and euerlasting Dan. 7, 27..
There no times succeede by a∣ges; neither night followeth af∣ter daie Reu. 21, 4.; There the valiant soldior after battels fought, is adorned abun∣dantlie with vnspeakeable re∣wardes 2. Tim. 4. verse. 7.8.; and crowned ho∣norablie with an euerlasting crowne. Oh that Christ of his diuine goodnes, hauing eased me of the heauie loade of my sinnes, oh that he would bid me, euen the basest of al his seruants, to laie off the burthen of this flesh Phil. 1, 23., that I might to my comfort Reu. 7, 16.17., passe ouer vnto the euerlasting ioies of his citie; be admitted into the felowship of the Saincts aboue Reu. 5, 1.2, &c.; attend vpon the maie∣stie of the Creator, with the bles∣sed Spirits; beholde the coun∣tenance of God 1. Cor, 13, verse. 12.; be neuer touched anie more with feare of death Reu. 21, 4.; but reioice securelie
for the immortalitie attained 1. Cor. 15, verse. 53.54.; and ioined to him which kno∣weth al thinges Eccles. 23, verse. 19.20., might forgo al blind ignorance 1. Cor. 13, verse. 13., and nei∣ther make accompt of earth∣lie things; nor vouchsafe either to behold, or to remember this vale of teares anie more, where∣as the laborsome life Iob. 7, 1., the cor∣ruptible life Psa. 102, 11. Psa. 103, 14.15., the life repleni∣shed with al manner bitternes is Iob. 14, 1., such à life as is the Ladie of euils, the handmaid of Diuels. The which both humors puffe vp, and sorowes plucke downe; heate withereth, and il aërs in∣fect; which both much eating maketh pursie, and much fasting maketh leane; Which by mirth is loosed, and by sadnes consumed; by care is shortned, and by securitie dul∣led; by riches made proud, and by pouertie ouerthrowne; by youth exalted, & by age bowed;
Which is both by sicknes bro∣ken, and by sadnes depressed; which both ye Diuel entrappeth by his snares; and the world de∣ceaueth by flatterie; & the flesh destroieth by filthie pleasure. Whereby the soule is made blinde, and the whole man di∣stempered: And after these so manie, and so great euils, succeedeth raging death, which bringeth vaine de∣lights vnto such an ende, that when they are once gone, they are as quite forgotten, as if they had neuer bin at al! Chap. 9. How God after much troubles doth comfort the pensiue soule. BVT what praises, or what thankes may we render Psa. 116, 12. vnto thy goodnes, ô GOD,
who ceassest not for al this by thy gratious visitation, to com∣fort vs amids so great wret∣chednes of our mortalitie! While I dread much to die; while I consider the multitude of my sinnes; while I do feare thy heauie iudgement; while I cal into minde the houre of death; and am a gast at the hor∣rible paines of hel; while I wot not how preciselie, and how strictlie thou wilt waigh my deedes; and am vtterlie igno∣rant how I shal ende my life; and ponder manie other things in mine hart, lo, of thy woon∣ted goodnes, ô Lord my God, thou art present to comfort me, wretch, replenished with much sorowe, and from these piti∣ous complaintes and crieng, thou carriest my pensiue and troubled vnderstanding ouer steepe hils, vnto the beds of
sweete spices, and makest me to rest in greene pasture Psa. 23, 2., by the riuers of sweete waters, where thou preparest à table diuerslie furnished against my cōming, to refresh my wearied spirites, and to comfort my sorowful hart, and so refreshed with those dainties, I forget at the length my manifold miseries, and exal∣ted ouer the earth, I do rest my selfe in thee which art the true peace Phil. 4, 7.. Chap. 10. A praier for grace to loue God. O Lord my God, I do loue thee; and more and more I desire to loue thee. Giue me grace, ô Lord my God Psal. 7, 1.3., who art fairer than the children of menPsa. 45, 2., giue me grace not onlie to desire thee, but also
to loue thee both as I would, and as I am bound. Thou art vnmeasurable Iob. 23, 8.9. Psal. 139, 7.8., and therefore to be loued without measure, especialie of vs whom thou hast so loued Ioh. 3, 16., so saued 1. Pet. 2, verse. 22., for whose sakes thou hast done such and so great things. O Loue, which burnest alwaie, and neuer goest out, ô sweete Christ, ô good Iesu, ô my God who art loue it selfe 1. Ioh. 4, 8., set mee wholie on fire with thy fire, with the loue of thee, with thy sweet∣nes, with hartie affection to∣ward thee, with a desire of thee, with godlie charitie, with god∣lie ioie, and reioicing; with god∣lie kindnes and sweetenes; with godlie delectation and concu∣piscence, the which is holie and good, and chast and pure, that being throughlie replenished with the sweetenes of thy loue, and altogether purged from the
grosse vapors of earthlie cogita∣tions by the fire of diuine chari∣tie, I may loue thee, most sweet, and most louelie Lord, with al mine hart, with al my soule, with al my strength, and with al my mindDeut. 6, 5. Matt. 22, 37. Luke. 10, 27., and that with much sorrowe of hart, and plentiful teares of the eies, with much feare and trembling Phil. 2, 12., hauing thee in such wise both in mine hart, and in my mouth, that no strange loues may find roome within me. Chap. 11. A praier for grace both du∣lie to thanke God for our redempti∣on; and worthilie to approch vnto the holie Table. O Christ my Sauior, who art of al the fai∣rest Psa. 45, 2., through the shedding of thy pre∣tious blood, wherewithal we be
redeemed 1. Pet. 1, 18.19., I humblie beseech thee, giue me grace vnfainedlie to repent, & hartilie to bewaile my sins, especialie at such times when I offer praiers vnto thee, when I sing-foorth thy praises; when I cal into mind the myste∣rie of our redemption1. Tim. 3, verse. 16., à mani∣fest argument of thy mercie to man ward; when I am at the holie Table, though vnworthie to approch therevnto, desiring to participate of that wonder∣ful, and heauenlie, and reuerend Sacrament, which thou, ô Lord my God, the vnspotted Priest Heb. 7, 26 27. didst institute, and command to be receaued Luk. 22, 19 in remembrance of thy loue, to wit of thy death 1. Cor. 11, verse. 26., and passion for our saluation, and for the strengthening of our dailie weakenes. Let my mind at such myste∣ries bee confirmed with the sweetenes of thy spiritual pre∣sence;
let it behold thee with the eies of faith, and reioice in thy sight. O sweete Christ, ô good Iesu, who art both the fire burning alwaies, and the loue inflamed euermore; the euerlasting and neuer wasting light Reu. 21, 23 24., and the bread of life Ioh. 6, 35.48.51., feeding vs, and yet neuer diminished, and ea∣ten-of dailie, and yet continu∣alie abiding whole; Shine thou vpon me, and set me on fire, inlighten and sancti∣fie me; purge thy vessel from the dregs of malice, fil me of thy grace, and keepe me ful, that I may eate the meate of thy flesh vnto the saluation of my soule, that feeding vpon thee, I may liue of thee, and through thee, I may attaine vnto thee, and rest in thee, Amen.
Chap. 12. A zealous praier for grace to meditate deepelie vpon the goodnes of God. O Sweet loue, & loue∣lie sweetnes, let my stomach digest thee; and with the nectar of thy loue be al my bowels fil∣led; & let mine hart vtter-forth good matter Psal. 45, .. O my God, who art charitie it selfe1. Ioh. 4, 8., the delectable honie, the snowie milke, and the foode of ye strong, make me to growe-vp in thee, that thou with à sound palate maiest be tasted of mee. Thou art my life Ioh. 14, 6. Iohn. 25, 11., whereby I doe liue Act. 17, 28.; the hope wherevnto I trust 1. Tim. 1, 1.; and the glorie, which I desire to attaine Col. 3, 4.. Guide thou mine hart, rule thou my mind, direct mine vn∣derstāding, erect my loue, cheere
vp my soule, and quench thou the thirst of my spirit, which lon∣geth after thee, with thine hea∣uenlie riuers. Let the tumultuous cogitati∣ons of the flesh, hold their peace I beseech thee; let earthlie, and worldlie phantasies be stil; let al dreames, and vaine reuelati∣ons, let euerie tong, euery signe, and what else soeuer doth va∣nish-awaie, be silent. Yea, let mine owne soule also be dumme too; and ouer-passe it selfe, not by thinking on it selfe, but vpon thee, my God: because thou art in deed al mine hope and confidence 1. Tim. 1, 1.. For in thee our most gratious, and kind, & merciful Lord, and God, Iesus Christ, ech of vs hath à portiō both of blood & flesh Eph. 5, 30.. Therefore where à peece of my selfe doth raigne, there I beleeue I doe raigne; where my blood
hath dominion, there I trust I haue dominion; where my flesh is glorified, there I knowe I am glorious. And although I am yet à sin∣ner, yet I doubt no whit of this participation of grace; although my sinnes do hinder me, yet my substance doth require it; and although mine owne offences doe exclude me, yet the com∣munion of nature doth not re∣pel me. Chap. 13. A thankes-giuing vnto God for the incarnation of his deere Sonne to saue man. FOr the Lord is not so vnkinde, that he can hate his owne flesh Eph. 5, 29., his owne members, his owne bowels. Surelie I might vtterlie des∣paire, in respect of mine outra∣gious
offences, and infinite sins, which I both haue committed, and dailie doe commit both in hart, word, and deede, and by al meanes whereby the frailtie of man may transgresse, had not thy word, ô my God, bin made flesh Iohn. 1, 14., and dwelled among vs. But now I dare not despaire, because he hauing showen him selfe obedient to thee vnto the death, euen the death of the crosse Phil. 2, 8., hath taken awaie Col. 2, 14. the hand-writing of our sinnes, and fastening it vpon the crosse, hath crucified both sinne and death. In him therefore who sitteth at thy right hand, and maketh request also for vs Rom. 8, 34, I take hart againe. Through mine hope 1. Tim. 1, 1., in whom we are quickened Eph. 2, 5.6., and raised, and sit together in the heauen∣lie places, I desire to come vnto
thee. To thee bee praise Reu. 19, 1., to thee glorie, to thee honor, to thee thanks, Amen. Chap. 14. The more God is thought-vp∣on, the more louelie he seemeth. O Most gratious Lord, who hast so louedIohn. 3, 16, and saued vs 1. Pet. 1, 18.19.; so quickened Eph. 2, 5., and glorified vs Rom. 8, verse. 30.; ô most gratious Lord, how sweet is thy remem∣brance! The more I thinke on thee, the sweeter thou seemest, and the more amiable in mine eies! Therefore thy good things do much delight me; and vnces∣santlie doe I couet, with a pure sight of the hart Matt. 5, 8., and with the sweet affection of godlie loue, as far-foorth as I am able in the
place of my pilgrimage, and so long as I carie these fraile mem∣bers about me, to desire, and to thinke-vpon thy woonderful loue, and beautie. For I am wounded with the dart of thy loue; I do burne ex∣ceedinglie with desire of thee; I couet long to be with thee Phil. 1, 23.; to behold thee, is al my desire. And therefore I wil stand-vp∣on my gard, and with watchful eies I wil sing with the spirit 1. Cor. 14. verse. 25., and I wil sing with the vnder∣standing also, and with al my strength too. I wil praise thee my maker Iob. 10, 8. Psal. 100, 3., & renewer; I wil perce the hea∣uens with mine hart, and in de∣sire I wil be with thee, so as my bodie onlie shal be in this mise∣rable world, but in thought, and in mind, and in desire Col. 3, 1.2. I wil be where thou art; and where thou my rich Matth. 13, verse. 44.45., and incomparable,
and much desired treasure art, there shal mine hart be also Matt. 6, 21. Luke. 12, 34.. But lo, ô most gratious and merciful God, mine hart is not able to consider the glorie of thine infinite goodnes, and mer∣cie. For thine honor, thy beau∣tie, thy strength, thy glorie, ma∣gnificence, maiestie, and loue, exceede al sense Phil. 4, 7. of mans vn∣derstanding; euen as the curte∣sie of thine eternal loue, wherby thou giuest to such the adoption of sonnes Rom. 8, 15 Galat. 4, 5.6., and ioinest them to thy selfe, whom thou hast crea∣tedGen. 1, 26.27., is inestimable. Chap. 15. How the trobles in this world are nothing answerable to the ioies in heauen. O My soule, were wee euerie daie to en∣dure torments; and to suffer the paines
of hel à long space, if we would behold Christ in his glorie, and be ioined to his saints; were it not meete that we suffered al kind of aduersitie Rom. 8, 18, to attaine vnto the participation of such felicitie, and of so great glorie! Let the diuels then lie in wait, and prepare their tentations; let fastings breake the bodie; let hard apparel bring-downe the flesh; let labors grieue; watch∣ings drie-vp; let this man crie out vpon me; let him or them disquiet me; let cold benum; the conscience murmur; heate parch me; Let mine head ake, my breast burne, my stomach swel, my countenance become pale, let euerie part of me be weakened. Let my life waste in heaui∣nesPsal. 31, 10., and my yeeres with mour∣ning; Let rottennes enter-into my
bones Hab. 3, 16., and let me tremble in my selfe, so I may rest in the day of troble, and ascend-vp vnto the saints of God. For how singular shal the glo∣rie of the righteous be 1. Cor. 2, 9! how great the ioie of al the sancts, when each of their faces shal shine as the Sunne Matth. 13, verse. 43.! when the Lord shal begin to sort his peo∣ple into sundrie degrees in the kingdome of his Father; and ac∣cording to each mans deserts and works Rom. 2, 6. Reu. 22, 12., as he hath promi∣sed, render his rewards, euen ce∣lestial for earthlie Matth. 25, verse. 34.35, &c., eternal for transitorie, and great things for verie trifles! Doubtles there shal be store of happines, when the Lord shal bring his sancts to the contem∣plation of his fathers glorie 1. Cor. 13, verse. 12. Reu. 22, 4., and make them to sit together in heauenlie places Eph. 2, 6., that God may be al in al 1. Cor. 15. verse. 28..
Chap. 16. Of the kingdome of hea∣uen, and how it may be attained. O Happie ioifulnes, & ioiful happines, to see the Sancts, to be with the Sancts, to be à Sanct; to beholde God 1. Cor. 13, verse. 12., and to enioie God from euerla∣sting, to euerlasting! Heerevpon let vs earnestlie muse; these things let vs harte∣lie desire, the sooner to come vnto their happie state. Askest thou how this may be done; or by what merits or meanes? Listen ô man. This matter consisteth in the power of the worker, for the kingdome of God suffereth violence Matth. 11, verse. 12.. The kingdome of Heauen ô man, asketh none other price, but thy selfe; it is worth so much
as thou art thy selfe. Giue thy selfe, and thou shalt haue that. What art thou troubled about the price? Christ hath giuen himselfe 1. Pet. 1, verse. 18.19., that he might pur∣chase thee à kingdome to God euen the Father 1. Cor. 15, verse. 24.. So giue thou thy selfe, that thou maist be his kingdome, and let not sinne raigne in thy mortal bodie Rom. 6, verse. 12., but the spirit to the at∣tainement of life. Chap. 17. VVhat Paradise is: and the ioies thereof. NOw my soule, re∣turne we vnto the celestiall Citie, wherein wee be written Reue. 20. verse. 12., and of which we be members. For as Citizens with ye SaintsEph. 2, 19., and of the houshold of God; and as the heires of God Rom. 8, 17, and
heires annexed with Christ, let vs cal into minde, as we are able, ye happie state of our Citie. Saie we therefore with the Pro∣phet, Glorious things are spo∣ken of thee Psa. 87, 3., ô Citie of God; they which dwel in thee are like such as sing. It is faire in situa∣tion, euen the ioie of the whole earth Psal. 48, 2.. There is neither age, nor the miserie of age in thee; in thee there is no maimed, nor lame, nor crooked, nor deformed per∣son; for al do meete together vnto à perfect man Eph. 4, 13., and vnto the measure of the age of the ful∣nes of Christ. Then what happier thing can there be than this life, where neither pouertie is to be feared, nor sicknes Reu. 21, 4 to weaken! where no hurt is done, and no man wil either be angrie, or enuious! Where there is no burning
concupiscence; no desire of meate; no suing for honor and preferment! Where we shal be out of al feare of the Diuel; of his traps; and of damnation! Where neither bodie, nor soule shal die Reu. 21, 4.; and à ioiful and im∣mortal life is! Where no euils at al, nor dis∣cord shalbe; but al things wel, al things at quiet: because the harts of al the Sancts shal wish and wil one thing! Where peace and mirth do possesse al; al things are as they should be, and at à good staie. Where continual light shal be; not such à light as we now enioie, but so much cleerer, as it is more blessed! For that Citie, as we reade, hath no neede of the Sunne, neither of the Moone to shine in it Reu. 21, 23.; for the glorie of God shal inighten it, and the
Lambe is the light of it. Where the Sancts shal shine as the Starres for euer & euer Dan. 12, 3.; and they that turne manie vnto righteousnes, as the brightnes of the firmament! So that no night shal be there Reuel. 21. verse. 25., no darkenes there; no gathering together of cloudes there; no complaining there either of parching heate, or of nipping colde: But such à temperature of al things there shal be, as eie hath not seene 1. Cor. 2. verse. 9. Esai. 64.4., neither eare hath heard, nor at anie time hath come into the hart of anie man, they onlie excepted, who are founde worthie to enioie that happines, whose names be writ∣ten in the booke of life Reuel. 21, verse. 27.. Notwithstanding, à greater happines than al this is, to be ioined to the quires of Angels, and of Archangels, and of al the
celestial powers; to behold the Patriarches, and the Prophets; to see the Apostles of Christ, and al the Saints, and our pa∣rents also. This is à great glorie: but the greatest of al is, to beholde God himselfe face to face1. Cor. 13, verse. 12. Reue. 22, 4.; to see the incomprehensible light. The superexcellent glorie shal be, when we see God in him∣selfe, and when we shal both see, and enioie him in our selues too, of which sight there shal be none ende. Chap. 18. That we can not please God, but through loue. THE soule, being goodlie through the image of God Gen. 1, 26.27. Colos 3, 20., and glorious thorough his likenes, hath in it of God, whereby it may be warned al∣waies
either to stand with him, or to returne vnto him, if she be moued with hir affections, or defections rather. And hath not onlie whence to take hart againe, through hope of pardon, and mercie, but also whence boldlie to aspire vnto the marriage of the word Matth. 22. verse. 2.3, &c., and to enter into the couenant of felowship with God, and to beare the pleasant yoke of ami∣tie with the king of Angels. Al this worketh loue, if the soule shew hir selfe like to God in wil, as she is to him by na∣ture, louing as she is beloued Ioh. 3, 16.. For of al the motions, senses, and affections of the minde, loue onlie it is, whereby man may, though not fullie satisfie the loue of God, yet answere in à sort his good wil. When loue once commeth, it draweth vnto it, and captiueth
al other affections. Loue suffi∣ceth of it selfe; pleaseth of it selfe, and for it selfe. Loue is the merit, the reward, the cause, the fruit, the vse. For by loue we are conioined to God 1. Cor. 13, verse. 1.2, &c.. Loue maketh one spirit of two. Loue maketh to wil, and to nil one thing. Loue maketh first to frame our manners; af∣terward to consider things that are, as though they were not; and thirdlie with a pure sight of the hart Matth. 5, verse. 8., to behold heauenlie, and spiritual things. Through loue, first honest things are wel handled in the world; secondlie, honest things of the world are despised Phil. 3, 8., and last of al, the secrets of God are seene and beholden 1. Cor. 13, verse. 13..
Chap. 19. How God requireth some thing of vs like to him∣selfe. GOD the Father is charitie 1. Ioh. 4, 8., God the Sonne is louingnes, God ye holie Ghost is the loue of the Father, and of the Sonne. This charitie, and this loue re∣quireth à like thing in vs, euen loue againe, whereby we may be linked, and ioined to God, as it were by some alliance of kin∣dred. Loue is ignorant what digni∣tie meaneth, knoweth no reue∣rence. He that loueth, approcheth boldlie vnto God, and speaketh familiarlie to him without feare, and stopping. He that loueth not, liueth not:
but he that loueth, looketh euer∣more vpon God whome he lo∣ueth, whome he desireth, vpon whome he thinketh, in whome he delighteth, vpon whome he feedeth, in whome he groweth. A man so deuoute, doth euer∣more so sing, and so reade, and so circumspectlie, and warelie behaue himselfe in al his acti∣ons, as if God were, as in deede he is Eccle. 23, verse. 19.20., alwaie present before his eies. He so praieth, as if he were taken-vp and presented before the face of God in his maiesti∣cal throne, whereas thousand thousands minister to him Dan. 7, 10., and ten thousand thousands stand before him. The soule which he visiteth with loue, awakeneth him that sleepeth; it monisheth, and mol∣lifieth the soule, and woundeth his hart.
It inlighteneth darke things; it vnlocketh things shut-vp; it inflameth colde things; it miti∣gateth the froward, angrie, and impatient minde. It chaseth awaie vices; bride∣leth carnal affections; amen∣deth maners; reformeth and re∣nueth the minde; and restrai∣neth the light motions, and a∣ctions of slipperie youth. Al these things loue worketh when it is present; but when it is wanting, the soule beginneth to droope, euen as à boiling caudron doth when fire is taken from vnder the same. Chap. 20. Of the boldnes of the soule that loueth God. LOue doubtles is à great thing, by it the soule of hir-selfe, doth boldlie aproch
vnto God, and cleaueth con∣stantlie vnto him. The soule that loueth, asketh questions of God familiarlie, and consulteth with him in al matters. She can thinke of nothing, and speake of nothing beside God, al other things she loa∣theth, and contemneth Matth. 6, verse. 24.. Whatsoeuer she mindeth, and whatsoeuer she speaketh, it sa∣uoreth of loue, and smelleth of loue, so wholie hath the loue of God won her vnto him. He that would haue the know∣ledge of God, let him loue. In vaine doth he giue himselfe either to reade, or to studie, or to preach, or to praie, that loueth not 8. Cor. 1, 2, &c.. The loue of God engendreth the loue of the soule, and maketh her to harken vnto it selfe. God loueth, because he would
be loued againe. When he lo∣ueth, he would be loued, know∣ing that through loue they are blessed which loue him. The louing soule renounceth al her owne affections, and wholie giueth her selfe to loue, that in rendering loue for loue, she may answere the loue she hath found: and when she hath loued what she can, yet what is it vnto the euerlasting streame of that heauenlie fountaine! For loue and the louer, the soule and God, the Creator and the creature meete not alike to∣gether: yet if man with al his hart wholie doth loue thee, ô GOD, there lacketh nothing where al is. Let not the soule then feare which loueth; but let the soule shake and tremble that loueth not. The louing soule is caried with
desire, and drawne with long∣ing; she dissembleth her deserts; shutteth her eies from the ma∣iestie of God; openeth them to pleasure; reposing her trust in thy saluation, and confidentlie reioicing therein. Through loue the soule with∣draweth herselfe, and departeth from the bodilie senses, to the end that feeling God, she may haue no feeling of her selfe. Which falleth-out when the mind allured by an vnspeakea∣ble sweetenes of God stealeth awaie from her selfe, yea is ra∣uished and slippeth-awaie, the better to enioie God at her ful pleasure. And this pleasure sur∣passeth al pleasure, where it is of continuance. Of loue springeth familiaritie, of familiaritie boldnes, of bold∣nes taste, of tasting hunger. The soule which the loue of
God hath touched can thinke none other thing, and desire no∣thing else, but with often sighes saith, As the Hart braieth for the riuers of water Psal. 42, 1.: so panteth my soule after thee, ô God. Chap. 21. The singular loue of God to man ward. THrough loue GOD himselfe came vn∣to men Iohn. 3, 16, came in∣to men, was made man Iohn. 1, 14.. Through loue the inuisible God became like vnto his ser∣uants Phil. 2, 7. Mat. 20, 28.. Through loue he was wounded for our transgressi∣ons Esai. 53, 5. 1. Pet. 2, 24.. In those wounds of our Saui∣or, sure and safe rest is for weak∣lings and sinners. There I dwel without care, his bowels of mer∣cie are laid open to my sight
through his wounds. Whatsoeuer I lack of my selfe, that I doe boldlie take out of the bowels of my Lord: For his mercies abound, and there want none holes for them to issue out by. Through the holes of the bo∣die, I behold the secrets of the hart; I see the great mysterie of godlines 1. Tim. 3, verse. 16.; and the bowels of the mercie of our GodLuk. 1, 78., where∣by the daie spring from an high hath visited vs, are open to mine eies. The wounds of Iesu Christ are ful of mercie, ful of clemencie, ful of sweetnes, and loue. They boared his hands, and his feete Luke. 24, verse. 39.40. Iohn. 20, 25, and pierced his side with à speare Ioh. 19, 34. By these holes I may taste, how gratious the Lord is Psal. 34, 8.; for doubt∣les the Lord is good and merci∣ful Psal. 86, 5., and of great kindnes to a
which cal vpon him in truth Psa. 145, 8, to al yea which cal vpon him Esai. 55, 6, but especialie to such as loue him Ezo. 20, 6.. Great redemption is giuen vs through the wounds of our Sa∣uior Christ 1. Pet. 1, 18.19. 1. Pet. 2, 24., great goodnes, much grace, and al virtues per∣fectlie. Chap. 22. The refuge of à Christian in the time of tentation. WHen I am tempted with anie filthie co∣gitation, I runne forthwith vnto the wounds of Christ; when my flesh subdueth me, I rise-againe through the recordation of my Lord his wounds; when the di∣uel laieth snares to entrap me, I doe flie vnto the tender mer∣cie of my Lord, and he leaueth me.
If burning lust doe inflame me, it is quenched through the calling of the wounds of our Lord Col. 1, 2.3., the Sonne of God Mat. 16, 16 Luke. 1, 35. into mind. In al extremities I can find none so good à remedie, as the wounds of Christ. In them I sleepe securelie, and rest without feare. Christ hath died for vs Rom. 5, 6.7.8. Rom. 14, 15. 1. Cor. 15, 3.. Nothing is so bitter vnto the death, but may by the death of my Lord be holpen. His death is my merit; my re∣fuge, saluation, life and resurre∣ction Ioh. 11, 25.. The Lords mercie, is my merit. I can not lacke merits, so long as the Lord of mercies is with me. And if great is the Lords merciesPsal. 86, 5.15. Psa. 119, 156, doubtles great are my merits. The more able he is to saue, the lesse care doe I take.
Chap. 23. Special medicines against sinne, and despaire. GReatlie haue I sin∣ned, ô Lord, and my conscience accuseth me of manifold of∣fences; yet doe I not despaire. For where sin abounded Rom. 5, 20 grace abounded much more. He that in consideration of his hainous wickednes doth des∣paire, denieth God to be à mer∣ciful God. He greatlie defaceth the glorie of God, which doubteth of his mercie; and as much as in him is, denieth God to haue loue Iohn. 3, 16 1. Iohn. 4, 8., truth Psa. 86, 15. Rom. 3, 4., & power in him Gen. 35, 11 Reuel. 4, 8., where∣in al mine hope consisteth (to wit in the loue of his adoption Rom. 8, 15 16, &c., in the truth of his promise Rom. 4, 16. Gal. 4, 28., & in the power of his redemption 1. Pet. 1, 18.19..) Then let my foolish cogitati∣on
murmur as much as it wil, saieng, who art thou; how great is that glorie; & by what merits hopest thou to obteine ye same? And I wil boldlie make this an∣swere: I knowe whome I giue credit vnto; for of his tender loue he hath adopted me for his Sonne Gal. 4, 28.: who is both of his pro∣mise true Iohn. 3, 33, and also mightie in performance, and he may doe what he wil Ecc. 46, 6. 2. Cor. 6, 18.. The multitude of my sinnes can not dismaie me, if the death of Christ come into my mind: for my sinnes are not able to o∣uermatch his mercie. The nailes, and the speare doe crie vnto me, that I am reconci∣led to Christ, if I loue him har∣tilie. Longinus with his speare hath opened to me ye side of Christ Ioh. 19, 34., and I am gone-in, and rest there quietlie.
He that feareth, let him loue. For perfect loue casteth-out feare 1. Ioh. 4, 18. There is no such remedie a∣gainst the heate of lust, as the death of my redeemer. He stretched-out his armes vpon the crosse, and held-out his hands Matt. 27, verse. 35. Gal. 3, 13., to show how he is readie to embrace the penitent sinners. Betweene those armes of my Sauior, I both wish to liue, and desire to die. There I wil sing without care: I wil magnifie thee, ô Lord, for thou hast exal∣ted mePsal. 30, 1., and hast not made my foes to reioice ouer me. Our Sauior bowed his headIoh. 19, 30, and gaue vp the ghost, euen to kisse his beloued. And so often doe we kisse God, as we are pricked at the hart with the loue of him.
Chap. 24. A zealous meditation to mooue vnto the loue of God. O MY Soule, thou which art endued with the image of GOD Gen. 1, 26.27. Col. 3, 10., redeemed with the blood of Christ 1. Pet. 1, 18.19., be∣trothed through faith 2. Cor. 11, 2, endued with the Spirit Rom. 8, 9.15., adorned with virtues, and counted with the Angels Luke. 20, verse. 36.: Loue thou him, who hath so loued thee; care thou for him, who hath a care of thee 1. Pet. 5, 7.; seeke thou him, who seeketh thee. Loue thy louer, of whom thou art loued 1. Ioh. 4, 7.8, &c.; who in louing hath preuented thee 1. Ioh. 4, 19; who is the cause of thy loueIam. 1, 17.. He is the me∣rit; he the reward, he the fruite, the vse, and the end. Be thou careful with the care∣ful;
be thou at leisure, with him that hath leisure; cleane with the cleane; and holie with the holie. As thou offerest thy selfe in the presence of God, so wil he appeare in thy sight. A good, and merciful God, of great kindnes Psal. 86, 5., requireth such as are good, and merciful, and louing, and humble, and kind. Loue thou him who hath brought thee out of the horrible pit Psal. 40, 2., out of the mirie claie. Choose him for thy friend be∣fore al friends; who when al things shal faile, wil keepe his faith Ioh. 13, 1.. In the daie of thy burial, when al thy friends wil depart from thee, he wil not forsake thee Psa. 37, 28 Psal. 27, 10.; but protect thee from the roa∣ring of them that be readie to deuoure Eccl. 51, 3., and conduct thee through an vnknowen contrie,
and bring thee vnto the streetes of supernal Zion, & there place thee with the Angels before the face of his maiestieReu. 22, 4., where thou shalt heare that angelical mu∣sicke, Holie, Holie, HolieEsai. 6, 3.. There is the song of mirth Reu. 5, 9. Reu. 14, 3., the voice of ioie and welfare, and thankes-giuing, and prai∣sing, and Halleluiah for euer and euer. There is perfect felicitie, ex∣cellent glorie, surpassing ioie, and al good things 1. Cor. 2, 9.. O my soule sigh hartilie, and earnestlie desire to attaine vnto that supernal citie, whereof such glorious things are spoken Psal. 87, 3.: in which who so dwel are al euen like such as triumph with ioie. Through loue thou maiest as∣cend. To the louer nothing is hard, nothing vnpossible. The soule that loueth doth of∣ten-times ascend, and boldlie
runneth about the streetes of ce∣lestial Hierusalem, visiting the Patriarches and Prophets; salu∣ting the Apostles, wondering at the armies of Martyrs, and Con∣fessors; and beholding ye flockes of virgins. Heauen & earth, and al things in them contained, do cal vpon me continuallie to loue my Lord God. Chap. 25. Of true knowledge, what it is. WHat is the know∣ledge of the truth? It is first to knowe thy selfe, and that thou both studie to be such as thou oughtest to be; and also amend that which is to be reformed. Se∣condlie, it is to knowe, and to loue thy maker; for this is al mans happines Ioh. 17, 3..
Consider therefore how vn∣speakeable the loue of God is to manward. He created vs of no∣thing Gen. 1, 26.27. Iob. 10, 8. Psa. 119, 73.; and whatsoeuer wee haue, he gaue the same 1. Cor. 4, verse. 7. Iam. 1, 17.. But forsomuch as we loued the gift more than the giuer; the creature than the creator Gen. 3, 6.7, &c., we fel into the snare of Satan, and became his bond-slaues Rom. 6, 16.17.. Neuerthelesse, God of his great loue, sent his owne Sonne Ioh. 3, 16.17., to redeeme seruants Rom. 8, 3.; and sent al∣so the holie Ghost, whereby he made seruants his sonnes by a∣doption Gal. 4, 6.. He gaue his Sonne for a ran∣some 1. Pet. 1, 18.19. Gal. 4, 4.5.; the holie Ghost for a pledge of his loue 2. Cor. 1, verse. 22. Ephe. 1, 13.14.; and reser∣ueth himselfe wholie for the in∣heritance of adoption Rom. 8, 17.. And thus God, as he is verie gratious and merciful Psa. 86, 5., of his good wil and loue to mankind∣ward, bestoweth not his goodes
onlie, but himselfe also to re∣deeme man, and that not so much for his owne sake, as for mans behoofe. That men might be borne of God, God first was borne of man Ioh. 1, 14.. Now what hart is so flintie, but wil be softened by this loue of God, so preuenting man 1. Iohn. 4, verse. 19.! O vehement loue, that God for mans cause can vouchsafe to become man Matt. 1, 21.! Who can hate man, whose nature and likenes he beholdeth in the humanitie of God? Doubtles, who so loueth not man, hateth God; and so abi∣deth in death 1. Iohn. 3, verse. 14.. For God became man for mans sake Luk. 1, 31.69., that he might be a redeemer 1. Pet. 1, 18.19., as he was before a creator Iohn. 1, 1.3. Heb. 1, 3.; and that man not on∣lie might be ransomed through his riches, but also loue him the
more entirelie. God appeared in the simili∣tude of sinful flesh Rom. 8, 3., that each sense of man might be made blessed in him, and as wel the eie of the hart be renewed in his diuinitie, as the eie of the bodie in his humanitie, that whether it go in, or out, mans nature which he hath created Gen. 1, 26.27., might in it finde comfort and refresh∣ment. Chap. 26. VVhat the sending of the holie Spirit worketh in vs. FOR our Sauiour came into ye worldLuke. 2, 11. and was crucified, and put vnto death for our sakes Rom. 5, 6.8., that he might through his death Heb. 2, 14., destroie him that had the power of death, that is the Diuel.
And seeing the grapes of his flesh were carried vnto ye wine-presse of the crosse, and the plea∣sant wine of his diuinitie began to spout-foorth; the holie Spirit was sent to make readie mens harts, that new wine might be put into new vesselsMatt. 9, 17., and to see first that they were cleane, least otherwise they marred yt which should be powred-in; and then that they were wel hooped that they leaked not: I meane that they were clensed from the de∣light of wickednes; and hooped to keepe-out the delight of va∣nitie. For that which is good could not enter, til that which il is were gone. The delight in wickednes pol∣luteth; and the delight in vani∣tie sheddeth. The delight in wickednes makes the vessel to stincke; and
the delight in vanitie maketh it ful of clefts. Men delight in wickednes, when they loue sinne; and they delight in vanitie, when they loue transitorie things. Then cast awaie that which is euil, that you may taste that which good is. Powre-out bit∣ternes, that you may be reple∣nished with sweetenes. The holie Ghost is ioie, and loue, then cast out the spirit of the Diuel, and the spirit of this world, that you may be capable of the holie Ghost. The spirit of the Diuel wor∣keth the delight of iniquitie; and the spirit of the world, the delight of vanitie. And these de∣lightes are euil, because the one is a sinne of it selfe, and the o∣ther is an occasion of sinne. But when these euil spirits are throwne-out, the spirit of God
wil come, and enter into the ta∣bernacle of the heart, and worke à good delight there Rom. 14, verse. 17., euen à good loue, which shal expel the loue both of the world, and of wickednes. The loue of the world allu∣reth, and deceaueth 1. Iohn. 2, verse. 15.16.17.; the loue of sinne defileth, and bringeth vn∣to destruction Rom. 6, verse. 23.: but the loue of God inlighteneth the mind Rom. 5, 5., clenseth the conscience 1. Cor. 13, 1.2, &c., reioi∣ceth the heart Gal. 5, 22., and bringeth into the sight of God 1. Cor. 13, verse. 12.. Chap. 27. The effects of true loue. HE that loueth God vnfainedlie, doth e∣uermore thinke it long vntil he come vnto God Phil. 1, 23., vntil he leaue the world, vntil he be free from the corruption of the flesh Rom. 7, verse. 24.; his
heart and affection are set on things aboue Col. 3, 2., that he may finde the true peace Phil. 4, 7. Reu. 21, 4.. Whether he sitteth, or wal∣keth, or resteth, or whatsoeuer he doth, his heart is with God 1. Cor. 10, verse. 31.. He exhorteth al men to loue God; he commendeth the loue of God to al men, and both in hart, in word, and by his con∣uersation he sheweth, both how sweete the loue of God is, and how euil and sower the loue of the world. He derideth the glorie, and re∣proueth the care of this world, and sheweth what a foolish thing it is to put anie confidence in transitorie things 1. Ioh. 2, 15.16.17.. He wondereth at the blind∣nes of men, that they can loue; he wondereth also that euerie man wil not forsake these tran∣sitorie and fleeting things of this world 1. Cor. 7, verse. 31..
He thinketh that what he sauo∣reth, should seeme sweete to al men; what he loueth, should like euerie man; and what he knoweth, euerie man should vnderstand. Much and oftentimes doth he mufe vpon God, and is sweete∣lie refreshed through such hea∣uenlie contemplation; and the oftner he doth so, the greater is his ioie. For verie comfortable is it al∣waie euen to thinke vpon that, which to loue and to commend, is so delightful to the minde. Chap. 28. VVhat the true quietnes of the minde is. DOubtles the heart is then at rest, when through desire it is wholie fixed vpon the loue of God; and desireth
nothing else, but with a certaine blessed sweetenes is much de∣lighted in that which it hath; and in delighting is made io∣cund. And if anie time either by à vaine cogitation, or through worldlie busines, it be some∣what drawne awaie there-from, it hasteneth to returne thether with al speede, deeming it a ba∣nishment to be anie-where be∣side. For, as euerie moment, man may either enioie, or vse the goodnes of God: so euerie mo∣ment is man to thinke vpon God. And therefore his offence is not small, who in praieng is carried suddenlie awaie from his sight, as though he did nei∣ther heare, nor beholde. Which is then done, when man followeth his euil, and vnbride∣led
affections; and, wherevnto the sight of the minde is easilie carried, preferreth some vile creature before God, by mu∣sing, & thinking therevpon, oft∣ner than vpon God, who dailie is to be thought-vpon as à crea∣tor Iob. 10, 8. Psal. 119, 73.; to be worshipped, as à re∣deemer Gal. 3, 13. Gal. 4, 4.5.; to be expected, as à sauiour Phil. 3, 20.21.; and to be feared, as à iudge Acts. 10, verse. 42. 2. Tim. 4, 1.8.. Chap. 29. That whatsoeuer withdraweth the sight of the minde from God, is altogether to be shunned, and abhorred. WHosoeuer thou art that louest ye world, looke afore-hande, whether thou must go. The waie which thou takest, is the worst waie, and verie dan∣gerous Matth. 7, verse. 13.. Wherefore, ô man, auoide by
little & little thy worldlie busi∣nes; & withdraw thy self awhile from troublesome cogitations. Cast awaie heauie cares, laie aside greeuous distractions of the mind; finde some leisure to serue God, and rest thy selfe somewhat in him. Enter into the chamber of thy minde Matth. 6, verse. 6.; exclude al things saue God, and what makes to the seeking of him; and the dore being shut, seeke him. And with thine whole heart saie vnto God, I seeke thy face, ô Lord, I seeke euen thy face. Oh then, ô Lord my God Psal. 7, 1.3., giue thou mine heart instructi∣ons, both where & how to seeke thee; both where and how to finde thee. O Lord, if heere thou art not, where shal I seke thee absent? but if thou art euerie-where Eccle. 23, verse. 18.19.20. Iere. 23, 24., then why do I not see thee present?
But vndoubtedlie thou dwel∣lest in the light that none can at∣taine vnto 1. Tim. 6, verse. 16.. But how may I come vnto the light that cannot be attained? Or who shal guide, and conduct me thereinto, that therein I may behold thee? Furthermore by what tokens, and with what face may I seeke thee? O Lord my God, I neuer sawe thee Ioh. 1, 18. 1. Iohn. 4, 12.; I knowe not thy counte∣nance. Then what shal he doe, ô Lord most hie Luk. 2, 14., what shal this thy far exiled seruāt do Heb. 11, 13.? what shal thy seruant doe, who is in perplexi∣tie through the loue of thee; and cast-awaie far fro thy presence? Lo, he longeth greatlie to be∣hold thee; yet thy countenance is far from his sight. He desireth to come vnto thee; yet vnto thy dwelling no man can attaine 1. Tim. 6, verse. 16.. He coueteth to find thee; yet he
wotteth not where. He loueth to seeke thee; yet he knoweth not thy face. Chap. 30. How through sinne man both lost the sight of God, and found wretchednes. O Lord, thou art my GodPsal. 7, 1.3., & my LordMat. 4, 10., yet did I neuer see thee Iohn. 1, 18.: thou hast both made me Psa. 100, 3. Psa. 119, 73., yea and made me againe Gal. 4, 4., and bestowed vp∣on me what good things soeuer I enioie 1. Cor. 4, 7., yet hitherto haue I neither seene, nor knowen thee. To be short, I am made to see, yet hitherto haue not I attained the thing, that I was made for. O miserable condition of man, seeing he hath so vndiscreetlie forgone that, for which he was created! ô heauie, and ô hard chance!
Alas, alas what hath he forgon, and what hath he found? what is lost, and what hath remained? He hath forgon happines, for which he was made; and he hath found miserieGen. 3, 16.17, &c., for which he was not made. He hath lost that, without which nothing is hap∣pie; and that remaineth which of it selfe is meerelie miserable. Man did then eate euen the Angels meate, which now he desireth; and now he feedeth vpon the bread of sorowe, which then he knewe not. O Lord, how long wilt thou forget, for euerPsal. 13, 1! How long wilt thou hide thy face from vs! when wilt thou respect, and heare vs! when wilt thou inlighten our eies, and show vs thy counte∣nance! when wilt thou restore thy selfe vnto vs! Behold and heare vs, ô Lord our God; lighten our eies, and
show vs thy selfe. Restore thy selfe to vs, that we may prosper without whome we are in such miserie. Inuite vs, and helpe vs Lord, we beseech thee. Mine hart is become sorowfu being made desolate: ô make it cheereful againe, Lord, with thy consolation. I haue begun to seeke thee with an hungrie stomach, ô let me not giue-ouer vnrefreshed of thee; I come with a greedie appetite, let me not depart vn∣fed; I who am in pouertie, com vnto thee that art rich Rom. 10, 12 Ephes. 2, 4.; in mi∣serie, vnto thee most merciful 2. Cor. 1, 3 ô let me not go-awaie emptie and contemned. O Lord, I am bowed, and croo∣ked verie sore Psal. 38, 6., erect me that may looke-vp, and behold thee Mine iniquities are gon-oue mine head, and as a weighti burden, they are too heauie fo
mee. O vnwrap, and vnloade me, that the deepe swalowe me not vp Psa. 69, 15. Teach me to seeke thee; and show thy selfe to him that see∣keth thee: for I can neither seeke thee, without thou teach me; neither find thee, except thou reueale thy selfe. Let me seeke thee in desiring, and desire thee in seeking; let me find thee in louing, and loue thee in finding. Chap. 31. Of God his woonderful mercie. I Confesse LORD, thankes vnto thee therefore, that thou hast made me after thine owne image Gen. 1, 26.27. Col. 3, 10., to the end I should remember thee, thinke on thee, and loue thee.
Notwithstanding, through the corruption of wickednes thine image is so defaced, and so blur∣red with the smoake of sinne that, without thou renew, and reforme the same, it can not do the thing, for which it was cre∣ated. Wherefore, Lord, who gi∣uest the gift of faith Rom. 12, 3, I be¦seech thee, giue mee grace per∣fectlie to knowe how great thou art. For according to our beliefe thou art; and we beleeue thee to be such à thing, than which there can be imagined nothing either for quantitie greater Ier. 32, 18.19., or for virtue better Esai. 6, 3.. Then what art thou, ô Lord God, than whom nothing is ei∣ther greater, or better; but euen that, which being onelie the so∣ueraigne good thing of al others of it selfe, hath made al other
things of nothing Gen. 1, 1.2.3, &c.. Then what good thing is there wanting to ye soueraigne good∣nes Iam. 1, 17. through whome is euerie good thing? Wherefore thou art righte∣ousPsal. 11, 7., and trueEsai. 45, 21 Psal. 86, 15. Iohn. 3.33. Rom. 3, 4., and blessedReu. 5, 12.13.; & whatsoeuer is otherwise, better is it not to be atal, than to be. But if thou art altogether most singularlie good, how is it that thou sparest the wicked? Is it because thy mercie is ouer al thy worksPsa. 145, 9.? But this lieth hid in the light which none can attaine vnto 1. Tim. 6, 16. Verelie the fountaine, whence the riuer of thy mercie doth flowe, lieth-hid in the deepe and most secrete bottome of thy goodnes. For, although thou art wholie and souerainglie righteous: yet thou sparest of thy goodnes the wickedMat. 5, 45, because thou art who∣lie
and most singularlie merci∣ful too. For in verie deede thou shoul∣dest not be so singularlie good, vnlesse thou wert gratious to some offenders. For he who is good both to the iust and to the vniust, is better than he who sheweth fauour onlie to the good. And he which is good to the wicked, both by sparing, and by punishing thē, is better than he, who is good onlie by punishing. So thou art therefore merciful, because thou art altogether, and soueraignelie good. Chap. 32. The happie state of such as en∣ioie the ioies of heauen. O Infinite goodnes, passing all vnder∣standing! Let that mercie
come vpon me, which procee∣deth from such riches; Let it haue influence into me, which floweth from thee; Spare of thy mercie, but reuenge not in thy iustice. Rise vp now, ô my soule, and lift vp al thine vnderstanding; consider so wel as thou canst, how great, and what maner of good thing, God is. For if each particular good thing be delectable, waie adui∣sedlie how delightful that good thing is, which conteineth the sweetenes of al good things 1. Cor. 2, 9.; and not such as commonlie we perceaue of things created, but so much differing there from, as the creator differeth from the creature! For if the life created bee good; howe good is the life that created it Ioh. 11, 25.! If the welfare that is wrought, delight; how
shal the welfare which worketh al saluation Esa. 12, 1.2.3., delight! If the wisedome consisting in the minde, or in the knowledge of knowne things, be louelie; how louelie is that wisedome which made, and created al things of nothing Iohn. 1, 1.2.3. Hebr. 1, 2. Prou. 8, 22.23, &c.! To be short, if there be much and great delight in delectable things; what and how great shal the pleasure be in him, who made these dele∣ctable things! Oh what shal he haue, or what shal he not haue, that enioieth this felicitie! doubtles, whatsoe∣uer he can wish, he shal haue it; and what he would not haue, shal not come to him. For there shal be the goodes both of soule and bodie, such goodes as eie hath not seene 1. Cor. 2, 9., neither eare hath heard, nei∣ther came into mans hart.
Chap. 33. That soueraigne happines is to be sought for. WHIE then rangest thou about, ô sillie man, seeking the goodes of thy soule, and of thy bodie? Loue one good, in which are al good things, and it sufficeth. Desire the simple good, which is al that good is, and it is inough. For what louest thou, ô my flesh? what desirest thou, ô my soule? There it is whatsoeuer thou louest; there it is whatsoe∣uer thou desirest. If beautie delight thee; the iust men shal shine as ye SunneMatth. 13, verse. 43.: If either such swiftnes, strength, or libertie of the bodie, as no∣thing may withstand; they shal be as the Angels of God in hea∣uen Matth. 22, verse. 30.. For it is sowne à natural
bodie 1. Cor. 15, verse. 44., but shal rise a spiritual bodie, to wit, by the power of God, not through the strength of nature: If a long, and an healthful life; there shal be founde eternitie, and eternal soundnes Reu. 21, 4., because the righteous shal liue euer Wis. 5, 15.; their rewarde also is with the Lord: If satietie; when the glorie of the Lord appeareth,Psa. 17, 15. they shal be filled: If drunkennes; they shal be satisfied with the fatnes of the Lords house Psa. 36, 8.: If pleasant musicke; the An∣gels there shal sing praises with∣out cessing vnto the Lord: If al maner honest, not vnho∣nest pleasure; the Lord shal giue them drinke out of the ri∣uer of his pleasures Psal. 36, 8.: If wisedome; the verie wise∣dome of God shal shew it selfe
to them 1. Cor. 13, verse. 12. Reu. 22, 4.: If faithful amitie; they shal both loue GOD more than themselues, and one another as themselues; yea, and God shal loue them, more than they can themselues. For they loue both him, themselues, and one ano∣ther through him; and he lo∣ueth both himselfe, and them too through himselfe. If concord; al they shal be of one minde 1. Cor. 13, verse. 13.; for they shal wil nothing, but what God willeth himselfe: If power; they shal haue ful power ouer their owne wil, as God hath of his. For as God of himselfe can do what he wil: so they can do what they wil, through him. Because, as they list none otherwise, than he li∣steth: so he listeth, as they list, and what he wil, must needes come to passe.
If honor, and wealth: God wil make his good and faithful ser∣uants Matth. 25, verse. 23., rulers ouer much; yea, they shal be called the sonnes of God Rom. 8, verse. 16.17., yea, and gods too; and be the heires, euen the heires of God, and heires annexed with Christ. To conclude, if certaine secu∣ritie; they shal be as sure that that felicitie shall not faile them Reu. 7, 15.16.17. Reu. 21, 4., as they are sure that nei∣ther they for their parts would willinglie forgo the same; nor God for his part wil bereaue his friends thereof against their wils; nor that anie thing is so mightie, that it can separate God and them. Now what, and how great ioie is there, where such and so great felici∣tie is!
Chap. 34. How the Sancts loue each other mutualie in Heauen. O Hart of man; ô poore hart; ô hart ful of miseries, yea, ouer∣whelmed with mise∣ries, how greatlie wouldest thou reioice, if thou aboundedst with these good things! Aske euen the most secret co∣gitations of thine hart, if they could receaue the ioie of so ex∣cellent blisse. But if another, whome thou lo∣uest as thy selfe, did enioie with thee the like felicitie, doubtles thy ioie would be doubled; be∣cause thou wouldest so much reioice at his felicitie, as at thine owne. Now if two, or three, or moe, were so blessed of God, thou
wouldest be as glad for each of them, as for thy selfe, if thou di∣dest loue them euen as thy selfe. Then, how great shal the ioie be in that perfect loue of the in∣numerable companie of bles∣sed Angels and men; where each shal loue another euen as himselfe! for euerie man there shal reioice as much for the happie estate of each particular person, as for his owne felicitie. If therefore the hart of man shal hardlie receaue the ioie of his owne blisse; how shal it comprehend such great ioies of so manie of his friends! for vn∣doubtedlie, euen as we loue à man, so shal we be glad for his felicitie. As in that blessed happines e∣uerie man shal loue God soue∣raignelie aboue himselfe, and al others with him: so most singu∣larlie shal each man be more
glad of Gods felicitie, than of his owne, and of al others with him. And if they shal so loue God with al their harts, with al their minds, and with al their soules, that neither al their harts, nor al their minds, nor al their soules can be able to comprehend the excellencie of the loue: assured∣lie the Sancts with al their harts, with al their minds, and with al their soules shal so reioice, as neither their hearts, nor their minds, nor their soules, shal be able to comprehend the abun∣dant streames of celestial ioie. Chap. 35. Of the perfect ioie of eternal life. O MY GodPsal. 7, ▪ 3., and my LordMatt. 4, 10, mine hopePsal. 18, 1.2., & the ioie of mine heart, resolue my soule whether this be the ioie
whereof thou speakest by thy Sonne, Aske, and ye shal re∣ceaue Ioh. 16, 24., that your ioie may be ful. For I haue found à certaine ioie which is ful, yea, and more than ful. For notwithstanding ye whole hart, be ful; the whole mind, ful; the whole soule, ful; yea, whole man, ful of this ioie: yet shal there remaine ioie for al that, which is incomprehensible. So then, that whole ioie shal not enter into the reioicers; but al the reioicers shal enter into the ioie of their maister Matth. 25, verse. 21.. Speake Lord, tel thy seruant secretlie in mine hart, if this be the ioie whereinto thy seruants shal enter, who shal enter into their maisters ioie. But surelie, that ioie, where∣with thine elect shal reioice, neither eie hath seene 1. Cor. 2, 9., nor eare hath heard, nor entred euer into
the hart of man. Then Lord, I haue not yet con∣ceaued in minde, much lesse vt∣tered by words, how greatlie thine elect shal reioice. Vndoubtedlie they shal so greatlie reioice, as they shal loue; they shal so entirelie loue, as they shal know thee, ô Lord. And how entirelie shal they loue thee? surelie neither mans eie hath seene, nor his eare hard, nor came it euer into his heart in this world Esa. 64, 4. 1. Cor. 2, 9., how perfectlie they shal both knowe thee 1. Cor. 13, verse. 12.13., & loue thee in the world to come. O my God, I beseech thee, grant that I may knowe thee, loue thee, and reioice in thee. And although I cannot so thoroughlie do so in this life as I should; yet giue me grace to profit from daie to daie, vntil I come vnto perfection. Let thy knowledge so growe
vp within me heere, yt it may be found ripe there; and thy loue so encrease within me heere, that it may be perfect there; that my ioie may be great heere in hope, and in deedeful there. O iust God, my humble sute is, that I may haue the thing which thou promisest, euen that my ioie may be ful Iohn. 16, verse. 34.. In the meane space, let my mind meditate therof, my tong speake therof, mine hart long for it, my speech reason thereof, & my soule hunger for the same. Let my flesh thirst therefore, and al my substance desire it, euen vntil I enter into the ioie of my maister Matth. 25, verse. 21., there to abide for euer and euer, Amen. FINIS.
¶ THE SVMME OF EVERIE CHAP∣TER CONTAINED IN THIS BOOKE, ACCOR∣ding as the titles doe im∣port, with the iust num∣ber of the page where euerie particular chapter is to be found. 1 OF the woonderful es∣sence, or being which God hath, pag. 1. 2 Of God his vnspeakeable knowledge, pag. 4. 3 The desire of that soule which hath à feeling of God, pag. 7. 4 The miserable state of that soule, which neither loueth our Lord & Sauior Christ, nor seketh after him, pa. 11. 5 A verie Christian desire of the soule after God, pag. 14. 6 The happines of that soule which is deliuered out of the earthlie prison of the bodie, pag. 17.
7 The blessed ioie of the heauenlie Paradise, pag. 20. 8 The glorious condition of the kingdome of Hea∣uen, pag. 22. 9 How GOD after much trouble doth comfort the pensiue soule, pag. 25. 10 A praier for grace to loue God, pag. 27. 11 A praier for grace both dulie to thanke God for our redemption; & wor∣thilie to approch vnto the holie Table, pag. 29. 12 A zealous praier for grace to meditate deepelie vpon the goodnes of God, pag. 32. 13 A thankes-giuing vnto God for the incarnation of his deere Sonne to saue man, pag. 34. 14 The more God is thought vpon, the more louelie he
seemeth, pag. 36. 15 How the trobles in this world are nothing answe∣rable to the ioies in hea∣uen, pag. 38. 16 Of the kingdome of hea∣uen, and how it may be attained, pag. 41. 17 What Paradise is: and the ioies thereof, pag. 42. 18 That we can not please God, but through loue, pag. 46. 19 How GOD requireth some thing of vs like to himselfe, pag. 49. 20 Of the boldnes of the soule that loueth GOD, pag. 41. 21 The singular loue of GOD to manward, pag. 55. 22 The refuge of à Christi∣an in time of tentation, pag. 57. 23 Special medicines a∣gainst
sinne, and despaire, pag. 59. 24 A zealous meditation to mooue vnto the loue of God, pag. 62. 25 Of true knowledge, what it is, pag. 65. 26 What the sending of the holie Spirit worketh in vs, pag. 68. 27 The effects of true loue, pag. 71. 28 What the true quietnes of the mind is, pag. 73. 29 That whatsoeuer with∣draweth the sight of the mind from God, is alto∣gether to be shunned, and abhorted, pag. 75. 30 How through sinne man lost the sight of God, and found wretchednes, 78. 31 Of God his woonderful mercie, pag. 81. 32 The happie state of such
as enioie the ioies of hea∣uen, pag. 84. 33 That soueraigne happi∣nes is to bee sought for, pag. 87. 34 How the Sancts loue ech other mutualie in heauen, pag. 91. 35 Of the perfect ioie of e∣ternal life, pag. 93. FINIS.
1581. OS HOMINI SVBLIME DEDIT Printed by Henrie Denham, dwelling in Pater noster Row, at the signe of the Starre. Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
