a615 15993090 104698
FROM THE Insurance-Office for Houses, ON THE Back-Side of the Royal-Exchange. IT was thought fit to give this Advertisement, That whereas there are Propositions in Print, setting forth the Rates and Terms for Insuring of Houses; being Six Pence in the Pound Rent for Brick-Houses, and Twelve Pence for Timber, with Deduction for the Ground-Rent; for which, the Office is to Re-build, or to Pay the Party, whose House is Insured, One Hundred Pounds for every Ten Pounds per Annum Rent, that is Insured, as oft as the said House is Burnt down, according to the Election then made at the Time of Insurance. And whereas those Words, Burnt Down, were not so large, but that they might admit of a Question, whether it was intended, that Houses Blown up, or Pulled down, were to be Rebuilt, or receive Satisfaction, as if they were Burnt down? And likewise, those Words did not make Provision, in case the Houses were only Damnified. It is thought fit therefore to declare, That it is the Intent of the Insurers, that Houses In∣sured, that are Blown up, and Pulled down, as well as Burnt down, should be Re-built at the Charge of the Office, or receive Satisfaction in Money, according as in the Propo∣sitions were set forth, for Insuring of Houses, and in a New Edition now expressed; the Former Copy being since Corrected, and the Words added, Burnt down, Demolished, or any wise Damnified, by reason of Fire. And because it might occasion some Dispute about the Expences of Work-Men, in making good the Damages where the House is neither Burnt down nor Demolished, but only Broken or Damnified; it is thought necessary to avoyd such Differences, that the Office should have the Liberty to set their own Work-Men, to Repair all such Damages: And if they are not Repaired at the Charge of the Office within Two Months after the said Damages made, then to Forfeit the whole Sum expressed in the Policy, as if the same were Burnt down or De∣molished: The Penalty is made the Greater, to avoyd all Suspicions of Difference, that might arise about the Charge of the Reparation, that Difference being Avoided, there can arise no Dispute; for the Breaches and Damages then made, will be as Visible and Certain, as if the Insured House were Burnt Down. It was promised in the Printed Propositions, That the Names of the Insurers, and Pla∣ces, where the Estates or Securities lye, with the Names of the Trustees, should in a short time, be set forth; that all Satisfaction might be given, as far as is necessary. The Names of the Parties that are Principally concerned, Are Samuel Vincent, Esq and Dr. Nicholas Barbon, who have the Security or Fund in their Possession; there are several other Persons that are Sharers, whose Moneys is to pay off the incumbrances on the several Estates, which because it is not Material to the Security, their Names are here Omitted. The Estates that are intended to be Setled for the Security, are the Ground-Rents of Essex Buildings, being One Thousand & Fifty Pounds per Ann. And the Ground-Rents at the Lower-End of Saint Martins-Lane, from the Strand to the Church-Yard, being Three Hundred For∣ty Seven Pounds per Ann. And the Ground-Rents of Devonshire Buildings, without Bishopsgate, being Seven Hundred and Nine Pounds per Ann. whereof Four Hundred Pounds per Ann. or thereabouts, is Built, and the other a Building; being in the whole Two Thousand One Hundred and Six Pounds per Ann. (the Rental of which Estates are to be seen at the Office, by all Persons that desire to see them): Which Security is more then the Undertakers did at First propose. But finding their Propositions meet with a general Acceptance, they are wil∣ling not to be wanting on their part in the Security. The Names of the Trustees upon whom these Estates are to be Setled, cannot yet be declared; because it is intended they shall be chosen by the Consent of those Persons that have already Subscribed, and that shall Subscribe before the First of June; and to that intent it's desired, that all Persons that have Subscribed, and that shall before that Time Subscribe, would please to meet at the said Office, on the Eighth of June, next, at Three of the Clock in the Afternoon, to give their Advice, and Consent in Choosing the Trus∣tees: That time being thought most convenient. At the same time it may be convenient, for the Subscribers to Name Counsel for Setling of the Conveyances, and to Appoint some of their Number (in the behalf of the rest) to see the Incumberances Discharged from the several Estates, and the Conveyances executed ac∣cording to the true intent and meaning of the aforesaid Propositions, at the Charge of the Office. The Propositions at Large, are to be had Gratis, at Mr. Starkey's a Bookseller near Temple Bar, at Mr. Hinchman's a Bookseller in Westminster-Hall, and at the Office on the side the Roval-Exchange. FINIS.
