A814 11921680 50980
THE MOST Natural and Easie Way OF INSTITUTION: CONTAINING, PROPOSALS For making a Domestic Education Less Chargeable to PARENTS, AND More Easie and Beneficial to Children. By which Method, Youth may not only make a very considerable Progress in Languages, but also in Arts and Sciences, in Two Years. . Plutarch. LONDON, Printed for Christopher Hussey, at the Flower-de-Luce in Little-Britain. 1698.
TO Sir WILLIAM HUSTLER, A MEMBER of the Honourable House of Commons. SIR, YOUR Honour, some considerable time ago, being much Concern'd about the best Method in the Edu∣cation of your Children, was pleas'd to ask my Opinion therein: But my Thoughts concerning it, at that time, being but in the Embryo, conceiv'd upon the Reading a Treatise of EDUCATION, writ by the Learned and Inge∣nious Mr. Lock, to whose Opinion fearing I might be too partial by the Satisfaction his other Writings gave me, and knowing how unsafe and invidious it is to oppose Inve∣terate Customs, I, as handsomly as I cou'd, declin'd the Matter. Only I ventur'd upon your pressing me further, to tell you I should prefer a Domestic to a public Insti∣tution. Your Honour was pleas'd to inform me, you were of the same Mind, and desir'd me to enquire out a Tutor, proposing such a Sallary as I believe few Gentlemen in England give, and which might have invited into your Family a Man of Sobriety, Parts and Learning. But tho' I durst not then venture my callow Thoughts abroad, after they were fledg'd and confirm'd by Time and mature Advice, at the Instance of your Worthy Brother, Mr. IAMES HUSTLER. (a GENTLEMAN of that Piety and Vertue, that I dare not write his Character; and if I durst, of such Modesty, I shou'd be afraid to lose a Friendship, which has been so many ways to my Credit and
Advantage) I sent them to you in a few Proposals, tend∣ing to make a Domestic Institution less chargeable to the Parent, and more Useful and Easie to the Child. Upon the Reading of which, some Objections arising, I was desir'd to answer them, and subjoyn the Reasons of the said propo∣sed Method, which I purpos'd to do with all the brevity I cou'd, and send them to you the same day. But beginning to think what Method to use therein, it seem'd necessary to shew there was a General Male-Treatment of Children; and this I conceive to be not only the most proper, but most useful way of proceeding in Cases of this Nature. For if I can prove a Reformation is necessary, I have gained a con∣siderable Point; and having no Ambition my Diminutive Name shou'd stand in the Catalogue of Reformers, shall be satisfy'd in the hopes of seeing some other more happy and suc∣cessful Proposals, in order to the effecting thereof. An honest and ingenuous Man ought not to be concern'd, that his Methods for Reformation, of any grievance in Church or State, are rejected, if he has been so happy to Convince that some or other were Necessary. SIR, I humbly desire your Pardon for prefixing your honour'd Name to these Papers, assuring you I don't pretend to make a Present, but beg a Patronage. And if you will please to do me these two Favours, first, To think I meant honestly, and nextly, To pardon the failures of the management to the Can∣dour and Ingenuity of the Design, I will (in Return) do you the only one that lies in my Power, in Superseding wretched Panegyrics and fulsome Flatteries, the usual Fur∣niture of Modern Dedications, being sensible that Persons of known HONOUR and WORTH, are abus'd by having their Names taken in vain by every trifling Scribbler; And only add that I am, Honour'd Sir, Your Obliged humble Servant, R. Ainsworth.
PROPOSALS Of a Method of Institution, &c. THE Advantages of giving Children an Ingenuous and Liberal Education, are so well known in England to all ranks and degrees of Men, we need no Lacedaemo∣nian Edict, by which those Parents were depriv'd of the Freedom of their City, who were negligent in this Particular, being look'd upon fit for nothing but to cleanse Shoars, and carry Burdens, who condemn'd their Sons never to be fit for any better Employment. But tho' we are sufficiently Convinc'd of the Usefulness and Excellency thereof, we are very negligent and careless of the Methods whereby to effect it, and so more blame-worthy than some of the ignorant La∣cedaemonians, who possibly saw no such real benefit thereby. To be solicitous about the End, and neglect the Meaens, be∣trays I know not whether more Levity or Imprudence. We generally think to give our Children education is but in other words, to send 'em to School; to whom, or for what, is not much material. It may be, about six or seven years after, 'tis expected a Lad shou'd understand Latin; if he does, all is well, if not, cries the Parent he's a Blockhead, I'll ne'r trouble my head further about him. If he is a Gentleman, may be he adds, He had as good play at Home as at School; and so the Youth being fit Company for none but Servants, familiarly converses and saunters away his Time with 'em. And now ha∣ving told you his Company, you may guess at his Manners, Uva conspectâ livorem ducit ab uvâ, But if a Tradesman, Away with the Dunce, I'll put him to 'prentice forthwith; so this often occasions that too, to be done
precipitately, and so he is little better for serving a tedious Ap∣prentiship, in a whipping Bridewell, under a flogging Orbilius. The better did I say? nay, generally worse, being habi∣tuated there to several Vices, which often keep him Company as long as he lives. But, if after all, the Parent is resolv'd, in spight of the Muses and Apollo, his Son shall be a Scholar, after a sound Chastise∣ment, he is sent to another School, 6 or 7 years longer, to make his Verse end—Berecynthius Atys, and read a little— , without knowing any thing of Arts and Sciences, and perhaps Common Sense. To reform these, and such like Abuses, in Childrens common treatment, several worthy Persons have taken great pains, (as Mr. Walker, Monsieur Fleury; but above all, the Learned and Ingenious Mr. Lock, (whom I have not the Honour to know but by his excellent Pen) and treated this subject so well, that they will always be reckon'd as our best and chiefest Reformers. Not have they miss'd of success amonst discerning and impartial Readers; but most being otherwise, and the Heresies over∣grown, and slubborn, a thorow Reformation cannot be expected on a sudden. Having often highly extoll'd the Method of learning Latin, as a Native of Rome, being convinc'd both by great Reasons, and great Authorities it must be the best; and being accus'd by some of Singularity, tho' following so great Authors, because I had made Proposals to some Gentlemen by which I suppos'd the De∣sign might be best answer'd, I thought my self concern'd to give a Publick Account of my so doing; in the performance whereof, I shall insist in this Order: 1. Enquire into the manner of our Childrens general Treat∣ment, both by Parent and Master, and make some Animadver∣sions on both. 2. Lay down a Method, in 10 Proposals, whereby I conceive it easie to teach them to understand a Roman Author very well, write Latin elegantly, speak it properly and easily, gain a considerable knowledge in Logic, Rhetoric, Geography, Histo∣ry, &c. in the space of two years. 3. Assign the Reasons of the said Proposals, and answer Ob∣jections. And lastly, Leave the whole to the Iudgment of the Candid and Iudicious Reader.
The Reasons of the slow Proficiency, and careless Institution of our Children, are such as either the Parents, or Master, is chargeable with. First, The Parents, Reason 1. Who don't ordinarily take care to have their Children taught to read, till they are so habituated to Vice and Idleness, that their Teacher must have as much Labour to bring 'em into love with their Book, as otherwise woud have taught 'em to read; from whence also various Inconveniencies arise both to the Pa∣rents and Children; the Enumeration whereof not being my Pro∣vince, I leave to those who write the whole series of Education. No doubt, as soon as they can speak, they may be taught to read either by Father or Mother, with case and pleasure, without ever imposing it as a Task upon 'em. The Ingenious Mr. Lock tells us of a Person of great Quality and Worth, who by pasting the six Vowels on the six sides of a Die, and the remaining 18 Consenants on the sides of three other Dies, has play'd his Son into Spelling and Reading with the greatest eagerness imaginable; and I doubt not but the said worthy Patriot may teach him Arithmetic, History, Music, with but a little deviation from that his so excellently con∣trived Method. Facile est inventis addere. This very Method, for fear of bad Consequences afterwards, may not be so well, but from it we have an hint for an hundred very harmless Inventions to teach Children to Read. 2. If they do take care to send 'em to School, perhaps 'tis to some Woman who never knew any thing of Orthography, tho' she may make a shift to read her Prayers, or Murder a Gazette, confound∣ing one Period with another, which she must needs do, having ne∣ver been acquainted with the Rules of Pointing. Hence it comes to pass, that Vulgar People, who only have learn'd to Read and Write at this rate, commit such horrible blunders in Spelling, and making no Points, are at the hazard of having no one, that writes true, to understand what they mean. I admire that Parents, that design their Children a Liberal Educa∣tion, shou'd commit them to such; they had better let all alone, for they contract such ill habits, as will cost their Master afterwards dou∣ble the trouble to unlearn 'em, as were requisite to learn 'em to read, and I shou'd scarce undertake to teach 'em for a double Reward: For to teach has a great deal of pleasure, to unteach has none at all to recommend it. To which I may add, That it not only discoura∣geth the Pupil, but is apt to create in him an aversion to his Tutor: And thus both the Master and Scholar labour in vain. —Ista felix nullo mansuescit aratro.Pers. And this I am sure of, by many Experiments, that an Adult Per∣son, who has had the misfortune to be taught English at this rate, cannot be so great a Proficient, in 6 Months time, in learning Latin,
as another, happy in his first English Rudiments, may be in two; and besides, must take a great deal more pains. Parents, when their Children are fit in their Accounts to be put Reason 2. 2. to a Master, think it sufficient to put them to a good Scholar, (as they phrase it) whether a good Man or no, is not much material. And what is this good Scholar? He understands Latin and Greek. As tho' this were Accomplishment enough! This is so far from it, that 'tis undoubtedly but one Qualification, and that one of the least too, of a good School-master to little Children, whose tender years are to be imbu'd with Piety, and Principles of right Reason: He ought to be a Vertuous, Modest, and humble Man, and very patient; his chief business ought to be to dissipate by soft and gen∣tle means, those passions that would over-cast the early dawnings of infant Reason, that it may shine out bright and glorious; and with a gentle hand, to weed out the Tares which perhaps were sown when the Parents slept, before they are grown so high, as to choak the Culture of an Ingenuous and Liberal Education, to cherish the Principles of Kindness, and good Nature, till they are grown into HABITS; to settle a Reverence to their Parents and Masters, and a Love and Respect for all, and they will soon enough after∣wards learn to exert them in a fashionable Mein, and decent Com∣portment, which, when they have learn'd with a Dancing-master, will more admirably become them, when their Bows and Honours, not forc'd by Modes and Fashions, not Ap'd and Mimick'd, but found to be real by the Divine sweetness of their Looks, which no Art can teach, will not only challenge from all Persons an high Commendation of their Parts and Breeding, but also gain 'em every where an Admiration and Love for their Virtue. He ought not only to have these Qualifications, but a reasonable knowledge of Arts and Sciences, as Logic, Rhetoric, History, Geography, &c. to speak Latin well and promptly, and understand the Greek Tongue; neither too young, nor too old, a proper well∣made Person, and of a good Presence. What shall I say? He must be —Qualem nequeo monstrare & sentio tantum. But you will say, All these Qualifications seldom meet in one Obj. Man, especially who will vouchsafe to be a Tutor. I confess it. And therefore get in one, as many as you can, and A. be content to abate him some of these last, (I mean as to Accuracy) but never any of the first; for in those that are to study as Gentle∣men, this Age looks upon it a greater Accomplishment to have a taste of all Arts and Sciences, so as to be able to discourse, and give some tolerable Account of each, as occasion shall offer, than to stick close to any particular Study, neglecting the rest, provided that when they are called to any Office or Imployment in the Com∣mon-wealth, they then apply themselves close to that Study, which
may best qualifie them for it, and make all their other Know∣ledge as much as they can subservient thereto: But if design'd for Scholars, in whatsoever their Master is deficient, they may perfect themselves by their Industry, and a Tutors assistance, in the University. Many Parents think 'tis well enough to send their Children to a publick School: Those that are not able to give them a Domestic, or more private Education, I censure not; but such persons as have good Estates, and some of Quality and Worth, who perhaps have taken great pains to form their Childrens Mind, and Man∣ners, with Piety and Vertue, till they are come to 7 or 8 years of Age, and then for the sake of a little Latin run so great an hazard to have the beautiful Image spoild, and the whole Work effac'd, some will be apt to Arraign of either Levity, Incogitancy, or both. Here Children of good, and bad Education, and good, and bad Tempers, being huddled promiscuously together, it may be rather fear'd the bad may infect the good, than hoped the good may reform the bad. —quoniam dociles imitandis Turpibus ac pravis omnes sumus. But further, Would publick School-masters (as 'tis next to an Impossibility they should) take care of their Morals, and be never so sollicitous of Cultivating their early Years with Piety and Ver∣tue, yet at Noon or Night, when dismiss'd from School, they would be apt to saunter about, and loyter in the Streets, where they wou'd see various Objects to divert their thoughts, hear se∣veral Common, if not impious Sayings, of Porters, Car men, and Kitchen-Wenches, which much abhor from that Phrase and Diction they ought always to be Accustomd to; whereby Barbatos licet admoveas mille inde Magistros, Hinc totidem, their Virtue and Innocency would be difficulty secur'd. I profess I shou'd hardly run the risque were there no better, no other way, whereby my Son could come at the Understanding of a Language. I am sorry I shou'd have Occasion to subjoin my next Reason: Many of good Estates, and I fear some of Quality, do give their Reason 3. Children a very mean and ordinary Education, because they are loth to be at any extraordinary Charge about it: Of this, Plutarch vehemently complains, in his Time, in these words; Many People are grown so Covetous, and (I will not translate my Authors word) so slighting of their Children, that for fear
of paying a greater price for their Tuition, they chuse Men of no Account for their Childrens Tutors, purchasing for them a cheap Ignorance. And tells us a biting reply of Aristippus, who being ask'd by one of these Fathers what he would ask for his Sons Education, , said he. O Hercules! cry'd the other in a great Astonishment, Why, I can buy a good Slave for that Money: Why, and so you may, reply'd the Philosopher, then you will have two Slaves, the Slave you have bought, and the Slave you have begot. But to set aside all Arguments drawn from the Usefulness, Ex∣cellency, and Ornament of Learning, since these are no Topicks to insist on with such a Reader, we will endeavour to convince him that the laying out his Money in his Sons Education, is not incompati∣ble with his own Maxims. If he had a piece of Land that were very barren and stony, but with a little Agriculture wou'd be as good as any of his Neighbours, wou'd he spare his Money here, where there was a prospect of a considerable Advantage? Wou'd he not rather order his Bailiff forthwith to Manure and Cultivate it? And is the Cultivating of his Son, a matter of lesser moment, from whence probably, in the very Letter, more profit may come into his Pocket than from his Field? Or when he has a considerable stock of Money by him, is he not apt to be uneasie, till he has put it out to Interest, hearken'd out a Mortgage, or wisely transmuted it into good Terra firma; because, says he, let Fires, losses at Sea, change of Government, any, or all of these happen, this will stay upon the spot, I shall still have this to leave my Son, Yet tho' the Land, as he saith, will still abide on the spot, he knows how moveable a skin or two of Parchment is. One would think now, if he could light of a Purchase more secure, and more advantageous too, for his Son, he should not grudge to lay out his Money upon it. If he ask me what that is, I answer: A Vertuous and Learned Education; and that too, (if he be as careful as he generally is) he may have a very good Penny-worth. Only let him remember, The best is the best Cheap. The Fondness and Indulgence of some Parents, who can scarce Reason 4. endure their Children out of their sight; For (say they) we are not sure they will be so indulg'd, and treated with that care and tenderness, they are at home. And what then? Suppose they should not, where would be the harm of it? Perhaps, nay pro∣bably, the inuring them to a little more hardship, may in a great measure contribute to their health, by confirming, and fortifying their Constitution. This the Lacedaemonians, Romans, and other Wise, and Warlike Nations, knew; and therefore were far enough from bringing up their Children with that softness, and niceness,
as our Cocker'd Citizens are. And certainly, whether we respect their Bodies or Minds, this nice and over-tender treatment of Chil∣dren, must be very pernicious to them; it makes their Constitu∣tions weak and infirm, subject to catch cold with every little breath of Air, and their health often various, and uncertain all their life long. Then as to their Minds, they must not be cross'd, nor contradicted, they must have their humour in every thing. What a piece of barbarous Cruelty is it in Parents to suffer those Passions to get strength in the pretty Creatures, the breaking of which will cost them so dear, and dearer if never broken! And certainly, a wife and sober Tutor may manage a Child to his Advantage both ways much better, who 'tis probable will never suffer those Irregularities in his Meat, Play, or Sleep, which the ill-tim'd and pernicious Indulgence of many Parents often winks at, and oftner sees not; And too great, or too little a weight, too quick, or too slow a Motion, often put this delicate Movement out of order. He will sooner see the first rising of any Disorder or Tempest in the Passions, even (like the Prophets Servant) when no bigger than a Man's hand, and so may dissipate, and scatter them with more case, that so they may not over-cloud the Sky of their dawning Reason, before the bright Sun of their Vertue can well be perceiv'd to be risen in their Horizon. The next Charge I have against Parents, is their frequent remo∣ving Reason 5. their Sons from one School to another, upon the slightest Reasons, and sometimes none at all; then which, nothing is more apt to rebate the Masters diligence, who cannot tell but another may reap the fruit, and have the credit of his care and pains, and the Child, by this means, is most certainly balk'd, for being put into one Method by his first Master, into another by the second, and perhaps into the first again by the third, or it may be into a new one, he loseth some years, and is not at last so good a profi∣cient as if he had been intrusted, or continued with any of the three. They ought to be very great and cogent Reasons, which oblige a Parent to remove his Child, if he has been a considera∣ble time under a Master, especially when the Pupil respects him, and makes, tho' but a flow, Proficiency under him. Parents ought to say so to their Sons as Tully does to his: Quamobrem disces tu quidem a Principe hujus aetatis Philosopho∣rum, Cic. de Offic. lib. 1. & disces quam diu voles, 'tamdiu autem velle debebis, quoad to quantum Proficias, now paenitebit. Some persons neglect to enquire into their Childrens Proficiency, Reason 6. even sometimes, tho' very learned themselves, perhaps, thinking it too mean a thing, or not their Province, to concern themselves in examining School-Boys Exercise; but Marcus Cato thought not so, who, tho' he kept a Tutor at home for his Sons, would not∣withstanding
himself, even in the Tutors presence, give them not on∣ly precepts of Virtue, but Grammar too, exciting at once both the diligence of Tutor and Pupil. But the Great Augustus, tho' labouring under the weight of Years and Empire, thought not so, who constantly taught his two Grandsons, Lucius and Caius. But Tully thought not so, who, tho' of Consular Dignity, and a great States-man, supporting, as it were, with his own Shoulders, a tottering Common-wealth, made Account he had not yet dis∣charged his duty to his Son, by sending him to Athens, the most learned City and University of the World, to be instructed by Cratippus, one of the greatest Philosophers of the Age, unless himself also wrote him a Treatise of Ethics, by which to form and regulate his Manners. These Examples I do not produce, be∣cause I would persuade learned Parents to toil and labour at the Oar, like these great Personages, (tho' perhaps, if they shou'd, their Fere wou'd often make them amends) but that they wou'd think it not so mean an Employ, now and then at leisure hours, to inquire into their Sons proficiency, that if either Tutor or Pupil be remiss, they may admonish him, or diligent, incourage him. These are the Reasons of the great Obstacles and Remoras in Childrens Education, occasioned by the Parents, some being tardy in one particular, and some in another. Now come we to those, which on the Masters part lie against their improvement in learning Languages. Some Masters have a standing Method, not only in teaching Reason 1. their Pupils a Language, but also in the Motives, by which they propose to raise and fix their Attention. This may proceed from a want of Reflection, that Chiidrens Passions, as well as of elder People, are excited by different Methods and Motives. Now whilst a Master continues ignorant of the particular Motives by which he must raise Attention in every particular Scholar, he must needs be often at a loss, let his general Method be never so good, and let him take never so much pains. He had as good talk to the Wind, and Plough the Shoar; the one would as soon learn, and the other be cultivated, as several of his Pupils. Cer∣tainly therefore, the knowledge of his Scholars temper must be the Theory, and the proceeding by that knowledge, the Practick of the most useful and excellent Science any School-master can study, whether respecting his own Ease, or his Pupils Advantage. Some again (I would hope not many) preferr'd (magis, ambitu Reason 2. quam merito) having annual Stipends in Free-Schools, in the Erection and Endowment whereof our Ancestors have been very liberal, make no Conscience of suffering their Pupils to lose their
time, their Duty and Credit being small Motives to their Dili∣gence, where the main Stake, their Sallery, is secur'd. But I have not time to declaim against one of these, and if I had 'twere lost labour. —Caret culpâ, nescit quid perdat & alto Demersus, summâ rursus non bullit in undâ. Pers. Others, tho' otherwise learn'd and conscientious, whether in∣deed Reason 3. approving their own Method, or taking it from Custom, without ever calling it to the Touchstone of their better Iudgment, enjoyn the Herculean Labour of getting Lilly's Grammar without book, perhaps two or three times over, and after that a long Word-book of two or three thousand Words jumbled together at a strange rate; and it may be, should Children, with prodigious la∣bour and courage, conquer these, the Hydra bubbles up again with more Heads, their Lessons out of their Authors are to be learn'd Memoriter too, which baffles our valiant Champions to that degree, they dare Encounter no longer, but slink away, and are not a pin better for all their former Victories. I wou'd ask one of these Gentlemen, should he set about the learning of the Arabian Tongue, carrying along with him an earnest desire, a firm resolution, and the Terms of Art, (which are common to all Languages) and desiring his Tutor to show him the most expeditious way of attaining it, should only receive this an∣swer, Sir, You must get Erpenius's Grammar perfectly without book, and afterwards fix in your Memory two or three thousand words out of an Ardbian Lexicon, would he not be discourag'd at this? Would he not be apt to think there might be some more expeditious way of learning it found out? Undoubtedly he would, especially if the Rules of Erpenius's Grammar were Arabic as Lilly's are Latin. And does he think that which discourageth him, a Man, with all these Advantages, shou'd not have the same effect upon a Child, without them? Not that I go about to depreciate Lilly's Grammar, especially with the Oxford Notes; no, perhaps it is the best that ever was writ, but several Rules, and many more Exceptions, seem rather to be calculated for the Meridian of riper Iudgments, than to the La∣titude of Childrens Capacities. Nor did the Learned Compilers ever design a fourth part of them to be learn'd without book by Children; they only propose a Boy should learn his Declensions and Conjugations very well, which when he understands, not by rote, but reason (as they phrase it), and is more cunning in under∣standing See the Preface to Lilly's Grammar. the thing, than rehearsing the words, which is not above a quarter of a years diligence, or very little more, to a painful and
diligent Man, if the Scholar have a mean Capacity: then they Advise to let him pass to the Concords, to know the agreement of Parts among themselves, thence to the Syntax, but not to learn the Rules as they follow in Order, but as occasion shall offer it self Reading and Persing some Author, wherein not only the Elo∣quence of the Tongue, but some plain Lesson of Honesty and God∣liness is contain'd. And after some time of turning English into Latin, and Vice versa a little below, they add, If to this were adjoyn'd some use of speaking, (which must also necessarily be had) he shall be brought past the wearisome bitterness of his Learning. This method seems to me so rational, that I am almost tempted to believe some School-masters have never read the Preface to the Grammar they daily teach, or if all have, I wonder (tho' some Learned and Ingenious Men may) others should have reason to think they have found out a better way of teaching their Gram∣mar, than the Compilers themselves had. In my Iudgment, those Masters who take a different method to their Prescriptions, (ex∣cept as before Excepted) walk a tedious round; but especially such as teach all the Rules and Exceptions as they follow one another, before their Pupil reads an Author. For if Children should by the Masters diligence, and continual beating their brains about the sence of this, or that particular Rule, or Ex∣ception, be brought to some little Notions about them, 'tis ten to one, but being forc'd to summon all their thoughts to under∣stand the next, the Ideas they had conceiv'd about the former are quite obliterated; by this means it often comes to pass that one poor Exception, which perhaps might not occur above once in an Author, at last is understood at the loss of two or three Ge∣neral Rules, and some Leather in at the bargain. Sure I am, that the learning this line, Tartara Taygetus sic Taenara Massica, &c. stood me in the latter, if not in the former, which had I never learn'd, had not been a pin of matter, since no Word is of one Gender in the Singular, and another in the Plural Number. Nor would I, by what I have said of Lilly's Grammar, be un∣derstood as if I thought that a perfect model. It's greatest Admi∣rers have confess'd, there are many Deficiencies to be supply'd, but more Redundancies to be retrench'd; and the modest Compilers themselves thus preface it. Wherefore it is not amiss, if one seeing by Tryat, an Easier and Readier way than the common sort of Teachers do, would say what he hath prov'd, and for the Commodity allow'd, that others not knowing the same might by Experience prove the like, and then
by proof reasonably Iudge the like, not hereby excluding the better way when it is sound out, but in the mean while forbidding the worse. This I believe I may venture to say, It may be easie for any Master, on half a Sheet of Paper, to extract out of this Gram∣mar what is sufficient for any Lad to know before he reads an Author. But I proceed: The harshness and severity of others, is a great obstacle to Reason 4. Childrens Improvement. Were they to perform their hard task, and carry burdens like Slaves, and not for every little Omission, or Peccadillo, to be thump'd like them, I shou'd think their condi∣tion something different. Nay, I fear they are beat sometimes for not performing Impossibilities, for not making Brick without Straw; I mean, for not finding Matter as well as Words. And is not this an AEgyptian Slavery? If these Gentlemen, whom a body would scarce take for Ro∣mans, unless by their Fasoes, pretend a liberty to scourge them, in order to their Manumission, I should be rather content my Son should be no Denizen of Rome, than pay so dear for his freedom. Indeed, when ill Principles, long indulg'd, are grown to ill Habits, and a Master has in vain, a long time, attempted to Weed them out gently with his hand, there may be occasion for a Spade or a Mattock, to dig them up at once, but that being once done, I can see no occasion afterwards, in any case whatsoever. When Boys, as Quintilian has observ'd, Facile sanabilibus labor ant malis, why should we always have recourse to the extreamest remedy? Correction, like Physick, where it has no operation, commonly doth harm, and the often repetition of it either spoils the Part, or at best fortifies it against it. Few, I believe, have been whipp'd into Virtue and Learning, but many, to my knowledge, have been whipp'd from them; and then it is the worse for them that ever they were sent to School, for either the severity of their Treatment makes them have an utter aversion for their Book as long as they live, or if they retain a love for it still, they com∣monly lard their discourses in common Conversation with such scraps, and serve it in with such bombast, that I must needs think he has a strong stomach that does not nauseate it. I declare it, when I hear this horrid Iargon, I know not which is greater, my pity or indignation. Certainly, nothing is more unbecoming a Gentleman, nothing more silly and ridiculous, than this Pedan∣tick humour. If the Company be learn'd, nothing can grate their Ears more harshly; if unlearned, 'tis an unmannerly Abuse. This
I take to be a worse plague than the former, and both of them are generally the effects of a Rod. 'Tis strange to me that Persons of Qvality, nice enough of their Honour in other points, should suffer their Children to be whipp'd and abus'd by every little fellow, whose understanding a little Latin and Greek is the only Title he has to the Birchen Scepter, wherewith he Tyrannizes like the Abdicated Dionysius. Curtius tells us, That the Power of scourging the Children of Curtius, lib. 8. the Macedonian Nobility resided only in their Kings, and a beat∣ing even by their Command was look'd upon to be so disgraceful, that Alexander the Great, for executing it, had almost paid his Life for satisfaction to the disgrac'd Youth. But tho' our Noblemen sometimes may indulge them this Power, I wonder our Strabo's should so willingly forfeit the favour and respect of their Pupils in time to come. The reason of our Obligation to our Physicians, and School∣masters, is not (as Seneca reasons very well) because we have re∣ceived Health of the one, and Erudition of the other, tho' both Lib. 6. de be∣neficiis, cap. 5. things unvaluable, because both of them set a value upon them, and that value we paid. Quid ergo? Quare Medico & praecep∣tori plus quiddam debeo, nec adversus eos mercede defungor? Quod ex Medico & praeceptore in amicos transeunt, & nos non arte quam vendunt obligant, sed benignâ & familiari tracta∣tione. What then? What is the reason I am still oblig'd, and not out of my Physicians and School-masters debt? Because of a Physician and School-master they become friends, and do not ob∣lige us by the Art, which they sell, but by their kind and obli∣ging devoirs. Lastly, Some both publick and private School-masters, being Reason 5. more devoted to their own Interest, than to the good of their Pupils, undertake more than they have time to manage; so by ta∣king in more Pupils they send out fewer Scholars. But this, in∣deed, is equally the fault of the Parent, who sending his Son to a Master, whose Time and Labour being to be divided amongst so many, can hope for little of either to fall to his Sons share. Having thus gone thro' my Reasons of, and Animadversions upon the Obstructions in Childrens Institution, let me beg of Parents to be∣ware of those failings for the future, wherewith I have charg'd 'em, by taking an especial care of the first 6 or 7 years the little Ones are under their Wing, and I hope I shall propose the best Method to manage them afterwards; for I don't doubt, if Vertuous and Ingenious Men be encourag'd, they can ever want fit Tutors, either in the following manner of teaching 10 or 12 together, or,
(which is next best) in their own Families. Let them but take care of the main matters in their Infancy, and they need not fear but Languages will be had afterwards easie and cheap enough. Childrens Minds are soft and moist Clay, such as may be easily thrown on the Wheel even how you please, but Age hardens it, and Custom confirms it, and then your Vessel, whether honourable or dishonourable, cannot be alter'd; therefore be sure to fashion it right, and season it well. I admire to see several Parents treat their Children like Bruits, till 6 or 7 years of Age, which is the ready way to keep them so much longer. Next to the Care of forming their Minds, succeeds that of teaching them to read; and, methinks, this might be done without sending them out of doors, as is usual to a Mistress, where, besides the inconve∣niences I have before recounted, among Children of worse Edu∣cation, they often learn ill Words, and ill Things. Since Chil∣drens Minds are pure Virgin Parchment, is it not a thousand pities to suffer it to be scrall'd over with foolish and senceless Characters, much more to be blotted and blurr'd with Anger, Envy, Pride, and Sullenness, when it may so easily be prevented? When they read English very well, 'tis time to dispose of them to a Master, not only to teach them Latin or French, as is usual, but enjoyn him to perfect and polish that Work which you have begun with so much success, to take care they be instructed in Piety and Morals, in Arts, Sciences, and Languages. But some will be apt to think, the perfecting of all this will be Obj. a Matter of great difficulty, and many Years; and that the learning of Latin alone taking up so much time, when will the rest be perfected, which are usually the Studies of Men, not Children? I answer: I do not mean they should be separate, and succes∣sive Answ. Acts, but all carried on at once; and that I believe the La∣tin Tongue may be learn'd so far forth as to understand very well a Roman Author, to write Latin correctly, and speak it fluently, and a considerable knowledge attain'd in Arts and Sciences, by little Children, by the Proposals following, in two years time at most, and that with ease and pleasure, both to Master and Scholar. THAT a convenient House be taken, a small distance from Prop. 1. London, with a large Garden, and other conveniencies.
THAT there be two Masters, whereof one to be capable of Prop. 2. teaching Latin, Greek and Hebrew: The other, at least, to un∣derstand Latin, and speak it fluently; to be well skill'd in Logic, Rhetoric, Geography, and History; and that he write a good Hand. THAT Latin be made a Living Language in the Fa∣mily; 3. i.e. That no other Language be us'd in presence of the Boys. THAT one or both the Masters continually be present 4. with the Pupils, whether Reading, Writing, Translating, or Playing, from 7 in the Morning till 8 at Night. THAT there be no Rods, or any kind of Punishment, but 5. that a generous Emulation be carry'd on by Rewards; to which Use the Parents shall allow per Annum, of which they to have an Account Monthly in a Latin Epistle, by which they may be inform'd both of their Proficiency and Diligence from time to time. THAT the number of Pupils exceed not Twelve. 6. THAT they read English well; and that their Master take 7. care to Improve it. THAT they be not younger than Six, nor older than Eleven 8. Years of Age. THAT their Authors, and Masters, be their Grammar, 9. Dictionary, and Phrase-Book. THAT nothing be impos'd on them as a Task. 10.
Here follow the REASONS of each par∣ticular Proposal, with OBIECTIONS Answered. TO this I see not what can be Objected: I think it ought not Proposal 1. to be propos'd in London, because the Air is not so good. And how much a good Air contributes to the health of the Body, and that to the health of the Mind, no Person can be ignorant; Nor far from London, because it not being convenient the Pu∣pils should ever be suffer'd to go home; and, as I said before, requisite Parents should frequently enquire into their Sons Profi∣ciency, they may do it in Summer, when they have a mind to divert themselves with a Walk, and in Winter by Coach, at a small expence. Their Garden ought to be pretty large, and to have some choice Plants and Flowers, not only for the Pleasure and Use, but such a Collection ought to be made, from which the Argument of some useful Discourse, as it were Occasionally, may be treated of. Hence they may not only be told the Names which not often occur in their Authors, or if they did, the Name only being known, and not the Idea, would easily ship out of their Memory, and whilst it was there, was of no use. Their Use and Natures also will be of great Advantage to them hereafter. To which I may add. That from their very Names they may learn a good part of the Heathen Mythology, as of Daphne, Narcissus, Hyacinthus, &c. I cannot suppose any Person can think the undertaking can be Prop. 2. (so commodiously) perform'd by one. Because it might grow tedious to any Man never to have an Reason 1. hours liberty, either to mind his private Studies, or enjoy a Friend. Because those Qualifications which are requisite in these Propo∣sals, Reason 2. are more easie to be found in two than one.
Because there seem to be two distinct Parts; the one ought, tho' never strange nor angry, very to be so cheap as the other should necessarily be, his Province is to take especial care of their Morals, to give them the sense of their Authors, which ought to be such, from whence with ease, and pleasure, he might draw Instructions of more useful knowledge, to distribute Rewards, to carry it with a certain coldness to such as are guilty of a fault, and with much kindness and affection to those that do well: The other's with all sweetness and affability, to infinuate himself into their favour, to invent for them Plays and Exercises, tending to the Institution of their Minds, and Health of their Bodies; and that I may express it in Tacitus's elegant words, Non studia modo Tacit. Dial. de Orat. curá{que} sed remissiones etiam lusus{que} puerorum, sanctitate quadam ac verecundia-temper are. Nor ought he only to invent such Plays, but often to make one in the sport, and show himself very much pleas d and delighted in it; also to teach them to write a good hand. Not that I would have these two Parts so separate, but that either of them might perform the others part, if one should hap∣pen not to be well, or have some earnest Vocation for a whole Day. The learning of Languages being in it self, as consisting of hard, and uncouth words, unpleasant, or at best insipid, ought to be well cook'd, and made pleasant, before it is serv'd up to Children. The Recipe may easily be had, a little Utile dulci, the one to season it, the other to make it palatable, for Children we know love sweet things; History and Geography, especially with fine Maps, and Pictures, as falling under the sense of Seeing, afford both these; and their natural Inquisitiveness and Curiosity will give their Master a large, and apt occasion to Instruct them, for their whole Instruction ought to be as it were occasional, and not design'd. The Master ought to study their Accessus & Idone a tempora fandi. These, and several other Arts and Sciences, might easily be made so palatable, that the Children would hang at their Masters Lips, and, as it were, devour his Words, to have the better Account of things; so they might be brought to love the Language for the Art, and afterwards, yet more dearly, love the Art for the Language. Their Play hours, I mean, their Absence from their Books, (for their whole Institution ought to have no other Name) ought to be made as beneficial as any other. Hear what the Pious and Learned Author of the Whole Duty of Man saith on this head: Methinks it might very well be contriv'd, that their Recreations might sometimes consist of such ingenious Ex∣ercises, that they might at once both play and learn.
If any one ask how Latin is to be made a living Language, I Prop. 3. answer: Their Master, who is always to be present as before, shall (after three Months spent in learning so much Grammar as may be necessary for them) never speak any other Language to them, nor suffer any other to be spoke before them. The Mistress of the House, in some measure, should understand and speak Latin, at least such forms as will suit her Occasions, which are about Dressing and Undressing, and serving them with Meat; and no Servant, at any time, be suffer'd to speak to any of them but before the Master, and that in a prescrib'd form. But tho' I were assur'd my Son may learn Latin the same way Obj. he learn'd English, by Conversation, in two Years time or less, yet you mean, he shall only then speak Latin as he now speaks English, i.e. improperly. If he now speaks English improperly, there is a proper Reason to Answ. be assign'd for it; because he has convers'd most with those that spoke improperly, his Nurse or Servants, than which Conversation nothing can be more pernicious either to a Childs Language, or Manners; but now his Conversation is to be with such as speak proper. But, It is not propos'd that he should learn the Latin Tongue purely by Conversation, he ought, I think, to have thus much Gram∣mar: 1. To distinguish the Parts of Speech one from another. 2. To learn to decline a Noun, and Conjugate a perfect Verb very well. 3. He ought to be acquainted with the Terms of Art, as Num∣ber, Case, Gender, Declension; Active, Passive, Mood, Tense, Conjugation, Person. 4. To learn his Praepositions. 5. His Concords. 6. And since there are 6 Cases, to have about 6 General Rules of Regimen.
And a body would think all this might as well be done in three Months as three Years. He ought also to be Instructed in the Analogy of the Tongue, that he may better understand, and fix his Rules in Me∣mory. But how can the Masters playing with them be so beneficial? Obj. Because he may teach them more there, than the other at their Answ. Books, since (as the Ingenious Mr. Lock hath observ'd) `Learning any thing as they should, may be made as much a Recreation to their play, as their play to their Learning. How many curious Fabricks may be built on their natural curiosity, and busie hu∣mour? And when sufficiently weary'd with those diverting plays, he may invent for them; I question not but their Natural activeness, (for they hate to be idle) will carry them to the equally diverting, tho' less useful play, their BOOK. But many Men will think it too great a Condescention to play Obj. away above half their time with little Children. I see no Reason any one should; especially since his Imploy∣ment Answ. being to invent Sports, and Plays for the Children, to in∣troduce them into the Per of more Useful Knowledge, he may lightly hit upon some thing that will aboundantly recom∣pence his pains. But if sometimes they should out-vote him, (for I would not have him insist upon any thing too much) and have a mind to play at Nine-pins, Cherry-stones, or Cok-nut, he needs not be asham'd of that, which the greatest Personages have delighted in Witness Augustus Caesar. Modo talis aut ocellatis nucibús{que} ludebat cum pueris minutis Suet. in vit. Aug. cap. 83. Quos facie et g conquerebat. The Noble Pair of Friends, Scipio and Ielius, even in their Old Age, woud, in the Company of little Children, gather Shells, and pretty smooth round Umbilicos Val. Max. Stones at Cajeta and Lauren∣tum, and play with them, and sometimes at Ball. Socrates him∣self, with Children in his Retinue, would publickly ride up and down on an Hobby-Horse. For my part, I should take this to be the most pl Life in the Wd to spend my Life in a Garden with such Company.
If any one thinks that Children cannot be govern'd unless by Prop. 1. the Discipline of the Rod, and the severity of Reprimands, I am sure he only thinks so, and has never try'd the Experiment, and I doubt not but thousands can inform him better. That Pedants so often joyn together the Idaea of a Red and Book, I have always conceiv'd to be the cause of their ill suc∣cess in Teaching. Can such imagine, Children should conceive any other of the latter than of the former? Can they think Chil∣dren should not do things much worse under dread? I am apt to believe, few of these could have been perswaded to declain ad aram Lugdunensem, tho' great Orators themselves, and great Rewards promis'd to such as came off with Applause. And why? Because the Punishment inflicted in case of failure, being so great, might have possibly so busied, and taken up their thoughts, as to have spoil'd the eloquent Harangue. But a Boy has rarely any Reward in a School; nay, scarce extorts an Euge from his Task-master if he doth well, and is certainly whipp'd if he doth not: Can he blame him then if he with∣draws his hand from the Ferula, when himself, in such a case, would do the same? Himself knows how fear so often praecludes the thoughts, as to leave room for nothing else; and will he expect from a Child, whose Passions are stronger, and Reason much weaker, that Fear should not have the same influence over him, which it has upon Adult Persons? But the giving them frequent Rewards tends to make them Obj. vain, proud, or covetous. Some, perhaps, it may, but that the Masters prudence ought Answ. to prevent, and he may do it several ways; I will instance in one. It may be propos'd, when their Praemiums amount to such a Sum to buy this or that pleasant Book, near and delicately bound; this or that fine Map or Picture; and when one has made up the Money, and bought the Book, an emulation will be excited in all the rest till another has got it. After which, every one will strive the more to ingratiate himself into the Masters affection, the more have been serv'd before him, when he perceives his Praemiums are purely the Reward of Merit. Only the Master ought to take care, that two or three of the last have their Monies made up at the same time, least any should be discouraged.
I hope none will Object this Number is too many, where Prop. 6. there are two diligent and careful Masters. Certainly, so ma∣ny may as well (some of my Friends have thought better) be instructed in this Method than two. And as the Ingenious Mr. Walker has observ'd, is neither so tedious to Master nor Scholar. Besides, a generous Emulation will be more easily promoted than amongst two or three only. And lastly, The Matter may be manag'd at lesser Charge to the Parents. Nor ought the Tutors, through Covetousness, to think it too few. For having so small a Complement, they need take none in but Children very well descended, and such as have had a vertuous and sober Education. And these Proposals being per∣form'd, they will deserve the respect of Persons of Quality, whose Interest may stand them in good stead. But not being perform'd, I think it too many, and their Reward, if any thing, too much. I could wish that such as are negligent in this important Matter, as they are accountable in foro Consci∣entiae, might be severely Animadverted upon by humane Laws. Certainly the Cynic was in the right on't, who trounc'd the Master because the Scholar was a naughty Boy. This Proposal seems very necessary. Because all their Dis∣courses Frop. 7. and Authors being Latin, it might be fear'd through a total Disusc they might be at a loss to express themselves handsomly and properly in their Mother Tongue. The Master ought to be very careful in this particular, and, as the afore∣said Method of Conversing with Latin People, Latin Authors, and earefully observing Latin Analogy, will certainly prevent Anglicisms in their writing Latin, he ought to take heed that no Latinisms creep into their Translations, or English Phrase, and Diction. And this I take to be the most proper time for it, viz. When he begins to find they had rather speak Latin than English; (which by the use of the one, and disuse of the other, I suppose may be a little more than a Year) then the Scholar ought to be put upon comparing them both together, by heedfully minding their particular Phrases, Idioms and Proverbs, and by almost an equal use of both the Styles, to ren∣der them both equally easie and familiar, and yet so as nei∣ther of them may smell of the other, the Analogy of both the Tongues being carefully observed. For this Reason a Foreigner cannot be fit to undertake this
Charge, unless exactly acquainted with our Phrase and Indiom, which few are. The Reason of this Proposal is, Lest a Disparity in their Prop. 8. Age should cause the same disparity in their Improvement. Not that I fear the Elder should get the start of the Younger, but on the contrary; for without doubt, the younger we put Children into this Method the better. The Masters will have most trouble with the oldest; yet when he is once manag'd, tho' he should exceed the Age in this Proposal, if he be a Youth of a sweet and loving temper, and studious withal, (but in this great care should be taken) he may lead the younger whither he pleaseth, and do his Master a great deal of Service. But Children are generally thought incapable of learning Obj. Latin at this Age. If People wou'd consider how soon they learn English, I Answ. dare say they wou'd be of another mind. These pretty little Mimics, with a sweet and natural de∣light, listen to all our sounds, and very well understand them in a few Months, so far (at least) as they any way concern themselves, as may be observ'd by many of their Actions, and desire to be understood themselves. Nay, they are so con∣cern'd their little Mimicisms cannot be conceiv'd, that they make a thousand signs to shew their meaning, which is as pleasant, and delightful a Rhetoric, to such as have but the Leisure, and Curiosity to observe them, as the quaintest Diction, and most celebrated Haranguel Children have, by Nature, no greater Aptness to imitate one Tongue than another; the Children of Iews, Arabians, French, and English, come to speak much at the same time, and need not any particular Rules and Directions about the Matter, nor indeed ever un∣derstand they are Learning, and yet they all arrive at a to∣lerable Proficiency in two Years. The consequence is there∣fore, they would equally understand Latin in that time, for none will think the Roman Children did not understand their, Mother-Tongue till 6 or 7 Years of Age. But some will say, Tho' this be demonstrably true, yet Obj. they may not, perhaps, at 6 or 7 Years of Age, be so capa∣ble of Foreign Languages.
Yea, much more capable; for if before that Age they learn'd, Obj.. their Mother Tongue, notwithstanding their weakness, fro∣wardness, contraction of their Faculties, and their want of as∣sistance from Art, and that purely by hearing their Mother, or Nurse, Lisp a little broken English, What shall we expect from them, when their Bodies are more firm, their poevish∣ness abated, their Faculties more dilated, when they may be assisted by Art, and Converse with Men that speak fine and properly? But what need these Collections, when daily Experience tells∣us, That Children, after having learn'd English, are in a Years∣time ordinarily taught French, or Italian, and that with Ease and Pleasure, both to themselves and Master? Nay, I am cre∣dibly inform'd of a Child, of ten Years of Age, who speaks five Languages very fluently by Conversation only, of which Latin is one: And undoubtedly, the learning of Latin the same way as they learn other Languages, must be most easie and natural. If Authorities were wanting, where Reason and Experience speak so loud, 'twere easie to accumulate them. 'Twas partly by this Method, but since better improv'd, that Roger Ascham taught his Royal Scholars, Elizabeth, Edward, and the Lady Iane Grey, Latin, Greek, French and Italian, in three or four Years time, to the Accomplishment of those great Personages, and to his own eternal Honour. 'Twas this way, tho' not so happily propos'd, that our ad∣mirable Cowley, almost by his own indefatigable Industry, learn'd the Latin and Greek Tongues, as is observ'd by the Gentleman that writes his Life in these words: His Teachers never could bring him to learn the ordina∣ry Rules of Grammar, but [he] chose rather to converse with the Books themselves, from whence the others were taken. This, no doubt, was the better way, tho' more dif∣ficult; and he found afterwards the benefit, that having got the Greek and Latin Tongues, as he had done his own, not by Precept but Use, he practis'd them not as a Scholar but a Native. And this very Consideration was the occasion of my For by making his Authors and Masters his Grammar, Dictio∣nary, 9th Prop. and Phrase-Book, he will better come to know the Genuine
significations from the Translated, fee how the latter come from the former, with pleasure, and learn as a Native of Ancient Rome to write, and speak, without encumbring himself with Rules, or conceiving his sense in English, before he speaks, or writes. And here I cannot but observe the Cause our Learned Gen∣tlemen of England, whom all Foreigners own to write Latin very politely, attempting to speak it, do it so awkwardly, and (as it were) unnaturally; because they have not learn'd it in this natural way: They must needs speak it slowly, who having been taught by multiplicity of Rules, their Mind is imploy'd in three different things at the same time: 1. Think∣ing of the Rules by which they learn'd it. 2. Thinking of the English sense which they carry along with them. And 3. Of the Latin Diction and Idiom, (which how troublesome it is, themselves knowing, can seldom be prevaild with to speak it, and all others, who consider it, may easily conjecture) whereas a Man in speaking Latin ought not to be concern'd about the two former, (for what signifies the Scaffold when the Building is finish'd) and, forgetting what Country-man he is, imagine himself a Citizen of Old Rome. The reason of this is, because Children finding no restraint Prop. 10. upon them but acting freely, act much more vigorously and to the purpose. When impos'd, they oft have an utter Aversion to that, which otherwise they freely chusing, wou'd take a great delight in. Bring but Children into love with a Lan∣guage, Art or Science, and when that point is gain'd, and some of them desire to be taught it, you may tell them, A great many Men do not understand it, and that it wou'd be the way to make them wiser than most Men, and you will find they will yet have the greater Inclination. When their Desire is sufficiently heightned, you may pre∣tend notwithstanding 'tis so great a Privilege, yet you love such an one (your favourite) so dearly for his diligence, and at∣tention, that you could almost find in your heart to give him a little insight into it; then proceed as tho' you were unwil∣ling the rest should be admitted to this favour, and such a proceeding, I question not, will oblige some of the rest quick∣ly, by their Attention and Diligence, in their own Studies, (when they find those are the only ways to recommend 'em) labour to ingratiate themselves into your favour, to enjoy the
Privilege of your favourite. So by degrees you may wind up their inclinations to what heighths you please, and bring them all by degrees, with submission and thankfulness, to accept the favour. Thus I have, as short as I cou'd, given the Reasons of the Proposals, and Answer'd such Objections as I cou'd think of, or have been made to me by Parents, when I have desird them to tell me their Opinion of Mr. Lock's Method in learning Latin, which (because upon the Reasonableness there∣of Pag. 196. Pr. Ed. these Proposals are grounded) I shall transcribe from the Learned and Ingenious Author. If therefore a Man cou'd be got, who himself speaks good Latin, who would be always about your Son, and talk constantly to him, and make him read Latin, that wou'd be the true, genuine, and easie way, of teaching him Latin; and that I cou'd wish, since besides teaching him a Lan∣guage without Pains or Chiding, which Children are wont to be whipp'd for at School six or seven years together, he might, at the same time, not only form his Mind and Manners, but instruct him also in several Sciences, such as are a good part of Geography, Astronomy, Chronology, Ana∣tomy, besides some parts of History, and all other parts of knowledge of things that fall under the Senses, and require little more than Memory. But hold—I had like to have forgot the Grand Objection, Obj. not levell'd at any particular part, but at the whole Design. The Method is singular, I dare not venture upon it for my Son. I hope 'tis a singular good one, and then no Matter. Is it Answ. reasonable? If so, it ought to be try'd. If this were any Ar∣gument, there never would have been, nor never would be, any Improvements in the World. Christian Religion woud ne∣ver have gain'd ground in the World at first, nor its Re∣formation since. Philosophy, Medicine, Law, and all Arts and Sciences, had been thousands of years ago put out of a possi∣bility of being improv'd; nay, to speak more properly, not so much as the Names themselves had been heard of. But if, for all that, any will think Singularity an Argu∣ment, I will beg of them to accept of it against our Gene∣ral
Method of Education in England, as being different from that of all Learned Nations, and Ages, that have been before us. I never heard that the Iews, AEgyptians, Phaenicians, Persians, Graecians, Romans, ever Study'd Languages, or if they did, that they were ever denominated learned from thence, much less order'd their Children to spend ten or twelve of their best Years in learning Words and Sounds, as tho' they were not only the Vehicles of Knowledge, but Knowledge it self. No, no, their Masters gave them a quite different Insti∣tution, they Admonished them to study themselves, and the Universe, to Converse with Nature, to observe the heavenly Influences; were continually preaching to them Iustice, Forti∣tude, and Temperance, in their tender Years, and afterwards, Oe∣conomics, and Politics, to know how to steer and guide them∣selves first, and then the Ship of the Common-wealth, if they were to be Public Men: They made them acquainted with the Constitutions of other Governments, not by reading Books, but sending them Abroad, where their having learn'd Langua∣ges, was reckon'd as one of the least benefits of their Travels. Nay, by many 'twas look'd upon a disadvantage, and such as had them were always cautious of intermixing them with their own. And were not these better Institutions of Youth, than purely Language and Words, which our School-Masters hunt af∣ter with such earnestness, neglecting the sense? In which Mat∣ter I could heartily wish a Reformation; when a Boys Lesson is that of Persius. Discite & ô miseri, causas cognoscite rerum, Quid sumus & quidnam victuri gignimur, ordo Quis datus, & metae quam mollis flexus, & unde, Quis modus Argento, quid fas optare, quid asper Utile Nummus habet, patriae charis{que} propinquis Quantum elargiri deceat, quem te DEUS esse Iussit, & humanâ, quâ parte locatus es in re; Would not any Parent think it far better his Son knew the meaning of this Divine Poem than the Syntax? Were not a fair Occasion given the Master to read his Pupil Lectures of Physics, Ethics, Oeconomics, Politics? &c. and by insisting a good while upon it, the Child, perhaps, would remember it as long as he lives.
Nay, we are not only singular in our Manner of Education to former Ages, but this too, in those Countries which are more concern'd to admire Latin than we, because the Service of their Church is in that Tongue: For they take greater care about their Childrens Morals, and Institutions of Piety, than Latin, but we postpone these Matters of infinitely more Concernment, or if we have taken any care in them, are wil∣ling to run the risque; Latin they must have, tho' at the ex∣pence of their Vertue and Innocence, and six or seven Years of their best time, to be Instructed in useful knowledge to boot. And does not this look like the Proverbial purchase, Pro thesauro Carbones? Nor do they learn it as we do, confounding themselves with unncessary Rules, and Exceptions of Grammar; but chief∣ly by Conversation, and the Authors from whence they were taken, and by this Method can often speak and write it tole∣rably well in a Year, and, perhaps, have at the same time profited in some useful Knowledge. And admit they do not understand it so well, as who have spent seven or eight Years about it, yet well enough for their Occasions, to read an Author, and converse with Strangers, (which last we sel∣dom, after all, can do); and how Gentlemen, Tradesmen, and all Persons, who do not design their Children for Scholars, shou'd think so many Years in learning a Language (tho they were sure they would be Critics in it) which, after all, would be but of very little use, well spent, I cannot easily imagine, when to understand it, as abovesaid, may do as well to all intents and purposes; nay, better for Conversation, and may be attain'd so easily. Here 'tis proposd, because unexperienc'd in this way to take two years to do that, which the Scots, French and Germans, often do in one; and yet to save a Child four or five years, which wou'd have been spent at School in learning Latin, which may be Imploy'd to a far greater Ad∣vantage, in writing a good Hand, reading the best English Writers, polishing and perfecting his English Style, learning Merchants Accounts, studying the Mathematics, improving those Rudiments of Arts and Sciences, which he had so good a taste of in reading Latin, learning the Art of a decent Carriage and Comportment with a Dancing-Master, Conver∣sing with Gentlemen of Sense and Experience in the World, whose Conversation will be much more Advantageous to him, than of any Scholar: And are not all these Accomplishments
preferrable to the being a Critic in a Tongue, which exist∣ing only in Books, can never perfectly be understood? Wit∣ness several things in Cato of Husbandry, Ennius and Plautus, which are not understood; upon which, notwithstanding, Peo∣ple will Comment and Criticize in Infinitum. But such as their Parents design for Scholars, in this Method, after one year, their Master may put upon reading Sanctius's Minerva, with Scioppius's Notes, and other Pieces of Criticism upon Grammar; or which, I take to be much better, to teach them from their Observations upon Authors, to make a Critical Grammar themselves, and when they have done it, they will not need so many Rules of Grammar before they read a Greek Author, as they had occasion for, before they learn'd a Latin one; and so the Tutor may proceed much after the same way as before, reading Lectures upon Authors, and still improving the Rudiments of Useful Knowledge. This is the Method I think best, in the Treatment and In∣stitution of Children, which I hope, by the blessing of God, and careful Endeavours of Able and Vertuous Men, may be of use to the Common-wealth. I shall leave the whole to the Readers Iudgment, desiring his Candour and favourable Opinion of this Proposed Method of Institution; and if he will vindicate the Common Method, or pro∣pose another he thinks better than that, or this, I will repay him, with Thanks. FINIS. Advertisement. SUch as desire to discourse the Author upon these Proposals, may hear of him at the Booksellers, or at the Marine Coffee-House in Birchin-Lane, after Change, who can inform them of Under∣takers.
AN Idea of Geography and Navigation. Containing Easie Rules for finding the Latitude and difference of Longitude of Places by Observation of the Sun, Moon and Stars. The de∣monstration and use of the Logline. The variation of the Com∣pass. The Doctrine of Plain Triangles. The Construction and Use of all manner of Maps and Charts. To keep a Iournal, and to work a Traverse both by Plain and Mercators Sailing. The Solution of all Nautical questions, Geometrically, Arithmetical∣ly, and Instrumentally. Also Tables of the Sun's Declination and Right Ascension for ever. A Table of the most Eminent  Stars in both Hemispheres, rectified for the Year 1700, with their Use, and other Tables necessary for Navigation By Samuel Newton, Master of the Math. School in Christ Hospital London. Print∣ed  Christopher Hussey, at the Flower-de-Luce in Little∣Britain.
