B5826 12330767 59668
The Libertine Overthrown: Or, a MIRROR for Atheists; Wherein they may clearly see their Prodigious Follies, Vast Extravagancies, Notorious Impieties and Absurdities: Containing a Compendious Account of the Egregious Vicious Life, and Eminently and Sincerely Penitent Death, Of that Great States-Man, Eminent Poet, and Learned Scholar, JOHN Earl of ROCHESTER, Who deparrted this Life the 26th of July, MDCLXXX. Wherein is briefly recited not only his Disputes and Arguments against God and Religion, as the same were used in Confe∣rences with Divines, and at several Atheistical Meetings; but also the chief of his notorious Pranks, such as his turning Mountebank, his Disguising himself in the Shapes of Beggars, his Amours, Revels, &c. To all which is added, The plain manner of his wonderful Con∣version, which was by hearing read the 53d. Chapter of Isaiah, his Christian deportment and Godly Expressions du∣ring his last Sickness; as also his Dying Remonstrance left in Writing, and signed and attested by Eminent Witnesses. The whole, for the use of the meanest Capacities, abstracted from the Remarks of the Right Reverend D. Gilbert Burnet, now Bishop of Sarum, and the Reverend Mr. Parsons, Chap∣lain to Ann Countess of Rochester. Licens'd according to Order. London, Printed and Sold by J. Bradford, without Bishopsgate.
A Mirror for Atheists. THE daily growth of Impiety and Athe amongst the meaner sort, obliges me to publshing the ensuing compendious Abstr wherein will appear the emptiness, shallowness and significany of the greatest and wisest Arguments, aga the Being of an Omnipotent Jehovah; in hand of which, I shall transcribe the Remarkable Pass of the Life of John Earl of Rochester, a Great M a greater Sinner, but at the last by divine Mercy, a  Eminent and Zealous Penitent. One who had for ∣veral Years, made it his Business to argue against  and Religion, and plac'd his Bliss and Happiness,  summum bonum, in carnal Pleasures and sensual  lights; but to be methodical, I shall give a short deser∣tion of his Birth, Parentage and Education. As for his Family, on both sides, from wh he was descended, they were some of the  famous in their Generations. His Grandfat was that Excellent and truly great Man,  Lord Wilmot, Viscount Athlone in Ireland.  his Father, who inherited the same Title,  Greatness, was by his late Majesty King  the I. created Baron of Adderburg in Oxfords and by King Charles the II. the Earl of Roches His Mother, of whom many worthy things  be spoken, was the Relict of Sir Francis- Lee of Ditchly, in the County of Oxford, Baron
Daughter of that Generous and Honourable entleman Sir John, St. Johns of Lyddiard, in the ounty of Wilts, Baronet. He was Born in April 1648. And as for his E∣ucation, it was in Wadham-College in Oxford, un∣er the care of that Wise and Excellent Gover∣our Dr. Blanford, the late Right Reverend Bishop  Worcester; there it was he laid a good Founda∣on of Learning and Study, tho he afterwards uilt upon that foundation Hay and Stubble ere he first suck'd from the Breasts of his Mother e University those perfections of Wit, Elo∣ence and Poetry, which afterwards by his own rrupt Stomach, or some ill juices after were  into Poyson to himself and others. Leaving the University, he betook himself to ravel, from which he return'd in the 18th Year  his Age, and appear'd at Court with as great dvantages as most ever had, greatly signalizing  Valour at Sea in the Year 65. when he went ith the Earl of Sandwich, &c. He had so entirely  down the Intemperance that was growing on  before his Travels, that at his Return he ha∣d nothing more. But falling into Company that  these Excesses, he was, tho not without fficulty; and by many Steps, brought back to it ain. And the Natural Heat of his Fancy being flamed by Wine, made him so extravagantly easant, that many, to be diverted more by that umour, studied to engage him deeper and deeper  Intemperance; which at length did so entirely bdue him, that (as he told the Reverend Dr. rnet now Bishop of Sarum) for five Years to∣ther he was continually Drunk; not all the
while under the visible Effects of it, but his Bloo was so inflamed, that he was not in all that time cool enough to be perfect Master of himself. Thi led him to say and do many wild and unaccount∣able things. There were two Principles in hi Natural temper, that being heightened by tha Heat, carried him to great Excesses; a violen love of Pleasure, and a disposition to extrava∣gant Mirth. The one involved him in great sen∣suality; the other led him to many odd Adve∣tures and Frolicks, in which he was oft in hazar of his Life. The one being the same Irregula Appetite in his Mind, that the other was in hi Body, which made him think nothing divertin that was not extravagant. And tho' in col Blood he was a generous and good Natured Man yet he would go far in his Heats, after any thin that might turn to a Jest, or matter of Diversion And so he came to bend his Wit and divert hi Studies and Endeavours to support and strenghten these ill Principles both in himself and others. An accident fell out after this, which confirm' him more in these Courses: (I shall relate it in th very Words of the Reverend D. Burnet) Whe he went to Sea in the Year 1665. there happen∣ed to be in the same Ship with him Mr. Mou∣tague, and another Gentleman of Quality; these two, the former especially seemed perswade that they should never return into England Mr. Mountague said he was sure of it, the othe was not so positive: The Earl of Rochester, an the last of these, entered into a formal Engage∣ment, not without Ceremonies of Religion, tha if either of them died, he should appear, an
give the other Notice of a future state, if there was any. But Mr. Mountague would not enter into the Bond. When the day came that they thought to have taken the Dutch Fleet in the Port of Bergen, Mr. Mountague, though he had such strong Presage in his Mind of his approaching Death, yet he generously staid all while in the the greatest Danger: The other Gentleman sig∣naliz'd his Courage in a most undaunted manner, till near the end of the Action; when he fell on a sudden into such a trembling, that he could scarce stand; and Mr. Mountague going to him to hold him up, as they were in each others Arms, a Cannon Ball killed him out-right, and carried away Mr. Mountague's Belly, so that he Died within an Hour after. The Earl of Ro∣chester (says the Doctor) told me, that these presages had in their Minds made some Impres∣sion on him, that there were separated Beings; and that the Soul either by a Sagacity or some secret Notice communicated to it, had a sort of Divination: But that Gentleman never appear∣ing was a great Snare to him during the rest of his Life. As to the Supream Being, he had always some mpressions of one, and profest often that he never knew an entire Atheist who fully believ'd there was no God: yet when he explain'd this notion of his Being, it amounted to no more than a vast power, that had none of the Attributes of Good∣ness or Justice, we ascribe to the Deity: These were his Thoughts about Religion. For Morali∣y, he freely own'd to me (saith the Reverend Dr. Burnet) that tho he talked of it, as a finething,
yet this was only because he thought it a decent way of speaking, and that as they went always in cloaths, tho' in their Frolicks they would have chosen sometimes to have gone Naked, if they had not feared the people: So tho' some of them found it necessary for humane Life to talk of Morality, yet he confessed they cared not for it, further than the Reputation of it was necessary for their credit, and Affairs; of which he gave many. In∣stances, as their professing and swearing friendship, where they hated Mortality; their Oaths and Im∣precations in their Addresses to Women, which the intended never to make Good: The delight they had in making people quarrel; their unjust usage of their Creditors, and putting them off by any deceitful promise they could invent, that might deliver them from present Importunity; of all which he afterwards sincerely Repented. He would often go into the Country, and be for some Months wholly imployed in study, or the Sallies of his Witt; which he came to direct chiefly to Satyre. For his other Studies they were divi∣ded between the comical and witty Writings of the Antients and Moderns, the Roman Authors, and Books of Physick, which the ill state of Health he was fall'n into, made more necessary to him∣self: and which qualified him for an odd Adven∣ture which I shall but briefly mention. Being under an unlucky Accident which obliged him to keep out of the way, he disguis'd himself, so that his nearest Friends could not have known him, and set up in Tower-street for an Italian Mountebank, where he had a stage, and practised Physick some weeks not without success. In his latter Years,
e read Books of History more. He took pleasure o disguise himself as a Porter, or as a Beggar, ometimes to follow some mean Amours, which or the vaniety of them, he affected. At other imes meerly for Diversion, he would go about in dd shapes, in which he acted his part so natural∣y, that even those who were on the Secret, and aw him in these shapes, could perceive nothing y which he might be discovered. Besides the Derision calumnies and Jeers he put pon Religion in his Lampoons Satyrs, &c. it was too frequent a Custom with him to meet with several dissolute Persons, purposely to ridi∣ule and dispute against Religion, &c. of which I hall give one memorable Instance related by Mr. Parsons, as the Earls own Words, One day at an Atheistical Meeting, at a Person of Qualities, I ndertook to manage the Cause, and was the principal Disputant against God and Piety, and for my perfor∣ances received the applause of the whole company; up∣n which my mind was terribly struck, and I immediate∣y reply'd thus to my self; Good God! That a man, hat walks upright, that sees the wonderful works of God, and has the use of his senses and reason, should se them to the defying of his Creator! But tho' this as a good Begining towards my Conversion, to find my Conscience touch'd for my Sins, yet it went off again; ay all my Life long I had a secret value and reverence or an honest man, and lov'd Morality in others: But I ad form'd an odd Scheme of Religion to my self, which ould solve all that God or Conscience might force upon e; yet I was not ever well reconciled to the Business of hristianity, nr had that Reverence for the Gospel of hrist as I ought to have, p. 23. of E. of Rochesters uneral Sermon.
In this Antheistical state of Mind, denying  Power of the Almighty: and despising his M∣sters, he continued till by a most wonderful P∣vidence, the Lord was pleased to open his  Blinded Eyes: And it was thus, as he gave the  count to the Reverend Dr. Burnet. Mr. Parsons in order to his Conviction, read him the 53. Chapter of our Saviour's Passion, t he might there see a Prophecy concerning it, writ many Ages before it was done; which the Je that Blasphemed Christ, still kept in their Han as a Book divinely Inspired: He said it to me,  Mr. Parsons, That as he heard it read, he felt an ∣ward force upon him, which did so enlighten his  and convince him, that he could resist it no longer:  the Words had an Authority which did shoot like  or Beams in his Mind; so that he was not only convin by the Reasonings he had about it, which satisfied  understanding, but by a Power which did so effectu constrain him, that he did ever after as firmly believe his Saviour, as if he had seen him in the Clouds.  had (said my Author) made it be read so often  him, that he had got it by Heart: and  through a great part of it in discourse with  with a sort of Heavenly Pleasure, giving me  Reflections on it;Vers. 1 some few I rememb Who hath believed our Report? H he said, was foretold the Opposition the Gospel was meet with from such Wretches as he was.  hath no Form nor Comliness,Vers. 2.  when we shall see Him, there is no Bea that we should desire Him. On this he said,  meanness of his Appearance has made vain and fo People desparage Him, because he came not in suc
Coat as they delight in, thus for his own ords. Having thus far trac'd his Life, in several consi∣rable and valuable Passages. I shall now Com∣ndiously incert some of his chief Atheistical Ar∣ments, used in defence of his immoraliies, and tious Practices, as the same were urg'd to, and swer'd by the Right Reverend Dr. Burnet, as ake it; upon their first Acquaintance. The Three chief things they talked about were Morality, Natural Religion, and Revealed Religion, hristianiy in particular: For Morality (saith my uthor) the Earl confessed, he saw the necessity  it, both for the Government of the World,  for the Preservation of Heath, Life, and iendship, and was much a shamed of his former actices, rather because he had made himself a east, and had brought pain and sickness on his ody, and had suffered much in his Reputation, an from any deep sense of a Supream Being or other State: But so far this went with him, at he resolved firmly to change the course of his fe, which he thought he should effect by the  of Philosophy, and had not a few no less  than pleasant Notions concerning the folly  madness of Vice: but he confessed he had no morse for his past actions, as offences against , but only as Injuries to himself and man∣nd. Upon this Subject; saith the Reverend Doctor hew'd him the Defects of Philosophy for reform∣g the World: That it was a matter of Specu∣tion, which but few either had the leisure or pacity to enquire into. But the Principle that
must reform mankind, must be obvious to  man's Understanding. That Philosophy in mat of Morality, beyon the great lines of our D had no very certaind fixed Rule; but in the  Offices and Instances went much by the fancie Men, and Customs of Nations and conseque could not have Authority enough to bear do the propensities of Nature, Appetite or Passi For which (saith the Doctor) I instanced in  Points, The one was about that Maxim of  Stoick, to extirpate all sort of Passion and con for any thing, &c. The other was upon the straint of pleasure how far that was to go. U this saith my Author, he told me the two Ma of his Morality then were, that he should do  thing to the hurt of any other, or that might p∣judice his own Health: And he thought that  pleasure when it did not interfere with these  to be indulged as the Gratification of our Natu Appetites. It seemed, continued he, unreasona to imagine these were put into man only to be  strained, or Curbed to such a narrowness:  he applied to the free use of Wine and Women. To this, saith my Author, I answered, Tha Appetites being natural, was an Argument for Indulging them, then the Revengful might as  alledge it for Murder, and the Covetous for St∣ing; whose Appetites are no less keen on those ∣jects; and yet it is acknowledg'd that these Ap∣tites ought to be curb'd. If the difference is  from the Injury that another Person recei the Injury is as great, if a Man's Wife is  or his Daughter corrupted? And it is impossible a Man to let his Appetites loose to vagrant
not to transgress in these particulars. I ther urged, saith the Doctor, that Morality ld not be a strong thing, unless a Man were termined by a Law within himself; for if he  measured himself by decency, or the Laws of  Land, this would teach him only to use such  in his ill practices, that they should not eak out too visibly; but would never carry him  an inward and universal probity: That Virtue s of so complicated a Nature, that unless a an came intirely within its discipline, he could  adhere stedfastly to any one Precept; for ces are often made necessary supports to one other. That this cannot be done, either steddily  with any Satisfaction, unless the Mind dos in∣rdly comply with, and delight in the Dictates  Virtue. And tat could not be effected, ex∣t a man's nature were internally regenerated and anged by a higher Principle: Till that came out, corrupt Nature would be strong, and Phi∣sophy but feeble: especially when it struggled th such appetites or Passions as were much kin∣ed, or deeply rooted in the constitution of ones dy. This, said the Earl, sounded to him like thufiasme, or Canting: He had no Notion of it, d so could not understand it. He comprehended the Dictates of Reason and ilosophy, in which as the Mind became much con∣rsant, there would soon follow, as he believed, greater easiness in obeying its precepts: I told  on the other hand, that all his Speculations Philosophy would not serve him in any stead, to  reforming of his Nature and Life, till he ap∣ed himself to God for inward assistances. It
was certain, that the Impressions made in his Rea∣son governed him, as they were lively presented to him: But these are so apt to slip out of our Me∣mory, and we so apt to turn our thoughts from them, and at some times the contrary Impressions are so strong, that let a man set up a reasoning in his Mind against them, he finds that Celebrated saying of the Poet. Video meliora probo{que} deteriora sequor. I see what is better and approve it: but follow what i worse. to be all that Philosophy will amount to. Where as those who upon such Occasions apply them∣selves to God, by earnest Prayer, feel a disengage∣ment from such Impressions, and themslves en∣ed with a power to resist them. So that thos bonds which formrly held them, fall off. This he said must be the effect of a heat in Na∣ture: it was only the strong diversion of th thoughts, that gave the seming Victory, and h did not doubt but if one could turn to a Problem i Euclid, or to Write a Copy of Verses, it would have the same effect. To this I answer, That  such Methods did only divert the thoughts, there might be some force in what he said: but if they not only drove out such Inclinations, but bega Impressions contrary to them, and brought  into a new disposition and habit of mind; the he must confess there was somewhat mre than  diversion, in these changes, which were brough on our minds by true Devotion. He further said sometime after that he did no understand the Business of Inspiration; he believe the pen-men of the Scriptures had heats and honest∣,
and so writ: but could not comprehend how d should reveal his Secrets to mankind. He could t apprehend how there should be any corruption  the nature of Man, or a lapse derived from am — The Incoherences of stile in Scriptures e odd transitions, the seeming contradictions, efly about the order of time, the Cruelties en∣ned the Israelites in destroying the Canaanites, Cir∣mcision, and many other Rites of the Jewish orship seemed to him infutable to the Divine Na∣re: And the first three Chapters of Genesis, he ought could not be true unless they were Parables his was the substance of what he excepted to Re∣led Religion in general, and to the Old Testament  particular. ut in all these things (said the Reverend B. Burnet) old him he was in he wrong way, where he ex∣mined the Business of Religion, by some da∣rts of Scripture: Therefore I desir'd him to con∣der the whole contexture of the Christian Religi∣, the Rules it gives, and the methods it prscibes, othing can conduce more to the peace, order and appiness of the World than to be govern'd by  Rules, nothing is more for the interest of every an in particular: the Rules of Sobriety, Tem∣erance and Moderation were the best preservers of ife, and which was perhaps more, of Health, umility, Contempt of the vanities of the World, d the being well employed, raised a man's mind  a freedom from the follies and temptations that aunted the greatest part. Nothing was so gene∣ous and great as to supply the necessities of the oor, and to forgive Inries: nothing raised and aintained a Man's Reputation so much, as to
be exactly just and merciful, Kind, Charitable an Compassionate: Nothing opened the powers of  Man's Soul so much as a calm Temper, a seren Mind; free of passion and disorder: Nothin made Societies, Families, and Neighbourhoods  happy as when these Rules which the Gospel pre∣scribes, take place, of doing as we would have other to do to us, and loving our Neighbours as our lseve▪ The Christian Worship is also plain and simple, sui∣table to so pure a Doctrine; the ceremonies of  few and significant. The Issue of all this Discourse was, He told th Reverend D. Burnet, that he saw Vice and Impie∣ty were as contrary to Humane Society, as wild Beasts let loose would be; and therefore he firmly resolved to change the whole method of his Life to▪ become stricty just and true, to be chast and Temperate, to forbear swearing and Irreligiou Discourse, to Worship and Pray to his Maker. And that tho' he was not arrived at a full perswa∣sion of Christianity, he would never employ his Wit to run it down or corrupt others; This Hope∣ful Bud of Grace, by the Blessing of God so fructi∣fied, that in a short time he became not an almost, but a ltogether Christian. Some Instances I shall compendiously give. And I. His hearty concern for the pious Education of his Children, wishing that his Son might never be a Wit, that is, (as himself explained it) one of those wretched Creatures, who pride themselves in abu∣sing God and Religion denying his Being, or his Provi∣dence, but that he might become an Honest and a Religi∣ous Man, which could only be the support and Blessing of his Family; Complaining, what a vicious and
naughty World they were brought into, and that no For∣unes or Honours were comparable to the Love and Favour f God to them, in whose name he Blessed them, Pray'd for 'em, and committed them to his Pro∣tection. And here I must not pass by his pious and most passionate Exclamation to a Gentleman of some Character, who came to visit him in his last Sick∣ness: O Remember that you contemn God no more, he is an avenging God, and will visit you for your sins; will in mercy I hope, touch your Conscience sooner or later as he has done mine; you and I have been Friends and Sinners together a great while, therefore I am the more free with you; we have been all mistaken in our conceits and Opi∣nions; our perswasions have been false and groundless, therefore God grant you Repentance. And seeing him the next day again, he said to him, Perhaps you were disobliged by my plainness yesterday; I spake the words of Truth, and soberness to you, and (striking his hand upon his Breast) said, I hope God will touch your Heart. To this may be added, his Comfortable Perswasions of Gods accepting him to his Mercy, saying three or four days before his Death, I shall die, but oh! What unspeakable Glories do I see! What Joys beyond thought or Expression; am I sensible of! I am assured of God's Mercy to me through Jesus Christ. Oh how I long to die and to be with my Saviour. The time of his Sickness and Repentance was just nine Weeks; in all which time, he was so much Master of his Reason, and had so clear and under∣standing, (saving 30. hours, about the middle of it, in which he was deliious) that he never dictated or spoke more composed in his Life: and therefore if any shall continue to say, his Piety was the effect
of Madness or Vapours; let me tell them it is h∣ly disingenuous, and that the Assertion is as sill it is wicked. nor was this thing done in a corn nmbers visited and attended him; and surely,  any, the learned Physicians, that were convers with him in the whole course of his tedious sickne are competent Judges of a Phrensy or Delirium. To conclude these Remarks, I shall incert his dying Rem∣strance, sufficiently attested and signd by his own Hand, as truest sence, (which I hope may be useful for that Good end design'd it,) in manner and form following FOr the benefit of all those whom I may have drawn sin by My example and encouragemnet, I leave to world this my last Declaration, which I deliver in presence of the great God, who knows the secrets of hearts, and befor whom I am now appearing to be judged▪ That from the bottom of my soul I detest and ab the whole course of my former wicked life; that I thi can never suffiently admire the goodness of God, who ha∣ven me a true sense of my pernicious Opinions and vile P∣tices, by which I have hitherto lived without Hope,  without God in the world; have been an Open Enem Jesus Christ, doing the utmost despite to the holy Spir Grace. And that the greatest testimony of my Chari such is, to warn 'em in the Name of God, and as they re the welfare of their Immortal Souls, no more to deny his ∣ing, or his Providence, or despise his Goodness▪ no mo make a mock of Sin, or contemn the pure and excellent ∣ligion of my ever Blessed Redemer, thro' whose Merits a I one of the Greatest of Sinners, do yet hope for Mercy  Forgiveness Amen. Declared and Sign'd in the presence of ANNE ROCHESTER. ROBERT PARSONS. F. ROCHEST Jun. 16, 1680. FINIS.
