B724 08833760 41916
ROBERT BARCLAY's APOLOGY For the true CHRISTIAN Divinity Vindicated From JOHN BROWN's Examination and pretended confutation thereof, in his book, called, QUAKERISME The Path-Way to PAGANISME. In which VINDICATION I. B. his many gross perversions and abuses are discovered, and his furious and violent Railings and Revilings soberly rebuked, By R. B. VVhereunto is added A Christian and Friendly Expostulation with RO∣BERT MACQUARE, touching his Postscript to the said book of J. B. written to him by LILLIAS SKEIN, wife of Alexan∣der Skein, and delivered some moneths since at his house in Rotterdam. Isaiah 51: 7. Hearken unto me, ye, that know righteousness, the People, in whose heart is my Law, fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be ye afraid of their revilings. Matth. 5: 11. Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and speak all manner of evil falsly against you for my Name's sake. Printed in the Year. 1679. And are to be sold by Benjamin Clerk, Stationer, in Georgeyard Lumberstreet, At LONDON.
The PREFACE To the READER. Serious READER, I shall not need to trouble thee here with a long Preface, most of what is commonly in∣serted in such Epistles being proposed to thee in the first Section, onely I will take occasion here, ingenuously and solemnly to profess that no delight in controversy hath induced me to undertake this Treatise, but pure necessity, to vindicat the Truth, professed by me, from the many gross perversions wherewith this Author hath abused it. For as for his Perso∣nal Reflections at me, which are very frequent, and whereby he labours to represent me to his Reader, as the veryest Fool, Ignorant, Sensless, Non-sensical, and yet Proud, Presumptuous and blasphemous Miscreant (for such are his expressions) that can be imagined; I should not have troubled my self nor the world with a Vindication, being perswaded none who truely knows me, will believe him, and that none of solidity and judge∣ment, who knows me not, will so easily agree to his Censur: as for such credulous creaturs (if his book find any such, for I have heard of severals of the same faith with him, who much condemn his Railing still) who will judge of me upon so smal and suspicious evidence, I must be contented, as many better men have been before me, to abide the rash judgment of those inconsiderat Souls. As for the book, from which he assumes
and pronounces this character of me, thou wilt find it here vindicated, and see that hideous masque, wherewith he la∣boured to vail it, that he might rail the more securely, taken off. I could easily shew the lightness of his judgement, by filling the other scale with a pressed-down measur of the Testi∣monys, both by word and write, of several Persons at home and abroad, who are not Quakers, and yet such, to whom without disparagement he must give the precedency, both for Parts, Piety and Learning; but I desire not to raise my reputa∣tion that way; it is his work that needs a Postscript of that nature: and truely he hath saved me this paines, while at other times he manifestly implies a contradiction to this character, while he persuades the Reader of the ne∣cessity he was under to write so great a Volumn, as if the whole Christian Commonwealth had been in danger to be overturned, and many Souls in hazard to be hurt by the Quakers (among whom both he and his brother R. M. C. give me and my writings a chief place, as their Goliah, patron, sharpest and neatest pen) if not seasonably supplyed by this his antidot. For sure had it been so inconsistent and contra∣dictory a piece of work, as he sometimes represents it to be, as being written by so silly and pittyfull an Ignoramus, as he is sometimes pleased to term me, there could not have been so great cause of fear, nor such need of so great a volumn, espe∣cially to such as could not understand mine, being not yet ex∣tant in a language they skilled, to whom he principally di∣rects his, and though they had, could have no great hurt, if he speak true, when he represents me frequently to write things unintelligible, and yet he is so wise as to apprehend he has refuted what he confesses he doth not understand. But the reason of his thus contradicting himself is, that, albeit his
malice to the Truth and my self, was such, that he could not say enough to render both it and me despicable, yet forgeting himself at other times, he was forced to acknowledge what I say considerable, that he might render his own work of some value, and himself a champion, which he could never have done, albeit he might be supposed to have rebuked and refut∣ed a piece of pittifull non-sense. Thus the man, while he stretcheth to exalt himself, and abase me; overturns, on the one part, what he affirms on the other: but if he can have so far pitty upon himself, as to think in time, of repenting, I do with my whole heart freely forgive him, and whether he do, or not, I can assure him, as I should never have valued my self upon his commendation, so I am nothing moved by his abuses, save only to pitty and commiserat him. I must en∣treat this of the Reader, that, if he desire to be fully inform∣ed in this controversy, he will be pleased first to read my Apo∣logy, which for his benefit will I hope be extant in our own language, ere this comes to his hands, and then perhaps he will little need an antidot against the pretended confutation, but if any scruple there remain, it will easily be removed by seriously perusing this Vindication. And because before his book he placeth a great list of that he accounts the blasphe∣mous assertions of the Quakers, that so he may preposses his Reader with prejudice at the very entry, to remove which, thou wilt find inferted at the end a List of so many of them as are utterly false, besides many of them are Perversions, & not owned in the terms he asserts them, & yet a great part of them he pretends not so much as to deduce from any words written by me, but has fished for them in the writings of others of our adversarys, which piece of injustice is in the last Section de∣monstrated. Not desiring to detain thee any longer, I shall
only wish the God of all Grace to minister to thee such a measur thereof, and give thee such Light and understanding by the holy influence of his Divine Spirit, that thou mayst, for his Glory and thy Soul's Salvation make a right judgment of the present Controversy, and come truely to discern which doctrin it is, and who speaks most consonantly to the Holy Scripturs, So wisheth he, who is a real friend to all men, R. B.
ADVERTISMENT. IT is hoped that the more moderat, sober and serious among the Presbyterian Preachers, and who have a true regard as wel to the Peace of their own Con∣sciences as to the Christian reputation of their cause and interest among sober and honest Christians, will shew their readyness to do justice to themselves, as wel as right to the injured Author of this Treatise, not only in respect to the ap∣peal added to the end of the last Section, but also to the many other gross abuses, falshoods and railings detected herein, to be most impudently asserted by John Brown, since he comes forth under no less character than a Presbyterian David, and that given him by so eminent a man as Robert Macquare is reputed among them: which justice is also the more hoped for, since the more moderat Pre∣sbyterians have themselvs felt the fruit of J. B. his violent, furious and unchri∣stian temper, in his fomenting Divisions among them, and encouraging Cameron by his Letter, whom they repute an Heady, Turbulent Incendiary, and the ef∣fects of whose work strengthened by J. B. have produced no small mischief both to the Cause in general, and to many poor People, who have been thereby ruined, if the occasion some of themselvs represent of the late rising in Scotland be true. ERRATA. The Reader is desired to correct these following Errors, which have escaped the Press: other literal ones, which do not so much touch the sense, are left to his discretion, and if any others considerable have not been observed and here remarked, it is hoped the cour∣teous Reader will not impute them to the Author, because of his absence from the Press. In the Preface, page 1. line 20. for still read style. P. 3. l. 24. for which r. them. P. 4. l. 6. r. who that speaks.—In the Book, pag. 16. l. ult. r. owne. P. 17. l. last save two, r. Sects. P. 22. l. 6. r. do. P. 23. l. last but two, r. preparatory. P. 26 l. 25. after may d. not. P. 32. l. 4. d. of. P. 34. l. 25. r. spirits. d. of. P. 43. l. 26. r. bonds. P. 57. l. 9. r. arcady. P. 68. l. 9. r. him. P. 83. l. 13. d. by which. P. 88. l. 11. r. he. P. 102. l. 5. after is, read not. P. 78. l. 2. add after dye for themselvs; If he mean a natural death, but if not, I see no reason of admitting his fi∣gure, nor is there any strength in it to prove that it imports his dying in their room and stead, as he would have it. P. 98. l. 34. r. is. P. 101. l. 14. r. say. l. 15. r. is. P. 110 l. 28. r. sine. P. 113. l. 16. d. by. P. 135. l. 16. r. by Papists against Protestants. Pag. 184. l. 15. r. he hath but said it. l. 18. r. so as all. P. 192. l. ult. r. and. P. 168. l. 17. for proof read reply. P. 180. l. 3. r. corruptions. P. 175. l. 34. for and r. add.
R. B's. APOLOGY For the true Christian Divinity VINDICATED From J. B's. Examination and pretended Confutation thereof, in his book, Called QUAKERISME the path-way to PAGANISME. Section I. Containing the Introduction, and the Method, the Author proposeth to himself, in this Treatise; with the rea∣sons wherefore, together with some general Considera∣tions relating to I. B's. whole book, and Remarks on his Epistle to the Reader. ¶ 1. AMong the many evils, that abound amongst those, that bear the name of Christians, this is a great one, that, in the unhappy difference they have among themselvs, there appears so much malice, bitterness and envy; and so little of that candor and sincerity, true and unmixed zeal, and of the meekness, peaçablness and gentlness of Iesus: so that there is often-times observed an eager willingness to re∣present their Opposits other ways than they are. But, among all sorts of such, as profess Christianity, I know none have more reason to com∣plain
of this abuse, than we; who, albeit we have not a little laboured to make known to all, the plain Truth, held by us; yet our words have been most miserably perverted upon many occasions, and we most horribly misrepresented, as is abundantly manifest to many, who are acquaint∣ed with the books writ against us, and our answers: wherein many, if not most, of the arguments used against us are not levelled at those things we truely hold, but at the monstrous and horrid conceptions, which our adversarys have framed to themselvs, and then would needs fasten upon us, as our Principls and doctrins. Many of us have been thus ex∣ercised in the controversys, wherein we have been concerned, and I my self, in some small rencountres that have heretofore faln to my share, have had my part, but I confess inferior to many of my Brethren. But now that I. B's work appears, I think (considering the bulk and natur of it, hereafter more particularly to be viewed) I may come up with most. For I scarçe think that ever a man's words were so horridly and constant∣ly throughout perverted, or that ever a book of controversy, of its bulk, to wit, (as I take it) betwixt 70 and 80 sheets of paper, was so stuffed with a continuall strain of Railing, from the very first page unto the last. Yet, when we consider the man's design, which appears from the natur of his work, perhaps there will be less occasion of wonder. ¶ For either he, or some brother of his abroad, having, without any provocation from us, the People called Quakers, faln into the most gross and vilest sort of railing against us, in a Post script to S. R's Letters, and that without the least offer of probation, it seems they judged themselvs con∣cerned to give the people some reason for their so doing. And there could not be a finer knack to beguil the credulous and implicit Multitud, than to answer a book writ in Latine, and not extant in their Mother∣tongue: for there a man, as to them, (who can not read, understand, and compare it with that, to which it relates) may pervert words, as he will, draw consequences at pleasur, and make to himself what monsters best please his fancy, or like his humour best to batter. And yet he can not find in it by all his perverting enough to make us so black, as he would have us, so that he is often-times constrain'd to fish for this, by citing the writings of some, that have writ against us, and bring us up some of their old threed-bare calumnys, long ago answered by us: in which his injustice shall be afterwards observed. And so he, being thus furnish∣ed, can the more easily abuse, especially while he is almost secure, that
the generality of those he writes to, are such, as will not call in question, as to the truth of it, what is said by one esteemed by them a pretious and gratious Minister, and sufferer for the good cause, to boot. But (blessed be God!) the number of such implicit believers groweth daily less, and many (that had wont to do other-wise) begin to love to see with their own eyes, and not to pin their faith so much upon the Clergy's sleeve, as they had used formerly to do. For this cause, had I had to do only with the more judicious and Learned, who could have wel understood the La∣tine edition, I should have thought my self the less concerned to have said any thing to this answer: But knowing that his may come to the hands of many, and may be read by them, who do not understand Latine: and that not a few, who do understand it, love rather to read and consi∣der things in their own language; this made me hasten an English edition (not one sheet whereof was committed to the press several weeks after I. B's book came out) and now it being abroad, as to those, who are diligent and judicious, and willing seriously to compare, as to the argu∣mentative part, I should not be much concerned to answer him, judging the English edition, with all such, a sufficient reply to this pretended exa∣mination, however he often-times sings a triumph to himself, saying in many places, What will our Quaker say now? Contrary to the rules of so∣briety, and to what the Scriptur teaches him, saying, Let not him boast, that puts-on his armour, but he that takes it off, besides what his brother, in a most fawning flattering manner, adds in his Postscript. (To which something may be said hereafter.) But, because too many out of malice, prejudice and ignorance, may be too apt to credit him, I resolve here to take notice of his gross perversions and abuses upon every These, and of his most unreasonable and brutish railing, which being subjected to the Readers view, will give him a great in-sight in the matter, and let him see what kind of man this is, and what kind of work it is that comes from him. And likewise in respect he insults very much, I may labour to allay it, in taking notice of his chiefest arguments, that are any ways to the purpose. This I know will satisfy the moderat and judicious, who bring not along with them an understanding already prepossessed, but are willing patient∣ly to hear both partys, and then make a judgment accordingly. And as for others, who are wholly prepossessed with malice and prejudice, and have no ears to hear, but (according to the Author of the Postscript his advice) avoid the least of that kind as poyson: I say, as for such, I wish the
Lord open their eyes, and give them a heart more just and equal, I shall not be much concerned if my writing have no great influence upon them at present. ¶ But, if any strange that so small a Treatise, as this may seem to be, should answer so great a bulk, the considering of these particulars fol∣lowing will easily remove that wonder. 1. If we consider how much is taken up in meer railing, of which few pages are found free, and somtimemes takes up near the whole page, besides that almost every paragraph ends with a dish of this desert: say∣ing, O what hell-hatched heresies these abominable Quakers maintain! and the like: besides many little sentences, such as, This is an answer fit for a Quaker. This is like the Quakers non-sense. I see the Quakers can dream wak∣ing, and such like stuff. I need not set down pages to prove this, for, as thou wilt find a specimen of it in the first half side to the Reader, so indeed thou'lt scarce open the book but thou wilt meet with it: so that I may safely say, to speak within bounds, there are 20 sheets (if it were all put together) that are meer railing, either by way of admiration, detestation, or execration, which have nothing of argumentation, neither from Scrip∣tur nor Reason, but the meer strong affirmo of the assertor; all which (albeit I may remark it as I go on) I think not my self concerned to an∣swer, nor do I conceive will any sober man judge I am, and my answer thereto, as now to the bulk of it, so may perhaps prove not much more all along, than The Lord rebuke that railing spirit in thee I. B., and, if it may stand with his will, redeem thee from it, that thou mayst learn sobriety, of that Grace of God thou so much fightst against. It is a trade I love not, nor do I skill or think to learn it, I will readily grant him both the preference and victory in this art of Billingat's rhetorik, or, to speak yet more plain to all our Scots capacitys, of kail-wives, oratory. So I say, Let all this railing in his book be laid aside: and whereas he would insinuat in severall places, as if there were much railing in my Apology, saying, I rage, and such like expressions, how great an abuse this is, I leave to the judgment of the intelligent Reader. 2. If all his excursions be laid aside, wherein he runneth out often∣times into long homilies, by way of explanation of their judgment, des∣canting upon the severall opinions of their Divines, as he calls them, in which he often-times not only bestowes severall pages, but sometimes divers sheets, as in its place may be observed. In all which tedious preach∣ments
(some whereof are may be shies of old rusty sermons, that have been lieing by him) I think my self no more concerned, than if the man had writt a great volumn of their Divinity, which I should not perhaps have bestowed the pains to read, far less lookt upon it as my business to an∣swer it. 3. If all his citations out of Hicks, Faldo and others, that have writen against us, all which are long ago answered, though not heeded by him, were laid aside, which is not only most impertinent, but likewise unjust, (as shall be after more particularly observed) and likewise his long citations out of the Westminster confession of faith and larger Catechism, a good part whereof he hath transcribed and inserted in his book, albeit it had been a great deal easier to have cited the chapters, and referred to them, the book being so common: but it seems it pleaseth the man's hu∣mour to see a great bulk go under his name, however it be filled up. 4. Lastly: If his many perversions be considered, wherein he either wil∣fully orignorantly mistakes my meaning, and sets up to himself a man of straw, and then batters at it: I say, this being laid aside, which takes up no small part of his work, will make a considerable abatement. Now all these things considered, and all this superfluous and chassy stuff being laid aside, which is little or nothing to the purpose, the Rea∣der will find that what remaineth will go into a pretty narrow compass, and bear no great disproportion, if any at all, with these my observations. ¶ 4. But, ere I make an end of this section, I judge it needfull to take some notice of his Epistle, where the manner of his introduction is very odd. Men use to be sober and moderat, that write controversys, in the be∣ginning at lest, and not seek to prepossess the Reader with prejudice against their adversarys, untill, by the strength of their Reasons, they have proven them to deserve it: but this man is so full fraughted with malice, and so in love with railing, that he can not forbear the first page, where we have him calling us Locusts, of whose ministry the Devil makes use, only Masculine in Malice against Christ, &c.—breathing forth nothing but that Putrid porson, that innate Serpentine Venom, &c. And of this strain is the whole of his Epistle, where we are termed Apostat-Quakers, Runagado Pag. 2 & 3. Quakers, &c. But methinks it should have been more rational, to have forborn this untill he had proved us such, and not to have begun thus to rail without the least probation. But however this may take with malitious or credulus persons, it will give the Judicious a sufficient tast of the natur
of his work, and we are not afraid of great prejudice by this kind of argu∣ing. But as he goes on, he gives us a clear specimen of what spirit he is of, and abundantly shewes, that, if either he had power, or were able to influ∣ence the Magistrat thereunto, he would have saved himself the labour of all this confutation, by making short, in cutting us all off. For since he re∣presents us not only as the worst and vilest of heretiks, but as the sworn and most desperat enemies of Jesus Christ in all his offices, we need not doubt, considering his judgment expressed in the case of Liberty of Conscience, what he would have done with us. And albeit it might have been judged that in prudence he should have let it alone, untill that place where it seemed to be most proper, and only might be inferred by way of conse∣quence, yet in this, as in most other things, his malice outdoes his pruden∣tials, and therefore he can not let 3 pages pass, and that in the Epistle, till he discover his temper in this; for there he tells us a story of a Turk, who caused punish a Iew for blaspheming of Christ, to the shame of Christians, who have not so much zeal, &c.—and a redress of this (saith he) is called for at the hands of one and other, according to their Place and Station. The language of this is sufficiently understood, and beareth no small reflexion upon Magistrats, as not being so forward to persecut, as I. B. would have them. And, if we consider that flood of railing that followes, the application is easy: and then, as he goes on, he takes a very convenient way that he may rail securely and calumniat without fear of being discovered, for he would fright People from so much as coming near us, yea he will have all fleeing from us more hastily than from persons having the black botch (such is his comely expression) yea and under the dreadfull hazard of incurring Anathema Ma∣ranatha, so much as to enter into a friendly communing with us, give us the least token of kindness and affection by word or deed! (What! not feed us, if ready to starve? or cloath us, if naked? which Christ commands all his Disciples Prov. 25: ver. 21. Matth. 5: 44. Rom. 12: 20. Rom. 7: 2. Eph. 5: ver. 25. to do to their greatest enemies.) But how would this man have a husband behaving towards his wife, or a wife towards her husband, if, turning Quaker, they must shew one another no token of kindness and affection either in word or deed, when the Apostle encourages Christian husbands and wives to live with one another respectively, if they be willing, albeit professed Heathens and open Idolaters? But with him, they must not so much as shew a token, so much as by one cast of the eye, far less by more homely dis∣coursings: and after the same manner a little after, he would have all for∣bear so much as looking into our writings, to which, according to his ordi∣nary
stile, he gives such epithets as his railing Genius affords him; a very ready way for him to belye and calumniat us at pleasur. But upon this occa∣sion I would ask him this question, If he judgeth it reasonable, that he, that readeth his Examination should look into the Apology to which it relates, or unto that which is said by way of reply to it, or if he would have them taking all upon trust from him? Were not this a brave way of examining controversys? and doth not this fairly lead to the blind ignorance and implicitness of the Church of Rome, and to the custom of the Turks and Mahumet's rule? (whom he hath so often in his mouth.) I would willingly know if the man would avow himself so irrational, as to require or desire this of any body in their wits: and yet he must be so irrational, or otherwise allow the breaking of the Rules he so earnestly presseth. ¶ 5. After he has proceeded at the same rate of railing, accusing us of Devilry, and what not, (as for the number of the poisonous assertions, which he saith he has gathered together, it shall be spoken of hereafter, and his gross abuse therein detected.) he comes at last to apprehend that some will think he is too large, but he has a quick way of solving that difficulty, by answering himself with a contrary apprehension, that more will blame him for not being larger, and so this objection is easily dispatched. As for the reason he gives of his prolixity, to wit, because of the temper of the Quakers, who would have been ready to vaunt and triumph, if he had omitted any thing. But for all this boast, it shall be shewn, that several times (as large as he is) he hath omitted whole considerable Paragraphs, where he found he would be pinched, and that the matter was too hot for his fingers, that he durst not meddle with it. At last he comes to an honest and ingenu∣ous confession, that in most of the heads, he hath adduced, for confirmation, only their Confession of Faith, and Catechism: A very plain acknowledgment of the natur of his work, for he is very good at begging the question, and proceeding upon Principles denyed by him he hath to do with. But the judicious Reader may judg whether his proofs be very valid and binding, which are only confirmed by that which is denyed by me, and which needes to be confirmed no less than the arguments deduced from it: since I account it no confession of the true Faith, this is just as if a Papist, argu∣ing against a Protestant, should tell him he useth only, for confirmation, the decrees of the council of Trent, how ridiculous this is any judicious man may judg. But since he hath so great a veneration of the confession of Faith, and also such an itch of scribbling, methinks he should not suffer it to lie so long
under the censur of that examen which was written several years ago, and lieth yet (for ought ever I could learn) unanswered, all the notions of which albeit I will not espouse, yet I think all I. B's Clergy and Reason will not solidly reply to it, and I am wel assured it hath disgusted hun∣dreds of that confession; (who are not Quakers) and also how weakly the Confession is confirmed, and how grossly the Scripturs are perverted, to make them serve it, I have given a tast in the last chapter of my book, intituled, a Catechism and Confession of Faith, which is not only extant in English, but he will find also printed in Low Dutch, and should in reason have been re∣moved by him, ere he had used it only for confirmation in controversy against me. But there is something more in this expression, for, when the Confession of Faith and Catechism is onely adduced for confirmation, what becomes of the Scripturs, that, in words, are so highly exalted? It seems, notwithstand∣ing all these verbal commendations, he has no more use for them than for an old Almanack, the Confession of Faith and Catechism is that which is to be minded. It seems what he brings of them in this controversy is only pro formâ, for the confession of Faith is only adduced for confirmation; it is the good antidot against the many Errors of the Times: and whereas he speaks of apposit passages of Scriptur, those, that will compare them with the things they are pointed to, to prove, will find in most not the least correspondence, of which I have given some proof in that place before mentioned. ¶ 6. But indeed he hath spoken out the truth of the matter, for all their great talk of the Scriptur, it is manifest to such as will narrowly look into it, that not the Scriptur, but the confession of Faith and Catechism is their Rule of Faith and Manners: for the Scripturs must serve the Confession of Faith, not the Confession of Faith answer the Scripturs, which must be turned, twin'd and wrested, to sute to the Confession of Faith. Hence if a man believe the Scripturs ever so firmly, and square his faith accord∣ingly, unless he agree to every point of the Confession of Faith, all is to no purpose, he must pass for an Heretik. At last, to conclude, he having, it seems, said all he has to say, makes provision not to be put upon the necessity to vindicat his gross perversions and calumnys. As for his comparison of Rats and mice their dealing with books, he must know I intend not to square these observations to gratify his humour, it will be enough for me to satisfy the candid and judicious Reader. He doubts not to make a judgment of things not yet in being,
and therefore expects no answer, that shall savour of Reason, Religion, Candor and Plainness. We have seen that of him, which gives us ground to be∣lieve he has bad enough thoughts of us: but however, he must not expect to be judge in his own cause, and whereas he saith, he will not be troubled at our Railings and Barkings, one may wonder the man has the confidence to accuse others of what himself is so highly guilty of; but he shall not need fear to be troubled with such stuff, and whether he gives or gets most of that, is referred to the judicious Readers, to whose judgment and cen∣sur, whether he will or not, as his writings will be liable, so to them, and to their Christian consideration, I freely submit what is written in these Observations. Section II. Wherein his two first Chapters, containing Remarks upon my Preface, and the first These of the true ground of knowledge, are considered. ¶ 1 UPon the Preface of my Theses, which is but about half a dozen of lines, he bestowes no less than 12 pages, all which being either bare assertions or railing (as can not escape the diligent Readers observation.) will therefore require the shorter reply. He hath not got the length of a dozen of lines, when with a piece of confidence he will seem so modest, as not to preoccupy the Reader's judgment, by calling the Theses, Ethnical or Diabolical, but methinks, if he has not forgotten his epistle, which we will in reason suppose the Reader to have first view∣ed, in which (as is above observed) there is enough of that sort said to preoccupy his judgment, so that he must needs put out his eyes, that doth not see that his pretended modesty and forbearance is not real. ¶ 2. Next, because these Theses are directed by me to Clergy men of all sorts in the Christian world, he will needs have it that I acknowledg a Christian world, to which my self and those I patronize do not belong: but how he makes this consequence appear he leaves us to divine, for there is no proof brought for it, but his own assertion. He needs not wonder that I acknowledge a Christian world, unless he had known me somewhere todeny it, for in respect of Profession (which distinction himself else∣where useth) all these may be accounted of it, who make an outward pro∣fession
of Christ, besides that I have sufficiently acknowledged my be∣lief that in severals of them the inward life of Christianity is to be found; as for what followes, he needs not doubt, but I am as much against the distinction of Laity and Clergy, as himself can be. But since I writ to such, many whereof own it, my using it to them, for distinction's sake, will not inferr my approving of it. With his usuall candor, he will have this direction to import no less than a chartal to provoke all those, it is dire∣cted to, to a dispute, as if a man for removing of mistakes and misrepresen∣tations, could not give an account of his faith, without it be esteemed a provocation to dispute: if he really believes I intended so, I must tell him he is greatly mistaken, and I apprehend I should know my own inten∣tions large as wel as he. He is offended that our doctrines should be thought as different from Papists as Protestants, but with how little ground, will after appear; and he also refers it to a fitter probation. Then, after he has knocked as hard as he can upon me, for my confidence, he tells me, that there is little said by me but what was refuted, ere I was born, by the orthodox writing against Pelagians, Socinians, Arminians, Enthusiasts, Ana∣baptists and Papists. But methinks then there was the less need of troubling the world with his volum, yet he has for that a ready salvo, he must an∣swer a fool according to his folly, lest he be wise in his own conceit. Some other reasons he adds for ingaging in this his work, which the Reader may judge of, whether they be of any weight. ¶ 3. As he goes on, he is greatly offended I should stile my self a servant of the Lord, and will have it to be upon no better ground, than Tho∣mas Muncer and the Anabaptists of Munster. But because all this is founded upon the supposition of my being a false prophet, and preaching another gos∣pel than the true, we must leave it to the Reader's judgment, after he has taken time to consider of the whole debate. But, because he speaks here of the produçing credentials, I would willingly have him producing his credentials for being a Minister of the Gospel, and it may be then seen, if I can not produce as valid, for any thing I stile my self, only he must remember, that, as his must have something more than his own affirma∣tion, or those of his party, so he must overturn mine with some stronger arguments than meer railing. ¶ 4. He needs not apprehend, as he would insinuat, that the omission of any words in the Theses prefixed to the Apology proceeds from my being asham∣ed of the name QUAKER; since himself bears witness in the very same
page, that I fully acknowledge it, in the explanation of the 11 Thesis. Here he has a descant upon Trembling, and seems to strange that any Qua∣ker should bring the example of Moses and Habbakkuk, to shew that such a thing was not so much to be wondred at in the Saints: but why this should be esteemed impertinent by him he doth not tell us. As for the foaming at the mouth, he talks of, both here and elsewhere, it is returned upon him as a calumny, and he is desired to prove it; but it must be by some more credible & impartial testimony than his Mr Stalham, for Partys use not to be admitted as witnesses. For his denominating us by that name of distinction, I shall not quarrel: but as for his insinuation in the begin∣ing of pag. 5. where he saith, It is like we would gladly have them casting away their Bibles, as no more to be regarded, than the Turks Alcoran, it bespeaketh the height of malice, as to which I shall only say, The Lord forgive him for so gross a calumny, which he, that is the Searcher of hearts, knows to be a most horrible lye. He goes on after his usual manner, saying, I inveigh against all humane learning, that hath been any ways made use of in Theo∣logy; but where he finds this asserted by me I know not, whether the words he would deduce it from, to wit, (that man has rendred the plain and naked Truth obscure and mysterious by his wisdom) will bear such a consequence is left to the Readers judgment. But he thinks he has found out our secret design of being against Learning and Schools of Learning. (which is nei∣ther our affirmation nor principle, but his own false supposition.) We would (saith he) have all those banished, that we might the more easily prevail with our errors. But methinks the man should be more wary in venting his own false imaginations, unless he could bring some ground for them: for his assertion is so far untrue, that, if he had been rightly informed, he might have known that we have set up schools of Learning for teaching of the Languages and other needfull Arts and Sciences, and that we never de∣nyed its usefulness; only we denyed it to be a qualification absolutly ne∣cessary for a Minister, in which case alone we have opposed its ne∣cessity. ¶ 5. He confesseth I speak not amiss, in saying, the world is overbur∣thened with books, but thinks that my Apology of 50 sheets adds some considerable weight: but methinks he of all men should have here been silent, who has troubled the world with an examination of it a great deal larger; albeit he confesseth all, that is in it, hath been refuted by the Or∣thodox long ago, & not only so, but since that he has written a book near
twice as large upon one point, to prove the first day of the week to be the Christian Sabbath, and yet it is but the first time, and seems but to be the porch of what he intends upon that subject. With his usual candor he saith, I am against disputes & debates, or books written of that natur: But to inferr simply that I am against all such, because I reprove the vain jangling that hath been and is among the School-men, is an ill consequence: he shall not find me any where speaking against usefull and solid controversys, for clearing and maintaining of Truth. He seemeth not to disapprove what I speak against School-Divinity, confessing the abuse of it, albeit he thinks it hath been of use: and as for this imagination of my being ac∣quainted with it, we will place it among his other mistakes. He pro∣ceedeth pag. 8 to say, I am against the labours of those that have writ com∣mentarys, but his conclusion here is like others of this nature. When I mention commentarys, it is with relation to what goes before, he will not deny but many books are written under the notion of commentarys on the Scriptur, by which the Truth has been more darkened than cleared; will it therefore fol∣low that he condemns Commentarys indefinitly? As for such writings, tending to the opening of the Scriptur, in which the Authors are acted and influenced by the same Spirit, from which the Scripturs came, and which alone can give the true meaning of them, I am so far from con∣demning them, that I highly approve them, as very beneficial to the Church of Christ. As for his talk here of our disrespect to the Scrip∣turs, I shall have occasion to take notice of it where they are particularly treated of: but he is apt to think, that the real ground of my prejudice against such books, is, because so much is to be found in them against my old errors; for I can not but know (saith he) that whoever reads these must see my nakedness and folly, without much study. As for this imagination we must take it with much more, upon trust; but this helps to prove the needlesness of his large Examination. ¶ 6. At his usual rate of Perverting he goes on to say, that the account I make of all the learned men of the World, is, that they are Scribes and disputers of the World, &c. But for proof of this we have nothing: he confesseth the words to be those of the Apostle, and how he proveth that I have a dif∣ferent meaning from the Apostle, I know not. After he hath commend∣ed his learned men, and loaded the Quakers with reproaches, he con∣cludes this Paragraph, pag. 8. with another falshood, and yet he will have it remarked, to wit, that, according to my judgment, the pure and naked Truth
of God was never unfolded nor declared, untill the generation of the Quakers arose, but where he finds me saying so he tells not, and indeed can not, since such a thing was never asserted by me. For answer to my saying, that God has laid aside the wise and learned, and made use of illiterat men, as to letter∣learning, after he saith, it is affirmed without proof, (not consider∣ing how improper it was not to expect any formal probation upon the oc∣casion and manner it was delivered) he gives us divers citations out of the Apostle Paul, warning against seducers, all which I acknowledge to be true, but the question lieth in the right application; and yet since, (albeit he believes they very appositly agree to us) he thinks it not his pre∣sent business to demonstrat it, it will need no reply. After he has pro∣ceeded in his 10 page, according to his usual sort of railing, affirming the great difference betwixt our doctrin and that of the Apostles, he brings forth a mighty charge, that I usurp the Throne of God, and judg of mens hearts and intentions: (but how guilty himself is of that crime, hath been in part already shewn, and will hereafter more appear.) but why do I so? because I say, the Clergy have clouded the Truth, that the common People might maintain and admire them? But have not Protestants, and that truely, asserted this of the Popish Clergy? and is not the Thesis directed to such? Will it not then hold true, according to his own judgment, of a great, yea the greatest part of those, to whom it is directed? what then will become of his clamors? Yea if it were needfull, I could give instances of very mean thoughts he and his Party have of many of the Protestant Clergy, yea and reflexions not much, if any thing, inferior to this, to verifie with how little ground he quarrelleth me here. As for his malitious aspersion, that there are shrewd presumptions our stock lies at Rome, he should have pro∣duc'd some of them, if he could; we could never yet obtain for this old calumny from our adversarys the least probation, and it will be found as hard for him to prove it, as he may think it for such, who strongly af∣firm their great IDOL, the COVENANT, was contrived at Rome, and came from thence. As for his reflexions upon our Church, as being all eyes and ears, it will be proper to speak of it in its own place. Next, to prove the posi∣tions of the Quakers to be such, as overturn and destroy the Gospel, he bringeth, pag. 11, divers citations out of Mr Norton and Mr Stalham, (as he terms them) adding more may be had out of Mr Hicks, but such wit∣nesses will have small credit with impartial Readers. If he himself had dealt impartially, he should have first read our answers to them, ere he
had given them such authority. It wer easy for me, by way of reply, to transcribe what our Friends have written particularly by way of answer to them, did I as much affect to have my writings bulky, as it seemes he doth. He closeth up this with a fit of railing, and, after he has quarrel∣led me, pag. 12. for having an high conceit (as he imagines) of my The∣ses, he falls fresh to that work again, telling, they have weight to sink into the bottomless pit the poor Soul that embraces them. I never sought any should receive doctrins, as truth, upon my bare testimony, and therefore he needs not upbraid me with so doing: and whereas, on the contrary, as himself immediatly observes, I leave what I say to the LIGHT in every man's Conscience, it shewes with how little reason he made his former alledg∣ance, after he has pleased himself with making an impertinent conjectur of the import of these words, that so he might, if he could, render them ridiculous, he cometh at last to the true understanding of them; and truely he needed not fear at my being offended that he should make a judgment of what I writ, according to his Conscience; but he went the wrong way to work, when his labour is to pervert and wrest, and make them speak what they do not. This apparently proceeds from malice and prejudice, and the Light of his Conscience, if he had minded it, would never have prompted him so to do. Thus I am come to the end of the first chapter. ¶ 7. In the second chapter, intituled, Of the true ground of knowledge, I find he can not contradict what is asserted by me. only, because he must be carping, he makes a noise that Joh. 17: 3. cited by me, so much of the sentence was not set down in the first as second edition. What a pittifull cavill this is the Reader may easily judge, since the place was noted, it was enough, though never a word had been set down, but this with him is a bad Omen, let the judicious judge of this man's judgment in the mat∣ter. But, because he can not quarrel at what is said, he will quarrel that so much is not said as he judged meet: but he may be pleased to under∣stand that I judged my self under no necessity to advise with him what was needfull for me to write. But (saith he) since I take upon me to teach the whole world, (it is strange it should be so natural for this man to write untruths, since I direct my Theses only to the Christian world: but if it may render me odious, such Peccadillo's pass with him it seems but for Piae fraudes) I intended never to write of those things, concerning which we do not differ from others. But let us see wherein he accounts me defective. I have
written nothing (saith he) of the nature and attributes of God. I write not to Atheists, but Christians, who already acknowledge, and I judg it not my work to write books to persuade men of that they already profess to believe. But I write not expressly and distinctly of the Trinity, yet him∣self after acknowledges, pag. 24, that it would seem I am orthodox herein, that he finds not any clear ground to the contrary. I writ as expressly and distinctly of that, as is expressed in Scriptur, which I hope I. B. will not say is defective in sufficiently expressing this article of Faith. ¶ 8. The third challenge is, I speak nothing of God's Decrees, by which some are praedestinated to Life, others fore-ordained to death. (for the man without ceremony takes the doctrin for granted) But if I have spoken nothing of this, (though perhaps not in the method he would) how ex∣travagant must he be, that writes a whole chapter upon Reprobation, as pretending to refute what I have said concerning it. With the like confidence, not to say impudence, he accuses me of silence, in relation to the Covenants, to the Redemption purchased by Christ, his taking flesh upon him, to the work of Grace and Sanctification, to obedience to the Law of God. Which gross abuse any one that reads my book will easily see, considering how much, and how particularly these things are spoken to, in the explana∣tion of the 5, 6, 7 & 8 Theses. Last of all, he accuseth me for giving no account of the Resurrection of the Body. But do I not expressly in my conclu∣sion affirm, that those, that accuse us of denying of it, belye us? and doth not that clearly import an owning? But as to that matter (because I love not repetitions, as he doth, who will be upon one matter often, and out of its proper place) I will referr what further I have to say, untill I come to his last chapter. At last, after he has confessed in part to what I affirm, he craves liberty, because some may put a wrong Foundation for the right to examin what by me is placed for it: which liberty is freely granted him, (for I am a great enemy to implicit Faith, as wel the Popish as Presbyterian, who in that are much what alike) and I will take also liberty to re-exa∣min his examination, that I may free my self of those many abuses, where∣with he has injured me.
Section III. Wherein his third Chapter of Inward and Immediat Revela∣tions is considered. ¶ 1. THat I may not trouble the Reader with a long and taedious pursuit of I. B. in all his extravagant rambls and unreasonable railings, wherein he accuses me as an Ignoramus, writing non∣sense and confusion. pag. 39. More of that kind in pag. 31. while yet, to his own confusion, pag. 40 & 41, he saith, he knows not what I mean, nor what I would prove, nor what my arguments must conclude: wherein if he speak true, he declares himself uncapable to judge of, and far less to answer, my arguments, a large disquisition of his impertinency in which things I willingly omitt, and will consider this his chapter, as wel where he misses, as where he truely in any measur urges the matter. And first to dispatch what is superfluous, all that is said by him against false revelations and delusions of the Devil, against which he speaks sometimes more large∣ly, sometimes more overly, in pag. 21. 22. 34. 35. 36. 47. no judicious Reader will think is any thing to the purpose; since I never did plead for False revelations, but for the necessity of the true Revelation of the Spirit to all real Christians. And though it could be proved that either I, or any other Quaker, so called, were deluded by a false revelation, yet it will not thence follow, that our asserting the necessity of true revelation to the building up of true faith, is erroneous, more than, in I. B's own sense, the Arminians or Socinians asserting false doctrins, pretending to have for them the authority of Scriptur, will make him judge, that their asserting the Scriptur to be the onely and adequat rule of faith, is false, in his judg∣ment, since he therein agrees with them. And therefore his disingenuity as wel as weakness doth notably appear, pag. 46, 47, & 48. where com∣ing to take notice of what I have said, in shewing how the same may be returned upon such as own the Scriptur, Reason and Tradition to be the Rule of their faith, he gives it no answer, and most effrontedly comes up with his oft reiterated story of Iohn à Leyden and Munster, (with which we are less concerned than himself) notwithstanding that I shew, that even men pretending to the Scriptur, and to be led by it, and in particular his ow Brethren, had don no less vile actions, than those of Munster, and
yet he would not think it wel argued to inferr thence that it were danger∣ous to follow the Scriptur, as the Rule. To all this he returns no answer, which taketh up 6 pages in my Apology, Lat. ed. pag. 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. unless it be a sufficient answer, to say he needs not take notice of my trifling answers, and that it is a meer rapsody. But the truth is, to use his own expres∣sion, it was too hot for his fingers; and therefore he judged best to shuffle it by so easily. but his unfairness in this is so much the more considerable, where the pinch of the question lay, and his own and his Brethrens re∣putation was so highly concerned, as being charged as guilty of no less abominations than the Monsters of Munster, in that he boasts, in his epistle to the Reader, that he hath examin'd every thing asserted by me, parti∣cularly, which he gives as the reason of troubling him with so prolix a Treatise. ¶ 2. Now albeit I might in reason pass his new inforced objection, till he have satisfied to this so shamefull an omission, yet lest he should fancy any strength in it, and to shew him the sillyness of it, I will here consider and remove it: it runnes thus, pag. 46. If since the Apostles and other extraordinary Officers fell asleep, and after the Arg. canon of the Scripturs was compleated, All that have pretended to immediat Reve∣lation have been led by a spirit of Error, Then that is not the Way of Christ. But the former is true: Therefore so is the other. Such an objection is not like to signify much, where, in both Propo∣sitions Answ. the question is most miserably begged, and the thing in debate taken for granted: for, albeit the connexion of the Major should be grant∣ed, yet the question is there, in a great part of it, begged, to wit, that such Officers in the Church, as were the Apostles, are not now, neither as to the natur of their Office nor manner of their being led by the Spi∣rit. Next, that the canon of the Scripturs is compleated, that is to say, No writings are ever hereafter to be expected or believed to be written by the Spirit, both which I deny, and he has not so much as offer'd to prove, and therefore his argument, if I should go no further, can con∣clude nothing. Next his Minor, to wit, that all pretending to Immediat revelation have been led by a spirit of error, is not at all proved by him, for albeit it might be said of all those old Scots, named by him, and of the German Enthusiasts, yet that is not sufficient proof, unless he can make it appear that there was never any other but were so also,
which yet remains for him to prove, and will trouble him to effect. For to affirm there were never any, because he has never heard nor read of them, were an argument a great deal more ridiculous, than rational. And for his challenging me to shew them, (albeit the instance of the Quakers be enough to spoil all his argument, as will after appear) yet by his good leave I am not bound, Affirmanti incumbit probatio, and that this answer is sufficient, I have the testimony of his learned Brother, John Menzies, Professor of Divinity at Aberdeen, in his book intituled Papismus Lucifugus, where he answers the Jesuit's Minor the same way, and proveth it to be sufficient. And surely he has not taken notice, that by this he has con∣demned, as led by a spirit of error, all the primitive Protestant Martyrs, that prophesied at any time, such as John Hus and George Wishart our Countrey-man, and many others, by reason of whose prophecying I. B. and his Brethren have valued their cause; since these Prophecys were said by them to proceed from inward and immediat Revelation, and so they pre∣tended to it, albeit not as the ground of their faith and obedience in all matters of Doctrin and Worship, yet as the ground of that Faith, by which they believed these Revelations to proceed from God, and not from the Devil: and of that Obedience by which they published and de∣clared these things. Moreover he overturns all, by the last instance, which he gives to prove it, to wit, that the Quakers who pretend to imme∣diat Revelations are led by a spirit of Error: for proof of which we have only his bare affirmation, and yet, till this be proved, his objection is naught. For indeed this is a rare way of debating with an adversary, to make use of an argument by which he must be concluded already as erroneous, in order to convince him that he is such: if this be not, as they say, to put the plough before the Oxen, I know not what can be said to be so, for I. B's argument, to make it plain, amounts to this, If the Quakers be led by a spirit of error, Then the Quakers err, in affirming inward and immediat Revelation to be the ground and foundation of true faith: But the Quakers are led by a spirit of Error: Therefore, &c. Which is just as if I should argue thus: If I. B. be a Knave, a manifest Lyar and Calumniator, Then he is not a true Minister of Christ, nor fit to write in Religious matters: But I. B. is such: Therefore, &c.
Is not this a notable way of arguing, and a quick way to dispatch con∣troversies? What saith Rob. Macquair? Doth not this wel become his singularly acute, solidly learned, and truely gracious Author? Postscript pag. 559. ¶ 3. The next thing to be considered, is, his stating the controver∣sy, where, according to his custom, he all along beggs the question; for having writ down his opinion, and taken it for granted, without offer∣ing to prove it, he goes on and builds thereon without more difficulty, as if it were not to be further questioned: This appears in pag. 20. 28. 29. 30. 34. 35. 36. 37. 40. 43. 44. in which places he states his opinion of the Immediat Revelation of the Spirit, as not being such, as presents any Truths to be believed objectively, but only in removing the Vail of the Eye of the Understanding, and spiritually Illuminating the Mind, and Working effectually upon the Heart, to embrace and receive the Truth already revealed and proposed in the Scripturs. Now for not using this distinction and holding revelation in this his sense, he greatly blames me, as jumbling things together, and darkning and prejudging the Reader, and bestows upon me ever and anon many railing words, with the repetition of which I will not trouble the Reader. And yet notwithstanding this accusation, in contradiction of himself, he cites me pag. 42 & 28, taking notice of this very distinction, as used by some, and also refuting it. Surely the man must have miserably forgot himself, and will verifie the Proverb Lyars should have good memo∣rys. Next, since he judges I err, in not holding this manner of Revelation, and that he builds all his superstructur upon it, as the Truth; he should have offer'd to prove it to be such, for since he saith they willingly grant to these Scripturs noted by me, as many as are led by the Spirit of God, &c. Rom. 8: 9-14. together with 1 Joh. 2: 27. Joh. 6: 45. Joh. 14: 16, 17. By which Scripturs he can not deny but the manner of the Apostles being led, as wel as of all Christians, is included, since some of them were directed to the Apostles particularly, in all which there is no ground for his distin∣ction, and assertion: It is not said, The Comforter, that I will send, shall lead you the Apostles immediatly, by proposing Truth, to be believed objectively, to you, and this shall be accounted extraordinary, but, after you, it shall only lead other Christians by illuminating their Understandings, and that shall be the ordinary lead∣ing. And since then it is a rule granted by all, that we must hold to the plain words of Scriptur, unless an urgent necessity force us to the contra∣ry, he should shew us where this necessity lies; and prove his assertion to
be the true and genuin meaning of the words, and that we ought not to take them, as we do, according to their plain and naked signification and import. For I would willingly hear any ground from Scriptur of this na∣tur, of Extraordinary and Ordinary Revelations, as pertinent to this debate; for albeit things extraordinary may be reveal'd to some, and not to others, that only respects the things revealed, not the manner of Revelation. For a man telling me extraordinary things, and ordinary, albeit the things may differ in their natur, yet neither my manner of hearing nor his of speaking do thence necessarily differ. ¶ But perhaps the man doth apprehend, that what he saith, pag. 20. 30. 31. 40. 44. 45. is some proof of his assertion, (which if he do, the Reader may easily observe his mistake) where he would insinuat, as if the manner of Immediat Revelation by the Spirit, asserted by me, rendred all other means, even those of Teaching and Exhorting, which are appoynted by God, useless, and took away all obligations of obeying the commands of God conveighed by others. And yet he taketh notice, pag. 23. that I acknowledge other means of Knowledge as profitable, neither has he ever heard me deny, but men are obliged to obey the commands of God through one another as wel as in themselves, as the children of Israel were those of Moses and the Prophets, and the Christians those of Christ and his Apostles. But I suppose he will affirm with me, that no man's Obedience to any command will avail him any thing, unless upon inward belief and conviction that the thing commanded is of God,, since Whatsoever is not of Faith is sin. If he say, that, albeit I do not deny such an obligation, yet it necessarily follows from my Principle. That this is untruely alleged will easily appear, since I suppose he will not deny but the rest of the Apostles, who were alive when Paul's Epistls were writen were obliged to receive them, and obey them, as the dictats of the Spi∣rit, yea and were benefited by them, and so the Apostle Paul by others: albeit on both sides he will acknowledge them to have had such revela∣tions as he accounts Immediat and Extraordinary. And so we see that to have such revelations and yet to be mediatly instructed are not inconsistent, nor do they render one another useless, and indeed to affirm they do so is rather a presumptuous accusing of God, who has appynted both in their order, for the edification of his Church, than a refuting of such as assert them. Such are his reasonings pag. 45. Besides that, this objection may be easily refuted, for since I. B. affirms, as particularly pag. 42. that the Scriptur is a compleat Rule in all things concerning Faith and manners in refe∣rence
to Salvation, might it not be said that this takes away the use of all Commentarys and expositions, and other books, especially since he and his Brethren do with all affirm, that it is clear and intelligible to all, in things essential to Salvation, let him shew how this is weaker as to him, than the other as to me. With the like presumption he blasphemously assert∣eth, that even these revelations, which he himself calleth and acknowledg∣eth to be inward, immediat and extraordinary, are uncertain, for this reason, because many men have been deluded by the Devil: on which he also insists in the following page. And pag. 34. & 48. where he sums up his mat∣ter in this question, How comes that others pretending to Revelation as much as I, have been deceived? But as I said before, How comes that others, pre∣tending to be led by the Scriptur as the Rule as much as I. B. have been deceived, since the Scriptur declares nothing but Truth? But how silly this is I have above shewn, and more largely in my Apology in those pa∣ragraphs, which I observed he most foully omitted. And indeed this is a fine argument he has provided for Atheists and Sceptiks, for it renders all Faith, even that of the Patriarchs, uncertain: for since the ground and warrand of their writing the Scripturs was, in his own account, inward, immediat and extraordinary revelations, and if such be, as he affirms, uncer∣tain, then the truth of the Scripturs, which depends upon such, must ne∣cessarily be uncertain, since the stream can not be more pure than the fountain, nor the superstructur more sure than the foundation. And therefore most weak is his reasoning, pag. 46. where he pleadeth that such Revelations can not be more sure than the Scripturs, which are the objective reve∣lations of the Apostles writen down, since the certainty of these writings de∣pends upon the certainty of these revelations, by which they were writ∣ten, and certainly if in any case that maxim of the Schools do hold, it must in this, Propter quod unum quod que est tale, illud ipsum est magis tale. ¶ 5. It will not be amiss here in the third place to take notice of his most uncharitable and unchristian insinuations, contrary to all Christian and fair rules of debate, as first, pag. 24. where he will needs inferr our denying of the Trinity, albeit he can not deny but he finds it owned by me, groundlesly coupling us with the Socinians: and to help him in this he brings-in the testimony of one Mr Stalham, as he terms him, an open Opposer of ours, which Witness to receive against us is most unjust. But I desire here in the entry that it be observed, that I intend to take little or no notice of his many citations, to prove what we hold, out of the
writings of our open Opposers, and shall give such a sufficient reason for my so doing, ere I make an end, as I am hopefull shall satisfie all judicious Readers, as wel of our innocency, as his unjustice therein: but by this the man's temper may be seen, and that his design is not so much to re∣fute what we truely hold, as to make the world believe that we hold what we doth not, to render us the more odious. And thus he proceedeth also basely to insinuat, that I deny Jesus of Nazareth to be the Son of God, albeit he doth not so much as pretend to any color for it from my words, only he finds some Quakers give an indistinct answer in this matter, but who they are or what their answer is he tels not: In pursuance of this, in the following page he insinuats, as if I mean'd not the first but the second Creation, and so joyned with Socinus, which is a gross calumny like the former; as also is what he saith, pag. 31. num. 18. where he raileth against me as writ∣ing things contrary to the Scripturs, and as one, whose revelations are not from God, but from Satan. For all this the only proof is, [I. B. saith so] which I must plainly tell him is with me of no weight at all. Of the same natur is what is asserted by him, pag. 33. nu. 20. wherein he insi∣nuats, that we contemn the Scripturs, telling a lying story from his Author Mr Hicks of one Nicolas Lucas, which I desire him to prove the next time, not by Hicks, for he is accuser, but by some more indifferent Witness, else to be justly held as a Calumniator. And whereas he saith, We should not obtrude any thing upon them, without Scriptures, this is an∣other lying insinuation; for where do we obtrude any doctrins without offering to confirm them by Scriptur, as much as he and his Brethren? For if he say, that our confirmations are not valid, that is not to the purpose, we can easily say so of his, and do as truely believe it: but the question is, Whether we obtrude any doctrins upon any to be believed, telling them they ought to believe it, albeit we either will not or can not con∣firm them by the Scriptur? Now he knoweth in his Conscience this to be a lye, since I affirm of the Scripturs, Apol. Lat. ed. p. 47. & n. 60. that they are the most fit outward judge of controversies, of which himself also taketh notice in that place. And lastly, of the natur of these malitious insinuations is what he saith, pag. 48 & 49, and last paragraph of this chapter, where, after he has repeated what he terms my monitory conclu∣sion, he infers, that I mean, that a man should believe that Natur's dim light is the Spirit of God and the Holy Ghost, and that he may burn the Bible, and with confidence assert he is led by the Holy Ghost, whatever
Scriptur or common sense say to the contrary. This is all affirmed by him without the least proof, which as it is the height of injustice, so it is with respect not only to my words, but belief and intention, (God the Searcher of hearts knows) a most horrid falshood and calumny. ¶ 6. Now albeit what is said, may seem sufficient for a reply to this chapter, and is indeed enough to give any sober man a disgust of it; yet that he may not have reason to complain that any thing, wherein he may judge there is weight, and is directly to the purposs, is omitted, I will now in the last place consider and answer what he saith against the vali∣dity of my Arguments, to which an answer hath not been included in what is already said. To begin then like himself, which to be sure is with some calumny or other, he saith pag. 14. I stigmatize with the black mark of being carnal and natural Christians all, that assent not to what I say: but he takes no time to prove it, and indeed can not, for, albeit I say that it is like many natural and carnal Christians will condemn what I say, yet it will not follow I account them all such who will not fully agree with me in this matter. Of the same kind is his calumny, p. 22. n. 5. where he allegeth the citations of the Fathers so called prove no more than his sense of Revelation above expressed, but whether he speaks true here or not the Reader may judge, by seriously reading over these citations, and then let him see if they do not hold out an inward and immediat teaching of the Spirit of God in the Soul as the firm ground of Knowledge with∣out which all outward teaching is in vain: but to inserr this, he tels they writ against such as, being Impostors and led by the spirit of the Devil, pre∣tended to Revelations. What then? Can not men write against false re∣velations, without they deny the necessity of true ones? That is an odd conclusion. If I. B. were wel acquainted with the writings of the Qua∣kers, (so called) he would find them as much against false Pretenders, as any other But pag. 24 & 25 he findeth fault with my argument, de∣duced from these words, that there is no knowledge of the Father but by the Son, because I take notice, as a first instance, of God's creating all things by Jesus Christ, adding, Was this so difficult a point to be proved, that I was constrained to go back to the first Creation for an argument? Answ. No: but I judged it not improper (however he may) to shew first, as prepatory, God's more general way of working by his Son Jesus Christ, ere I come to that, which is more particular, and this was the reason as wel of my putting these Propositions into that order as of my using of
that instance, by which that pretended abomination, which he pretends lurks under words, evanisheth. For the man is very good at drawing in∣ferences from other mens words, which they, that spake and wrot them, never thought of, as I for one can very wel witness, since the least can be allowed me is to know my own thoughts and purpose, which how he should come to assure himself he knows better than I, is more than I can fathom. For the same reason above mentioned I used the instance of God's moving in his manifesting himself in his creaturs, and of the Spirit of the Lord's moving upon the face of the waters, which, pag. 26. he flouts at, but doth not answer: and it is strange, that he, of all men, should be offended with such preparatory considerations, where the matter is in a few pages after closely come to, who has used so many remote arguments and several not pages only but sheets, yea quires of paper, in order to prove the first day of the Week to be the Christian Sabbath. He objects, pag. 26. against my affirming that God's communion with man was by immediat manifestation of the Spirit, from Adam to Moses, because so few are mentioned, and he supposeth the rest, not mentioned, had it only by their instruction. But since these few, that are mentioned, are said to have had immediat revelation, and that the rest had no written Rule as I. B. will confess, it seems there was more of God's immediat re∣velation in those dark times, even by his confession, than now under the Gospel, where the chief Pastors of the Church, according to him, are to expect no such thing; neither is it proved that others, not mentioned, had no immediat revelations, albeit they might have been instructed by these Patriarchs, which I have shewn before to be very consistent. And thus may be easily answered (seting-aside his railings) what he saith pag. 27. against my urging the frequent revelations that men had during all the time of the Law betwixt Moses and Malachy, (by which himself confesseth the Scripturs of the Old and New Testament to have been written) that that doth not prove that every one had such revelations. What then? I lay not the stress of the proof of every one's having im∣mediat revelations upon this, but this is clearly proved from it, that since immediat, inward and objective revelations were so frequent during all the time of the Law, which was the less glorious administration, and that of the Letter, it is grossly absurd to say, as I. B. and his Brethren do, that they are now ceased under the Gospel, which is said to be more glorious, and the pouring-forth of the Spirit more abundant and Universal, and that not
only for a little time, to wit, to the Apostles, with restriction to them and their times, (for which he never produc'd the least proof from Scriptur) but to the end of the world. And if so that immediat Revela∣tion be not ceased, there is a great deal of the point gained, albeit I. B. confidently affirm that there can be proved nothing by these reasonings, but what no body will deny, since the Divines of Westminster have deny∣ed, and I. B. no doubt with them will deny, that immediat revelation now is, since they positively say that it is ceased, and Iames Durham, whom I. B. applauds as a reverend Brother, and Pastor of the Church, hath most absurdly affirmed, in his Treatise upon the Revelation, that when John finished that book, God spake his last words to his Church. ¶ 7. When he cometh, pag. 28. to my Proposition, asserting that these revelations were of old the Formal Object of Faith, he beginneth to inquire and conjectur what I mean by the formal object, and upon that he bestows the following page. For answering then his scruples in that matter, I say, In a Divine revelation two things are to be consider∣ed, 1. the thing revealed, and 2. the revelation: the thing revealed is indeed the Material Object, the revelation is the Formal Object; In which may be considered not only the manner of the Revelation, that is, the voyce, or speech of God unto the Soul, or his imprinting in the soul, by a Divine manifestation the things revealed, but also God himself so operating: both which, to wit, Deus loquens, id est, God speaking, is the formal object of Faith, He himself, his Veracity is the original ground of our Faith, his voyce, holy Influence and manifestation, by which he expresseth himself, gives us the certainty and assurance that it is He; and is very distinguishable, by those of a Spiritual discerning, from the most subtile appearance and transformations of the Devil, since Christ saith, My sheep hear my voyce, and will not hear that of a stranger: even as the voyce and appearance of two men of the most contrary and diffe∣rent humors, staturs and complexions, are different and distinguishable by a man of sharp sight to whom those men are wel known; but of this I wrot more largely in my Letter to a certain Ambassadour, printed the last year at Rotterdam, at the end of the Letter writen to the Ambassa∣dours of Nimwegen, whereto I referr him for further satisfaction. But I wholly deny the consequence deduced by him, that, if God's Veracity, because it is God that speaketh and commandeth, be the formal object of faith, Therefore it is all one, whether it be mediat or immediat: since
albeit that be the original ground, yet the immediat revelation is ne∣cessary, that we may certainly know that it is he. For what avails it me to believe that all, that God commands, is true, and ought to be obeyed, if I do not certainly know the things I believe as truth do come from him? And the question is, Whether certain knowledge can be had without immediat revelation, and therefore to this his question, in the following page 30, What was the formal object of the faith of the People to whom the Patriarchs and Prophets said [Thus saith the LORD] I an∣swer, The inward Testimony of the Spirit in their heart, assuring them that the things spoken were from the Lord, and not the Divinations of the mens brains that spake them, and therefore inclining their hearts to receive and acknowledge these things as the commands of God unto them; since, as I. B. confesseth, they were not to believe them, because spoken by those men, but because of the Authority of God, it must be that, which wrought this perswasion and assurance in them, was the formal object of their faith, as the things spoken were the material: Even as the Light serves, by way of formal object, to make us see what is pro∣posed unto us. ¶ 8. Pag 31 & 32. he acknowledgeth that Divine and inward reve∣lations need not be tried by the Scriptur as a more noble Rule, by him, who hath such a revelation, but by those to whom he delivers it; and then giveth the instance of the Bereans being commended: to which I shall willingly assent, judging no man, that delivers or declares a revelation to another, ought to be offended, that he try it by the Scriptur, which no true revelation can contradict. But that such may not also try it by the Testimony of the Spirit of God in their hearts I can not deny, and that it is the more noble Rule, as being most universal: since some Di∣vine revelations, such as Prophecys of contingent truths, or things to come, can not be tried by the Scripturs, as was that of George Wishart concerning the Cardinal's death: for had another taken upon him at that time to prophesy the quite contrary, I would willingly be informed, by what Scriptur it could be deduced or known that the one was false, or the other true: yet who will be so absurd, as to deny but that it could, by the immediat Testimony of the Spirit? As for his proof that the Scriptur is the most certain Rule, taken from those words 2 Pet. 1: 19, 20. We have also a more sure Word of Prophecy, &c. it is but a begging of the question, in supposing that Peter by this understood
the Scriptur, and indeed is most ridiculous to affirm. For since the Apostle reckons this Word, more sure than the voyce they heard with their outward ears, and the vision they saw with their outward eyes, it were absurd to affirm that the description or narration of a thing were more sure than the immediat seeing and hearing it. Can any description I may receive of I. B. however true, give me so certain a knowledge of him, as if I saw him and spake with him? Yet without any absurdity it may be said, that the Inward Word or Testimony of the Spirit in the heart is more sure, in things spiritual, than any thing that is objected to, or conveighed by the outward senses, as that vision was, of which the Apostle there speaks; since the inward and spiritual senses are the most proper and adequat means of conveighing spiritual things to the Soul, by which the saints, after they have laid down this body, and have no more the use of the outward senses, which are seated in it, do most sure∣ly enjoy the blessed vision of God, and fellowship both with him and one another. As for that of Isa. 8: 20. To the Law and to the testimony, &c. and that of Joh. 5: 39. Search the Scripturs, &c. mentioned here by him, I shall have occasion to speak of them hereafter. It's true John tels we are not to believe every spirit, but it will not thence follow that the Scriptur is a more sure rule than the Spirit, for such a trial. Pag. 35. he thinks my saying, that the Divine revelation moveth the understand∣ing wel disposed, confirmeth what he saith, and spoileth all my purpose, because then every revelation pretending to be Divine is not to be submitted to. But where did ever I say so? What he talks further of this wel di∣sposed intellect, pag. 36. I spake to, in my answer to Arnoldus, pag. 18, 19. to which I referr. For I believe all men in a day have, by the gratious visi∣tation of God's Love, an understanding wel disposed, to some Divine re∣velations, which becomes disposed for others, as these are received; which will after in its place be discussed. And some Divine revelations, which are prophetik of things to come, may so far manifest themselves by their self-evidence even to men not regenerat, as to force an assent, as in the case of Balaam, mentioned by him, did appear. What he saith further, pag. 36 & 37. inquiring how and after what manner these revelations were the object of the Saints faith of old, is easily answered, by applying it to what is before mentioned in answer to his querys and conjecturs of the formal object. For those of old that had these revela∣tions immediatly, the formal object of their faith was God manifesting
himself and his will in them, to them, by such revelations: and those, who received and obeyed the things delivered by the Patriarchs and Prophets, those things, so delivered, (as he confesseth) were not the For∣mal, but Material Object of their Faith, but the Formal Object was GOD, by the secret and inward Testimony of his Spirit, perswading them in their hearts that these things declared to them were really his command, and thence inclining and bowing their minds to an assent and obedience to them. And albeit pag. 38 he terms this a wild assertion, yet he hath but said and not proven it to be so, and till he prove, he needs no fur∣ther refutation, neither is it non-sense nor yet a destroying of the cause, as with the like proofeless confidence he affirms, p. 37 that, where revelati∣ons are made by outward voices, or in a manner objected to the outward senses, the cause or motive of credibility is not so much because of what the outward senses perceive, as because of the inward testimony of the Spirit, assuring the Soul, that it is GOD so manifesting himself. Which testimony, to answer his que∣stion, is distinguishable from what is objected to the outward senses, al∣beit it go always along with it simul & semel, as they use to say; since he with me accounts it a serious truth to say the Devil may delude the exter∣nal senses, and he can far more easily deceive them, than the true inward and spiritual senses of the Soul, by counterfeiting the inward testimony of the Spirit, since by that, the Apostle saith, we know and partake of that, which neither eye hath seen nor ear heard. ¶ 9. Pag. 39. He confesseth with me, that the formal Object of the Saints faith is always the same. But yet, that he may say something, he spendeth the paragraph in railing, accusing me, as writing non-sense, and being an Ignoramus, because I bring instances which relate to the mate∣rial object, which himself confesseth also to be the same in substance. But by his good leave, for all he is so positive in his judgment, I must shew the Reader his mistake: for those exampls of Abraham, and others, are adduced by me, to shew the one-ness of the formal object, neither has he shewn that they are impertinent for that end, since as the formal object of Abraham's Faith was God's speaking to him by Divine revelations, so is the same the Formal object of the saints now, and therein stands the unity or one-ness of our faith with him, and not in the material object, which often differs; for to offer up his son was a part of the material object of his Faith, which is none of ours now. And so for as much as he desires to know of me, what was the material object of Adam's faith before the fall, (a
question not to the purpose) he must first tell me, why he so magisterial∣ly and positivly denys Christ to have been the object of his faith, and then he may have an answer▪ And whereas he flouts at that reason, that actions are specified from their objects, as non-sensical, he should have prov∣ed and shewn wherein, and then I might have answer'd him: he might have wit enough to know, that no man of reason will be moved by his bare railing assertions, pag. 40. besides a deal of railing, wherein he ac∣cuseth me of confusion and darkness, he accounts my arguing for immediat revelation, from the revelations the Patriarchs and Prophets had, imperti∣nent; to which I answered before: the sum of which is, that, since these immediat revelations were so frequent under the Law, it must be very absurd, to say, they are ceased under the Gospel. He himself prov∣eth, pag. 41, that under the New there is a more clear discovery, according to that of Paul, 2 Cor. 3: 18. But we all with open face, beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, &c. which being brought by him, albeit against himself, I leave him to answer. In this page and the next, 42, he allegeth the sayings of Christ and his Apostles, brought by me, and my argu∣ments thence, do prove no more than he confesseth: but whether they prove not all I plead for from thence, is left to the Readers judgment. Here, according to his custom, (though I condemn the Socinians) he will be insinuating, that I agree with them, to whose notions of the Spirit, al∣beit I assent not, yet I desire to know of him, in what Scriptur he finds these words, that the Spirit is a distinct Person of the Trinity; for I freely ac∣knowledge, according to the Scriptur, that the Spirit of God proceedeth from the Father and the Son, and is God, and by what authority he seeks to obtrude, upon others, expressions of the chief articles of faith, not to be found in Scriptur, or to accuse such as will not accept of them, and as∣sent to them, or whether any has reason to think he truely makes the Scriptur the Rule of his faith, (notwithstanding his pretence) when he either will not or can not find words in it to express the chief articles of his Creed. ¶ 10. Pag. 43. By a strange mistake he would have me prove, that, since I make use of these promises of Christ relating to the Spirit, I would prove that all have warrand to write Scriptur: as if no man could have immediat revelation, without he write Scriptur, whereas himself confesseth that many of the Patriarchs had it, before Moses, who yet wrot no Scriptur, yea and Cain, whom I suppose he judgeth to have been no writer of Scri∣ptur.
And by the like mistake, pag. 45. he confesseth all I plead for, and contradicts all he has been fighting for, in affirming, that Believers now have free access to Christ, the great Teacher of his People, always to get his mind known and writen in their hearts, but not to get prophetik revelations. But where doth he find me plead for prophetik revelations as common to all? And whether the former words do not grant immediat objective reve∣lation, in the largest sense I plead for it, I leave the Reader to judge. Here he accuses me of speaking basely of the Scriptur, but neither tels me where, nor what I say, which is indeed a base way of reviling, though familiar to him. To my last argument, pag. 49. § 35. he answers little, but railing. The minor [to wit, that whereas Protestants call the Scripturs their Rule, yet, if asked why they believe them, do say, because in them is deliver∣ed the Will of God, which was revealed objectively and immediately to holy men] he saith, destroyeth the whole argument, but why I know not; since surely that proves they at last recurr to the immediat testimony of the Spirit, as the certain and infallible ground of Faith, which is my conclusion. That I thence inferr that Protestants are for the uncertainty of immediat objective revelation, is most falsly and disingenuously asserted by him, for I seek not to inferr any such thing from the medium of that argument; but having shewn there∣by how they are forc'd to recurr to this revelation, as the primary ground of their Faith, I add, that it's strange then they should seek to represent that as dangerous, or uncertain, which they are thus forced to recurr to. And whether he doth not so, ever and anon repeating the story of Delusions, to nauseat∣ing, through this chapter, any that reads it may see, and easily perceive his base disingenuity in that part: as also in the following lines, where he saith, their concession makes nothing for the falsly pretended immediat and ob∣jective revelations which Quakers boast of, for where doth he find me plead∣ing for any such? Neither is it the question, Whether the Quakers do falsly pretend to immediat revelation, yea or nay? but, Whether Quakers do wel, and are sound in believing that immediat Divine inward revelation is necessary to every Believer, for the building up of true faith? But it is usual with him, where he can not answer, to turn-by the question, and fill-up the paper with rail∣ing and reviling!
Section IV. Wherein his Fourth Chapter of the Scripturs is considered. ¶ 1. WE may judge of this chapter of the Scripturs by the first sen∣tence, which contains a lye, saying, he finds the third Thesis in somethings altered, and more clearly set down in the Apology, than in the single sheet; whereas there is not one word of difference, but the misplaçing of a word by the Printer: but it is become so familiar with him to speak untruth, that he can not forbear it! Indeed this whole chapter is a complex of railing, calumnys and malitious groundless insinuations: and indeed the man is so troubled, that he can not find any thing in what I write, (which he ought according to his title and undertaking only to examin and confute) that in stead of that he be∣stows several pages out of Stalham and Hicks, and his considerations upon them, whose lyes and calumnys are long ago answered, and unre∣plyed to by them. So that the Partys concerned having already vindi∣cated themselvs, it is not my place to medle in it; and if I. B. would do any thing in this to the purpose, he should take up this debate, where his friend Mr Stalham and his brother Mr Hicks the Anabaptist (whose au∣thority he useth so often, and to whom he gives so much credit) have given it over, by a reply to these answers. Having solaced himself in the repetitions of these mens calumnys, (for that appears to be his de∣light) he digresseth to prove the Scripturs to be the Word of God. But if they be granted to be the words of God, which no Quaker, that ever I knew of, did or will deny, wherein are they derogated from? since they are ma∣ny words, and not one. But if he will plead they are the Word of God, , or per eminentiam, to say so, seing the Word of God is ascribed to Christ, must either equal them with him, or speak non-sense, seing that one epithet can not be predicated of two things, , without a gross contradiction. That the Word of the Lord came to the Pro∣phets, and that what they spake was the words that came from that Word, is granted, nor was it ever denyed by us, who are against all false reve∣lations and lying fancys of mens imaginations, as much as he, which he here in this chapter repeats over and over again, to nauseating: but it
will not thence follow, that the Word, spoken of by the Apostle, 2 Pet. 1: 19. is the Scriptur, which he has not yet proven, and I have shewn the contrary in the former Section ¶ 2. At last, pag. 54. n. 5. he comes to treat of of the Divine authority of the Scripturs, and reckons it confusion and self-contradiction in me, to assert, that the authority of the Scripturs doth not depend upon any efficacy or vertue placed in these writings, but is wholly to be ascribed to that Spirit from whence they came; and yet, within half a dozen of lines, he confesseth the same, saying, we stoop unto the authority of the Scripturs of Truth, because de∣livered by the Inspiration of God, so the confusion and contradiction is his own. Yea the exampls he brings, of the Acts and Statutes of Parliament, do very wel prove what I say, for we do not submit to these status, be∣cause of the matter in them, or things commanded, but because of the Authority commanding: for when the Parliament by an Act appoynts a tax of so much money to be levyed from the Subjects, it is not the mat∣ter or substance of this Act, that makes us obey it, but because of the Magistrats Authority. But he saith, they are Divine revelations, and there∣fore must have the stamp of Divine authority. Answ. The stamp of Divine Authority lies not in the things revealed, but in the manner of the reve∣lation, as being the voyce and manifestation of God; else great ab∣surdity would follow, as I shall briefly shew, being to pursue him in this poynt, as he has it lieing up and down in his rambling discourse, whose way is not to follow one matter to a period, but to touch it here and there, intermixing other things, that so his nauseating repetitions and oft re∣iterated railings may be the more covered. And therefore I intend not to tie my self to follow him page after page immediatly, lest I should em∣bark my self in the like disorder, and make such a confused hodg-podg, as he has done; but to follow every matter as he has it scatter'd up and down. And of this I thought fit to acquaint the Reader in this place, once for all, as being the method I purpose to use, throughout this trea∣tise. So from this 55 page we have him not upon this matter, untill page 61, where he takes notice of my citations out of several Protestant Confessions and Calvin, and will not have them to favour me, giving most disingenuously, as one reason, because they expressly say, that the work of the Spirit is by and with the Word, and not an inspiration, distinct and se∣parated from it: thereby he would make his Reader believe, as if this were said by all of them, whereas it is only said by the Westminster Divines, of
whom I particularly observed, that they spake not so clearly as the other. The French confession saith, it is by the inward perswasion of the Ho∣ly Spirit: and the Belgik, that it is by the testimony of the Spirit in our hearts: and Calvin saith, the Spirit of God must inwardly teach us that Moses and the Prophets spake from God. But that testimony of the Spirit, which is in our hearts, and by which the Spirit teacheth us there, albeit it be not diffe∣rent from and contrary to the things it teacheth us of, yet it is certainly distinct and separat; albeit all the things taught were the very same, which here is not. Els, because a man may be taught that, by a Jesuit at Rome, which I. B. may teach another man in Holland, therefore that Jesuit and I. B. are not distinct and separat. Are these good reasonings? But let us now see whether these be any better, by which, in the two fol∣lowing pages, 62 & 63, he prosecutes the same matter, the sum where∣of amounts to this, that there are such evident characters of Divinity in the Scripturs, which do as manifestly prove them to be of God, as the Sun doth its shining, to a man whose eyes are opened: and that the work of the Spirit, is, only to take the vail from offmens eyes, that they may see these Characters of Divinity, and not that the Spirit, by any inward immediat revelation, doth signifie to the Soul, by way of object, that these Books proceeded from the Dictats of the Spirit of God: in which he places the difference betwixt himself and the Quakers. Now whether these aforesaid Testimonys of Calvin and the rest do not confirm this last, rather than the other, I leave the Reader to judge. But further, it's like the man has not been aware into what inextricable Difficulty he has run himself, by his reasoning here; for, if this opening of the eyes by the Spirit be needful, to perceive these Divine Characters (as the opening of the natural eyes is needful, to see the outward Sun) then the Characters can not be seen, but by those, whose eyes are thus opened, that is to say, who have a wel disposed intellect. And thus recurr upon him∣self all the difficultys and absurditys he would urge upon me, in his for∣mer chapter, for saying, that Divine Revelations are evident to a wel disposed Intellect. For it may be query'd Whether all have this wel disposed Intel∣lect? their eyes thus opened? If yea, then all men have subjective revela∣tion: yet at other times he accounts this a privilege of the Saints, and thence denies it, in confessing, pag. 63, that some are blind, and see it not; and then again the question recurrs, How a man knows he has it, so that he may not think he sees it, and has it, when he has it not? This can not be decided by the Scripturs, for they are the matter under debate, and
that were to run in a Circle. And since, as he saith, the Devil is God's Ape, and that there are so many Delusions of the Devil and false imagina∣tions of the phansy which men are subject unto, as he has told over and over again; how is he sure that he is not thus deluded by the Devil, and abused by his phancy, in imagining he seeth, when indeed he is blind? And to give him his own argument and query, since some and even The Ex∣aminers of the Westmin∣ster Con∣fession. Pro∣testants have affirmed Books, denied by him, to be of the Canon, such as the Wisdom of Solomon and Esdras, and to have these Divine Characters; and Some Luthe∣rans. others deny some to be of the Canon and to have these Characters, as the Epistle of Iames, which he saith has it, how is he sure that they are blind, and deceived, and not he? So that he must either confess all his former reasonings, as also here pag. 83: 86. to be to no purpose, or els acknowledge that all he saith here for the Scripturs is of no force, and that he has no better certainty nor ground for his faith of the Scripturs verity (to give him back his own durty example he throws at me, p. 64.) than for the Turks Alcoran; and thus is dispatched also what he saith, p. 64. n: 18 where he confesseth, some approved Books, which others rejected. And whereas he saith, p. 86 & 87 that sad Experience has taught the World, what devilish Doctrins have been invented under the Notions of New Revelations, of which after he gives a list, since the same sad Expe∣rience has taught the World, what Devilish doctrins have been taught, under the notion of being revealed in the Scriptur, such as in his own account, those of the Socinians, Arminians, Antinominians and present English Anabaptists, to wit, his Author Hicks and his Brethren; and yet what will more follow the one against the Spirit of Revelations now, than from the other against the Scripturs? ¶ 3. Like to this are his reasonings, pag. 87 concerning the Canon of the Scripturs, that there are just so many Books, neither more nor less: for I have proposed this to be proved by Scriptur, it being an Article of their Faith, since they judge all such should be proved by Scriptur. To this, in stead of offering any Scriptur-proof, he saith they have the Characters of Divine Light, the weakness of which is above observed; & then he brings two Exampls, one of the Acts of Parliament, another of a man's writing ten letters to his wife. But exampls are poor arguments, especially to prove Articls of Faith, when not one Scriptur can be brought to do it by such as say the Scriptur is the adequat and only Rule of their Faith; neither will his ex∣ampls do. For if in a Nation one Part should differ from the other, alledging
spurious Acts, not made by the Parliament, were by the industry of some, printed and recorded with the right, as the case is now among the Pro∣fessors of Christianity, concerning the Canon of Scriptur, the writen Acts could never decide this question, but either these Legislators, if alive, or a new Parliament having equal Authority and Legislative pow∣er with those that made the former. And if a Woman should doubt that five of the ten Letters, subscribed with her Husband's Name, were not his, she could not know the certainty, but by her Husband's own Te∣stimony, and since he himself has said, that, to discern these Characters, a subjective concurrence of the Spirit is necessary, which since he saith some have not, they can then not be sure of this Article of Faith: his Example here of the five Fingers is yet more silly than the former. And albeit he confidently affirms he has above shewn this, we shall by examining it shew the contrary, as p. 74 & 75. answering to that of mine, where I shew that in Prov. 30: 5, 6. there is the same Prohibition of not adding, that is Rev. 22: v. 18. and therefore it would follow, that all writen after Solomon's time was against the mind of God. To this he gives a rare an∣swer! what is spoken of that Book (I suppose he means the Revelations) and elsewhere of the Commands of God, is consequently to be understood of all; but this is to repeat that against which the argument is formed, in stead of answering it. Either that of Revelations must not be understood as he doth it, or that of Proverbs makes the same exclusion, since the words are the same, and the Authority also. But the Prophecys of the Pro∣phets (saith he) were but Explications of the Law of God: but such Ex∣plications go to make up the Canon, and will he admit that yet? No. But the Lord did not (saith he) bind up his own hand; but has he bound up his hands now, that he can not move any of his Servants by his Spirit to write? I suppose he will not say he hath. He confesseth there were Prophets after John's days, who truly fore-told Events, but were not to write Scriptur. But is not a part of that, which he accounts the Canon, a fore-telling of Events? and yet that excludes it not from the Canon. Here, because he is pinched, he takes his usual retreat by falling a railing, and comparing us with Papists, who he saith use this Argument. And what then? I could tell him an hundred arguments, used by him, which the Papists also use against us, will he say it follows, they are invalid? But at last he thinks he has found a mysterious Riddle, that will do the bu∣siness, and therefore he leaves it with a defiance, Let him un-riddle this
mystery, if he can, to wit, when shall our Canon be compleated? when will there be no more need of Revelations? But might not this same question have been proposed to the Christians that lived before John wrot his Book of the Revelation? And, as I suppose they would have answered, (to many of whom perhaps it was not revealed that John should write such a Book afterwards) so shall I directly answer his question, When it shall please God, in whose Power it is to reveal himself, when, how, and so long as he pleases, and who (as he saith) has not bound up his own hand. ¶ 4. I come now to consider what he saith of the perfection of the Scripturs: and because he is very clamorous in accusing me, as derogating therefrom, it will be manifest whether he has any reason so to do. P. 55. n. 6. he quarrels I forget the narration of the first Creation, and that the Exampls are instructive. But who will deny, or when did I, that the remarkable Providences of God towards his Children are instructive? Do not I expressly shew how they are instructive, p. 46. which himself also notiç∣eth? And was the first Creation no part of God's Providence towards Man, who was to rule over it? Is it not then there included? But I make no mention of the promises and threatnings: but are not they any part of the Doctrins of Christ, nor included in any part of these pretious Declara∣tions, which I say the Scriptur contains? Next, he carps at my saying [the Chief Doctrins of Christianity] asking where we may find the whole Doctrins of the Christian Faith? I answer freely, in the Scripturs: and let him prove, if he can, this to be any contradiction, seing my saying [the Chief Doctrins of Christianity] is indefinit, excluding none. And therefore most base and abominable is that lye he makes of me in the last part of this paragraph, where he saith, I say the Scriptur only beareth Testi∣mony to some of them, to wit, of the Chief Heads of Christianity, which I dare him to prove ever to have been said or written by me. And of the like na∣tur are his lying conjecturs and his malitious insinuations from my words, in the two following paragraphs, which I utterly renounce and return upon him as his own false and fictitious apprehensions: for do not I de∣clare the Authority of the Scriptur, when I testifie they are from the Spi∣rit, and that such commands require obedience, as has been above shewn? But what he urgeth of this further, p. 57 & 59, from the saying of some Quakers, affirming that is not a Command to them, which is given to another, albeit I might justly reject it as impertinent, till he prove it, for the rea∣sons upon this occasion above declared; yet, because he mentions
Benjamin Furly in Rotterdam having some knowledge of that matter, I an∣swer, Whether will he say all the Commands in Scriptur to every per∣son, there mentioned, are binding upon every individual now? If he dare not say they are, as I know he dare not, how must I then distinguish be∣twixt what binds me and binds me not? Must it not be by the Spirit (suppose it were only subjectively, as he will confess) inlightening the Understanding? To make this distinction then, it seems it is the ope∣ration of the Spirit that makes them know their duty, and sure they can not obey before they know. But, if he say that though they should want that operation of the Spirit, & did not know nor acknowledge them to be their duty, yet they are binding upon them: neither B. F. nor any Quaker will deny but even the Commands of God's Spirit & the Precepts of the Scriptur, which now concern all, are binding upon all, so that they shall be justly condemned for not obeying, albeit that by the perversness of their hearts and wills they either refuse to obey, or will not acknow∣ledge them. So that his urging of that, p 60 & 61. n. 13. and his plead∣ing for it, is unnecessary, and needs no answer: yet who would say, they could obey, to any advantage of their Souls, without this operation of the Spirit, since what soever is not of Faith is sin? But as to these words said to be writen by B. F. he is here challenged to prove they are his, without adding or diminishing, (and it's wel known the adding or dimi∣nishing of two or three words in a few lines will quite alter the sense) and before he has answered this challenge, and free'd himself from the just censur of a Calumniator, albeit he take the help of his Author Hicks, he will find his folly, in accusing men at second hand, proofs, and upon the testimony of their adversarys. What follows in this paragraph and p. 60. is meer railing and perversions, comparing us with Papists, as is before ob∣served; and indeed all of it is overturned by that one assertion of mine, that what revelations are contrary to the Scriptur are to be rejected. ¶ 5. Pag. 57. n. 10. he faith, I come nearer to the core of my designe, which is to set up Enthusiasmes, in affirming that the Scripturs are not the Fountain, but a declaration of the Fountain: and yet the man within 3 or 4 lines con∣fesseth it himself, ascribing it to my folly to dream any man thinks so, (thus he goes backward and forward!) which he illustrats by the example of Laws. But if it be so, are not they to be blam'd that account them the principal Original of all Truth and knowledge? Whether the other branch of my deduction follow from this, that they are not to be accounted the pri∣mary
Rule of Faith and manners, will appear, when the arguments and ob∣jections, relating to that, come particularly to be mentioned. And whereas he thinks this is absurd, and not making for my designe, because God himself is the Fountain, and yet not the Rule, he mistakes the matter as urged by me; for I argue that the Scripturs are not the original ground of knowledge, but GOD, not simply considered, but as manifesting himself in Divine immediat revelations in the hearts of his Children: which be∣ing the New Covenant's dispensation, as in the last section is proven, is the primary and adequat Rule of Christians.. For I was never so absurd as to call God, simply considered, or the Spirit of God [in abstracto] (not as im∣printing Truths to be believed and obeyed in mens hearts, not contrary but according to Scriptur, for he can not contradict himself) the Rule of Christians: and this may serve to answer all his cavills upon this Theam. And whereas he wondereth in the following page 58. why any revelations even from the Spirit should be more primary than the Scripturs, since they are confessed to come from the inspiration of the Spirit, (for why he useth the La∣tine word afflatus, and doth not interpret it, I know not, unless to fright ignorant folk, that they may think it's a piece of the witch-craft of the Quakers whom he accuseth) it is strange he should have so little sense, as to make it a matter of admiration, as if that were not more primary to a man which cometh immediatly from the Spirit of God in his heart, than that which (albeit it come from the Spirit) yet is through another, and so must needs be but secondary, albeit it be confessed they writ them not for themselvs, but for others, which I deny not. Of the same natur is, and the same way is answered, what he saith, p. 65. n. 19. to wit, that I confound the Principal Leader with the Original Rule, because I say the Spirit is the Prime and Principal Leader: but I deny his consequence, neither doth his example of the Wind and Compass prove it; the Spirit is the Principal Leader, as imprinting upon man's Soul the Rules he should walk by: but indeed he would prove a very uncertain Pilot that had no compass but only a description of it, and a journal how other men had steered that course, and such Pilots is he and his Brethren, according to their own confession. But he thinks I drive at something more intolerable, to wit, that the Revelations the Quakers pretend to, or the Light within, is to be preferred, as the more primary and principal Rule, to the Scripturs: If the Quakers did affirm any revelations, they speak of, as coming from that Light, either were or could be contrary to the Scripturs, he would say something,
otherwise it will amount to no more but that commands, as they are im∣printed upon the Soul, that is, the Law writen in the heart by the Spirit, is more primarily and principally the Rule than the same things writen and received only from another; as to which I will only ask him, Whether those things, which the Apostles received immediatly from the Spirit commanding them to go here or there to preach the Gospel, or the like, were, as to these ends, more primarily and principally the Rule to them, than any thing that was recorded in the Scriptur, where they could not learn their duty, as to those particulars? And that I make not the Scri∣pturs and the Spirit all one, I have above shewn; and therefore his mali∣tious insinuations of Socinianisme fall to the ground: but he thinks he has found-out a mighty dilemma in the end of this paragraph, p. 66. Or will I say that the Light within me is really the Increated Spirit? This (saith he) must be blasphemy with a witness—to be heard with horror, and therefore needing no other confutation. Poor man! how apt is he to make a noise about no∣thing? If there be any blasphemy, it is his own. For what if I should say Is not GOD a LIGHT? and is not he in every man? and is not this Light within the Increated Spirit? The Reader may judge how easily these windy boasts of his are blown away: how the Spirit ruleth us and yet is not confound∣ed with the Rule, I have above shewn, so that what he saith to that in the rest of this page, where he vapers and rails, is but superfluous. Next, after he has a little plaid the Pedant upon the words magis originaliter, he concludes his 22 paragraph, with asking me, why the revelations I pretend to should be accounted more One with the Spirit himself, than those revelations by which the Scripturs were dictated? but this is his allegeance, none of my affirmation. Next, I never said that the Revelations, by which the Scri∣pturs were dictat, were less primary than any other whatsoever, albeit no revelation, which is writen and transmitted to a man only by the re∣port of another, can be so primary and immediat to him as that which he receives in himself: he confesseth here with me, p. 67. that the Spirit is the Prime and Principal Leader; whether that makes for my cause, as also what follows, will after in its place be examined. ¶ 6. But because he foundeth his assertion of my detracting from the perfection of the Scripturs, because I deny them to be the primary and original Rule, (for he acknowledgeth that I confess them to be a secondary one) I will examin the ground by which he goes about to prove it, as also his answers to my arguments proving the contrary. His first is from the
parable, Luke 16: 31. where it is said, They have Moses and the Prophets, whom if they hear not, neither will they be perswaded, if one be raised from the dead: but this proves only that one raised from the dead is not able to convince those that will not hear Moses and the Prophets, not that the Scri∣ptur is a more primary and principal Rule than what the Spirit immediatly reveals in the Soul; for that consequence will not nor doth follow, nor is in the least proven by him, neither can be, unless he first prove, that, albeit the testimony of one from the dead be less powerfull to perswade than the Scripturs, yet it is more than the immediat testimony of the Spirit in the heart, which I deny, and rests for him to prove, before he conclude any thing from this place. Next, this Parable was used by Christ to the Jews, to shew them their hypocrisy, who, albeit they deceit∣fully pretended so much to reverence and follow Moses and the Prophets, (as many now adays do the Scripturs) yet they did not really hear them, els they would have acknowledged him, of whom Moses and the Prophets did so clearly write, since he also did as great and convincing miracls be∣fore them, as if they had the testimony of one raised from the dead. And this leads me to take notice of what he saith, p 68. n. 24. in answer to my argument drawn from the difference betwixt the Law that is writen without and the Gospel that is writen within; where he accuseth me of con∣tradiction, because of my argument drawn from the revelations that were under the Law and the same-ness of the object: but I have answered this ca∣vill, in the former section. Yet since the strength of this resolves in his supposing I affirm there is no writen Rule under the Gospel, which he after con∣cludes, the whole falleth to the ground; for I never denied the Scriptur to be a secondary Rule, and that is some Rule, for to say I affirm there is no writen Rule, because the writen is not the primary, is a wild conclusion. And therefore all the rest of his talk to prove that Christ inspired the Apostles to write things to be a Rule to Christians, is meerly superfluous, since that that is a Rule, though not the primary, was never denied by me: and it may be here observed, that all his arguments to prove the Scriptur to be a Rule, unless they prove them to be the primary and principal one, conclude nothing, and are against me to no purpose. ¶ 7. His second argument is deduc'd from 2 Tim. 3: 16. where he cites the Apostle saying of the Scripturs, they are able to make wise unto Sal∣vation, and to make the man of God perfect. Where is first to be observed, his perverting of the Apostl's words, by an addition of his own, (and
therefore no wonder that he so frequently pervert mine) for the Apostle saith not, they are able to make the man of God perfect, but, All Scriptur given by inspiration is that the man of God may be perfect, that is, contributeth in its kind and order towards the perfection of the Saints; but it follows not thence, that they are the Primary Rule, no more than though I. B. will af∣firm that his book is writen, that the man of God may be perfect, that is, to help him to perfection, that thence it is to be esteemed the primary and chief Rule. Thus is answered that of John 20: 31. But these are written, that ye may believe, &c. cited by him, p 74.. For his book is also written for that end, yet the consequence will not follow: that they are able to make wise unto Salvation is not denied, in so far as they declare of the grace that brings Salvation and directs to the Light which leads to it; but how he thence inferreth they are the primary Rule, he must inform us the next time, since he has forgotten to do it now. And this may serve to answer those places, where he (according to his custom) repeats it over and over again, as p. 74. 77 & 82. where he hath again the fore-mentioned perversion, and enumerated the particular uses, applied to the Scriptur, he concludeth its perfection, as wanting nothing. Now I deny not that every book as wel as chapter and verse of Scriptur is perfect as to its end, that is, so far to express the mind of God, as he was pleased at that time, and also with a respect to its Author, as being written by the dictats of the Spirit: but that place will not conclude its perfection, either as the primary only or adequat, that is, entire, Rule, els all the other Scripturs, which were written after that Epistle of Paul, (as he will not deny but there were some so written) must be denied being any part of the Rule, & so to be any way necessary for that end. The like absurditys follow upon his using 2 Cor. 3: 14. where the Apostle speaks of a Testament, since he dare not deny a great part of that Testament was written afterwards. And thus is also answered what he urges from Psal. 19: 7. (pag. 74 & 79) The Law of the Lord is perfect, &c, and from other Scripturs of like import: for if he understand perfection in the first sense, it is not denied; if in the second, which indeed is the question, it concludeth nothing, without rendring all the Scriptur, written afterwards, no part of the Rule or Ca∣non, to use his own term. As for that of Peter, which he insists upon, in the end of his paragraph, p. 70. I deny it to be understood of the Scri∣ptur, and gave my reasons before; and yet the man takes that for grant∣ed, and thence argues from it, which is a most silly manner, albeit very familiar to him, to beg the question.
¶ 8. Next, he comes to consider my answer to their objections, but how he removes them may be judged by the first he observs, p. 71. where, in stead of proving that these words of Isa 8: 20. usually brought by them, To the Law and to the Testimony, &c. are meant of the Scriptur, which I desired, ere any thing could be inferred for it, he answers, As if any, that ever read the Bible, could be ignorant, what is all along meaned by these words. Is not this a goodly proof, Reader? I am one that have read the Bible, and know by the [Law] is sometimes meant the outward, sometimes the inward, and thousands more are yet to be convinced, that that place speaks only of the outward, and will need some better ar∣gument than this of his, ere we change our judgment. But to proceed, he thinks my saying that the Law was in a more special manner given to the Jewes, and more principally than to us, to be a railing and roaving, and a con∣tradicting what I said in the former These: but this cavill, often repeated before, I did answer above. The like he judgeth my arguing there∣from, that as they were to try all things by the outward Law, so we are to try all in the first place by the Word within: but here his base disingenuity ap∣pears, for he has left-out these words [in the first place] that he might in∣troduce the better the difficulty he phancyeth to himself to have brought me to afterwards; for by this argument (saith he) I prove more than I ought, to wit, that the Scripturs shall not be so much as a less principal Rule. Who will be so foolish as to conclude that the saying things ought [in the first place] to be tried by the Word within, excludes things [in the second place] to be tried by the Scripturs? and is not that still to own it as a secondary and subordinat Rule? And so he may see my feet here are easily rid, and that he held them not so fast as he phancyed. And as for the other part of his alternative, the consequence is of the like natur, that what was a prin∣cipal Rule then is now only subordinat: for albeit I said it was more principal to them than now to us, yet I said not it was the most principal to them, or then more principal than what came immediatly from the Spirit, which he confesseth to have been frequent under the Law, yea more frequent than now, according to his Principle, and my saying so could only inferr that consequence. He rejects what I urge from the version of the Septuagint as spurious, but for that we must take his word, els want a proof. And then because he can not come off better, according to his custom, he concludes with a gross perversion and falshood, saying, it is my opinion, that the Law, id est, the outward Law, was given the Jews for a
Rule, even above the Spirit's revelations: which if it be mine, (as I utterly renounce it) I desire to know where I have asserted it; he might have been at the pains to mark it, but he knew, it's like, it was not conveni∣ent. Next, he comes to prove, that these words Search the Scripturs, &c. Joh. 5: 39. do evince the Scripturs to be the primary and adequat Rule, be∣cause if Christ's doctrins should be tried by them, much more privat Euthu∣siasmes: but who denies that? Yet he doth not thence prove, that the Scripturs are the primary Rule, by which all things must be tried in the first place, which is the thing in question. Secondly, I would ask him, Whether the words Christ spake to the Jewes, which are recorded in Scriptur, were less a Rule to them, or less binding and obliging upon them, than the sayings of Moses and the Prophets? If he say they were less, then he overturns all his own tedious reasonings, by which he la∣bours to prove the obligation of what Christ and the Apostles delivered, (p. 84. at the end) as wel as what Moses and the Prophets, without the need of a new obligation: and likewise he must shew us how these say∣ings come to be as binding upon us now, as Moses and the Prophets, or how they acquired greater authority, after Christ spake them, than they had then, or why they wanted then that authority. If he say, they were binding and obliging to the Jews, because spoken by Christ, then his proof falleth to the ground. He is angry that I say the words may be interpreted, Ye search the Scripturs, as wel as Search the Scripturs, albeit the Greek word signify the one as wel as the other, and for answer, very magisterially tels it is quite contrary to the very words of Command, Search the Scripturs; but the question is whether that be the words, and that was what he should have proven: but he makes no bounds of begging the question, telling, Tolet and Maldonat say it is so taken by all the Fathers, except Cyrill. And what then? Did I undertake to subscribe to all these Authors writings? He must give me a reason why, ere I do it, and let him deny it, if he dare, that the Greek word fignifies Ye search the Scri∣pturs, as wel as Search the Scripturs; and if it do, before I conclude the one more than the other, I must have some better argument than his bare affirmation. But to finish this, he will conclude all by the words of the Apostle James, c. 1: v. 25. where he saith the Apostle calleth the Scripturs the perfect Law of Liberty, but that doth not prove them to be the primary Rule. Suppose it were granted the Apostle meant the Scripturs, which remains yet by him to be proven, and is not done by what he
citeth chap. 2: 8. by his desiring them to fulfill the Royal Law, according to Scri∣pture, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thy self, which proves it not at all; yea to understand it of the Scripturs were to make the Apostle's words scarce good sense, as if he had said fulfill the Scripturs according to the Scripturs, whereas it sutes the place much better, that the Apostle meaned they should fulfill the Royal Law in their hearts, which was one with the Scri∣pturs, that also command the same thing: that the Apostle means the outward Law, and not that written in the heart, chap. 4: 12. he hath af∣firmed, but not proven. Next, he comes to the Bereans being com∣mended for searching the scripturs, Act. 17: 11. But this is the same way answered as the former, for if the Bereans were obliged to believe and receive Paul's testimony, because he preached the Truth to them, by authority from God, then their using or his commending them for using the Scriptur will not prove the Scriptur to be the Primary Rule, yea more a Rule than the doctrin they tried by it. In the rest of what he saith in this n. 28. he but sights with his shaddow, for I never said they excluded the Law of Natur, in affirming the Scriptur to be the Rule; or did I ever de∣ny but that the Sriptur reveals things which Natur could never have discovered? But the question is, whether that truth, that Man is the Off spring of God, from which the Apostle argues with the Athenians, was discovered to any by meer Natur, or by a Divine Principle? and this is that he should have proven, and therefore yet remaines for him to do; but to be like him∣self, he concludes this also with a gross lye, saying, I affirm the Scriptur to be no more our Rule, than the Heathen Poets, which no ways follows from my words, neither hath or can he ever prove it. ¶ 9. He thinks the Scriptures not determining of many things, nor having any Rule for them, which he seems to acknowledge, is no argu∣ment against their being the primary and adequat or only Rule, for that he apprehends no rational man will think needfull to a compleat Rule. Why? because general Rules are enough, and thence he thinks it would follow, that the Quakers must have a new particular revelation for every act and word, such as eating, drinking, walking, &c. But I deny this consequence: these acts, as simply considered, are natural; and it will not follow, be∣cause to spiritual acts, relating to Faith and my immediat service towards God, I need a spiritual motion and influence of the Spirit, that therefore I need such a thing to natural acts. If he say these natural acts, under some circumstances, may be sin, or duty; I confess then the revelation
of the Spirit is needfull: for if I be sitting, sleeping, or eating in one place, when it is the mind of God I should be preaching and praying in another, I do sin: but how can the Scriptur give me a Rule here? All that he answers to this, p. 76 & 77. resolves into this, that all such doubts may be solved apply∣ing the general rules of Scriptur, by Christian Wisdom, Prudence and Discre∣tion, &c. But how shall I know that I truly make this application? And to give him his own often repeated argument in the case of Revelation, have not some thought they have made this application by Christian prudence, when they did not? And not to go further than I. B's own Brethren, the Presbyterians, yea the chief and most eminent Teachers among them, did not some of them judge it Christian prudence, accord∣ing to the Scriptur Rule, to draw near & adhere to the Remonstrance which others called publik Resolution men, denied? Do not some of them think it Christian prudence, to go hear the Bishops Curats, which others deny? Did not those chief men among them, as George Hutcheson and others, think it Christian prudence, to acçept of the Indulgence, Anno 1668, in entring according to the limitations proposed by the Council to their Places, which others, especially of the banished Brethren, and perhaps himself was highly offended at? whence these men were termed Council-Curats. Other instances among them I could give. But how shall all this be decided? What Scriptur-Rules can he assign, that clearly do it? Let him answer this distinctly, and not pass it over, lest he be suspected to leap, where he can not step. He confesseth to my alledging 1 Cor. 12. & Rom. 12. and after a little railing, he tels, p. 78. that he that is to rule is to do it with diligence, &c. but that the Scriptur saith not that James or Pe∣ter should take-on this or that Office, by which confession he destroys all, since the question is, How James and Peter knew they should take upon them to rule? This he saith he has shewn above, but how insufficiently my reply will evidence. He thinks no less impertinent, p. 78. for me to argue against their being a Rule as to all things, because they do not tell a man that he has the marks of true Faith, upon which knowledge the assurance of Salvation is founded; as if I must think the Laws of the Land must prove that R. B. is a Quaker, or that if R. B. had murther'd a man, it is a sufficient defence to say the Law doth not name R. B. But such examples are poor arguments, and do miserably halt: R. B. confessing himself to be a Quaker, acknowledging every one of their doctrins, is enough to prove him one, in the sense of the Law of the Land, and the
Judge is to condemn him a murtherer, if convict by Witnesses that he really did the deed. And both these relate to outward things, which can be proven by outward restimonys, for without the certainy of the evi∣dence the Judge can not pronounce his sentence. But is a man's own confessing or affirming he hath the true marks of faith enough to prove he has them? And what are the Witnesses, to apply the example of committing the murther, by which a man shall know he has these marks? and who must examin the Witnesses, and judge of the certainty or clear∣ness of their evidences? Must it be the man that is accused? who useth that method? Doth not the man see how miserably his pittyfull example claudicats? ¶ 10. To my objection against the Scripturs being the Only and Adequat Rule, the example of deaf persons, idiots, infants, such as can not read, and are ignorant of the Original Tongues, so called, all which in some measur, less or more, are deprived of the benefit of the Scripturs, so as to apply them to themselvs immediatly and effectually for a Rule, he asketh, Whether if any such person in a land should kill a man, or do any thing contrary to the Law, would it not punish them? And this he repeats, n. 35. in other words, which urgeth nothing, but upon supposition that the will of God can not be known otherwise than by the Scriptur, which suppo∣sition is false, and therefore his argument concludes nothing, yea him∣self confesseth that some things, and in particular murder, may be known by the Light of Natur, and so overturns his own argument. But he asketh What use can children, or idiots, or mad men make of the Light within? Answ. The Light within being affirmed by us to be a Living Principle, that quickens the Soul, may influence such persons, but so can not any writings. As for his learned Dr. Owen's book, which he recommends, he may find it answered long ago by Samuel Fisher a Quaker, which because the Doctor found too hot to reply to, I. B. that is so busy a body may supply that want. But most rare of all is his answer, p. 80. to my Conclusion, that Christ would not leave his own to be led by a Rule obvious to so many doubts, which is, and yet we see he hath done it; if this be not to beg the question in the highest degree, the Reader may judge. He confesseth the Spirit is the chief Leader: but to seem to come off with some credit, he falleth a railing upon me, for not distinguishing, but confounding the Spirit's work and the Scripturs, and then bestows many words, to prove they are distinct, with a heap of citations in the next p. 81. all which he might have spared,
untill he had proved first that I denyed they were distinct, or shewn where or when I confound them. What he writes, n. 38. & 39. p. 82. is meer railing, as the Reader by looking unto them may observe: he flouts there at my affirming I know one, that could not read, discover an error in the version, saying, but the good luck was, himself was Judge; what he would infer hence I see not, unless that their version is free of errors, which if he will adventur to affirm, his mistake may be shewn by the testimony of learned men among themselvs and his own correcting it divers times, which will after be observed. He saith, my speaking soberly of the Scripturs is only out of Policy, because the Quakers could not effectuat their poynt, which was to have the Scripturs quite laid-by, as an old Almanack But such malitious lyes and railings need no answer. To this he adds two other gross calum∣nys, to conclude his paragraph, that it is the Quakers fixed opinion, that the Scripturs are not to be made use of in their assemblys, it being below them to expound any portion of it there, or to adduce any testimony therefrom for confirma∣tion of their assertions. This can be proved to be a manifest untruth by the testimony of many that are not Quakers, who have been witnesses of the contrary. The other, which he calleth their constant opinion, is, that when one cometh to hearken to the Light within, he hath obtained the whole end of the Scripturs, so that they become wholly useless to him: this is also a horrid calumny. ¶ 11. In his examining of what I assert to be the end and usefulness of the Scripturs, p. 83, 84. he can not find fault with what I ascribe to them, but that I give them not all; and whether I do wrong denying that to them which he would seem to give, the former debate will shew. But that he may be here like himself, he seeks to infer from my words most gross and malitious consequences, which are utterly false, and till he prove them, they need no other answer, but to observe them, and deny them, which I utterly do, such as, that albeit Christ has ordained Pastors, and the Scripturs under the Gospel, to make the man of God perfect, yet the Quakers think they may be both laid aside as useless: that, according to me, the Scripturs are not so much as a subordinat Rule: that the Quakers would have all others save themselvs to look upon themselvs as not concerned in the Scripturs, that so they might be the sole keepers of these Oracles, and then, he saith, they shall quickly know what shall become of them: and that the Quakers always suppose that what the Spirit within them saith, can not contradict the Scriptur, and therefore what they say contrary to the Scriptur from the Spirit within must be supposed to
be seeming, and not real: this he repeats again (according to his custom) in the next page; if he mean the Spirit of God, I hope he will not deny it, and if he mean any other spirit, we deny it. But he would be fasten∣ing that upon us here, which may be justly said to them of their exalting their Confession of Faith above the Scripturs, as in the first section upon his Preface I observed. But he hath an objection which he urgeth, p. 67. and by which he thinks to overturn all, asking if I believe the testimony of the Scripturs to be true? Yes I do believe them, because the Testimony of the Spirit in my heart obligeth me so to do, and therefore being perswad∣ed they are true I make use of them, though, in respect to my self, not in the first and primary place, but in a secondary, next to the Spirit; yet as to him I may urge them every way, because he accounts them so: and as to their testimony for the Spirit's being the Principal Leader, upon my using of which he founds his objection, (albeit, since he acknowledg∣eth it, he has the less reason to carp at it) I believe it from the Scriptur testimony, but not as the primary ground of my faith which I derive from the Spirit it self; yet as a ground and that a very weighty one. As for his other question Whether I be of the same mind with other Quakers, of whom Mr Hicks reporteth, I answer, that what is there reported by Hicks is false: and I here dare I. B. and his Author Hicks to prove it to have been said by any Quaker, which till they can do by good and sufficient proof, they are both to be held as lying Calumniators. Section Fifth, Wherein his Fifth and Sixth Chapters, intituled by him, Of Man's Natural State, and Of Original Sin, are considered. 1 AFter he has repeated some of my words, he complains I speak darkly, and having given his usual malitious insinuations, that I do it of designe, and have some mysteries under it. He takes upon him to endeavour to guess at my meaning, and bestows many pages, to frame one conjectur after another, and then spends ma∣ny words to refute these shaddows, and men of straw of his own making: and yet at the end of all he confesses he doubts whether he has got or hit my meaning, and to be sure then he must be as uncertain that he has refuted
it; and therefore knoweth not but all his reasonings against his own conjecturs are impertinent, for after he hath written one conjectur, and bestows much labour in refuting it, his own words are, p. 91. n 5. if this be not his true meaning, let us try another Conjectur. Which shews he knows not whether what he said before was to the purpose: thus he spendeth pag. 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98. in which last page he is very angry that I should condemne the Socinians and Pelagians; but the reason is manifest, because he would so willingly have it believed that I am one with them; and albeit I could not in reason be obliged to say any thing more to these pages, yet that none of these fictitious and false conjecturs may catch any unwary Reader, I do freely affirm that I believe man fell and was degenerated both as to Soul and body, and I understand the first Adam, or earthly man, to comprehend both, but that there was something in Adam, which was no part of his Soul and body, nor yet constitutive of his being a man, in my judgment, which could not degenerate, and which was in Adam by the fall reduced to a seed, and could never have been raised in him again, to his comfort, but by a new visitation of Life, which from Christ by the promise was administred unto him, and is to all men in a day, (for to say the affirming such a Seed remained in Adam, when he fell, doth infer his understanding was not hurt, and as he doth p. 94. is a consequence I deny, and remains for him to prove) That to believe there was such a thing in Adam, which the Scriptur calleth spiraculum vitarum, the breath of Lives, is no new coin'd doctrin, these may see, that will read Athanasius, de definitionibus, and his third dialogue de Trinitate, & 4 oration against the Arians, and Cyrillus Alexandrinus in his Treatise upon John, lib. 2. & 3. & lib. 8. 47. and in his Thesaurus, lib. 4. and others that might be mentioned. As for his arguing, p. 96. that because I affirm the Seed of God is a Substance, therefore according to me the seed of sin must be a substance also, which consequence I de∣ny, and therefore what he builds against me upon this supposition falls to the ground. What he saith, here and there scattered in these pages, of the Light, will in its proper place come more fully to be considered. ¶ 2. Pag. 98. n. 17. after he has saluted me with the titles of effronted and impudent, he will have me one with Socinians and Pelagians, because I deny outward death to be a consequence of the fall; but where he proves I do so, I see not. It's true I say the death threatned, Gen. 2: 17. was not outward death, for Adam did not so dye the day he did eat, and I do still be∣lieve
so, neither offereth he me any thing to give me ground to alter my mind: but to conclude thence I deny outward death to be a consequence of the fall, was too hastily inferred. But what if I were undetermined in this matter, and that it remained a mystery to me? (for I believe not the being positive therein essential to my Salvation) which if I were, truly what he saith seems not to me sufficient to proselyt me to his opi∣nion, for albeit I willingly confess with him that sickness and all the other miseries attending this life, yea and death it self, considering the anguishes wherewith it is now generally accompanyed, are the consequence of the fall and of sin; yet I see not how it would thence follow that Adam should not have dyed, seing death to him, if he had not faln, would have been freed of all these miseries, and rather a pleasur than a pain, which has been known to have befaln many Saints. As for his n. 19. he con∣fesseth the matter of it is left to the next chapter, where I may meet him. ¶ 3. Pag. 100. n. 20. he goes on at an high rate of perverting, for after he has said, Who would suspect but I mean honestly? he applieth to me the saying of Solomon, he that hateth, dissembleth with his lips, we must not be∣lieve him, for there are seven abominations in his heart. But why am I, with him, guilty of this great charge? Because, albeit I affirm that man is wholly dege∣nerat, yet I say, Whatever good man doth in his natur, that doth not proceed from him, but from the Divine Seed in him. Answ. These words are none of mine, but a forgery of his own, so incident it is for the man to lye and pervert; and therefore all his vaporing and absurd inferences drawn from this, throughout this Paragraph, fall to the ground. My words are, that the natur, by which the Apostle saith, the Gentiles did the things contained in the Law, cannot be understood of the proper corrupt natur of man, but of a Spiritual natur which proceedeth from the Seed of God, as he receiveth a new visitation of the Di∣vine Love. Where it is very plain, I consider man as visited anew, and that in the strength of that Grace thereby received (not of his degenerat natur) he doth that which is good. Nor do I any where say, as he falsly insinuats, That this Spiritual Natur is in all men, though I do say That all men are visited by God, in order to beget this spiritual Natur in them, as will after come in its place to be spoken of. Now all his battering of this my as∣sertion in the three following pages depends upon this supposition, That the good acts, done by the Gentiles, are not done by vertue of any such visitation, but only by a Light of corrupt natur, which remained in them after the fall: so
that it is but a meer begging of the question, untill that be first debated. But he thinks he has brought me under a great dilemma, p. 103. urging, That, since I say all their imaginations are evil, I must say every Heathen has this Spiritual natur in him, yea and the Devils must be partakers of it, because they believe there is a God, which is a good thought. Answ. He is too hasty in his reasonings: for that the knowledge a man may receive from the Di∣vine Seed makes him instantly to partake of the Divine Natur, is not proved by him, and he knows I believe all men to be visited by this Di∣vine Seed, which may give them an head-knowledg, which they may retain, as some men do the Truth, in unrighteousness, and yet not re∣ceive it in the love of it; so though they have it from a Divine Seed, yet it will not follow they must necessarily so receive it, as to become partakers of the Divine Natur. And as for the Devils, he wil confess that once they had this knowledge from a Spiritual Natur, and though they have faln, yet they may retain the memory of it, for that their fall and Man's is every way alike he will not affirm. He saith p. 102. That to believe good done by Heathens (that is, by such as have not the benefit of the out∣ward knowledge of Christ) is done in vertue of a Divine Seed, overturns the Go∣spel, but he leavs the confirmation of it to the sequel, where I shall at∣tend him. N. 25. he tels me very fairly, the Apostle doth not contradict him∣self, as if I had ever imagined he did, but the question is whether the meaning he gives the Apostl's words implys not a contradiction, which indeed he can no ways reconcile but upon the supposition above denied; and the Reader may judge whether he or I do most fully acknowledge Man's fall, and most truely exalt the Grace of God, he that affirmeth that Man, notwithstanding the fall, yet retaineth some reliques of the Image of God, yea so that the Law of God, which is holy, just, good and Spiritual, is written in his heart, pag. 105. and all this considered as faln man, without re∣ceiving any Grace and benefit from Christ; or I, who affirm That Man by the fall was wholly degenerated, retaining nothing of the Image of God, in whom albeit there remained a Seed of Righteousness, yet no other ways than as a naked Seed in barren ground, in vertue of which he can do nothing, untill visited by a new visitation which he receives by vertue of Christ as Mediator. And yet while he ascribeth all this to unregenerat men, he saith in a few lines, that the Apostle and all regenerat men are, in a certain respect, carnal: so his Divinity will run thus, the Devil and all unregenerat men are in a certain respect spiri∣tual, and the Apostle and all regenerat are, in a certain respect, carnal.
¶ 4. But he thinks in the following page 106. he has gotten me in a notable contradiction, so that he concludeth if I may have occasion to contradict the Truth, I care not how often I contradict my self, and that is, by asking me this question, Wherein appeared the wisdom of the wise men among the Greeks, if not in the knowledge of the things of God? I answer: in the wise and prudent management of worldly affairs, for he hath not proved that is necessarily united to a knowledge of God and things Spi∣ritual, since it is said of some beasts, that they have something of this, such as Bees and Ants, &c. And whereas he asks, wherein man differs from Brutes then? I say, in many things; as in the knowledge of Numbers and Mathematical and mechanical demonstrations; is the knowledge of such natural Truths (as 2 & 3 makes 5: and the whole is greater than the part and all that's deduced therefrom) the knowledge of the things of God? And yet is not this further than what Beasts know? And to shew him his forwardness in this, let him shew me, if he admitt not this, how the Wisdom of this World is Foolishness with God, and the Wisdom of God foolishness with men. At last he comes, p. 107 & to the end of this chapter, to prove that there doth remain in Man some reliques of the Image of God, notwithstanding the fall; which he builds upon that saying of the Apostle, Rom. 1: 19. Because that which may be known of God is manifest in them, and the reason he urgeth, is, because it was known not to a few only. Answ. This is very true, but makes nothing for him, for here (as for the most part elsewhere) he with an unparalleled confidence, not to say impudence, every where begs the question: First, in that he supposeth that this , or what is to be known of God, is somewhat that man retained in the fall, and no new Visitation of Light and Grace, which he knows I deny. And Secondly: That it must be so, because all men have it, where he supposeth that all men receive not such a visitation, which he knows I also deny, and yet he concludes, without offering to prove either of them. Who but one desperat, and that cares not how ridicu∣lous and absurd he be, if he can but heap together a company of railing words, would urge his adversary by mediums which he knows he denies, without first proving them, or at lest attempting so to do? ¶ 5. Next followeth his sixth chapter, intituled of Original Sin, in which nothing of what he saith can touch me, but so far as he proves That those who never actually sinned, such as Infants, are guilty of Adam's sin: Therefore what he saith of others, who affirm that Man sustained no hurt
by Adam but by imitation, concerns me not, since I say no such thing, and yet he thinks it a paradox for me to say (albeit he can not deny but it is true) that I deny the errors of such. And of this natur is what he writes in the first 4 pages of this chapter, in the last of which he goes, after his custom, as it were, to pump for the meaning of my words, that he may insinuat to the Reader, as if I wrot all in the dark, and had great myste∣ries under them; whereas any one that reads them may see they are so plain, that they need no commentary: for who is so weak, as not to un∣derstand me saying, that the seed of sin is not imputed to Infants, untill they actually joyn with it? He comes p. 114. n. 8. to examin what he saith I say in defence of this error. And first, he will take notice of what I say of Augustin, whom he alledgeth I abuse, because I say that he was the first among the Antients that opened the way to his opinion, in his de∣clining age, out of zeal: but will he deny that Augustin wrot most zeal∣ously against Pelagius in his declining age? Next he shews here his great disingenuity, for while he names many of the Antients as being of the same mind, and whom Augustin also cited against Pelagius, he gives none of their words, that it might have been seen whether it was in this that they condemned him, to wit, that Infants are not guilty of Adam's sin: for these citations may relate to that which was accounted indeed Pelagia∣nisme, to wit, that Man by natur without the Grace of God could fulfill the Law, yea that he needed not Grace to perform the will of God, which was the thing for which Pelagius was condemned by the African Synod. As for the cita∣tion he gives of Augustin, saying, he was of the same mind, since the beginning of his Conversion, seing in this place Augustin's words, which he saith he has held, are no more than the express words of the Apostle, Rom. 5: 12 which I. B. has not yet proved to import that Infants are guilty of Adams sin: so if he has no better way to prove Augustin's positive judgment in the case than this, he doth but give a token of his own effrontedness and shameless boldness, not of mine. But since he seems so great an admir∣er of Augustin as an honoured instrument of the Lord, and an holy Father, as he terms him, then I desire to know whether he will agree to all that Augustin has written; which if he will not do, he doth ill to accuse me for condemning Augustin as erroneous in some things; and if he will, I may then shew him, that Augustin both commended and practiced things which he and his Brethren cried-out against, as superstition, will-wor∣ship and abominable Popery and Idolatry, and for far less than which
they have excommunicated their fellow-Preachers: which shews in ef∣fect meaner thoughts of him than I have yet expressed. My argument drawn from Ephes. 2: 3. where the Apostle ascribes the reason of mens being children of wrath to their evil deeds, he saith was the Fathers against Pelagius. And what then? doth that render it null? But his own answer to it is rare, saying, he thinks I put out my eyes that do not observe how the Apostle changes the second person, saying, Among whom also we all had our conversation in times past,—and were by natur the children of wrath: whence the man wisely infers That Paul and the Jews were the children of Wrath, which is not denied; but they must have quick eyes indeed that see it from thence to be inferred that they were such, ere they committed any actual sin, since the Apostle expressly mentions his & their having had their conversation among the World as a reason of their having been in the same condition. He saith further, I confess 1 Cor. 2. that  is to be understood of the Rational soul: and what then? Therefore so soon as they partake of the Rational soul they become children of Wrath; This is indeed a rare consequence, but he must excuse me for not admitting it, till better proved. It would seem much more rational, to say, that so soon as they come to the exercise of their Rational soul, and then do evil, they become guilty; for he can not deny that the Gospel nor condemn∣eth nor threatneth any man but him that has actually sinned, and whe∣ther this destroys not his cause the Reader may judge: That except a man be born-again, he can not enter the Kingdom, I never denied. Albeit child∣ren be capable of death, yet it will not follow that they are guilty of sin, since death is no punishment but rather an advantage to such, to whom it's a transition to a better Life. He thinks, p. 117. that my saying such as homologat their fathers sins, God will visit the iniquitys of their fa∣thers upon them, is not worth noticing; but whether his answer be worth noticing, the Reader may judge, which is, That Adam's sin was not a personal sin, as other mens are, and his own after-sins; but the man for∣got to prove this, and therefore may do it next: but he thinks the child∣ren of Core, Dathan and Abiram, of Achan and the Sodomites, were judged guilty of their Fathers sins, for unless he proves that, he saith nothing, but for what reason I know not, unless that they were outwardly destroy∣ed: but untill he prove that infers guilt, he must for bear making his con∣clusion. He is highly offended I should say their opinion is contrary to the Iustice and Mercy of God, alledging, it is without proof: but if to ac∣count
one guilty for a sin committed by another thousands of years ere they had a being, and to punish for it, be not against Iustice, and incon∣sistent with Mercy, I desire to know of him what is more unjust and un∣mercifull. To say that this is an accusing of God is but a silly begging of the question, untill he has first proved his opinion to be true; it's no ac∣cusing of God to condemn mens opinions, when contrary to his Natur. He will have it to be a rapsody of non-sense, when I say, this proceeds from self-love founded on their opinion of absolute Reprobation; but whe∣ther it be or not, the Reader may judge, sure his saying it makes it not so. That this of Infants being guilty of Adam's sin, and therefore many of them being damned, depends upon their doctrin of Reprobation, no Man of sense, that knows their doctrin, will deny; since they say some Infants are saved, because elected. Are not the rest then, according to them, damned, because reprobated? He gives me nothing here in answer but railing, and so concludes this Paragraph with this notable saying, Woe, I say (that is, I. Brown forsooth) and thrice woe to such, as drink-in this Man's doctrine, and live and dye accordingly. p. 118. n. 14. He thinks my saying Papists are more charitable in allowing a Limbus to children shews my affection to them, but he has not heard me allow of their notion of a Limbus, as he does, in the chapter of Iustification, p. 310. of the opinion of a certain Popish Cardinal, preferring it not only to what is said by William Forbes a Protestant Bishop, but even, as it would appear, to Richard Baxter his ancient Presbyterian Brother; and in pursuance of this he asks, how they come to Heaven, meaning Children, who have nothing to do with Christ? But then, what wil he say of those he accounts elect children? go they to Hea∣ven without Christ? If not, the difficulty is the same way solved. To prove Children are under a law, and subject to transgression, he gives the common practices among men who forfeit children, yea such as are unborn, with their fathers, for great crimes. But in what countrey do they use to kill all the children, when the father is put to death for a crime? and unless this were done, his comparison infers not the poynt. His plain answer (he saith) is, Adam his being a publike person, of which hereafter. To my citation Ezech. 18: 20. the son shall not bear the father's iniquity, he preaches at large upon the Prophet's words, alledging his meaning is, that those persons he wrot to had so much sin of their own, that God might justly judge them, albeit he did not visit them for their fathers iniquitys; and this is the quick dispatch he saith this place re∣ceives:
it is a quick way to dispatch indeed, if it were valid, to make the meaning destroy the Text; but men of sense use not to be sudden in receiving such dispatches. The words are plain and positive The son shall not bear the father's iniquity; therefore, untill he give ground from plain Scriptur to take it away, it must stand, to the overthrow of his Doctrin; for the greater sinners those men were, the more justly and deservedly might their Fathers iniquity be laid upon them. ¶ 6. Pag. 120. n. 17. he cometh from my confession that Adam was a publike person, to infer That the guilt passeth from him to all, and first in this page he affirmeth that this sin of Adam's, from whence Original sin pro∣ceeds, is the sin of the whole natur of Mankind, and not like Adam's after sins and the sins of other Men, which he confesses are not the sins of the whole Nature: and because upon this dependeth much of what he infers, he had don wel to have proved this in the first place by some Scriptur, till which time his inference is not to be received. For did Adam cease to be a publick person, after he had committed that sin? If he say Yea, let him prove it by plain Scriptur, for I deny it: if not, then his other sins must be imputed to all men (which he denies) or els nothing can be urged from his being a publick person; and while to urge it he asketh Did ever any hear one stat∣ed as a publick person, whose failings could have no effect, untill the persons repre∣sented did testifie their approbation of it? For here speaking of Failings, he must either conclude, in contradiction to himself, that Adam's sins are laid to the charge of his Posterity, or his instance is wholly impertinent. And yet, to go round again, he takes notice, p. 125. that the Apostle names One Offence in the singular Number, as if thence he would infer that one sin is only transmitted; but how he proves his consequence thence he has not shewn: for albeit by that first offence he gave entrance to sin, that being his first, yet it will not follow he then ceased to be a publick person, and if not, nothing can be proved from granting him to be such, as is above observed. Next, the words are the offence of one, and not one offence, as he would insinuat; which (though in the singular number) may include many, yea all his offences. For whatever way he seek to urge this from this place as to Adam, the parallel will allow it to be interpreted of Christ, where the Apostle speaking of his Righteousness useth also the singular num∣ber, and thence according to him we might say that it is only the first act of Christ's righteousness that is imputed unto us, and none of the rest, so that we have nothing to do with his Death, Sufferings and Resurre∣ction.
What thinks he now of his own Divinity? Let him loose his knot the next time, to give him one of his own modestest proverbs. The absurdity he seeks to draw from denying this consequence of his being a publick person, that if Adam had stood, infants should have no advantage by him, since they have no hurt by his fall, toucheth not me at all, who no where say that Infants have no hurt by Adam's fall. Adam by his fall lost his glory, his strength, his dominion by which he could have easily with∣stood the Devil, and came under great weakness, whereby the Ene∣mie's tentations had already access to him, and he became very obno∣xious to fall under them; and so all his Posterity are come under the same weakness and obnoxiousness to the Enemie's tentations, who in∣fluenceth them by entring into them, and powerfully inclining them to sin: and this malignant influence is that seed of sin in all men, whereunto they become obnoxious, by reason of the fall, which though in it self really sin, yet is it not Man's, but the Devil's, untill Man give way to it. But I deny not but the least yeelding is Man's sin, among which I reckon concupiscence to be one, and so differ from Papists. For albeit the tentation simply considered, or as presented by the Devil, be not Man's sin, yet if he have the least love or desire to it, albeit he joyn not actually, that shews his mind is already defiled and corrupted, and that he is become a partaker of it. Thus are answered his reasonings and questionings how this seed of sin can be, and yet not the persons sin, p. 121, 122, &c. as the Reader by comparing may observe: only it is remarkable, p. 121. where he seems to put a great stress upon the judgment of Augustin, and citing him he brings him in saying these words among others, concern∣ing Infants, Shall they sin that are under no command? Now since they who are under no command are under no Law, for every Law imports a com∣mand, how will he reconcile this saying of his holy Father, which he brings as a matter of authority, with his accounting it both foolish and strange in me p. 119. to prove children are under no Law? So that either the authority of Augustin he brings is not to be regarded, or his reasonings to prove children under a Law, that is, a command, must be naught: let him chuse which he will, and clear himself of impertinency. His argu∣ment in this page, that as the Seed of Grace denominats a man gratious, even while not exercising works of Grace, so the seed of sin must denominat a man sinfull, is but a begging of the question, as in its place will appear, when I come to treat of the Seed of Grace.
¶ 7. When he cometh, p. 123. n. 18. to reply to my answer to their objection Rom. 5: 12. among his preliminary observations the first is very proper, where he saith, It is observable the Apostle makes comparison betwixt Adam and Christ. I answer: it is indeed so, for as the righteousness of Christ is not imputed to men for justification, untill they actually joyn with it, or apprehend it by faith, (as himself will acknowledge, for I suppose by his accounting the Antinomians heretiks he will not with them affirm that men are justified before they believe.) so neither is the un∣righteousness and disobedience of Adam imputed to men for condemnation, untill they actually joyn with it. but this comparison spoils all his do∣ctrin. Then after he has begg'd the question a while, by meer allega∣tions, affirming his doctrin to be so clear, from the Apostle's words, that it can not be contradicted, without doing violence to the Text; he forms an argument thus: That sin, which is so described to us by the Apostle, that he saith it brought death upon all men, that men sinned by it, and were made sinners, even they who could not as yet actually sin, that thereby all became guilty of death and of con∣demnation, that sin by imputation is the sin of the whole nature, included in Adam, and rendereth the whole nature obnoxious to death, and to con∣demnation. But the first sin of Adam is described to us by the Apostle, &c. Ergo That sin is the sin of Natur, &c. This argument may perhaps satisfie such as are already proselyts of his Theam, but will not convince one, that either believs other ways, or doubts; since the Major is a meer begging of the question: and if any thing be a foisting-in of words to the text, this must be it, since he foists∣in the thing in debate, and words not in the text, such as [even they who could not as yet actually sin] and joyneth them with the words of the text, without distinction, and not as an interpretation, that his unwary Read∣er may conclude them to be of the text, and yet the man has the impu∣dence in the same page to accuse me of intolerable boldness, as foisting words into the next, while I expressly shew it is but an interpretation, by say∣ing That is, &c. so much is he blinded with self-interest: but I am con∣tent there be neither addition nor so much as consequence made use of. Let him shew me the plain Scriptur that saith Infants are guilty of Adam's sin. If he say it must be necessarily inferred from these words [in whom all have sinned] I say it as necessarily follows that it is only to be understood
of all that could sin, which Infants could not, as not being under any law, as I have above proved, and Augustin (whom he so much reverenc∣eth) doth affirm, if his citation from him be true: and therefore finding this to pinch him, he brings it up again, p. 126. where bringing me in saying, Infants are under no Law, he answers, but the Apostle saith the contra∣ry. He would have done charitably to have told me where, that I might have observed it. What he saith in this as wel as the former page in an∣swer to my affirmation that  may relate to death, and that it's un∣derstood [upon which occasion man sinned] urging absurditys by the like ap∣plication of Christ's Righteousness, is solved by a serious observation of the comparison, as stated by me, betwixt Christ and Adam. His argu∣ing from Childrens dying doth not conclude, untill he prove Death simply considered necessarily to infer guilt in the Party dying, of which I have spoken before, p. 126. n. 20. to my answer to Psal. 51: 5. alledged by them, wherein I shew that David saith not my Mother conceived me sinning, and therefore it proves not his assertion. His reply is, after he has given a scoff, it quite crosseth David's designe. But why so? because in that Psalm he expresseth his sorrow and humiliation for his sins? and what then? might not David lament upon that occasion, that he was not only a sin∣ner himself, but also came of such as were so? But when I urge this place further, shewing their interpretation would make Infants guilty of the sin of their immediat Parents, since there is no mention here of Adam, his answer to this is a repetition of his own doctrin. A rare method of de∣bate, very usual to him! And then taking it for granted he asks me whe∣ther this originated Sin (of which he supposed David spake, for he ne∣ver offers to prove it, though it be the matter in debate) came from another Original than Adam? What he affirmed here of my insinuating Marriage-Dutys to be Sin, is but a false conjectur; but as to the hurt and loss that Man got by Adam, which I ascribe to no other Original, as be∣ing no Manichee, I spake before: but he should first prove, before he obtrude such things upon others (and I desire yet to be informed of him) in what Scriptur he reads of Original Sin, and whether, if the Scriptur be the only Rule, he can not find words in it fit enough to express his faith, or must he shift for them elsewhere? ¶ 8. Pag. 127. n. 21. He urges Paul's saying the wages of sin is death, and to my saying This may be a consequence of the fall, but that thence it can not at all be inferred that iniquity is in all those that are subject to
death, he saith, it is in plain terms (but my modesty dare not speak it out) to say, the Apostle speaketh not truth. Answ. Is not this to take upon him to judge of another man's heart, which elsewhere he accounts a great pre∣sumption? & why takes he no notice, or gives he no answer to the absur∣dity I shew followed from thence? since the whole Creation received a decay by Adam's fall, and yet we say not Herbs and Trees are Sinners: and while he would make-out this great charge of my contradicting the Apostle, he forgets the half of his business, which is, to prove the Apostle meaned, in that place, Natural death, and not Eternal, since the Apostle opposeth it there to Eternal Life: and eternal death he will confess is the wages of Sin, which the Apostle shews they shun by Jesus Christ's obtain∣ing Eternal Life, whereas Natural death they do not avoid. Likewise he should have proved that all the Scripturs mentioned by him, p. 128. are meant of natural death, which he will find not very easy. As for his cit∣ing Death as mentioned by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. the Apostle's words ver. 56. confirm what I say, That death is only a punishment to the wick∣ed, not to the Saints, for the words are, The sting of death is Sin; so where sin is taken away, there death has no sting, and that is the Saints Victory. Now he can not apply this to Infants, without supposing that they have sin, which were to begg the question. And whereas he asks Whether Death be NO punishment for Sin? I answer that I said not so, neither is that needfull for me to affirm, seing it is sufficient, if it be not always a pu∣nishment of sin; which if it be not, it can not be concluded that because infants dye, therefore they must be guilty of sin. Since then the absur∣ditys he after urges follow from his supposition that death is No punish∣ment for sin (which I say not) they do not touch me. He judgeth, p. 128. n. 22. that I run wilder than Papists, in saying we will rather admitt the supposed absurdity of saying all Infants are saved, to follow from our doctrin, than with them say, that innumerable Infants perish eternally, not for their own, but only for Adam's fault. This he reckons a contradicting of my doctrin of Christ's dying for all, saying, I here grant that all Infants will be saved without Christ. What horrible lye is this? Where say I that all Infants will be saved without Christ? If he say, it is by consequence that I say so, (which he must needs do, or els be an impudent unparallel'd lyar) then he infers it either from my saying Christ dyed for all, Therefore if all Infants are saved, it must be without Christ; or that, If all Infants be saved, Christ can not have dyed for all: for one of these two must be, if I
contradict my self. But such consequences are only fit for such an Au∣thor as seems to have abandoned all sense of honesty and Christian re∣putation, and resolvs per fas aut nefas, and without rime or reason, as the proverb is, to bespatter his adversary. As for his adding they that have no sin, have no need of a Saviour to save them from sin, he overturns it all by asking me, (in which also lies the pinch of his matter) since I affirm they have a seed of Sin in them, wich is called Death and the Old man, how can they put-off this, and sing the Song of the Redeemed, which all that enter into Glory must do? Does not this then shew I believe they have need of Christ as a Saviour, who dyed for them, to deliver them from this? and is not the contradiction his own, in urging this que∣stion? which I thus answer, How are those he accounts elect Infants sav∣ed, whom he affirms to be really guilty of Adam's sin, and so in a worse condition than I affirm Infants to be? (for he will not say with Papists and Lutherans that the adminstiring of that they call the Sacrament of Ba∣ptism does it.) When he answers this, he will solve his own argument. To insinuat that some Infants are damned, he asketh me what I think of those of Sodom, Jude v. 7. the words are these, Even as Sodom and Gomor∣rah, and the Citys about them, in like manner giving themselves over to fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire. But it is strange the man should be so desperatly audacious, as to proclame his own sottishness to the world. Is there a word here of Infants? Is not the very reason of suffering the vengeance of eternal fire given? because of their giving themselvs over to Fornication: which rea∣son could not touch Infants. Pag. 129. he thinks I wrong Zuinglius upon the credit of the Council of Trent; but if the Counçil of Trent wronged Zuinglius, in condemning him for that he was not guilty of, he and his Brethren have the honour to have their judgment approved by that Council, while ours is condemned: and let him remember how he useth to upbraid me with àffinity with Papists, yea in this very chapter, upon less ground. Pag. 130. he goes about to prove his matter from several Scripturs, but how shallowly, the Reader may easily observe. (1.) He citeth Gen. 6: 5. Man's thoughts are evil continually. What then? Are In∣fants therefore guilty of Adam's sin, that's the thing in question. But the Hebrew signifies à pueritiis, from their infancy. What then? how proves that the case? I do not deny but Children may become guilty of sin very early, but the question is Whether they be guilty of Adam's sin,
even in their Mothers womb? And hereby we may see he thinks not their version so exact, but I. B. must take upon him to correct it, to help himself at a dead lift, as they say. The same way is answered the other Scripturs, that follow, Ezech. 16: 4. Matth. 15: 19. Eph. 2, 3. which are yet more impertinent, as the Reader by looking to them may see; and I might easily by examining them particularly shew, if it were not that I study brevity, and delight not to glory over the man's impertinency. And though Infants perished in the flood, and that was brought upon the men and women that sinned, for their iniquitys; yet it will not follow thence that infants are guilty of sins, untill he better prove that natural death is always, and to all, the wages of sin, albeit I confess with the Apo∣stle eternal death is. And indeed if these infants were punished at all, it must have been for the sins of their immediat Parents, which he will not affirm, since the flood is not said to have come for Adam's sin, but for their own: so this instance clearly overturns his assertion. I leave to the Readers judgment the Scripturs not mentioned at length, but set down by him, in this to judge whether they prove the thing in debate, to wit, that Infants are guilty of Adam's sin. The citations out of Augustin and Origen, brought by him in the next page, 131. the Reader may also judge of, (in case they be truely cited, which I can not examin at present) whether they have weight enough to overturn what has been here proved from Scriptur. The words of Eliphaz (Iob 15: 14.) speak of a Man, not of a child, and therefore not to the purpose; neither do I be∣lieve, though the Spirit of God gave a relation of what Eliphaz said, that we ought to build our Faith upon his affirmations. Next he urges Gen. c. 5: v. 3. And Adam—begat a son in his own likeness, after his image; but this would prove Adam's sons as guilty of all sins, as that first, which he denied, or let him shew a ground for such a distinction. And thus is further answered what he saith, next page, Gen. 17: 14. where it is said, the man-child that is uncircumcised shall be cut-off, which he thinks so strong, that in a vapor he desires me to chew my cud upon it; for if this cutting-off was a punishment of these children for sin, it must be for that of their immediat parents, who neglected to circumcise them, which Adam could not do, and therefore could not sin in omitting it; and since he will not say this, he can urge nothing from that place. He saith the Fathers used to make use of these words of Christ, Ioh. 3: 5. Except a man be born of water, &c. but their using it was upon their mistake that Baptism took
away Original sin, and that therefore infants unbaptized could not be saved. That regeneration is needfull to Infants I deny not: and whereas he asks how are they regenerat? I answered that before, asking him how those he accounts Elect Infants, whom he confesses to be guilty of Adam's sin, are regenerat? He confesses the Fathers argument, taken from sprinkling in∣fants with water, (which they and he falsly call Baptisme) will conclude nothing against me: but since he names here Initial Sacraments, in the plural number, which the Fathers made use of, it seems they had some more than Baptisme. And since he and his Brethren make use of no more as Initial but Baptisme, it seems he differs from them, in what they judg∣ed needfull here, as wel as the Quakers. I have shewn above how I evite both contradicting myself, as to Universal Redemption, and excluding in∣fants from the benefit of Christ's death. And for his last question, where∣in did Christ excell other Infants, if they be born without sin? (he should have said [not guilty of Sin] I answer, In that he had no Seed of Sin in him, as other infants have, and that not only, but he had nothing of that weak∣ness and propensity to yeeld to the evil influence thereof, as other In∣fants; but was in greater strength, glory and dominion over it, than Adam, even before he fell: This shews his privilege above others, and in nothing contradicteth what I have said before. Section Sixth, Wherein his Seventh and Eighth Chapters Of Reprobation and Vniversal Redemption are considered. ¶ 1. IN his seventh chapter of Reprobation he expatiateth himself at great length, in large and tedious homilies, which will make my reply the shorter, who look not upon it as my concern to answer them; because these controversies are largely handled by others, and what is said by him is abundantly answered: yet if he will affirm he has said something that is new, upon this Theam, and poynt to it, it is like it may not want an answer. And indeed the Reader may observe him much pained and strained to put a fair face upon these foul doctrins; and though what he saith here may be, and it is most pro∣bable, is to be understood of the reason he gives, in his Epistle, in being
so large, because of the opposition of others, besides Quakers; and also because I touched these things but passingly, as being a Theam much debated, and common to us with others, I might pass it by, with a refe∣rence to those Authors, who largely treat of them; yet I will take no∣tice of what he saith in direct answer to what by me is affirmed. And first, as for his accusation of me as not being positive and punctual enough, in setting down my judgment of the Decrees of Election and Reprobation, it is of no weight. All do at times confess that it is not safe nor proper too cu∣riously to inquire into the Decrees of God, though this man dive into them, and be as positive in telling the several causes of them, as if he were upon the Secret Counsel of the Almighty! I judge I have said that which is needfull and sufficient, to wit, that God calleth every Man every where to repent and be saved, through faith in Jesus Christ, who tasted death for Every man, and is given for a Light to inlighten the Gentiles, & to be God's Salvation to the ends of the Earth; and therefore that Every man ought to apply himself to repent and believe, and obey, without believing that God has fore-ordained him to be damned, and therefore has with-held from him Grace and Power to do what he finds himself commanded and obliged to do: which if it were true, as he supposeth it to be of most men, there can be no reason why they ought not to believe the Truth. If he say they either ought or need not, because they know it not; Let him remember what pains he has been at, in the former chapter, to prove that ignorance of a truth doth not take away the obligation of believing it: so he must either overturn all, or be content this absurdity stick to his doctrin. As for his saying that the Opposers of it do arraigne God, and give a sign of their Pride and arrogancy, because they can not comprehend it with their corrupt and blinded understandings, it is but a silly begging of the question, and suppos∣ing it to be true. Thus every Impostor might intrude upon sober Chri∣stians wild absurd and non-sensical notions, contrary to God's Justice and Mercy; and because they would not accept of them, tell them, they arraign God, are proud and arrogant, and not receiving the Truth, be∣cause not comprehended by their corrupt Understandings. Would not this thinks he be wisely reasoned? But pag. 135. n 3. he thinks I run so furiously against this doctrin, that I run my self blind. And why so? because I say they affirm That God did predestinat to everlasting damnation the most part of men, without any respect had to their sin, only to demonstrat the glory of his justice: and upon this he rants as a ridiculous and false representa∣tion
of their meaning. But this storm is quickly blown away, for all his great noise; for their Westminster confession of Faith saith, chap. 3. express∣ly, that GOD ordained such as are not elected for dishonour and wrath, to the Praise of his glorious justice. And the same Confession saith, in the same chapter, that nothing future, or what was to come, even as fore-seen by God, was the cause of God's Decree; and this himself also affirms, p. 137, 138, 139. What then is become of all his boast? But if he place it here, and say, Sin be∣came the cause so soon as [to demonstrat the glory of his justice] became the end, and therefore they say it was for their sin he so Decreed. This may serve for a rattle to please fools and children, but not such as are spiritually wise, and look more narrowly unto things, since they so manifestly contradict themselvs, telling, Sin, nor any futur thing is not the cause of God's Decree, and yet in a few lines, that God ordained or decreed men to wrath for their sin, to manifest the glory of his justice, which is as much as to say, God decreed men to be damned without respect to sin, and yet he decreed them to be damned for their sin. How makes he this hang together by Scriptur proofs? Besides, all will confess that the cause of all God's decrees is his own Glory, which is exerted in his Divine attributes, whereof Iustice is one, so that this must be a cause, (before sin can have any place to be a cause) since they deny it has any. He tels me, p. 136. n. 5. that the Ortho∣dox have written copiously on this subject, and very far above my reach; there was the less need then for him to write so many pages upon it, which must be little but a transcribing out of their writings, unless he think he has written more accuratly and copiously than any of them. (which I judge he will hardly affirm) I might easily, if I would, trouble the Reader with a tedious discourse, also transcribe an answer out of those, who write copiously against these his supposed Orthodox, but truely Heterodox, men; but I rather chuse to pass it by, (not affecting to be admired for the bulk of my writings) to come to what he saith directly in answer to me, which is the business properly in hand. ¶ 2. After he has premised what he thinks meet, he comes, p. 143. n. 12. to take notice of what I say; and first wherein I misrepresent them, in which he saith he has found no less than 12 untruths: but how untrue this assertion is shall shortly appear. The first is, that I say, God, for perfecting of this, that is, for bringing his Decree to pass, did appoint, that these mi∣serable souls should necessarily sin; this he saith is a mistake. But if the resti∣monies of Calvin, Zanchius, Piseator and others, cited by me, whose te∣stimonies
must have more weight than his, to prove the Calvinists prin∣ciple in this; do not prove this to be no mistake, then I may conclude that 2 and 3 makes not 5. Calvin saith that God not only predestinated men to sin, but to the causes of it, which is sin: the Reader may look the other pas∣sage of it in my Apology. Several of his other untruths, p 144. he builds upon supposing that I insinuat that they believe the Gospel is once preach∣ed to every person, that every reprobat had the knowledge of Christ, and that God had given to every one, that heareth the Gospel, sufficient Grace to embrace it. But truely I was never so mad as to insinuat they believed these things, for not believing of which I condemn them; neither will his pedantism upon the word subtrahendo make it out, since to withdraw or with-hold may be said of things that man never had, with∣out any great impropriety: and yet, according to him, all men had a will and power to obey God's Law, in Adam, so his ordaining Adam should fall, was even in that sense a withdrawing of what they once had in their Foederal Head, according to his phrase and notion. Another of his alledged mistakes, is, that I say they affirm God did decree men should not obey; but whether these passages, I cited out of their Anthors, do not make out this, the Reader may judge; yea his Coufession doth ascribe the with-holding of Mercy, which is the means, to agree to the Decree of Repro∣bation: so that all the fig-leaf coverings, whereby this man would fain shelter this opinion contrary to their publick Confessions of Faith and positive sentences of their chief Doctors, are too short and narrow to hide the ugglyness of it. He confesseth the Antients say little of this be∣fore Augustin, I never so used their testimony, as to build my faith upon it, or to reject their doctrin meerly for its dissent from them, which he insinuats, and yet to his own self-contradiction confesseth I say I would not much regard all that, if it had any ground in Scriptur; and he denies not his union with the Dominicaus, and that he may shew how little he cares for good company, he willingly rejecteth the chief and first Refor∣mers, to wit, the Lutherans, whom, according to his charity, he denieth so much as the name of Reformed Protestants. ¶ 3. Pag. 146. n. 16. He cometh to prove that this their doctrin maketh not God the author of sin, but he laboureth here like a man in a sweat, and giveth so little of a direct answer, as scarce deservs any reply, such as amounts to this, being by way of retortion, that, if I acknowledge God fore-saw sin, permitted it, and might have hindred it, I will make God the author
of sin too, but I deny the parity, and he has forgoten to prove it. His other answer is from the authority of Cicero and Plautus, who oppose au∣thor to dissuasor, and then he asketh whether they say God perswadeth any man to sin? But Zanchius, one of their Doctors, saith, he moves the thief to kill, and that he sinneth, God putting him, yea forcing him to it, and sure that's more than perswading. But the poor man must be at a low ebb, when he is forced to go to the Heathens, of whom he has expressed he has so mean thoughts, for a shelter to his doctrin! At last, to come off with some seeming credit, he desires me to confute the Apostle, Rom. 9: 11, 12, 13. because that he thinks from that, as much as from their doctrin, this charge may be inferred: but here he doth only begg the question, he and I do both agree that the Apostle makes not God the author of sin; but it doth not thence follow that their doctrin doth not infer it, since from the positive saying of their Doctors and the doctrin itself it is manifest, as is more largely shewn in my Apology, and this remains yet by him to be removed. For his desiring me to refute the Apostle is no more answer, than if to all his arguments in his book I should only say, Confute the Scriptur, which contains our Doctrin, and therefore dispute no more against us, untill thou first do that. Would he reckon this suffieient? As for their misapprehensions of Rom. 9. he may find them refuted in many Authors, that have written upon that subject, particularly in the exami∣nation of West. Confess of Faith, chap. 3. to which I refer him. To the ci∣tations I give him of their Authors making God the author of Sin he saith, If they give more ground than the very expressions of Scriptur, he will not own them. And what then? the consequence is but very small, whether he will or not. It is enough for me that I have shewn the absurdity of their doctrin, which even by the testimony of their chief Doctors makes God the author of Sin; unless he will reply all this is nothing, because I, I. B. will not own them: and if to say he that forceth another to do a thing is the cause & author of it, who, without contradicting their own Reason, can de∣ny they make God the author of sin? As for the many testimonies of Scriptur, brought by him, I own them; and both agree they make not God the author of sin, but that the saying of their Divines doth it, what is above said doth evince. Pag. 149. He cometh (but as may be observ∣ed, unwillingly) to vindicat the twofold will they ascribe to God, the one revealed, by which he commands men to repent; and the other secret, and quite contrary: how he is pained here, the Reader may observe by
his [IFs] [and ANDs] thinking to turn it by, without any direct answer. The sum of what he saith resolvs in this, That the Purpose of God is not of the same natur with his Command: but what if that should be granted? The question is Whether they be quite contrary, and that in respect to one and the same subject; so that, when a man is commanded by God to do a thing, by his secret Purpose he is forced to do the quite contrary? Pag. 150. n. 19. He comes to answer my saying that their affirming Man sinneth willingly, will not avail; because, according to them, his propensity of Inclination to sin is necessarily imposed upon them by God. To this in stead of answer he refers me to Rom. 9. of which before; and, for want of reason, he falles a railing, calles me a proud Quaker, saying, I agent the Devil's cause: but whether that be to remove my objection, or vindicat their doctrin, the Reader may judge. Pag. 151. n. 20. In answer to my shewing their doctrin is injurious to God, because it maketh him delight in the death of a sinner, contrary to Ezech. 33: 11. 1 Tim. 2: 3. 2 Pet. 3: 9. he saith nothing directly, but would be retorting, that, if I prove any thing from this, then I must say That God did absolutely Decree that all men should be saved. But I deny this consequence; albeit it is injurious to God, to say he de∣creeth that which he declareth to take no delight in, it will not follow that it is injurious to him, to say he permitteth what he delighteth not in. For on all hands it is confessed he permitteth sin, and yet on no hand that he delighteth in sin; so that this injuriousness of their doctrin to God is no ways removed by him, albeit he would fain be mincing and covering it, saying, they do not say that God purposes to punish any not for their sins, but meerely to satisfie his own Pleasur: but such silly shifts must only satisfie blind men. Do not they say God purposed to damn Many to eternal torment, and that Sin is no ways the cause of this purpose? And will he say to be eter∣nally tormented is no punishment? And was not this a purpose to punish men, and not for their sin? His alledging, in this page, that this is not injurious to Christ's Mediation, is upon the supposition that Christ dyed not for all, which comes after to be examined. ¶ 4. Pag. 152. n. 22. He comes to prove their doctrin makes not the Gospel a meer mock, as I shew it did, by proposing the offer of Salvation to many, who yet by an irrevocable Decree are excluded from receiving any benefit by it: and to this he gives the instance of Moses being sent to Pharaoh, whose heart was hardned, and Esai to the People of Israel, to make their ears heavy and shut their eyes, with others of like import. But
this is easily answered, considering I grant many men out-live the day of God's Visitation to their Soul, and are justly hardned; and yet the of∣fers of Mercy and Peace is no illusion, because they were once in a capa∣city to have by it received it. But he thinks here he has goten me in a contradiction, because he supposeth that I willingly grant that the Light within may continue to exhort such to repent and turn, whose Day of Visitation is expired; but it is no wonder the man's arguments are weak, that are built upon so groundless suppositions. For I will never grant that the operations of the Light are every way the same in man after, as they were before, his Days of Visitation were expired; for, albeit before they judge, reprove and condemn for sin, yet this is accompanyed with a gentle drawing and Invitation to Life; but that he has this afterwards I utterly deny, as is clear by Christ's weeping over Ierusalem. To prove, p. 153. that this their doctrin is not injurious to Christ's Propitiatory Sacrifice, by making it a great judgment and plague to many; he asks Must not Christ be for the fall of many in Israle? Luk. 2: 34. çiting other Scripturs of the like import. Answ. All this urgeth nothing but upon supposition that all these never had a Day of Visitation: so that he doth but beg the question. His supposed contradiction, which he repeats again here, is before removed. Pag. 154. N. 24. To prove their doctrin putteth not men in a worse condition than Devils, he saith, Devils are under no offer of Mercy now, and hear not the Gospel: but is not this a pretty solution? whereas he confesseth this offer of Mercy and hearing is no advantage, nor was ever intended to advantage those who are damned; and there∣fore fore-seeing the weakness of this he brings-in my words, where the pinch of the matter lies, to wit, Devils had once a possibility of standing, but so not Men, according to their doctrin: to this he has no answer, but that all Mankind once stood in Adam. But did not God decree that Adam should fall? Let him answer me this directly: where then was their ca∣pacity of standing, or his either? If he say not, let him take home his own reasonings, that something came to pass, which God decreed not, and consequently, according to him, fore-saw not. But suppose this difficulty were solved, let men of sense and Reason judge whether men be not put, by their doctrin, into a worse condition than Devils; while they affirm that Devils had once a standing, and fell by their own personal dis∣obedience and presumption, but Men had only a standing in Adam, fell by his act, and not by any of their own, all of them, before they had a being, and many seve∣ral
thousand years before. but, to befool his Reader, he saith, in the end of this paragraph, their Doctrine is consonant to that Rev. 22: 17.—and whosoever will, let him take of the waters of Life freely; and this he repeats in the end of the next paragraph. But how deceitfull he is in this, cannot be hid from the understanding Reader, since that invitation signifies no∣thing to those, that are by an absolute Decree excluded from the benefit of it, and is but to deal with such invited ones, as the Poet feigned of Tan∣talus, who was up to the chin in water, but restrained from drinking; which he takes notice of, as objected by me, p. 155. and labours to re∣move it, but in vain. What he saith to that end resolvs in this question, Have Heathens or Reprobats as great a desire to Salvation as Tantalus had of drinking? And what if they had not? the comparison is not impertinent, for he, that hath resolved to starve a man, whether he do it by hindring him to eat, or by destroying his stomach, that he has no appetit, and therefore doth perish; doth equally contribute to his death. And the like doth their false doctrin most injuriously ascribe to God. As for the Scripturs here brought by him, such as, all men have not Faith 2 Thess. 3: 2. and others of the like import, they are not to his purpose; for the que∣stion is not Whether all men have the exercise of those gifts that lead to Salvation? but Whether the most of men be by an irrevocable Decree, before they had a being, yea from all Eternity, secluded from all means of obtaining these Gifts, that they may be saved; and that because or∣dained to be damned, albeit by the Gospel, as the revealed will and com∣mand of GOD, invited to repent and be saved? ¶ 5. Now I come to his 8 chapter of Universal Redemption, where I shall not have much ado, for many pages; for after, according to his custom, he has introduc'd himself with railing and reproaches, and that in the first 4 pages he has told the various opinions of those that held uni∣versal Redemption, and at last his own, as conceived in the Westminst. Confess. of Faith; he goeth about to prove that there is no Universal Redemption, and that upon this medium, that there was a Covenant betwixt God and the Mediator, which would be destroyed by such as assert this Universal Redemption, because, according to them, it might have faln-out, notwithstanding that Eternal transaction that not one person should be saved. Upon this he enlar∣ges, endeavouring to shew the absurdity of it both from Reason and Scriptur, unto page 194. All which toucheth me not at all, who do not say that Christ by his Death purchased a meer possibility, against which
he battereth thtough all these pages; since I have expressly affirmed, and he himself observs it, that Christ's death purchased not only a suffi∣ciency of Grace for all, but also such a prevalency for some, by which they were necessarily brought to Salvation: and yet is so unjust, as to af∣firm that I am for this meer possibility, saying, p. 178. n. 28. I embrace this opinion with the Arminians. and p. 179. n. 30. he saith,—or as this Quaker saith, who in effect saith, that it may so fall-out that there shall be no ap∣plication: whether this be malice or forgetfulness himself best knows. But this is sad, he seldom forgets to be malitious, but often to be just; yet as to the bulk of his reasonings of that matter, perhaps he bestows them for the confutation of those others he speaks of besides the Quakers, against whom he saith he writes; who, if they judge it their concern, may answer it. Yet in this prolix disputation he has cast-in some argu∣ments, which seem not only to urge against this meer possibility, as he terms it, but also against Christ's dying for all in any respect, such as from page 169, N. 19. to page 175. But these are such, as his usually are, which only proceed upon the question's being begged; for whereas he saith that those for whom Christ dyed, he dyed to take-away their sins, it is not deny∣ed, provided they resist not the Grace purchased thereby, so that faith and repentance be wrought in them. But he urges this in the following page, 170. that since this non-performance of the Condition is a sin, if he dyed for all sins, he must have dyed for this also; and if there be another Condition imagin∣ed, for that too, and so in infinitum. I answer: This reasoning would in∣ferr those to be saved by the death of Christ, who never repent, espe∣cially with those who judge men may sin, yea must sin all their life-time, and yet be saved; neither doth the absurdity reach those who affirm Christ to have dyed for all, as to obtain remission of sins that are past, and Grace sufficient to work faith and repentance, yea and restore those that may fall into sin after their conversion, if not resisted: and this is sufficient to infer that Christ dyed for all, neither can that absurdity more reach them, than the Apostle, who speaks of such as denied the Lord that bought them. And since the Evangelist placeth the benefit upon the reception, saying but unto as many as received him he gave power to become the sons of God; all these Scripturs, afterwards cited by him, signifiing the efficacy of Christ's Blood, is not denied; they themselvs confess it was sufficient and of value enough to have redeemed every man: but that doth not hinder it from proving ineffectual to such as will not receive it, as is above shewn.
And therefore his question, p. 172. If Christ dyed for the sins of all persons, how cometh it that they are not all actually pardoned? is easily answered: Be∣cause of their non-reception of the Grace by which his Death should be made effectual to them: and albeit this maketh Free-will author of con∣demnation, as himself will acknowledge, yet not of Salvation, as shall after appear. His next argument, p. 174. is, that If Christ had dyed for all men, all men should be saved, because he hath purchased Faith and Salvation for all for whom he has dyed, and this he supposeth he has shewn before; but his confidence in his own arguments doth not influence other men, I am yet to see where he has proved any such thing. The Scripturs he brings, such as Rom. 8: 32-39, &c. to prove this, speak of those who had really received the Grace, and in whom regeneration was working by it, and do indeed very wel prove that Christ dyed for them, yea what if I should say hath purchased them Grace prevalent to Salvation? Yet they will not prove that he has not dyed for others also that may miss of Salvation. Pag. 175. N. 25. he saith, It is considerable That no where in Scriptur, we find it expressly affirmed, That Christ dyed for all Men. Why then is all this trouble made? But is it not expressly said, Heb. 2: 9. that we see Jesus,—that he by the Grace of God should tast death for every man. Let him tell us what less that importeth, yea if it be not more emphatik, to say, Christ tasted death for Every man, than to say, Christ dyed for all Men. It is much the man would so proclaime his ignorance! ¶ 6. After more of his tedious and superfluous reasonings against this meer possibility, as he calls it, he comes p. 195. n. 48. to overturn my grounds for Universal Redemption; and first, in answer to the Angels song, Luk. 2: 10. urged by me, wherein they hold-forth the coming of Christ as tideings of great joy to all People, This he saith is to shew the Offer was to be made now to all Kindreds, Nations, Tongues and Languages. And what then? It is not said only so, excluding all Particulars of these, since the word ALL, in the common acceptation, comprehends every Particular, as wel as all sorts; and he should have given some reason from Scriptur, why he restricts it here; but, in stead of that, he contradicts himself, in the very following words, saying, for he was to reign over the house of Iacob. Luk. 1. v. 13. for this if it urge any thing, it will exclude his former concession, if it be not exclusive, he can prove nothing from it. Neither doth he more pertinently alledge Matth. 1: 21. that he was to save his People from their sins, for that Scriptur doth not say, that he purchased not a capacity
for some to be his People, who, by their resisting, lost the benefit ofter∣ed them. How often would I have gathered you,—and ye would not? saith Christ, Mat. 23: 37. Luk 13: 34. He saith further, this would not have been glade tideings, if it had been a meer possibility. But I affirm no such thing. To my urging Christ's commission, Mark 16: 15. to preach the Gospel to every creatur, and that of Paul, Col. 1: 28. he saith, it will no more, prove that Christ dyed for all men, than for Devils, and Beasts: for they are creatures. But how silly and perverse this answer is, is easily apparent; for is it lawfull to preach the Gospel to Beasts and Devils? or is it as unlawfull to preach the Gospel to any men, as it is to do it to Beasts and Devils? But, on the contrary, since he will not deny but it is a duty to preach the Gospel to all men indefinitly, yea in this place he acknowledges it, they being the proper subjects of it; so that of them must be understood [every creature] here mentioned. Pag. 196. N. 50. To my arguing the Gospel inviteth all, and that it would be a mocking of men, if Christ dyed not for all, to command them all to believe that Christ dyed for them, he saith, This is built upon an untruth, that the Gospel doth not command all, to whom it is preached, to believe that Christ dyed for them, but only to flee to an all-sufficient Saviour. But what's the preaching of the Gospel, especially in his sense, even as a little before acknowledged by him, but a declar∣ing and offering of Salvation to all, to whom it is preached, Mercy and Good-will, through the merits of Christ who dyed for them? Next, the argument still holdeth good, if the Gospel commands (as he saith) to flee unto an all-sufficient Saviour; for unless it be possible for such, who are so com∣manded, to do it, the preaching of it to them is a mocking of them, and that to purpose, if this impossibility be imposed upon them, by him, by whose command the Gospel is thus preached. The example of Moses to Pharaoh, and Esaias to the Iews, has been before answered. He ends this paragraph, begging the question, as if the Gospel could be said no where to be, but where there is an outward dispensation of it, by the ministery of men. ¶ 7. Pag. 197. N. 51. He confesseth there is no Scriptur that saith Christ has not dyed for all men, and there is, that saith, he has tasted death for every man, which is rather more, and not a probation by consequence only, as I have already shewn: then he cometh to consider my argu∣ment from 1 Tim. 2: 13, 4-6. shewing that Salvation can not be im∣possible for all, since we are commanded to pray for all; and that, since Christ gave himself a Price of Redemption for all, it can not be impos∣sible
that all should be saved, as is more largely illustrated in my Apology. Now how he is pained in answer to this, and in his nibblings about the particle [all], even unto pag. 204. the Reader may easily observe. First he distinguisheth upon the word possible, it is meant (saith he) here of such a thing as may be, abstracting from the decree, yea in respect of the Decree, the contrary whereof is not decreed by God, but not a thing simply so. The man it's like thinks he has found-out a very subtile distinction, but it servs for little, save to shew his own confusion; for to be possible, abstracting from the Decree, and with a respect to the Decree, is for a thing to be impossible, if God had not decreed the contrary, and yet to be possible, because God has not decreed the contrary. But to leave this piece of confused pedantry: he denies that we may pray for every one, because Iohn saith,—there is a sin unto death, I do not say, ye should pray for it. But this is in plain words to say, the Apostle Paul was deceived, and therefore his brother Iohn reproved him: for the man labours more in this to make these two Apostles contradict one another, than to refute me. But for all this we see they are no ways at variance, we may pray for all, be∣cause all may in a day be saved, though, when some have out-lived that Day, it may not be sit to pray for them; but if Salvation were by an absolute decree made impossible for most of men, it were madness to pray for them: he thinks it may as wel be inferred that we should give thanks for all men. This I suppose he reckons absurd: but why so? May not men give thanks to God, for, and in the behalf of, all men, for his Grace that he has given to all men, and also for his daily care and good Providence over all men? That, which he saith afterwards in many words, amounts to this, that men have prayed allowably for that, which, by reason of God's decree, was impossible; and therefore may pray in faith for that, which is impossible: of this he gives one great instance, from Christ's praying, save me from this hour, which is always with a sub∣mission to God's will. But this may divers ways be answered, for he has not proved that Christ's praying to save him from this hour, was in him a real desiring, however submissivly, that he might not undergo that which he knew he came into the world to do. Neither can this be affirm∣ed without importing that Christ was unwilling to do his Father's will, and desirous to shun it; which to affirm were blasphemy, to accuse him, who in all things was found willing and obedient. So that his Prayer was not a desiring the thing might not be, but that he might be saved and and preserved from being overwhelmed with the difficultys and distresses
that in that hour did and might attend him, and in this his prayer was answered; for, albeit these difficultys were not removed, yet he triumphed over them. That a man pray for the life of his father, or friend, who notwithstanding dyeth at that time, is not denied; but it will not thence follow, that it was impossible that those Prayers could have been answered. For to conclude from the events, that things could not have been other ways, were to conclude all things come to pass by a Stoical fate, so that God himself were Agens necessarium; and to favour of Spinosa, then it had been impossible for I. B. to have omitted, though at the earnest desire of his friends, one word of what he has written, or to have added one word more, and yet he saith, in some places, he might have said more. But the Apostle's desiring to pray here is founded upon the positive mind of God, who willeth all men to be saved: this (he saith) is most false in the sense asserted by me, else all men should be saved; but I never took it in that sense. The question is, Whether in any true sense it could be said that he will all men to be saved? and that given as a reason why we should pray for all, if God had made it always simply impossible for many to be saved. To shew that God's will of Precept (as his phrase is) may be impossible in respect of his decree, he saith, God commandeth all, perhaps Devils and Damned to love him perfectly, and yet this is not now possible. But this [perhaps] spoils all this inference, for untill he be certain of it, he can conclude nothing from it. He bestows divers pages upon the uni∣versal particle all, to shew how it is diversly taken, and by an instance of several Scripturs, to prove it sometimes is not taken for all and every one: but in this (had he not loved to be longsom and tedious) he might have spared his pains, since that was never denied by me. But the que∣stion is, that since the proper, common and most universal signification of [all] is to signify every one, whether, in the places brought by me, the most common signification should not be made use of, according to the general rule of all Interprerers? And therefore if he had said any thing to the purpose, he should have proved that in these places there must be a restriction, and not have bestowed many words to prove [all] some∣times to be restricted, which I never denied: and the pinch lieth here, wherein I desired to be satisfied, but find not as yet he has given any an∣swer. Where is [all] made use of in Scriptur, to express of two numbers the least? which yet, according to their principle, they make it to do; since they usually affirm that the number of the Elect is much less than
that of the Reprobats. After the like manner, ere he make an end of this, he would turn-by the word [World] as being understood of a part, and not all; but he is mightily pinched upon this occasion, where he comes, p. 208. n. 64. to answer what I urge from 1 Ioh. 2: 1, 2. where Christ is said to be a Propitiation for the sins of the whole World; and that he may do it the more easily, he omits a long time the word [whole] to shew that the word World is sometimes taken with a restriction: and at last he tels us fairly, that the phrase the Whole World can not prove any thing, and that It is but rational to suppose, that the whole World here denoteth no more, &c. and for this he referreth to Rev. 3: 10. & 12: 9. & 13: 3. &c. But these Scri∣pturs are so far from hurting me, or making against what I say, that they confirm it; for I argued that all and every one was included by the Apostle in these words, wherein he saith, Christ was a Propitiation for the sins of the whole World, because he mentions the Saints before,—not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole World, and so it must be the whole world, as contradistinguished from the Saints. Now these places of the Revel. cited by him do denote all and every one, as contradistinguish'd from the Saints, which himself I judge will not deny; for will he say that the hour of tentation (Rev. 3: 10.) came upon every one, as contradistinguished from the Saints? and that the Beast (12: 9.) did in this sense deceive the World, that is, all and every one? and that (13: 3.) all the World wondred after him? The other places, marked by him, have no relation to the Whole World, in the sense I here urge it; which is, that the whole World, when used in contradistinction from the Saints, expresseth all and every one: and the thing he should have done, if he would have truely reued me, which he has not so much as attempted, was to prove, that the Elect, or any part of them, as expressed by the word [We] or [Us] by any of the Pen-men of Scriptur, are contradistinguished from the Elect, or any part of them, under the term of the [whole World,] untill he do which, he no ways overturns my argument, and therefore what he saith besides this, is beside the purpose. ¶ 7. Pag. 204. N. 59. In answer to Ioh. 3: 16. compared with 1 Ioh. 4: 9. God so loved the World, &c. and God sent his Only-begoten Son into the World, &c. he tels whosoever (albeit indefinit) is not universal, unless it be in a necessary matter, which this is not. But he should have defined what he means by a necessary matter distinctly, and then proved this not to be such; till both which be done, that's now omitted by him, his answer
is deficient. His next quibble is, that the world in these two places is not the same, the one being understood of the Habitable World, and the other of the Inhabitants; but the last may be understood of the Inhabitants as wel as the first: where is the absurdity of saying God sent his Son into the world, that is, unto men, or among men? 3. He supposeth I will not say, God sent his Son into the World, that all Inhabitants might live the life of Faith, for all men have not faith, and all men will not be saved, or God should be disappointed of his Intentions; and therefore he adds, as his commentary upon Rev. 3: 3, 4.—what if some do not believe? shall their unbelief make the unchangeable Purposes of God of none effect? No. Answ. I perceive, as most of the man's reasonings are built upon suppositions, so most of his suppositions are false; for God sent his Son into the World, to put all men into a capacity to live the life of Grace: and therefore who do not, the fault is their own, nor are God's unchangeable Purposes of none ef∣fect, since God has not unchangeably purposed to damn any, which he supposeth he did. And upon this meer and unproved supposition, ac∣cording to his method, he builds his matter. He adds Ioh. 3: 16 is di∣rectly against the meaning of his Adversaries (I judge he means all those, who assert Universal Redemption) who build much upon it, albeit I had not the wit to improve it: but it seems had I had a great deal more wit than I have, he judgeth himself to have wit enough to prove it all to no pur∣pose. why? because, according to the Greek, it is, for God so loved the World,—that all believing (or all believers, or every one that believeth) in him might not perish, &c. And what then? we must prove, that either all are, or shall be Believers, and then he will easily grant, without disput, that Christ dyed for them all. But the man has not here wel heeded what he saith, there is no necessity of proving that all are, or shall be Believers; it is enough, to prove that all are put in a capacity to believe, and that Faith is not made by an absolute decree impossible to most: this in part is done already, and more of it will appear hereafter; that Christ by this place intended to shew, that his Death should not be restricted to the advantage of the Jews only, is not denied. In answer to Heb. 2: 9. that he tasted death for every man, he saith, that the Greek here, for every man, importeth in their room and stead, shall we think that Christ dyed so for every man, and yet many of these men dyed for themselvs? But if any absurdity be inferred here, it will redound upon himself no less than upon me, who will confess, as his after words make manifest, the saying here Christ
tasted death for Every man imports his dying here for the Elect, and yet do not many of the Elect dye for themselvs? Here again he saith, this sheweth the benefit of his death is not restricted to the Jews, which is granted; but that proveth not that it is not therefore Universal. Next, he taketh notice of the context, where it is said, it became him, in bringing many sons unto glory, &c. and therefore these are the all for whom he dy∣ed. But this is strongly to affirm, not to prove; albeit Christ brought many sons unto glory, and called such Brethren, it doth not follow he tasted death only for such. The Apostle sheweth us first the general ex∣tent of Christ's death, in saying, he tasted death for every man; and then sheweth us, how it became effectual to many: and yet the man is so con∣fident (albeit he has urged nothing, but only affirmed) that he adds, If this context do not sufficiently confute this conceit, we need regarde the Scripturs no more. But here he has spoken out the truth, as it is, for this evident∣ly shews, that for all their pretence to exalt the Scripturs, yet they re∣gard it no more than it favours their opinion. This is the account, for which they regard the Scripturs; if it favour their opinion, and confute their advetsaries; but if it do not, they need no more regard it, else surely he should have said, If the Scripturs do not confute that which he esteems an error, then he will not judge it so any more, but regard the Scripturs more than his own judgment; but, on the contrary, he is resolved, if the Scriptur do not confute what he thinks a conceit, that he need no more regard them. Likewise in the rest of this page he gives himself a notable stroak, for to my saying, that their doctrin would infer that Christ came to condemn the world, contrary to his own words. Ioh. 3: 17. 12: 47. he answereth, that prejudice has so blinded mine eyes, that I can not see the beam in mine eye, for in my opinion, not one man might have been saved, because Christ only procured a meer possibility, and no certainty for any one man, &c. But, as I have above observed, I assert, as my judgment, the express contrary, that Christ has so dyed for some, that they can not miss of Salvation; and this himself also no∣ticeth afterwards, p. 276. I would know then, and let all honest men judge, if there be any spark of honesty left in him, whether himself be not the man, whom prejudice has blinded. Almost at the same rate, p. 207. he asketh me, if my argument from 2 Pet. 3: 9. the Lord is—long∣suffering to us ward, not willing that any should perish, but that all should come unto repentance, do hold; What will I do with those that out-live the day of their Visitation? is the Lord willing to give them repentance? I answer, No: and
yet no overturning of my argument; for, in respect all had a day of vi∣sitation, wherein they might have repented, God may be said to be long-suffering, and not to have been willing any should have perish∣ed, &c. But this can not be said, if none ever had such a day, or season, as they affirm. He would insinuat as if this made all to depend upon Free-Will, but how frivolous this calumny is, will after appear: and whereas both in this and the following page he rants at an high rate, as if I did fight against God's Omnipotency, saying, God will be God, whether I will or not, and that Christ must turn a petitioner, and supplicat Lord [Free-Will,] exclaiming, O cursed Religion! the man doth but shew his malitiousness and weakness. For, if God's Omnipotency, because he doth whatso∣ever he will, be urged, to prove that men can not resist his will; and that therefore whatsoever men do, even the wickedest actions are willed by God, then violence is offered to the will of the creaturs, and the li∣berty and contingency of second causes are necessarily taken away; which yet is expressly denied by the Westminst. Confess. chap. 3. Nor will all his distinctions, far less affirmations, solve this; that Peter speaketh only of the Elect, because he mentioneth them elsewhere, unless he prove [all] here to be restricted, is but a begging of the question. ¶ 8. Pag. 210. n. 65. He quarreleth my bringing some testimonies of Antiquity agreeing with what I say, which he termeth a fouling of fingers with humane writings, saying, himself layeth not so much weight upon the au∣thority of men in this matter: and yet afterwards he cites some, as making for his purpose. He may know, I as little build upon the testimony of the Antients, as he can, for the bottoming of faith; and yet to shew their agreement with us, and against them, is a good check to their shameless objection of Novelty, considering how the same is objected to them as strongly, and with no less reason, by their Mother, the Church of Rome, whom, when pinched by us, they begin to run to, for the ground of their Church, Ministery and Maintainance. That ever I said, the Quakers, whom he terms to be of yesterday, have only found the Truth, is false; albeit I say, they have a more clear and full discovery of it. But one would think, notwithstanding his pretending he lays little weight upon the Authority of Antiquity, in this matter, that it is not so; else why doth he so often in this matter upbraid us with the heresie of Pelagius, as contradicting the sense of the antient Church, and their Doctors? Who are those, whose testimony he cals the authority of men, in this matter?
Section Seventh, Wherein his IX. Chapter Of Vniversal Salvation Possible: his X. Of Vniversal Grace and Light. XI. Of the ne∣cessity of this Light to Salvation. and his XII. Of the Salvation of Heathens without hearing the Gospel, are con∣sidered. ¶ 1. HE beginneth his 9 chapter Of Universal Salvation Possible, according to his custom, with railing, accusing me of ignorance, folly, pride and pedantry; but he thinks it not worth his pains to spend words to discover it: yet he gives a main reason for all, to wit, I suppose our opinions were never known in the world, before we were raised up to declare them. Which being a manifest untruth, and never said by me, the Reader may thence judge of the grounds he has for this his Railing, however he supposeth they are but old errors cloathed with new notions, and which himself has sufficiently enough enervated, in his former chapter of Reprobation and Vniversal Redemption; which being the basis of them is by him (if he may be admitted judge in his own cause) already overturned. And then he thinks it was imper∣tinency, to say, that Quakers can by sensible experience be confirmed in their doctrin; and so brings to an end his first two paragraphs. His next work is to play the Commentator, and to tell his Reader my meaning, which to be sure is to pervert it, as he doth in this chapter throughout, affirm∣ing it to be my belief, that every man has power and ability moral to lay hold of Salvation, and that there is not requisit thereunto any new grant of Grace and Divine help to quicken the man;—he has a stock from his Mothers womb, which is sufficient, this he cals the proper and native face of my doctrine; and this he put∣eth down as my opinion, and charges me with it, p. 214. And 218. he saith it further, without any concurrence of Divine Grace. Pag 220. he saith, I conclude Man has power to believe and obey the Gospel without the Spirit of God, as also the like, p. 221. twice. And p. 222. he saith, I conclude that the wicked have power, of themselvs, without the Spirit of Regeneration and Grace, to do what is commanded in reference to Life eternal, and further, p. 223, 224 & 226. he affirmeth the like of me; which is utterly false, and was ne∣ver
believed nor asserted by me: and it's observable, that in all these places where he thus charges me, he doth not so much as once poynt to any one page in my Apology; and not only so, but not so much as from the words or writings of any other Quaker, borrowed from some of his usual Authors, which is his most frequent refuge. And therefore the Reader may judge, what he builds upon his false supposition, or batters against it, fals to the ground, without further refutation. After he has branded this brat of his own begeting, p. 214. with Pelagianism, Jesui∣tism, Arminianism and Socinianism, thence accusing the boldness and con∣fidence of the Quakers, and of my self in particular, in terming it a new discovery of ours; he endeth this page with a fit of Railing, and beginneth in his next to wonder, how the Heathens can be said to have a day of Visita∣tion, since nothing can be called a day of Visitation, in reference to Salva∣tion, but what is in and through the preaching of the Gospel. But this wonder is built upon his supposition that the preaching of the Gospel is no where, but where there is an outward administration of it; wherein his mistake will come hereafter to be manifested, into which mistake he fals, in the next page, and elsewhere in this chapter, where I shall pass it over, untill I come to speak of it in its proper place. In this page, 215. he thinketh that since I affirm their doctrin makes God unjust, as de∣nying to some the means of Salvation, that, which I affirm may be likewise so charged, because some may think God is not just, in not granting to all an equally long day of Visitation: but the question is not what some may think, but whether these thoughts be built upon Justice and Reason? All men know it is manifest unjustice to punish a man, and torment him, for non∣performance of that, which he, that commands him to perform, has by an invincible necessity barred and hindered him from doing; and there∣fore to suppose this of the most Just God, must be a great error and abuse: but it is no injustice to punish a man, for not performing that, which he had received sufficient power to do, albeit another had receiv∣ed more, to say so, is like the labourers whom Christ reproves in the parable, for murmuring that those, that came-in after them, received equal wages with them, Matth. 20: 12, 13, 14. That the preaching of the Gospel is not a mocking of those, whose day of Visitation is expired, as it is to the Reprobats among them, I have in the former section shewn; but he asketh here whether such become obdured before or after their Day of Vi∣sitation be expired? What if I shall say both, though not in the same man∣ner
and degree? it was before removeable, but not after; since albeit simply considered the same, and always pardonable, yet with a respect to certain persons and their circumstances, unpardonable, or not pardon∣able. That God permitteth sin to be in the world I never denied, nor accused their Divines for so saying: but whereas he saith, it is a manifest untruth, that I would make the Reader believe, they say, God doth impell men to sin necessarily, he seeketh to hide their doctrin, and beguile the simple Reader, since P. Martyr upon Rom. 1. saith expressly that God forceth the will of wicked men unto great sins. and Piscator saith that the wicked are absolutely decreed necessarily to sin, and therefore to sin, that they may be justly punished. Now these being more eminent Divines among them than I suppose I. B. presumes, for all his scribling, he is to be accounted; the Reader may judge, and by the passages elsewhere cited by me, whether he doth not here most untruely charge me with an untruth: that the sins charged up∣on the Gentiles were only such as were against the Light of Nature, he has affirmed, p. 217. but not proved; for the great reason of their con∣demnation is, because what was to be known of God is manifest in them, and that this is not only the light of Nature, will after appear. If what he urges from Rom. 11. concerning the Iews and the imprecation those brought upon themselvs, who said, His blood be upon us, and upon our child∣ren, hold true, we must suppose no Iew since that saying of Paul and Bar∣nabas, Act. 13: 46. to have been really converted. But how came any of them to be converted before, since that imprecation was long before Paul and Barnabas spake these words of their turning to the Gentiles? and, according to this reasoning, all the preaching of the Gospel, which the Iews have since heard, and do hear, is in vain. I have sufficiently explained what I mean by this Day of God's Visitation to every Man, in the explication of the 5 and 6 Theses in my Apology, n. 17. And albeit he think otherwise, as I know I have satisfied many moderat Readers, who are not Quakers, so I hope to have satisfied all that are truely unprejudi∣cat. After he has, p. 218. given large citations, to shew their doctrin, out of the Confession of Faith and Catechism, and thereafter made a kind of preachment thereupon, he comes at last, p. 221. to examin the proofs I bring for my assertion. ¶ 2. And first to my argument drawn from the reproofs in Scriptur to men, for rejecting of God's Visitation and Love, he answers, that my Proposition is universal, and these complaints and reproofs only particular, and
so can prove nothing. The like he answereth, p. 224. to what I urge from Esai 5: 1, 2, 3, 4. where the Vineyard is expostulated with, as like∣wise Mat. 23: 33. Mark 12: 1. Luk 20: 9. and p. 225. to what I urge from Mat. 23: 37. Luk 13: 34. & 19: 41, 42. where Christ expostulat∣eth with, and lamenteth over Ierusalem. But for answer to all this, al∣beit these places were granted all of them to be particular, yet so much is gained by them, that so me, that did perish, had a day of Visitation, in which they might have been saved; and thus his doctrin Salvation was ne∣ver possible to any, but to such as must necessarily be saved is overturned, and he should at least have answered them as to this. Further, all the Scriptur reproofs and complaints are not particular, but some of them general, and one general one is enough to prove my assertion, (albeit as to that I may see what he saith hereafter, to answer that by which, as to the universality, it is more particularly proven in my Apology) such as Gen. 6: 3. which is spoken of men indefinitly: and whereas he suppos∣eth this striving of God with men to be only by his Word and Servants, meaning the outward Word; he doth but beg the question. Likewise that of Micah 6: 8. he hath shewn thee, O man, what is good; and what doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? where the word [but] doth shew this is all that is required, and that no more is required than is shewn to man indefinitly: others might be mentioned. And whereas in this and other places he saith, my argument will not prove that men have power to lay hold on Salvation, without the Grace & Spirit of God; it is true, for as I never affirmed any such thing, as is above observed, so I never intend to bring any argument to prove it. Pag. 222. n. 14 in answer to 1 Pet. 3: 20. brought by me, he saith, I fore-saw it would be answered, that the long-suffering of God, there men∣tioned, was not unto Salvation. But the man is unhappy in his conjecturs of other mens thoughts; it will not follow, it was not to Salvation, be∣cause the Partys, towards whom it was, remained obstinat, and so pe∣rished: and albeit the Apostle Peter (2 Pet. 3: 15.) be speaking to his Brethren, who might have been advanced in Grace, yet he shewes not how it thence follows, that the long-suffering, there mentioned, is restri∣cted to them only, the Text saith no such thing, and what though this Epistle of Peter was not particularly directed to the Romans, to whom Paul wrot? yet this being a general epistle included the Church of Rome among the rest, and others had need to have seen Paul's Epistles to the
Romans, since according to him it was a part of their Principle, and on∣ly Rule of Faith and manners. But to overturn what I observed here from Peter's taking notice of some wresting Paul's writings, he bringeth nothing but his own affirmation. His answer to what I urge from the Riches and Bounty of God towards men, spoken of Rom. 2: 4. which could not be, if Salvation were impossible to them, is, that the [riches] there mentioned is understood of the good things of this Life, contrary to the express words of the Text; which shews that the natur of that Riches and Long-suffer∣ing is, to lead to repentance, and ver. 7. eternal life is proposed as the reward of such, as by not despising of those Riches are led to Repentance, and continue in wel-doing. And whereas he adds, this can not be done by the meer strength of Nature without the Grace of God, I never said so; and there∣fore like to this calumny is what he saith, p. 225. where, that he may take occasion to rail and reflect, he would make his Reader believe that I ar∣gue, that, because men can do evil, they have therefore a power to do good, and then pleases himself to add, these are Quaker-like inferences that want all solidity, and no little of sobriety. At last he desires me to prove, that by the Talents, mentioned Mat. 25: 15. is understood Saving Grace; but, if he think that be not meaned by them, I would know of him what is meaned: for it is observable, he doth not (because he dare not) deny that Saving Grace, or the means of Salvation, is meaned by them. Doth not Christ make use of this parable, to compare the Kingdom of Heaven to it? and is it not of the same import with the former of the ten Virgins, five whereof, who had Oile in their Lamps, (I suppose he will confess this was Saving Grace) entred with the Bridegroom? Is it not said to those, that improved their Talents, Wel done, good and faithfull servant, enter into the joy of thy Lord? It is much the man had confidence to insi∣nuat so much as a denial, that saving Grace is here meaned. As to what he adds of this being not Universal, and not proving that men have power of themselvs, without Divine help and Grace, I have answered it above. ¶ 3. I come now to his tenth chapter, entituled of Universal Grace and Light, where he grows warm to purpose, and rails almost constantly. He is scarce wel entred this chapter, when he accounts the further piece of our Divinity, as he terms it, and against which himself writes, as none∣sense and the soaming of a distracted brain, yea p. 228. such as he doubts whether it can be understood at all, pag. 230. whose meaning is unintelligible. But what need he bestow near 40 pages, to refute unintelligible non-sense? For, if it
be so, he can not be sure he has refuted it, since no man can be sure he has answered that sufficiently he doth not understand. And his malice has so overdriven him, that he writeth down his own judgment, saying, pag. 227. some may justly blame him, for spending words, and wasting time, upon such a non-sensical, self-contradictory Proposition; yet the man will be do∣ing that, for which he confefesseth he is justly blameable, and so much the more, as he further confesseth, p. 261. that non-sense can not be wel an∣swered. Of this violent railing take one instance, p. 248. where, in an∣swer to my saying, that the Light of Christ will not consent to any abo∣mination, but taketh-away blindness, openeth the understanding, and directeth the judgment and Conscience; he addeth, And while the Qua∣kers preach up this, as a sure guide to life eternal, they are abominable Pelagian, and Socinian deceivers, who should be fled from, as the most impudent and sworn enemies of the Grace of God, and of his Gospel, that ever appeared out of the bot∣tomless pit; a company of pure Pagan-preachers, whose doctrine is Paganisme, and driveth thereunto The Reader may judge of the rest, which he may find in terms no less abusive very frequent, pag. 227. 233, 234. 237, 238. 240. 248. 258. 260. 261. 266. All which railing, as it occurreth in these pages, needs no answer, but that of Michael to the Devil, who is the Au∣thor of such stuff, The Lord rebuke thee. This method of answering is no less unreasonable, than his railing, for it is either by supposing things not proved by him, by concluding things not following from my asser∣tions, or by manifest perversions, all improved by the height of abuse, to render the things, that displease him, absurd and ridiculous: of these I shall take notice in order. First: He supposeth nothing to be the Gospel, save the outward preaching, and that there is no Gospel, where there is not an outward administration of it; and this he never offers to prove: what he saith to contradict my asserting the Gospel to be, where the out∣ward may not be, will after be examined. Upon this his meer supposi∣tion he accounts me absurd, pag. 226. and upon this supposition he urges all mens not having Grace, as not having the Gospel, p. 235, 236. 240. that to preach the Light within, is to despise the Gospel, p. 244. that, acord∣ing to me, the preaching of the Gospel is not necessary to Salvation. Another of his suppositions is, that, because the Light within is common to all, there∣fore it can be nothing but Nature. And upon this false and unproved ground he raileth, and enlargeth, p 229. where he cals it the Pelagian Grace of of God, that is, Man's free-will, doubting whether I will say so much as
did Pelagius; which is nothing to the purpose, neither proveth his infe∣rence, which is false, as the Scripturs, brought by me, in my Apology, to prove there is a Saving Spiritual Grace given to all, do evince. What he saith in answer to any of them, as it occurs, will hereafter be considered; and yet upon this false inference he concludes, p. 233. the height of the Quakers Divinity is but what a Natural Conscience can teach a Man-eater, & to the same purpose, p. 234. and then battereth against it, p. 237. saying, Christ in the Saints the hope of glory is not brought about by Nature, which I never said; & therefore he but fights with his own shaddow, as he doth upon the like occasion, pag 231, 232. 236-238. 241. 256. where he saith, that Men are not made partakers of the privilege of the Saints, in their natural state, and the Scriptur saith not there is any thing in the heart of man by nature, which produceth Christ in the Soul, &c. which things were never asserted by me. More of his mistakes of this kind may be seen, pag. 257. 262. 265. where he concludeth the Quakers Religion and Gospel to be nothing, but what meer Nature teacheth; but it is observable, that, in that, almost one and only argument, which he bringeth, to make this inference good, (albeit much of his work and exclamations depends upon it) he involvs himself in a notable contradiction, for (p. 234. n. 7.) to prove there is no Universal Light, or Seed, that beareth witness against all evil deeds; he asketh, How came it, that this Light and Seed did not bear witness against the Cilicians, who lived upon theft; and against the Messagetians, who use their wives, in common;—and against such as used to kill men and eat them? Now these can make nothing for his purpose, unless for this reason, that be∣cause these people commonly and avowedly did these things, therefore they had no Light that reproved them for them, otherwise their doing of them will not import the Light did not bear witness against their so doing, more than men under the Presbyterian Ministery, committing adultery and murder, will import there was no witness born against these sins, by the Presbyterian Preachers. But he has overthrown this his reason himself, by affirming, p. 232. & 235. that there is a Natural Conscience, or the Law of Nature, left in every man, as God's deputy, informing of some good, and testifiing against some evils, of which elsewhere he particularizeth murder and adultery, and yet here he saith, it is observed there is hardly one poynt of the Law of Nature, which some nation hath not violated, not only by their customs, but by their very Laws. If then their thus violating the Law of Nature do not prove they had not the Law of Nature, or were not reproved by
it,) which he himself has confessed all had) then neither will their doing those things prove they had no Divine Light, nor Seed, or were not thereby reproved; for if it prove they had not that, it will as much prove they had no Natural Conscience, no Law of Nature, which yet he con∣fesseth is in Every man. ¶ 4. In this chapter also he would insinuat and infer, to render that, which he writes against, odious, that the asserting of an Universal Gospel, by which Salvation may be possible, to such as want outward preaching, renders out∣ward preaching needless: but this cavill, used often before by him, is al∣ready answered, in the 3 & 4 Sections; and therefore what he repeats of this again here, p. 229. 236. 245. needs no further answer. And whereas he asks upon this occasion, p. 244. how can the believing of the hi∣story of the Gospel be necessary, as I say it is, to such as hear it, if they may be saved without it? Because God commands every one to believe these Truths, to whom he bringeth the knowledge of them. (albeit not them, to whom he hath rendred it impossible) Has he forgotten their own di∣stinction of some things being necessary necessitate praecepti, that are not so necessitate medii? Neither do I intend by this belief (which the proposing of the outward knowledge requires) a belief meerly historical, as he mali∣tiously would insinuat. I shall now take notice of his gross perversions and calumnies, which, as he advances, I observe grow thicker, and are in this chapter very numerous: as first, from my saying that we un∣derstand by the Light, or Seed, a Spiritual and Heavenly Principle, in which GOD, as he is the Father, the Son, and the Spirit, dwelleth: from this he infers, p. 231. It may be, he doth not acknowledge a Trinity, &c. But if there be any ground for such an inference from these words of mine, I leave it to all rational men to judge. Pag. 255. Because I say, it is Christ's flesh and blood, which came down from Heaven, he asks, if Christ had no other flesh and blood? & then, as if I had answered He had not, he concludes Us deniers of the incarnation of Christ, asking, Whether the death of Christ, his resurrection, and ascension, and all the history of his Life, be but dreams and lyes? which malitious insinuation and perversion is returned upon him, as false and groundless. And whereas he saith here, he will ask one word more, Where I read that Christ's flesh and blood came down from heaven? (for so my words should be translated) it seems he is either very ignorant or forgetfull of the Scripturs, and therefore let him read John 6: 51. where Christ saith, he is the Living Bread, that came down from heaven, add∣ing,
that Bread to be his Flesh. In like manner is his other malitious per∣version denied, and returned upon him, where he would infer upon us, that each of us esteemed our selvs as much the Christ of God, as Christ was: so that the blasphemy, he exclaims against, is his own, who speaks evil of others without a cause. Another of his perversions is, p. 236. where re∣peating my words he rendereth them thus, out of the Latine, this is that inward Christ, of which we Only and so often speak, whereas it should have been translated, which we so much and so often speak for, as the English edition doth verifie; the Latine word tantum signifies so much, as wel as only, and was so intended here by me: that it must be so, both the con∣text, and what I say elsewhere, sheweth. But he would have it only, that he might pervert and rail the more liberally, albeit he can not be igno∣rant, that the Latine word tantum signifies so much, as ordinary Dictio∣naries shew, and Cicero, saying, nec tantum proficiebam, quantum volebam, nec quicquam posthac non modo tantum, sed ne tantulum quidem praeterîeris. Those, who debate fairly, use not to strain their adversaries words, to abuse them, when they know they may bear a better interpretation. His next perversion is yet more gross and abusive, p. 238. where from my denying that we equalour selvs to that Holy Man, the Lord Jesus Christ, &c. in whom the fulness of the Godhead dwelt bodily, he concludes I affirm him to be no more but a Holy Man; and, because I use the words plenitudo Divinitatis, that I deny his Deity, which is an abominable fals∣hood, I detest that doctrine of the Socinians, and deny there is any ground for their distinction, and when I confess him to be a Holy Man, I deny him not to be GOD, as this man most injuriously would insinuat, for I confess him to be really both true God and true Man. And whereas he rails and exclaims here and in the following page at a monstrous rate, as if the comparison I bring of the difference betwixt every saint and the Man Jesus, from the sap its being other ways in the Root and Stock of the Tree, than in the branches, did further confirm our equalling our selvs to him; he doth but shew his folly: since Christ himself useth the same compari∣son, Ioh 15: 5. I am the Vine, ye are the branches, to which I alluded; and upon this he runneth out in a vehement strain of railing, p. 239. exclaim∣ing against us, as if we denied the Deity of Christ and his Incarnation, which is utterly false, and therefore his work there, to prove what I deny not, is in vain. And yet he repeateth this calumny, p. 242. adding, that my saying, that we believe what is written of the Conception, Birth, Life and
Death of Christ, &c. to be true, doth not vindicat us from it; and then he sub∣joyns, Do you believe, that that Body, which was crucified at Jerusalem, rose again and is now in glory? Speak your mind here, if you dare; this defiance to all men of reason will insinuat, as if I did not believe this, or durst not speak my mind of it, and therefore if this be found false, he must, in the judgment of all sober men, pass for a malitious perverter: for answer then, I say, I do believe that the Body of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was cru∣cified at Ierusalem, was again raised by the Power of God, in which glorified Body the Lord Jesus Christ dwelleth; and I dare him to shew where in my Apo∣logy, or elsewhere, I ever said or wrot any thing to the contrary. Of the like nature to these perversions is what we saith, p. 264. where, from my urging from Heb. 4: 12, 13. the Word of God is said to be a discerner of the thoughts of the heart, he would infer, that the Quakers then must know other mens thoughts, who have this in them, and are sensible of it. But the absurdity here is his own, do not they say, Every true Believer has the Spirit of God in them? And albeit the Spirit know all things, yet every Believer knoweth not all things: since he is so ready by consequences to make men blasphemers, for asserting Scriptur truth, how can he avoid passing this censur upon the Apostle, who saith, 1 Cor. 2: 15. he that is Spiritual, judgeth all things; and no man can judge any thing but what he knows? And whereas he rails here, in saying, we ascribe to the Light within, the property of God, and have no other Christ; as also to the same purpose, p. 242. 237. saying, the Christ we command to believe in, is not the Christ the Scripturs testifie of, but one born with every man, neither God nor Man, &c. is all answered, and the absurdity he draws from it, re∣moved, by what George Keith hath said, in his book, called, The Way east up, wherein he shews by the extension of the Soul of Christ, how this is no denying of the Man Jesus, but, on the contrary. And, if either I, or any other, have called the Light within, God, or ascribed to it the proper∣ty of God, it is no more upon this hypothesis, than they do, who say, the Man Christ is God, and, by reason of the personal union, ascribe some∣times the actions of the one nature to the Person denominated by the other, as the West. Confess. it self acknowledges, chap. 8. And since R. Macquair hath promised a refutation of that book of G. K. by I. B. in his name, when we see it, this may be further spoken to, if need be; upon which also will depend the full discussion of that question, men∣tioned, p. 240, 241. whether the Seed be a Substance, since he will not
deny the Soul of Christ is a Substance, and consequently distinct from Rea∣son: as also that, of Christ's being crucified in the Wicked, which p. 246. he cals a non-sensical dream: and of the Seed's being a distinct Principle from the Soul, spoken of p. 247. the full treating of all which being referred untill that promised work of his appear, as to that I shall only say in short, at present, that whereas I say, this Seed is not the being of God, simply considered, he addeth, p. 230. that then all men are partakers of the being of God some other way considered; and what blasphemy is wraped up here, he leavs to any that will, to judge. But there is no man of reason, dealing impar∣tially, will judge any blasphemy to be here, more than in the Apostle's concession to the Athenians, Act. 17: 28. that we are the Off spring of God, and live, and move in him. And whereas he mocks, p. 241. at my saying the Seed is a Substance, because it abideth in the hearts of the Ungodly, even while they remain in ungodlyness, asking, doth not Pravity, Igno∣rance, Rebellion, &c. remain in their hearts? Are these therefore Substances? But he allays his own windy triumphs, by my following words, that not∣withstanding this Seed is in them, they are not denominated by it, which wicked men are by their wickednesses, while they continue in them, and therfore it is a substance, since no accident can be in a subject, unless the subject be denominated therefrom. To this he asks why a man in whom this Seed and Grace is, may not be denominated graced and enlightened? and, as if it were absurd to deny they might be so denominated, he concludes, And thus this Substance shall be turned into an accidens, by this man's philosophy. But the reason is clear, because they partake not of the vertue of it, nor have not suffered it to work in them, as by the example of physik being in a sick man I did shew; and therefore he has no go-by for this, but a pitti∣full impertinency, that if there be such a difference betwixt this Seed and Holy∣ness, as betwixt Physik and Health, then it is no part of Holiness: for I never said there was such a difference, in every respect, but only in respect of the difference betwixt a Substance & an accident, for clearing of which only, the example was brought. And whereas he would several times insinuat here in this p. 232, 233. my asserting the Seed to be in all, did import Christ dwelling in all; that no such thing followeth, I have shewn in my Apolo∣gy, which himself elsewhere observeth: for I shew there is a difference betwixt meer in-being and inhabitation, the last imports union, and not the first. Themselvs confess God to be every where, and yet they will not say God dwels in the wicked; yea notwithstanding God's Omni-pre∣sence,
it is said, Some are without God in the world, by reason of their be∣ing not united to him. And thus is answered his cavils, p. 243. so that I need not further urge (untill he has removed this difficulty) from Amos 2: 12. only it is observable, how great pains the man is at here, to shew how faulty their translation of the Bible is, but how can it then be a sure Rule of faith to any? And whereas he saith, p. 236. that when it is said, the Seed is received in the heart, it is supposed, it was not formerly there. I deny that consequence, money may be brought unto a man's house, and yet he not have received it; the piece of silver which the woman, Luk 15. in the parable, had lost, (and to which the Kingdom of God was com∣pared) was in her house, and yet she rejoyced not, untill lighting the candle and sweeping the house she had found it. What he repeats so often, to make an odious noise, of my making this Grace Universal, that Turks, Japonians, Cannibals, &c. have it, who never heard of Christ, is impertinent; since he has a chapter afterwards for that, of purpose, where it shall be examined: as also what he saith, p. 245. he thinks strange, any such should partake of the benefit of this mysterie, for I speak not of their knowing the mysterie. That's one of his usual tricks, to foist-in other words, to alter the matter. ¶ 5. Having thus traversed his tedious perversions unto p. 251. n. 25. where he pretends to have traced me to my den, while he has only faln into the pit of his own making; I come to examin his pretended exami∣nation of the grounds I bring, for this he terms my wild assertion: and first unto Ioh. 1: 9. That was the true Light, which lighteth every man that cometh into the world. In stead of an answer he tels a long story of some taking it one way, some another, then after he has plaid the Dictator a while, in telling his own conception, he concludes at last, that every one is not to be understood of all without exception, because the Scriptur tels of many, whose understandings are darkened, who are under the power of dark∣ness, who abide in the darkness. What then? that will not prove, that Light is not come to them, in order to bring them out of that darkness, since Christ saith expressly, Ioh. 3. of such, that Light is come, but men love dark∣ness rather, and these that love it, are under the power of it, and as they continue to love it, and hate the Light, they abide in it. But it seems, not being satisfied with his own answer he proceeds, p. 252. n. 26. to con∣fess all men are enlightened, but not spiritually, supernaturally and savingly, but for this he giveth no proof, but his own assertion; and truely he must
be much puzzled with this Scriptur, for he knows not what way to take it,: first, he understands every man only of Believers, and then he will have the enlightening to be saving & spiritual then he understands it of all indifferently; and then he will have it to be common & not saving: but with these his guessings & divinings he is not like to satisfy any sober Christian. He goes-on at the same rate of uncertainty, p. 253. upon these words, that the Life is the Light of Men, doubting what is the meaning of them. After he has told Calvin's, Origen's and Marlorat's thoughts, he concludes, that though Light be come into the world, yet men love darkness better, and none become children of the Light, but by believing, and that all are not children of the Light, which I never denied? He goes-on to tell Calvin's further thoughts of the following words, all which shews this place pains him, but overturns nothing of what I have asserted, and then p. 254. n. 29. he refers me to his 8 chapter, to prove, that every man here admits an ex∣clusion, which a little before he confessed it did not, adding, that the text it self inferreth a restriction, when it tels darkness did not comprehend the Light. But this imports no more than somes rejecting, which I deny not, but not, that the Light shined not: for it is expressly said, it shined in the darkness, so it was there, which is the thing in debate, and the Text saith positivly, this true Light lighteth every man; and therefore it is but to cover his own shame and weakness, that in stead of something more so∣lid, he closes this paragraph with a ridiculous bob, saying, Quakers are good at dreaming: but this silly covering will not serve him, with such as are not blind. To what I have said to shew that  is to be re∣ferred to the Light, and not to John, he teturneth his contraary assertion, in stead of reason. My she wing it, by its being said, That all might believe through him, which all could not do through Iohn, as not hearing him, in stead of answering, he tels me, I may learn thence how to take the particle [all], which in effect is nothing, but by his own bare authority, to com∣mand me to take [all] not universally; but I find no vertue in his order, to perswade, and therefore will wait for probation, ere I obey. That Iohn, as an instrument, might be usefull, to bring people to believe in the Light, I deny not; and therefore he might have spared his pains in this page to prove that: but it will not thence follow that  is referred to Iohn, untill he first remove the ground given against it by me, in shewing [all] is not understood here universally, which is incum∣bent for him to do, since he denies it.
¶ 6. Pag. 256. n. 31. In answer to my arguing, that this Light is saving and sufficient, because it is the Light of Christ, whereby all ought to believe, he saith, they know no Light sufficient, which is not efficacious, that is, which certainly doth not save. But besides that this answer is but a meer begging of the question, it is contrary to many Scripturs, which I have at length shewn before, in proving, many, that have had a day, have resisted the Mercy and Grace thereof. What he saith further here against those, who af∣firm that the emproving of Nature aright shall obtain Grace, toucheth me not, who affirm no such thing. He beginneth his n. 32. p. 257. with a perver∣sion, as if I denied that we received what is natural and common from Christ, because I say, the Evangelist Iohn c. 1. is treating of what we re∣ceive from Christ as Mediator, Therefore I deny we receive from Christ what is common and natural. But in answer to my urging the Light's be∣ing supernatural, (to pass-by his pedantik quibble, which he adventur∣eth not to insist upon) because the darkness, that is, man in his natural estate, comprehendeth it not, but man in that estate can comprehend what is natural to him; he tels me, they thence infer, that man in that estate is void of all spiritual Light. Is not this a learned refutation of my reason, Reader? But suspecting this would not serve, he adds another quibble upon the word comprehend, that though man in his natural state can comprehend that which is natural, yet he can not comprehend the God of Nature. I say not that in his natural state he can, nor yet in his spiritual; comprehend being taken in the most comprehensive sense, but otherwise being understood of receiving or apprehending, for so  may be understood, he may receive it by vertue of the Power, which from the Light he receivs, so to do. That the Quakers exhort people to believe in a meer creatur, is a meer calumny, with which like stuff this page is filled; and therefore my ar∣gument of the Light being saving and supernatural, because we are com∣manded to believe in it, remains unremoved. Pag 258. In answer to what I urge from the parable of the Sower, Matth. 13. and the word of faith, Rom. 10. and the engrafted Word, Iam. 1: 21. he only opposeth his meer assertions and railing, calling it Quaker-dotages, and a fancifull dream. And to the argument drawn from the Talents, Mat. 25. he denieth them to signify Saving Grace, of which above. Pag. 259. When he comes to answer what I urge from Col. 1: 23. of the Gospel's being preached in every creature, which is not only a declaration of good things, but the Power of God; he gives his meer assertions, that the Gospel was the doctrin deliver∣ed
by men: but the doctrin was not the Power of God, which the Go∣spel is, albeit it declared of it, no more than a recept of Physik is the in∣gredients. Next he asserts, that if the Gospel be in them, it needs no Preach∣er, but this he proves not. A man may have good herbs in his garden, and yet need another to tell him the right use of them, yea and discover them unto him. And what if I would say, as he desires, that it was preach∣ed from the beginning of the world in a measur, that it wrought in mens hearts, in order to save them; albeit the full, plain and manifest discovery, and pretious effects thereof, was reserved to the ministration of Christ and his Apostles? And therefore his assertion, in the next page, 260. is false, that according to the Quakers principle, the Gospel was alike manifest, in all ages. Was not the promised Seed a preaching of the Gospel to Adam? How poorly he has shewn the restriction of the particle all (albeit the words here be every creatur, which is more pathetik) in his 8 chapter, is before evinced. And whereas he desires to know where the Gospel is taken properly for that inward strength that is common to all men, I have shewn him, the Gospel is called the Power of God expressly, Rom. 1. and that is an inward Power and strength; and then again I have shewn him, that this Gospel is preached to or in every creatur, which is plain words, what is preach∣ed to every creatur, is common to all men: and therefore, untill he an∣swer this, his calling me a babler and a Pagan-preacher (as he doth in this place) with such like stuff, will have little weight with men of reason. The rest of this page, and the following, 261 & 262. is a complex of railing, that the Quakers Gospel is meer heathenism, worse than Pelagianism, Socinianism, Arminianism and Jesuitism, because they say, that what is ma∣nifest from God in man, is by the Gospel, and that which revealeth justice and equi∣ty, is the Gospel, which this man supposeth only to be the light of Nature, and thereupon concludeth, the Quakers Gospel is but Nature's dimme and corrupt light. All which is but to beg the question, as he doth, where he supposes that man naturally can perceive the eternal Power of the Godhead, in the outward Creation, without any supernatural light, which he should prove, and not mock at my being otherwise minded, for this savours more of Pelagianisme, than any thing asserted by me. He asks me, by what au∣thority I make , that is, what is to be known of God (for it seems he was fear'd to speak plain Scots of it, lest every one should have seen his impertinency) and the knowledge of God, one and the same? For to see this, he saith, he wants the Quakers spectacls. But indeed he
must be as dark-lighted inwardly, as these are outwardly, that need spe∣ctacls, if he deny that the knowledge of God is somewhat of what is to be known of him, and then what is to be known of God indefinitly must comprehend the knowledge of God. He addeth, that if by inward revelation the Heathens know the will of God, then the Apostle was quite out here: but this follows no more than that a Master teacheth not his scholar navigation, because he makes use of the compass and outward observations, to de∣monstrat it to him. Pag. 262. n. 38. as also n. 40. In answer to what I urge from Rom. 10. of the Word being near in the heart and in the mouth, he returneth railing, and meer assertions: for his saying that this word is not in every man, is but to affirm strongly, not to prove. As for his assert∣ing that the Apostle speaks of outward preaching, I deny not; and that by an outward testimony the mystery, that had been hid, and even spar∣ingly revealed, in the visible Church, was openly declared by Christ and his Apostles, I acquiesce to: but from all that it will no ways fol∣low, that the Apostle spake only of outward preachers, and that it was not in the hearts of all men, though they had not a distinct knowledge of it. He confesses the mystery of Adam's fall was not known to the Gentiles, but by the Scriptur; yet that hindered not but they were hurt, yea and according to him, all of them defiled, by it. His saying, that I confirm here my desperat designe, and overturn the foundations of the Christian Re∣ligion, with his exclamations, O desperat Souls! O wretched error! with much more of this kind of stuff, uttered by him, for want of better ar∣guments; may fright fools, but will not move men of reason. At last, to conclude this chapter, he alledgeth the testimonies of the Fathers, brought by me, do not expressly prove my assertions; yet he tacitly and indirectly acknowledges such testimonies may be found among the most ancient of them, while (albeit to their disadvantage) he saith, it is observ∣able, that some of them had so put-on Christ, as not fully to have put-off Plato. ¶ 7. Pag. 267. Cometh his XI. chapter, entituled, Of the necessity of this Light to Salvation, where, according to his custom, he beginneth with proofless affirmations, and railing; saying, the Universal Gospel, pointed at by me, is no Gospel, not the Gospel revealed in the word, making the whole Gospel and Grace of God null and void, as that by which the outward administration thereof by the Apostles is unnecessary, to which is answered before. And then after an enumeration of many Scripturs, wherein the Apostle Paul glorieth in his being an instrument of the preaching of it, with which he
hath not shewn our doctrin inconsistent, he concludeth, O what wretch∣ed desperado's must these Quakers be, who thus undervalue and trample upon the riches of the wisdom and grace of God, and instead of the true Gospel, give us pure Paganisme! This is a fit introduction for such a chapter, wherein there is much of the same sort of stuff (which I shall willingly pass) and which, that he may end, as he begins, has the like railing conclusion, p. 281. Then, when he enters upon the matter, n. 5. and p. 269. and comes to examin what I say, to shew wherein we differ from some other assertors of Universal Redemption, and for that end, to shew why one is saved, and not another, seing all have sufficient Grace, among others he mentions these my words, Moreover we believe that in that special time of every man's visitation, as man of himself is wholly impotent for working with grace; so neither can he make the least progress out of his natural state, till grace lay hold on him. So that it is possible for him to suffer and not resist, as it is also pos∣sible for many to resist. By these words of mine, cited by him, the Reader may easily observe how falsly he charged me in the fore-going chapter, with asserting that men could be saved by meer Nature, without the operation of the grace of God, and yet he is not ashamed to re-iterat the same calumny here, p. 279. But to proceed, he saith, this my answer is not satisfactory: the reason of which (besides some tedious discourse of the opinions of the Arminians, Iesuits and Molinists, concerning the difference betwixt sufficient and effectual Grace, which is not my work to answer, neither needs any as he gives it here and there, p. 270, 271, 272-274. 280. amounts to this, that since the working of the grace comes from this non-resis∣tence, which he saith is a positive act of man's will, then Salvation depends upon Free-Will, and this he labours to aggravat by divers odious and some∣times ridiculous expressions, such as Grace must stand, cap in hand, to Lord Free Will, and more of that kind, alledging that the two examples of sick men, and men lieing in a deep cave, brought at length by me, in my Apology, Lat. ed. p. 91. n. 17. do not free me of this absurdity. To which I reply (1) That the question is here only concerning such as have only a sufficiency of Grace, and not of those who have a prevalency of Grace, which I confess to some. (2) That I say not that any man can convert himself by any Light, Grace, or Seed in him, untill quickened, visited and stirred-up by a new visitation of Life from God. (3) That on both hands it is confessed, that there must be a concurring of the will of man, in the act of Conversion: for no man is saved against his will.
(4) That I say, as wel as he, that this concurrence of man's will and pliablness to the Grace of God, proceedeth not from man's will natural∣ly, but is the product and effect of the Grace: then what has man to glory in? O (saith he) such as are saved, may say I was not so ill disposed, my will was not so averse as another, that had the like sufficient Grace; and what then? his aversion and resistence is the cause of his condemnation, that is not denied, but it follows not from thence, that the non-resistence is the cause of the others Salvation; I deny that consequence, for his non-resistence did not procure him that visitation from God. Where then is his absurdity? it may resolve in one of these two, that it was pos∣sible for those that are damned, to have been saved; or for some of those that are saved, to have been damned. What will the supposing that these, that are damned, might have been saved, amount to, but that their damnation is of themselvs, which all acknowledge? And if he think it is absurd to say, any that are saved, might have been damned, why is Salvation preached to any? or to what end is pains bestowed upon any, in order to Salvation? or how doth that signifie any thing really to their Salva∣tion, if damnation was altogether impossible to them? When he has sufficiently answered this, he will solve his own difficultys. But because the man will always be nibbling, where he can not give a solid answer, therefore he fals a quarreling at some comparisons, brought by me, pag. 273-275-277. shewing they do not hitt in that for which I did not bring them, whereas I took notice that the comparison did not hitt every way. (since all comparisons claudicat) The first is, because I say, that Grace softens the heart, as the fire softens the wax, therefore he concludes, that, ac∣cording to me, Grace doth not change the heart, because fire changeth not the natur of the iron; and what then? It was only with a respect to the softening that I brought the comparison, albeit, had he been a good Chymist, he might have known, that by the fire the nature of mettals may be chang∣ed also. The example of the sun's hardening clay, and softening wax, was brought by me, to shew that the sun loseth not its effect, though the operation in the subject be different, and for no more, albeit the sun also work a disposition towards the produçing its effect in some creaturs, which by their resisting or not resisting may be hindered. ¶ 8. When he cometh, p. 277. to examin the proofs I bring to prove the necessity of this Grace to Salvation, he mistakes the end, for which I bring them, and thence either alledgeth upon me false insinuations, or
judgeth them insufficient for not proving of that, for which they were ne∣ver intended: for the end, for which I bring these proofs here, is, to shew, that, whatever use, profitablness, or necessity of believing, to those, to whom they are revealed, may be in outward knowledge, yet Salvation chiefly depends upon the inward work of Grace, bringing about regene∣ration in the Soul; and this in order to shew, that where this is wrought, (albeit the outward be wanting) Salvation will follow. Now when he sheweth this is not proven by the arguments I here bring, he may be an∣swered, and till then, it is in vain for him to say, I would infer a destroying of the ordinances of Christ, which is false, or that this doth not prove that this com∣mon & sufficient Grace is able to effectuat the new birth, that not being the mat∣ter here to be proved. Pag. 178. n. 13. he denieth the new Creation, spoken of 2 Cor. 5: 16, 17. proceedeth from this Light & Grace: but his mistake herein will be shewn hereafter, from Tit. 2: 11. when I come to speak of that place. He saith that the manifestation of the Spirit, given to every one, spo∣ken of 1 Cor. 12: 7. is only understood of those within the Church, but for this giveth no proof: if there be an enumeration made of all the several vertues wrought by it in the visible Church, it doth not thence follow, that none have it without it; the text saith, it is given to every man indefi∣nitly and absolutely, not to every one only within the Church, that remains for him to prove. He would fasten a contradiction upon me, p. 279. n. 14. because I say the Seed is small in its first manifestation, and though it be hid in the earthy part of man's heart, because a thing can not be both hid and manifest, and upon this he triumphs, as if he had discovered a great absurdity; but doth he not know that that may be said to be hid, with respect to a great and clear and full manifestation, which yet may be in some respect manifest, at sometimes? I do not say that absolutely it is hid and manifest at one and the same time. In answer to Luk 17: 20, 21. brought by me, where Christ saith, the kingdom of God is in the Phari∣sees, he tels, judicious Calvin thinks these words were spoken to the Dis∣ciples: but he it seems is not of his mind (and therefore I know not to what purpose he brought him, since he follows not his sense) for he will have it to signifie [among], and the meaning to be, that the Kingdom of God was near and among them. But his proof for this it not valid, for  is sometimes interpreted among; but the question is if it should be so interpreted here? and till he prove that, he saith nothing. But his mis∣take here is greater than he is aware of, for the Greek word is ,
not , which signifies intus, [within] and I desire him to shew me, in the New Testament, where it signifies among. All the Scripturs brought by him are impertinent, none of which is  as in this place, but . He confesseth, p. 280. the Calvinists make Grace an irresistible power, but saith that they have reason so to do, because the Scriptur speaketh of Grace as a drawing and teaching, for that may draw, which draweth not irresistibly. And because I say the Papists, Socinians, and Ar∣minians deny this little seed and manifestation of Light to be that superna∣tural and Saving Grace of God, given to all, to Salvation, he bringeth two passages of the Arminians, wherein they confess the Spirit of God works im∣mediatly upon the will, giving it strength to believe, desiring me then to tell him wherein I differ from Arminians: but will my agreeing with Armi∣nians in this prove I differ not from them? doth not himself agree with the Arminians, in saying, (as he affirms they do) that the power of believ∣ing is conferred by irresistible grace? And if he agree with them as wel as I, may not I ask him the question, as pertinently as he doth me, wherein dif∣fers he from them? Has not he himself affirmed, that as to our doctrin of the Saving Substantial Seed being in all, pag. 226. neither Arminians nor Soci∣nians ever spake of it? what then needs he ask me wherein we differ from them? But it seems he, that phancyeth men can dream waking (as he sometimes speaks of the Quakers) has been in that postur, when he wrot this, which helped him to conclude this chapter with railing. ¶ 9. Now I come to his XII. chap entituled by him, Of the Salvation of Heathens without hearing the Gospel, he should have added, outwardly, that is the thing in debate; but as in the title, so in the chapter, he beggs the question: and that he may begin with railing, as he ends it with a flood of it, p. 292. he faith, to say, men may be saved without the outward preaching must be true with this Quaker, though the Apostle saith the contrary, for this citing Rom. 10: 14. Eph. 2: 12. 1 Cor. 1: 20, 21, 22. all which say no∣thing contrary to my assertion, unless by the hearing there he prove is meaned only outward hearing. And what though the Apostle say to the Gentiles, that they are aliens to the common-wealth of Israel, and that by wis∣dom they knew not God, and that the preaching of the Gospel was foolishness to them? All this may be faid of some living in, and esteemed members of, the Visible Church, who have the advantage of the outward preach∣ing; and therefore it can not prove that the want of this takes-away the possibility of Salvation. To that of Peter I agree, Act. 4: 12. that there
is not Salvation in any other, &c. but it follows not therefore, that none can partake of this Salvation, without the outward knowledge: him∣self overturns this conclusion, by granting infants and deaf persons may. Pag. 287. To my argument, that since the Gospel is preached to every creatur, they may be saved by it, he saith, a [may be] will not evince a [shall be]; but I said only may be saved, not shall be saved, and if it evince that, it doth my business. That some have been saved without it, himself acknowledges, in the example of Iob. Pag. 288. To over∣turn my using of the Gospel's being preached to every creatur, he refers to his former answer to this place, and so do I to my reply. Beza's sense to whom he refers me, movs me no more than his doth, but when it is agreable to Truth Next, he comes to answer my argument, drawn from Tit. 2: 11. For the grace of God that bringeth salvation, hath appeard to all men, and for answer, he will have [all] here not to be understood universally, but with a restriction; alledging it is my part to prove it: but that needs no more proof, than to prove that Iohn Brown signifies, Iohn Brown, and for all his pretended skill in the rule of disput, he is under a mistake. To take it universally, is to take it as the common and proper signification of it; so by the rule of all Commentators we are to hold the words of Scriptur so, untill by solid reasons we be moved to the con∣trary; and therefore it is his part that denies it, to give the reason: that [all] sometimes is taken with a restriction, I deny not, that therefore its so taken here doth not follow. That the Gospel is said to be preached by men outwardly, I deny not, but that therefore it is only so, and never preached, but when outwardly, by the ministery of men, is no conclu∣sion: himself acknowledges, in the examples of Iob, who he saith was taught by God, without Scriptur. His other explications upon this place are his meer assertions, not to the business, he calleth it, upon the credit of his own affirmation, false and childish pedantry, to say, they take [all] for the lesser part, because they take it indefinitly, while yet they under∣stand that indefinit number to be the lesser part; but do they not take the Whole World, 1 Iob. 2: 2. for the far lesser part of the world, which is yet more absurd? To my argument, taken from Rom. 5: 18. where it is said, as something came upon all, to condemnation, so something is come upon all to justification, which shews the last [all] to be of as large extent as the first, which they confess is universally taken, he saith, this will prove more, viz, that all men are and shall be saved, because judgment came actually upon all
to condemnation, by Adam's fall; but this is only his own assertion, the word judgment is not in the text, and Beza's putting in reatus or guilt prov∣eth not it ought to be so, whatever he do, we account not Beza infal∣lible, and therefore reject his sense, untill he prove it agreable to Scrip∣tur: nor yet his enlargements afterwards upon the place, because alledg∣ed without probation. Pag. 285. n. 5. He accounteth my citing Esai 49: 6. where Christ is said to be given for a Light to the Gentiles, imperti∣nent, because albeit the Gentiles are not excluded from the dispensa∣tion of the Gospel, it will not follow that such as hear not of Christ can be saved, as wel as such as are brought within the Church. But this an∣swer is founded upon the supposition, that I affirm, that any are saved, which are not within the Church Catholik or universal, which is false. And how men may be of the Church, who want outward preaching, will af∣ter appear. I think no sober man will deny (supposing Salvation possible to the Gentiles, without outward preaching) that it were blind charity, to judge some of them have been saved, for upon that supposition, it were against all charity, to say, none of them were ever saved. His example of the captives, to whom one, that redeemed them, did not com∣municat the conditions, remaining really captives, to answer my argu∣ment from the rule of Contraries, that as men are hurt by Adam's fall, who know not of it, so they may be benefited by Christ's death, who know not of it, hitteth not the matter; it is as strange for men to be captives, and not to know how, nor by whom, as to be redeemed, and not know how, nor by whom, if he suppose the first, he may do the last: and this example himself overturns in what he grants of deaf persons and children, as will after appear. To my asking Why men can not be saved, who never heard of the death and resurrection of Christ, as wel as men are damned who never heard of Adam's sin; he tels me very fairly, because God hath appointed this way of Salvation by faith in Christ, which can not be without the knowledge of Christ, by which he meaning the outward, as he needs must, his answer is none at all, but a ridiculous begging of the question, as he doth also, when he mentions that Esai 53: 11. by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justifie many: for thought that should be understood of out∣ward knowledge, which yet remains for him to prove, it will not follow because Christ shall justifie many by that knowledge, that therefore he shall justifie none without it. ¶ 10. When he comes, pag. 186. n 7. to answer what I urge from
the example of Deaf persons and Infants, the Reader may observe how much he is pained; so that he is forced, after so long contending and wearisom wrestling, at last to give-away his cause, by confessing they ex∣cept both these from the necessity of outwardly hearing the Gospel: if so, then Salvation is impossible, without the hearing of the Gospel, and the outward preaching of the Gospel is not of absolute necessity to Salva∣tion. But why are they, and they only, excepted? in which resolvs my question, (which doth so vex him, that, in stead of answering, he tels me, I am a deluded Quaker) of which this is one, Is not one in China or In∣dia as excusable for not knowing that, which they never heard, as a deaf man, that can not hear, since God, that has permitted the one to be naturally deaf, has also permitted the other to be necessarily absent? To this I can not find his answer, save only this, that these deaf persons and infants are members of the visible Church, but not the other, of which this must be the consequence, that none can be saved, but such as are members of the visible Church; for his saying, that none are members of the invisible Church, but such as are of the visible, clearly imports it. But has not he, or at lest the most eminent of his way, said, that the Church was many ages invisible, and in the wilderness, and yet denied that all were damned, during that time? Or will he say, the Church of Rome was the visible Church of Christ, all that time, of which they were members? What then becomes of the testimonies of those, who termed her Antichrist, the mother of abomi∣nations, the synagogue of Satan? which albeit true, yet begins to be eaten up again by the Clergy, yea even the Presbyterians, who begin by degrees to creep back again to acknowledge their old father, the Pope, to esta∣blish their Succession and Ordination, especially when pinched by the Quakers, as is at more length shewn in G. Keith's book, called Quakerism no Popery.? But further, it seems the outward hearing is not necessary to make a man a member of the visible Church, and then what becoms of all his tedious reasonings from Rom. 10. How shall they believe in him, of whom they have not heard, which he urged before so vehemently, but now has overturned? He thinks the instance of Cornelius not to the purpose, because he might have had the knowledge of the Messias from the Jews: but his bare supposition is no answer, besides, that he was no Jews prose∣lyte, is manifest, else Peter should not have been quarrelled for convers∣ing with him; and unless he had been such, or had received the Gospel, according to him, he must be esteemed to have been within the Covenant,
and yet before any of these, he is said to have been heard of God, and accepted. Pag. 289. He confesseth Iob lived before Moses, and was taught of God without Scriptur, and then is it not thence manifest, that some have been saved, to whom the Gospel was not preached by the ministery of men? This also overturneth his arguments from Rom. 10. Because he knows not how to answer my argument drawn from Rom. 2. therefore to amuse his Reader, he raises a storm of railing, calling me no less, with an exclamation, than a miserable miscreant, who make the Apostle contradict himself. My argument lies in the Apostle's positive words, who saith, the Gentiles did the things contained in the Law, and again, in the same chap∣ter, ver. 13. the doers of the Law are justified; whence in the very words of the Apostle, without any commentary, I argue, that if the doers of the Law be justified, then the Gentiles, who did the things contained in the Law, are ju∣stified: do I therefore make the Apostle contradict himself? Yea saith he, because the same Apostle saith, that by the deeds of the Law no flesh shall be justified: but will he say, that these two sentences of this Apostle, the doers of the Law shall be justified, and by the deeds of the Law no flesh shall be justified, are contradictory? I say, they are not. If both these sayings be true, his challenge is in vain, if he will speak-out that which he must, else manifest his abuse of me, and say they contradict one another, then let the Reader judge who is the miscreant, and observe how he fals himself into the pit, he had prepared for another. But, to shew how this distinct outward knowledge was not absolutely needfull to Salvation, I instanc∣ed how that divers of the Patriarchs, yea Mary, and the Apostles them∣selvs, had not so clear a knowledge of it, but appeared ignorant upon se∣veral occasions: to this, p. 289. he would make the Reader believe, that I conclude the Patriarchs had no saving knowledge of the Messias, because the wicked Iews crucified him, which is false; I shew indeed, according to Scriptur, that the Jews, that crucified him, wanted this distinct know∣ledge, notwithstanding they had the Scriptur. His further answer to this confutes himself, saying, the Apostles did understand so much as was then revealed; and if this was sufficient for them, as he must say, if he speak sense, the like may be said of the Heathens: for, if the Apostles were not condemnable for not believing nor understanding more than what was revealed to them, neither could the Gentiles. But, to make his un∣wary Reader believe as if all this said by me brought no relief to my desperat cause, as he terms it, he concludes this 11 Paragraph, p 200.
with one of his sententious sayings, Quakers can dream waking, I see. He goes-on in answer to my proofs brought from the antient Philosophers to confirm this, to which he resumes little but railing, wherein I will not trouble the Reader to follow him, since without them the thing in hand is sufficiently proved by Scriptur; yet if he will affirm the citations to be either false or fictitious, they may be proved by production of the books themselvs. He thinks the impertinency of my citing Augustin's words is discovered by the bare reading, and little less he saith to those of Buchanan, which I refer to the Readers judgment, as he will find them in my Apology, towards the latter end of the explanation of the 5 and 6 Propositions; and I will leave him concluding this chapter with railing, and empty threats, which I neither fear nor value, as being without ground, and the fruits of no better spirit, than that of Rabshakeh. Section Eighth, Wherein his thirteenth Chapter Of Iustification is considered. ¶ 1. I come now to his thirteenth chapter Of Justification, where, after he has begun by telling this doctrin hath been principally questioned by Heretiks, which I deny not, and given us, ac∣cording to his custom, some large citations out of their Con∣fession of Faith and Catechism, with the supposed sense of other Quakers, from some of his formerly mentioned partial Authors; at last he comes pag. 296. n. 4. to examin what I say in this matter: where, according to his custom, he begins with a calumny, upon his own false supposition, as if the justification, I plead for, were not the true justification of the Saints, because proceeding from the Light, which (saith he) is but the dimme light of nature. This he takes for granted to be true, and thence falsly makes his inference, pag. 297, 298. 307, 308. 324. To this he adds another per∣version, as if, because I say from the Light received proceeds an holy birth, therefore there were no infusion of any gracious Principle or Vertue, &c. which is false. Men use to say, that where seed is received in the earth, it grows up to fruit, yet not without the influence of the Sun, and de∣scending of rain; so is it with this Spiritual Seed, but with this diffe∣rence, that where-ever this Seed is, God is never wanting to give his Hea∣venly
influences, towards its growth & advançment. In this chapter also he omits not his railing, calling us poor deluded Wretches, &c. with the repetition of which I will not trouble the Reader; if he be pleased, he may observe it, pag. 227-299. 316. 318, 319. & in several other places, but especially where he endeth the chapter, p. 324, 325. I needed not at all trouble the Reader with his often re-iterared accusation of my joyning with the Papists, since he saith I am worse and less orthodox than they in this matter, p. 301. 309. were it not to shew him how his malice has blinded him, for he confesseth p. 300. n. 8. that I condemn their meritum ex condigno, and placing justification in such works as are ra∣ther evil than good; and yet p. 305. he asks wherein I differ from the worst Papists? So then such as assert meritum ex condigno and these other things denied by me, are not in his sense the worst Papists, let him reconcile this with the general sense of Protestants; yea with great bitterness he quarreleth me for wronging the Papists, p. 301. calling it a base falshood, and deceit, in me, to say Papists do not place justification in any real inward re∣novation of the soul, citing the words of the Councel of Trent and Bellarmin to the contrary: but he must know, if he will, I will not be cheated by the fair words of Papists, contrary to what mine ears have heard, and eyes seen, to be the general practice of their people and Preachers, and that in a kingdom, where their superstition less abounds, than any place of their territories. I know they place more vertue, towards the inward re∣novation of the Soul, in such things as are justly condemnable, than in obedience to Christ's precepts: and were it not that he is even glad to pa∣tronize the Papists, that he might get some occasion to rail against me, he could not but acknowledge this, since he can not be ignorant (what∣ever distinctions and fair words they have invented now, to smooth their doctrin) that all the first Reformers do with one voice affirm, that before the Reformation, there was a profound silence of any thing, save their superstitious works, pilgrimages and indulgences, in the point of ju∣stification, not only as to making just, but even as to remission of sins, which they asserted to be attained by such means. Yet this man's charity can extend to palliat their hypocrisy, that he may accuse me, while yet in the same page, as to me, he lays-aside all his charity, alledging most abu∣sivly, that it is but good words I give them about the satisfaction of Christ, and that I deceive them with Socinian glosses, and metaphorical senses, which is a gross calumny: like to which is his calumny, p. 317. where he saith,
the Quakers talk of Christ's Sufferings and Death, &c. as all done within man. ¶ 2 That the Reader may not be interrupted, in the through exami∣nation of this point, by his calumnies, perversions and malitious insinua∣tions, which he bestows throughout most of his work to squeeze out of my words, that he may render me either odious or ridiculous; I will remove them in the first place, ere I come to the main matter. Of this kind is what he saith, p. 297. where he plays upon me, saying, that justification is not by our work, or works, considered by themselvs; as if this were a mighty absurdity, to say, works wrought in a man could in any sense not be called his, which he reckons Phanaticism in folio. But if this be so, he must accuse Christ and the Apostle Paul of this Phanaticism, and it shall not much trouble me to be accounted guilty with them, albeit I lie under I. B's cen∣sur for it, for Christ saith to his Apostles, Mat. 10: 20. For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father that speaketh in you. and Mark 13: 11.—for it is not ye that speak, but the Holy Ghost, yet they uttered the words. He must either here confess his shame, albeit he term me a shameless man, for saying that Christ's words confirm it, or else condemn Christ: was not this speaking a work of the Apostles? and doth not Christ say, it is not they? and dare he call this a contradiction? So then he may see in what respect good works, considered otherwise than as meerly the works of men, help in justification: see also 1 Cor. 15: 10.—But I laboured more abundantly than they all, yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me. So here the Apostle's labour is ascribed to the Grace, so as he saith it was not he; and yet this man asketh, p. 248. if to be justified by Christ within be not to be justified by our works? adding, to render me odious, especially se∣ing this is Christ formed within, and not Christ who laid-down his life a ransom for sinners, which Christ, in our account, he saith, can not cleanse, nor do any good, which is a gross calumny. But the evil he intendeth here to us re∣turneth upon his own head, for, if to assert Christ formed within be to assert another Christ, than dyed and suffered, Then the Apostle was guilty of this crime, Gal. 4: 19.—I travel in birth again, untill Christ be formed in you: yea he cals Christ within the hope of Glory, Col. 1: 28. Will he thence dare to say the Apostle held another Christ than he that dyed? And let him prove, if he can, that, in our speaking of Christ formed within, we say more than the Apostle. Another of his calumnies, is, p. 302. where, because I say that all have sinned that come to man's age, therefore I deny that the wicked actions of such as are not come to be men and
women are sin; which is utterly false, as I never said so, so I never in∣tended, as he malitiously affirms, to insinuat any such thing. Pag. 303, 304. he would screw my words speaking of a twofold Redemption, where∣of the first is the capacity of being redeemed, purchased by Christ with∣out, and the receiving of and enjoying that wrought by Christ in us; to make an absurdity, because I say that as to us they can not be separated, then all must be redeemed the one way, who are redeemed the other, and that then every man must be redeemed from the power of corruption, and saved. But here, according to his custom, he cites not my words justly, which are, that they are both perfect in their own nature, albeit in their applica∣tion to us ward they can not be separated, that is, he, that comes effectually to enjoy the benefit of the one, must enjoy the other; he, that receivs the second, partakes of the first also; he, that really receivs the first, receivs the second also: but that hinders not but many may be offered the benefit of the first, and by rejecting and resisting it lose the benefit both of first and second; and he, that rejecteth it at any time, albeit he receive it for a season, as by his falling he loses what of the second is wrought in him, to wit, of purification, so he doth also lose the first, which was remission of sin. His last cavill at this is very impertinent, which is by way of question, that if this second redemption be necessary to sal∣vation, as it indeed is, what shall become of the child of God, that hath no light? what shall become of them that have true grace uniting them to Christ, &c. and yet through darkness can see and acknowledge no such thing? For to pass-by the absurditys here supposed, that saints can be said to have no light, or have grace, and be united to Christ, yet neither be able to see it nor acknow∣ledge it, and that not during their life-time here; for unless this be also supposed, he can not conclude what he will, for that a saint may be clouded at a time is not denied, yet this maketh nothing for his purpose. Will it follow, because they see it not, that it therefore is not needfull to their Salvation? His own words imply a contradiction to this. And thus the man confutes that by which he would urge another, in the very words by which he expresses it, for is not grace to unite the heart to Christ necessary to Salvation? He will surely say Yes: if then the acknowledg∣ment of that, and seing of it, which is needfull to salvation, be not need∣full, then the not seing or not acknowledging of a thing makes it not a thing unnecessary to Salvation, which is the absurdity he would in∣sinuat.
¶ 3. Thus having removed out of the way his most obvious perver∣sions and abuses, I come to treat of the main matter, which all depends upon this one question What is that whereby a man is justified, so as to appear truely just, in the sight of God? This he supposes to be don by the righteous∣ness and death of Christ without, even before any work of righteousness be wrought in man, even as a cautioner, to whom he compares Christ in this case, frees him, whose debt he pays. I, on the contrary, affirm, that, albeit reconciliation and remission of sins be by the death of Christ without, and the door opened, so that all may be at peace, by the offer of grace, made in Christ, if they reject it not, yet hereby no man can be said to be justified, or appear just, properly, untill Christ be received in his heart, there to renew and purifie him, and make him just, so that, however justification may be distinguished from sanctification, yet not di∣vided, nor yet so distinguished, that a man can be truely said to be justified, who is unholy and unsanctified. And therefore upon the examining of what he urges against this, and for his position, as also what he answers to my proba∣tions for it, depends the whole matter; but before I enter particularly upon this, and that there may no interruption meet me, when entred in it, I will first take notice, and remove his mistakes and misapplied proofs thereupon, both in what he opposes me, and affirms for himself, as also here take notice of his meer assertions. And first then, pag. 299. he supposes there can be no reconciliation by the blood of Christ's cross, &c. unless for such, in whose room Christ dyed, as a Cautioner and Surety, and so made satisfaction, that they should be redeemed and delivered. But, albeit upon this notion and affirmation all depends, yet I miss the proof of it; if his after proofs say any thing to it, I shall examin them: that which he men∣tions here written Rom. 8: 3, 4. is so far from doing it, that it proves the contrary. For albeit the Death of Christ was, that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, yet it follows not that the righteous∣ness of the Law must be fulfilled in all, for whom he dyed: yea the fol∣lowing words—who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit, shew this to be the condition requisit on our part, that we may partake of the benefit of his Death. If, to prove that man should be reconciled, re∣deemed and delivered by the Death of Christ, he bring the instances of the righteousness of the Law to be fulfilled in us; then men can not be said to be reconciled, redeemed and delivered, untill this righteousness of the Law be fulfilled in them. What he addeth to this, that we can not be said to be accounted righteous, and absolved from Accusation, upon the account
of our works of righteousness, since I say no such thing, freely confessing that not only pardoning of sin, but removing of the filth, as wel as of the guilt, is the act of God's Mercy, and Grace, as saith the Apostle, Tit. 3: 5, 6. and yet we are saved, and consequently justified, accord∣ing to his Mercy, by the washing of Regeneration, since this is the fruit of the Grace and Spirit of God freely given us. And therefore it is not enough for him, pag. 302. to affirm that I pervert the Apostle's words, 2 Cor. 5: 19, 20.—God was in Christ reconciling the World unto himself, upon this bare supposition, that this [World] is only understood of the Elect: for, if this reconciliation had been absolute, and not in part only, that is, a readyness on God's part to be reconciled with them, if they re∣pent, which I affirm; to what purpose should the Apostle, as an Embas∣sadour intreat them to be reconciled? there needed no intreaty to that which was already done; neither are his meer assertions to this, p. 303. any answer. It is strange, that to prove that all, for whom Christ dyed, are certainly made alive one time or other, he brings these words And that he dyed for all, that they which live, should not hence forth live unto them∣selvs, but unto him, which dyed for them, &c. for he doth not say here, that all he dyed for are made alive, but that they that are made alive should so live; neither doth the saying Christ has born the sins of all in his own body on the tree import any being actually freed of the guilt of sin, untill they re∣ceive the condition as above, be ye therefore reconciled unto God. But he overturns what he earnestly pleaded for before, p 310. n. 23. where he saith, they owne not that reconciliation was so perfected by Christ on earth, that there is nothing to be done by man, in order to his actual justification: if so, then no man is actually justified, untill something be done by him, and this doing imports a work, so here a work of man is necessary for justifica∣tion; and this is rather more than I say. And if something be to be don on man's part, ere actual justification be obtained, then that which is don by Christ before, must be only a potential justification, and what is this more than a capacity of being justified? which yet he batters against in me, and yet he must confess this to distinguish himself from the Antinomians, whose opinions albeit he divers times disclaims, yet he shews not how he can liberat himself from it: and therefore in contra∣diction to what is here observed, both his assertions and proofs resolve in the Antinomian doctrin, and concludes for it, as much as for him, which I might therefore pass all, as impertinent. But for instance, his great ex∣ample
of a Cautioner or Surety, used often, as pag. 299. 310, 311. for when a Cautioner pays a man's debt for him, so soon as he lays down the money, which is a sufficient intimation to him, to whom the debt is due, the person, for whom it is paid, is really acquited, albeit he have done no act, yea know not of it; and this, as I observed before, himself ac∣knowledgeth, in the application, saying, p. 304. that some, who are united to Christ by Grace, (and surely such are justified) can neither see it, nor ac∣knowledge it. So then, if this example of his Surety hold true, men are justified, before they believe, as say the Antinomians; and therefore all the Scripturs, brought by him, p. 308. to prove that Christ made a proper, real and full satisfaction, in the behalf of men, will conclude for the Antino∣mians as much as for him: whereas p. 314. he looks upon it as a calumny to say they speak not of a real justification, for he concludes, p. 312. that imputative justification is real. He argues for the Antinomians also, since he accounts this imputation to be only of righteousness wrought without men by Christ in his own person; for, if by this imputation men be real∣ly justified, then they are as much or at lest as really justified before they believe, as after, since faith is an act of man's will, and no such thing ac∣cording to him can have place in Justification: and yet, to go round, he saith, p. 308. that they say not, that God justifieth any remaining in their sins. But do they not say so, since taking his opinion the safest way, and fur∣thest from Antinomians, he concludeth a man justified in the act of conversion? and such he supposes to have been great sinners, yea and that they may not be purged from them many years after; yea and how can they, if they must sin daily, as they say, in thought, word and deed? (of which more hereafter) are not such then remaining in their sins according to them justified? Pag. 306. N. 16. he would infer a contradiction upon me, from saying, good works are necessary as causa sino qua non, for this he saith contradicts my saying We are justified by the inward birth, and not by our works, seing works being but the consequence of that birth, is but the effect, even a causa sine qua non must be before the effect; on which he also insists, p. 319. n. 38. But this contradiction is founded upon the supposi∣tion, that this birth is brought forth without good works; which I deny, seing regeneration is a work of the Spirit in us, by which we are justified, that is, really made just, and the works, which proceed therefrom, are but a consequence of it. And now as to his proofs, and also his examin∣ing of mine, they are inserted, pag. 204. n. 13. where he saith, that the re∣demption
of Christ is a far other thing, and hath far other effects, than to make men capable of salvation, even remission of sins. But I never denied, but that it brought remission of sins to such as embrace and receive it, neither do the Scripturs cited by him prove more, 2 Cor. 5: 19. Dan. 9: 24-26. Col. 1: 19, 20. Ephes. 1: 11-15. Ioh. 17: 2. Heb. 9: 12, 13. 2 Cor. 1: v. 20. none of which speak of the reconciliation made by Christ to be in itself more than procuring a capacity of Salvation, other ways than as received and laid hold-on by believers; and when it is spoken of, with respect to such, I never denied but it was more, for the capacity is brought unto action: he addeth, the very texts cited by my self make against me, Eph. 2. 15. he dyed to make in himself of twain one new man, so making peace: ver. 13. but now in Christ Iesus, ye who sometimes were far off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ, asking, was this only a capacity of coming near? but the Apostle here speaks of those, who had received, and not resisted, the benefit of that capacity. And whereas he saith 1 Joh. 4: 10. the Son of God's being said to be a propitiation for our sins, is more than a meer possibi∣lity of friendship. But doth not the same Apostle say, he is a propitiation for the whole World? yet he did not actually reconcile the whole world, save in a capacity. Ezech. 16: 6. he giveth a question, in stead of answer, 1 Pet. 2: 24. Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that we being dead to sins, should live unto righteousness, by whose stripes ye were healed. noting 1 Pet. 3: 18. Christ hath once suffered, that he might bring us to God, but it saith not, that Christ by his sufferings did bring us to God, which would have more made for his purpose; and though it had been so, yet neither that nor what is above cited prove any thing, being spoken to those, who had received the second redemption, as wel as the first. Then he notes these following, Col. 1: 14. Gal. 1: 4. 3: 13, 14. 4: 5. Rev. 5: 9, 10. & 14: 3, 4. Tit. 2: 13. all which I have looked, but find not that they prove what he intends: some were spoken not only to those who had already received the benefit of Christ's death here, but of such as were already glorified in heaven; if he think they will prove his mat∣ter, he must shew how, the next time he writes. ¶ 4. Pag. 309. n. 21. He brings my argument shewing that where there is a perfect reconciliation, there there is no separation. why doth God then so often complain of his People for their sins? from this it would follow that sin made no separation, or that their good works and worst sins are the same, in God's account, His answer to this, is, that a
man may be in a justified state, and declared just, because constituted so, albeit unrighteous as to his person, because of his unrighteous actions, in which sense he is not justified nor approven of God, that is, in plain Scots, to say, God consti∣tuteth and declareth men just, albeit they be wicked men, and really unjust, the first being understood of their condition, the second of their per∣son: but the misery is, there wants something to knit this incoherent matter together, and inform us how a man, as to his condition, is just, while in his person unjust; and indeed he brings no proof for all this. And albeit I wonder not at this omission, since he could do no better, yet I de∣sire he may let me know the next time, why I should receive his answer without proof. That every sin, which may be committed by a Saint, doth not unsaint him, or destroy his condition, I acknowledge; but they sup∣pose no sin to do it, for when they affirm murder and adultery and treachery not to have done it, (as they do) if these sins are not destructive and kill∣ing as to man's condition, I know none; and desire to be informed how by Scriptur it can be made appear that these do not: so my argument still remains in force, and his charge of Antinomianism against me falleth to the ground. Pag. 311. He brings my argument shewing the absurdity of their objection from 2 Cor. 5: 21. thus, If we be just, as Christ was a sinner, by imputation, then as there was not the least sin in Christ, so there is no necessity for the least righteousness in us. To which he answers, neither is there to our being justified upon that account. The Reader may judge of this doctrin, which the man, either forgeting, or being ashamed of, plainly contradicts in the same page, saying, that sanctification is inseparably joyned with justifica∣tion; for then sure righteousness must be necessary to be justified upon whatever account. And yet to go round again, within five lines he cites Joh. 6: 29. & 9: 35, 36. & 10: 38. & 12: 36. & 14: 1. & 16: 9. to prove that Christ would have people resting upon a righteousness meerly imputative, for justification, for that is the thing denied by me; for, if san∣ctification be unseparable from justification, it is impossible to rest upon that, which is meerly imputative. That these Scripturs prove no such thing, the Reader may see, all of them press believing in Christ, but that to believe in Christ is to rest upon a righteousness meerly imputative, remains yet for him to prove. But to proceed, with an unparalleled confidence to answer to me saying, that to my observation that sentence, the imputed righteous∣ness of Christ, which they so much urge, as the foundation of their faith, is not to be sound in all the Scriptur, he noteth divers places of Scriptur, in not
one of which there is any such thing; and indeed this controversy, being of matter of fact, can be easily decided by any that can read, who can easily see whether that expression be there or not: for the question is of the expression in terminis, not of what he apprehendeth may by conse∣quence import the like. What he saith in answer to my proving justifying to be understood of being really made just, from 1 Cor. 6: 11. he over∣turneth himself in a few lines, confessing that the Corinthians were really changed, and if so, we need not doubt where it is said they were justified, but they were really made just, that is, changed from unrighteousness, as he confesseth they were. ¶ 5. Pag. 312. n. 26. He cometh to take notice of what I urge from the word justification, and from the etymology of it, and having intro∣duced himself with a scoff he saith, I do place this upon the authority of the vulgar Latine edition; but therein he is mistaken, the Greek word  will make as much for my purpose, as the Latine: he passeth from the etymology, p. 313. and saith the words usually import a juridical absolution by by the sentence of a Judge. but what then? is not that because Judges usual∣ly at lest absolve men upon the account of their innocency. And so his comparison of a Surety will not here hitt, for when men are accused of murder or adultery, or theft, and that the case is proven and confest, what Judges use to declare the person acquitted upon Surety given by an∣other innocent person? And therefore justifico, I justify, signifies the de∣claring of one just, who is so; and though justifico, as being sometimes taken in a Law sense, doth not, in the Indicative, answer to sanctifico, because it is there active, and has relation to another person; yet in the Passive, when relating to the person sanctified, it is understood one way, for justificatus and sanctificatus signifie the same. But he overturneth all his quibbling here, p. 313. n. 27. by asking, whether they say, that a man is said to be justified, who is not really just? which imports they say not so, and then we are agreed, only I would ask him how a man is really just, while committing actual wickedness and unrighteousness as to his person? and yet he said before, such were justified, and yet in the next, p. 314. he saith, I malitiously calumniat them, to say, they make use of the figurative sense of the word: let the Reader judge of these consistencies. And whereas I cite some Scripturs, that justifying is spoken of some, who arrogat righ∣teousness to themselves, though it do not belong to them, and at these he carpeth, saying, the very first, Exod. 23: 7. is spoken of God of himself, he
should have said, it is God speaking of the wicked, that he will not justi∣fie them: some of them speak of a not justifying, Job. 9: 20. & 27: 5. and what then? the places were marked, to shew the import of the word ju∣stify, and to shew that many of them speak nothing of justifying at all, whence he concludes in these words, So unhappy is the man in his citations. He notes first Esai 5: 23 but it seems he has been in hast, and therefore to rectifie his mistake, let him read the words, which are, which justify the wicked for reward: and what, though, where many Scripturs are noted together, by the mistake of the transcriber or Printer the figurs may be misplaced, and so miss? Truely they must be very happy, that can secure themselvs from this hazzard; he has not been so happy, who denied the words to be in a place, where the knowing of it depended not upon the diligence of others, but of his own looking to it, as I have just now shewn. Pag. 315. to prove that justified is not taken in the epistles of the Apostle Paul to the Rom. Corinth. Gal. for making just, as I affirmed in the passages cited by me, he saith, to take it so would make the Apostle contradict himself. But this he affirms upon the meer supposition that the Apostle with him excludes all works from Justification, which is but to begg the question, as will after appear. What he adds here, and in the following page, in answer to the citations I bring out of divers Protestant Authors, I need not trouble the Reader with a reply to it, because he turns by the most material of them, as not having the Authors by him, to examin them; others he positivly rejects, as not agreing with them, as Forbes and Baxter, and at last insinuats that the trial is not to be by humane Te∣stimonies, for such he accounts all the writings of his Brethren, whereun∣to I do very wel agree: only I brought some of his own folks, not as if I needed them to confirm me in my opinion, but as having weight with those among whom they are esteemed Doctors. In this page answering what I urge from Rom. 8: 30. shewing how in that golden chain sanctifi∣cation must be excluded, or justification must be taken in its proper sense; he saith, that sanctification is comprehended under Vocation. If this be true which he asserts, then he gives again away his cause, for then no man is sooner called than he is sanctified; and since he will not say (seing he di∣sclaims to be an Antinomian) that any man is justified, before he be called, it follows then necessarily that no man is justified before he be sanctified, and then to what purpose has he been fighting and wrestling all this while? Pag. 316: n. 33. he accuses me of unparalleled falshood, impudency
and boldness, for saying that I have sufficiently proven that by [justification] ought to be understood [to be made really just] whereas I undertook only to prove that the word might be so understood without absurdity; adding, I wonderfully conclude a must be from a may be, &c. but the best is, his greatest charges are built either upon forged calumnies, or his own pit∣tyfull mistakes. I never concluded by [justification] ought to be understood [to be made really just only] upon that which I said from the etymology of the word, nor by [justification] there did I understand meerly the word, but I conclude from all my Scriptur arguments of the thing, as my following words manifest, where I say We know it from sensible experience, but he may be sure it is not the etymology of the word, we know so. And if thence he urge that this falleth not under the inward sensation of the Soul, he but fights with his own mistake, for that the real justification of the Saints falleth under the inward sensation of the Soul, I think no man of sense will deny; for Christ is formed in the mind, where he is said to be revealed inwardly, and that gives a sense of justification, albeit he seem to wonder at it, asking, what Scriptur speaketh so? he may read Gal. 1: 16. Whether was not the Apostle here justified, and under the sense of it? He is angry, p. 317. that I call the life of Christ an inward and spi∣ritual thing, but will he say it is an outward and carnal thing? But what thinks he of 2 Cor. 4: 10, 11.? He confesseth this Life of Christ supported and carryed the persecuted Apostles through many miseries and deaths, will he say then it was not an inward and spiritual thing that carryed them through these trials? But he addeth, But who, except a Quaker, could say, that the Apostle sayes, we are justified by this life? I answer: all, except such absurd men as will deny that where we are said to be saved by a thing, we are said to be justified by it, Rom. 5: 10. Tit. 3: 5. we are said to be saved by regeneration. And whereas he saith the Apostle saith not that this is the Formal Objective Cause of Iustification; these are words the Apostle useth not at all, and therefore no wonder there be no word of it here. He looks upon it as being absurd for me to think that Reprobation is Non-Iustification, but I would know of him if there be any Reprobats who are justified. That the marks and evidences are not always taken from the Immediat, Nearest, and Formal Cause, I confess, but that therefore the not having Christ revealed in the Soul, is only a sign, and no cause of Reprobation, remains for him to prove: wickedness is a signe of Reproba∣tion, will he therefore affirm it is not the Immediat nor Formal Cause of
it? After the same manner he denieth, p. 31. 9. that we must lean to that which the Apostle calleth (Col. 1: 27, 28.) Christ within the hope of Glory; his reason is, because the Apostle saith, Phil. 1: 28. And in nothing terrified by your advarsarys, which is—to you an evident token of salvation, asking, must we also lean to that in Justification? But will he say there is no difference betwixt that which is only a token and Christ within? If there be, his reason concludes nothing. ¶ 6. Lastly: he comes to answer what I say of the necessity of good works to Iustification, and what I urge from Isai. 2. he confesseth that Good Works are an Instrumental cause, which concession doth prove all I affirm; if they be an instrumental cause, they must be a cause sine qua non, and necessary, since the instrumental cause of a thing must be neces∣sary towards its being. What? though Abraham was justified, before he offer'd up his son, it will not follow that he was justified without works. His absurdity, as if it would thence follow, that no man is justified when he sleeps, or is not actually doing some work, looks liker the objection of a man sleeping, who knows not what he saith, than of one awake, for by the same way it might be said, that Faith is not necessary, since men do no more actually believe, than do good works, when they are sleeping. My argument deduced from Heb. 12: 14. Matth. 7: 21. Iohn 13: 17. 1 Cor. 7: 19. Revel. 22: 14. he sayes, proves the necessity of Works unto final Sal∣vation, but not to Iustification, and if it do so, it doth the business, unles he will say, that full and perfect justification is not sufficient to Salva∣tion. My answer to their first objection he observs, but replies not: to the second, answering what they urge from Rom. 3: 20.—by the deeds of the Law, there shall no flesh be justified, which I shew, is to be understood of works don and not by the Grace of God, he answers, that such are no good works at all. But may not a man do some of the works, which even the Moral Law commands, such as not to committ murder, theft, or adul∣tery, without the Grace of God? Hath not he confessed as much of some Heathens, whom he judgeth not to have had the Grace of God? and will he say, these works are not materially good, albeit not formally, with a respect to any advantage, as to Salvation, they receive by them? And though it should be confessed, that all is not always requisite to be ante∣cedent to justification, which falls-out to be antecedent to Salvation; yet the question is Whether there be any thing absolutly requisit to be antece∣dent to salvation, which is not also absolutly requisit to be antecedent
to justification? If not, then if works be absolutly necessary, or so far as they are absolutly necessary to Salvation, they must also be so to ju∣stification. If he say other ways, then (as I observed before) full and per∣fect justification, according to him, must not be esteemed sufficient to Salvation. Pag 322. n. 42. He comes to prove the best works, even those wrought by the Spirit in the Saints, to be impure, which before also he had affirmed, pag. 307 there he would infer we say the same of good works, because I affirm that works done by man's own strength are polluted, but it will not thence follow we believe Works done by the Grace of God to be such. But for this impurity of good works he marks Psal. 143: 2. 130: 3. Iob 9: 16. none of which speak one word of good works thus understood; then he mentions Esai 64: 6 all our righteousness is as filthy rags, but silently passeth over how I shew their own Authors, as Calvin and Musculus, &c. affirm this not to be understood of Evangelical righ∣teousness, and himself overturns what he urges from this, affirming, that we ought not to call the work of the Spirit of God in his People, filthy rags, but if they were so, they might be so called; and yet he overturns it fur∣ther, by confessing some works wrought by the Apostles were undefiled, then all the works wrought by the Spirit in the Saints can not be said to be im∣pure, which is their assertion. And the instance of clean water passing through an unclean pipe doth not hold, which is their great probation. He will not contend with what I say about the word Merit, neither hath he much against my conclusion in this matter, yet that he may end this chapter like himself, he concludeth it with a gross lye, and railing, say∣ing, I affirm a man may be regenerated without the least help of the Grace of God, which as I wholly abhorr, so there can not be a greater falshood alledged upon me. Section Ninth, Wherein his Fourteenth Chapter Of PERFECTION is considered. ¶ 1. I come now to his XIV. Chapter Of Perfection, where after he has repeated my eighth Proposition, he reckons it confidence in me, to accuse their answer in their larger Catechism, of speaking against the power of Divine Grace, which saith, that man is not able by any Grace of God, received in this life, to keep the commands of
God. But in stead of justifying this assertion, he saith, they are not ashamed of it, then he recurreth a little to his Author Hicks, according to his cu∣stom, and falls a railing, where, among other great charges, he accuseth the Quakers of Reproaching, Revileing, Calumnies, Scolding, and the like. also pag. 329. speaking of bridling the tongue. But he of all men should have been silent in this, who is such a Railer in the Superlative degree, that some of his own faith, who have bad enough thoughts of the Qua∣kers, have said, that he not only equals them, but exceeds them in railing: of his Railing in this chapter the Reader may further observe, pag. 332. 345-349. Here, as in his former chapter, to enervat the perfection assert∣ed by me, he brings forth his old and often repeated Calumny, as if I asserted this perfection to proceed meerly from the Light of Nature, affirming the Light pleaded for by me, p. 327. to be such as never came from the Grace of God, to be flesh, blindness, enmity to God, natural, sensual, &c. affirming that I say Man is regenerated, sanctified, justified, though not one ray of Divine Illumination hath shined into his Soul, nor one act of Grace has reached either his intellect, will or affection, to cause this change: the like p. 331. all which is most abominably false, and never either believed or asserted by me, and therefore all he concludes upon this malitious assertion falls to the ground, and needs no further answer. Next, he bestows much pains p. 328, 329. to shew, from the Hebrew and Greek word, that perfection is sometimes understood of sincerity and integrity; and Perfection in these respects he thus defines, in regeneration the whole man is changed, so that he is now born a new creatur, sanctified wholly in mind, heart, spirit, affections, Conscience, memory and body, though but in a small measur or degree, and again, yeelding impartial obedience, through the Grace of God, unto all God's pre∣cepts, waving none. But if he will stand by what he here asserts, I will de∣sire no more, albeit he falsly say, in the following page, that all this will not satisfie us, for I would desire the next time he would reconcile this with breaking the commands daily in thought, word, and deed. To prove this he insists, (in contradiction to what he said before) p. 330. n. 7. and his proofs are (1.) because in Christ's house there are diverse syzes, and degrees of persons, as babes, or little children, young men, old men: and this is not de∣nied, but the thing he should have proved is, that none of those degrees can be without daily breaking God's commands. His second proof is yet more rare, Christians are exhorted to grow in Grace, to put-off the old man, which is corrupt, to put-on the New Man, to mortifie their members. Very
good: but is to break the commands daily in thought, word and deed, the way to grow in Grace, to put-off the old man, and on the New? if this be not to pervert Christianity, what can be said to be so? If men can dream waking, as he sometimes supposes, he has sure been in this postur, when he brought this proof. But he adds, that this Perfection rendreth Gospel commands useless; but are the Laws useless, if men obey them? This, saith he, takes away the exercise of Repentance, the exercise of Prayer, and maketh the petitions of the Lord's Prayer useless, [forgive us our sins] on this he also insisteth, pag. 345, 346-349. That, because all have sinned, they have need to repent, and pray for forgivness, and the continuance of it, I have shewn in my Apology: but if this his argument hold true, to prove that men must sin all their life-time, and break the commands every day, in thought, word, and deed, then the greatest sinners and most wicked profligat villains do less make useless Gospel commands than others, because they afford more matter to exercise Repentance and Prayer, for forgivness of sins. But he proceedeth, that this tendeth to foment Pride and Security, and taketh-away diligent watchfulness, and holy fear, humility, and the usefulness of the Ordinances of Christ: but where free∣dom from sin is, where can pride and security have place, or diligence and humility be wanting? But with him, to sin is the way not to be proud and secure, but to be watchfull and humble. Let the judicious Reader judge, whether they, that break the commands daily, in thought, word, and deed, and affirm they must do so all their life-time, be more diligent and humble, and less proud and secure, than such as keep and obey them: for such Ordinances, as must be made usefull by daily breaking God's commands, in thought, word, and deed, I resolve never to cry-up, but always cry-down, by the Grace of God, however I. B. may rail at me for it. Some Scri∣pturs here added by him will come hereafter to be examined. ¶ 2. Pag 332. N 9. When he comes to take notice of my stating this matter, as not being such a Perfection as can not admitt of a daily encrease, but only a being kept from sin, and receiving strength to ful∣fill the will of God; (for these are my words) he would upon this, both in this place and elsewhere, pag. 333. 341, &c urge this absurdity, that, since the least sin is a transgression of the Law, it follows, that no regenerated man can sin, and that no man, that sinneth is regenerated: but we will not wonder at his inference here, considering his many other perversions. But to shew he has no ground to urge this absurdity, let it be considered, that we
are to consider Regeneration as begun and carrying on, and as perfected and accomplished;—he which hath begun a good work in you, saith the Apostle Paul, Phil. 1: 6. And again, Ye did run wel, Gal. 5: 7. with many other places, which might be mentioned. Whereby it is clear, that Regeneration is not wrought in an instant, (and if he think so, he must prove it, ere he conclude any thing from it) and those were already converted, and regeneration begun in them. Now albeit such may sin, and that every sin doth hinder and impeed the work of Regeneration, yet it doth not destroy it, nor wholly annihilat it: Physik given to a man, in whom there is an inward and inveterat disease, doth not cure instantly; and albeit by some heedless actions he may hinder the cure from being perfected, so soon, yet every one of these actions do not render it altogether unsuccessfull. Also as to the comparison of a child, which he accepts of, albeit he have all the integral parts of a man, yet he has not that vigor and strength of body, nor yet that understanding nor exercise of mind, that a man hath, and thence can neither defend himself, nor do either in body or mind, that a man can do. Now what I speak of such as are born of God, saying, that I dare not affirm but there may be some that can not sin, I understand of this absolute, compleat, and full rege∣neration; not that I deny but such as are entred and in part regenerated may be also said to be born of God, though not in that absolute sense, and therefore still under the possibility of sinning, and capacity thereun∣to. And thus his great absurdity, upon which he insists so much, is re∣moved. Next he proceeds, p. 334. to shew my agreement with the Pe∣lagians, but the very citation he brings to prove it out of Vossius history bewrays his weakness, and shews the contrary, where it is manifest, that the thing condemned in Pelagins was his affirming men might keep the commands, by the power of Nature, which I never said, but always denied. And whereas he cites the Fathers saying, that none by the strength of Grace did live all their days without sin, that the perfection ascribed to some in Scriptur was not from Nature, but from Grace, &c. this clearly shews they believed men might be free from sin by Grace, sometime, though none bad been so for all their life-time, which shews they were far from believing man must break the commands daily, in thought, word, and deed, which is his af∣firmation. What he adds of the Fathers arguments against the Pelagians, and of the opinions of the Socinians, and others, in this matter, I judge it not my work, to meddle with it; I heed not in this what these Sects
say, but believe the Truth (without respect to them) as it is clearly pro∣posed in Scriptur. I could easily recriminate, by shewing things, wherein he agrees with Papists, Socinians, Arminians, Antinomians, Pelagians, Ana∣baptists and others, against us, if I judged it pertinent to be filling-up paper with such stuff, to make a noise, as he doth hundreds of times, to nauseating: but I love to abstain from such superfluitys, and come to the purpose, and will now consider what he saith in answer to my argu∣ments. ¶ 3. He begins pag. 337 n. 18. and to my saying, their doctrin is against the Wisdom of God, who is of purer eyes, than he can behold iniqui∣ty, he asketh Is it against these attributes of God, that sin should be in the world? But my following words shew I spake of the Godly, neither will it follow what he adds after that then they must be as free of sin here, as in heaven, and that at first; for I urge it to be contrary to God's Wisdom, to make this freedom impossible unto them only, means for their being free being given them, & not his permitting sin. And whereas he proceeds in answer to my saying, that, if man be always joyned to sin, he should be always disjoyned from God, according to Esai 59: 2. Whereas, on the con∣trary, they, to wit, the Saints, are said to be partakers of the Divine Na∣ture, 2 Pet. 1: 4. and one Spirit with him, 1 Cor. 6: 17. he answers, All this would plead for a sinlesness, from the very first instant of Regeneration. In the absolute sense above mentioned it doth, as also for the necessity of pressing after, and for the possibility of obtaining it, after Regene∣ration begun, since so far as man is joyned to sin, his perfect regenera∣tion is retarded; yet, as himself, towards the end of this Paragraph saith, it may be begun, where some members may yet be to be mortified: and albeit some corruption be not wholly purged-out, yet God can have fel∣lowship with his own work of Grace in the Soul, and with the Soul, so far as it is sanctified and renewed, but no further. Pag. 339. n. 19. he saith, I wickedly dispute for God, &c. to say it is against his Wisdom not to have found means, whereby he might be served, but by such actions by which the Devil is no less, yea is more, served. But his charge is upon the naked supposition that their doctrin is the Truth, which is pittifully to beg the question, yea he indirectly (notwithstanding much winding about, to avoid it) confesseth my charge, saying, there is no formal service performed to the Devil: so he grants some material service to be perform∣ed to him. Is not the Devil served, and that service justly displeasing to
God, unless it be a formal service; for to serve the Devil formally, is to acknowledge him as their Master, and give him service as due to him, which many do not, who yet may be said truely enough to serve him. He addeth, that God hath seen meet his children be in a spiritual warfare. What then? can no man be in a warfare, unless he be overcome? Men may be engaged in warr, and may be liable to be assaulted, yea may be often-times narrowed, straitned, and beset by the Enemy, and some∣times wounded, and yet never overcome: but what he pleads for, is not only a warfare, but a being worsted, and overcome, and that every day; for so truely are such overcome by the Devil, who daily break the com∣mandments of God, in thought, word and deed, as he affirms of all God's children. He goes-on, n. 20. to say, I run my self blind, in saying, it is against God's justice to require men to abstain from all sin, and not enable them to do it, because it would prove all the wicked are perfect, for God requires of them obedience. But it seems himself has been blind, when he made this answer; I never urged, that, because God gave men power, therefore they are perfect, as he foolishly throughout this paragraph imagineth, and then battereth against this man of straw of his own mak∣ing: and that this proves that wicked men might, if they had not resist∣ed God's Grace, have forsaken their wickedness, and been perfect, I deny not, neither doth he prove the contrary. He confesseth man's imperfection to be of themselvs, but he thinks it can not be accounted unrighteousness in God, to require, and yet not to give that measur of Grace, whereby men should become perfect, because that power, which was once given, was sinfully cast-away. But all this dependeth upon the supposition that man lost his power in Adam, which was before dis∣cust, and is now in him but a begging of the question. And when I shew that their doctrin maketh God more unjust than the vilest of men, who will not give to their children, asking bread, a stone, &c. here∣proacheth me, as a blasphemous tongue. But let us see how he frees their doctrin of this foul consequence: the Lord forbid, saith he, they hope for a full deliverance, but it is in heaven. This answer confirmeth the charge, and doth not lessen it, and so, for all his bragg, the stone yet remains, according to them, instead of bread, and is like to choak him, unless he find some better way to digest it than thus; for God requires to forsake sin here, and yet (according to them) denies the power here, for con∣cerning being free from sin in heaven, there is no question. He addeth,
pag. 341. that my saying their doctrin is injurious to the sacrifice of Christ's Death, which was, to take-away sin, destroys all I said of Universal Re∣demption: but he forgets to shew how, perhaps we may expect it next, since his 8 chapter is already answered. His saying they affirm that the stain of sin is taken-away, and victory obtained, doth not answer, because they refer that to another life, and the question is concerning this. And to my saying, that, if the children of God sin in thought, word, and deed daily, then there is no difference betwixt the Holy and Profane, he answereth, the difference is great, because what the Wicked do, is done with full purpose of heart, &c. but the other mourneth over and repenteth of his sin. This difference is in respect of Repentance, not of sinning, in their sinning they are both alike. That there is a difference betwixt him, that conti∣nueth in sin, and him that repenteth, I deny not; but since he supposes the godly to continue in sin, all their life-time, yea in daily sinning, the similitude still remaineth, and such will do wel to take heed, who break God's commands daily in thought, word, and deed, lest notwithstanding they may be in I. B.'s account the godly, yet in Jesus Christ's they prove such to whom it shall be said, Depart ye workers of iniquity, I know you not. ¶ 4. Pag. 343. N. 23. In stead of answering my argument shewing their doctrin maketh the work of the Ministery, Preaching and Praying useless, he saith, Hence we see the necessity of a standing Ministery, which I am against: this is false, as shall appear. He adds, The Ministry is to bring them on toward perfection; but the question is Whether that Perfection is not attainable here? For a Perfection, that admitteth not of a growth, I plead not. If he would have had this answer understood to be to the pur∣pose, he should have said, that such as sin not, can not be said to admitt of a growth, which he doth not so much as attempt, nor offer to prove. What I affirm to the contrary, in the example of Christ, who, not∣withstanding he was always free of sin, is said to encrease both in favour with God and man. Luk. 2: 52. to this mentioned in my Apology (notwith∣standing his prolixity) he is as mute as a fish. How their doctrin makes Prayers useless, I have shewn before. In stead of answering Col. 4: 12. where Epaphras is said to labour fervently in prayers, that the Colossians might stand perfect, and compleat in all the will of God. and to 1 Thess 3. 12, 13. where Paul prays that the Lord would make them increase and abound in love, &c. To the end he might establish their hearts unblameable in holyness: I say, in stead of answering, he makes commentaries upon these places,
(which in themselvs are as plain as can be) that this is, they should walk in sincerity, and always be growing. And what if all this be granted? it will not follow that it is impossible men should be free of sin here, even by the Grace of God. And sure where men are perfect and compleat in all the will of God, and unblameable in holiness, they are not sinning daily in thought, word and deed. Thus the Reader may judge of this man's con∣fidence, who saith these Scripturs make against this imagined Perfe∣ction, meaning that which is asserted by me. Pag. 343. He saith, my affirming Men are called justified, or reprobated, in respect of their being leavened with sin, or righteousness, (fermenting is a piece of his own pedantry, and none of the Quakers dialect) would prove full Perfe∣ction to be essential to the state of Christianity: therefore I must answer it, as wel as they, who deny that to be common to all the Regenerat. But it seems he has not wel understood his own new-coined English word [fer∣menting] for one thing is not said to be leavened with another, but where it hath much prevailed: every touch or tast of a thing doth not leaven him with it, that so toucheth or tasteth it; as all men, that understand com∣mon language, know: and so every sin is not enough to denominat a man leavened with sin; And so with his own answer, that follows, he looseth the knot he imagined I was tied by. What he adds afterward of fulfilling the Law, urges nothing but upon a supposition of its being fulfilled by the meer strength of man, which I never affirmed. That no man is called just, because of inward righteousness, is but his bare supposition: as for the word inherent, so often repeated by him, it is none of mine. And to my urging that the subject is denominated from the accident he saith, yet that a wall is called white, though the whiteness be not perfect. But it is not called white, if it be more black, than white, which was the pinch I urged, but slily over-slipt by him; and such must be those, that break the commands daily, for how such can be said to be more just, than sinfull, is more than I can reconcile either with Scriptur or Reason: sure the answer, which he gives, doth it not. To this question, Where are then the children of God, and of Light? his reply is with a notable piece of inconsistent Presbyterian canting, Even where these are, who are giving to Christ much work (to speak so) to wash and make them clean from their daily pollutions and defilements, and have renounced the works of darkness, &c. I desire to know of him the next time, how these can be said to have re∣nounced the works of darkness, who have need to be washed from their
daily defilements. To my argument shewing that Christ's command to be perfect proves it possible, he saith, p. 344. that this only proves we should endeavour after it. But for this he addeth no proof, we must rest contented with his meer affirmation, as we must also do throughout the next N. 26. where he confidently preacheth his own sense of Scriptur, in stead of answer or reason, and then concludes with a railing saying, I am led by an anti-Evangelical and Diabolical spirit. He saith that Matth. 7: 21. and some other places cited by me prove nothing, without supposing that no man shall be saved, who ever sinned, but without giving any reason: that the unconverted may be by the Grace of God converted, and conse∣quently made perfect, I deny not. He saith Rom. 6. speaks only of the dominion of sin. And what then? Doth not every sin bring him, that commits it, under the power of that sin, in so far? To the instances of Enoch, Noah, and others, whom the Scripturs call Perfect, he goes about to prove they sometimes sinned. And what then? the question is not Whether they always were without sin? but Whether they never were without it? and sinned daily? which is his affirmation. Which if they had done, they could at no time have been called perfect. As for his other glosses, it will be time to receive them, when he proves them; it is not enough to make them authentik with me, though Augustin had ap∣proved, if he will subscribe to all Augustin's glosses of Scriptur, I may give him a further answer. ¶ 5 Pag. 346. n 28. He comes to take notice of my answers to their arguments, and first to my answer to their arguing from 1 Joh. 1: v. 8. If we say, we have no sin, we deceive our selves, &c. that this will not prove the Apostle included more than Iames, c. 3: v. 9, 10. he an∣swereth, the Apostle is included, though not for the present time. If it be not for the present time, then it will not plead for sinning daily in thought, word, and deed, which is the case in hand. Next, supposing the Apostle were not included, he saith, it is enough that Believers are included. But this he affirms without proof, troubling himself and the Reader, to prove that those Iohn wrot to were Believers, which no body will deny; yet though they were included, it will not prove such a continual and daily sinning, as they plead for. In answer to my shewing the words are have not sin, and not ye sin not, he only proves that they did or may sin, which I deny not. And then, when I say it may be affirmed of the Seed of sin, he concludes this to be sinfull, so as to affect the man, but
minds not to prove it, and with this manner of begging the question he concluds this paragraph, pag. 347. To my shewing that in 1 King. 8: 46. & Eccles. 7: 20. there is nothing said of sinning daily, he answers, It is express in Ecclesiastes, that there is not a just man upon earth, that doth good and sinneth not, clearly importing, that even in their doing good, they sin; but that this is clearly imported he affirmeth, but proveth not, though there be no man that sinneth not, it will not follow they sin dai∣ly. And for his alledging that my answer, that it will not thence follow that, though there was none that did not sin at that time, there are none such now, or that it is impossible there should be such, will infer there was none then regenerat, no not Solomon himself; what if I should say so, understanding Regeneration in the absolute sense? To what I shew from the Hebrew word, that it may be interpreted, not that sinneth not, but that may not sin, he tels me in sum, that it is but vanity, and this he saith is obvious to every Reader, to whom we will then leave it. To my af∣firming that the Apostle is not (Rom. 7: 14.) speaking of himself, but personating others in that state, after he has told me that Socinians and Arminians say so, he tels me, the circumstances of the Text evince the contrary, and then gives a kind of a preachment upon the place, which I shall ac∣cept as a declaration of his sense, but must wait the next time to have him prove it. He saith the Apostle doth not contradict this, chap. 6: 2. That the Apostle doth not contradict himself, is without doubt to me; but he must endeavour to reconcile the meaning he gives to the Apostle's words when he has leasur. He saith Paul in a respect was a carnal man, but unless he prove him to have been so, in respect of sinning at that time, he saith nothing. To my urging Rom. 8: 35, where the Apostle saith Nothing shall separat him, because, where sin is continued, there is a separation He denieth, that, where sin is striven and wrestled against, it maketh a se∣paration; but the matter is how he proveth, that those, who strive and wrestle against sin, do daily commit sin: and untill he do this, he but begs the question. To prove the impossibility of being free from sin∣ing daily, from the examples of Noah's and David's sins, he useth this ar∣gument: If these men, whom the Spirit of God stileth Perfect, and men according to God's heart, have had their failings, and these failings are registrated for our use; Then we have no Scriptur warrant for such a Perfection here, as is not attended with sin:
[he should have said as doth not admit a sinning daily, in thought, word, and deed, if he would have concluded according to the state of the que∣stion.] But the former is true: Therefore, &c. But I deny the consequence of this Proposition, or the connexion of the Major, besides the argument is defective divers ways, if he had stat∣ed and then proven it, that, if such, whom the Scripturs call Perfect, did break the commands daily, in thought, word, and deed, then he had ar∣gued to the purpose: and for their failings being recorded to our use, it can not infer the necessity of our sinning daily, unless he will be so ab∣surd, as to say, that they are therefore recorded, that we may imitat their failings, and not avoid them. In fine let him cause his argument con∣clude in the term of the question, to wit, that every man, notwithstanding any Grace received, must sin daily, in thought, word, and deed, and prove his Propositions, and he shall not want either an acknowledgment, or an answer. And lastly, to conclude this chapter, he saith, I should rather have cited the old Begardi, than the Fathers, and the old Alumbrados, who had the same opinion, and practices suteable. But if their opinion was, that men may be free of sin, and their practices suteable, sure then they were perfect, and if so, deserve more to be followed, than I. B. or his Bre∣thren, whose principle and practice (as himself confesseth) is for sin, and daily continuing in it, against any perfection, except such as can admit of sin, for to be breaking the commands daily, in thought, word, and deed, is essential to his Christianity. Section Tenth, Wherein his Fifteenth Chapter, of PERSEVERANCE, is considered. ¶ 1. In this chapter of Perseverance it would seem the man fansieth he hath got into the pulpit, for he affirms, as if all, that read him, were bound to believe without further inquiry; for, after he has introduced himself with his old accusation of Pelagianism, he concludeth this doctrin of the possibility of falling from Grace to depend upon free∣will, and ushereth-in a long invective against this, as maintained by me, upon the supposition of his old re-iterated calumny, that I asserted all the regeneration of the Saints to proceed only from the Light of Nature, without the
effectual operation of the Spirit of Grace, which how false it is hath above been shewn: he giveth us a large citation out of their Confession of Faith, with an account thence deduced (or explication thereupon) in what re∣spect they hold Perseverance. Wherein if he will hold to the first assert∣ed by him, to wit, that they assert not the perseverance of any that are not truely regenerated, we are agreed, for in that sense I never did deny it. And then he gives eight considerations for their doctrin, all which conclude nothing but upon the supposition of the truth of their former principls, especially of Election and absolute Reprobation, so that it is but a begging of the question, as his very eighth consideration shews, pag. 356. n. 14. to wit, that the affirming this doctrin (to wit, that there may be a failing-away from beginnings of true and saving Grace) will give a blow unto many ar∣ticles of their Faith: but can this have any weight to convince such as do not believe these articles of their Faith? It seems then it is nor for me or any Quaker that this is written, so we are the less concerned to trouble our selvs with it. ¶ 2. At last he comes, pag. 357. n. 15. to examin my arguments, and first to what I urge from Jud. vers. 4. where it is spoken of some, that turned the Grace of God into wantonness, he saith, this is not understood of the true Grace of God, but external grace, such as is that Tit. 2: 12. which teacheth to deny ungodliness, but for this he gives no proof. Next it seems to him the Grace of God, that teacheth to deny ungodliness, mentioned Tit. 2: v. 12. is not the true Grace of God. where learned he this, or how proveth he it? He saith, to understand the faith, which some are said to have made shipwrack of, 1 Tim. 1: 19. to be true and saving faith, is contrary to 2 Tim. 2: 17. and other places, where the doctrin of faith is spoken of, thence he concludes it was only the doctrin of faith they fell from: but this is a conclusion fit only for credulous persons, and proveth nothing, un∣less he will argue because in some places the doctrin of faith is spoken of, therefore wherever faith is spoken of, it must be understood of the do∣ctrin of Faith, and not of true and saving Faith, which were most ab∣surd. He saith to Heb. 6: 4, 5. the words are not absolute, but conditional, if they fall-away: but such a condition importeth the thing supposed, to be possible, being given for a caution. He adds, there is nothing there that is necessarily to be understood of true and saving Grace: but let him inform, ac∣cording to Scriptur, how any man can come to tast of the Heavenly Gift, and of the Powers of the Life to come, and be made partaker of the Holy Ghost,
without true and saving Grace. For what he adds to this, being built upon the supposition of Election, I refer it to what is above said upon this subject. He concludes Vossius's testimony to be false, in saying, that this was the common opinion of the Antients. But if so little credit be to be given him, he did not wel that made so much use of him to prove what was Pelagius's doctrin, as he has done throughout this Treatise. For Iohn Owen's citations, I have neither accommodation nor time at present to examin them, it is enough to me that this is contrary to Scriptur, though all these he mentions had said so. To prove that men may have a good Conscience, and yet want true faith, he bringeth Paul's words, Act. 23: v. 1. where, speaking of himself while a Pharisee, he saith, he lived in all good Conscience before God, &c. but that will not meet this case. Those 1 Tim. 1: 19. who are said to make shipwrack of a good Conscience, are such who believed the true doctrin of faith in Christ, as himself before ac∣knowledgeth. Now albeit a man may be said to live in good Conscience to other principles, while ignorant of this, yet he should prove how a man can be said to have a good Conscience, with respect to the true faith of Christ, held by him, and yet without saving or true grace. With railing he tels me, pag. 358. n. 18. that Phil. 1: 6. & 1 Pet. 1: 5. speak of God's beginning and perfecting the condition. And what then? yet God doth not this against our wills, it is with a respect to our performing the condi∣tions on our part, which yet we can not do without him. Then he goes about to prove that Paul could not fall, in answer to my saying from 1 Cor. 9: 27. that Paul supposeth a possibility that he might become a re∣probat: but if the Reader consider how I bring that in my Apology, he will find he had no reason for this cavill, for I alledged it only to reprove those that are too too secure, shewing, where sin was, there was always a ground of jealousy, since the Apostle did reckon it needfull to keep under his body, to subdue sin, that he might not become a reprobat, which since the Apostle did, but upon this supposition, if he did not keep under his body, suppose possible, others had no reason to presume.
Section Eleventh, Wherein his XVI Chapter Of the Church, his XVII Of the Ministerial Call, his XVIII, XIX and XXI Of their Quali∣fications, Office, and Maintenance, and his XX Of VVo∣mens Preaching, is considered. ¶ 1. HIs chapter of the Church is soon dispatched, for it contains scarce any thing but perversions and railing; for after he has given a large citation out of their Confession of Faith, and then added some enlargements of his own; and some little nibling ca∣vils to what I say of no Salvation being without the Church, pag. 361. he goes on with his old reiterated calumny, that I suppose men may be made members of the Catholik Church by the Light of Nature, which is utterly false. And upon this false supposition is built his n. 5. pag. 362. as also what he saith, pag. 364. But n. 4. he screws this to a greater pitch of falshood, affirming that what I say of a Particular Church gathered together in the faith of the true Principles and Doctrins of Christ, by the Spirit of God and te∣stimony of some of his Ministers, is, that these are persons only taught by the Light of Nature, and by such Ministers, as preach nothing of the Gospel. Against a man thus desperatly resolved and determined to lye and calumniat, there can be no guard; but sure all sober Readers will abhorr such dealing. What I speak of a Church, in this respect, is only of such as have the ad∣vantage of the outward knowledge of Christ, as my words afterwards shew, where I say, such were the Churches gathered by the Apostles, of which the Scriptur makes mention. And therefore what he objects that can not be don by Pagans is wholly impertinent, and doth but verify the grossness of his calumny, which he endeavours to inculcat as a truth to his Reader, pag. 363. as if what I say further of the things requisit to be a member of this Particular Church were a third sort, and not a more par∣ticular description of the former, which the Reader may easily observe, by looking to the place, to be a meer fetch of his, to afford himself some matter of cavill, which imagining he has got, he fills-up the paragraph with gross lyes and railing, saying, That the Quakers believe not the holy Truths set down in the Scripturs, because they oppose and contradict them: That they believe not in, nor maké profession of, Jesus Christ revealed in the New Te∣stament,
because they oppose him and all his Institutions: That faith, according to them, is not wrought by the Spirit of God, but that Nature can sweetly and na∣turally incline yea compell thereunto, All which are gross calumnys. And then he concludeth, saying, And thus we have run round, and are again where we began, which is very true, for he began with calumnys, and having run round the same way, his work resolvs in them. Pag. 364. he affirm∣eth Men may be Members of the visible Church (and consequently ought to be reputed such) who are ungodly and without holiness, and offereth to make it good, if I will form a dispute upon it; but I leave him, as to this, to disput with his learned Dr. Owen, whose works he has applauded in this Trea∣tise, and whom his Postscript-Brother R. M. has in his preface to this J. B.'s book highly commended, as a gratious man. As for his silly ar∣gument, that from the Apostle's saying, Act. 2: 39.—the promise is unto you, and to your children, and 1 Cor. 7: 14. it follows men become mem∣bers of the Church by birth, I leave him to debate it with his great Au∣thor Thomas Hicks, who will tell him (if he be consonant to his own principles) it is a Babylonish invention. But I. B. hath here unawares contradicted himself, for if these Scripturs prove men become members of the Church by birth, then the sprinkling them with water sometime after they are born, or their Baby-Baptism, is not necessary to make them members of the Church, and they are to be accounted such without it. He saith, I am mistaken, when I say, Antichrist built his structure upon this foun∣dation, (to wit, that men without holiness may be members of the true Church) because he applieth all the priviledges of the invisible Church unto his vi∣sible synagogue of Sathan: where as this sheweth that I am not mistaken, but that my affirmation is true; for if he, to wit, Antichrist, did believe holiness to be necessary to make a member of the true Church, he could not apply the privileges of the invisible Church unto his visible members, most of which he wel knows (as often-times himself) are not only void of, but enemies to, holiness. It is false that I agree with him in his not di∣stinguishing betwixt the Visible and Invisible Church, and yet much more in un∣churching all who are not of his combination; in which albeit I. B. most impu∣dently insinuats I approach to him, yet himself can not but know it to be a most manifest falshood, since I suppose some of all sects of Chri∣stians may be members of the catholik Church, and he knows, and has observed here, how contrary the Pope is to this doctrin. At last he con∣cludes this chapter with a fit of Railing, of which the last words must
not pass without observation, to wit, that in stead of true holyness I press up∣on them a natural, dead, and anti-Evangelical Morality. Now this Morality, as pressed by me, he himself confessed before to be such as the Law of Nature taught, (albeit in truth I pressed none but what is through the Light of Christ, or Grace of God that is by Christ) which he acknow∣ledged did lead men not to murder, not to steal, not to commit adultery, which he confessed also was just, holy and good. And so it seems, according to him, that, which is holy, just and good, not to murder, not to steal, not to commit adultery, is no part of true holiness, yea is anti-evangelik and contrary to the Gospel. Now if I would insist after his method, having much more reason than he, I might at large shew what a Pagan-Gospel to purpose his must be, that is contrary to honesty, chastity, and innocency; albeit I deny not but the true Gospel teacheth more than the height of meer Morality. ¶ 2. He beginneth his 17 chapter, entituled of a Ministerial Call, af∣ter the repetition of some part of my 10. Thesis, with his old reiterated calumny and false supposition, that I affirme men to be called and qualified to the Ministery by the Light of Nature: and to this purpose, to help him to fill up the paper, he insisteth, pag. 369, 370, 371. which being false, all that is built upon it falls to the ground. In this chapter also he is very li∣beral of his Railing: Take one instance, pag. 372. where he saith, That the Quakers are Pagan Preachers, who know not the Gospel, but are sworn ene∣mies to it, and plain subverters of it, and all the Ordinances thereof. And pag. 378. he saith, They are a company of the most desperat antichristian opposers of Christ and all his appointments, that ever the Sun shined on. More of this kind may be seen, pag. 374, 375, & 376. Pag. 366. n. 3. He saith, when I speak of a true call to the Ministery, I must suppose Ten things, which he after enumerateth, and albeit I judg not my self obliged to follow him in such excursions, yet, for the Reader's satisfaction, let it be observed, That I deny not but what I speak here is with a relation to a visible Church, which is his first supposition. Secondly, That I acknowledge that in it there must be a standing Ministery, which is necessa∣ry, and this is his second and third. That I acknowledge this to be an Insti∣tution of Jesus Christ, which is his fourth. That None ought to take this upon him, without being lawfully called thereunto, which is his fifth. That also None may take upon them that work, but such as are called to the Ministery, so as to exercise it constantly, as exercised by Ministers; yet a man may, when parti∣cularly
called by the Spirit thereunto, do that which is the work of a Minister, which his doing pro hic & nunc maketh him not a Minister properly, and this is his sixth. That neither the Work nor Office is common to all the Members, so that they may not do it simply as Members, which is his seventh and eighth. That a Call differeth from Gifts and Qualifications, which is his ninth. And lastly, That there are some Rules in the Scriptur (if he understand general Rules, as I suppose he doth) which difference a true Call from a false, which is his tenth supposition. Now wherein I here disagree from other Qua∣kers, or my self, as he insinuateth, he may be pleased next time to in∣form. I might pass what he saith in the next paragraph, pag. 368. con∣cerning the several sorts of Calls to the Ministery, as containing no an∣swer to me, were it not to shew that he there but begs the question, and contradicts himself. (1.) He begs the question, while he supposeth that the approbation and concurrence of men, in a call, hinders the cail from being immediat, and that there is no immediat call now, which he all affirms without proof. (2.) Of Mediat Calls he saith, some are Rare and Singular, when a Church is erecting, and another Ordinary, according to the Rules set down in the Word. So it seems the Rare and Singular Call, which is usual∣ly ascribed to that of the first Reformers, was not according to the Rules prescribed in the Word. But, if such Rules be set down, by what au∣thority, without the Word, can he affirm they may be dispensed with, if he contradict not his own Principles? (3.) He saith there must be an In ward Call, which is the signification of God's mind, of his calling and appointing him to the Ministery. This is good, and it is false that he saith, pag. 372. that this will not satisfie us. Yet he can not stand to this, but contradicts it, pag. 372. speaking of my words thus, What meaneth he by this, must be called by the Spirit? Is this an inward Inspiration, or Enthusiasme, saying to the man, he must go preach? We reject all such phancies, &c. But is not an inward call, signifying God's mind to a man of his calling him to the Mi∣nistery, an inward inspiration, telling him he must go preach? Or can an inward call be without an inward inspiration? The Reader may judg of these inconsistencys. As to his question, pag 369. Whether to be in∣structed by the inward Vertue and Power of God in the heart be so necessary to a Minister, that he can not be without it? I say it is, and the Reader may ob∣serve how he is pinched, while himself is loath to say otherwise, pag. 370. yet at last he saith, he dare not say it, referring to his learned Mr Durham, as he calls him, and giving the example of Judas, of which
hereafter. However we see, according to him, that not only one who want∣eth holiness, but even a Devil may and ought to be esteemed, heard and obeyed, as a Minister of Christ, and that all they judge needfull in the Call and Qualification of a Gospel Minister may agree to the Devil himself, nor can they be sure but their Ministers may be all Devils, for ought they know. It is false that he addeth in this page 370. that I agree with Socinians and Arminians, in affirming that whoever understands the Truth of the Gospel, and are able to in∣struct others, may and have right to teach. This I no-where affirmed, and do wholly deny whatever knowledge or ability a man have to instruct, by reason of his gifts either natural or acquired, that he ought to take up∣on him to teach, without being particularly called thereunto; and there∣fore the Scripturs he brings against such as say so, are not to the purpose against me. To my first argument he confesseth that it proveth the necessi∣ty I speak of, to make a man a real, upright, and sincere Minister, before God, but that any that are not real and upright are to be esteemed Ministers at all, or heard, as such, I deny, and remains for him to prove. Why are we so often forbidden to hear false Teachers? And that this is not only with respect to teaching false doctrin, the Apostle shews, 2 Tim. 3: v. 5. where he exhorts to turn away from such as have the form of godlyness only, (which can not consist with false doctrin) To my second Ar∣gument, mentioned pag. 372. he confesseth, what he saith further in that paragraph is above answered. To my argument shewing that if the Inward testimony of the Spirit be not thought needfull, the Gospel-Ministery should be postponed to the Legal, he most ridiculously answers then the Jews needed to doubt of the Priests and Levits; whereas my argument was, if they were certain, and we should be uncertain, it would make the Evangelical worse than the Legal: and therefore to this he returneth nothing further but railing. Pag. 373. n. 10. he asketh, how I will prove that all such as want the call of the Spirit come not in by the door, but are thievs and robbers, affirming here a man may come in the way appointed by Christ, though they want this; whereas before, pag. 369. and in the end of this page he affirms the necessity of an inward call, saying they must have an inward call. I run not out, as he alledgeth, upon a mistake, in saying, the succession of the Church is objected against this doctrin, al∣beit I. B. and his We may not do so, since I write to others than he will perhaps include in his We. He bestoweth his n. 12. pag. 374. in railing, and referring to what is formerly said by him, pag. 375. n. 13. To my
answer to that objection, that who pretend to an immediat call, should prove it by miracles, shewing it was the same objected by Papists against the primitive Protestants, he in a frothy manner desires me to take it thus, and it will be too hot for my fingers, that they who had immediat calls from God were able to give evidence of the same by miracles or some other evident te∣stimony of the Spirit, which to contradict had been iniquity and utterly unreason∣able. I grant the whole, and therefore desire him to shew me, and prove it, what way the first Reformers did thus evidence their call, which is not done by those called Quakers, but his probation must be somewhat solider than the railing with which he filleth up the rest of this para∣graph. Pag. 376. n. 14. (as it should be marked) he argueth against my saying that such as receive and believe the call of true Ministers verify it, and become the signes of their Apostleship. 2 Cor. 13: 3. albeit this was the very answer given by Beza to Claudius Espenseus at the conference of Poissy, and let him urge this if he can, any way against us, which may not be as wel urged by Protestants against Papists, and if he can not, he doth but work for his great Father the Pope, to whom to their great shame the Protestant Clergy begin to recurr, to justify their calling. Having ended this paragraph with railing, he begins the next with a silly groundless perversion and inference, viz, that because I say that this, to wit, the inward Life and Vertue, which is in true Ministers, is that, which giveth to the Minister the true and substantial call and title, it fol∣lows that the extraordinary call was no true and substantial title, as if any ex∣traordinary call wanted this life and vertue, and that, albeit it prove an evidence to such as receive them, yet some may have it who are rejected of rebellious men. To prove the necessity of laying-on of hands, he ask∣eth Why then were hands laid upon Paul and Barnabas Act. 13: 3.? citing other places. Answ. Because there was then a Spiritual vertue com∣municated by that action, which they ascribe not to theirs, yea the places cited by him prove it, as Mark 16: 18. Luk 13: 13. where the laying-on of hands is said to cure the sick. I said not that the laying-on of hands always was the giving of the Holy Ghost, it is enough if it was a com∣municating of some spiritual vertue, which by their own confession theirs is not. After he has ended this paragraph with railing, he ends this chapter with observing the infallibility pleaded for in Ministers by some Quakers: but if he judgeth them to errin this, he should have applied himself to them, answering the arguments, by which they vindicat what they say in that matter.
¶ 3. I come now to his 18 chapter of Ministerial Qualifications, where, after he has begun and repeated some words of mine, he will have the Grace of God to respect not the esse or being, but benè esse or wel-being of a Minister; albeit elsewhere he would be mincing this and eating it up, yet it appears to be his belief, to prove which he asketh, pag. 380. what I think of Balaam, who is called a Prophet, not a false Prophet? But he hath not proven that no more is required in a Gospel Minister, than in a Prophet meerly to fore-tell things to come. God's speaking to him urg∣eth nothing, for God spake also to Cain, as himself confesseth, chap. 3. yet it will not follow that Cain had all the qualifications requisit to a Go∣spel-Minister. To my answer of Iudas, that they had not proved he want∣ed Grace when called, he refers to what is written of the possibility of falling from Grace, to which also I refer it, and in this also resolveth what he saith, pag. 380. n. 4. in his very first paragraph he has his old ca∣lumny, that all the power, vertue and life of the Spirit, according to me, is not to be understood of what is imported by these words in Scriptur, and this he in∣sinuateth again, pag. 379, 380-384. but as this is false, so what is built upon it falls to the ground. Because I deny the absolute necessity of hu∣mane learning to the Ministery, therefore he insinuats as if I thought it utterly useless, pag. 379. which is false. And so what he saith, p. 382, 383, 384. to prove the usefulness of natural Sciences is to no purpose against me, who deny not their usefulness among men, nor yet say, when wel improved, they are useless to a Minister, or that such things may not be improved by a Minister, when acted by the Spirit so to do, as Paul did the saying of the Heathen Poet. The thing then I only deny, is, that they are absolutely needfull qualifications to a Minister. What he mentions to be said by Calvin of the Philosophy spoken of by Paul, Col. 2: 8. I can very wel agree to, without prejudice to any thing said by me, I do not say, as he falsly affirms p. 383. that Learning and Grace are contradictory. And whereas he saith he is far from saying that Learning is more neces∣sary than Grace, he doth but cheat his Reader, and contradict himself and his learned Mr. Durham, who makes Grace only needfull to the wel-being, but Learning to the being of a Minister. And their admitting of Ministers shews this, for they will admit none, till they be sure he has Learning, but many whom they are not sure have Grace, yea upon the supposition they want Grace, yet they think they ought to be held and reputed by the People as true and lawfull Ministers. And whereas he insinuateth,
pag. 383. that I bring-in a fable, which he saith I have ready at hand; if he dare charge me in this with the asserting of a falshood, in matter of fact, I will give evidence for proof, the persons being yet alive, but untill he do that, my knowing the thing to be true gives me ground enough to assert it. To my argument shewing that without Grace a man can not be a member of Christ's Body, which is the Church, far less a Minister, in stead of answer, after he has accused me as not understanding the diffe∣rence betwixt the Visible and Invisible Church, he tels, Christ is an Head to both, which I deny not: that I apply Epb. 4: 7. 11. 16. 1 Cor. 12. solely to the Invisible Church, so as to exclude the Visible, is his mistake, not my ignorance. Then he goeth about to shew the difference betwixt Gift and Grace; but that any had the gifts, there mentioned, who were alto∣gether void of Grace, remains for him to prove. Besides what is men∣tioned, he is not sparing of his calumnies in this chapter, as where he saith, pag. 382. that I deny that about the time of Reformation there was a Christian World, which is false, in respect of Profession, in which sense I only here understood it; and pag. 385. albeit he find me calling the he∣resy of Arius horrid, yet upon the trust of his Author Mr. Clapham he af∣firmeth the Quakers to be in this erroneous: but sure I have better reason to be acquainted with the Quakers doctrins, than any of his lying Au∣thors. Another of his calumnys is, pag 386. that we lay-aside all means in coming to the Saving knowledge of God's Name: and albeit his railing in this chapter be thick enough, that the Reader may easily observe it, yet for his more particular direction, let him observe, 380, 381-385, 386. And whereas, pag. 386. n. 11. he enumerateth several particulars, where∣in he affirmeth we agree with Papists, he may find them refuted and an∣swered in G. K's book, called Quakerism no Popery. And in the last two sections of that book written by me he may find himself and his Btethren proved far more guilty of that crime than we, which because the Pro∣fessor Iohn Menzies, against whom it is written, found not yet time to answer, he, as having more leasur, may assume that province. If the increase of our number be, as he saith, a clear verification of 2 Thess. 2: 9, 10, 11, 12. that we are of the deluded ones there spoken of, then it must be a clearer verification of it, as to them, that they are of that de∣luded company, since they are more numerous than we, and also en∣creased more suddenly. As for his exhortations and wishes in the end, because I will be so charitable as to suppose they come from some mea∣sur
of sincerity, I do not wholly reject them, only I must tell him, that nothing has more conduced, of an external mean, to confirm me in the belief of the verity of the principles I hold, than his treatise, because of the many gross calumnys, manifest perversions, and furious railing in it; since I know the Truth needed no such method to defend it, and I can not believe one in the Truth would use it, since lying is contrary to the Truth, therefore if he will lay-aside all this falshood and passion, he may have a more sure ground of hope to see the truth manifested to the dis∣pelling of Error. ¶ 4. He beginneth his 19 chapter of the Ministerial Office with suppos∣ing that their Order is according to Scriptur, and that what we plead for is quite contrary; and so ushereth himself into a rant of railing, with which he concludeth this paragraph, saying that the evil Spirit that acteth us, is such an Enemy to all Gospel Order, that it cryeth up only Paganish and Devilish Consasion. More of this kind the Reader may observe, pag. 388. 389. 391, 392-394. His calumnies and perversions are also very fre∣quent in this chapter, as pag. 387. where he saith, We cast-away all Order, and in stead thereof bring-in the confusion of Babel. and pag. 388. because we are not for the shaddow without the substance, therefore he saith we make a repugnancy betwixt them, which is also false: and again in the same page N. 4. because I say it was never the mind of Christ to establish the shad∣dow of Officers, without the power and efficacy of the Spirit, therefore he concludes that the Quakers think that men can establish the Spirit, which silly perversion will easily be manifest to every intelligent Reader. And after the like manner pag. 389. n. s. because I say that upon setting. up meer shaddows, where the Substance was wanting, the work of Anti∣christ was erected, in the dark night of Apostasy; he concludes, that then (according to me) Christ and his Apostles wrought the work of Antichrist, and mystery of iniquity, accusing me thence of blasphemy. But who can be so blind, as not to see this manifest perversion? And again, pag. 390 he saith, I will that every man, according as his own spirit (falsty called the Spirit of God) moveth him, setting to this work, meaning that of the Ministery; which is a false calumny, never said by me, who deny all false motions of man's own spirit, however called. And pag. 391. he saith that ma∣lice prompteth me to charge them with owning the distinction of Clergy and Laïty, though I know they do not: where the man supposeth that what I write is only written against the Presbyterians, while he can not but know that
I write against others, since in his first chapter he charges me with writ∣ing against all the Christian World: so it is his malice to say I charge them with it, if any of those I write to be guilty of it, it is enough, al∣beit I doubt whether the Presbyterians can free themselvs of it. ¶ 5. Having thus far discovered his perversions, I come to the main business, pag. 388. he saith they plead not for shaddows, but own the Ordi∣nances, as Christ hath appointed to remain and continue for the perfecting of the Saints, &c. Eph. 4: 11, 12, 13. And pag. 389. n. 6. he asketh whether the primitive Church was not instituted by Christ, and gathered by God, in whose assemblys he was Ruler and Governour? asking, were there no distinct Officers, particular individual Persons, set apart for the work of the Ministery, in the Apostles days? And p. 391. n. 7. he argueth against my saying that these mentioned 1 Cor. 12: 28, 29. & Rom. 12: 6. were not distinct Officers, but only different operations of the same Spirit, and against this also he pleadeth, p. 393. n. 11. & 394. To all which I answer distinctly and particularly, that they can plead nothing from Eph. 4. unless their Church had all the Officers there mentioned, which it has not, yea and which themselvs affirm are ceased, such as Prophets, Apostles, which are said to be given for the work of the Ministery and perfecting of the Saints, nothing less than the other: and by what authority do they then turn these by, and plead so tenaciously for the other? Let him give a reason for this next, and by the same we shall answer what he urges from this, but he must remember it is not enough for him barely to say, these were extraordinary and are ceased, and the other ordinary and remain; but he must prove it by plain Scriptur, or else be justly rejected, as but begging the question, as he doth pag. 394. where he supposeth there were only 13 Apostles, or perhaps 14, if Barnabas be accounted one, since he con∣fesseth the word signifies one sent, and therefore whoever is sent is pro∣perly an Apostle. Thus also will his other argument return upon his own head, for since such (as he saith) were settled and ordained in the Church by Christ and his Apostles, how come they to walk so contrary to Christ's Or∣der, as to want, yea and to judge such unnecessary, in their Church? And as for all the Scripturs cited by him, to shew the distinction of such Church Officers from other Members, they are not to the purpose against me, who deny not but Members were to be distinguished; but yet that proves not that any Member was barred from these exercises, when call∣ed by the Spirit thereto, which is the thing in question. As for his saying
that the Apostle is speaking of the Church, 1 Cor. 12. as an Organical body, if he means the Apostle is comparing the Church to a Body, to which it an∣swers in many respects, I deny not, but if he say that it answers in all, I leave him to prove it: however then if we make application of it, as, the Apostle illustrateth it, their Church will prove a very lame one, for in this Body (as I. B. himself observs) the Apostle names Apostles and Prophets, and if we may suppose that these, as being the most eminent, are the chiefest Members, as the eyes and ears of the Body, their Church that wanteth these, must be blind and deaf. And whereas he would make my saying, that the Apostle meaned here different operations, ridi∣culous, he but sheweth his own folly, for if the Apostle point at diffe∣rent Offices, they will not only want Apostles, Prophets and Evangelists, but a great many more, for the Apostle nameth also verse 28. miracles, gifts of healing, helps, governments, diversitys of tongues; &c. these then must all be distinct Offices also: how come they to want them in their Church? or how can they plead for these they have, more than for such as are plac∣ed nothing less by way of distinct Officers, than they? Yea all the se∣veral titles, enumerated by him, pag. 390. will prove the same way di∣stinct Officers, and how came they to cashier all these, and reduce them to so few a number? By what authority and Scriptur warrant do they this? But I would enquire at him what an Office is? if it be not an ope∣ration of the Spirit, more particularly working in some persons under such a designation. And this is proved by the coincidency of these Offi∣ces in one person, which he confesseth: that some are thence more par∣ticularly called to the work of the Ministery, I acknowledge, and he ob∣servs it. That God will move none to violat the Order established in his house, I deny not; but that to move some at times to speak, is a viola∣tion of that Order, I deny, since the Apostle saith the contrary, 1 Cor. 14: 31. we may all prophesy. In answer to which he supposeth this is re∣stricted to Prophets, but the Text saith all, not all Prophets (albeit it were no absurdity to suppose all the Lord's People to be Prophets in this sense, as wel as they are said to be Kings and Priests) and the words fol∣lowing shew it that all may learn, and all may be comforted, for it were non∣sense to understand this with a restriction. And therefore his bare as∣serting, that this contradicts the plain scop of the place, is no argument for men of reason, who resolve not to build their faith upon his meer say so. pag. 395. he thinketh my acknowledging that some are more par∣ticularly
called to the work of the Ministery than others, is not enough, because they are not to exhort but when moved by the Spirit, and others when moved may as wel as they, so there is no difference. That Ministers ought not to preach or exhort without the Spirit's motion or assistance, will come afterwards to be proved, and to suppose God can not or will not move any but Mi∣nisters by his Spirit, to exhort, were to limit him, which is presum∣ptuous in us to do: but in this appeareth the difference, that we confess many may, and know thousands among us, whom we acknowledge to be good men, and sufficiently endued with the Spirit, towards the work of regeneration in themselvs, and brotherly love and care to their bre∣thren; who never find themselvs moved to speak a word in publike: and there are others, whom God calleth, to make teaching and the oversight of the Church so their constant business, that they are less engaged in worldly affairs, than the generality of those called Clergy-men, even among I. B's Brethren, and therefore are owned and honoured, and so far as need requires, maintained by the Church. But to say that no man ought, without he be thus particularly called, at any time speak in a pu∣blik assembly, (since we say, that they ought not, but when moved by the Spirit) is not only to accuse us, but imperiously bind up God, from moving with his Spirit whom and when he pleaseth: and this being ap∣plied will answer his querys, pag. 369. where, n. 14. he affirms, that to suppose Ministers may use an honest trade, is to account the work of the Ministery a light business: But this is to account it no more a light business, than the Apostle did, who recommended working with their hands for a livelyhood to the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, Act. 20: 34, 35. giving them his own example in so doing. But they indeed must have small expe∣rience of a true Ministery, who do not know a man may be better quali∣fied to discharge it, by being inwardly exercised in the Spirit and instru∣cted thereby, than by all the labour and study they can derive from their books; and perhaps it may be true, which he after affirms, that such who bring their preaching always out of books, will find little time to follow another trade: but it seems such Preachers are uncapable to follow the Apostle's exhortation above mentioned, and therefore we will justly conclude them to be no true Gospel-Ministers. ¶ 5. That he may be like himself, he begins his 20 chapter of Woman-Peachers with railing, saying the Quakers are against all the appointments and ordinances of Christ; then he goeth-on at a high rate, enveighing against
the liberty of Womens speaking, from Paul's words, 1 Cor. 14: 34. as being against the Law, as being contrary to modesty and shamefacedness, urging, pag. 398. the Apostle's authority in writing that epistle, which we deny not, and then he urgeth against us 1 Tim. 2: 11. alledging that its being said Adam was first formed, and then Eva, and Eva being first in the transgression in∣fers that Womens preaching is against the Law of Nature, and that this silence is imposed upon Women as a just judgment for Eva's transgression, for this last inference we have nothing but his affirmation, to the former I answered in my Apology, shewing that these words of the Apostle can not be taken absolutely, and without limitation, since the same Apostle giveth rules how Women should behave themselvs in their praying and preaching in the Church. But he reckons that this is for me to make the Apostle contradict himself, while this is his own case, who takes the Apostle's words without limitation, else there is not the least contradi∣ction, yea his desiring them to ask their husbands at home shews that it can not be taken universally, seing all women have not husbands. And for his saying that what the Apostle saith, chap. 11: v. 5. But every woman, that prayeth, or prophesieth with her head uncovered, &c. is not to be meant of their carriage when they are praying themselvs, but when they are present at others doing of it, this is his bare affirmation without proof, contrary to the ex∣press words of the Text, which saith every woman that prayeth, &c. not when she heareth another pray. And by this way it might be as easily af∣firmed, where the Apostle in the same place speaks of mens praying with their heads covered, that it is not when they pray themselvs, but when they hear others. And that there must be a limitation he confesseth saying, that the Lord made use of Prophetesses of old, and that he is free to make use of whom be will. If so then, if the Lord do so now, who dare plead against it? Yea the practice of 1. B.'s brethren doth contradict this Scri∣ptur, if they will not admit a limitation; for will he deny but heretofore at Presbyterian meetings, where sometimes 20 and 30 and more have been together, Women have both spoken and prayed, yea been invited and urged to do so by eminent preachers there present? And is not that pro∣perly a Church, where Christians are met together to worship God and edify one another? If he say this was only private, I answer: However Privat it was, it was still a Church, for it is not the greatness of the num∣ber that makes the Church, since the fewer number may more properly sometimes be esteemed the Church, than the greater. And if he take
the Apostle's words absolutely without limitation, it will exclude Wo∣men from speaking in any assembly met for Religious worship and exer∣cise, unless he will be so superstitious as to ascribe the Church ship to the old Popish Mass-house walls (and if so, it will trouble him to prove there were any such in Corinth used by Christians, when the Apostle wrot to them) so as to think that if women speak not there, they do not speak in the Church. And yet how comes it that by the Acts of the General Assembly whoores are not only permitted but constrained to speak in the most pu∣blick Assemblys, and that in a place allotted for them, no less eminent than the Pulpit? Sure if such Women may there speak of their sins, and tell how they have been tempted of the Devil, good Women mov∣ed by the Spirit of God may tell what God has done for them, in pre∣serving them from such evils. Neither will it serve to say that it is not authoritative speaking, for the Apostle's words are, I permit not a Woman to speak, not I permit her not to speak authoritatively; for the words added, nor to usurp authority over the man, is a distinct precept. Women may usurp authority over their men, who never offer to preach in the Church, as also some may speak there, who may be very subject to their husbands. Besides they permit women to sing publickly, which is a speaking and actual part of God's worship. Now there is not a word in the Text of these exceptions, more than the other, and let him prove them, if he can, from the Scriptur, without making way for Womens preaching. He confesseth pag. 400. that Women may be instrumental in conversion privat∣ly, but not publickly; and for his saying, he will suspect the conversion that way wrought rather to be a delusion, he but telleth his own conjectur, that so he may conclude this chapter, according to his custom, with Railing. ¶ 7. Pag. 401. He begins his 21 chapter, of Ministers Maintainance, with a manifest perversion, insinuating as if I were joyning with such who are against Ministers maintainance, which is utterly false, as by what I say upon that subject doth evidently appear. But indeed the man contendeth here very warmly, and with might and main, and tooth and nail, as they say, albeit the thing he pleads for, as to the substantial part of it, be not denied; but it will not satisfie him to grant, as I do, that the Ministers should receive temporal things from them to whom they minister Spiritual, or that their necessitys should be supplied: No, he will have it to be an honorary, as he calls it, and that a large one too, for so Pag. 405. he interprets 1 Tim. 5: 17, 18, as if double honour could not be
given without large giving of money. It seems poor folks with him can not give double honour, nor fulfill this command of the Apostle; it is on∣ly the rich folks honor, who can give largely, that he regards, yea he reckons this giving liberally to Ministers a sowing to the Spirit, for so he interpreteth Gal. 6: 8. By all which it is manifest, that to give libe∣rally to Ministers goeth with him for a great article of Faith: but the question only lieth betwixt us concerning a limited and forced maintainance, for a sumptuous he can not for shame but seem to disclaim, and a necessary, yea what in any true sense can be so called I confess; therefore, as what he saith of our denying it, is false, so what he urgeth to prove it as to us is superfluous. As for a constrained or forced Maintainance, I desire him next time to prove it from Scriptur, since he has not yet done it, nor indeed can he by any thing there written, since what is there said, is only by way of such exhortation, as liberality and charity is injoyned, which albeit he saith confidently he has convicted of falshood, but he hath said it, and that is all, for there were then no Christian Magistrats to limit or constrain such as would not give; the conclusions and determinations, of the Ma∣gistrat and People make it not lawfull in it self, as all that hath been given, either by Heathen or Popish Magistrats or People, out of Super∣stition, may be lawfull for Ministers to receive, and indeed many of them begin to call that the Churches patrimony, and reckon it sacrilege for others than Church-men, as they call them, to meddle with it. He knows not how to turn-by Paul's exhortation to the Elders of Ephesus, Act. 20: 33. and therefore at last, after some ado, he agrees to it, but to make it have the less weight, he tels how Paul took from other Churches, which is not de∣nied, but it is manifest Paul preferred the not taking, but working with their hands to supply their necessitys, as that which was rather to be done, else to what purpose desires he them to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, that it is more blessed to give than to receive? But it seems 1. B. and his Brethren think it the most blessed thing to be getting large augmentations. My speaking of their complaining of the hardness of Christians indefinitly, doth not hinder exceptions, and therefore his carping at it, pag. 409. is frivolous. And albeit Paul did not plead for a carnal Ministery, in reasoning for Maintainance, as he saith pag. 410. yet it very wel follows that such are but a carnal Ministery, that will not preach without they get money, yea himself confesseth in the former page that true Minister must speak, whether they get aliment or not,
and commendeth some for so doing. But he hath given in this page 410. a notable example of his sottishness and malice both together, for in an∣swering what I say, that a carnal Ministery wanteth the Life and Power, and therefore needs a fixed maintainance, but a Spiritual Ministery can confide in God who will provide for them; to this he tels, that the Priests in the days of Iezabel were richly provided for, and the servants of God put to great straits, shall we therefore (saith he) say, that these Priests of Baal were the only called of God, sent-forth in his Power and Authority; and that the Ser∣vants of the Lord were but a carnal Ministery? This were to argue carnally with belly arguments, as our Quakers do. The sober Reader may judge of the sottishness and malitious perversness of this answer: sottish it is, be∣cause no ways to the purpose, for I never made the being richly provided a token of a Spiritual Ministery, as the whole I say of this matter evinc∣eth, but, on the contrary, with Christ and the Apostle I think they are most blessed who receive least. And will he say that my saying that Spi∣ritual Ministers can depend upon God who will provide for them, so as not to need a fixed maintainance, infers any such thing, it is malitious, because he would insinuat to the Reader that this gross assertion were mine, affirming we argue with belly arguments, which is a base, but bare, calumny; how much more his arguments savour of that, the Reader may judge, and that his extream keenness in this matter shews how near of kin he is to those, whose God is their belly, who preach for hire, and di∣vine for money, and look for their gain from their quarter. What he saith of the Quakers riches is both false and frivolous, for they are none of the richest People, and their Preachers, especially such as receive maintain∣ance, are usually the poorest among them; for such as have of their own, and are called to the Ministery, do not use to receive, but follow∣ing the Apostle labour to make the Gospel without charge. He turns-by what I say in the conclusion of my explication of my 10 These, where I shew by many Scripturs the distinction betwixt a true and false Ministe∣ry, shewing how we plead for the true, and deny the false, this he calls false, groundless and impertinent, but he passed it so hastily, because it was too hot for his fingers, and having given it this passing sentence, he concludes with his old calumny of our being Pagan-Preachers, and designing Paganish Antichristianisme.
Section Twelfth, Wherein his 22th Chapter Of the Quakers Silent Worship: his 23th of Preaching: his 24th of Praying: and 25th of Singing Psalmes are considered. NOw followeth his 22th chapter entituled of the Quakers silent worship, wherein if I should return him no answer, but that of Michaël to Lucifer the father of lyes, I should do him no injustice, it being a heap either of manifest calumnies, gross perversions, or abusive railing; wherein, as if he were constituted Judge by GOD over the Quakers, he concludes them over and over again to be acted and deluded by the Devil, and to be such as wholly lay themselvs open to him, to possess them and work in them at his pleasur, with much more of this stuff, for which I need not particularly note pages, for the Reader will scarce look seriously unto any one of this chapter from 412. to 419. but he will find it very thick: and for a sufficient refutation of it I recommend to any sober and unprejudicat Reader, seriously to compare and read with this chapter that to which it relates, to wit, the explication of the 11th These in my Apology, which I judge may suffice to give a sufficient disgust of this chapter. But lest he should think this were too slightly a passing∣over his matter, and for the Readers more full direction and satisfaction, I will propose to him to be considered these things following. ¶ 1. And first his calumnies, as pag. 411. where he saith, I would have them understand Christ's Spiritual Resurrection was never till now: whereas I speak only with reference to the time since the Apostasy, and not to the primitive times before. And pag. 412. he saith We acknowledge no Motion or inward Breathing of the Spirit, but what is Extraordinary and meerly Enthu∣siastik, as also that we abstract from all means. This is false. But as for his supposing that studied sermons are a mean appointed of God, and that not to do it is a sure way of tempting God, and inviteing the Devil to deceive and delude, which he affirms he has shewn; I have not seen it, and will expect that next time he will make it more manifest. His 413 page containeth a mass of calumnies, to wit, That there is no word in our Assemblys of the Scriptur, That we apply them not for instruction, reproof, and edification of
the People, That the Scriptur is no Rule to us in our walk, nor has any place in our Worship, That there is to be found in all our solemn service neither preach∣ing, nor prayer, nor praise. And pag. 414. he has his old reïterated calum∣ny, that the power and life the Quakers speak of proceedeth not from the Grace of God, but is the meer operation of Nature To this purpose he hath over and over again pag. 415, 416, 417, 418. 421, & 422. He supposeth, p. 414. that it is affirmed by me, that at all times the Quakers meet, all of them are truely gathered unto the sense of the Power, and whatever any sayes comes from it, and is not to be questioned: which is wholly false. I shew their manner of meeting, and their duty when met, according to their principles, and the consequence thereof, when they truely perform it; but it doth not thence follow that none of them ever miss in the perform∣ance, no more than if he should relate their manner of Worship, and the good effects he may suppose it sometimes has, it would follow that whoever set about it, and got up to the pulpit, and read his Text, could not preach false doctrin, nor speak impertinently: and therefore what he builds upon this here, as also pag. 416. n. 7. pag. 517 & 429. falls to the ground. But he seeketh to uphold this with another calumny, as if all, that frequent the Quakers meetings, and are accounted of their num∣ber, were supposed by us to be perfect, asking, how can the power of dark∣ness work, if they be made free from sinning? which is false. How we affirm this absolute perfection, even of such as we account our Brethren, I have shewn in my section of Perfection. A sixth calumny is, pag. 415. which he also hath, pag. 424. where he supposeth it to be our doctrin that there is no setting about Prayer or other dutys without a previous motion of the Spirit, and upon this he insists as an absurdity. But we speak not of a previous motion, in order of time, as absolutely necessary, it is enough if it be in order of nature, which he knows may be without any priority of time; and so his absurdity upon this, pag. 424. evanisheth, which I also answer, speaking of Prayer, in my Apology. A seventh calumny is, p. 426. where he concludeth, because I say Gospel-Worship is not to be in outward observations, gon-about by man, in his own will and proper strength; that I affirm Gospel worship putteth-away all external actions, which how false it is and inconsequential, any ordinary Reader may easily judg, and yet upon this false inference he thinketh to bind upon me a contra∣diction, in owning afterwards external acts of Worship, for to say wor∣ship may be performed without these acts, and that worship can not be
performed in these acts, is very different: the last I deny, but own the first. An eighth calumny is, pag. 418. where because I say, that it some∣times falleth out, that one come into a meeting upon a sinistrous ac∣count may by the Power raised in the Meeting be reached, if the day of his Visitation be not expired, he concludes, if any such come in, and be not thus changed, his day is gon, and it is impossible to him to be saved, which is a gross abuse, for albeit the not expiring of his day must be presupposed to a capacity of Salvation, yet his not presently, yea after divers times, not being converted, doth not suppose his day to be over, since it was never our principle, to say, God affords men no opportunity but one. Besides these, there are many other perversions scatter'd up and down, such as, pag. 421. his saying that the waiting we plead for, is such as putteth away Prayer, that we plead for it, to shut out the ordinances of Iesus Christ, and to give God no more, for all his solemn worship, but a dumb mumry, which word pleaseth him so wel, that he hath it several times over. ¶ 2. His great and mighty charge in this chapter is indeed great enough, if he could make it out, and that is, that the Quakers are guilty of Devilry, and are certainly acted by the Devil in their assemblys. But this he only strongly affirms without proof, unless one, which, whether it be valid or not, comes now to be examined, and that is, pag. 418. from my saying that there will be sometimes an inward struggling, yea so as the body will be strangely moved: to this he adds a story of one Gilpin, long ago answered, and describeth these motions of the Quakers to be foam, swell and froath at the mouth, which is false, and returned upon him as a calum∣ny, however he compares these motions of the body as asserted by me to the work of the Devil, and the old Phythoniks. But it seems malice hath wonderfully blinded the man here, else he would not have given his own cause, which he esteems the great Cause of God, so deep a wound; for in the book called The Fulfilling of the Scripturs, a treatise much applauded by them, whose author is said to be Robert Fleeming, one of their non∣conforming Brethren, he relates as a convincing proof of the Power of God, how some were so choaked, and taken by the heart, that they were made to fall over, and so carryed out of the Church, and as a convincing appearance of God and down-pouring of the Spirit, that there was a strange and unusual motion on the hearers, which by the profane was called [the Stewarton Sickness] from the name of the Parish. Now what difference is betwixt this and my speak∣ing of mens being strangely moved by the Power of God? Will not
this prove as much that all this was Devilry and the passions of the old Phytho∣niks? Since these motions are made the great argument why the Quakers are said to be acted by the Devil, let him the next time assign clear rea∣sons, according to Scriptur, why these motions upon the Presbyterian bodys are a convincing sign of the working of the Power of God among them, but that the motions on the Quakers bodys are enough to confirm they are acted by the Devil: and if he do this effectually, he may be in some hopes of gaining a proselyt. Next to this I come to consider what he urges as a great absurdity, to wit, that the Quakers turning their minds inward (which he will needs term introverting, and not interpret the word; that he may make ignorant folks believe it is a piece of the Quakers Devilry) and laying-aside all their own thoughts and imaginations were a laying-aside both Christianity and humanity, a becoming no men, but brutes, and worse, and most capable to be deluded by the Devil. Upon this he insists, pag. 414. 422. and else where, as if for men to abstain from their own thoughts and imaginations were the way to unman them: yet if he will understand it of the Old Man, the Man of sin, that is corrupted, we will say with the Apostle, that ought to dye and be crucified, and are so far from thinking this is against Christianity, that we believe, according to Scri∣ptur, it is the way to become a Christian, and to overcome the Devil, not to lay our selvs open to him. And therefore his railing against man's silence from his own thoughts, that God may speak and work in him, doth evidence his great ignorance in the work of a true Christian; for this is so far from descending from humanity to brutism, that it is rather an ascending from humanity to Divinity: so that, albeit in one sense we are said to dye, or be emptied as to our selvs, yet we do more truely live and exist. And if he think this a contradiction, let him consider that of the Apostle, Gal. 2: 20. I am crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in me: and this if rightly considered will answer his questions, pag. 422. by answering of which he would have me clear my way of Devilry. As for any arguments in this cahpter that have the least shew of solidity or weight, I have looked narrowly, but can find none, only in stead thereof he has some little nibbling quibbles and que∣stions, which albeit they be so inconsiderable as scarce deserve the pains to answer, yet left he may think something of them, if omitted, I will now take notice of them, and answer them; as first, pag. 412. he ask∣eth whether the appointing of set times and places be not a limiting of the Spirit?
Answ. If it were to exclude other times and places, when God moves thereunto, it might be so judged, but other ways it is not; for meeting together is not an immediat act of worship, but a matter of outward conveniency, and therefore needs not always a particular motion. As for his desiring me in this page to answer what he has said of the Sab∣bath (the denying of which in their sense he accounteth a great error) I must wait then till he come to his matter, which he has not done in his first Tome, (which I have only seen as yet) albeit it be a book about an hundred sheets of paper, and when he has written all that he can say upon that subject, I doubt whether it may not be sufficiently refuted by a few lines which Calvin has written thereon, Inst. lib. 2. cap. 8. § 34. from whom, as wel as the generality of Protestants, I know not that I differ in this matter. Pag. 413. he proposeth as an exception against the man∣ner of Worship expressed by me, that it wanteth that preparation requisite, which he accounts to be some impression of that Divine Majesty, with whom they have to do. But I see no reason why he should accuse us for want of this, since none can be more fit than such as make silence and an inward turning of the mind necessary to their entring to Worship: but if he un∣derstand this by outward Prayer, meaning this should be done first, since it is an actual part of Worship, by which we draw near to that Majesty, there would be a preparation to that, by the same rule, and another to that, and so a progressus in infinitum. But a godly frame of Spirit, and a studying to be found always in the sense of God's holy fear in all things, is a good general preparation to all acts of Worship. And for his cry∣ing out against Silence as that which can not edify, and thinking it so strange that Life or Vertue should be transmitted from one to another, when they do not hear one another speak, as pag. 415. 420. 426. what will he say to what is reported by the foresaid Author of the fulfilling of the Scripturs, pag. 432. how Robert Bruce his Praying caused unusual motions upon those who were not in the chamber with him, nor knew the cause how that came upon them, and yet this is given as an instance of his knocking down the Spirit of God upon them, as they themselvs phrase it,? Pag. 420. he won∣dereth & asketh, how one in whom the Life doth flow, so that he might speak, yet may forbear, since that is a sufficient call? and how dare they follow their own choise? But this is a silly quibble: the flowing of Life may sometimes give ability to speak justifiably, and yet it may be no sin to forbear, since albeit it gives a sufficiency of authority, yet not a peremptory command,
and this is no contradiction. The Apostle Iohn could have written more and that no doubt from the Spirit, and yet did it not, 2 Joh. 12. 3 Joh. 13. and I suppose I. B: will not dare to say he sinned in this forbearance. He goeth about, pag. 420. n. 12. to examin the Scriptur proofs I bring for Waiting, and then he shews in what respect waiting is there understood, which nothing hurteth my using them. What if waiting be understood, as he saith, in opposition to freting? may not that be in silence? But as to this since his brother R. M. in the Postscript has promised us his answer to G. K's book called The Way cast up, we will wait to see what he an∣swers to his 15 sect. and to the Scripturs brought by him there, to this purpose: and that he may more fully consider that matter, I recom∣mend to him the serious perusal of G. K's book, called the Glory and Ad∣vantage of Silent Meetings. He alledgeth falsly, pag. 423. that I say men can not wait upon God in prayer, I say only that Waiting in it self rather denot∣eth a passive dependence, and that true Prayer presupposeth waiting; and that therefore their objection is frivolous, that ascribeth waiting, of it self, or simply considered, to such acts: but I never denied that a man in Pray∣er might be said also to wait. Another of his silly quibbles is, pag. 424. n. 17. where, because I say that the Devil can only work in and by the Natu∣ral man, for so he may be pleased to translate my words, or at lest he must suffer me so to do; he saith, he thought he could also work in a Spiritual man, as in Peter, &c. But not in and by the Spiritual man: it was in and by the natural part both in Peter and Paul that he wrought; if he thinks not so, let him say the contrary. Pag. 425. in answer to what I say of the excellency of this Worship, as that which can not be interrupted, to prove that Christ's Kingdom needeth outward power to protect it, he telleth of the promise that Kings shall be nursing fathers. What then? That may be an advantage, yet it will not follow there is an absolute need for it, else Christ's Kingdom could not be without it: but indeed such a sure outward Kingdom the Priests always covet, where they may be up∣held by the Magistrate, and supplied with daily augmentations, and have all others that differ from them severely persecuted; for where this is wanting, they cry out Alas! like Babylons Marchants, and think it goes not wel with their Zion. The rest of this page he concludes with rail∣ing; but for answer to it, he may know that the Quakers meetings in Scotland, albeit few in number, have met with more injurys from wicked men, than the Presbyterians, and that they never defendedh emselvs with
force of Armes against any, far less against the Magistrate, as his Bre∣thren have don, or with sheding of Blood. As for his other quibble, pag. 427. that ceasing to do evil is not without all action of the mind: not to contend with him about it, I shall not plead for a further cessation, than such a simple forbearance importeth; and let him call it an action, if he will. His chief reply to what I say in answer to what they object of Silence, besides some scofs, is, that what I alledg is not spoken of an intro∣verting Silence, for he will needs use this Latine word, and not translate it, but can there be any true silence, in order or with respect to the wor∣ship of God, where the eye of the mind is not inward, since the Spirit of God, by which Christians are led and instructed, is said to be within them? But pag. 424. n. 16. he saith that watching is not a turning inward, but a looking outward also. Indeed they, who look outward, go the way to be tempted, for outward objects is not that which delivers men from temptations, but often draws them to them. But it would seem accord∣ing to him, that men, if their eyes be shut, or in a dark room, can not watch, in a Spiritual sense, and then what became of many Saints that have been put into dungeons? As to what he adds out of Dr Stilling∣fleet's book of the idolatry of the Church of Rome, and Taulerus sermons, which takes up about 7 whole pages, (by which the Reader may see how his book grows so bulky) he misseth his aim, for he will never prove that the first and most eminent Preachers among the Quakers, who both practised and commended this way of Worship, as wel as thousands of them yet, did ever know that there was such a thing spoken of among Papists, or that there ever lived such a man as Taulerus. So that he but wasts his paper, in seeking to prove they have borrowed their doctrin thence: and albeit I will not justify many of the expressions used in the pages cited by him, yet I will not scruple to affirm that some of them favour more of Christianity, than his lyes, calumnys, and railings. ¶ 3. He begins his 23th chapter of Preaching, that he may be like himself, with a calumny, saying, I have something against Preaching, Pray∣ing and Singing, which is false. I am against none of those dutys, as truely performed according to the right Gospel method, as by the sequel will appear. And that he may go on at the same rate, he seems to be glad that I acknowledge the necessity of Worships being consonant to Scriptur; but then, that he may not want something to cavill, he en∣treats me to reconcile this with what I say of the Scripturs: but he
should first have shewn me wherein the difference is, for I profess I see none. He desires also to know from Scriptur the necessity, when men are met together, of turning their minds inward, which he still will ex∣press, to make it the more frightfull, by the Latine word Introversio; and this he thinks so hard, that he often insists upon it, as pag. 446, 447, 448. But is it not needfull to assemble in the Name of Jesus? And can that truely be without turning the mind inward? unless with superstitious Papists he thinks it is enough, for meeting in the Name of Jesus, to say, when they begin, In Nomine Domini, however their minds be abroad. Can there be any true sense of God's Majesty, as him to whom we draw near, which himself confest before to be needfull, without a serious turn∣ing of the mind inward, that is, an abstracting from all worldly and vain thoughts, to mind GOD and the operations of his Spirit in the Soul? Let him read Psalm 46: 14. & 62: 1. Eccles. 5: 2. Zach. 2: 3. It were hard for him to forget his old often reiterated calumny, and therefore he hath it here oftner than once, as pag. 441, 442-447. alledging most falsly, that all that, by which the Quakers preach, or require as needfull to preach, is but the dimme and darkned and malignant Light of Nature: neither will he forget here his constant trade of Railing, take one instance, pag. 447. where he sayes, that, before I want revelations, I will go to the Devil to get them, as Saul did to the Witch of Endor. More of such railing stuff the Reader may find, and that very plentifully, pag. 440-442-448. He wants not here also his malitious insinuations, as pag. 439. that the Quakers use legerdemaine, to make People believe they speak all without a pre∣vious thought in their Preaching, and yet have all, to a word, wel studied. If he accuse the Quakers of this, let him prove it, if he can, for we deny it as a gross calumny. Another is, pag. 441. That we would have all study, all meditation, all Prayer, and wrestling with God in Prayer laid aside, which is also false. But to proceed, he foundeth what he saith in this matter upon two great mistakes, which being removed, the superstructur will fall of it self. The first is, pag. 438. where, to prove the usefulness of study and premeditation to Preaching, he tels how Paul made use of what he had read out of a Heathen Poet, his recommending reading to Timo∣thy, his desiring Titus to hold fast the faithfull Word, as he had ben taught, &c. and Apollos being instructed by Aquila and Priscilla: all which are nothing to his purpose, for we never said it was unlawfull for men to read books, especially the Scriptur, or that by such reading men may
not acquire knowledge, which may prove usefull in Preaching or defend∣ing the Truth; but the question is Whether men may make use of these things in publik Worship, otherwise than as led and acted and influenç∣ed by the Spirit so to do? and Whether any of these places will allow men to preach in the strength of their natural or acquired parts, without being acted therein by the Spirit? Let him prove this, if he can, for this is the matter in question; and remember Robert Bruce his censur of Robert Blair his sermon recorded in the fulfilling of the Scripturs. His second mistake is, pag. 443. where he supposeth that to be led by the Spirit exclud∣eth, or is inconsistent with, reading Scriptur, and with all the particular instructions given by Paul to Timothy and Titus, who might have said, as this man argues, I can not be stinted unto these doctrins, which you desire me to put the brethren in remembrance of; for I must speak as the Spirit speaketh in me, and the like. But will he say, that Timothy was not to speak as the Spirit spake in him? To suppose this, as inconsistent with such instru∣ctions, is to beg the question; and that these are consistent, I have shewn above in my third section of Immediat Revelation: or let him tell plainly, if Timothy could do those things acceptably without the Spirit, since all worship is commanded by Christ to be done now in the Spirit. And yet he seemeth to agree to the necessity of the Spirit, else why quarreleth he me, pag. 448. for insinuating, as he saith, that their Ministers preach not in the demonstration of the Spirit? giving an enumeration, pag. 439. of seve∣ral ways which he saith, I know not, but their Ministers are led to preach by, among which this is one, What know I (saith he) but there may be some, that never digest their preachings so, as not to lye open to the influences of the Spi∣rit, and to welcome his seasonable and usefull suggestions, and so speak many things, which they had not once premeditated? But I would ask him Whe∣ther it be lawfull for any so to digest their matter, as not to lie thus open to the Spirit's influences? He would seem to say it were, since it is but some, and a may be some too, with him, that do so. And whereas he tels of some, that are constrained to change their text, and what they bad purposed to speak upon it, this shews the case is but rare, and therefore I am not to be blamed for what I say in general of Preachers among Papists and Prote∣stants, whose general way is to prepare aforehand what they preach, and then speak it to the People at a set hour, without waiting for the leading of the Spirit, or whether they have its influence or not. And for all the weight that this man would seem to lay sometimes upon the Spirit's in∣fluence
and concurrence, yet he gives shrewd presumptions that he doth it but pro forma, else how comes he to urge as an absurdity, pag. 445. that all that Ministers preach by the Spirit must be true? And why not? If it be from the Spirit, it can not be other ways; yet men, whose principle it is to speak from the Spirit, may through weakness and mistake preach false doctrin; yet the Spirit is not to be blamed for it, but those who keep not purely to it. I suppose he will not deny, but all that, which men preach according to the Scriptur, is infallibly true, it will not thence fol∣low, that all that, which men, whose principle it is to preach acccording to Scriptur, preach, is true, because that through weakness they may mistake the true meaning of the Scriptur. Also what he adds, if the matter be thus, it is all one whether the Preacher be young or old,—for it is not he that speaketh, but the Spirit in him, for this savoureth not of a Chri∣stian Spirit, to seek to draw an absurdity or make a mock of that which is no other than Christ's express words, Matth. 10: 20. Mark 13: 3. and indeed what he saith in this page, N. 9. in answer to these Scripturs, seemeth rather a mock at Christ & his Apostles, than any answer, asking me if I know not that Christ gave them their Preaching with them, telling them what they should say, And as ye go, preach, saying, The Kingdom of God is at hand. And a little after he saith, they had their sermon taught them be∣fore hand. But dare he say, that Christ's words, before mentioned, were therefore false? This he must say, or else prove nothing. Or will he say that the Apostles in all that progress said nothing but these seven words The Kingdom of God is at hand? For, according to him, this was all they said, which they had learned aforehand, and not as the Holy Ghost taught them in that hour what to say, albeit it be Christ's express words Luk 12: 12. Pag. 447. to my argument that according to their doctrin the Devil himself ought to be heard, seing he knoweth the notion of Truth, and excelleth many of them in learning and eloquence; he an∣swers, Why doth the man thus speak untruth? Do we say that every one, though he were the Devil, if he speak truth, should be heard? Do they not say that men ought to be heard and accounted as Ministers, albeit void of the true Grace of God, if having the formality of the outward call? And to prove this, do not they bring the example of Judas, whom Christ called a Devil? And they suppose him to have been such, even when sent by Christ, & deserved to be heard as his Apostle. Let him consider then how he can shun what I have affirmed. And albeit the Devil may speak with∣out
study, yet he can not be said to speak by the Spirit of God, which is the thing we affirm needfull to Gospel preaching. And for his last ar∣gument, pag. 448. that, since extraordinary gifts ceased, there hath been no ordinary way of Preaching but by ordinary gifts studied and acquired; it is but a bare begging of the question, and the same upon the matter with his new enforced objection which I answered towards the beginning of my third section of Immediat Revelation. ¶ 4. I come now to his 24th chapter of Prayer, and as to his first pa∣ragraph, there needs no debate, for (except some railing intermixed) I own what is asserted in it, as to the necessity of Prayer, and its being through Christ as Mediator. In the next he alledgeth I speak untruely in saying that the acts of their Religion are produced by the strength of the natural will, for they can pray when they please: but how truely this is affirmed con∣cerning them will after appear, albeit in opposition to it, after citing a passage out of the larger Catechism, he saith, they owne the influences of the Spirit as absolutely necessary to this duty; which if he would hold to, there needed no further debate, I should agree to it, for he doth untruely state the question, when he saith a little after, that the motions and inspirations I plead for are extraordinary, which is false, and never said by me: and there∣fore his building on it is in vain, as wel here, as pag. 452. 457-459. 461. where he insinuats that I judge not the gratious and ordinary influences of the Spirit a sufficient warrand to pray, which is false. What he saith, pag. 451. of the necessity of Prayer at some times, and of the Scripturs men∣tioning Prayers being made three times a day, I deny not, nor is it to the purpose. The question is Whether any can pray acceptably without the Spirit? We see he hath granted they can not, then the thing to be proved, is, Whether the general command authorizeth any to set about it, albeit in a manner, which is granted, will not avail, and is unacce∣ptable. So the matter resolves in examining what he can say from Scriptur or other ways, to prove this: and that there may be no mistake, let it be considered, that I deny not the general obligation to pray upon all, so that they, who do not pray, sin, albeit they be not sensible of the Spirit's help enabling them to do it; but that the way to avoid this sin is not to commit another, to pray with out the Spirit, but to wait for the Spirit, that they may pray acceptably, seing without it, though they should use words of Prayer, it would be no fulfilling of the command. And first then to what he argueth pag, 452. from the reïterated commands of God
to pray, I answer, that God's command lays upon man an obligation to pray I deny not, but God commands no man to pray unacceptably, God commands the right performance of Prayer, and this he has confessed can not be without the Spirit, therefore God commands no prayer without the Spirit, neither is the command answered or fulfilled by such as pray with∣out it. To this he objecteth, pag. 453 & 458. that the same Moral dutys might be shifted, untill the Spirit lead to them, and also natural acts of sleeping, eating, &c. which are abomination in the wicked: & yet, to go round, he accuseth me, p. 454. albeit falsly, of saying Men may pray without the Grace of God, which by this objection is his own faith, since he will not deny but men may sleep & eat without the Grace of God. But to this objection I answered in my Apology, shewing the difference betwixt these acts and acts of Wor∣ship, which he grants, pag. 461. and albeit I confess, which he urgeth here, that these profit not the man at all, as with respect to God's favor, when done without the Spirit, yet they really fulfill the matter of the thing commanded in relation to our neighbours and to our selvs, in eat∣ing, drinking, sleeping, else it would be self-murder. But in Prayer the matter is not fulfilled without the Spirit, which relateth only to God, to whom every prayer without the Spirit is an evil favour, and not in any true and proper sense a Prayer; for Prayer, as to the material part, can not be performed without the Spirit. He confesseth, according to their Catechism, that the Spirit is needfull to know what to pray for, which is the material part, but the necessity of the Spirit as to these other things is only as to the formal part, or right manner. And this pleading for Praying from these natural acts shews how he contradicts himself, in saying, it is untrue that they are for Prayer without the Spirit; for if they be not, this argu∣ment were impertinent, which is, as these ought to be done without the Spirit, so ought the other. And yet he more manifestly contradicts this, pag. 456. saying, that God requireth not men to feel the influences of the Spi∣rit, as a preparation to Prayer, yea that men ought to pray, even when, and be∣cause, they feel they want them; for if it be true that he said before, that these influences are necessary to the right performance of Prayer, either men ought to perform prayer wrong, or this must be a manifest contradiction: but since this manner of Prayer is owned really in their praying at set times, whether they have the Spirit's influence or not, it shews I spake no un∣truth of them, and that his saying so was untruely said by him. And hence also the man's impudence may be seen, pag. 460. in saying, I am alyar in
affirming they profess they may pray without the Spirit, and have their set times. But the thing I say, is, that they limit themselvs so, as to lay a necessity upon themselvs to pray at set times, as before and after Sermon, and be∣fore and after meat, and this he can not deny, or if he should, there uni∣versal practice would declare him a liar. And if they pray at set times, and that professedly, without waiting for the Spirit's influence, yea when they are sensible they want it, do not they profess to pray without the Spirit? What he saith here and elsewhere, that this was the opinion of Swenk feldius and the Familists, is not to the purpose; for what we believ in this, we do it as being the Truth, and not with respect to such, of whose belief we take no notice, so as to make it any ground for our faith. And to shew how impertinent this classing us with others is, to render us odious upon every occasion, I may tell him here once for all, that even as to this very thing of Prayer he agrees against us with Papists, So∣cinians, Pelagians, Episcopalians, Independents, Anabaptists, Lutherans, Ar∣minians, Antinomians, yea and with Pagans, Turks and Jews; all which af∣firm with him, that men may and ought to pray at certain times and up∣on certain occasions, albeit not having any present motions or influence of the Spirit of God so to do. ¶ 5. What he saith here in several places of Introversion, I refer to to what is said before, to avoid repetition. It might have been thought that in this chapter of Prayer, and where he urges it so much from the ge∣neral command, that he would have minded it would have been more suteable to pray for such, as he may account his enemies, and even here∣tiks, than rail at them. But the treating upon this subject has had no such inference with him, and therefore he is sure to keep here his old stile of railing, which the Reader may observe, pag. 452-456-459, 460, 461. He hath divers little cavils and quibbles in this chapter, which I willingly omitt, as not concerning the weight of the question, only to give the Reader a tast of them, I shall note one or two. Pag. 455. up∣on these words sub degustationem he fansieth the Quakers hold a state of Prayer distinct both from publik and privat. But if he had not been very critical, and ready to catch, albeit he omits more weighty things, he had not troubled himself with this, which is an error either of the Transcri∣ber or Printer, for it is in my copy, ad cibum, meaning the prayers be∣fore and after meat, and that the other word doth also signify. The next is his asking what I mean by ejaculations emitted to man's self, and
this he saith looks like a piece of Quaker-idolatry. This shews the man's eagerness to stretch every thing to make an accusation, for by this I in∣tended nothing, but to express such prayers as men make unheard of others. And if this be a piece of Quakers idolatry, it is such as he must account the Apostle Paul guilty of as wel as I, whose words are 1 Cor. 14: v. 28. , sibi ipsi loquatur, let him speak to himself, as both Arias Montanus & Beza translate it, as wel as the English: & that this is understood of Prayer see from verse 24. So the furious man may see whither his malice hath driven him. He forgeteth not also in this chapter his old calumny, & therefore hath it here oftner than once, that as all the rest, so the prayers of the Quakers as wel as preparations there unto come only from that Light of Na∣ture, as pag. 455, 456, 457. and hence he accuseth me of Pelagianism, 459. for saying that to command a man to pray without the Spirit is to command him to see without eyes, and work without hands, because Pela∣gius said, that whatever God commanded us to do, he gave us sufficient strength to do it. But if Pelagius said so, he understood it of an ability without the Spirit of God, for which the Antients condemned him: whereas my very assertion here is in as opposit terms to that, as any thing can be, since I argue that a man can no more pray without the Spirit, than he can see without eyes. And indeed all this man's reasoning in this chapter savours strongly of Pelagianism, where he pleads throughout for mens seting about Spiritual dutys, without the Spirit; yea pag. 463. he saith, that the Divine indulgence towards such as have begun to pray without the Spirit, and afterwards have found it assisting them in their prayer, is a strong induce∣ment and encouragement to them. For this agrees exactly to the Semipela∣gian principle, facienti quod in se est Deus non denegat gratiam, i. e. God will not deny Grace to such as do what they can. And indeed this allowing men to perform Spiritual dutys without the allowance of the Spirit, as this man doth, pleading for it, and reckoning the contrary absurd, pag. 453. is compleat Pelagianism, and doth clearly import, that man by the working of Nature can acquire the Spirit, and can do something in order to ob∣taining the Spirit, of himself, before he have it: and thence this man pleads so much, pag. 451. for the general use of Prayer, from the Light and Law of Nature, let him reconcile this, if he can, with his other do∣ctrins, and clear himself of Pelagianism. And it is so much the more considerable, that he has faln into this pit, of which he so often falsly accuseth me, as also pag. 461. He asketh again, pag. 460. why we come to
their places of Worship, if our Conscience be hurt in joining with them, and thence he concludes, it is to do open contempt. This is but his mali∣tious conjectur: we come not there but in obedience to the Lord, when moved by his Spirit so to do, to bear a faithfull testimony against all su∣perstition and will-worship; for it is not pleasant to us to come there, where for the most part we are saluted with knocks and stones and other such brutish and Paganish dealings by their Church Members, which is the fruit of their holy things, and whereunto the People are often en∣couraged by their Preachers, who sometimes shew an example of this themselvs, and of whose barbarous actions even by the Presbyterian Preachers there is a book extant, entituled, of Fighting Priests, giving ac∣count how many of them fell upon these innocent servants of the Lord with their own hands; and I my self have seen of the present Preachers of Scotland do it. As for his flouting at the Quakers, for laying claim to a Spirit of discerning, so as to distinguish who pray from the Spirit, and who not, he doth but therein declare himself to be none of Christ's sheep, who are said to know his voice from that of a stranger. And as for his saying that the Quakers judge of this by the mimical postur of the body, it is false, and would agree far rather to his Brethren, whose affected posturs of body, as wel as their nonsensical and absurd expressions in Prayer have disgusted many of their way, of which I could give some eminent instances, but that I spare them at present. The example I gave of their excluding some from their Sacrament of the Supper, so called, doth not halt, as he affirmeth, pag. 462. as to the main, for if the com∣mand to take it, is with presupposition of examination, so the command of praying is with the presupposition of its being in the Spirit, in which all Worship is now to be, Praying always—in the Spirit, Eph. 6: 18. To my shewing, in answer to their objection of Peter his commanding Simon Magus to pray, that he sayes repent and pray, after a meer assertion with∣out proof, he sayes, he sees, that with our Quaker, a graceless person can re∣pent, but not pray. To which I answer, if he speak of possibility, I be∣lieve a graceless person may both repent and pray, but as he can not re∣pent without Grace, so not pray without the Spirit; but Grace worketh in all, if not resisted, as the Spirit doth in all to Prayer, when they have received the Grace in measur: but that some measur of repentance must go before prayer, himself I judge will hardly deny, since the very offering to pray importeth, in the person applying himself thereunto, a
sense of his iniquity, and a desire to be delivered from it, for which end he approacheth to God to demand pardon and help to amend. ¶ 6. Now I come to his 25th chapter of Singing Psalmes, where I shall not need to be large: I deny not, as he observs, singing, but to justify their custom of singing David's conditions, by which many are made (as I observed in my Apology) to speak lyes, in the presence of God. He objecteth the practice of the Iews: But their practice in mat∣ters of Worship, without a Gospel precept, is not a rule to us. Neither doth the instance given by him of Psal. 66: 6. answer the matter, for the Jews might very wel praise the Lord for the deliverance of their fore-Fathers out of Egypt, but that will not allow Drunkards and impenitent persons to say, They water their couch with tears, as by singing Psalmes many do, which is false. As for his saying, they do but praise God for what he hath done for others, why do they not express it so then? And whereas he asketh, whether the Spirit inspireth the meter in the song, and the tone of the singing? he sheweth his folly and lightness, while he ridiculously suppos∣eth that Meter is necessar, or any other Tone, than Nature hath given to every one, of which God by his Spirit maketh use as an instrument, as he doth of other parts and facultys of the body, to the performing of Spiritual dutys. And the like folly he sheweth when he tels what they do not in Scotland, since he knows it was not particularly or only against the things practised in Scotland that I write in that Apology. Section Thirteenth, Wherein his 26th Chapter Of Baptisme is considered. ¶ 1. OUr Author, to shew how angry and froward he resolvs to be in this chapter, makes his first paragraph a compleat stick of railing; he begins with telling, that the Paganish Anti∣christian Spirit, which reigneth and rageth in the Quakers, manifesteth a perfect and compleat hatred at all the Institutions of our Lord Jesus Christ, and he endeth with this exclamation, O! what desperat Runagadoes must these men be? More of this kind may be seen, pag. 472, 473, 474. 480, 481. As for what he adds from several Scripturs of Baptisme, pag. 466, 467. what of it relates to the weight of the question will be examined after∣wards. He gives us here a citation out of their larger Catechism, and then
comes at last, pag. 468. n. 4. to examin what I say in the matter, where upon my urging the many contests among Christians concerning these things called Sacraments, as one reason against them, he concludes, I might as wel plead against all Christianity, because of the many debates about it: and with this conceit he pleaseth himself a little, which only evidenceth his malitious genius, for I should never have used that as an only argument, and did not use it at all, but as having many other considerable ones against their use of these things, and therefore I add that these things con∣tended for are meer shaddows and outward things. Then to cover their making use of the word Sacrament, which is not to be found in Scriptur, he objecteth my making use of the word fermentation, and of the Vehicle of God: but I use not to make use of these words, when I speak Scots or English, but these words, when interpreted are made use of in Scriptur, for the Latine fermentum, which signifies leaven, is oft used, even as compared to Spiritual things, as Matth. 13: 31. Luk 13: 21. 1 Cor. 5: 6, 7, 8. yea the word leaven and leavened is to be found in Scriptur above 30 times, but the word Sacrament never so much as once; and it is not (as he saith) a poor thing to challenge them for expressing the chief myste∣ries of their Religion in words that can not be found in all the Scriptur, while they affirm it to be the only adequat Rule of their faith and man∣ners. That we deny the thing truely imported by the Trinity is false. As for the word Vehiculum Dei as having a respect to Christ's Body or Flesh and Blood from heaven, that it is a Scriptur word, see Cant. 3: 9. King Solomon made unto himself a chariot of the wood of Lebanon. and v. 10. Vehicu∣lum ejus purpureum, the Hebrew words for Chariot and Vehiculum are  appirion and  merkabh or merkaba, both which signify a chariot and vehicle, and that by Solomon is mystically understood Christ, of whom Solomon was a figur, or type, none who are spiritually minded can deny, and consequently that this chariot or vehicle must be mystically and spiritually understood: nor can it be meant of Believers or the church, because it is said, the midst of it being paved with love for the Daughters of Je∣rusalem, i. e. for Believers, so that they are received by Christ into this chariot or vehicle, and therefore not it, but distinct, as the contained is distinct from the containing. But for the further understanding of these Hebrew words, see Buxtorf his Hebrew lexicon, and the book called Ap∣paratus in lib. Sohar. part. 1. p. 144. & 553. And however he might cavill upon this mystical meaning, yet the word is Scriptural, which their bar∣barism
Sacrament is not. And to his saying (in answer to my shewing that by laying aside this unscriptural term, the contest of the number of the Sacraments will evanish) that it will remain, if instead of Sacrament they use Signes or Seals of the Covenant, this is but his bare assertion, untill he prove by clear Scriptur that there are only two signes or seals of the Covenant, which he will find hard, and yet harder that these two are they. Pag. 469. n. 5. he denieth the Scriptur saith, there is one onely Baptisme, instancing the baptism of Affliction. But I speak here of the Baptisme of Christ, in a true and proper sense, and Eph. 4: 5. will prove as much that there is one onely Baptisme, as there is one onely God, which is in the next verse. But before I proceed any further, I must desire the Reader to observe how this man, speaking of the Baptisme of the Holy Ghost, understands it only to relate to the extraordinary gift of speaking with tongues, which the Apostles had, and not as any thing common to all true and really regenerated Christians: so that he concludes the Baptism with the Spirit and with Fire now to be ceased. And upon this his suppo∣sition he buildeth, pag. 471-473, 474-478. without so much as offering to prove it. And to this he addeth a gross lye upn me, pag. 472. that I will have none to be baptized in the Spirit but such as are endued with these extra∣ordinary gifts, which I never said nor believed; and therefore this his false supposition I deny, & consequently till next time that he take leasur to prove it, all that he builds thereupon is meerly precarious, and needs no further answer. Iohn the Baptist speaking of the Baptisme of Christ in general, as contradistinct from his, saith, He that cometh after me shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire, which could not have been the mark of distinction, if this had only been restricted to what the Apostles received the day of Pentecost, and not of the Baptisme where∣with Christ baptizeth all his Children. But to rectify the mistake he sup∣poseth I am in, concerning the One Baptisme, he tels me, the One Baptism comprehendeth both the outwvrd element and the thing represented and sealed thereby: but the reasons he gives for this are so weak, that thereby I am confirmed I am not in a mistake. I might say (saith he) there were two Cir∣cumcisions, because Circumcision is called Circumcision of the heart. And what then? In that sense there were two, so long as the outward continued, to wit, the outward and the inward, that of the Flesh and that of the Heart; and if he can answer this no better than by smiling at it, we must pitty the levity of his Spirit, but not be moved by the weight of such
airy arguments. What he addeth of the Object of Faith, being called faith as also the profession, albeit the Apostle say there is one faith, is not to the purpose, since these are included in the one true faith the Apostle speaketh of; but for him to say that the baptisme of water is included in the One Baptism, spoken of there by the Apostle, is only to beg the question: and yet all he doth is strongly to affirm this, without proof, so that all that he saith in answer to me being built upon this and such like mistakes needed in strictness no more reply, as his answer to my argu∣ment, pag. 471. sheweth, where he supposeth two Baptismes, one admi∣nistred by Men, another administred by Christ himself by his Spirit, and not by men. But he should have proved this, ere he had used it as a distinction, and till he do so, my argument, to wit, That since such as were baptized with Water were not therefore baptized with the Baptisme of Christ, therefore Water-Baptisme can not be the Baptism of Christ, will stand for all his blowing. I desire the Reader take notice here of his insinua∣tion, as if I had borrowed this argument from Socinus, which he hath over and over again afterwards, as to others, speaking expressly, pag. 433 of my stealing arguments from Socinus. But to shew him how unhappy he is in being so apt to speak untruth, he may understand that I never read three lines of Socinus's writings hitherto, nor knew what arguments he used, till now he informs me, in case his information be true. In stead of answer to what I urge from 1 Pet. 3: 21. in my Apology he giveth a preaching made up of meer assertions built on the former mistakes, and railing; his answer is built upon the supposing that water baptisme goes to the making up of Christ's Baptisme, which is now to continue, which yet remains for him to prove; and on the other hand supposing that I affirm that by the answer of a good Conscience there mentioned is to be un∣derstood the extraordinary gifts of the Spirit, which is false. And upon the same two mistakes he grounds his answer, pag. 473. n. 8. to what I urge from Gal. 3: 27. and Col. 2: 12. as a supplement, that the putting-on of Christ, there mentioned by the Apostle, may be understood of putting-on Christ by profession, though not in truth and reality, which he also hath, pag. 438. for which exposition I shall expect his proof next time, if he have any. ¶ Pag. 474. He proceedeth upon the same unproved supposition, that Water-Baptisme was instituted by Christ, and here he denies that Iohn's
baptisme was a figure. But since Iohn's baptisme was a washing with wa∣ter, and that the Apostle ascribeth the putting-on Christ to the baptism of Christ, as washing with water typifieth or signifies the washing of Re∣generation, so doth Iohn's baptisme that of Christ. He concludeth this paragraph with a silly quibble, where, in answer to my urging Iohn's words, saying, I must decrease, and he must encrcase, he adds, as if John and Baptisme with Water were all one, and Christ one and the same with the Ba∣ptisme of the Holy Ghost. Poor man! he has been sore pinched, when he betook himself to this silly shift. Will he say this is to be understood of Iohn's and Christ's Persons, and not of their Ministery? Then we must suppose Iohn grew less and decrepit as to his person ever after this, and Christ grew bigger and taler; let him remember to prove this, when he writes next. He goes on, pag. 475. upon his old mistake, supposing that Water-baptism was instituted by Christ, and that he gave com∣mand to his Disciples so to baptize, and that Mat. 28: 19. is to be under∣stood of water-baptisme, all which is meerly to beg the question. He saith, that to say John's baptisme is not pure and Spiritual, or that it is a Legal rite, is to condemn John, Christ and his Apostles, because God gave John an express command for it. And what then? God commanded the Legal rites also, that did not hinder them from being such, to say he needed not such a command. If it had of the nature of the Legal rites, is but a pre∣sumptuous quarrelling with God, seing on all hands it is granted he commanded it, and a meer affirming it is not such, in stead of proving of it. As for the Apostle his making honorable mention of Baptisme in his Epistles, and of its ends, which he points in several Scripturs, all which is granted, but it doth not thence follow, that all this is to be un∣derstood of Water-baptisme, and while that still remaineth the thing in debate, he can prove nothing from these Scripturs. But it is no wonder he thus forgets himself here as to me, since in the following words he quareleth with the Apostle Paul, saying in answer to his words, 1 Cor. 1: v. 17. that he was not sent to baptize; if Paul had not been sent to baptize, why would he have done it? I think it needless to me to answer the absurdi∣ty he would here fix upon the Apostle, since it sufficeth me, and I hope will other good Christians, that the Apostle saith positively, that he was not sent to baptize: and for his baptizing of some, we will suppose he had a reason, though not from his commission, which he expressly denies, whatever Iohn Brown may brawle to the contrary. As for his saying,
that it seemeth then the other Apostles had another commission than Paul had, it is built upon the supposition that they had a commission to baptize with water, which remains for him yet to prove. And not to contend with him for brevity's sake about that of Hosea 6: 6. whether [not] there be only to be understood of less principally, yet though it were, it would not follow, it should be so understod here also; I shew him by an example, 1 Cor. 2: 5. what wild work such an interpretation would make, if ordinarily applied: but he it seems judged it most con∣venient not to take notice of it in this his Examen, albeit in reason he should have done it, if he would give a compleat answer, for he must either prove [not] always to be understood of less principally, or other∣wise he must bring particular reasons why it should be so here, and not that it sometimes is so understood, for such a Particular will not infer the consequence. ¶ 3. The reason he giveth of Christ's submitting to water-baptisme to prove it now to continue, is, his saying, for thus it becometh us to fulfill all righteousness. But may not that be applied also to Circumcision, and yet its continuance will not thence follow? John's receiving a Divine com∣mand to baptize, sheweth there was a Divine institution for it, under the Law, because the Law was not as yet abrogated, nor the Legal mini∣stration accomplished, till Christ was offered up. As for Christ his con∣secrating it in his own person, the like may be also said of Circumcision. I come now to see what he saith, n. 14. to prove Matth. 28: 19. to be understood of Water-baptisme, and first, after a little railing, he saith, This was but an enlargement of their former Commission, as to the Object, And before this we heard of their baptizing with Water, with Christ's warrand and authority, &c. Answ. We have heard him say so indeed, but must wait untill he prove, ere we be so forward as to believe it: And next, what if it were all granted? we heard before of the Disciples preparing and eating the Passover with Christ's warrand and authority, will it thence follow that that practice is still to continue in the Church? (2.) Be∣cause it is joyned here with Discipling, and baptizing was the way of making Disciples among the Jews. So was Circumcision and that no less constantly and necessary, will it therefore follow that circumcision is to continue? (3.) He saith, Their constant after-practice declareth this to be the meaning of the Command. But the Apostle Paul's practice and testimony declareth this to be false. (4.) He saith, This is the proper import of the word. But
I deny it is so in Scriptur, since we see no necessity in most of the places of Scriptur to understand the word of Water-baptisme; and when he shews the necessity, he may be answered, and the Scripturs so frequently using it, where Water upon all hands is confessed not to be understood, prove this to be true. And as for his saying, that it can not be understood here of Baptisme with the Spirit, it falleth to the ground, because only built upon the supposition that that is only understood of extraordinary gifts. He urgeth Christ's saying, Luk 12: 50. I have a baptisme to be ba∣ptized with, and how am I straitned till it be accomplished? as if this were to be called Christ's own baptisme; and so I shall grant it, with a respect to his Personal Sufferings: but when I speak of Christ's own baptisme, I speak of that which is his, as being instituted by him for others, and that contradistinct from John's. Pag. 479. He saith, the words of baptizing into the Name, , is only to be understood of a dedicating to God, and not a being baptized into the Power and Vertue. But this is his own assertion, neither doth Paul's saying, 1 Cor. 1: 13. were ye baptized in the Name of Paul make it clear at all, for making it unto Paul will render the Apostle's argument more forcible, to shew the Corinthians their folly, in saying they were of Paul or other men, into whose power or vertue it was absurd to say they were baptized, as must be said of all true Chri∣stians, being baptized into the Name of Christ. That I condemn their manner of baptizing is true, but that I do it because of their doing it in the Name of the Father, is his false and foolish conjectur; and therefore his troubling himself to prove that, is to no purpose. For his saying, that, if Matth. 28: 19. be not understood of Water-baptisme, it would make a tautology; I answered that (n. 8.) in my Apology of Baptisme, and here he only repeats the objection, without taking notice of my answer: which sheweth how defective his Examen is. He goes on, pag. 480. upon the supposition, that the Apostle's baptizing with Water was not by meer permission, and yet the Apostle's commanding the Gentiles to abstain for a time from things strangled and from blood, which was a Jewish rite, shews their using baptisme with Water doth not prove it Evangelical. He confesseth here they did not fully at first comply with their commission, and he must also say they did not understand it, though he would here wave it; and because he knows not wel what to say, he falls to rail, saying, he seeth What Quakers can not do with reason, they must do with confident and bold lyes. But the reason he gives of all this
accusation, so strange confidence, is my saying that the chief of Christ's Disciples had been John's, adding, Will he tell us, who these Chief were? Yes I will, seing he is so ignorant, Joh. 1: 35-37. where he may see two of John's disciples followed Christ, one of which is expressly men∣tioned to be Andrew the Apostle, and it is there clearly enough imported that Peter was another, and such may without absurdity be accounted among the chief of Christ's Disciples. Pag. 481. He most falsly saith that I condemn Peter and all the Apostles for resting satisfied with what he had done. His saying here, that they do not urge their baptisme from Pe∣ter's baptizing Cornelius, shews he sees a necessity of not laying great stress upon that: but for his adding, that Jesus Christ hath commanded, he doth but say and not prove it. He saith that Gal. 2: 12. will not prove that Peter constrained the Gentiles to be circumcised: but verse 14. to which my words alluded, saith expressly,—why compellest thou the Gen∣tiles to live as do the Iews? and sure that was to be circumcised. For his malitious false asseveration, that we with the Iews designe to destroy Christia∣nity; it needs no proof, that there were baptisines among the Iews is clear from Heb. 6: 2. albeit Paulus Riccius were not alledged to prove it, nor any debate used about the antiquity of the Jews writings; but that some of them wrot before the year 200, Iosephus's history is an example. He confesseth the etymology of the word inferreth dipping, and albeit we deny not that, yet this sheweth with how little reason he urgeth that etymology upon us: if the Reader will but seriously read what I have written in my Apology, of Baptism, he will easily find how slender his answer is, albeit I had not written this reply. Section Fourteenth, Wherein his 27th Chapter, entituled, Of the Lord's Supper, is considered. ¶ 1. THe Reader before this time hath had so much opportunity to discern the temper of this man's spirit, that he need not wonder to find him begin this chapter, of the Lord's Supper, with an heap of Railing, accounting us such as overturn Christianity, and introduce Paganisiue, yea as are posting towards it. And then having given a large account, pag. 48, 484. of their Confession of Faith and larger
Catechism, pag. 485. he comes to tell of the good experiences many have had by their use of this Supper, which to make strong in his conceit, he useth a continued stile of railing against us, as men only led by our own imaginations, & given up to the working of the Prince of darkness: and thus he goes on. But such experience, albeit granted, will not prove the necessity of its continuance; for the Assembly of Divines, so called, in their Preface to the Directory, do speak of the good which was experienced by the Liturgy of the Church of England, and of the religious intentions of the Compilers of it, while yet they are rejecting & abolishing it, as that which proved an offence to the godly, and occasioned much mischief, Therefore that is no Argument. Pag. 486. n. 5. He comes to examin what I say in the matter, and then, after a reference to his 10th chapter, he has his old calumny that the Celestial Seed and Spiritual Substance is nothing but the dimns light of Nature; he falleth into a new fit of Railing, which holds him to the end of this paragraph, terming us such as are judicially blinded and de∣luded, acted and driven by the Devil into a profane and Paganish contradiction to the ways of Grace. And with the like shame, and upon the same old sup∣position of our exalting the Light of Nature, which is most false, he filleth his n. 6. and also his 7. pag. 488. For what he saith there of the absurdity of God's revealing himself to Heathens, or such as were Idolaters, I have spoken before, writing upon that subject: and here he concludes that my asserting of a Spiritual body and flesh of Christ, at one blow, is a deny∣ing the Christ of God, and overturning Christianity, but in stead of proving it he proposeth some questions, Had Christ two bodys? Yes: and let him deny it, if he dare, without contradicting the Scriptur Ioh. 6: 58. Christ speaks of his flesh which came down from heaven, but this was not the flesh he took from the Virgin Mary, for that came not down from heaven, but he had a Spiritual Body, in which his Soul existed long before he took flesh of the Virgin; and we will see how Iohn Brown proves this to be an error, in the refutation that is promised in his name of G. K's book. And for the rest of his conjecturs, such as, We have two such bodys too, is but a fiction of his own brain, we call no body of Christ carnal, but believe that that body which Christ took of the Virgin, which was of the Seed of Abraham and David, in which Christ walked upon the earth, and was crucified, did arise the third day, was glorified, and remaineth in hea∣ven, wherein the center of his most glorious Soul remaineth for ever: and let him shew, if he can, how this is a denying of the Christ of God,
or overturning of Christianity. He proceedeth, Pag. 489. at a most violent strain of railing, upon the supposition of his old calumny; and here that it may be compleat, he makes a preaching to the Devil, for which blasphemous abuse I wish heartily the LORD forgive him, that these Devils, to whom he preacheth, be not permitted to give him his reward for his sermon. But seing he blusheth not to do this in print, I shall not think the many gross abuses I have heard to have been uttered by Presbyterian Preachers so incredible, as I have been apt to do, especially that which I have been informed of, of late, of one who at a conventicle in the South, near Legerwood, not far from Lauther, made a digression in his Prayer to the Devil, saying, O Devil! thou hast troubled us much with the Bishops and Curats! We beseech thee, Devil, take them to thee, and make us quite of them! This prayer sutes with Iohn Brown's preaching, and indeed the Presbyterians will need a new Directory, for the old one, by which they are instructed to preach to men and pray to God, will not serve for this new Ministery, by which they begin to preach and pray to Devils. And of the like strain is his saying, after much railing, pag. 490. that if the Quaker write comments on Paul's Epistles, it must be of Paulus Paganizans, this sort of stuff is enough to give all sober Christians a disgust of this man's writings. In this page, after some quibbles about Relation, he comes, pag. 491. n. 11. to affirm that there may be a Relation which is neither from the nature of the thing, nor from some Divine precept, such as a Promise and Divine Institution. But is not a Divine Institution a Divine Precept? And whereas he boasts here that my whole discourse falleth, as being built up∣on a mistake, the Reader may see the mistake is his own, and not mine, and then judge of his discourse, that's built thereon; as also how airy, vain, and ostentive he is, in saying, What will he now do? His Light has confounded him so as he knows not what he sayes. Is this language becoming a Gospel-Minister? That what Luke saith, doth not import a perpetuall but temporary command, will after appear. Of what Paul saith, 1 Cor. 10. will be spoken hereafter. To my shewing that 1 Cor. 11: 26. Paul expresseth the end of this ceremony to be a declaring of the Lord's Death, which hath no necessary relation with partaking of Christ's body and blood, he answereth that a declaration of Christ's Death is a comprehen∣sive end, &c. And what then? That proves not the necessary relation, nor yet what he adds in this paragraph; therefore I intreat him next time to speak to the purpose. Pag. 492. n. 12. He raileth at me, as pervert∣ing
the Apostle's words, but giveth no reason, unless his own meer af∣firmation and querys be esteemed sufficient: he asketh, What signified Christ's blessing of the Bread, breaking, giving it to his Disciples, desiring them to eat? Answ. Christ blessed the bread, brake it, and gave it to his Dis∣ciples to eat, and they to others, where themselves confess no such my∣stery or Sacrament, as they would have here, is deducible, see Matth. 14: v. 19. Mark 6: 41. He insinuats I speak falsly, in saying there is no mention of this ceremony, 1 Cor. 10: 16. but is not so charitable as to poynt to me where, if there be any such thing. As for his meer affirma∣tions and distinctions here, about the bread, I will wait the next time to have them proved by Scriptur, then will judge them worth the consider∣ing. I have shewn in my Apology that the Corinthians being in the use of this ceremony, and the Apostle's rectifying the abuse they were in, in the use of it, nor yet its having been done upon a religious account, or in a general respect to the participation of the Body and Blood of Christ; will not prove the necessity of its being now to be performed: and there∣fore what he saith, pag. 493. n. 14. evanisheth. And as for his adding here, that then it was an act of will-Worship and Superstition, and that I con∣clude the Apostle encouraged such a thing, whence he taketh occasion to rail at me, as blasphemously imputing unfaithfulness to the Apostle, and to the Spirit of God that acted him. I answer: What is done by per∣mission for a time, is not will-worship and superstition, and he confesseth he argues not from the Corinthians practice; and for his railing, the ground of it being false, it needs no answer. As for his denying the Jews had such a custom at the time of their Passover, his meer negation is not sufficient to elide the testimony of far more credible Authors than he himself in this matter: and as for the words of Luke, Do this in remem∣brance of me, it doth not infer perpetual obligation upon the Church in all ages. He raileth at this, but without a reason, pag. 495. instancing the Apostles, 1 Cor. 24: 25. But I told him before, that the Apostle gives here an account of matter of fact, which infers not a command; and in this page the man is miserably pinched to shew how the washing of one anothers feet, albeit commanded with as great solemnity, doth not oblige as much now: but his conjecturs prove nothing. What? albeit it was a custom in the hot countreys, and that it was a signe of Christ's humility, how doth all that abrogat the express command to do it? Let him shew an exemption from this from plain Scriptur, for his
meer assertions have but smal weight, and by which I am not like, nor yet any man of reason, that is not resolved to set up Iohn Brown as a Pope, to believe all he saith, from his bare words, to conclude the differences. He thinks, pag. 496. that their not keeping exactly to the method used by Christ in this thing signifieth nothing, but he should prove by Scri∣ptur how they are safe in practising one part and not the other, and by what rule he accounts the one part circumstances, and not the other; for as to the matter of the thing, he will confess there is nothing in it but by reason of Christ's command and practice, so that affects all parts alike, and indeed he gives a very summar answer to what I urge as to this, as the Reader by comparing his n. 17. with n. 6. of my Apology upon this sub∣ject, may observe. It passeth my mean capacity to see any solid reason given by him, pag. 497. n. 18. why Act. 2: 42. should be understood of other than their common eating, unless this may be esteemed one, that to say so, is a meer groundless fancie, like many of the Quakers bold notions. To prove Act. 20: 7. to be understood of Sacramental eating, he saith, it required Paul's preaching: but for this we wust wait his proof. That Paul preached not upon other occasions, because not mentioned, is but his meer conjectur; and his inference from this being the Christian Sabbath, is but a silly begging of the question. ¶ 2. Pag. 498. n. 20. He stateth my words, shewing how the Apo∣stle, 1 Cor. 11. saith, When ye come together, this is not to eat the Lord's Sup∣per, and not that it was not to eat aright; and I expected his answer to this to follow, but in vain, for I found not any; perhaps he has forgoten it, and therefore I desire he may remember it next: also here in stead of giving a reason to prove the Apostle gives here a command, and not sim∣ply a relation of the matter of fact, he returneth railing: I entreat him next to lay-aside his railing, and give a reason. That the Corinthians were babes in Christ, and some of them even further advanced, I ac∣knowledge; yet that will not prove that somethings might be indulged to them, which is not needfull to us now: the Christians, that had been Jews, were also babes in Christ, and even more, such as the Apostle James, who desired Paul to purify himself in the Temple, and yet we are not thence obliged to imitat such practices. Whether the Syriak ver∣sion, mentioned by me, make not to my purpose, I leav to the Reader's judgment; my using it will not infer my acknowledging that version in all things to be authentik, more than his own using it: and albeit I think
it might have been sufficient to have given the words upon the credit of the interpretation in the Poly-glotta, yet to shew him how apt he is to fall into false conjecturs, he may know I did it not; and if he could hence, as wel as from several other occasions heretofore observed, learn not to lay so much stress upon, and so forwardly vent, his own conjecturs, he would do himself a courtesy. Pag. 499. n. 21. He can easily turn-by the Apostle's express command, Act. 15: 29. as being a part of of the Cere∣monial Law, but I hope he will acknowledge that the obligation upon the Christians, especially such as had not been Jews, to observe it, was not its being a part of the ceremonial Law, but its being now a com∣mand of the Apostles, or rather of the Spirit of God, to whom it seem∣ed good so to command, and he should shew next time how this is more abrogated in the Epistles of Paul than the other, and particularly how that Rom. 14: 17. doth touch the one more than the other. And this command, Act. 15: 19 being after the pouring-down of the Spirit, and universal preaching of the Gospel to the Gentiles, hath as much of a Gospel institution as any thing commanded before by Christ can have, if not, let him give us a reason from Scriptur, till then his meer asser∣tions, pag. 500. will not do the business. To my shewing that this is not to distinguish the Gospel from the Law, he thinks it enough to say, this is a Socinian argument formerly spoken to, and he is very carefull not to weary the Reader with repetitions. I wish he had minded this all along. He also referreth the proof of their Authority to administrat this Sacra∣ment to his 17 chapter: but they must be very clear-sighted that can ob∣serve any such thing there. And to conclude with some shew of victory, he in a most oftentive way saith that I have fought untill I can stand no longer, and finding my self weak, and unable to fight any more, I come to something like a parlie, by saying, Such as out of Conscience will perform this ceremo∣ny, as the first Christians did, might be indulged in it: but he conclud∣eth, these things I affirm being proved, none can be supposed to do it out of Conscience. But some may not have such a clear sight of it, and thence may stick in these things. He dispatcheth what more I say as to this, as being a bundle of groundless whimsies, without truth, sense, or consisten∣cy. But indeed I must say, I wonder to see the man so weak upon this Theam, as wel as the former of Baptisme, considering they are the great Sacraments of their Religion: but it seems his rage in these has robbed him of his reason. I will entreat the Reader seriously to peruse what I
have written upon both these in my Apology, that comparing it with his, he may easily perceive, albeit this reply had not been written, how weak all is, the man brings for the proof of these things. Section Fifteenth, Wherein his 28th Chapter, Of Liberty of Conscience is consi∣dered. ¶ 1. AS he ended his last chapter with railing, so he begins this, comparing the Quakers to Thievs and Robbers, adding, that their being conscious to themselvs of the evil of their ways, which after he has a little amplified in as black a manner as he can, he concluds that they thought it best for their own safety to add this to the rest of their errors, that Magistrates have no lawfull power over them: in which (besides his rail∣ing) are two gross Lyes: First, that the Quakers are conscious of their own evil ways, and that moves them to assert Liberty of Conscience, which being a gross falshood hath no bottom but his own malitious conjectur, where he presumptuously assumes to judge of other mens hearts. The second is, that the Quakers say, the Magistrate hath no lawfull power over them, A most gross lye, the contrary whereof is expressly asserted in the These in these words, provided always that no man, under the pretence of Conscience, prejudice his neighbour in his life or estate, or do any thing destructive of, or inconsistent with, humane society, in which case the Law is for the trans∣gressor, and justice is to be administred upon all, without respect of persons. Who will but open their eyes, may see here the man so desperatly resolved to calumniat, that he neither seems to regard his Conscience towards God, nor his reputation among men, that he may fulfill his envy in this parti∣cular: but such gross abuses will not hurt but help the Quakers. Yea in the very next page he takes notice, that I grant to the Magistrate only Li∣berty to judge in matters touching the life and goods of others, &c. So here is some lawfull Power. As for the malitious insinuation that follows, it needs no other refutation with men of sobriety, but to repeat it, to wit, But probably not of Quakers, for they are perfect and so can not do wrong. Is not this solidly and learnedly and Christianly argued, Reader? Thinkst thou, that to say that this restriction is destroyed, because men may pre∣tend
Conscience in wronging their neighbours, as some have done, in committing villanies, saith nothing, since the Proposition expressly al∣lows the Magistrate to punish acts, that are materially injurious to Ci∣vil Society, albeit Conscience be pretended? After, according to his usual manner, he has given us a large citation out of the Confession of Faith, and some quibbles about the word Conscience, which, as not dire∣ctly concerned in this debate, for brevity's sake, I omitt. Secondly, he comes, pag. 504. n. 5. to say, that I most perversly state the question, in saying, the Magistrate has not power to compell men against their Consciences, in matters of Religion. and why? Because I distinguish not betwixt Elicite and Imperat Acts of Conscience, that is, as himself explains, Inward and Outward; for as to the first, he confesseth the Magistrate is not to compell men, so as to hinder them to think, judge, understand and conclude in their mind as they will, but only in speaking, writing and open profession, which are visible and audible: yea he thinks the Magistrates power doth not only extend on this side to prohibition, but that he may also force them to hear, and to the use of publik means, that is in plain terms, to an out∣ward conformity; and yet he saith; this is no force upon Consceince. We I then, Popish Magistrates, according to him, used no force upon the Con∣sciences of Protestants, in forceing them to hear Mass; nor yet the Pagans upon the Christians, in forceing them to go to Idol-worships: and to come near home, the present Magistrates in Scotland use no force upon the Consciences of his Brethren, the Presbyterians, in the west-countrey, in constraining them to go to hear the Bishops Curats, as they term them, where they can not pretend there is any thing of Idolatry. As for his di∣stinction of the Magistrates having power of outward but not inward acts, it were enough for me to reject it, as not being proved by him to be founded on Scriptur, as indeed it is most deceitfull. For if the Magi∣strate restrain me from doing that outward action, either of confessing to Truth or denying error, abstaining from idolatry or false worship, and practising the true, which my inward perswasion convinceth me of, he encroacheth upon, and takes upon him to rule over my inward per∣swasion, as wel as the outward, which follows naturally from the inward, and without doing whereof, my inward could and nothing to me save condemnation, seing Christ requires an outward confession. And if the Magistrates power, as to outward acts, even in matters of Religion, be limited, then he of right may decide and judge of all outward mat∣ters
relating to Religion, which Iohn Brown may remember his Brethren have strongly denied, reserving that only for the Kirk. for to say, as he addeth, that the Magistrate has power to punish Heretiks, but not the Orthodox, is (as I observed) miserably to beg the question, since never any Magi∣strate was so mad, as to persecut Truth, as Truth, but still under the notion of Error. The sum of what he saith further upon this matter, pag. 505-507, 508, 509. in answer to me, resolves in these two obje∣ctions, ¶ 3. First, That my Arguments do no less take away the Magistrates power in Civils. Secondly, That by the same arguments may be denied and taken away all Church censurs, which I grant, and in so doing contradict my self, or must answer my own arguments. For proof of the First he tels that many Magistrates have been or may be uncapable to judge in Civil matters as wel as Religion, as also have done unju∣stice in their judgement. Answ. True, but all this will no ways inferr his conclusion, because they still had that which was needfull to the being of Magistracy, that is, being duely to constitute (for of usurpers we do not here speak) however they may want these qualitys which might more accomplish them in their employment, or that they may err in the administration of it; but Christianity, and consequently to judge in matters of Religion, doth not so much as pertain to the esse or being of a Magistrate, for if it did, no man could ever have been, or yet could be, a true Magistrate, or ought to be so owned, unless a Christian, which I suppose Iohn Brown will not adventur to affirm, or if he do, he will mani∣festly contradict the doctrin as wel as practice of Christ and his Apostles, who preached Subjection, and were themselves subject to such Magistrates as were enemies to Christianity. If then a Magistrate may be truely a Magistrate, and ought by Christians to be acknowledged and submitted to, as such, who is not a Christian; to deny to Magistrates that power of Judgment, which they can only have as being Christians, will not necessarily take away any of their power as Magistrates: for Christian Subjects, especially being privat persons, may and ought to submitt and obey their lawfull Magistrates, albeit committing errors in the Govern∣ment, and commanding things hurtfull to the State, and if they do other ways may be justly punished, where the nature of the Govern∣ment giveth them not allowance so to do. But if the Magistrate shall
command any thing contrary to the Law of God, or impose in matters of Conscience, contrary to Truth, I. B. will with me confess (unless he condemn himself) that every privat Christian may, without being justly accused of contempt, refuse to obey, as many of Iohn Brown's friends do in not going to the parish Kirks, (where the same faith and doctrin they hold, is preached) contrary to acts of Parliament. For he hath not proved that a Magistrate by being a Christian acquires more power than he had before, or is more a Magistrate, though he may be a better. For albeit, as he observs, Fathers be desired to instruct their children, which Pagan fathers can not do, yet they are not more fathers than before, nor have more authority or power over their children to force them than before: so a Magistrate being a Christian may instruct, coun∣tenance and advance Christianity, by the advantage of his place, but acquires no more power thereby to force his people upon that account. I. B. if he judge so, will do wel to prove it by Scriptur. ¶ 4. The reason of his second objection is, because a Church may err in their judgment, being defective, as he supposed the Magistrate in the former objection, and so may condemn Truth for error. But how weak this is, is very apparent. For if he can shew us a Church having the true being of a Church, which ought to be acknowledged and sub∣mitted to by Christians as such, which vet is wholly a stranger to, yea an enemy and persecutor of Christianity, (as I did him in the case of Ma∣gistracy) he will say something, but other ways nothing at all. Next, the censur of a Church (however he seems to judge otherwise) can not be called forceing of Conscience, in the sense I grant it, which is only for to deny the persons censured their Spiritual fellowship; since he him∣self by his differing from them breaks it off (as in my book, intituled The Anarchy of the Ranters, &c. written concerning Church Government, I have at large shewn) And if the difference be such, as the Church judgeth in conscience they can not have spiritual communion with one so principl∣ed, it were in him a forceing of their conscience to urge it upon them: for since he takes the liberty out of Conscience, as he judgeth, to differ from all his Brethren, it were a most unreasonable thing in such a one to deny them the liberty (being perswaded in their conscience they ought) to withdraw from him, seing the band of their unity, which at lest in part was an agreement in doctrin, is so far by him broken; but as he doth not fall upon them, to beat, imprison, or kill them, neither ought they to do so to him.
As for his answer, that they are not for propagating Christianity by force, or that the Ministers should use fire and sword, pag. 508. it is the same de∣ceitfull return, that the Pope and the Iesuits his Janizarys give upon the like occasion, (with whom the Presbyters in most things of this nature do most unanimously agree) who it is said after they have judged any one guilty of heresy, deliver him over to the Magistrate, because alas! mercifull and tender-hearted men! (as is usually spoken by contrarys) they will not meddle with blood: but how would they thunder the Magistrate, if he did not proceed to execution? The same way do the Presbyters, for we know what naturally follows upon the Church censur, or disobe∣dience to their Orders, as by many examples, during the reign of Pre∣sbytery in Scotland might be proved, and which I may instance, if further provoked thereto, by which it shall appear that they are no less BLOODY and CRUEL than the Popish Inquisitors, and that both the POPE and the PRESBYTERS, assuming the power of judgment to themselves, leave nothing to the Magistrate but the dishonorable office of being their Executioner, or in plain Scots, Hangman, while both most deceitfully wipe their mouths, as if they were innocent of the Blood shed procured by them. ¶ 5. In stead of giving any direct reply to my answer to their obje∣ction drawn from Deut. 13. where false Prophets and Idolaters are ordained to be killed, he seeks malitiously to infer that I deny all Authority of the Old Testament, which is a horrid calumny: But since there are many things commanded there, which himself will acknowledge are not binding up∣on us now, what shall be the rule whereby we shall judge what we are now tied to, and what not, unless as the same is ratified or again com∣manded by Christ in the New? And for clearing of this, let him tell me, if he can, what is incumbent upon us now from the Old Testament which hath no precept or authority in the New? But further, after he has manifestly wrested the place, to evite what I urge from Deut. 5: 9. as the Reader by comparing it may judge, at last he confesseth to it, only alledgeth it was a circumstance: but seing this circumstance was com∣manded as wel as the rest, he should shew where the one is repealed, and not the other, and how it comes to pass, that it should be duty to obey the one part of the command, and yet murder to obey the other, or (if he will) the circumstances commanded conjunctly with it, as I hope he will confess it should be for any now to kill their brother or sister as an
heretik or blasphemer, without bringing them to a Judge. He has a quick way of answering what I say, pag. 323, 324. in alledging that it is not to the purpose, as also what I say, pag. 328, 329. in answering it by two or three lines of railing, pag. 513. But methinks, since he gives his Reader as a reason of his prolixity, that he left nothing said by the Qua∣ker unanswered, it is strange he jumpes so quietly over that place, pag. 324. where I shew that the Presbyterians as wel as the Iesuits, not∣withstanding their pretended subjection to Magistrates, and pleadings for the extension of their Power, and accusing us for denying it, do not spare to tyrannize over the Magistrates Conscience, when they can, as by the example of the Presbyterians behaviour towards this present King of Brittain I did prove: it is enough for him to this to say, this page is not to the purpose. But the judicious Reader will rather judge, that he is here so silent, being elsewhere, upon less occasions, so clamorous, because heknew not wel what to answer to the purpose. With the like hasty and pittifull stuff he would turn-by the many citations of the antients, brought by me, against Persecution, because of his deceitfull Popish con∣cession above observed; but he should have shewn how these things of the Antients are consistent with the Civil Magistrats using any force in matters of Religion, as being a thing inconststent with Christianity, which the Reader by reading over these places may easily observe, and thence find why he made such hast, and gave all these citations no other answer. ¶ 6. But as he is hasty in passing over what he finds he can not an∣swer, so, to fill up the pages, he spares not to insist upon triffles, or things of no moment, or which only serve to shew his own folly and imperti∣nency, as in page 503. is manifest, where he saith, he doubts whether it be 25 years since I adjoyned my self to the Quakers. But whether it be so or not, it nor adds to, nor takes from, the controversy: only to solve him of this doubt, he may assure himself it is not, since I have not yet seen the 30th year of my age. But because I say, it is about 25 years, since they were a distinct and separated People, thence he sayes, he sees it is not an old Sect, and so has less affinity with true Christianity, because he is sure Christianity is older. But what Protestant in his wits, if malice did not blind, would use such an argument, knowing how easily the same may be, and has been, objected by Papists, that use to ask us, where our Religion was, before Luther and Calvin? That Christianity is older than 25 years I am sure, as
wel as he, but it will not thence follow, but that it may be a short time since God raised up a separated gathered visible People, to shake-off the corruptions of Babylon, and restore the pure and old Christianity, as it was before the Apostasy entred: and if he will not admitt of this to the ac∣knowledgment of his own impertinency, he must needs own the like ar∣gument in the mouth of Papists to have been valid against our great grand Fathers, and consequently give away the Protestant cause. ¶ 7. But the man seems not to have heeded what he wrot in this page, by another yet more palpable mistake, for while in the calculation of the appearing of the Quakers, he goes about to find me contradicting another Quaker, he sheweth his own senslesness. My account, saith he, of 25 years, being numbred from 1676, will fall in Anno 1651; but another Quaker in Anno 1659 saith, it is now about 7 years since the Lord raised us up, in the North of England, &c. Now number 7 back from 1659, my Ari∣thmetik tels me it will 1652, and if I account it 1651, and the other reckon it about 1652, it comes to one reckoning; but Iohn Brown will have mine to be 15 years latter, as if 25 years back from 1676 were 15 Years after 7 Years back from 1659, that is, that 1652 is 15 Years be∣fore 1651: so far has the poor man missed of his numeration. He some∣times reproachingly and scoffingly sayes, he sees the Quakers can dream waking, but it is a question, whether he was dreaming or not, when he proclaimed his sottishness thus to the world; which can not be reputed an error of the press, since he is at pains to reconcile this imaginary dif∣ference, saying, but perhaps I mean of these in the North of Scotland, the other of the North of England, and therefore he will not contend about it, he will find he has reason, when he sees his mistake; yet he must have one ob∣servation, that, according to the old proverb, all evil cometh out of the North: but no wonder, the man has been here benummed, since he will, ere he want something to reproach the Quakers, make use of old Pro∣verbs, albeit to contradict Scriptur Prophecys, Jer. 50: 3. where the Prophet speaking of the judgment of Babylon saith, For out of the North there cometh up a Nation against her, which shall make her land desolat. and verse 9. I will raise and cause to come up against Babylon an assembly of great Na∣tions out of the North countrey. But an old proverb with him it seems is of more weight, which can hitt the Quakers, than the Scripturs, for all the reverent esteem he pretends to them: yet that an Evil hath or may come out of the North, I shall not deny, for of that the PERSECUTING
Spirit of PRESBYTERY is one example, which as to its rise in Scot∣land was more Northerly than the appearance of the People called Quakers. Section Sixteenth, Wherein his 29th Chapter of VVars, and 30th of Oaths, is considered. ¶ 1. AFter having classed us, according to his custom, with such as he accounts odious Heretiks, for our opinion of Wars, he proceedeth with his old trade of malitious insinuations and railings, questioning whether our intent may not be, that we may ob∣tain freedom and liberty to rage over all. And whereas he saith, he leavs our selves to judge of this, truely we can sincerely judge, in the sight of God, that this is a gross calumny, of giving any colour for which we are altogether innocent. And like to this is that malitious insinuation, pag. 515. 521. wherein he chargeth us with a bloody designe, in seeking to reduce them to Paganisme, and by disarming Christians give up Christendom, as a prey to Turks and Pagans: to which I shall only answer, that, as it is ob∣viously enough malitious, so he shall never prove it true, and therefore I wish the Lord rebuke him, and forgive him for these his evil thoughts. What he sayes here, as wel as pag. 517, 518. 522. of the necessity of de∣fensive War, to defend from those that justly assault, and Thievs, and Robbers, and cut-throats, &c. he speaks more like an Atheïst than a Christian, and like one, who believeth, nothing of a Divine Providence of restraining evil men at his pleasur, and not suffering them to go further than he seeth meet. Doth he think that all the endeavours of the wicked men of the world can do any thing, but as GOD permits them? and that all the opposition to such by force of Armes can prevail but by God's blessing? If so, he must not think that such carnal and atheïstical rea∣sons can brangle the faith of those, who, out of pure obedience to God, and a desire to be conform to the Image of his Son, according to the measur of the Grace given them, so as to make them think they are less secure, under the protection of the ALMIGHTY, than by their guns and swords. But this is consistent with his faith, the most eminent of
whose brethren have learned to preach with sword and pistols, and in stead of the guard of a Christian boldness and a good Conscience, which the primitive Christians and Apostles used, will be guarded with men in armes, and that in opposition to the authority of those they confess to be their lawfull Magistrates. And if he say that we must not lay-aside law∣full means, I ask him whether he thinks, not to defend a man's self from a principle of Conscience, be simply unlawfull? Let him remember the most remarkable deliverances, that God's People met withall, was, when there appeared least of outward help, and where the arme of flesh had least hand in it, as the children of Israels deliverance out of Egypt, as also Iudges c 5: from ver. 16 to the end, 2 Kings 6: 17, &c. and cha∣pters 7, 13. & 19: 35. and in other places. To prove that Christ in the 5th of Matth. commands no more than in the Law, he referreth to the writings of their Divines: but he might have done this all to all he has written, if he judge it sufficient, and so have saved himself a great deal of labour, since he saith elsewhere, all I have written is confuted long ago. How men can love their enemies, and yet kill and destroy them, is more than I can reach; but if it were so, such as rather suffer, than do it, do surely more love them, and to do so is no injury to our selvs nor neigh∣bours, when done out of conscience to God, in answering our duty to whom we must not regarde our own or neighbours profite. And if what I grant of the lawfulness of Fighting to the present Magistrates and state of Christians be considered, it will render all his arguments superfluous, since he confesseth a time will come, in which the prophecy of Esay 2: 4. Mic. 4: 3. will be fulfilled, and thinks fit there should be a praying for the fulfilling of it: and what if some believe that as to some there is a be∣ginning already of the fulfilling thereof? We do nothing doubt but that of Rev. 16: 5, 7. which he mentions, pag. 522. will in due time be ful∣filled; but we see no necessity of believing that that will be performed by outward fighting, or that the Saints shall need to draw carnal swords, or shut cannons, towards the performing of it. When he saith that the argument of fighting is not taken from the corrupt nature of man, pag. 519. he must have forgotten himself, since, had not man faln, and so his nature been corrupted, he may infer, if he can, where there should have been an occasion for fighting with carnal weapons. And since he confess∣eth that in nothing more, than in warr, is seen the fruits of man's rebel∣lion against God, he may thence see how little need Christians have to
plead for it: as for the citation out of the Confession of Faith, wherewith to fill-up he closeth his chapter, I know not to what purpose he did it, since no man doubts their faith in this matter. ¶ 2. He begins his 30th chapter, of Oaths, with saying, We deny their lawfulness, that we may destroy all Policy and Government: But it must only be the Devil's government, for where the Government of Christ pre∣vails, and men speak truth, there all must confess there is no need of Oaths; and also where the like punishment of Perjury is inflicted for speaking falsly, the end of Oaths is obtained, and that without break∣ing Christ's command. Thus according to his own concession, since the verity may be had as wel without an oath, none should be urged to take an oath. But let us see what after a citation out of their Confession of faith he saith to answer Matth. 5: 34. and James 5: 12. which saith so express∣ly, Swear not at all, to this he saith that Christ is only interpreting the Law, and not adding any thing to it, and that it only relates to ordinary discourse: but for proof of this he has nothing but an heap of words asserting the thing. To all which, till he bring some Scriptur proof, there needs no answer, but oppose Christ and James words, Swear not at all, it is not said, except ye be called before a Judge, let him prove this exception by Scriptur next time, and therefore till he do so, his affirming over and over again that Christ for bad no more than was forbidden in the Law, pag. 525. is to no purpose. The Law forbadidle swearing and oaths in communication, but Christ's resumption shews throughout that chapter some more to be urged, to any that understand plain words, and will not shut their eyes. That its being said, Deut. 6: 13. Thou shalt swear by his Name, is urged as an explication or comprehensive part of Moral worship I deny, and re∣mains for him to prove, or that it was more than a command to the Iews to swear by the true God, that they might not swear by idols; and till he prove this, arguments founded upon it need no further answer. As for what he addeth n 8. to prove Swearing not to be of the Devil, because commanded of God, and afterwards concluding that my urging against it, as being of the Devil, is pregnant of blasphemy, because it would infer some of the ceremonial Laws of God to have their rise not from the will of God, but from the work of the Devil, he sheweth here more malice than strength of reason. Was not the command, Deut. 24: v. 1. Let him write for her a bill of divorcement, a part of the ceremonial Law? and yet Christ saith, Matth. 19: 7. that Moses did this because of
the hardness of their hearts, and is not hardness of heart, which gave a rise to this command of the work of the Devil? Let him then make the ap∣plication, and then answer the empty bluster he has made of blasphemy. And doth not what Christ saith of this matter of Divorce, Matth. 5: v. 31, 32. shew Christ commanded more there, than was commanded under the Law? He confesseth, pag. 529. that God can not be said properly to swear, albeit somethings being ascribed to God makes them not un∣lawfull to us, yet any things being ascribed to God makes it not lawfull to us, when Christ commands the contrary. That Christ' saying Verily Verily is more than yea and nay, I deny, and it remains for him to prove it, That the Apostles asseverations are Oaths he affirms in like manner, but proves it not. His thinking we, in being willing to do as much as the Apostle did, do strain at a gnat, and swallow a camel, is but an evidence of his railing genius, as it doth of his malice in catching what follows, that the question is not What Paul or Peter did? but What their and our Lord? for that is not said by me, as believing they did swear, or that their words were Oaths. But the giving not granting it had been so, to shew it would not prove this thing now lawfull, and that Peter and Paul both had their failings, though not in that, himself will not deny, which is enough to shew their practice in all things is not to be our rule. His 531 page needeth no answer, being but his own affirmations and conje∣cturs in stead of answers, these may be considered, when he proves them. That Paul swore any way we deny, and neither Abraham's nor Iacob's pra∣ctice, nor yet that of Angels will warrand us to imitat them, when Christ has commanded the contrary: and albeit he acknowledge the testimony of Pythagoras, Socrates and Plato doth shame many Christians for their swearing, yet he can not omitt here his ordinary reflexion at our Religion, as Paganish. He confesseth that many of the Fathers were against swear∣ing, and indeed none any ways versed in Antiquity can deny this to have been the general faith of the primitive Church.
Section Seventeenth, Wherein his XXXI Chapter of Civil Honour, and XXXII called A View of the Conclusion is considered. ¶ 1. AS he enters upon this chapter of Civil Honour, he accuseth me as being effronted and shameless, for saying All our adver∣sarys plead for the lawfulness of superfluity of Apparel and Plays; and to make this appear the more probable, he would seem to be much against these things, and wisheth there were less of them. But all will not do, nor hide him in this matter, for he will not deny the lawful∣ness of Laces and Ribbands, the man will not offend the good Ladys, to whose bountifulness they are so much obliged, so as simply to deny their superfluitys. And how can he? since it is become a practice of some eminent Presbyterian Ministers, which they have learned from their friends the Popish Priests and Iesuitish Emissarys, not only to go up and down with their sword and pistols, to evidence they are men of Blood, and brethren in Politiks, but also in their laced bands and cravats, perriwigs and gilded belts, to make them look like Monsieurs. But if he think that I wrong any of our adversaries in this, let him tell me which of them dogmatically hold it as a general principle, that superfluity of Cloaths and the use of Plays in ge∣neral is unlawfull, whatever some particulars may do, whereof I made an exception. As for any their laying-aside these vanitys out of pride, I do not justify it; for him to insinuat that as to us, is but his bare malitious assertion. After that (pag. 534.) he has told his Reader he comes to treat of that which is peculiar to the Quakers, he gives him a large list of strange Heretiks, as among others, Heracleonites, Carpocratians, Gnosimachians, enough to fright ignorant folk, telling, that what the Devil could not effectuat by all these, he thinketh now to accomplish by the miserable Quakers. It seems the man must be one of the Devil's counselours, that he is so wel ac∣quainted with his purposes, but I shall not covet this his preferment, nor seek to imitat the language he has learned of that Court, which he bestows in the following page to rage at us, as rude and uncivil, and such as deny to give the least signification of civil honour to Equals or Superiours, which is false. And then by a strange figur he will seem no less known in God's
Counsel than he before would appear in the Devil's, and therefore ma∣gisterially concludes that God has given us up to the unmaning of our selvs, who have renounced all Christianity, and every thing that looketh like serious Religion. It seems bowing, and taking-off the hatt, and complemental rules, is this man's Christianity and serious Religion, which the Quakers have re∣nounced; I will next examin how he proves it. ¶ 2. Pag. 536. He tels that honour is to be rendered to whom honour is due, but this we never denied. The question is Whether honour may not be rendered without bowing or taking-off the hatt? The Scripturs he brings here, to prove this, are so far from doing it, that most of them are egregiously impertinent, as will appear; for as to Abraham's and Lot's bowing there mentioned, I shew in my Apology how their practice in that was not to be a Rule to us. But he brings Act. 14: 15. where Paul and Barnabas are said, in our English translation, to say Sirs, and Act. 27: v. 10. where Paul saith Sirs to the Mariners, to prove they gave a title of honour, as if Sirs did infer the plural number of what usually Sir to one imports with us. but if he had looked the Greek, he would have found in both places  which signifies Men. I would willingly know, if the man will be so void of ingenuity, as not to acknowledge his folly here: for as for the Jaylour's practice, he will have much ado to prove it a Rule to Christians. Neither is he less impertinent, when ge brings the instance of Mary saluting Elizabeth, Paul the Church of Corinth, Christ desiring his Disciples to salute the house, and Paul in his epistles desiring such as he wrot to, to salute others in his name; for who will not condemn him of folly, in imagining that the Apostle by these Christian salutations desired them to take-off their hats and bow to one another in his name, or that this was the way Christ willed his Disciples to salute the houses they came to. He must remember to prove this next time, and know we deny neither Salutations nor Civility, but have not yet heard him prove that they consist in such practices. He confesseth, pag. 537. that several of the titles used may be granted not to be lawfull to Christians, but thinketh that makes nothing for our blunt and rustik (as he terms it) Thou and Thee, with which we speak to Magistrates and great Persons, no otherwise than we would do to our foot-boys. But since he confesseth they use this Thou and Thee, which he thinks so blunt and rude, when speaking to God, I desire he may acquaint me next time, why they speak to God no other ways than they would do to their foot-boys, to whom I
hope he will say they owne greater respect than to any Magistrates or great Personages whatsoever: and this shews it was no rudeness in me to address my self thus in my epistle to the King, besides that what he quarels being written in Latine shews his folly, since it is usual for them∣selves writing in that language to use the Singular number even to Kings. And forasmuch as he thinks this so absurd, that in a silly scoff he saith, under favour of my Thouship, and Pag. 540. he accounts this in us singularity, contempt, pride, yea and to proceed from a more stinking root; I will desire of him to know how it comes that the Bishop of Canterbury in the corona∣tion of this present King, in most of his addresses to him during that so∣lemnity, terms him Thee and Thou, as Philips in his history relates, print∣ed at London, Anno 1670, pag. 764, 765. But if he think this of little weight, as being the practice of a proud Prelat in his esteem, what will he say of his reverend Brethren the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, who teach us in their Directory to use this Thee and Thou, as in the forme pre∣scribed for Marriage, in these words, I I. N. dotake thee to be my Wife, &c. He must say, that either they had a reason for this, or they had none, if none, he must conclude them to have been an irrational pack, which I think he will hardly do; if they had, when he gives it, let him free them of pride, contempt and singularity, or something more stinking, (to use his own phrase) and find us guilty of it. For his proverb of being as proud as a Quaker, we think he has hardly authority to make this pass for one, though by coining this it seems he affects to be a Proverb-monger; but if vulgar proverbs were of any great weight, I could tell him of more antient and authentik, long ago ascribed to his brethren. Pag. 537. he saith, the terms of Grace and Eminenty are not given because of per∣sonal enduements corresponding thereunto, but because of Place and Power. But he should prove that to do so, where these vertues are absent, is ether pro∣per or lawfull, since in addressing our selvs to any, in saying Your Grace or Your Eminency, we suppose them to have these enduements, which if they have not, we speak a lye, and that is not lawfull to Christians. To prove the lawfulness of the compellation of Majesty, to Kings, he telleth that the Lord bestowed upon Solomon royal Majesty, and Nebuchadnezzar, saying, Dan. 4: 26. that Excellent Majesty was added unto him, in both which places it imports no more than an outward glory: but where finds he that any, addressing themselvs to Kings, use the compellation of Ex∣cellent Majesty, as is usual now adays? he will read his Concordance often
over, ere he can find this. As for his jeering me about my Concordance, and saying, I cite Scripturs at random, for that Psal. 29: 4. Majesty is ascrib∣ed to the Thunder, he but declares his own folly; Majesty is there ascrib∣ed to GOD, for what is ascribed to God's voice is ascribed to him: he may say also then that Powerfull in the same verse is not ascribed to God, but to the thunder, if he resolve to be ridiculous. What he saith, pag. 540. n. 11. that we salute no man, is false; but the question is, Whether there can not be salutations without the uncovering of the head, or bow∣ing the body? this he should have proved. He saith, Abraham's bowing was against no Law of the Creation, but so was Abraham's practice in the matter of Hagar (which I brought, to shew that Abraham's practice was not to be our Rule) But since Abraham's practice in the matter of Hagar, and the like practice of Jacob and the Iews, was permitted to them, and yet thence we are not allowed to do the like, that shews that argument de∣duced from Abraham's simple practice is of no weight. He thinks it silly to say that bowing of the body and knee and uncovering of the head are only external signes of our adoration of God, because it may as wel be in∣ferred that a man must never bow his body to tie his shoes, or uncover his head to have his hair cut. But this his answer is silly, since men do not these things as a signification of honour, which is the end of their bowing to one an∣other, and the thing here in question; and therefore his repetition of the same in the following page needs no answer. He would make Morde∣cai's case singular, because Haman was an Agagite, one come of Agag: but since he is so good at genealogies, let him prove this next time, for if the similitude of the name were enough, might we not say with as much reason, that Iohn Brown is a Brownist? and yet perhaps he would think this a reproach. ¶ 3. But the poor man thinks it's like he has hitt the nail on the head to purpose, when he saith, pag. 542. upon this subject, One thing I would ask, what he thinketh of that honour and worship, that was given to James Nay∣lor, as he rode into Bristol, Oct. 24. 1656? I answer, I think it was both wicked and abominable, and so do the people called Quakers, who there∣upon disowned him and all those that had an hand in it, as by several Let∣ters found written to him, and other papers, if need were, I could at large prove; but it sufficeth to inform the Reader of this, that he was denied by that People, and not any ways afterwards owned by them, untill several years after, that he testified his full repentance for that
thing, in a publike assembly, upon his knees, with many tears, signify∣ing the same also under his hand, which also was printed. And thus is swept away his malitious insinuation, pag. 530. as to this, and also what his brother R. M. C. saith so often in his Postscript, in terming us Naylo∣rists, as if I. N. had been the first among the Quakers, hence Iohn Brown in the list he gives of the Quakers Errors of Civil Honour, calleth him their first Father: but to teach him not to be so forward to lye next time, he may know that years before I. N. joyned with the Quakers, there were hundreds went under that name, and who both preached and practised their way. This may shew the sober Reader, how apt these men are to print malitious lyes, and R. M. C. so frequently seeking to denominat us from that name, because of this, sheweth how frivolous and false it is. I must mind that it were but a just retribution, and no injury done to them, (as this of theirs to us is a manifest one) if I should minde them of no less abominable actions, than ever was or could be proved against I. N. not many years ago done by some eminent among them, who dyed without any sense of true repentance (whereof I. N. gave singular evi∣dence.) What would he think then, if I should thence term them ists? But I spare them at present, in hopes they will see their folly, and amend. After this thing of I. N. he ends this chapter with railing, but I observe he makes an entire omission of what I say, n. 16. upon the last These in my Apology, which I therefore refer to the Reader's serious consideration. ¶ 4 I come now to his last section entituled A View of my Conclusion, where coming to examin the few lines wherewith I conclude my Apolo∣gy, he bestows upon me a flood of most unreasonable railing. I did in that conclusion recommend to the Reader the system I had presented to him, of the True Christian Religion, which this man here with many bitter words affirms to be other ways, but we must leave the judgment of this to the Reader, when he has seriously read both what he saith on the one hand, and I on the other. And whereas I in my Conclusion did shew the Reader, how falsly we are charged with denying the outward ap∣pearance of Christ, the real existence of Heaven and Hell as a place without us, the Last and General Judgement, the Resurrection of the Body, by telling him seriously, and in the presence of God, that these accusations are false, and that we really believe these things; he with a most effronted impu∣denee reckons it boldness in me, to say so, pag. 554. and that because of the testimony of Faldo and some others of our manifest Opposers, as if
they should know what I and my Brethren believe, better than I my self do, or should be more credited in giving account of our faith, than our selvs. Who can secure themselves from being stigmatized as the Vildest and grossest of Heretiks from the malice of lyars, if this method be to be followed? But to proceed to shew his unjustice and unfairness in this matter in the highest degree, contrary to the rules of fair disputing, and all honest dealing in matters of controversy, it doth manifestly appear, in that notwithstanding in his Title he declares he intends an Examina∣tion of the Quakers Religion, as the same is presented to the world by me, when he has laboured all he can by turning, perverting, commenting, and divining, to squeeze out of my words all that may seem absurd and erroneous, or at lest which he will have to be so, and that he can not find enough there to render the Quakers such horrid monsters and Vild blasphemers, as he ever and anon proclaims them to be; then away he runs from R. B's. Apology, which is the theam of his Examination, and comes off with a But is not the man of this opinion, or May we not conjectur that he is of such and such an opinion (which to be sure is more absurd) as such ans such a man as Mr Stalham, Mr Norton, or Mr Hicks and Faldo re∣late of such and such Quakers, that say so and so? Is this justice? Is this Christian dealing? Is this honesty, as among men, in writing against a People not to seek their opinions and faith from their own mouths and pens, but from those of their manifest enemies and opposers? Doth not this bespeak the height of malice with a witness, and shew a determinat resolution to calumniat at any rate? Is this to walk accordlng to the Royal Law, to do as he would be done by? Dare I. B. say he would be content to be done so by? Would he judge it equal dealing, if one writing against Presbytery should represent them not as they declare themselvs to be, but out of the writing of their manifest opposers, as to give credit to Spotswood's History, in judging of the rise and growth of Presbytry? Would he judge it fair reasoning, if one writing against the Calvinistical points of Reprobation should in stead of making use of their own Authors, or when he could not make the matter bad enough there, tell the case is so and so, as Arminius or Episcopius relates it; or one writ∣ing against Protestants shoule, in the representing of their Principles make use of Bellarmin and other Popish writers? If this then would just∣ly be accounted ridiculous and absurd, let the judicious Reader judge what character may Iohn Brown so doing deserve. But above all is sin∣gularly
to be noticed I. Brown his venerable esteem of his beloved Au∣thor Mr Hicks, as he terms him, of whom he has so high an esteem, that he hath given him more place in his book than any other, there being no Author, to my observation, so frequently cited by him, who, be∣cause this Thomas Hicks has been the most abusive and grossest lyar and calumniator that has appeared against us, therefore he receivs him with the most kindly entertainment; for as malice against Christ of old ce∣mented Pilat and Herod to put up their privat quarels, so at this day it hath done these men against his Truth and followers, else what should it mean that a fierce Presbyter should so heartily embrace a keen Anabaptist Preacher, since the same man often upbraids the Quakers with their affinity to the Anabaptists? Certainly the Presbyters cause must be at a low ebb, and he in mighty fear of the Quakers prevailing, when he can so cordially shake hands with his beloved Anabaptist brother Hicks, to help at a dead lift against the Quakers, and take him for his Auxiliary with his lyes and forgerys, to make a noise, when other matters and arguments fail. But it had been more wisely done in I. Brown, ere he had given the Anabaptist Hicks his writings so much place in his book, to have considered the an∣swer to the first dialogue and continuation thereof, written by W. P. en∣tituled Reason against Railing, Truth against Fiction, and the answer to his third Dialogue, by the same Author, entituled The counterfeit Christian detected, and the Real Quaker justified: for I question if I. B. will judge it safe to take implicity upon trust in matters of controversy of Religion, without examining the word of an Anabaptist, unless it be against the Quakers, where any witness it's like with him may be admitted, for if he do but speak evil enough, it will be acceptable, whether true or not. And I. B. should also have done wel to have informed himself, how this Thomas Hicks, being publikly called to an account before several thousand witnesses, for his gross abuses in framing answers in the Quakers name, which was never said by any Quaker, and in other ways perverting and misapplying sentences of their writings, to questions of his own fram∣ing, so that he might make them as impertinent and ridiculous as he was willing others should esteem them to be; did pittifully succumb, so that his best defence to come off, was to plead the infirmity of his lungs, which made him desert the second meeting held for that purpose, and substitute in his place a free-will Anabaptist (with whom I suppose I. B. will yet have less fellowship) who made a noise and brawling, to keep off the chief
matter: and yet the grosness of Thomas Hicks dealing was so discovered, that some of his own way and others who are not Quakers did publikly yea and in print declare their abhorrency of his forgerys, as appears by a book written at that time, entituled The twelve Pagan Principles consider∣ed, upon which Thomas Hicks undertakes to unchristian the Quakers, and another, entituled Quakerisme no Paganisme, and another, The Christian a Quaker, the Quaker a Christian, all written upon that occasion by men that were no Quakers. Yea Th. Hicks's abuses and lyes were so far from doing us hurt, that they were instrumental to bring among us a young Independent Preacher, of good repute, and wel received and heard among them, who has told my self, that the reading of Hicks Dialogues and seeing his gross lyes and abuses gave the first rise to his searching after and embracing the Truth; and when Th. Hicks and his complices were fur∣ther pursued by the answer to their pretended narration of these debates, entituled Forgery no Christianity, written by Thomas Ellwood, and another paper, entituled A Fresh Pursuit, by the same hand, wherein he arraigneth the said Hicks and his compllces of falshood, lying, forgery, and requires them to make them good, or else abide under the just condemnation of so manifest guilt, which they were glad to do, and have not so much as peeped out now these 3 years, since the last of these transactions, untill now this vomit, of which all sober men are ashamed, and from which the Authors have shamefully shrunk, is licked up by Iohn Brown, and is become the chief authority of his Tract. Will it savour wel in the mouths of sober Professors, that the chief gun, that I. B. useth against the Quakers, are the lyes, forgerys and abuses of a shameless Anabaptist? Certainly when I. Brown considers these things, he will, if malice hath not altogether blinded him, find that he has too suddenly laid hands up∣on his brother Hicks, ere he wel minded the consequence of it, and that so great an infusion of Hicks his Anabaptistical durt, which takes the best share of not a few pages of his book, will make the rest to stink, albeit it were more cleanly stuff, than it is. And for Faldo's books, out of which he coppyeth not a little in this chapter, he may find them both an∣swered by W. P. the one called Quakerism a new Nick name to old Christia∣nity, and the other the Invalidity of John Faldo's Vindication, in which, pag. 430, 431, 432, 433. he may find a list of Iohn Faldo's miscarriages in citing assertions said by Quakers, without telling the books, and of books without parts, chapters end page, of these books falsly cited, of
passages clipt and maimed, and others perverted by additions, and which makes up above 70, to which Iohn Faldo hath never had face yet to answer. So that this man may see what kind of authority he has made use of, and how his proofs are bottomed. And lastly, of our full belief of future states, and of the Resurrection, he may find a large account in a book call∣ed The Christian Quaker and his Divine Testimony vindicated, by W. Pen and G. Whitehead, printed in the Year 1674, from page 146 of the second part to the end. Section Eighteenth, Wherein Robert Macquare his Postscript is considered. ¶ 1. AS to R. M. C. his Postscript, which I come now to in the last place, I shall not need to be large, it being a compound and heap of most abusive and unreasonable railing against me and my Friends, on the one hand, and a most fawning manifest piece of nauseating and shameless Flattery to his brother I. Brown, on the other. In the very entry he brands our doctrin as the Devil's, and ourselves as his Ministers and Amanuenses, and a little after he exclaimeth thus, O what horrid! what hell-hatched, boid blasphemies this black brood belcheth forth! And for me in particular, pag. 559, 560. in a few lines he cals me both a Turk and a Devil, and what more his railing Spirit affords him: To all which I shall only say, the worst I wish him is heartily to desire the Lord to forgive him, as by the strength of his Grace I freely do. As to his brother I. Brown, he accounts him singularly acute, solidly learned and truely gratious. So that he conceits, if the Devil, who he supposeth drew me on to write, had his dictats again, he would bury or burn them: thence he highly exalts the great depth of this his little Presbyterian David, as he cals him, in the shining light and sharpness of his Examen. Sober men will blush to read such shameless flattery. And truely this Presbyterian Prince looks liker cursing Shimei, than little David; and he himself looks like the daring Philistim, who thus commends him, proclaiming a defiance in his name, as if no solid answer could be given: but such crying of triumph before hand will have small weight with men of reason. His jeering quibble at my words in my book of Universal Love, where I speak
overly of the felicity of my understanding, shews he wanted matter, but not malice. Many modest men will be found to have said as much of themselvs, neither did I that, as a thing by which I would have any to measur now either me or my writings: the greatest natural understand∣ing (wherein I confess my self freely to be inferior to many) availeth but little, yea often hurteth, to the chief thing needfull, to wit, regeneration, which by Grace and not by Nature, and therein I desire to glory. His petty remark upon Barclaij Argenis is both childish and malitious, he must know that the Quakers and my self do both abhorr and condemn such books, and truely my love to my name is not so great, that I would have that exempted; and therefore I could freely give my vote, that all Romances were burnt, and he will find it hard to prove that such are used by any of us, whileas I know some, who passed, and yet go for pious and elect Ladys, among them, that bestowed no small share of their time in reading them, and Preachers may be found eminent enough, whose closets are wel stor∣ed with most approved Romances, and some being challenged, even of note among the Presbyterians, by some serious professors, for their read∣ing of them, did justify it, as that, whereby they were helped in their pulpits to give their sermons a better lustre. So he may see these books are of more use to his brethren than us, who can content our selvs with such homely language, as the holy Scriptur teacheth. For what he saith of James Naylor I need return no answer, having sufficiently done it in the former section. And whereas he gives the example of the AntiNo∣mians, to shew the Quakers are not singular, in not being called after a particular person, he doth but miss of his aime, for the Quakers are known by that name as such, being an imbodyed People, consisting of several hundred gathered Churches, or Congregations; but the Antino∣mians are only here either some having these particular notions, and no such imbodyed people, else let him tell us where we may find these Anti-Nomian Churches I need say no more to this Postscript, which hath no∣thing in it but meer railing assertions as to me, and that the rather as I suppose R. M. C. will, long ere this appear in print, receive a solid and grave Letter from an old friend and acquaintance of his, which may make him sensible of his iniquity in this matter, if there be yet any Christian ingenuity abiding with him, and that by prejudice he is not totally blinded. ¶ As for his railing assertions of George Keith's book, we will see how
it is refuted in the promised answer to it, and then it will be time to an∣swer them, as to that, as wel as to the list of the blasphemous assertions, which they pretend they have goten out of it: but all Christians may judge how they are like to prove it blasphemous, when, as an instance of the blasphemous assertions, they give G. K's saying, that the Man Christ Jesus is the Mediator. And to help them to do their work fully, I desire them, when they go about to prove this assertion to be blasphemy, they may not forget the Apostle's words, 1 Timoth. 2: 5. For there is One GOD, and One Mediator between GOD and men, the MAN Christ Jesus, and shew how G. K's words are more blasphemous than these of the Apostle, which, to make it more plain to the Reader, I will add thus: G. K's position, which I. B. and R. M. C. two eminent Presbyterian Preachers, in the Index at the end of J. B's book, affirm to be one of the abominable heads of Quakerisme, is, That the MAN CHRIST JESUS is the MEDIATOR. The Apostle his assertion (1 Tim. 2: 5.) is, That there is One MEDIATOR between GOD and men, the MAN CHRIST JESUS. We desire the sense and censur of the Presbyterian Ministery upon this, or otherwise we hope they can not in reason be offended, if justly reputed accusers of the Spirit of God, that taught the Apostles to speak, and thence condemned, as signal Calumniators and Heretiks. Here follows the Letter of Lillias Skein to R. M. C.
AN Expostulatory EPISTLE, directed to ROBERT MACQVARE. Friend ROBERT MACQUARE, MY tender Love and Sympathy was great towards many of the Non-Conformists, who were suffering for Conscience sake, and not for interest espousing that opinion, of whom thy self be∣ing one, thou was often very near me, notwithstanding I knew generally the Non-Conformists are more imbittered and prejudiced against us, called Quakers, than any other men; yet this I often constructed to flow from misinformations concerning us, being so little acquainted with and conversant among us, whereunto your being so shy, was but like the Disciples in a storm seeing him appear in a manner they had not seen him before, thought he was coming nearer them for deliverance, yet they cried-out through fear, as if it had been the appearance of some evil Spirit. Other times I have looked upon the great prejudice many had against us answerable to Christ's saying, No man having drunk old wine, straightway desireth to drink new, they say the old is better, which hi∣therto hath and yet doth cause me bear with you, and love that which is good amongst you, wherever it appeareth. And so because of this love towards thee, I am the more concerned at this time with what thou hast lately published, for, though my acquaintance and intimacy with thee was not so much as others, yet it being in a very serious season with both of us, as I very wel remember, when thou was shut up close prisoner, and was daily in expectation of the sentence of death, thy deliverance from which I retain the fresh sense of, & it was and is with many such like seasons (wherein the Lord prepared my heart, and bended his ear) a sweet encouragement to trust him, and a singular engagement on me to wait for his immediat leadings and the manifestations of his will at all times. But Oh! since I heard of and read thy Postscripts to Iohn
Brown's book, and S. R his Letters, as is supposed, I am astonished, and much ashamed on thy behalf! O! is this the best fruits of so many years affliction thou hast to publish to the world? that one called and suffering as a Non-Conformist, (to this sinfull time) should have learned no more conformity to meek lowly Iesus (of whom it is said, he learned obedience, by the things which he suffered.) Surely none who read thy lan∣guage, will say, this man hath been with Jesus, but rather say, whoseso∣evers company thou hast been in, thou hast learned to be a cunning Artist at the scolding trade, and art therein vainly puffed-up, that thou even fleest aloft (though with waxen wings) above the lowly, harmeless, meek Spirit of Christ. And verily, had I all thy Rhetorik (whether natural, or acquired) which thou so much misimprov'st, to the gratifying of that which needs more to be crucified in thy self, and many, who are ready implicitly to follow thee; it is not in my desire to follow thy exam∣ple, nor shall I wish that ever thou have an answer from any of the Lord's People, in thy own terms, which are such as all sober unprejudiced People, who read them, will see thy Spirit most strongly imbittered, when thy pen is so dipt in gall, I say, it is not in my desire to bring forth one railing accusation against thee, neither to answer many things thou hast vented against the Lord's present work and witnesses, whom thou despisest and abhorrest more than dung under thy feet, and crowest over, yet, if the Living God (a part of whose host they are) see it meet, he can raise up the least of them, and make thee feel worm Iacob a threshing instrument with teeth to deal with thee, and thresh that Iofty malitious spirit of prejudice, that breaths through thee: the conside∣ration whereof upon thy own Soul's account is the occasion of this Let∣ter, wherein I desire to lay somethings before thee, which are with weight upon me, my compassions being kindled towards thee, that when the Lord cometh to visit the earth, thou shouldst be found among them, who are beating their fellow-servants, the hazard of which state thou knowst, and many will feel, when the Lord riseth up to the prey, for his eyes are upon the righteous, and his ears are open to their cries, though now he be trying the children of men, and permitting some to suffer, and others to do hard things; yet a hope lives in me, the time approacheth, wherein the Lord will more manifestly appear to the joy and refreshment of the single in heart, who suffer with him, and patiently wait for him, and for the shame and utter overthrow of his malitious opposers.
And so One of the Particulars I would lay before thee, is, a desire thou wouldst yet in the Lord's Light search thy own heart more, till thou findst out what secret affinity hath remained with thee to any of the Lord's enemies in thy own heart, for if all were brought under the go∣vernment of the Son of God inwardly, I am fully perswaded thy out∣ward opposition to the Lord's work could not long stand. The outward is a true figure of the inward, and I know by true experience all that de∣spight and disdainfull under valuing epithets thou squeezest up thy en∣gine to coyn (which one may feel answers not fully thy own satisfaction) for bespattering and loading that People and their principles, is but (alas!) a mirrour-glass set up to represent the low, mean, unworthy esteem thou bearest to the Light of Christ in its inward appearance in thee, as a reprover, for whosoever turneth universally at the reproofs of God's Light in the Conscience, shall witness the pouring forth of his Spirit in larger manifestations, according to Prov. 1: 23. But that Spi∣rit speaketh in thee, of which Ifaiah prophesied, Isa. 53: 2, 3, &c. concerning the outward appearance of the same Christ, our Head, and the Captain of our Salvation (whose sufferings, death, resurrection and glory we dearly own, and wait from day to day more to feel the pretious vertue thereof) although he then was and now is rejected and despised of men, who hide, as it were, their faces from him, because his outward appearance was as a root out of a dry ground, in whom there was no form, nor comelyness, nor beauty, that he should be desired by that mind, which was looking after great things, and expecting much out∣ward glory and advantage, and so Christ's appearance was mistaken by the learned Rabbies in that day, notwithstanding they had Moses and the Prophets testimonys, and were not wanting in reading the letter, as others now; for as it was then, it is now, he was & is mistaken by all, who seek any thing to glory in, save the Cross of Christ, for the wisdom of the flesh hath and doth lift faln man above the innocent Seed in them∣selvs, onely through which they can see the invisible glory of the Kingdom of God, and find an abundant entrance unto the righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Ghost, whereof it consists: wherefore take heed of being lifted up above the Seed, Light, Life and Spirit of Christ in thee, and so thou wilt see matter to work out thy Salvation in fear and trembl∣ing, and wilt not sit down upon former attainments or experiences, when the Life is gone.
Another thing I would put thee in remembrance of, in these present times, is the great danger of sinning at the waters of strife, whereof Moses his example may be a standing monument to all generations, of whom it was said, he was the meekest man upon the earth, yet at the waters of strife he spake unadvisedly with his lips, because of which he was debarred from entring into the promised rest. And are there not some, living at this day, who, with sorrow of heart, have observed the heat and bitter∣ness of spirit, that hath arisen because of differences and controversy concerning Religion, hath eaten out the life of that love and tenderness; that was with many, and having hurt the green thing in themselves and one another, hath brought on death, darkness, dryness, and sensible withering, and can not chuse but so to do, seing bitterness of spirit and prejudice, and such like frames in man or woman separats from God, while there any one abides? For God is Love, and he that dwels in God dwells in love, and Christ hath said Unless ye abide in me, ye can not bring forth much fruit, so not abiding in that pure Love to God, and his Image in his Children hath caused many fall short, and hath letted their progress, and made many lose sight of their way, and the Guide of their youth, and so they have not followed the Lord fully, nor followed him in the regeneration, renewing according to the increase of Light and the measurs of his manifestation, whereby they should know, even in this life, a being changed from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord. Thou mention'st in thy Postscript to J. B. pag. 557. Many who may re∣member with shame and confusion of face their laughing at, and making light of the apperance of that prodigie, and that it may cause some go groaning to their grave, being an evidence that ye knew not the signs of the time, and what they called you to do. To which I answer, Lightness and laughing among people that lay claim to Religion, is none of the least causes of mour∣ning, but I also believe if the appearance of Quakerism, so called, had in the beginning been looked on as the fore-runner of the down-fall of a meer man-made Ministry in these Nations; it's like it would have moved those, who laughed most, to have mourned most even then; and Ba∣bylon's marchants would have cryed Alas! Alas! but since now thou acknowledg'st in the space of a score of years at most, thou seest cause to mourn for th, which ye then laughed at, I am very willing to ad∣mitt of your own aknowledgmem for a ground of hope that the single∣hearted among the Non conformists may out-live all the clamor they are
now making against us, and in less than as many years more, may work through the foggs and mists, that now darken their understandings con∣cerning the signs of this time, and look back with shame and confusion on their great darkness that would have mourned for that which was mat∣ter of joy: and this is no far fetched consequence, for ye had then, and now the same acquaintance with the letter of the Scripturs, and as much humane learning and sharpness and natural abilitys for an acute examen, and so it followes by the rule of contrarys; and may it not be without presumption concluded, ye needed then, and do now, the help of the Spirit's immediat teachings in your own hearts, without which ye will not yet understand the signs of this time aright? which if ye did, ye would see the Lord staining the pride of all flesh, and bringing into contempt all the honorable in the earth, that the Lord alone may be exalted, and see him coming out of his Holy habitation to silence all flesh. Hath not the Lord removed most of all those, who were eminently instrumental to serve him in the work of the ministry? and is he not daily making their skirts bare, who remain, and daily making them to cease out of the midst of the National Church, who rejoyced in her pride? Is not his voyce sounding aloud unto such of you as yet remain? Ye shall no more be haughty because of my holy mountain, if to day ye will hear his voyce, harden not your hearts, for I am sure the Teacher, that will tell you infal∣libly what ye are called to do, is near, and is not removed into a cor∣ner. But it is the enemies work to vaile and cover present dutys and opportunitys, and represent what is past or lost as very desirable, and even to prompt a people or person to lament and bewail their by-past failings, and short-comings, who do little heed or regard the worth of the remaining season, and so to redeem the time, wherefore my advice, in tender love to thy Soul is, that thou wait on the Lord, to understand aright the import of such signs, as are now appear∣ing, when the Lord is proceeding to work marvellous works and won∣ders in the earth and is making the wisdom of the wise to perish, and the understanding of the prudent to be hid; and pouring out his Spirit upon Sons and Daughters, servants and hand-maids, provoking to jea∣lousy and angering the mighty learned wise men in this generation by the foolish appearance of a company of illiterat tradesmen, who were never bred up at schools and universitys, weavers and shoe-makers, and fishers. Yea is not one of the dreadfull signs of this time fulfilling in thee and
thy Brethren, Rev. 16: 8, 9.—the fourth Angel poured out his vial upon the Sun, and power was given unto him to scorch men with fire. And men were scorched with great heat, and blasphemed the Name of God, which hath po∣wer over these plagues: and they repented not, to give him glory? And whe∣ther this plague be not poured out upon your Anti-Christian Sun, and ye be the persons, that are thus scorched, your dialect doth sufficiently declare unto all those, whose eyes the Lord hath opened. I also desire thee to consider how inconsonant with true Christianity a spirit of perse∣cution is, and how much more unsutable, and unequal for a people or person under the same condemnation. Surely that poor man, who had been but a little time in Christ's company, was so far influenced by his meek and moderat Spirit, as not onely to forbear rayling himself against suffering Christ, but to rebuke his fellow-companion for so doing, which instance will stand in judgment against thee, for the contrary practice, neither will thy denying us to be members of Christ, and not suffering for wel-doing, thy accounting us Demoniaks, will not avail thee, nor cover thee from that wo, (if thou obtain not mercy to repent) denunced against such as call good evil, and evil good, and Light darkness, and darkness Light, in that day, when the Lord Jesus shall de∣clare before men and angels we are his friends and followers. O Robert! thy hard speeches have manifested thy own sad acknowledgment to be very true, the Holy fire is gone out with thee indeed, in place of which, that, which never was, nor is of God's kindling, is brought forth, and this is not now to be found by secret search in corners by secret sur∣mises: but is by many of you laid open, and in thy late Postscripts, as on a theatre set up, as those, who run, may read the holy fire, if ever there was any, is quite extinct: concerning which compound of unjust groundless accusations and malitious inventions I hope I may say there are many sober serious people, who fear and serve the Living God, inward Jewes whose hearts the Lord hath circumcised, to love him, who desire continually in the integrity of their hearts to serve him, against whom I know no divination nor inchantment of Devils or men shall prosper, of which blessed company I do avouch my self one, through the Free Grace of God, and I hope I, and many with me, have put all thine and thy Brethrens writings in the Lord's own hand to answer, for the vindication of his Glory, and the mani∣festation of his Truth, and I desire to make no worse use of thy Post∣scripts
than Hezekia made of the writings of Rabshakeh in that day, unto the Righteous Lord who searcheth the heart, and trieth the reins, do I ap∣peal, for whose immediat help and seasonable powerfull appearance I desire both to hope, and patiently to wait, untill he have performed his whole work in Zion and Jerusalem both amongst you and us, then shall be brought to pass the sure promise, the Lord will punish the fruit of the stout heart of his adversary, and the glory of his high looks, in that day he will inwardly and outwardly both plead our cause, and execute judgment for us, He will bring forth our righteousness as the light, and make his judgments for us manifest as the noon-day, although we lie among the black pots of your reproaches. Now, the Lord will bring us forth unto the Light, and we shall behold his righteousness fulfilled in you or manifested upon you; my witness is in heaven, I am one, who desires not the evil day, but am willing to embrace all the sweet opportunitys of the drawings of my Father's love and the arisings of his Life to stand in the gapp for the single-hearted among you, and I must declare, for the exoneration of my own Conscience, I am an expe∣rimental witness how grievously thou violatst the Truth, in misre∣presenting the things, which thou callest the bitter root springing up in these sprouts of hell. 1. Mens not receiving the love of the Truth. 2. Their pleasing themselves with names and notions, while Christ was not received to dwell in the heart. 3. Their not departing from iniquity, who seemed to call on his Name, I am a witness, when the Lord called me out from among the Presbyterians, I was one, who ac∣cording to my education and information and inclination from my child-hood was a true lover of that called the Glorious Gospell, and a constant attender upon the declarations thereof, and the messengers feet, that published it, were beautifull to me, so long as those Ordinances of man were unto me as the Ordinances of Christ, which was more than 30 years, I loved them more than all things in this world, I passed through them hungry, and hardly bestead for many years, feeling after Life and immortality, but could not find that, somewhat was raised in me, that words and reports could not feed, names and notions I minded little, but Christ to dwell in me, was that and is that more and more I press af∣ter. And now I must for the Truth's sake say somewhat, which I hum∣bly mention with a fresh remembrance of the Love, Power and tender Mercy of God, who enabled me (I know the Lord will not impute it to
be boasting) in that season, wherein the Lord revealed the true way to life and immortality to me, by his inward appearance in my Soul, it was a time, wherein he had mercifully turned me from all that ever his Light inwardly and Law outwardly had condemned me for, my heart also did bear witness for me that whatsoever I had known would please him, I was chusing to do that, not that thereby I was seeking justification in my own righteousness, but a sure evidence of my interest in him, who was made unto us Righteousness, Justification, &c. This blessed glimpse of my begun freedom was given me in a seasonable time, that I might thereby be enabled to speak with mine enemy in the gate, and be en∣couraged to believe in the Light and wait upon the Lord, to feel his vertue perfectly to cleanse me from all filthyness of flesh and Spirit. Neither was I an undervaluer of the Scripturs, they were my Rule then, and I hope for ever my life shall answer them, I think they honour the Scripturs most, who live most according to them, and not they, who call them the only Rule, yet do not make them their pattern. The Scripturs of Truth were pretious to me, and by them was I taught not to walk nor worship in the way of the People, the Spirit shewing me his mind in them, and then I saw in his Light, that it is not the Scripturs many adore so much as their own corrupt glosses upon them, neither can my expe∣rience go along with what thou affirmest of the hazard of converse with that People. It is very wel known to all that lived in the place where I sojourned, I was none who conversed with them, I was never at one of their meetings, I never read one of their books, unless accidentally I had found them where I came, and lookt to them, and laid them by again. So now it remains with me to tell thee what was the occasion I joyned with them, since it was none of those thou mention'st, which I will very singly and can very comfortably do; it was that thing ye school-men call Immediat Objective Revelation, (which my desire is ye were more particularly and feelingly acquainted with) whereby the Lord raising in my Soul his feeling Life, I could not sit down satisfied with hearing of what the Son of God had done outwardly, (though I believe thereby he purchased all that Grace and Mercy, which is inward∣ly wrought in the hearts of his Children) untill I should be a partaker of the vertue and efficacy thereof, whereby I might possess the Sub∣stance of things hoped for. I saw an historical faith would neither cleanse me, nor save me: if that could save any, the Devils were not
without a door of hope. I felt I needed the Revelation of the Son of God in me. All that ever I read or heard, without this, could not give me the Saving knowledge of God. None knoweth the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son revealeth him, through the vertue whereof mine eyes were more and more by degrees opened, for the tender-hearted Samari∣tan had pitty upon my wounded Soul, when both Priest and Levit passed by, and the watch-men rent my vail, and when there was no eye to pitty, nor hand to help me, he drew near, and poured in wine and oile, as he saw needfull, and fulfilled the promise in measur, wherein he had long caused me to hope, he that follows me, shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the Light of Life, and that sweet saying, whereby I am confirmed and comforted, if evil Parents know how to give their children good things, how much more will the Lord give his holy Spirit to those who ask him? When your children ask bread, will ye give them a stone? or when they ask a fish, will ye give them a serpent? These pretious Scripturs, and many such like, being opened up and applied by the Spirit of Truth powerfully and sea∣sonably (in saying, be not faithless, but believing, times above number be∣fore and since hath made me set to my seal to these words of Christ, The words that I speak are Spirit and Life, and as I walk with him, and abide in him, watching at the posts of Wisdoms gates, travelling in Spirit more and more to bring forth fruit unto him, and walk worthy of him, unto all wel-pleasing, daily to dye unto self, that Christ may live in me, I becom∣ing a passive creatur, and he an active Christ, in the encrease of his Government I feel the encrease of my peace And so, my friend, thou hast here, by some touches at things, occa∣sion to see how far thou art mistaken concerning us, and how far contra∣ry to the Truth, as it is in Jesus, thou represent'st many things to the world, speaking evil of things which thou knowst not, and if thou dost, the greater is thy sin, two Particulars indeed I can not strain charity so far as to believe thou thinkst, do we deny Jesus Christ, and justification through his Righteousness, because we make the sufficiency thereof of a more universal extent, than ye, or because we love whole Christ so much, and his seamless coat that we will not have it divided? Nay we dare not divide justification and sanctification, neither confound them, we have felt the Blood and the Spirit distinct things, yet inseparable: neither canst thou think we make void the Scripturs, because we honour the Spirit that was before the Scripturs were written, and bear testimony against all,
who deny the Spirit's immediat teachings to be the universal privilege of his People, whereby ye take away the key of knowledge, and neither enter the Kingdom, nor suffer others, who would, but monopolize knowledg to your selvs, and intrude your meanings upon the Consciences of men, as the Rule, which meanings indeed I do not own, either as the only, or any Rule, but as the Spirit of Christ in my Conscience answers it; the testimony of the Spirit of Truth in thousands with me will stand and rise up against thee, in the presence of the Lord, when all thy unjust re∣proaches and malitious accusations shall melt away before the presence of the Glory of the heart-searching God, before whose Tribunal I desire daily to stand, that he may more narrowly search me by his Light, and both discover and destroy what he finds contrary to his Pure nature and holy will, whether mediatly or immediatly revealed, and before whose Tribunal thou and I will, ere long, more solemnly appear to give an ac∣count of things we have done in the body, which that thou mayst do with joy, and not with grief, hereafter when thou commend'st thy ad∣vice to the Readers of thy Epistles, have so much mercy upon thy own and the Souls of those thou writ'st to, as to desire them to ponder their path, and be established, and be sure they become to the holy faith, and not to an implicite believing the Tradition of men, for by so doing in∣deed thou and as many as thou canst influence may come to farewel, ac∣cording to Prov. 4: 26. Ponder thy path, and be established, and turn not to the right hand, nor to the left. I am one, Newtyle, the 8 of the fourth moneth, 1678. Who, in my measur, travell for the redemption of the Seed of God in all Soules, and in thine. LILLIAS SKEIN.
A Catalogue Of some of the many downright Lyes and Calumnys, which he asserts, in the Index before his book, to be the assertions of the Quakers. All these things he asserts falsly of us. 1. THat we arrogantly stile our selvs the servants of God. 2. That we glory of the Title Quakers. 3. That we account our selves the only Teachers of Truth, equa∣lizing our selvs to the Apostles. 4. That we say we are perfect, without sin. 5. That we only tast, see and smell the inward Light. 6. That we assert our expe∣riences, in matters, that can not be experienced. 7. That we assert our selves to be equal with God. 8. That we say, all is done without the Spirit, that is not done in our way. 9. That we remain covered, when they pray or praise, really to mock. 10. That we ascribe as much to our own writings, as to the Scri∣pturs. 11. That we speak basely of Learned men. 12. That we condemn the stu∣dy of Original Languages. 13. That we speak most basely of the Scripturs. 14. That we say they are no Rule to us. 15. That we call them imper∣fect. 16. That we disswade from reading and studying them. 17. That we say, God only worketh a possibility of Salvation. 18. That we say, God ordain∣eth nothing from eternity. 19. That we deny Christ's se∣cond coming. 20. That we are not clear con∣cerning Jesus of Nazareth his being the Son of God. 21. That we acknowledge no Christ, but a Christ within us. 22. That we make him no∣thing but a meer holy man. 23. That a Christ without us is but a carnal Christ with us. 24. That we are unclear touch∣ing the sin of Adam, and the fall. 25. That we make Original Sin to be a substance. 26. That we deny that Hea∣thens have any thing of the Law written in their hearts. 27. That we say, a Pagan can perform all inward worship easily. 28. That we confound Reve∣lations with the gratious opera∣tions of the Spirit.
29. That we succeed to the old Enthusiasts. 30. That we turn the history of Christ's Death into allegorys. 31. That we wildly describe it. 32. That we say, there is no more advantage to be had by the history of Christ's Death, than by the history of other Saints. 33. That we miserably mistake the judgment of the Orthodox about Reprobation. 34. That in exaggerating the matter of Reprobation we mise∣rably belch out against God. 35. That we deny Faith and Repentance to be the gifts of God. 36. That we vilify the vertue and efficacy of Christ's Satisfa∣ction. 37. That we deny all imputa∣tion of Righteousness. 38. That we say, the Patriarchs had no faith of the Messiah to come. 39. That with us all members of the Church are Officers. 40. That we say all Worship must be done by inward Inspira∣tions, as to time, place, and dura∣tion. 41. That we make no use of the Scripturs in our Worship. 42. That in our Worship we unchristian and unman our selves. 43. That we deny Magistrates to be lawfull that are not of our way. 44. That we are against giving of all honour and respect to Supe∣riors or equals. 45. That we assert no Heaven nor Hell, but what is within us. I could have noted several others, which are direct enough lyes, set down in the Index, besides not a few he has in the book, which are not in his Index, and which the Reader will in this Vindication observe. There are also several in the Index which are false, and not owned by us, in the terms he writeth them, of which I shall give the Reader a few examples, that he may judge thereby of his fallacy in most of the rest, as where he saith, 1. That we say, the knowledge of the Fall is not necessary. Now this is false, for we hold it necessary for all, to be sensible of their loss and want; onely we say, a distinck knowledge of the history of Adam's fall is not of ab∣solute necessity to such as God never afforded the means of knowing it. 2. That we deny bodily death to be a punishment for sin. This is also false, only we say, that it is not a punishment for sin unto all, but rather a pleasur and satisfaction, according to the Apostle's words, to me to dye is gain.
3. That with us the preaching of the Gospel is not necessary. This is a meer fallacy, for we say the preaching of the Gospel is absolutely neces∣sary, onely we do not think the external knowledge of Christ to be only the preach∣ing of the Gospel, and that the preaching of the Gospel has been or may be, where this is wanting. If I should go through the rest of the Index thus, I should find very few particulars, in which there is not some such perversion or fallacy, so that very few are set down, as they are truely owned by us; some indeed are, such as 1st. That we deny men to be Christians by birth, for we believe that men by nature are born children of wrath; and yet this may have exceptions, as in the case of Jeremiah and John the Baptist, who are said to be sanctified from their mothers womb. 2. That we would have Ministers learning Trades, whereby to live. We true∣ly think it were no disparagement for Ministers to work with their hands, as the honest Apostle Paul did, who commended the same to the Elders of Ephesus, Act. 20: 34. And yet we think a man may be a good Minister, though he have not a trade, and work none, but yet never the worse, if he have one, 3. That in Worship we think men should be silent in the first place. Yes, for Silence goes before all solemn actions of speaking. 4. That we think to command men to pray without the Spirit, is to command men to see without eyes. Yes, because we know not what to pray for as we ought, without it, Rom. 8: 26. and no man should be commanded to pray as he ought not. But as to these which are indeed owned by us, thou wilt find them at large vindicated by Scriptur and Reason, either in my Apology or in this Treatise. I could have made a further remark in this his Index, to shew thee how many of them, he sets down, as our assertions, are not nor ever were asserted by any of us, nor by him affirmed to be so, where he has them in his book, but only his own meer conjecturs and consequences; but I am loath to detain thee any longer in this, by looking the pages, to which he referreth, thou mayst easily observe it. FINIS.
