C1563 R27285 9794374 44105
CAUTION to the Good People of ENGLAND, about the Choice of Members for the Ensuing Parlia∣ment. Gentlemen, IT is now fully seen, that notwithstanding the Mortification, which some were under during part of the Late King's Reign; yet they are now but the same Men, which they were in the Reign of King Charles the II, when they ran down all that opposed their Designs, as Fanaticks or Commonwealths-men. But never were Names more improperly applied, when those High Tantivy-men were truly possest with that Fanatick-fury or Madness, with which they with∣out colour reproach others. Nor can any thing con∣tribute more to a Commonwealth, than the extrava∣gancies of them, who by abusing the Favour of Princes, have render'd the Governments of some of them Grie∣vous, and Insupportable; making very forward pre∣tences of Loyalty, and vowing Lives and Fortunes, which they never intended to venture. These Men are now especially the more dangerous, because those rights of Soveraignty which they ascribe to all Kings, are not only Inconsistent with the Laws, Liberties, and Statutes, of This or any other Free Na∣tion, but with the Right of our present King and Queen: and the late King is evidently that Ʋnaccount∣able, Irresistible, Sacred Monarch, whom they contend for. To observe what Fears the Papists express at this time of Danger to the Church of England, which they were but lately pulling down as fast as they could, and of our falling into a Commonwealth, which the chief of their Writers have commended most; would induce one to believe that Church and Crown, are but the Word given the Party, and the Pasport to their Regi∣ments in the Highlands of Scotland; or rather an Ar∣tifice to List Soldiers for their supposed King of Divine Right, against him whom they call but King in Fact. And this they would have ignorant People believe to be the Doctrine of the Church of England. Thus, tho they dare not directly declare for the Late King, they prepare Men insensibly for him, and follow the steps of the Observator, and other Hackney Writers for Rome, who while Popery was getting within the Walls, ala∣rum'd you against Moderate Churchmen, and other Protestants; but especially, the Men of Forty One, whom they had coniured up from them Graves. You cannot but observe the Emissaries, and Instru∣ments, who are again playing over the same Game at Markets, Fairs, Churches, and all Places of publick Resort. The Success which the Knaves have formerly had, gives them hopes again to make Honest Men Tools, to carry on their Work; and indeed, it is a melanchol∣ly Consideration to think, how many are now cheated in as gross a manner, as the Romish Priests impose up∣on their credulous Laity. Many of their Hirelings pass among you for zealous Churchmen, just as the Popish Gentry do for Officers of this Kings Army, by their Scarlet or Blew-Coats, which is their common Disguise. You, The good People of England, are in earnest in that Cause, which brought over His present Majesty. Remember His most gracious Declaration, which en∣gaged your Hearts, your Fortunes, your Lives; nay, what is more, your Reputations and Honours, when the most eminent among you for untainted Loralty, contemn'd the Reproach of being accounted Rebels in the Cause of God, and your Country. Nor did you fear to be thought Commonwealths men, while you were so hearty in desiring that our present Sovereigns would accept the Crown, as an earnest of this Nations Gratitude, and Love of Kingly Power; while others, if they meant any thing by a Regency, but an Office under the Late King, cable at his Pleasure; were directly for a Commonwealth, with such another Protector as Oliver Cromwell. This is little less than Demonstration, for this Re∣gency, or Protectorship, which is the old English word for it, while the Lovers of France were for the French word; either was to be derived from the Late Kings Authority, or from the Peoples. If from the Kings, then his entire Power, or indivisible Sovereignty, would come back to him, when ever he thought sit to return, tho perhaps he could not depute another in his Absence, because the Law allows of no Act of Royal Power, but while a King is in Possession. If it were derived from the People, this were a Go∣vernment of their own Choice, without a King, and what is that, but a Commonwealth. Thus, this part of the Charge against Men moderate in all things, but in their Zeal for the Protestant Religion, and for this Go∣vernment, falls upon their Accusers, who either would have the Church of England preserved by a Popish King, or the Monarchy by a Commonwealth Many  who rose in Arms to meet your Great Deliverer, while the Generality shew'd the like Disposi∣tion, have this for ever to stop their mouths, when they would accuse you of Rebellion; that some of them were Rebels by their own Confession, in Levying War against one, whom they acknowledg still to be their King, whilst you, at least acquit your selves before God, as you re∣sisted not the Power which he had permitted or placed over you, till it, wholly ceast to be any Ordinance of God or Man; and that he who had been your King, had lost both his Name and Authority. That you may reap the full benefit of His Present Majesties most Gracious Declaration, while he was on∣ly Prince of Orange, I take leave to offer these Can∣tions to you, in Relation to that Choice which ap∣proaches. 1. To have a care of any Man,Ken re∣commend∣ed by them who refuse the Oath of Allegi∣ance, &c. Regency-Men. for whom you are courted by those who have not taken the Oath of Allegiance to this King and Queen, being in Capacities which require it, or who decline all publick Employments to avoid it; or if they have taken the Oath, declare that it was with such Reserva∣tions, as leave room for Allegiance to the Late King. 2. By no means to chuse the Regency-men, who were not only against the Government of our Present King and Queen, but by their unseasonable Loyalty to the Late King, whom they would not assist in his greatest Extremity; occasioned the delay of Relief to the poor Protestants in Ireland, and that Expence of Blood and Treasure which has followed it. That this may appear to you more plainly, it is to he observed, That the loss of so much time, as was unne∣cessarily spun out in Disputes, was in it self but a small mischief in Comparison of the immediate and natural Consequences, in encouraging the Rebels in Ire∣land, who were ready to have submitted upon any Terms, till they found the Strength of their  and making it needful for His Majesty
rei Troops to secure him against them, who were so fond of Allegiance to the Abdicated King; nor could he tell which of those, who had declared for him, were to be trusted against one whom many of them still look'd on as their King. This is a true and just Vindication of His Majesties great Wisdom and Inclination to make His Kingdoms happy, and give Peace to Christendom! while some, out of labour to clear Evil Instruments, cast Reflecti∣ons upon Him, contrary to that Character which all the World has conceived of Him But as to them of the Regency, they were for it, either out of Principle, be∣heving the Late Kings Royal Power to continue; or from Design, as they thought that side the Strongest; or that by joyning with it, they might be considerable enough to be bought off, either way the Late King has been beholden to them; but neither our Present King and Queen, nor their People. 3. You may consider,rs of the Bill of Exclu∣sion. That they who opposed the Bill of Exclusion, generally did it upon a Principle of the unalterableness of the Succession, which is directly contrary to our Kings Title. Not but that some few of them are to be thought to have gone upon other Grounds, they having in all other things been always in the Interest of their Country. 4 You ought not to chuse any who were Instru∣ments of Violence and Oppression in the two last Reigns.Instru∣ments of Violence formerly. The men are known among you, they have left their marks in the ruin of many Families; and tho Death has put an end to the miseries of some of them, 'tis not so long since the Lamentations of their Friends, their Wives, their Children, struck through your very hearts, and you were your selves weeping Spectators of the inhumanities and butcheries under which they suf∣fered. Have a care lest you come into Partnership with their guilt, who made it dangerous to be an English∣man, or to appear for the interest of all Protestants in general, while they ridicul'd the very name. 5.Sons or Re∣lations of them who have got∣ten Wealth or Honours by the spoil of the Li∣berties &c. Such as are likely to repeal the Acts of the last Parlia∣ment. Be cautious how you chuse the Sons or nigh Re∣lations of them who got Riches or Honours by the Spoil of the Liberties of their Countrey; if their Fa∣thers or near Relations are living, their dependance upon them is too great to permit them to enquire free∣ly into those miscarriages which you complain of: if they are dead, their Memories or Estates which might be subject to Attainders, or Confiscations, to ease you of Taxes, will give the young men too strong a byass. 6. Take care lest you chuse such as may repeal the Acts of the last Parliament, either as disliking the mat∣ter of them, or questioning the Authority, which not only made an happy Settlement of the Crown, and well secured to you many Civil Rights which had been invaded, but freed you from the burden of Chimuey∣money; and eased many of your fellow Protestants, who had been severely prosecuted, to the weakning your hands against the common Enemy, and enriching only Informers, Officers of the Spiritual Court, Clerks of the Peace, and some greedy Justices. 7.Accessa∣ries to the inurders of L. Rus∣sel, &c. Be sure to avoid all Judges, Lawyers, Sheriffs, Jury-men, or others, who were accessary to the Mur∣ders of Ld. Russel, Col. Sidney, Sir Tho. Amstrong, Mr. Cornish, Mr. Colledg, or who by slighting the po∣sitive Proof against Sir George Wakeman, or robbing the City of London of its choice of Sheriffs, were means of stifling the Popish Plor, and turning the Plot upon Protestants. 8.Pensuners Pensioners, who sold their Voices and their Coun∣try at certain Rates, according to the Reputation which each man had in his House, how smoothly soever they may have carried it since the Temptation has ceas'd, are never to be trusted, lest they fell you to France, or any Interest that bids most. 9.Maintain∣ere of the Dispensing Power, &c. Promoters and Maintainers of the Dispensing or other arbitrary Powes, Abhorrers of Petitions, and modest Applications for obtaining the sitting of a Par∣liament, to enquire into the Popish Plot, ought to give very good Proofs of their Repentance before you chuse them for your Representatives. 10.Surrends rers of charters. Your sense of what you have suffered by the Surrenders of Charters, how nigh you were to the loss of your greatest Civil Right, and how far the common people were excluded from Voting, may al∣most make it needless to caurion you against Surren∣derers, Promoters or Advisers of Surrenders of Char∣ters. How much soever the Threats and Sollicitations of Lieutenants, Deputy-Lieutenants, Justices, Recorders and others, with face of Authority, may plead in ex∣cuse of well-meaning Countrey-men, not so well ac∣quainted with the ends for which they were delivered up, nothing can lessen the Crime of such as pretend to represent the collective Wisdom of the Nation. 11.Some im∣mediate consequen∣ces of thi choice. It concerns you by this Choice from which His Majesty is like to form a setled Judgment of you, to re∣present your selves worthy of His most indulgent pur∣poses; the fault, doubtless, will lye at your own doors, if you become not an happy People under him; which that you may be, you ought to take particular care, that no man may be chosen by you, whose business it has been, and therefore 'tis probable may be, to alie∣nate your Affections from the present Government; which it behoves you to Support, as you would be free from the French Slavery and Dragoons: The like Con∣sideration should oblige you to avoid those who would separate the King from his People, or the Church from both, or from all other Protestants and Protestant Churches: How much soever particular Persons may profit by such Divisions, it is morally impossible that the Nation should not be weakned by them. Gentlemen, If you chuse Men of Fortunes and Reputations, and (where other Circumstances do not greatly over-bal∣lance) of good Families, with regard to the Cautions which I have offered, out of an unfeigned Love to my Countrey, you may well hope to revive the Honour of the English Mation. I need not caution you against Dissenters from the Church of England, because how much soever you may have been imposed upon formerly by those of them who were Papists, they cannot now expect to be chosen? and tho some Protestant Dissenters may have interest enough for it, yet they will in prudence decline the competition with men of Moderation, who are for the good of the whole, before any Party or Faction; and if Protestant Dissenters stand to keep out others, you will have reason to be for them. Neither need I mention other Commonwealths mn than those of the Regency; for tho some men thought the faults of former Reigns might justifie their succes∣ful endeavours to alter the Government then, yet their own experience of the necessity of Kingly Power, and the affection which they have ever since shown for the English Monarchy, has clear'd them from that im∣putation now; and all others that way inclin'd, are as few and as inconsiderable, as the Regulators who went about for hire to settle Corporations, according to the Power first given by Surrenderers; for either of them to pretend to be chosen at this time, were a piece of Considence which none but themselves could be guil∣ty of. In short; This Election will shew, Whether you are for Papist or Protestant, King James or King William; and should you find the effect of the worst choice, there would be small comfort in the excuse of Fools, That ye had not thought it. LONDON: Printed in the Year 1690.
