C4957 R31649 99826981 31393
A Supplement By way of ADDITIONS to and AMPLIFICA∣TIONS of the foregoing TREATISE, CONCERNING COPY-HOLD and CUSTOMARY ESTATES: Wherein the Grounds laid down in the said Treatise are made good and con∣firmed by several Resolutions and Judgements given in the Courts of the Common Laws of Eng∣land in divers Cases. LONDON, Printed by John Streater, James Fleser, and Henry Twyford, Assignes of Richard Atkyes and Ed∣ward Atkyns, Esquires. 1668. Cum Gratia & Privilegio Regiae Majestatis.
THE INTRODUCTION. THE Learned Au∣thour of the before-going Book, intitu∣led, The Compleat Copy-holder, having in a very compendi∣ous manner treated of the Origi∣nal of Manors and how constitu∣ted; and of their Demesn Lands, as also of the several Tenancies thereof, and of the nature of the Services, Qualities, and Courts in∣cident and belonging thereunto; and (amongst the rest) of Copy-holders, Copy-holds and Customary
Estates, and their Tenures, Services and Customes, distinguishing them from the other Tenures and Ser∣vices; setting forth therein like∣wise the Antiquity and Original of Copy-holds, the Services, Duties, and other things incident to such Tenure; with divers Customes, Prescriptions and Ʋsages, claimed by such Copy-hold-Tenants, toge∣ther with the manner of Grants and Estates thereof, and how and in what manner they are either to be granted or accepted of: Now because the drift of the Authour of the said Book was (as I conceive) to speak more particularly of Co∣py-hold and Customary Estates then of the other Tenures; and there∣fore the Authour of the said Book hath therein laid down some gene∣ral Grounds concerning the same, but hath not confirmed them ei∣ther by Judgments or Precedents of the Common Law, which would
have more illustrated the same; and some things likewise concern∣ing Copy-holds and Customary Lands and Estates have been o∣mitted by the said Authour wor∣thy to be known by all Students and others whom the same may concern: therefore at the request of divers persons, by way of Amplification of what hath there∣in been formerly treated of by the said Authour, and by way of Ad∣dition of what therein hath been omitted, I have added what here∣after followeth by way of a Sup∣plement to the former Book; wherein I shall endeavour to con∣tribute somewhat de novo, and to make good the former Grounds laid down in the said Book, and what shall be added thereunto, by several Resolutions and Judg∣ments given in the Courts of the Common Laws of England in se∣veral Cases concerning the same.
And therefore Surrenders (after a Grant thereof made) being one of the principal matters which do concern Copy-holders and their E∣states, I shall first begin with them, and then proceed to other matters concerning Copy-holders and their Customary Estates.
SECTION I. What a Surrender of Copy-hold or Customa∣ry Estate is; to whom, and in what manner and place it is to be done; and who shall be said such a Tenant of a Co∣py-hold as may make such a Surrender. SUrrenders of Copy-hold-lands and Copy-holders are of two sorts; viz. Surrenders Actual, and Surrenders in Law. An Actual Surrender, according▪ to the Definition of Mr. Little∣ton, and the best Description of it, is a Copy-holder's yielding up of his Copy-hold-lands or Customary Estate into the hands of the Lord of the Manor, in the Court of the Manor, or unto his Bailiff, Reeve, or Steward, to such Uses and
for such Estates as are particularly men∣tioned in the Surrender it self, made by a Deed or Writing; or if it be by Word, in the presence of the Lord and Te∣nants in the Court of the Manor. And yet it hath been a great doubt and Que∣stion, whether of Copy-holds or Custo∣mary Estates, any words used to the Lord himself shall amount to make it a good Surrender. Proofs. Vide Mr. Littleton, in his Chapter ofLitt. 15. b. Book of En∣tries, 131. acc. Tenant by Copy, &c. fol. 15. Ad hanc Curiam venit A B, & sursumreddidit in eadem Curia in manus Domini, &c. unum Messuagium, &c. ad usum C D. & haere∣dum suorum, &c. But if the Surrender be made in Court into the hands of the Lord or his Steward, it must be to such a person or his Use who is in esse and capable of such a Sur∣render, or that may take Presenty by force of the Surrender; otherwise such Surrender, though it be an Actual Sur∣render made in the Court of the Manor to the Lord or Steward himself, is not good. A Copy-holder in Fee surrendred
his Copy-hold-lands into the hands ofH. 7 Jac. B. R. Simp∣son and So∣thern's Case. H. 17 Jac. in B. R. Bambridge and Whit∣ton's Case acc. the Lord of the Manor, Habendum after his decease to the Use of an Enfant in Ventre sa mier, and if the said Enfant died within age, then to the Use of J S and his Heirs. In this Case these Points were Resolved. 1. If a Copy-holder in Fee doth surrender his Copy-hold-lands into the hands of the Lord, to the Use of him∣self and his Heirs, That in that Case, be∣cause the Limitation of the Use to him who had it before was void, the Surrender thereof to the Lord himself was also void. 2. That the Surrender made to the Enfant in Ventre sa mier was not good as an im∣mediate Surrender, and to take effect im∣mediately, as the intention of the Surren∣derer was it should, because it was of a Free-hold, which could not begin at a day to come. But yet Quere, If the Surrender be made into the hands of the Lord, to the Use of the right Heirs of the Surrenderer,Vid. P. 30 Eliz. Allen and Palmer's Case. Leon. part 1. 101. if the Lands shall not continue in the hands of the Lord till the death of the Copy-holder who made the Surrender, for the Court doubted of it, Pasc. 30 Eliz. in Allen and Palmer's Case. A Surrender being then by the Copy-holder
himself, in the Court of the Ma∣nor, to the Lord, of his Copy-hold or Customary Lands; if then, upon the very Act done, the Estate be in the Lord, or in the Surrenderer, or in whom it resteth, re∣maineth a Doubt. For Resolution there∣of, I humbly conceive the Law to be, and so it hath been Resolved, That not∣withstanding such a Surrender made, yet the Estate remaineth in the Copy-holder who surrendreth, and is not in the Lord, or in any other person whatsoever. But in case where the Copy-holder doth sur∣render his Copy-hold in the Court of the Manor to the Use of the Lord himself, (which he may doe) there, by such a Surrender, the Land is immediatly vested in the Lord without any other Act done or required, because the Lord cannot take a Surrender, as to make thereof an Ad∣mittance unto himself. And to that purpose Vide Erish and Rive's Case, where it was Resolved, ThatVid. Cro. part 1. in Erish and Rive's Case, acc. if a Surrender be made by a Copy-holder of his Copy-hold-lands into the hands of the Steward of the Manor to the Use of the Steward himself, that Surrender is good without any farther Act, for the rea∣son aforesaid.
Having thus shewed what will be a good Surrender of Copy-hold or Custo∣mary Lands by an actual Surrender in the Court of the Lord of the Manor, I shall now consider SECT. II. Whether a Copy-hold may be said to be sur∣rendred by any Act, Words, or Agree∣ment, made betwixt the Lord and the Copy-holder, or by the Copy-holder with a Stranger made in the Court, in the Pre∣sence of the Lord or his Steward. I Do conceive generally, that no Act or Words of the Copy-holder canVid. Leon. 1. part, 172. Penruddock and New∣man's Case. pass his Copy-hold in such a manner, as that the same shall be accompted to a∣mount to a good Surrender of the same. But yet it rests upon a Difference. Proofs. If a Copy-holder bargains and sells his Copy-hold by Deed of Bargain and Sale enrolled, though it be to the Lord of the Manor himself, it is void, and shall not a∣mount to a Surrender.
If Tenant for life of Lands at the Com∣mon Law agrees with his Lessor, or him in the Reversion, that he shall have his Interest in the Land for the Rent of 20 s. per annum; this Agreement will not a∣mount to a Surrender of his Land by the Common Law. A fortiori, If a Copy-holder, or other Customary Tenant, shall say to his Lord, or other person in the Court of the Manor, I agree to surren∣der my Lands; these words will not be a present or an express Surrender, nor will they amount to so much as a Relinquish∣ing of his Estate: for in truth it is not any thing in present, but an Act to be done in futuro: Like unto the Case put by WrayTr. 31 Eliz. in B. R. Sweeper and Randall's Case, Leon. 1 part, 178. Chief Justice; A seised of the Manor of D demiseth the same Manor at will; that it is no Lease. No more in the other Case shall it be a Surrender, or a Relin∣quishing of his Copy-hold or Copy-hold-estate. But yet notwithstanding it will be agreed that in some cases an express and particular Agreement made by a Copy-holder with the Lord of the Manor for or concerning his Copy-hold-lands will amount to a Surrender of the same. The Case was, That the Lord of a Manor, pretending that a Copy-holder
had forfeited his Copy-hold-lands, entredM. 32 Eliz. in Ce B. Collam and Sir Hugh Portman's Case, Leon. 1 part, 191. into a Communication with the Copy-holder concerning the same: Upon the Communication thereof had betwixt them, it was agreed, that the Copy-hol∣der should pay unto the Lord the summe of 10 l, which he paid accordingly; and that in consideration thereof, the Copy-holder should have Election, whether he would have the Land assured unto him by Copy or by Bill, for the life of him and his Wife, or durante viduit ate of the Wife: who made his Election to have the Land by Bill. It was the opinion of the Ju∣stices in that Case, That this Agreement was a good Surrender of the Lands, and a good Estate thereupon vested in the Wife for her life. A Copy-holder in Fee came into theM. 13 Jat. B. R. Betfield and Adams Case. Court of the Lord of the Manor, and took a new Estate of his Copy-hold-lands from the Lord to himself for life, and afterwards to his Wife for life, and after to his Son for life. It was a Que∣stion, whether this Act of the Copy-hol∣der was the giving up and the relin∣quishing of his Estate of Inheritance in his Copy-hold, and did amount to a Sur∣render of his old Estate therein. It was
agreed in this Case, That if a Copy-holderVid. 29 Eliz. Co. 2. part, Lanc's Case. of Inheritance takes a Lease by Indenture for years of the Lord of his Copy-hold, that by that Act of his his Inheritance in his Copy-hold is gone and determined. But it seemed to be the better opinion of the Court, That although that this ta∣king of a new Estate shall imply a Sur∣render, and be accounted as to some pur∣pose to amount to a Surrender; yet in the judgment of Law it shall be but as a Sur∣render to his Use for life, and after to his Wife and Son for their several lives, and that still the Inheritance of the Copy-hold remains in him. But Quere this Case. For that H. 36 Eliz. in Co. B. Rot. 2640. in Adams and Shepheard's Case, it seem∣eth to be adjudged to the contrary. A Copy-holder said to his Lord, thatVid. Colman and Bedil's Case, An∣derson's Re∣ports 199. acc. he would not hold his Land longer by Co∣py, but by a Bill under the Lord's hand for his life, who made him such a Bill, which the Copy-holder accepted of. It was agreed by the Justices in that Case, That thereby his Copy-hold was deter∣mined.
SECT. III. Of Surrenders out of Court; and where Sur∣renders to the Steward, Deputy-steward, or into the hands of Tenants of the Ma∣nor, out of Court, shall be good, where not. BY the general Custome of the Realm a Copy-holder may surrender his Lands in the Court of the Lord of the Manor, or out of Court, to the Lord, by the hands of Tenants of the Manor: But a Surrender out of Court to the Lord, or by the hands of Tenants of the Manor, or of the Bailiff or Reeve, is not good without a special Custome. The Lord hath such an absolute Inter∣est in his Manor, that he may hold a Court within his Manor at what time he pleas∣eth: But he is not compellable by his Co∣py-holder to hold or call a Court to ac∣cept of a Surrender. But if he doth ac∣cept of such a Surrender of his Copy-holder out of Court, the same is good, whether it be to his own Use, or to the Use of other persons. And as the Lord may himself accept of a Surrender out
of Court, so likewise may the Lord him∣self grant new Copies of the Lands out of Court, and such Grants shall be good. But the Lord himself cannot hold his own Court for any of the purposes aforesaid. But the Lord himself may give authority unto others to take Surrenders to the Use of others out of Court; and so may his Steward or Under-steward give Condi∣tions to others to take the like Surren∣ders out of Court to others Uses, which Conditions shall be in the nature of a De∣dimus potestatem. And so it was Resolved in a Case out of Ireland, referred to the Judges of England, to certifie their opini∣ons therein; where the Case was, The Steward of the Court of a Manor in Ire∣land, being in England, sent a Writ in the nature of a Dedimus potestatem to one who was in Ireland, to take a Surrender there of Copy-hold-lands: and the opinion of the Judges here, to whom the Case was referred to advise and certifie their opi∣nions was, That such a Surrender taken by Dedimus was good enough. But note, that in such case it must be intended, that such giving power to take a Surrender, if it be to be done, it must be alledged to be done either by Prescription or Cu∣stome:
for that Surrenders generally ta∣ken out of Court must be by Custome. Proofs. If the Under-steward hold a Court2 E. 6. Br. Tenant per Copie 26. within the Manor, and grants Copies by Court-Roll, without the authority of the Lord or of the high Steward, the Grants are good. But contrary it is, if he doe it out of Court, as it seemeth. And there it is a Quere, if the high Steward out of Court may grant Lands by Copy. But it is clearly holden, that he cannot admit a Copy-holder upon a Surrender out of Court, without a special authority from the Lord so to doe. A Deputy-steward may take a Sur∣render19 Eliz. in Co. B. out of Court, if the Office be granted to the Steward and his sufficient Deputies, or to be exercised by him and his sufficient Deputies; as it was Resolved 19 Eliz. in the Court of Common-Pleas. The Lord of a Manor may retain a8 Eliz. Dyer 248. Steward by Word, and such a Retainer shall be good untill he be discharged, and such a Steward may take a Surrender out of Court, as it is holden in Coke 4. part, in the Lady Holcroft's Case. And so wasCo. 4. part, Holcroft's Case. it Resolved Tr. 41 Eliz. in Harris and
Jaye's Case in B. R. But Quere of the firstVr. 31 Eliz. C. B. Bl∣grave and Wood's Case, Godb. 142. Point. For that Tr. 31. Eliz. in Co. B. in Blagrave and Wood's Case, the opinion of the Justices was, That a Surrender to a Steward who was by word onely, out of Court, was not good. In 17 Eliz. in Co. B. it was said byM. 17 Eliz. in C. B. by Dyer and Mounson. Dyer and Mounson, That without a Pre∣scription a Surrender of Copy-hold-land could not be out of Court, nor an Admittance out of Court, neither to the Lord himself nor to his Steward. But in divers places it is used by Custome so to be. And then and thereupon the doing of Fealty and the paying of the Lord's Fine shall be presented by the Homage to be done at the next Court. And all these things they said are to be done by Cu∣stome. And in that Case it was said by the Lord Dyer, That a Surrender out of Court might be to the Lord himself, to go by the way of Extinguishment. A Copy-holder in Fee did, according to the Custome of the Manor, surrender his Copy-hold-lands into the hands of two Tenants; but the Surrender was to the Use of J S, to take effect immediately after his death. In this case it was Resolved, That as unto the Surrender into the hands
of two Tenants, that might be good, al∣though it was out of Court, by Custome. But because in that Case the Surrender was unto the Use of J S, to take effect im∣mediately after the death of the Surren∣deror, and a Free-hold cannot begin in futuro, or at a day to come, by the Com∣mon Law, and for that the Estates of Co∣py-holders shall be directed according to the Rules of the Common Law; for that cause onely the Surrender was holden to be void. But although a Surrender out of Court may be good into the hands of Tenants of the Manor by Custome; yet untill such Surrender be presented by them in the Court of the Lord of the Manor, the E∣state of the Lands doth remain in the Surrenderor, and nothing passeth thereby. A Copy-holder in Fee did surrenderM. 14 Jac. B. R. Fros∣well and Welshe's Case, Bridg∣man 52. into the hands of two Tenants, according to the Custome, to the Use of A and B, who thereupon entred into and upon the Lands, and paid the Rent to the Lord; but before any Court was kept for the Manor, the Tenants to whom the Surren∣der was made, as also the Copy-holder the Surrenderor, all of them died, and thereupon the Heir of the Copy-holder
Surrenderor entred upon the said A and B, and made a Lease for years of the Lands, which Lease was warranted by the Custome. In that Case it was Resolved, That the Lease for years was well made, because that before such time that the Presentment was made in Court of the Surrender, the Interest of the Copy-hol∣der did remain in the Surrenderor, and his Right descended unto and upon his Heir, and he might take & receive the Rents and Profits of the Lands; for that no person can have a Copy-hold or a Copy-hold-Estate, but such a person who comes in∣to the same by the Custome of the Ma∣nor, viz. by Admittance of the Lord, which in this Case A and B did not doe. But in that Case it was doubted by the Ju∣stices, but not Resolved, Whether the Acceptance of the Rent by the Lord at the hands of the said A and B did amount to an Admittance or not. There were two Joynt-tenants in FeeM. 9. Jac. Cro. 2. part, Porter and Porter's Case. of Lands which were holden by Copy. One of them, according to the Custome, surrendred into the hands of two Tenants to the Use of his last Will, and afterwards he made his Will, and thereby devised the Lands. In that Case it was holden
by the Justices, That because the said Surrender was presented by the Tenants in the Court of the Lord, that the said Surrender should bind the Survivor; for that it shall have a relation to the first time of the Surrender. But if in that case the Copy-holder who made the Surrender had died before the same had been presen∣ted, then the Copy-hold had survived to the surviving Joynt-tenant. Two Coparcenors, Copy-holders, werep. 10 Jac. B. R. Godb▪ 141. in possession; the one did surrender her Reversion in the Moyety after her decease. It was adjudged a void Surrender, because a Free-hold could not commence in fu∣turo, as well of Copy-hold-lands as of Free-hold-lands. A Copy-holder surrendred a MessuageM. 8 Jac. in B. R. Cro. 3. part, Bur∣goyne and Spurling's Case. and 20 Acres of Lands into the hands of two Tenants out of Court, to the Use of J S and his Heirs, upon Condition, that if he paid J S 100 l. before such a day, the Surrender to be void. Before the day of payment he surrendred one Acre, parcel of the 20 Acres, unto J D and his Heirs, and afterwards he performed the Condition by paying the 100 l. and afterwards in Court he surrendred the said Messuage and 20 Acres of Lands in∣to
the hands of the Steward, to the Use of J N and his Heirs. It was found by the Jurours that the first Surrender made to J S was never presented, but the two last Surrenders were presented. In this Case it was Resolved, That by the Condi∣tional Surrender nothing passed, untill it was presented; but the Interest, Right and Possession remained in the Copy-hol∣der who made the Surrender, so as he might transfer it to whom he thought good. For although it was a Surrender into the hands of Tenants, and so accor∣ding to the manner of the Surrender the same was good by the Custome; yet be∣cause the said Surrender into the hands of Tenants was but an Inchoation of the Case to whose Use the Surrender was made, which had no farther perfection or prosecution, but became void by the performance of the Condition, the first of the two last Surrenders presented, viz. the Surrender to the Use of J D and his Heirs, stood good, and the last Surrender to the Use of J N and his Heirs took no effect. A Copy-holder in Fee made a LetterCoke 9. part, Comb's Case. of Attorney to two Tenants of the Ma∣nor, to surrender his Copy-hold out of
Court unto the Use of J S and his Heirs: They surrendred the same accordingly, and at the next Court brought in the Sur∣render into Court, (but no Custome was found to warrant such a Surrender.) Not∣withstanding in that Case it was Re∣solved, 1. That it was a good Surrender, because he might doe it de communi jure without alledging any Custome. 2. When the Tenants shewed the same in Court, and the Authority which was given to make the Surrender, all which they had done was Resolved to be good, and legal∣ly done. SECT. IV. Where, although Surrenders are made to the Lord or to Tenants out of Court by Cu∣stome, yet nothing passeth out of the Co∣py-holder before Admittance: And what shall be a good Admittance in such case, what not. ADmittance is the life and perfection of the Copy-holder's Estate, and before Admittance the Tenant is not a perfect Copy-holder.
Proofs. The Custome of a Manor was, That aM. 23 Car. B. R. Baker and Den∣ham's Case. Copy-holder might surrender his Copy-hold out of Court to the Use of another; the party to whose Use it was, to be ad∣mitted at the next Court. Such a Surren∣der was made, but before the next Court Cestuy que use died, and so was not admit∣ted. It was Resolved in this Case, That he was not a Copy-holder within the Cu∣stome; for by the Surrender before Ad∣mittance the Surrenderee hath no possess∣on, and the Heir is in by Discent, and holds by the Copy of his Ancestor, and so the Cestuy que use is not a perfect nor compleat Copy-holder. And it may be compared to the Case where a man makes a Feoffment in Fee of Lands, and makes Livery within the View; it is no perfect Livery till he doth enter into the Lands, but the Feoffor may punish a Trespass there done in the interim, for it is but in∣choatum untill he enter. And so it is in case of a Copy-holder; the Surrender is but quasi inchoatum, as before, till he be admitted to the Copy-hold, Vid. Fros∣well's Case before.
In 26 Eliz. the Question was, Whe∣ther26 Eliz. Gal∣loway's Case vouched in Bulstr. 3. part, 17. the Copy-holder might have an A∣ction upon the Case against the Lord for not holding his Court, and not admitting of him to whom a Surrender was made according to the Custome of the Manor. It was Resolved in that Case, That the Copy-holder himself might have the A∣ction. But in that Case it was Resolved, That he to whom the Surrender was made, untill Admittance, by force of the Sur∣render had nothing; it was onely an Act begun, and not perfected; and therefore in such case he could not maintain the A∣ction of the Lord for not admitting of him. A Surrender of a Copy-hold is like to the Induction into a Benefice: before Induction there is no Possession; so before Admittance there is no Possession. A Copy-holder, according to the Cu∣stome,M. 12 Jac, Robinson and Green's Case, Bridg∣man 82, 83. Bulstr. 3. part, 238. acc. did surrender out of Court into the hands of Tenants to the Use of J S and his Heirs; which Surrender was de∣livered into the Court by the said Te∣nants and there presented; which was ac∣cepted of by the Steward of the Manor, and an Entry made thereof in the Court-Roll, and a Copy of the Surrender was
delivered unto J S; and in the Copy it was, viz. Compertum est per Homagium, that the Surrender was to J S and his Heirs. It was the opinion of the Court in this Case, That none of these colou∣rable things did imply a perfect Ad∣mittance to the Copy-hold. For 1. The Acceptance of the Presentment by the Steward from the Homage was no more then what he was bounden to doe as be∣ing Judge of the Court. 2. The Entry of it in the Roll was but an Office of Du∣ty, being but an Evidence for the Lord, as also for him to whose Use the Surrender was; and so was the delivery of the Co∣py to J S, the Cestuy que use. But none of these things did imply the Consent or Will of the Lord, that the Cestuy ue use should be admitted or have the Lands according to the Surrender; and all these things together do not imply any Admit∣tance, for all of them may be done, though no Admittance be in the case. Note, It was Resolved in the Court ofM. 6 Jac. in B. R. Wil∣son and Wed∣dall's Case, lv. 144. King's Bench, That if a Surrender be of a Copy-hold to J S, it is of no effect untill he be admitted Tenant: and if be∣fore Admittance J S doth surrender the Land unto another, a Stranger, who is
admitted, yet nothing passeth to the Stranger by this Admittance of the Stran∣ger. SECT. V. Where some things, and what things, may be done by the Copy-holder or his Heir before Admittance. Proofs. 1. THE Heir of a Copy-holder mayCo. 4. part, Clark and Penyfather's Case. enter and have an Action of Trespass before Admittance. 2. A Pos∣sessio Fratris or Sororis may be of a Copy-hold before Admittance. 3. A Discent shall not bind the Heir of a Copy-holder. 4. He may surrender unto a Stranger be∣fore Admittance. A Copy-holder in Fee had Issue twoVid. 12 Eliz. Dyer 291. Daughters by divers Women, and died seised; the Daughters entred, and took the Profits many years; and before Ad∣mittance, the eldest Daughter died with∣out Issue, and afterwards the youngest Daughter was admitted to the whole Land, as sole Heir to the Father. In this Case it was holden, That the possession of the eldest Daughter, though before
Admittance, should make her Sister, though of the half bloud, inheritable to the Land. If a Copy-holder in Fee by Licence24 Eliz. in Co. B. Coke 4. part, 23. Brown's Case acc. maketh a Lease for years, and the Lessee entreth, the Copy-holder having a Son and a Daughter by one Woman, and a Son by another; the Land shall discend to the Daughter of the whole bloud, al∣though that the Son died, and was not ad∣mitted to the Copy-hold as Heir to his Father. And that that should be Possessio Fratris of a Copy-hold before Admit∣tance. If a Copy-holder doth surrender to a40 Eliz. in B. R. Arnold and George's Case, Yelv. 16. acc. Stranger, and the Steward will not admit him, and the Stranger enters, and holds the Land; if the Lord bring Trespass a∣gainst him before Admittance, he may plead Not guilty, and his Plea shall be good, and it shall be found against the Lord, because he is particeps criminis to the Admittance, because it shall be inten∣ded, that the Lord would not suffer the Steward to admit him to the Copy-hold. A Copy-hold was seized by the LordTr. 3 Jac. B. R. Joyner and Lam∣ber's Case, Cro. 2. part, 36. of the Manor, and he granted it to ano∣ther in Fee, who died, and his Heir was admitted; then the first Copy-holder di∣ed,
and his Heir entred, and surrendred unto a Stranger in Fee. It was Resolved in that Case, That the Entry of the Heir was lawfull, though he was not admitted to the Copy-hold-estate, and the Discent of the Land to the Heir of the Grantee of the Lord should not bind him. And farther it was Resolved in that Case, That the Heir of the Copy-holder being in the Land, his Surrender of the Land unto a Stranger was good before his Admit∣tance. SECT. VI. Where the Lord is but an Instrument to con∣vey the Copy-hold by Admittance onely, and that the Surrenderee is in by the Copy-holder, and not by the Lord. ALthough generally (as before is said)Vide Plow. Com. 421. in Hare and Bickley's Case. a Copy-holder cannot enter and have Seisin of the Land without the Ad∣mittance of the Lord, no more then a Parson or Prebend can have Seism, or be full Incumbent, till the Arch-deacon hath inducted him, or the Dean and Chapter enstalled him: yet the Lord is but an Instrument used for the settling of the Co∣py-holder
in his Copy-hold, and to trans∣fer the Land secundum formam & effe∣ctum Sursumredditionis, and the Estate, Right and Interest in the Copy-hold doth not pass as from the Lord; but upon the Admittance made by the Lord the Copy-holder is in by him who made the Surren∣der, and by the Custome, and seised of the Copy-hold secundùm Consuetudinem Manerii, &c. Proofs. The Lord of a Manor demised Copy-holdM. 40 Eliz. B. R. Pay and Brown's Case, Cro. 1. part. of Inheritance to A, upon Conditi∣on that he should pay to B 20 s. yearly during his Minority, and 100 l. at his full age. A paid not the 20 s. but sur∣rendred the Land to the Use of P and his Heirs. The Lord admits him. B attains his full age, and the 100 l. is not paid. The Lord enters for the Condition bro∣ken, and grants the Land by Copy to B. P enters upon him. It was holden in this Case, That his Entrie was lawfull, for that he to whose Use the Surrender was made comes in by him who surren∣dred, and not by the Lord. A Copy-holder in Fee surrendred
his Lands into the hands of the Lord by theTr. 15 Jac. B. R. Brook's Case, Poph. 125. hands of Tenants, according to the Cu∣stome, without expressing to whose Use it should be. At the next Court he was admitted Habendum to him and his Wife in tail. It was objected, That no Use being expressed, the Surrender was void, and the Admittance not good, to pass an Estate to the Wife not being named in the Premisses, but in the Habendum one∣ly. It was Resolved, 1. The Surrender was good, for it shall be intended, that the Surrender generally made was to such Use as was specified in the Admittance; and the Lord was onely as an Instrument put in trust to convey the Estate, and make such Admittance as he who surren∣dred would have him to make. 2. That the Wife should take by the Admittance, though she was not named in the Premis∣ses, but in the Habendum onely. If a Copy-holder surrendreth his Lands33 Eliz. Co. 4. part, West∣wick's Case. to the Use of J S, the Lord hath but a Customary power to make the Admit∣tance secundùm effectum & formam Sur∣sumredditionis. And if in such case the Lord grants the Land to J S and a Stran∣ger, all shall enure to J S, and nothing to the Stranger. And if the Copy-holder
doth surrender his Lands without a Con∣dition, if the Lord doth admit the Te∣nant upon a Condition, the Condition is void; for that after the Admittance the Surrenderee is in by him who made the Surrender, and not by the Lord. A Copy-holder surrenders to the Use28 Eliz. Co. 4. part, Bunting's Case. of another; the Lord admits him to hold to him and his Heirs: yet he shall have but an Estate for life, for that after the Admittance he is in by him who made the Surrender, and not by the Lord. The Custome of the Manor was, ThatCoke 8. part, in Swayne's Case. a Copy-holder for life might take Timber to repair: The King made a Lease of the Manor, excepting Woods and Under∣woods and Trees: The Lessee for years of the Manor grants a Copy-hold upon which were Timber-trees to another for life, who cuts Timber to repair. It was Resolved, That in this Case, notwith∣standing the Severance and Exception, the Grantee should have the Trees, for that the Estate of the Copy-holder who comes in by a voluntary Grant is in by the Cu∣stome, and the Lord is but an Instrument to make the Grant. When a Copy-holder surrenders to theCo. 4. part, in Tavernor's Case. Use of another, and the Lord admits him;
now he who is admitted is in by him who makes the Surrender. For in a Plaint in the nature of a Writ of Entry in the Per, he shall be supposed to be in the Per by him who made the Surrender, because the Lord is but an Instrument to make the Admit∣tance; and he who is admitted shall not be subject to any Charges or Incumbrances of the Lord, for the Lord hath but a Custo∣mary power to make the Admittance se∣cundùm effectum sursumredditionis, as be∣fore is said. A Copy-holder surrenders to the UseM. 37 Eliz. Cro. 1. part, Berry and Green's Case. of J S; the Lord refuseth to admit him: he cannot enter, unless there be an espe∣cial Custome to warrant it; but if there be, then he may enter. SECT. VII. Where the Admittance of the particular Tenant shall be the Admittance of him in the Remainder. Proofs. A Copy-holder in Fee by Licence made a Lease for years; the Lessee enters;M. 24 Eliz. Co. 4. part, Browne's Case. the Copy-holder, having Issue a Son and a Daughter by one Woman, and a Son by
another, died; the eldest Son died before Admittance. In this Case it was Resolved, (amongst other things) That the Admit∣tance of Tenant for life is the Admittance of him in the Remainder, but not to bar the Lord of his Fine, which he ought to have by the Custome. The Father a Copy-holder in FeeP. 36 Eliz. B. R. Coke 4. part, Fitch and Huckley's Case. made a Surrender to the Use of himself for life, and after to the Use of his Son for life, and after to the Use of his last Will. The Father was admitted, and died: The Lord pretending a Forfeiture entred, and granted the Copy-hold to a Stranger. Resolved, That the Admit∣tance of the Tenant for life was the Ad∣mittance of him in the Remainder; and then the Land could not vest in the Gran∣tee of the Lord. It was Resolved by the Justices, ThatTr. 36 Eliz. B. R. Deal and Hig∣den's Case, Moore 358. the Admittance of Tenant for life of a Copy-hold is the Admittance of him in the Remainder, because he is to pay his Fine which is intire, and no Fine is due to be paid by him in the Remainder to the Lord: but otherwise it is of him in the Reversion.M. 39 Eliz. B. R. Cro. 2. part, Gip∣pin and Ban∣nye's Case. A Copy-holder surrendred to the Use of one for life, the Remainder to another
in Fee: Tenant for life was admitted: He in the Remainder surrendred to the Use of J S; which Surrender the Lord accepted of, and admitted him, and then the Tenant for life died. It was holden in this Case, That the Heir of J S should have the Land, for that the Admittance of the Tenant for life was the Admittance of him in the Remainder; and also be∣cause the Acceptance of the Lord was quasi an Admittance to him in the Re∣mainder. A Copy-holder in Fee surrendred toTr. 2 Jac. B. R. Aun∣celme and Auncelme's Case, Cro. 2. part. the Use of his Wife for life, the Remain∣der to his younger Son in Fee, and died: The Wife was admitted, but the younger Son refused to be admitted during the life of his Mother, but afterwards, without other Admittance, he surrendred to the Use of J S. It was Resolved, That the Admittance of the Mother Tenant for life was the Admittance of the younger Son in the Remainder, because they made but one Estate. A Copy-holder had Issue 3 Sons, B, C,Hil. 31 Eliz. B. R. Bullein and Graunt's Case, Leon. 1 part, 174 and D, and surrendred to the Use of his last Will, and thereby devised the same to his Wife for life, the Remainder to C and the Heirs of his body: The Wife di∣ed
after Admittance, and the Lord gran∣ted the Copy-hold to D in Fee, who sur∣rendered to the Use of J S for life, and after died without Issue: B the eldest Son entred. It was adjudged, That his Entry was lawfull, and that Admittance of him was not necessary; for that if a Copy-holder surrendreth to the Use of one for life, he in the Reversion or Remain∣der may enter without any new Admit∣tance. SECT. VIII. By what and whose Act, either of the Law, of the Copy-holder himself, or of the Lord, severally or all together, the Co∣py-hold-land or Estate shall be gone, de∣termined, or extinguished; and where suspended onely. HAving in the Sections before decla∣red where a Surrender and Admit∣tance thereupon, either by the Lord or his Steward in Court, or to them, or into the hands of Tenants out of Court, shall be good, and where not: Let us now look upon this Division, and see in what case the Copy-hold or Copy-holder's E∣state
or Interest shall be said to be gone, determined, or extinguished; and by what and whose Act it was or may be determined. First, It may be determi∣ned by the Act of the Lord himself. 2. By the Act of the Copy-holder. 3. By Acts of them both joyned together. And lastly, by the Act of the Law. All which will evidently appear by the Judgments, Resolutions and Precedents after ensuing. Proofs. The Lord by his Act cannot, withoutCo. 2. part, 17. in Lane' Case. the concurrent Act of the Copy-holder himself, determine the Estate and Interest which the Copy-holder hath in his Co∣py-hold. And therefore the Severance of the Free-hold and Inheritance of the Land holden by Copy of Court-Roll (being done by the Act of the Lord) doth not determine the Copy-holder's Estate, or extinguish the Copy-hold. For although that the Estate of the Copy-holder be but an Estate at will, viz. adCo. 4. part, 21. in Brown's Case. voluntatem Domini secundùm Consuetu∣dinem Manerii; yet Custome hath so established the Estate of the Copy-hol∣der, that he is not removeable at the
will of the Lord, so long as he performs the Customes and Services. If a Copy-holder will joyn with the Lord in a Deed of Feoffment of the Ma∣nor, there, by that Act of them both, the Copy-hold is extinct; as it was said by the Lord Anderson Chief Justice, P. 24 Eliz. in Co. B. A Feme-sole was Lady of a Manor, toVid. Cro. 1. part, 5 acc. which were divers Copy-holders: One of the Copy-holders did intermarry with the Seignioress of the Manor. It was the opinion of the Justices, That the Inter∣marriage was onely a Suspension of the Copy-hold, and not an Extinguishment of it. But afterwards they joyned in suffering a common Recovery of the Land; and upon that their Act it was Resolved, that the Copy-hold was extinguished. Husband and Wife Copy-holders inH. 26 Eliz. in Co. B. Cro. 1. part, Stockbrid∣ge's Case. Fee to them and their Heirs: The Hus∣band for Money obtained an Estate of Free-hold to him and his Wife, and the Heirs of their bodies. It was Resolved in that Case, That by the Acceptance of the new Estate the Copy-hold was de∣termined. If a Copy-holder doth surrender toM. 29 Eliz. in C. B. Godb. 101. him who hath a Lease for years of the
Manor to the Use of the same Lessee, by that Act of his the Copy-hold-estate is extinct. The Lord of a Manor sold the Free-holdP. 30 Eliz. B. R. Leon. 1. part, 102. Wakesield's Case. of a Copy-hold unto another, and so it was divided from the Manor; and af∣terwards the Copy-holder did release to the Purchasor. It was the opinion of the Justices, That by this Release the Copy-hold was gone and extinct. But in that Case it was said, That if a Copy-holder be ousted, so as the Lord of the Manor is disseised, and the Copy-holder releaseth to the Disseisor, Nihil operatur by such Release. A Copy-holder had common by Usage in the Wastes of the Lord as to his Mes∣suage and Lands belonging: The Copy-hold comes to the Lord, who after grants the same to the Copy-holder cum per∣tinentiis. In this Case it was holden, That these words, viz. (cum pertinentiis) could not create a new Common, and the Com∣mon first holden was by Custome annex∣ed to the Customary Estate, and was ab∣solutely extinguished. If there be Lessee for life, the Remain∣derM. 9 Jac. in C. B. ad∣judge. acc. for life of a Copy-hold, and the first Tenant for life purchaseth the Free-hold
of the Copy-hold, and afterwards levieth a Fine thereof, and five years pass: It was adjudged, That in that Case by the Fine levied the Copy-hold was not gone nor destroyed, and that this Fine was not a Bar to him who was in Remainder in life of the Copy-hold. There was Tenant for life of a Copy-hold:P. 8 Jac. in Co. B. Moore and Ride∣val's Case. The Lord granted the Reversion of the Copy-hold after the determination of the particular Estate to another for 20 years: Afterwards the Copy-holder, who was Tenant for life, by Deed made a Lease for life of his Copy-hold, and made Live∣ry, which was a Forfeiture of his Copy-hold-estate. It was the opinion of the Justices in that Case, That this Act of the Tenant for life was not a Determina∣tion or an Extinguishment of the Copy-hold: For although it was a Determina∣tion of the particular Estate of the Co∣py-holder, and that he in the Remain∣der might enter; yet the Land remained Copy-hold as it was before. The Custome of a Manor is, That if3 Jac. in B. R. Lashmor and Averi's Case, Cro. 2. part. a Copy-holder in Fee dieth seied, his Wife shall hold the Land during her life as Free-Bench: The Lord enfeoffeth the Copy-holder of the Land. It was ad∣judged,
That she should not hold the Land for her life as Free-Bench, but it was gone by the Purchase. Contrary, if the Lord had infeoffed a Stranger of the Land. C purchased a Copy-hold from AVid. 30 H. 8. Dyer, acc. Lord of the Manor, to him and his Wife and their Child for their lives: After∣wards A by Indenture granted the Free∣hold to B for life, rendring Rent, and made Livery: And afterwards A levied a Fine sur Conusans de droit, &c. to C of the same Lands, who afterwards accep∣ted of the Rent from B. It was holden in that Case, That by the Acceptance of the Rent from B the Copy-hold of C was destroyed and determined. Note, If a Copy-holder takes a LeaseM. 15 & 16 Eliz. in Co. B. for years of his Copy-hold-lands, the Copy-hold is determined: and so it is, if the Lord leaseth a Copy-hold for years which is escheated, the Copy-hold is determined. But if a Copy-holder pur∣chaseth the Manor, the Copy-hold is not determined, but suspended, because there is no Interruption, but it is able to be gran∣ted again, because by the Custome it suf∣ficeth that it hath been demised and de∣misable.
SECT. IX. Of Forfeitures of Copy-holds and Copy-hold-estates; and what Acts or things done by the Copy-holder shall amount unto or be adjudged a Forfeiture of the Co∣py-holder's Estate, what not. THE general Grounds of Forfeitures of Copy-holds, or of their Estates, are declared in the former part of this Treatise, unto which I shall refer you. That which I shall now say is but by way of Amplification of those Grounds, with some Judgments and Authorities in seve∣ral Cases upon sundry differences. All Forfeitures may be reduced unto these Heads: Either voluntary Acts done to the prejudice of the Lord, or negligent or wilfull refusall to doe and pay his Duties and Services to the Lord, which by the Laws and Customes of the Manor he ought to doe and perform. Proofs. A Copy-holder makes a Lease eitherCoke 4. part, Murrel's Case. for life or years of his Copy-hold-lands,
which is not warranted by the Custome of the Manor: now although such Lease shall be a good Lease as betwixt the Co∣py-holder and his Lessee, and he shall not avoid his own Lease; yet as unto the Lord it is a Forfeiture of the Copy-hold and of his Estate, and the Lord shall take advantage of such Forfeiture, and may enter upon the Lands leased. So if a Copy-holder makes a Lease ofH. 37 Eliz. East and Harding's Case. his Copy-hold for 3 years by word, to begin at Michaelmas or at a day to come; although it is a good Lease as betwixt the parties to it, yet it is a Forfeiture of the Copy-hold to the Lord; and so it was holden Hil. 37 Eliz. in East and Har∣ding's Case. A Copy-holder of a Manor made aP. 10 Jac. in Co. B. the Lady Moun∣tague's Case, Cro. 2. part, acc. Lease of his Free-hold-lands for 10 years, and, to avoid a Forfeiture, made a Lease of his Copy-hold-lands for one year; but covenanted with his Lessee, that he should enjoy the Copy-hold-lands de anno in annum, during the 10 years. It was the opinion of the Justices in this Case, That because this Demise of the Copy-holder was but for one year, and so warranted both by Law and Custome, and it was but onely a Covenant on the part of the Lessee that
he should hold it for a longer time, that this was no Forfeiture, although the Lord pretended the same to be a Forfei∣ture. The Lord licensed his Copy-holder toM. 27 Eliz. in Co. B. by Anderson. Moore 184. make a Lease of his Copy-hold-lands for 21 years, to begin at Michaelmas follow∣ing: The Copy-holder by Indenture made a Lease accordingly; but afterwards, before Michaelmas, he made another Lease by Indenture to another person, to begin at Michaelmas following. It was the opinion of the Lord Anderson Chief Justice, Mich. 27 Eliz. in Co. B. That the making of this second Lease, being without the Licence of the Lord, was a Forfeiture of his Copy-hold. A Copy-holder for life hath LicenceM. 15 Jac. in B. R. Wor∣lidge and Banburie's Case, Cro. 2. part. of the Lord to make a Lease for 3 years, if he so long live, and he makes a Lease for 3 years without such Limitation. It was holden to be no Forfeiture of his Estate in the Copy-hold, because the Law makes such a Limitation to the Estate which he makes, that it shall continue but during his life. But if he had been a Copy-holder in Fee, it had been a For∣feiture of his Estate to have made such an absolute Lease, because he had done more
then he was licensed to doe by the Law. And so it was adjudged in Hall and Ar∣rowsmith's Case, which see in Popham's Reports, 185. If a Copy-holder without Licence ofM. 8 Jac. in B R. Ward's Case. the Lord doth erect a new House upon his Copy-hold-lands, some opinion hath been, That the same is a Forfeiture of his E∣state. But I doubt much of that Case, because the Act done is for the benefit and advantage of the Lord, and not to his Prejudice. Quere of it. SECT. X. Where deniall or refusall to pay his Rent, Fine, or to doe his other Customes and Services, shall be a Forfeiture of his Copy-hold and Copy-hold-estate, and where not. Proofs. A Copy-holder in Fee was seised ofH. 33 Eliz. Crispe and Fryer's Case in Moore. Land rendring Rent at Michaelmas and our Lady-day. The Lord at the last instant of the day of payment demanded the Rent upon the Land, and the Copy-holder was not there, nor any for him, to pay it. It was a Question, if his Non∣payment of the Rent was a Forfeiture of
his Copy-hold or not. And the better opinion of the Court seemed to be, That it was a Forfeiture, because the Copy-holder was to take peremptory notice of the day of payment of his Rent, and his not being there seemed to imply that it was a voluntary Denial, or Refusal at the least, of doing the same. But Quere of it; for it was Resolved in another Case, Tr. 21 Jac. in C. B. ThatTr. 21 Jac. in Co. B. not payment of Rent, or of the Fine upon Admittance to his Copy-hold, was no Forfeiture of his Copy-hold-estate, without there was some express verbal Denial of it, which there was not in this Case. A Copy-holder seised by force of se∣veralM. 37 Eliz. B. R. Taver∣nor and Lord Crom∣wel's Case, Cro. 1. part. Copies of Black-acre by the Rent of 4d, White-acre by the Rent of 4d, and Green-acre by the Rent of 6d, denied the Rent of Black-acre. In that case it was holden to be a Forfeiture of that Acre, but no Forfeiture of the other two Acres, be∣cause, although they were all in one hand, yet because they were holden by several Rents, the Forfeiture of the one Acre can∣not be the Forfeiture of the other two Acres. No Fine is either due or payable to
the Lord, but either upon a Discent, orVid. Coke 4. part, 28. in Sands Case. upon an Admittance. But if such a Co∣py-holder upon his Admittance shall make an absolute Refusal to pay the Fine to the Lord, the same is a Forfeiture of his Co∣py-hold and of his Estate. But there such a Fine must be reasonable. For if the Fine assessed by the Lord be an unreaso∣nable Fine, (of which the Judges shall determine) a Refusal or Denial of the Copy-holder to pay the same shall be no Forfeiture of his Estate or Copy-hold. Note, It was Resolved by the Justices,M. 43 Eliz. Dalton and Hamond's Case, Moor 622. That if the Lord demandeth an unrea∣sonable Fine of his Copy-holder, and he refuseth to pay it, it is no Forfeiture; otherwise where it is a reasonable Fine. If a Fine be certain, the Tenant is to bring it with him to the Court, and to pay it before Admittance; and if he be not ready to pay it, it is a Forfeiture, and so it was adjudged. But what shall be a reasonable Fine or an unreasonable Fine, ought to be determined per arbitrium bo∣ni viri; and the Court and Justices of it shall be Judges of the Reasonablenesse of the same, if it be pleaded that the Fine demanded by the Lord, or the
Distress for it, be unreasonable or exces∣sive. A Copy-holder seised of Copy-hold-landsM. 6 Jac. in C. B. Wil∣lowes and Willowes Case, Coke Select Cases. of the yearly value of 53s. 4d. per annum, and no more, surrendred them into the hands of the Lord of the Manor to the Use of J S and his Heirs: The Custome of the Manor was, That upon the Admission of any person a reasonable Fine shall be assessed by the Lord or his Steward to be paid. The Steward at the Court holden for the said Manor assessed a Fine of 5l. 6s. 8d. (the value of the Lands for 2 years) to be paid by J S for a Fine; which Fine being requested of him by the Lord to pay, he refused to pay the same; whereupon the Lord en∣tred upon the Lands for a Forfeiture. In which Case these Points were Resolved. 1. That if the Fine assessed had been rea∣sonable, yet a certain time was to be set, and a certain place where it should be paid: for it shall not be intended that the Tenant hath sufficient Money about him to pay a Fine which is uncertain to be assessed. 2. That the Fine assessed by the Steward was an unreasonable Fine: and 3. That the Refusal was no Forfei∣ture.
If the Fine of a Copy-holder be as∣sessedH. 13 Jac. C. B. Denny and Lemon's Case, Hob. 135. Co. 11. part, God∣frie's Case acc. by the Lord or his Steward, be the Fine reasonable or unreasonable, the Lord must demand the Fine of the Copy-hol∣der before he can enter upon the Copy-hold for not payment thereof, and the Reasonablenesse or Unreasonablenesse thereof shall be adjudged by the Court. Lands being Customary Lands, andP. 30 Eliz. B. R. Aumo∣ry and Eves Case, Leon. 1 part, 100. by the Custome discendable to the youn∣ger Son, the Father died, the younger Son being of the age of 2 years: Thir∣ty years incurred after the death of the Father, and no Court had been holden for the Lord of the Manor: But in the in∣terim the younger Son had made a Lease of the Lands to a Stranger; and after, at the next Court holden for the Manor, he came into Court and prayed to be ad∣mitted, but the Steward refused to admit him. It was holden in this Case, That the Lease made by him was good, and that there was no negligence in him to be admitted to the Copy-hold-estate; for that it was holden in this Case, That if a Copy-holder dieth, his Heir within age, he is not bound to come at any Court during his Nonage to pray Admittance, or to tender his Fine for the same; and
if the death of the Ancestor be not pre∣sented, nor Proclamations made that the Heir come in to take up the Land and pay his Fine, the Heir shall not forfeit his Land for such neglect, although he be of full age. If the Homagers in a Court-Baron4 Eliz. Dyer 211. being Copy-holders do refuse to make their Presentments, it is a Forfeiture of their Copy-holds: and so it was Resolved to be by both the Chief Justices in the Star-Chamber in the Earl of Arundel's Case. A Copy-holder came not to the Lord'sH. 13 Jac. B. R. Bel∣field and A∣dams Case, Bulstr. 3. part, 81. Court of the Manor to doe his Suit and Service by the space of 3 years toge∣ther. The Question was, if it was a suf∣ficient cause of Forfeiture of his Copy-hold. It was said by the Court, That it was no cause of Forfeiture, if a Warning be not given by the Lord of the time of his Court to be holden, and no∣tice thereof given to the Copy-holder himself; and the withdrawing of his Suit by a Copy-holder is onely fineable: but if he doth deny to doe his Suit and Ser∣ve, then it is a Forefeiture of his Copy-hold: and so was it adjudged M. 14 Jac. in B. R. in Hammond and Winibank's Case.
Summons was given at the Church∣doorH. 36 Eliz. in Co. B. Godb. 142. for a Copy-holder to appear at the Lord's Court, and doe his Suit and Ser∣vice; upon which Summons he did notVid. M. 30 Eliz. C. B. Sir John Bruanche's Case, Leon. 1 part, 104. Where gene∣ral Warning of a Copy-holder to appear at the Lord's Court given with∣in the Parish shall be suf∣ficient, where not. appear. The Doubt was, if it was a cause of Forfeiture of his Copy-hold. It was the opinion of the whole Court, That it was no cause of Forfeiture of his Copy-hold, because that it was not shewed that it was the Custome to make such Sum∣mons: and the Court said, That it were hard to make it a Forfeiture, because per∣haps the Copy-holder had not Notice of it: and they held that in such case Notice must be given to the person, and his Re∣fusall must be a wilfull Refusall. The Custome of a Manor was, That ifH. 25 Eliz. in B. R. Borneford and Sir John Packington's Case, Leon. 1. part, 1. a Copy-holder died seised, his Wife should hold his Lands as her Free-Bench, and be admitted Tenant, and that the Son should not be admitted Tenant during the life of his Mother: and farther the Cu∣stome was, That if any Copy-holder com∣mitted Felony, and it were presented by the Homage, that the Lord might seize the Copy-hold as forfeit: The Copy-holder died; his Wife was admitted to her Free-Bench: The Son committed Fe∣lony; the Wife died. The Question
was, if the Lord might seize the Copy-hold as forfeit. It was objected, He could not, for that the Son was not Te∣nant at the time of the Forfeiture com∣mitted, and so the Lord could not then seize, and the Custome should be taken strictly. But notwithstanding it was Re∣solved, That the Lord should have the Land as forfeit, and that the Son was a Copy-holder within the Intent of the Cu∣stome. If Husband and Wife be Joynt-Copy-holders of the purchace of the Husband; during the Coverture the Husband is at∣tainted of Felony, and dieth: It is no Forfeiture of any part of the Copy-hold. But if the Purchace be made before the Coverture, then it is a Forfeiture of the moyety. The King being Lord of a Manor, aM. 5 Jac. in Scaceario, Godb. 269. Copy-holder within the Manor made a Lease of his Copy-hold for 3 Lives; and the surviving Tenant for life continued the possession of the Lands for 40 years. Though the making of such a Lease for 3 Lives was in Law a Forfeiture of the Copy-hold; yet because it did not ap∣pear upon the Endorsement of the Deed that Livery was made, it was holden, That
the King could not take advantage of the Forfeiture. If a Copy-holder doth bargain and sell his Copy-hold-lands by Deed indented and enrolled, it was Resolved, The same was no cause of Forfeiture of the Copy-hold of which the Lord can take advan∣tage, because the Copy-hold did not pass by the Deed: and so it was said it was adjudged in London's Case. So, if a Copy-holder for life surren∣dreth to the Use of another in Fee, and35 Eliz. Bul∣lock's Case. besides that makes Livery of the Land; this is no Forfeiture of his Copy-hold, because the Estate passeth by the Surren∣der, and not by the Livery. If a Copy-holder for life cuts down Timber-trees, it is a Forfeiture of his Co∣py-hold: and so it was adjudged in Bel∣field and Adams Case. But if a Copyhol∣der makes a Lease for years, and the Les∣see cuts down Timber-trees, or commits other Waste upon the Copy-hold-lands, the Lord cannot enter upon the Land for a Forfeiture; but in such case the Lord is put to his Action upon the Case against the Wrong-doer.
SECT. XI. Where the Act of the Lord, and what Act of his, shall dispense with a Forfeiture made by his Copy-holder; where and what not. Proofs. A Copy-holder commits Waste, and af∣terPasc. 5 Jac. Cro. 2. part, Mantlie and Willington's Case. the Waste done, the Lord ac∣cepts of the Rent from the hands of the Copy-holder. Quere if it shall bar him to enter for the Forfeiture. It is a Quere not Resolved. If Lands be demisable to two by CopyP. 5 Eliz. Moore 49. for life successivè, and the Custome of the Manor is, that they may not cut Trees: if the first of them cutteth down Trees, it is a Forfeiture both of the Estate of the present Tenant for life, and of the Estate of the other in Remainder over. If a Copy-holder levies a Fine, makes a Feoffment, or suffers a common Re∣covery which destroys the Estate: in such case no Acceptance of the Rent, or Act done by the Lord, shall be available to make the Estate again good. But where the Custome of the Manor onely is bro∣ken;
as if the Copy-holder makes a Lease of his Copy-hold-lands for more years then one year, or denies to pay his Rent, or denies to be sworn of the Homage, or commits Waste: there his Estate may be afterwards confirmed, and there and in such case the Acceptance of the Rent by the Lord will amount to a Confirmati∣on of the first Estate. In some cases, where an Estate of a Co∣py-holder is forfeited by Law, yet by Cu∣stome, and the Act of the Lord in his Court of the Manor, the Forfeiture may be mitigated, and the Land shall not be utterly forfeited or destroyed. As where the Custome is, That for Waste Copy-hold shall be forfeited, a Custome for to amerce the Tenant for the Waste done, and to distrain for the Amercement, will be a good Custome to mitigate the Forfei∣ture of the Copy-hold. The Custome of the Manor where Co∣py-hold-tenements17 Car. in B. R. Thorne and Tyler's Case. were demisable for lives was, That if any such Copy-holder suffered his Messuage to be ruined for want of Repairing, or by committing of Waste, if the same was presented by the Homage, the Lord used to di∣strain the Cattel as well of the Copy-holder
himself as of his Under-tenant levant and couchant upon the Lands for the said Amercement. It was objected, That the Custome was not good, for that it was an unreasonable Custome, that the Under-tenant should be punished for the offence of the Copy-holder, for the Under∣tenant is a Stranger to the Custome, and Customes should be taken strictly. But it was Resolved that the Custome was good: For by the Law, the suffering of the Co∣py-hold Messuage to fall to ruine, or to be wasted, was a Forfeiture of the Copy-hold, and the Custome did abridge and mitigate the Forfeiture, and the Under∣tenant for a year was a Tenant to the Lord, and distrainable for the Rents and Services, and the Charge lies upon the Land, and not upon the person; and there∣fore it was Adjudged, That the Custome was good, and the Amercement lawfull, and the Distress of the Cattel of the Un∣der-tenant levant upon the Land was law∣full, all of them being by the Act of the Lord in his Court, and by the Custome of the Manor, in mitigation of the For∣feiture of the Land, and so for the good of the Copy-holder.
SECT. XII. Whether Copy-hold-lands be within the Sta∣tute of Westm. 2. and may be entailed, or not; and where and by what Acts the Issues in tail may be barred; and what shall be a Discontinuance of the Estate, what not. WHether Copy-hold-lands are with∣in the Statute of West. 2. cap. 1. de Donis, &c. or may be entailed, hath been much controverted, and many Judg∣ments and Resolutions have been on both sides; and it seemeth to be a Point not fully agreed upon at this day. I shall therefore make some little mention what hath been said on either side, and leave it to the judgement of others. And first for the Affirmative part, That Copy-holds are within the said Statute, and may be entailed, I shall begin with Mr. Lit∣tleton himself. Tenant by Copy of Court-Roll is, saith he, where there is a Cu∣stome in a Manor time out of mind used, that certain Tenants within the said Ma∣nor have used to have Lands and Tene∣ments
to them and their Heirs in Fee∣simple or in Fee-tail: and in that Chap∣ter he particularly sets forth the manner of Grants of such Estates, viz. Ad hanc Curiam venit A de B, & sursumreddi∣dit in manus Domini, &c. unum Messua∣glum, &c. ad usum C de D, & Haeredum suorum, vel Haeredum de corpore suo exeunt. Habendum sibi & Haeredibus de corpore suo exeunt. &c. By which it appeareth to be the opinion of Mr. Littleton, that an Estate may and might be of Copy-hold-lands. And herewith agreeth the opini∣on of Mr. Plowden in his Commentaries in Morgan and Manxell's Case. But note, that the opinion of Mr. Littleton is, That there must be a Custome of the Manor to enable such Estates of Co∣py-hold-lands. It is said in Coke 3. part, in Heydon's Case, That where an Act of Parliament doth alter the Service, Tenure or Inte∣rest of the Estate, either in prejudice of the Lord or of the Custome of the Ma∣nor, or in prejudice of the Tenants, there such an Act of Parliament doth not ex∣tend to Copy-holds. And therefore the Statute of Westm. 2. de Donis, because it extendeth to the Alteration of the Ser∣vice
and Tenure of the Land, and is pre∣judicial to the Lord of the Manor, doth not extend to Copy-holds. But in that Case it is agreed, That by a special Cu∣stome Lands might be entailed; for that it might be, that upon the creation of the Ma∣nors Lands were given by Lords of Ma∣nors to hold by their Tenants by parti∣cular Services and for particular Uses; viz. to some to them and their Heirs in Fee-simple, to some others to hold to them and the Heirs of their bodies begotten, and to some others for particular Estates, as for life, &c. and such Estates having continued in their Issues time out of mind, Custome hath now enabled such Estates to be of Copy-holds in tail: and although they have and enjoy such their Estates, be it either Fee-simple or Fee∣tail, yet it is but secundùm Consuetudi∣nem Manerii: and therefore and for these Reasons and causes, although that Co∣py-hold be not or could not be entailed within the general words of the Statute de Donis, &c. yet by Custome time out of mind used, they say that Copy-holds may be entailed. 36 Eliz. in the King's Bench, it was Adjudged, That where the Custome of
the Manor was, that Lands might be gran∣ted unto any in Fee-simple, in such case a Grant of Lands unto a man and the Heirs of his bodie was within the Custome: For a Custome which extendeth to the greater will extend to the lesser Estate. Tenant in tail of a Copy-hold surrendredM. 15 Jac. Lee and Brown's Case, Poph. 128. the same into the hands of the Lord, to the Use of J S, &c. In that Case 2 Questions did arise. 1. If Copy-holds were within the Statute de Donis, &c. 2. Whether the Tail might be cut off by a Surrender. The Court doubted of the first Point; but the better opinion seemed to be, That the Statute co-operating with the Custome, they might be entailed. A Copy-holder had Issue 3 Sons, A,H. 31 Eliz. B. R. Bullein and Graun's Case, Leon. 1. part, 174. B, and C, and surrendred his Copy-hold-lands to the Use of his last Will, and thereby declared the same to be to the Use of his Wife for life, the Remainder to B his second Son in tail, and after∣wards to A in Fee. It was a Question in this Case, if B had a Fee-simple conditi∣onal in the Lands, or an Estate-tail. For if a conditional Fee, then a Remainder over of it could not be limited. It was the opinion of Wray Chief Justice, That it was an Estate-tail in B, and not a Fee
conditional, and that Customary Lands might be granted in tail. A Surrender of Copy-hold-lands wasH. 34 Eliz. B. R. rot. 29 Stanton and Barney's Case. made within the Manor of Stevenson, to the Use of J S and the Heirs of his body; and after Issue, he surrendred the Lands unto another. It was agreed by all the Justices, That it was a Fee-simple con∣ditional at the Common Law, and after Issue that he might alien the Lands. A Copy-holder in Fee of the ManorM. 36 Eliz. B. R. Gra∣venor and Brook's Case, Poph. 34. of Fairchilds and Preachers, 3 H. 8. sur∣rendred his Copy-hold-lands to the Use of his eldest Daughter for life, the Re∣mainder to the eldest Son of the said Daughter and the Heirs-males of his bo∣dy, the Remainder to the right Heirs of A the Copy-holder in Fee. In this Case it was said, That an Estate in Tail could not be of Copy-hold-lands. It was the opinion of Fenner and Popham, That by Equity of the Statute de Donis an Estate∣tail might be of Copy-hold-lands, though not otherwise. Now on the other side, That Copy-hold-lands cannot be entailed, nor are within the Statute de Donis, &c. see these Cases and Resolutions following. H. 35 Eliz. in Co. B. it was Resolved
by all the Justices, that Copy-holds wereH. 35 Eliz. in Co. B. Pitts and Huckley's Case. not within the Statute of Westm. 2. de Do∣nis: For if they were within that Statute, then the Lord should not enter nor take advantage of the Forfeiture of the Copy-hold for Felony, (the contrary of which was Resolved in Borneford and Sir John Packington's Case) but the Donor, and the Services should be done to the Donor, and not to the Lord of the Manor; which is against the nature of a Copy-hold-Te∣nure. The Case was, That a Copy-holderTr. 18 Jac. in Co. B. Royden and Moulster's Case, Cro. 3. part, 32, 33. Godb. 367. acc. surrendred to the Use of one in Tail, there being no Custome to warrant such Sur∣render. In this Case the Question was, whether a Copy-hold might be entailed within the Statute de Donis. It was hol∣den by all the Justices, That it could not be entailed within the Statute, and that for divers causes. 1. Because it is not with∣in the Letter of the Statute, which speaks onely de Tenement is per Chartam datis: and Copy-holds cannot pass by Deed, but by Surrender onely, as is agreed on all sides. 2. Because they are not within the mean∣ing of the Statute, because that before 7 E. 4. 19. they were not of any account in Law, being onely Estates at will of the
Lord secundùm Consuetudinem Manerii. 3. Because the said Statute de Donis pro∣vides onely against those who might make Disinherison by Fine or Recovery, which a Copy-holder there could not doe or make, because that then upon such Grants in Tail the Reversion should be left in themselves, which could not be, being to the prejudice of the Lord of the Manor. And also 4. because it would be very mischievous, because then there should be no means to dock or cut off such Entails, (common Recoveries and Fines not be∣ing then in use) unless there were a spe∣cial Custome to that purpose. Having thus declared and made men∣tion of the several Cases and Resolutions in this much-controverted Point, Whe∣ther Copy-hold may be entailed within the said Statute de Donis, &c. I shall not de∣liver any absolute opinion upon the same, although I do much incline to the Affir∣mative part, being chiefly led thereunto by the opinion of Mr. Littleton, and by the Resolution in Manxell's Case, and of my Lord Coke in Heydon's Case, and a late Resolution in the said Point, 42 Eliz. in Erish and Rives Case, where it was ad∣judged in the Court of Common Pleas,
upon an Evidence given in a Case of Copy-hold-lands within the Manor of Istleworth-Sion in the County of Middle∣sex; where it was Resolved, That no E∣state-tail could be of a Copy-hold with∣out a particular Custome to warrant the same: but if there was such a particu∣lar Custome within the Manor to warrant such Estates, then by the Custome co-o∣perating with the Statute (as before is ex∣pressed) Copy-hold-lands might be well entailed within the said Statute. Admitting then that by an especial Cu∣stome of the Manor Lands may be entai∣led; the next matter to be considered of is, By what and whose Acts the said E∣state shall be either discontinued or bar∣red, and what shall amount to a Discon∣tinuance or a Bar to the Issue in Tail of such Estate. In 13 R. 2. sits. Judgment 7. it is13 R. 2. sits. Judgment 7. said, That the Heir who is inheritable to the Copy-lands by Custome may re∣cover the same by Plaint in the Court of the Lord in the nature of an Assise of Mort-dauncestor, but he shall not have an15 H. 8. Te∣nant by Co∣py 24. Assise of Novel Disscisin: And 15 H. 8. Tenant by Copy 24. The Heir of a Copy-holder Tenant in Tail shall re∣cover
the Lands in a Formedon in the Discender. The Custome of a Manor was, That Plaints in the Court of the Lord of the Manor have used to be in real Actions. A Recovery was by Plaint in the nature of a real Action against a Copy-holder being Tenant in Tail, and a Recovery thereupon had. It was holden in that Case, That the said Recovery shall be a Discontinuance to take away the En∣try of the Heir in Tail, because such Plaints are warranted by the Custome, and it is an Incident which the Law an∣nexeth to the Custome, That a Reco∣very shall be a Discontinuance. But vide Tr. 36 Eliz. in B. R. in Deal and36 Eliz. B. R. Deal and Rigden's Case, Moore 358. Rigden's Case. If it had been a Surrender in Court, it had been no Discontinu∣ance. In 27 Eliz. in a Case concerning theM. 9 Car. in Co. B. Hill and Ʋp∣churche's Case, Brown∣loe 121. Manor of Northhall in the County of Es∣sex, That if Copy-hold-lands might be entailed within the Statute of Westm. 2. then a Custome of a Surrender of it should be a Bar or a Discontinuance of such E∣state; for as the Estate might be created by Custome, so it might be discontinued by a Surrender by Custome. And Tr.
38 Eliz. Field and Eliot's Case, A Sur∣render by Tenant in Tail of a Copy-holder in Fee makes a Discontinuance of it. But yet notwithstanding those Authorities and Cases, I do conceive that a Surrender is no Discontinuance of a Copy-hold-estate in Tail. If a man be seised of a Copy-hold inH. 30 Eliz. B. R. Right and Foote∣man's Case, Leon. 1. part, 95. the right of his Wife, or be Tenant in Tail of a Copy-hold, and he doth sur∣render to the Use of another in Fee: It was holden in that Case, That the same doth not make any Discontinuance of the Estate of the Wife or of the Estate-tail, but that the Wife or the Issue in Tail may respectively enter into and upon the Land. And according to this it was adjudged in Gravenor and Brook's Case be∣fore mentioned in 36 Eliz. Copy-hold-lands were entailed, and37 Eliz. in C. B. Lane and Hil's Case. the Copy-holder surrendred the said Lands to the Use of another man in Tail with divers Remainders over, and then he died. It was said in this Case, That it was no Discontinuance of the Tail, but the Issue in Tail, notwithstanding the Surrender, might enter. But it was said in that Case, That if it were a Disconti∣nuance, that in such case a Formedon in
the Reverter did not lie by the Tenant in Tail, because when a Copy-holder makes a Gift in Tail, he hath no Reversion, but a Possibility; and the Lord shall avow upon the Donee for the Rents and Ser∣vices, and not upon the Donor. In Trespass it was adjudged, That aH. 1 Jac. Oldcat's Case, Moore 753. Surrender by Tenant in Tail of a Copy-hold was not any Discontinuance of it, no more then a Surrender by Tenant for life to another in Fee was a Forfei∣ture. If an Enfant Tenant in Tail surren∣drethH. 35 Eliz. Goales and Gran's Case adjudge; acc▪ his Copy-hold-lands to the Use of a Stranger, who is admitted; the Enfant may enter at his full age, because it was not a Bar nor a Discontinuance. It is not to be disputed or questioned whether a Common Recovery of Lands at the Common Law with Voucher over and Warranty be a Bar of Lands entailed: It is universally received by all Learned in the Laws of the Realm to be a Bar of such an Estate, and the Inheritances of a great many persons of Quality and others do depend upon such Common Recoveries had and suffered. But then the Que∣stion hath been, whether a Common Recovery had and suffered in the Court
of the Lord of the Manor shall be a Bar of an Estate of Copy-hold-lands entailed: and for that, it will stand upon this dif∣ference, Where the Custome of the Ma∣nor hath always been, that such a Reco∣very there had shall be a Bar, where not. For without a special Custome, I do con∣ceive that by a Recovery had and suffered in the Court of the Lord of the Manor an Estate-tail of Copy-hold-lands cannot be barred: But where such a Custome is or hath been out of mind used, there I con∣ceive that a common Recovery had and suffered in the Court of the Manor will bar an Estate in Tail of Copy-hold-lands. I shall onely put you two Judgments and Resolutions to make good this difference, although many others may be alled∣ged. Upon a special Verdict in an ActionP. 37 Eliz. in B. R. Clun and Pease's Case, Cro. 1. part. of: Trespass it was found, That the Lands were Copy-hold demisable in Tail, with the Remainder over in Tail: That Te∣nant in Tail in possession suffered a Com∣mon Recovery with Voucher in the Court of the Manor of these Lands, and after∣wards died: But there was not any Cu∣stome found for suffering Recovery of such Lands in the Court of the said Ma∣nor.
It was holden by the whole Court in that Case, That the Recovery should not bind the Tail but upon a Recom∣pence in value, and in that case the Issue could not have Land in value: Also the Lord should lose his Fine, and the party to whose Use the Recovery was had should hold the Lands without Admit∣tance or Grant from the Lord, which is contrary to the nature of a Copy-hold. The other Case was this. Land wasM. 37 Eliz. in B. R. Eylett and Lane's Case, Cro. 1. part. demisable in Tail by Custome: A Copy-holder demised the Land in Tail by Co∣py: The Copy-holder suffered a Com∣mon Recovery in the Court of the Ma∣nor with Voucher and Warranty. The Court at the first doubted of it, because a Warranty could not be annexed to such an Estate in Tail. But yet afterwards it was Resolved, That the Recovery there was a Bar of the Tail. And Note, for a Conclusion of this Point, That at this day, by the Customes of several Ma∣nors, Common Recoveries are had and suffered in the Courts of Lords of Ma∣nors for the docking and barring of E∣state tails of Copy-holds. And much inconvenience would ensue, both if Co∣py-holds at this day might not by Cu∣stome
be entailed, and likewise if by Cu∣stome Common Recoveries had of Estate∣tails with Voucher over in the Courts of Lords of Manors should not thereby be docked and barred. SECT. XIII. What things are incident to a Copy-holder, and what he may take of common right without the Grant or Licence of the Lord: And what Acts upon the Land shall bind the Copy-holder, what not. IF a Copy-holder according to the Cu∣stome doth surrender into the hands of 2 Tenants to the Use of J S and his Heirs, and afterwards the Copy-holder dieth before the Presentment be made of the Surrender by the Tenants, and the Lord before the Presentment accepts of the Rent of J S generally, but not as a Copy-holder: the Heir of the Surrende∣ror may eter into and upon the Lands, and receive the Profits thereof to his own use, for that nothing vesteth in the Surrenderee before Admittance, and the Inheritance of the Copy-hold is in the Heir quasi by Discent.
To have Common in the Wastes ofPasch. 45 E∣liz. adjudge. acc. the Lord is not a thing incident to his Copy-hold, but is by Prescription or Custome of the Manor. If therefore a Copy-holder purchaseth the Inheritance of the Land, the Interest of the Com∣mon being a thing intire is gone and determined. But if the Copy-holder doth surrender part of his Copy-hold-lands to the Use of another, who is ad∣mitted, yet his whole Common is not thereby determined, but he shall have Common still for the Lands not surren∣dred. A Copy-holder may take House-bote,9 H. 4.  Waste 59. Coke select Cases 68. Hedg-bote and Plough-bote upon his Co∣py-hold-lands of common right, as a thing incident to the Grant, if it be not re∣strained by a Custome, that the Copy-holder shall not take it but by Assign∣ment of the Lord or his Bailiff. And if the Lord, where the Tenant hath such Botes, cuts down all the Woods and Un∣der-woods which are standing and grow∣ing upon the Lands, to prevent the Co∣py-holder of his Botes, he may have an Action of Trespass against the Lord, as it was Resolved in Heydon and Smith's Case, Pasch. 8 Jac. in Co. B.
A Manor may be Copy-hold, and hol∣denM. 8 Jac. B. R. The King and Stafferton's Case, Yelv. 190, 191. of another Manor by Copy of Court-Roll: and if such a Copy-hold-Manor be granted unto J S and his Heirs, J S may hold a Copy-Court within his said Manor without a special Grant of it; for that of common right a Court-Baron or a Copy-hold Court is incident to every Manor. A Lord of a Manor grants a Copy-holdP. 26 Eliz. C. B. Chaw and Dover's Case, Leon. 1. part, 16. for  Lives, and afterwards takes a Wife: The 3 Lives end  determine: The Lord enters into the Manor; and keeps the Copy-hold-lands in his hands for a time, and then grants the Lands over again by Copy, and dieth: The Wife of the Lord enters, and clums Dower in it. In this Case it was Resolved, That the Copy-holder should hold the Lands dis∣charged of the Dower, because the Co∣py-holder comes and is in the Lands by the Custome, which is paramount to the title of Dower. A Copy-holder is feised of Lands atP. 5 Eliz. by Dyer. Vde Moore 50. Common Law, and also of Lands holden by Copy of Court-Roll, and he by Indenture, without Licence of the Lord, makes one Lease of both Lands, rendring Rent. It was said by Dyer, That in such case the whole
Rent is issuing out of the Lands at Com∣mon Law, because the Lease as to the Copy-hold-lands was utterly void. If the Lord grants to his Copy-holderP. 12 Eliz. in B. R. Moore 94. the Trees growing upon the Lands, and which shall after grow, with liberty to cut them down and carry them away; he may justifie the cutting of the Trees which are growing, and it shall not be a Forfeiture of his Copy-hold, because the Lord hath by his Grant dispensed with it: But he cannot cut down the Trees which shall there after grow, as it was said by Plowden and Popham. If a Copy-holder binds himself in aPasc. 12 Eliz. in B. R. ad∣judge. acc. Statute, his Copy-hold-lands shall not be extended upon the said Statute, because the Copy-holder in the eye of the Law hath an Estate but ad voluntatem Domini secundùm Consuetudinem Manerii: But if a man be Tenant for life or years of a Ma∣nor, and a Copy-hold comes to his hands by Forfeiture or other determination, and he binds himself in a Statute; al∣though the Copy-hold be after granted, yet it may be extended upon the Sta∣tute, because the Copy-hold was an∣nexed to the Free-hold, and joyned with it in the hands of the Lord, when
the Statute was acknowledged and entred into. The Custome of a Manor was, That a Copy-holder might cut and lop TreesM. 5 Jac. Swayn and Beckett's Case, Moore 812. for Hedg-bote and other necessaries: The Queen made a Lease of the Manor to J S, with Exception of Trees: King James granted the Reversion to J D in Fee: The Assignees of the Term granted a Copy-hold to other for 3 Lives, Ha∣bendum to them successivé: The Copy-holder cut Trees. It was Resolved, That the Copy-holder was in by the Custome paramount the Exception, although he took his Estate after the Exception, and therefore might justifie the cutting of the Trees for the Hedg-be and other ne∣cessaries. The Husband seised in Fee of Copy-hold-lands35 Eliz. Co. 4. part, Bullock and Dibles's Case. in the right of his Wife sur∣rendred the same to another, who was ad∣mitted, and afterwards the Husband died. It was Adjudged that in this case the Wife might enter, and she should not be put to her Cui in vita. If there be Lessee for life, the Remain∣derM. 9 Jac. in Co. B. ad∣iudge. acc. for life, of a Copy-hold, and the first Tenant for life doth purchase the Free∣hold of the Copy-hold, and levies a Fine
thereof, and 5 years pass: it was Ad∣judged, That this Fine should bar him in the Remainder of his Copy-hold. SECT. XIV. Where the Lord of the Manor shall be Chancellour in his own Court, to deter∣mine the Differences which arise betwixt Copy-holders. A Copy-holder doth surrender his Co∣py-hold-landsH. 25 Eliz. in B. R. Le∣on. 1. part, 2. to A, to hold the Lands till he hath levied the summe of 100 l. upon trust that afterwards he shall surrender to the Use of B: A levies the money, and being required to make the surrender to B, he refuseth to doe it; whereupon B exhibits his Bill to the Lord in the Court of the Manor: The Lord there makes a Decree, that A make the Surrender to B, which he again refuseth to doe; and thereupon the Lord seizeth the Lands, and afterwards admits B to the same. It was the opinion of the whole Court in this Case, That both the Seizure of the Lord and his Admittance of B were lawfull, because the Lord in such Cases of Equity to execute Trusts
is Chancellour in his own Court. If a false Judgment be given in aVid. 14 H. 4. 34. Court-Baron by the Steward against a Copy-holder, the Copy-holder in such case shall not have either a Writ of Errour or a Writ of False Judgment; but he may sue in the Court of the Lord by Bill, to be relieved against such Judgment; and the Lord, as Chancellour, may give him Relief therein, and shall restore the Land to the party upon the false Judgment gi∣ven by the Steward, and Restitution made to the Copy-holder. SECT. XV. Of Surrenders upon Conditions; and where such Surrenders shall be good, where not. Proofs. A Copy-holder in Fee surrendred outP. 31 Eliz. Co. 4. part, Kite and Queinton's Case. of Court his Copy-hold-lands to the Use of another and his Heirs upon Condition: At the next Court the Sur∣render was presented, but in the Present∣ment the Condition was omitted: He to whose Use the Surrender was made be∣ing dead, the Lord admitted his Heir. It
was Resolved in this Case, That the Pre∣sentment of the Surrender was void, be∣cause it was not made in such manner as the Surrender was made. But if the Conditional Surrender had been presen∣ted, it had beed good, although it was not entred into the Court-Roll. A Copy-holder surrendred his Copy-holdTr. 2 Jac. B. R. Cro. 2. part, Hall & Shardbrook's Case. upon Condition, and afterwards by Deed he released the Condition. Re∣solved it was good without a Surrender, for that a Condition or a Right cannot properly be said to be determined by a Surrender, but it may be by a Release. The Case was; Grandfather, Father,M. 15 E. 3. 13. and Son: The Grandfather died: The Father assigned Dower to the Grandmo∣ther, being his Mother, who surrendred it back to the Father paying 10 l. per an∣num: The Father died; his Wife brought Dower against the Son and recovered, because the Father had the Fee and Free∣hold conjoyned in the life of the Grand∣mother by the Surrender. It was Re∣solved in this Case, That when the Wife of the Father doth recover Dower, she shall pay to the Grandmother so much Rent as doth belong to her proportion in Dower. And in this Case it was hol∣den,
That although the Estate of a man be Conditional and defeasible upon a bad Title; yet the Wife shall not be ousted of her Dower untill the Conditional or defeasible Title be defeated. And where Husband and Wife are Tenants for life, and surrender to him in the Reversion, the Wife of him in the Reversion shall be endowed, and yet the Surrender is but Conditional; for if the Wife of the Tenant for life overliveth her Husband, the Surrender is defeasible: à fortiori in case where it is not defeasible, as in this Case. And it was said in case of a Sur∣render of Copy-hold-land, where it was Conditional, the Wife is dowable of it, if the Condition do not determine the E∣state in the life-time of the Husband: But a Feme is not dowable of Copy-hold but by Custome of the Manor.H. 27 Eliz. Cro. 3. part, 68. Bright and Hub∣bard's Case. A Copy-holder devised his Lands to his Wife for life, and that she should sell the Lands for the payment of his Debts; and surrendred to the Use of his Will: The Copy-holder died: His Wife sur∣rendred the Land upon Condition to pay 12 l. It was Adjudged, It was a good Sur∣render upon the Condition, and that it was a good Sale made by her.
The Father, Copy-holder in Fee, sur∣rendredTr. 33 Eliz. Cro. 1. part, Symonds and Lawn's Case. his Copy-hold-lands to the Use of his Son in Fee, upon Condition to perform Covenants in an Indenture: The Son after Admittance surrendred to J S upon Condition that if the Son pay 10 l. the Surrender to be void: The Son nei∣ther pays the 10 l. nor performs the Co∣venants in the Indenture: The Father enters. Resolved, That by the Entry of the Father both the Surrenders were avoided, and there the Son might well en∣ter after the death of his Father, and the Surrender made by him to J S. If a Copy-holder doth surrender his33 Eliz. Co. 4. part, West∣wick's Case. Lands to the Use of J S and his Heirs absolutely, and the Lord admits the Te∣nant upon Condition, it is void; for that after Admittance the Tenant is in by him who made the Surrender, & not by the Lord. The Custome was, That a Copy-hol∣der might out of Court surrender to theTr. 28 Eliz. in B. R. Cro. 1. part, ¦dett's Case. Use of a Stranger in Fee: The Lord of the Manor made J his Steward ad exe∣quendum per se, or his sufficient Deputy, who made A his Deputy pro hac vice to take a Surrender of Husband and Wife, the Remainder in Fee: The Deputation was farther, viz. Et ulteriùs faciendum
quantum in me est: A took a Surrender of the Husband and Wife upon Condition, which Condition was afterwards peform∣ed and executed. Resolved in this Case, That although the authority to take the Surrender was absolute, and to be with∣out a Condition; yet when A took it upon a Condition to be performed, it was a good Surrender made to him, by reason of the words in the Deputation, Et ulteri∣ùs faciendum, &c. A Woman Copy-holder durante Vidui∣tateP. 39 Eliz. B. R. Oland and Bar∣wick's Case, Cro. 1. part, acc. sowed the Land, and before Seve∣rance of the Corn she took Husband. Resolved, That although the Estate of the Wife was incertain, and determined by the Limitation, and not by any Con∣dition either in Fact or in Law, that the Lord should have the Corn sowed upon the Lands. A Copy-holder in Fee of Lands dis∣cendable in Borough-English had 3 Sons,H. 2 Jac. B. R. Cro. 2. part, Cur∣ies and Wolverston's Case. and surrendred to the Use of his Will, and thereby devised his Lands to his middle Son in Fee, upon Condition to pay to his 4 Daughters, to every of them 20 l. at their full age: The eldest Son had Issue 2 Daughters, and died: The middle Son is admitted, and doth not
pay the Daughters their Summs at their full ages: The youngest Son entred in the name of the Daughters, who disagreed to it. It was Resolved, That it was a Condition, but not broken without demand of their Summs at their full ages; and when they disagreed to the Entry, the Entry of the youngest Brother was not lawfull. A Copy-holder surrendred his LandsM. 13 Jac. B. R. Simp∣son and So∣thern's Case, Cro. 2. part. into the hands of the Lord, Haben∣dum after his death to the Use of an Enfant en ventre sa Mier. Resolved that a Surrender to an Enfant en ventre sa Mier was not good as an immediate Surrender, for that it cannot begin at a day to come. And whereas a Re∣mainder was thereupon limited over, it was holden to be void, because it was to begin upon a Condition precedent, (Vid. the Condition) which was never performed; and therefore the Surren∣der into the hands of the Lord was void, because he takes it but as an Instrument to convey it over.
SECT. XVI. Where Custome which warrants the Lord or his Copy-holder to grant greater E∣states, warrants the Grants of lesser E∣states. Proofs. THE Custome of a Manor is, That36 Eliz. Co. 4. part, Gra∣venor and Tedd's Case. a Copy-hold-estate may be grant∣ed in Fee-simple. In that Case it was adjudged, That an Estate thereof granted to one and the Heirs of his body is good, and within the Custome; for Ubi licet quod est majus, non debet quod est minus non licere. The Custome of a Manor is, That39 Eliz. in B. R. Downs and Hop∣kins Case. Copy-hold-estates may be granted for life or lives: In such case a Grant is made to a Woman durante Viduitate suâ: And it was adjudged good, and within the Cu∣stome, for that every Grant for life is durante Viduitate; but every Grant du∣rante Viduitate is not for life. The Custome of a Manor out of mindH. 34 Eliz. B. R. Stanton and Bar∣ney's Case. used was, To grant certain Lands, par∣cell of the said Manor, in Fee-simple, and never any Grant was made to any and the
Heirs of his body for life or for years: The Lord of the Manor did make a Grant by Copy to one for life, the Remainder over to another and the Heirs of his bo∣dy. It was adjudged, That the Grant and the Remainder over was good; for the Lord having an Authority by Cu∣stome, and an Interest withall, might grant any lesser Estate: but otherwise it is where one hath but a bare Authority. In Trespass the Issue was, if the LordP. 29 Eliz. C. B. Kempe and Carter's Case, Leon. 1. part, 56. of the Manor granted the Lands per Co∣piam Rotulorum Curiae Manerii secundùm Consuetudinem Manerii praedict. It was given in Evidence, that the Lord of late at his Court granted the Lands per Copiam Curiae, where it was never granted by Co∣py before. In that case the Jury are bound to find quòd Dominus non concessit, as it was holden by the Court. For al∣though de facto Dominus concessit per Co∣piam Rotulorum Curiae, yet non concessit secundùm Consuetudinem Manerii praedict. But in that Case it was holden, If Custo∣mary Lands had been grantable in Fee, if the same Land escheat to the Lord, and he grant the same to another for life, it is a good Grant, and warranted by the Custome; for the Custome which enables
him to grant in Fee shall enable him to grant for life. If a Copy-hold-estate fall into theM. 15 & 16 Eliz. in Co. B. ad∣judge. acc. hands of the Lord by Escheat, Forfei∣ture, or the like, and the Lord make a Lease thereof for years or life by Deed or without Deed, or if he make a Feoffment of it upon Condition, or if the Copy-hold so escheated, &c. be extended up∣on a Statute or a Recognizance, or the same Land be assigned to the Wife of the Lord in Dower; In all these cases the Land can never be granted again by Copy, because after such Disposi∣tion thereof it was not demiseable. But if the Interruptions were not lawfull, but tortious, as if the Lord be dissei∣sed, or if the Land be recovered a∣gainst the Lord by a false Verdict, or by an erroneous Judgment; yet after the Land is re-continued, and the In∣terruption which was wrongfull remo∣ved, the Land is grantable again by the Lord by Copy.
SECT. XVII. Who shall be said such a Lord of a Ma∣nor as may grant Copy-hold-estates; and how long such Estates shall continue; and what persons shall be capable of Co∣py-hold-estates, what not; and what may be granted by Copy. EVery one who hath a lawfull EstateCoke 1. part, Instit. 58. or Interest in the Manor, be it Fee, Fee-tail, Dower, Tenantry by the curtesie of England, Tenantry for life or years, Guardian, Tenant by Statute-Merchant or Elegit, are sufficient Lords and persons to grant Copy-hold-estates to others. And in some special case Estates in Co∣py-hold-lands may be granted by such a one who hath no Estate or Interest in the Manor. Proofs. A Guardian in Socage held a Copy-CourtTr. 1 Jac. B. R. Soap∣land and Ridler's Case, Owen 115. in his own name, and granted Copies in Reversion. Adjudged he was Dominus pro tempore, and had an Interest in the Lands; for he might make a Lease
thereof in his own name, and therefore he might both grant Copies, and also admit Copy-holders to Estates before granted. But the Bailiff of a Manor hath no Interest in the Manor, and therefore he cannot grant Copies of the Land holden of the Manor. The Custome of a Manor was, ThatP. 41 Eliz. B. R. Ga and Kay's Case, Cro. 1. part. Dominus pro tempore might make a De∣mise for 2 or 3 Lives in Possession or Reversion: A Woman Tenant in Dower for life of the Manor granted a Copy-hold to J S and 2 others for their Lives, Habendum post mortem of A B, and di∣ed: A B died. It was holden by the Court in this Case, That the Grant was good in Reversion, although it was not executed in the life of the Tenant in Dower: And Vide, That the Lord of a Manor for life, or any other particular Estate, having In∣terest in the Manor, might grant Copies in Reversion of Lands which are holden by Copy of Court-Roll, although the Grants were not executed in the life of the Grantors; as it was adjudged in SirH. 14 Eliz. the Earl of Oxford's Case, Moore 95. Peter Carew's Case. Quere: for Hil. 14 Eliz. in the Earl of Oxford's Case in Moore 95. it is not good, unless it come in Possession during the life of the Grantor.
Note, It was holden by the JusticesP. 15 Car. C. B. Godb. 6. acc. P. 15 Jac. in Co. B. That there ought to be a Custome to enable the Lord of the Manor to make a Grant of a Copy-hold in Reversion. Generally, Things which lie not in Tenure, as Advowsons in grosse, Com∣mons in grosse, or the like incorporate Inheritances, out of which a Rent can∣not be reserved, cannot be granted by Copy of Court-Roll by the Lord of the Manor; nor can they be holden by any Service to be done for them. But Ad∣vowsons appendants, Commons appen∣dants, and such things as are parcell of a Manor, and which have Continu∣ance, may be granted by the Lord of the Manor, to be holden by Copies of Court-Roll, according to the Custome of the Manor. In Trespass for cutting down of Un∣der-woods,M. 38 Eliz. B. R. Cro. 1. part, Hoe and Taylor's Case. the Question was, Whether Under-woods might be granted by Copy of Court-Roll, for that by such Grant or Lease the Soil passeth not. But it was Resolved, That Under-woods are a thing of Inheritance and perpetuity, which may have Continuance for ever; for af∣ter they are once cut, they will grow a∣gain
ex stipitibus, and so they may be well granted by Copy. In Trover and Conversion of 20 LoadsP. 43 Eliz. B. R. Sands and Darcie's Case, Cro. 1. part, acc. of Tith-Hay, the onely Question was, Whether Tithes were grantable by Copy. It was objected they were not, because it is against the nature of Tithes, and none could have a property in them be∣fore the Council of Lateran, and there∣fore it was impossible to have any Cu∣stome so to grant them. But it was Re∣solved, That they might be granted by Copy, if there had been a Custome time out of mind so to grant them. One Manor may be holden of another39 H. 6. 9. b. Vid. M. 11 Jac. Moore and Good∣greave's Case, Cro. 2. part. Coke 11. part, Sir Henry Nevil's Case. M. 37 Eliz. B. R. Sir John Bourn's Case, acc. Manor, and may be demiseable by Copy of Court-Roll, and there may be Custo∣mary Tenants, according to the Custome of the Manor; and so it was said, That a Market or a Fair, although they are things of Priviledge and Liberty onely, yet because they might be appendant unto or parcel of a Manor, or used with a Ma∣nor and Lands, that an Estate might be granted of them by Copy of Court-Roll.
SECT. XVIII. What Acts or things are inseparable, and must be done by the Copy-holder himself; and what acts and where may be done by his Attorney. A Copy-holder, notwithstanding that generally and according to the Cu∣stome of the Manor he hath an Estate of Inheritance in his Copy-hold-lands, viz. secundùm Consuetudinem Manerii; yet it hath this Qualification, that it is ad vo∣luntatem Domini: and in that respect, upon the Original Grants of such Estates, the Lords of Manors did reserve unto themselves certain Duties and Services and Suits to be done by their Copy-holders; some of which were so inseparable to the person of the Copy-holder, that they could not be done by any other person; others were such as concerned and had respect both to the Lord for his good, and the good of the Manor, as those which con∣cerned the particular good of the Copy-holders themselves, or the Lands which they held of the Lord. The principal Dutie inseparably to
be done to the person of the Lord, and by his Copy-holder, is his doing of Fealty,Co. 9. part, in Comb's Case. which upon every Admittance he is to doe to the Lord, for that is especially mentio∣ned in the Copy granted by the Lord in these words, viz. Dat. Domino pro Fine, & fecit Domino fidelitatem: and Fealty cannot be done but in person, and not by an Attorney. And although (as Mr. Littleton saith) Fealty may be taken by the Steward of the Court of the Lord of the Manor, yet it is done to the Lord himself, and it must be done by the Copy-holder himself in person. A Copy-holder may take an Estate in the Copy-hold by the Surrender of ano∣ther Copy-holder into the hands of two Tenants of the Manor by Custome, (as before is declared.) But then this Surren∣der must be presented in Court, and he to whose Use the Surrender was made must personally appear in Court, and be there admitted to the Land; and he can∣not be admitted by Attorney. The Suit and Service which is to be done in the Court of the Lord by his Co∣py-holder must be done in person, and not by another for him; and it is to be done upon his Oath, and a man cannot
swear by Attorney; and therefore he cannot make an Attorney to doe his Suit and Service, but the same must be done by him in person. Again, If a Copy-holder, upon No∣tice given him of the special day of hol∣ding the Lord's Court, and being sum∣moned to appear and to doe his Suit and Service, shall wilfully neglect, or refuse to appear and doe his Suit, it is a Forfeiture of his Copy-hold: and there∣fore such Suits and Services cannot be done by Attorney, but in proper person. A Copy-holder of a Manor of the EarlTr. 28 Eliz. in B. R. the Earl of Arundel's Case, Leon. 1. part, 36. of Arundel did surrender his Lands to the Use of his Will, and thereby devi∣sed them to his youngest Son and his Heirs, who being in Prison made a Let∣ter of Attorney to J D, to pray to be admitted to the Land for his Use, and af∣ter such Admittance to surrender the same Lands to the Use of J S and his Heirs, to whom he had sold it for the payment of his Debts, who came into Court accordingly, and prayed to be ad∣mitted, and make a Surrender of the Land to J S; all which was done. In this Case it was Resolved by the Justices, That it was no good Admittance, nor
no good Surrender; for that the Heir ought to have come himself in person in Court to take up his Land, and after∣wards to surrender it, or otherwise have procured the Lord to appoint his Stew∣ard to have gone to the Prison unto him to have been admitted, and after∣wards to have surrendred the Lands. Some particular things a Copy-hol∣der may doe by his Attorney; as he may pay his Rent by his Servant or Attorney, or tender it by them; and such Payment and Tender shall be good. So if the Cu∣stome of the Manor be, That upon the death of every Copy-holder the Tenant shall pay and render his best Beast unto the Lord for a Heriot, there the Heriot may be paid by the Heir before his Ad∣mittance, or by the Executor of the Co∣py-holder; and such Payment or Ten∣der of it shall be good. So by an especial Custome within the Manor a Copy-holder may appoint orM. 5 Jac. in B. R. Bale's Case. nominate, in the presence of two Te∣nants of the Manor or other two sufficient Witnesses, who shall have his Copy-hold-lands after his decease, and also that they may appoint what Fine the Lord shall have for the Admittance of the Tenant,
so it be a reasonable Fine; and such Dis∣position of his Lands and appointment of Fine shall be good by the Custome: But yet after such Disposition made, the party who is to have the Land must in person come into the Lord's Court, and pray to be admitted unto the same. And so was it very lately adjudged in the Court of Common Pleas, both for the Point of the Custome, that it was a good Custome, and Admittance. A Copy-holder dwelling in a TownM. 3 Eliz. B. R. Sir John Braun∣che's Case, Leon. 1. part, 104. long distant from the Manor, having No∣tice of the Court-day when it was to be holden, upon Summons appeared not himself, but appointed his Son his At∣torney to appear and doe the Services for him for his Copy-hold-lands. In this Case it was holden by the Court, That such a person so appointed might es∣soign the Copy-holder, but not doe the Services for him, for that none could doe the same but the Tenant himself.
SECT. XIX. What Customes within Copy-hold-Manors shall be said to be good and reasonable Customes, and what not. CUstome is the very Soul and life ofCoke 4. part, 21. Copy-hold-estates; for without Cu∣stome, or if they break their Customes, they are at the Lord's will, for they hold their Lands ad voluntatem Domini, al∣though (as before is said) it be secun∣dùm Consuetudinem Manerii, &c. But then the Customes must be reasonable, and not unreasonable Customes. If the Lord doth challenge a CustomeCoke 1. part Institut. 59. within his Manor, to have a Fine of e∣very of his Copy-holders of the said Ma∣nor at the Alteration or Change of the Lord of the Manor, be it by Alienation, Demise, Death, or otherwise; this is an unreasonable Custome, for by this means his Copy-holders may be oppressed by the Lords by the payment of a multitude of Fines. A Custome within a Manor, That e∣veryCoke 5. part, Pennieman's Case. Alienation of Lands within the Ma∣nor shall be presented at the next Court
holden for the said Manor, upon pain that such Alienation shall be void, is a good and reasonable Custome; for it is but reasonable that the Lord should know who is his Tenant. A Copy-holder alledged a CustomePasch. 6 Jac. in Co. B. Glascock's Case. Vid. God Godb. acc. within a Manor in Essex to be, That all the Tenants within the said Manor had used to cut down Trees, to repair their Copy-hold and Free-hold Tenements within the said Manor, and also to sell their Trees at their pleasures. It was doubted if it was a good Custome: but the better opinion of the Court seemed to be that the Custome was good. The Custome of a Manor in Worce∣ster-shireM. 6 Jac. in Co. B. Paginton and Hunt's Case. was, That if any Copy-holder committed Felony, and that the same be presented by 12 Homagers in the Lord's Court, the Tenant should forfeit his Co∣py-hold. It was presented that J S, a Tenant of the said Manor, had commit∣ted Felony at such a time; but that at the Assizes next after he was acquitted of the same: After which the Lord seized the Lands. In this Case it was adjudg∣ed, That the Custome was not good, be∣cause in judgment of Law, before Con∣viction or Attainder he was not a Felon.
But whether in that Case the Verdict and finding of the Jurors upon the Bill of Indictment agreeing with the finding of the Homagers, that the party had com∣mitted Felony, did entitle the Lord to the Copy-hold-lands, notwithstanding the Acquitall of the Jury which was af∣terwards, was not Resolved. A Copy-holder did alledge the Cu∣stome of the Manor to be, That the Lord might grant Copies in Remainder with the assent of the Tenants, and not otherwise, and that Copies otherwise granted in Remainder should be void. It was said, That this Custome might be good, for it might be so agreed and gran∣ted by the Lord at the beginning upon the Creation of the Manor; and that it seemed to be grounded upon the reason of the Common Law, That a RemainderM. 31 Eliz. Co. B. Godb. 40. should not be without the assent of the particular Tenant, and to commence with his Estate, and that therefore it was a good Custome. Quere the Case, for it was not Resolved, M. 31 Eliz. in Co. B. The Custome of a Manor was, That those who claimed Copy-holds by Dis∣cent ought to come at the first, second, or third Court, upon Proclamations made, to
take up their Estates, or else they shouldH. 7 Jac. in Co. B. Cop∣ley's Case. be forfeited. A Tenant of the Manor (having Issue inheritable by the Custome beyond the Sea) died: The Proclama∣tions all passed, and the Heir did not return in two years; but upon his return he prayed to be admitted to the Co∣py-hold, and profered the Lord his Fine in Court, which the Lord refused to ac∣cept of, and to admit the Heir, but seized the Land as forfeited. It was adjudged in this Case, That it was no cause of Forfeiture, because the Heir was beyond the Seas at the time of the Proclamati∣ons, and the Lord was at no prejudice, for that, for any thing appeared in the Case, the Lord had taken all the Pro∣fits of the Land in the mean time. The Custome of a Manor was, ThatM. 7 Jac. in Co. B. by Dodderidge. every Copy-holder at his death should pay to the Lord his best Beast for a He∣riot: A Feme-sole within the Manor Tenant for life took a Husband, and died. It was the opinion of Dodderidge in this Case, That although the Custome was good, yet, as this Case was, no Heriot should be paid, because the Wife had not any Goods, by Cattell to pay the same.
A Custome of a Manor was said to be,M. 42 Eliz. B. R. Cro. 1. part, Parker and Combleford's Case. That the Lord had used after the death of every one dying within his Manor to have the best Beast of such a person for a Heriot, and to seize and distrain for it. It was adjudged a void Custome,Vid. 3 & 4 Eliz. in Co. B. Wilson and Wise's Case, Moore, acc. not good to bind a Stranger: but such a Custome to extend to and bind the Te∣nants of the Manor might be good. The Custome of a Manor was, QuòdPasc. 24 E∣liz. Moore. Vide Skip∣with's Case, Tr. 33 Eliz. in Co. B. Godb. 143. where the contrary seemeth to be adjudg∣ed. quilibet tenens per Copiam poterit dimit∣tere terras suas for life, in Fee, or other∣wise; and that a Woman Cooperta viro po∣terit devisare her Copy-hold-lands to any other, or to her Husband, by the assent of the Husband. In this Case the Court held, That the Custome was not unreaso∣nable; but because it was poterit devisa∣re, where it ought to have been alledged usi sunt devisare, for that cause it was said it was not good▪ Note by the whole Court, That if thePasc. 8 Jac. in Co. B. Rapley and Chaffyn's Case, acc. Custome of a Manor is alledged to be, That the eldest Daughter shall solely in∣herit the Land, such a Custome may be good: But then such Custome shall be taken strictly▪ viz. That the eldest Sister shall not inherit the Land by force of the said Custome.
It was Resolved by the Justices, ThatVid. Moore's Rep. 3 E. 6. a Custome that a Lessee for years may hold the Land for half a year after his Term ended, is no good Custome: But it was agreed, That the Lord of a Copy-hold might by Custome lease the same for life and 40 years after, and that such a Custome was good. A Custome was alledged, That all In∣habitantsTr. 14 Jac. in Co. B. Harbin and Green's Case, Moore 887. of certain Messuages holden of the Bishop of S had used to grind their Corn which they used to spend in their Houses, or should sell, at certain Mills, called the Bishops Mills in S, and not elsewhere, without the Licence of the Bishop. It was the opinion of the Ju∣stices, That it was a void and unreaso∣nable Custome, to grind all their Corn there which they should sell, &c. The Custome of the Manor of Y in theP. 13 Jac. Ford and Hokn's Case, Moore 842. County of Dorset was, That every Co∣py-holder might name who should have his Copy-hold, and that the Lord ought to admit the Copy-holder so named at the death of the Nominator. Quere if it be a good Custome, because the person nominated hath neither jus ad rem, nec in re, the Interest being in the Lord, and a man cannot gain an Interest to him∣self
from the Lord against the will of the Lord. And therefore it was holden, That where the party in that case brought an Action against the Lord for denying to admit him to the Copy-hold upon such Nomination, the Action would not lie. But Quere that Case as to the Custome, for that in 45 Eliz. in B. R. in Powell45 Eliz. B. R. Powell and Peacock's Case. and Peacock's Case it was adjudged, That a Custome that a Copy-holder in Fee might nominate his Successor, and so in perpetuum, was adjudged a good Custome.Vid. Hob. Reports 6, and 11. Brock and Spencer's Case. And Vid. Brock and Spencer's Case in Hobart 6 and 11. a Custome that such a Copy-holder in Fee might▪ fell Timber∣trees was adjudged a good Custome. The Custome of a Manor was, ThatP. 41 Eliz. B. R. Parman and Bowyer's Case. if any Tenant allowed his Lands holden of the Manor by Writing or Feoffment, or devised them, or surrendred them in∣toVid. the same Case in Anderson's 2. part, 125. where it seemeth the Custome was much doubed, if good, or ot. the hands of the Lord of the Manor to the Use of another, that such Alie∣nation, Feoffment, Devise or Surrender ought to be presented within one Year next after. It was said, It was no good Custome. But the Court ruled the Cu∣stome to be good and agreeable to the Law; for that it is reason that the Lord should know, &c. Tant. Vid. before.
A Custome was, That a Copy-holderVid. Willis and Buck∣nall's Case, in B. R. Style's Re∣ports, 311. of Inheritance might make a Letter of Attorney to two Joynt-tenants, and se∣verally, to surrender his Copy-hold-lands in Fee to certain Uses after his death. It was Resolved, That the Custome was a void Custome, because by the death of the Copy-holder the Lands were set∣tled in the Heir, and an Authority given to devest him was not good. The Custome of a Manor was, ThatM. 21 Jac. Cro. 2. part▪ Page's Case. the Land was devisable by Custome for 21 years, paying the treble value of the Rent, and if the Lessee died, that the Term should be to his Heirs, paying for a Fine one year's Rent, and if he assigned it, the Assignee to have it for one year's value of the Rent, and that he might renew the Devise for 3 years va∣lue. The Court held all the said Cu∣stomes to be good and reasonable. The Custome of a Manor was, That ifP. 17 Car. in B. R. Thorne and Tyler's Case. any Copy-hold-tenant did suffer his Mes∣suage to be ruined for want of Repara∣tions, and the same be presented in Court by the Homage, that such a Te∣nant should be amerced, and that the Lord had used to distrain the Beasts as well of the Under-tenant as of the Te∣nant
himself, which were levant and couchant upon the Lands, for such A∣mercement. It was said, That the Cu∣stome was not good, but unreasonable, to distrain a Stranger's Cattel, such as the Under-tenant was. But it was Resolved that the Custome was good: for the Un∣der-tenant, although he was but Tenant for a year, yet he should have all the bene∣fits and privileges which the Copy-hol∣der himself should have had; & qui sentit Commodum sentire debet & Onus; and he is distrainable for the Rents and Services due and payable to the Lord; and the Charge lies upon the Land, and not upon the Custome: and therefore the Custome is good. The Custome of a Manor was shewedH. 37 Eliz. B. R. Brown and Foster's Case, Cro. 1. part, acc. to be, That any Copy-holder of the Ma∣nor may surrender within any place of the Manor into the hands of two Te∣nants; and if a Surrender be to the Use of a Stranger, without expressing any Estate, that the Lord might grant it in Fee to him to whom the Surrender was made. It was objected, That the Custome was unrea∣sonable, because it is to charge the Land with a greater Estate then the Copy-hol∣der gave. On the other side it was said,
That the Custome was good; for that the Lord is Chancellour in his own Court, and might dispose thereof when the Tenant leaves it uncertain. Quere; for the Case was not Resolved. SECT. XX. Where and in what case a Copy-holder or his Lessee upon an Ouster may have and maintain against the Ejector an Ejecti∣one firme, and where and in what not. Proofs. IN Ejectione firme the Case was, TheH. 38 Eliz. C. B. Wells and Par∣tridge's Case, Cro. 1. part. Plaintiff was Lessee for years of a Co∣py-hold; and the Custome of the Manor was, That a Copy-holder might let the Land for 3 years. It was the opinion of Anderson Chief Justice, That the Lessee of a Copy-holder cannot maintain Ejecti∣one firme; but if he might, he ought to shew his Lessor's Estate, or his Licence, or a special Custome, to warrant it. A Copy-holder made a Lease forM. 14 & 15 Eliz. Leon. 1. part, 4. years by Indenture warranted by the Cu∣stome. It was adjudged, That the
Lessee should maintain Ejectione firme; although it was strongly objected, That if it were so, then the Plaintiff should have an Habere facias possessionem, and so Copy-holds should be ordered by the Laws of the Land. The Custome of a Manor was, That if any Copy-holder of Inheritance died,P. 33 Eliz. in B. R. Cole and Wall's Case, Leon. 1. part, 328. his Heir within the age of 14 years, then the Lord of the Manor might grant the Custody of his Body and Lands▪ to whom he pleased: A Copy-holder of Inheri∣tance died, his Heir within the age of 14 years: The Lord committed the Cu∣stody of his Body and Lands to J S, who, being ejected, brought a Writ of Ejectione Custodie of his Body. It was the opinion of the Justices, That the Action did not lie. But it was agreed in that Case, That an Ejectione firme lieth upon a De∣mise of Copy-hold-lands by Lease for years by the Copy-holder himself, but not upon a Demise by the Lord of the Copy-hold. Note, It was Resolved by the Justices,Coke 4. part, 26. in Mel∣wich's Case. M. 8 Jac. in C. B. Crane∣ford and Freshwater's Case, acc. That the Lessee of a Copy-holder for a year may maintain an Ejectione firme: for inasmuch as his Term is warranted by the Law by force of the general Cu∣stome
of the Realm, it is but reason that,H. 39 Eliz. Cro. 1. part, Goodwin and Langhurst's Case, acc. if he be ejected, he should have an E∣jectione firme; for it is a speedy Course for a Copy-holder to gain the possession of the Land against a Stranger, being no more then what right requires to be yielded him for the Recovery of his E∣state. SECT. XXI. What Statutes and Acts of Parliament do extend to Copy-holds and Copy-hold-e∣states, what not. SOme things concerning this Division being spoken of in the former part of this Treatise, and some particular Sta∣tutes there being mentioned within which Copy-holds are included, and in what not, I shall refer the Reader thereunto; adding onely a few Cases upon some par∣ticular Acts not therein mentioned, with the Authorities and Resolutions of the Ju∣stices therein. And as concerning with∣in what Statutes Copy-holds are, I shall take and relie upon the general RuleCoke 3. part▪ Heydon's Case. which is put in Sir Edward Coke's 3. part of his Reports, in Heydon's Case,
viz. When a Statute or Act of Parlia∣ment doth alter the Service, Tenure, In∣terest of the Estate, or other thing in prejudice of the Lord or of the Custome of the Manor, or in prejudice of the Tenant, there the general words of such Statute or Act of Parliament do not extend to Copy-holds or Copy-hold-estates: But when the Statute or Act of Parliament is generally made for the good of the Commonweal, and no prejudice can come thereby, by alteration of any Service, Tenure, or Interest, or Custome used within the Manor, there Copy-holds and Copy-hold-estates are within the pur∣view of such Statutes or Acts. Proofs. It was Resolved by all the Justices,6 Jac. in Co. B. Coke Select Cases 27, 28. That no Tenure shall pay for a reasonable Aid to make the eldest Son Knight, or to marry the eldest Daughter, but Te∣nure by Knight's-Service or Tenure inLittl. 16. sect. 36. Socage. Now Littleton saith, that all Te∣nures are either Knight's-Service or So∣cage: And the Statute of Westm. 1. cap. 36. of reasonable Aid extends onely to such Tenures. The Question then is,
Whether a Copy-hold-Tenure be with∣in that Statute. I shall not determine the Question, for that I do not find it moved in any Book of the Common Law: But although I humbly conceive Copy-holds be within the general words of Mr. Littleton, (all Tenures in So∣cage;) yet that the said Statute of Westm. 1. cap. 36. doth not extend to Copy-holds. Quere of it. The Statute of Westm. 2. de Donis con∣ditionalibusStatute Westm. 2. de Donis. I conceive doth not extend to Copy-holds within the general words thereof. The words of the Statute are of Gifts per Chartam datis; and Copy-holds do not pass by Deeds, but by Surren∣ders. But yet it is conceived, that al∣though they be not within the general Words of the Statute, yet they are within the Equity of the said Statute, if there be a Custome to warrant such Estates. The Case was, A Copy-holder in FeeH. 37 Eliz. in Co. B. Church and Wyatt's Case, Moore 637. surrendred his Copy-hold-lands to the Life of his Will; and having a Daugh∣ter born, and his Wife with Child, he devised part of his said Lands to his Son or Daughter which his Wife went with, & Haeredibus suis legitimè procreatis; and the residue thereof he devised to his
Daughter born, to have to her and the fruit of her body. One Point in this Case was, What Estate the Daughter born had in the said Copy-hold-lands, if in Tail or not. It was said, It was a Fee-tail in the Daughter born. But it was much doubted if it was an Estate within the said Statute de Donis, &c. But in that Case it was agreed, That Co∣py-hold might be entailed by Custome co-operating with the said Statute, and if not within the words, yet within the Equi∣ty of the said Statute. The Statute of Praerogativa Regis, cap.Stat. Prae∣rogat. Regis, cap. 9 & 10. Co. 8. part, 170. in Tow∣erson's Case. Co. 4. part, 127. in Be∣verly's Case. 9 and 10. gives the Lands of Idiots na∣tural to the King, he finding them con∣venient Maintenance out of the Profits thereof: But if the Idiot hath Copy-hold-lands discended unto him, the King shall not have the Wardship of those Lands therewith, out of the Profits there∣of to maintain the Idiot, because the same would be prejudicial to the Lord of the Manor, of whom the Lands are holden by Copy. But yet all Alienations made by an Idiot of his Copy-hold-lands, af∣ter Office found, shall be avoided by the King.
Copy-hold-lands are not within theStat. West. 2. cap. 20. Statute of Westm. 2. cap. 20. of Exe∣cutions. For if a Judgment be had in a Court of Record against a Copy-holder for Debt and Dammages, although the Plain∣tiff may have Execution by Fieri facias against his Goods, or a Capias against his Body; yet he cannot have Execution of the moyetie of his Copy-hold-lands by Elegit, for that Copy-hold-lands are not within that Statute. And so it is, if a Statute-Merchant or Staple be acknow∣ledged by a Copy-holder for the pay∣ment of Money at a day certain, which is not payed, his Copy-hold-lands are not extendable for the same. And the rea∣son of these Cases is, because no person can come to Copy-holds but by Admit∣tance of the Lord; and the Lord should thereby lose his Fine which is due upon Admittance, if the party might have the Lands upon Extent delivered unto him. If Tenant by the Curtesie, or LesseePasc. 12 E∣liz. in Co. B. Moore 94. for years, be of a Manor, and Copy-holds were in his hands by Forfeiture or
other determination, and he bindeth him∣self in a Statute, and afterwards he de∣viseth the Copy-hold again; the Co∣py-hold shall be liable to the Statute. But if a Copy-holder bindeth himself in a Statute-Merchant or Staple, his Co∣py-hold-lands shall not be extended upon the said Statute, because therein he hath but an Estate at will. Copy-hold-lands are not within the Sta∣tuteStat. 31 H. 8. cap. 13. of 31 H. 8. cap. 13. of Monasteries. The Guardians of the Colledge of Otlery, Lords of a Manor, grantedM. 25 & 26 Eliz. in the Exchequer, Leon. 1. part, 4. Lands for 3 Lives by Copy, according to the Custome of the Manor; afterwards in 30 H. 8. they leased the Lands to J S, rendring the accustomed Rent, and af∣terwards surrendred their Colledge to King Hen. 8. And if the Lease, being within one year of the Surrender, was with∣in the Statute or not, was the Question. The Case is not adjudg'd, but a Quere made of it. But in that Case it was adjudged, That if there be Lord of a Copy-holder for life, and the Lord grants a Rent-charge out of his Manor, of which the Copy-hold is parcell, and then the Copy-hol∣der
doth surrender to the Use of another, who is admitted; he shall not hold the Lands charged: but if he dieth, so as his Estate is determined, and the Lord grants the Land to another de novo to hold by Copy, the new Tenant shall hold the Land charged. Copy-hold-lands not within the Statute of 32 H. 8. of Rents. The Lord of a Manor (of whichTr. 27 Eliz. in B. R. Rot. 1201. Sands and Hemp∣strie's Case, Leon. 2. part, 109. there were Copy-holds) granted a Rent-charge for life, and afterwards made a Feoffment of the Manor to J S and his Heirs, who granted a Copy-hold for life: J S died, and the Rent was behind, and the Grantee of the Rent di∣strained for the Arrerages. It was Re∣solved in that Case, That the possession of the Copy-holder was not chargeable to the Distress, for that the Copy-holder was not in by him who immediately ought to pay the Rent, but in the possession of the Land by the Custome. But QuereHil. 18 Eliz. in Co. B. the Earl of Westmor∣land's Case, Leon. 3. part, 59. that Case: and vide Hill. 18 Eliz. in Co. B. the Earl of Westmorland's Case. For there the Case was, That the De∣mesnes of a Manor were usually let for
lives by Copy, and the Lord granted a Rent-charge to J D pro Consilio impen∣dendo for life, and afterwards conveyed the Manor to J N in Tail: The Rent was behind, and the Grantee of the Rent died, and the Executors of the Grantee distrained for the Arrerages. And there it was adjudged, That the Copy-holder should hold the Lands charged. Copy-hold-lands not within the Statute of 32 H. 8. of Conditions. A Copy-holder by Licence made a Lease by Indenture for 21 years ren∣dring Rent: The Lessee covenanted to lay upon the Lands yearly 40 Loads of Dung: Afterwards the Copy-holder sur∣rendred his Lands unto another in Fee,M. 20 Jac. in C. B. Plott and Plomer's Case, Cro. 1. part, 17. who was admitted. The Point was, If he was such an Assignee as might have Covenant within the Statute of 32 H. 8. Quere; for the Case was not Resolved. A Copy-holder by Licence of the LordTr. 10 Jac. in B. R. Brasier and Beale's Case, Yelv. 223. made a Lease for 60 years, if he so long lived, rendring Rent, upon Condition to re-enter: The Copy-holder surrendred to the Lessor of the Plaintiff in Fee, who demanded the Rent, which was not pay∣ed.
It was Resolved in this Case, That the Entry of the Lessor was not lawfull, for that Copy-hold-lands were not within the Statute of Conditions, nor the Lessor such an Assignee as the Statute inten∣ded: For the Assignee of a Copy-hol∣der being in onely by Custome, is not privy to the Lease made by the first Copy-holder, nor in by him, but may plead his Estate immediately under the Lord. Note, That in no case, where the King claims a share in the Forfeiture of the Lands, (as in the Statute of 2 H. 5. which speaks of Lands forfeited for He∣resie, viz. that the King shall have An∣num, diem & vastum, as he hath for Lands forfeited for Felony) Copy-hold-lands are not within the general words of such Statute; for that in such case, if the Copy-holder committeth Felony, the Copy-hold is presently forfeited to the Lord of the Manor; and therefore out of the words of that Statute, and other the like Statutes. The Statute of 12 Eliz. cap. 8. which speaks of Inquisitions or Offices found by Escheators, doth not extend to Copy-hold-lands:
for although the same are not found within the Inquisitions or Offices, yet the King shall not be entitled to any of the said Copy-hold-lands, but all such Copy-holders shall and may hold and enjoy their Estates and Interests in their said Copy-hold-lands as for∣merly they might have done; and the Interest of the Copy-hold is preserved by the said Statute, though it be not found by Office after the death of the King's Tenant. The Statute of 13 Eliz. cap. 4. ofVid. 30 Eliz. in Scaccario, Leon. 1. part, 98. Auditors and Registers of the Queen, doth not extend to Copy-holds, for that it should be a great prejudice. Then for the second part of this Di∣vision. Proofs. Copy-hold-lands are within the Statute of 4 H. 7. of Fines. If I levy a Fine of my Copy-hold-lands,Vid. 30 Eliz. Leon. 99. acc. and 5 years pass; not onely the Lord is thereby barred as to the Free-hold of it and the Inheritance, but I,
who am the Copy-holder, am also barred as to my Possession: For the intent of theVid. Coke 5. part, Sat∣tyn's Case. Statute was to take away all Controver∣sies, & litibus finem imponere; and Con∣tention may as well arise and be about Copy-hold-lands as for Free-hold-lands at the Common Law. Copy-hold-lands are within the Statute of 29 Eliz. and other Statutes of Recu∣sancy. A Recusant being convict for not pay∣ingTr. 30 Eliz. in Scacca∣rio, Saliard and Evert's Case, Leon. 1. part, 97. of 20 l. a month forfeited by the said Statute, a Commission issued out of the Echequer to enquire and seize all his Goods, Lands, Tenements and Heredi∣taments liable to such Seizure: Upon the Return of the Commission it appeared, That some of the Lands returned were Copy-hold-lands. It was a Question if they were within the Statute. It was the opinion of the Court, That they were within the Equity of the Statute: for the words of the Statute are, Lands, Te∣nements and Hereditaments, which are for∣cible words; and the intention of the Statute was, That the Queen should have all the Goods, and the Recusant by
the words of the Statute was onely to have the third part of his Lands, which is all that the Law gives him: And if Co∣py-hold-lands should not be within the Statute, if a Recusant, who had great Possessions onely of Copy-hold-lands, should go unpunished, it was contra∣ry to the meaning of the Makers of the Act. Copy-holds are within the Statutes of 13 Eliz. and 1 Jacobi. It was Resolved by all the Justices,Tr. 15 Jac. in▪ B. R. Cris and Prat's Case, Noth. 34, 35, and 36. That Copy-hold is within the Statutes of 13 Eliz. and 1 Jacobi, because it is no prejudice to the Lord, for that there ought to be a Composition with the Lord and the Vendee of the Lands; and al∣though the Sale is and ought to be by In∣denture, yet the Vendee ought to be ad∣mitted by the Lord. 2. The words of the Statute of 13 Eliz. expresly are, That the Commissioners shall dispose of Lands as well Copy as Free; and the said Sta∣tutes shall be construed most beneficially for Creditors, i. e. suum cuique tribuere.
There are divers other Statutes and Acts of Parliament which extend to Co∣py-hold-lands, viz. 1. The Statute of 5 Eliz. cap. 13 & 14. of Forgery. 2. The Statutes of 5 R. 2. of Departure out of the Realm, and 14 Eliz. of Fugitives. 3. The Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 9. of Buying of Pretensed Titles. All which Statutes ex∣tend to Copy-hold-lands; of which I might shew many Cases and Resolutions of the Justices in their several Courts. But because the same would make this Section to be long and tedious, and my Intention was to use much brevity in this Addition and Amplification of what in the former part of this Treatise hath been written concerning Copy-hold and Custo∣mary Estates; I shall here put an End to the Work. FINIS.
The Contents of the several Sections. SECTION I. WHat a Surrender of Copy-hold or Customary Estate is; to whom, and in what manner and place it is to be done; and who shall be said such a Tenant of a Copy-hold▪ as may make such a Surrender. Page 1 Sect. II. Whether a Copy-hold may be said to be surrendred by any Act, Words, or Agreement, made betwixt the Lord and the Copy-holder, or by the Copy-holder with a Stranger made in the Court, in the Presence of the Lord or his Steward. 5 Sect. III. Of Surrenders out of Court; and where Surrenders to the Steward, Depu∣ty-steward, or into the hands of Tenants of the Manor, out of Court, shall be good, where not. 9 Sect. IV. Where, although Surrenders are
made to the Lord or to Tenants out of Court by Custome, yet nothing passeth out of the Copy-holder before Admit∣tance: And what shall be a good Admit∣tance in such case, what not. 17 Sect. V. Where some things, and what things, may be done by the Copy-holder or his Heir before Admittance. 21 Sect. VI. Where the Lord is but an Instru∣ment to convey the Copy-hold by Admit∣tance onely, and that the Surrenderee is in by the Copy-holder, and not by the Lord. 23 Sect. VII. Where the Admittance of the particular Tenant shall be the Admit∣tance of him in the Remainder. 27 Sect. VIII. By what and whose Act, either of the Law, of the Copy-holder himself, or of the Lord, severally or all together, the Copy-land or Estate shall be gone, deter∣mined, or extinguished; and where sus∣pended onely. 30 Sect. IX. Of Forfeitures of Copy-holds and Copy-hold-estates; and what Acts or things done▪ by the Copy-holder shall a∣mount unto or be adjudged a Forfeiture of the Copy-holder's Estate, what not. 36 Sect. X. Where deniall or refusall to pay
his Rent, Fine, or to doe his other Cu∣stomes and Services, shall be a Forfeiture of his Copy-hold and Copy-hold-estate, and where not. 39 Sect. XI. Where the Act of the Lord, and what Act of his, shall dispense with a Forfeiture made by his Copy-holder; where and what not. 48 Sect. XII. Whether Copy-hold-lands be within the Statute of Westm. 2. and may be entailed, or not; and where and by what Acts the Issues in tail may be barred; and what shall be a Discontinu∣ance of the Estate, what not. 51 Sect. XIII. What things are incident to a Copy-holder, and what he may take of common right without the Grant or Li∣cence of the Lord: And what Acts up∣on the Land shall bind the Copy-holder, what not. 64 Sect. XIV. Where the Lord of the Manor shall be Chancellour in his own Court, to determine the Differences which arise be∣twixt Copy-holders. 69 Sect. XV. Of Surrenders upon Conditions; and where such Surrenders shall be good, where not. 70 Sect. XVI. Where Custome which warrants
the Lord or his Copy-holder to grant grea∣ter Estates, warrants the Grants of lesser Estates. 76 Sect. XVII. Who shall be said such a Lord of a Manor as may grant Copy-hold-e∣states; and how long such Estates shall continue; and what persons shall be ca∣pable of Copy-hold-estates, what not; and what may be granted by Copy. 79 Sect. XVIII. What Acts or things are in∣separable, and must be done by the Copy-holder himself; and what acts and where may be done by his Attorney. 83 Sect. XIX. What Customes within Copy-hold-Manors shall be said to be good and reasonable Customes, and what not. 88 Sect. XX. Where and in what case a Copy-holder or his Lessee upon an Ouster may have and maintain against the Ejector an Ejectione firme, and where and in what not. 97 Sect. XXI. What Statutes and Acts of Parliament do extend to Copy-holds and Copy-hold-estates, what not. 99 FINIS.
