C537 12278187 58561
A Word in Season: BEING A Parallel between the intended Bloo∣dy Massacre of the People of the Jews, in the Reign of King Ahasue∣rus; and the Hellish Powder-Plot against the Protestants, in the Reign of King James. TOGETHER With an Account of some of the Wicked Princi∣ples and Practices of the Church of Rome, De∣monstrated in their Barbarous and Cruel Mur∣ders and Massacres of the Protestants in the Ne∣therlands, France, Ireland, Piedmont, the Albigen∣ses, &c. ALSO SHEWING That the present Church of Rome is an Apostate Church, and so discovered to be that Mystery Babylon, Mother of Harlots, and Abominations of the Earth, mentioned in the Revelations. By H. C. a Lover of true Protestants. LONDON, Printed for Francis Smith, at the Elephant and Castle in Cornhill near the Royal-Exchange, 1679.
The Author to the READER. Courteous Reader, NOt because I envy the Person of any Man of any Per∣suasion, so consequently not those of the Papal Church, who at present I am concerned with; but 'tis their Capital Errors, and Damnable Principles I aim at in this my Discourse, knowing they are contrary and repugnant to the Word of Truth, which is the Rule of Faith and Manners, and having compassion on Souls, which may be Ignorant, lest they should fall into the Errors of the Wicked (and especially young ones) which are not aware of their Principles, I have taken a little pains to gather up some of their Horrid Practices, and Soul-destroying Principles, into a narrow Compass, that so in a little time any may perceive what kind of condition they shall be in that do taste, touch, or handle any of them; there∣fore I beg of you all to whom this shall come, to reade it conside∣rately, and compare their Principles and Practices with the Word of God, and you will see that there is as much difference between them, as between Light and Darkness, Good and Evil, Heaven and Hell, God and the Devil. And this is not my Opinion alone, but the Opinion of almost all the Reformed Churches: For that the Pope is Antichrist, hath been put in∣to most of the Confessions of Faith. I shall only recite the Te∣stimony of one, whose incomparable Learning and Piety may make his Words received, or mine at least not over-hastily con∣demned; it is the Reverend Doctor Usher, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, who in his Catechise writ thus. As Christ is the Head of the True Church, so Antichrist is the Head of the Romish Church, which is his Body.
Quest. Who is that Antichrist? Answ. He is one who under a colour of being for Christ, nd under Title of being his Vice-gerent, exalteth himself above and against Christ, opposing himself against all his Offices and Ordinances both in Church and Commonwealth, bearing Authority over the Church of God, ruling over that City with seven Hills, which did bear Rule over the Nations, and put our Lord to Death; a Man of Sin, a Child of Perdition, a Destroyer; establishing himself by Lying Miracles and False Wonders. All which Marks do agree together to be none but the Pope of Rome. Quest. What is the use of all his Doctrine? Answ. That whosoever are partakers of the Sins of Rome, are also under the same Curse. Quest. What further? Answ. That there can be no sound agreement between Popery and the Gospel, no more than between Light and Dark∣ness, Falshood and Truth, God and Belial; and therefore no Reconciliation can be devised betwixt them. For if the Antichrist shall be destroyed, we cannot in any sort communi∣cate with them in their Errors, unless we will bear them com∣pany in their destruction also. An Account of which Errors, Heresies, and wicked Practices, this Book may give you light in, which I had not concerned my self withal at this time, but that I was stirred up from the consideration of their Damnable and Hellish Designs of late against England; so that they may thank themselves for what I have done, and a great many more, who are no friends to Popery. If these few Sheets shall do any good to the Establishing of those that have received the Truth as 'tis in Jesus, or informing the Ignorant, ani∣mating the Spirits of any against those Principles and Practices, or bring any out of that gross Egyptian Darkness and leading them into the path of Light and Life, I shall have my desire; and I desire you may give God the Glory: Which that it may be so, shall be the hearty prayers of him that is a lover of the true Protestant Religion. H. C.
A Parallel betwixt the Jews Deliverance from the in∣tended Bloody Massacre in the Reign of Ahasuerus, and our Deliverance from the Hellish Powder-Plot in the Reign of King James. BEloved Friends and Country-Men, I am this Day, as God's Messenger, to remind you of a very Signal, but almost∣forgotten Deliverance, which England received in the Year 1605, from that hellish Powder-plot of the blood-thirsty Papists: Which was not only a general Mercy then received; but as it was a kindness to our Grand-Fathers and Fathers, so also to us: For had Popery then entred England (which hath been, yet is, and I hope will be Emmanuel's Land) what in all probability had we been at this time! (Now for as much as God delights to have his wonderful Works remembred, (Psal. 111. 4.) by those that are in the fruition and en∣joyment of them; and more especially, considering the need we may have of as great a kindness as then received, already through Grace begun to be shewed, the Lord of his rich Mercy bring Ahitophel's Counsel to nought totally) what cause have we to be praising God this day! that so your Hearts may be animated and stirred up to the Work. I shall in this my Discourse at this time, run a Parallel be∣tween the wicked Conspiracy made against the Jews and People of God in the days of King Ahasuerus, and the hellith Powder-Plot in the days of King James of happy Memory, for defending the Protestant Religion, and discountenancing the contrary; and I hope by that time I have done, you will see what great cause there is to bless God for his unspeakable Goodness, and also see what Enemies Papists are to all true Protestants, and so I shall now begin what I have to say. 1. As in the days of Ahasuerus (who Reigned from India even to Ethiopia, over one hundred and seven and twenty Provinces, Esther 1. 1.) there was a Massacre designed upon all the Men, Women, and Children, which were of the Nation of the Jews (the Church of God) Esther 3. 13. So in the days of King James 1605. (about seventy three Years since) there was a Powder-Plot against this Nation, and all the People of God; for there was thirty six Barrels of Gun powder in a
Seller under the Parliament House: And in stead of Shot, they had laid upon the Powder, Bars of Iron, Logs of Timber, massy Stones, Iron Crows, Pickaxes, and all their working Tools; and to cover all (that the Plot might not be discovered) they had laid great store of Billets and Faggots; so that nothing was wanting to carry on their wicked Design: Neither were the Jesuites and Priests slack on their parts, who usually concluded their Masses with Prayers for the success of that Good day, as they called it. 2. The chief Conspirator in King Ahasuerus's days was wicked Haman, a Person of no small note. So in like manner, those that had a hand in this Gun-powder Plot, were great Men, men of Note, some that could give many Hundreds to carry it on. Mr. Percy, and Mr. Catesby, finding the Charge lay heavy, call in Sir Everard Digby of Rutlandshire, and Francis Tresham, Esquire. Catesby also took in Ambrose Rockwood, and John Graunt, two Recusant Gentlemen, besides Winter, Fanks, John Writh. And Sir Edmund Baynam, an attainted Person (who stiled himself Prince of the damned Crew) was sent to the Pope to acquaint him of the Gun-powder Plot. These were some of the Instruments imployed in this Design. 3. And as Haman was willing to be at vast Expences to have the Jews Massacre'd; for he offers ten thousand Talents of Silver for the accomplishing the thing, Esther 3. 9. So those men, and many more, did not care what Expences they were at. Sir Everard Digby offers one thousand five hundred Pounds, and Tresham two thousand, and Percy, four thousand, to forward the Action. And they were in great hopes of having in a few Months ten times as much. The Pope himself was willing to give one Million of Money to compleat the Spanish Armada, which he called the Invin∣cible Armada, but God made it vincible; for of one hundred and thirty four sail of Ships that came for England, Sir Francis Drake with eight Fire-ships, by God's blessing, destroyed so many of them, that but fifty four returned to Spain. But will the Pope give this Million of Money gratis, and expect nothing for it? No I'le warrant you, for he lays but one half down, and the other half when they had won any notable Haven in our Dominions; and with this proviso that the Crown of England should be held Tributary to the See of Rome; in token whereof he bestows on the King of Spain, his Apostolical Bene∣diction, and the Title of Defender of the Faith. Not at so little Charge was the King of Spain, whom the Pope animated to the Work, by persuading him that the Church of God could not be more glori∣ously
nor meritoriously propagated, than by the Conquest of England, extirpating Heresie, and planting the Catholique Roman Religion; and that the subduing England was but a just thing, considering that the Queen of England, Queen Elizabeth, was Excommunicated, and persisted contumaciously against the Church of Rome. By this means the King of Spain, like Haman, was willing to be at vast Expence to please the Pope, whom indeed he dared not to displease, for it was as much as his Crown was worth: And so that word is verified, that she Raigneth over the Kings of the Earth, Rev. 17. 18. His Charges must needs be great, for they were five Years a pre∣paring their Fleet, which consisted of an hundred thirty and four Sail, containing fifty seven thousand eight hundred and eight Tun, wherein were eight thousand and forty five Mariners, nineteen thousand two hun∣dred and ninety five Souldiers, to cut the poor Protestants Throats, had they been landed: Two thousand eighty eight Gally-Slaves; and so sure were they that England should pay the Shot, they spared no cost for Furnishing; they were provided for Sea and Land; they had Bullets of great shot two hundred and twenty thousand, of Powder four thousand, and two hundred Kintals, every Kintal containing one hun∣dred pound weight; Musquets seven thousand; of Partizans and Hal∣berts ten thousand, with store of other murthering Pieces, as double Cannon; they had also store of Torches, Lamps, Lanthorns, Whips, Butcherly Knives, to murder and torment the poor English. This Army cost the King of Spain thirty two thousand Ducats every day. Oh who would be at such charges to do God service, as the Pope and King of Spain, Catesby, Tresham, Percy, Haman, &c. were to do the Devil service! Don Pedro being asked the question of the intent of their coming to England by some of the Privy Council, stoutly answered, To sub∣due your Nation: But what would you have done with the Papists? We would have sent them (good men) in the Nation to Heaven, and you Hereticks to Hell. But what meant you to do with your Whips of Cord and Wyer? We meant to whip Hereticks to death. But what would you have done with the young Children? Answer, Them that were above seven years old, should have gone the same way their Fathers did, them under should have lived; only we would have branded them in the Forehead with the letter L. for Lutherans, and reserved them for perpetual Bondage. This Rome's cruelty is one infallible mark of her being the Whore of Babylon, which is a better sign of her being a false Church, than her pretence of Unity, Antiquity, Universality, Infallibility and Miracles will render her to be a true one. For these
Denominations do as rightly belong to the Devil himself, as to her; I conceive to both alike. 4. The chief cause and reason why Haman sought the lives of the Jews, was, because Mordecai the Jew would not bow and stoop to him: He was so full of Ambition, that all the Honour the King con∣ferred on him signified nothing, so long as Mordecai would not bow, Esther 5. 13. So in like manner, because we will not bow to the Pope, and ac∣knowledg him to be Head of the Church, who is a great Enemy to God, by worshipping Idols; to Christ, by its new-found Mediators; to the Holy Ghost, by putting a Pope in his room; to the Scripture by its Legends and corrupt Traditions; to Reason, by its imposed Absur∣dities; to Common Sense, by its most foolish and Idolized Transub∣stantiations; to all tender dissenting Consciences, by Fire and Faggot; an Enemy also to all Civil Government that refuses to be subject to it, by Plots, Assassinations, and horrid Massacres. Shall we stoop to her that will not stoop to God? Let Rome know, that as Mordecai which was a Jew would not stoop to Haman, Son of Hamadatha the Agagite, Esther 3. 1. The Heathen King, the Person and People whom God sent Saul to destroy, 1 Sam. 15. 2, 3. which People were called Amalekites, Agag being King of them; they were a People ha∣ted by the Lord, and of whom God said, Numb. 24. 20. That Ama∣lek was the first of the Nations, but his latter end should be that he perish for ever. Now Mordecai knowing that they were a People of God's hatred, and knowing Haman to be one of them, Mordecai out of Conscience (I conceive) would not bow to him; and also consider∣ing that they had been Enemies to the People of God. So in like manner, we knowing Rome to be an Enemy to the Peo∣ple of God, and that God hath purposed to destroy her, and give her Blood to drink, being worthy, Rev. 18. 6. because she hath drunk deep of the Blood of the Martyrs of Jesus, and also because she sets at nought God's holy Word; therefore we cannot, we will not bow to her Golden Image that she hath set up, notwithstanding all her Threats. As Nebuchadnezzar threatned the three Worthies with a burning fiery Furnace, if they would not bow down to the Image of Gold which he had set up. So this Mother of Harlots, if you will not put your Necks under her Yoke, then comes an Armada, an Inquisition, a Massacre, a Powder-plot, Fire, Faggot, Racks, Assassinations, Strang∣lings, witness Justice Godfry, Who for taking but an Exami∣nation which was his Place, and Work, and Sworn to it, those Men of Blood could not sleep quietly, till their malice was vented on his Body,
by strangling and other Tortures they put him to, as is more than pro∣bable, to protract his misery; and after a considerable time thrust a Sword into his Body, to make the World believe it was his own Act. Surely had he done it himself, some Blood would have appeared on the Ground where he lay! but the Sword being run into his Body some considerable time after Strangling, the Blood being coagulated, nothing appears but a black Water, which usually followeth after the Bloods coagulating: And that Act, inhumane and horrid Act, was done by the Papists, is clear, from their taking his Pocket Book, where the Depositions and Examinations were; which was that they wanted, though not his Gold nor Silver. 'Tis true, his great Lace Band he went out withal in the Morning, was taken away, the Gentleman being strangled, doubtless the Band was torn in the Fray; and to have let that gone, would have told the Story too plainly. But this Blood, as well as the Blood of many millions more, crieth for Ven∣geance. That one instance in Ireland, in that most inhumane Massacre in 1642, wherein were more than three hundred thousand in a few days put to Death; some burnt, some slain with the Sword, some shot to Death, some smothered, some starved and pined to Death, some killed with Staves, some cut in pieces, some hanged twice or thriee, many thousands drowned at Portendown-Bridg: And when the poor Souls came swimming by the River side to save their Lives, the Papists knockt them on the head with the But-end of their Musquets. But the Instance I mind is that at Portendown-Bridg, a Woman was seen to rise Brest-high out of the River, her Hair hanging down, with Skin as white as Snow, often crying out, Revenge, Revenge, Revenge, which made the Persons much amazed that saw, and heard it. This was attested by one Elizabeth Price (whose Husband was thrown into that River) be∣fore the Commissioners appointed for that purpose; with many more that might be named. 4. Sudden Death was designed by wicked Haman, after one Years provision and preparation for the Work; as the Spanish Invasion was five Years before compleated, so there was to be one Year. For on the 13th day of the first Month, the King's Scribes were called to make the Writings, and on the 11th day of the twelfth Month, the month Adar, the Massacre was appointed, and then nothing but sudden Death in one day: Saith the Word, They were to Destroy, Kill, and to cause to Perish, all Jews both young and old, little Children and Women, in one day, Esther 3. 12, 13. So in like manner, Sudden Death was like to be the portion of the Protestants in England. Time for Repentance would have been rec∣koned
too good for an Heretick. To kill them, and send them to Hell speedily, is an act meritorious, and cause of Triumph: when there was near one hundred thousand lives in three days time taken away in France, (which it seems no less could quench the thirst of that unsatiable Whore and Harlot) his Holiness at Rome, at the same time made Bon∣fires, rings his Bells, shoots off his Guns, and sang (O horrid Bla∣sphemy!) Te deum Laudamus, We praise thee, O God: As if he would draw in the most Gracious God to be accessary to his Murders, and an accomplisher of his Bloody and Abominable Impieties. Sud∣den death is that they delight in, when so many Barrels of Gun-powder were under the Parliament House, and Chair of State. Thir∣ty six Barrels would soon have dispatcht the King, Princes, Clergie, Nobles, Knights and Burgesses, the very confluence of the Flower of Glory, Learning, Prudence, and Authority in the Land; Fathers, Sons and Brothers, Foes, Papists, Protestants, all at one blast; and after that had been done, then a sudden Massacre throughout the Nation, and so would have altered Religion and Government, and brought in a Foraign Power. But our good God hath prevented them hitherto, praised be his holy Name. O what a settled Detestation, and fixed Opposition, should we have against that Religion! whose Faith is Faction, whose Promises are Equivocations, whose Worship is Ido∣latry, whose Principles are high Treason, whose Mercies are Cru∣elties, whose practices are Stabbing, Strangling, and poysoning of Kings, whose frame of Government is a politick design to enslave the World, and to bring the Necks of Princes under their Iron Yoke, and whose God is a pretty little tiny thing, which the Priests first create with a Charm of four Words long, and then worship the Works of their own Hands; and when they have done, chop him up at a bit, and make no Bones of him. 5. Much Deceit and Hypocrisy was acted by wicked Haman, when he intended to have the Jews Massacred: For he pretended to the King Ahasuerus, that this People had Laws diverse from the King's Laws, and that they kept not the Laws of the King; and besides, that it was not for the Kings profit to suffer such People, Est. 3. 8. This he pretends to the King, as the great reason why he would have them destroyed, when indeed it was not out of love he had to the King's Honour, but his own, through the pride of his own Heart: All the reason was, because Mordecai would not bow to him, Esther 3. 5. As hypocritical and deceitful hath Rome been, in bringing about her wicked Designs at all times: for concerning this Powder-plot, the
better to bring about her design, Mr. Percy takes some Rooms of one Mr. Winyard, which Rooms served for withdrawing Rooms in Par∣liament-time for the Lords, for these Rooms adjoyned to the Wall of the Parliament-House, and Percy took Fauks under pretence to be his Man, who changed his name into Johnson, he had the Keys and keep∣ing of the Rooms; and these Rooms were taken for Lodging Rooms. They took also another House and a Seller, just under the Parliament House, under pretence to keep Coals and Wood, which was to make the Serpents Nest in; thus their deceit appears. Yea further, When they wanted to bring the Plot upon the Protestants, (for that they would have done) one of the Conspirators, Mr. Keys, a Relation of Mr. Pickring of Tichmarsh Grove, in Northamptonshire (which Pickring was a Protestant, and a great Favourite of King James's) who had a very choice Horse: This Mr. Key, (one of the Conspirntors) borrowed Mr. Pickring's Horse, under pretence no Horse could serve his turn so well as that, (which indeed would not, considering he was a Protestant); this Horse was to stand in St. Georges Field, ready for Fauks after the Blow was given, as the Papists pretended to him. Mr. Pickring was to be killed, and conveyed away so as not to be found; and when Fauks came into St. Georges Fields, the Papists did intend to kill him, and so to have mangled him, that he should not have been known from Mr. Pickring the Protestant, and so it should have been bruited abroad presently, that the Protestants had done the work of the Plot; and to make the World believe it, Here, say they (or would have said) is Mr. Pickring with his choice Horse, who did the thing, and was about to make his escape, but he was prevented; and so they did intend to have Massacred the Protestants, under that pretence of their blowing up the Parliament House. Fauks after he was taken and put into the Tower, would not con∣fess any thing, notwithstanding they put him upon the Rack, till he came to understand the design of his Brethren in Iniquity against him, who promised him a great sum of Money to set the House on Fire; yet when he came to make his escape in St. Georges Fields, there they intended to take away his Life, the better to bring about their design, and then he confessed all when he came to hear this. Thus we see there is no manner of safety in being a Papist, for they value not the lives of their own party to bring about their designs; for if we will not be subject to them in every thing, they matter not the lives of their own Proselytes. Witness King Henry the 3d, and 4th of France, the first, because he would not destroy all the Hugonots and Protestants in France, they Assassinated him, and took away his Life. So Henry the 4th
was their Convert, whom they twice Assissinated, and the third time took away his Life; so that a Man cannot promise himself any security under the Romish Religion, but upon every humour and suspicion, the Blood of the most Noble must go. 6. As God wrought marvellously in the delivering the Seed of Abraham from the cruelty of wicked Haman, so he did deliver Eng∣land from the fate of Rome: Consider with me a little, how the pro∣vidence of God did work in the saving the former. King Ahasuerus makes a Feast, invites his Nobles, when his heart was merry with Wine, he sends for Queen Vashti to come before him, she refuseth to come; the King and Nobles were greatly troubled for her not coming. Queen Vashti is no more to come into the King's presence, she is shut out for ever from being Queen more; this makes way for Esther who was a Jew, to be an Instument to save her People. A great many fair Virgins, were to be sought for (by the King's Command) out of all Provinces, and brought to Shushan the King's Palace. Now Mordecai the Jew, brings in Esther, his Uncles Daughter, who had neither Father nor Mother; and among all the Virgins that were brought, none pleased the King so well as Esther, whom he made Queen. Again it came to pass on a certain Night, that the King could not sleep, (a Hand of God there was in that also) he calls for the Re∣cords, in which he finds that two of the King's Chamberlains, Big∣thana and Teresh, intended to lay Hands on the King, which was discovered by Mordecai the Jew. Then saith the King, What hath been done to him for that good deed? Hath he not been pro∣moted for the same? No, say the King's Servants. Who is in the Court, saith the King? Haman, say the Servants. Now Haman at this time stood in the outer Court to speak with the King, to have Mordecai hanged on the Gallows he had prepared. The King com∣manded Haman to be called in: What (saith the King to Haman) shall be done to the man whom the King delighteth to honour? Haman thinking he should be the man, said thus, Esther 6. 7, 8, 9. Let the Royal Apparel be brought which the King useth to wear, and the Horse that the King rideth upon, and the Crown Royal, which he useth to wear: And let this Apparel and Horse be delivered into the hands of one of the King's most noble Princes, that they may array him withal, whom the King delighteth to honour: And bring him on Horse-back through the Street of the City, and proclaim before him; Thus shall be done to the man whom the King delighteth to honour. Then said the King to
Haman, Take the Apparel and Horse, and do so to Mordecai the Jew that sitteth in the King's Gate, and let nothing fail of all that thou hast spoken. Then Haman did as the King commanded, but Haman hasted to his own House mourning, and having his Head covered. Mark how God's Providence did work further. When Mordecai had by Proxy informed Queen Esther of wicked Haman's design, and sent her a Copy of the Writings among the Jews, by the hand of Hatateh the King's Chamberlain, poor Mordecai weeps bitterly, puts on Sack∣cloth, and went into the midst of the City, and cried with a loud and bitter Cry. But when Queen Esther came to hear of the Design, she is in a very great strait, she had not been called before the King for thirty days space: And there was a Law, that whoever comes before the King into the inner Court, except the King holds out his Scepter to them, they are to be put to death. What shall Queen Esther do now? Well, out of love to her own Country, and considering what Mordecai said; Think not that thou shalt save thy own Life. Upon these considerations, she resolves to go to the King with her Life in her Hand, and if I perish, I perish, saith the Queen. When she comes before the King, God puts it in his heart to hold out his Scep∣ter to her: so Esther drew near and touched the top of his Golden Scepter. Then saith the King to her, What is thy Request, and it shall be granted, to the half of my Kingdom? And Queen Esther an∣swered, Let the King and Haman come this day to a Dinner I shall prepare: The King and Haman did so. Now Haman's heart was lifted up, when he heard that none but he was to go with the King to the Dinner the Queen had prepared, yet saith he, All this avail∣eth me nothing, so long as Mordecai standeth in the Kings Gate. When the King, Queen, and Haman was at the Banquet of Wine, What is thy Request Queen Esther, saith the King, and it shall be perform∣ed to thee, even to the half of my Kingdom? Then Esther the Queen answered, If I have found favour in thine Eyes, O King, if it please the King, let my Life be given at my Petition, and my People at my Request; for we are sold, I and my People to be destroyed, to be slain, and to perish: But if we had been sold for Bond-men, and Bond-women, I had held my Tongue. Then said the King Ahasuerus, Who is he? And where is he that durst presume in his heart so to do? And Esther said, The Enemy is this wicked Haman. Then the King rose up in Wrath, and went into the Palace Garden, and Haman being afraid, standeth up and makes request for his Life to the King, and to Esther the Queen, in the Kings absence. When the King returned out of the Palace-Gar∣den,
Haman was lying on the Bed where Esther was. What, saith the King, will he force the Queen before me in the House? Thus the King was more and more enraged against Haman. Haman's face was covered of a sudden. The saith one of the King's Cham∣berlains, there standeth a Gallows in Haman's House, which he built for Mordecai, who hath spoken good for the King; then the King said, Hang him thereon. So Haman was hanged, and the former Writing reversed by sending Letters through all the Provinces, and Orders was given the Jews should be ready to destroy all that day, that came to destroy them; and on that day they destroyed seventy five thousand, but laid not their hands on the Prey. Thus you see, how wonderfully God did work for their Deliverance. So in like manner did he for England, for the Lord was pleased to prevent their design by two Prorogations before this Fifth of No∣vember, and but ten days before the Parliament sate, there was a Letter sent from some (whose heart God had stirred up) to the Lord Mount-Eagle, to have him exempt himself from the Parliament House that day: The said Lord Mount-Eagle takes the Letter, and late at Night goes to White-Hall, and sheweth it to the Earl of Salis∣bury, then Principal Secretary; the Earl of Salisbury acquaints the Chamberlain therewith; these two Councellors shew the Letter to the Earls of Worcester and Northampton, and all concluded how slightly the Contents seemed to be to shew the King, for it was without Date and Subscription, and not very legible: However the Earl of Salis∣bury presents the Letter to the King, which is as followeth. MY Lord, out of the love I bear to some of your Friends, I have a care of your preservation: Therefore I would advise you, as you tender your Life, to devise some Excuse to shift off your attendance at this Parliament, for God and Man have concurred to punish the wicked∣ness of this Time; and think not slightly of this Advertisement, but retire your self into your Country, where you may expect the event in safety. For though there be no appearance of any stir, yet I say they shall receive a terrible Blow this Parliament, and yet they shall not see who hurts them. This counsel is not to be contemned, because it may do you good and can do you no harm, for the danger is past so soon as you have burnt the Letter, and I hope God will give you the grace to make a good use of it; to whose holy protection I recommend you.— God's goodness did greatly appear in giving the King that Wis∣dom to interpret some dark phrases in the Letter by receiving a
terrible Blow, this Parliament; the King did presently apprehend that a sudden blow of Gun-powder was intended, by some base Villain in a Corner: And that the danger was past, so soon as the Letter was burnt. The King putting the former words, a terrible Blow, and these together, gathered that for so soon, was as quickly as the Letter was burnt, the danger would be past. Order was given that the Rooms under the Parliament House should be searched throughly: Accordingly the Earl of Suffolk, then Lord Chamberlain, upon Monday in the Afternoon, with the Lord Mount-Eagle, repaired into those under Rooms; and finding the Sellar well stored with Wood and Coals, asked Fauks, the counterfeit Johnson, Whose they were? Who answered, The Lodgings belonged to Mr. Thomas Percy, and the Sellar was to lay in his Winter Provision. When they were come forth, the Lord Mount-Eagle told the Chamberlain when he heard Percy's name named, he did much suspect Percy to be the In∣diter of that Letter. The Lord Chamberlain returned and told the King and Council what he had seen, and the suspicion the Lord Mount-Eagle had of Percy, and of Johnson his Man; all which in∣creased his Majesties jealousie, and a Charge was given that a nar∣rower search should be made, the Billets and Coals turned up to the bottom. Sir Thomas Knevet, a Gentleman, one of his Majesties Privy-Chamber, and a Justice of Peace in Westminster, was imploy∣ed herein; who about Mid-night before the Parliament was to be∣gin, went with a small, but trusty number of Persons, and at the sellar door they found Fauks at so unseasonable an hour, Cloaked and Booted, with a Dark-Lanthorn; they found about him three Matches, and other Instruments for blowing up the Powder: He was no whit daunted, and instantly confessed his Guiltiness, and was so far from Repentance, that he vowed had he been within the House (as he came but just forth) he would have blown up the House, with himself and them all in it; and further said, That the Devil and not God, had discovered that Design. And when they came to ransack the Billets, they found the Serpents Nest, thirty six Barrels of Powder, with Bars of Iron, and massy Stones. This Wretch would not discover the Plot, till he knew the design of his Brethren in Iniquity, which was to murder him in St. Georges Fields, when he came to take Mr. Pickrings Horse, and would have so man∣gled him, that the World should have thought that it had been Mr. Pickring the Protestant; and so, as I said before, would have father∣ed the Plot upon them. This Villain remembred the Oath of Se∣crefie that he took with the rest, from Gerard and Tresmond, Jesuitical
Priests, who by their Apostolical Power, did commend the Fact and absolve the Actors; the Oath was in these words: You shall swear by the Blessed Trinity, and by the Sacrament you now purpose to receive, never to disclose directly, or indi∣rectly, by word or circumstance, the matter that shall be proposed to you to keep secret, nor desist from the Execution thereof, un∣til the rest give you leave. 6. As the Wicked was snared in the work of his own hands, in the days of Ahasuerus; wicked Haman was hanged on the Gallows he made for Mordecai, Est. 7. 10. Yea, his ten Sons were hanged also, and seventy five thousand were slain, who thought to have slain the Jews, Est. 9. 16. So in like manner, about the Gun-powder Plot, the judgment re∣turns on their own Pate, many of their lives being taken away that were Actors of it. Fauks was Hanged and Quartered, as some say; others say, that he had a pair of Iron Boots, made red-hot, which he was put to stand in. Sixteen were taken in the Country and sent to London. Catesby, Rockwood, and Grant, had their Faces scorch∣ed with some Powder which they had put in a Chimny-corner; a Billet thrown into the Fire, raised a spark that fell on the Powder. Two whose names were Wright, were shot down dead in a Fray, that was in Holback-House in Staffordshire, which belonged to Stephen Littleton; these and many others were pursued there by the high Sheriff of Worcestershire; those that were in this House being despe∣rate, set open the Gates, and suffer'd the Sheriffs Men to rush upon them: Rockwood, and Thomas Winter were sorely wounded, Gatesby and Percy desperately fighting back to back, were both shot through and slain with one Musquet-Bullet; the rest being taken were carried to London, where they received the just demerit of their Wicked∣ness. But most remarkable is that Judgment of God, that befel the Papists in Black-friars, on a Lord's Day, Anno Christi, 1623. about seven∣teen Years after this Plot was levelled against the Protestants, which
was the Fifth of November, by the Roman Account: One Drury, a Romish Priest, a Man of parts, was to preach in a fair House in Black-friars. Upon this Report, many Protestants as well as Papists, Schollers as well as others, assembled to hear him; he had not dis∣coursed half an Hour, but the Floor whereon he was and his Com∣pany, fell down with such Violence, as therewith the Floor of the Chamber underneath where Redgate was and his Company (another Jesuite Priest) was broken down with it, so that both the Floors, with the Beams, Girders, Joyces, Boards and Seilings fell down together upon the third Floor; some there were that were pulled out alive, but so bruised or spent for want of Breath, that some lived not many hours, some died not many days after. On the Lord's Day at Night, were numbered ninety one dead Bodies. Both the Jesuites were killed. One thing is very remarkable further, There was at this time one Parker, who was a Factor for the English Seminaries and Nuns be∣yond Sea; he had so dealt with two of his Brethren, that he had got from one a Son, and from the other a Daughter, to send them to Religious Houses, as they falsly call them beyond Sea. This Parker, at this time, took his Nephew with him, a Lad about sixteen Years old; the Youth lost his Life, but Parker escaped with a bruised Body. But though he had his Life given him, he did not prize his Mercy, but would often wish that he had died among so many Martyrs. (Many such Martyrs have been made at Tybourn for Treason) But, Beloved, the preservation of the Wicked, is but a reservation to future Judgment: For about ten days after, this Parker was shooting London-Bridg with his aforesaid Neece, whom he was conveying beyond Sea, they were both cast away, and drown∣ed in the Thames. Judg by this, O Parents, whether God is well pleased with di∣sposing your Children to Popish Education. Again, Should we go back to the Spanish Invasion, and see how God turned their own Cruelties on their own Heads. For on the 29th of May, 1588. the Fleet set sail out of the River Tago: but God, who is an Enemy to all such Hostile Actions, caused a Storm to raise, a very dreadful one, their Ships were dispers'd, some their Masts broken and blown over-board; and abundance of their Men died with the Pestilence, and their Fleet was so torn that they could not possibly come out that Year. The next Year coming out again with a Fleet of about one hundred and thirty sail, they seemed as if they made for Plymouth, they came with lofty Towers like Castles
(their Ships being so built) in front like a Half-Moon: On July the twenty third they had a great Fight, and the greatest they ever had; the English Commanders found very hard work to Fight them, and were out of all hopes of doing much good, because they did not dare to board them, they having so many thousand Souldiers; but God was pleased to put a Project into the Heart of Queen Elizabeth, (Or Sir Francis Drake) So that the next day after they had cast Anchor, the Lord Admiral made ready eight Ships, filled with Wild-fire, Pitch, Ro∣sin, Brimstone, and other combustible matter, their Ordnance being charged with Bullets, Stones, Chains, all the Men being taken out; about two a Clock after Mid-night, the Ships were let drive with Wind and Tide (under the guidance of Young and Prowse) among the Spanish Fleet, their Train taking fire, such a Thunder-clap was given by them in the dead of the Night, the Spaniards were amazed, and knowing not better how to avoid these Fire-Ships than by cutting their Cables asunder, which they did, and so some run upon the Sands, others were taken, that in all they lost eighty one Vessels, thirteen thousand five hundred and odd Souldiers, Prisoners taken in England, Ireland, and the Low-Countries about two thousand, and there re∣turned to Spain but a small number of Ships and Men, to what they had when they came out; thus their Invincible Armada by God's blessing proved Vincible. Now, Beloved, I think none will be so unbelieving as to think that all these Judgments came by chance; no, God forbid ye should; we would not be rash in censuring, yet when we see Judgments exe∣cuted on Sinners in the act of their Sins, when they are impudent and presumptuous therein, not to acknowledg such to be judged by the Lord, is to wink at their Light, Psal. 9. 16. God is known by the Judgments he executeth. Shall Nebuchadnezzar while he is vaunting of his great Babylon, be bereft of his Wits? Shall Herod, while he is priding himself in the flattering applause of the People, be eaten with Worms? Shall Haman, while he is practizing to destroy all the People of God, be hanged on the Gallows fifty Cubits high, which he prepared for Mordecai? Shall the House where the Phili∣stines met together to sport with Sampson, fall upon their Heads? Shall these and such like Judgments overtake Men in acts of Sin, and yet be accounted no Judgment, no evidences of God's Revenging Judgments? Truly then we may deny all Providence. ☞ God will certainly take Vengeance on all his Implacable Ene∣mies, God will not forget the Blood of so many Millions of Ameri∣cans, which now crieth for Vengeance, whose greatest guilt was their
Gold; nor the cry of the Blood of so many hundred thousands of Men, Women, and Children, Infants, Virgins, Wives, Widows, and the variety of the most unheard-of Cruelties which Malice could invent, whose Blood will be a lasting Monument of Romes Barba∣rity: The Blood of those ten thousand Souls that were taken away in three days time in Paris, while his Ʋnholiness, the Pope, makes Bon∣fires, rings his Bells for joy, shoots off his Guns, and sings Te Deum laudamus, we praise thee, O God, for it. The Massacre of Ireland, where was (as I said) three hundred thousand Starved and Murdered, whose Blood calls aloud to be reckoned for. O the Blood-shed in Pied∣mont, wherein a vast number of quiet peaceable Souls were by the insatiable malice of Cut-throat Papists, at the instigation and im∣portunity of the Pope and his cruel Clergy, murder'd! The Blood of Sir Edmund-Bury Godfry, will not leave crying till God avenge it: We see by that what they would do with us all, did it lie in their power; the Powder-Plot, the Burning of London again and again attempted; the Spanish Invasion; the many that have been privately Murdered, must all be reckoned for: God hath every one of them, and a thousand more, in his Book of Remembrance, which he will exactly remember when Babylon's Sins are grown to the height. Let me give you a short Scheme of the variety of Popish Tortures, pra∣ctized by the Bloody Idolaters, upon the poor Christians in Ireland, Paris, and Piedmont. Some had their Bellies ript up when they were with Child, and the living Child laid on the dead Mother; some driven into a River, and there Drowned in great numbers; if any could Swim, they either shot at them, or knockt them on the Head with the But-ends of their Musquets, as they came near the Land. One Mrs. Manuel they threw into the Water then in Labour, the Child being half born when the Mother was drowned. The merciless Papists having set fire on a Castle where many Pro∣testants were, and hearing them screek, O how sweetly do they cry! said they, rejoycing. In one place they burnt two Protestants Bibles, and said, It was Hell fire they burnt; other Bibles they took and cut in pieces; and they took the Bible of one Mr. Edward Slack, a Minister, opening of it, they laid it in a puddle of Water, and then stampt upon it, say∣ing, A Plague on't! this Bible hath bred all the Quarrel. Women great with Child, had Swords run in them in such an inhuman manner
that the Children in the Womb thrust their Arms and Feet out of the Wounds: Others have been tortured alive, others deadly wound∣ed and laid on Tenter-hooks; others their Flesh sliced off their Bo∣dies; some with Ropes and Withs about their Necks, have been drawn through Water, Bogs, Woods, Streets, to inforce them to confess their Treasure, and when they had so done, and gotten their Treasure, were basely Murdered; some were hanged up by their Arms, and Soldiers did try the strength of their Swords upon them. A School-Master of Rovas being stript Naked, had his Nails tore off with Pincers, his Hands stabb'd with a Dagger-point, drawn through the Borroughs of Lucerna in Piedmont, and had his Flesh cut off with a Faulchion, crying out to him, What sayest thou now? Will you go to Mass? To which with admirable constancy, he said, Much rather Death than Mass, crying, O dispatch me quickly for the love of God! Some they ript up, and their Guts left to trial about their Heels; Women great with Child were hung up by the Heels, and Bellies ript open till the Children dropt out, and then cast into a Ditch. Some Children have had their Brains dasht out against the Wall, and their Bodies thrown to Dogs and Swine; some Chil∣dren thrown to Dogs to be devoured by them; some trampled upon to death; other Infants have been found sucking the brests of their dead Mothers: Some were driven to the Woods and Moun∣tains in the extremity of Frost and Snow, having first been stript stark naked, and so were starved; others have been driven to take shelter in Caves, and there by Fire and Smoke made at the Caves mouth, were smothered and choaked to Death. Some of the Murderers in Piedmont finding eleven Men, made a Furnace red-hot, and made one cast in another, and the last they cast in themselves. In Piedmont two Children, both Dumb, murthered. The Marquess of Pionessa commanded the Hangman to take the Body of Giovani Pul∣lions, after many Scorns laid upon him by the Friars, to be dragged to a Tree and there Hanged, who before they hanged, used many Argu∣ments to him to leave his Religion, but could not prevail. Some time after an Elder of the Church at Rosanna, was brought to the same place to die, the Marquess of Pionessa three or four days after going that way, and one of the Soldiers discharging a Musquet on the dead Bodies, there came a stream of fresh Blood from one of them, which the Marquess seeing, said, This Blood crieth for Ven∣geance.
Some have been compelled to carry their own Parents to the place of Execution, others to set fire to the Pile that burnt them; some Mo∣thers compelled to cast their own Children into the Water to drown them; some Wives to hang up their own Husbands, and Children to hang up their own Parents, and when this was done inhopes of Life, because Life was promised for so doing, were Massacred themselves; some have been boil'd to death in Cauldrons; some have had their Eyes twisted out with Cords. When the Massacre was in Ireland, the Popish Priests gave the Sa∣crament to many Irish, upon condition that they should not spare Men, Women, nor Children that were Protestants. One Hulligan a Priest, when this Massacre began, read an Excom∣munication against all those that from henceforth should harbour any English, Scotish, or Welsh, or give them Alms, whereby many were famished to death. At this time, when the Irish Massacre was acting, they boasted, That when they had destroyed the Irish, they would go over to England, and not leave the memorial of an English-Man under Heaven. The Popish Priests after they had given their Crew a dismiss at Mass, the day before the Massacre, told them they should go and take possession of all the Protestants Lands, also to Strip, Rob, and Di∣spoil them: for the Protestants were worse than Dogs, they were Devils, and therefore their killing them was a meritorious Act. Some had their Brains taken out and fried in a Pan; many stoned to Death; some have been put into a Hole, and nothing but their Head appearing, covered to the Neck with Stones and Earth, that they might feel Death, and taste death more deliberately. Some have been stript stark-naked and driven by the Inhumane Per∣secutors through the Streets; and if their weakness was such that they could not go so fast as they would have them, they would prick them forward with Swords and Spears. Some have been so wracked, that in their Festering Wounds, Worms and other Vermin have bred. Some of the Papists openly profest in Irelands Massacre, that they held it as lawful to kill a Protestant, as a Dog: And one of their Priests said, It was as lawful to take away their Lives, as a Bone out of a Dogs mouth. One Ann Hill, going with a young Child on her back to save her Life, and four more by her side, they met her and pulled the Child from off her Back and trod on it till it died, stript her and the four Children naked, so that they died with cold. One Joan Addis they stabbed, and then put the Child to her
Brest, and bid it Suck, English Bastard. One Good-wife Lea they carried and her Daughter into the Woods, and first hung the Mother, and then the Daughter by the hair of her Mother's Head. Poor Children that went out into the Fields to eat Weeds and Grass, they murdered without all pity. Some of those Bloody Murderers have boasted, that their Arms have been so weary with killing, that they could not lift them up to their Heads. Some Infants have been closed up in their Mothers Belly and been strangled. Many thousands have died in the Inquisition. Some have been drawn with promises of Life, and threats of death to renounce their Religion and turn Papists, and when they have so done, have been murdered; the scoffing Papists telling them it was good to kill them while they were in a good humour, lest they should recant if they lived longer. Others have yielded up their Forts and Castles upon Articles and Conditions to have their lives spared, and then being disarmed, were kept in the Fort or Castle, till starved, with this Jesuitical Evasion, We promised you your Lives, but not Food to preserve them. Like that Treachery the Marquiss of Pionessa was guilty of in the late Massacre in Piedmont, April, Anno 1655. The Deputies of the Protestants, by the Subtilties of this Marquis of Pionessa, were detained at Turin, in which time a great Army arrived at St. Giovani, and some other Towns, to the number of fifteen thousand, which set upon the poor Protestants in an inhumane manner; the Marquiss also made a great Dinner for many of the Protestants, and made the Deputies many fair promises, that there should be no hurt to any of them, if they would but quarter a few Troops, as a token of their Obedience; they did assent to what the Marquiss designed. But no sooner were those Troops entered, but they put all to Fire and Sword, slaying all they met with in the most barbarous manner that could be invented. Much like this was that of Admiral Coligny with abundance of Protestants, who were enticed to Paris with Promises and Oaths of Security, under pretence of a Marriage between two Houses, where were barbarously slain ten thousand Protestants, whose Blood ran down the Chanel like Water. Not much different from this, was the practice of the Duke of Savoy, Soveraign Prince of the Valleys of Piedmont, after a tedious and chargeable Application of the Protestants to him, for a confirma∣tion of their Liberty of Conscience, did at last by an Edict promise expressly that he would confirm unto them the enjoyment of the Li∣berty
of Religion, and of these Priviledges granted to them by his Predecessors, Dukes of Savoy. Yet by the powerful persuasion of the Congregation, as they call it; or of the Jesuits, Friars, and others, one Gastalt was at last sent from the Prince with a Commission, who calls himself Conservator General of the Catholick Faith against the Reformed Professors, affirming that he had received Instructions from the Prince, That in case they will not within three Days receive the Romish Religion, they must for ever bid farewel to their Native Country, Houses, Lands, and Possessions; adding moreover, It should be death without mercy, if after that space of time any were taken in those Places. So that you see those Men make little conscience of Promises, or Covenants. But what need we question that? 'Tis a Maxim owned by the Priests, That Faith ought not to be kept with Hereticks; and that all Oaths, Covenants, Promises, made to and with the silly Protestants, are of no force longer than it pleaseth the Pope; and so it seems indeed by their practices. It was the Pope (to the scandal of all the World) persuaded the King Ʋladislaus, to break his League with the Turk upon some seem∣ing Advantage: the Pope absolved him from his Oath: But God re¦venged the Perjury, with the death of many thousand poor Christians. 7. As the People of God of old (the Jews) did keep the fourteenth and fifteenth days of the Month Adar, Annually, in remembrance of that great Deliverance from Haman's designed Massacre, as you have in Est. 9. 18, 29. So in King James's dayes, from a sense of the Mercy then received, it was Enacted, that November the Fifth should be kept throughout the Nation, with praising God for so great Deliverance. Let this (Beloved) be your work this day to praise God from your Hearts, and let the thankfulness of your Hearts be seen in the holiness of your Lives, Psal. 50. ult. He that praiseth me, glorifieth me; and to him that ordereth his Conversation aright, to him will I shew my Salva∣tion. Do also as the Jews did, send Portions one to another, and to the Poor, Est. 9. 22. To praise God heartily for former Delive∣rances, will engage God to give us more Salvation, which he hath begun to give England already in his discovering this horrid Plot against it: His Name be praised for that Mercy; and O Good Lord, as Thou hast still delivered us from Invasions, Horrid Massacres, Powder-Plots, Assassinations, Stranglings, and all sinful Conspiracies of thine implacable Enemies; let us now praise that God with joyful Lips, that hath hitherto kept us (and we hope still will) from those whose
faith is Faction, whose Promises are Equivocations, whose Worship is Idolatry, whose Principles are High-Treason, and whose Mercies are Cruelties. Amen. A Hymn sung after the Discourse, by way of Praising God, for so great Deliverance as England enjoyed in 1605. HAman of old, the Seed of God, He thought for to destroy: So wicked Men in this our Age, God's Church seek to annoy. Though they have digged wide and deep, Their secret Plots to hide; Yet when they dig as deep as Hell Our God will them deride. For he the first Man's thought did know, Of this Plot of November; And it in His due time did show, And's People did remember. O Lord, as Thou remembred'st us, To save us from that Blow; So on November we'll remember, Thy Praises forth to show. Let Men and Devils do their worst, A True Church Thou wilt have; Though she that's false will do her best, To throw it in the Grave. When Cain his Brother Abel slew, His Seed God did revive:
When Pharoah pursu'd th' Israelites, The Seas 'gainst him did strive. When Jezebel God's Prophets sought, Them every one to kill, God turn'd her Witchcraft unto nought, By his Almighty Skill. When Haman thought the Jews to kill, And utterly destroy; The Lord on him destruction brought, And his whole Family. From Rome and Hell deliver us, For Blood they thirst for still; Defend us, Lord, our Cause is just, Of Blood give her her fill. A Golden Cup there's in one Hand, A Sword there's in the other; If we the Poyson will not drink, We shan't be call'd a Brother. Our Names will then be Hereticks, Yea, Fire and Sword's too good For those that do decline her ways, And love God's holy Word. From an Invasion, Lord deliver; From Massacre also; From Powder-Plot preserve us still, That we may know no Woe. Then shall Thy Name extolled be, By Praises in a Song, Who hath his Church and People sav'd, From Men and Devils strong.
REVEL. xvii. 5. And upon her Forehead was a Name written, MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS, AND ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH. THese words, Beloved, contain the Inscription that is writ∣ten upon the Forehead of Antichrist; and they may be written in Capital Letters in our Bibles, to show unto us that this Inscription is as plain, obvious, and legible upon the Forehead of Antichrist, as in our Books. By the Forehead we may safely understand the Principles and Pra∣ctices of the false Church: For as what is written on the Forehead is plain, apparent, and obvious to all Spectators: So all that will but take a prospect of Romes Practices and Principles, through the Glass of God's sacred Word, must needs read this Inscription, Mystery, Babylon the Great, the Mother of Harlots, and Abominations of the Earth. 1. She is called Babylon, because she resembles Babylon, where the the Jews and the People of God were seventy Years in Captivity: For as Literal Babylon held the Bodies of Men in Captivity, so Rome, which is Mystery Spiritual Babylon, keeps their Souls. Therefore some of the Learned have said, Babylon was the first Rome, and Rome is the second Babylon. 2. She is called Mystery Babylon, because she pretends to be Sion, but is truly Babylon. That that is a Mystery, is something hidden: So Rome is Babylon, but hidden under the name of the Mother Church, God's Temple, the Mistress of Faith. Rome hides her Fornication under the name of the pure Spouse, her Impiety and Blasphemy un∣der the name of Piety and Infallibility, she dares not appear to be what she is. 3. She is called the Mother of Harlots, because she is the Head of the great Apostacy from Christ; and is not only a Harlot her self,
but hath many Daughters of the same Nature, whom she hath taught to commit Spiritual Whoredom. How many Kings, Kingdoms, Nations, and Languages, hath she infected by the Golden-Cup of her Fornication? This poor Nation of England was once greatly infected and poysoned by that Harlot, that indeed to this day some Reliques of her Poyson, which was then drunk, remain. The good Physician of Value cleanse this Nation wholly of all such Poy∣sonous and Infectious Doctrines. Hence 'tis the Spirit hath this Emphatical phrase in the Text, GREAT, because there never was, nor will be a greater Harlot than she is, and hath been; there is not a worse to be found, she is the Mother, the first, the greatest that can be named. 4. She is called the Abomination of the Earth, because she is the Mother of all false and Adulterous Churches; so the Abomination of the Earth, the Mother of Impious and Idolatrous Practices. The Doctrine from these words is this: Doct. That the Church of Rome is Mystery Babylon, the Mother of Harlots, and Abominations of the Earth. This Doctrine appears to be true, if we consider the description the Sripture giveth of Rome. She standeth, or is built upon Seven Mountains, or Hills. This is her Scituation, as you may see, Rev. 17. 9. The seven Heads are seven Hills, on which the Woman sitteth; that Woman in my Text, the Mother of Harlots. And this stands strongly against them, un∣less they can find out another City which is so Situated, which is impossible, and this they cannot deny but the City is so Situated, many of the Fathers acknowledg it. Beside, Rome being built on seven Hills, her own Poets sing loudly of it; as Virgil, Ovid, Pro∣pertius. See the Book intitled, The Man of Sin. Also the Reverend Bishop Ʋsher is of the same mind. But that which they Object, is this: Object. 1. Say they, This is meant of Rome in her Heathen State, and not in her State of Christianity. Answ. 1. That cannot be meant of Rome in its Heathen State, because the Apostle spake Prophetically, of a Time to come. Rome consist∣ed of seven forms of Government, called Seven Kings, (Rev. 17. 10.) to govern the Common wealth. 1. Kings, properly so called: 2. Consuls. 3. Decemviri. 4. Tribunes of Souldiers. 5. Dicra∣tors. 6. Emperors, properly so called. 7. Antichrist, the state of
the Beast, which is a note of difference from all the others which were yet to come. Now five of those in the Apostles days were fallen; one then was in being, namely the Roman Emperor; and the other (that was the Beast Antichrist) was yet to come. Therefore if the Antichrist, the Beast, the Mother of Harlots, was not then in being, in the Apostles sense, it could not be Rome under the Reign of the Em∣perors in her Heathen State. But Rev. 17. 10. clears this fully. 2. It cannot be Heathen Rome, because she never made a Covenant with God, and broke it. The Antichrist is a Whore, a Harlot, one that hath left her first Husband. Heathen Rome never professed Christ, therefore it cannot be her. It must needs be Rome Apostate: For the Antichrist, the Man of Sin, is some Apostate, as you may see in 2 Thess. 2. 3. The Apostle there exhorting the Saints to constancy in the Faith, and that they should not expect Christ's coming (which they so much looked for) till there was some great Apostacy from the Faith, ver. 3. Let no Man deceive you with vain words by any means, for that Day shall not come except there be a falling away first, and that Man of Sin be revealed, the Son of Perdition. So that this Beast is one that falls from the Truth, which Heathen Rome never did. But Rome in its profest Christian State hath so done: For she was once a famous Church, when the Apostle Paul writ the Epistle to them, Rom. 1. 8. St. Paul thanks God that their Faith was spoken of through∣out the whole World; and many Elders and Christians did suffer under the sixth form of Government. But now she is Rome Apostate, the fallen Star, mentioned in Rev. 9. 1. I saw a Star fall from Heaven to the Earth, to earthly Concupisence, an earthly Mind, which had the Key of the bottomless Pit. The Pope, &c. pretend to have the Key of Hell: By that means they delivered Trajan the Emperor's Soul out of Hell; a great Persecuter of the Christians. But I shall not impose the belief of this on you in the least. Rome did once shine as a glorious Star, but now a place of Darkness, by reason of the Smoke that comes out of the Pit. The Sun and Moon are darkned. True Principles of Christ are hid from a great part of the World, by the black and smoaky principles of the fallen Star. So in my Text, she is called, a Whore, a Harlot. Which she would not have been called, had she not defiled her Lord's Bed. We have her portraied to the life, in 1 Tim. 4. 1, 2, 3. Now the Spi∣rit speaketh expressly, that in the latter Times some shall depart from the Faith, giving heed to seducing Spirits, and doctrines of Devils, speak∣ing Lyes in Hypocrisy, having their Consciences seared with a hot Iron, forbidding to Marry, and commanding to abstain from Meats, which God
hath ordained to be received with thanksgiving. Who is this but Rome Christian? St. Ambrose, St. Augustin, think it Antichrist. Know we not that she forbids her Priests to Marry, and to abstain from Meats, under pretence of doing Penance for Sin, and imitation of Christ, who fasted forty days. 3. Had it been Heathen Rome the Apostle spake of, he would not have spoken of her as a Mystery: He calls her Mystery Babylon, and mystery of Iniquity, 2 Thess. 2. 7. Now it was not a Mystery for Heathen Rome to persecute Christians; but for Christians to perse∣cute Christians, that was a Mystery indeed. The Pope pretends he loveth Christ, but hates his People. He is Christ's Vicar by Name, but Enemy in Deed; he is not Iniquity publick, openly, and profes∣sedly, but Iniquity in a Mystery, in a dark and hidden way. 4. Nor could the Apostle John have made Heathen Rome the Mer∣chants of Souls, which only subdued Nations by Force, and not in∣fected them by Poyson; it kept a Shambles for Bodies, but not a Market for Souls, as Mystery Babylon doth; Rev. 18. 13. And in her was found Slaves, and Souls of men. Among all the Traffick of Rome, none is so gainful as Souls. Her Merchants are the Monks and Je∣suites, called the false Prophets, who are to be cast into the bottom∣less Pit, Rev. 19. 20. That the Apostacy is not a Civil Apostacy, but Religious, is the opinion of some of their own, as Nical Delyra, Theodoret, St. Augustin, Oecumenicus, and others. 5. It cannot be Heathen Rome, because she never did sit in the Temple of God, as Antichrist is described, 2 Thess. 2. 4. Heathen Rome never pretended to be God's Temple, but the Church of Rome doth: She saith she is God's House, and doth not Apostate Rome an∣swer to all those Phrases? 2 Thess. 2. 4. First, She opposeth and exalteth her self above all that is called God: Doth she not oppose Kings, and exalt her self above all Magi∣strates, called Gods in Scripture, in respect of their Authority? Secondly, Doth she not oppose and exalt her self above what is worshipped? God saith in his Word, You shall worship Me only, not Images. Saith the Pope (quite contrary) you shall worship Ima∣ges. In the Nicene Synod, 567, the Pope with three hundred and eighteen Fathers, (as they call them) ordained the making and wor∣shipping of Images. Thirdly, Doth not he pretend to sit in God's Temple, and make himself as if he were a God? In many things he makes himself equal with Christ; in forgiving Sins, in redeeming Souls by their Satisfa∣ctory, Propitiatory, and Explatory Sacrifices, which they blasphe∣mously
say they make in their unbloody Sacrifice at Mass. Besides, The Pope and his Council can make new Articles of Faith, as if he were the thirteenth Apostle, and he is much troubled that he cannot find the name of Pope mentioned in the four Evangelists; therefore he hath made other Articles of Faith, which Christ never made. Take an account of some of them. 1. That St. Peter, and so consequently say they the Pope, is the Rock on which the Church is founded. 2. That the Virgin Mary is our Mediatrix. 3. That all other Saints sustain that Office. 4. Religious Worship is to be paid to Stocks and Stones, yea, old Clouts, called Reliques of Saints. 5. That Images do as great Miracles as Christ himself, if not greater. 6. Christ's Sufferings will not make satisfaction for our Sins; but we must also make satisfaction our selves. 7. Such as died before St. French's time were saved by Christ, since by St. Francis. 8. All buried in the habit of St. Francis, whether Jew or Turk, shall be saved. 9. That Chrism takes away Sin, as Christ's Blood. 10. That there is no Salvation without praying to Saints. They deemed our Lord Jesus Christ but half a Saviour; and there∣fore they devised Francis, Peter, Baruardons Son, as if he had been wounded with the same Wounds of Christ, and in the same parts, and consecrated him in the Lateran Council, the typical Jesus. Also how prophanely do they speak of the Scripture, calling it, A Leader, Rule, Aesops Fables, a Nose of Wax, black and inkie Divinity, a Del∣phian Sword; and Christ's Ministers, Scripture-Men, Inkie Divines. He will judge all Men, but will be judged by none. Therefore I infer, he that fitteth in the Temple of God, and opposeth and ex∣alteth himself above all that is called God, is the Man of Sin, the Antichrist: But thus the Pope of Rome doth; therefore 'tis not Rome Heather, but Rome Apostate, that is this Mother of Harlots. Object. 2. It cannot be (say they) the Church of Rome that can be this Mother of Harlots, the Antichrist: Because the Scripture sets him out to be a single Man, 2 Thess. 2. 3. called there, that Man of Sin, and Son of Perdition. Answ. This word here [Man of Sin] doth not respect the sin∣gleness of the Person, but the nature of the Antichrist: He shall be a Man, or succession of Men, which shall be full of Sin, a Man of
Sin, as if there was nothing but Sin in him. As Christ is called a Man of Sorrows, to shew that his whole Life was full of Sorrows: So the whole state of Antichrist is a state of Sin. A Man of Sin, 'tis an apparent Hebraism, 'tis one given up to commit Iniquity. We reade of Men of Knowledg, of Patience, a Man of Strife; which are Persons arrived above the common pitch: So he is called a Man of Sin, also Son of Perdition, one past all hopes of Honesty. Secondly, It cannot be one single Person, as some of the Fathers suppose, or one of the Tribe of Dan, a Jew which shall rise in Jeru∣salem; he must not be a Jew, but a pretended Christian. And the City cannot be Jerusalem, because she is not built on seven Hills; nor can Antichrist be one single Person, because we find he had a being in the Apostles days, 2 Thess. 2. 7. For the mystery of Iniquity doth already work. And this mystery of Iniquity will continue un∣til the coming of Christ, whom he shall destroy, ver. 8. Now surely this Person, if a single Man, must be very Aged, that should be in the Apostles days, and continue till Christ come in the Flesh the second time: What is his Name? Where doth he dwell? It is ridiculous so to think. You see therefore it must intend a succession of Men, and not one single Person. Object. 3. Rome Christian cannot be Antichrist: Because the Apostle St. Paul saith, that Antichrist, that Man of Sin, was in his days, 2 Thess. 2. 7. But he whom the Apostle speaketh of, Rev. 17. 10. was not then in being by your own account, which you say must be the Antichrist. Answ. 'Tis true, Antichrist was then in being: But though he was then in being, he was not then revealed, as the Apostle phraseth it, 2 Thess. 2. 8. he had not arrived to his full Power, which is that the Apostle St. John means, when he saith, Five are fallen, one is, and the other is not: Not that he meaneth he had no beginning; no, for he tells us he had, in that phrase, Rev. 17. 8. The Beast that was, is not, and yet is: He is, saith the Apostle, yet is not: He is an In∣fant, but not a Man. Antichrist began to work in the Apostles days, 1 John 2. 22. but was not revealed, in full power, had not ten Kings to assist him, till that which did let, was taken out of the way, which was the Roman Empire, which many Learned did believe; therefore prayed that the Empire might stand, that Antichrist might be kept out. But the reason why the Apostle might not name the Heathen Emperor, was, because in all probability Persecution would have issued from Nero (then in Power) against the Christians; and that it was the Heathen Emperor did let Antichrist from being
revealed, is the opinion of many of the Learned, even some of the Church of Rome, Cyril, Chrysostom, Tertullian, the famous Bishop of Hippo, Theodorus: see a Book called, The Man of Sin, pag. 9, 10. As the Babylonian Monarchy must make roome for the Persian, that for the Macedonian, and that for the Roman: So the Roman must make way for the Man of Sin, Antichrist, the Beast, and he at last must make way for Christ. So that though Antichrist was in the Apostles days, yet he was then but as an Infant, by degrees he grew more and more, till he came to his perfection; to have ten Horns, ten Kings, which gave their power to him according to the Prophecy. Having thus proved that Rome is that Mystery Babylon, and Mother of Harlots, I now come to shew what a Harlot she is. First, She is a close, secret, cunning Harlot: Well may the Apostle call her the mystery of Iniquity, or iniquity in a Mystery; or Mystery Babylon, or Babylon in a Mystery. The Apostle doth well describe her, Rev. 13. 11. The Beast that came out of the Earth had two Horns like a Lamb, but a Voice like a Dragon. She pretended to be like Christ, but she really is like the Dragon, the Devil, from whom she hath her power; she hath a form, a shew of Godliness, but the power of Ungodliness: She hath the name of a Christian, but, like Sardis, is dead indeed. She is in a counterfeit shew Christ's Vicar, Christ's Vicegerent; in presumption a Fellow-mate, in purpose an Adversary. She hides the greatest Impieties under the name of Piety; and in∣deed she gets her Riches by her Cunning. Not a little of her Cun∣ning and Craft is discovered in making that a Principle. That the Publick Worship should be performed in a Language unknown to the People. And the Pope knows what he doth well enough: For seeing there are so many Idolatries, Errors, and Heresies, in the Mass-Book, 'tis better to be in Latin, than in the Mother-tongue, least it should be discovered, and the People come to know their Delusions. But if you please to reade 1. Cor. 14. the Apostle Paul condemns these Principles throughout the whole Chapter. And indeed no less is Antichrist's Subtilty discovered in his inven∣tion of Purgatory; a place that they say the pains are as sharp, but not as eternal as the pains of Hell. But for as much as the Scripture speaks not one word of Purgatory, but only Heaven and Hell, one for the Godly, and the other for the Ungodly, how dares the Pope to invent such a place! O, Beloved, half his Religion, if not half his Gains, depends upon it. Therefore the Pope hath cunningly determined that there is a Fire. (which is not in the very Hell of all)
where souls after this Life are purged from Sins, and that by the help of Masses, Dirges, and Prayers, these may be pardoned and deli∣vered out of those Torments, especially if they leave the Pope a good round sum of Money to procure Indulgences, and have a Mass-Priest to pray for their souls. Again, Her Cunning is seen in her pretence of having things im∣possible to be seen and had; their lies further appear in that. They say, they can produce the Fore-skin of our Saviour, after Circumcision; the Platter Christ eat the Paschal Lamb in; the Chal∣lice Christ gave the Sacrament in; yea, the Towel he wiped himself withal at Supper. Surely it was made of good Flax. So the Water∣pots, wherein the Water was turned to Wine in Cana of Galilee; yea, the Cross, and also the Nails that nailed Christ to the Cross, if you will believe them. The Text saith, one Man carried the Cross: Yet Calvin saith, They have so much Timber, which they pretend to be Christ's Cross, that a Horse cannot carry it, nay, not many Horses. Can you imagine they can shew the Virgin Mary's Hair, her Comb, upper and under Garments, yea, her Milk also: John Baptist's Head, Bones, yea, the Finger that pointed at Christ when he said, Behold the Lamb of God! John 1. 29. also St. Peter's Jaw-bone, his Beard, one of his Teeth, his Chair, Garments, Altar, and a hundred Reliques more if needful. Again, They have Holy Water, Holy Oyl, Spittle, Salt, Beads, and those other Superstitions, for which not one word can be found. But what faith the Pope to them? Can he make no use of them? Yes; hereby we pick the Pockets of credulous Fools; hereby we get their Money, and give them bits of Virgins Wax, fine Beads, Toys for Children to play with: For all which she receives good and law∣ful Money. Thus she is a cunning Harlot. 2. She is a Blasphemous Harlot, Rev. 17. 3. Ʋpon her Head was the names of Blasphemy, Rev. 13. 5. A Mouth speaking great things, and blasphemous, ver. 6. He opened his mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his Name, and his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in Hea∣ven. 'Tis said, he had not only the Name, but Names of blasphe∣my: He is not content with one Name, as Nebuchadnezzar, Epi∣phanius, Domitian, his Predecessors were: but this Beast as he was to succeed in their Room, so he was to inherit their Nature, and out∣do them in the worst of their Actions. Now he may be said to open his Mouth in blasphemy against God, two ways: 1. Either denying the very Beingof God, as Pharaoh, and Sennache∣rib, saying, Who is the Lord, that we should obey him? Or,
2. When frail Men shall intrude into the Place of God, by assuming to themselves some of his Divine and Incommunicable Attributes. Thus the Prince of Tyre blasphemed God, when he said, I am a God, I sit in the Seat of God, Ezek. 29. 2, 4, 7. This description St. Paul gives of the Man of Sin, 2 Thess. 2. 4. He exalts himself not only above Magistrates, called Gods, but declares and labours to demonstrate that he is God, by pretending to a God-like Power, to pardon Sin, and offer up a propitiatory Sacrifice in their un∣bloody Mass: yea, to absolve from Laws, dispence with Oaths, to be Infallible, and the like. Which Title and Power whoever dares assume to himself, the same is Antichrist, a Blasphemer, and conse∣quently a Beast. This the Pope doth assume, therefore he is the Beast, and Antichrist. Take some further Instances of their Blasphemy: The Gloss saith, he that denieth the Pope's Obedience, lieth under the same Sentence of Damnation, as he that denieth the Almighty Power of God. Stapleton, an English Jesuit, styl'd Pope Gregory the 13th, The Great, most Gracious and Soveraign God on Earth. The Sicilian Ambassadors coming to ask Pardon of Martin the 4th, delivered their Supplication, by saying three times, O Lamb of God, which takest away the Sin of the World. Again, 'Tis Heresie to think that our Lord God the Pope, hath no power to decree as he hath decreed. And the Canonists say, one Article of the Popish Creed is, That the power of Indulgences was left by Christ, and that the use of them is very available to Salvation. Secondly, She blasphemeth the Tabernacle of God. 1. This may either signifie the Church of God, which oftentimes is called the House of God, over which the Beast doth sinfully assume a Power. Or, 2. It holds forth the Humane Nature of Christ, which the Au∣thor to the Hebrews doth elegantly call it, because it was the true Tabernacle which the Lord had pitched, and not Man, which is blasphemed, when the merit of those Sufferings which God himself underwent in the Humane Nature is lessened, and Christ's Blood not accounted sufficient to cleanse from Sin, without something added by Men to inch out its value. Nay, these Blasphemers do take away the property of each Nature in Christ; the Godhead is Infinite, the Humane Nature, Finite. The Pope doth set out the Deity of the Father in Pictures and Images, and doth imagine the Humane Na∣ture of Christ to be in many places at once: With this shift, Is any thing too hard for God? So he forges a Finite Divinity, and an Infi∣nite Humanity. He doth also confess in words, that Chirst is Just
and Merciful, but in deed doth indirectly deny both. For perfect Justice doth not admit of imperfect Satisfaction, that's humane; and perfect Mercy doth not grant imperfect Pardon. Christ doth not remit the Fault, and retain the Punishment. The Pope doth teach indirectly, that imperfect Satisfaction and Pardon is performed by Christ to the Faithful, and so makes Christ a plain Idol. Thirdly, Those that dwell in Heaven, saith the Text, are Blasphe∣med, Rev. 13. 6. They are Angels, or departed Saints. Now when any thing is done to them that are in Heaven, which they would not own on Earth, is to blaspheme them. You know when the Men of Lystra, Acts 14. 14. offered to worship St. Paul and Barnabas, which had the excuse of an amazing Miracle to justifie them, yet 'tis said, they rent their Clothes: Which was usual in cases of Blasphemy, 2 Kings 18. 37. So when St. John would have worshipped the Angel, said he, I am thy Fellow-Servant: Worship God, Rev. 22. 8, 9. So the Son of God himself appearing unto Manoah in the shape of an Angel, would not have sacrifice offered to him, but said, If thou offer an Offering, offer it to God. Yet one Article of the Popes Creed is, I do hold that the Saints reigning with Christ, are to be worshipped and invocated; that they offer up their Prayers to God for us, and that their Reliques are to be wor∣shipped. When they pray to St. Gregory, they say, Let him save us from our Sins, that in Heaven with the Saints we may rest. So of St. Peter, and St. Paul, Grant that by both their Merits, we may obtain the the glory of Eternity. Again, O Queen of Heaven most mild, dearest Mother to thy Child. Despise me not, O Dust, in thee alone I trust. God's sweet Heart springing, and Star of Grace, Think on me still, till I have run my Race. We do thee praise, and beg always, Christ Jesus's Mother dear; That thou attend, and us defend From sad Death, which we fear. Again, O, Mary, the Mother of Grace and Mercy, defend us from our Ene∣mies, and receive us in the hour of Death. O holy Cross, our only hope, increase our Righteousness. O Saint, saith the holy Servant of Christ, prepare for us the Glory which thou hast merited. O Prince Gabriel, be on our side against the Wicked, and all that work Iniquity. Jaspar, Mel∣chior, and Belthazar, with all the twelve Apostles, help me in my necessity.
Thus they invocate the Saints and Angels, which is proper only to God: Call upon me in the day of trouble, Psal. 50. 15. Reliques Invocated. A Prayer to the Cross. O, Cross, our only hope, all hail Now on this Passion Day, Make good mens Goodness more prevail, Take Sinners guilt away. Devotion to a Rag. A piece of Linnen, they say, that wiped our Saviour's Face when he sweat in his Passion, on which the lively picture of his Face was imprinted, if you will believe it. All hail our Redeemer, the most holy Face, Wherein doth shine the beauty of Divinest Grace; Imprinted on a Snow-white Cloth by th' Power above, And on the Vernacle beside, as pledg of Love. Be to us, we thee pray, a Buckler, and Relief, A sweet Refreshment, and great comfort from our Grief; That Foes may never hurt us, but we still the same, May heavenly rest enjoy for evermore, Amen. Thirdly, The Church of Rome is a proud Harlot. This appears in that she cannot be satisfied without Ruling and Reigning over mens Bodies and Souls, yea, over the best Kings and Princes in the World; and all under pretence that the Pope is St. Peter's Successor. Which makes nothing for him if he were, but against him, for St. Peter tells us, that Bishops must not be Lords over God's Heritage, 2 Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Christ alone is the chief Shepherd of the Sheep. Therefore Shepherds are so far from being Lords over God's Heritage, that they are to be Servants; as Christ saith, He that will be greatest among you, let him be a Servant: As Christ commanded Peter, to feed his Lambs and Sheep, John 21. 15, 16, 17. Shep∣herds have an equal Power here under Christ, and he is the Head of all. See Ephes. 1. 22. Col. 1. 18. Besides, St. Peter exhorts to a subje∣ction to Kings, and Kingly Government, 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14, 15. such as are a Terror to evil doers, and a praise to them that do well. But the Pope is so unlike St. Peter, that he tells us he hath power to dispos∣sess Princes, if they will not root out such as he calls Hereticks.
Pope Alexander the third, made one of the Emperors fall down before him in the Temple of St. Mark, at Venice, all the People be∣ing present, putting his beastly Foot on his Neck, and uttered these words of the Psalmist, Thou shalt tread on the Lion and the Adder, the young Lion and Adder thou shalt trample under foot. The usages of King Henry the second, and King John, do very plainly prove his Usurpation over Kings. They did what they could against Queen Elizabeth, when they Excommunicated her, and they would have dispossessed her of the Kingdom, they did what they could by their Invincible Armada (as the Pope christened it) in 1588. but through God's Goodness it proved Vincible. When the Scripture tells us we must be subject to the higher Powers, which are Magistrates and Princes, Rom. 13. 1, 2, 3. &c. The Pope exempts himself and all his Clergy, (Priests, Monks, Friars, Jesuits, Nuns, and all Religi∣ous Persons) from the Jurisdiction of the Civil Magistrates, and takes upon him to absolve all their Subjects from their Oath of Alle∣giance (if they do not please him) and give away their Kingdoms and Dominions to others, that will submit to him, and do him bet∣ter service: As Gregory did spoil Leo the third, in taking from him all the Government of the West. Again, her Pride is seen in laying the Sriptures of God so low, and trampling upon them. The Coun∣cil of Trent saith, That holy Council was to have the same Veneration and Honour as the Scripture. And we read in their Decrees, That the Doctrine of the Christian Religion, is rather taken from the Popes mouth than the Scripture. 'Tis they that have pronounced the Apocrypha Authentick, which was not written by the Prophets, nor received by the Jewish Church. And how often do they take from, and add to the Scripture? Yea, say they, the Scripture owes its Authority to the Church; and she is superiour to it: And none are Command∣ments of Christ, but such as are accounted so by the Church; and that Tradition is the very rule of Truth, and the Pope's Instructions better than the Scripture, say the Decrees. The Scripture is a dumb and dead Thing, and the tale of Christ, saith Leo the tenth. No less is his pride seen, when he calls himself the Founda∣tion, Head, Husband, Lion of the Tribe of Judah, the Root of David. And though the Scriptures speak sufficiently of their own clear∣ness, Psal. 19. 7. 2 Tim. 3. 15, 16, 17. &c. Yet Antichrist is of another mind, he saith they are very ambiguous in their meaning, and may be twisted any way, like a Nose of Wax, or Leaden Ru∣ler; therefore 'tis not for the Common People to look into them, lest they are poisoned with Errors and Heresies; and (say
they) the Scripture is defective in many things, and there is much more of the Mind of God to be known than in the Scripture, which is conveyed down by unwritten Traditions. Now those truths in which the Scripture is defective, are such as these; the Offering on the Altar, Sacrifice, Invocation of Saints, Prayers for the Dead, the Primacy of the Bishops of Rome above Kings and Princes, the Sacra∣ments of Confirmation, Orders, Matrimony, Penance, Extream Unction, Merits of Works, Auricular Confessions, and many more weighty and necessary truths, say they, which must be supplied by Tradition, because the Scripture is silent in them, and I question not but ever will. Will you hear the Decree of the Council of Trent, That Traditions are to be received with the same pious affection as the holy Scripture. O pride, above all pride! One Marta expounds that saying, in Psal. 8. 6, 7, 8. Thou hast put under his feet (the Popes) all Sheep and Oxen, Christians and Sarazens, Fowls of the Air, the Angels in Hea∣ven, the Fishes in the Sea, and Souls in Purgatory. Again, In the Year of Jubilee, the Pope is carried in Procession in a Chair of State, a sumptuous Canopy born over his Head by Kings and Nobles: He is a King over all the Children of Pride. His Pride is Illustrated in his endeavouring to have the whole World at his command, and to wear his Mark in their Foreheads, and Hands. She hath but too many Souls that have received this Mark. So Rev. 11. 3. The World wandred after the Beast, ver. 16. He causeth all, both Rich and Poor, Small and Great, Free or Bond, to receive a Mark in their right Hand, or in their Foreheads; and that no Man might buy or sell, but he that hath the Mark, or the name of the Beast, or the number of his Name. In Rev. 17. 1. her pride is painted out there to the life, she sits upon many Waters, that is, People, Multitudes, Nations, and Tongues. Ver. 3. And I saw a Woman sit upon a Scarlet-coloured Beast, full of names of blasphemy, having seven Heads and ten Horns. Seven Heads, which is seven forms of Government; and ten Horns, ten Kings, that gave their power to the Beast. The Woman is the City; the Beast is Anti∣christ; her Names of Blasphemy you have heard. The Beast is cal∣led a Scarlet-coloured Beast, to shew her sins are of a very deep Dye; they are Scarlet-sins, and accompanied with the greatest Impe∣nitency. Fourthly, Her Character: She is an Idolatrous Harlot: Which is made manifest in her worshipping of Images: And that she may do this with the more ease, they have taken away wholly the second Com∣mandment
out of their Bibles. And lest the People should miss one, they divide the Tenth into two. And when they are urged with the breach of the second Commandment, they say, 'Tis not Images we are forbidden to worship, but 'tis a Thing in the Original. Suppose that be true, Is not an Image a thing? Notwithstanding this second Commandment, they set up Images (in their publick places of Wor∣ship) of the Virgin Mary, of St. Winifred, of God like an old gray-headed Man sitting in a Chair, and of the Trinity like a strange Mon∣ster with three Faces, before which the People fall down and wor∣ship. O horrid Idolatry! And that they might make the World be∣lieve this is lawful, though forbidden in Scripture, they feign that Christ in the thirty first Year of his Age, himself sent his own Image to King Abdager, and made it also by Miracle on the Handkerchief of St. Veronica, and on his own shroud. He that will believe it may. This we might have put among the popish Lyes and Forgeries. And therefore the Nicene Council anathematizes Image-breakers (that is, such as shall break them in contempt or scorn) and all such as alledg the places of Scripture which are against Idols, against their sacred Images. 'Tis one of the Articles of the Popes Creed, I do hold that the Images of Christ, ever blessed Virgin, and all other Saints, are to be had and adored with due worship. They commit Idolatry at Mass also, when they shall bow to a Wafer, as if it were a God, after Consecration: also they make Me∣diators of Saints and Angels, though the Apostle Paul speaks so very plainly, that there is but one Mediator between God and man, the Man Christ Jesus, 1 Tim. 2. 5. The Pope hath found out a great many. The Virgin Mary is prayed to, that she would command her Son to have mercy on them: For as one of the Jesuits saith, The Virgin's milk is as precious as the Blood of Christ. And as for what St. Paul saith in this Case, 'tis not much to be heeded: For as one Canon in the Decretal saith, St. Paul spoke against all Reason and Truth; and others have said, That if the Apostle St. Paul be not warily ex∣pounded, he will smell of Heresie; and that St. Paul's Epistles have need of a Roman Commentary. But may we not be too bold to come to Christ, and by him to God the next away? Would it not be more decent and mannerly to come by Angels: As when we come to a King, we make use of Courtiers to get access to the presence Chamber. But the Scripture plainly tells us, we must come to God by Christ alone, John 14. 6. Besides, what will it avail us to go to God by Saints? they cannot hear our R∣quests, neither know they our Wants, nor can supply them, Heb. 4. 15.
Fifthly, She is a Drunken, Blood thirsty, Cruel, Inhumane Harlot: Not without cause is she called the Scarlet-coloured Beast, having drunk so much of the Blood of the Saints and Martyrs of Jesus. Rev. 6. 9, 10, 11. And when he had opened the fifth Seal, I saw under the Altar the Souls of them that were slain for the Word of God, and for the testimony that they held. And they cried with a loud voice, saying, How long, O Lord, Holy and True, dost not thou judg and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the Earth? Rev. 17. 4. These came out of great Tribulation. Rev. 16. 6. For they have shed the blood of Saints and Prophets. Rev. 18. 20. Rejoyce over her thou Heaven, and ye holy Apostles and Prophets; for God hath avenged you on her. Ver. 24. And in her was found the blood of Prophets, and of Saints, and of all that were slain on the Earth. This further confirmed: For under Charles the Ninth of France, more than thirty thousand Protestants were slain in one Month, Anno 1572. Bellarmin confesseth, that an hundred thousand of the Albigenses were slain in one day, under Pope Innocent the Third. Let me here call in the Powder-Plot against England 1605, for a Witness to this truth. Let me not forget the many thousands Ameri∣cans, whose guilt was their Gold. Also that Inquisition of the Duke of Alva in the Netherlands, which he called the Council of Blood, where were above fifty thousand Christians murdered at once. Will not Ireland witness for me here, where were about three hundred thousand Massacred, Starved and Drowned, whose Blood calls aloud to be reckoned for? So in Piedmont, how many quiet peaceable souls were murdered there? Shall I not bring in their Design of firing London, Semptember 2. 1666, as a Witness in this matter? Let me not forget Sir Edmond-bury Godfry, who will in the great Day of Judgment come in against this Church, and prove her a Blood-thirsty Harlot, yea, the Mother of Harlots. I would not have you forget this last Conspiracy, in some part (blessed be God) discovered. Sixthly, She is a Lying dissembling Harlot: Which appears in her pretended Miracles. And this is one sign and mark the Apostle gives of Antichrist, 2 Thess. 2. 9, 10. Even him whose coming is after the working of Satan, with all Power, and Signs, and Lying Wonders, and with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that perish. Rev. 13. 14. He doth great Wonders, insomuch that he maketh Fire come down from Heaven on the Earth, in the sight of Men. And that you may not think this is real, but only seeming, in the 14th vers. the Apostle saith, He deceiveth them that dwell on the Earth.
Bellarmine, and some others, would not have the Pope and Rome, to be this mystery of Iniquity: because, saith he, the Pope never brings down Fire from Heaven in the sight of men. Answer. But the Pope pretends to it, or as bad, if you will believe their Legends: How often by them are Images counterfeited to move, to sweat, to nod, to speak, in the account of poor simple Men and Women, that they may be assured to the worshipping of those Images they see. See a Book called, A Looking-Glass for the Pope. The Devil did often speak in the Images of Heathen Rome; and no doubt but the Devil doth some∣times speak in the Images of Mystery Babylon. Now the Apostle Paul calls them Lying Wonders and Signs. 1. In respect to the End, because they serve to seduce Men. 2. Called so in respect of the Matter: For they are either the counterfeits of Lying Men, or the Wonders of Deceitful Spirits. 3. In respect of the Form: For whereas true Miracles exceeded Nature, and were wrought by the Omnipotent Power of God, false Wonders are those that are effected by Natural Causes, and partly by the power of Satan. The Miracles of the first kind have been infinite in the dark Kingdom of Antichrist; the Apparitions of Spirits, the Visions of Angels, our Lady Mary; How often hath she been com∣ing gliding out of Heaven? How often have the miserable Souls crept puling out of Purgatory, besetting High-ways, and recount∣ing their Torments, to procure Men to pity them. Hence the Mar∣ket of Purgatory is grown so very gainful. How often have Images walked on foot, if you will believe it, the Bells struck alone with∣out help, the Angels like Choristers chant it in Canterbury Minister, and play upon Dunstan's Harp; the Apostles to come down from Heaven, to help Basil to say Mass? These Lying Miracles were feign∣ed by Cheating Priests, to confirm strange Lyes, and cozen simple People of their Coyne: For how often hath a Spirit been appre∣hended by a Magistrate, Angels stript, and our Lady sent to her Cell? All of them have been notably whipt, so that they had bet∣ter have been in Purgatory. These had a shew of Miracles, but were not really so. Nay, how have they pretended to confirm their Mass with Miracles, and the Transubstantiation? Witness that Pillar of Fire from Heaven falling to the Earth upon that place, whereby the negligence of the Priest, as the Legend doth report, the Body of God fell out of the Pix upon the Grals, that Pillar of Fire shining like the Sun about the Body of God, so that all the Beasts of the Field (except one black Horse which bended but two) bended all their four
Legs to the Body of God. This is like the rest of her Miracles. Pray see a few of their own Authors against their pretended Miracles. Lyranus saith, The People in our Church are grievously guld with Miracles, the Priests fain for worldly Gain. So Ludovicus Vives, a learned Papist, saith, There be those who thought it a piece of Piety to tell Lyes for Religion. Saith Chrysostom, Miracles were of good use in the Apostles days, but of none now: But because there is none now, think not there were none then. St. Augustin saith, He that asketh now for a Prodigie, or Miracle, is a Prodigie himself. Theophilact, speaking of the Miraculous Gifts of the Holy Ghost, saith, They were ceased long a-go. So Erasmus saith, That the gifts of Miracles are now ceased. The Colledg of Paris, in a Writing in 1389. saith, Miracles ought to be suspected, since our Lord saith, Mat. 24. False Prophets shall arise. From whence I infer from this last Mark, That whoever pretends to work Miracles, which are nothing else but Lyes and Impostures, is Antichrist: But the Church of Rome doth so pretend, yet nothing but Lyes is the bottom of it; Therefore the Church of Rome is this Antichrist, this Beast, this Man of Sin, this Mother of Harlots, and Abominations of the Earth. Seventhly, The Mother of Harlots, the Church of Rome, is a cross crooked Harlot. The Holy Ghost saith one thing, she another quite contrary. The Spirit saith, 'Tis lawful for all sorts and degrees of men to Marry: But Antichrist forbids it, and saith, That the Priests must not, though Whoredom probably may pass, or else six thou∣sand Infants Sculls had not been found in the Pope's Pond. And a Book in Henry the Eighth's days, represents to the King, that there were one hundred thousand Whores made by the unmarried Clergie. And Pope Joan had a Bastard, proving her self the Literal Whore of Babylon. They say 'tis much less sin for a Priest to have many Whores, than have one Wife; and he that hath no Wife, but in stead of that a Whore, may not for that be suspended the Communion. Many In∣stances we might give. At Bath, one Monk had seven Whores, three married, four single, and was a Sodomite to boot. At Monk-fairlee, the Prior had nine Whores, and the Convent many more. At Maiden∣bradly, the Prior had five Whores, and six Bastards.
Many more Instances might be given; but let these suffice: Here are too many of these. Again, God saith that all our Righteousness is as filthy Rags and men∣struous Clothes: But the Pope saith, That our good Works do properly merit Salvation; so that God would not be Just, did he not reward our good Works with Heaven: And that we have ability to do all that God com∣mands, and more too, so that we may merit for our selves and others. These are Works of Supererogation. Look but into the Lives of the Popes, and you will see this confirmed backward. Again, Christ in his last Institution, said, Drink all of this Cup, all my Disciples: But the Pope saith, The People must be contented with half the Sacrament, which is enough for the poor inferiour sort of People; the Priest alone must drink of the Cup. Again, The Scripture never speaks of the Minister's Communica∣ting by himself: But this the Church of Rome doth, which they call private Mass. See what the Scripture saith to this, 1 Cor. 10. 16. But 'tis enough for the People to stand and gaze on the Priest (saith the Pope) while he mumbles over his Latine, saying some∣thing they know not what, and doing something they care not what, and drinking something they taste not, and yet 'tis a Communion for all this. Again, The Scripture saith, That the Heavens must retain Christ's Body, till the time of the Restitution of all things. But the Pope saith (and is not this a cross Harlot) that as soon as the Priest hath said these few words, Hoc est Corpus meum, This is my Body, that the Bread and Wine are transubstantiated into the same Body of Christ, that was born of the Virgin Mary, and hung upon the Cross: When if People did but believe their own Eyes, Taste, and Feeling, they must needs conclude 'tis nothing but a Wafer, which the Priest makes many scores of, and consecrates at the same time: And though this be done in a thousand places besides, so many Bodies Christ must have. O horrid! O sensless! and unreasonable! that a man cannot be a Papist, but he must become a Beast. Again, The Word of God saith, That Christ by his own Offering, hath for ever perfected those that are Sanctified, Heb. 10. 12, 14. Heb. 9. 24, 25, 26. But this cross Harlot saith, That Christ is offered up once every day as an Unbloody Sacrifice for the Quick and the Dead, to fetch souls out of Purgatory; and every time the Priest lifts up the Wafer, he makes an Attonement for the sins of the People: But 'tis dangerous to trust to that Atonement. 'Tis an Article in the Pope's Creed, I profess that there is offered up in the Mass to God, a true
proper and propitiatory Sacrifice for the Quick and Dead. The Scrip∣ture is full and clear, that Christ's Propitiatory Sacrifice for sin in number is but one, Heb. 10. 14. For Time, but once offered; the Priest was himself alone: the Place, upon the Cross: the Manner, not Unbloody, but Bloody: for the Virtue, Exceeding, Effectual: For what reason then doth the Pope devise another Propitiatory Sacri∣fice, I know not, except it be to fill his Coffers. Yea, they give the same Honour to their departed Saints as to Christ. Thus they speak of Gregory, Let him save us from our Sins. 'Tis true what some say, Christ can hardly be discerned from the Apostles. Again, O blessed Mother, sanctifie us from our Sins, by the right of Mother, command a Redeemer. So she forbids Meats, 1 Tim. 14. 1, 2, 3, 4. in Lent, and other times, which God hath commanded to be received with Thanksgiving; And is not this a perverse Harlot? Eightly. This Harlot is an impenitent, yet a secure Harlot; not∣withstanding all the Blood she hath shed, and all the Judgments threatned, she is yet secure and impenitent, and will be like Babylon of old, that Type of Mystical Babylon, Isa. 47. 7. Thou sayest thou shalt be a Lady for ever. So Rev. 18. 7. For she saith in her Heart, I sit as a Queen, I am no Widow, and shall see no Sorrow. And as God plagued Imperial Rome with sending the Goths and Vandals to burn up their City: So God will plague Mystery Babylon, yet she will not repent of her Fornication. Rev. 16. 8, 9, 10. Men are scorch∣ed with Fire, and great heat shall be their Judgment. But how will they behave themselves? Do they repent and beg for Mercy? No, They blaspheme more and more the Name of God, which had power over those Plagues, and they repented not to give him Glory. Ver. 11. They blasphemed the God of Heaven, because of their Pains, and their Sores, and repented not of their Deeds. No, they could not, for they were judicially hardned in their Sins. So in Rev. 11. 18. when Judgment is poured down upon them, they are angry, they fret and vex, they cannot have their Will on God as they have had on his Saints. So in Rev. 9. 20. The rest of the men that were not killed by those Plagues, yet repented not of the Works of their Hands, that they should not worship Devils, and Idols of Gold, Silver and Brass, Stone, and of Wood: which neither can see, nor bear, nor walk. Ver. 21. Neither repented they of their murders, (mark that) nor of their Sorceries, nor of their Fornication, nor of their Thefts. Thus you see she is an impenitent Whore, a brazen-faced Harlot, she is not ashamed of any thing she hath done against God, or his People.
Ninthly, She is a Superstitious Harlot; full of Ceremonies that Christ never gave any Toleration for. Out of what Evangelist did Christ command your Altar? Did not he Administer the Sacrament at a Table, in all probability? Where do you find any other Gar∣ments that Christ wore, than his usual Garments, when he Instituted the Sacrament? Why do your Priests then wear so many foolish an∣tick Garments, more fit for a Stage-player, than a Minister of Christ? Which of the Apostles wore the Amis, or Linnen-Vail, or Albe? Who commanded you to wear a Girdle, in signification of that Cord (you say) Christ was bound in the Garden withal? the Maniple that bound Christ to the Piller? The Stole, a Cord by which Christ was led to be Crucified with? I do not remember I have read of such a Cord in the Scripture, neither do I find any Chalice the Apostles used, nor a Pattin, or Altar-Clothes, Corporal or Pall. Where did Christ ever say the Sacrament is for three sorts of Men; those in Heaven to encrease Glory; them in Purgatory, to free them from pain; them on Earth, to encrease Grace? or the Ministers going back three steps from an Altar, in token of Christ's prostrating him∣self? Where did the Priest learn to beat his Brest at Mea culpa, and to bow at the Confiteor, and to kiss the Altar? Where do you find in God's Word the Introit? In what Chapter do you find the Kyrie Eleison, to repeat nine times, Lord have mercy upon us; three times to the Father, three times to the Son, three times to the Holy Ghost? What Book in the Scripture do you find Prayers called the Collects, or that Allelujah is repeated at Easter, more than any other time of the Year? Where is the Trackt to be found; that is, to be read with a slow and a long Voice? Where did any of the Apostles reade the Gospel at the North-end of the Altar, or St. Peter, or St. Paul, sign the Book with the sign of the Cross? Or the Minister and People sign themselves in three places with the sign of the Cross, on the Forehead, on the Mouth, and on the Brest? Where do we find Christ wash his Fingers just after the Sacraments Institution, as your Priests do? In what Epistle do you find the Apostles adore the Bread and Wine that were in his Hand when he Administer'd it? Where have you any Office of the Virgin Mary consecrated in Scripture, as Hymns, Psalms, Canticles, Antiphones, Versicles, Responsories, and Prayers, which you divide the Virgins Office in? Not in holy Writ, I am sure. Who bid you beg for the assistance of the Virgin Mary, to perform your service to God's Glory? Where did the Apostles ever pray that God would pardon their negligence in the service of the blessed Vir∣gin? What Rule have you for keeping a Feast in remembrance of
our Saviour's Birth, or for the observation of Circumcision, or Epiphany day? What Rule have you for blessing your Candles you use in your Worship? and why must the Day call'd Candleman-Day, be the day above all others? So we may ask a Rule for the keeping of Ascension-Day, Pentecost, Trinity, Sunday, Corpus Christi, Trans∣figuration Day, as you call it? Who commanded this, I pray? The Pope, not Christ. So Advent-Sunday, the four Lords-Days which precede Christmas-Day (as you say): Where do you find that the Apostles observed those four Days which preceded the Resurrection of Christ, Septuagesima, Sexagestma, Quigesima, Quadra∣gesima, hard words for the Simple to understand? Which are four days of Penance and Mortification. Where do you find a Lent com∣manded by Christ? In what Chapter is Palm Suny, or Passion Sun∣day mentioned? or Low-Sunday? Who taught you to keep a Feast, and solemnly observe the Conception, Nativity, Presentation, Annunciation, Visuation, and Assumption of the blessed Virgin? Where is any time in Scripture set apart for the People to confess their Sins to a Priest? Where are any holy Ashes spoken of in Scripture to be used on the Forehead on Ash-Wednesday? These and forty more Ceremonies I could recount, that the Church of Rome practiseth; all which prove her to be a Superstitious Harlot. Let the Church of Rome prove that she hath received those Ceremonies from the Spirit of God, as she pretends, and I will own them too. Tenthly, I might show that this Harlot is a rich Harlot. See what Rev. 18. throughout, saith, The Merchants of this City which were made Rich by her, they seeing her Destruction, shall say, Alas! alas! that great City! which was clothed in fine Linnen, and Purple, and Scarlet, and decked with Gold, and precious Stones, and Pearls. Her Worldly Pomp she hath in her present Church state, even among the Clergy only, is quite out of the reach of the best Arithmeticians. Add to this that of Experience, and it will shew us that when that Church had her Domination in this Land, they knew where the best ground lay, as the Ruins of their Abbies do evince. APPLICATION. Is it so, that the Church of Rome is this Mystery Babylon, Mother of Harlots? Then let all the People of God that are out of it, bless God for that Mercy. Had God suffered Popery to continue in England, as it was in the Marian Days, had not thousands, and ten thousands (in all probability) of us in England, been in that False Worship, which now are freed from it? O let us bless God in Deed, with all
our Hearts, lest our Sins should let her in again upon us; as the Sins of Israel brought in the King of Assyria upon them; and not only so, but laid their City desolate, and caused God to take away their Pro∣phets, Priests, Ark, Ʋrim and Thummim, their Solemn Assemblies, Sabbaths, and appointed Feasts. Let us keep our ground that we have got against Antichrist, and stand up as Witnesses for the Lord: Though we may be slain for it, comfort your selves in this, the Wit∣nesses shall live again. 2. Let all that are in Babylon, be exhorted to take the Counsel of the Spirit of God in Rev. 18. 4. Come out of her: And that first, because she is a false Church. Whatever she pretends, as marks to denote her a true Church, she cannot be so, because National. The Church of the Jews was so indeed: But the Gospel-Church is Con∣gregational; only such to be Members of the Gospel-Church, which can give an account of the Work of Grace upon their Hearts, Acts 2. 42, 43. Acts 8. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. As little can they say for their Holiness, which they say must be in a True Church. See the Lives of many of them which have been Heads of that Church, I mean the Popes; some have been Drunkards, some Whore-mongers, Thieves, given more to War than to Christ, prophane Scoffers of Christ, Murderers, Poisoners of their own Parents, calling on the Devil to help them, Players at Dice, and Drinkers of the Devil's Health, Traitors to Princes, &c. Bernard was a little moved with the Popes of Rome, when he called them Tyrants, Defrauders, Ra∣venous, Traitors, Darkness of the World, Wolves and Devils. Are these St. Peter's Successors? I am sure he never taught Men to live at this rate; neither did he live so himself. If they will have Peter's Seat, they must have Peter's Doctrine and Life. But the Church of Rome hath neither; therefore not St. Peter's Seat. And as to their pretended Miracles, we have already spoke to them. The Mahometans may as soon prove themselves Christ's Spouse upon that account, as the Church of Rome. And as to her Ʋnity, as little can be said upon that account, if we may believe History, there's some scores of Orders of Monks and Friars amongst them; and some of them have been so divided, that they Burnt one another for matters of Religion, and for different Opinions. And if you will see the Pope's Infallibility, or rather Fallibility, look into their Lives, which I just past. And as for her pretence of Visibility, if we ever behold and see the True Church (but as we look on her we shall never see her the true visible Church of Christ) it hath Christ for its Head, so hath
not the Church of Rome. All her Members are such as profess Re∣pentance from dead Works, and Faith in Christ: So do not all the Members of the Church of Rome, and 'tis impossible they should, being National. The true Visible Church observeth all Christ's Or∣dinances, have a true Baptism both in respect of Manner and Sub∣ject; so the Church of Rome hath not. The true Visible Church of Christ on Earth, may be known by these three Marks: First, A right Gathering, Acts 20. 25. not by the Sword, but by the Word. Se∣condly, A right Constitution, which consists in free Fellowship of the Doctrine of the Apostles, Acts 20. 40, 41, 42, 47. Acts 17. 4. The second thing pertaining to Church-Constitution consists in the disposing her Members to those Places to which they are fitted to serve in, 1 Cor. 12. 27. with ver. 18, 28. Acts 6, 3, 4. The third mark of the true Visible Church of Christ, is Government, accord∣ing to the Primitive Practice, which was only Spiritual, and did re∣side not in the Pastors and Elders apart from the Church, but in the Pastors together with the Church, Acts 15. 22, 25. yet so as that those to whom the Church hath committed her Power, are the In∣struments in the Name of Christ and his Church, to exercise Go∣vernment: Which Government consisteth in these things, Exhorta∣tions, Reproofs, with all Long-suffering and Doctrine, 2 Tim. 4. 2. And if this prevail not with Offenders, then is the power of Excom∣munication to be exercised, according to Mat. 18. 17, 18. 1 Cor. 5. 3, 4, 5. But can any of these Marks be found in the Church of Rome? No, she makes Members by the Sword, as the True Church by the Word; She forceth them to be of her Religion. Whereas Members of the true Visible Church are Volunteers, 2 Cor. 8. 5. Rome's Government is by the Sword, not by God's Word; 'tis Car∣nal, not Spiritual, as the Government of Christ's Church is: There∣fore you see she is still the false Church, the Mother of Harlots, what ever she pretends. In the last place. Come out of Babylon those that are in her: And you that are out, keep out; because if you partake of her Sins, you will partake of her Plagues. Take an account of them in several Threatnings of God against her: the Apostle calls upon us in Rev. 17. 1. to see the Iudgment of the great Whore, that sitteth upon many Waters. In this Judgment they shall kill one another, Rev. 6. 4. making good that Prophecy in Rev. 17. where 'tis said that God shall put it into the Hearts of the ten Horns, the ten Kings, to hate the Whore, to burn her Flesh with Fire, and make her desolate, Rev. 18. 16. Reward her double even as she hath rewarded you: And
double unto her double according to her Works. In the Cup which she hath filled, fill to her double. The King of France, who proved so Treacherous and Cruel to the Admiral Coligny, and the Protestants in France, to the number of about an hundred thousand Massacred in a most Inhumane man∣ner; though he gloried so much in that Action, as to make certain Medals to perpetuate the Memory of it, yet the same King was in∣wardly tormented with the Horrors of a guilty Conscience, which the Effusion of so much Blood did justly raise in him, being sometimes troubled with Visions, he was often heard to say, Ah! my poor Sub∣jects, what had you done? But I was forced to it. The strange man∣ner of his Death, looked like a signal Judgment from Heaven, for that Bloody Day: For after a long Sickness, believed to be the Effect of a Lent Poison, given him by the Queen-Mother, Blood not only came out at all the Conduits of his Body, but through the very Pores; so that he was sometimes found all bathed in his own Blood: And he that made the Kingdom swim with Blood, died thus wallowing in his own. Thus wicked Men fall into the same Pit they thrust others into, and their violent dealing comes on their own Pate: As lately here in London, one Edward Coleman, a Papist, who was found to be a grand Conspirator against the Protestant Religion, intending to subvert and overthrow Religion, and the People of God, was him∣self (with divers others) taken in the said Conspiracy, Judged, Condemned, Drawn, Hanged, and Quartered, as his just Demerit for that Act and Deed, December the 3d. 1678. at Tybourn, in the view of thousands. Yet again, in Rev. 15. 5. we have an account of seven Viols, or Goblets of Gold, all filled up to the brim with the Wrath of God, which often in Scripture is compared to Wine; and because of the effects of it, called the Wine of Trembling, or Astonishment. And they are called the seven last Plagues, or Stroke: Because in them the Wrath of God is finished. Then he stirs up all his Wrath against them, that the sufferers do knaw their Tongues for pain. And well they may: For mark that in Rev. 14. 10, 11. 'tis like Zechariah's Roll, filled with Curses within and without. Those that receive the Mark of the Beast in their Forehead publickly, or in their Hand privately, shall drink of the Wine of the Wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture into the Cup of his Indignation, and they shall be tormented with Fire and Brimstone in the presence of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb: And the smoke of her Torment ascendeth up for ever and ever. They have no rest
Day nor Night, who worship the Beast and his Image, and whoso∣ever receiveth the mark of his Name. And when the Voice shall be, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, Rev. 17. 2. which shall be when she is very secure, and saith in her Heart, I sit as a Queen, and am no Widow, and shall see no Sorrow: Then shall Worldly spirited Men lament and tremble, and cry, Alas, alas, while the blessed Inhabitants that are in Heaven, the holy Apostles, Prophets, and Angels, are command∣ed to rejoyce over her destruction; for which also the Blood of the Martyred Souls under the Altar doth cry, and all their Brethren, who are yet witnessing in the Wilderness, do earnestly pray, as being then to receive a full Reward for their Labours, and to Reign with Christ, for whom they suffered. Even so, come, Lord Jesus, come quickly. POST-SCRIPT. THat the Church of Rome doth look upon shedding of the Blood of Protestants (which they call Hereticks) as Meri∣torious, let us take a view of their Practices after the Mas∣sacre in France. The News being brought to Rome, on the 6th of November, 1572. A Consistory was called of Cardinals, and the Legats Letter, that contained a Relation of the Massacre, was presently read. See Thuanus. Upon this they went straight in a Procession to St. Mark's Church, where they offered thanks to God for this great Blessing to the See of Rome, and the Catholick Church. And on Monday following, there was another Procession made by the Pope and Cardinals, to the Minerva, where they had high Mass, and then the Pope granted a Jubilee to all Christendom; and one Rea∣son was, that they should thank God for the Slaughter of the Enemies of the Church lately executed in France. Two days after that, the Cardinal of Lorrain had another great Procession of all the Clergy, the Ambassadors, Cardinals, and the Pope himself, who came to St. Lewis's Chappel, where the Cardinal Celebrated Mass himself, and in the King of France's Name, he thanked the Pope and Cardinals for their good Counsel, the Help they had given him, and the Assistance he had received by their Prayers, of which he had found most won∣derful Effects. He also delivered the King's Letters to the Pope, in which he wrote, that more Hereticks had been destroyed in that one Day, than all the twelve Years of the War.
Nor did the Pope think there was yet Blood enough shed, he sends Cardinal Ʋrsin, his Legat, in all haste to France, to thank the King for so great Service he had done the Church, and desired him to go on and extirpate Heresie, Root and Branch, that it might never grow again. And as the Legat passed on his Journey, he gave a plenary Absolution to all that had been actors in the Massacre. Besides, the best Picture-Drawers and Workers of Tapistry, were also put to work, to set off this Action with all possible glory: And a sute of these Hangings are to this day in the Pope's Chappel. So well do they like that Act, that they still preserve the Memory of it. I must confess, such a Representation does well agree with their Doctrine. FINIS. ERRATA. PAge 5. Line 35. for 11th, Reade 13th. P. 6. l. 3. for three days. r. few Months. P. 9. l. 7. for among, r. against. P. 18. l. 29. for designed, r. desi∣red. P. 23. l. 13. r. because as she is. P. 25. l. 35. for 567, r. 1567. P. 31. l. 38. f. O Saint, saith, r. O St. Sith. P. 34. l. 17. for Purgations, r. Purgatory. P. 39. l. 16. for 1 Cor. 10. 6. r. 1 Cor. 10. 16.
