C5820 R20805 12259480 57788
A Congratulatory Poem, Dedicated to his Excellency, the Ambassador, from the Emperor of Fez, and Morocco. SErene SIR, you'r Welcome to the Nation, A Man of Honour, and Splendid in your station; Whose noble worth, and ever-matchless Fame, Does cause the vulgar to applaud the same. Had th' Indian King no other Man to send But th'Duke his Brother, and his Natural Friend? Surely this love it must be reckoned high By us, pretenders to Civility; Should we not render good for good, when we (Nay, all the World) knows your Conformity: Therefore to be uncivil to a Stranger, Is like to a Dog snarling in a Manger: For, saies the Philosopher, an untaught Man Flies off from Nature, and from Reason strong; He's worse then the Beasts in doing so ill, For they act according to their Species still: So that an ignorant and rude Man's but at best, A kind of Manly unmannerly Beast; To affront a stranger out of his Country dear, That out of love comes to us about Tangier: I do protest it was so wondrous rude, That nothing could do it but th'multitude, A sort of Beasts that knows nothing but to Eat And Drink, be drunk, and then lye down and sleep. Wise Men and of understanding high, Were angry at the Multitudes folly: Whilst Noble English-men such crimes detest, And scorn to bear such thoughts within their breast: Ignorance is so great a Monster, 'tis begot Only by Eating, and by the idle Pot; Whereas Men of Learning and prudene still, Are civil to Ambassadors, 'tis their will: A rude Man is no Man, but a Glass Bottle, According to the Precepts of Aristotle: So those that affronted you are really none But Flies, and Fleas, and Scare-Bees of the Sun: Like Fish with springing Tides come up in Shoals, And night draws on the play of Batts and Owls: So may the Rabble fitly compared be To these poor Creatures of stupidity: Therefore pray Sir, let it all pass over, And don't Record it with your good Red Oker. You are a Horse-man good, a Marks-man straight, The like it has never been seen of late; With throwing of a Dart up to the Sky, Catching it again, when falling from on high, And with his Launce he runs it through a Ring, Performing of that beyond any thing;
And at a large, distance his Javelin lets flye, And shoots a Man in order for to dye: Thus is he accomplish'd in the Arts most high, Of swift, Horsman ship, and good Archery▪ Which pleas'd the King so extreamly, well, Quoth he where's the Man that can this parallel: Besides  ead your Noble Speech, Enough a great Christian for to teach. Shewing though you'r dark without, you'r Fair within▪ Innocence in action is the beauty of each thing; And  demonsstrated to us from Nature's Eye; The Star  brightest in the Cloudiest Sky, A Metaphor for your Exceliency high, Nature's great Wonder in Epitomy. We thank you therefore for your Visit fine, And as a Star in Friendships Orb doth shine: Glisten on  you go to your own Country dear, And part with poor Englands Hemisphere; And when you'r gone, this we will proclaim, You left behind you a sweet and Rosie Name: Absence in love it is a kind of Death. Before we do descend to Mother-Earth: Life's but an Embassie, having been heard, What's to be done, and what to be learn'd; It is then gone, and so vanishes away, As Mists are lost upon a Rainy day; Till the Sun breaks out afresh and agen, To chear the hearts of all the Sons of Men: Teaching how first we live, and then we dye, And so go off to all Eternity. Loves Vision. ON Candlemas-day there did repair and go To White-Hall, the Ambassador of Morooco; To see that high and most renowned place, And each fine Lord deck'd up with Golden lace; From thence he went into Westminster-Hall, There to espy and there discover all: The Courts of Justice where the Judges sit, Men great in wisdome and acute in wit. To'th' Abby he repairs, and there doth see Effigies of Nobles sent on Embassie. And so to Westminster-School he doth repair, To see that place where Learning is most rare. Pleas'd with the prospect of the famous School, That renders wise beyond each idle Fool, At last Traveller like, comes on his way, With all agility without the least delay, To his Apartment and his own dear home, As Night is struck from the departing Sun. FINIS. Printed for W. Davis, in the Year 1682.
