C7306 12259641 57811
Admirable CURIOSITIES Rarities & Wonders in England Scotland & Irland K Canutus Commanding The Sea. pa. 86 K. Henry 3. Preaching to ye Monks pa. 88
ADMIRABLE CURIOSITIES Rarities, & Wonders IN England, Scotland, and Ireland, OR, An Account of many Remarkable Per∣sons, and Places, and likewise of the Bat∣tels, Seiges, Prodigious Earthquakes, Tem∣pests, Inundations, Thunders, Lightnings, Fires, Murders, and other considerable Occurrences, and Accidents for several Hundred Years past. Together with the Natural, and Artificial Rarities in every County, and many other observable matters; As they are recorded by the most Authentick, and Credible Historians of former and lat∣ter Ages; Adorned with the Lively Description of several Memorable things therein contained, Ingraven on Copper Plates. By R.B. Author of the History of the Wars of England, &c. and Remarks of London, &c. London Printed by Tho. Snowden, for Nath. Crouch at the Bell, next to Kemp's Coffee-house in Exchang-Alley, over against the Royal Ex∣change in Cornhill. 1682.
TO THE READER. HAving already published a brief Treatise called, Historical Remarks of London and Westminster, which hath found general acceptation, I was encouraged to prosecute the same design, upon every County in England, as also in Wales, Scotland and Ireland, wherein the Reader cannot be so unreasonable to expect an exact description of every Town or considera∣ble place, that having been already performed at large by divers others; this being only a Collecti∣on of the Natural, and Artificial Curiosities, Rarities and Wonders, & likewise of several Re∣markable Places, and Persons, with the Prodigi∣ous Accidents in each County, as I find them in Mr. Fox, Dr. Heylin, Dr. Fuller, Sir Rich. Baker, Mr. Speed, Mr. Clark, and several o∣ther Authors of credit, which I have not parti∣cularly named to every Relation, because it would have taken up too much room most of the particu∣lars
herein being very well known to the Learned, and for others it will not signify much, since this is published for the sake of those that are desirous of knowledge, but are not in a capacity to buy a multitude of Books; now though the Title speaks of Battels and Seiges, yet I have purposely omit∣ted all of that kind which have happened in our late Civil Wars, as having already published a book of the same price with this, wherein is a succinct Account of all the Transactions during the Reign of K. Charles the 1. till His Majesties Happy Restoration; I desire it may please all, since I intend to offend none, but only to serve the Publick and my self, wherein if I find suc∣cess, I shall be very well satisfied, neither can the Reader be much displeased to have so much variety for so little money, and to find that not∣withstanding some think there are no wonders but in other Countries, he may yet observe there are it may be as strange things at home as in o∣ther places. R. B.
Of BRITTAIN. THE Island of Brittain is of all others the most famous, and has been accounted the greatest in the World; it compre∣hendeth all those Islands both great and less, which lie in compass about it, the length thereof from South to North (that is from Lysard Point in Cornwall, to the North of Scotland) is 624 miles, and the breadth thereof from the Lands end in Cornwall to the Isle of Thanet in Kent about 300 English miles; It is a Country always very temperate, and was highly esteemed by the Romans, as appears by what hath been said concerning it, by one of their Orators, who calls it, the happy and most fortunate Island, endued by nature with all the blessings of Heaven and Earth, in that therein is neither extream cold in Winter, nor scorching heats in Summer, and that which is most com∣fortable, long daies, and very lightsome nights; wherein there is such an abundance of Grain, as may suffice both for Bread and Wine; the Woods thereof are without wild Beasts, the Fields without noysom Serpents, but therein are vast numbers of Milch Beasts, and Sheep weighed down with their own Fleeces. To which may be added what Alfred the Poet of Beverly writ long since of Brittain. Insula praedive, quae toto vix eget orbe, &c. A wealthy Island which no help desires, Yet all the world supply from her requires,
Able to glut King Solomon with pleasures; And surfeit Great Augustus with her Treasures. As to the name Brittain there is no great certainty of its Original; that which hath passed for currant in for∣mer times (when almost all Nations did pretend to be of Trojan Race) was, that it took this name from Brutus, affirmed to be the Son of Silvius, Grand-Child of Aeneas, and third King of the Latines of the Trojan Blood, which Brutus having unfortunately killed his Father, and there∣upon flying from Italy with his Friends and followers, after a long Voyage, and many wandrings, is said to have fallen upon this Island, and to have conquered here a race of Giants, and having given unto it the name of Brittain, to leave the Soveraignty thereof to his posteri∣ty, who quietly enjoyed the same, till subdued by the Romans; but this Tradition has been since laid aside, as altogether fabulous, since the Roman Historians never mention either Brutus or the Giants, Caesar telling us, that he found the Brittains under many Kings, and ne∣ver under the command of one sole Prince, but in times of Danger; it is therefore more probable that it was de∣rived from Britt, which in the Brittish Language signi∣fies Painted, and the word Tain a Nation, agreeable to the custom of the Ancient Brittains, who used to discolour and paint their Bodies, that they might seem more ter∣rible in the Eyes of their Enemies, such as the Romans called afterwards Picts, or Painted Men; other particu∣lars may be observed in the description of those parts into which it is now divided, that is, 1. England. 2. Wales. 3. Scotland. ENGLAND is bounded on the East with the German; on the West with the Irish; on the South with the Brittish Oceans; and on the North with the Rivers of Tweed and Solway, and thereby parted from Scotland, invironed with Turbulent Seas, guarded by inaccessible Rocks, and where these are wanting, preserved against all Forreign Invasions by strong Forts, and a puissant
Navy. The whole Island was first called Albion, either from the story of one of the Giants so called, or Ab al∣bis Rupibus, the white Rocks toward France, which name continued till the time of Egbert the first Saxon Mon∣arch, who called the Southern parts thereof England, from the Angles, who with the Juits and Saxons conque∣red it; Pelagius being Bishop of Rome, Gregory seeing some beautiful Children in the Market place of Rome to be sold, he inquireth what Country they were of, who answered Angli (Englishmen) and were Heathens; what pity is it (said he) that the Inhabitants being so fair and Angelical of Countenance, should yet be subject to the Prince of Darkness; asking further of what Province they were, they answered Deira (a Province in England then so called) These People (saith he) are to be delivered de Ira Dei, from the Wrath of God; and understanding the name of one of the Youths was Alle, They ought (saies he) to sing Allelujah to the living God; upon this Gregory was mighty desirous to come hither to convert these Heathens, but could not at that time, yet after Pelagius his death being chosen Bishop of Rome, and remem∣bring his former intentions he sent Austin with about 40 more Preachers to undertake this work. This Nation enjoys a soil equally participating of ground fit for Til∣lage or Pasture; most of her other Plenties and Orna∣ments are expressed in this old verse following. Anglia Mens, Pons, Fons, Ecclesia, Foemina, Lana, For Mountains, Bridges, Rivers, Churches fair, Women, and Wool, England is past compare. For the Mountains here and there lift up their lofty heads, and give a gallant prospect to the lower grounds; all of them having Mines in their Bowels, or else are clothed with Sheep, or adorned with Woods; the Bridges are in number 857, the chief whereof are Rochester Bridge over Medway; Bristol Bridge over Avon; and London Bridge over the Thames; the Rivers are 325, the Principal being the Thames, of which a German Poet thus truly spake,
Tot Càmpos, Sylvas, tot Regia tecta, tot Hortos, &c. We saw so many Woods and Princely Bowers, Sweet Fields, brave Pallaces, and stately Towers; So many Gardens drest with curious care, That Thames with Royal Tyber may compare. The Churches before the General Suppression of Ab∣bles, were most exquisite. The Women are generally handsomer than in other places, sufficiently endowed with natural Beauties, without the Adulteration of Art. In an absolute Woman (say the Italians) are required the parts of a Dutch Woman from the Girdle downward, of a French Woman from the Girdle to the Shoulders, over which must be placed an English Face; as their Beauties so likewise their Prerogatives are the greatest of any Nation, neither so servilly submissive as the French, nor so jealously guarded as the Italian, but keep∣ing so true a decorum, that as England is termed the Pur∣gatory of Servants, and the Hell of Horses, so it is ac∣knowledged the Paradise of Women: And it is a common by-word among the Italians, That if there were a Bridge built over the narrow Seas, all the Women of Europe would run into England: For here they have the upper hand in the Streets, the upper place at the Table, the Thirds of their Husbands Estates, and their equal share in all Lands; which are Priviledges wherewith other Wo∣men are not acquainted; they were of high esteem in former times amongst Forreign Nations, for the mo∣desty and gravity of their Conversations, but the Women of these times are so much addicted to the light Garb of the French, that they have lost much of their honour and reputation among sober Persons abroad, who before admired them. The Wool of England is of exceeding fineness, of which are made excellent broad cloaths, dispersed over all the World, to the great benefit of En∣gland, as well in return of so much Mony which is made of them, as in setting to work so many poor People, who from it receive sustenance. Having thus briefly gone through the Method of the
old Verse, it is time now we should look upon the Men, and they are commonly of a comely Feature, and a gracious Countenance, for the most part grey Eyed, pleasant, beautiful, bountiful, courteous, and much resembling the Italians in Habit and Pronunciation; In matters of War they are both able to endure, and rea∣dy to undertake the hardest Enterprises, and for their Courage are deservedly renowned throughout the World. K. Edw. 3. and his Son did carry their victori∣ous Arms through all France: K. Hen. 6. was crowned King at Paris: The D. of Bedford was Regent of France, and being slain in a Battle, was buried in Roan, whose Monument when Charles 8. K. of France came to see, a Nobleman standing by, advised him to raze it, Nay, (answered he) let him rest in peace now being dead, of whom in War, whilest he lived, all France stood in fear. Marshal Biron said, He liked not the English March, (being beaten by the Drum) because it was so slow; Sir Roger Williams, a gallant Souldier, answered him, That as slow as it was, yet it had gone through all France. Our Wooden Walls, the Ships, are a great security to this Nation, the Eng∣lish having been generally accounted the strongest in the World: What service did our Ships do us in 88. Sir. Francis Drake, and after him Thomas Cavendish Esq, within the space of Three Years, and Three Months, travelled about the Globe of the whole Earth. Sir Ri∣chard Greenvill in a Ship of Q. Elizabeths fought against a great Navy of the Spaniards, and his single Vessel was fought within turns by 15 other great Ships, whereof the great St. Philip of 1500 Tuns, Prince of the 12 Sea Apostles, was one, yet this valiant Knight sunk Two of their best Ships, and killed a Thousand Men: He is called by the Spaniards still, Don Richard of the Green∣field, and they fright their Children with him. Our Na∣tion without Vanity may assume to itself the Praise, con∣sidering its narrow Limits, to have produced as many Schollars, admirable in all degrees of knowledge, as a∣ny Country on this side the Alps, and received the Christian Faith as some say from St. Peter and Paul; and
Lucius was the first Christian King of any in Europe. Among many other worthy Men, Bishop Jewel, Bishop Andrews, Bishop Whitgift, and Dr. John Reynolds are very famous, of the last of whom the following account is very remarkable; this Jo. Reynolds had a Brother named Wil∣liam, who was at first bred up a Protestant of the Church of Eng. and John was trained up in Popery beyond the Seas; William out of an honest zeal to reduce his Brother to this Church, made a Journey to him, where after a confe∣rence between them, it so fell out that John being over∣come by his Brothers Arguments returned into Eng. where he became a very strict, and serious Protestant, and Wil∣liam being convinced by the reasons of his Brother John staid beyond Sea, where he proved a very rigid and violent Papist: of which strange accident Dr. Alabaster who had tryed both Religions (and among others had some notable whimsies) made this ingenious Epigram, Bella inter geminos plusquam Civilia fratres, &c. In point of Faith some undetermin'd jars Betwixt two Brothers kindled Civil Wars; One for the Churches Reformation stood, The other thought no Reformation good: The points propos'd, they traversed the Field With equal skill, and both together yield. As they desir'd his Brother each subdues, Yet such their Fate that each his Faith did lose; Both Captives, none the Prisoners thence to guide, The Victor flying to the vanquish't side, Both joy'd in being Conquer'd (strange to say) And yet both mourn'd because both won the day. The Government of England is Monarchical, of a per∣fect, and happy Constitution, wherein the King hath his full Prerogative, the Nobles all due respect, and the People amongst other blessings, extreamly happy in this; That they are Masters of their own purposes, and have a strong hand in making their own Laws. Of all the Seniories in the World (saith P. Comines the French Historian) the
Realm of England is the Country where the Common∣wealth is best governed, the People least opprest, and the fewest Houses and Buildings destroyed in Civil War. It is a Country always most Temperate, the Air is thick, and much subject to winds, rain, and dark Clouds, and therefore Gundamore the Spanish Ambassador here in K. James's his time, bid the Spanish Post when he came to Spain commend him to the Sun, for he had not seen him here a great while, and in Spain he should be sure to find him. The Ocean which beateth upon the Coast of this Island aboundeth with all manner of Fish, and the Meadows and Pastures with Corn, Cattle, and all other necessaries; a Spaniard boasting, That they had ex∣cellent Oranges, Lemmons, and Olives growing in their Coun∣trey which ours wanted; Sir Roger Williams reply'd, It is true (said he) they do not grow here, yet all this is but sauce, whereas we have dainty Veal, and well fed Capons to eat with them, with many other delicate Dishes worth the name of Victuals indeed; There are more Parks, Forrests and Chases in England than in all Christendom beside, there are in no place of the World greater and larger Dogs than here, which caused them to be most in request by the Romans both for their baitings in their Amphithea∣ters, and in all other their huntings; the English Cock is a bold and stout Fowl, and will fight valiantly with his Adversary, and presently crows when he obtains the Victory, which seldom happens till death parts them. There are 44 Shires and Counties in England, every Shire consisting of so many Hundreds, &c. and every Hundred of a number of Burroughs, Villages or Ty∣things, &c. But this may suffice by way of Preface, the design of this small Tract being not to give a particular, or exact description of every County, and the Towns and Villages therein (since that has been largely perfor∣med by Mr. Speed, Mr. Blome and others) but only to contract in a little volume, and price, the Natural, and Artificial Curiosities and Rarities in England, Scot∣land and Ireland, with Remarks upon some famous Per∣sons and Places, as also an account of the Earthquakes,
Tempests, Seiges, Battels, and other strange Accidents, and Occurrences that have happened in each County, whereby my Countrymen may observe that there is hardly any thing worth wondring at abroad in the world, whereof Nature or Art hath not written a Copy in these Islands; and therefore I shall not confine my self so much to methodize matters as to time, as not to let slip any thing considerable; and because I suppose most Men have a desire to read something of their own Country first, I have (according to the method of Dr. Fuller and others) placed the Counties Alphabetically for the more ready finding of them, and will therefore begin with BARKSHIRE (whether so called from a stri∣ped or bark-bared Oak is uncertain) is bounded by Wiltshire on the West, Hamshire on the South, Surry on the East, Oxford and Buckinghamshire on the North there∣of; the air is temperate, sweet, and pleasant, the soil plenteous of Corn, Cattle, Waters, and Woods, so that for profit and pleasure it gives place to none; The most remarkable place in this County is Windsor Castle, a most Princely Pallace both for strength and State, and hath in it a Colledge for Learning, a Chappel for Devotion, and an Alms-house of decayed Gentlemen for Charity; it is reported to have been built by K. Arthur, and K. William the Conqueror was so desirous of it, that by composition with the Abbot of Westminster, whose then it was, he made it to be the Kings Possession; in this Castle the Victorious K. Edward 3. was born, and herein after he had subdued the French and Scots, he kept at one time John K. of France, and David King of Scotland as his Prisoners; after which he graced it with greater Ma∣jesty by instituting the Honourable Order of the Garter, the Institution whereof some ascribe to a Garter occa∣sionally falling from the Countess of Salisbury, though others affirm the Garter was given in testimony of that Bond of Love and Affection, wherewith the Knights and Fellows of it were to be bound severally one to ano∣ther,
and all of them to the King; nay some others make it yet more ancient, relating that when K. Ri∣chard the 1. was at War against the Turks and Saracens in the Holy Land, and that the tediousness thereof began to discourage his Soldiers, he to quicken their Courage, tyed about the Legs of several choice Knights a Garter or small Thong of Leather, the only stuff he had at hand, that as the Romans used to bestow Crowns and Garlands for encouragements, so this might provoke them to stand together, and fight valiantly for their King, and for their honour. K. Edward the Third found a Chapple erected in this Castle by K. Hen. 1. and other Princes, with maintenance for eight Canons, to whom he added a Dean, 15 Canons more, and 24 poor Impo∣tent Knights, and other Officers, and Servants; these were to pray for the good Estate of the Soveraign, and Brethren of the most Noble Order; the Soveraign and Knights had their particular Laws and Constitutions, and K. Edward likewise appointed divers Ceremonies, and distinct habits, and St. George the pattern of Christi∣an Fortitude is intituled to the Patronage of this Order, and the beautiful Chappel in Windsor Castle, (where his day, being April 23. is usually celebrated every year, and new Knights commonly installed,) was consecrated by that King to his memory; there are of this Order twen∣ty six Knights, of which the Kings of England are one, and it is so much desired for its worthiness, that 8 Em∣perors, 21 Forreign Kings, 23 Forreign Dukes and Prin∣ces, besides divers Noblemen of other Countries have been Fellows of it; The Ensign is a blew Garter buck∣led on the left Leg, on which these words are imbroide∣red, Honi soit qui mal y pense, Evil to him that Evil thinks; About their Necks they wear a blue Ribband, at the end of which hangeth the Image of St. George; the Hall of this Pallace is remarkable for greatness, Winchester Tower for height, and the Terrace on the Northside for pleasure: but his present Majesty K. Charles the Se∣cond hath added such magnificence to it both within and without, that now for Grandeur, State and Pleasure,
it exceeds it may be any Palace of ever a Prince in Europe. The Chappel is graced with the Bodies of King Henry 6. and K. Edward 4. & those whom the whole King∣dom was too little to contain, (the one being of the House of Lancaster, and the other of York) lie now u∣nited in one mould, with the branch of both these Hou∣ses, K. Henry 8. who there lies interred; and likewis King Charles the Martyr. In the Reign of K. Henry 8. 1544. Anthony Persons a Priest, Robert Testwood a Singing man of the Quire, and Henry Filmer Churchwarden of Windsor (who had Ar∣ticled against their Superstitious Vicar) were all three burnt together at Windsor, for the Protestant Profession; when Persons was fastned to the Stake, he laid a great deal of Straw on the top of his head, saying, This is Gods Hat, I am now armed like a Souldier of Christ; Robert Test∣wood was condemned for dissuading the People from Pilgrimages; for, walking in Windsor Chappel, he saw multitudes of Pilgrims that came flocking out of Devon∣shire and Cornwall, with Candles and Images to offer at the Shrine of King Henry of Windsor; Testwoods Spirit was much moved to see this Idolatry, and thereupon he mildly exhorted them to leave that false Worship per∣formed to dumb Images, and to learn to Worship the living God aright; shewing them how God plagued his own People the Jews for going a Whoring after such stocks and Stones, and would certainly plague them and their posterities if they did not reform. This so much prevail'd upon some, that they said They would never go on Pilgrimage again; Testwood going farther, saw another Company, licking and kissing a white Lady of Alabaster that stood behind the high Altar, rubbing their hands upon it, and then stroking their heads and faces there∣with, which so provoked him, that with a Key he had in his Hand, he struck off a piece of the Images Nose, say∣ing, See good People this is nothing but a piece of Earth that cannot help itself, how then is it like to help you? When these three were burning. King Hen. 8. came by the place on Horseback, and having an account of their
Christian and patient death, the King turning his Horses ead, said, Alas poor Innocents! a better speech it had een from a private Person than a Prince, who is bound y his Office, not only to pity, but protect oppressed nnocence; however by this occasion other persecuted People were pardoned, and preserved. There is a Proverb in this County, that the Vicar of Bray, will be Vicar of Bray still; Bray is a Village well known in this Shire, and the Ancient Vicar thereof li∣ving under K. Henry 8. K. Edward the 6. Q. Mary, and Q. Elizabeth was at first a Papist, then a Protestant, then  Papist, then a Protestant again; he had seen some Martyrs burnt two miles off at Windsor, and found this Fire too hot for his tender temper; this Vicar being axed by one for being a Turncoat, and an unconstant Changeling, No, (said he) that's your mistake, for I always kept my Principle, which is this, to live and die the Vicar of Bray; and no doubt there are some still of the same sa∣ving Principles, who though they cannot turn the wind, will turn their Mills, and set them so, that wherever it bloweth, their Grist will certainly be grinded. In the Reign of K. Will. Rufus 1100. at Finchamsted in this County, a Well boyled up with streams of blood, and continued so 15 days together, and the waters dis∣coloured all others where they came; and great flames of fire were seen in divers places at several times. In the year 1348 there was a very great Plague all over Europe, and then was Wallingford (being a bigger, and more considerable Town than now it is) almost dispeo∣pled with it. In 1237. Ottoon a Cardinal came as Legate from the Pope to K. Henry 3. and lying at Osney Abby, there happened a difference between his Servants, & the Schollars at Oxford, in which contention a Brother of his was slain, and the Legate for fear got him into a Stee∣ple, till the Kings Officers coming from Abingdon, con∣veyed him to Wallingford, after which the Cardinal cur∣sed and interdicted the Schollars and University, so that the Colledges grew desolate, and the Students were dis∣persed into other places for half a year time, till the
Monks and Masters of the University were forced to go bare-footed, and bare-headed a great way to the Legates Lodgings, and there upon their humble submission, and great Mens intercession, they were pardoned and ab∣solved, and the University restored to its former Estate; such was the pride of the Superior, and the base-spirit, edness of the Inferiour Clergy in these days of Popery and Slavery. In the time of Hen. 6. 1431. certain lewd Persons began an Insurrection at Abington, which might have occasioned much mischief, if the chief Author thereof one Mundevile a Weaver had not been taken and hanged. In the year 1647. Several freakish, and enthusiastick Women at Newbery in this County pretended to Divine Revelations, and Dreams, wherein very glorious things were discovered to them, and the chief of them had such strange gestures and Fits, as astonished the Spectators; this Woman de∣clared she had a Revelation that such a night she should be taken up into Heaven, at which time many of her de∣luded Followers assembled together, and took their so∣lemn leave of her with Tears, and the hour being come out they all go to see her ascension; it was a Moonshine night, and as they expected when an Angel should fetch her up in a Chariot, a Cloud covers the Moon, where∣upon they all cry out, Bebold he comes in the Clouds, but the Cloud soon vanished, and thereby their hopes were frustrated, after a while comes a flock of Wild-Geese a great way off, upon which they again cry out, He comes, he comes; but when the Wild-Geese were gone, they were fain at length to return home again as wise as they came, having made themselves ridiculous to the Spectators. Reading is the chief Town in this Shire. It is divided into 20 Hundreds, wherein there are 12 Market Towns, 140 Parishes, and out of it are Elected 9 Parliament Men, that is, for the County 2; New-Windsor 2; Reading 2; Wallingford 2; & Abington 1. Eaton is adjoining to Wind∣sor by a wooden Bridge over the Thames, wherein there is a fair Colledge of that name, and a famous School of good Learning, founded and built by K. Henry 6
in which besides the Provost, 8 Fellows, and the singing Choristers, there are 60 Schollars instructed in Gram∣mar, and in due time preferred to the University of Cambridge; this County is in the Diocess of Salisbury, and gives the Title of Earl to the Right Honourable Thomas L. Howard. BEDFORDSHIRE hath Northamptonshire on the North; Huntington, and Cambridgeshire on the East, Hartfordshire on the South, and Buckinghamshire on the West thereof; in the year 1399. just before the Wars broke out between the Houses of Lancaster and York, on New-years-day, the deep River which runs between Suelstone and Harwood (two Villages not far from Bedford Town) called Cuse, suddenly stood still, and divided it∣self, so that by the space of three miles, the bottom re∣mained dry, and backwards the waters swel'd up to a great height, which wonder many judicious Persons thought did presage the division of the People, & falling away from the King; and a while after in a little Town in this County it rained blood, the red drops whereof appeared in sheets hung out to dry. In the 22 of Q. Elizabeth, 1580. there fell such great rains in September and October, as caused very great floods in divers parts of the Kingdom; in Newport the Cottages were born down, and the Corn lost; in Bedford the water came up to the Market place, where their Houshold stuff swum about their Houses, their Wood, Corn, and Hay were carried away; and the Town of St. Needs, in Hunting∣tonshire was suddainly overflowed, while the Inhabitants were in bed; the waters brake in with such violence, that the Town was all defaced, the Swans swum down the Market-place; Godmanchester was also overflown, their Houses being full of water, and their Cattel de∣stroved. At St. Needs in K. Hen. 7ths time there fell Hailstones, which were measured 18 inches about. At, Asply near Woburn in this County, there is a little Rivolet the Earth whereof it is reported, turneth Wood into Stone, and that a wooden Ladder was to be seen in the
Monastery hard by, which having lain a great while co∣vered all over with it, was digged out again all Stone; Take the strange operation of it from his Pen, who though a Poet, is a credible Author: The Brook which on her bank doth boast that earth alone (Much noted in this Isle,) converteth wood to stone. This little Asplyes Earth we anciently instile 'Mongst sundry other things a wonder of the Isle. There is another of the same nature in Northampton∣shire, of which hereafter. In 1507. Thomas Chase, a Re∣ligious sober Man, being a very zealous opposer of Popish Idolatry, and Superstition, was thereupon brought be∣fore the Bishop at Woburn, (by means of some malicious Informers,) who proposed divers questions to him, inter∣mixt with many Taunts, Jears, and Reproaches; Chase answered him very undauntedly, defending the Truth a∣gainst Popish errors boldly, for which he was committed into the Bishops Prison called Little Ease, where he lay cruelly manacled with Chains and Fetters, and al∣most starved for hunger; which when the Bishop saw did not prevail upon him, but that the more severely he was used, he was the more fervent in defending the Protestant Faith, he resolved privately to murder him for fear of an uproar amongst the People, and accor∣dingly soon after ordered him to be strangled, and pres∣sed to death in the Prison, he still heartily calling upon God to receive his Spirit; the Bishop causing it to be reported that he had hanged himself in Prison. This was in the Reign of K. Henry 7. In 1506. One William Tilsworth was condemned by Dr. Smith, Bishop of Lin∣coln, for Heresy, and burnt in this County, at his burning his only Daughter a Religious Woman, and Wife to one Clark, was compelled by the bloody Papists to set fire with her own hands to her dear Father; and at the same time John Clark her Husband, with many others did pennance by bearing Faggots, and were burnt in the Cheek with an hot Iron; and about two years after Tho∣mas Bernard, Husbandman, and James Melvin, Labou∣rer,
were both burnt for the Protestant Religion in one Fire in this Shire. The chief Town of this County is Bedford, most frui∣fully and pleasantly seated; without the Town there formerly stood a Chappel upon the bank of the River Ouse, wherein (as some Authors affirm) the Body of Ossa the great Mercian King was interred, but by the overswelling of that River was carryed away, and swallowed up, whose Tomb of Lead (as if it were some Phantastical thing) appeared often to them that sought it not, but to them that seek it (saith Ross) it is invisi∣ble. In K. Henry 3. his Reign, while a Parliament was sitting at Northampton, an unsufferable outrage was com∣plained of to them, committed by one Falcacius a Nor∣man by birth, who seized upon Henry Braybrook a Judge, as he was upon the Bench at the Assizes at Dunstable, and clapped him close Prisoner in Bedford-Castle with a strong Guard upon him, because 30 Verdicts had passed against him upon Tryals at Law for Lands which he had forceably entred upon; the Judges Wife came to the Parliament, and with her Tears and complaints so mo∣ved them with pitty and indignation, that all other mat∣ters laid aside the Clergy, as well as Laity attended the King to besiege the Castle, Falcacius being Governor thereof, was gone himself into Wales with hopes of raising more Forces to maintain his Rebellion, but had left his Brother Lieutenant in his room, with a despe∣rate crew of Villains, and all manner of Ammunition, and Provision sufficient for a whole years Siege; yet af∣ter 2 Months the Castle was taken by Storm, the Lieu∣tenant and all his Companions hanged, and the Castle it∣self pull'd down to the ground as a den of Thieves, and to deter all others for the future from committing such Villanous and Treasonable Crimes. This Falcacius (as we said) was a French-man born, and a Bastard, and came o∣ver in K. Johns time in a very mean condition, by whom for his Courage he was made Governor of Bedford Castle, to defend it against the Barons; where by plunder and Rapine, he got a great deal of mony together, K. John
likewise forcing a Lady who was a great Heiress to Mar∣ry him, no less to her own discontent, than disparage∣ment; but now when his Castle was thus unexpectedly le∣velled to the Earth, and all his Estate seized to the King, he prevails with the Bishop of Coventry to bring him to the King at Bedford, where throwing himself at the Kings feet, he implores his mercy for his forme good Services, which he with difficulty obtained, but upon condition to be sent into perpetual banishment, which was done accordingly, and the King was so incen∣sed at the keeping of his Castle against him, that he thereupon commanded all Frenchmen to depart by a a time limited under a very severe penalty. In the 7th of Queen Elizabeth; Henry Cheyney, High Sheriff of Bed∣fordshire was created Baron of Tuddington in this County, in his Youth he was very wild and ventrous, witness his playing at Dice with Henry 2. King of France, from whom he won a Diamond of great worth at a cast, and being demanded by the King what shift he would have made to repair himself in case he had lost the cast, I have (said young Cheyney in a huffing bravery) Sheeps Tails e∣nough in Kent (where he had an Estate) with their Wool, to buy a better Diamond than this; in his latter age he was much reduced, and very grave, dying without issue. Dunstable is seated in a chalky ground well Inhabited, and full of Inns, hath four Streets answerable to the four Quarters of the world, in every one of which there is a pond of standing water for the publick use of the In∣habitants; a Tale of vain credit is reported of this Town, that it was built to bridle the outragiousness of a strong Theif called Dun, by K. Henry 1. but certain it is, that the place was held by the Romans, yet Sir John Heyward saith, Dun was a famous Thief among others, and Commander over the rest, and of him the place was called Dunstable. This County is divided into 9 Hundreds, wherein are 10 Market Towns, and 116 Parish Churches, and is in the Diocess of London; it Elects only 4 Parliament Men, two for the County, and two for the Town of Bedford, and gives the Title of
Earl to the Right Honourable William L. Russel. BƲCKING HAMSHIRE hath on the East Hertfordshire, and Bedfordshire, on the West Oxfordshire, on the North Northamptonshire, and Huntingdonshire, and on the South Hertfordshire; it hath its name from the lenty of Beech-Trees, which the Saxons called Bucken, with which the Country was formerly so over-run, that it was altogether impassable, and became a refuge for Thieves and Robbers, and occasioned that Proverb in this Country, Here a Bush, and there a Thief, for which cause they were cut down. In 1665. Jan. 20. about six a clock at night there was an Earthquake in some parts of Buckinghamshire, which was attended with an unusual kind of noise in the Air, but was quickly over; it much frighted some People on the sudden, to feel their Chairs and Stools quake under them, and to hear Tables, and such things to clatter in the rooms; and the whole House to shake, this Information (saith Mr. Clark in his Examp. p. 2.) I had from an honest Minister in that County. K. William the Conqueror gave a Mannor and certain Yardlands in Buckinghamshire to a Person upon this Condition, That the Possessor or Owner thereof should find Straw or Litter for the Kings Bed whensoever he came that way; which shews what an alteration there is as to matter of Grandeur since that time. The best and big∣gest bodied Sheep in England, are in the Vale of Aylsbury in this County, where it is nothing to give Ten pound or more for a Breed-Ram, so that should a Forreigner hear the price thereof, he would guess that Ram to be rather some Roman Engine of Battery, than the Crea∣ture commonly so called; I know not (saith Dr. Fuller) whether his Observation with the reason thereof be worth the inserting, who first took notice that our Cattle for food are English, when feeding in the Field, but French when fed on in a Family, as for example. English. 1. Sheep. 2. Ox. 3. Calf. 4. Hog. 5. Pig. French. 1. Mutton. 2. Beef. 3. Veal. 4. Bacon. 5. Pork.
Whereof the Author assigns this Reason, that after the Norman Conquest the French so Tyrannized over the English Tenants, that they forced them to keep and feed their Cattel, but the Mounsieurs eat all the good meat after it was killed, and drest to their hands. Forreign∣ers much admire at our English Sheep, because they do not (as those in other Countries) follow their Shep∣heards like a pack of Dogs, but wander all abroad; and the Popish Priests tell their ignorant Flocks, That this disobedience of our Sheep happened to us, because we have left their great Sheperd the Pope, (a very profound reason) whereas our Sheep did the same long before our Sepa∣ration from Rome, because being freed from the fear of Wolves (which infest their Flocks beyond Sea) they feed safely in the Fields wanting neither Guide to direct them, nor Guard to defend them. Roger Wendover was born at a Market Town of that name in this County. and was bred a Benedictine in St. Albans, where he became the Kings Historian, and it is observable, that our English Kings had alwaies a Monk, generally of St. Albans (as being near London, the Staple of News and Books) to write the most remarkable Passages of their Reign, and some add, that their Chro∣nicles were locked up in the Kings Library, and were never suffered to be opened in that Kings, nor his Sons life, if so they had a great incouragement to be impar∣tial, not fearing a blow on their Teeth, though coming near to the heels of Truth; as being hereby in some kind tyed up from doing them any hurt; this Roger be∣gan his Chronicle at the Conquest, and continued it to 1235. which Matthew Paris and others carried down further after his death. The Lady Hester Temple, Wife to Sir Thomas Temple, was born at Latimers in this County, she had 4 Sons, and 9 Daughters, who lived to be Married, and so exceedingly multiplied, that this Lady saw Seven hundred extracted from her own Body; Vives tells of a Village in Spain of about an 100 Houses, whereof all the Inhabitants issued out of one certain old Man who then lived, and says, the Spanish Language did not afford
name whereby the youngest should call the Elder, nce they could not go above the Great Grandfathers ather; but had the Off-spring of this Lady been con∣racted into one place, they were enough to have peop∣ed a City of a competent proportion, though her issue as not so long in Succession as broad in extent, this ady died in 1656. Sir Edward Cook that famous com∣entator of the Law was born in this Shire. One time a Parliament was called, and the Court Party being jea∣ous of Sir Edwards Activity against them, as not having igested the discontent he had received from thence, ereupon to prevent his Election as a Member, and con∣ine him to this County, he was pricked Sheriff thereof; he hereupon scrupled to take the Oath, alledging many hings against it, and particularly that the Sheriff is bound hereby to prosecute Lollards, wherein the best Christi∣ns may be included; but no excuses would serve his urn, he must serve the Office, however his Friends be∣eld it as an injurious degradation of him who had been ord Chief Justice to attend on the Judges at the Assizes. Buckingham is the Shire Town of this County, fruit∣ully seated upon the River Ouse, and was fortified for∣merly with Rampires, and a strong Castle mounted on a igh Hill, whereof nothing now remains but some small igns of such a place. It is divided into 8 Hundreds, wherein are 15 Market Towns, 185 Parish Churches, nd is in the Diocess of London; out of it are Elected 14 Parliament Men; For the County 2. Buckingham 2. Chip∣in-Wiccomb 2. Alisbury 2. Agmondisham 2. Wendover 2. and Marlow 2. It gives Titles to George Villiers, Duke of Buckingham, and Robert Bruce, Earl of Alisbury. CAMBRIDGSHIRE is bounded on the North with Lincolnshire, and Norfolk, upon the East with Norfolk, and Suffolk, on the South with Hartfordshire and Essex, and on the West with the Counties of Bedford and Hun∣ington; so named from the River Came, which divides it n the midst, upon the East Banks whereof stands the amous University of Cambridge; from whence for ma∣ny
hundred years have issued the streams of learned Sciences in all other parts of the Kingdom; it is ancient indeed if the story be true that it was built by one Can∣tabria a Spaniard, 375 years before the Birth of our Sa∣viour; it was formerly called Grantchester, and in Bedes time about 700 years after Christ, was laid in Ruines by the Tyranny of the times, and is described as a little de∣solate City without Inhabitants, or any memory of its being incompassed with Walls; the Monk of Burton re∣ports that in 141. nine Students of this City received Baptism, and became Preachers of the Gospel among the Brittains, in the time of Adrian the Emperor, but when the Picts, Scots, Huns, and Saxons, had laid all things waste, and with their savage Swords cut out the leaves of all civil Learning, this City as the rest fell to destruction, and so lay forlorn, till the Saxons themselves became civilized, when Sigibert the first Christi∣an King of the East Angles (by the example of France, whither he had been banished) built Schools in this Kingdom, and here at Grantchester, or Cambridge the chief, recalling thither the Professors of Arts and Scien∣ces, who began so to increase, that the place grew too little for the Students, and therefore inlarging more Northward, seated themselves near the Bridge, upon which the place was called Grantbridge, and afterward Cambridge; it was again much damaged by the Danes, but after the Norman Conquest three Monks resorted to this place, and in the Reign of K. Hen. 1. read Lectures in a publick Barn, in Grammar, Logick, Rhetorick, &c. and one Gislebert read Divinity upon the Lords, and o∣ther Festival Days; from this little Fountain (saith an Ancient Author) grew a great River, which made all England fruitful. The first Colledge therein endowed was Peter-house, built by the Bishop of Ely 1284. whose wor∣thy example many others followed, so that there are no sixteen stately Colledges and Halls, which for building, beauty, and endowments, and number of Students, ex∣ceed any other in Europe, except her Sister Oxford; in the Reign of K. Edward 1. of a School Cambridge was
Lord When shall I be cleered Q. Emma goes blindfold & barefoot over 9 Burning plowshares at Winchester. Pa. 87.
by the Court of Rome made an University, in the 21 of whose Reign a great part of the Town, and the Church of St. Maries was burnt. Upon Midsummer Eve, 1626. a Codfish was brought to the Market in Cambridge, and there cut up for Sale, and in the Maw thereof there was found a Book in Twelves, bound up in Canvas, containing several Trea∣tises of Mr. John Friths; this Fish was caught upon the Coasts of Lin, called Lindeeps, by one William Skinner; the Fish bei g cut open, the Garbidge was thrown by, which a Woman looking upon, espied the Canvas, and taking it out, found the Book wrapped up in it, which was much soiled, and covered over with a kind of slime, and congealed matter; this was looked upon with great admiration, and by Benjamin Prime, the the Batchelors Beadle, who was present at the opening of the Fish, was carried to the Vice-Chancellor, who took special notice of it, examining the particulars be∣fore mentioned; the leaves of the Book were carefully opened and cleansed, the Treatises contained in it were, A Preparation for the Cross, a Preparation for Death, the Treasure of Knowledge; a Mirrour or Looking-glass to know themselves by; a brief Instruction to teach one willingly to die, and not to fear death; they were all re-printed, and how useful the reviving of these Treatises by such a special Providence hath been, may be easily discerned by such as have lived since these times. In the Year 1640. a Pond in Cambridge became red as Blood, the water whereof being taken up in Basons, remained still of the same colour, and many strange sights were seen in the Air, as Armies fighting against each other, which were lookt on as sad Presages of our ensuing Trou∣bles. Ely another City in this County, was formerly a place very famous for a Nunnery there founded by Audrey, Wife to one Tombret a Prince in this Province, who had this place as a part of her Dowry, and she after his death Marrying with a King of Northumberland, in a short time left her Husband and the Rights of Marri∣age,
and according to the Superstition of those dark times, built this Monastery, and became her self first Abbess thereof; this in the Danish Desolations was de∣stroyed, but soon after re-built by Ethelwold, Bishop of Winchester, who stored it with Monks, to whom K. Edgar granted the Jurisdiction over four Hundreds and an half within these Fenns, which to this day are called The Liberties of St. Audrey; after whose example ma∣ny Nobles so inriched it with Revenues, that the Abbot thereof laid up yearly in his own Coffers 1400 pounds; and soon after the Monks thereof repaired their old Church with new and stately buildings, which now is the Cathedral of the Diocess, and for beauty gives place to no other in the Land; Ely Minster presenteth itself afar off to the Eye of the Traveller, and on all sides at a great distance not only promiseth, but giveth earnest of the magnificence thereof; the Lanthorn therein built by Bishop Hotham, (wherein the labour of Twenty Years, and Five Thousand ninety four pounds, eighteen Shil∣lings ten pence half penny farthing was expended) is a Master-piece of Architecture; when the Bells ring, the Wood-work thereof shaketh and gapeth (which is no defect but the perfection of Architecture) and exactly falleth into the joints again; rare also is the Art in the Chappel of St. Maries, and the other of Bishop West, wherein the Master Masons in King James his time, on serious inspection sound finer Stonework than in K. Hen∣ry 7. Chappel at Westminster. In 1190. K. Richard 1. went into the Holy Land, and at his going left in chief place of Authority at home William Longshamp Bishop of Ely, who carried himself so, that though the things he did were justifiable, yet the pride wherewith they were done was unsufferable, sel∣dom riding abroad without 500 or a 1000 Men in his Train, not for safety, but for State, and though others were left in power besides, yet he made but Ciphers of them, ruling all as he pleased; this insolency was insuf∣ferable, so that some holding for, and others against him the Kingdom was in danger to be rent in sunder, till at
last the Bishop finding himself too weak for his Ene∣mies, thought it best to fly out of the Kingdom, where∣upon for his greater safety disguising himself in Wo∣mens Apparel, and carrying a piece of Linnen Cloath under his Arm, he designed in this manner to take Ship∣ping, and go beyond Sea; but being discovered, and known, the Women in revenge of the abuse done to their Cloths in making them the instruments of his de∣ceit, fell upon him, and beat him so, that it might have beaten Humility into him for ever after; this disgrace made him glad to get into France his Native Country, where to little purpose he woed the King and Queen for Reparation. Edward Norgate, Son of Dr. Robert Norgate, was born in Cambridge, and being very judicious in Pictures, was imployed into Italy to buy some for the E of Arundel; returning by Marseilles, he missed the money he expect∣ed, and being unknown, neither knowing any man there, he was observed by a French Gentleman (deservedly so stiled) to walk in the Exchange (as we may call it) of that City, many hours every morning and evening, with swift Feet, and sad face forward and backward, to him the civil Monsieur addressed himself, desiring to know the cause of his discontent, & promised if it were in his power, to help him with his best advice, and assistance. Norgate communicated his condition, to whom the other answered, Pray Sir take my Counsel, I have taken notice that you have walked at least twenty miles a day upwards and downwards, which if it had been spent in going forward, would in a few days have brought you into your own Countrey I will if you please furnish you with a light habit, and a compe∣tent sum of Mony for a Footman, to enable you to walk home; Norgate very chearfully consented, & being accommoda∣ted accordingly, footed it through the body of France, being more than 500 English miles, and so leisurely with ease, safety, and health, returned into England; he be∣came after the best Limner in our Age, was an excellent Herald, and which was the Crown of all, a right honest man, he died in 1649.
I may here insert (saith Dr. Fuller) an artificial won∣der, of what is commonly called Devils Ditch, Country People conceiting that it was made by the Devil (the lie to be sure was) whereas it was the work of some King or Kings of the East Angles; see the laziness of posterity, who are so far from imitating the industry of their Ancestors, that they even libel the pure effects of their pains as Hellish Atchievements! probably it was made to divide and defend their Dominions from the King of Mercia, or possibly to keep the People in imployment, and for diverting mutinous thoughts; Laziness being the Mother of disloyalty, industry of obedience; this County by reason of the Fens hath but a sickly air; the soil yeilds good Barly, and store of Saffron; the Herb called Scordium (or Water Germander) groweth very plentifully in this County, of which Diascordium is made; in the Country about the Fenns (saith Speed) Water-Fowl is so plentiful and cheap, that five men may be well satisfied with that kind of Fare for less then an half penny; when they have mowen their grass in the Fenns, as much as will serve, they set fire on the rest in November, that it may come up again in abun∣dance. This County is divided into 17 Hundreds, where∣in are eight Market Towns, and 163 Parishes, and e∣lects, 6 Parliament Men, that is, for the County 2; Uni∣versity 2; Town of Cambridge 2; and has given the Ti∣tle of Duke to four Sons of the Duke of York succes∣sively, who are all deceased; it is in the Diocess of Ely. CHESHIRE hath Lancashire on the North; Denby, Flintshire, and the Irish Ocean on the West; Darby and Stafford shires on the East; and Shropshire on the South; it produces the best Cheese, also Milstones, Fish, Fowl, and all sorts of Cattel; in K. Richar 2. time it was made a Principality; the City of Chester is the chief Town, and in the daies of King Edgar was in a very flourishing condition, he having the homage of 8 other Kings, who rowed his Barge from St. Johns to h Pal∣lace, himself holding the helm as their Supream; a fair
stone Bridge is built over the River Dee, upon 8 Arches, at either end whereof is a Gate, from whence the walls incompass the City, high and strongly built with four fair Gates opening to the 4 winds, besides 3 Post∣erns, and 7 Watch Towers; it is reported by credible, and believed by discreet Persons, that there is a Pool adjoining to Brereton, the seat of the Honourable Family of the Breretons, wherein Bodies of Trees are seen to swim for certain days together before the death of any Heir of that house, and after the Heir is dead they sink, and are never seen more till the next occasion; neither must we forget the many Fir-trees found buried under ground on the Southside of Cheshire by the River Wever; which the common People imagine to have lain buried there ever since Noah's Flood; the Inhabitants cut pieces of such wood very small, and use them instead of Candles, which give a good light; the Author adds, That such wooden Candles have long snuffs, and yet saith he (which in∣deed is a wonder) in falling down they do no harm though they light into Tow, Flax, or the like, yet let not this incou∣rage careless Servants, since this Country has been sadly sensible of casualties by Fire, Nantwich a fair Market Town therein being twice burnt to the ground in 150 years. In 1657. July 8, In the Parish of Bickly in this Coun∣ty about 3 in the afternoon was heard a very great noise like Thunder afar off, which was much wondred at, be∣cause the sky was clear from Clouds; soon after (says the Author) a Neighbour comes and tells me, if I would go with him I should see a very strange thing; so com∣ing into a Field called Layfield, we found a very great bank of Earth, which had tall Oaks growing on it, now quite sunk under ground, Trees and all; at first we durst not go near it, because the earth for near 20 yards about was much rent, and seemed ready to fall in, but since that time (saith he) my self and some others by Ropes have ventured to look down, and saw water at the bot∣tom about 30 yards from us, under which is sunk all the Earth about it for 16 yards round at least, with 3 or 4
tall Oaks, and certain other small Trees, and not a sprig of them to be seen above water; four or five Oaks more were expected to fall every moment, and a great quantity of Land beside, it never ceasing more or less, and when any considerable clod fell it was much like the report of a Canon; we could discern the ground hollow above the water a great way, but how far, or how deep is, not to be found out by man; the water was salt, like that of the Sea, from whence some imagine it came through cer∣tain large passages under ground, but it is probable to be no other than that which issues from those salt Springs about Nantwich, and other places in this County; may we not also judge that those Trees which are digged up in some places hereabout were buried in the Earth by some such accident as this is? July 30. 1662 was a very stormy and Tempestuous day in many parts of Cheshire, and Lancashire; at Orms∣kirk there was such a storm of hail, as brake the Glass-windows, and did much hurt to their Corn; Mr. Hey∣wood measured an Hailstone after some of it was wasted, and found it four inches about, others being thought larger; the same day in the afternoon in the Forrest of Maxfeild in Cheshire there arose a great Pillar of smoke, in height like a Steeple, and judg'd 20 yards broad, which making a most hideous noise, went along the ground 6 or 7 miles, levelling all in the way; it threw down Fences and Stonewalls, and carried the Stones a great distance from their places, but happening upon Moorish ground not inhabited, it did the less hurt, the terrible noise it made so affrighted the Cattel, that they ran away, and were thereby preserved; it passed over a Cornfield, and laid all as even with the ground as if it had been troden down with Feet; it went through a Wood, and turned up above an hundred Trees by the Roots; coming into a Field full of Cocks of Hay ready to be carried in, it swept all away, so that scarce an handful of it could afterward be found, only it left a great Tree behind in the middle of the Field, which it had brought from some other place; from the Forrest
of Maxfield it went up by a Town called Taxal, and thence to Waily Bridge, where, and no where else, it overthrew an house or two, yet the People that were in them received not much hurt, but the Timber was car∣ried away no body knew whither; from thence it went up the Hills into Derbyshire, and so vanished; this ac∣count was given by Mr. Hurst, Minister of Taxal, who had it from an Eye-witness. Dr. Walter Needham, an eminent and learned Physician in a late discourse of Anatomy, gives a Relation of a Child that cryed in its Mothers Womb, which is as followeth; A long time (saith he) I could scarce believe that there were such cryings, till I was informed of that which I now set down by a Noble Lady in Cheshire; as this Honourable Person sate after meat in the Dining Room with her Husband, their Domestick Chaplain, and divers others, she was sensible of an extraordinary stirring in her Belly, which so lift up her cloths, that it it was easily discernable to those that were present (she was then with Child, and in her seventh month) upon a suddain there was a voice heard, but whence it should come they were not able to conjecture, not suspecting any thing of the Embrio in her Womb, soon after they perceived the Belly and Garments of the Lady to have a second and notable commotion, and withal heard a cry as if it proceeded from thence; while they were a∣mazed at what had passed, and were discoursing toge∣ther of this Prodigy, all that before had happened, did a third time so manifestly appear, that (being now be∣come more attentive) they doubted not but that the cry came from her Womb; the Girl that was so talkative in the Womb of her Mother doth yet live, and is like∣ly enough so to continue; I cannot doubt, saith he, of the Truth of so eminent a story, receiving the confir∣mation of it from so credible Persons. There is a Proverb in this Country, Cheshire Chief of Men, which I hope does not carry a Challenge with it, as ingrossing Manhood to themselves, for then the Men of Kent will undertake these Chief of Men, and ano∣ther
Proverb will cross this, That no man is so good, but that another may be as good as he; indeed the Cestrians have behaved themselves valiantly in their undertakings, which was well known to K. Richard 2. who in dange∣rous times sent for 2000 Cheshire Men, all Archers to at∣tend him; which number in time of a suspicious Par∣liament was doubled by him, all of them being allowed Bread and Ber, and six pence a day besides, which was large wages in those days; pity it was that the valour of these Cheshire Men was once wasted against themselves in a terrible Battel betwixt K. Hen. 4. and Henry Piercy Sir∣named Hotspur, which is not ill described by Mr. Dray∣ton the Poet, alluding to the names of several considera∣ble Families in this County. There Dutton, Dutton kills; a Doue doth kill a Doue; A Booth a Booth, and Leigh by Leigh is overthrown: A Venables against a Venables doth stand, And Troutbeck fighteth with a Troutbeck hand to hand; There Molineux doth make a Molineux to die, And Egerton the strength of Egerton doth try: Oh Cheshire wer't thou mad? Of thine own native gore, So much until this day thou never shedst before. This County is divided into 7 Hundreds, wherein there are 13 Market Towns, 86 Parish Churches, and 38 Chappels of ease, and out of it are Elected four Parlia∣ment Men, two for the County, and two for the City of Chester; it is in the Diocess of Chester. CORNWALL, so called partly from its Form, and partly from the People, for shooting itself into the Sea like a Horn, which the Brittains called Kern, and inhabi∣ted by those whom the Saxons called Wallia, of these two compounded words it became Cornwallia, it is fabu∣led that Corineus Cousen to King Brute, had this County freely given him for his valour in wrestling with the Giant Gogmagog, and breaking his Neck from the cliff of Dover; it hath Devonshire on the West, divided from it generally by the River Tamer, incompassed with the Sea
on all other sides, affording plenty of Harbours, so that Forreigners in their passage to or from Spain, Ireland, the Levant, East or West Indies sometimes touch here, sometimes are driven hither against their Will, but ne∣ver without the profit of the Inhabitants, according to the common Proverb, where the Horse lieth down, there some hairs will be found. Cornish and Devonshire Men are more active in wrestling, and such boisterous exercises than other Counties in England, and likewise more brauny, stout, and able of body, there was one Kiltor, who lying upon his back in Lanceston Castlegreen, threw a stone of some pounds weight over the top of one of the high Towers of that Castle; and one John Romane a thick short Fellow, would carry the whole Carkass of an Ox; John Bray likewise carried at one time for a considerable space almost six Bushels of Wheaten Meal, reckoning 15 Gallons to the Bushel, and the Miller a luberly Fellow of 24 years of Age upon the whole; of whom Cambden observes, That the Western People of most Countries are the tallest and stoutest, and it is certain that the Eastermost People of the world the Chineses, are the most effeminate and unwarlike in the world; it is also observed that Rocky, and Mountainous places breed stout, hardy, warlike, and tall People, as the Highlanders in Scotland, and the Suitzers and Grisons. Mr. Carew in his survey of Cornwall, assures us upon his own knowledge, that 90 years of Age is ordinary in every place, and in most Persons accompanied with an able use of the body and their senses; one Polzew, saith he, lately living reached to an 130, a Kinsman of his to 112, one Beuchamp to 106, and in the Parish where him∣self dwelt, he professed to have remembred the decease of four within 14 weeks space, whose years added to∣gether, made up the sum of 340; the same Gentleman made this Epigram or Epitaph upon one Brawn, an Irish man, but a Cornish Beggar. Here Brawn the quodam Beggar lies, Who counted by his Tale
Some sixscore Winters and above, Such virtue is in Ale; Ale was his meat, his drink, his cloth, His Physick too beside; And could he still have drank his Ale, Then sure he had not dy'd. And one Chamond who liv'd at Stratton in this County was Uncle and great Uncle to at least 300. There was within these hundred years one Mr. Alwell Parson of St. Tues in Cornwall, who likewise practised Physick, but so strange was his method (not to say his humor) that though sometimes he used blood-letting, and administred Manus Christi, and the like Cordials, yet for all diseases he did chiefly prescribe Milk, and very often Milk and Apples, by which he performed many strange and des∣perate Cures, and got great reputation from many Pa∣tients of the Neighbouring Countries, but it is doubtful whether Mr. Atwells Physick, or the pure air of Cornwall did the work. This Country abounds with Pilchards, and also with Copper and Tinn, which grow so plentiful∣ly in the utmost part of this Promontory, that at low water the veins thereof lie bare; and in the time of Edw. 1. and 3. Silver hath been found in this Shire to the great profit of these Princes; nay Tinners do now find little quantities of Gold, and sometimes Silver a∣mong the Tinn Oar, which they sell to the Goldsmiths; Diamonds are found in many places cleaving to those Rocks out of which the Tinn is digged, they are smooth∣ed, squared, and pointed by nature, their quantity is from a Pease to a Walnut, the Tinners many times dig up whole huge Trees of Timber at the bottom of the Mines, which they think were there buried ever since the Flood; they find also Pick axes of Holm, Box, and Hartshorn, and sometimes certain small tool heads of Brass, and once a brass Coin of the Emperour Do∣mitian, an argument that the Romans formerly wrought in them; these Mines are discovered by certain Tinn∣stones round and smooth found lying on the ground;
but if we believe reports, there is a more easy way, and that is by Dreams, by which it's said, works of great va∣lue have been found; as in K. Edward 6th time, a Gen∣tlewoman (Heiress to one Titsculiard) dreamed, a hand∣some man told her, that in such a Tenement of her Land she should find Tinn enough to inrich her self and her posterity; who telling her Husband, upon Tryal he found a Tinnwork there, which in 4 years was worth to him almost 4000 pounds; it is said likewise that one Taprel of St. Niot, by a dream of his Daughters was wished to such a place, which he farmed of the Lord of the Soil, and found a Tinnwork accor∣dingly, which made him a rich man; which Stories if true make much for the credit of Womens dreams. From the bottom of the Tinn-works if they be of any depth, you may see the Stars at noon-day in clear wea∣ther; the labour is so hard, and tedious, that they can∣not work above 4 hours in a day, they sometimes meet with loose earth, yet otherwhile they light upon such hard Rocks, that a good workman can scarce hew above a foot in a week; sometimes again they meet with great streams of water, and sometimes with stinking damps that distemper their heads for the present, though not dangerously; I hear of no Medicinal Water in this Countrey, but only one, and since he that telleth a mi∣raculous truth, must always carry the Author at his back (saith my Author) I will transcribe the words of B. Hall in his Myst. of Godliness, speaking of the good Of∣fices of Angels to Gods Servants; Of this kind, saith he, was that no less than miraculous cure which at St. Maderns in Cornwall, was wrought upon a poor Cripple, whereof besides the attestation of many Hundreds of the Neighbours, I took a strict and impartial examination in my last Visitation; this man for 16 years together was fain to walk upon his hands, by reason the sinews of his legs were so contracted, and upon Monitions in his dream to wash in that Well, was suddenly so restored to his Limbs, that I saw him able both to walk, and get his own maintenance, I found here was neither Art nor Col∣lusion the thing done, the Invisible Author being God.
In this County there are some stones called Hurlers, at a competent distance from each other, which are vainly reported to be men transformed into Stones; in St. Cleers Parish there are upon a Plain 6 or 8 Stones, such as are upon Salisbury Plain, which like them too, will be mistaken in the telling: near Helford is a Rock lying on the ground, the top whereof is hollow like the long half of an Egg, this they say holdeth water, which ebbeth and floweth with the Sea, and indeed, saith the Author, when I came hither to see this Curiosity the Tide was half gone, and the Pit or hollowness half empty, There is a rock in this County called Mainamber, erected as some conceive by Ambrosius that Valiant Brittain upon some Victory obtained by him against the Romans, or other Enemies; this is a Masterpiece of Mathematicks, and Critical Proportions, being a great Stone of so exact position on the top of a Rock that the push of a Fin∣ger will sensibly move it to and fro, and yet all the strength that men could make, was not thought sufficient to remove it out of the place; but know Reader (saith Dr. Fuller) that this wonder is now unwondred, for I am credibly informed that some Souldiers of late have utterly destroyed it, which shews how dangerous it is for Art to stand in the way of ignorance, surely Cove∣tousness could not tempt them to it, though it was the ruine of a fair Monument in Turky, where a Tomb was erected near the Highway (according to the fashion of that Country) on some Person of Quality, consisting of a Pillar, and on the top thereof a Chapiter or great Globe of Stone, whereon was written in the Turkish Language; The Brains are in the Head; this stood many years undemolished (it being very criminal there to violate the Monuments of the dead) till one of less conscience, but more cunning than others, passing by it, resolved to unriddle the meaning of this Inscrip∣tion, and breaking the hollow Globe open, found it full of Gold, and departed the richer, though not the hone∣ster; certainly if any such temptation invited the Soul∣diers to this Act they missed their mark therein.
At Hall near Foy there is a Faggot all of one piece of wood, naturally grown so, it is wrapped about the middle with a band, and parted at ends into four sticks, one of which is divided into two others. In Lanhadron Park there grows an Oak that bears leaves speckled, and white; and so doth another called Painters Oak; it is certain (saith our Author) that divers Ancient Fami∣lies in England are forewarned of their death by Oaks bearing strange leaves. An Earthen Pot was found some years ago near Foy, gilded and graven with Let∣ters in a great stone Chest, and full of a black Earth, the Ashes, it's thought, of some Ancient Roman. At Tre∣maton in Cornwall in the Chancel of the Church a Leaden Coffin was digged up, in which being opened was found the proportion of a very big mans body, but being tou∣ched, turned to dust. It was thought to be the body of Duke Orgarus who, as Speed saith, married his Daughter to K. Edgar, for there was an Inscription on the Coffin that signified it was the body of a Duke whose Heiress was Married to a Prince. Likewise an exceeding great Carkass of a Man was found by the Tinners digging at a Village near the lands end called Trebegean; there is a story that passes of St. Kaines Well in this County, that whoever drinks first of this water, whether Hus∣band or Wife, they are sure to get the Mastery; a fit Fable for the vulgar to believe; In the West parts of Cornwall during the Winter, Swallows are found sitting in old deep Tinn-works, and holes of the Sea-cliffs. On the Shore of this Shire about 30 or 40 years ago, a huge Mass of Ambergreece was found by a poor Fisherman, of a very great value. King Arthur Son to Ʋter-pendragon, was born at Tinta∣gel Castle in this County, and was afterward Monarch of Great Brittain; he may fitly be termed the Brittish Hercules in three respects. 1. For his Illegitimate Birth, both being Bastards, begotten on other Mens Wives, and yet their Mothers honest Women, both deluded by Art-Magick, (the last by Merlin) by other men coming to them in the form of their Husbands. 2. In his pain∣ful
life, one being famous for his twelve labours, and the other for his 12 Victories against the Saxons, and both of them had been greater had they been made less, and the reports of them reduced within the compass of probability. 3. In their violent and painful deaths, our Arthur being as lamentable, and more honourable, not caused by Feminine Jealousy, but Masculine Treachery, being murdered by Mordred near the place where he was born. As though no other place on Brittains spacious earth, Were worthy of his end, but where he had his Birth. As for his round Table, and his Knights about it, the Tale thereof has never met with much credit a∣mongst the Judicious. The Cornish men in general have ever been held valiant, and therefore K. Arthur made them his Vanguard, as appears by the following Verses. Brave Arthur when he meant a Field to fight, Ʋs Cornish men did first of all invite; Only to Cornish against Caesars Swords, He the first blow in Battel still affords. Yet these People have sometimes abused their valour to Rebellion, as in the Reign of Hen. 7. where upon the account of raising a subsidy granted by Parliament a∣gainst the Scots, they made a commotion, the Ringleaders being Thomas Flammock a Lawyer, and Mi∣chael Joseph a Smith, who having assembled an Army, went to Taunton, where they slew the Provost Peryn, one of the Commissioners of the Subsidy, and marching for∣ward, James Tutchet, Lord Audly joined with them, and took on him to be their Leader, at last they came to Black-Heath (intending to come to the King at London) and there incamped on the top of the Hill; the King sent the Earls of Oxford, Essex, Suffolk, and others to in∣compass the Hill, that so none might escape, and him∣self incamping in Sr. Georges Fields, he sent the Lord Dawbeny to set upon them, who won Debtford Bridge
from them, though strongly defended, their Arrows being reported to be a full yard in length, and assaulting them every way, killed 2000, and took many Prisoners, divers of whom the King pardoned, but none of the Leaders; the L. Audly was drawn from Newgate to Tow∣er-Hill in a Coat of his own Arms drawn upon Paper, reversed, and all torn, and there beheaded; Thomas Flammock and Michael Joseph were drawn, hang'd and quartered, and their quarters set upon stakes. It is me∣morable with what comfort Joseph the Blacksmith chear∣ed up himself at his going to Execution, saying, That yet he hoped by this, his name and memory should be everlasting; so dear even to vulgar spirits is perpetuity of name, though joined with Infamy, what is it then to noble Spirits when it is joyned with Glory? They were likewise guilty of another Rebellion in the 2. of K. Edward 6, 1549. for injunctions being sent forth by that pious Prince for removing Images out of Churches, and that the Ministers should dissuade the People from praying to Saints, for for the dead, from use of Beeds, Ashes, and Processions, from Masses Dir∣ges, praying in an unknown Tongue, &c. when Commissio∣ners went abroad to see them executed, Mr. Body a Commissioner as he was pulling down Images in Corn∣wall, was suddenly stabbed with a knife into the body by a Popish Priest; hereupon the People flockt together from several parts of this Shire, and taking Arms, com∣mitted divers outrages, as they did also in several other Counties; these Religious Mutineers sent several Articles to the King, and among other things required to have the Latine Mass again, and the six Articles in K. Henry 8. time (called the bloody Articles) revived again; now though the King knew reasons would little prevail with unreasonable men, yet he sent them answers in writing, and a general Pardon if they would desist, and lay down their Arms; the answer about the 6 Articles is worth re∣hearsing; You require, saith the King, to have the Statute of the 6 Articles revived, do you know what you ask? Do you understand what safety and ease you enjoy without them? these
Laws were indeed made, but as soon repented of, for they were too cruel and bloody to be endured by our People; oh poor Igno∣rant Subjects, how are you insnared and deceived by subtle Traitors? We out of pity took them away, beeause they were bloody, and you out of Ignorance desire them again, you know full well they made us to be cruel and severe, and gave us cause to draw our Sword very often; they were like a whetstone to our Sword, and for your sakes only we left off to use them; and since our mercy inclineth us to write our Laws in Milk and Equity, how come you to be so blinded as to desire they should be writ in blood? But assure your selves and be confident, that we make account of nothing under Heaven so much as this, to have our Laws obeyed, and this cause of God which we have underta∣ken to be throughly maintained, from which we will never re∣move a hairs breadth, nor give place to any Creature living, much less to any Subject, but therein we will venture our own Royal Person, our Crown, Treasure, Realm, and all our Estate, whereof we assure you of our high honour; and as to the Com∣mon Prayer which you are against, it cannot certainly offend any reasonable man that the service of God is changed from an unknown Tongue, since it is only to make him understand what before he knew not, and thereby to give his consent to those Pray∣ers which he hath most need of, and to affect his Conscience therewith, since God requireth the heart only, and that we should offer a reasonable Service to him. He concludes; We for our parts desire to live no longer than to be a Father to our People, and as God hath made us your Rightful King, so hath he com∣manded you to be obedient, by whose great Majesty we solemnly protest, you shall feel the Power of the same God in our Sword, which how mighty it is, no Subject knoweth, how puissant no private man can judge, and how mortal no English heart can think; therefore imbrace our Mercy while it is offered, lest the blood spilt by your means cry for vengeance from the Earth, and be heard in the ears of the Lord in Heaven. But the Rebels grew still more outragious, coming before the City of Exeter, and demanding entrance; which being refused, they endeavoured to take it by storm, and firing the Gates, and Mining, but all in vain, yet they lay so long before it, that the Citizens within suffered great want of
Victuals, making bread of the courfest bran, and fee∣ding upon Horseflesh, in which extremity an aged Citi∣zen bringing forth all his Provisions to the People, told them, That as he communicated to them his store, so he would partake with them in their wants, and that he would feed upon one Arm, and fight with the other before he would consent to put the City into the hands of the Seditious; but the L. Grey, and the L. Russel after many conflicts with the Rebels forced them to raise the Seige, and utterly routed them; the Sedition being thus suppressed, it is memorable what cruel sport Sir William Kingston the Provost Marshal made, by virtue of his Office upon men in misery; one Boyer Mayor of Bodmin in Cornwall had been amongst the Rebels, not willingly, but inforced; to him the Pro∣vost sent word he would come and dine with him, for whom the Mayor made great Provision; a little before Dinner the Provost took the Mayor aside, and whispered him in the ear, That an Execution must be that day done in the Town, and therefore required to have a pair of Gallows set up against Dinner was done; the Mayor provided them accordingly, presently after Din∣ner the Provost taking the Mayor by the hand, intrea∣ted him to shew him the place where the Gallows was, which when he beheld, he asked the Mayor, if he thought them to be strong enough; yes, said the Mayor, doubtless they are; well then, said the Provost, get you up speedily for they are provided for you: I hope, said the Mayor, you do not mean as you speak; In faith, saies the Provost, there is no Remedy, for you have been a busie Rebel; and so without respite or defence he was hanged to death; a most un∣courteous part for a Guest to offer his Host. Near the same place dwelt a Miller that had been very active in that Rebellion; who fearing the approach of the Mar∣shal, told a sturdy Fellow his Servant, that he had occa∣sion to go from home, and if any man should inquire for the Miller, he bid him say, that himself was the Miller, and had been so for 3 years before; soon after the Provost came, and called for the Miller, when out comes the Servant, and said he was the man, the Provost
demanded how long he had kept the Mill: These 3 years, answered the Servant; the Provost then commanded his men to lay hold of him, and hang him on the next Tree; at this the Fellow cried out, That he was not the Miller, but the Millers Man; Nay Sir, said the Provost, I will take you at your word, and if thou beest the Miller, thou art a busie Knave; if thou beest not, thou art a false lying Knave, and however thou canst never do thy Master better service than to hang for him, and so without more ado he was dis∣patched. I will conclude the Remarks of this County with somewhat more Comical. At the Dissolution of Abbeys K. Ken. 8. gave away large shares to almost every one that asked: Amongst other Instances take this merry story. It happened that two or three Gentlemen, the Kings servants, waited at the door, where the King was to come out, with a design to beg a large parcel of Ab∣by Lands; One Mr. John Champernoun, another of his servants, seeing them, was very inquisitive to know their suit, but they would not impart it to him; in the mean time out comes the King, they kneel down, so doth Champernoun, (being assured by an implicit Faith that Courtiers beg nothing hurtful to themselves) they present their Petition, the King grants it, they render him humble thanks, so doth Mr. Champernoun; after∣ward he requires his share; they deny it; he appeals to the King, who avows, that he meant they should have equal shares; whereupon his Companions were forced to allot him the Priory of St. German in Cornwal, valued at 243 pound a Year; so that a dumb Beggar met with a blind Giver, the one as little knowing what he asked as the other what he gave. This County is divided into nine Hundreds, wherein are 22 Market Towns, and 161 Pa∣rish Churches: It elects 44 Members to sit in Parlia∣ment, and is in the Diocess of Exeter. CUMBERLAND hath Scotland on the North, Northumberland and Westmerland on the East, Lancashire on the South, and the Irish Sea on the West. We read that King Edmund, with the help of Leoline Prince of
Wales, wasted all Cumberland, and having put out the Eyes of the 2 Sons of Dunmail, King of that Province, granted that Kingdom to Malcolm, K. of Scots, whereof their eldest Sons became Prefects. King Edward the 1st dyed at Carlile in this County; for intending to invade Scotland, he raised a great Army, which he ordered to attend him at this City; but falling sick, and being sen∣sible it would be his death, he commanded his Son (af∣terward Edward 2.) to be brought into his presence, to whom he left many good Precepts and Admonitions, exhorting him, To be merciful, just, and courteous, constant and true both in Word and Deed, that he should be pitiful to those in misery, that he should carry his bones with him about Scotland till he had subdued it; and that he should send his Heart into the Holy Land, with Sevenscore Knights, and Thirty two thousand Pound of Silver, which he had provided for that purpose; lastly, that upon pain of eternal damnation the said Money should not be expended upon any other use: soon after which he died. In the 17th Year of this Kings Reign the City of Car∣lile, with the Abby, and all the Houses belonging to the Friers Minors, were consumed with fire. In the Reign of Q. Elizabeth a rich Vein of most pure and native Brass was found at Keswrick in Cumberland, which had lain neglected a long time. In April 1651, about 5 a Clock in the Afternoon, there was a general Earthquake in the Counties of Cumberland and Westmerland, where∣with the People were so affrighted, that many of them forsook their Houses, and some Houses were so shaken, that the Chimneys fell down: Presently after the Scot∣tish Army came into England to assist the Parliament, it rained Blood which covered the Church and Church-Yard of Bencastle in this County. At Salkelds upon the River Eden is a Trophy of Victory, called by the Coun∣try People, Long Meg and her Daughters; they are 77 stones, each of them 10 Foot high above ground, and one of them is 15 Foot in height. Skiddaw Hill riseth up with two mighty high Heads like Parnassus, and be∣holds Scruffell hill in Anandale within Scotland, there is a Rime that
Skiddaw, Lauvellin, and Casticand Are the highest hills in all England. These being two other Hills in this Tract; according as Mists rise or fall upon these Heads, the People there∣by prognosticate of the change of Weather, and there∣fore they sing, If Skiddaw have a Cap, Scruffell knows full well of that. The Sea hath eaten a great part of the Land away up∣on the shores of these Western Shires, and Trees are sometimes discovered, when the Wind blows at low Water, else they are covered over with Sands, and the People thereabout say that they dig up Trees without boughs out of the mossy places in this Shire, which they find by the direction of the Dew in Summer, which they observe never falls on the ground under which they lie. Some Emperick Chirurgions in Scotland take a jour∣ney to the Picts Wall the beginning of every Summer, to gather vulnerary Plants, which they say grow plenti∣fully there, and are very effectual, being sown and plant∣ed by the Romans for Chirurgical Uses. There is a small Burrough called Solway Frith, under which, within the very Frith or Bay, the Inhabitants report the Engl sh and Scots fought with their Fleets at full Sea, and also with their Horsemen and Footmen at the Ebb. This Province was accounted a Kingdom of itself, and King Steven to purchase aid from the Scots, confirmed it by gift to that Crown, which Henry 2. claimed and regain∣ed from them, since which many bickerings have hap∣pened between the two Nations in this Shire, but none so fatal to the Scots as the Fight at Salome Moss, where the Nobility disdaining to serve under their General Oliver Sinclare, gave over the Battle, and yielded them∣selves to the English, which dishonour so deeply wound∣ed the heart of K. James the 5. that he died for grief soon after. There are many ruines of Castles, Walls and Forts in this County, with Altars and Inscriptions of
their Captains and Collonels. This County is not divi∣ded into Hundreds as the rest, but therein are seated 9 Market Towns, 58 Parish Churches, and divers Chap∣pels of ease. It Elects 6 Parliament Men; for the Coun∣y 2. Carlile 2. Cockermouth 2. and is in the Diocess of Chester and Carlile. DERBY-SHIRE hath Yorkshire on the North, Nottinghamshire on the East, Leicestershire on the South, Stafford and Cheshire on the West, the River Derwent runs through the middle of it; the best Lead in England is found in this County; as likewise Milstones, Christal, Alabaster, and Whetstone, Pitcoal, and Iron. The most remarkable thing in this County is the Peak, where∣in there is a Cave called the Devils Arse, which is a great Rock or Castle upon an high hill, under which there is a Cave in the ground of a vast bigness; the name is oc∣casioned by reason it seems to have two Buttocks stick∣ing out like a Mans, bending to the ground, the Arch of the Rock is very high, and through it drops of wa∣ter fall; having good store of Lights they enter into it, and going between two Rocks near together, lose the sight of day, the passage is so low, that they are fain to creep on their hands and knees, they then come to a dark River which runs slowly; beyond which they can∣not pass; there is another high hill called Maim Tour, or Mam Tor, called so (saith one) because maimed, or roken at the top, and looks like an old ruined wall, from which the Sand falls continually down, and yet the hill is not in the least diminished, having as it seems a spring of matter from whence it is recruited. Eldenhole is a place remarkable, two miles distant from Castleton, a Town in the High Peak, the hole is about 0 yards long, and 15 yards broad on the top, descen∣ding directly down into the Earth, but it is much strai∣er when it cometh forty yards deep, you may see into it above 60 yards, which is as far as the light which cometh in at the mouth will admit; if you throw a stone into it, you may hear it strike 10 times on the
sides of the Rock in its fall, and then you hear it no more; it is reported that the Earl of Leicester in Q. Eliza∣beths time hired a poor Countryman to suffer himself to be let down with Ropes tyed about him, and to hang in the middle while they threw down Stones, that there∣by he might know the depth thereof; having a pole in his hand to keep the Stones from hurting him; being let down in this manner above an 100 yards, and the Stones thrown down, he was drawn up again; but whe∣ther the fear of the Rope breaking, or the Stones knoc∣king him on the head from above, or the Ghosts and Spirits which are supposed to be there, was the occasion of his disturbance is uncertain, but it seems he fell stark mad, and died within 8 days after; and about 60 years since Mr. Henry Cavendish, who had spent his day in Travel, having been at Jerusalem, and several other parts of the World, hearing of this place came to it, and caused Engines to be made to let a man down into the hole, and one George Bradley was let down accordingly in a Rope of 80 yards, and then another Engine was made to let him go fourscore yards further, and at the end thereof a third Engine whereby he was let down al∣most 80 yards further; at the top of the Rope was faste∣ned a Bell, which he was to ring if he could go no fur∣ther; when he was let down almost the third fourscore yards, he rung the Bell, and being drawn up he was much affrighted, remained speechless for a time, and was struck with lameness; after he recovered his speech he declared, that as he descended down, there were bones of Deer, Sheep, and other Cattel, and also of Men, and that he was ated, but how or in what manner he could not  he lived several years, but never was in his per senses, nor sound of his Limbs▪ Not far from hence there is a Fountain which eb and f like the Sea, though not the same hours, neither is it fa: At Burton there is a hot Bath, where out of the Rock, within the compass of 8 yards, nine Springs a∣rise, eight of them warm, and the ninth very cold; these run from under a fair Stone Building, and about
sixty paces off, receive another hot spring from a Well closed with four flat Stones, called St. Ann, near which a very cold Spring bubleth up; it is found by aily experience that great cures have been done by ese waters, as being good for the Stomach and Sinews, nd very pleasant to bath the body in, the effects whereof e thus described by our Author. Ʋnto St. Ann the Fountain sacred is, With waters hot and cold its Springs do rise, And in its Sulphur veins there's Medicinelies. Old Mens numb'd joints new vigour here acquire, In frozen Nerves this water kindleth Fire; Hither the Cripples halt some help to find, Run hence, and leave their Crutches here behind. The barren hither to be fruitful come, And without help of Spouse go Mothers home. Pools Hole is another Cave not far off, so called, say he Inhabitants, from a famous Thief of that name, who eizing upon Travellers, carried them in hither, and hen robbed and murdered them; it is seated at the bot∣tom of a Hill, and the entrance so narrow, that they re forced to stoop much, but farther in it is higher, ut very dark; when they go in with lights, the roof eems to shine with sparks of fire, going further over ocks and Stones which seem like Mountains and Val∣es; there is a blind River, which murmures against the Rocks, passing this over, they creep up another high Rock, where there is a dark Cave, on the ceiling where∣of hang stones like Gammons of Bacon, there is also a yellow Stone like a Lyon with a rough main, and ano∣her which resembles a grave old Man lying on a Bed; a ittle from hence is another Cave which is called Pools ed Chamber, all of plain Stone, wherein there is a Rock like a Bed, and a Stone like a Chamberpot. Joan Wast a blind Woman in the Town of Derby, was Martyred in this County, who was rather, saith Dr. Fuller, the object of any Mans mercy, than the Subject of his Cruelty; besides she was a silly soul, and indeed
an Innocent though no Fool: This poor Woman had a clear apprehension of Gods Truth, for the Testimony whereof she was condemned and burnt at the stake, by the command of Bains the bloody Popish Bishop, who a he began with Ms. Joyce one of the best, and this Joan Wast one of the meanest birth in this Diocess, so no doubt, had Queen Mary lived, he would have made hi cruelty meet in persons of a middle condition. Th Ms. Joyce being asked by the Bishop why she would no be present at the Mass, and receive the Sacraments, she answered, Because she found them not in Gods Word, other∣wise, said she, I would with all my heart reverence, esteem, and receive them. The Bishop replied, If thou wilt belie no more than is written in the Scriptures thou art in a damna∣ble condition: At which she was much amazed, telling him his words were ungodly and wicked; being con∣demned, and brought to the stake, she prayed earnest∣ly three times, and especially that God would abolish the Idolatrous Mass, to which almost all the multitude and amongst them the Sheriff himself, cried Amen; the taking a Cup of Beer, she said, I drink unfeignedly to all those that love the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, and that wish the abolishment of Popery; her Friends pledged her, and several of them did pennance for it afterward; when the fire was put to her she neither strived nor struggled, but with her hands lift up to Heaven, she quickly gave up the Ghost. Sir Hugh Willoughby was born of a worthy and ancient Family at Risely in this County; In the Reign of K. Ed∣ward 6. he was imployed by the King and the Mer∣chants of London to find out the North East passage to the East Indies, having three Ships provided for that purpose with a large Commission, which did not bear date from the Year of our Lord, but from the Year of the World 5515, because in their long Voyage they might have occasion to present it to foreign Princes: They depart∣ed from Deptford May 10. 1553, and after much fou weather steered North-North-West; but Aug. 2. Tempest arose, whereby one of the Ships was divided
from the rest, and they never saw it again: Sir Hugh holding on his Course discovered a Land, which for Ice he could not come near in the Latitude of 72 Degrees; This was then called Willoughby's Land, as well it might, since it had neither then nor since any Owner or Inha∣bitant pretending to the propriety thereof; It appear∣eth by a Will found in that Ship, which was the Admiral, in the Pocket of a Person of Quality, that in January 1554. Sir Hugh, and most of his company, were then in health, though all soon after frozen to death in a River or Haven, called Arzina in Lapland: The next Summer some other English Ships coming to the same place, found the Ship intire, and all the men frozen to death, with a particular account of all the passages of their Voy∣age. Lapland hath several times since been surrounded by the English, the West part whereof belongeth to the K. of Sweden, and the East to the Muscovite, they are ge∣nerally Heathens, as poor in Knowledge as Estate, pay∣ing their Tribute in Furs, whose little houses are but great holes, wherein they generally live in the Ignorance of Money. Here let me insert a passage to refresh the Reader after this sad story: There is a custom in this barbarous Country, (as credible Merchants, who have been Eye-witnesses, report) that it is death to marry a maid without her Parents and Friends consent; there∣fore if any man have an affection for a Maid, a day is appointed for both of their Friends to meet, and see the young couple run a Race; the Maid hath the advantage of starting, and a third part of the Race, so that it is im∣possible, except she be willing her self, she should ever be overtaken; if the Maid outrun her Sweet-heart the bu∣siness is ended, he must never have her, nor make any further motion to her under a great penalty; but if the Virgin have any affection for him, though she at first may run hard to try the truth of his Love, yet she will pretend to stumble, or make a voluntary halt, before she comes to the end of the Race, so that he may over∣take her: Thus none are compelled to marry against their Wills, which is the cause that in this poor Country the
married People are richer in their own content than in other Lands, where so many forced matches make feigned Love and cause real unhappiness. In April 1660, about Chesterfield it rained white Ashes, which fell in such quantities, that several Fields lookt white as if Snow had covered them. The same Year, Nov. 20. the River Derwent was at Derby, and 5 Miles above, and 5 Miles below that Town, for 3 or 4 hours totally dried up, so that no water during that time came to any of the Mills upon the River; the Boats were all on ground, and the Fishes upon the Sand, so that the Children took them up in their hands, and in several places the people went over the Channel dryshod, which is more remarkable, because Derwent is an inland River, and never ebbs or flows, and it is at Derby generally an 100 Foot broad, and 7 or 8 Foot deep, and is an ex∣traordinary quick, fierce stream. On Nov. 11. 1662, there happened a dreadful Whirlwind at Derby where∣by tat, Town was in 4 Minutes time damnified above 500 Pounds: It blew the Tiles off the Houses, threw down several Barns; Apple-Trees, and other Fruit-Trees were torn up by the Roots; it overturned great Stone-walls, and broke some Gates (though fastened with Iron Bars) into pieces; this strange Wind was ac∣companied with great flashes of Fire, and some af∣firmed that it rained Blood also. The Ale of Derbyshire is very famous, as being count∣ed the best and strongest in the Nation; it is the old Drink of England, though a French Poet in King Henry the Third's lays, merrily jested on it in these verses. Nescio quid Stygiae monstrum conforme paludi, &c. Of this strange drink so like the Stygian Lake (They fall in Ale) I know not what to make: Men drink o hi, and vent it passing thin, Much dregs therefore must needs remain within. This County is divided into six Hundreds, wherein are 10 Market Towns, 106 Parish Churches, and out
of it are elected 4 Parliament Men, for the County 2. for the Town of Derby 2. It is in the Diocess of Ex∣eter. DEVONSHIRE hath the narrow Sea on the South, the Severn on the North, Cornwal on the West, and Dorset and Somerset shires on the East; the Natives thereof are generally very ingenious in any imployment, and Q. Elizabeth used to say of their Gentry, They were all born Courtiers with a becoming Confidence. There was Silver formerly found in great Plenty in the Parish of Comb-Mar∣tin, and in the Reign of K. Edw, the 1. Miners were fetcht out of Derbyshire for digging thereof, which turn∣ed to considerable profit, as appeareth by a Record in the Tower of Lond. For Will. Wymondham accounted for 270 pounds weight of Silver in his 22. Year, and in his 23. Year, he was fined 521 pounds 10 shillings weight; in his 24. Year there was brought to London in fined Sil∣ver in Wedges, 704 Pounds, 3 shillings, and 1 penny weight; in his 25. Year, though 360 Miners were pres∣sed out of the Peak and Wales to dig it, yet great was that Years clear profit in Silver and Lead: In the Reign of Edw. 3 it appeareth by the Record of particular Ac∣countants, that the profits of the Silver were very con∣siderable toward the maintenance of that Kings great Expences in the French Wars: These Mines having been long neglected, it may be by reason of the Civil Wars between Lancaster and York, were again re-entred on by one Bulmer, an Artist in the Reign of Q. Elizabeth, who presented a Silver Cup made thereof to the Earl of Bath, with this Inscription, alluding to the Mettal, In Martins-Comb I long lay hid Obscure, deprest with grossest Soil, Debased much with mixed Lead, Till Bulmer came, whose skill and toil Reformed me so pure and clean, As richer no where else is seen. This County hath many commodious Havens for
Ships, among which Totnes was famous for Brutes first entrance, if Geffry Monmouth say true, and another Poet who writes thus of Brute: The Gods did guide his Sail and Course, The Winds were at command, And Totnes was the happy shore Where first he came to land. But it is more certain, and withal more lamentable, that the Danes first entred at Teignemouth to invade this Land about 787, unto whom Brightrick King of the West Saxons sent the Steward of his house to know their demands, whom they villanously slew, yet were they forced back to their Ships by the Inhabitants. With more happy suc∣cess hath Plimouth set forth men of renowned Fame, and prevented the entrance of Invaders, as in the Reign of that eternised Queen, the Mirrour of Princes, Elizabeth of everlasting memory; for from this Port Sir Francis Drake that famous Knight, and most valiant Sea Cap∣tain, set forth to Sea in 1577, and entred into the Streights of Magellane, and in Two Years and Ten Months, through various changes of Fortune, Divine Providence being his Guide, and valour his Consort, sailed round about the World, of whom one writ thus: Drake peragrati novit quem terminus orbis, &c. Drake, whom the incompast World so fully knew, Whom both the Poles of Heaven at once did view; If Men are silent, Stars and Sun will care To Register their Fellow-Traveller. As he lived most part of his Time, so he died and was buried at Sea; when his Corps was cast out of the Ship one made this Tetrastick on him: Though Romes Religion should in time return, Drake, none thy Body will ungrave again. There is no fear Posterity should burn, Those Bones which free from Fire in Sea remain.
And the Lord Charles Howard, High Admiral did not only from Plimouth impeach the entrance of the proud Invincible Spanish Armado in 88. but with his Cannons marked them so, as shewed who had had the handling of them, as tokens of their own Shame, and his immortal Honour. The Commodities of this Shire consist much in Wool and Clothing; Corn is likewise very plenteous, as likewise Fish and Fowl; The City of Exeter is the Shire Town, environed with Ditches and strong Walls a mile and half in Circuit, wherein are 15 Parish Churches, and a Castle called Rugemont, which commands the whole City and Country about it, and hath a pleasant prospect into the Sea. The River Lid by Lid∣ford runs under ground, the stream sinking so deep, that it is altogether invisible, but it supplies to the Ear what it denies to the Eye, so great is the noise thereof. In the Parish of North-Taun on near an House called Bath, there is a Pit, but in the Winter a Pool, not maintained by a∣ny Spring, but the fall of rain water, and therefore com∣monly dry in Summer; of which Pool it hath been ob∣served (saith Dr. Fuller) that before the death, or change of any Prince, or some other strange accident of great importance, or any Invasion or Insurrection, it will though in a hot and dry season, without any rain overflow its banks, and so continue till that which it prognosticated be past and fulfilled, and the Re∣later who published his book 1648. reports, That it over∣flowed four times in 30 years past; There is another thing in this County called the Hanging Stone, being one of the Bound stones which parteth Comb-Martin from the next Parish; it took the name from a Theif, who having stoln a Sheep, and tyed it about his neck to carry it on his back, rested himself a while upon this Stone which is about a foot high, till the Sheep strugling, slid over the Stone on the other side, and so strangled the man, which appeareth rather to be a Providence than a ca∣sualty, in the just execution of a Malefactor. We may add to these wonders, the Gubbings, which is a Scythia within England, and they pure Heathens within, this place lyeth nigh Brent Tor, on the edge of
Dartmoor; it is reported that about 200 years ago, two Strumpets being with Child fled thither to hide them∣selves, to whom certain debauched Fellows resorted and that this was their Original; they are a People who live by themselves, exempt from all Authority Eccle∣siastical and Civil; they dwell in Cottages like Swine, being rather holes than Houses, having all in common, and multiplied without Marriage into many Hundreds; their Language is the dross of the dregs of the Devonshire Speech, and the more learned a man is, the less they can understand him; during our Civil Wars no Souldiers were quartered among them, for fear of being them¦selves quartered by them; their Wealth consists of o∣ther mens Goods, and they live by stealing the Sheep on the Moor, and vain it is for any to search their Houses, being a work beneath the pains of a Sheriff, and above the Power of any Constable, their swiftness is such, that they will outrun many Horses; they are so healthful, that they outlive most men, living in the ignorance of Luxury, the extinguisher of life, they hold together like Burs, and if you offend one, all will revenge his Quarrel. In the year 959. Edgar, one of the Saxon Kings of this Land, hearing of the admirable beauty of Elfrida, the only Daughter of Ordgarus, Duke of Devonshire, and Founder of Tavistock Abby in that County; he sent his great Favourite Earl Ethelwold, who could well judge of beauty, to try the truth thereof; with Commission that if he found her such as Fame reported, he should bring her with him, and he would make her his Queen; the young Earl upon sight of the Lady, was so surprized, that he began to woe her for himself, and had procured her Fathers good will in case he could obtain the Kings consent; hereupon the Earl posted back to the King, re∣lating to him, That the Lady was fair indeed, but nothing answerable to the report that went of her, yet desired the King that he might Marry her, as being her Fathers Heir thereby to raise his Fortune; The King consented, and the Marriage was solemnized; soon after the fame of her beauty be∣gan
to spread more than before, so that the King much doubting he had been abused, resolved to try the truth himself, and thereupon taking occasion to hunt in the Dukes Park, came to his house; whose coming Ethel∣wold suspecting, acquainted his Wife with the wrong he had done both her and the King in disparaging her beauty, and therefore to prevent the Kings displeasure, intreated her by all manner of persuasions he could possibly use, to cloth her self in such attire as might least set her forth; but she resolving to be revenged, and con∣sidering that now was the time to make the most of her beauty, and longing to be a Queen, would not be acces∣sary to her own injury, but decked her self in her ri∣chest Ornaments, which so improved her beauty, that the King was struck with astonishment, and admiration at first sight, and was fully resolved to be quit with his perfidious Favourite, yet dissembling his passion, he went to hunting, where taking Ethelwold at an advantage, he ran him through with a Javelin, and having thereby made fair Elfrid a Widdow, he took her to be his Wife. We read that Ordulphus Son of Ordgarus, Earl of Devon∣shire, (but whether this or no is uncertain) was a Gi∣antlike Man, and could break open the bars of Gates with his hands, and stride 10 foot at once, but of what credit it is I know not. Agnes Preist was burnt for the Protestant Faith with∣out the Walls of Exeter; her own Husband, and her Children were her greatest Persecutors, from whom she fled, because they would force her to be present at Mass; she was Indicted at the Assizes, and afterward presented to James Troublefield, Bishop of Exeter, and by him condemned for denying the Sacrament of the Al∣tar; after her condemnation she refused to receive any mony from well affected People, saying, She was going to a City where Mony had no Mastery; she was a simple Wo∣man to behold, little of stature, and about 50 years old; she was burnt in a place called Sothenhay, in November 1558. One Child, whose Christian name is unknown, was a
Gentleman, the last of his Family, being of an ancient extraction at Plimstock in this County, and had great possessions; it happened that hunting in Dartmore, he lost both his Company and way in a deep Snow: ha∣ving therefore killed his Horse, he crept into his hot bowels for warmth, and writ this with his blood, Whoever finds and brings me to my Tomb, The Land of Plimstock that shall be his doom. The night after it seems he was frozen to death, and being first found by the Monks of Tavistock, they with all possible hast provided to inter him in their own Abby; his own Parishioners at Plimstock hearing there∣of, stood at the ford of the River to take the body from them; but they must rise early, yea not sleep at all, who over-reach Monks in matter of profit; for they cast a slight Bridge over the River, whereby they carried over the Corps, and interred it; in remembrance whereof the Bridge, since better built, is called Guile-Bridge to this day. Nicholas, and Andrew Tremain were Twins, and younger Sons to Thomas Tremain of Colacomb in this County, Esq such was their likeness in all the parts of Face and Body, that they could not be distinguished but by their different habits, which they would some∣times exchange to make sport, which occasioned very merry mistakes; they felt like pain though at a distance, & without any notice given, they equally desired to walk, travel, sit, sleep, eat, drink together at the same time, as many credible Gentry of the Neighbourhood, by re∣lation from their Father will attest; in this they diffe∣red, at Newhaven in France, the one was a Captain of a Troop, the other but a private Soldier; here they were both slain 1564. death being pitiful to kill them together, to prevent the lingring languishing of the Surviver; John de Beigny Lord of Ege-Lifford in this County, ha∣ving been a great Traveller and Soldier in his youth re∣tired home, married, and had 3 Sons in his staid Age; of these the youngest went to fight against the Saracens in Spin, of whose valor his Father to his great content
heard very high Commendations, which made him the more patiently endure his absence, but when death had bereft him of his two elder Sons, he was often heard to say; Oh that I might but once imbrace my Son, I would be contented to die presently, His Son soon after returning un∣expectedly, the old man instantly expired with an exta∣sy of Joy; thus if Heaven should always take us at our word in all our wishes and random desires, we should be drowned in the deluge of our own passions. This Knight lived in the time of K. Edward 3. Thomas Stuckly was a younger Brother of an Ancient, wealthy Family near Il∣fra-Comb in this County, a man of good parts, which himself knew too well; having prodigally mis∣pent his Patrimony, he entered on several projects, the first was peopling of Florida, then newly found out in the West Indies; so confident was his ambition, that he blushed not to tell Q. Elizabeth, That he would rather chuse to be Soveraign of a Molehill, than the highest Subject to the greatest Prince in Christendome; adding withal, That he was sure he should be a Prince before his death; I hope, said the Queen, I shall hear from you, when you are setled in your Prin∣cipality; I will write unto you (quoth Stuckly;) In what Language, said the Queen; He replyed, In the stile of Prin∣ces, To Our Dear Sister; But his project in Florida being blasted, he resolved treacherously to attempt what he could not Loyally atchieve, and went over into Ireland, and from thence into Italy, where he got into the inti∣mate favour of Pope Pius 5. boasting that with 3000 Soldiers he would beat all the English out of Ireland; the Pope gave him many Titles in Ireland, as Earl of Wexford, Marquess of Lemster, &c. and furnished him with 800 men, paid by the King of Spain for this Irish expedition; in passing to which, Stuckly lands in Portu∣gal, just when Sebastian, the King thereof, with two Moorish Kings, were undertaking a Voyage into Africa; Stuckly scorning to attend, is persuaded to accompany them; landing in Africa, Stuckly gave this seasonable and necessary Counsel, That they should refresh their land Souldiers for two or three days, some of whom were sick and
weak, by reason of the tempestuous Passage: But this would not be heard, K. Sebastian was so furious to engage; and so in the Battle of Alcaser, their Army was wholly de∣feated, where Stuckly lost his Life. A fatal Fight where in one day was slain Three Kings that were, and one that would be fain. This Battle was fought in 1578. where Stuckly with his 800 Men behaved himself most valiantly, till over∣powered with multitude, and so ended this Buble of Emptiness, and Meteor of Ostentation. In the troubles between K. Edward 2. and the Barons, one John Powdras, a Tanners Son of Exeter, gave out, that he himself was the true Edward, eldest son of the late King Edward 1. and by a false Nurse was changed in his Craddle, and that the now K. Edward was a Carters Son, and laid in his place; for which forgery being ta∣ken, and hanged, drawn, and quartered, he confessed at his death, That he had a familiar Spirit in his House, in the likeness of a Cat, that assured him he should be King of England, and that he had served this spirit 3 years before, to bring his design about. K. Richard 3. called Crookback, lay some few days in Exeter Castle, and demanding the name of it, they told him Rugemont, whereat the Usurp∣er was much startled, having been told by some Wi∣zards, That he should never prosper after he had met a thing called Rugemont; but it seems either the Devil or his Oracle spoke low or lisping, being desirous to hide his Folly or Ignorance, or that K. Richard having a guilty Conscience, which is soon frighted, mistook him, seeing not Rugemont but Richmond, the Title of K. Henry 7. was the utter Destruction of this Usurper. In the Reign of K. Edw. 4. Sir John Hawksford, one of the Lord Chief Justices, living at Annory in this Coun∣ty, a man of great a Estate, and without Children, fell into a deep Melancholy, and one day calling to him the Keeper of his Park, charged him with negligence in suffering his Deer to be stoln, and thereupon com∣manded him, That if he met with any one in his Night∣walk,
that would not stand or speak, he should not fail to kill him whosoever he were. Having thus provided, and intend∣ing to end his doleful Days, he in a dark night conveyed himself secretly out of his house, and walked alone in his Park; the Keeper in his Circuit hearing one stirring and coming toward him, asked, who was there, but no answer being made, he commanded him to stand, which when he would not do, the Keeper shot him dead, and coming to see who it was, found it to be his Master. In 1588. Twiford was burnt down, occasioned by burning straw in a Chimney, which fired the House, and so the Town about one Afternoon, the fury where∣of was so great, that in an hour and an half it consumed 400 Houses, to the loss of an Hundred and fifty thousand pounds, in Money, Plate, Merchandise, Houshold-stuff, and Houses; Fifty persons, Men, Women, and Chil∣dren, were consumed therein, yet through Divine Pro∣vidence, an Almshouse, with several poor people there∣in, was preserved, almost in the midst of the flames. In the Year 1638. Oct. 21. being Sunday in the Pa∣rish Church of Withy Comb, during Sermon time there happened a very great darkness, which still increased, so that they could not see to read; soon after a terrible and fearful Thunder was heard, like the noise of many great Guns, accompanied with dreadful Lightning, to the great amazement of the People, the Darkness still increasing that they could not see each other, when there presently came such an extraordinary flame of Lightning, as filled the Church with Fire, smoak and a loathsome smell like Brimstone; a Ball of fire came in likewise at the Window, and passed through the Church, which so affrighted the Congregation, that most of them fell down in their Seats, some upon their knees, others on their faces, and some one upon another, crying out of burning and scalding, and all giving up themselves for dead: Mr. George Lyde, Minister of the Parish, was in his Pulpit, and though much astonished, yet through Divine Mercy, had no harm, but was a sad spectator of the hurt and sufferings of others, the Lightning seizing on his
Wife, and burning her Cloaths, and many parts of her Body, and another Gentlewoman by her in the same manner, but her Maid and Child sitting at the Pue door had no hurt; another Woman attempting to run out of the Church, had her Cloaths set on fire, and was mise∣rably scorched and burnt, and her Flesh torn off her back, almost to the very bones; another Woman had her flesh so torn, and her Body so terribly burnt that she died the same Night. One Master Hill had his head suddenly struck against the Wall in his seat, with such violence, that he dyed the same night, no other hurt being observed, his Son sitting by him received no hurt; at the same Instance another man had his Head cloven, his Skull rent into 3 pieces, and his Brains thrown upon the ground whole, the Hair of his Head, through the violence of the blow, stuck fast to a Pillar near him; some Seats in the Body of the Church were turned up∣side down, yet those which sate in them had little or no hurt: One man going out of the Chancel door, his Dog ran before him, who was whirled about toward the door, and fell down stark dead, upon which the Master step∣ped back, and was preserved: The Church itself was much torn and defaced with the Thunder and Light∣ning, a Beam whereof breaking in the midst, fell down between the Minister and Clark, and hurt neither; the Steeple was much rent, and it was observed where the Church was most rent, there the least hurt was done a∣mong the People; there were none hurt with the Tim∣ber or Stones, but one Maid, who it was judged was killed by the falling of a Stone, which might easily hap∣pen, since Stones were thrown down from the Steeple as fast as if it had been by an 100 Men: A Pinnacle of the Tower being thrown down, beat through into the Church; The Pillar against which the Pulpit stood be∣ing newly whited was turned black and sulphury; there were in all 3 persons killed, and 62 hurt, divers of them having their Linnen burnt, though their outward Gar∣ments were not so much as singed; The Lightning be∣ing past, and the People in a terrible Maze, a Gentle∣man
in the Town stood up and said, Neighbours in the name of God shall we venture out of the Church? To whom the Minister answered, Let us make an end with Prayer, for it is better to dye here than in another place; But the Peo∣ple looking about them, and seeing the Church so terri∣bly rent and torn over their heads, durst not proceed in the publick Devotions, but went out of the Church. At the same time there were strange accidents else where; for a bowling Ally near the Church-yard was turned in∣to Pits and Heaps, as if plowed. And at Brixton near Plimouth at that time fell Hailstones as big as an ordina∣ry Turkey-Egg, some of 5, 6, and 7 Ounces weight: And it was discoursed, that the like Judgment happened at Norton in Somersetshire; the truth of these things was attested by the Minister, and diverse Inhabitants pre∣sent. This County is divided into 33 Hundreds, wherein are 32 Market Towns, and 394 Parish Churches: Out of it are elected 26 Parliament Men; it is in the Diocess of Exeter, and gives the Title of Earl to William L. Ca∣vendish, as Exeter doth to John L. Cecil. DORSETSHIRE hath Devonshire on the West, Somerset and Wiltshire on the North, Hantshire on the East, and the narrow Seas on the South: It abounds in Wheat, Cattle, Wool, Kersies, and all other commo∣dities necessary for the Life of Man; Dorchester is the chief Market Town, which was formerly walled, where∣of some part yet standeth, especially upon the west and South sides; the Tract or Trench whereof in the man∣ner of a Quadrant, contains 1700 paces, but was de∣stroyed by the Danes. Other places are memorable for the Actions happening therein, though nothing now but Ruines, as Badbury now a Trench and decayed Castle only, though sometimes the Court of the West-Saxon Kings; such also is Cerne, where Austin the Monk, broke down the Altars and Idols of the Saxon God Hell, whom they devoutly worshipped as the preserver of their health; Shaftsbury likewise, wherein one Aquila, (ei∣ther
Man or Eagle) is reported to have prophecied of future times; In this City Edward, son of Edgar (who was murdered at Corf-Castle by his Step-Mother, to make way for her own Son,) was buried. In the Reign of K. Edward 2 the great Earl of Lan∣caster married a Lady from Camford in this County, who was taken out of his house by one Richard Martin a de∣formed lame Dwarf, who challenged her for his Wife, alledging he had lain with her before the Earl married her, whereupon the Lady was examined, who volunta∣rily confessed it was all true, and thereupon the ugly Fellow in her right claimed the Two Earldoms of Lin∣coln and Salisbury. In the Fourth of this Kings Reign the Church of Middleton, with all the Monuments, were con∣sumed with Lightning, the Monks being at Mattens. In the 22d of Edward 3. a Plague was brought from be∣yond Sea into the Towns and Villages of England, on the Seacosts of Dorsetshire, which raged so, both there and in other parts of England, that scarce the Tenth man was left alive in the Kingdom. In 1506. King Philip sailing out of Germany to take pos∣session of the Kingdom of Spain, was driven by Tempest upon the Coasts of England, and landed at Weymouth to refresh himself, and was invited by Sir Tho. Trenchard, a worthy Knight of that County, to his House, who im∣mediately sent word to King Henry 7. of his Arrival, who, glad to have his Court honoured by so great a Prince, sent the Earl of Arundel at present to wait upon him till himself should follow; the Earl attended him with a gallant Troop of about 300 Horse, and for more state came to him by Torch light; upon this Message, though K. Philip had many reasons to hasten his Journy, yet not to distaste K. Henry, he came Post to Windsor, where after great and magnificent Entertainment, K. Henry taking an opportunity, when they were both in a private room, laying his Hand civilly upon K. Philip's Arm, said, Sir, you have been saved upon my Coast, I hope you will not suffer me to wreck upon yours: The King of Castile asking him what he meant, I mean, saith the King, that
hair-brain'd Fellow the Earl of Suffolk, who being my Sub∣ject is protected in your Country, and begins to play the Fool when all others are weary of it. The King of Castile answer∣ed, I had thought Sir your felicity had been above these thoughts; but if it trouble you I will banish him. K. Henry answered, That his desire was to have him delivered to him; with this the King of Castile a little confused, said, That can I not do with my honour: Well then, said the King, the matter is at an end; at last the King of Castile who much esteemed K. Henry, composing his Countenance, said, Sir, you shall have him; but upon your honour you shall not take his Life: I promise it upon my honour, said K. Henry; and he kept his promise, for he was not put to death du∣ring all his Reign; but yet he took such order, that in the Reign of his Son K. Hen. 8. he had his Head cut off. This Earl of Suffolk had lately gone over to Flanders to the Lady Margret, K. Henry's sworn Enemy, which made the King doubt of his Intentions: The Earl was accordingly brought over, and sent to the Tower, and after K. Philip had received the Order of the Garter, and Prince Henry that of the Golden Fleece, the King of Castile departed home. In the 26. of Q. Elizabeth 1558. at a place called Black∣more, in the Parish of Armitage, in this County, a piece of ground containing 3 Acres, removed from its place, and went quite over another Close, with the Trees and Fences thereon, a great way off, stopping up an High∣way which led to Cerne, the same Hedges inclosing it as before, and the Trees standing very upright thereon, onely one Oak of almost 20 Load fell down; in the place from whence it removed there remained a great deep Pit. In 1613. Aug. 7. The Town of Dorchester was utterly consumed with Fire, which began in the house of a Tallow-Chandler, and destroyed the whole Town, save a few Houses near the Church, and all their Wares and Goods, to the value of Two Hundred Thou∣sand Pounds, yet no man perished therein. In June, 1653. a black Cloud was seen over the Town of Pool, and soon after dissolved into a shower of Blood, which
fell warm upon mens hands, some green leaves with those drops upon them were sent to London, and seen by many. The Forrest of the White Hart is in this County, so called, because in the Reign of Henry 3. the King came hither to hunt, and having taken other Deer, he spared a most beautiful and goodly white Heart, which after∣ward Thomas de Lynd a Gentleman of this Country with others in his Company took and killed, for which the King put a mulct or Fine upon him, and the whole County, and the very lands which they held, pay even to this day every year by way of amercement a sum of Mony into the Exchequer, which is called White Hart Silver; My self, saith Dr. Fuller, have paid a share for the sauce, who never tasted any of the meat, so that it seems Kings Venison is sooner eaten than digested. Mr. Ignatius Jordan was born at Lime Regis in this County; and when he was young, was sent to Exeter, to be brought up a Merchant; in this City having passed through the several inferiour Offices, he at last came to be Mayor, and was a Justice of Peace 24 years together; yet his beginning was but very mean, which he was al∣ways ready to acknowledg for when some threatned him with Law-suits, and that they would not give over while he was worth a groat, he cheerfully told them, That he should be then but two pence poorer, than when he came first to Exeter, for, said he, I brought but six pence with me hither; He would often say, He wondred what rich men meant, that they gave so little to the Poor, and yet raked so much together for their Children; do you not see, said he, what becomes of it? and would reckon up divers examples of such as heaped up much for their Children, and they in a short time con∣sumed it all; on the other side, he spoke of such as had small beginnings, and afterward became rich, or of a competent Estate, giving a particular instance of him∣self, I came, said he, but with a groat or sixpence in my purse to this City, had I had a shilling in my purse, I had never been Mayor of Exeter. In his Troubles in the Star Chamber, when one told him, he was sorry that the Lord Keeper was against him; He answered, I have a greater Lord Keeper than
him, the Lord is my Keeper, I will not be afraid, He was fa∣mous for Justice and Charity in his life, and at his death left very large Legacies to the poor, both of that City and County; he died in 1640. This County is divided into 29 Hundreds, wherein are 19 Market Towns, and 248 Parish Churches. It is in the Diocess of Bristol, Elects 20 Parliament Men, and gives the Title of Earl to Charles L. Sackvil, (who is al∣so Earl of Middlesex) as the Town of Dorchester doth the Title of Marquess to Henry L. Pierrepoint, and Shaftes∣bury the Title of Earl to Anthony L. Ashley. DƲRHAM. This Bishoprick hath Northumberland on the North, divided by the Rivers Derwent and Tyne; and Yorkshire on the South; the German Ocean on the East; Cumberland and Westmoreland on the West; it abounds with Coals, Lead and Iron; near Darlington in this County, whose waters are warm, there are three Pits wonderful deep, cal∣led Hell Kettles; these are judged to come of an Earth∣quake which happened in 1179. For on Christmas day say our Chronicles at Oxenhall, which is this place, the ground heaved up aloft like a Tower, and so continued all that day, as it were immoveable, till evening, and then fell with so horrible a noise, that it affrighted the Inhabi∣tants thereabout, and the Earth swallowing it up, made in the same place three deep Pits; it is reported that Bishop Tonstall put a Goose into one of these Pits, ha∣ving first given her a mark, and the same Goose was found in the River Tees, which if true, these Kettles have passages under ground; within the River Weer at Butterby near Durham, in Summer Time their issues a salt reddish water, which the Sun makes white, and growing thick becomes Salt, which the People thereabout always use. In the Reign of William the Conqueror, one Wolstan was Bishop of Durham, whom upon Lanfranks reporting to be insufficient for the place, for want of Learning, the King commanded to put off his Pontifical Robes, and to leave his Bishoprick, when suddenly out of Divine In∣spiration, saith our Historian, Wolston answered, A better
then you O King bestowed these Robes upon me, and to him will I restore them; and therewithal going to Edward the Confessors Shrine, who had made him a Bishop, and putting off his Robes, he struck his Staff upon St. Ed∣wards Monument, which stuck so fast, saith the Author, in the Stone of it, that by no strength it could be drawn forth, till he pluckt it out himself, which so terrified both Lanfrank and the King, that they intreated him to take his Robes again, and keep his Bishoprick. When K. Edward the 3. was Victorious in France, the Scots with David Bruce their King (by the incite∣ment of the French King) invade England with an Ar∣my of Threescore and two Thousand Men, and marched as far as Durham, supposing that none but Priests and Shepheards, were left at home, because such a vast num∣ber were abroad upon Service; but they found it other∣wise, for the Lords in the North, as Gilbert Ʋmfrevile, the Earl of Angus, Henry Piercy, Ralph Nevil, William Dayncourt, with the Archbishop of York, the Bishop of Durham, and others of the Clergy, gathered such great Forces, and ordered them so well, that by the anima∣tion of Queen Philip, who though big with Child, rode in Person through the English Troops, and with wise and gracious words incouraged them, that they obtained a very signal Victory; for meeting the Scots at Nevils Cross in this Bishoprick, they utterly defeated their great Army, and took David their King Prisoner, with the Earls of Fife, Menteith, Murray, Sutherland, Dowglas, the Archbishop of St. Andrews, and others, and slew fif∣teen thousand Scots; who yet could not be charged for want of valour, especially the King himself, who had two Spears hanging in his body, his leg desperately wounded with an Arrow, his Sword and other weapons beaten out of his hand; and yet disdaining to be taken Captive, endeavoured by provoking language to induce the English to kill him, and therefore when one John Copland, Captain of Roxborough Castle, advised him to yeild, the King struck him so fiercely over the face with his Gauntlet, as beat out two of his Teeth; but since he
could not force a death, he must submit to be a Prisoner, and was conveyed by Copland, and eight of his Servants out of the Field; the Queen retired to Newcastle to at∣tend the event of the Battle, and understanding that K. David was taken, she sent Letters to the Captain to de∣liver up his Royal Prisoner, which he refusing, she sends over a complaint to K. Edward; who ordered him to come to Calice, where he made so discreet a defence, that he was sent back, and had 500 pound a year in Land given him in any place which he should chuse near his own dwelling, with order to deliver up his Prisoner to the Queen, which he did accordingly at York with such a modest and ingenious Apology, as satisfied both the Queen and the Lords of the Council. King David was committed Prisoner to the Tower, and continued so e∣leven years, and then was set at liberty upon condition to pay one hundred thousand Marks in ten years, as a Ransom. Cicely Nevil, whose Fathers vast Estate, afforded him a Mansion House for every week in the year, cannot be here omitted, as being the clearest instance of humane frail felicity; she was youngest Daughter and Child to Ralph Earl of Westmoreland, (of which Family, Raby in this Bishoprick was the chief Seat) he had twenty one Chil∣dren in all, but she exceeded her Sisters in honour, being married to Richard Duke of York; she was blessed with three Sons, each born in a several Kingdom, Ed∣ward (afterward K. Edward 4.) born at Burdeaux in France; George at Dublin in Ireland, and Richard at Fothe∣ringhay in England; this was her happiness, behold now her Miseries; she saw her Husband killed in Battel, George Duke of Clarence her second Son cruelly murde∣red in a Butt of Malmsey; K. Edward her eldest Son cut off by his own intemperance in the prime of his years, his two Sons butchered by their Uncle Crookbackt Richard, who himself not long after was slain in the Battel of Bosworth; she saw her own reputation publickly murdered at Pauls Cross by the procurement of her youngest Son Richard, taxing his eldest Brother for Ille∣gitimate,
and a Bastard; and yet our Chronicles do not charge her with haughtiness in her good, nor dejection in her ill Estate, an argument of an even and steddy soul in all alterations; indeed she lived to see Elizabeth her Grand-child married to K. Henry 7. but little com∣fort acrued to her by that conjunction, the party of the Yorkists were so depressed by him; she lived 35 years a Widdow, and died in the 10 of Hen 7. 145. and was buried by her Husband in the Collegiate Church of Fotheringay in Northamptonshire; which Quire being de∣molished in King Henry 8. time, their bodies lay in the Church-yard without any Monument, till Q. Elizabeth coming thither in Progress, gave order that they should be interred in the Church, and two Tombs erected over them; hereupon their Bodies wrapt in Lead were remo∣ved from their plain Graves, and their Coffins opened; the Dutchess Cicely had about her Neck hanging in a Silver Ribbon a Pardon from Rome, which penned in a fine Roman hand, was as fair and fresh to be read as if it had been written but yesterday; this Lady was a great Benefactress to Queens Colledge in Cambridge. In former Ages the Bishops have had the Royalties of Princes over this County, and the Inhabitants have plea∣ded the priviledge not to pass over the River of Tees or Tyne to serve in War, whose charge as they alledged, was to keep and defend the Corps of St. Cathbert their great adored Saint, and therefore they called themselves The Holy Work Folks, and the repute of this Cuthbert and his supposed defence against the Scots was such, that seve∣ral of our English Kings went in Devotion to his Tomb on Pilgrimage, and gave large Possessions to his Church; among others, zealous Canutus, the greatest of all, came thither bare-footed, and at Cuthberts Tomb both inlar∣ged, and confirmed their Liberties. This County is not divided into Hundreds, but Wakes, which are 4, wherein are 118 Parishes, and is in the Diocess of Dur∣ham; It elects four Parliament Men, 2 for the County, and 2 for the City of Durham.
ESSEX hath Kent on the South; divided by the River Thames, Suffolk on the North, severed by the Ri∣ver Stoure, Cambridge, Hertfordshire, and Middlesex on the West, the two latter for the most part parted by the River Ley, and the Germane Ocean on the East; this Shire produceth plenty of Saffron, especially about Walden, a fair Market Town, which Saffron may seem to have coloured with the name thereof; it hath also Oy∣sters called Walfleet, the best in esteem, and are thought by Pliny to have been served in the Roman Kitchins, like∣wise Cloths, Stuffs, Hops, and is indeed a fair Country affording all things necessary to mans subsistence, only the Air of the Eastern part is not accounted very health∣ful; Those parts adjoining to the Sea, are commonly called the Hundreds of Essex, and are very fruitful in Cattle: However the vulgar Wits of this County much astonish strangers with the stock of poor People in these parts, affirming that they have Five Hundred Cows, and Nine Hundred Sheep, which are indeed but five Cows and nine Sheep in these Hundreds. The chief City of account is Colchester, built by Coilus the Brittish Prince, 124 Years after Christ, wherein (saith Monmouth) the first Christian King, Empress and Emperour in the World were born, that is, his Son Lucius, Helena, and Constantine, of which thus the Poet sings. From Colchester there rose a Star, The Rays whereof gave glorious Light Throughout the World in Climates far, Great Constantine, Rome's Emperour bright. The most famous place for antiquity in this County is Camolodunum, now Maldon, which was the Royal Seat of Cunobolin, King of the Trinobantes, as by the Money there∣in minted appeareth, about the time of our Saviours Birth, which City Claudius afterward won from the Brittains, and therein placed a Colony of Soldiers: In the East Promontory of this County in the Reign of
Richard 2. the Teeth of a Giant were found (if they were not of an Elephant) of a very great size, and not far thence in the Reign of Q. Elizabeth more bones as monstruous were digged up. The Monks have recorded that a Pilgrim was sent by St. John Baptist to K. Edward the Confessor with a Ring, upon which account his house in this County was called Hav-a-ring; but the Clergy in those times made no Conscience to invent fictions daily for their own advantage: There were bones digged up at Ness near Harwich in this County, which with their bigness and length amazed the Beholders. I cannot see, saith Dr. Fuller, how such can maintain them to be the bones of men, who must confess that (according to the Proportion of the Doors and Roofs of ancient Building, which we have either seen or read of) if they were so big and tall, they must go into their Houses stooping, not to say creeping along; except those who affirm it be as careless of their credit as the Traveller was, who affirming he saw Bees as big as Dogs, and yet their Hives were of our ordinary size, and being demanded what shift they made to get in, Nay, said he, what know I, let them look to that. More probable it is, that these were bones of Elephants, store whereof were brought over into England by the Emperour Claudius. To these wonders it will not be amiss to adu the ensuing relation, written by Mr, Tho. Smith of Sewarstone near Waltham Ab∣by, a discreet person lately deceased; Toward the latter end of Q. Elizabeth, saith he, I served Sir Edward Donny, who lived in the Abby of Waltham Cross in Essex, which at that time lay in ruinous heaps and Sir Edward beginning to re-edifie it, one Tomkins, his Gardiner, being employed there∣in, among other things discovered a fair Marble Stone, which was the cover of a Tomb of the same Stone, this cover being re∣moved, there appeared the Anatomy of a man therein, the Bones only remaining in due order, and none of them out of place, and no other dust or filth whatsoever remaining in te Tomb; having well observed it, I told the Spectators, that if they did but touch any part thereof, it would fall in sunder, which being tried happened accordingly; for my part I am per∣suaded
that as the Flesh and Entrails of this Anatomy to us became in visible, so would the bones likewise have been in some longer time. O what is man then which vanisheth thus away, like the Smoak or a vapour, and is no more seen? Whosoever thou art that shall read this passage, thou mayst find sufficient cause of humility: It is generally conceived, that this was the body of King Harold. This County hath no Cathedral, and the Churches therein cannot challenge to themselves any eminent Commendation; but for private houses Essex will own no Shire her superiour, whereof Three are most re∣markable. 1. Audly end built by the E. of Suffolk, which without compare was one of the best Subjects Houses in the Nation; yet is the Structure better than the stand∣ing thereof, as being somewhat low on the one side. 2. Newhall, built by the Ratcliffs, Earls of Sussex, which is extream pleasant for the shady approach thereunto, and for the Parks round about it. 3. Copthal highly seat∣ed on an hill in the midst of a Park, built by the Ab∣bot of Waltham, enlarged by Sir Thomas Heneage, and others; herein is a Gallery as well furnished, and more proportionable than any in England. In November 1639. there happened an Hurricano, or Whirl-wind, which entring in at the great East Window, blew that down, and carried some part thereof, with the Picture of the L. Coventry (singled from many more which hung on both sides untouched) all the length of the Gallery, being about 56 Yards, out of the West Window, which it threw down to the ground; some observed the like Wind in other places about the same time, as ominous and presaging our civil Dissentions. There is a Proverb in this County, He may fetch a Flitch of Bacon from Dunmow: This Proverb dependeth on a custom practised in the Priory of Dunmow, which was founded by Juga a noble Lady, for black Nuns 1111. But it seems the property of it was after altered into a Male-Nunnery, the Friars whereof were sometimes, it appears, very merry: for they ordained, That if any person from any part of England would come thither, and hum∣bly
kneel on two stones, yet to be seen, at the Church door be∣fore the Convent, and solemnly take the ensuing Oath, he might demand a Gamon or Flitch of Bacon, which should be freely gi∣ven him. You shall swear by the custom of our Confession, That you never made any nuptial Transgression Since you were married Man and Wife, By houshold Brawls, or contentious Strife, Or otherwise in Bed, or at Board, Offended each other in deed or Word, Or since the Parish Clerk said Amen Wished your selves unmarried agen, Or in a Twelve Month and a day Repented not in thought any way, But continued true, and in desire, As when you join'd hands in Holy-Quire; If to these conditions without all fear Of your own accord you will freely swear, A Gamon of Bacon you shalt receive, And carry it hence with love and free leave: For this is our custom at Dunmow well known, Though the sport be ours, the Bacon's your own. It appeareth in an old book on Record, that Richard Wright of Badesworth in Norfolk in the 23. of He. 6. when John Canon was Prior; and that Stephen Samuel of Little Easton in Essex, the 7th of Edward 4. and Thomas Lee of Coxhall in Essex the 2. of Hen. 8. took the afore∣said Oath, demanded their Bacon on the premises, and received it accordingly. Randolph Peveril of Hatfield-Peveril in this County, was in great esteem with K. Edward the Confessor, who was very bountiful to him, as having married the Daugh∣ter of Inglerick his Kinsman, who was of great Nobility among the English Saxons; this Lady was of such ad∣mirable beauty, that she therewith conquered William the Conqueror, who desired nothing more than to be a Prisoner in her Arms, to obtain which, he inriched St. Martins Le Grand in London, first founded by her Father,
and her Uncle K. Edward; he then preferred her two Brothers, William Peveril to be Keeper of Dover Castle, and Pain Peveril he made Baron of Bourn in Cambridg∣shire; having thus preferred her Kindred, he began to sollicite her by the Messengers of the Devils Bed-Cham∣ber, that is, subtil insinuating Pimps, and Bawds, and sometimes he himself visited her (like Jupiter) in a golden shower, by these forceable demonstrations of love, and unavoidable allurements (especially from a King) she was at length brought to his unlawful Bed, unto whom she bore a Son, named William, who was Lord of Nottingham; but his Mother being afterward touched with remorse of Conscience, to expiate her guilt, was taught by the Doctrine of those times to found a Colledge in the Village of Harpsfield, which she con∣secrated to the honour of God, and St. Mary Magdalen; wherein setting apart all worldly affairs, she spent the remainder of her days, and died about the year 1100. In the 17th of Henry 2. there was seen at St. Osythes in Essex, a Dragon of wonderful bigness, which wherever it moved, burnt the Houses and places about it. In the Reign of Hen. 3. the King commanded Hubert de Burg, Earl of Kent, to be apprehended; who having notice thereof, rose at midnight, and fled into a Church in Essex; the Officers found him upon his knees before the High Altar, with the Popish Sacrament in one hand, and a Cross in the other, however they seized him, and car∣ried him away Prisoner to the Tower of London; Roger Niger, then Bishop, made great complaint to the King, of this violence, and wrong done to Holy Church, and would not be satisfied till the Earl was carried back to the same Church again, though well guarded there; however this it is thought saved the Earls life, for the Kings anger cooled, and he was soon after reconciled to him. In the year 1510. in the Marshes of Dengey Hundred near South-Minster in this County there sudden∣ly appeared an infinite number of Mice, which over∣run those Marshes, tearing up the Grass by the roots, and so poysoned it with their venemous Teeth, that the
Cattle which grazed thereon died, but at length a great number of strange painted Owls came, no man knew whence, and devoured all the Mice; it is reported that there happened the like in Essex in 1648. There were no less than forty four Persons who suffe∣red Martyrdom for the Protestant Religion in this Coun∣ty; among whom was William Hunter a young man of 19 years old, born of religious Parents, who instructed him in the Truth, and sent him to be an Apprentice in London, where refusing to go to Mass, and receive the Sacrament, he went home to his Parents at Burntwood, and one day going into a Chappel there, he found a Bi∣ble, which while he was reading, a Summoner came in, and asked him whether he could expound the Scrip∣ture, he answered, He did only read it to his Comfort; the Sumner replied, It was never a merry world since the Bible came forth in English; Hunter answered, Say not so for Gods sake, for it is Gods Book, out of which every one ought to learn how to please God, and therefore I pray God that we may have the Blessed Bible amongst us; Ay said the Sumner, I know your mind well enough, you are one of those that do not like the Queens Laws; but you and many more must turn over a new leaf, or you will broil for it; pray God give me grace, said Hunter, that I may believe his word, and confess his name whatever comes of it; Nay, said the Sumner, you confess the Devils name, and will all go to him; The Sumner then fetcht a Priest out of a blind Alehouse, who finding Hunter reading, reviled him for it, and then asked him what he thought of the blessed Sacrament of the Altar, whether there were not really Christs Body and Blood; Hunter said, He found no such thing in Scripture; ah, quoth the Vicar, now I find you are an Heretick; Hunter replyed, Would you and I were both tyed to a Stake to try whether of us would stick closest to our Faith; The Priest left him, and informing against him, he was seized and brought be∣fore Bishop Bonner, who finding that he stood firm to his Principles, caused his Officers to set him in the Stocks, in his Gate-house, where he lay 2 days, and had nothing but a crust of brown bread, and a cup of cold water;
after Imprisonment three quarters of a Year, the Bp. condemned him, and sent him to Burntwood to be burnt; where his Father and Mother came to him, be∣seeching God he might continue constant to the end: His Mo∣ther added, she was happy in bearing such a Child, who could find in his heart to lose his Life for Christ's sake. At the stake he kneeled down, and read the 51st Psalm; then the Sheriff said to him, Here is a Letter from the Queen, if thou wilt recant thou shalt live, otherwise thou shalt be burnt: No, quoth William, I will never recant, and so he was fasten∣ed to the stake: He then said, Good People, pray for me while you see me alive, adding, Son of God shine upon me: and the Sun immediately shone out of a thick Cloud so full in his face, that he was forced to turn his head aside; fire being kindled he lift up his Hand to Heaven saying Lord, Lord, receive my Spirit, and so ended his Life in the Flames. John Lawrence was burnt at Colchester, whose Legs be∣ing lame with Irons, and his Body weak with cruel u∣sage, he was carried to the Stake in a Chair, and burnt therein; at his burning many young Children being a∣bout the fire, cried out to him, Lord strengthen thy ser∣vant, and keep thy Promise, which was lookt on as a pro∣duct of Divine Providence, who out of the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings hath ordained strength. Thomas Hawks Gentleman was first brought into trouble for refusing to baptise his Child after the Popish fashion: This man go∣ing to the stake, promised his Friends to give them some solemn Token of the clearness and comfort of his Conscience; in performance whereof, whilst his Body was burning, he raised up himself, and though having the sense, yet having no fear of the Fire, joyfully clap∣ped his hands over his head, to the Admiration of all the Beholders. There was an Idol called the Rood of Dover-Court in this County, to which multitudes of Peo∣ple went in Pilgrimage: Divers zealous Protestants at Dedham being much troubled to see the Almighty so dis∣honoured by wicked Idolatry, went from thence in a Frosty Moonshine Night 10 Miles to the place where
the Idol was, where they found the Church Doors open, the Popish Clergy boasting the power of this Rood was such, that no man could shut the doors of the Church where it stood: These Persons taking the Image from the place where it stood, carried it a quarter of a Mile off, and there burnt it to ashes; for which three of them were by the bloody Papists hanged in Chains. In 1605. a great Porpus was taken at Westham in a little Creek alive, a Mile and half within the Land, and with∣in a few days after a Whale came up the Thames, whose lenght was seen divers times above Water, and judged to exceed the largest Ship in the River; but when she tasted the Fresh-Water, and scented the Land, she returned into the Sea. This County contains 20 Hundreds, 21 Market Towns, and 415 Parish Churches: It is in the Diocess of London, and elects 8 Parliament men; for the County 2. Col∣chester 2. Harwich 2. Malden 2. and gives the Title of Earl to Arthur L. Capel. GLOCESTERSHIRE hath Worcester and Warwickshire on the North, Oxford and Wiltshire on the East, Somersetshire on the South, Herefordshire with the River Wye on the West; the River Severn runs through it, and Malmsbury, the old Historian thus describes it: The ground of this Shire throughout, saith he, yieldeth plenty of Corn, and bringeth forth abundance of Fruits, the one only through the natural goodness of the ground, the other by diligent manuring and tillage, insomuch that it would provoke the most lazy Person to take pains; Here you may see the High ways and common Lanes full of Apple-trees and Peer-trees, not in∣grafted by the industry of Mans hand, but growing naturally of their own accord, the ground itself is so inclined to bear fruit, and those both in taste and beauty far exceeding others, and will endure till a new supply come; There is not any Coun∣ty in England so thick set with Vineyards as this is, so plen∣tiful of increase, and so pleasant in taste, the very Wines made thereof have no ill taste, and are little inferiour to the French; the Houses are innumerable, the Churches very fair, and the
Towns standing very thick, but that which addeth a greater glory to it, is the River Severn, than which there is not any in the Kingdom exceeds it for breadth of Channel, swiftness of stream, or for Fish better stored: There is in it a daily rage and fury of the Waters, which I know not whether to call a Gulf, or Whirlpool of Waves, raising up Sands from the bottom, winding and driving them upon heaps, and sometimes overflow∣ing its banks, roveth a great way on the bordering grounds, and then returneth again into its usual Channel; unhappy is the Vessel, which it taketh full upon the side, but the Watermen be∣ing aware of it, when they see it coming turn their Vessels, and cut through the midst of it, and thereby avoid the danger. Thus far he. This encounter of the salt, and fresh water (as is supposed) here mentioned, is called in this Country the Higre, and by some the Eagre, for the keenness and fierceness thereof, which is such, that it is equally terri∣ble with the flashings, and noise, to those that see and hear it, much more to them who feel it; of which there can be no reason rendered, since the Thames where we find the same cause, hath no such disturbance. Hear how the Poets describe this Higre. — Ʋntil they be imbraced In Severns Soveraign Arms, with whose tumultuous Waves, Shut up in narrower bounds, the Higre wildly raves, And frights the stragling Flocks the Neighbouring shores o flie, Afar as from the Main it comes with hideous cry; And on the angry front the curled foam doth bring, The Billows 'gainst the Banks when fiercely it doth fling; Throws up the slimy Ouze, and makes the scaly brood, Leap madding to the Land, affrighted from the flood. O'returns the toyling Barge whose Steersman doth not launch, And thrusts the furrowing beak into her dreadful paunch. We read that in the 2. of King Richard 3. at that time when the Duke of Buckingham intended to pass with his Army over the Severn there was so great an Inundation of Water that men were drowned in their Beds, Houses were overturned, Children were carried a∣bout the Fields swimming in their Cradles; and Beasts
drowned even upon the Hills, which rage of the Wa∣ters continued for the space of 10 days, and is called to this day in those parts, The Great Water. In the 17 of Q. Elizabeth, Feb. 24. being a hard frost, after a flood which was not great, there came down the River of Severn such a swarm of Flies, and Beetles that they were judged to be above an 100 Quarters; the Mills therea∣bout were dammed up with them for the space of 4 days, and then were cleansed by digging them out with Shovels. In 1607. a mighty West-wind which conti∣nued 16 hours, brought the Sea into the Severn (after a great rain, and at a spring Tyde) with such violence, that the River began to overflow its banks from as far as the Mount in Cornwall, along on both sides up into So∣mersetshire, and Glocestershire; in some places the waters rose three foot, in others 5, and 7, and in some Towns and Villages they rose higher than the tops of the Hou∣ses, so that notwithstanding whatever course could be taken, there were 80 Persons drowned, besides much Cattle, divers Churches, and several Parishes overwhel∣med thereby; it did likewise a great deal of harm in Wales, the damages being reckoned above 20 thousand pound. In the year 755 Kenwulf King of the West Saxons, gi∣ving himself up to all manner of Vice, and Debauchery, coming to Merton in this County to visit a Wench that he kept, was there slain, and buried at Winchester. About the year 1020. Godwin the subtle Earl of Kent cast a covetous eye on the fair Nunnery of Berkly in Glocester∣shire, and thus contrived it for himself; he left there a handsome young man as seemingly sick, for their Chari∣ty to recover, the Abbess was a fair and noble Lady, Godwin seeking not her but hers, gives the young man charge so long to counterfeit, till he had debauched the Abbess, and as many of the Nuns besides as he could intice to his pleasure, and left him withal Rings, Jewels, Girdles, and such toys to give them still when they came to visit him; the young man willing to undergo such a task, so plaid his part, that in a short time he got up
most of their Bellies, and when he had done, told his Lord how he had sped; the Earl goes instantly to Court, tells the King that such a Nunnery was become a Bawdy House, procures a Visitation, gets them turned out, and begs the Land for his own use. At another time this Godwin had a mind to another rich Mannor in Sussex, called Boscham, and complemented it out of Ro∣bert Archbishop of Canterbury in this manner; coming to the Archbishop, he said, Da mihi Basium, that is, Give me a buss or kiss, an usual favour from such a Prelate; the Archbishop answers, Do tibi Basium, I give thee a kiss, and therewith kissed him; upon which Godwin presently goes to Bascham, and takes possession thereof, and though here was neither any real intention in him that passed it away, nor valuable consideration to him, but a meer circumvention, yet such was Godwins power, and the Archbishops poorness of Spirit, that he quietly enjoyed it; these rich and ancient Mannors of Berkly and Boscham, though distant ten miles asunder, are both now met in the Right Honourable George Earl of Berkly, as Heir Ap∣parent thereof, his Ancestors being long since possessed of them. In the Reign of K. Edward 1. the Monastery of Glo∣cester was burnt down to the ground. In King Henry 8. time, James Bainham Son to Sir Alexander Bainham of this County, was burnt for professing the Gospel; he was bred in Learning, and had knowledge of the Greek and Latin Tongues, of a virtuous disposition, and Religious Conversation, much addicted to Prayer, and a diligent Reader of the Holy Scriptures; he applied himself to the study of the Law, wherein he was very merciful to his Clients, ready to give Council to Widdows, Fa∣therless and Afflicted without mony or reward; at last he was suspected, and complained of to Sir Tho. More, then Lord Chancellor, and being brought to his House at Chelsey, Sir Thomas laboured with frowns and flatteries to withdraw him from the truth, which not prevailing; he caused him to be tied to a Tree in his Garden (cal∣led by him the The Tree of Truth) and then most cruelly
scourged him to make him renounce his opinion; this not succeeding, Sir Thomas himself saw him cruelly racked in the Tower, till he was lamed, because he would not accuse some of his acquaintance, nor discover where his Books lay; then was his Wife Imprisoned, and his Goods confiscated, yet at last he was persuaded to abjure, and solemnly carried a Torch and a Faggot in St. Pauls Church; but hereby he rather exchanged than escaped fire, feeling such a fire in his own Consci∣ence that he could not be quiet till he had asked God, and all the world forgiveness, which he did 1st in the Pro∣testant Congregation who met privately in a Ware-house in Bow-lane; the next Lords day he went to St. Austins, the next Parish Church to St. Pauls, that the Antidote might be brought as near as he could conveniently to the place of his poyson, where standing up in a Pew with an English New Testament in his hand, he declared o∣penly before all the People with abundance of Tears, That he had denied God, and prayed all the Congregation to believe him, and to be warned by his fall not to do the like; for, said he, if I should not return again to the Truth, this Word of God, (holding up his New Testament) would damn me both body and soul in the day of Judgement, and therefore he intreated them all, rather to dye presently, than to do as he had done, for he would not feel such an hell in his Conscience again for all the World; After this he was soon apprehended a∣gain, and cruelly handled by the Bishop of London, put∣ting him in the Stocks, and whipping him barbarously for a fortnight together, to force him again to recant, but all in vain, so that he was condemned to be burnt; and being in the midst of the Flames which had half consumed his Arms and Legs, he spake these words; O ye Papists, behold you look for Miracles, and here now you may see a Miracle, for in this Fire I feel no more pain than if I were in a bed of Down, but it is to me as a bed of Roses. There was in this County one William Dangerfield, who (with his Wife) was imprisoned for the Protestant Faith, and was so cruelly used by the Bishop, that his legs were al∣most eaten off with the Irons; after a while the Bishop
sent for him, and told him his Wife had recanted, who was as well learned as he, and therefore persuaded him to sign a Recantation which they brought; having signed it, they let him go to his Wife, and shewing his Recan∣tation, her heart was ready to break, crying out, Alas Husband, thus long we have continued one, and hath Sa∣tan now so far prevailed with you, as to cause you to break your Vow which you made to God in Baptism. This so far prevai∣led with him, that he repented of his Apostacy, and not long after through the extream cruelty used to them, they both dyed in Prison. In 1575. Feb. 16. between 4 and 5 in the afternoon, great Earthquakes happened in Glocester, Worcester, Hereford, York, Bristow, and the parts adjacent, which caused the People to run out of their Houses for fear they should have fallen on their heads; in Tewksbury, Bredon, and other places, the dishes fell off the shelves, and books in mens studies fell down before them; in Norton Chappel the People being at Prayers, and feeling the ground move, ran out for fear it should have fallen on their heads; part of Rithing Castle fell down, and likewise divers brick Chimnies in several Gentlemens Houses. In the year 1650. Nov. 30. being St. Andrews day, about Sun-rising, the Sky opened in a dreadful manner in the South west, over Standish, a Town 5 miles from Glocester, and there appeared a ter∣rible fiery Sword shaking, with the Hilt upward to∣ward the Heavens, and the point downward to the Earth; the Hilt seemed to be blew, the Sword of a great length moving to and fro, and coming lower to∣ward the Earth, there was a long flame of fire toward the point sparkling, and flaming in a fearful manner to the great astonishment of the Spectators, who were ma∣ny; at last the Heavens closing, the Sword vanished, and the fire fell to the Earth, and ran upon the ground; this, saith Mr. Clark, I had from an Eye-witness. Glocester is the chief City of this County, and lieth stretched out in length over Srn. The Cathedral Church is a beautiful building, consting of a continued window work, but hath the loudest praises from the
whispering place within, which is thus described by Sir Francis Bacon; There is a Church at Glocester, saith he, (and as I have heard, the like is in some other Places) where if you speak against a Wall softly, another shall hear your voice bet∣ter a great way off than near at hand, I suppose there is so Vault or Hollow, or Isle behind the wall, and some passage to it toward the further end of that wall against which you speak so as the voice of him that speaketh, slideth along the wall, and then entreth at some passage, and communicateth with the air of the hollow; for it is somewhat preserved by the plain wall, but that is too weak to give an audible sound, till it hath communi∣cated with the back air. In this Church lies the unfortunate Robert Duke of Normandy, eldest Son to William the Conqueror, in a pain∣ted wooden Tomb in the midst of the Quire, whose Eyes were pluckt out in Cardiff Castle, wherein he was kept Prisoner 26 years. Here also the unhappy King Edward 2. lies buried, under a Monument of Alabast∣er, who in the 20 year of his Reign was deposed by Parliament; who sitting at London, sent several Bishops, Lords, and Gentlemen in the name of the body of the State (if that may be called a body, which then had no head there) to Kenelworth Castle to the King, to whom one of the Commissioners represented, That the Commonweal had received such irreconcilable dislikes of his Government, the pa ticulars whereof had been opened in the General Assembly at London, that they were resolved never to endure he should be King any longer; that notwithstanding these dislikes had not extended themselves so far as for his sake to exclude his issue, but that with universal Applause and Joy, the Commonweal had in Parliament Elected his eldest Son the Lord Edward for King, that it would be a very acceptable thing to God if he did willingly give over an Earthly King∣dom for the common good and quiet of his Country, which they said could not otherwise be secured; that yet his honour would be never the less after his Resignation than it was before; only the Commonweal would never suffer him to Reign any longer, and finally they presumed to tell him, That unless he did freely of himself renounce his Crown and Scepter, the People would nei∣ther
endure him, nor any of his Children for their Soveraign but disclaiming all homage and fealty, would elect some other t be their King, who should be of another Blood and Family; The King having heard their Message, fell down as half dead, and being somewhat recovered, we cannot say to himself, but to a sense of his misery, brake forth into Sighs and Tears; And being (saith Sir Thomas de la More) more ready to sacrifice his body for Christs cause, than once to behold the disinheriting of his Sons, or to be the occasion of the perpetual disturbance of the King∣dom, as knowing (saith he) that a good Shepheard should give his life for his Flock, made answer at last to this effect, That he knew that for his many sins he was fallen into this Calamity, and therefore had the less cause to take it grievously; that he was very sorry that the People of the King∣dom were so exasperated against him, as that they should utter∣ly abhor his having any longer the Rule and Soveraignty over them; he therefore besought all that were present, to for∣give & spare him being so afflicted; that yet it was greatly to his good pleasure and liking, (seeing it could be no otherwise on his own behalf,) that his eldest Son was so gracious in their sight, and therefore he gave them thanks for chusing him to be their King; This being said, they proceeded to the short Ceremonies of his Resignation, which consisted princi∣pally in the surrender of his Diadem, and other En∣signs of Majesty for the use of his Son the new King. Edward being thus unkinged, the Ambassadors retur∣ned joyfully back to the Parliament at London with the resigned Ensigns, and an account of their imployment; but he now deprived of his Royal Crown and Dignity remained with his Kinsman Henry E. of Leicester, wan∣ting nothing but liberty, being shut up like a Monk, but his cruel Wife Q. Isabel, who had been one of the greatest Instruments of his misfortune, being told by her wicked Counsellor, Adam Torleton Bishop of Here∣ford, that the Earl was too kind to him, ordered Thomas Gourney, and John Martravers to take the King into their Custody, who carried him from Kenelworth to Coe Castle, and then to Bristow, where they shut him in the
Castle, till upon discovery of a design laid to get him out, and send him beyond Sea, they conveyed him to Berkly Castle; by the way these Villains exercised divers Cruelties towards him, not permitting him to ride but by night, that he might not be seen of any, they forced him to ride bare headed, and when he would have slept, they hindred him, neither would give him such meat as he could eat, but such as he most loathed; they con∣tradicted him in whatever he said, persuading him he was mad, and endeavoured by all manner of ways to break his heart, yea they often gave him Poyson in his drink, but the strength of his nature overcame it; one of them made a Crown of Hay, and put it on his head, the rest made a scorn and May-game of him; they were afraid any of his Friends should meet him, and therefore to prevent his being known, they resolved to cut off both his hair and beard, and coming by a little Ditch, they commanded him to come off his Horse and be shaven; then setting him on a Mole-hill, a Barber came to shave him with a bason of cold water taken out of the Ditch: telling him, That must serve at present, To whom the miserable King looking sternly upon him, answered, That whether they would or no, he would have warm water for his beard, and therewithal to make good his word, he presently shed forth a shower of Tears; at length he was brought to Berky Castle, where he was courteously received by Thomas Berkly Lord thereof, who was allowed a 100 shillings a day for keeping him close Prisoner; But Q. Isabel being much troubled that her Husband lived, consults again with the wicked Bish∣op of Hereford, pretending that she was much troubled with frightful dreams, which presignified, that if her Husband should be again restored to his dignity, he would burn her for a Traitor, or send her into perpetu∣al banishment; the Bishop, and several other great Men, both of the Nobility and Clergy, finding them∣selves likewise equally guilty, became uneasy while the King lived, and therefore sent chiding Letters to the Keepers, pretending they gave the King too much li∣berty,
and kept him too high, and delicately, and withal added this line at the end of the Letter, contri∣ved by the Bishop. Edwardum occidere nolite timere bonum est. To shed King Edwards blood Refuse to fear I count it good. Never was the fallacy of pointings, or ambiguity of Phrase more mischievously used to the destruction of a King, or for the defence of the Contrivers, than in this hainous Parricide, for it was so craftily contrived in a double sense, that both the Keepers might find suffici∣ent warrant, and himself might find sufficient excuse, the Keepers guessing at the meaning took it in the worst sense, and therefore putring the L. Berkly out of the Castle; they shut up the King in a close Chamber, where with the stinch of dead Carkases laid in the Cellar un∣der him, he was almost poysoned, of which he made complaint to some Carpenters who worked at his Cham∣ber-window; but these wretches perceiving this would not do the work, they rushed one night into his Cham∣ber, and casting as many heavy bolsters upon him, as 15 men could carry, they pressed them down hard, and not content with that heated an Iron red hot, and through a Pipe like a Trumpet thrust it up into his body, that no marks of a violent death might be seen; but however they were heard, for when they were thus doubly murdering him, he was heard to roar and cry all the Castle over; Gourney and Martravers his Murthe∣rers expecting rewards, had the reward of Murtherers, for the Queen and Bishop Torlton disavowing the Com∣mand threatned to question them for the Kings death, whereupon they fled beyond Sea, and Gourney after three years being taken in France, and sent into England, was in the way upon the Sea beheaded, Martravers flying in∣to Germany, had the grace to repent, but lived ever after miserably, thus died this unfortunate Prince in 1327, a∣bout half a year after his deposing; never certainly was any King turned out of a Kingdom in such a manner;
many Kingdoms have been lost by the chance of War but this was lost before the Dice were cast, no blow struck, no battle fought; done forceably, and yet with∣out force, violently and yet with consent, both parties agreed, yet neither pleased; for the King was not plea∣sed to leave his Kingdom, and the Queen was not plea∣sed to leave him his life, though he often declared in his Captivity; That nothing grieved him so much as that t Queen his Wife would never be persuaded to come and see him, and swore very devoutly, That from the first time he saw he face, he could never like of any other Woman; by which it ap∣pears that neither Gaveston nor the Spencers (his wicked Favourites) had so far debauched him, as to make him false to his Bed, or disloyal to his Queen; but she was hardened against him, thinking it not safe to leave him a part by which he might afterward recover the whole; which was the chief occasion of his coming to this mise∣rable end. The County of Glocester is divided into 30 Hundreds wherein are 26 Market Towns, 208 Parish Churches, and is in the Diocess of Glocester; out of it are elected 8 Parliament Men. For the County 2; for the City of Glocester 2; Tewksbury 2; Cirencester 2. HANTSHIRE hath Berkshire on the North; Surry and Sussex on the East; the Sea on the South; Dor∣set and Wiltshire on the West; from North to South it is 54 miles, and from East to West 30. It is fruitful in Corn, plenteous in pasture, and for all advantages of the Sea wealthy and happy; Wools, Cloths, and Iron are the general Commodities of this County; Winchester is a City which flourished in the time of the Romans, and now indifferently peopled, and frequented by water; it is a∣bout a mile and an half in Circuit within the walls, which open at 6 Gates, and is adorned with magnifi∣cent Churches, and a Bishops See. Dr. Heylin tells us, That one of the Principal Orders of Knighthood is that of the round Table, instituted by Arthur, King of the Brittains, and one of the worlds 9 worthies: It con∣sisted
of 150 Knights whose names are recorded in the History of King Arthur, the principal of them were Sir Lancelot, Sir Tristram, Sir Lamarock, Sir Gawin, &c. all placed at one round Table to avoid quarrels about Prio∣rity and Place; The round Table hanging in the great Hall of Winchester is falsly called Arthur's round Table, it being not of sufficient Antiquity nor containing but 24 Seats. In the Year 959. Edgar the Saxon King hearing the Daughter of a Western Duke exceedingly praised for her Beauty, he was so inflamed therewith, that he presently made a journey into those parts, and coming to Andover in this County, he commanded the Virgin to be brought to his Bed; the Mother being tender of her Daughters honour, brought her Maid in the dark to the King, who pleased him as well in his lascivious dal∣liance; the morning approaching this late Maid made haste to rise, but the King being loth to part so soon with his supposed fair Lady, asked her why she made such haste; she told him, she had a great deal of work to do, and that her Lady would be very angry if she did not rise and dispatch it, but being kept longer than her time, she upon her knees did beseech the King to free her from her angry Mistriss, alledging, That she who had been imbraced by the King, ought not to serve any other: The King hereby perceiving the deceit was very angry, yet since he could not recall what was past, after having se∣verely reproved the deceitful Lady, he turned it into a jest; but the Girl it seems pleased him so well, that he took her for his Concubine, whereby she ruled over them who lately commanded her, and loved her en∣tirely, keeping to her alone till he was married to the fair Elfreda before mentioned. This King likewise de∣bauched a Nun, named Wolfchild, on whom he begat Edith, afterward accounted a Saint: He committed the like folly with Ethelfleda, Duke Ordmars Daughter, who for her extraordinary beauty was called The White, on whom he begot his eldest Son Edward, for which, Mr. Fox affirmeth he did 7 Years Penance, enjoyned
him by St. Dunstan. This Edward succeeded him in the Kingdom at 12 Years old, the beginning of whose Reign was miserably afflicted with barenness of ground, Famine, Murrain of Cattle, and a fearful Comet ap∣peared, all which were thought to be the signs of Divine Displeasure, for the wrong done to the married Clergy, who were turned out of their Livings and ancient Pos∣sessions, only for having Wives (contrary to the Law of God, and against all Justice and Reason;) whereto the unmarried Priests answered, That Christ respected nei∣ther the Person nor the place, but had only regard to thse that took up the Cross of Pennance and followed him; But they, good men, little understood the incumbrance of marrying, for otherwise they would have felt, that the condition of married men, was more truly taking up the cross, and enduring Pennance, than their careless single Life. The Churchmen thus divided and rent, the Nobles as well as others took part of either side, as they were affected, and both parties raised great Armies in their own defence; the Fire thus blown from a spark to a flame, was like to have grown higher, but by medi∣ation Arms were laid aside, and the cause was referred to a Council assembled at Winchester, where after long debate, when the cause was like to go against the un∣married Monks, the matter was referred to the deter∣mination of a Rood or Image of a Man, that stood a∣gainst the Wall, by the persuasion of the great Oracle St. Dunstan, who desired them to pray devoutly, and to give diligent ear for an answer; the Idol being as good natured as they were devout, was very easily persua∣ded to give them this advice, God forbid it should be so, God forbid it should be so, you have judged well once, and to change that again is not good: This was Authority su∣ent to suppress the Priests, who now with their Wives went down the Wind; yet they made another At∣tempt, for persuading the People that this was bu trick of the Monks, who placed a man behind the W, that through a Trunk uttered these words through the mouth of the Rood, they therefore earnestly desired,
hat the cause might be heard once more; this at last was granted, and appointed at Cleve in Wiltshire, whi∣ther the Prelates, and most of the Nobles and States of the Kingdom, besides innumerable Gentlemen and Commons, came; the Council being sate, and the Con∣troversie growing hot, whether by the weakness of the Foundation, or the vast weight of the People, or both, the joysts of the Chamber where they sate fell down, and the multitude with it, whereof many were hurt, and some killed; only Archbishop Dunstan, then Presi∣dent, escaped, for the Post whereon his Chair was set stood wholly untouched, which the Monks said was not without a miracle, he being their mouth against the married Priests, whose cause fell now with this fall, and the Peoples affections drawn from them, they had li∣berty now to accompany with their Wives without Cure, though not without Care: And all this happened by the strange preservation of Dunstan upon the Post, which yet is not so strange, since the Monks report, that the main Beam of his House being one time sunk out of its place, and the whole building like to fall and knock him on the Head, he made it return into its former place only by making the sign of the Cross thereon with his Fingers; so extream powerful was he in such wooden miracles; which are not much to be wondred at, since it seems his very harp could do miracles, as when of itself it sung a Hymn very melodiously; yea the blessed Virgin her self is said to have come to solace him with her songs, and it was ordinary for Angels to sing familiarly with him, and for him to whip Devils that came to him in the Shapes of Dogs, Foxes, and Bears; but his great∣est exploit was, when the Devil knowing that he was unmarried, came to tempt him in the shape of a hand∣some brisk Wench, but the Saint got her by the Nose with a pair of hot burning Pincers, and thereby spoiled a good Face, making her to rear in a dreadful manner; Thus these sottish Monks deluded the People with such ridiculous stories, and thereby rather disgraced than honoured those whom they designed to magnify.
Southampton is a Town populous, rich and beautiful, from which the whole County derives its name; The famous King Canutus his flatterers persuaded him that he was greater than Alexander, Caesar, or Cyrus, and was possessed with more than humane Power; to convince these fawning Courtiers being one time at Southampton, he commanded his Chair of State should be set on the shore when the Sea began to flow, and then sitting down therein, in the presence of many of his Atten∣dants he spake thus to the Element, Thou Sea art part of my Dominion, and the ground whereon I sit is mine, neither was there ever any that durst disobey my command, or by breaking it escaped unpunished, I charge thee therefore that thou presume not to come upon my Land, nor wet these Royal Robes of thy Lord that are about me, But the Sea giving no heed to his threat∣nings, but keeping on its usual course of Tide, first wet his Skirts, and then his Thighs, whereupon suddenly ri∣sing up, he thus spake in the hearing of them all; Let all the worlds Inhabitants know that vain and weak is the power of their Kings, and that none is worthy of the name of King, but he that keeps both Heaven, Earth, and Sea in obedience, and bindeth them in an everlasting Law of Subjection. Af∣ter which time he would never suffer the Crown to be set upon his head, but presently crowned therewith the Picture of our Saviour on the Cross at Winchester; with such strong delusions were these devout Princes drawn away, by those crafty Priests who alwaies made gain of their Godliness. This King after he had reigned 19 years in great glory, died at Shaftesbury, and was buried in the Church of the old Monastery at Winchester, to which Church he gave most Rich, and Royal Jewels, whereo one is recorded to be a Cross worth as much as the whole Revenue of England amounted to in one year; this Church being new built, his bones with many other English Saxon Kings were taken up, and preserved in gilt Coffers fixt upon the walls of the Quire in that Ca∣thedral Church. In the year 1053. King Edward the Confessor dispossest his Mother Queen Emma of all her Estate, because af∣ter
his Fathers death she Married King Canutus, and seemed to favour her Children by him more than the former; he also committed her to Custody in the Abby of Worwell; yea he so far hearkned to an aspersion cast upon her of unchast familiarity with Alwine, Bishop of Winchester, that to clear her self, she was fain to pass the Tryal of Fire Ordeal, which was in this manner; nine Plowshares red hot were laid in unequal distance, which she must pass barefooted and blindfold, and if she pas∣sed them unhurt, she was judged Innocent; this terrible Tryal she passed fairly without the least damage, to the great astonishment of all Beholders, using this Speech to her Leaders, O Lord when shall I come to the place of my Purgation? but having her eyes uncovered, and seeing her self clearly escaped, she fell upon her knees, and with Tears gave thanks to her deliverer, whereby she recovered her former honour, and in memory thereof gave 9 Mannors to the Minster of Winchester according to the number of the Plow shares; this King was as un∣kind to his Wife, as to his Mother, for having Married Editha, the beautiful, and indeed vertuous Daughter of Earl Godwin, because he had taken displeasure against the Father, he would shew no kindness to the Daughter, he had made her his Wife, but conversed not with her as his Wife, only at board, but not at bed, or if at bed, no otherwise than David with Abishag, and yet was con∣tent to hear her accused of Incontinency, whereof if she were guilty, he could not be Innocent, so that what the virtues were, for which after his death he should be reputed a Saint, doth not easily appear; it seems he was chast, but not without injury to his Wife; Pious, but not without ingratefulness to his Mother; just in his present Government, but not without neglect of Posterity, for through his want of Providence in that point he left the Crown to so doubtful a Succession, that soon after his Decease it was translated out of English into French, and the Kingdom made servile to another Forreign Nation. In the year 1184. A Priest at Ando∣ver, praying before the Altar was slain with Thunder;
likewise one Clark and his Brother were burnt to death with Lightning; and soon after a shower of blood rained in the Isle of Wight two hours together. In the year 1250. King Hen. 3. in whose nature it see∣med an inseparable quality, to be violent in every thing he had a mind to have done, and that sometimes with∣out due respect to his Majesty, as appears by what fol∣lows, This King having a design to advance his half Bro∣ther Ethelmare to the Bishoprick of Winchester, was not sa∣tisfied in sending a strict command to the Monks to chuse him, but goes to Winchester in Person, and the Clergy being met, he gets up into the Pulpit, and Prea∣ches a Sermon to them, taking for his Text these words, Justice and Peace have kissed each other; from whence he raised this Doctrine, That whereas the rigor of Judgment and Justice belonged to him and other Kings, who were to Rule the Nations, so quiet, peace, and tranquillity belonged to the Clergy, and this day, saith he, I hope they will both kiss each other, for I doubt not but that both for your own good, and my desire, you will chuse my Brother Bishop this day, with many other words to the same purpose, whereby the Monks perceiving the earnestness of his desire, held it in vain to deny him; and thereupon elected Ethelmare; but be∣cause he was no Priest, they did it with this reservati∣on, If the Pope did allow thereof; but the Pope resolving to make his advantage thereof as well as the King, exacted 500 marks of Church Revenues for his Confirmation, which made Matthew Paris a Monk, to utter this bitter lamentation, O Pope the chief of Bishops, why dost thou thus suffer the Christian World to be defiled; worthily, worthily therefore art thou driven out of thine own City, and See; and like a Runagade, and another Cain, art inforced to wandr up and down; O thou God of just vengeance, when wilt thou draw forth thy Sword, and imbrue it in the blood of such wretched Oppressors? The Pope it seems was then fled from Rome, for fear of the Emperor of Germany, and though he would neither reform these grand abuses in himself, nor others, yet Robert Crosthead, the stout and learned Bish∣op of Lincoln, resolved to reform the Monks and Fry∣ers;
but they appealing to the Pope, the Bishop went to him, and plainly told him, That all Offenders escaped punish∣ment, because his heart was so open, and ready to receive Bribes from them; The Pope dismist him, and sent him back with n angry Countenance, and reproachful words; he was t this time at Lyons, where a while after the Council breaking up, Cardinal Hugo Preached a Farewell Sermon o the Citizens, and among other benefits which they ad reaped by the Popes residence in their City, recko∣ned up this for a principal one, That whereas at their oming to Town, there were but three or four Bawdy Houses n Lyons, now at their departure they left but one, but indeed hat reached from one end of the City to the other; whereby we may observe that France had some part of the Popes Blessings as well as England. But it seems the People had no very good opinion of he proceedings of this King Henry, both against the Lords and the Church, and not only Men, but Women ndertook to reprehend him for the same; for Isabel, Widdow to the Earl of Arundel, a young Lady, having eceived a repulse from the King in a matter which she lledged was hers in Equity, presumed to speak thus to is face; O my Lord King, why do you turn away from Just∣ce; we cannot now obtain right in your Court, you are placed as  middle Person between God and us, but you neither govern s nor your self, neither are you afraid to vex the Church divers ways at present as well as you have formerly, nor by several ppressions to afflict the Nobles of the Kingdom. The King eing fired at this free discourse, looking on her with a cornful and angry countenance, spake thus to her with loud voice, O my Lady Countess, what, have the Lords of England given you a Charter, and hired you to be their Advo∣ate and Orator, because they know you have your Tongue at will? No my Lord, said the Countess, They have made me no Charter, but the Charter which your Father made, and which your self confirmed, swearing to keep the same inviolably, and constantly, and often extorting mony upon promise that the Li∣berties therein should be faithfully observed, which yet you have not kept, but have broken without regard to Honour or Consci∣ence,
therefore you are found to be a manifest violater of you Faith and Oath; for where are now the Liberties of England so often fairly ingrossed in Wriing? so often granted? so often bought and paid for? I therefore though a Woman, and all the Natural Loyal People of the Land, appeal against you to the Tribunal of the dreadful Judge, and Heaven and Earth shall bear us Witness that we are used unjustly, and God the Lord of Revenges right us: The King, saith the Author, aba∣shed at these words, asked her if she did not look to ob∣tain her suit upon favour, since she was his Kinswoman; she replied, that seeing he had denied that which the Law gave, how could she hope to obtain her suit by favour? Therefore, said she, I do appeal to the presence of Christ against those also of your Counsellors, who bewitch and dull your Judg∣ment, and draw you out of the path of Truth, gaping only after their own advantage. But the King, saith M. Paris, re∣mained uncorrigible, and the Lady lost both her char∣ges, hopes, and Travel. In the Year 1257. K. Henry 3. kept his Christmas at Winchester, where new grievances arose; the Merchants of Gascoign having their Wines taken from them by the Kings Officers without satisfaction, complain to their Lord the Prince, he to his Father, who having been in∣formed that their clamour was unjust, as relying upon the Prince's favour, he falls into a great rage with the Prince, and breaks out into these words, See now, my Blood and my own Bowels oppose me: The Prince's Servants likewise relying on their Master, commit many outrages, abusing men at their pleasure, neither was the Prince altogether free, for it is said that he caused the Ears of a young Man to be cut off, and his Eyes to be pluckt out as he travelled by the way, which was the occasion of very great disturbances. In this Kings Reign a Child was born in the Isle of Wight, who at 18 Years old was scarce 3 Foot high, and therefore brought to the Queen, who carried him about with her as a Monster in Nature. In King Edward 3. time, Southampton was fired by the French, under the conduct of the King of Sicily's Son whom a Countryman encountred, and knocked him
own with his Club; the Prince cried out Rancon, Ran∣on, (that is, he would pay him a Ransom) but he neither nderstanding his Language, nor the Law that Arms oth allow, laid on him more severely still, saying; I now thee to be a Francon, (or Frenchman) and therefore hou shalt die, and thereupon knocked him at Head. In 1554. the conditions of the Marriage between Q. Mary, and K. Philip of Spain were agreed to in Parlia∣ment upon these Articles. 1. That K. Philip should ad∣mit of no stranger in any Office but only Natives. 2. That e should alter nothing of the Laws and customs of the King∣dom. 3. That he should not carry the Queen out of the Realm without her own consent, nor any of her Children without con∣sent of the Council. 4. That if he outlived the Queen e should challenge no right in the Kingdom, but it should de∣scend to the next Heir. 5. That he should carry none of the Crown Jewels out of the Kingdom, nor any Ships or Ordi∣nance. Lastly, That neither directly nor indirectly he should ntangle England in the Wars between Spain and France. It was also proposed in this Parliament, that the Supre∣macy of the Pope should be restored, which was not as∣sented to without great difficulty; for the 6 Years Reign of K. Edward 6. had spread a Plantation of the Protestant Religion in the hearts of many. The Mar∣riage being thus agreed, several Lords and Gentlemen were sent to fetch over the Prince from Spain, who ar∣rived at Southampton July 20. 1554. and was met by the Queen at Winchester, where they were openly married, the disparity of Years in Princes being not much re∣garded, though he were but 27, and she 38 Years old: Then the Emperors Ambassadour being present, declared that in Consideration of the Marriage, the Emperour had given to King Philip his Son the Kingdoms of Naples and Jerusalem, and thereupon Garter King at Arms, o∣penly in the Church in the presence of the King, Queen, and Nobles, both of Spain and England, solemnly pro∣claimed the Title and Stile of these two Princes as fol∣loweth; Philip and Mary, by the Grace of God, King and Queen of England, France, Naples, Jerusalem, and Ireland,
Defenders of the Faith, Princes of Spain and Sicily: Archdukes of Austria, Dukes of Millain, Burgundy and Brabant; Counts of Habspurg, Flanders, and Tyrol. In 1608. June 26. In the Parish of Christs Church in Hampshire, one John Hitchel a Carpenter, lying in bed with his Wife, and a young Child by them, was himself and the Child both burnt to death with a sudden Light∣ning, no fire appearing outwardly upon him, and ye lay burning for the space almost of three days, till he was quite consumed to ashes, In 1619. there was one Bernard Calvert of Andover in this County, that rid from St. Georges Church in Southwark to Dover, and from thence passed by Barge to Calice in France, and from thence returned back to St. Georges Church the same day, setting out about three a clock in the morning, and returning about 8 a clock at night fresh and lusty; I was at London the same time, saith Mr. Clark, and saw the man. Portsmouth is a very convenient Port; The Isle of Wight belongs to this Shire, the whole County is divi∣ded into 39 Hundreds, wherein are 253 Parishes, and is in the Diocess of Winchester. Out of it are elected 26 Parliament Men; Southampton gives the Title of Duke to Charles Fitz-Roy, eldest Son to the Dutchess of Cleave∣land; Winchester the Title of Marquess to Charles L. Paw∣let; and Portsmouth, that of Dutchess to Lovise de Quero∣nalle, a French Lady. HARTFORDSHIRE so called from Hart∣ford, the chief Town therein, as Hartford is termed from the Ford of Harts, a Hart Couchant in the waters, being the Arms thereof; It hath Essex on the East, Middlesex on the South, Buckinghamshire on the West, Bedford and Cambridgeshire on the North; it is a rich County in Corn, Fields, Pastures, Meadows, Woods, Groves, and clear Rivers, and is indeed the Garden of England for Delight, and it's usually said, That such as buy a House in Hartfordshire, pay two years purchase for the Air thereof; no County in all England can shew so many good Towns in
so little compass, their Teams of Horses are oft-times deservedly advanced from the Cart to the Coach, being kept in excellent equipage, much alike in colour and stature, fat and fair, such is their care in dressing, and well feeding them; and to make an innocent digression, I could name the place and Person, saith Dr. Fuller, who brought his Servant before a Justice of Peace, for stealing his Oats and Barley; the Man brought his five Horses tailed together along with him, alledging for himself, That if he were the Thief, these were the Receivers, and so escaped. The most famous place in this County for Antiquity is Verolamium, now utterly ruined, and subverted, and the footsteps thereof hardly to be seen, though in very great account by the Romans, and one of their Free Cities; It was plundered by Boadicia, that ever eternized Queen of the Icenians, when Seventy Thousand of the Romans, and their Confederates perished by her Revenging Sword; The magnificence thereof for stately Archi∣tecture, and Grandeur, was discovered by the large and arched Vaults found in the days of King Edgar, which were filled up by Eldred, and Edmer, Abbots of St. Al∣bans, because they were the Receptacles, and lurking holes of Whores and Thieves; hear what our famous Spencer saies of this once renowned City of Verulam. I was that City which the Garland wore Of Brittains pride delivered unto me, By Roman Victors; this I was of yore; Though nought at all but ruines now I be, And lie in mine own Ashes as you see, Verlam I was, what boots it that I was, Since now I am but weeds and wastful grass? And another English Poet writes thus in the name of Watling, one of the 4 Imperial Highways. Thou saw'st when Verlam once her head aloft did rear, Which in her Cinders now lies sadly buried here,
With Alabaster, Tuch, and Porphyry adorn'd, When well near in her pride great Troynovant she scorn'd. A nameless Author hath writ thus upon this forgot∣ten City. Stay thy foot that passest by, And a wonder here descry; Churches that inter'd the dead, Here themselves are buried. Houses where men slept and wak't, Here in Ashes underrak't; And (to the Poet to allude) Here is Corn where once Troy stood; Or if you the Truth would have, Here's a City in a Grave. A wonder Reader, think it then, That Cities thus should die like men: And yet a wonder think it none, For many Cities thus are gone. Out of the ruines of this City rose the fair Town of St. Albans, remarkable for bringing forth Alban the Mar∣tyr; for about the year of Christ 180. King Lucius reigned in Brittain, who hearing of the Miracles and Wonders done by the Christians in divers places, sent Letters to Eleutherius, Bishop of Rome, desiring to re∣ceive the Christian Faith; the good Bishop being glad of this request, sent him two Preachers, Faganus and Damianus, by whose faithful endeavours, it pleased God, the King and many of his People were Converted, and Baptized, the Temples of Idols, and other Monuments of Gentilism were subverted; thus the true Religion increased, and Superstition and Idolatry decreased, ma∣ny Bishops being ordained, and set over the People, and all things setled in good order; after which this religi∣ous King sent again to Eleutherius for the Roman Laws, according to which he desired to govern his People; to which request Eleutherius returned this answer, That for the Roman and Imperial Laws, they might have their defects, but the Law of God could not; and thereupon advi∣sed
him to study the Scriptures, and out of them by the Council of his Realm to enact Laws for the Govern∣ment of his Kingdom; For, saith he, You are Gods Vicar in your Kingdom, and therefore it behoves you to unite your People, to call them to the Faith and Service of Jesus Christ, to cherish and maintain them, to rule and govern them, and to defend them from all such as would do them wrong, &c. The Christian Faith thus received by the Brittains, flourished here 216 years, till the coming of the Saxons; But the Ramans continuing Heathens, raised much trouble a∣gainst the Professors thereof, especially after the death of Lucius, who dying without , the Barons and No∣bles disagreeing about a Successor, the Romans stepped in, and took the Crown into their hands, whereupon great ruine and misery ensued to the Kingdom; for sometimes the Idolatrous Romans reigned, and some∣times the Christian Brittains, according to the fortune of the War; The first remarkable Persecution which we hear of, was under Dioclesian, and Maximi, when the Heathens raged so extreamly, that in Brittany, and some other Places, there are reckoned Seventeen Thousand Martyrs who suffered for the name of Christ; In this Persecution a famous Preacher called Amphibolus being searcht for to be Imprisoned, he to escape the fury of his Persecutors, hid himself in the House of Alban aforemen∣tioned, who was a Citizen of Verulam, now St. Albans; this Alban was at that time a Heathen, but observing Amphibolus to continue day and night in watching and Prayer, he began to be convinced, and to hearken to the Divine Instructions and Exhortations of this good man, and forsaking Idolatry, he became a very sincere Christian; The Enemy having intelligence that this Minister was in his house, Soldiers were ordered to search for him, which Alban having notice of, he apparel∣led himself in the cloths of Amphibolus, and offered him∣self to the Souldiers, who bound him, and carried him before the Judge, who was at that time sacrificing to his Idols; The Judge perceiving the business, said, Since thou hadst rather convey away the Rebel and Traytor to our
Gods, than deliver him up to undergo due punishment for his blaspheming our Deities, look therefore what Torments he should have suffered if he had been taken, the same shalt thou endure if thou refuse to practise the Rights of our Religion; Alban was regardless of these Threats, and being replenished with Divine Fortitude, boldly told the Judge to his face, That he would not obey his Commandment, Then said the Judge, Of what House and Stock art thou? Alban an∣swered, It is no matter of what stock I am, but if thou desirest to know my Religion, be it known unto thee that I am a Christi∣an, and that I imploy my self in the exercise of their Holy Re∣ligion; The Judge then demanded his name; my Parents, said he, named me Alban, And I Honour and Worship the True living God who made all things of nothing. The Judge being inraged hereat, said, If thou desirest to prolong thy life, come and Sacrifice to our Gods; Alban answered, The Sa∣crifice you offer to the Devil profits you nothing, but rather pur∣chaseth for you eternal pains in Hell-fire; The Judge was still more incensed hereat, and commanded the tormentors to beat him, thinking stripes might prevail more than words; yet Alban continued not only patient, but joy∣ful in the midst of all his Torments, the Judge percei∣ving that neither words nor blows would remove him from his Constancy, commanded him to be beheaded; The Executioner observing his fervent Faith and Pray∣ers, fell down at his Feet, throwing away the Sword, desiring rather to die for him or with him, than to do Execution upon him, and suffered accordingly, whereby he was made a Martyr for that Faith, of which he was before a Persecutor; The other Officers were astoni∣shed and trembled to behold this strange Providence, but at last one of them took up the Sword, wherewith he cut off the Martyr Albans head. In this Town of St. Albans King Offa built a most stately Monastery, which we read was upon this occasion; In the Year 793 Offa the 11th King of the Mercians took to wife one Quenrid, of whom it is recorded, that her name was Drida, and that she was Kinswoman to the French King Charles the great, and was for some Of∣fence
banished his Realm; being put into a boat without Sail or Tackle, and arriving upon the Coasts of England was relieved by Offa, who was then a young Nobleman, and changed her name to Quenrid, of whom he became so much in love, that contrary to the Will of his Pa∣rents he married her; she being of a proud, cruel, and ambitious Nature, as appears by the sequel; For E∣thelbert King of the East Angles, a wise and religious Prince, coming to the Court of King Offa, being per∣suaded by his Nobles to desire his Daughter in Marri∣age, was accompanied with a great Train suitable to his Quality; but Queen Quenrid, envious of his grandeur, persuaded her Husband, that he came thither upon some treacherous design, and therefore he with some of his Council, contrived his destruction, which some say was by causing him to fall into a deep Pit, digged to that purpose under his Chair of State, and that then be∣ing alone, one Gimbert took and bound him, and then struck off his Head, which he presented to the King and Queen: Thus was this Innocent Prince unjustly mur∣dered, but not without divine Vengeance following the Actors; for the Queen, Author of this Villany, died in three months after, and was so tormented in her sick∣ness, that she bit and tore her Tongue in pieces, which had been the Instrument of this Barbarity, and Offa at length being satisfied of the Kings Innocence, and the heinousness of the Fact, gave the 10th part of his Goods to the Church, and according to the De∣votion of that Age, built the Abby of St. Albans and other Monasteries, and went afterward to do Pennance at Rome, where he gave to the Church of St. Peter a Penny from every House in his Dominions, which were commonly called Romeshot, or Peter-Pence, and at last was transformed from a King to a Monk: Thus the Almighty punished not only him and his Wife, but the whole Land suffered for this horrid Murder, in being made the Popes Vassals, for the Clergy seldom parting with any thing they get, the poor English were forced to pay this unjust Tax for many Hundred Years
after: Nay further, the King and his Son also died within a year after this cruel Murder, whereby that Kingdom was translated from the Mercians to the West-Saxons. In the Reign of K. Henry 3. the Abbot of St. Albans ordered his Servant to fetch him a mans Wife in the Town, with whom he pretended earnest business; the Servant accordingly brought her to his Masters Cham∣ber, and then withdrawing, the Abbot told her, that her Cloaths were but very mean, but if she would be ruled by him, she should wear as good Cloaths as any Woman in the Parish, and therewith began to be very brisk upon her; and finding persuasions would not pre∣vail, endeavoured by force to debauch her, but all in vain, whereupon he kept her several days a Prisoner in his Chamber, which her Husband having notice of, fetches her from him, and tells his Neighbours he will sue the Abbot for imprisoning his Wife; which he hear∣ing of, prosecuted the poor man in the Ecclesiastical Court for defamation, and thereby frighted him from any further proceedings. Sir Thomas More (though a vi∣rulent Papist) reports a story of the like Nature, That a poor man found a Priest over familiar with his Wife, and because he told it abroad, and had no Witnesses to prove it, the Priest sued him in the Bishops Court, and at length the Poor man under pain of being cursed and excommunicated, was enjoined to stand up in the Church the next Sunday, and say, Mouth thou lyest; ac∣cordingly having repeated what he had reported of the Priest, he put his hand to his Mouth, and said, Mouth thou liest, and then laying his hands on his Eyes, he said, But Eyes, by the Mass, ye lye not a whit. In K. Henry the 7. time an Act was made to punish the incontinency of Priests, and Francis Petrarch an Archdeacon thus Anato∣mizes the Roman Clergy, which discovers the extream Chastity of the Popish Batchelors. Here Venus with her wanton toys Is honoured with base Bawds and Boys,
Whoredom, Adultery and Incest Are honoured here among the best. And counted but for sports and plays Even with the Prelates of these days. The Wife is ravisht from her Spouse, And to the Sons of th' Church she bows. The poor good man must leave the Town, Such Ordinances are set down, And when her Belly riseth high By Clergy-Men who with her lie, The Husband must not dare complain, But takes his Wife with Child again. In the Reign of K. Hen. 6. 1454. the Duke of York raised a great Army, of which the King having notice, got considerable forces together, and marched to St. Albans; to whom the Duke and his Adherents came, de∣siring the King to deliver such Persons whom they would name, that they might be deservedly punished: To whom the King taking Courage returns this resolute Answer, That the Duke and his Accomplices were Traitors, and that rather than he would deliver up any Lord then attend∣ing him, he himself would that day live and dye in their quarrel and defence: Whereupon the Duke and his Party went away dissatisfied, and the Yorkists fell immediately upon the Kings Party in St. Albans, and the Earl of Warwick breaking through a Garden, a sharp Fight is immedi∣ately begun, which ended with very great loss on the Kings side, the Dukes of Somerset, Buckingham and his Son, the Earls of Northumberland, Stafford, and the L. Clifford being slain, and buried at St Albans, with above 5000 common Souldiers; and the King himself un∣guarded is left in a poor thatcht house, whither he re∣tired from the danger of the Arrows: The Duke of York having notice where he was, goes with the Earls of Warwick and Salisbury, who all three upon their knees present themselves to him, making humble Petition for Pardon of what is past, and now seeing the Duke of Somerset, the common Enemy, is slain, they had what
they aimed at: To whom the King throughly affrighted said, Let there be no more killing then, and I will do what you would have me: After which a Parliament was called, wherein the Duke of York was made Protector of the Kings Person and of the Realm, though the King were 35 years old; This Battle of St. Albans was fought May 23. in the 33. Year of K. Henry's Reign, wherein the King himself was shot in the Neck with an Arrow. In 1461. another Battle was fought at St. Albans, between the Earl of March, Son to the Duke of York, and King Henry the 6. his Queen; for the Duke of York being slain at Wakefield, his Son Edward, E. of March, (after∣ward King Edward 4.) getting his forces together, beat the Queens Army at Mortimers Cross, before which Bat∣tle it is said, the Sun appeared to the Earl of March like three Suns, and suddenly joined altogether in one, for which it is thought he gave the Sun in its full brightness for his Badge or Cognizance: The Queen in the mean time encouraged by the death of the Duke of York, got some Northern Souldiers together, and marched toward Lon∣don, and coming to St, Albans, the Duke of Norfolk, and the Earl of Warwick, with the forces of the Earl of March, (King Henry himself being Prisoner among them) encountred them, where after a stout resistance, the Queens Army routed the other, of which about 2000 were slain; after which the King, Queen, and the Prince her Son met joyfully together, though their joy continued not long, King Henry being deposed soon af∣ter, and Edward Earl of March proclaimed King, and all this by the assistance of the Citizens of London and their Wives, who were much inamoured with the Beautiful E. of March. In our remembrance, saith Cam∣den, near Fishpoolstreet in St. Albans, certain Anchors were digged up, which is very strange, and worth en∣quiring into. There is a Brook near St. Albans called Wenmere, or Womere, which never breaketh out but it foretelleth scarcity of Corn, or else some extraordinary dangerous times to ensue, as the Vulgar believe. At Ashwell in this County rise so many sources of Springs to∣gether,
that they presently drive a Mill, and become a pretty big River. Sir Henry Cary, Kinsman to Queen Eliz. was made Baron of Hunsdon in this County, a valiant man, and lover of Men of their Hands, very cholerick, but not malicious; one Mr. Cols once meeting him, this Lord on some former grudge gave him a box on the Ear, Cole presently returned him three or four for i, upon which the Lords servants swarmed about Cole with their drawn Swords; You Rogues, said the Lord, cannot I and my Neighbour change a Blow or two but you must interpose: Thus the quarrel was begun and ended the same Minute. This Lord suppressed the first Northern Commotion, for which a Letter of Thanks was solemnly returned to him by the Queen, the first part whereof was written by the Secretary of State, but the Postscript was all of the Queens own hand, as followeth, I doubt much my Harry, whether that the Victory given me more joyed me, or that you were by God appointed the Instrument of my Glory, and I assure you for my Countries good the first might suffice, but for my Hearts contentation the second more pleaseth me; it likes me not a little, that with a good Testimony of your Faith, there is seen a stout courage of your mind, that more trusted to the goodness of your quarrel, than to the weakness of your number; well I can say no more, Beatus est ille servus, quem cum Dominus venerit, inveniet facientem sua Mandata: Hap∣py is that servant whom when his Lord cometh he shall find doing his Commands; And that you may not think you have done nothing for your Profit, (though you have done much for your Honour) I intend to make this journey somewhat to increase your livelihood, that you may not say to your self Per∣ditur quod factum est ingrato, what is done for an in∣grate person is lost. Your Loving Kinswoman, Elizabeth Regina. Three times was this Lord in Election to be Earl of Wiltshire, but some accident still hindered it; when he lay on his Death-bed the Queen gave him a gracious vi∣sit, causing his Patent for that Earldom to be drawn,
his Robes to be made, and both to be laid upon his Bed; but this Lord who could never dissemble sick nor well, said, Madam, seeing you did not count me worthy of this honour while I was living, I count my self unworthy of it, now I am dying: He died 1596. The County of Hartford is divided into 8 Hundreds, wherein are 18 Market Towns, 120 Parish Churches, and is in the Diocesses of London, Chichester, and Lincoln; out of it are elected 6 Parliament men; for the County 2. for St. Albns 2. for Hartford 2. and gives the Title of Marquess to Charles L. Seymour, who is also Duke of So∣merset, &c. HEREFORDSHIRE hath Worcestershire and Shropshire on the North; Glocestershire on the East, Mon∣mouthshire on the South, and Brecknock and Radnorshire on the West; the Air thereof is very healthy, as ap∣pears by the vivacity of the Inhabitants: Many aged Peo∣ple which in other Countrys are confined to their Beds and Chimney Corners, are here found in the Fields both able and willing to work: The ingenious Serjeant Hoskin gave an Entertainment to K. James in this Coun∣ty, and provided 10 aged People to dance the Morris before him, all of them making up more than a Thou∣sand Years, for what was wanting in one was supplied in the age of another; This County shares as deep as a∣ny in the Alphabet of our English Commodities, though exceeding in W. that is for Wood, Wheat, Wool, and Wa∣ter; besides excellent fruit, especially Apples, of which the best Sider is made: There is a little Fountain called Bonewell, nigh Richards Castle in this County, the Wa∣ter whereof is always full of the Bones of little Fishes, or as others conceive of little Frogs, they being so small as hardly to be distinguished, and which addeth to the Wonder, this Spring can never be emptied of them, but as fast as some are drawn out others presently succeed: To this may be added a second Wonder of Marcley Hill in the East part of this County; for Feb. 17. 1571. the Earth began to open at 6 a Clock in the Evening, and
this Hill with a Rock under it, made at first a mighty bellowing noise, which was heard a great way off, and then lifted up itself a great height, and began to travel, carrying along with it the Trees which grew upon it, the Sheepfolds, and flocks of Sheep abiding thereon at the same time; in the place from whence it first moved, it left a gaping distance 40 Foot wide, and 80 Ells long, the whole field was about Twenty Acres; passing along it overthrew a Chappel standing in its way, removed an Ewe-tree growing in the Church-Yard from the West to the East; with the like violence it thrust before it Highways, Houses, and Trees, it made tilled ground pasture, and again turned pasture into Tillage; having thus walked from Sunday in the Evening, till Monday Noon, it then stood still, and moved no more, mounting to a Hill 12 Fathoms high. In the Reign of William the Conqueror, Walter Bishop of Hereford attempted to force the Chastity of a Woman who was a Semstress, whom out of pretence of work∣ing for him he brought into his Chamber, but she refu∣sing to consent, wounded him in the Belly with a pair of Scissars, whereof he died. In 1233. a little before the Wars broke forth between K. Hen. 3. and his Barons, there appeared at Hereford five Suns at once, and a cer∣tain great Circle of a Christal colour about two Foot in breadth, as it were compassing all England. In the Reign of King Hen. 4. 1402. Owen Glendour being by the Welch made their King and Captain, having got together a considerable number, brake into the borders of Here∣fordshire, making spoil and Prey of the Country, as free∣ly as if they had leave to do it, and indeed they had none to oppose them, but only the Lord Edmund Morti∣mer, who was at his Castle of Wigmore, he assembling the Country Forces, and joining Battle with them was over∣thrown by them, himself being taken Prisoner, and then fettered, and cast into a deep and vile Dungeon, from whence King Henry would not be persuaded to de∣liver him, but could rather have wished both him and his two Sisters in Heaven, they being all three Competi∣tors
for the Crown with him, It was thought, if Owen Glendour had as well known how to use the Victory, as to get it, he might at this time have gone far in freeing the Welch from the English Yoak, but having killed a Thou∣sand of the English, he thought he had done enough for that time, and so giving over the pursuit, retired; The Inhumanity of the Welch Women was here memorable, who fell upon the dead Carkases of the English, first stripping, and then cutting off their Privy Members, and Noses, whereof the first they thrust into their Mouths, and the other they pressed between their Buttocks. Sir John Oldcastle L. Cobham was born in this County, a valiant man, and a great Follower of Wickliff, for which he lost his life; for this worthy Lord imbracing his Doctrines, and being a zealous defender both of them and the Professors thereof, he thereby exposed himself to the utmost fury and malice of his Popish adversaries, and thereupon Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury, called a Synod of the Clergy, who charged him with 246 Articles of Heresy, and then made grievous complaints of him to K. Henry 5. who having patiently heard these blood-thirsty Wolves, desired them that because he was of Noble Blood, and was his Knight, they would endea∣vour to reduce him with gentleness, rather than rigor, promising also that himself would seriously discourse with him concerning these matters; and accordingly sent for the L. Cobham, advising him as an obedient Child to submit himself to the Church, and acknow∣ledge his fault; To whom this Christian Knight answe∣red, Most worthy Prince, I am always ready and willing to obey you, whom I know to be the Minister of God, bearing the Sword for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of those that do well; unto you next to my eternal God, I owe all obedience, and submit all I have to you, being ready to obey at all times whatever you shall in the Lord command me, but as for the Pope and his Spiritualty, I owe them neither sute nor service, knowing him by the Scriptures to be the Great Antichrist, the Son of Perdition, the open Enemy to God, and the Abomination standing in the Holy place; When the King heard this
stout answer; he left him to the Bishops, not daring in∣deed to do otherwise, the Princes of that Age being miserably Priest-ridden and Inslaved by the Pope and his Clergy; Then the Archbishop proceeded further a∣gainst him, persuading him to recant what he had writ∣ten, or else threatning to condemn him as an Heretick; the L. Cobham answered, Do as you think best, for I am at a point, that which I have written I will stand to, to the death; Soon after the Archbishop came again, telling him he was ready to absole him if he humbly desired it, No, said the Lord Cobham, I will not, for I never yet trespassed a∣gainst you, and so kneeling down, and lifting up his Eyes and Hands toward Heaven, he said; I humbly confess my sins unto thee O Eternal, and everliving God; In my frail youth I offended thee O Lord, by Pride, Covetousness, Wrath, and Ʋncleanness, many men have I hurt in mine anger, and have committed many other horrible sins, for which good Lord I ask thee forgiveness; And then weeping, he stood up and said, Lo good People for breaking Gods Laws, and his Holy Commandments, the Prelates never yet cursed me; but for their own Laws and Traditions they handle me most cruelly, and therefore they and their Laws shall according to Gods promise be utterly destroyed. After this they proceeded to read the Sentence of Condemnation against him, to whom the L. Cobham with a cheerful countenance said, Though you judge my body which is but a wretched thing, yet I am sure you can do no more harm to my Soul than Satan could to Jobs, for he that created it will, I doubt not, of his infinite mercy save it, and as for the Confession of my Faith, I will stand to it even to the very death, by the Grace of my eternal God; And then turning to the People, he spake thus to them with a loud voice; Good People for Gods sake be well aware of these men, or else they will beguile you, and lead you blindfold into Hell with themselves, and so falling down upon his knees, he prayed for his Enemies, saying, Lord God Eternal, I beseech thee of thine infinite mercy to forgive my Persecutors, if it be thy blessed will, and so he was sent back to the Tower, from whence he soon after escaped into Wales, where he lay concealed four years, though a great sum of money was offered to
bring him in alive or dead; But at last the Lord Powis, either for love of the mony, or out of hatred to the True Christian Religion, sought divers ways to play the Judas, and at last obtained his purpose, apprehending him, and sending him to London, where he was soon af∣ter drawn through the Streets, to the new Gallows in St. Giles's Fields, and there first hanged, and then burnt on the Gallows, and this was the end of this Godly Martyr of Jesus Christ; and though the Papists charge him with Treason, yet we know it hath ever been the practice of the Devil and his Instruments to accuse Gods Servants rather for Sedition than Religion, because they per∣ceive Princes are generally more careful of their own Honour, than Gods Glory; for thus they dealt with our Blessed Saviour, and St. Paul, who were accused for Disloyalty, and stirring up Tumults; But the Almighty did not suffer his death to go unpunished, for the Arch∣bishop who sate in Judgment upon him, and condem∣ned him, was soon after struck with a disease in his Tongue, that he could neither swallow any thing, nor speak a word some days before his death, by which means he was starved to death. Robert Devereux, Earl of Essex, was born in this County in 1567. He was a Masterpiece of Court and Camp, and came with many advantages to the Court of Queen Elizabeth, who passio∣nately loving his Person, sent him once an angry loving Letter for going into France, often saying, We shall have this young Fellow knocked on the head, as foolish Sydney was, by his own forwardness, and was impatient till his return; after this upon some misdemeanors he was brought to a private Tryal, wherein some words in his Letters were produced against him, as that, No storm is more fierce than the indignation of an Impotent Prince, what, cannot Princes err? May they not injure their Subjects? These things be∣ing proved, he falling on his knees, professed he would not contest with the Queen, nor excuse the faults of his young years, protesting that he alwaies meant well, and therewith shed so many tears as made the Spectators weep too; he was then censured, but the Queen soon
forgave him, however he retired into the Country, and remembred himself to the Queen by the L. Howard in these words; That he kissed the rod, and the Queens hands, which had only corrected, not overthrown him; yet he should ne∣ver enjoy solid comfort till he might see those blessed Eyes, which had been his loadstars whereby he had happily steered his course while he held on his way at lawful distance; But now he re∣solved to eat grass with Nebuchadnezzar, till it pleased the Queen to restore his senses; she being overjoyed with these Speeches; Would to God, said she, his deeds would be answerable to his words; he hath long tried my patience, I must now make tryal of his Humility; Upon which the Earl be∣came so confident of the Queens favour, that being de∣nyed a Suit about farming sweet wines, he conspired with others to seize her Person, and which more aliena∣ted her affections than any thing else, she heard he de∣spised her Person, and that he had said, That the Queen was now old and decrepit, and withered as well in mind as in body; After this he made an Insurrection in London, which not succeeding he was sent to the Tower, and being arraigned (together with the Earl of Southampton) by his Peers, was found guilty, and Feb. 25. 1601. was to be the fatal day; in the mean time divers Ministers were sent to comfort him; The Queen now wavered in her self, one while remembring former kindnesses, she would not, and then again she would have him die, be∣cause of his stubborness in not asking her mercy, and his openly saying, That he could not live, but she must perish; So that she gave order for his death within the Tower, where he spake to this Purpose; My Lords and Christian Bre∣thren who are present witnesses of my just punishment; I confess to Gods Glory, my self a most wretched Sinner, and that my sins in number exceed the hairs of my head, that good which I would have done, I did not, and the evil which I would not, that did I, for all which I beseech my Saviour Christ to be a Mediator, but especially for this my last crying sin; I beseech God, Her Ma∣jesty, and the State to forgive me, and bless her with a prospe∣rous Reign, with a wise and understanding Heart, to bless the Nobles, and Ministers of the Church and State; I likewise be∣seech
you and all the world to have a charitable opinion of me fo my intention toward her Majesty, whose death I protest I never in∣tended, nor any violence toward her Person, I thank God I ne∣ver was an Atheist in not believing the Scriptures; nor a Pa∣pist to trust in my own merits, but am assured to be saved by the merits and mercies of Jesus Christ my Saviour, This Faith I was I brought up in, and herein I am now ready to die, beseech∣ing you all to join your souls with me in Prayer, that my soul may be lifted up by Faith above all earthly things; and lastly I desire forgiveness of all the world, even as freely as from my heart I forgive all the world; And then kneeling down, said; I have been divers times in places of danger, where death was neither so present nor so certain, and yet even then I felt the weakness of my flesh, and therefore now in this last and great conflict I desire the assistance of Gods Holy Spirit; and so, saith Mr. Speed; with a most Heavenly Prayer, and faith∣ful constancy, as if his soul had been already in heaven∣ly fruition, he laid himself on the block, and spreading abroad his arms (the appointed sign,) with three strokes his head was severed from his body, for which the Exe∣cutioner was in danger of his life at his return, if he had not been secured by the Sheriff; of this great Favourite Dr. Fuller concludes, That his failings were neither so foul nor so many, but that the Character of a right worthy man most justly belongs to his memory, It is recor∣ded that Walter E. of Essex, his Father, having wasted his Spirits with grief, fell into a Dysentery whereof he dyed, after he had requested such as stood by him, That they would admonish his Son (who was then scarce ten years old) that he should alwaies propound and set before him the 36th year of his life, as the utmost he should ever attain to, which neither he nor his Father had gone beyond, and his Son never reached to, being beheaded in the 34th year of his Age, so that his dying Father seemed not in vain to have admonished him as he did, but to speak by Divine inspiration and suggestion. Hereford is the chief City of this County, seated a∣mongst pleasant Meadows and Cornfields; Lemster is a∣nother Town, which hath the greatest fame for Wool,
which they call Lemster Oar; of which Mr. Drayton thus writes. Where lives the man so dull, on Brittains furthest shore, To whom did never sound the name of Lemster Oar? That with the Silkworms web for smallness may compare, Wherein the winder shews his Workmanship so rare; So doth this Fleece excell all others in the Land, Being neatly bottom'd up by natures careful hand. This County is divided into 11 Hundreds, wherein there are 8 Market Towns, 176 Parish Churches, and is in the Diocess of Hereford; Out of it are elected 8 Par∣liament Men; for the County 2. for Hereford 2. for Lem∣ster 2. for Webly 2. and gives the Title of Earl to Leicester L. D' Eureux. HƲNTINGTONSHIRE is surrounded with Northampton, Bedford, and Cambridgeshires, being small in extent, hardly stretching 20 miles outright, though measured to the most advantage; it is good for Corn and Tillage, and toward the East very plentiful for feeding Cattle; Huntington is the chief Town of all the County, called in their publick Seal Huntersdune, The Hill or Down of Hunters, and gives name to all the Shire; Godmanchester is a very great Country Town, and of as great repute for Tillage; no place having more Ploughs, or more stout Husbandmen, for they boast that in for∣mer times they have received the Kings of England as they passed in their progress this way, with ninescore Ploughs, brought forth in a rustical kind of Pomp, as a Gallant show; when K. James came first into England, the Bayliffs of this Town presented him with 70 Team of Horses, all traced to fair new Ploughs, to shew their Husbandry; of which when the King demanded the reason, they told him, That it was their ancient Custom, whensoever any King of England passed through their Town, so to present him; And added further, That they held their Lands by that Tenure being the Kings Tenants; The King was much pleased herewith, bidding them use well their
Ploughs, and said, he was glad he was Landlord of so ma∣ny good Husbandmen in one Town. St Ives is another Town in this County, reported to be so named from Ivo, a Per∣sian Bishop, who, it's said, about the Year of Christ 60 travelled through England, Preaching diligently the Christian Religion; and dying in this place left his name thereunto. There are two little Springs at Ayleweston in this Coun∣ty, the one fresh and the other somewhat brackish; the latter they say is good for Scabs and Leprosie, and the other for dim sights: The Lake of Wittlesmere, and other Meers near it in this Shire, do sometimes rise tempestu∣ously in calm and fair Weather, and make Water-quakes by reason the ground near it is rotten and hollow, as some think, which occasions vapours to break violently out of the Earth: The Natives who dwell about these Meers are healthy, and live long, but strangers are sub∣ject to much sickness. In the Year 1580. Sept. 23. at Fennystanton in this County one Agnes, Wife to William Linsey, was delivered of an ugly strange Monster, with a black Face, Mouth and Eyes like a Lion, which was both Male and Female. In 1584. there happened a strange thing at Spaldwick in this Shire; Mr. Dorrington, one of the Gentlemen Pensioners to Q. Elizabeth, had a Horse which died suddenly, and being opened to see the cause of his Death, there was found in his heart a Worm of a wondrous form, as it lay together in a kall or skin, it resembled a Toad, but being taken thence the shape was hard to be described; the length of it di∣vided into 80 Grains, (which spread from the Body like the branches of a Tree) was from the snout to the end of the longest grain 17 Inches, having 4 Issues in the grains, from whence dropped a red Water; the Body was 3 Inches and an half about, the Collar being like that of a Mackrel; this prodigious Worm crawling about to have got away was killed with a Dagger, and being dried was shewed to many Honourable Persons as a great rarity. We read that Henry Holland, Duke of Exeter, and E. of Huntington, who married the Sister of K. Edward 4.
was driven to such want, that passing into Flanders, Phi∣lip de Comines saith, he saw him running on Foot and bare leg'd, after the Duke of Burgundy's Train, begging his Bread for God's sake; whom the Duke of Bur∣gundy at that time did not know, though they had mar∣ried two Sisters, but hearing afterward who it was, al∣lotted him a small pension to maintain him, till not long after he was found dead upon the shore of Dover, and stripped all naked, but how he came by his death could never by any inquiry be brought to light. It is observed by Mr. Speed, that the ancient Families of this County have been more outworn proportionably than in any other, few now remaining whose Sir-names were eminent in the Reign of K. Hen. 8. the reason whereof may probably be, because this Shire being generally Ab∣by Lands, after their dissolution, many new purchasers planted themselves therein; But, Let's not repine that Men and Names do die, Since Stone-built Cities dead and ruin'd lie. This County is divided into 4 Hundreds, wherein are 6 Market Towns, and 69 Parish Churches, and is in the Diocess of Lincoln; out of it are elected 4 Parlia∣ment men; for the County 2. for Huntington 2. It gives the Title of Earl to Theophilus L. Hastings. KENT in the Saxon Heptarchy was an entire Kingdom by itself, an honour which no other County attained to; it hath the Thames on the North, the Sea on the East and South, Sussex and Surrey on the West; from East to West it is 53 Miles, and from North to South 26. The upper part of it they say is healthful but not so wealthy; the middle they account both healthful and wealthy; the lower they hold to be weal∣thy but not healthy, as which for a great part thereof is very moist: It is every where almost full of Meadows, Pastures, and Corn fields; abounding wonderfully in Apple-trees and Cherry-trees; the Trees are planted af∣ter a very direct manner, one against another by square,
most pleasant to behold: It is plentiful of Fowl, Fish, and all sorts of grain; It hath Villages and Towns ex∣ceeding thick and well peopled, safe Roads, and sure Harbours for Ships with some Veins of Iron and Marble: The Air is somewhat thick and foggy, by reason of Va∣pours arising out of the Waters. This County hath 2 Ci∣ties and Bishops Seas, was strengthened formerly with 27 Castles, graced with 4 of the Kings Houses; The Kent∣ish People in Caesars time were accounted the civilest a∣mong the Brittains, and had the Priviledge to lead the Van in all Battles for their valour shewed against the Danes, and those of Cornwall, Devonshire, and Wiltshire the Rear: They esteem themselves the first Christians, since their King and People received the Christian Faith before any other of the Saxons, in 596. yea and long before that time Kent received the Gospel, for it is recorded that Lucius the first Christian Brittish King in this Island, built a Church for the service of Christ at Dover, en∣dowing it with the Toll of that Haven. They glory that they were never conquered, but were compounded with by the Norman Conqueror, of whom our English Poet writes thus: Stout Kent, this praise to thee doth of most right belong, Thou never wast enslaved, impatient wert of wrong; Who when the Norman first with Pride and Horrour sway'd, Threwst off the servile Yoak upon the English laid, And with a Courage great most bravely didst restore That Liberty so long enjoy'd by thee before, Not suffering foreign Laws should thy free Customs bind, And thereby shewedst thy self o'th noble Saxon kind: Of all the English Shires be thou sirnam'd the free, And foremost ever placed when they shall marshall'd be. Of their throwing off the Norman Yoke, Mr. Sden thus explains it: When the Norman Conqueror had the day, he came to Dover Castle, the Look and Key of the Kingdom, that he might with safety subdue Kent also, a most strong and populous Province, and secure him∣self from the Invasion of Enemies; which when Stygand
Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Abbot of St. Austins, who were the chief Lords and Governours of Kent un∣derstood, they assembled the Commons, and told them of the dangers of their Country, the miseries of their Neighbours, the Pride of the French, and that the Eng∣lish till then were born free, and the name of Villains or Bondsmen not heard among them; but now slavery only attends us, said he, if we submit to the insolency of our Enemies; And therefore these two Prelates offered to command them, and to dye with them in the defence of their Freedom and Country, whereby the People were so extreamly encouraged, that they concluded to meet at a day appointed at Swanscomb, two Miles West from Gravesend, where being come accordingly, and keeping themselves private in the Woods, they waited the coming of William the Conqueror, filling up all the way by which he was to pass, with each of them a great green Bough in his hand, whereby they might hide their number from being discovered, and if occasi∣on were, fall upon the Normans; the next day the Duke came by Swanscomb, and was much amazed to see a Wood as it were marching toward him, for being as he thought free from the Enemy, he was now beset on all sides with Trees, and knew not but all the other vast Woods thereabout were of the same nature, neither had he leisure to avoid the danger, for the Kentish men imme∣diately enclosing his Army about, displayed their Ban∣ners, and throwing down their Branches, at the sound of a Trumpet, prepare their Bows and Arrows ready for a Fight; so that the Conqueror, who just before thought he had the whole Kingdom absolutely at Com∣mand, began now to despair of his own Life; of which Consternation the two valiant Prelates taking advantage, presented themselves to the Duke, and thus addressed him in behalf of their followers: Most noble Duke, behold here the Commons of Kent are come forth to meet and receive you as their Soveraign in peace, upon condition they may for ever enjoy their ancient Liberties, Freedoms, and Estates, which they received from their Forefathers; If these be denied, they are
here ready to give you battle immediately, being fully resolved rather to die, than to part with our ancient Laws, or to live in slavery and bondage, the name and nature whereof as it hath been hitherto unknown to us, so we will rather every man lose his Life than ever endure it. The Conqueror driven to a strait, and loth to hazard all upon so nice a point, their demands being not unreasonable, rather wisely than willingly granted their desires, and Pledges on both sides are given for performance, Kent yielding her Earl∣dom and Castle of Dover to her new King William: A∣mong other Customs they retain one called Gavelkind, that is, Give all kin, whereby Lands are divided among the Male-Children, or, if there be no Sons, among the Daughters, by which every man is a Freeholder, and hath some part of his own to live upon: By vertue of this also they are at full age, and enter upon their Inhe∣ritance at 15 Years old, and it is lawful for them to ali∣enate or make it over to any, either by Gift or sale, without the Lords Consent: By this likewise the Son, though his Parents be hanged for Felony or Murder, succeedeth them nevertheless, in such kind of Lands ac∣cording to that Rhime, The Father to the Bough, And the Son to the Plough. K. William after this to secure Kent to himself, placed a Constable in Dover Castle, and according to the manner of the Romans, made him also Lord of the Cinqueports. which are Hastings, Dover, Hith, Rumney and Sandwich, unto which are joined Winchelsey and Rye, as principal Ports, and other small Towns as Members, which be∣cause they are bound to serve in the Wars by Sea, en∣joy many great Priviledges, being free from the pay∣ment of Subsidies, and from Wardship of their Chil∣dren, and are not sued in any Court but within their own Towns; and of the Inhabitants therein, such as they call Barons, at the Coronation of Kings and Queens sup∣port the Canopies over them, and have a Table by themselves on the Kings Right hand, and the L.
Warden, who is always of the Nobility, hath the Au∣thority of Chancellor and Admiralty within his Juris∣diction, in very many cases, and hath many other Rights. Canterbury is the chief City of this County, ancient and famous no doubt in the time of the Romans; The Archbishop of Canterbury was called, Totius Angliae Pri∣mas, Primate of all England, the Archbishop of York on∣ly Primas Angliae, Primate of England; he is the first Peer of the Realm, and hath the Precedency of all Dukes not of the Royal Blood or great Officers of State, Anselm in recompence of his service in opposing the Marriage of Priests, and resisting the King about investing Bishops, had this accession of honour given him by Pope Ʋrbane, That he and his Successors should have place at the Popes right foot in all General Councils, the Pope adding these words, We include him in our Orb, as Pope of a∣nother world. This City hath had a rare Cathedral, it is in the midst of the Town, the body within being near as large as St. Pauls in London was; between the body and the Quire there hangeth a Bell called by the name of Bell Harry, being one of those which Henry 8. brought out of France; there are also four Spires like St. Sepulchres London; on each side of the great West Gate are 2 other Steeples, the one called Dunstan, and the other Arnold Steeples, in each of which are a very pleasant ring of Bells; in the same Cathedral there was the famousest window in England, for which they say the Spanish Am∣bassador offered Ten Thousand pound; being the whole History of Christ from his Nativity to his Passion, but it was afterward battered to pieces; In the Quire of the Cathedral, Edward, called the Black Prince, is buried in a Monument of Brass; underneath this Cathedral there is a great Congregation of French Protestants, the Dutch also have a Church in that Place, which is called the Bishops Pallace; there are many other Churches in the City and Suburbs. It is reported by the Monks of that Age, that in the year 619. Canterbury being accidentally on fire, which
raged so extreamly against all opposition, that the grea∣test part of the City was almost burnt down, and the furious flashes thereof extended to the Bishops Pallace, whereupon Melitus the Archbishop seeing mans help fail and trusting to Divine Assistance, commanded him∣self to be carried out of his house, and set against the fiercest flames, which were it seems in the place of the Martyrdom of four Saints, where the Bishop being ac∣cordingly placed, though grievously tormented with the Gout, yet went to Prayers, when behold the wind sud∣denly turned, and thereby the fire was soon after won∣derfully quenched. In the Reign of K. Hen. 2. 1172. Thomas Becket, Archbishop of Canterbury, who was Ca∣nonized by the Pope, though an Arch-Traitor to his King and Country, being murthered, was at first obscure∣ly buried, but afterward his body was taken up, and laid in a most sumptuous shrine in the East end of the Cathe∣dral by Stephen Langton his Successor; To this new shri∣ned Martyr, People of all degrees, and from all parts flocked in Pilgrimage, loading his Tomb with such large Offerings, that the Church all round about did a∣bound with more than Princely Riches, the meanest part being of pure Gold, garnished with many precious Stones; the chiefest whereof was a rich Jewel offered by K. Lewis of France, who required, and we may be sure was told he had obtained, having bought it so dear, That no Passenger between Dover and Whitesand shou perish by Shipwrack. There was such pressing to touc St. Thomas his body, and such creeping and kneeling to his Tomb, that the Prints of their Devotion, saith Lam∣bert, appear to this day in the Marble Stones, and every Pillar resounded the Miracles of this reputed Martyr, yea the Church itself which was dedicated to Christ, was forced to give place to the name of St. Thomas; his blood was almost matched in virtue with our Blessed Sa∣viours, and his old shoe was devoutly kissed by all Pas∣sengers; John Stow thus describeth the Shrine; it was built, saith he, about a mans height all of Stone, and from thence upward of Timber, within which was a
The Rebellion under Kett the Tanner in the Oak of Reformation neer Norwich. Pa. 149.
chest of Iron, containing the bones of Thomas Becket Skull and all, with the wound of his death, and the piece cut out of his skull laid in the wound, the Timber work of this Shrine was covered on the out∣side with Plates of Gold, damasked, and imbossed with Gold-wire, garnished with Brooches, Images, Angels, Chains, Precious Stones, and large Orient Pearls, the spoil of which in K. Hen. 8ths time, in Gold and Jewels of inestimable value, filled 2 great Chests, one of which six or eight strong men could scarce carry out of the Church, all which were seized for the Kings use, and his bones burnt to Ashes. 1538. Divers Epitaphs, and An∣thems were composed in memory of this Martyr, and this among others. Tu per Thomae sanguinem quem pro te impendit Fac nos (Christe) scandere quo Thomas ascendit. For the blood of Thomas which he for thee did spend, Grant us (Christ) that we may climb where Thomas did ascend The Pope likewise writ to the English Clergy to make a new Holyday for St. Thomas, as they expected pardon through his Intercession to God for them; At Halbaldown in Kent there was an Hospital erected by Archbishop Lanfrank, wherein was reserved the upper leather of an old shoe, which they said had been worn by St. Thomas Becket, and being set fair in Copper and Christal, was offered to be kissed by all Passengers. In the Reign of Edward 3. there was great variance be∣tween the A. Bishops of Canterbury and York, and the Londoners were cursed by the A. B. of Canterbury, be∣cause they suffered he of York to carry his Cross in that City, but the King ended the difference, ordering they should both freely carry the Cross in each others Pro∣vince, but that in sign of subjection, the A. B. of York should send the Image of an Archbishop, bearing a Cross, or some other Jewel wrought in fine gold, to the value of 40 pounds to Canterbury, and offer it publickly there upon St. Thomas Beckets Shrine; They likewise report
that Thomas lying in an old House at Otford, and finding it want a Spring, he struck his Staff into the dry ground, from whence issued Water, and is called to this day St. Tho∣mas Well; and that a Nightingale disturbing his Devotions one time in that place, he commanded that from thence∣forth no bird of that kind should dare sing there; many o∣ther such ridiculous miracles are reported, which were invented by Popish Knaves, and believed by none but Popish Idiots. In 1386. William Courtney Archbishop of Canterbury summoned certain of his Tenants to answer an heinous and horrible Trespass, as he called it, which was, That they brought Straw to litter his Horses, not in Carts as formerly, but in Bags; for which wicked Offence, having confes∣sed their fault, and asked him forgiveness, he enjoined them this Pennance, That going leisurely before the Procession barefoot, and bare leg'd, each of them should carry upon his Shoulder a Bag stuffed with Strow hang∣ing out, whereupon these Rhimes were made: This Bag full of straw I bear on my Back, Because my Lords Horse his Litter did lack; If you be not the better to my Lord Graces Horse. You are like to go barefoot before the Cross. In the Reign of K. James Dr. George Abbot Archbishop of Canterbury, being hunting in a Park, and shooting at a Deer, his Arrow by mischance glanced and killed a man; upon which Fact it was much debated, whether by it he were not become irregular, and ought to be de∣prived of his Archbishoprick, as having imbrued his hands (though unwillingly) in Blood; but Bishop An∣drews of Winchester, and Sir Hen. Martin Advocate, de∣fended him, giving such reasons for mitigation of the Fact, that he was cleared from all imputation of crime, and thereupon judged regular, and in state to continue in his Archiepiscopal Charge; yet out of a religious ten∣derness of mind, he kept that day in which the mis∣chance happened as a solemn fast all his life after. In the Year 1553. Nicholas Wotton, Dean of Canterbury be∣ing
then Ambassadour in France, dreamed that his Ne∣phew Thomas Wotton was inclined to be a Party in such a Project, as if he were not suddenly prevented, would turn to the loss of his Life, and ruine of his Family; the night following he dreamed the same again, and knowing that it had no influence upon his waking thoughts, and much less the desires of his heart, he did then more seriously consider it, and resolved to use so prudent a Remedy by way of prevention, as might be no great inconvenience to either party, and thereupon writ a Letter to Queen Mary, that she would cause his Nephew to be sent for out of Kent, and that the Coun∣cil might interrogate him in such feigned Questions as might colour his Commitment into a favourable Prison, of which he would hereafter give Her Majesty the true Reason; this was done accordingly, and soon after the Queen being married to K. Philip, divers persons decla∣red, and raised forces against it, among whom Sir Tho∣mas Wiat of Kent (with whom the Family of the Wot∣tons had an entire Friendship) was the Principal, who being defeated, suffered death with many others, for the same; and of this number Mr. Wotton in all probability had been, for he afterward confessed to his Uncle that he had some strong intimation of Wiat's design, and be∣lieved he should have been engaged in it, if his Uncle had not so happily dreamed him into a Prison. Thus much for Canterbury. Rochester is another City and Bishops See in this Coun∣ty; the Cathedral is low and little, saith Dr. Fuller, pro∣portional to the Revennues thereof, yet hath it, though no Magnificence, a venerable aspect of antiquity there∣in: There was a Castle built in K. William's time, but now all in ruines: In the woful Wars of the Barons when K. John was viewing this Castle held against him by the E. of Arundel, he was espied by a very good Archer, who told the Earl thereof, adding, That if he would but say the word, he would quickly dispatch the cruel Tyrant; God forbid, vile Varlet, said the Earl, that we should procure the death of the Holy One of God: Why, said the Souldier, he
would not spare you if he had you at the like advantage: No matter for that, said the Earl, let Gods Will be done, he will dispose thereof, but let us not hurt the King. Chatham joins to this City, and is now one of the Royal Docks for build∣ing Ships, of which this story is recorded: It happened the dead Corps of a man was cost ashore in this Town, and being taken up was buried decently in the Church-Yard, now there was an Image or Rood in the Church, called our Lady of Chatham, this Lady, say the Monks, went next night and roused up the Clerk, telling him that a sinful person was buried near the place where she was worshipped, who offended her Eyes with his ghastly grinning, and unless he were removed, to the great grief of good People she must remove from thence, and could work no more miracles, therefore desired him to go with her to take him up, and throw him into the River again; which being done, soon after the Body floated again, and was again taken up and buried in the Church-Yard; but from that time all miracles ceased, and the place where he was buried did continually sink downward; this Tale is still remembred by some aged People, receiving it by tradition from the Popish times of darkness and Idolatry. In the Reign of K. Will. Rufus all the Lands in Kent sometime belonging to Earl God∣win were by breaking in of the Sea covered with sands, and are called Godwins Sands to this day; It is said, that Thira a Dane, Godwins Wife, used to make Merchandise of the beautiful Virgins of England, by selling them to Denmark at a dear rate, seeking thereby to satisfie her own Covetousness and the Danes Lusts, which practice she continued till Divine Vengeance fell upon her by a Thunderbolt from Heaven, whereby she was slain. In 1199. The Town of Malling in Kent with the Nun∣nery were consumed with Fire. In 1216. about Maid∣stone a certain Monster was found struck with Lightning which had an head like an Ass, a belly like a Man, and all other parts far differing from any other Creature.  the first of Q. Mary the bravest Ship then in England, cal∣led the Great Harry, being of Burden a Thousand Tun,
was burnt by negligence at Woolwich: About the same time the Parson of Crondall near Canterbury preaching up∣on a Shrove Sunday, went besides his Text into an imper∣tinent discourse in commendation of the Popes Articles lately set forth, and in disgracing the Protestant Religi∣on, speaking thus to the People; My Masters and Neigh∣bours, rejoyce and be merry, for the Prodigal Son is come home; for I know your hearts well enough, that the most of you are like my self, and I shall tell you what happened to me this Week; I have been with my Lord Cardinal Pool, and he hath made me as clean from my Sins as I was at the Font-stone, and he hath also appointed me to publish unto you the Bull of the Popes Par∣don, (reading it to them, and adding,) he thanked God that ever he lived to see that day, and he believed by vertue of that Bull he was clean from sin as the Night he was born; which words he had no sooner uttered, but he was struck with sudden death, and never stirred more, to the astonishment of the Spectators. In 1575. a vast mighty Whale was cast upon the Isle of Thanet in Kent, Twenty Ells long, and 13 Foot broad from the belly to the backbone, and his Tail as broad; the nether Jaw was 12 Foot, and as much between the Eyes, some of his Ribs were 15 Foot long, and so was his Tongue; one of his Eyes being taken out of his Head was more than a Cart with 6 Horses could draw, the Oyl being boiled out of the Head was Parmacitte. In 1548. one Mr. Mr. Arden of Kent by procurement of his Wife was murdered in his own House; being dead, his Body was carried out and laid on the ground in a Close hard by, where this is memorable; that for two Years after, the ground where his Body lay bore no grass, but still represented as it were a picture of his Body, only in the space between his Legs and Arms there grew Grass, but where any part of his Body touched, none at all; yet this miraculous accident was not, it may be, so much for the Murder, as for the Curses of a Widow Woman, out of whose hands this Mr. Arden had bought this very Close, to her utter undoing; and thus Divine Justice even in this World oftentimes works Miracles upon Of∣fenders,
for a merciful warning to others, if they will be so wise to take it. In 1585. Aug. 4. a marvellous accident happened in the Hamlet of Mottingham near El∣tham, in this County, in a field belonging to Sir Perci∣val Hart; betimes in the morning the ground began to sink so much, that three great Elm Trees were suddenly swallowed into the Pit, the Tops falling downward in∣to the hole, and before 10 a Clock they were so over∣whelmed, that no part of them could be discerned, the place being suddenly filled with Water; the compass of the whole was about 80 Yards, and so deep, that a sound∣ing line of 50 fathoms could hardly find or feel any bot∣tom, ten yards distance from this place there was ano∣ther piece of ground sunk in the same manner near the Highway, and so nigh a dwelling House, that the Inhabi∣tants were greatly terrified thereby. In 1602. April 20. Thirteen Persons were slain by misfortune at the Gunpowder Mill at Redriff, and much more hurt done in divers places. Nicholas Wood of Har∣rison in this County, Yeoman, did with ease eat a whole Sheep of 16 shillings price, and that raw, at one meal; another time he eat 30 dozen of Pigeons; at Sir William Sidlys he eat as much as would have sufficed 30 men; at the Lord Wottons in Kent, he eat at one meal 84 Rabbets, which number would have sufficed 168 men, allowing to each half a Rabbet; he suddenly devoured 18 yards of black pudding, London measure, and having once eat 60 pound weight of Cherries, he said they were but washmeat; he made an end of a whole Hog at once, and after it swallowed three pecks of Damasons, this was after break-fast, for he said he had eat one pottle of milk, one pottle of pottage with Bread, Butter, and Cheese before: he eat in my presence, saith Taylor the Water Poet, six penny Wheaten Loaves, three six penny Veal Pies, one pound of sweet Butter, one good dish of Thornback, and a shiver of a peck Houshold Loaf an inch thick, and all this in the space of an hour; the House yielded no more, and so he went away unsatisfi∣ed; one John Dale was too hard for him at a place called
Lenham, he laid a Wager he could fill Woods belly with good wholsome Victuals for 2 Shillings, and a Gentleman waged on the contrary, that when he had eaten out Dales two shillings, he should then presently eat up a whole good Sirloine of Beef; Dale bought six pots of mighty Ale, and 12 new penny white Loaves, which he sopped therein, the powerful fume whereof conquered this Conqueror, and laid him in a sleep, to the preservation of the roast Beef, and unexpected winning of the wager; he spent all his Estate to pro∣vide provant for his belly, and though a landed Man, and a true Labourer, died very poor about 1630. In 1652. One Adam Sprackling Esq lived at St. Law∣rence in the Isle of Thanet, he had a fair Estate, and Mar∣ried Sir Robert Lewkners Daughter, but growing extream∣ly debauched, brought himself into many troubles, and spent his Estate; This Gentleman coming home one night, fell into a great rage against his Wife, who was a very virtuous Lady, and resolving to mischief her, he first struck her with his Dagger, hurting her Jaw, which she bore patiently, saying little to him; He raged still more against her, and she rising to go away, he struck her with a chopping knife on the wrist, and cut the bone in sunder; he then dashed her on the fore-head with the Iron Cleaver, whereupon she fell down bleeding, but recovering her self on her knees, she prayed God to forgive her Husband his Sins, as she did; and likewise to pardon her own sins; while she was thus praying, her bloody Husband chopt her head in the midst, even to the very brains, so that she fell down dead immediately, then did he kill 6 Dogs, 4 of which he threw by his Wife, and chopped her twice into the Leg after she was dead; being apprehended for this horrid murther, he was carried to Sandwich Goal, and was Tryed, Condem∣ned and Executed for the same, dying very desperately; and refusing to discourse either with Ministers or Gen∣tlemen who came thither to speak to him. In 1655. Sir George Sonds of Kent had two Sons grown up to that Age, wherein he might have expected
most comfort from them, but the younger of them ha∣ving no apparent cause, or provocation, either from his Father or Brother, did in a most unnatural and barba∣rous manner murther his elder Brother, concerning which, Sir George in a Narrative written by himself, useth these expressions; For my Sons wickedness, I must needs say Cains was not greater, for he did it in the Field, and first talked with his Brother, and had some pretence of reason for it, and because Abel, and his offering was more respected, but thou, saies he, didst murther thy Brother basely and inhu∣manly, not in the Field, but in his Bed, thou didst not talk and dispute it with him, but didst kill him sleeping, and couldst hear nothing but sad groans from him; nor didst thou do it with a Sword or manly weapon, but with a butcherly Cleaver didst beat out his brains, and as if that had been too little, with a most cowardly Steeletto didst stab him 7 or 8 times in and about the heart; thou couldst have no such pretence as Cain had, for thou wast ever equally respected with thy Brother; Even pro∣phane Esau came short of thee, he did but resolve to kill his Brother, but when he met him he repented and imbraced him, but thou didst go through with thy work, in the height of malice, and when thou hadst brought me to him, after thou hadst slain him, I saw not any relenting in thee, not one tear to drop from thine eyes for that foul Fact; Judas did betray his innocent Master, but thou didst more, for thou didst kill thy innocent Brother; Judas did but deliver up his Master to the Judge for Tryal; but thou wast Judge and Executioner thy self; He might plead that the Devil (after he had taken the Sop) entered into him, and that he was hired for 30 pieces of Silver; thou hadst no Devil, nor any hire but thy own malicious nature; he did it in the dark night, as ashamed that the Light should see so foul a Fact; But thou in the fair morning when the Sun was risen, and shined clear; He gave his Master time to pray before he took him; but thou didst kill thy Brother sleeping, not suffe∣ring him to wake or speak, only to sigh and groan, and that most sadly, yet all moved thee not, &c. This young man was soon after deservedly Executed for this horrid Fratricide, & so this worthy Knight lost both his Sons at one time. Two Watermen of Gravesend, one named Smith, and
the other Gurnay, being some years before hired by a Grasier to carry him down to Tilbury Hope, intending to go to a certain Fair in Essex to buy Cattle; these Villains by the way perceiving he had mony, conspired to take away his life, and accordingly one of them cut his throat, and the other taking his mony, threw him over∣board; This Murther was concealed divers years, but in 1656. these Murtherers being drinking together, fell out, and one of them in his passion accused the other of Murther, and he again accused him, upon which being apprehended and examined, they confessed the Fact, were condemned at Maidstone Assizes, and hanged in Chains at Gravesend In 1658. June 3. A Whale came up the Thames as high as Deptford, and being discovered at Greenwich, many Boats made out after her, and a Marriner struck her with an harping Iron, whereupon she spouted forth much water and blood, and roared like a Lyon, and so beating her self up and down till she came below Greenwich, she there turned up her Belly and died; she was 59 foot long, and 15 foot high as she lay on her Belly; September 3. following, Oliver Cromwell dyed, three days before which there was such a Tem∣pestuous, and violent wind as overthrew divers Houses, brake and overturned many Trees by the roots, and did much mischief. In 1660. August 4. At Dover from 10 a clock at night till 2 next morning, were such storms of Hail, accompanied with Thunder and Lightning, as the like was never known, some of the Hailstones that fell were as big as Walnuts, and were measured 4 inches a∣bout; the damage was reckoned 50 pound in glass Windows which were broken. In 1662. July 2. about 3 in the afternoon there happened a very strange whirl∣wind in Mason Dufield between the Town and Castle of Dover, at the upper end of which Field the wind took up divers sheafs owards of Pease, a vast height into the Air, and carried them over the Town into the Se; and it was judged they were carried two or three miles before they fell into the Sea; it also took up some Calves and other small Cattle, and threw them into a Ditch; a
Hoy likewise in the Road was almost overset by it. Upon Aug. 4. following, several great Spouts were seen in Do∣ver Road, about quarter Seas over; some affirm they were 7 and about half a mile asunder, and ran about half an hour, they were big at both ends, and slender in the middle; some Seamen affirmed they were bigger than those in the Streights, and are very unusual in these Seas. The County of Kent is divided into 5 Laths, and 67 Hundreds, wherein are 29 Market Towns, and 408 Parish Churches; it is in the Diocess of Canterbury and Rochester; and gives the Title of Earl to Anthony L. Gray; as Dover doth to John L Cary; Thanet to Nicholas L. Tuf∣ton. Rochester to John L. Wilmot, and Sandwich to Edward L. Montague. It elects 10 Parliament Men. LANCASHIRE hath the Irish Sea on the West, Yorkshire on the East, Cheshire parted with the River Mersey on the South, and Westmoreland on the North; It is a County Palatine, and is replenished with all necessa∣ries for the use of man, yielding without any great la∣bour, Corn, Flax, Grass, Coals, and is plentifully furni∣shed with Fish, Flesh and Fowl; the Brigantes the anci∣ent Inhabitants of this County were subdued by the Emperor Claudius, who secured it by Garrisons, as ap∣pears by the many Inscriptions found in Walls, and by certain Altars erected in honour of some of their Em∣perours; it is famous for the four Henrys, the Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, and Seventh, all derived from John Duke of Lancaster; the Shire Town is Lancaster, more plea∣sant in situation, than rich in Inhabitants, the beauty thereof is in the Church, Castle, and Bridge; Manchester is a Town of great Antiquity from Main a Brittish word, which signifieth a Stone; it is seated upon a stony hill, and beneath the Town there are most famous quarries of Stone; it far excelleth the Towns lying about it for the beautiful shew it maketh, for resort to it, and for clothing, in regard also of the Market place, the fair Church and Colledge.
In this Province King Arthur is reported to have put the Saxons to flight in a memorable Battle near Duglas, a little Brook near the Town of Wiggan; In this Shire not far from Fourness Fells, or Hills, is the greatest stan∣ding water in all England, called Winander Mere, which is wonderful deep, and 10 miles over, and all paved with Stone as it were on the bottom, it breeds a Fish called a Chare, no where else to be found At Ferneby the People use Cannal or Turss, both for Fewel and Candle, which when they dig, they find under them a certain black water, upon which swims a fat oily matter, and therein are little Fishes, which the Diggers catch; on the very top of Pendlehill grows a peculiar plant called Cloudesberry, as though it came out of the Clouds; this Hill some years ago did the Country near it much harm, by reason of an extraordinary deal of water gushing out of it; it is also famous for an infallible sign of rain, whensoever the top of it is covered with a mist; there are three great Hills here, not far distant from each other, seem∣ing to be as high as the Clouds, which are, Ingelburrough, Penigent, and this Pendle; In the Reign of Q. Mary, Bishop Bonner put out a Mandate to the Priests within his Diocess, commanding that comely Roods or Images should again be set up in all Churches, the same in∣junction was published in other Diocesses; in pursuance whereof, the Churchwardens of Cockram in Lancashire, had agreed with a Carver to make them a Rood to set up in their Church, at a certain price; the Carver accor∣dingly made one, but the Image being of an ugly grim countenance, they disliked it, and refused to pay the Workman; who thereupon brought them by a Warrant before the Mayor of Lancaster, who was a favourer of the Protestant Religion, when they came before him, he asked them why they did not pay the man according to agreement; they replied, they did not like the grimness of his Visage, saying, They had a Man formerly with a hand∣some face, and would have had such another now; well, said the Mayor, though you like not the Rood, the poor mans labour has been never the less, and it's pity he should lose by it; But
I'le tell you what you shall do, pay him the money you promised him, and if it will not serve you for a God, you may make a De∣vil of it; At which answer they laughed and departed. In the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, a certain Jesuit in Lancashire, as he was walking by the way, lost his Glove, and one that came after him finding it, followed him apace, with an intention to restore it, but he fearing the worst, being inwardly pursued with a guilty conscience, ran away, and hastily leaping over an Hedge, fell into a Marle-pit, which was on the other side, in which he was drowned; In 1613. April 17. in the Parish of Standish in Lancashire, a Maiden Child was born, having four legs, four Arms, two Bellies joined to one back, one head with two faces, the one before, the other behind like the Picture of Janus. In 1662. July 4. At Litham about two miles from Preston in this County a very strange Fish was cast upon the Shoar; it was about four yards in length, and as big as an ordinary Horse, the forefeet were as long as a mans Arm; the hinder feet much shorter, but broad like the Finns of a Fish, it roared most dreadfully like a Bear, it continued alive for some time, and multitudes of People came to view it. Also much about the same time, and nine miles from this place, many credible Persons often saw a very dread∣ful Serpent come forth out of a Wood, the length there∣of being about five or six yards, and they judged it to be bigger than the biggest Cart Axel Tree; it was so great that some who viewed the place where it sometimes lay, near a Well at Dunkin Hall, affirm, that it made such an impression on the ground, as if an Ox or some more large and pounderous Beast had lain there. The Thir∣tieth of the same month at Ormskirk, there happened such a storm of Hail, as was hardly ever seen, it beat down the Apples, spoil'd the Corn, broke the glass Windows, on that side of the Houses the wind was of, and cut the lead in pieces; some Hailstones were taken up 8 Inches about, and some as big as Pullets Eggs; all the French Wheat was utterly spoyl'd, and the other Wheat and Barley in the three adjacent Parishes much damaged.
This County is divided into 6 Hundreds, wherein are 26 Market Towns, and 61 Churches, and is in the Di∣ocess of Chester; it elects 14 Parliament men; Manchester gives the Title of Earl to Robert L. Montague. LEICESTERSHIRE hath Lincoln and Rut∣land Shires on the East, Derby and Nottingham Shires on the North, Warwickshire on the West, and Northamp∣tonshire on the South: It is a Champion Country, and a∣bounds with Corn, Cattle, and Coals; the chief City Leicester stands almost in the heart of the County, which by Etheldred the Mercian King was made an Episcopal See, but being removed, the Beauty of the Town de∣cayed, yet the renouned Lady Ethelfleda casting an Eye of compassion upon it, re-edified the Buildings, and compassed it about with a strong Wall, whereby the Trade of the City was much increased: But in the Reign of Hen. 2. Robert Earl of Leicester rebelling against him, the King beseiged, took, and plundered it, throw∣ing down the Walls, which seemed hard to be done, some parcels of them remaining like hard Rocks by rea∣son of the excellent Mortar; The King then command∣ed the City to be set on fire and burnt, the Castle to be razed, and an heavy Imposition was laid upon the Ci∣tizens, who with great Sums of Money bought their own Banishments. In the ninth Year of K. Henry 5. a Parliament was called at Leicester, wherein an 110 Prio∣ries were suppressed, because they spoke ill of his Con∣quests in France, and their Possessions given to the King. In 1485. King Richard, called Crookback, set out of this City in the morning to meet the Earl of Richmond, (afterward K. Henry 7.) and chose Bosworth Field to try his fortune with him for the Crown of England that day; the Van of his Army was led by the Duke of Norfolk con∣sisting of 1200 Bowmen, flanked with 200 Curiassers under the E. of Surrey; the main Battle K. Richard led himself, being 1000 Billmen, empaled with 2000 Pikes; the King expected the L. Stanly's 2000 Horse to come
for his assistance, of whose Fidelity to him the King having some doubt, he had before got his Son the Lord Strange as a pledge of his Loyalty with him; Stanly not ap∣pearing, K. Richard sent a Letter to him to come pre∣sently into his presence, or else he swore by Christs Pas∣sion he would strike off his Sons head before he dined; to which the L. Stanly returned answer, That if he did so he had more Sons alive, and he might do his pleasure; but to come to him he was not determined: Which Answer when K. Richard heard, he commanded the L. Strange to be immediately beheaded, but it being at the very time when both Armies were in sight of each other, his Lords persuaded him it was now time to fight, and not to put to Execution, and so the L. Strange escaped. The Earl of Richmond likewise sent to the L. Stanly, to repair pre∣sently to him, but he sent word, he must expect no aid from him till the Battles were joined, and therefore ad∣vised him with all possible speed to give the onset; which Answer somewhat staggered the Earl, because his num∣ber did but a little exceed one half of the Kings, yet to make the best shew he could, by the advice of his Coun∣cil of War, he made the Front of his Army thin and broad, of which the Earl of Oxford had the leading, the Earl himself leading the Battle; soon after the Fight be∣gun, and the Arrows being spent on both sides, they came to handstroaks, and just then came in the Lord Stanly to the Earls assistance; while they were thus con∣tending K. Richard was informed, that the Earl of Richmond with a small number was not far off, and there∣upon being of an invincible courage, whereof he was now to give the last proof, he made toward him, and gave such a furious assault, that first with his own hands he slew Sir William Brandon who bore the Earls Stand∣ard, next he unhorst and overthrew Sir John Chyney a stout man at Arms; and then assaulted the Earl of Rich∣mond himself, who unexpectedly, for all the Kings fury, held him off at the Lances point till Sir Wm. Stanly came in with 3000 fresh men, and then opprest with multi∣tude K. Richard was there slain; It is said, that when the
Battle was near lost a swift Horse was brought him, with which he might have saved himself by flight, but Richard out of his undaunted courage refused it, saying He would that day make an end of all Battles or else lose his Life. In this Battle Henry E. of Northumberland who led King Ri∣chards Rear, never struck stroke, as likewise many o∣thers who followed K. Richard more for fear than love, and so he who had deceived many, was at this time de∣ceived by many; which was not unforeseen by some who caused a Rhime to be set upon the Duke of Norfolk's Tent, the night before the Fight, which was this, Jack of Norfolk be not too bold, For Dickon thy Master is bought and sold. Yet notwithstanding this warning, this noble Duke continued firm to K. Richard, and lost his Life in his quarrel: The whole number slain in this Battle on K. Ri∣chard's side was about 1000 Persons; Sir Wm. Catesby one of the chief Counsellors of K. Richard, with divers others, were two days after beheaded at Leicester: This Battle was fought Aug. 20. 1485. continuing a little above two hours: The Earl Knighted several persons in the Field, and then kneeling down he rendred hearty Thanks to Almighty God for the Victory he had obtained, and commanded all the wounded men to be cured; whereat the People rejoycing clapt their hands and cried K. Hen∣ry, K. Henry, of which joy Sir W. Stanly taking opportu∣nity, he took the Crown of K. Richard, which was found among the spoils in the Field, and set it on the Earls Head, as though he had been elected King by the voice of the People. The Body of K. Richard after he was slain was script and left naked to the very skin, not so much as a rag being left about him to cover his nakedness, and being taken up was trussed behind a pursivant at Arms, his Head and Arms hanging on one side the Horse, and his Legs on the other; thus all besmeared with Blood and dirt, he was brought to the Gray Friars Church in Leicester, and there for some time lay a mise∣rable spectacle, and afterward with small Funeral Pomp
was there buried; But K. Henry 7. afterward caused a Tomb to be set over the place, with his Picture in Ala∣baster, which at the suppression of that Monastery was utterly defaced, since when his Grave overgrown with Nettles and Weeds, is not to be found, only the stone Chest wherein his Corps lay, is now made a drinking Trough for Horses at a common Inn in Leicester, and re∣taineth only the memory of this Monarchs greatness; but his body is reported to have been carried out of the City, and contemptuously laid under the end of Bow-Bridge near that Town; it is likewise said, that upon this Bridg there stood a stone of some height, against which, K. Richard as he passed toward Bosworth, by chance struck his spur, which a Witch or wise Woman obser∣ving, she should say; That where his spur struck, his head should be broken, as they say it was, when he was brought back dead. He lived 37 years, and reigned two years and two months; it is memorable that this Sir William Stanly, who so seasonably saved K. Henries life, and set the Crown on his head, was about 11 years after upon pretence of some dangerous words, beheaded at Tower∣hill by order of the same King Henry. Mr. Wanly writes, that in St. Martins Church in Lei∣cester, there is this very remarkable Epitaph to be seen; Here lies the body of John Heyrick of this Parish, who died 1589. aged 76 years, who lived with his Wife Mary in one House full 62 years, and had issue by her, 5 Sons, and seven Daugh∣ters, and in all that time never buried Man, Woman nor Child, though they were somtime 20 in Houshold; the said Mary li∣ved to 97 years, and died 1611. She did see before her depar∣ture, of her Children, and Childrens Children, and their Chil∣dren to the number of 142. Matthew Paris relates of a Maid in Leicestershire, who being exactly watched, was found in seven years together, neither to eat nor drink, but only that on Sundays she received the Sacrament, and yet continued fat, and good liking; which if true, we may well believe that in the Resurrection our life may be maintained without meat or drink. About Lut∣terworth in Leicestershire, a Miller had murdered one in his
Mill, and privately buried him in a ground hard by; this Miller removed into another Country, and there li∣ved a long space, till at last guided by the Providence of God for the manifestation of his Justice, he returned unto that place to visit some of his Friends; while he was there, the Miller who now had the Mill, had occasion to dig deep in that very place, where he found the Carkass of a man; this known, it pleased God to put it into their hearts to remember a Neighbour of theirs who 20 years before was suddenly missed, and since that time not heard of; and bethinking themselves who was then Miller of that Mill, behold he was ready in Town, not having been there for many years before; this man was suspected, & thereupon examined, & without much a∣do confessed the Fact, & was accordingly executed for the same. In 1660. Sep. 3. near Worthington in this County there happened a dreadful Whirlwind which tore up a great Tree by the Roots, casting it four or five yards from the place, rent off the great limbs of an Apple-Tree, and threw down a House in the Street; the Chap∣pel was much shaken, and the Chancel in danger of fal∣ling; then it passed on with great force and noise to Wor∣thington Hall, where it overturned five Bay of Barn-building, and a Gate-house, it blew down a stack of Chimnies, and hurried a man into the Garden, who by catching hold of a Tree stayed himself; at another Town, it rent a House, where a woman and three Chil∣dren were miraculously preserved, to which it brought a great Log of Wood, no body knew from whence; it carried away a Hive of Bees, and a load of Thorns, which could not be heard of, and turned up 20 Load of Wood by the roots; this whirlwind ran about three miles in length, and not above 20 yards in breadth, some said there were flames of fire seen in it. Upon the 24. of January following, between six and seven a clock at night there was a very great Earthquake in most parts of Leicestershire, which came at first like a noise in the Air at great distance, it shook the Houses very much, and in some places men could hardly stand without holding;
the continuance thereof was about a quarter of an hour. Near Lutterworth is a spring so cold, that in a short time it turneth straw and sticks into stone; John Wickliff was sometime Parson of Lutterworth Church, a man of singular and polite wit, and much conversant in the Scripture; his bones were afterward taken up and burnt by the Pa∣pists. Sir Robert Belknap, Lord Chief Justice of the Com∣mon Pleas in K. Richard 2. time was of this County, and that K. having a design to destroy certain Lords, sent for the Judges to Nottingham, where the Kings many questi∣ons were in fine resolved into this, Whether he might by his Regal Power revoke what was acted in Parliament; to this all the Judges, Sir William Skipwith alone excepted, an∣swered Affirmatively, and subscribed it, though this Belknap did it unwillingly, as foreseeing the danger, and putting to his Seal, said these words; There wants nothing now but an Hurdle, an Horse, and an Halter to carry me where I may suffer the death I deserve; for if I had not done this, I should have dyed for it, and because I have done it, I deserve death for betraying the Lords. Yet it had been more for his credit to have adventured Martyrdom in defence of the Laws, than to hazard the death of a Malefactor in the breach thereof; but Judges are but men, and most men desire to decline that danger which they think nearest to them; but he and the other Judges were con∣demned for High-Treason in the next Wonder working Parliament, and hardly had escaped death, if the Queen had not earnestly interceeded for them. The County of Leicester is divided into six Hundreds, wherein are 200 Parish Churches, and 12 Market Towns; it is in the Diocess of Lincoln, and gives the Title of Earl to Robert L. Sydney. LINCOLNSHIRE hath Yorkshire on the North, the German Ocean on the East, Cambridge, and Northamp∣ton Shires on the South, and Leicestershire on the West; it abounds in Fish, Fowl, Corn, Cattle and Flax. Lin∣coln is the chief Place, well inhabited and frequented; It stands upon the side of a Hill, where the River Wi∣tham
bends his course Eastward, and being divided into three small Channels, watereth the lower part of the City; in the highest part thereof is the Cathedral, a stately structure, being built throughout with singular and rare Workmanship, especially the West end, it is very ancient, and had 50 Parish Churches in it, whereof at this day only 15 remain besides the Minster; In the year 1180. a great Earthquake overthrew many Buil∣dings, amongst which the Cathedral Church of Lincoln was rent in pieces by it; about this time the Bishoprick of Lincoln was so long void, that a certain Hermit of Tame prophecied there should be no more Bishops of Lincoln, but he proved an untrue Prophet, for after 16 years vacancy, Geffery the Kings Bastard Son was prefer∣red thereunto, of whom it was said, That he was more skilful in fleecing than feeding his Flock; this Gallant Bishop would usually in discourse protest, By the honour of his Father, but one of the Kings Chaplains told him, Pray Sir remember sometimes the honesty of your Mother, as well as the Royalty of your Father; he used to put in his Episcopal Seal, The Seal of Geffery Son of the K. of England A poor Country Husbandman coming to Robert Grostead Bishop of Lincoln challenged kindred of him, and there∣upon desired him to prefer him to such an Office, which he was very unfit for; Cousen, said the Bishop, If your Cart be broken, I will mend it, if your Plough be old, I will give you a new one, or seed to sow your Land, but a Husband∣man I found you, and a Husbandman I will leave you. In 1537. King Henry the 8. by advice of the L. Cromwell, sent abroad injunctions, whereby the People were per∣mitted to read the Bible, and to have the Lords Prayer, the Creed, the Ten Commandments, and all the Arti∣cles of the Christian Faith in English, to be taught by all Parsons and Curates to their Parishioners; which so in∣raged the stupid Papists, that in Lincolnshire Twenty Thousand of them assembled together, against whom the King himself went in Person, who by persuasion win∣ning their Chief Leaders, brought the rest upon pardon
to submit themselves; but when he had himself done the work of mercy, he afterward sent the Duke of Suf∣folk, Sir John Russel and others to do the work of Justice, who caused Nicholas Melton, and a Monk who called him∣self Captain Cobler, with 13 other Ringleaders of the Se∣dition to be apprehended, and most of them executed. In 1564. a monstrous Fish was driven on the shoar at Grimesby in this County, being 19 yards in length, his tail was 15 foot broad, and six yards between his Eyes, 15 men stood upright in his mouth to get the Oil. Job Hartop was born at Bourn in this County, and went in 1568. with Sir John Hawkins his General, to make discoveries in New Spain; He was a Gunner in one of Queen Elizabeths Ships, called The Jesus of Lubeck; long and dangerous was his Voyage, eight of his men being killed at Cape-Verd, and the General himself woun∣ded with poysoned Arrows, but was cured by a Negro, who drew out the Poyson with a clove of Garlick; he first writ of that strange Tree which may be termed, The Tree of Food, affording a Liquor which is both meat and drink; The Tree of Raiment, yeilding Needles where∣with, and Thred whereof Mantles are made, The Tree of Harbour, Tiles to cover Houses, being made out of the solid parts thereof, so that it beareth a self-sufficiency for mans maintenance. Job was his name, and patience was with him, so that he may pass for a Confessor of this County, for being with some others by this General left on land for want of Provisions, after many miseries they came to Mexico, he continued a Prisoner twenty three years, that is, 2 years at Mexico; one year in the Contracta∣tion House in Sevil, another in the Spanish Inquisition in Triana, 12 years a Gally Slave, four years with the Cross of St. Andrews at his back in the Everlasting Prison, and three years a drudge to Hernando de Soria, to so high a sum did the inventory of his sufferings amount; so much of his patience, now see the end the Lord made with him; whil'st inslaved to the aforesaid Fernando, he was sent to Sea in a Flemish Vessel, which was afterward taken by an English Ship, and so he was safely landed at Plymouth Dec. 2. 1590. And died soon after. Sir William
Mounson was extracted out of an Ancient Family in this Shire, and was from his Youth bred in Sea Service, wherein he attained to great perfection; Queen Eliza∣beth having cleared Ireland of the Spanish Forces, and desiring carefully to prevent a Relapse, altered the Scene of War from Ireland to Spain, from defending to inva∣ding; and Sir Richard Levison being Admiral, and Mounson Vice Admiral, they in 1602. went to Portugal, where without drawing a Sword they quite killed Tra∣ding on those Coasts, no Ships daring to go in or out of their Harbours; there they had Intelligence of a vast Carract ready to land in Sisimbria, which was of 1600 Tun, richly laden out of the East-Indies, & resolved to as∣sault it, though it seemed placed in an invincible posture; of itself it was a Gyant in comparison of our Pigmy Ships, and had in her 300 Spanish Gentlemen; the Mar∣quess De Sancta Cruce lay hard by with 13 Ships, and all were secured under the Command of a strong and well fortified Castle; but nothing is impossible to the English Valour, and Gods blessing thereon; After an hot dis∣pute, which lasted for some hours, with the Invincible Ar∣guments of Fire & Sword, the Carract was conquered, the wealth taken therein amounting to the value of Ten Hun∣dred Thousand Crowns of Portugal Account; But though the Goods gotten therein might be valued, the good gotten thereby was inestimable, for ever after the Spani∣ards beheld the English with admiring Eyes, and quit∣ted the thoughts of Invasion; this worthy Knight died a∣bout the midst of the Reign of King James. In 1614. Such great Inundations of Water happen∣ed in Lincolnshire and the parts adjacent, that the Sea en∣tred 12 miles into the Land. I have a Letter by me saith Mr. Clerk, dated July 7. 1606. written by one Mr. Bo∣vy, to a Minister in London, where he thus writes; Touching News, you shall understand, that Mr. Sher∣wood hath received a Letter from Mr. Arthur Hilder∣sham, which containeth this following Narrative; That at Brampton in the Parish of Torksey, near Gains∣borough in Lincolnshire, an Ash-Tree shaketh both in the Body and Boughs thereof, and there proceeds from
thence sighs and groans, like those of a man troubled in his sleep, as if it felt some sensible torment; Many have climbed to the top thereof, where they heard the groans more plainly than they could below: One a∣mong the rest being atop, spoke to the Tree, but pre∣sently came down much astonished, and lay groveling on the Earth Speechless for 3 hours, and then reviving said, Brampton, Brampton, thou are much bound to pray: The Author of this News is one Mr. Vaughan a Minister, who was there present, and heard and saw these Passages, and told Mr. Hildersham of it: The Earl of Lincoln cau∣sed one of the Arms of the Ash to be lopped off, and a hole to be bored into the Body, and then was the sound or hollow voice heard more audibly than before, but in a kind of Speech which they could not comprehend nor understand. In 1666. Oct. 13. there was an extraordinary and dreadful Storm of Thunder in Lincolnshire, accompa∣nied with Hailstones much bigger than Pigeons, and some as large as Pullets Eggs; immediately after there followed a terrible storm and Tempest, attend∣ed with a very unusual noise, and with such violence, that at Welborn it threw most of the Houses to the ground, brake down some, and tore up other Trees by the Roots, scattering abroad much Corn and Hay, but by Divine Providence only one Boy was killed in that Town: It went thence to Willingore the next Town, o∣verthrowing some houses, and killing 2 Children with the fall; it fell so violently on the Church of the next Town to this, that it presently dashed the Spire Steeple to pieces, and rent the Stone and Timberwork of the Church so violently, that but a little of the Wall, and only the Body of the Steeple was left standing; it threw down many Houses, Trees, and out-houses in this Town, as well as in two others far distant: It was observed to move only in a channel or small breadth, and if it had been considerably broader, could not but have ruined a great part of the Country; to some that saw it at a di∣stance before it came near them, it had the appearance
of Fire, and was by some observed to move in a kind of circle, though at the same time it kept its general course along: It passed also through Nottinghamshire; some of the Hailstones being measured were 9 Inches about; this Whirl-Wind extended above 60 Yards in breadth; In the Forrest of Sherwood it broke down and over∣threw at least 1000 Trees, it brake one short off in the Body which was three Foot in Diameter, it overthrew divers Wind Mills, some Boats in the River, and in one Town consisting of 50 Houses it left but 7 standing: The same Evening over Derby Town, and some other places, there appeared a fiery Sword hanging in the Air over them: The Thursday after in the Evening there were strange Fires seen hanging over Nottingham Town, sinsomuch that some of the Inhabitants coming home∣ward from a Country Market, thought the Town to be on Fire in three several places; these Informations, saith Mr. Clerk, I had from Eye-Witnesses worthy of Credit. About April 26. 1661. at Spalding, Bourne, and seve∣ral other places in Lincolnshire, it rained Wheat, some grains whereof were very thin and hollow, but others of a more firm substance, and would grind into fine flower, several Pecks of it were taken up out of Church Leads, and other houses that were leaded, several Inhabitants who were Eye-Witnesses brought up a considerable quantity to London. There is a Proverb in this Country, As mad as the bait∣ing Bull of Stamford, the Original whereof was thus oc∣casioned: William Earl of Warren, Lord of this Town in the time of King John, standing upon the Castle Walls of Stamford, saw two Bulls fighting for a Cow in the Meadow, till all the Butchers Dogs great and small pur∣sued one of the Bulls (being mad with noise and multi∣tude) quite through the Town; this sight so pleased the Earl, that he gave all those Fields called the Castle Mea∣dows, where first the Bull-duel began, for a common to the Butchers of the Town, after the first grass was eaten, upon condition they find a Mad Bull, the day 6 weeks before Christmas-day, for the continuance of the sport every year; some think that the men must be as mad as
the Bull, who can take delight in so dangerous a pastime, whereby Gods providence more than mans care is to be observed, that no more mischief is done. Sir William Hussee was born in this County, he was Lord Chief Justice in the Reign of K. Edward 4. and lived till the time of K. Henry 7. In the first Parliament of whose Reign, it happened that many Members were returned, who being formerly his Friends, were at∣tainted by Crookbackt Richard, and thereby disabled to sit in Parliament, it being incongruous in the highest de∣gree, that they should make Laws for others, who were themselves outlawed; King Henry much concerned here∣at, remitted the Case to the Judges, who all agreed with Sir Wm. Hussee upon this grave and safe opinion, mixed with Law and convenience; That the Knights and Burgesses attainted by course of Law, should forbear to come in∣to the house till a Law were past for reversing their Attainders, which was done accordingly; when at the same time it was moved incidentally, what should be done for the King himself, who likewise was attainted; the rest unani∣mously agreed with Sir W. Hussee, That the Crown takes-a∣way all defects and stops in blood, and that by the assumption thereof the Fountain was cleared from all Attainders and Cor∣ruptions. He died in the 10th of Henry 7. Peregrine Berty Lord Willoughby, was a very valiant Gentleman, as ap∣pears by his Atchievements both in France and the Ne∣therlands in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, he could not brook the Flatteries of the Court, and was wont to say, he was none of those little Animals who could creep on the ground; the Camp was his proper Element being a great Souldier, and having a suitable magnanimity; when one sent him an insulting challenge whilst he lay sick of the Gout, he returned this answer, That although he was lame of his Hands and Feet, yet he would meet him with a piece of a Rapier in his Teeth: He once in a Battle took a Spanish Gennet managed for the War, which was in∣tended for a present to the King of Spain, and was desi∣red by a Trumpeter from the General to restore it, of∣fering this Lord a Thousand Pound down for him, or an
The Horrid Murther of K. EDWARD 2. Pa. 78. The Dreadfull Tempest in Devonshire Pa. 55.
Hundred a Year during his Life, which he pleased; the Lord returned answer, That had it been any Commander he freely would have sent him back, but being but an Horse he loved him as well as the King of Spain himself, and would keep him. This Lord dyed 1601. and lies buried under a stately Monument at Eresby in this County. The County of Lincoln hath three Divisions, wherein are 30 Hundreds, and hath in it 35 Market Towns, 630 Parish Churches, and is in the Diocess of Lincoln; It e∣lects 12 Parliament men, and gives the Title of Earl to Edward Lord Clinton, as Stamford doth to Henry Lord Gray. MIDDLESEX hath Hartfordshire on the North, Buckinghamshire on the West, Essex parted with the Ley on the East, Kent and Surrey severed by the Thames on the South; The Air is generally very healthful, espe∣cially about Highgate, where the expert Inhabitants re∣port, That divers who have been long visited with sickness not curable by Physick, have in short time recovered by that sweet salutary Air: The Soil is very fruitful, pleasantly beauti∣fied on all sides with sumptuous Houses and pretty Towns: Harrow-Hill is the highest in all this County, under which there lie a long way together Southward exceeding rich and fruitful Fields, especially about He∣ston a small Village, which yieldeth such fine flower for Manchet, that the Kings Bread was formerly made thereof, and therefore Q. Eliz. received no Composition Money from the Villages thereabout, but took her Wheat in kind for her own Pastry and Bakehouse. Hampton Court, a Royal Pallace, and the neatest of all the Kings Houses, is in this Shire; it is a Work of admirable mag∣nificence, a City rather in shew than the Pallace of a Prince; for stately Port and gorgeous Building, saith Weaver, not inferiour to any in Europe: It was built out of the ground by that Pompous Prelate Cardinal Woolsey in ostentation of his Riches, one so magnificent in his ex∣pences, that whosoever considers his House-building, would admire that he had any thing for his House-keeping
or House-furnishing: He bestowed this on K. Hen. 8. who for the greater grace thereof erected it to be an honour, Princes having Power to confer dignities on Houses as well as Persons: The King increased and enlarged it, so that it now containeth 5 very large inner Courts, incom∣passed with fair buildings of curious Workmanship. Now whereas other Royal Pallaces found their fatal Pe∣riod, as Holdenby, Oatlands, Richmond, Theobalds, Hampton Court had the happiness to continue in its former Estate, of which one thus writes; I envy not its happy Lot, but rather thereat wonder, There's such a rout our Land throughout of Pallaces by plunder. Osterly-House must not be forgotten, built in a Park by Sir Thomas Gresham, who here magnificently entertain∣ed and lodged Q. Elizabeth; Her Majesty found fault with the Court of this House as too great, affirming, That it would appear more handsome if divided by a Wall in the middle; What doth Sir Thomas (Money commanding all things) but in the night time sends for Workmen from London, who so speedily and silently apply their bu∣siness, that the next morning discovered that court dou∣ble which the night had left single before; it is questi∣onable whether the Queen next day were more con∣tented with the conformity to her fancy, or more plea∣sed with the surprise and sudden performance thereof; whilst the Courtiers disported themselves with their se∣veral expressions, some avowing it was no wonder he could so soon change a building, who could build a Change: Others reflecting on some known differences in this Knt's Family, affirmed, That any house is easier divided than united. Ed∣ward the 5. sole surviving Son of K. Hen. 8. and Jane his Wife, was born at Hampton Court in this County 1537. He succeeded his Father in this Kingdom, and was most eminent in his Generation, saith Dr. Fuller, seeing the Kings of England fall under a five fold Division, 1. Visi∣bly vicious, given over to dissoluteness and debauchery, as K. Edward the Second, 2. Rather free from Vice than
fraught with Virtue, as King Henry the Third. 3. Those in whom Vices and Virtues were so equally matched, as it was hard to decide which got the mastery, as in King Henry 8.4. whose good qualities beat their bad ones quite out of distance of competition, as K. Edward 1.5. Whose Virtues were so resplendent, no faults (humane frailties excepted) appeared in them, as in this K. Edward; He died July 5. 1553. and pity it is that he who deserved the best, should have no Monument erected to his memory. Smithfield in London being Bonners Shambles, and the Bonfire Gene∣ral of England, no wonder if some sparks thereof were driven into the Neighbourhood, as Barnet, Islington, and Stratford, Bow, where more than twenty Persons were Martyred, as in Mr. Fox it doth appear; nor must we forget Mr. John Denly burnt at Ʋxbridge, who began to sing a Psalm at the stake, and Dr. Story there present, caused a Faggot to be hurled in his face, which so hurt him, that he bled therewith; however we may believe that this Martyrs Song made good melody in the ears of the God of Heaven. The last pitcht Battle in England between the two Houses of Lancaster and York, was fought at Barnet. 1472. by K. Edward 4. who hearing that the Earl of Warwick, on the behalf of K. Henry the 6. was with his Army incamped on a Heath near Barnet, he marched to∣ward them upon April 13. being Easter Eve, and came that evening from London thither, where he would not suffer a man of his Army to stay in the Town, but com∣manded them all to the Field, and lodged with his Ar∣my nearer to the Enemy than he was aware, by reason of a thick mist, raised as some say, by Fryar Bongey the Conjurer, which made it so dark, that it could not well be observed where they were incamped; In taking his ground he caused his People to keep as much silence as was possible, thereby to keep the Enemy from knowing of their approach, great Artillery they had on both parts, but Warwick had more than K. Edward, and therefore in the night time they shot continually at the Kings Army, but did little hurt, because they overshot
them as lying nearer than was conceived; on Easter day early in the morning both Armies are ordered for Battle; the Earl of Warwick, appointed the command of his Right Wing, which consisted of Horse to his Bro∣ther the Marquess Montacute, and the Earl of Oxford; the left Wing likewise consisting of Horse, was led by him∣self, and the Duke of Exeter, and the main Battle of Bills, and Bows was conducted by the Duke of Somerset; on K. Edwards part the Van was commanded by Richard D. of Glocester, the main Battle (in which the unfortu∣nate K. Henry was Prisoner) was led by K. Edward him∣self, and the L. Hastings brought up the Rear; after ex∣hortations for incouraging their Souldiers, the fight be∣gan, which with great valour was maintained for six hours without any apparent disadvantage on either side, only Warwicks Van seemed by the courage of the Earl of Oxford, to overmatch King Edwards, which made some flying toward London carry the news, that the Earl of Warwick had won the Field, and so perhaps he had in∣deed, but for a strange misfortune which happened to the Earl of Oxford and his men, for they having a Star with streams on their Liveries, as K. Edwards men had the Sun, the Earl of Warwicks men by reason of the mist, not well distinguishing the badges, shot at the Earl of Oxfords men, who were of their own side, whereupon the Earl of Oxford cryed out, Treason, Treason! and fled with 800 men; at length after great slaughter made on both sides, K. Edward having the greater number of men, caused a new recruit of fresh Souldiers to come on, whom he had reserved to that purpose, which the Earl of Warwick observing, being a man of an invinci∣ble courage, nothing dismayed, rushed into the midst of his Enemies, where he adventured so far, that amongst the press he was struck down and slain; though some write, that seeing the desperate condition of his Army, the Earl leapt on his Horse to fly, and coming to a Wood where was no passage, one of K. Edwards men came to him and killed him, and stript him to his naked skin; The Marquess Montacute thinking to relieve his Bro∣ther,
lost likewise his life, and left the victory to King Edward; There were slain on both sides at least Ten Thousand Men; and hereby King Edward again got the Kingdom, and King Henries Friends not being afterward able to raise any considerable power on his behalf, he was soon after sent to the Tower, and there murdered by the Duke of Glocester. I shall not speak any thing in this place concerning London, as having already published a book of the same price with this, of Historical Remarks and Observations of the ancient and present state of London and Westminster, wherein the most considerable particulars relating thereto for several hundred years are succinctly discovered. The County of Middlesex is divided into 7 Hundreds, wherein are 4 Market Towns, and 73 Parish Churches, besides those in London and Westminster; It is in the Diocess of London, and out of it are elected 8 Parliament Men; For the County 2. Westminster 2. London 4. and gives the Title of Earl to Charles L. Sackvil, who is also Earl of Dorset. NORFOLK hath the German Ocean on the North and East thereof; Suffolk severed by the River Waveny on the South; Cambridgshire parted by the River Owse, and part of Lincolnshire on the West; it is 50 miles East and West, and 30 North and South; all England, saith Dr. Fuller, may be carved out of Norfolk, represented therein not only to the kind, but the de∣gree thereof, for here are Fens, and Heaths, and Light, and Deep, and Sand, and Clay-ground, and Meadows, and Pastures, and Arable and Woody, and sometimes Woodless grounds, so that herein is sufficiency of profit and plea∣sure collectively in this County; it abounds in Corn, Wor∣steds, Stuffs, Wool, Coals, and Rabbets, who are an Army of Natural Pioneers, whence men have learned the Art of undermining, they thrive best in barren ground, and gow fattest in the hardest Frosts, their flesh is fine and wholsome; if the Scottish men tax our language as im∣proper, and smile at our Wing of a Rabbet, let us laugh at
their Shoulder of a Capon; great store of Herrings, and very good are caught nigh Yarmouth, and vast profit rai∣sed out of them, We may conclude the natural Com∣modities of this County with this memorable passage of a modern Author, who writes thus; the Lord F. W. assu∣red me of a Gentleman in Norfolk, who made above Ten Thousand pound of a piece of ground not 40 yards square, and yet there was neither Mineral nor Mettal in it; he after told me, it was a sort of fine Clay, for the making of a choice sort of Earthen Ware, which some that knew it seeing him dig up, discovered the value of it, and sending it into Holland received so much mony for it. It is recorded that one chief occasion of the Danes invading this Kingdom proceeded from the following Accident; About the year 867. one Lothbrook a Noble∣man of the Royal Family of Denmark, being upon that Shoar, his Hawk in pursuing her Game, fell into the Sea, he to recover her, got into a small Cockboat alone, and by a sudden Tempest was driven with his Hawk to the Coast of Norfolk near Rodham, where being seized for a Spy, he was sent to Edmund K. of the East Angles, but having declared his birth and misfortune, the King took affection to him for his skill in Hawking, and his o∣ther good parts, and preferred him, but Berick the Kings Falconer envying this favour, as they were hun∣ting together in a Wood, privately murdered him, and hid him in a Bush; Lothbrook was soon missed, and by no inquiry could be found, till it pleased God his Dog, which would not forsake his dead Masters Corps, came fawning to the King several times, and then went back to the wood, which the King observing, at length follow∣ed the Hound, who brought him to the place where Lothbrook lay; and Berick being found guilty of the mur∣der, was sentenced to be put into Lothbrooks Boat with∣out Tackle or Sail, as he arrived here; but behold the Event, the Boat returned to the same place in Den∣mark, from whence it had been driven for Berick, as it were to be punished for this Murther; here the Boat
being known, Berick was taken, who to free himself from that bloody Fact, added Treason to Murther, affirming, That King Edmund had put Lothbrook to death in Nor∣folk; In revenge whereof, Inguar and Hubba the 2 Sons of the murdered Lothbrook, being made Generals of a Danish Army arrived in England, and burnt up the Coun∣try, sparing neither Sex, nor Age, and breaking into Norfolk, sent this Message to K. Edmund, That Inguar the most victorious Prince, dreadful both by Sea and Land, having brought divers Countries under his subjection, was now arrived in these parts, where he meant to winter, and requireth thee Edmund to be subject, and a vassal to him, to yield up to him thy hid Treasures, and all other the riches of thine Ancestors, and so to reign under him, which if thou refusest to do, he ad∣judges thee unworthy both of life and Kingdom; Edmund hearing this proud Pagan Message, after advising with his Council, returned this answer; Go said he, and tell thy Lord, that Edmund the Christian King for the love of a Temporal life will not submit himself to a Pagan Duke, unless he will resolve to become a Christian; whereupon Inguar and Hubba, with their furious Danes, pursued the King to Thetford; who raising an Army, gave them Battle, but being overpowered by his Enemies, he retired to Fra∣mingham Castle, where pitying the terrible slaughter of his People, he submitted himself to the Danes, but be∣cause he would not renounce the Christian Religion, these bloody Heathens beat him with sticks, and whipt him with rods; but he still fervently calling upon the name of Jesus, they were so inraged, that binding him to a stake, they with their Arrows shot him to death, and cutting off his head, scornfully threw it into an hedg; But his body was afterward honourably buried at St. Edmundsbury, from whence that Town had its name. At Walsingham in this County there was a Chappel built in the year 1601. dedicated to the Virgin Mary, and renowned throughout England for a Pilgrimage to our Lady of Walsingham, and those who did not visit, and present her with offerings, were counted irreligious;
hear the description of Erasmus, an Eye-witness, con∣cerning this place; About four miles from the Sea side, saith he, standeth a Town that lives on nothing else almost but the resort of Pilgrims to this place; there is a Colledge of Regular Canons, which hath scarce any other Revenues than from the libe∣rality of this Virgin, for the greater oblations are preserved, but the Mony and other Offerings of smaller value go to the maintenance of the Fryers; the Church is fair and neat, yet the Virgin dwells not therein, that honour (forsooth) she hath done to her Son; she hath her Church to her self in the right hand of her Son; neither doth she dwell there for all this, for the building is not yet finished, small light there was in it but by Tapers or Wax-Candles yielding a pleasant smell; and when you come into it, you would say it were an heavenly habitation indeed, so bright shining all over it with precious Stones, and Gold and Silver. This Chappel with all the Trinkets therein, fell in the general destruction of Popish Mona∣steries by K. Henry 8. At St. Bennet in the Holm, there was a great Abby built by Canutus the Dane, which was after∣ward so fortified by the Monks with Walls and Bulwarks, that it seemed rather a Castle than a Cloyster, insomuch that K. William the Conqueror could not win it by assault, till a Monk betrayed it into his hands, upon condition he himself should be made Abbot thereof; which was done accordingly; but the King presently hanged up this new Abbot for a Traitor, and so he was justly puni∣shed for his Treachery. K. Stephen had only one Son named Eustace, a Prince of much blossoming valour, as being cut off at 18 years of Age, some say by drowning, and others by a stranger Accident, but strange Relations must not alwaies be rejected, for though many of them be forged, yet some no doubt are true; and who knows but it may be of this kind which some writers relate of this Prince, That being at the Abby of Bury in the Diocess of Norwich, and denyed some money he demanded, he presently in a rage went forth, and set the Cornfields belonging to the Abby on fire, but afterward sitting down to Dinner, at the first morsel of bread he put into his mouth, he fell into a fit of madness, and in that fit dyed; certainly the Persons of Prin∣ces
are for more observation than ordinary People, and as they make Examples, so they are sometimes made Examples. In the 11th of K. Hen. 2. there was so great an Earth∣quake in Norfolk, and some other Counties, that it o∣verthrew many who stood upon their feet, and made the Bells towl in the Steeples. In his 18th Year the Ca∣thedral Church at Norwich, with the Houses thereto be∣longing, was burnt, and the Monks dispersed. In the Reign of K. Richard 1. a Jew being turned Christian at Lynn in Norfolk, he was persecuted by those of his own Nation, and assaulted in the street; who thereupon fly∣ing to a Church hard by, was followed thither also, and the Church assaulted, which the People of the Town see∣ing, in defence of the new Christian they fell upon the Jews, of whom they slew a great number, and after pil∣laged their Houses; By this Example the Jews were as∣saulted in other places, and vast multitudes of them mas∣sacred, and some of them being blocked up in a Castle at York, cut the Throats of their Wives and Children and cast them over the Walls on the Christians Heads, and then burnt the Castle and themselves; neither could this Sedition be stayed, till the King sent his Chancel∣lour, the Bishop of Ely, with force of Arms to punish the offenders. In the 5th of Hen 5. a great part of the City of Norwich was burnt, and all the Houses of the Fri∣ers Preachers, where two of the Friers themselves were burnt in the flames. In the 2d of Edward 6. 1549 a dangerous Rebellion broke forth in Norfolk, about Grievances for Inclosures; The Rebels had got one Ket a Tanner to be their Lead∣er, who with others encouraged them to pull down In∣closures, and in short time they grew to a Body of 20000, so that the Sheriff of Norfolk commanding them in the Kings name to depart, or else he would proclaim them Traitors, he had been certainly slain, had not his Horse been too swift for them; they furnished them∣selves with Arms and Artillery, and for their better se∣curity they fortified themselves upon Monshold hill, near
St. Leonards hill by Norwich, where they carried a face as it were of Justice and Religion; for they had one Con∣vers an Idle Fellow for their Chaplain, who morning and evening read solemn Prayers to them, also Sermons they had often; and as for Justice they ordained a Seat of Judgment in an old Tree, whose Canopy was the Cope of Heaven; in this Tree sate the Tanner, as Chancel∣lour and chief Judge, giving out Warrants in the Kings name, and as his Deputy committed many Persons of Quality to Prison, he was assisted by two chosen men of every hundred among them, from whom Commissions were sent to bring in to them Powder, Shot, Victuals, and all things necessary, and here such as had exceeded their Commission were ordered to be imprisoned, so that this Tree was called, The Oak of Reformation, whence likewise some Sermons were delivered to the People, and once by the Reverend Dr. Parker which had like to have cost him his Life; and now beginning to grow to a height, they presented certain Complaints to the King, requiring he would send an Herald to give them satisfaction; the King, though he took it for a great Indignity to have such base Fellows capitulate with him, yet framing himself to the time, he returned this answer; That in October following he would call a Parlia∣ment wherein their Complaints should he heard, and all their Grievances redressed, requiring the in the mean time to lay down their Arms and return to their houses, and thereupon granting them a general pardon: But this was so far from satisfying the Seditious, that thereupon they first assaulted the City of Norwich, took it, and made the Mayor attend them as their servant, and then returned again to their Station at Moushold: Soon after the Mar∣quess of Northampton, the L. Sheffeild, with several other Lords, 1500 Horse, and a small Band of Italians were sent against them, whom the Seditious so stoutly op∣posed, that much mischief was done on both sides, the L. Sheffeild falling with his Horse into a Ditch, was taken Prisoner, and as he pulled off his Helmet, to make him∣self known, he was struck down dead by a Butcher; so
that the Marquess with his Forces not prevailing, the Earl of Warwick was sent with 6000 Foot, and 1500 Horse, and many other Persons of Quality; When the Earl approached the Camp of the Rebels, he sent a He∣rald offering them the Kings Pardon if they would dis∣band, which they were so far from accepting, that a lewd Boy turned up his naked Breech toward the He∣rald, and bid him kiss it; upon this many skirmishes passed between the Earl and them, with loss sometimes of one side, and sometimes of another, at last they came to a Battle, where the Rebels placed in the Front all the Gentlemen they had taken Prisoners, designing they should first be slain, of whom yet very few were hurt, but of the Rebels above 2000 were killed; and now once a∣gain the Earl of Warwick offered them pardon, but for all their losses they continued obstinate; at last the Earl sent to know if they would entertain their Pardon if he should come in Person, and assure them of it; this mo∣ved them much, and they answered, That they knew him to be so honourable, that from himself they would embrace it; whereupon he went to them, and causing their Pardon to be read again, he confirmed it by his words so effectu∣ally, that they all cast away their Arms, and with one voice cried, God save K. Edward: The day following Robert Ket the Tanner, and Arch-Rebel, was taken, and hanged in Chains upon the Castle of Norwich; and Wil∣liam Ket the younger, was hanged upon the high Steeple of Wimondham, and 9 of the other principal Rebels were hanged upon the Oak of Reformation; and thus ended the Sedition in Norfolk, the day of the defeat of the Re∣bels being a long time after observed as a Festival by the Citizens of Norwich, with no less joy than the Jews did when they escaped the sword of wicked Haman. In 1578. the 20 of Q. Elizabeth, Matthew Hamond of Hitherset, 3 miles from Norwich, Plow-Wright, for de∣nying Christ to be our Saviour, and publishing divers other horrible Heresies, was convented before the Bi∣shop of Norwich, condemned in the Consistory, and de∣livered to the Sheriffs of Norwich to be executed; but be∣cause
he had spoken seditious words against the Queen, he was condemned to lose his Ears, which was accord∣ingly executed, and 7 days after he was burnt in the Castle Ditch at Norwich. In the 23d Year, Aug. 12. there arose a great Tempest of Thunder, Lightening, Whirlwind, and Rain, in the County of Norfolk, with Hailstones fashioned like the Rowels of Spurs, two or Three Inches about; it beat the Corn flat to the ground, rent up many great Trees and shivered them to pieces; at Hemming a Mile from Worsted, the West door of the Church of above 300 pound weight, was lifted off the hooks, and blown over the Font, within a Yard of the Chancel; the top of the Church was ript up, and the Lead blown away; five sheets of Lead were wrapt up to∣gether like a Glove, and blown into a Field without the Church-Yard. In Her 25th Year, Sept. 17. John Lewis for denying the Godhead of Christ, and holding other detestable Opinions, was burnt at Norwich. The 10th of October following at Castor near Yarmouth, a Fish was by the force of the Easterly Winds driven ashoar, the length thereof from the Neck to the Tail was 17 Yards and one Foot; the Head was great, for the Chap of the Jaw was 3 Yards and a quarter in length; with Teeth of 3 quarters of a Yard in Compass; it had great Eyes, with 2 great holes over them to spout Water, her Tail was 14 Foot broad; she was 4 Yards and an half in thick∣ness from the Back to the Belly. In 1656. July 20. being Lords-day, there was a sudden Tempest in and about Norwich, attended with Thunder and Lightning, the flashes whereof were very violent, and the claps of Thun∣der so dreadful, as astonished the hearers; about an hour after many saw a black Cloud like the smoak of a Furnace, which did oftimes cast forth flames of Fire; af∣ter this followed a White Cloud, labouring as it were to overtake the other, but the black Cloud presently co∣vering the City, there arose a sudden Whirlwind, which raised such a Dust in the Streets, that one man could not discern another, and the Clouds still grew thicker, especially in the South-West, out of which there broke
forth terrible Lightnings and Thunder-claps, accompa∣nied with Hail-stones of 5 Inches about, dashing all the Glass Windows to the Wind ward in pieces: In the Country adjoining many Corn-fields were destroyed; Trees were torn up by the Roots; Rabbets and Birds, yea some Sheep, Cows and Horses were killed; the Lightning ran upon the ground, many Houses being fi∣red by it, and more had been consumed, had not an ex∣traordinary shower of Rain quenched them; the Hail∣stones were not round, but flat pieces of Ice: This ac∣count was sent, saith Mr. Clark, from several credible Persons upon the place. And here must not be forgot∣ten Sir Robert Venile, a Knight of Norfolk, who when the Scots and English were ready to give Battle, in the Reign of Edward the Third, a certain stout Champion of great Stature commonly called Tournboll, coming out of the Scots Army, and challenging any English-man to meet him in a single Combate, this Sir Robert Venile accepteth the challenge, and marching toward the Champion, and meeting by the way a certain black Mastiff Dog, which waited on the Champion, he suddenly with his Sword cut him off at the loins, and afterward did more to the Cham∣pion himself, cutting his Head off from his Shoulders, The County of Norfolk hath in it the City of Norwich, is divided into 31 Hundreds, wherein are 28 Market Towns, 660 Parish Churches, and is in the Diocess of Norwich; it elects 12 Parliament men, and gives the Title of Duke to Henry L. Howard. NORTHAMPTONSHIRE hath Cambridge∣shire on the East; Lincoln and Leicestershire on the North, Buckinghamshire on the South, and Warwickshire on the West; it is a Champion Country, exceeding populous, and well furnished with Noblemen, and Gentlemens Houses, replenished also with Towns and Churches, in∣somuch as in some places there are 20, and in others 30 Steeples with Spires or square Towers within view at once; Northampton is the Shire Town, the Houses where∣of were formerly very sair, but by a dreadful fire a
great part thereof was lately burnt to Ashes, though since for the most part nobly re-built; there are seven Parish Churches within the walls, whereof that of All-hallows is the chief; at Boughton there is a Spring which is conceived to turn Wood into Stone. The truth is, saith Dr. Fuller, it doth incrust any thing with Stone, but I have seen a Skull brought from thence to Sydney Colledge in Cambridge, which was can∣died over with Stone within and without, yet so as the bone remained entire in the middle, as by a breach made therein did appear; this Skull was sent for by K. Charles, whil'st I was there to satisfy his own Curiosi∣ty, and by him safely returned again to the Colledge. The River Nen runs by the Southside of Peterburrough, in the middle whereof is a gulf so deep, and cold with∣al, that even in Summer no Swimmer is able to dive to the bottom thereof, yet it is never frozen in Winter, for there is a Spring in it, whence the water always riseth and bubleth up; and that keeps it from freezing. Robert Braybrook, born at a Village in Northamptonshire, was consecrated Bishop of London in the 4th of Richard 2. 1381. he was after Chancellor of England, he died 1404. and was buried under a Marble Stone in the Chap∣pel of St. Mary in the Cathedral of St. Paul, London, yet was the body of this Bishop lately taken up, and found firm as to skin, hair, joints, nails, &c. for upon that fierce and fatal Fire in London 1666. which turned so much of St. Pauls into rubbish, when part of the floor fell into St Faiths, this dead Person was shaken out of his Tomb, where he had lain, and slept so unchanged, as you have heard no less than 262 years. His body was for a great while exposed to the view of all Persons, many coming daily to see this strange Curiosity. Elizabeth Daughter of Sir Richard Noodvil, was born at Grafton in this County, she was Widdow to Sir John Gray, who lost his life for the House of Lancaster, and petitioned K. Edward 4. to take off the sequestration from her join∣ture; Beauty is a good Solliciter, where youth is to be the Judge; the King fell inamoured of her, and be∣came
a Suitor to her for a nights lodging; and being importunate with her therein, she modestly told him; That as she did account her self too mean to be his Wife, so she thought her self too worthy to be his Harlot; The King fin∣ding he could not prevail by wanton love, resolves to marry her, though much to the discontent of his Council, and likewise of his Mother; who among other reasons alledged, That her being a Widdow might be suffici∣ent to restrain him; to whom the King replied, Whereas you say, Madam, that she is a Widdow, and hath already Children, by Gods blessed Lady I am a Batchellor, and have some too, and so each of us have a proof that none of us is like to be barren; and he accordingly married her, being the first of our Kings since the Conquest, that married his own Subject; yet was his love divided among three o∣ther of his Mistresses, of whom he was wont to say; The one was the fairest, the other the merriest, and the third the Holiest Harlot in England, as being alwaies at her Beads in the Chappel, when he sent for her to his Bed; His Queen lived to see the death of her Husband, murther of her two Sons, restraint of her self, and the rest of her Children, so that she had more greatness than joy, height than happiness by Marriage; she finished Queens Colledge in Cambridge, and died not long after. At Fotheringay Castle in this County, was acted the Tragedy of Mary Q. of Scots, Mother to K. James, in the 29 year of Q. Elizabeth. 1587. This Mary was the Daughter, and only lawfully begotten Child of James 5. and succeeded in her Cradle to the Throne, she was promised in Marriage to King Edw. 6. of England, but by the power of the Hamiltons carried into France, and there married to Francis 2. King of France; about which time Reformation in Religion began to be practi∣sed in Scotland as well as England; for at the Preaching of John Knox, and some other Ministers, Images, Altars, and such things were defaced, and it was further put in∣to the heads of the Nobility, That it pertained to them of their own Authority to take away Idolatry, and by force re∣duce the Prince to the prescript of Laws; whereupon there
was presently bandying of the Lords of Scotland against the Queen Dowager, and each of them sent for Aid; she from France, and the Lords from England; but this was matter for Consultation; it seemed a bad example for a Prince to give Aid to the Rebellious Subjects of a∣nother Prince; on the other side it seemed no less than Impiety not to give Aid to Protestants of the same Re∣ligion; but most of all it seemed meer madness to suffer enemies to be so near Neighbours, and let the French nestle in Scotland, who pretend Title to England; upon such considerations it was resolved Queen Elizabeth should send them Aid, and thereupon an Army of 6000 Foot, and 1200 Horse were sent under the Duke of Norfolk and others, who going into Scotland, joined with the Lords, where passed many light Skirmishes, many Batteries, and sometimes Assaults, which growing tedi∣ous, soon after ended in a Peace between France and En∣gland, upon condition, That neither the King of France, nor the Queen of Scotland should thence forth use the Arms or Titles of England or Ireland, and that both the English and French should depart out of Scotland; and a general pardon should pass in Parliament for all that had been Actors in those Stirs; The Peace was scarce concluded, when Francis the young K. of France died, and left Mary Qu. of Scots a Widdow; soon after the House of Commons in Parliament humbly moved Queen Elizabeth to Mar∣ry, who answered, That she was already Married to the Kingdom of England, and behold, saith she, the pledge of the Covenant with my Husband; and therewith held out her Finger, and shewed the Ring wherewith at her Corona∣tion she gave her self in Wedlock to the Kingdom, and if, said she, I keep my self to this Husband, and take no other, yet I doubt not but God will send you as good Kings as if they were born of me, for as much as we see by dayly experience that the issue of the best Princes do often degenerate, and for my self it will be sufficient that a Marble Stone declare, that a Queen having reigned such a time, lived and dyed a Virgin. She had indeed many matches propounded to her, to whom she gave Testimonies of her Princely favour, but never
pledges of nuptial Love; about this time the Earl of Feria, who had Married the Daughter of Sir William Dor∣mer, being denied leave of Queen Elizabeth for some of his Wives Friends to live in England, he grew so inraged, that he persuaded Pope Pius 4. to Excommunicate her as an Heretick and Usurper; but the Pope pretending to great gentleness, writ to her lovingly, To return to the Ʋ∣nity of the Catholick Church; and made great offers, if she would hearken to his Counsel, particularly, That he would recall the Sentence against her Mothers Marriage, confirm the Book of Common-Prayer in English, and permit the use of the Sacrament in both kinds, but the Queen neither terrified with Feria's practices, nor allured with the Popes great offers; according to her Motto, Semper eadem, always the same, persisted constant in her resolution to maintain that Religion which in her Conscience she was persua∣ded to be most agreeable to the Word of God, and the practice of the Primitive Church. Queen Mary after the death of her Husband went from France to Scotland, and then sent Letters to Q. Elizabeth, offering readily to enter into a League with her, so she might by Authority of Parliament be decla∣red her Successor, which was but her Right; to which Q. Elizabeth answered, That though she would no way dero∣gate from her Right, yet she should be loth to endanger her own security, and as it were to cover her own eyes with a grave cloth while she was alive; The two Queens were indeed both of great Spirits, Mary doubting Queen Elizabeth meant to frustrate her Succession; and Elizabeth lest the Queen of Scots meant to hinder her Succession, which created Jealousies, and many unkind passages between them, as by the sequel appears. The Queen of Scots having a desire to Marry again, Queen Elizabeth propo∣sed the Earl of Leicester to her, but she Married the Lord Darnly Son to the Earl of Lenox, and thereupon the next Parliament again move Queen Elizabeth to marry, to declare her Successor to the Crown, some of them boldly arguing, That Princes were bound to design a Successor, and that in not doing it, the Queen would shew her
self no better than a Parricide, and destroyer of her Country: The Queen was contented to bear with words spoken in Parliament, which out of it she would never have en∣dured, and commanded 30 of each House to appear before her, to whom she said, That she knew what danger hangeth over a Princes head, when a Successor is once decla∣red; she knew that even Children themselves, out of a hasty desire of bearing Rule, had taken up Arms against their own Father, and how could better be expected from Kindred? And therefore though she had given them leave to debate the matter of Succession, she bid them beware not to be injurious to their Princes patience; After which they never made any further motion to her; but now the love between the Queen of Scots, and the Lord Darnly began to cool, and their unkindness was fomented by one David Risio an Italian Musician, and afterward the Queens Secreta∣ry, who had often secret conference with her, when the King might not be admitted; this indignity the Lords a∣bout the King made him sensible of, and thereupon his death was contrived, and he was killed in an outer Chamber next the Queen, she being then with Child, and like by the affright to have miscarried; the Earl of Murray base Son to K. James 5. and base Brother to the Queen, was the chief instigator of this murther, of the foulness of which Fact when the King was sensible, he resolved to be revenged upon Murray, who having no∣tice thereof prevented it, with causing the like to be done to him, for soon after the King in a stormy tem∣pestuous night was strangled in his Bed, and then cast forth into the Garden, and the House immediately blown up with Gunpowder; the rumor of this murther being spread abroad common fame laid it upon Morton and Murray, and their Confederates; Morton and Murray lay it upon the Queen; the King thus murthered, the Queen was advised by them to Marry James Earl of Bothwell (though he was the man that had acted the Murther) but upon condition that above all things respect might be had to her young Son; and that Bothwell might be legally quitted both from the bonds of his former Mar∣riage,
and also of the Kings Murther; hereupon it is plotted that Bothwell should be brought to the Bar, and Morton being his advocate, by the sentence of the Judg∣es, he is clearly acquitted; and then by consent of some of the Nobility he is Married to the Queen, being first made Duke of Orkney; which bred a suspition in many, that the Queen was conscious of the Murther, which was the thing the Confederates aimed at by this Marri∣age, for they by all means increased the suspition, that they might have the better colour against her, and so the very same men who absolved Bothwell, and consen∣ted to the Marriage, now take arms against her, as a De∣linquent in both, forcing her Husband to flee, and then seize upon the Queen, whom clad in a very homely garment, they thrust into Prison in Lochlevyn; Queen Elizabeth hearing of it, sends Sir Nicholas Throgmorton to expostulate the matter with them, who alledged The Queen was subject to no Tribunal under Heaven; That no Judge on Earth might call her in question, &c. They again opposed the peculiar right of that Kingdom, and used Buchanans argument in his Treasonable Dialogue, That in extraordinary Cases the People have power both to create, and to depose their King; They then persuaded her to resign the Kingdom, which if she refused to do fairly, they threatned to question her openly for her inconti∣nent living, for the Kings Murther, & for Tyranny, so that through fear She resigned her Kingdom to her young Son James at that time scarce thirteen months old, who was five days after anointed and Crowned King; and she constituted Murray Vice-Roy during his Minority; soon after some of Bothwells Servants were executed for the Kings Murther; who cleared the Queen from being concerned in it. The Queen having been 11 Months Prisoner, after∣ward made her escape, and raised Forces, which being unexperienced were soon defeated by Murray; where∣upon she endeavoured to save her self by flight, and tra∣velled 60 Miles in one day, and contrary to the advice of her Friends went with a few of her Attendants in a
small Bark, and landed at Wickington in Cumberland, send∣ing Letters to Q. Elizabeth, that having made an escape from her insolent and rebellious Subjects, she was now come into England, upon certain hope of her approved Clemency, and therefore humbly desiring that she might be forthwith admitted to her presence; Q. Elizabeth sent her Letters of comfort, and promised her aid & de∣fence according to the equity of her cause, but denied her access, since she was held guilty of many crimes, giving command to have her brought to Carlile as a place of more safety: Q. Mary then desired she might depart to some other Country, but upon consultation, most were of Opinion to have her detained as one taken by right of War, and not to be dismissed till she had made satisfaction for assuming the Title of England, and for the death of Darnly her Husband, who was born one of the Queens Subjects: After this many Conspiracies were made to set the Queen of Scots at Liberty; The Pope sends out his Bull against Q. Elizabeth freeing her Sub∣jects from all Allegiance to her; and the Duke of Nor∣folk is beheaded upon her account: These and many o∣ther contrivances and conspiracies seemed very much to indanger the Life of Q. Elizabeth, and tended to the In∣vasion of England; whereupon, the better to provide for her safety, a number of her Subjects, the Earl of Leicester being the chief, and others of all ranks and conditions enter into an Association, wherein they declare, That since by Her Majesties Life, they and all other Her Ma∣jesties Subjects do enjoy inestimable benefit, they do by this Writing make manifest their duty for the safety of their Sovereign Lady; They then proceed: And to that end, we, and every of us, first calling to Wit∣ness the name of Almighty God, do voluntarily and most wil∣lingly hind our selves every one of us to the other, jointly and seve∣rally in the Band of one firm and Loyal Society; and do hereby vow and promise by the Majesty of Almighty God, that with our whole Powers, Bodies, Lives, and Goods, and with our Children and Servants, we, and every of us, will faithfully serve, and humbly obey, our said Sovereign L.Q. Elizabeth, a∣gainst
all States, Dignities, and Earthly Powers whatsoever, and will as well with our joint and particular Forces, during our Lives, withstand, offend, and persue, as well by force of Arms, as by all other means of revenge, all manner of Persons, of what state soever they shall be, who shall attempt against Her Royal Person, &c. to the utter extermination of them, their Counsellours, Aiders and Abettors: And if any such wicked attempt against her most Royal Person shall be taken in hand, and procured, whereby any that have, may, or shall pretend Title to come to this Crown, by the untimely death of Her Ma∣jesty so wickedly procured, (which God for his mercies sake for∣bid) may be avenged, we do not only bind our selves jointly and severally never to allow, accept or favour any such pretended Successor, by whom, or for whom, any such detestible Act shall be attempted or committed, as unworthy of all Government in any Christian Realm or Common-Wealth; And do also further vow and protest, as we are most bound, and that in the pre∣sence of the Eternal and Everlasting God, to prosecute such Per∣son and Persons to death, with our joint or particular forces, and to take the utmost revenge upon them, that by any means we, or any of us can devise and do, or cause to be devised and done, for their utter overthrow and extirpation; and to the better Corroboration of this our Loyal Band and Association, we do also testify by this writing, that we do confirm the con∣tents hereof by our Oaths, corporally taken upon the holy Evange∣lists, with this express condition, that no one of us shall for any respect of Persons, or causes, for fear, or reward, separate our selves from this Association, or fail in the prosecution thereof during our lives, upon pain of being by the rest of us prosecuted, and supprest as perjured Persons, and as publick Enemies to God, our Queen, and to our native Country; To which punish∣ment and pains we do voluntarily submit our selves, and every of us without benefit of any colour or pretence. In Witness of all which Premises to be inviolably kept, we do to this writing put our Hands and Seals, and shall be most ready to accept and admit any others hereafter into this Society and Association. The Queen of Scots presently apprehending that this Association was entred into her destruction, offers to en∣ter into it herself, it permitted; to which Q. Elizabeth
seemed inclining, but it was alledged by her Enemies That the Queen could be no longer in safety if the Q. of Scots were set at liberty; that the Reformed Religion lay a bleeding if Papists were admitted into the Court Walls, &c. In the succeeding Parliament this Association was universally ap¦proved, and enacted in this form, That 24 or more of the Queens Privy Council and Peers of the Realm should be se∣lected and authorized under the great Seal of England, to make enquiry of all such Persons as shall attempt to invade the Kingdom, or raise Rebellion, shall attempt any thing else against the Q's Person for whomsoever, and by whomsoever that layeth any claim to the Crown of Eng. and that Person for whom and by whom they shall attempt any such thing, shall be altogether in∣capable of the Crown, &c. The next Year a dangerous con∣spiracy was discovered against the Queen, for one John Savage, by the seducement of Dr. Gifford was persuaded it was meritorious to take away the Lives of Princes ex∣communicate, who thereupon vowed to kill Q. Eliza∣beth; but to make the Queen and her Council secure, at the same time they writ a Book, exhorting the Pa∣pists in England to attempt nothing against their Prince, and to use only the Christian Weapons, Tears, Pray∣ers, Watching, and Fasting; Babington and several other Gentlemen were in this Plot, to whom he shewed Let∣ters which he received from the Q of Scots, and her Closets being broke open a number of Letters were found from foreign parts, offering her their service, and 60 Alphabets of private Characters; Fourteen of the Con∣spirators were executed for this Treason, and great consultations were held about the Q. of Scots, and at last it was concluded to proceed against her by the afore∣mentioned Law; whereupon divers Lords are authori∣zed by the Queens Letters to enquire, and by vertue of that Law, to pass Sentence against all such as raised Rebellion, invaded the Kingdom, or attempted any vi∣olence against the Queen, who Oct. 11. went to Fothe∣ringay Castle, where Q. Mary was prisoner, and the next day the Queens Letters were delivered her, which ha∣ving with a settled Countenance read, she said, It seems
strange to me that the Queen should lay her Command upon me to hold up my hand at the Bar, as though I were a Subject, eing I am an absolute Queen, no less than her self, and especially that I should be tryed by the English Laws. It was at last plainly told her by the Chancellor and Treasurer, That f she refused to answer to such Crimes as should be objected, they would then proceed against her though she were absent. Being brought at last with much ado to consent, the Commissioners came together in the Presence Chamber, and the Queen of Scots being come, the Chancellor spake thus to her; That the Queen had appointed these Com∣missioners to hear what she could answer to the Crimes laid to her charge, assuring her that nothing would be cause of more Joy to the Queen, than to hear that she had proved her self inno∣cent; Upon which she rising up said, That although being an absolute Prince, she could not be compelled to appear before them, yet to manifest her Innocence, she was now content to ap∣pear, Then one of the Commissioners opened her Crimes, shewing that by the Confessions of Babington, Ballard, Savage, and also Nave and Curle her own Secre∣taries, she was privy to their Treasons, and consented to the Invasion of England, and destruction of the Queen; To which she answered that Letters might be counterfeited, her Secretaries might be corrupted, the rest in hope of life might be drawn to confessions which were not true; In this she stood peremptorily, that she never consented to attempt any thing against the Queens Person, though for her own delivery she confest she did design it; and at last requested, That she might be heard in full Parliament, or before the Queen her self; But this re∣quest prevailed not, for Oct. 25. at the Star-Chamber at Westminster the Commissioners met again, and pronoun∣ced Sentence against her, confirming by their Seals and Subscriptions, That after the first of June in the 27th year of Queen Elizabeth, divers matters were compassed and imagined in the Kingdom by Anthony Babington and o∣thers, with the privity of Mary Queen of Scots, pretending Title to the Crown of England, tending to the hurt, death, and destruction of the Royal Person of our said Soveraign Lady
the Queen. A few days after a Parliament began, where the Peers of the Kingdom unanimously presented a Pe∣tition, that for the safety of the Queen, themselves, and their Posterity, the Sentence against Mary Q. of Scot might according to Law be published, putting her i mind of the fearful Examples of Gods Judgments in Scripture upon Saul for sparing K. Agag, and upon Ahad for not putting  Benhadad to death; The House of Com∣mons likewise enforced this request a while after; the Queen at last replied to this effect, I protest my chief desire hath been▪ that for your security and my own safety some other way might be devised, than that which is now propounded; but since it is now evident and certain, that my safety without her destruction is in a most deplorable State; I am most grievously afflicted, that I who have pardoned so many Rebels, have neg∣lected so many Treasons, either by silence or connivence, should now at last exercise cruelty upon a Prince so nearly allied to me: As for your Petition, I beseech you to rest in an answer without an answer; If I say I will not grant your Petition, I shall hap∣ly say what I meant not; if I should say I will grant it, then cast I my self into destruction headlong, whose safety you do so earnestly desire, and that I know you in your VVisdoms would not I should do. After this the Queen upon much sollici∣tation sealed Letters for executing the Sentence, but was in much suspence what to do; yet at last, her fear pre∣vailing, she delivered Secretary Davison Letters under her Hand and Seal, to get a Commission under the great Seal ready drawn upon occasion, who telling her it was ready and the Seal put to it, she was very angry, re∣buking him sharply for his hastiness; yet Davison, though charged with secrecy, imparteth the matter to some Privy Counsellors, and persuade them, that the Queen commanded the Commission should be put in Executi∣on: Hereupon Beal, Clerk of the Council, is sent down with Letters without the Queens knowledge, wherein the Earl of Shrewsbury and others are ordered to see her put to death according to Law. And now comes the last Act of this Queens Tragedy; for as soon as the Earls were come to Fotheringay, they
The Battell of Bosworth with the Miserable Death of Crookbackt Richard Pa. 129.
read their Commission; whereto she answered, That she thought the Queen her Sister would not have consented to her death as not being subject to her Laws; but since it is her plea∣sure, death should be welcome: The next morning, Feb. 8. 1587. she gets up early and makes her self ready, and after her Devotions came forth covered with a Linnen Vail, with an Ivory Crucifix in her Hand; in the Galle∣ry the Earls met her, and the other Gentlemen, where Melvin her servant upon his knees deplored his mis∣fortune, that he should be the Messenger to carry this sad news into Scotland; to whom she said, Do not lament Melvin, thou shalt by and by see Mary Steward freed from all cares; she then came to the Scaffold at the upper end of the Hall, where was a Chair, a Cushion, and a Block, all covered with Mourning; Then the Dean of Peterbo∣rough going to Prayers, she falling upon her Knees, and holding up her Crucifix in both hands, prayed with her Servants in Latine; she then kissed the Crucifix, and signing her self with the Cross, said, As thy Arms O Christ were spread forth upon the Cross, so embrace me with the open Arms of thy Mercy, and forgive me my sins: Then the Exe∣cutioner asking her pardon, she forgave him; and now her Woman helping off her outward Garments, and breaking forth into shricks and cries, she kissed them, signed them with the Cross, and bid them leave la∣menting, for now an end of her sorrows was at hand; and then shadowing her face with a Linnen cloth, and lying down on the Block she repeated that Psalm, In te Domine speravi, &c. In thee O Lord have I hoped, let me never be confounded, &c. at which words stretching forth her Body, her head was at two Blows cut off, and after Royally buried in the Cathedral Church at Peterborough, but since removed to VVestminster by her Son K. James. This end had Mary Q. of Scots in the 46 Year of her age, and of her Imprisonment in England 18. a Lady who might have been happy if she had not been a Queen, and perhaps a happy Queen too, if she had not been Heir to the Crown of England, since all her endeavours want∣ed success only from the fear of that Succession.
The County of Northampton is divided into 20 Hun∣dreds, wherein are 13 Market Towns, 326 Parish Churches, and is in the Diocess of Peterborough; It e∣lects 9 Parliament Men, and gives the Title of Earl to James L. Compton. NOTTINGHAMSHIRE hath Yorkshire on the North; Lincolnshire on the East, Leicestershire on the South, and Derbyshire on the West: It abounds in Li∣quorice, Fish, Fowl, Corn, Coals, Water and Grass; Nottingham the principal Town, which giveth name to this Shire, is seated on the side of an Hill, it is pleasant∣ly fighted, having on the one hand fair and large Mea∣dows by the Rivers side, and on the other Hills with a gentle and easie ascent: It is large and well built, stand∣ing on a stately climbing Hill, and for a spacious and fair Market-place compares with the best. Many strange Vaults hewed out of the Rock are seen in this Town, whereof those under the Castle are of special Note; one for the story of Christs passion, engraven on the Walls by David a K. of Scots, while he was Prisoner there; another wherein the L. Mortimer was surprised in the minority of K. Edward 3. still called Mortimer's Hole; these have stairs and rooms artificially made out of the Rocks: Al∣so in that Hill are Dwelling-Houses with winding Stairs, Windows, Chimneys, upper and lower Rooms, all wrought out of the hard Rock. The Castle was strong and kept by the Danes against the Mercians and West Saxons who jointly beseiged it; and for the further strengthen∣ing of this Town K. Edward the elder walled it about, whereof some parts yet remain from the Castle to the West-gate, and thence the foundation may be perceiv∣ed to the North, where in the midst of the way ranging with the Bank stands a Gate of Stone: Its Circuit con∣tained about 2220 paces. In the Wars between K. Ste∣phen and Maud the Empress, these Walls were thrown down by Robert Earl of Glocester, and the Town also suf∣fered much by Fire, but recovering its former estate, it hath ever since encreased in Beauty and Wealth.
Robbin Hood, if not by birth, yet by his chiefest abode, was this Countryman, Camden saith, he was the gentlest Thief that ever was; This Gallant, accompanied with little John, and 100 stout Fellows more, molested all Passengers on the highway, of whom our Poet gives this Character: From wealthy Abbots Chests and Churls abundant store What oftentimes he took he shar'd amongst the poor; No Lordly Bishop came in lusty Robbin's way, But that, before he went, his pass to him must pay: The Widdow in distress he graciously reliev'd, And remedi'd the wrongs of many a Virgin griev'd. But I cannot tell who made him a Judge, or gave him Commission to take where it might best be spar'd, and give where it most wanted. His Principal residence was in Sherwood Forrest in this County, though he had another haunt near the Sea, in the North-riding in York∣shire, where Robbin Hood's Bay still retaineth his name, not that he was a Pyrate, but a Land-Thief, and retired to these unsuspected Parts for security: One may won∣der he escaped the hands of Justice, dying in his Bed, for ought we find to the contrary; for the King setting forth a Proclamation to have him apprehended, it hap∣pened he fell sick at a certain Nunnery in Yorkshire, cal∣led Birkleys, and desiring there to be let Blood, was be∣trayed, and made bleed to death: It is said that he was of Noble Blood, at least made Noble, no less than an Earl, for some deserving services; but having wasted his Estate in riotous courses, meer penury forced him to take this course, in which he was rather a merry than mischievous Thief, and may be said to be honest∣ly dishonest, complementing Passengers out of their Purses, and never murdered any thing but Deer, and this popular Robber generally feasted the Neighbours with his Venison; he seldom hurt any man, never any Woman, spared the poor, and made prey only of the rich: He played his pranks in the Reign of Richard 1. a∣bout 1195. We must not forget that two Ayrs of Lan∣nards
were lately found in Sherwood Forrest; these Hawks are the natives of Saxony, and it seems being old, and past flying at the Game, were let, or did let them∣selves loose, where meeting with Lanarets enlar∣ged on the same Terms, the did breed together, and proved as excellent in their kind when as managed, as a∣ny which were brought out of Germany. In the last Year of Q. Mary 1568. such a marvellous Tempest of Thunder happened within a Mile of Notting∣ham, that it beat down all the Houses and Churches in two Towns thereabout, cast the Bells to the outside of the Church-Yards, and some Webs of Lead, writhen as if it had been Leather, were thrown 400 Foot into the Field. The River of Trent runs between the 2 Towns, the water whereof, with the mud at the bottom, was carried a quarter of a Mile, and cast against Trees; with the violence whereof Trees were pulled up by the roots, and cast 12 score off; also a Child was taken out of a Mans Hand, and then let fall 200 Foot off, of which fall it died; five or six men thereabout were slain, and neither flesh nor skin perished; also there fell some Hail-stones that were 15 Inches about. Upon Jul. 6. 1662. several Persons being in a field near Nottingham in Thundring Weather, saw a Wind-Mill at some distance from them which seemed to be all in a flame, insomuch that the spectators thought it had been burnt and consumed, but when they came near it, they found that it was not in the least prejudiced by the Fire, only one Rake head was burnt in the Mill. This County is divided into 8 Hundreds, wherein are 9 Market Towns, 168 Parish Churches, and is in the Diocess of York; It elects 8 Parliament men, and gives the Title of Earl to Charles L. Howard. NORTHUMBERLAND hath Durham on the South, Cumberland on the South-West, the Germane Oce∣an on the East, and Scotland on the North and East; the soil is not very fruitful; it chiefly abounds in Fish, Fowl and Sea-coal: This County was formerly reckoned
a Kingdom, and several Kings reigned therein, among whom we read of Ethelburg, who in the year 617. was King thereof, and married his Daughter to one Edwin a Pagan, this Edwin being envied and hated by Ethelfride another King, was forced to fly to Redwald King of the East Angles, who being both afraid and corrupted by Ethelfride, intended to betray Edwin into his hands, of which conspiracy he had notice by a friend, who per∣suaded him to fly and save himself, to whom Edwin said; Whither shall I fly that have already sought for shelter almost in all the Provinces of the Realm, and if I must needs be slain, I had rather the King should do it than some other unworthy Person; Edwin being afterward alone and solitary, there appeared one to him, saith the Reverend Bede, who said, I know well the cause of thy heaviness, what wouldst thou give him who would deliver thee from this fear, and reconcile thee to Redwald again? I would, said Edwin, give him all that ever I could make. And what, said the other, if I make thee a mightier King than any of thy Progenitors? Edwin answered as before; Then said the other, And what if I shew thee a better kind and way of life than ever was shewed to any of thy Ancestors, wilt thou obey my Counsel? Yes, said Edwin, I will do it with all my heart; Then the other laying his hand on his head, said, When this token happeneth to thee, then remem∣ber this time of Tribulation, and the promise which thou hast made, and the words which I have said unto thee; And so he vanisht out of his sight; presently after his Friend came to him, bidding him be of good cheer, For the heart of Redwald, said he, which formerly sought thy destruction, now by the mediation of the Queen is turned, so that he is resolved to keep promise with thee, and to protect thee whatever comes of it. Not long after Redwald raised a great Army in Ed∣wins quarrel, and gave Battle to Ethelfride on the bor∣ders of Mercia, where Ethelfride was slain and Edwin quietly made King of Northumberland yet all this while he remained a Pagan though Ethelburga his Queen, and Paulinus a learned Bishop continually persuaded him to imbrace the Christian Faith. Hereupon a new affliction fell upon him; for Quince∣linus,
and Kingilsus, Kings of the West Saxons, envying and hating Edwin, hired a Villain privately to murther him, who watching his opportunity when the King had but a few with him, run at him with an invenomed Sword, but one of the Servants interposing, received the wound through his own body, the King also being somewhat wounded by the Swords point which came through; the King lay long sick of this wound, but upon his recovery he raised a great Army, and went against those West Saxon Kings, who had so basely sought his dest∣ruction, and withal promised to Jesus Christ, That if he ob∣tained the Victory, he would presently be Baptized, and his Queen being then delivered of a Daughter, he caused it to be Baptized, with twelve more of his Family; Then advancing against his Enemies through the assist∣ance of Christ he obtained a notable Victory, putting the whole power of his Enemies to flight, and so retur∣ned home with Honour and Victory; yet did the Pomp and Glory of the world so dazle his Eyes, that he neg∣lected to perform his vow of being Baptized, for though he willingly heard Paulinus Preach, and gave over his Idolatrous Services; yet withal told him, That he could not suddenly leave the Religion of his Fore-fathers, nor be Baptized, but upon mature deliberation, and with the serious advice of his Council; Paulinus observing these difficulties, continually prayed to God on his behalf, whereupon the Vision of Edwin aforementioned, appeared to Paulinus, who watching his opportunity, came to the King, and laying his hand on his head, asked, him, If he remembred that Token, the King well remembring it, was so affected, that he was ready to fall down at Paulinus his feet; but Paulinus not suffering it, said unto him, Behold O King you have vanquished your Enemies, and have obtained your Kingdom, now perform your promise, which was to imbrace the Christian Faith, and to be obedient to our Lord Christ. The King after consultation with his Nobles, was himself with many more of his Subjects Baptized by Paulinus, and presently after all the Idols with their Altars were cast down and destroyed. We read likewise that during
the Heptarchy of the Saxons in England, there were two Kings in Northumberland called Ostrich, and Eaufride, who before their coming to the Crown had been in∣structed, and trained up in the Christian Religion by this worthy Bishop Paulinus, but after they came to Kingly Dignities, they renounced Christ, and returned to their filthy Idols; whereupon as they forsook Christ, he forsook them, and within one years space both of them were slain by Cadwalla King of the Brittains. In the Reign of K. Edward 1. 1276. there happened the greatest rot of Sheep in England that ever was known, which continued 25 years, and came, it was thought, by one infected Sheep of incredible greatness brought out of Spain by a French Merchant into Northum∣berland. In his Reign also John Duns, called Scotus, was born at Emilden in Northumberland, though others for his name say in Scotland, who being brought up in Merton Colledge in Oxford, was wonderful learned in Logick, and in the crabbed and intricate Divinity of those days, wherein he grew to such perfection, that he was called, The Subtile Doctor, he went from thence to Paris; where as he was once sitting at Table in respect of his learning, with Charles the Bald Emperor, and King of France, he behaved himself like a slovenly Schollar, not at all gen∣tilly; whereupon the King jestingly asked him Quid interest inter Scotum & Sotum; What is between a Scot and a Sot; he merrily, yet confidently answered, Mensa, The Table, as though the Emperor were the Sot, and he the Sot; Another time the Emperor gave him two large Fishes, and one little one in a Dish, bidding him carve to two other Schollars who were tall men, himself be∣ing little; Mr. John lays the two great Fishes on his own Trencher, and gives them the little one; The Em∣peror smiling said, In good Faith Mr. John you are no fair Car∣ver, yes, if it please your Highness, very fair, said he, for here (pointing to himself and the two great Fishes) be two great ones, and a little one; and so is yonder (pointing to the Schollars) two great ones, and one little one. He went thence to Colen where he died miserably, for being taken
with an Apoplexy, he was too hastily buried, and after a time revived, and making means in vain by a lamenta∣ble voice to call for help; after he had a long time knock∣ed his head against the Grave-stone, dashed out his Brains, and so yielded up his vital breath, as was after∣ward discovered, whereupon these Verses were made by an Italian. Quaecunque humani fuerant jurisque Sacrati, &c. All learning taught in Human Books, and couch'd in Holy Writ, Dun Scotus dark and doubtful made, by subtilty of wit: No marvel that to doubtful Terms of life, himself was brought, For with a wile and subtil Trick, death on his body wrought; Since she her stroke to kill outright would not to him vouch∣safe: So he poor Man (a piteous case) was buried quick in grave. In the 12th of K. Edward 3. 1339. a sudden inunda∣tion of water happened at Newcastle upon Tyne, which brake down a piece of the Town wall, of six perches in length, and near a place called Walkenew 120 Men and Women were drowned. In the reign of K. Hen. 4. 1402. Patrick Hepburn a Scottish-man with a considerable Army invaded Northumberland, making great spoil, and loading his Soldiers with prey and Prisoners, but in his retreat marching carelesly and licentiously, he was set upon by the Earl of Northumberland, himself and all the flower of his Army slain, and a multitude of common Soldiers taken Prisoners; in revenge whereof Archibald Dowglas with an Army of 20000 entred Northumberland, but in a place called Hamilden were encountred by the English under the Command of Henry L. Peircy, Sirna∣med Hotspur, and George E of March, who put them to flight, and after the slaughter of 10000 of them, took 500 Prisoners. In 1657. Machal Vivan, Minister of Lesbury in Northumberland being then 110 years old, and who for 40 years before could not read without Specta∣cles, yet then his sight was so renewed, that he could read the smallest print without the help of Spectacles;
and whereas he had lost most of his Teeth, yet now new ones came in their room, and having been long bald, his hair came again like the hair of a Child; he was also before very weak and feeble, but now his strength so much increased, that he was able to walk some miles, to study much, and to preach twice every Lords Day; This is a most certain and undoubted truth, which he himself confirmed under his hand to a Citizen of Lon∣don, who sent him a Letter on purpose to receive satis∣faction. The County of Northumberland is divided into six Wards, wherein are 6 Market Towns, 460 Parishes, and is in the Diocess of Durham; It elects 8 Parliament Men, and for many Ages gave the Title of Earls to the Family of the Peircies, which being extinct in the male line, George Fitz-Roy, third Son to the Dutchess of Cleaveland, is now Earl of Northumberland. OXFORDSHIRE hath Barkshire on the South, Glocestershire on the West, Buckinghamshire on the East, Warwick and Northampton shires on the North; The Bles∣sings both of the sweet breathing Heavens, and the fruitful soil of this County are so happy and delicious, that it is difficult to determine, which of them exceeds; it takes its name from that City which hath long been the glorious Seat of the Muses, the English Athens; It is said, this place was consecrated to the sacred Sciences in the time of the old Brittains, and that the Academy was translated from Greeklad, a Town in Wiltshîre to Oxford, as more pleasant and beautiful, both in respect of private Houses, and publick Buildings; Matthew Paris calls it the second School of Christendom, and the chief Pillar of the Catholick Church; and in the Council of Vienna it was ordained that in Paris, Oxford, Bononia, and Sala∣manca, Schools should be erected for the Hebrew, Greek, Arabick, and Chaldean Tongues, and that Oxford should be the general University for all England, Ireland, Scot∣land & Wales, soon after it so flourished, that in the Reign of K. Henry 3. 30000 Students were therein resident.
There are at present seventeen Colledges, seven Halls, and many fair Collegiate Churches therein, all adorned with stately Buildings, and enriched with great endow∣ments, noble Libraries, and most learned Graduats of all Professions; but the famous Library is that founded by Sir Thomas Bodley, formerly a Fellow of Mton Col∣ledge, who began to furnish it with Desks and Books a∣bout 1598. before which King Henry 8. was a good Benefactor thereto, who imployed Persons into divers parts of the world to collect Books, and from Constantino∣ple, by reason of the Patriarch thereof, he received a Ship laden with Arabick and Greek Books. Afterward it met with the liberality of divers of the Nobility, Prela∣cy and Gentry; William Earl of Pembroke procured a great number of Greek Manuscripts out of Italy, and gave them thereto; William Laud A. B. of Canterbury bestowed 1300 choice Manuscripts upon it, most of them in the Oriental Tongues; at last to compleat this stately and plentiful mansion of the Muses, there was an ac∣cession to it of above 8000 Books, being the Library of that most learned Antiquary Mr. John Selden. By the bounty of these noble Benefactors, and many others it is improved in such a manner, that it is a question whe∣ther it be exceeded by any other Library in the world. To this may be added the most Noble Theatre lately e∣rected by Dr. Gilbert Sheldon late A. B. of Canterbury, which is a building of as excellent Workmanship and curious painting and contrivance as any in Europe. In the year 1036. Canutus the famous Danish King dyed, and Hardiknute his Son by Queen Emma, being then in Denmark, Harold his elder, but Bastard Brother, stept into the Throne, for the Nobility meeting at Ox∣ford, the presence of the one out-weighed the absence of the other; so that they unanimously proclaimed him to be their King, & he was soon after solemnly Crowned at Oxford by Elnothus A. B. of Canterbury, though for some time he seemed unwilling to perform that service; for it is reported, that he having the Regal Crown and Scep∣ter in his possession, he swore he would not consecrate
any other for King, so long as any of Q. Emma's Children were living; For, said he, Canutus committed them to my Trust and Protection, and to them will I give my Faith and Allegiance; this Scepter and Crown therefore I here lay down upon this Altar, neither do I deny, nor deliver them to you, but by Apostolick authority I require all Bishops that none of them presume to take the same away; neither therewith to consecrate you for King, as for your self you may if you dare, usurp that which I have committed to God on this his Table: But not∣withstanding these thundring words were soon allayed with golden showers of Promises of his future just and religious Government, though they were soon forgot; but he did not long enjoy his Usurpation, dying 4 years after and was buried at Oxford. In 1258. a Parliament was called at Oxford, to recon∣cile the differences between K. Hen. 3. and his Barons; where the Lords and Bishops propounded several Ar∣ticles to the King, as, That he should faithfully keep and ob∣serve the Charter of Liberties which he had so often sworn to; That none should be Judges but those who would judge accord∣ing to right, without respect to poor or rich, &c. Then they again renewed their Confederacy, solemnly swearing, That neither for life nor death, nor love, nor hate, they would not be drawn to relent in their purpose, till they had cleared England, in which themselves and their Forefathers were born, from Ʋpstarts and Aliens, and had procured laudable Statutes; Yea these turbulent Nobles went farther, and it was con∣trived by the Bishops, saith M. VVestminst. That 24 per∣sons should be chosen to have the whole Administration of the Kingdom, and to appoint yearly all Officers, reserving only to the King the highest places in publick Meetings, and saluta∣tions of honour in publick Places: And to inforce these Ar∣ticles they were strongly armed, and provided with Forces, so that the King and Prince Edward were com∣pelled to swear to these Oxford Provisions, as they were called, for fear of perpetual Imprisonment, the Lords having published a Proclamation, That whosoever resisted them should be put to death: Then the Peers and Prelates rook their Corporal Oaths to be true to the King, and
that they would all stand to the Trial of their Peers; the Lords soon after required VVilliam de Valence the Kings half-Brother to deliver up a Castle to them; which he swearing he would not do, the E. of Leicester and the rest answered, That they would either have his Castle or his Head; The People seemed wholly theirs, which so heightened the Barons, that when Henry Son to the King of lmain refused the confederacy, or to take the Oath without his Fathers consent, they boldly told him, That if his Father himself did not hold with the Baronage of England, he should not have a furrow of Earth among them; These hot proceedings made all the Frenchmen about the King run from Oxford into France; yea Richard King of the Romans, the Kings Brother, coming to see the King and his Coun∣trey, the Barons grew suspicious of him, and therefore required him to take the following Oath: Hear all men, I Richard E. of Cornwall swear upon the holy Gospels to be faithful and forward to reform with you the Kingdom of Eng∣land, hitherto by the counsel of wicked men too much deform∣ed; and I will be an effectual coadjutor to expel the Rebels and Troublers of the Realm from out of the same: This Oath will I ob∣serve upon pain to forfeit all the Lands I have in England. These proceedings were too hot to hold; for a while af∣ter the Earls of Leicester and Glocester, two of the chiefest Confederates, falling at debate among themselves, the King took the advantage thereof, and in a little time re∣covered his former Power and Authority: But from hence we may observe that the Popish Nobility, Clergy nor Laity, have not at all times been so very Loyal to their Princes, as they would now make the ignorant be∣lieve. In the 20. Year of his Reign a Scholar of Oxford en∣deavouring to kill the King in his Camber at Woodstoock was taken, and afterward pulled to pieces with wild Horses. In 1400. a Conspiracy was contrived against K. Hen. 4. in the first Year of his Reign, in the house of the Ab∣bot of Westminster, who was a kind of a Book-Statesman, but better read in the Politicks of Aristotle than Solomon, who remembring some words of K. Henry when he was
only Earl of Derby; That Princes had too little and Religi∣ous men too much; and fearing lest now being King he should put his words into Act, he thought it better to use preventing Physick before hand, than to stand to the hazard of curing it afterward; and thereupon invited to his House several discontented Lords, as the Duke of Exeter, the Duke of Surrey, the Duke of Aumerle E. of Sa∣lisbury, E. of Glocester, Bishop of Carlile, Maudlin, one of K. Richard 2. Chaplains, and several other Knights and Gentlemen, who after Dinner conferring together, and communicating their disaffections to each other against K. Henry; they resolved at last to take away his Life, and contrived this way to do it; They would publish a solemn Justs or Turnament to be held at Oxford at a day appointed, to which the King was to be invited to honour it with his presence, and there while all men were intent upon the sport, they would have him mur∣thered. This Plot was resolved on, Oaths of secrecy were taken, and solemn Indentures for performing the agreed conditions were signed, sealed and delivered: The Justs are proclaimed, the King is invited, and pro∣miseth to come, secrecy on all hands is kept most firm∣ly to the very day: But though all other kept Counsel yet Providence would not; for it happened that as the Duke of Aumerle was riding to the Lords at Oxford against the day appointed, he took it in his way to go visit his Father the Duke of York; and having in his bosom the Indenture of Conspiracy, his Father as they sate at din∣ner chanced to spy it, and asked what it was; to whom his Son answering, It was nothing that any way concerned him; By St. George (saith the Father) but I will see it, and therewithal snatching it from him read it; and then with great fierceness spake thus to him: I see Traitor that idleness hath made thee so wanton and mutinous, that thou play∣est with thy Faith and Allegiance as Children do with sticks; thou hast been once already faithless to K. Richard 2. & now again art false to K. Henry, and art never quiet; thou knowest that in open Parliament I became Surety and Pledge for thy Allegi∣ance both in Body and Goods; and can neither thy Duty nor my
Desert restrain thee from seeking my destruction? In faith but I will rather help forward thine; And commanding his Horses to be made ready, he with all speed rid to the King to Windsor; but his Son knowing his danger rid in∣stantly another way, and came to the Court before him, where locking the Gates, and taking the Keys from the Porter, pretending some special reason, he went up to the King, and falling on his Knees asked his Pardon, the King demanding for what Offence, he then discovered the whole Plot; which he had scarce done when his Father came rapping at the Court Gates, and coming to the King shewed him the Indenture of Confederacy which he had taken from his Son: This amazed the King, and thereupon laying aside the seeing of the Just∣ing of others in jest, takes care that he be not justled out of the Throne in earnest: In the mean time the confe∣derate Lords being ready at Oxford, and hearing nothing of the Duke of Aumerle, nor seeing any preparation for the Kings coming, they were certainly persuaded their Treason was discovered, upon which considering their case was desperate, they apparel Magdalen, who was like K. Richard 2. in Royal Robes, and published that he was escaped out of Prison; next they dispatch Mes∣sengers to require assistance from the King of France, and then set forward against K. Henry at Windsor; but he be∣ing gone to London they could not agree what measures to take, and coming to Cicester the Bailiff of the Town couragiously set upon them, and with the assistance of the Townsmen beat their forces, killing the Duke of Sur∣rey and the E. of Salisbury, and taking divers Prisoners; a∣bove 30 Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen, with Magda∣len the Counterfeit being sent to Oxford to the King, and there executed. About this time also a strange piece of Treason is reported to have been practised against King Henry's Life, that there was found in his Bed-cloaths an Iron with three sharp spikes standing upright, that when the King should lie down he might thrust himself upon them: Thus ended this Treasonable attempt, soon after which followed the cruel murder of K. Richard 2. in Pomfract Castle.
In the Reign of K. Hen. 8. 1541. This ridiculous ac∣cident happened, as it is related by Mr. Fox, which shews what disorders may fall out through errour and mistake; There was one Mr. Mllary Master of Arts in Cambridge, who for opinions contrary to the Romish Church was convented before the Bishops, and then sent to Oxford, there openly to recant, and carry a Faggot, to the terrour of the Students of that University: The next Sunday he was brought into St. Marys Church, many Doctors, Divines, and Citizens being present; Dr. Smith preached the Recantation Sermon, and Mr. Mallery stood before him with his Faggot; about the midst of the Sermon there was suddenly heard in the Church the voice of one crying Fire, Fire, in the Streets; occasion∣ed by one that came by and saw a Chimney a fire in Al∣hallows Parish, and so passing by the Church, cried Fire, thinking no hurt, this sound of fire being heard in the Church, went from one to another, till at length it came to the Ears both of the Doctors and Preacher himself, who amazed with sudden fear, began to look up to the top and Walls of the Church, which others seeing look up also; then began some in the midst of the crowd to cry out, Fire, Fire, where saith one, and ano∣ther, In the Church says one, the Church was scarce pronounced, when in a moment there was a great cry, The Church is afire, the Church is afire by Hereticks: Then was there such horrour and confusion as cannot be ex∣prest, which raised such a Dust as seemed like Smoak indeed; this and the outcries of the People made them all so afraid, that leaving the Sermon they began all to run away; but such was the press of the multitude crowd∣ing together, that the more they laboured the less they could get out; for they stuck so fast in the door that there was no moving forward nor backward; they ran to another little Wicket on the North side, and from thence to another door on the West; but there was so great a throng, that with the force thereof the great Bar of Iron, which is almost incredible to speak, was pulled out and broken with the strength of mens hands,
and yet could not the door be opened for the vast con∣course of People: At last being past hope of getting out, they in great amazement ran up and down, crying out, That the Hereticks had conspired their death: One said he plainly heard the Fire, another affirmed he saw it, and a third swore he felt the melted Lead dropping down upon his Head and Shoulders; none made more noise than the Doctor that preached, who first of all cried out in the Pulpit, These are the subtleties of the Hereticks a∣gainst me, Lord have mercy upon me, Lord, &c. In all this consternation nothing was more feared than the melting of the Lead, which many affirmed they felt dropping on their Bodies: The Doctors finding Authority and force could not prevail, fell to Intreaties, one offering 20 pound, another his Scarlet Gown, so that any man would pull him out though it were by the Ears: A Pre∣sident of a Colledge pulling a Board out from the Pews, covered his Head and Shoulders therewith against the scalding Lead, which they feared much more than the falling of the Church; one thought to get out at a Win∣dow, and had broken the Glass, and got his Head and one Shoulder out, but then stuck fast between the Iron Bars, that he could move neither way; others stuck as fast in the doors, over the heads of whom some got out: A Boy was got up to the top of the Church door, and seeing a Monk, who had got upon the Heads of men, coming toward him, with a great wide cowl hanging at his Back, the Boy thought it a good opportunity to make his escape, and handsomely conveyed himself into the Monks cowl; the Monk got out with the Boy in his cowl, and for a while felt no weight nor burden, but at last feeling his cowl heavier than ordinary, and hearing a voice behind him, he was more afraid than while in the throng, verily believing that the Evil Spirit which had set the Church on Fire had flown into his cowl, whereupon he began to play the Conjurer; saying, In the name of God, and all Saints I command thee to declare what thou art at art behind my Back; I am Bertrams Boy, said the other, But I, said the Monk, adjure thee in the name
of the inseparable Tity, that thou wicked Spirit do tell me who thou art, and from whence thou comest, and that thou go hence: I am Bertrams Boy, said he, and I pray good Ma∣ster let me go: When the Monk perceived the matter he took the Boy out, who ran away as fast as he could; In the mean time those without the Church seeing all things safe, made signs to them within to be quiet; but the noise being so great that no word could be heard, these signs increased their fear, supposing all the Church on fire without, and that they were bid to tarry within, and not to venture out, because of the dropping of the Leads, and the fall of other things; this trouble lasted many hours, but at length the mistake was discovered; the next day and Week following there was an incre∣dible number of Bills set upon the Church doors to en∣quire for things lost, as Shoes, Gowns, Caps, Purses, Girdles, Swords and Money, for in this hurry there were few but through negligence or forgetfulness left something behind: The poor Heretick who by this di∣sturbance had not done his sufficient Pennance, per∣formed the rest of it the next day at the Church of St. Frideswide. In the 6. of K. Edw. 6. at Middleton-Stony 11 Miles from Oxford, a Woman brought forth a Child with two perfect Bodies from the Navel upwards; the Legs for both the Bodies grew out at the midst where the Bodies joined, and had but one issue for the Excrements of them both, they were Women Children, and lived 18 days. In the 19. of Q. Elizabeth 1577. when the Judges sate at the Assizes in Oxford, and one Rowland Jentis a Bookseller was questioned for speaking opprobrious words against the Queen, suddenly there arose a Pestilent damp and savour, whether coming from the noisome smell of the Prisoners, or from the infectious ground is uncertain, but almost every one who was there present (except Women and Children) died within 40 hours after, and the con∣tagion went no further; there died the L. chief Baron Bell, the Sheriffs, several other Gentlemen, almost all the Jury-men, and about 300 other persons. In 1650.
Dec. 14. Ann Green, a person unmarried was indicted arraigned, cast, condemned and executed for killing her Bastard Child, at the Assizes at Oxford; after some hours her body being taken down, and prepared for dissection in the Anatomy Schools, some heat was found in her, which by the care of the Doctors was improved to a perfect recovery; which some believe was a mira∣culous Token of her Innocence, she affirming both before and after her Execution, that the Child fell from her sud∣denly into the Vault without any design to destroy it; she lived many Years after, was married, and had three Children. The Family of the Popes is considerable in this Coun∣ty, the Predecessor thereof being very active under the L. Cromwell in dividing rhe Abby-Lands, whereby he made his fortune; there are many descendants from him in Oxfordshire, of very competent Estates, by the same Token that when K. James came to the House of Sir T. Pope, when his Lady was lately delivered of a Daughter, the Babe was presented to the King with this Paper of Verses in her hand, which because they pleased the King I hope they will not displease the Reader: See this little Mistriss here Did never sit in Peters Chair, Nor a Tripple Crown did wear, And yet she is a Pope. No Benefice she ever sold, Nor did dispence with sins for Gold, She hardly is a sev'night old, And yet she is a Pope. No King her Feet did ever kiss, Or had from her worse looks than this, Nor did she ever hope To saint one with a Rope, And yet she is a Pope. A Female Pope, you'l say a second Joan, No sure, she is Pope Innocent or none.
The County of Oxford is divided into 14 Hundreds, wherein are 15 Market Towns, 280 Parish Churches, and is in the Diocess of Oxford; It elects nine Parlia∣ment Men, and gives the Title of Earl of Aubrey de Vere, the twentieth Earl of that Family. RƲTLANDSHIRE hath Lincolnshire on the East, Nottinghamshire on the South, and Leicestershire on the West and North; the form thereof is round, and no longer in compass, than a Horseman can easily ride round in one day, upon which some will have this Shire named from one Rutt, who accordingly rid round it; but others will have it called Rutland, of the redness of the soil, because the earth doth stain the wool of their Sheep into a reddish colour; The air is good both for health and delight, subject neither to extremity of heat nor cold, nor is it greatly troubled with foggy mists; The soil is rich for Tillage and Corn; Woods there are plenty, and some of them imparked; the Hills are scored with Heards of Cattle, and Flocks of Sheep, the Vallies besprinkled with many sweet springs, so that they abound both in Grain and Pastures, neither is there any thing wanting for mans conveniency even in this little County, which is but 14 miles long, 12 broad, and 42 miles circumference. The Ancient Inhabitants were subdued by Publius Ostorius under the yoke of the Emperor Claudius, and after the departure of the Romans, the Saxons made it part of their Mercian Kingdom; This County was be∣queathed by the will of Edward the Confessor to his Queen Edgith, and after her Decease to his Monastery at Westminster; The Family of the Ferrers were at first here seated, as the Horshoe, whose badg then it was, doth witness, for in the Castle, now the Shire Hall, just over the Judges Seat, there is an Iron Horshoe fixed, curiously wrought, containing five foot and an half in length, and the breadth proportionable. Near Burley House, the ancient Seat of the Harringtons, standeth Oakham a fair Market Town, which Lordship the Lord
Harrington enjoyed, with a Priviledge that was some∣what extraordinary; which was this, That if any of No∣ble Birth came within the Precinct of that Lordship, they should forfeit as an Homage, a Shoe from the Horse whereon they rid, or else to redeem it with a Sum of Money; in witness whereof there are many Horshoes nailed upon the Shire Hall door, some of large size and ancient fashion, others new, and of our present Nobility, whose names are stam∣ped upon them, and many without names; That such homage was due it appears, because there was a suit in Law commenced against the Earl of Lincoln, who refused to forfeit his penalty, or pay the Fine. Little Jeffery was born in the Parish of Oakham, his Father was a very proper man, broad shouldred, and chested, though his Son never arrived at a full Ell in Stature; his Father who kept and ordered the baiting of Bulls for George Duke of Buckingham, a place requiring a strong body to manage it, presented him at Burleigh in the Hill to the Dutchess of Buckingham, being then nine years old, and scarce a foot and half in height, upon which Jeffery was instantly heightned, not in stature, but condition, from one degree above Raggs into Silk and Sattin, and had two tall men to attend him; he was without any deformity, wholly proportionable, whereas Dwarfs are often Pigmies in one part, and Giants in ano∣ther; and yet though he was the least that England ever saw, he was a proper Person, compared to him that Sabi∣nus saies was seen in Italy, who was a man of a ripe Age, not above a Cubit high, and was carried about in a Parrots Cage; this Jeffery was once presented in a cold baked Pye to King Charles, and Queen Mary at an enter∣tainment, and ever after lived in great plenty at Court, wanting nothing but Humility, having a high mind in a low body, which made him that he did not know himself, and would not know his Father, for which by the Kings Command he was severely corrected; He was though a Dwarf no Coward, being a Captain of Horse in the Kings Army in the late Civil Wars, and afterward went over to follow the Queen in France, where being provo∣ked
by Mr. Crofts, who accounted him the object, not of his Anger, but contempt, he shewed to all, that every fly has his sting, and they must be small indeed who can∣not do mischief, especially since a Pistol is a pure level∣ler, and puts both Dwarf and Giant into equal capacity to kill and be killed, for shooting this Mr. Crofts he was Imprisoned. It is said, that the Kings great Porter one time in a Mask at Whitehall, in the middle of his dance pulled little Jeffery out of his Pocket, to the surprize of the Spectators, and so I leave Jeffery the least man of the least County in England; yet I find in a late Author, that there is now, or was very lately, one Philippa French, born at Milcomb in Oxfordshire, of 36 years of Age, and a married Woman, who hath all parts proportionable, and of good shape, and yet wants half an inch of a yard in height, which is somewhat lower than Manius Maximus, or M. Tullius, who, as Varro reports, were each but two Cubits high, and yet were Gentlemen and Knights of Rome, but higher than Canopas the Dwarf of Julia, Neice to the Emperor Augustus, who, Pliny says, was but two foot and an hand-breadth high, but whe∣ther he were at his full growth, or proportionable, he doth not tell us. The County of Rutland is divided into five Hundreds, wherein are 2 Market Towns, 48 Parish Churches, and is in the Diocess of Peterborough; It elects only 2 Parlia∣ment Man for the County, and gives the Title of Earl to John L. Mannours. SHROPSHIRE hath Cheshire on the North, Worcester, Hereford and Radnorshires on the South, Mont∣gomery and Den bigh shires on the West; It produceth Iron, Pitcoal, Barley, Wheat, Cattle, Wood and Cloth; The Shire Town is Shrewsbury, which for Circuit, Trade, and Wealth doth surpass Ludow, and is inferior to few of our Cities; her buildings are fair, her Streets many and large, her Inhabitants rich, her Trade chiefly in our Staple Commodities of Cloth and Freezes. In the reign of King John 1197. Robert of Shrewsbury was
Bishop of Bangor, whom this King afterward in War with Leoline Prince of Wales took Prisoner in his own Cathedral Church, and enjoyned him to pay 300 Hawks for his ransome, which seemed not so proper, that a man of Peace should be ransomed with Birds of Prey; yet we read that in the Reign of K. Charles 1. a Nobleman was ransomed at the Isle of Rhee for a brace of Grey∣hounds; neither may it be wondred how the Bishop procured them of a sudden, since many were brought from Norway, and he might also furnish himself out of Pembrokeshire; This Bishop seemed somewhat humorous by a passage in his Will, wherein he ordered his Body should be buried in the midst of the Market place of Shrewsbury, which may be imputed either to his humili∣ty, or his foresight, that the fury of the Wars then be∣tween the English and Welch would fall fiercest on Chur∣ches as the fairest Market, & that men preferring their pro∣fit before their Piety, would preserve their Market Places, though their Churches were destroyed; He died 1215. In 1402. K. Henry 4. was made sensible that a Crown can hardly sit easy upon the head, if it be not set right on at first, for now a new conspiracy was hatched against him, the Piercies Earls of Northumberland and Worcester, with Henry Hotspur began at this time to fall off from K. Henry, because at their request he denied to redeem their Kinsman Mortimer from Glendours slavery; & that he denied them the benefit of such Prisoners as they had taken of the Scots at Hamilden, whereupon they themselves procured Mortimers delivery, and then entred into a League Of∣fensive and Defensive with Glendour, whereby they a∣greed to divide the Kingdom into three parts between them, wherein Glendour persuaded them they should ful∣fill a Prophecy, as though K. Henry were the Mouldwarp cursed of Gods own mouth, and they were the Lyon, the Dragon, and the Wolf who should divide the Land among them; all England from the Severn to Trent South and Eastward was to be the portion of the Earl of March; all Wales and the Lands beyond Severn West∣ward to be Owen Glendours, and all the remainder of the
Land from the Trent Northward to be the L. Piercies; n the mean time K. Henry not unacquainted with the Conspiracy, published by Proclamation, that Mortimer Carl of March had voluntarily caused himself to be ta∣ken Prisoner; that the Rebels having him in their Custo∣dy, might pretend some colour for their Conspiracy, nd therefore he had little reason to take care for his eliverance; Hereupon the Piercies assisted with a Com∣pany of Scots with the E. of Stafford, Richard Scroop Archbishop of York, and many others resolved to join with Glendour, but first they framed certain Articles a∣gainst the King, and sent them to him in writing. That King Henry had falsified his Oath given at his lan∣ding, swearing that he came only to recover his Inheritance, and would not meddle with the King or Crown; That most Traitorously he had taken Arms against his Soveraign Lord King Richard 2. had Imprisoned him, and then most bar∣barously caused him to be murdered, and without any Title or Right had procured himself to be made, and crowned King; That ever since the Murder of King Richard he had unjustly kept the Kingdom and Crown from his Cousen Edmund Mor∣timer Earl of March to whom of night it belonged; That when no want compelled him he had imposed divers subsidies and Taxes upon the People to their great grief, of which they would willingly, but durst not complain; That no Justice could be expected from him, since contrary to his Coronation Oath he had by Letters sent into divers Counties, procured such Parliament Men to be chosen, as upon occasion might serve his turn; And lastly, that whereas for Affinities sake he ought to have ranso∣med his Cosen the Earl of March from his strait and loath∣some Imprisonment, he not only denied it, but falsely and untruly published, that he became a voluntary Prisoner; for all which and many other causes, they utterly defied Henry as a Traytor and Ʋsurper, and as an Enemy vowed his destruction, and the restoring the said Earl to his Right. K. Henry could not but know that all these Articles against him were true, yet since this knowledge did not hinder him from seek∣ing the Crown when he had it not; it would less hinder: him from seeking to keep it now he he had it; and if
he were able, being a private man to get it from a King, he was likely to be more able being now a King to keep it from private Men; and as for any objections of Con∣science he could answer them all by this, That if his Title were good against King Richard by his resignation, it was good against Mortimer by his swearing Allegiance; and upon these grounds, with a mind as confident as if all Circumstances were on his side, he raised an Army, and marched toward the Lords, taking care they might by no means join with the Welch, and in Battlefield near Shrewsbury he encountred them, in which Fight though the Scots, and Henry Hotspur shewed mu valour, yet the Victory rested on the Kings side, Hotspr being slain, the Earl of Worcester taken Prisoner, with several others; On the Kings part the L. Stafford who that day revolted to him, and nine who were that morning Knighted were slain, and 1600 common Soldiers, but of the Conspira∣tors above 6000; The King was once unhorsed by Dow∣gss, who in his presence slew Sir Walter Blunt, who was that day attired in all things like the King; Dowglas be∣ing afterward taken Prisoner by the fall of his Horse, was by the Kings Command for his valour set at liberty without ransom; In this Battel the young Prince Henry, though wounded in the face with an Arrow, lost not his Courage, but continued fighting still; After this Victory the King caused publick thanks to be given, and then ordered the Earl of Worcester to be beheaded, and ma∣ny others to be hanged, drawn and quartered; after which he sent Prince Henry into Wales with his whole Army, but before his coming all Owen Glendours Army forsook him, so that lurking in the Woods for fear of being taken he was there miserably famished: Many of his Associates were taken and put to death, and thus in the fourth year of his Reign all the great troubles of this K. Henry ended. In the 5th of Edward 6. 1552. the sweating sickness broke out first in Shrewsbury, and then in the North, and after it grew more extream in London, so that in the first Week there died 800 Persons; it was so violent that
The Groaning Tree in Lincolnshire Pa. 137. The Lady riding naked through Coventry Pa. 207.
it took away men in 24 hours, sometimes in 12. the 2 Sons of Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk died thereof, one an hour after another, so that both of them died Dukes. This Disease was proper to the English, and followed them wheresoever they were in foreign parts, but seized upon none of any other Country. Thomas Par was born at Winnington in this County, in the Reign of K. Edward 4. 1483 At 80 Years of Age he married his first Wife Jane, and in 32 Years had but two Children by her, one living but a Month, the other but a few Years, be∣ing 120 Years old he fell in love with Katherine Milton, and with remarkrble strength got her with Child, he lived to 150 Years; Two Months before his death he was brought to London by the Earl of Arundel, he slept a∣way most of his time, and is thus characterized by an Eye-Witness. From head to heel his Body had all over A quickset, thickset, natural, hairy cover. Change of Air, Diet, or the trouble of many Visitants are thought to hasten his end. He died Nov. 15. 1634. and was buried in the Abby Church. Shropshire is divided into 15 Hundreds, wherein are 15 Market Towns, 170 Parish Churches, and is in the Diocess of Hereford and Litchfield; it elects 12 Parliament Men, and Shrewsbury gives the Title of Earl to Charles L. Talbot, the 12 of that Family. SOMERSETSHIRE hath the Severn Sea on the North, Glocester on the North-East, Wiltshire on the East, Devonshire on the West, and Dorsetshire on the South: It abounds in Cattle, Chease, Lead and Corn, of which it is so very fruitful that the Inhabitants tell you, several single Acres of Land in this shire will serve a good round Family with Bread for the Year, as affording a Bushel of Wheat for every week therein, which is not easily to be parallel'd in other places; This Country is famous for three Cities, Bath, Wells, and Bristoll; the first takes its name from the hot Baths, which some call The Waters of
the Sun; It is recorded that Bladud the Son of Lud, King of the Brittains in the year of the world 3100 built this City, and conveyed the admirable virtues into these Waters by Magick Art, and that he was so much ad∣dicted to Necromancy; as he wrought Wonders there∣by, insomuch that he made himself Wings, and attempt∣ed to fly like Dedalus, but the Devil ever a deceiver, for∣sook him in his Journey, so that he fell down and broke his Neck; This City is seated in a plain, invironed round about with Hills almost of one height, out of which certain Rills of fresh water flow continually to the great benefit of the Citizens; within the City there bubble or boyl up in three several places hot springs of Water, of a Sea-coal colour, sending up from them thin vapours, and a kind of strong scent withal, by reason it is strained through veins of Brimstone, and a clammy kind of Earth called Bitumen. These Springs are very Medicinal, and of great virtue to cure Bodies overchar∣ged and benummed with corrupt Humors, by their heat causing much sweat; They are much frequented by Persons of all Qualities, and almost for all diseases; of al these the Cross Bath is of a most mild and temperate Nature, having 12 seats of Stone in the sides of it, and is inclosed within a wall; The second distant about 200 paces is much hotter, whence called the Hot Bath, adjoyning to which is the Spittle or Lazar House, for the relief of poor diseased Persons; The third and grea∣test is called the Kings Bath, walled also round about with 32 Seats of Arched Work therein; This City is fortified with Walls, wherein are set Antique Images, and Roman Inscriptions, and hath in it a fair large Cathe∣dral Church. The City of Wells so called from the Springs or Wells that boil up there, hath a very beautiful Cathedral, near which there is a Spring called St. Andrews Well, from whence comes such a confluence of Water, that it soon makes a swift brook; The Church is throughout very beautiful, but the Frontispiece of the West end is very excellent, for it riseth up from the foot to the top all
of Imagery carved in Srone of a curious and antique fashion very artificially embowed. Bristow hath the Ri∣ver Avon passing through it, and was incompassed with a double wall; it is beautiful with Buildings publick and private, and hath common Sewers or Sinks made to run under ground for the conveyance of all filthiness; There are within the City and Suburbs 26 fair Chur∣ches, whereof 18 are Parish Churches; There is no Dunghill in all the City, nor Sink, all being conveyed under ground; they carry all upon fleds without Carts; the water at the Key sometimes ebbs and flows 40 foot in height. This City is Populous, Rich and well Inhabi∣ted, and next to London and York may justly challenge the Superiority, having a very commodious Haven, which admits Ships under Sail into the very bosom thereof. In this County K. Arthur was buried; for being mur∣dered by Mordred, at Cambula near Tintagel Castle in Cornwall as is aforementioned, he was carried from thence to Glastenbury in Somersetshire, and was there buri∣ed in 542. and 600 years after was found and taken up on this occasion; King Henry 2. in the last year of his Reign being at Pembroke, chanced to hear certain Songs in praise of the worthy Acts of King Arthur, sung by a Welch Bard or Poet, to his Harp, wherein it is mentioned, that he was buried in Glastenbury Church-yard between two Pillars there standing; whereupon King Henry cau∣sed the ground to be digged, and at seven foot deep was found a huge broad Stone, whereon was fastened a lea∣den Cross; on the lower side of the Lead in rude and barbarous Characters was written, Hic jacet, &c. Here lies King Arthur buried in the Vale of Avelona; And digging nine foot deeper his Body was found in the Trunk of a Tree, the bones very large, and in his skull were per∣ceived ten wounds, one very great and plain; His Queen Guenever a Lady of excellent beauty, lay by him, whose Hair curiously plaited, and of a golden colour shewed perfect and whole till touched, but then it fell to ashes. The Cross of Lead with the Inscription was taken off,
and kept in Glastenbury Church, and the bones of King Arthur were put into a fair Tomb of Marble, and his Queen laid at his feet in the same Church; but were all raced at the general suppression of Abbies by Henry 8th. In the 22. of Queen Elizabeth 1580. a strange Appa∣rition happened in Somersetshire, 60 Parsonages all clo∣thed in black, a furlongs distance from those that beheld them, who continued some time and then vanished; and immediately another strange company in like man∣ner, number and colour appeared in the same place, and encountred each other, and then vanished; and the 3d time appeared that number again all in bright Armour, and encountred one another, and so vanished away; This was examined before Sir George Norton, and swore by four honest men, that saw it, to be true; In Her 38th year Dec. 5 being Sunday, a great number of People being Assembled in the Cathedral Church of Wells in Somersetshire, in the fore-noon during Sermon, a sudden darkness fell among them, and a great Tempest with Thunder and Lightning followed, which threw the People on the ground, and all the Church seemed to be in a flame, and there was a lothsome stink, some Stones were stricken out of the Bell Tower, and the wires and Iron of the Clock melted; the Tempest being over, and the people recovering their senses, some of them were found marked with strange Figures on their Bodies, and their Garments not perished, neither were any marked who stood in the Chancel. In January 1648. there was seen a great fiery Meteor in the Air near Bristol on the South side of the City for divers nights together, long in shape, and shooting out fiery streams East and West; this happened saith Mr. Clark, a week before the death of K. Charles 1. and I had it from an Eye witness. In August 1655. a Carpenter living at Pennard in this County, went to a Fair at Lidford not many miles off to set up some Stalls; and left his Wife and four small Children at home; but at his return he found all his four Children murthered, (the eldest being
about nine years old) and put into a Chest; it was sup∣posed to be done by his Wife the Childrens own Mo∣ther, because she was not to be found. Wockey hole in Mendip Hills near two miles from Wells is very remarkable; It is an underground concavity, admirable for its spacious Vaults, stony Walls, and creeping Labyrinths. I have been at but never in this wonderful Cave saith Dr. Fuller, and therefore must use the description of a Learned Eye-witness; Entring and passing through a great part of it with many Lights, among many other strange Rarities worth observing, we found, saith he, the water which continually dropped from the roof of the Rock made some impression in it, but was not turned into Stone, as appeared by the shape, colour and hardness thereof, it being of a more clear and glassy substance than the Rock itself, though doubtless in time it will turn to the same substance, and thereby the Rocks will be increased. John Courcy, Baron of Stoke-Courcy in this County was the first Englishman who subdued Ʋlster in Ireland, and therefore deservedly created Earl thereof; He was after∣ward surprized by Hugh Lacy (Corrival for his Title) sent over into England, and imprisoned by King John in the Tower; after this a French Castle being in controver∣sy, was to have the Title thereof tryed by Combate, the Kings of England and France beholding it; Courcy who was of a lean lank body with staring Eyes, is sent for out of the Tower to undertake the Frenchman, and because weakned by Imprisonment, a large allowance of Victuals is given him to recruit his strength; The Mon∣sieur who was to fight with him, hearing how much he eat and drank, and guessing at his courage by his sto∣mach, took him for a Canibal who would devour him, and was therefore afraid to encounter him; Afterward the two Kings being desirous to see some proofs of Cour∣cies strength, caused a steel Helmet to be laid on a block before him; Courcy looking about him with a stern and grim Countenance, as if he intended to cut it with his Eyes as well as with his Arms, cut the Helmet in two pieces at one blow, striking his Sword so deep into the
wood also, that none but himself could pull it out again; Being demanded the cause why he looked so sternly, he replied, Had I failed of my purpose, I would have killed the two Kings, and all the rest in the place, words well spoken because well taken, saith Dr. Fuller, all Persons present being then highly in good humor. He died in France 1210. The County of Somerset is divided into 42 Hundreds, wherein are 30 Market Towns, 385 Parish Churches, and is in the Diocess of Bath and Wells; It elects 18 Par∣liament men, and gives the Title of Duke to Charles L. Seymour; Bath the Title of Earl to John L. Greenville, and Bristol to John L. Digby. STAFFORDSHIRE hath Cheshire on the North, Darbyshire on the East, Warwick and Worcester shires on the South, and Shropshire on the West. The Commodities of this County consist chiefly in Corn, Cattle, Alabaster, Wood, Iron, Pitcoal and Fish, where∣of the River Trent is very full; Stafford Town was built by King Edward the Elder, incorporated by King John; Litchfield is far greater, & of much more fame, it is a very ancient City known to Reverend Bede by the name of Lichidfield, that is, The Field of dead Bodies, by reason of the number of Christians there Martyred in the bloody Persecution of Dioclesian; The City is low seated, of a good largeness and Fair withal, divided into two parts by a shallow Pool of clear water, which are joined by two Bridges made over them, having sluces to let out the water; the South part is the greater, consisting of di∣vers Streets, having in it a School, and an Hospital of St. John, founded for the relief of the Poor; The farther part is the less, but beautified with a goodly Cathedral Church, which is incompassed with a very fair Wall like a Castle, this Church mounteth up on high with three Pyramids or Spires of Stone, making an excellent shew, and for elegant and proportionable building yieldeth to few Cathedrals in England, but by the late confusions it was much defaced.
In the 35th of Queen Elizabeth 1591. there was a great Tempest in Staffordshire whereby the shaft of the Steeple in Stafford Town was rent in pieces all along through the middle, and thrown upon the Church, wherewith the roof was so shattered, that a 1000 pound would not repair it; Many Houses and Barns were over∣thrown in divers places in that Shire; In Cauck Wood a∣bove 3000 Trees were blown down, and likewise more than 50 Steeples; soon after there was a strong North∣wind, and a very great rain which continued 24 hours. In 1662. July 30. between two and three a clock in the afternoon there happened a great storm at Eardly in this County, accompanied with Thunder, which made such a continual strange noise in the Air, that it struck a ter∣ror into all that heard it, of which there was no inter∣mission for a long time; also there fell a shower of Hailstones as big as Hens Eggs, some 5, 6, and 7 Inches about: I my self, saith the Relator, measured one after the Storm was over, and a good part of it melted, yet then it was five inches about; There was a Gentleman who measured some of them by a good big Watch, and they were full as big as it; within half a mile of this place the Hailstones lay upon the ground a quarter of a yard thick; there was a Man getting in a Load of Hay, and his Horses, as well as all others, would not be ruled, but ran about as mad, which forced the man to continue in the storm, and his back, shoulders and arms were black and blew with the Hail; it did much hurt to the Barley, and struck it out of the Ear as if threshed; it beat down other Corn as it stood on the ground all to pieces, it also killed abundance of Fowl, Sheep, and Lambs; some of the Hailstones tasted Salt, like Sal Prunella, and were kept long after without be∣ing at all wasted; The people were very much amazed, and the continual strange noise in the Air was very ter∣rible to them. In the year 1669 July 31. There was a great dark cloud seen to arise in the East not far from Litchfield, which drawing nearer to the City, came over it about
noon, and then appeared to be a huge number of Ant∣flies, so thick that they darkned the Sky; and it being Market day there, they fell down in great abundance, so that they filled the very Houses; The People both within and without doors were much bitten or stung with them, yea the very Horses were so disturbed with them, that they ran about as if wild; The Market Peo∣ple were so plagued with them; that they were forced to pack up and be gone; People were driven out of the Field from their Harvest work, and thus they continued 2 or 3 hours, multitudes of them falling dead, and lying so thick in the Streets, that whole handfuls of them might be taken up and the People swept them in heaps; The remainder took their flight Northward, and mo∣lested other places; This was attested saith Mr. Clark, by many Eyewitnesses. The County of Stafford is divided into 5 Hundreds, wherein are 18 Market Towns, 130 Parish Churches, and is in the Diocess of Coventry and Litchfield; It elects 10 Parliament Men. SƲFFOLK hath Norfolk on the North, Cambridg∣shire on the West, the German Ocean on the East, and Essex on the South; It abounds in Corn, Cattle, Pastures, Cloth, Wood, Sea-fish and Fowl; their Cheeses are Traded into Germany, France and Spain; Ipswich is the only Eye of this Shire both for Commerce and Buil∣dings, it hath been formerly walled as by the ruines ap∣pears, but probably raised by the Dants, who in 991. plundered all the Sea-Csts, and in the year 1000. they laid the Streets of the Town desolate, and the Houses on heaps; yet after recovering both breath and beauty, her buildings from Soke Church in the South to St. Mar∣grets in the North, now extend to 1900 paces, and from St. Hellens in the East to St. Matthews Church in the West is 2120 paces. It hath 12 Parish Churches, be sides six gone to ruine. In the Reign of King Henry 2. 1180. near Orford in his County certain Fishers took in their Nets a Fish, having the shape of a man in all parts, which Fish was
kept by Bartholomew de Glanvile in the Castle of Orford above six months, he spake not a word; all manner of meats he gladly eat, but most greedily raw Fish when he had pressed out the Juice; he was oftimes brought to Church, but never shewed any sign of Devotion, at length being not well looked to, he stole to the Sea, and was never seen after; In the Reign of K. John 1216. One casualty happened, which we might count disaste∣rous, if it had not had relation to our selves; For Hugh de Bones coming to aid K. John with 60000 French∣men, they were all cast away at Sea, to whom the King had granted Norfolk and Suffolk to Inhabit. Thomas Wool∣sey was born in Ipswich, where a Butcher a very honest man was his Father, though a Poet be thus pleased to descant thereon. Brave Priest whoever was thy Sire by kind, Woolsey of Ipswitch ne're begat thy mind. Yet he was sometimes upbraided with the meaness of his birth, even when he was Cardinal, for one time a Nobleman who was very merry, but very extravagant, having newly sold a Town with an hundred Tenements, came huffing into the Court with a new suit of Cloths, and said, Am not I a mighty man that have an Hundred Houses on my back; which Cardinal Wolsey hearing, re∣plyed, You might have better imployed it in paying your debts; Indeed my Lord, quoth he, you say well, for I remember my Lord, my Father owed my Master your Father three-half-pence for a Calves head, hold your hand here is two-pence for it; He was one of such vast undertakings, as the History there∣of would almost require a volume; He was made Car∣dinal of St. Cicely, and died heart-broken with grief at Leicester 1530. without any Monument, which made Dr. Corbet a great wit of his own Colledge (Christ-Church in Oxford) thus complain: And though from his own store Woolsey might have A Palace or a Colledge for his Grave;
Yet here he lies inter'd as if that all Of him to be remembred were his fall. Nothing but Earth to Earth; no pompous weight Ʋpon him; but a pebble or a quait; If thou art thus neglected what shall we Hope after death, that are but shreds of thee? It is reported that being afraid of the Anger of K. Henry 8. he took such a strong Purge, that his rotten body being not able to bear it, he died thereof, and that his body was as black as pitch, and so heavy, that six men could hardly carry it, and stunk so intolerably, that they were forced to bury him in the night, at which time there was such a hideous Tempest, that all the Tor∣ches were put out, and withal such a stink, that they were glad to throw him into his Tomb, and there leave him. In the 2. of Queen Mary 1555. in August at a place in Suffolk by the Seaside all of hard stone, and pebble, between Orford and Aldborough, where never grass grew, or earth was ever seen, there suddenly sprung up with∣out any Tillage or Sowing, so great abundance of Pease, that the poor gathered above an 100 quarters, yet there remained some ripe and some blossoming which brought down the price of Corn, there being a great dearth be∣fore by reason of unseasonable weather; In the 10th of Queen Elizabeth 1568. 17 monstrous Fishes were taken at Downham Bridge near Ipswich some of them being 27 Foot in length. In her 19th year Aug. 4. being Sun∣day about 10 before noon, whil'st the Minister was Preaching at Bliborough in Suffolk, happened a strange and terrible Tempest of Lightning and Thunder, which struck through the wall of the Church almost a yard deep into the ground, throwing down above 20 Per∣sons, rending the wall up to the Vestry, cleaving the door, tearing the Timber, and breaking the Chains of the Steeple; the People that were struck down lay above half an hour before they recovered, a Man and Boy were found stark dead, and the rest miserably scor∣ched.
In the 6th of K. James 1609. St. Edmundsbury be∣ing by chance set on fire, it consumed 160 Houses but by the Kings bounty giving 500 load of Timber, and the relief of the City of London, it was soon rebuilt in fair∣er Manner than before. Suffolk is divided into 22 Hundreds, wherein are 29 Market Towns, 575 Parish Churches, and is in the Dio∣cess of Norwich; It elects 16 Parliament Men, and gives the Title of Earl to James L. Howard, as Clare doth to Gilbert L. Holles. SƲRREY hath Middlesex on the North, Kent on the East, Sussex on the South, Hant and Bark shires on the West; the Skirts and Borders of this County are rich and fruitful, but the inward parts thereof very hun∣gry and barren, though by reason of the clear Air, and clean ways, it is full of many Gentile Habitations; it hath good Box, Walnuts, Fullers Earth and Corn; ex∣cellent Tapestry is also used at Moreclack in this County; Kingston was formerly the seat of many Kings, and Gil∣ford hath been much larger, being formerly the Royal Mansion of divers Saxon Monarchs; There are two most beautiful Palaces in this Shire, Richmond and Nonsuch; The Medicinal Waters at Ebsham or Epsum, are much frequented, which were found out about 1618. upon this occasion; one Henry Wicker in a dry Summer, and great want of water for Cattle, discovered some water standing in the footing of some Beast, he at first sus∣pected it to be their Urine, but was quickly confuted by the clearness thereof, he therefore with his staff dig∣ged a square hole about it, and so departed; returning next day he could hardly find the place in so wide a Common; at last he found the hole running over with most clear water, which the Cattle, though very thirsty, would not drink of, as having a Mineral Tast. It is con∣cluded to run through some veins of Allom, and at first was used only for healing outward sores, which it per∣formed, but since hath been inwardly taken, and with good effect in many diseases; The convenient distance from London addeth to the reputation of these waters,
and no wonder if Citizens coming thither from the worst of Smoaks into the best of Airs, find in themselves a per∣fect alteration. There is a River in this County which at a place cal∣led the Swallow sinketh into the Earth, and riseth again some two Miles off near Leatherhead, which the Coun∣try People say was experimented in a Goose, which was put in and came out again alive, though without Feathers: Nor may we forget a Vault nigh Rygate of ve∣ry fine sand, capable of receiving 500 men, which Ca∣stle under ground was in ancient time the Mansion of some great Person, having several Rooms therein: If it be meerly natural it doth curiously imitate Art, if pure∣ly artificial it doth most lively represent Nature. We read that K. Edward 3. that glorious Conqueror, after he had reigned 50 Years and 4 Months, being in the 60th Year of his Age, 1377. fell into his last sickness at Richmond, where when he was observed to be drawing on, his Concubine Alice Pierce came to his Bed side, and took the Royal Rings from his Fingers; and leaving him gasping for breath, went away; The Knights, Esquires, and Officers of his Court, rifled whatever they could, and hasted away also; only a poor Priest lamenting the Kings Misery, that amongst all his Counsellors and servants there was none to assist him in his last Moments, entred his Chamber, exhorting the King to lift up his Eyes and Hands to God, to repent him of his sins, and to implore the Mercy of Heaven, and its forgiveness; the King had before quite lost his Speech, but at these words taking strength, uttered his mind, though imperfectly, in these matters, and made signs of contrition, wherein his voice and speech failed him, and scarce pronouncing this word Jesu, yielded up the Ghost. In 1491. K. Hen. 7. held solemn Justing at Richmond, which continued for a Month; wherein Sir James Parker running against Mr. Hugh Vaughan, by reason of a faulty Helmet he was struck into the month at the first course, so that his Tongue was thrust into the hinder part of his Head, and died immediately in the place.
In 1602. Q. Elizabeth feeling some Infirmities of old Age and Sickness, retired her self to Richmond, at which time, as a sad Omen, she commanded the Ring to be fi∣led off her Finger, wherewith she was solemnly at first inaugurated into the Kingdom, and since that time had never taken it off, it being grown into the Flesh in such a manner, that it could not be drawn off without filing; at the beginning of her sickness the Almonds of her Jaws began to swell, her Appetite to fail her, and she was ve∣ry melancholy, which some imputed to her loss of Es∣sex, others because she heard that divers of the Nobility sought the favour of the K. of Scots, adoring him as the rising Sun, and neglecting her; but however a numness seised her, and she would discourse with none but Dr. Whitgift A. B. of Canterbury, with whom she prayed fer∣vently till her Speech failed her; which was a day be∣fore her death; she being so ill, it was thought fit the Secretary and Admiral should go to her, and know her mind concerning a Successour; to whom she answered, My Throne hath been the Throne of Kings, I would have no mean Person succeed me: The Secretary requesting her to speak more plainly, I will, said she, have a King succeed me, and what King but the King of Scots, my nearest Kins∣man? After this the Archbishop exhorting her to think upon God, That I do, said she, nor do my thoughts ever wander from him: And when her Tongue no longer ser∣ved her, it was evident by the lifting up of her Hands and Eyes, that her thoughts were fixed upon him; and so on the 24 of March, being the last day of the Year 1602. she yielded up her Soul to God, when she had lived 69 Years, 6 Months, and 7 Days, whereof she had reigned 44 Years, 4 Months. Her Body was embalmed, wrapped in Lead, and brought to White-Hall, from whence April 28. following, it was buried at Westminster Abby; at which time the City of Westminster was sur∣charged with a multitude of all sorts of People in the Streets, Houses, Windows and Leads, who came to see the Funeral; and when they beheld her statue lying in Royal Robes, with a Crown upon her Head, there was
such a general sighing, groaning and weeping, as the like hath not been seen nor known in the memory of man, neither doth any History mention any People, time, or state to make the like lamentation for the death of their Soveraign. It is said there were 1600 Mourners in black at her Funeral. Thomas Cromwell was born at Putney in Surrey, his Fa∣ther was a Blacksmith, and therefore could bestow no great matter on his Education, yet such was his wit and activity, that he made his own Fortune; He was in the service of Cardinal Wolsey, after whose death he is recommended to K. Henry 8. who finding the quickness of his understanding advised with him in many diffi∣cult matters, and upon occasion he informed the King how his Princely Authority was abused by the Pope and his Clergy, who being sworn to him, were afterward dispensed with and sworn anew to the Pope, so that he was but half a King, &c. He also shewed him, that the Clergy by their Oath were fallen into a Premunire, and their Goods, Lands, Chattels and Possessions were fallen to the King; which he afterward demonstrated to the Bishops to be true, who gave the King above an hun∣dred thousand pound for Composition; after this by his persuasion the King suppressed all the Abbies and Mona∣steries in England, and commanded the Bible to be Printed and read in the English Tongue, and the Bishop of Romes Power was by several Statutes abolished in England; howeuer divers of the Popish Bishops and Clergy privately endeavoured to restore it again, which he was alwaies aware of, and therefore calling his Ser∣vants together, he discovered to them in what a slippe∣ry condition he stood, considering the variable affections of the King, and the malice and subtlety of his Popish Adversaries, and therefore required them to be very circumspect, least by their default any quarrel might be pickt against him; and soon after some false witnesses accused him of Heresy, and of speaking some words a∣gainst the King; yet his Enemies durst not bring him to his answer, nor try him by his Peers, but procured an
Act of Attainder, whereby he was condemned before he was heard, and the King not long after his death repen∣ted his hast, wishing That he had his Cromwell alive a∣gain; When he came upon the Scaffold at Towerhill, he spake thus to the People; I am come hither to die, and not to purge my self as some perhaps may expect I should; I am by the Law condemned to dye, and I thank my Lord that hath appoin∣ted me this death for mine offences, for I have alwaies lived a Sinner, and offended my Lord God, for which I ask him hearty forgiveness; It is not unknown to many of you that I was a great Traveller, and being but of mean Parentage was called to high Estate, and now I have offended my Prince, for which I heartily ask him forgiveness, beseeching you to pray with me to Almighty God that he will forgive me, And once again I de∣sire you to pray for me, that so long as life remaineth in this flesh, I may waver nothing in my Faith; Then kneeling down on his knees, he made an excellent Prayer, concluding thus. Grant O most merciful Father that when death shall shut up the Eyes of my Body, yet the Eyes of my Soul may still be∣hold and look upon thee, and when death hath taken away the use of my Tongue, yet my heart may cry and say unto thee, Lord into thy hands I commend my soul, Lord Jesus receive my soul, Amen. Having ended his Prayer, he made a Divine ex∣hortation to those on the Scaffold, and then quietly gave up his Spirit, 1541. Upon his Monument was In∣graven Cromwell, surnamed the Great, whom Wolsey first raised from the Forge to eminent good Fortunes, whom Henry 8. used as his Instrument to suppress the Popes Suprema∣cy, and to dissolve Religious Structures, whom he advanced to the highest pitch of Honour and Authority, whom he cast down suddenly, and bereft both of Life and Dignities, lies here Inter∣red. Surrey is divided into 13 Hundreds, wherein are seven Market Towns (besides Southwark, which keeps the same with London) 140 Parish Churches, and is in the Diocess of Winchester; It elects 14 Parliament Men, and gives the Title of Earl to Henry L. Howard who is also Duke of Norfolk.
SƲSSEX hath Surrey on the N. Kent on the E. the Sea on the S. and Hantshire on the W. The Soil is rich, but ill for Travellers in the Winter, the Land lying low, and the ways being deep; the middle Tract is adorned with Meadows, Pastures, and Cornfields, the Sea-Coast with Hills called the Downs, abundantly yielding both Corn and Grass, and the Northside is overshadowed with Groves and thick Woods, called the Weald, where sometimes was the famous Wood called Andradswald, 120 miles in length, memorable for the death of Sige∣bert King of the West Saxons, who being deposed, was stabbed in this place by a Swine-heard. Chichester in this County is a large and beautiful City, very well walled a∣bout, a little River running hard by it on the West; It hath four Gates, from whence the Streets lead directly, and cross themselves in the middle, where in a fair Market House of Stone, supported with Pillars round a∣bout the Market is kept; between the West and South Gates stands the Cathedral Church, not very great, but handsom and neat, having a Spire Steeple of Stone ri∣sing a great height; It is the residence of the Bishop, and has often suffered by Fire; It was first built by Cissa, the second King of the South Saxons, wherein he kept his Royal Court. Lewes seems to contend with Chichester for Populousness, largeness, and buildings, where King Athelstan appointed a Mint for his Money; and William de Warren Earl of Surrey, who came into En∣gland with William the Conqueror, built a strong Castle, and founded an Abby there; It is recorded that Edw. 1. in the 8th year of his Reign 1282. sent out his Writ of Quo Warranto, through England, to examine by what Title men held their Lands and Estates, which brought him in much mony, till John E. Warren, Successor to this William, being called to shew his Title, drew out an old rusty Sword, and then said, he held it by that, and by that he would hold it till death; which caused the King to desist from proceeding any further in that Project. In King Henry 3. time, the same John Earl Warren had
the confidence to kill Zouch Allen, Lord Chief Justice with his own hands upon the Bench in Westminster-Hall; so much did he presume upon his great favour with the King. In the Barons Wars with this King, the Lords got into this Castle of Lewes, and not far off fought a great Battle wherein the King had his Horse shot under him, and was taken Prisoner with his Brother and Son. In the year 1058. Harold putting to Sea in a small Boat for his pleasure from Boseham his Mannor in Sussex, and having unskilful Marriners, was driven upon the Coasts of Normandy, where by Duke William he was de∣tained till he had sworn to make him King of England, if Edward the Consessor died without Children; yet af∣terward without any regard to his Oath he placed him∣self on the Throne. Duke William hereupon arrived at Pemsey, and with his Sword revenged the Perjury of Harold at Battle in this County with such severity, that there fell 67974 English Men that day, the Conqueror putting himself thereby into full possession of the whole Kingdom; over which he Reigned 22 years, being victorious both at home and abroad; but to discover the vanity of all earthly things, it sometimes happens, that some great Persons are not suffered to go to rest when their Bed is made, and others are pulled out of those Lodgings whereof they had once taken peaceable possession; as appears very fully in the following Relati∣on. No sooner had the soul of this victorious Prince, William the Conqueror left his Body, but that his dead Corps was abandoned by his Nobles and Followers, and by his meaner Servants he was stript of Armour, Vessels, Apparel, and all Princely Furniture, his naked Body left upon the floor, and his Funerals wholly neg∣lected, till one Harlwin a poor Country Knight under∣took to carry his Corps to St. Stephens Church at Caen in Normandy, which the dead King had formerly founded; At his entrance into Caen, the Covent of Monks came forth to meet him, but at the same instant there happe∣ned a great Fire, so that as his Corps before, so now his
Hearse was forsaken of all men, every one running to quench the Fire; That done, they return and carry the Corps to the Church; The Funeral Sermon being en∣ded, and the stone Coffin set in the Earth in the Chan∣cel, as the body was ready to he laid therein, there stood up one Anselm, and forbid the Burial, alledging, that that very place was the floor of his Fathers House, which this dead King had violently taken from him to build this Church upon, Therefore, said he, I challenge this ground, and in the name of God forbid, that the Body of this Oppressor and dispoyler be covered with the Earth of mine Inheritance;; They were therefore forced to compound with him for an hundred pounds; now was the body to be laid in that stone Coffin, but the Tomb proved too little for the Corps, so that pressing it down to gain an entrance, the Belly not bowelled, brake, and sent forth such an intolerable stink among the Assistants at the Funeral, that all the Gums and Spices suming in their Censers could not relieve them, but all in great amaze∣ment hastened away, leaving only a Monk or two to shuffle up the Burial, which they performed with all possible hast, and so got to their Cells; yet was not this the last of those Troubles that the Corps of this great Prince met with, but some years after at such time as Caen was taken by the French, his Tomb was rifled, his bones thrown out, and some of them by private Sol∣diers brought as far as England again, so that if we con∣sider his many troubles in life, and after his death, we may well think that notwithstanding all his greatness, a very mean man could hardly be persuaded to change Fortunes with him. In his Tomb there was found a plate of Brass, whereon this Epitaph was Ingraven. He that the sturdy Normans rul'd and or'e the English reign'd, And stoutly won, and strongly kept what so he had obtain'd; And did his valiant Enemies by force bring under awe, And made them under his Command live subject to his Law: This great King William lieth here, intomb'd in little Grave; So great a Lord, so small a House sufficeth him to have.
Sussex is divided into six Rapes, wherein are 65 Hundreds, 16 Market Towns; 312 Parish Churches, and is in the Diocess of Chichester; It abounds much in cast Iron; elects 20 Parliament men, & gives the Title of Earl to Thomas L. Leonard, Married to Ann Filz-Roy, eldest Daughter to the Dutchess of Cleaveland. WARWICKSHIRE hath Leicester and Nor∣thampton shires on the East; Oxford and Glocestershires on the South, Worcester on the West, and Staffordshire on the North thereof; it hath a very good air and soil, wanting nothing for the pleasure or profit of man, and yieldeth plenty of Corn, especially The Vale of the Red Horse, so called from the shape of a Horse cut out in a red hill by the Inhabitants thereabout; it abounds also in Malt, Iron, Wood and Wool; It hath many fair Towns, and some of them hardly to be matcht in England, the chie∣fest whereof is Coventry, so called a Tribus Conventibus, from the three Covents that were in it, commodiously seated, and has been fortified with very strong walls, with 13 stately Gates, and 18 Towers for defence; a little River runs through it; many fair and beautiful Houses are therein, among which there rise up on high two Churches of rare Workmanship, in the midst is the Cross or Pillar of Stone of very curious and cost∣ly Architecture; The Citizens of this Town having in former Ages highly offended their great Lord Leofrick, had their Priviledges seized upon, and themselves op∣pressed with many heavy burdens and Taxes; But his Wife the Lady Godiva pitying their condition, continual∣ly interceeded with her Lord for their Release and Freedom, and that with such importunity, that it could hardly be determined which was greatest, his hatred, or her love; at last the Earl being overcome with her con∣tinual intercessions, he granted her desire, but upon such a condition as he thought she would never perform, which was, that she would ride stark naked through Coventry, at noon-day from one end to the other; though thi was very hard for a modest Lady, yet however she
thankfully accepted his Grant, and stripping her self o all her Attire, let loose the large and beautiful Tresse of her Hair, which on every side so covered her naked Body, that no part thereof was uncivil to be seen, where∣by she redeemed their former Liberties, and freed them from their grievous Impositions. Warwick is the next Town of Account and Com∣merce in this Shire, it standeth over the River Avo, upon a steep and high Rock, and all the Passages to it are wrought out of the very stone, the River on the Southside is checked with a most sumptuous and stately Castle standing high upon a Rock, invironed with a strong wall, whereon is a noble Gatehouse, and three high strong Towers called Caesars Tower, Guyes Tower, and the Iron Tower, in all which are very fine Lodgings, and a great Bulwark; There are two fair Churches i the Town, and it is adorned with handsome Houses, which the Poet thus describes; A place of strength and health; in the same Fort, You would conceive a Castle and a Court; The Orchards, Gardens, Rivers, and the Air, May with the Trenches, Rampires, Walls compare. It seems no Art, no Force can intercept it. As if a Lover built, a Soldier kept it. Twelve miles hence is Alcester, a very Ancient Market Town, which formerly was much bigger, probably it was a Garrison of the Romans, since in Plowing and digging many ancient Copper pieces of Mony are found to this day, one of which, saith Mr. Clark, of Vespasians with Judea Capta, or Judea Conquered, upon it I have by me; He proceeds; When I was Rector there, about 1638. my Neighbour whose Housewas next the Church-yard, be∣ing about to dig a Celler, I lent him one of my men to as∣sist him, who digging about four foot deep, they met with two Urns or Earthen Pots, not far asunder, in one there was nothing but Ashes, in the other were Me∣dals set edg-long as full as it could be thrust; my man judging it to be only that Copper Mony which they
find so oft about the Town, set it carelesly upon the Ground by him; and the Town consisting of Knitters, some of them coming to see the work, picked out some pieces of this Money; at last one brought in a piece to me, which upon Trial I found to be silver, and there∣upon sent for the Pot into my house, and being loth to break the Pot, with the help of a Chisel I got all out of it; in the midst thereof I found 16 pieces of Gold, as bright as if they had been lately put in, and about 800 pieces of Silver, and yet no two alike, and the latest of them above 1400 years old; they contained the whole History of the Roman Empire, from Julius Caesar till af∣ter Constantine the great; each of the Silver pieces weigh∣ed about 7 d. and each of the Gold about 15 or 16 shil∣lings; I took some few of the Silver, and one of the Gold pieces; and sent the rest to the Lady of Robert L. Brook, who is Lord of the Town. At Shugbury in this County, at a place called Barnhill, the precious stone Astroites is found in great plenty, which being put into Vinegar, will move up and down till they have composed themselves into a Triangle. At Offchurch was the Palace of Offa the great Mercian King. At Lemington, though far from the Sea, a spring of Salt-Water boileth up; and at Newnham is a Fountain whose Waters are very sovereign against the Stone, Green-Wounds Ulcers and Impostumes, and being drunk with salt loosens, but with sugar binds the Body; it was found out by one Charles Daws in 1579. who having received a great wound in his Arm by a Hatchet, it was perfectly cured in a few days, by washing it in this Water; one special effect thereof is, that it turneth wood into stone. Not far from Warwick is Guy Castle, where the famous Guy Earl of Warwick after many valorous exploits reti∣red, and led an Hermits Life, and was at last buried in a Chappel there, which remains to this day. Michael Drayton, the famous English Poet, was born at Athelston in this County, and died 1621. of whom this Epitaph was made.
Do pious Marble, let thy Readers know What they, and what their Children owe To Drayton's name, whose sacred Dust We recommend unto thy Trust. Protect his memory, and preserve his story, Remain a lasting Monument of his Glory; And when thy Ruines shall disclaim To be the Treasurer of his Name, His Name that cannot fade must be An everlasting Monument to thee. The County of Warwick is divided into 5 Hundreds, wherein are 15 Market Towns, 158 Parish Churches, and is in the Diocesses of Litchfeild and VVorcester; it e∣lects 6 Parliament Men, and gives the Title of Earl to Edward L. Rich. WESTMORELAND hath Cumberland on the West and North, Lancashire on the South, Yorkshire and Durham on the East: It is Western Moorish Country, from whence it hath its Name. The soil thereof for the most part is barren, and can hardly be made fruitful by the Industry of the Husbandman. Kendal the chief Town hath a very great Trade and Resort, with two broad and long streets crossing each other, herein are made excel∣lent cloths, which are very well esteemed of throughout the Kingdom: Places most memorable are Verterae and Appleby, famous in the time of the Romans, but since ve∣ry much decayed: There is mention but of one Mona∣stery in this County, near the River Loder, where there is a Spring that Ebbs and Flows many times a day, and it is thought that some notable and famous Exploit hath been performed in that place, there being many huge stones in the form of Pyramids, some 9 Foot high, and 14 Foot thick, ranged directly on a Line at an equal distance for a Mile together, which seems to have been Placed there as a memorial, but of what Action there is not the least remembrance. At Ambleside near the upper corner of Winander Meer,
which is a great Water, there appears at this day the Ruines of an ancient City, which by the Brittish Bricks, the Roman Money often there sound, by paved High∣ways leading to it, and other circumstances seems to have been a work of the Romans; The Fortress fenced with a Ditch and Rampart was in length 132 Ells, and in breadth 8. In the River Can, near Kendal, are two Wa∣terfals, where the Waters descend with so great a down∣fall as causes a mighty noise, from whence the neigh∣bouring Inhabitants prognosticate of the Weather; for when that on the North sounds more clear, and with a louder Eccho in their Ears, they certainly look for fair Weather to follow, but when that on the South doth the like, they expect foggy Mists and Rain, Henry Curwin was born in this County, and made by Q. Mary A. B. of Dublin: It is observable, that though many of the Protestant Clergy in Ireland were imprison∣ed and much molested, yet no one Person of what qua∣lity soever did suffer Martyrdom therein, and hereon depends a remarkable story which hath been solemnly avouched by the late Reverend Dr. Ʋsher A. B. of Ar∣magh; that about the 3d of Q. Mary a Pursivant was sent with a Commission into Ireland, to impower some emi∣nent Persons to proceed with Fire and Fagot against poor Protestants: It happened by Divine Providence this Pursivant coming to Chester, lodged in the House of a Protestant Inn-keeper, who having some secret notice of his business, privately took the Commission out of his Cloak-Bag, and put the Knave of Clubs in the room of it; some Weeks after the Pursivant appeared before the Lords of the Privy Council at Dublin, of whom Bishop Curwin was Principal, where he produced a Card in∣stead of a pretended Commission; for which affront they caused him to be committed to Prison, as supposed to be done on design to deride them, where he lay 4 Months, and at last with much ado got his Inlargement; then o∣ver he returned into England, and quickly getting his Commission renewed, goes with all speed into Ireland again; but before his Arrival there, he is prevented
with the News of Q. Marys Death, and so the Lives of many, and the Liberties of more poor Servants of God were preserved. This Bishop Curwin died 1567. Westmoreland is divided into 4 Wards, wherein are 8 Market Towns, 26 Parish Churches, and is in the Dio∣cesses of Chester and Carlile; it elects 4 Parliament Men, and gives the Title of Earl to Charles L. Fane. WILTSHIRE hath Glocestershire on the North, Berkshire and Hampshire on the East, Dorsetshire on the South, and Somersetshire on the West, both for Hills and Valleys abounding in Wood, Sheep, Wool, and all things else; Salisbury is the chief City therein, in which there is a stately and beautiful Cathedral, with an ex∣ceeding high spired Steeple, not founded on the ground, but on 4 Pillars; The Windows of the Church, as they reckon them, answer just in number to Days, the Pil∣lars great and small to the Hours, and the Gates to the Twelve Months of the whole Year, according to the Poet. How many Days in one whole Year there be So many Windows in one Church we see; So many Marble Pillars there appear As there are hours throughout the fleeting Year, So many Gates as Moons one Year doth view: Strange Tale to tell, yet not so strange as true. It hath a Cloister beside on the South side, for large∣ness and fine Workmanship inferiour to none, joined to the Bishops Pallace; on the other side is an high Bell-Tower exceeding strong, standing by itself; There are Rills and Sewers of Water run through every street of the City, which is very well inhabited and accomodated with plenty of all things, especially Fish; it is adorned with a very stately Market place, wherein standeth their Common Hall of Timberwork, a very handsome build∣ing. About 6 miles from Salisbury upon the Plains, is to be seen a huge and monstrous piece of Work; for within the circuit of a Pit or Ditch there are erected in
the manner of a Crown, certain mighty and unwrought stones, whereof some are 20 Foot high, and 7 broad, upon the heads whereof others like overthwart pieces do bear, and rest cross-wise with Tenents and Mortesses, so that the whole frame seemeth to hang, whereof it is commonly called Stone-henge. Near Badmington is a place called The Giants Cave, whereof there are 9 in number, some deeper than others, being two great long stones on both sides; and a broad one to cover them, both these are thought to be some ancient works either of the Ro∣mans, Danes, or Saxons. In the Year 975. Queen Elfrida having barbarously murdered K. Edward her Son in Law, to set up her own Son K. Etheldred, afterward repenting of her cruel Fact, and to pacifie the crying Blood of her slain Son, built the two Monasteries of Amesbury and Worwel, in Wiltshire and Hamshire, in which she lived and died with great Penance; but these and the like Foundations being built with Rapine and Blood; have felt the Woe pronounced by the Prophet, That the Stone in the Wall shall cry, and the Beam out of the Timber shall answer it, woe to him that buildeth a Town with Blood, and establisheth a City with Iniqui∣ty. In the Year 1154. K. Stephen seizing into his hands the Bishop of Salisburys Castles, and Goods, a Synod was called by the Popes Legate to right him, where the King was summoned to appear, to answer for his im∣prisoning of Bishops, and depriving them of the r Goods, which being a Christian King he ought not to do. The King by his Attorney answers, That he had not arrested him as a Bishop, but as a Servant, who ought to make up his Accounts about his Employments. This answer caused some Debates, they not presuming to excommunicate the King without the Popes leave, and therefore they fell from Authority to Submission, falling at his Feet, and beseeching him to have pity on the Church, and not make dissention between the Kingdom and the Priest∣hood; which shews the great magnanimity and courage of K. Stephen, that he was able to pull down the high Spi∣rits of the Prelates in that time; this rich Bishop of Sa∣lisbury,
who built the Castle of the Devizes, and divers o∣ther strong Castles in this County, being now thrown out of all his Grandeur, was so swallowed up of over much grief, that he ran mad, and spake and did he knew not what. In 1275. K. Edward 1. calls a Parliament at Salisbury, without admitting of any Church-men to sit therein, and Marchian his Treasurer acquainting him, That in Churches and Religious Houses there was much Treasure to be had, if it were lawful to take it: He made no scruple of it, but cau∣sed it to be seized, and brought into his Exchequer; but finding that he had thereby displeased the Clergy, he bid them ask what they would have; who requi∣red the Repeal of the Statute of Mortmain, which hindered devout People at their death from giving all their Estates from their Children to the Church; To which the King answered, That it was a Statute made by the whole Body of the Realm, and therefore it was not in his Power, who was but one Member of that Body, to repeal it. In another Parliament at Salisbury, this King requires cer∣tain of his Lords to go to the Wars in Gascoign, who all ex∣cusing themselves, the King in a great rage threatned they should either go, or he would give their Lands to others that should: Upon this the Earl of Hereford High-Constable, and the Earl of Norfolk Marshal of England, declare, That if the King went in Person, they would at∣tend him, otherwise not: Which answer offended the King more, and being urged again, the Earl Marshal protest∣ed, he would willingly march in the Front, if the King went himself: But the King told him he should go with any other without him; I am not bound to do so, (said the Earl) neither will I take this Journey without you: The King swore by God he should either go or hang; And I swear by the same Oath, said the Earl, I will neither go nor hang, and so without leave departs; shortly after the two Earls assembled many Noblemen, and 1500 Souldiers where∣with they stand on their own Guard; but the King be∣ing obliged to go to France, condescends to their De∣mands, and desires them, that since they would not o,
they would do nothing prejudicial to himself and the Kingdom in his Absence; and upon his return the King solemnly confirmed the two great Charters, which ap∣peased the present disturbances. In the 4. of Q. Mary 1454, exemplary Justice was done upon a great Person; for the Lord Sturton, a man much in the Queens favour, because he was an earnest Papist, was, for a Murther committed by him, arraign∣ed and condemned, and he with 4 of his Servants were carried to Salisbury, and there in the Market-place hanged, he having this favour to be hanged in a silken Halter, and his servants in places near adjoining where the Murther was committed. Not long since, saith Mr. Clark, a Soul∣dier in Salisbury in the midst of his Cups, drinking and carousing in a Tavern, drank a Health to the Devil, say∣ing, That if the Devil would not come and pledge him, he would not believe there was either God or Devil, whereupon his Companions being struck with horrour, hastened out of the Room, and presently after hearing a hideous noise and smelling a stinking savour, the Vintner ran up into the Chamber, and coming in he missed his Guest, and found the Window broken, the Iron Bar in it bowed and all bloody; but the man was never heard of afterward. Wiltshire is divided into 29 Hundreds, wherein are 23 Market Towns, 304 Parish Churches, and is in the Diocess of Salisbury; It elects 34 Parliament-Men, and gives the Title of Earl to Charles L. Pawlet, as Salisbury doth to James Lord Cecil, and Marleburgh to William L. Ley. WORCESTERSHIRE hath Staffordshire on the North, Warwickshire on the East, Glocestershire on the South, Hereford and Shropshire on the West; It is a Coun∣ty rich and populous, the soil is very fertile, producing besides Corn, Cattle and Wood, abundance of Apples and Pears, which yield pleasure to the sight, and also profit; for with the juice they make great quantity of Sider and Perry, both very pleasant and wholsome Drinks; The City of Worcester is most pleasantly seaed,
and is admirable both in respect of the Antiquity and Beauty thereof; It standeth in a place rising somewhat with a gentle ascent by the Rivers side, which hath a fair Bridge with a Tower over it; it is well and strongly walled, and the Inhabitants are much enriched by the Trade of Clothing, It is 1650 paces about the Walls, through which 7 Gates give entrance, with 5 Watch Towers for defence, there are in it divers Churches be∣side the Cathedral, which is seated on the Southside of the City, and is an excellent fair building, adorned with the Tombs and Monuments of K. John, Pr. Arthur, and divers of the Beauchamps. This City was set on Fire, and almost every one of the Citizens slain by K. Hardicknute 1041 for killing the Collectors of this Danish Tribute, yet was presently repaired; but in 1113. a sudden Fire hap∣pened no body knew how, which burnt down the Ca∣stle, and the Cathedral Church, likewise in the troubles of K. Stephen it was twice defaced by the Flames, and made hopeless of Recovery, yet out of these a new Phoenix a∣rose, and her Buildings were raised more stately than before, especially the Cathedral. At Droitwitch are three Fountains of Salt water, divided by a little Brook of fresh water passing between them, by the boiling of which salt water they make pure white saltt Edmund Bonner, alias Savage, was born in this Coun∣ty, his Father was John Savage, a rich Priest in Cheshire, his Mother was this Priests Concubine, a dainty Wench in her Youth, and a jolly Woman in her Age; she was sent out of Cheshire to cover her shame, and laid down her burden at Elmly in this County, where this bonny bouncing Babe Bonner was born, in the Reign of K. Hen. 7. He was bred a Batchelor of the Laws in Oxford, and in K. Hen 8. time he was made Doctor of the Laws, Archdea∣con of Leicester, Master of Arts, Master of the Faculties under Archbishop Cranmer, and imployed in several Em∣bassies beyond Sea; All this time Bonner was not Bonner, being as yet meek, merciful, and a great man for the L. Cromwell, as appeared by some tart printed Repar∣tees betwixt him and Stephen Gardiner. Indeed he had a
Body and an half, but corpulency without cruelty is no sin, and toward his old Age he was overgrown with fat, as Mr. Fox, who is charged to have persecuted Persecutors, with ugly Pictures doth represent him; not long after he was consecrated Bp. of London, and under K. Edward 6. being ordered to preach publickly concerning the Re∣formation, his faint and cold expressions thereof mani∣fested that he had a mind rather to betray it, for which he was deprived of his Benefice; being restored to his Bishoprick under Q. Mary, he caused the death of twice as many Martyrs as all the Bishops of England beside, justly occasioning the Verses made upon him. If one for shedding Blood for Bliss may hope, Heavens widest gate for Bonner doth stand ope. No body speaking to Bonner. All call thee cruel, and the spunge of Blood, But, Bonner, I say thou art mild and good. Under Queen Elizabeth he was deprived and secured in the Marshalsea, where he lived 10 Years in soft du∣rance, and full plenty, his Face deposing for his whole Body that he was not famished, enjoying a great Tem∣poral Estate by his Father, wherein as he was kept from doing hurt to others, so it kept others from doing hurt to him, who was so universally odious, that he had been stoned in the Streets if at Liberty: He died 1569. and was buried in Barking Church-Yard among Thieves and Murderers, but enough, if not too much of this Herostratus, who burnt so many living Temples of the Holy Ghost, and who, had he not been remembred by other Writers, had found no place here. In the 18th of Queen Elizabeth 1576. June 20. Wil∣liam Lumnley a poor man in the Parish of Emely, being kept in Prison by a rich Widdow, and having a Mare of 22 years old, saith Mr. Stow, with Foal, within three days after she Foaled a Female Colt, which immediate∣ly had an Udder, out of which was milked the same day a pint of Milk, and every day after it gave above three
pints, to the great relief of his Wife and Children, and continued to do so a long time, as was seen by many Thousands. In her 35th year in the month of March were many great storms of wind, which overturned Trees, Houses, Steeples and Barns, and in Bewdly For∣rest in Worcestershire many Oaks were overthrown, in Horton Wood in this County above a 1000 Oaks were blown down in one day. Worcestershire is divided into seven Hundreds, wherein are 11 Market Towns, 152 Parish Churches, and is in the Diocess of Worcester. It elects 9 Parliament Men, and gives the Title of Earl and Marquess to Henry L. Somer∣set, L. President of Wales. YORKSHIRE hath Westmoreland and Durham on the North, Lancashire on the West, Derby, Nottingham, and Lincoln shires on the South, and the German Ocean on the East. It is the greatest of any County in England, placed under a temperate Climate, and so is indifferent∣ly fruitful, so that if one part of it be stony, sandy barren ground, another part is fruitful, and richly ador∣ned with Cornfields; if it be here bare of Woods, you shall see it there shadowed with Forrests full of Trees; If in one place it be Moorish, miery and unpleasant, another presents itself to the Eye full of beauty and de∣lightful variety. This County being so spacious, is divided into three parts, called the West Riding, the East-Riding, and the North-Riding; It produceth Corn, Cattel, Cloth, Knives, and Stockins. The City of York is very ancient, and formerly of so great estimation, that the Roman Emperours kept their Courts there; it is at this day the second City of Eng. the fairest in all the Country, & a sin∣gular safeguard & ornament to all the Northern Parts; it is a large stately pleasant place, well fortified, and beauti∣fully adorned both with publick and private Buildings, Rich, Populous, and an Archbishops See; The River Ouse flowing with a gentle stream from the North part Southward, cutteth it in twain, and maketh as it were two Cities, which are joined with a strong Bridge,
whereon is a very great Arch; The West part is incom∣passed with a very fair Wall, and the River together foursquare, having an entrance only at one Gate, from which a long and broad street reacheth to the very Bridge, which is beautified with handsome Houses, with Gardens and Orchards on the back, and pleasant Fields behind; On the East side the Houses stand very thick, and the streets are narrower, being fortified with a strong wall, and is divided on the South-East with the deep Channel of the muddy River Fosse, which entring into the heart of the City by a blind way hath a Bridge over it with Houses built upon it, and so close ranged one by another, that it seems rather a street than a Bridge, and soon after runs into the Ouse, where a stately Castle formerly stood, which commanded the whole City, but it is now gone to decay; toward the North stands the Cathedral Church, an excellent, fair and stately Fabrick. We read that William the Conqueror, after he had setled himself in this Kingdom, did much a bridge the power of the prelates in Temporals, ordaining that they should exercise no Temporal Authority at all; but yet in Spiri∣tuals he rather raised them, as appears by a passage be∣tween Aldred Archbishop of York, and this King; for one time upon denying a certain suit, the Archbishop in great discontent offered to go away, but the King for fear of his displeasure staid him, and fell down at his feet, desiring his pardon, and promising to grant his Suit, the King for sometime lay at his fet, and the Noble∣men that were present put the Prelate in mind that he should cause the King to rise; Nay, said the Archbishop, let him alone, let him find what it is to anger St. Peter. And as by this story we may see the insulting Pride of this Prelate in those days, so by another we may observe the equivocating falshood of another Prelate at that time, for Stigand A. B. of Canterbury would often swear, he had not one penny upon Earth, when under the Earth it was af∣terward found he had hidden great Treasure; It is al∣so memorable, but scarce credible, of another Bishop,
who being accused of Simony, and denying it, the Cardinal before whom he was to answer, told him. That a Bishoprick was the gift of the Holy Ghost, and therefore to buy a Bishoprick was against the Holy Ghost, and thereupon bid him say, Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, which the Bishop beginning, and oft trying to do, saith our Historian, could never say, and to the Holy Ghost, but said it plainly when he was put out of his Bishoprick. In the 19th of King Henry 3. 1235. there was a great dearth in Eng. so that many poor people died for want of food, the Rich being so cruelly covetous as not to re∣lieve them; and among others Walter Gray A. B. of York had great store of Corn, which he had horded for five years together, yet at that sad time refused to bestow a∣ny of it upon the necessities of the poor; but suspecting that it might be destroyed by Vermine, he commanded it to be delivered to Husbandmen that lived in his Man∣nors, upon condition to return him as much new Corn after Harvest, but behold a terrible Judgment of God upon him for his covetousness, when they came to one of his great stacks of Corn nigh the Town of Ripoon, there appeared in the Sheaves all over, the heads of Worms, Serpents and Toads; so that the Bailiffs were forced to build an high wall round about the stack of Corn, and then to set it on fire, least the venemous Crea∣tures should have gone out, and poysoned the Corn in other places; In the Reign of K. Edward 4. 1570. George Nevil Brother to the great Earl of Warwick, at his Instalment into his Archbishoprick of York, made a pro∣digious Feast to the Nobility, chief Clergy, and many Gentry, wherein he spent 300 Quarters of Wheat, 330 Tuns of Ale, 104 Tuns of Wine. 1 Pipe of spiced Wine, 80 fat Oxen, 6 wild Bulls, 1004 Sheep, 3000 Hogs, 300 Calves, 3000 Geese, 3000 Capons, 300 Pigs, 100 Peacocks, 200 Cranes, 200 Kids, 2000 Chickens, 4000 Pigeons, 4000 Rabbets, 204 Bittours, 4000 Ducks, 400 Herons, 200 Phesants, 500 Partridges, 4000 Wood∣cocks, 400 Plovers, 100 Curlews, 100 Quales, 1000
Egrets, 200 Rees, above 400 Bucks, Does and Roe-Bucks, 1506 hot Venison Pasties, 4000 cold Venison Pasties, 1000 Dishes of Jelly parted, 4000 Dishes of Jelly plain, 4000 cold Custards, 2000 hot Custards, 300 Pikes, 300 Breams, 8 Seals, 4 Porpusses, and 400 Tarts; At this Feast the E. of Warwick was Steward, the Earl of Bedford Treasurer, the Lord Hastings Controller, with many more noble Officers, 1000 Servitors, 62 Cooks, 515 Scullions; But about 7 Years after the King seized on all the Estate of this Archbishop, and sent him over Prisoner into France, where he was bound in chains, and in great Poverty; Justice thus punishing his former prodigality. The East-Riding of Yorkshire is divided into 4 Hun∣dreds, wherein are 8 Market Towns; the West-Riding is divided into 10 Hundreds, wherein are 24 Market Towns; the North is divided into 12 Hundreds, where∣in are 17 Market Towns; it is in the Diocess of York, hath 563 Parish Churches, and elects 29 Parliament men; York gives the Title of Duke to His Royal High∣ness, Richmond that of Duke to Charles Lenos, Son to the Dutchess of Portsmouth, Hallifax the Title of Earl to George L. Savil. WALES. THis Principality hath the Severn Sea on the South, the Irish Ocean on the West and North, and England on the East; It is 100 Miles from East to West, and 120 from North to South; it consisteth of 3 parts, Northwales, Powis, and Southwales, wherein are contained 13 Shires or Counties, of which I have not room to give a particular account as before, but shall only observe what is memorable in each of them; the names thereof are Anglesey, Brecknockshire, Cardigan, Carmarthan, Carnarvan, Denby, Flint, Glamorg n, Merioneth, Monmouth, Montgomery, Pembroke, and Radnor; The name of Wales some derive from Idwallo the Son of Cadwaller, who with the small Remainder of his Brittish Subjects, made good the dan∣gerous
places of this Countrey against his Enemies, and was first called King of Wales: This Country is Moun∣tainous and barren, not able to maintain its People but by helps elsewhere; their chief Commodities are course cloths, called Welch Freez, and Cottons; Lewellin Son of Griffin; the Brother of David, the last Sovereign Prince of VVales, of the Race of Cadwallader, was slain by K. Edward 1. 1282. whereby the Principality of Wales was added to the Crown of England, though it may be this Conquest happened not for want of Valour, since Hen. 2. in a Letter to Emanuel Emperour of Constan∣tinople gives this Testimony of them: The Welch Nation is so adventurous, that they dare encounter naked with armed men, ready to spend their blood for their Country, and pawn their Life for praise. Anglesey, is an Island separated from the Continent by a small and narrow Streight of the River Menai: In di∣vers places in the low Fields and Champion Grounds of this County there are divers Trees digged out, black within like Ebony, and are used to inlay cupboards, &c. it is hard to resolve how they came hither, some imagine the Romanes cut them down as being the coverts of Re∣bellion, others think they fell of themselves, and with their own Weight in those waterish places buried them∣selves, and that the clammy Bituminous substance that is found about them keeps them from Putrefaction: This Island yields such plenty of Wheat, that they call it the Mother of Wales: He that relateth wonders, saith Dr. Fuller, walks on the edge of an house, if he be not care∣ful of his Footing, down falls his credit. This shall make me exact in using my Authors words, That Cloaks, Hats and Staves cast down from the top of an Hill, called Mo∣unch-Denny, or Cadier Arthur, which hath its top above the Clouds, in the County of Brecknock, will never fall, but are with the Air and Wind still beaten back and blown up again, nor will any thing descend save a stone or some metalline substance: And that the Meer Llynsa∣vathan within two Miles of Brecknock, was once a fair Ci∣ty, till swallowed up by an Earthquake, which is not im∣probable,
because all the high ways of this Shire do lead thither, and Ptolomy speaks of a City called Loventrium hereabout, which is not now to be found; they say like∣wise, that at the end of Winter, when after a long frost the Ice of this Lake breaks, it makes a fearful noise like Thunder; Giraldus Cambrensis reporteth there is a Foun∣tain in Carmarthenshire, which conformable to the Sea Ebbs and Flows twice in 24 hours: There are in this County strange Vaults under ground, supposed to be the Castles of People who were conquered in the Wars Dr. Ferrar was Bishop of St. Davids in K. Edward 6. time, but in the Reign of Queen Mary he was sent for, and ex∣amined about his Faith by the Bishop of Winchester, who told him that the Queen and Parliament had altered Re∣ligion, and therefore required him to embrace the same; to which he answered, That he had taken an Oath never to consent or agree that the Bishop of Rome should have any Ju∣risdiction in this Realm, The Bishop of Winchester called him froward Fellow, and false Knave, and so returned him to Prison again; He was afterward examined before Henry Morgan, pretended Bishop of St. Davids, who re∣quiring him to subscribe to several Articles, he refused it, or to recant any thing, whereupon he read the Sen∣tence of Condemnation against him; then he was degra∣ded and deliver'd to the secular, Power by whom he was carried to Caermarthen; there to be burned; a little be∣fore his Execution there came one to him, who much lamented the painfulness of his Death, to whom Dr Fer∣rar answered, That if he saw him once stir or move in the pains of his burning, he should then give no credit to the Doctrine he had taught; and he was as good as his word, standing so patiently in the midst of the Flames that he never mo∣ved, holding up his stumps, till one with a staff dashed him on the head, whereby he fell down, and quietly re∣signed his Spirit to God. There was at Bangor in Carnavanshire a great Monaste∣ry, in which were many religious Monks, who lived by the sweat of their Brows, and the labour of their hands, far unlike the Monks since: Out of this Monastery the
Monks went to Westchester to pray for the good success of their friends against the Heathen Saxons, continuing 3 days in fasting and Prayer; Elfride the Saxon King see∣ing them so fervent in their Prayers, asked what kind of men they were, and being told that they prayed for their Enemies; then said he, Though they carry no weapons yet they fight against us, and with their Prayers and Preach∣ing prosecute us; therefore after he had overcome the Brittains, he commanded his Souldiers to fall upon the unarmed Monks, of whom he murthered 1100, only 50 of them escaping: But God left not their death long un∣revenged; for this cruel King was soon after killed in the field by the Christian Edwin, who succeeded him in the Kingdom. It is said, that there is a Lake in Snowden-Hills in this County, which hath a floating Island there∣in, but it seems it swims away from the sight of those who endeavour to discover it; they tell also of Fishes found here which have but one Eye, which yet men with two Eyes could never behold. The highest hill in Denby∣shire called Moilenly, hath a Spring of clear Water on the Top In 1660. a very great well near Chirk Town in this County was dried up. In Flintshire is that excellent Well called St. Winifrids Well, or Holy well, so famous for cure of Aches and Lameness: When K. Richard 2. came to Flint castle, be∣ing there received by Henry Duke of Lancaster, as he was going from thence, they let loose a Greyhound of the Kings, as was usual whenever the King got on Horseback, which Greyhound used to leap upon the Kings Shoul∣ders, and fawn very much upon him; but at this time he leaped upon the Duke of Lancaster, and fawned upon him in the same manner as he used to do on his Master; the Duke asked the King what the Dog meant or intend∣ed; It is an ill and unhappy O men to me, said the King, but a fortunate one to you, for he acknowledges thee to be King, and that thou shalt reign in my stead: This he said with a pre∣saging mind upon a light occasion, which yet in short time came to pass. It is reported that in an Island in Gla∣morganshire there appeareth a Chink in a Rock or Cliff,
to which if you lay your Ear, you may easily hear a noise like Smiths at work, one while blowing of the Bellows, another while striking of the Hammer, the grinding of Iron Tools, the hissing of Steel Gads, yea the puffing noise of a Fire in a Furnace: There is also at Newton on the Bank of the River Ogmore in this Shire, a Well where at full Sea in the Summer you can scarce get a dishful of Water, whereas at the Ebb you may easily get a pail∣full. On the top of a hill called Mynd-Morgan is a Monu∣ment with a strange character, which the Inhabitants thereabout say, if any man read the same, he will dye shortly after, whereby I suppose they mean, that it is impossible to be read; There is a Lake in Merionethshire near Bala, containing near 160 Acres of ground, into which the River Dee runs, and goes through it without mixing their Waters; This Pemble-Meer doth not swell with all the Waters and Land-floods which fall from the Mountains unto it, but a small blast of Wind will make it mount above its bounds and Banks. I know not whether it be worth relating, what is known for a truth of a Market Town called Dogelthy in this Shire, 1. That the Walls thereof are 3 miles high; that is, The Moun∣tains that surround it. 2 That men come into it over the water, but go out of it under the water; because they go in over a fair Bridge, but the water falling from a Rock is con∣veyed in a wooden Trough, under which Travellers must make shift to pass. 3. The Steeple thereof doth grow therein; since the Bells (if they have more than one) hang in an Yew-tree. 4. There are more Ale-Houses than Houses; for Tenements are divided into 2 or 3 Tipling-Houses, and Barns without Chimneys are used to that purpose. In the Year 1661. Dec. 20. about Sunsetting the Inhabi∣tants of Weston in Montgomeryshire, discovered a great num∣ber of Horsemen about 400 paces from them, marching two a Breast in Military order upon the Common, and were half an hour before the Reer came up, seeming to be about 500 in all; the spectators were amazed, think∣ing them to be an Army of Roundheads going to release the Prisoners at Montgomery, there being at that time se∣veral
Ministers and Gentlemen in Prison) and therefore several of them went to the top of the next hill, where they had another full view of them, and could distin∣guish their Horses to be of several Colours, as white, grey, black, &c. and that they marched in 3 Companies, and betwixt every Division they had 2 Horse colours flying; but as they drew toward them they still marched from them, so that they could not come nearer than 100 Yards; they asked a man (who was thatching a House all that day, which they judged the Horsemen went by) whether he saw all those Souldiers which marched by, who said that he saw none, neither was there any Tract of the Horses to be seen that night nor the next morning, so that they concluded it to be a wonderful Apparition, and deposed the Truth of these particulars before the Lord Herbert, and several other Justices of the Peace of this County; at the same time a Woman com∣ing from Bishops Castle over the same Common, fell off her Horse being much terrified with the sight of a bla∣zing Star, which she and 6 men with her saw, some∣times white and sometimes red, with a Tail like an Ar∣row, which seemed to hang just over their heads from Bishops Mount to this common being 3 miles, and the People of the house where the Woman fell, when they came out saw the Star also. The Moor or March near Chepstow in Monmouthshire suf∣fered great loss in 1606. by the River Severn, overflow∣ing its banks, and drowning many Cattle and some Peo∣ple, and overthrowing divers Houses. Merlin Propheci∣ed That when a stout Prince with a freckled Face should pass over a Ford called Rydpencarn, in a River called Nantpen∣carn, the Welch should be conquered, and therfore when K. Hen. 2. who was freckle faced, passed over it, the Welchmen remembring this Prophecy, through too much credulity submitted themselves, and it may be the King thinking their hearts might fail them, chose to go over this Ford to facilitate his Conquests. In the Reign of K. Henry 1. by the breaking in of the Sea a great part of Flanders was drowned, whereupon a great number of
Flemings petitioned the King for some place to inhabit in, who accordingly assigned them Pembrokeshire in Wales, where their posterity continue to this day; when King Hen. 2 was at St. Davids in this County, and from thence in a clear day discovered the Coasts of Ireland, in a huf∣fing Bravado he said, I with my Ships am able to make a Bridg thither, if it be no farther: Which Speech of his be∣ing related to Murchard K. of Lemster in Ireland, he asked, whether he did not say He would do with the help of God; and when it was answered, that he made no mention of God, he chearfully said, Then I fear him the less, since he trusted more to himself than to the help of God. The same K. Henry returning out of Ireland, arrived at St. Davids, where being told, That the Conqueror of Ireland returning that way, should die upon a stone called Lech-laver near the Church-Yard; he thereupon before a multitude of Peo∣ple passed over it, and reproving the Welchmen, said, Now who will hereafter credit that Lyar Merlin? Radnor hath a sharp and cold Air because of the Snow lying long un∣melted under the shady Hills and hanging Rocks, where∣of there are many. In the Reign of K. William the Con∣queror upon the Sea shore in Wales was found the Body of Gawen, Sisters Son to Arthur the great King of the Brittains, reported to be 14 Foot in length. In 1662. July 2. were seen above 100 Porpusses together near Newport, which seemed very strange and prodigious to the Inhabitants. In these 13 Shires, which I have cursorily run over there are reckoned 1 Chase, 13 Forrests, 36 Parks, 230 Rivers, 100 Bridges, 4 Cities, 55 Market Towns, and 41 Castles of old Erection; 4 Bishopricks, St. Asaph, Bangor, St. Davids and Llandaff, and 1016 Parish Churches; it elects 30 Parliament Men; Anglesey gives, the Title of Earl to Arthur L. Annesly, Brecknock to James L. Butler (who is also D. of Ormond) Cardigan to Thomas L. Brudenel, Caernarvon to Charles L. Dormer, Denby to William L. Feilding, Glamorgan to Henry L. Somerset (who is, Marquess of Worcester) Pembroke to Philip L. Herbert, who is likewise Earl of Montgomery, Monmouth the Title
of Duke to James Fitz-Roy; and Radnor the Title of Earl to John L. Robers. SCOTLAND. THis Kingdom is separated from England by the Rivers Tweed and Solway, and the Cheviot Hills reaching from one River to the other on the South. It hath on the East the German Ocean, on the North the Isles of Orkney, and the Deucali∣donian Sea, and Ireland on the West; It is a fair and spacious Coun∣try, 480 miles in length, but in breadth much less, no place being 60 miles from the Sea; It is divided into Highland and Lowland, the People of the Highland living on the Western parts of Scot∣land have some Civility, but those In the out Isles are very barba∣rous; The Lowlanders are in disposition and language much like the English; Scotland is far more barren than England; the chief Commodities are course Cloths, Freezes, Fish, Hides, Lead, Oar, &c. The principal Rivers are Forth, Cluyde, and Tay, all Navigable; There are two Universities, St. Andrews, and Aberdeen, and 2 Archbishops, and 12 Bishops; The Nobility, and Gentry are great Affecters of Learning, and therefore do not only frequent their own Universities, but travel into Forreign parts for improvement; It is divided into 34 Shires or Counties; the Regal City thereof is Eden∣burgh, seated in Lothian, where is the Royal Pallace, it consists prin∣cipally of one Street about a mile long, into which run many Lanes, so that the whole compass may be about three miles; It is strength∣ned by a Castle that Commands the Town Scot. was once Inhabited by 2 Populous Nations the Scots and Picts, till after long Wars the Scots prevailing, they utterly extinguished not only the Kingdom, but the name of Picts; Most memorable was that Fortification drawn from Abercorn upon the Frith of Edenburgh to the Frith of Dumbritton opening upon the West Sea, where Julius Agricola set the limits of the Roman Empire; at this place began the great Wood Calidonia, famous for the wild white Bulls bred therein, with Manes like Lyons thick and curled, so fierce and cruel by Nature, and so hateful to Mankind, that they abhorred whatever was hand∣ld or breathed on by them. The Cattle in Scotland are small, but ma∣ny, Fish so plentiful, that in some place men on Horseback hunt Salmons with Spears; The Islands belonging to it are the Western, the Orkney, and the Shetlands in number above 300 They have infinite numbers of Barnacles or Soland Geese, so that they even darken the light of the Sun; these Geese are most plen∣tiful about the Bass near Edenburgh, and hither they bring an in∣credible number of Fishes, and withal such abundance of sticks and little twigs to build their Nests, that the People are very plen∣tifully provided of Fewel, who also make great gain of their Fea∣thers and Oyl, There have been great disputes among the Lear∣ned
about the generation of these Geese, some holding that they were bred of the leaves of the Barnacle Tree falling into the Wayters, others that they are bred of moist rotten wood lying in the Waters, but it is since found that they come of an Egg, and are hatched like all other Geese; There is a water in this Country cal∣led Merton Lake, part of whose Waters are frozen in Winter, and part not; In the Lake of Lennox, being 24 miles in compass, the Fish are generally without Finns, and yet there is great abundance of them; It is said, that when there is no wind stirring, the waters of this Lake are so Tempestuous, that no Marener dares venture on it; They write also of a deaf stone 12 foot high, and 33 foot thick, of this rare quality, that a Musket shot off the one side, can∣not be heard by a man standing on the other, these wonders are reported by Hector Boetius, and if not true, let him bear the blame. Near Falkirk remain the ruines and marks of a Town swallowed up by an Earthquake, and the void place is filled with water, saith Lithgow. The Lough Lmond turneth sticks into stones, in which are several Islands, and one of them which is full of Grass, Rushes, and Reeds swims about the Lake; near a place called Dysert in Fife by the Sea side, is a Heath where there is great plenty of earth∣ly Bitumen; In the Country of Argile at this day, saith Cambden, are Kine and red Deer ranging wild upon the Hills; Between the Coast of Cathness and Orkney is a dreadful Frith or Gulf, in the North end of which by reason of the meeting of 9 contrary Tides or Currents is a Male stream or great Whirlpool, which whirleth continually about, and if any Ship, Boat, or Bark come within the reach thereof, they must quickly throw over something into it, as a Barrel, a piece of Timber or the like, or else the Vessel will inevi∣tably be swallowed up, which the Cathness and Orkney Mareners know very well, and observe it as a constant custom to redeem themselves that way from danger. Toward the North of Scotland saith Speed, there be Mountains all of Alabaster, and some all of Marble; At the mouth of the River Frth in the main Sea, is a very high Rock, out of whose top a spring of water runs abun∣dantly; The Snow lies all the year upon the Hills in Ross; A large piece of Amber saith Cambden, as big as a Horse was found not long since upon the Coast of Buquan, in which County they say Rats are never seen, and if any be brought thither they will not live. It is credibly reported, saith Ortelius, that there is a Stone found in Argile, which if covered a while with Straw or Flax, it will set it on fire. The Snow lies all the year long upon the Hills in Ross. It is recorded that Sergius K. of Scots, was so addicted to Har∣lots, that he neglected his own Wife, and drove her to such pover∣ty, that she was forced to wait upon another Noblewoman for her living, whereupon watching her opportunity, she slew her Husband in Bed, and her self after. The Castle of Edenburgh was built by
Cruthenus King of the Picts, and called Maiden Castle, because the Daughters of the Pictish Kings were there kept working with their Needles till they were married; Ethus King of Scots was almost as swift in running as a Stag or Greyhound, and therefore called Wing-footed, but utterly unfit for Government, being cow∣ardly, and a slave to Pleasure. In the time when the Barbarous and bloody Danes raged in England, they came to Coldingham, a Nunnery on the hither part of Scotland, where Ebba the Prioress, with the rest of the Nuns cut off their own Noses and Lips, chu∣sing rather to preserve their Virginities from the Danes, than their beauty or favour, whereupon these cruel Heathens burnt their Monastery and all of them therein. Malcolm King of Scots was a very magnificent and couragious Prince in 1067. of which he gave proof in the beginning of his Reign, for being informed of a Conspiracy against his life, he dis∣sembled the knowing of it, till being abroad one day a hunting, he took one of the chief Conspirators aside, challenged him as a Traitor, adding; Here now is a fit place to do that manfully, which you intended to perform by Treachery; now if you have any valour, kill me honourably, and none being present you can incur no danger. With this Speech of the King, the man was so daunted, that he fell at his Feet, confessed his fault, asked forgiveness, and proved ever after Faithful and Loyal. This King repealed that barbarous Statute of K. Eugenius 3 by the persuasion of his Virtuous Lady Margret, Sister to K. Edward Atheling, which ordained, That when a man was married, his Lord should lye with his Bride the first night; He al∣lowing it to be redeemed with half a Mark of Silver, which sum is to this day put into the Leases which the Lords make to their Vas∣sals; this King besieging Aldwich Castle, an English Knight unar∣med, only with a light Spear in his hand, on the end of which he carried the Keys of the Castle, came riding into the Camp, where being brought to the King, and bowing his Spear, as though he intended to present him with the Keys, ran him into the left Eye, and left him for dead, and by the swiftness of his Horse escaped; hence some say came the great Family of the Pierceys; His Queen hearing of her Husband and Sons death, beseeched the Almighty that she might not survive them, and had her desire, dying within a days after. In 1137. Kentigern was Bishop of Glasgow, a man of rare Pie∣ty, and exceeding bountiful to the poor; It is recorded that an Honourable Lady having lost a Ring which her Husband gave her, as she crossed the River Clayd, her Husband grow Jealous, as if she had bestowed it on one of her Lovers; upon which she went to Kentigern, intreating his help for the safety of her honour; who after he had used his Devotion, went to the River, and spoke to one who was fishing, to bring him the first Fish he caught, which he doing, the Ring was found in the Fishes Mouth, and the Bishop
sent it to the Lady, who was thereby freed of her Husbands Jea∣lousy; This good Bishop, saith A. B. Spotswood lived till he was 185 years old. In 1550. The Persecution waxing hot in Scotland against the Protestants, many Prodigious signs were observed, saith A. B. Spots∣wood, a Comet like a fiery broom or besom flamed the whole months of November, December, and January; great Rivers in the midst of Winter were dryed up, and in Summer swelled so high, that divers Villages were therewith drowned, and numbers of Cattle feeding in the low grounds were carried into the Sea; Whales of an huge bigness were cast up in divers parts of the Ri∣ver Forth, Hailstones as big as Pigeons Eggs fell in many places, which destroyed abundance of Corn; And which was most Terri∣ble, a fiery Dragon was seen flying near the Earth, and vomiting out Fire both day and night, which continued a long time, and so affrighted the People, that they were fain to watch their Houses and Cornyards continually, for fear they should have been burnt; About which time the Qu. Mother of Scotland having received aid from France, forced the Protestants for a while to retire toward the Highlands, whereupon she scoffingly said, Where is now their God, my God is stronger than theirs even in Fife; but her boasting lasted not long, for within a few days 600 Protestants beat above 4000 French and Scots; This same Qu. Mother, when some English and Scotch attempted to take Leith by Storm, and many of them were slain, because the Scaling Ladders were too short, beholding the slaughter from Edenburgh Castle, she burst forth into a great Laughter, saying, Now will I go to Mass, and praise God for what mine Eyes have seen; And when the French had stripped the flain, and laid the naked bodies along the Walls, the Queen looking on them, jeeringly said; Yonder are the fairest Tapestries that ever mine Eyes beheld, I wish that all the Fields which are between Leith and this place were all strewed with the same Stuff; But her Joy was very short, for presently after a Fire kindled in Leith, which burnt up all her Store-houses aad Provisions for her Army, and the Queen Mother for grief fell sick and died. And thus much for Scotland. IRELAND. THis Kingdom is invironed on all sides by the Ocean, parted from Brittain by a violent and Tempestuous Sea, called St. Georges Channel, scituate on the West of Brittain; next to which it is the biggest Island of Europe; containing in length 300. and in breadth 120 miles. They discourse that the Christian Faith was first Preached to them by St. Patrick, who is therefore very considerable among them and their Titular Saint; In one of those little Islands in Loughdirg, there is a place very famous, called St. Patricks Purga∣tory,
into which whosoever had the courage to enter, & remain there the appointed time, did see and suffer very strange and terrible things, and to beget the greater re∣putation to this fictitious Purgatory, the People were made to believe, that St. Patrick 400 years after Christ had obtained the same by his Prayers, to convince unbe∣lievers of the immortality of the Soul, and the Tor∣ments the wicked suffer after this life; though it is cer∣tain nothing of this was known till long after the death of this Holy Person, but about the latter end of K. James the truth of the matter was discovered by the E. of Cork and the L. Chancellor, who desirous to know the truth, sent some Persons of Quality to inquire exactly into it; who found that this miraculous Cave descending down to the bottom of Hell, was no other but a little Cell digged out of the Rocky ground, without any Winnows or holes, so as the door being shut, it was utterly dark, being of so little depth that a tall man could not stand upright in it; and of no greater capacity than to hold 6 or 7 Persons. Now when any desired to go this Pilgri∣mage, he was kept fasting & watching by the Fryers, and told wonderful stories, so that being throughly affrigh∣ted, and then put in, he came out in a few hours all a∣mazed, and told strange stories of his going underground, &c. To prevent this delusion for the future, the Lords, Justices caused the Fryars to depart, and laid the hole open, and exposed to the Air. The Earl of Kildare being charged before K. Henry 7. for burning the Cathedral of Cassiles, & many witnesses rea∣dy to prove it, he suddenly confessed it to be true, to the great surprize of the Council wondring how he would justify it; By Jesus, saith he, I would never have done it, if it had not been told me the Archbishop was within it, and because the Bishop was one of the chief Accusers, the K. laughed at the plainness of the man, to hear him alledge that fo excuse, which did chiefly aggravate his Crime. Ireland is divided into 4 Provinces, Monster, Lemner, Cor∣naught, & Ʋlster, wherein are 33 Counties; Dublin is the Me∣tropolis, seated on the River Liffie, in which is an Uni∣versity; It hath 4 Archbish & 19 Bish. FINIS.
The Names of all the Counties in England, with the pages where each is to be found. BArkshire p. 8 Bedfordshire p. 13 Buckinghamshire p. 17 Cambridgshire p. 19 Cheshire p. 24 Cornwall p. 28 Cumberland p. 38 Derbyshire p. 41 Devonshire p. 47 Dorsetshire p. 57 Durham p. 61 Essex p. 65 Glocestershire p. 72 Hantshire p. 82 Hartfordshire p. 92 Herefordshire p. 102 Huntingtonshire p. 109 Kent p. 111 Lancashire p. 126 Leicestershire p. 129 Lincolnshire p. 134 Middlesex p. 141 Norfolk p. 145 Northampton. p. 153 Nottinghamshire p. 166 Northumberl. p. 168 Oxfordshire p. 173 Rutlandshire p. 183 Shropshire p. 185 Somersetshire p. 189 Staffordshire p. 194 Suffolk p. 196 Surrey p. 199 Sussex p. 204 Warwickshire p. 207 Westmoreland p. 210 Wiltshire p. 212 Worcestershire. p. 215 Yorkshire p. 218 Wales p. 221 Scotland p. 228 Ireland p. 231 There are lately published Three very useful, plea∣sant and necessary Books, which are sold by Nath. Crouch, at the Bell next door to the Widow Kemp's Coffee-House in Exchange-Alley, over against the Royal-Exchange in Cornhill. I. VVOnderful Prodigies of Judgment and Mercy, discovered in above Three
Hundred Memorable Histories, containing 1. Dreadful Judgments upon Atheists, Blasphemers, Perjured Vil∣lains, &c. As of several forsworn Wretches carried away by the Devil, and how an horrid Blasphemer was turned into a black Dog, &c. 2. The Miserable ends of many Magicians, Witches, Conjurers, &c. with divers strange Apparitions, and Illusions of the Devil; and several real discourses between 4 or 5 famous Divines, and Satan; With the strange feats of the Devil of Mas∣con. 3. Remarkable Predictions, and Presages of approa∣ching Death, and how the event has been answerable, particularly as to A. B. Laud, the late D. of Bucking∣ham, and others; With an account of some Appeals to Heaven against Unjust Judges, and what vengeance hath fallen upon them. 4. The Wicked Lives, and woful deaths of several Popes, Apostates, and Persecu∣tors; with the manner how K. Henry the 2. was whipt by the Popes Order by the Monks of Canterbury; and how the Queen of Bohemia, a desperate Persecutor of the Christians, was swallowed up in the Earth alive, with all her followers, &c. 5. Fearful Judgments upon bloody Tyrants, Murderers, &c. with the terrible Cruelties used by those Monsters of Men; Nero, Helio∣gubalus, Domitian, and others upon the Christians, and of the constancy of several famous Martyrs under all their Tortures; also how Popiel, K. of Poland, (a Cruel Tyrant,) his Queen and Children were devoured by Rats; and how a Town near Tripoly in Barbary, with the Men, Women, Children, Beasts, Trees, Walls, Rooms, Cats, Dogs, Mice, and all that belonged to the place, were turn'd into perfect Stone, (to be seen at this day,) for the horrid crimes of the Inhabitants; also the won∣derful discovery of several Murders, &c. 6. Admira∣ble Deliverances from imminent Dangers, and Deplo∣rable Distresses at Sea and Land. Lastly, Divine Good∣ness to Penitents, with the Dying Thoughts of several famous Men, concerning a future state after this life, as St. Austin, The Emp. Charles 5. Philip 3. K. of Spain. Prince Henry. The E. of Northampton. Galleacius. H. Gro∣tius
Salmasius. Sir F. Walsingham. Sir P. Sydney. Sir H. Wotton. A. B. Ʋsher. E. of Rochester. L. Ch. Justice Hales, and others, Faithfully Collected from Ancient and Mo∣dern Authors of undoubted Authority and Credit, and imbellished with divers Pictures of several remarkable passages therein. Price One Shilling. II. HIstorical Remarques and Observations of the Antient and Present State of London and Westminster, shewing the Foundation, Walls, Gates Towers, Bridges, Churches, Rivers, Wards, Halls, Com∣panies, Government, Courts, Hospitals, Schools, Inns of Court, Charters, Franchises, and Priviledges thereof; with an Account of the most Remarkable Accidents, as to Wars, Fires, Plagues, and other occurrences, for a∣bove 900 years past, in and about these Cities; and a∣mong other particulars, the Poisoning of K. John by a Monk; The Resolution of K. Henry 3. utterly to destroy and consume the City of London with Fire, for joyning with the Barons against him, and his seizing their Char∣ters, Liberties and Customs into his hands; The Rebel∣lion of Wat Tyler, who was slain by the Lord Mayor in Smithfield, and the Speech of Jack Straw at his Execu∣tion; the deposing of K. Rich. 2. and his mournful Speech at his resigning the Crown, with the manner of his being Murdered: The D. of York's coming into the Parliament, and claiming the Crown in K. Henry 6. time. The Murder of K. Henry 6. and likewise of Edw. 5 and his Brother, by Rich. 3. call Crook-back; The Execution of Empson and Dudley; the Insurrection in London in K. Henry 8. time, and how 411 Men and Wo∣men went through the City in their Shifts, and Ropes a∣bout their necks to Westm. Hall, where they were pardo∣ned by the King: The Speeches of Q. Ann Bullen, the Lord Protector, and Q. Jane Gray at their several Deaths upon Tower hill. With several other Remarques in all the Kings and Queens Reigns to this Year 1681. And a description of
the manner of the Tryal of the late L. Stafford in West. Hall; Illustrated with Pictures of the most considerable matters, curiously Ingraven on Copper Plates, with the Arms of the 65 Companies of London, and the time of their Incorporating, by Rich. Burton, Author of the Histo∣ry of the Wars of England, &c. Price One Shilling. III. The Wars in England Scotland and Ireland; Or AN Impartial Account of all the Battels, Sieges, and other remarkable Transactions, Revolutions and Accidents which have happened from the beginning of the Reign of King Charles the First, in 1625. to His Ma∣jesties happy Restauration 1660. And among other par∣ticulars, The Debates, and Proceedings in the Four First Parliaments of King Charles the First, with their Disso∣lutions. The Siege of Rochel. The Petition of Right. The Murther of the D. of Buckingham by Felton. The Tu∣mults at Edinbrough in Scotland, upon Reading the Com∣mon-Prayer. The Et caetera Oath. The Cursed Plots and Designs of the Jesuits, and other Papists, for imbroiling these Three Kingdoms. The Insurrection of the Ap∣prentices and Seamen, and their Assaulting of Arch∣bishop Lauds House at Lambeth: Remarks on the Try∣al of the E. of Stafford, and his last Speech. The hor∣rid and Bloody Rebellion of the Papists in Ireland, and their Murthering above Two Hundred Thousand Pro∣testants in 1641. The Remonstrance of the State of the Kingdom, with the King's Answer thereunto. The Pro∣ceedings about the Five Impeached Members. An Ac∣count of the Parliament at Oxford, January 22. 1643. with their proceedings and Dissolution, An Abstract of the Fights between the King and Parliament. The Death of A. B. Laud, Mr. Chaloner and Tomkins, Sir John He∣tham, Sir Alexander Carew, Duke Hamilton. Earl of Hol∣land, Lord Capel, and others. The Illegal Tryal of King Charles the First, at large, with his last Speech at his Suf∣fering, Jan. 30. 1648. Together with the most conside∣rable matters which happened till the Year 1660 Illust∣rated with Pictures of several Remarkable Accidents curiously engraven on Coper Plates, Price One Shilling FINIS.
