d500 r7738 13240275 98623
depiction of bucolic scene with two people in a field, a house, and a horse
Licensed. decorative border for license E. C. GAD depiction of Gad ASAP depiction of Asaph
The DEATH and BURIAL OF Mistresse MONEY. With her Will she made at her Departure: And what happened af∣terwards to the Usurer that Buried Her. depiction of the burial of Mistress Money London Printed by E. Cotes, and are to be sold by Charles Tyus at the Three Bibles on London-Bridge. 1664.
ARGVMENTVM hujus Libri. THesauro invento qui limina mortis juibat, liquit ovans laquem, quo periturus erat, At qui quod terra abdiderat, non repperit au∣rum quem laqueum invenit, nexuit; & periit. AN Usurer did hide his gold which two young Lovers finde, And having took the gold away, Did leave a Rope behind. The Usurer finding of the Rope, and missing of his Wealth, Did take the Rope that he had found, and therewith hang'd himselfe.
THE DEATH AND BURIAL OF MISTRIS MONEY. WHen the earth for her wan∣tonnesse in Summer did pen∣nance in a white sheete of Snow; and when the short dayes, and long Evenings gave assured tokens that it was the depth of Winter: The covetous wretch, old Avarez, to save fire and candle, went to Bed, where having meditated a while on his Trunke of Golden earth, which stood in his Chamber, and now finding him∣selfe dispased to sleepe, hee made this short Prayer. Whether I do sleep or rest, Pluto still defend my Chest.
And no sooner had spoke these words but hee fell fast asleepe before he could say Amen. But yet though his senses were bound up with the silken chains of sleepe, yet his minde (ever watchfull over his gold) and jealous of the losing it, drew him into a fearfull dreame, Which was that theeves had assaulted his house (hee living alone with an old Mayde called Kerdona) & that they were ready to breake open that Chest wherein all his trrasure lay. The feare of this Dreame had so sur∣prized his fancie, that thinking hee heard the locke cracke; and that his angels were taking their flight, be leapt out of his bed; and his cloathes hapning to lye upon his Trunke, thinking it to bee one of the Theeves, catching fast hold thereon; and so holding the Trunke and cloathe fast in his armes, calls out aloud for helpe. Kerdona his Mayde hearing this noise, and having sayde by her Smocke when shee went to bed, because it should not weare out, come running unto him starke naked: Where you may thinke what a strange sight it was to see the mayde per∣swade
her master that there wa  se of fear? No, sayes old Avarez, hy I have one of the Theeves under me, come helpe me to hold him fact. Alas saies the Mayde, it is your owne cloths. I will not beleeve that sayes he, till I see more. With that the Mayde lights a candle, and coming towards her master, I hope sir sayes shee you will now see the truth of all: with that her master looking upon her, and seeing her starke naked, hee fals backward into a swound, crying O Cupid, I never knew the power of thy bugle how till now, tis pitty (saies hee) thou shouldst live a Mayde longer, and therewithall embra∣cing his Mayde Kerdona, he fitted his own Arrow to her Bow-string, and that night got a bastard on her, called senne in the hundred.
How Kerdona did rise from her Master old Avarez: and how he went the next day to Bury his Gold. KERDONA having all this night laine with an old Man, and beeing weary with his tedious sumbling, at last lightly slipt ont of the Bed, as good a Mayde as shee came in. And so stealing down, shee intended to send for her sweet∣heart, who should finish that taske of plea∣sure which the other had so flightly begun, and accordingly shee sent a messenger for him. Now in the mean time Old Ava∣rez calling to minde the terrour and feare of his former Dreame, presently resolves upon a new course, which was, to avoyde the like perplexitie, he meant to bury his Money, being the safest way, (as hee thought) that posibly could be invented,
For sayes he, then I may sleepe securely on my Pillow, nor can any Dreames af∣fright me with the fear of loosing my be∣loved Gold. Being thus resolved, up hee gets, and having put on his old furr'd Gowne, away he goes into the fields, with a spade in one hand, and a great bagge of Gold in the other hand, meaning to bury his money privately without any Cere∣monies, himselfe being both Priest and Sexton: so having made a deep hole un∣der the roote of a tree, he layes therein his bagge of money; and as he was going to say Earth to Earth, a Spirit sitting upon the bagge in the likenesse of a Reden, spake thus unto him in the behalfe of Mi∣stresse Money. I hope Master Avarez you will not commit so soule a deed as to bury Mistresse Money alive, for know that all the world lives by her, and shee being bu∣ried, the whole world would be all amort. Shee is the life of the living, the comfort of the rich, the hope of the poor, and there∣fore shee dying and being buried, all world∣ly hope and comfort dies with her. How∣ever, I hope if you will needs bury her, yet
suffer her to make her Will. Avarez wil∣lingly agreed hereunto, and did the spirit tell him what shee desired. Why saies the Spirit, this is her Will. MIstresse Money, being sicke in bo∣dy as you may perceive by her pale looke, but healthful in minde, bequeaths her body to be buryed under this Tree, and her soule to the infernall Vault be∣low. Also shee gives and bequeaths unto her Friends in manner and forme as fol∣lowes. To young Mistresse Tireby, who for my sake first lost her mayden head, and afterwards turned a common whore, I give five pound to fetch her best gowne out of pawne. To young master Rastley a Gamester, who hath often quarrelled in my behalfe, I give forty shillings to sweare and drinke sacke withall.
To master All sup the Broker I give six pence for a halter. To master Fatling an Inn-keeper, I give twenty shillings to paint his signe withall. To the incurable Hospital of Knaves and Fooles I give three pence per annum for Whips and Coxcombs. To the Schollers I give nothing. Item, to those Drunkards that have spent all their money over-night, I give six pence for a mornings draught. Item, to Master Nonsence a young heire, I give four pence to buy Greenes Groats∣worth of wit. Item, to Maydes that have no portions, I give five shillings to buy a chaine to lead Apes in hell withall. Item, to him that hath a scoulding wife, I give twelve pence to go to the alehouse; and if shee follow him thither, I give him sixe pence to buy holly wands to swaddle her withall.
Item, to maides that are in Love, I give pence apeece, to buy the next new ballet of Love, that so they may sing it o∣ver their Milking pails. Item, to a grave chamber maid that ve∣ry gracelesly has lost her mayden-head, I give six pence to carry her water to the Doctor. Item, to Tobacconists, I give six pence for a brush to scoure their smoaky throats. Item, To the poore of the Towne of Nonesuch, I give three pounds sacking threescore shillings. Item, to them that keepe the Roade way of preferment, otherwayes called highway∣men or theeves, I give five shillings for a false Beard and Pistol. Item, to Country Book-sellers, I give three pence to buy this new book withall. And so him that writ it, I give what hee can get, and so he will thanke you for no∣thing.
THese are all the pooe legacies which Mistresse Money intends to trouble you withal at this time, hoping you will be a just Executor in performing her last Will and Testament. Old Avarez having heard what the spirit said, consents to all that was demanded of him; Avarez tyes the strings of the leather bag so close toge∣ther, that he strangled Mistresse Money by letting no ayre come unto her, and after∣ward buries her, and the paper which shee had made, both in one grave: and so having laid Earth upon his golden Earth, think∣ing now it safe enough, he goes merrily home, while his braine seemed to ring a peals of bels in this manner. Avarez has done well, Then ring out every bell: For I have laid my Gold, Within the earths fair mold. Ding, dong, ding, dong.
How Kerdona and her Sweet∣heart having stood by all this while unseene, found Avarez gold. NO sooner was the old Avarez gone home, reioycing that his money was now past theeves handling, when Kerdona and her sweet-heart came forth from be∣hinde a bush, where they had laine in amo∣rous dalliance, and had beheld what had past between Avarez and the spirit; and had seene how injuriously hee stiffed, & then buried Mistris Money. But Kerdona a long time through duty to her Master, perswa∣ded him to let the body rest: How? sayes her lover, I will not be guilty of her death for a Hundred pounds, and therefore let us make haste to digge her up againe, for perhaps the warmth of my pocket may recover her. So they both went to the
Grave which Avarez had made under the Tree, and scratching away he Earth with both their hands, they found Mistresse Money starke dead, in which manner shee has ever since continued, for your tradse∣men complaine that money is dead, and your Countrymen finde fault that money is dead too. So that ever since Avarez buryed his money, there has been a dead time of money both in Country and City. But let that passe: Kerdona and her lover having taken up the Vsurers gold, and ha∣ving found the Will which was buryed with it, her lover sweare he will performe all that was contained therein, seeing that it was Mistresse Moneys charity to bestow it upon such members of the Common∣wealth: as Whores, and Knaves, and the like. Nay then sayes Kerdona, since you have gain'd this by my Fortunate Love, which brought you to these fields, let us send for a License, and let this buriall bee turned into our Bridall, I am contented said the Lover, but first (sayes he) that Avarez when bee digges up this earth againe may say that we are
conscionable theeves, I meane to leave him this halter and this paper, which con∣teined these Verses. He must sure be a covetous knave, That hid his mony in a grave, For such as he makes money dead, But let him know his money's fled; Which when he misses I doe hope Hee'le hang himselfe in this same rope. So having cast in the Earth upon the halter and paper, they both went home∣ward, meaning to be married the next day.
How Kerdona, and her Sweet-heart were married, and how Avarez would have hanged himself, but that he was prevented. THe Sun was no sooner risen fr his Rosie bd, but the two Lovers made hast to rise after him, and away they went to Church, where the Parson quickly e them man and wife; and thinking to stl home again together, they hpned to come to that , from whence the day before they espyed Avarez burying his Gold. And so being invited by the natural delght of the place, and the flames of love beginning to blaze forth at their lip; they both consen∣ted to lye down a while, and quench that rising flame with the hony dew of isses. But they had not lain here long, when they might perceive Avarez comming to∣warde the tree, where he had buryed his gold, and looking round about, finding the cost cleere, ad that no body saw him, he began to scrape with oth hands lie a do that would fain hide a marry boe,  ing that he could not see his bg of Gold, at lst he  the nd of  ro, which being pluckt out of  Erh id
end in a fair halter, and brought forth with it the former paper of verses; the old man not knowing what to think, open she pa∣per, and there reading the two last lines, Which when he misses, I doe hope, Hee'l hang himselfe in this same rope. He begins thus to reason with himselfe: Hang my selfe, saith he, yes I will hang my self, for now I perceive that my gold is stolne from hence, and that the arrant theefe in orne hath left me this halter to end my dayes withal; well, I will hang my self I need no Iury to pronounce me guilty, for I confesse my self guilty of much folly in biding my gold, and thinking to save it: Was it not safe enough in my Trunk? (foele that I was) but I must have new devises of my own to bury it without bell, booke, or candle; but I see we old men doat, and thinking to be over-wise, prove extreamly ridiculous. Having thus said, cursed himself often, and fear∣ing his ver ae for the losse of his gol∣den coyn, he get at last upon a high hedge, and having fastned one end of the halter to a bough of the same tree (under which hee
had buried his gold) he puts the noose over his neck, and then begins to confesse in ti manner. ear me you wood and trees, while I confsse that I have worthily deserved of is kinde of death, for know all, that it is such as I am, that makes money so dead in the world as it is: while we cc∣vetous wretches hide and bury our Gold; for mee I hope the world will forgive mee, but for my sake I wish, that those that hereafter bury their Gold, may first loose it as I have done, and then hang them∣selves as I mean to doe; and herevishal being ready to caste himselfe off the hedge, the two Lovers (who all this while had heard his confession) came in and safed him from the gallowes, and comforting him for the losse of his Gold, which they had gotten, at last with many perswa∣sions brought him home, where for very griefe not long after he hung himself in his owne Gartere. And thus have you seene that marriage and hanging goes by destiny, for the finding of this Gold made Kerdona and her sweet-heart marry & the loosing of this gold made the Vsurer hang himselfe, which was a fit end for an Vsu∣rer, and so I end with Finis, Funis.
The Morall Meaning of this BOOKE. AVAREZ fearful dreame shewes, that the Poore man sleepes more quietly than the Rich man. Kerdena is as much as to say gaine, from lucrum; so that Avarez getting his Mayde Kerdona with childe, does shew, that Usury does beget upon gaine, ten in the hundred. Avarez burying his gold, and yet loosing it, does shew that we should rather lay up our Treasure in Heaven than in Earth. Kerdona's marrying with a young gallant and making him finde Avarez gold, does shew, that which is gotten miserably does at last come to some prodigal hand, and so is spent wickedly. And this is the morall meaning that this short story doth afford.
Funerall Verses upon the Death and Buriall of Mistresse Money, with the number of Mourners that will be sorry for her Departure. COme hither you worldlings all, lament for your dear honey: For here you may see the funerall, and burial of Mistresse Money. We need not stretch invention, with praises to adorn her, For though she be dead and buryed, she will have many a mourner. The swaggering gallant will mourns in sable weeds hereafter, For now he cannot roar any more, since Moneyes sad departure. The Tapster too will mourne, for his scores are now released: He must stay, for who can pay, when Money is deceased? The young Heire too will mourne, when Money cannot be procured: With morgage of land, & setting his hand for Mistresse Money is buryed.
Your wanton Lasses will mourne, that themselves for Money hired: For they in Term they nothing can erne since Money is thus expired. The Souldier too will mourne, that in the warrs hath served: For he must stay now for his pay, which he before deserved. The Country man will mourne when he doth hear it told, That Money is dead and buryed, for how shall his corne be sold? The Scholler too will mourne, for his Verses can never flourish, Nor can he write with any delight, till money his Muses doe cheerish. Blind Cupid a Mourner will be, for he is now assured, That he shall never such matches see as money hath often procured. Your Gentlewomen will mourne, and their hearts will now he fainting, For they may stay full many a day if their portion be but wanting.
The Countrey Mayds will mourne, for they at home must tarry; Nor can they repaire to Market or Faire, if they no money do carry. The Fidlers they will mourne, and with their trade be wearied, They'le scrape no more at your chamber dore since Mony is dead and buryed. The Sheepherds they will mourne, for though their flocks are increased, Yet their wool on the plain, will yeeld no gain, since money is now deceased. Your Chapmen too will mourne, for now they are assured They cannot have ware to sell at the faire since Money is dead and buryed. The Tobacco-men will mourne, and be full heavy hearted, For with their smoke themselves they may choke since Money is thus departed. The Ostler he will mourne, for since Moneys funerall, Though your horse he dress, yet neverthe∣lesse his gettings will be very small
The Countrey Innes will mourne, for they have little trading: Since Money is dead and buryed, their custome will be fading. Your Water-men will mourne, for Gentlemen hereafter, Since Money is dead and buryed, will goe with a Skuller by water. And all good fellows will mourne, for how should they be merry: They have reason to curse the Usurer, that did Mistresse Money bury. Thus Money was so beloved, that no man ever did scorn her And now being dead and buryed, the whole world will be her mourner. FINIS.
