e2317a 09527434 43489
Anno Regni JACOBI II. REGIS Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae & Hiberniae, Primo. At the Parliament begun at Westminster the Nineteenth Day of May, Anno Dom. 1685. in the First Year of the Reign of Our Most Gracious Sovereign Lord JAMES, by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, &c. royal blazon or coat of arms J2 R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill deceas'd: And by Henry Hills, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers To the KINGS most Excellent MAJESTY, 1685.
A TABLE OF THE STATUTES Printed and not Printed. Statutes Printed. 1 AN Act for Settling the Revenue on His Majesty for His Life, which was settled on His late Majesty for His Life. Page 3 2 An Act to Attaint James Duke of Monmouth of High-Treason. p. 7 3 An Act for Granting His Majesty an Imposition upon all Wines and Vineger, Imported between the Four and twentieth day of June, One thousand six hundred eighty five, and the Four and twentieth day of June One thousand six hundred ninety and three. p. 11 4 An Act for Granting to His Majesty an Imposition upon all To∣bacco and Sugar Imported between the Four and twentieth day of June One thousand sit hundred eighty five, and the Four and twentieth day of June One thousand sit hundred ninety three. p. 23 5 An Act for Granting an Aid to His Majesty by an Imposition on all French Linnens, and all East-India Linnen, and several other Manufactures of India, and on all French wrought Silks and Stuffs, and on all other wrought Silks, and on all Brandies Imported after the First day of July One thousand six hundred eighty five, and before the First day of July One thousand six hundred and ninety. p. 43 6 An Act for Repealing certain Clauses in an Act of Parliament made in the Nine an twentieth and Thirtieth years of the Reign of His late Majesty for Prohibiting French Commodities. p. 59 7 An Act for Reviving and Continuing two former Acts for Encouragement of Coynage. p. 63 8 An Act against the Importation of Gun-powder, Arms, and other Ammunition, and Utensils of War. p. 67 9 An Act to Enable His Majesty to make Grants, Leases and Co∣pies of Offices, Lands and Hereditaments, parcel of His High∣nesses Dutchy of Cornwall, or annexed to the same, and for Confirmation of Leases and Grants already made. p. 71 10 An Act for the Providing necessary Carriages for His Majesty in His Royal Progress and Removals. p. 79 11 An Act for Reviving an Act for Providing of Carriages by
Land and by Water, for the Use of His Majesties Navy and Ordnance. p. 87 12 An Act for Consolidating the Estates Tail and Reversion in Fee, which His Majesty hath in the Post-Office, and Twenty four thousand pounds per Annum of the Hereditary Excise. p. 89 13 An Act for Reviving a former Act for Exporting of Leather. p. 93 14 An Act for Continuance of three former Acts for Preventing of Theft and Rapine upon the Northern Borders of England. p. 95 15 An Act for Rebuilding, Finishing and Adorning of the Ca∣thedral Church of St. Pauls, London. p. 99 16 An Act for Clearing, Preserving, Maintaining and Repair∣ing the Haven and Piers of Great-Yarmouth. p. 112 17 An Act for Reviving and Continuance of several Acts of Par∣liament therein mentioned. p. 123 18 An Act to Encourage the Building of Ships in England. p. 131 19 An Additional Act for Improvement of Tillage. p. 135 20. An Act to Enable the Inhabitants of the Parish of St. Anne within the Liberty of Westminster, to Raise Money to Build a Church to be the Parish-Church there. 21 An Act for Repealing a Clause for Dividing of Commons in an Act of Parliament made in the Fifteenth year of King Charles the Second, Entituled, An Act for Settling the Dreyning of the Great Level of the Fens called Bedford-Level. The Statutes not Printed. 1 AN Act to Enable James Lord Butler of Moor-Park and Earl of Ossory in the Kingdom of Ireland, to make a Joynture to such Woman as he shall Marry. 2 An Act for the Naturalization of John Esselbron, Otto Geertz, David Becceler and others. 3 An Act for Rebuilding the Earl of Powis's House in Lincolns-Inn-Fields lately demolished by Fire. 4 An Act for the Conveyance of Fresh Water through several Grounds unto the City of Rochester. 5 An Act for Naturalizing Magdalen Pellazary and others. 6 An Act for the Naturalizing of James Dufais, Theodore Janssen and others. 7 An Act to Enable Edward MellerEsq to sell Lands for pay∣ment of Debts. 8 An Act for Erecting a new Parish to be called the Parish of St. James within the Liberty of Westminster. 9 An Act for the Repair of the Cathedral Church of Bangor, and for the Maintenance of the Choire there; and for the Augmentation of the Revenue of the Bishoprick of Bangor, and for an Augmentation of several Vicarages within the Comportions of Landinum in the Diocess of Bangor aforesaid. FINIS.
