e2893 11207897 46768
royal blazon or coat of arms At the Court at WHITEHALL, The 20th of July, 1683. Present The Kings most Excellent Majesty, Lord Archbishop of Canter∣bury Lord Keeper Lord President Lord Privy Seal Duke of Ormond Duke of Albemarle Earl of Peterborrow Earl of Sunderland Earl of Clarendon Earl of Bathe Earl of Craven Earl of Aylesbury Earl of Conway Viscount Falconberg Lord Bishop of London Lord Dartmouth Mr. Chancellor of the Exche∣quer Mr. Chancellor of the Dutchy. THe Right Honourable the Lords of the Committee for Trade and Foreign Plantati∣ons, having this day Present∣ed to the Board, a Report concerning New-England, toge∣ther with the Draught of a Declaration from His Majesty, to the Gover∣nour and Company of the Massachusetts-Bay, up∣on
issuing a Quo VVarranto against the Charter of that Colony; And the said Report and De∣claration being Read and Considered at the Board, It was Ordered, as it is hereby Ordered, That Mr. Edward Randolph be sent to New-England with the Notification of the said Quo VVarranto; which he is to Deliver to the said Governour and Company of the Massachusetts-Bay: And there∣upon to Return to give His Majesty and Account of his Proceedings therein; And one of His Majestie's Principal Secretaries of State, is like∣wise to Prepare the said Declaration for His Majestie's Signature, in order to be sent to New-England, and delivered to the Governour and Company, by the said Edward Randolph, as afore∣said. And it is hereby further Ordered, That His Majestie's Printers do forthwith Print, and deliver unto the said Edward Randolph, Two hun∣dred Copies of the aforesaid Declaration, as also One hundred Copies of all the Proceedings at the Council-Board, concerning the Charter of London, which were Printed by Order of His Majesty at this Board; to be Dispersed by him in New-England, as he shall think best for His Majestie's Service. PHIL. LLOYD.
Charles R. CHARLES the Second by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, &c. To all, to whom these Presents shall come, or may in any wise concern, Greeting. Al∣though We have thought fit to Issue Our Writ of Quo Warranto against the Charter and Privi∣ledges Claimed by the Governour and Company of the Massachusetts-Bay in New-England, by reason of some Crimes and Misdemenours by them Committed; Yet Our Will and Pleasure is, and We do hereby Declare, That the Private Interests and Proprieties of all Persons within that Our Colony, shall be Continued and Preserved to them, so that no man shall receive any Pre∣judice in his Freehold or Estate; and that, in case the said Corporation of the Massachusetts-Bay shall, before further Prosecution had upon the said Quo VVarranto, make a full Submission, and entire Re∣signation to Our Pleasure, We will then Regu∣late their Charter in such manner, as shall be for Our Service, and the good of that Our Colony, without any other Alterations, then such as We shall find necessary for the better Support of Our Government there.
And We do hereby further Declare and Direct, That all those Persons who are questioned in or by the said Quo Warranto, and shall go about to maintain the Suit against Us, shall make their De∣fence at their own particular Charge, without any help by, or spending any part of the Publick Stock of Our said Colony; And that as well those that are not Freemen, as such as are willing to submit to Our Pleasure, shall be Discharged from all Rates, Levies and Contributions to∣wards the Expence of the said Suit, both in their Persons and Estates. And Our further Pleasure is, That this Our Royal Declaration be Publish∣ed within Our said Colony, that none may pre∣tend ignorance hereof. Given under Our Signet and Royal Sign Manual at Our Court at Whitehall, the 26th day of Ju∣ly 1683. In the Five and thirtieth Year of Our Reign. By His Majestie's Command. L. JENKINS. LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill deceas'd: And by Henry Hills, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1683. Declaran about ye Governor & Company of the Massachusetts-Bay in New-England: 26th July 1683. His Ma Declaran upon issuing His Writ of Quo Warranto agt. the Charter & Privileges claimed by the Go∣vernor & Company of the Massachusetts-Bay in New-England; & ca. 26th July 1683
