F2288 R40979 19540326 109089
A Full and Perfect ACCOUNT of the Particulars of the Terrible and Bloody Fight which the Christian Army have ob∣tain'd over the whole Turkish Forces near the Bridge of Esseck. With a particular of what Plunder they have Seiz'd and Taken. Written from a Person of Quallity who was present in the whole Action. August the 30th. 1687. LEtters yesterday Afternoon (by three Flanders Mails) of the 21st. instant from Vienna bring us the Joyful increase, and Particulars of the Intire and Accomplish'd Victory the Christian Army have obtain'd over the Turks, near Darda the, 12th. Courant, for which Glorious Atchievment, their Imperial Majesties attended by all the Nobility of that Court, paid their Devotions in the Cathedral of St. Stephen, where Te Deum was Sung (with a Royal Salvo) of a Triple Discharge of all the Canon upon the Ramparts, continued by Vollies of Musquets, Resounding with Ringing of Bells, Bonefires, and Acclamations of the People; the same being brought the Emperor from the Duke of Lorain, by General Count Taaffe, since the dispatch of Prince Eugine of Savoy. The better to conserve the Method of acquiring this mighty Action, 'tis necessary at first to know the Inducement that oblig'd the Grand Vizier to quit his Impregnable Retrenchment, and give Battle to the Christians; on the 27th. the Grand Vizier passed the Drave with his Army, and Fortified his Camp near Darda, with two Modern Retrenchments in the Front, strengthned with Pallisados, having Esseck and the Drave in his Rear, the Danube and the Morass on his right, with a Wood and a Morass on his left; which being view'd by the Generals, 'twas judg'd Impossible without hazar∣ding the Ruine of the whole Army, to attaque and force his Camp; there∣fore 'twas resolv'd by some Stratagams of War, to draw the Grand Vizier from those secured Retrenchments, so March'd and Counter-march'd the Army in divers Figures, one Detatchment of them making shew as if they would repass the Danube at Mohaez, and go into high Hungary, whilst another made a feigned movement, of Marching towards Sygeth and Sycloss, not without being able suddenly to re-unite their Main Body, which the Turks perceiving, look'd upon it at first, as really it was intended, to decoy him out of his Post; and thereupon would scarce permit the Ravaging Tar∣tars to pick up some of our Forrigers, till believing they might be retreating in earnest, made some Detatchments to observe the Countenance of our Army, and sometimes Skirmished with our advanced Guards, gave us the Alarm; and having taken 200. of our Men, return'd to the Camp (flushed with this advantage) the Turks began to shew themselves in different Parties; our Generals contrived new Methods, Marching their Armies in several Fronts further afield, as well to be distant from a Wood, which incommo∣ded our Foragers, as to give the Grand Vizier a larger space of Ground with desire to follow us; But this March was yet in vain, yet notwithstanding, the same day we perceived a considerable Body of Turkish Cavalry in our Rear; But so soon as we faced about, and began to Skirmish with them, they made a hasty Retreat: The Duke of Lorain, by this time, judging that he should not be able to cause him to give Battle in open Field, took a resolution to March for Sycloss and Five-Churches, and withdraw those Garrisons, Demolishing the Fortifications, which otherwise might have fallen into the Enemies possession, began to move towards them on the 10th. and with easie Marches, continued the 11th. sending Baron De
Orlick to precede the Vant-Guard with 4 or 500 Horse; In this March, a great Body of Turkish Spahies did what they could to interrupt our mo∣tion, shewing themselves sometimes on the Wing, then on the Flanks; We enter'd upon Dispute with them, but they Retired with recipitation: On the Twelfth, the Grand Vizier thinking the CHRISTIANS were making the best of their way from him, would not loose the opportunity, but detach'd some of his best Troops, to give us a Diversion; and about two in the Afternoon 10000 Turkish Cavalry, and half the number of Janizaries came right upon our Left Wing, Commanded by the Elector of Bavaria and Prince Lewis of Baden, preceded by some German Curiasiers, who vigo∣rously sustain'd the Turkish Charge, but retir'd into their first Line: on a sud∣dain The Janizaries were Posted on an Eminence, with some Field-Pieces, and made continual Firing with small Shot, whilst 10000 of their Horse en∣deavour'd to put us in Disorder, which oblidg'd the Elector of Bavaria to extend his Front to be in proportion with that of the Enemy, the Regi∣ments of Savoy and Comercy sustain'd this first Charge, which was very fierce and obstinate; the Christians continuing firm with great Resolution and Courage, notwithstanding they were Attaqu'd in Front and Flank, the E∣lector came in Person to their Assistance, and found the Dispute so warm, that he received a Shot in his Hand, Prince Comercy a Wound in the Breast with an Arrow, which yet did not hinder his continuing in the Action, to give what necessary Orders were requir'd. The Duke of Lorain to get ground, causes at the same time, the Right Wing to March cross, and stretch towards the Flank of the Enemies, who Attack'd on the Left, and the Left went to meet another Body of Horse and Foot which March'd to Charge them, and now the Fight began to be bloo∣dy on both sides, the Victory hanging in suspense for two or three hours; but by the coming in of a fresh Detachment on the Christians side, the Turks began to lose ground, afterwards to mend their pace; and in the end, to take a perfect Flight. One Body of their Cavalry relying upon their Foot, put the whole in disorder; a great Slaughter being made, and we pursu'd the Enemy with so much Rigour and Heat, that we enter'd Pell Mell into their Camp; and made our selves with little resistance, Masters of both the En∣trenchments, and pursued the Enemy as long as the day would permit. This Victory is so great, as not to have any parallel for some Ages: We drove many into the Morass and Drave, where they perished; the Bridge over the River, through the weight of People thronging to get over, broke down; some say the Grand Vizier caus'd the same to be done, leaving a multitude on this side the Drave, who are retir'd to the Woods, Marshes, and Isles, where they are shut up: and must Surrender upon discretion, for want of Food: And some Persons report that there is no less than 25 or 30000 Men thus di∣spers'd. And of 15000 old Janisaries, scarce 50 are saved; and they reckon above 20000 are Kill'd and Drown'd. They have Seised a mighty Rich Booty, the Grand Vizier's Tent, which is fell to the Lot of the Elector of Bavaria, is so Rich in Gold, Pearl, Precious Stones, &c. as is inestimable. 116 Cannon, and Mortars taken, 6000 Head of Cattle, 1500 Camels, an hundred Buffulors seized 2000 Waggons with Provision and Ammunition, are fell into our Hands, a number of Tents, Standards, and Horses Tails, and there is scarce a Souldier but abounds in Gold and Silver. The Prisoners also Report, that the Grand Vizier had not been induced to come out of his Retrenchments, but by the Perswasion of some Christians in his Army, who Flatter'd him with assurance of Success; and that they should certainly take Prisoners the Dukes of Lorain and Bavaria; and thereby oblige the Empe∣rour to make Peace with the Grand Seigneur, and restore all the places in Hun∣gary he has Conquer'd during the War: But Providence has dispos'd other∣wise, and 'tis not to be doubted, but that this Glorious Victory will have a quite contrary Effect. LONDON, Printed by N. T. 1687.
