f2544 16437520 105393
A further ACCOUNT OF THE PROCEEDINGS Against the Rebels in Scotland, Since the Arrival of his Grace THE Duke of Monmouth. Communicated In a LETTER to a Person of Quality From EDENBƲRGH▪ Dated the 19th of this instant June, 1679. With the Substance of a New Declaration, Published by the Rebels. SIR, HIs Grace the Duke of Monmouth arrived at Eden∣burgh on the 18th instant, and was very honou∣rably entertain'd, his presence giving much assu∣rance and satisfaction to all his Majesties good Subjects in these parts, who express'd their joys in loud Shouts and Acclamations all the way as he pass'd in the City.
He was immediately received into the Privy Council; and ha∣ving seriously inquired into the present posture of Affairs, and consulted thereupon, being resolved vigorously to enter into Action, he neglected no time, but this day hastened to the Kings Host, who were marched away before on Tuesday, and lay encamped at Black-burn, where he is now at the head of them Commander in chief. They are very near Fourteen thousand strong, all well ap∣pointed, and full of Resolution and Zeal to serve his Majesty, and within a day or two will be much Encreased in number, if there shall be occasion for the same: for these Forces are onely those which come from the South, the West having never been employed, and those of the North are not yet come up; though from thence we may be confident of considerable Strength: For those parts are intirely dutiful to the King, not one place in all the Northern Shires having ever been infected with Fanaticism of any sort. The Rebels are about Hambletoun, but we have no exact Account of their Numbers; onely we have advice, That Welsh, the eminent, turbulent, and seditious Preacher, has lately joyned their Main body, with Three hundred men brought in by him; and that one Spreul a quondam Clerk of the Council under Cromwel, is President of their Commit∣tee, and a great Oracle amongst them. This man having for his Ill behaviour formerly been taken into custody, was suffer∣ed by the Council, not long since, to return home, upon his Parol, and solemn Engagement to live peaceaby: And yet was scarce any sooner at home, but he began to foment Sedi∣tion, and is now thus become a prime Ring-leader amongst the Rebels. And indeed we have little reason to expect any sincerity in the Promises of such men as make no Conscience of the Obligations of Loyalty. And by such their Indulgence to him, it appears how little severe the Council was in their Proceedings, and how ready to trust any persons that would peaceably demean themselves; they having never punisht any man for his Opinion, but suffered every thing which these men could call Religion, except going to the Field-Conventicles
in Arms, and suchlike insufferable Insolencies. Nor hath there been Fifty pounds Sterling exacted in Fines for House-Conventicles these three years; so false are all Reports of that nature suggested abroad, and onely coyned to make the Government odious, and colour Religion. 'Tis plain, this design has for some time been hatching: for Cameron, one of the Rebels, was privately imployed to go o∣ver into Holland to buy Arms, and from thence they were furnished; during his being there, he preached at Rotterdam, and declared that it was a pious thing to kill the Prelates, and highly pleasing to God. They commit strange Insolences and Barbarities, where-ever they come. At Glascow, a Butcher when they first at∣tempted that City, & were beat off, having shot one of them, they have since taken him, and by a Court-Martial of their own, Condemned and shot him to Death for the same, though what he did was fairly, as he was a Souldier under command. They have likewise taken down the heads of the Rebels who were Justly Executed for the Rebellion in the year 1666, and have buried them in great State within the Cathedral-Church of Glascow. And very lately they have emitted an impudent Declaration, wherein they publish their demands, the chief of of which are these, viz. That they would have a Parliament wherein there should not be any Noble-man; and a General As∣sembly wherein no Bishop or indulg'd Minister should be admitted. By which extravagant Devices, you may guess at the Qua∣lity of the men, and their Principles: for in truth there is not a man Five pounds Sterling per annum appears as for them; but they freely entertain Bankrupts and Malefactors, and yet pre∣tend highly to Religion, though much divided in their own notions.
They have not of late encreased their numbers, but rather moulder away; and the Gentry in general throughout the Land, appear very vigorous for the Kings Service. We are now ready to advance towards them, and do not doubt, by Gods Blessing, to give a good account of them very shortly, though the common opinion is, they will scatter themselves be∣fore we can get up to them. As soon as any Account happens, be assured, you shall have it; in the mean time accept my ser∣vice, and continue me in your prayers, &c. FINIS.
