G723 11309989 47412
: OR, ENGLANDS Passing-Bell. Psal. 80: 3. Turn us O God to thee again, For we too long have swerv'd: Cause thou thy face on us to shine, And we shall be preserv'd. Quarles Eleg. Offended Iustice often strikes by turns, Edom beware, for thy next neighbour burns: LONDON, Printed in the Year M. DC. LXXIX.
TO THE READER. REader, perhaps my melancholly Quill May dote; but let Melpom'ne weep her sill. Bear with her weakness, grudg not at her Tears; It springs not from her Envy, but her Fears: She is no hired Naenia; her moans Are like to purchase little else than stones. Then give her leave to mourn upon these Rocks; To ease her troubled heart to Stones and Stocks. Her sad abodings do not imprecate: But wish and warn thee to anticipate: And if there may no loyal method be Form'd to prevent thy hanging-Destinie Immure thy soul within those gracious Arms, That may protect thee from the Syrenes charms.
ENGLAND'S PASSING-BELL. I Am no Prophet, no, nor Prophet's Son; Yet dare pretend unto a Vision; Pretend, say I? nay, 'tis no meer pretence, Pretences do but juggle Conscience. I pray for peace, yea, I could die for't too A willing Sacrifice, if that would do. But what I do foresee, I dare foretell, God is now ringing ENGLANDS Passing-Bell, The sound is in mine ears, the doleful Toul Strikes strange amazement on my trembling Soul. She gasps for breath, her Optick nerves are crackt. Eyes sunk into their holes, her spirits rackt On fatal Tenters, and her Pulses beat To her oppressed soul a faint Retreat. Alas the day! these threatning symptoms call Her Friends to mind her of a Funeral. O thou the God of life, commiserate Thy foolish peoples self-undone estate! Calm all these Paroxismes, and allay Those mortal heats; so will I ever pray. 'Wake sottish Island! let thy ruins teach Thy Sons and Daughters to bewail the Breach. Where are thy Noahs, Daniels and Iobs? Are these the men, that in their linsie Robes Chant their Devotions? th' Angels of the Quire, Whose very Noses threat their shirts with fire; Whose Bacchanalian zeal's a flame they stole Not from the Altar, but Maeonian coal.
Are these the men, that with their Pipes can do The Counter-wonder on a Iericho? Ah! poor bewitched Land! how long wilt be Before thy banisht Wits return to thee? The Cup is in thine hand, hath toucht thy lips; Thou wring'st thy mouth at some distasteful sips: Fain would'st thou plead, enough; ay, so would I, Or drink it in thy stead, and for thee die. But what e're be the hopes that buoy thy mind, Unless I dream, the dreggs are yet behind. On whose unhappy heads this Lot shall fall God knows, the wrathful fate doth threaten all. Let him that thinks he's with a Bargain blest, Know, the last Nail may double all the rest. There are some few within thee that begin To smite the thigh, and to confess their sin. Others that think it safer to compound, To shark and shuffle while the Cup goes round. But if I know ought of thy constitution, Or of the Products of a Revolution, Compose the present Frights, and 'twill appear The Frogs now quasht will be as bold as e're. These brows of brass, these iron sinews may Shine like the gold, and bend like kneaded clay, Whilst an hot Furnace, preaching to the sence, Applys the terrour of a Providence; But once withdraw the coals, and you may see These Metals have not lost their Propertie. But as for Ionas, who's now Tarsus bound, Let him remember who a Ionas found. Let Demas know too, that his present world Will cheat his fond love, when he shall be hurl'd By an Ejectment from that dear possession, That lay in right of Heaven's Sequestration. And Iudas may be sure, his treacherous Kiss Shall be repay'd with lips as foul as his. Haman must also know, the Gibbet's up; Where Mordecai should dine, there he may sup. 'Twas not for lack of eyes the Iews were grown So strangely blind, that nought but Babylon
Could make them see; nor is't for lack of eyes I grope at noon, and fall, and cannot rise; But 'tis this Babylon the Mystical Hath blinded me; nay, which is worst of all, She is my mated Incubus, and hence I'm rid by her bewitching influence. O pity me, all ye that ever saw A Sampson snared by a Delilah! Were Moses here, sure he would sigh with me For their dear sakes; whose sin and slaverie Was once like mine: Or could I but produce A Ieremy, his eye should be the sluce To weep me out a bitter Lamentation, And to condole a bleeding dying Nation. With tears of blood I could sit down and mourn On my dear Children's most unhappy Urn▪ Thousands of sprightly youth, whose breasts and bones Were richly fill'd, have breath'd their fruitless moans Under that wrathful hand that did dispense The bloody arrows of the Pestilence. Sure death had never such a Table spread In any age, for ought we hear or read. How greedily he fed on rich and poor, As though he never meant to feast it more! Wit, wealth, or beauty, honour, sex or age, Made no distinction in his mortal rage. O cruel death! could not thy heart relent At those dear Infants that thy fury rent From tender mother's breasts! Could not their groans Have pierc'd thy heart, that might have pierced stones? Heaps upon heaps of choicest friends I saw; Our Glory's now become our Golgotha. Could not the Ancients venerable Hairs, (The silver Symbole of their age and cares) Have aw'd thy bold attempt? or pleaded pity, Who were the Eyes and Pillars of the City. Nor could thy sacrilegious hands forbear To rob our Churches of their Common-Prayer.
Th' affrighted Levite durst not for his head, Appear between the Living and the Dead. On him (poor Soul!) thou charged'st the extent Of his own Law, of five miles Banishment. O King of terrours great! how could'st thou quell The sacred vertue of his powerful spell, Against thy sudden stroak? or who should care For his forsaken Flock, whose Fleece they are? Now was not this enough? but must it be But the Praeludium to thy Tragedy? Whence is't, thou wert in combination found With Mars and Neptune, for a vantage ground? What! had poor Mortals over-matcht thee? or Hadst thou a Fit to hear the Cannons roar? To toss their shatter'd bones, and serve them in, As carved Messes, unto Triton's shrine? Or was't to prove how far thy pow'r would do, To feast not only Worms, but Fishes too? Was ever blood so prodigally spent? Whole Hecatombs seem'd little to present. Neptune himself could not but blush to see Thy greedy Altar's Anthropophagie. Did not the Passing-Bell go sad enough? That Cannons hellish mouths must speak how rough And grim a Ghost thou art? for this, will I Ne're hope to bribe thee when I come to die. O Death! what is my sin, that still I hear Those ruthful sighings to torment my ear? Behold the Fatherless and Widows eyes, The woful Relicts of thy Sacrifice. Would God, say they, our dearest blood had run In those dear veins, from which our blood begun; Then had we been as happy as the dead, And ne're have pin'd for lack of daily bread. Ah me! methink with grief and shame I see The hostile rage of the proud enemy Insulting on our shores, who durst not peep, Had they not found us in so dead a sleep. Then might Philistims with advantage come, When Sampson's shorn, and lull'd with Opium.
Oh! then who could but rent his heart to see Our Glory led into captivity? Those floating Eulwarks, and of Royal race, The envy of the world, that ne're gave place To a superiour, nor could e're be mated By those of whom they were both fear'd and hated; That like a thunder, brake the thickest clouds Of bold assaults, and scatter'd all the crouds Of martial force, that could command their way, And dash their foes like pots of glass or clay. With what reproach and ignominious boasts Led they their captive prey to foreign coasts! Then farewell Royal Charles! yet this shall be Our joy and triumph still, that here is He By whose great name th'rt call'd; let Shadows go, (The substance being come) sith't must be so. Might here my sorrows end, I'd ne're lament As one undone; but ah! my Fate is bent To rack my guilty bones, and to devise New methods, that her fury may comprize All the sad stories of the Ages past, As though this scene were to us both the last. From Plague and Sword, my mournful eyes I roul On that amazing mirrour, which my soul So trembles to behold; my Strength, my Crown, My Hope, my Magazeen, which now was grown From Troy novant, to Troy le grand, is now My Troy l'extinct; thus must the mighty bow When God will humble them, and lick the dust When once he smites; for sure this God is just. But Oh! th' unhappy day that dawn'd in Flames, Flames that contemned all the floods of Thames. What! could no Engins art nor power prevail? Were Samson's Foxes turned tayl to tayl? 'Twas some strange God, no doubt, that should require So chargeable an Offering made by fire. London and Sodom may sit down together, And now condole the Ashes of each other. For sin they perisht both, and both by Fire, But here's the odds; Efficients did conspire
In different methods; that from Heaven came, This from beneath: a black and hellish flame, A spark of Faux's Cell, infernal coals Matur'd for service in some Stygian holes. How did the hungry flames devour their prey! And lick up stones like straw! and force their way Through all obstructions, Nature, Art, or Might Had rais'd to check their desolating flight! With what stupendious terrour did they roul From street to street, disdaining all controul! As though the lungs of wide-mouth'd Aeolus Had been in sacred Oath to drive them thus! What horrour, think you, what distractions then Seiz'd on the heart of our poor Citizen! What bitter cries, complaints and lamentations! While some bewail their own loss, some the Nations! Some die for very grief, and others curse The late indulgence of a faithful Nurse. Alas! no tongue nor pen can e're express The Hurries, Hazards, and the sad distress. Was ever grief like mine! Deeps call to Deeps: And what one Judgment spares, the second sweeps. This Scald, I doubt, I shall bear in my face Unto my grave, with grief and sore disgrace. And now, if Plague and Sword, and Fire wont do To melt the heart, and let the captive go; I dread the thoughts of some impendent scourge,☞ More like to be a Poyson than a Purge. Good God! avert whatever it may be; Avenge not on us our Iniquitie. Sin has gone big; but ah! we knew it not: She's now in Travel, and her reckonings out; The fore springs come, which threatens what may be The Birth, if God permit Deliverie. Lord strangle thou the Monster in the womb, And let the Mothers bowels be its Tomb. But if my wandring Muse should chance to fly Within the compass of that Royal eye,
Whose very Aspect gives her life or death, And for whose sake this Die she ventureth; She will confess 'tis bold to soar so high, To trip on Crowns; the beams of Majesty May shine too hot for such Icarian wings, And melt the Copper of her feeble strings. She has no wanton nor prestigious Lyricks To fawn on Kings with flattering Panegyricks. But her true loyal heart she'l ne're betray, Though she can't vent it in the Courtiers way. Nor will she e're bethink her sworn Allegiance, Or boggle at her duty of obedience; Although the Persians have contriv'd their snare, And made it criminal if found at Prayer. Pardon, dread Sov'raign, if some rambling fit Transport her honest zeal, and so commit A sin Poetical; Her Pegasus Is Saddle-gall'd, and therefore hobbles thus. She gads eccentrick; hence it is she hovers On every Pinacle that hope discovers; Under these gracious wings my Dove may find Protection, if propitiously inclin'd. I hate those Tongues, whose morsels make them loyal, To serve their Int'rest on the Favour Royal. I only wish their Lips may never shew Those bloody Teeth that just within them grow. Nor that those Hooded Moths may ever sit So near the Crown as to dishonour it. I'le ever pray the King may know his Friends, And fully understand his Flatterers ends. The Kingdom groans, although her King be come! Why! what's the matter? sure he's welcome home. Alas! she's sick, and of some strange disease, Which neither Kings nor Parliaments can ease, Until that God, whom th' Athiest doth contemn, Do purge the Blood of our Ierusalem. I'le say no more here, but God save the King, From whom, or whatsoe're may mischief bring!
And what if I let loose my scribling Fancy, To give a piece of her poor Chronomancie Unto her Honourable Senate, who If God incline their hearts, great things may do. O Sirs! ye are our wise Physicians, and Ye have the sickest Nation now in hand That e're had men: The first step to a cure Is to know the cause of what we do endure. The cause is complicated both in Civil And Spiritual respects; a twisted evil, Deep Labyrinths we're in; our strong foundations Do shake and tremble; dismal Desolations Seem to attend us: Lord! avert this cup, And let thy bloody En'mies drink it up. Ye're our Physicians, Sirs! Oh! cast the state Of your sick Patient, and prevent that Fate Her Enemies threaten, and her fears suggest, And all Posterities shall call you blest. O cast abroad your wise and prudent eyes, And pity, pity England's miseries. Let not the Canaanite reproach and laugh To see us breaking of that Golden staff On our own Shoulders, which might else have been Our Rod to rule, and reins to hold them in. Our costly Pills indeed have purg'd the Purse, But our disease is growing worse and worse. Poor England's hour is come! a Trinitie Of wrestling Int'rests in her bowels lye. Two Opposites might happy Union know, If well concenter'd in some Tertio. Three Contradictories will never be Espoused in a fair consistencie. Those that consult the peace and good of State, I think (as case stands) must accommmodate. Sirs! pity those poor hearts that cannot see With any other eyes than those that be Their own; some squeamish stomacks turn at Cheese, Which I won't give for all our Coquus Fees. Were all confin'd to one Dish, and no other, You'd poyson me with what you feed my brother.
When you can pare all Bodies to one stature, And club the Elements into one nature, And make all faces of the same complexion, (which will scarce be ev'n at the Resurrection) Then may you find all Consciences agreed In nice Punctilio's, and our judgments freed From quaint Idea's, which not understood, Have bred us this dissenting Brotherhood. Religion is that Primum Mobile Of States and Kingdoms, yea, their Int'rests be Mov'd in their Politick Circungyrations, Upon this golden Pole, the soul of Nations. Lord! so co-ordinate each gliding Sphere, As that their motions may not interfere. Two parallel lines are never like to greet, Till Capricorn with sultry Cancer meet. If each would stoop to other, you might see Our Tabernacl's handsome Canopie. Our First is up; where are the Builders now? Come! shut the Roof, and let the Rafters bow. Is it impossible such storms should rise From Hell or Rome, as may convince our eyes? Our Walls will tumble if they want a Cover; Why! 'tis but mud, though it be varnisht over. All ope' at top? nay, ev'ry Thief may enter, And scale our naked Walls; who's mad to venture His Life and Fortunes on such Guards, and let His Iewels hazard such a Cabinet? Well! in this naked case, I'le pray, I'le sing To him that is both Walls and Covering. Alas! poor London! who can see thine Ashes, And not sit down and score those angry lashes Thy righteous Judg hath in just wrath inflicted For that whereof thou hadst been long convicted? Thy Prophets were not dumb, but thou wert deaf: They warn'd in season; but thy unbelief Was warning-proof: like knotty crooked wood, They rul'd and hew'd thee for a common good,
Until their hearts did ake, and arms did tire; At last thou art condemned to the Fire. Thou could'st out-face the frowns of Pestilence. Daring provoked Justice to commence In hotter Plagues: That Cup is fill'd thee now, That hath abasht thy proud and shameless brow▪ Old Sodom was in our young London found, Yea, more than Sodom did in her abound, And now if any will of London hear, To Sodom he may go, and find her there. In thee was found the blood of Martyrs, yea, The murder'd blood of Royal Majesty. Oaths, Drunk'ness, Lust, and ravenous Oppression, Pride and Deceit, the spots of high Profession. In thee was found the woman Iezebel, With those infernal Locusts that compell Her Proselytes to commit Fornication; Which were sad Omens of thy Desolation. And now, my Daughter, may we come to treat With that poor Rag that's left? or art too great Yet to incline thy stubborn ear? Remember In Sixty-six thou hadst a hot September. He that thy Remnant, like a smoaking Brand, Then snatcht out of the fire, with the same hand Can crush what he hath sav'd; nay, look thou to it, Lest perad venture he indeed may do it. True Penitentials might have prevented That fearful breach that's now in vain lamented. The Buckets of thine eyes had checkt the Flames, If well appli'd, 'fore all the Pow'rs of Thames. But Epimetheus doth but aggravate And rake the wound▪ by being wise too late. Yet for the future, if thou wilt be wise, And re-espoused, thus I do advise. Thine Ashes steept in penitent tears may Make thee a Lie to wash thy shame away. Thou hast been in the smoak, (and wash thou must); Both in the smoak of Fire, and smoak of Lust. Wash therefore, make thee clean, and thou shalt be As in the days of thy Virginity.
Thy Bricks are fallen, wilt thou change them for The Hewen Stone? and turn the Sycomore Into the Cedar? yea, and be it so! And let thine Ashes to a Phoenix grow! But yet I doubt, thy pregnant hopes may prove A Babel's project, unless God above Unite thy Languages, and undertake Both to begin, and a full end to make: Be both thy Builder, and thy Corner-stone, And raise thee in a Modell of his own. Lord! rear thy London's Walls, and purge her blood, And let her know thou hast chastiz'd for good. Make her thy Sion, thine Emanuel's Land, And let her Ruins be under thine hand. The World is God's great Wheel, his Providence The hand that turns it; its intelligence, The Wheel's in motion; but the rising side Will still pursue their chase, till they bestride The whole Circumference; and then beginning To take their turn again they fall a whining; Complain of Envy, Pride, Revenge, Oppression, Which just before was but their own ambition. Rebeccah's Twins! we catch each others heel, And ne're observe the Dog that's in the wheel. Lord! shall we e're have wit enough to know To poise our selves in Aequilibrio? Sure God hath set his Ministers for Lights In a blind, giddy world; the Rechabites Of an apostate age; but sure I am, There are too many of the seed of Cham, Yet can Canonical Adoption lurch, And so are naturaliz'd Sons of the Church. The Clergy's Gods inheritance; but these Are Pliny's Insects, Worms that spoil the Bees, Those sweet industrious creatures; Aesop's Dogs, That starve the Ox, but will not touch the Hogs, Whose blushing Carbuncles, and purple faces, Are no Crown Iewels, nor the Churches Graces.
Will a debauched Clergy e're invest Your Cause with an applauded Interest In sober minds? Will a sulphureous zeal, In things confest indifferent, ever heal Our dismal breaches? or what! do you hope To make us your Peace-offring to the Pope? But I have better thoughts; yet pray take heed Lest you and we both offer'd be indeed. While we contend for shadows, there are those That will their greedy clutches interpose, And seize that Morsel, which preserv'd, might be The Medium of our Correspondencie. What! are we Artick and Antartick? must The Mother separate the Babes she nurst? Did one womb bare us? and what! are we now No nearer kin at all, than I, and thou? Sirs! is't not bold enough to set your Post By Gods? to introduce a ragged Host Of Ceremonies, borrowed of that Groom, (For the most part) that keeps his Stall at Rome? But would you back to Egypt shuffle too, In hopes to feast it on their flesh-pots? you May chance to change your wood for worser Timber; Nay, there's a Red Sea too, as I remember, 'Twixt us and them, where Pharoah and his Host Were buri'd once: although his restless Ghost Still haunt our shores, and with his Magick strive To serve his Capias on's, Dead or alive. Are Egypt's Leeks such Dishes! let me tell ye, Their Tale of Bricks may chance to fill your belly! Sirs! you that bear so stiff from Scylla, may In a Charibdis cast your selves away. 'Twill vex you sure (yet help it while you can) When you are plac't behind the Veteran. Turn Capuchins then, if your guts will bear it; Though you have won it, let your Lord-Danes wear it. Your Rubrick, Articles, and Canon-Law, You may set back with the Apocrypha. Some Mendicancy of unbounded Order May be your Monitor, and my Recorder.
Nay, were it not for our Faith's Great Defender, Whose prudent jealousie hath been so tender In this important case, they'd run us down☜ E're this, (for ought I know) Miter and Crown. This piece of Logick I can't understand, No Bishop, if no ceremony; and No King, if there no Lordly Bishop be; I must confess they'r Parables to me. Nay, in the fancy of my jealous Reason Its consequence speaks little less than Treason. But be it so, I never will impeach you, Nor yet presume for 'tis in vain) to teach you what's the conclusion of your Syllogism (If I might urge this piece of Catechism) But this? no ceremony, then no King; And what's a ceremony but a thing So adiaph'rous, that his Lordship may Pro libitu, impose or throw away? This Papal Oracle in its Essaies Was practically known in Becket's daies. And is the Crown then but a ceremony? Will you believe St. Thomas and his Chrony Who had near prov'd it once? shall th' Scepter be But a poor Pinacle of a Bishops See? I dread those Politicks that do advise To perch the Miter on State-dignities! Nay, let the Crosiers staff and Lawn-sleeves lye Some Orbs beneath the Sphere of Majesty. And may I now presume to speak a word To those my Brethren, that are thus abhor'd? Ye are the Salt, Sirs! that hath lost its savour With men, at least, and therefore lost their favour. But like unsav'ury Salt, though ye are cast, It may be 'tis their mouths are out of taste. If so, they may come or't, when they have try'd That cellar which they have so magnify'd. For my part, I think yours to be the cheaper, And far the better too, for the House-keeper.
But sith 'tis so, that out at doors you must, And trampl'd on be, both by Law and Lust, I hope you will not murmur, but reflect, And own that Hand, that doth these Heels direct. Although your eager spirits have been fed On those crude humours that the times have bred, Which have dissolv'd your sweet consistencies Into that brine, which now leaks at your eyes: Yet when this brine is boil'd and scum'd, who knows How the good Steward may of it dispose? Rome! Rome! thine Hour is coming though't be long; Thy Mattens sung, turn to thy Even song. Thou struggl'st hard to grasp within thy wings The Churches Dowry, and the Crowns of Kings; To brood those Chickens thou didst never hatch, That so thou maist thy prey at pleasure catch. Thou crouchest low a Favourite to be, And boastest highly of thy loyalty. But yet these Visards thou dissemblest with, Are cut one inch too short to hide thy teeth. We can't forget thy love in Eighty-eight, When thy kind Visit cast us on that streight. The poor Waldenses, and cold Piedmont Have felt thy mercy, with sharp Comments on't. Let Ireland's Tears, and England's long experience Produce their Records of thy vow'd Allegiance. Thy Sacrifices in Queen Maries daies; Thy faith and service prov'd so many waies To her Successors; Faux's Loyalty In that unparallel'd Conspiracy; Thy secret Hit at our late Soveraign's Head, Which at one blow struck his three Kingdoms dead; The dismal ashes of our City Royal; All these bespeak thee trusty, kind, and loyal. But hark! in London's dust these coals that rest☞ May sindg thy Plumes, and chance to fire thy Nest. Muntzer no doubt had play'd the man, if we Had better fee'd his sacred Fealty.
Our happy War, with its triumphant feats; Our lingring Treaties, and undoing cheats; Our beggar'd subject, yet indebted Prince, Are of your loyal hearts clear evidence. Whole Volumes here each word doth comprehend; More I could say too, had I time to spend. England's a Vine, a sowre and barren one; Her Judgments come, God seems to cut her down. Had I a Stentor's lungs, I'd stretch them here, To rouze those stupified souls, that fear But what they feel, whose Dreams are sweeter to 'um Than Life or Gospel, till their Dreams undo 'um. We have undone our selves; I'le say no more, For 'tis not words that will our Paths restore. 'Tis sport enough for Gath and Askelon, To see our emulous zeal to carry on Their grand designs, and with what art we spin Our selves a Halter to be hanged in. What! hath their Curfue ring'd us all to bed? Shall they that strike us thus, next strike us dead? Good God! what ails us? are we all run mad? Is there no sober party to be had? O bring us so far to our selves, as we May once devolve the care and cure on thee! Nay, may a Bethlem bring us to our wits, To Bethlem let us go to cure these Fits. But let it not (as some would have it) be☜ The Bethlem we were in 'bout Forty-three. I am for peace, let false and bloody minds Be Cyrus-like, rewarded in their kinds▪ But I'm condemn'd, it's like, by good and bad; My Muse is peevish, froward, bold and mad. 'Tis true, she's apt to speak her fears, but so As she may timely caution Friend and Foe. Let none be grieved at her sad Presages, Or think her melancholly spirit rages. When times of laughter come, she'l laugh with you; And when you sing, she'l strike in consort too▪
But oh! let not her counsel be her crime, Though it may seem to you born out of time. We know who 'twas that breath'd on Israel's bones, He that can form him children out of stones. He that sav'd Peter on the raging Seas Will save his Church too, when and how he please. Then be content, let Faith and Patience be Your Life, your Refuge, and your Victorie. The RIDDLE. THere was a Man, (l've heard my Grandsire say) That had two Sons that in his bosom lay: The first was Bat, a sober loving youth, But through much weakness, very slow of growth; The other Ned a lusty jocund child, But that he prov'd extreamly high and wild These grew together; Ned was Father's Boy; Who knew it well, and therefore did imploy His wits and interest against his Brother To get his Birth-right: yea, sware to his Mother To be his Guardian, and as tender of him As she could be, who did so dearly love him. So 'twas agree'd through much ado; but Ned Grew proud and high, which great Dissentions bred. In short, the House fell into such a flame Of strife between the Master and the Dame, That all the Neighbourhood began to ring; Some wept to hear it, other some did sing. Among the rest there was one neighbour Cross, Who's alway wont to gain by others loss. This Cross (they say) had an old servant been Unto the House these Children lived in, But justly long before had been cashier'd For sev'ral urgent causes that appear'd. This Villain, seeing these broils thus begun, Hopes now to reel the yarn that he had spun▪
VVorks with both Parties, but at such a distance, That neither was the neer for his assistance: How e're it was, at length 'twas thus agreed; Ned must away, and so the House be freed. Then Cross with Bat and's Mother would collogue; But they defie him for an arrant Rogue. Some say, Had it not been for such as he, These sparks had never fir'd the Family. Few of his Neighbours have a good word for him; No more but Ned swears that he doth abhor him▪ Thus scann'd on all hands, he must hide his face, And act his part by those that are in place; And so he did, until the House did grow Too hot for Father, Ned, and Mother too. Thus Bat is left alone, shakes every limb, For fear of what was now attending him. By secret Packets then he did implore His Father's powerful presence, to restore His dving hopes: The Father mounts his steed, His wings are impt with pity, joy, and sheed. But with the Father home comes busling Ned, Calls all his own, his Mother being dead. (Though Bat were promis'd, Ned should never more Presume to set his foot within the door.) Bat over-joy'd to see his Father come, Rings out the Bells to bid him welcome home. Ned makes some offers to capitulate; Being forc'd thereto, but after some debate, The bus'ness comes to this, poor Bat must be What Ned will have him, nay, for ought I see He'd rather that he might not be at all, Poor love, you'l say, and but this brother all. The Father being griev'd to see this strife Between his Children, looks him out a Wife To rule the stubborn lads; the Mother law Takes Bat in hand, and swears she'l whip him raw. The Bed's prepar'd, where both these Boy's must lye, To lull them into Uniformity. Ned leaps in first, and with him Spot his Cur, He puts off ne're a Rag, Cloak, Boots, nor Spur.
Poor Bat would fain lye down too by his Brother: He shuts in one foot now, and then the other; Intreats for room, but Ned begins to thunder, That if he would lye there, he must lye under. Hard terms, you'l say, but melancholly Bat (Had that been all) would scarce have stuck at that, But through disorders and excess in drink, (Which was his life) his very skin did stink; His clothes were all with mire and vomit drest, That Bat crys out, Sure Ned! th'hast foul'd thy Nest. Is this the fashion thou intend'st to lye? Thy Dog may like it well, but so can't I. But weeps, and bids Good night, and looks about For some dark corner, where to cry it out. But Ned's offended thus to hear him roar, And bid's his Mother turn him out at door. Now Bat must wander; yet I've heard him say, That while he lives he'l do no worse than pray For Father, Mother, and for Ned, all three, And for the rest of his dear Family. Where's Cross this while? has he been idle? no: He hands his fails as every wind doth blow. When Ned was come, thought he, There's none that can Be so well spar▪d, to be his Gentleman As I; by this, and one trick more, I know I shall be chosen for his Bed fellow; Then Art shall fail me, if it be not sed, In few days more, Cross is as good as Ned. And to this end, he first accuses Bat Of Frenzv, Murder, Theft, and who knows what! Which Ned lik'd well; on whose report it was (Some say) that Bat's Ejectment came to pass. Howe're it was, it seems that Ned and Cross Were well enough agreed, though 'twere too gross To hold an open correspondencie Which might to their Designes destructive be. These Tragedies premis'd, Cross thinks he may Begin to scrape, and make some fresh Essay To prove his loyalty; but some cry out, Nay, he's a Thief; others reply, no doubt
But we may trust him now; he has been try'd, 'Tis Bat's the greater Thief, Cross is be-ly'd. But most affirm, that Bat's the honest man; And Cross's cringing is but to trepan. These were shrewd rubs, at last, in the smooth Run Of Cross's hopes; but what is thus begun Can't linger now, for when the Ulcer's gone Unto a rotten Suppuration, It struggles hard for vent, and so did this, Resolving to attempt it, Hit or miss. First, he engag'd th' unhappy Family In an unlucky brawl, with two or three Of their malignant Neighbours; some say 'twas The Ghost of an old grudg reviv'd, a mass Of scurrilous reproaches, and such things As soon produc'd these bloody Quarrellings; But that which did these furious feuds advance (Most say) was claim to an Inheritance. However 'twere, Cross serves his Interests here; Nay, boasts it too, that he had brew'd the Beer Wherewith he hop▪d shortly to entertain Such other Friends as once came out of Spain. Most of the Family were griev'd to see This cursed Villain's pride and treachery▪ It were too sad and tedious to tell All those defeats and mischiefs that befell This poor divided House, how Mogonde swagger'd. And sharkt and robb'd, till both were almost beggar'd; The Stables plunder'd, and the Garners fir'd By such Accomplices as Cross had hir'd. And is't not strange, that such a Rogue as he Should thus bewitch so brave a Family! Well! Ned may know, if ever he be wise, What clouds they are that thus be-night his eyes.
The Bill of Request. THere is a Woman (Sir) and she a Friend That lyes in Travell, and is like to end Her own life and her Babes at once; her case Is often spread before the Throne of Grace; Her Midwives also have almost undone her, And left her worse than when they first began her▪ 'Twill cost her bitter Throws (poor Heart) I doubt, If ever she have strength to weather't out. Your Prayers are desir'd for such an one, That you would mind her case before the Throne. Pray give this Bill to one that is devout Among the Priests, if you can find him out. ROMANZI. 'TWas when the Heaven's winged Charioteer Was swiftly racing in his high carier Through Cancer's hot Ascendent, whose fierce beams Exhal'd from parched Earth those sweating steams Which left her surface, (like a Niobe Bak't to a crust) curst with an Atrophie. And when, besides the Torrid Influence Of Aestive Rays, the dire malevolence Of three Coelestial Heroes did conspire In their Trine-aspect, to incense the fire. That I descending from the lofty brow Of a steep Hill, where just beneath did grow A shady Grove, which the fair Dryades Had lately chosen for their Chap'l of ease; And fast by, Neptune comb'd his powder'd Locks In the course teeth of sharp and craggy Rocks. I heard (methought) the sighs of deep despair From off the Grove, refract the gentle air. At these strange Eccho's being mov'd, I stood Amuz'd a while, at length drew to the Wood;
Where the first words that met my ear, were these, After a sigh: Ay! they do what they please! Would ever men, that were not worse than mad, (Yea, mauger all those cautions we have had) Have done as we have done? but 'tis too late, Now that the steed is gone, to shut the Gate. To whom reply'd another, with an Oath, Nay now, no doubt, but we shall thrive forsooth▪ Our En'mies we have thrice quite overthrown, And forc't their mourning Widows to atone Our Grace and Favour; men could ne're have done More bravely, and have won what we have won. Old Noll the Tyrant would have gnasht to see The rich successes of his Enemy In his old Field, recounting what it cost him, Yo do what we have done; yea, what it lost him In not improving what his Tyrannie Had gain'd, when he had brought them on the knee. But what! we could not chuse but prosper thus, While God and man did so encourage us. Indeed the Oracle spake plain, methought, But that we deem'd it as a thing of nought, An accident in London's first Oblation, Whose Gifts and whose Devotions acceptation Was witnessed by fire; I think she may Expound the Omen now without a Key. Provisions we had store, but wisely cookt; Great wages too, but that tis most on't bookt. Such care our Commissaries had, it's sed Our very Powder-casks were ballasted. In short, most honestly 'twas rigg'd and man'd, Like to go through what e're we took in hand. Well, well, Marinus! said the other, you Can jest it out, as you are wont to do. Iest! said Marinus, could I get my Pay, It were a jest indeed, the merriest day That I, or my poor wife and babes have seen Since the first hour that we divorc't have been. I would redeem their Pledg, and set them free From thy contentious, Parish-charitie.
The other griev'd to hear this well known story, Breaks this Discourse: Where's then, says he, the glory Of your great Victories? The glory, said Marinus; Nay, you may see, when those that undermine us Have done their shuffle and begin to cut, Into whose hands the Master-Trumps are shut. There's nothing vext me more than this, that we Must thus adventure Life and Liberty To take a Prize, which then must be conducted By us their Convoys, as they were instructed. —Take you Monsieurs! must our Vict'ry make Courtiers of you, and us slaves for your sake? Is this the way to raise our Countrey credit? And to eternalize his fame that did it! Hold! said the other, now you seem to rage; Passion can hardly keep due Equipage. Passion! quoth he, I take him for an Ass, Or for an Angel, that in such a case Can rule his Passions; but I'le say no more, Sith I can't say but what was known before. The other whom by his discourse I take To be a Country-man, reply did make: It is observ'd, said he, though but by few, We never thriv'd since that Black Bartholomew; Then pluckt we out our Eyes, and thought to see By a Canonical Ophthalmistry. But now we'r into Ditch, who ever't were That led us thus: but hark methink I hear The Pixie laugh; but we shall cry (I doubt, Or something worse) before we scramble out. Ho! said Marinus, if it be but so, Turn something in and out, and that will do. Turn something in and out! said th' other, ay, Were that but done, we might hit out the way. But how shall this be done? Be done? said he, Why! 'tis half done already! Out there be Coats turn'd enough; might they again turn In Body and sleeve, our hopes might here begin. What hath this beetle brow'd suspicion spy'd In them or theirs, it's still so evil ey'd?
Since that most black and dreadful day of Bats, That pip't our Fathers off to bring these Rats? That's not the business, said the Country-man, There's still a jealous head, though nothing can Be prov'd; I doubt, from that kind Principle, On which Cain on his righteous Brother fell: They must be Lords, and rule like Kings; but not By Canon Law, but by their Cannon-shot. But what! let these alone, a few years more May this mad Priesthood to their wits restore. But there's a cloud which hath been gathering About these six years; if it chance to wring It self upon our shores, our case may be The parallel of a sad Germanie. Besides those home-bred vipers which we hug In our own breasts, where they have drawn the Dug So dry, that now they draw our very blood: And here's the curse; it is not understood. Not that we do bethink our Sov'raign Lord The utmost that our Lands or Lives afford. But when our Plough-shares must perverted be Into Stilletoes for an Enemie: This makes me fret, and wish my limber goad (In a just call) might do as Shamgar's did. Our Senators (they say) are in a maze; They stare on us, and we on them do gaze. But 'tis no wonder; 'twas once so with Saul; We fight with God, and therefore needs must fall. Our Foes are greedy, early, strong and wise, They're on their way, e're we can find our Eyes. Our Eyes are lockt up in a Pix (they say) Where 'twill be hard to get without the Key. Lord help us! Sir our Story's like to be Our poor Posterities dismal Tragedy▪ Thus we sit here, and in complaining spend Our wretched Hours and Thoughts, and to what END? The ECCHO.Eccho. Weep. Rome. Ay. THine House is foul; Lord, wilt thou sweep? We weep; Lord sweep; But with what Broom? Fast then, and throw the Shrub away.
The POSTSCRIPT. READER! 'tis now almost six years twice told My Muse conceiv'd; so that this Brat's born old▪ Yet even then it had Nativity; But ever since hath mist Epiphany; I took it for still born, and buried it, As smother'd by an Epileptick fit. But since that time, it seems its Ghost hath walkt; And with some Friends familiarly talkt. I do not know whereof it might complain; But this they say, they'l dig it up again In hopes to make the Bones and Dust to speak, Which so long lay in silence, and to break The nap of this poor Dormouse. I confess It's not grown out of season, more or less; Much of what then did look like Prophesie, Late actions have turn'd into History. So that to read aright, thou must begin Eleven years back, and think how things were then. Yet some things here thou'lt find, which I have reason Enough to think will ne're be out of season. And once more may I speak but what I think, You'l find the bitterest cup is yet to drink. The Ball is up, by that the Game is out, Those that survive will wish for death, I doubt: When that curst Fox that's now unkennel'd shall Turn head against the Chase▪ we stand or fall. Ah me! methinks I see the bloody Field; But here's my comfort; Heaven is my shield. I smell the Battel, and you'l shortly see How you are juggl'd to your Destinie. When God shall heal the sickness of this Nation, And purge her Blood by an Evacuation, Yea, when our veins shall weep their fountains dry, And shed those crimson Tears, which from the eye Might have been better spar'd; then shall we know With what a God England hath had to do. FINIS.
