L1397 13111136 97638
A LETTER From Gentleman OF THE City of New-York To nother, Concerning the Troubles which happen'd in That Province in the Time of the late Happy REVOLUTION. Printed and Sold by William Bradford at the Sign of the Bible in New-York, 1698.
SIR; I Cannot but admire to hear that some Gentlemen still have a good Opinion of the late Disorders committed by Capt. Jacob Leyster, and his Accomplices, in New-York, as if they had been for His Majesties Service, and the Security of that Province; and that such Monstrous Fals∣hoods do find Credit, That the Persons before in Com∣mission, & did labour to oppose & prevent those Disorders, were Jacobites, or Persons ill affected to the Happy Revo∣lution in England. But it has been often the Calamity of all ges to palliate Vice with false Glosses, and to criminate the best Actions of the most Virtuous and most Pious Men. So that Truth and Innocency, without some Defence, has not proved at all times a sufficient Bullwok against malitious Falshoods and Calumnies. Wherefore I shall endeavour to give you a true and brief Accout of that matter, as I my self have been a Personal Witness to most of them. It was about the beginning of April, 1689. when the first Reports arrived at New-York, that the Pince of Orange, now his present Majsty, was arrived in England with considerable Frce, and that the late King James was fled into France, and hat it was expected War would be soon proclaimed between England and France. The Leiut. Governour, Frances Nchoson, and the Council, being Protestants, resolved thereupon to suspend all Roman Catholicks from Command and Places of Trust in the Government, and accordingly suspended Major
Baxtr from being a Member of Council and Captain of a Cmpany at Abany, and Bartholomew Russl from being  in the  at New-York, they both being Papists, who forth-with st their Command, and departed the Province. And because but three Members of the Council were residing in New York, viz. ir. Frederick Phillips, Coll. Stephanus Cortlandt, & oll. Nicolas Bayard, all of Dutch Birth, al Members, and the two last, for the space of near thirty Years pst Elders and Deacons of the Dutch ro∣testant Church in New-York, and most affectionate to the Royal House of Orange; It was Resolved by the said Leu. Govrnor and Council, to call and conveen to their Assistance all the Justices of the Peace, and other civil Magistrates, and the Commission Officers in the Provnce, for to consult and advise with them what might be proper for the Preservation of the Peace, and the Safety of said Province in that Conjuncture, till Orders should arrive from England. Whereupon the said Justices, Magistrates and Officers were accordingly convened, and stiled by the Name of The General Conventin for the Province of New York; and all matters of Government were carried on and ma∣naged by the major Vote of that Convention. And in the first place it was by them agreed and ordered, Forth-with to fortifie the City of New-York. And that for the better Security of the Fort (since the Garrison was weak, and to prevent all manner of Doubts and Jealousies) a competent Number of the City Militia should keep Guard in said Fort, and Nicholas Bayard, Coll. of said Militia recommended to give suitable Orders accordingly.
And that the Revenue should be continued and received by some Gentlemen appointed by that Convention, for Repairing the Fort, and Fortifyng of the City; but against this Order Capt Leyster (who as a Captain was a Member of that Convention) did enter his dissent, with some few others. It was also recommended to said Coll. Bayard to hasten to fortifie the City with all possibe speed, who upon the Credit of the Revenue did advance what Money was need∣ful for Materials. And by the Assistance of the Militia Officers, and daily Labour of the Inhabitants had the same finish'd before the end of May, excepting Capt. Leyster's Qota. About the middle of May the Ship Beaver, John Corbie Master, being ready to sail for England, the Lieu. Gover∣nour and Council sent in her by Mr. John Riggs, and in several other Ships that soon followed, Letters to the Earl, now Duke of Shrewsbury, then Principal Secretary of State, and to the Lords of the Committee for Trade and Planta∣tions, wherein they signified their rejoycing at the News of his Royal Highness, the Prince of Orange, now his present Majesties arrival in England. in order to Redress the Grievances of the Nation, and giving a particular Account of the state of Affairs of this Province, and that they would endeavour to preserve its Pece and ecurity till Orders should arrive from England, which thy humbly prayed might be hastened with all possible speed. Which said Letters were most graciously received, and answered by his Majesties Letter bearing date the 30th of July, 1689. But against Expectation, it soon happened, that on the last day of said Moneth of May, Capt. Leyster having a Vessel with some Wines in the Road, for which he refused to pay the Duty, did in a Seditious manner stir up the meanest
sort of the Inhabitants (affirming, That King James being fled the Kingdom, all manner of Government was fallen in this Province) to rise in Arms, and forcibly possess themselves of the Fort and Stores, which accordingly was effected whilest the Lieut. Governour and Council, with the Con∣vention, were met at the City Hall to consult what might be proper for the common Good and Safety; where a party of Armed Men came from the Fort, and forced the Lieut. Governour to deliver them the Keys; and seized also in his Chamber a Chest with Seven Hundred Seventy Three Pounas, Twelve Shillings in Money of the Govern∣ment. And though Coll Barard, with some others ap∣pointed by the Convention, used all endeavours to prevent those Disorders, all proved vain; for most of those that appeared in Arms were Drunk, and cryed out, They disown'd all manner of Government▪ Whereupon, by Capt. Leyster's perswasion, they proclaimed him to be their Commander, there being then no other Commission Officer amongst them. Capt. Leyster being in this manner possest of the Fort, took some Persons to his Assistance, which he call'd, The Committee of Safety. And the Lieut. Governour, Francis Nicollson being in this manner forced out of his Command, for the safety of his Person, which was daily threatned, with-drew out of the Province. About a week after, Rports came from Boston, That their Royal Hghnesses, the Prince and Princes of Orange were proclaimed King and Queen of England. Where∣upon the Council and Convention were very desirous to get that Proclamation, and not only wrote for it, but some of them hearing that two Gentlemen were coming from Conecticut with a Copy of said Proclmation, went ou two days to meet them, in expectation of having th
Happiness to proclaim it but Major Gold and Mr. Fitz missing them, having put the Proclamation into Capt. Leyster's hands, he, without taking any Notice of the Council or Convention, did proclaim the same, though very disorderly, after which he went with his Accomplices to the Fort, and the Gentlemen of the Council and Magi∣strates, and most of the principal Inhabitants and Mer∣chants went to Coll. Bayards House and drank the Health and Prosperity of King William and Queen Mary with great Expressions of Joy. Two days after, a printed Proclamation was procured by some of the Council, dated the 14th of February, 1688. whereby their Majesties confirmed all Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, Collecters and Receivers of the Revenues, &c. being Protestants; which was forth-with published at the City Hall by the Mayor and Alder men, accompanyed with the Council, and most of the chief Citizens and Merchants. And pursuant thereunto the Collector, Mat. Plowman, being a Papist, was forth-with suspended by the Convention; and Coll. Bayard, Alder man. Paul Richards, Capt. Thomas Winham, and Lieut. John Haynes, Merchants, were by them commissionated and appointed to collect the Revenue until Orders should arrive from England Whereupon those Gentlemen were sworn by Coll. Cortland, then Major of the City, they being the first in this Province that took the Cathes to their Ma∣jesties appointed by Act of Parliament, instead of the Oathes of Allegiance and Supreamacy. But as soon as those Gentlemen entered upon the Office, Capt. Leyster with a party of his Men in Arms, and Drink, sell upon them at the Custom-House, and with Naked Swords beat them thence, endeavouring to Massacree some of them, which were Rescued by Providence. Where∣upon
said Leyster beat an Alarm, crying about the City, Treason, Treason, and made a strict search to seize Coll. Bayard, who made his escape, and departed for Albany, where he staid all Summer, in hopes that Orders might arrive from England to settle those Disorders. The said Capt. Leyster finding almost every man of Sence, Reputation or Estate in the place to oppose and discourage his Irregularities, caused frequent false Alarms to be made, and sent several parties of his armed Men out of the Fort, drag'd into nasty Goals within said Fort several of the principal Magistrates, Officers and Gentle∣men, and others, that would not own his Power to be lawful, which he kept in close Prison during Will and Pleasure, without any Process, or allowing them to Bail. And he further publish't several times, by beat of Drums, That all those who would not come into the Fort and sign their hands, and so thereby to own his Power to be lawful, should be deemed and esteemed as Enemies to his Majesty and the Country, and be by him treated accordingly By which means many of the Inhabitants, tho' they abhor'd his Actions, only to escape a nasty Goal, and to secure their Estates, were by fear and compulsion drove to comply, submit and sign to whatever he commanded. And though Capt. Leyster had at first so violently oppo∣sed the collecting of the Revenue, alledging it unlawful, as soon as his Wines were landed, and that he got into some Power, he forth-with set up for himself the collect∣ing of said Revenue by Peter d' Lanoy, allowing him a great Sallary, and all the Perquisits of that Office. Upon the 10th of December following returned the said Mr. John Riggs from England, with Letters from his Ma∣jesty and the Lords, in answer to the Letters sent by the Lieut. Governour and Council above recited, Directed, To Our Trusty nd Well-beloved Francis Nicholson, Esq
Our Lieutenant Governour and Commander in chief of Our Pronce of New-York in America, and in his absence To such as for the time being, take care for the Preservation of the Peace, and administring the Laws in Our said Province. Whereby his Majesty approved of the Proceedings and Care that had been taken by said Lieut. Governour and Council for the Peace and Safety of the Province, with further Power and Directions to continue therein till fur∣ther Orders. Which said Letters the said Mr. Riggs de∣signed to deliver on the following Morning to the entle∣men of the Council, to whom they properly did belong, being an answer to their said Letter; but was obstructed therein by said Leyster, who sent a party of his Men in Arms, and brought said Riggs to the Fort, where he forced said Letters from him, though some Gentlemen of the Council, that went the same time to the Fort, protested against it, but he drove them out of the Fort, calling them Rogues, Papsts, and other opprobious Names. Soon after the Receipt of said Letters said Capt. Leyster stiled himself Lieutenant Governour, appointed a Council, and presumed further to call a select Number of his own Party, who called themselves The General Assembly of the Province, and by their advice and assistance raised several Taxes and great Sums of Money from their Majesties good Subjects within this Province. Which Taxes to∣gether with that 773 l. 12 s. in Money, which he had seized from the Government, and the whole Revenue, he applyed to his own use, and to maintain said Disorders, allowing his pivate men 18 d. per Day, and to others proportionably. On the 20h of January following Coll. Bayard and Mr Nicolls had the ill fortune to fail into his hands, and were in a barbarous manner, by a party in Arms, drag'd
into the Fort, and there put into a Nasty place, without any manner of Process, or being allowed to bayl, though the same was offered for said Coll. Bayard, by some of the ablest and richest Inhabitants to the Sum of Twenty Thousand Pounds, either for his appearance to answer, or dprt the Province, or to go for England; but with∣out any Cause given, or Reasons assigned, laid said Coll. Bayard in Irons, and kept him and Mr. Nicolls close Prisoners for the space o fourteen Moneths, where they, with several others, that had been long detained Prisoners, were set at Liberty by Governour Slaughter. And whilest he kept those Gentlemen in Prison, he quartered his armed Men in their Houses, where they Committed all manner of Outrages; And to give one Instance of many others, A Party of twelve Men were quartered at the House of Coll. Bayard, with directions to pillage and plunder at discretion, which was bought off with Money and plentiful Entertainment. But the same day, when that party had received their Money, another party came in with Naked Swords, opened several Cham∣bers and Chests in said House, and did Rob and carry away what Money and other Goods they found. At the same time Coll Bayard and Mr. Nicolls were taken, strict search was made for Coll. Cortlandt, but he, with several other Gentlemen, having made their escape, were forced to leave their families and Concerns, and remain in Exile, till relieved by the arrival of Governour Slaughter. It is hardly to be exprest what Cruelties Capt. Leyster and his Acomplices imposed upon the said Prisoners and all others that would not own his power to be lawful. Nither could the Protestant Mnsters in the Province escape their Malice and Cruelty; for Mr. Selyns, Minister
of New-York, was most gross abused by Leyster himself in the Church at the time of Divine Service, and threatned to be silenced, &c. Mr. Dellius, Minister at Albany, to escape a nasty oal, was forced to leave his Flock, and fly for shelter into New England. Mr. Varick, Minister of the Dutch Towns on Nassaw Island, was by armed men drag'd out of his House to the Fort, then imprisoned without bayl, for speaking (as was pretended) Treasonable words against Capt▪ Leyster and the Fort; then prosecuted, and decreed by Peter d' Lanoy, pretended Judge, without any Com∣mission or Authority, To be deprived from his Ministerial Function, amerced in a Fine of 80 l. and to remain in close Prison till that Fine should be paid; yea, he was so torment∣ed, that in all likely hood it occasioned and hastened the suddain Death of that most Reverend and Religious Man. The French Ministers, Mr. Periet and Mr. Dellie had some better Quarters, but were often threatned to be prosecuted in like manner, because they would not approve of his Power and disorderly proceedings. None in the Province, but those of his Faction, had any safety in their Estates; for said Capt. Leyster, at will and pleasure, sent to those who disapproved of his Actions to furnish him with Money, Provisions, and what else he wanted, and upon denyal, sent armed men out of the Fort, and frcibly broke open several Houses, Shops, Cellars, Vessels, and other places where they expected to be supplyed, and without any the lea payment or satis∣faction, carried their Plunder to the Fort; ll which was extreamly approved of by those poor fellows hich he had about him, and was forced to feed and maintain; and so he stiled those his Robberies with the gilded Name and Pretence, That it was for their Majsties King William and Queen Mary's special Service, though it was after found
out, that whole Cargo's of those stolen goods were sold to his Friends in the City, and shipt off for the West-Indies and else where. In this manner he the said Leyster, with his Accomplices, did force, pillage, rob and steal from their Majesties good Subjects within this Province, almost to their uter Ruin, vast Sums of Money, and other Effects, the estimation of the Damages done only within this City of New-York, amounting, as by Account may appear, to the Sum of Thirteen Thousand Nine Hundred and Fifty Nine Pounds, beside the Rpines, Soils and iolences done at oll. Willts on Nassaw. Island, and to many others in several parts of the Province. And thus you may see how he used and exercised an Exorbitant, Arbitrary & Unlawful Power over the Persons and Estates of his Majesties good Subjects here, against the known and Fundamental Laws of the Land, and in subvertion of the same, to the great Oppression of his Majesties Subjects, and to the apparent decay of Trade and Commerce. In this Calamity, Misery and Confusion was this Po∣vince, by those Disorders, enthrawled near the space of two years, until the arrival of his Majesties Forces, under the command of Major Ingoldsby, who, with several Gentlemen of the Council, arrived about the last day of January, 1690/1. which said Gentlemen of the Council, fr the Preservation of the Peace, sent and offered to said Leyster, That he might stay and continue his Command in the Fot, only desiring for themselves and the Kings Forcs quietly to quarter and refresh themselves in the Cit, till Governour Slaughter should arrive; but the said Leyster, instad of complying, asked Mr. Brooke, one of his Majesties Council, Who were appointed of the Council in this Province?
and Mr. Brooke having named Mr. Phillips, Coll. Cortland & Coll Bayard, he fell into a Passion, & cry'd, What! those Papist Dogs, Rogues Sacrament if the King should send Three Thousand such I would cut them all off; And without any cause given, he proclaimed open War against them. Whereupon, they, for Self-preservation, protection of the King Forces and Stores, and the safety of the City, were necessicated to perswade to their assistance several of their Majesties good Subjects then in Opposition against the said Leyster, with no other intent, as they signified to him by several Letters and Messages, but only for self-security and Defence; yet notwithstanding, the said Leyster proceeded to make War against them and the Kings Forces, and fired a vast Number of great and small Shot in the City, whereby several of his Majesties Subjects were killed and wounded as they passed in the streets upon their lawful Occasions, tho' no Opposition was made on the other side. At this height of Exremity was it when Governour Slaughter arrived on the 19th of March, 1691. who having publish't his Commision from the ity Hall, with great signs of Joy, by firing all the Artillary within and round the City, sent thrice to demand the surrender of the Fort from Capt. Leyster and his Accomplices, which was thrice denyed, but upon great Threatnings, the following Day surrendered to Governor Slaughter, who forth-with caused the said Capt. Leyster, with some of the chief Malefactors to be bound over to answer their Crimes at the next Su∣pream Court of Judicaure, where the said Leyster and his pretended Secretary Millborn did appear, but reused to plead to the Indictment of the grand Jy or to own the Jurisdiction of that Court; and so afer sevl hearings, as Mutes, were found guilty of High Treason and Murder, and executed accordingly.
Several of the other Malefactors that pleaded wer lso Found Guilty, and particularly one Abraham Governe for Murdering of an Old Man peaceably passing along the Street, but were Reprieved by Governour Slouhter, and upon Coll. Fletcher's arrival by him set at liberty, upon their Submission and promise of good Behaviour. Sir, All what is here set down is True, and can be proved and justified by the Men of greatest Probity and best Figure amongst us. If I were to give a particular Nar∣rative of all the Crulties and Robberies perperrated upon thei Majesties most affectionate Subjects in this Province, they would fill a Volumn: There was no need of any Revolution here; there were not ten Jacobites in the whole; they were all well known, and the strictest Protestants, and men of best Figure, Repuration and Estates were at the Helm, it may plainly be perceived by the several steps and measures were followed at that time, and by their Letters to the then Earl, now Duke of Shrews∣bury, and to the Lords, and the Kings Answer thereunto. The Copy of which Answer, and some other Papers worthy of your perusal are inclosed. So soon as Governour Sloughter arrived, an Assembly was called, which upon the 18th of April, 1691. did present an Address to his Excellency, signed by their Speaker, together with the Resolves of that Huse, which when you are pleased to read, gives the Conclusive Opi∣nion and Judgment of the General Assembly of this Pro∣vince, of all those disorderly Proceedings, for which those two have suffered Death, and their Sentence was since approved by Her Majesty, of ever blessed Memory, in Council. Many worthy Protestants in England, and other parts
of the world, being sincerely devoted to his Majesties In∣terest, have yet notwithstanding (unacquainted with our Circumstances, and not duely apprized of the truth) been more easily induced to give credit to the false Glosses and Calumnies of byassed and disaffected Persons from this Province. But in my Observation, most Gentlemen that have come hither so prepossessed, after some time spent here, have been thorowly convinced of their Mistake, and that those men who suffered Death, did not from pure zeal for their Majesties Interest, and the Protestant Religion, but being of desperate Fortune, thrust themselves into Power, of purpose to make up their wants by the Ruin and Plunder of his Majesties Loyal Subjects, and were so far engaged in their repeated Crimes, that they were driven to that height of Desperation, had not the Providence of Almighty God prevented it, the whole Province had been Ruined and Destroyed. I have put this in writing at your Request, to assist your Memory, and leave it to his Excellency Coll. Fletcher, and your own Observations, to enlarge upon the Cha∣racters of those Persons who have been the greatest Sufferers in the time of those Disorders, and of their Patience and Moderation since your arrival; also, of the Disaffected, and the Causes which you have frequently observed to hold this Province in Disquiet and Trouble. Notwithstanding all which, and the frequent Attachs of the French and Indians upon our Fronteers, this Province has not lost one foot of ground during the War, but have had considerable Advantages upon the Enemy, which, under God, is due to the prudent and steady Conduct and great Care and Diligence of Coll. Fletcher, our present Governour.
You have been an Eye Witness, and have had Time and Experience enough to enable you to inform others in England, which if you will please to do, I doubt not but it will gain Credit, and be an extraordinary piece of Service to this Province. I am, SIR, Your Most Humble Servant. New-York, December 31. 1697.
The KING's Letter. VVilliam R. TRusty and Well-beloved, We greet you well. Where∣as We have been given to understand by Letters from you, and others the principal Inhabitants of Our Province of New-York, of your Dutiful Submission to Our Royal Pleasure, and readiness to receive from Ʋs such Orders as We should think requisit for settling the Peace and good Government of Our Province of New-York. We have thought fit hereby to fignifie unto you, That We are taking such Re∣solution concerning the same as may tend to the Wellfare of Our Subjects, Inhabitants there. And in the mean time We do hereby Authorize and Impower you to take upon you the Government of the said Province, calling to your Assistance, in the Administration thereof, the principal Free-holders and Inhabitants of the same, or so many of them as you shall think fit, Willing and Requiring you to do and perform all things which to the Place and Office of Our Lieutenant Governour and Commander in Chief of Our Province of New-York, doth or may appertain, as you shall find necessary for Our Service, and the good of Our Subjects, according to the Laws and
Customs of Our said Province, until further Order from Ʋs. And so We bid you Farewell. Given at Our Court at White∣hall the 30th Day of July, 1689. in the first Year of Our Reign. By His Majesties Command, Nottingham. Was Superscribed, To Our Trusty and Well-beloved Francis Nichollson. Esq Our Lieut. Governour and Commander in Chief of Our Province of New-York in America; And in his Absence, To such as for the time being take care for pre∣serving the Peace and administring the Laws in Out land Province of New-York in America.
The Resolves of the House of Repre∣sentatives, &c. House of Representatives for the Province of New-York, April 17. 1691. P. M. UPON further Consideration of the Petition pre∣sented to this House by many of the Free-holders and Inhabitants within this City and Province, Resolved, Nimini Contradicente, That Jacob Leyster, Samuell Edsall, and divers others aiding, assisting and abetting him in the Dissolving the Convention that was convened at the City of New-York for the Preservation of the Peace, the Execution of Justice, and the securing of this Provice for their Majesties Service, King William and Queen Mary, King and Queen f England, &c. was Tumultuous, Illegal and against their Majesties Right over this their Province, being a Dominion of their Crown of England. Resolved, That the Imprisoning of their Majesties Protestant Sub∣jects into Doleful and Natious Prisons, and their keeping them by Force and Violence, without any Commitment, or the assignment of any legal Cause, was Arbitrary, Illegal, & against the Peace and Dignity of their Majesties Crown of England, and also a Violation of the Rights and Priviledges of Their Majesties Subjects inhabiting within this Province.
Resolved, That the prosecuting and forcng their Majesties Pro∣testant Subjects to fly their Habitations, and forsake the care of their Families, by which the strength of this Province was much weakened, was also Arbitrary, Illegal, and Destructive to Their Majesties Interest in this Province. Resolved, That the Depredations made by the French and Indians upon Schanectady, and other Plantations in the County of Albany, by which many of their Majesties Protestant Subjects were slain, their Houses burnt, and others carried into Captivity; which great loss is only to be attributed to the Disorders and Disturbances that were raised by those who had usurped a Power contrary to their Majesties Authority and Right of Government over this Province. Resolved, That the seizing and forcibly taking away of the Goods and Merchandizes from the Merchants and Persons inha∣biting within this City and Province, was a Violation of their Majesties Peace, and the Destruction of their Laws, and to the manifest Ruin of many of their good Protestant Subjects within this City and Province. Resolved, That the levving and raising of Money upon their Majesties Subjects without lawful Authority, is Arbitrary and Illegal, and against the Rights and Priviledges of their Majesties Subjects inhabiting within this Province. Resolved, That the raising of Forces, and keeping their Majesties Fort of New-York against their Majesties Officers and Souldiers lately arrived, was Rebellious, and in pre∣judice
to their Majesties Right and Dominion of this Province. Resolved, That the denying the Surrender of their Majesties Fort to his Excellency, after his arrival, and publication of their Majesties Commission to him, was Rebellious, and against the Dignity and Authority of their Majesties Crown of England. Ordered, For the prevention of the like Mistakes and Disorders amongst their Majesties Subjects in this Province for the time to come, That these Resolves be sent to the Gover∣nour and Council, with the desire of this House, that they would be pleased to give the Concurrence of their Board thereunto. Ordered, That an Address be made to his Excellency of the Re∣solution of this House to support and defend their Majesties Right and Dominion over this their Province, as it is now established by their Majesties Authority, in the admini∣stration of his Excellency, with our Lives and Fortunes against all their Majesties Enemies. By Order of the House of Representatives, Ja. Graham, Speaker.
An Address to his Excellency Collonel Slaughter. May it please your Excellency; WE Their Majesties most Dutiful and Loyal Sub∣jects convened by their Majesties most gracous Favour, in General Assembly, in this Province, do in all most Humble manner heartily congratulate your Excel∣lency's arrival in this Government; and withal, preume to acquaint your Excellency, That as in our hearts we do abhor and detest all the Rebellions▪ Abitrary and Ille∣gal Proceedings of the late Uurpers of their Majesties Authority over this Province so we do, from the bottom of our hearts, with all Integriy, acknowledge and declare, That there are none that can or ought to have Right to Rule and Govern their Majesties Subjcts here, but by their Majesties Authority, which is now placed in your Excellency. And therefore we do solemnly declare, That we will with our Lives and Fortunes support and maintain the Administration of your Excellency's Government, under their Majesties, against all their Majesties Enemies whatsoever. And this we humbly pray your Excellency to accept as the sincere Acknowledgment of all their Majesties good Subjects within this their Province, praying for their Majesties long and happy Reign over us, and that your
Excellency may long Live and Rule us, according to Their Majesties most Excellent Constitution of Govern∣ing his Subjects by a General Assembly. By Order of the House of Representatives, Ja. Graham, Speaker. April 17. 1691. At the Court at White-hall the 17th of March, 1691. PRESENT The Queens most Excellent Majesty in Council. WHereas the Right Honourable, the Lords of the Committee for Trade and Plantations, have by their Report, dated the 11th Instant, represented to Her Majesty, That they have examin'd the matter of the Petition of Jacob Leyster, the Son of Jacob Leyster of New-York, de∣ceased, referred to the Committee by Her Majesty's Order in Coucil of the 7th of January last, Complaining of Pro∣ceedings against his Father and Jacob Milbourn, by Coll. Slaughter at New-York, who were thereupon condemned and put to Death, and their Estates confiscated. And their Lordships having fully heard the said Jacob Leyster, the Petitioner, by his Council learned, upon the whole matter, are humbly of Opinion, That the said Jacob Leyster and
Jacob , decsd w condemned & have suffered according to Law. But th Lordship do humbly offer thir Intercession to her Maje in behalf of their Familie, as fit Objects of their Majesti Mercy, That the Estates of the said Jacob Leyster and Jb Millbourn, deceased, may b Restored to them, upon their humble Application to their Majesties by Petition fo the same. Her Majesty in Council is this day pleased to Approve the said Report, and to declare. That upon the humble Application of the Relations of the said Jacob Leyster and Jacob Millbourn deceased, Her Majesty will order the Etates of Jacob Leyster and Jacob Milbourn to be restored to their Families, a Objects of her Majesties Mercy. Rich. Colinge.
FINIS.
