M2524A 8788009 41810
The Great TRUMPET OF THE Lord God Almighty OF HEAVEN and EARTH, Blown, and sounded out unto those that are ready to perish, that they may return to the Lord Jesus Christ, (the Light) and be saved. OH all ye Inhabitants of the Earth! My soul pitties you, because you are walking in the Land of darkness, and under the shadow of death, & unto you hath the light shined which shews you sin & iniquity; and if you wil but own that light, & as it shews you sin, so deny it, you will come to re∣receive the light of life, and so come to be brought out of the land of darkness which the Lord will destroy; and the day is now dawned wherein neither their silver, nor their gold shallZeph. 1. 18. be able to deliver them in the day of the Lords wrath; but the whole land shall be devoured by the fire of his jealousie, for he shal make even a speedy riddance of all them that dwel in the land; for many people in this Nation are in the land of darkness, which is sin and iniquity, and their destruction will come upon them in a day & an hour when they are not aware of, & in that day if they shall cry for help, they will find none. Awake, awake unto righteousness, for the glory of God is
come, & his light is risen which searches the heart, & tryes the reins, & shews unto man what his Works are, for every man is to receive a reward according to the deeds done in the body, whether they be good, or whether they be evil; & them whose deeds are evil, are them who are deceived, and the wages of sin is death; so all people consider what you have profited towards salvation; For many there be who follows them who doth not profit them towards redemption, & those can cry, Lord, Lord, but they are found workers of iniquity, & so doing the will of another; and the teachers of this people never brings them to know Gods salvation; but teacheth the people to speak against it, & so the people & themselves remains in their sins, & igno∣rant of Gods salvation, which he hath prepared before the face of all people, a light to lighten the Gentiles, & the glory of thy people Is∣rael; So all to mark & consider the false prophets, they cry up the letter, & saith that is the way unto God, & to bring man unto Christ; and I say, the letter brings no man unto God, nor to the knowledge of Christ; for the Scribes and Pharisees they had the letter & Scriptures of truth, & neither knew God nor Christ; for Christ said, If ye had known me, ye would not have cru∣cified me; And said, No man comes unto me, except my Father draws him; [mark] It was the Father that drew unto the Son, & not the letter, for the letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life; and many there be that can read the letter, but doth not know the way unto eternal life; & these are them who profess God & Christ in words, but deny him in works; for all who denies perfection, or that wch is perfect, they deny the Father & the Son; & them who hates Judgement, they hate Gods Way: And people, do you not see and know that the Ministers of England (so called) do hate and deny perfection, or to be perfect? So herein they deny Christ, which is Perfection, & his Work, which is perfect;Deut. 32. 4 he is the Rock, his work is perfect, [mark] his work is perfect; for all his wayes are Judgement, a God of truth, and without iniquity, just and right: So herein they do deny the Workmanship of his hand, and so denies the Lord that bought them; and these are them who declare of God and Christ in words, but their hearts are far removed from him, following after the love of money, which is the root of all evil; & this is more followed & sought after by the Ministers of England, then perfection, [mark] mo∣ney
is more sought after then perfection, by the deceivers who join house unto house, and land unto land, and these called the proud, happy; them who calls the proud, happy, their Works stand against the Lord; yea, and they that work wickedness andIsa. 5. 8▪ abomination are set up; but the hand of the Lord is lifted up a∣gainst them, and will dash them to pieces like a Potter's Vessel. And if they should say, What have we spoken so much against the Truth? Ans. Thou hast spoken against the Truth, and in re∣bellion against the Light; for thou knovvest not the Way there∣of, vvhich Way is pure and holy, vvhere the defiled cannot walkJob 2▪ therein; and from this were the Scriptures of truth given forth, & by the same holy and perfect life they come to be known and witnessed; and by this light nd life comes all the false Prophets & Deceivers to be seen and denyed, who rebel against the light, and this is not strange unto many; all which rebels against that light which shews sin and iniquity, they rebel both against the Father & the Son; & this is the Message which we have heard of him, and declare unto you, that God is light, & in him is no darkness at all. And Christ Jesus who is the light of the world, and lighteth every man that cometh into the world, who saith, Ye shall know the false prophets by their fruits; [mark] it is by their fruits that people should know them, which are fruits of Wickedness: Now we looking into the World to see what fruits the Ministers thereof brings forth, which fruits are these, Pride, Covetousness, Drunkenness, Swearing, Ly∣ing, and Envy, these are the fruits of the false prophets, and the Ministers of England, who keep the people ever learning, but ne∣ver able to come unto the knowledge of the truth; for of this sort are they that creep into houses, and leads captive silly women, laden with sin, led away with divers lusts, pride and wantonness, heady, high-minded2 Tim.  people, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God, men of corrupt minds, who resist the Truth, and speak evil of the Light; but now the time is come that these men wil not endure sound Doctrine, but walk after their own ungodly lusts, and this is plainly made manifest unto many; for they do not cause so many to be put into prison for the unsoundness of their Doctrine, for this is the cause, their Doctrine is sound and wholsome, & the Ministers of England can∣not endure it because it is sound Doctrine; But all people learn Wisdom, & let your Ministers make good by Scripture their pra∣ctices, or else take heed of upholding them, lest you partake of
their sins, and so partake of their plagues also; for it is one thing to talk of the deceivers, and another thing to know them, and so deny them; for no man can be greater deceived then to live in sin, for that is the broadest way that man can find upon earth, & ma∣many there be that walk therein; but strait is the way that lead∣eth unto life, and few there be that find it; which way is a perfect way. So all people call unto remembrance what you know or have found, which is pure, holy & perfect, which is the way unto eternal life; for many there be that finds the Bible, & reads the let∣ter, and are ignorant of the power of God, and is found without God in the World; and these are them who will not come unto Christ that they might have life, neither do they believe the. 5. 40. Work of God, which is perfect, but they run to do their own Work, and in their own name, and the World receives them; but he that cometh in the Name of the Lord, they hate, revile, & per∣secute, for they that will live godly in this world, must suffer per∣secution, but many that live in pleasures, and following the Mi∣nisters (so called) day by day, and from time to time, and from place to place, until they were many years old, and alwayes sin and iniquity remaining, & they are at this day saying, Oh that we knew the truth! So here it appears that these people are ever learning, that say, Oh that we knew the truth! These are the de∣ceived people: And this I can really say, That these followed not the truth, nor the Lamb of God, for as many as followed him, he takes away their sins, and brings them to sit down with him in heavenly places; but the deceivers they please the people with crying against sin, and tells them they must live in it; But now Christ Jesus the light of the World is come, and is making mani∣fest himself unto them that fear him, to the destroying of sin and iniquity: And this is the testimony which I am sent to bear wit∣ness of unto the World, that they through his name might believe and be saved, for there is no other Name under Heaven whereby any man can be saved▪ but by the Name of Jesus Christ, which is pure, holy, and perfect, without spot or blemish; & this is he who is God's righteousness and salvation to the end of the Earth; but many of this World are ignorant of this pure and perfect Way which leads unto eternal life. All people consider, do you not hear and know that them who are called Ministers of England do deny purity, holiness, and perfection in this life, that man can∣not
come unto it; Christ saith, Come and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly; And all that come unto Christ, they come unto him that is perfect, and who is the end of all perfection, God of Heaven & Earth: And this we hold forth unto all people, the gift of God, & the perfect way and life; but them that denies perfection, we can say no less, they deny both God and Christ, and also the blood of the Covenant, and accounts it an unholy thing, and tramples it under foot; do you not see with your eyes, & hear with your ears, that perfection is cryed against by many in this day? and all that speak against it, speaks against the truth and Gods righteousness, these are the deceivers, from them that are ignorant of perfecti∣on, they are ignorant of Gods righteousness, and so they being ignorant of Gods righteousness, are going about to establish theirRom. 2. own; and these are them who preacheth against sin in words, but practiseth it in their lives and conversations, & preacheth against perfection, for that which is of faith is perfect, and of God; & that which is not of faith, is sin: Now if any should say, Who are these that are the deceivers, and they that know not Gods righteous∣ness? Ans. I have found many in this Nation who are ignorant of perfection; for all who live in sin and ungodliness, are out of the Way of God, and are in the broad way which leads unto de∣struction. I have more to say against the blind guides of the world, who tells people Scripture is their rule, and finds them acting contraray unto Christ and the Scriptures, who said, Try all things, hold fast that which is good, which is the gift of God by which man is saved, as saith the Scriptures; For by grace are ye saved, through faith, and that not of your selves, for it is the gift of God; but the Mini∣stersEph. 2. of England do counsel the people not to hear them who are called Quakers, and so would not have them to try all things for fear they should see their ignorance & errors, & deny them, & no longer uphold them in their ungodlypractices, which is cove∣tousness, and persecution, and many evil practices more then is here mentioned; but if there be any who love the truth, they wil love that which proceedeth from the truth, which is the holy Scriptures, and will search them, to see if the Ministers of England live the same life as they did who gave forth the Scriptures, who were holy men of God, and their Faith gave them victory over the World, and that Gospel which they preached, was the Gospel of Christ, which is the power of God unto salvation to every oneRom. 2.
that believes, to the Jews first, and also to the Greeks; And now people consider, you have long gone to hear the Ministers of Eng∣land, and hath believed that Gospel which they have preached, but you alwayes remain in your sins, and ignorant of the power of God, & so it is manifest that they preach another Gospel, and so you should not uphold them in it, neither in their pride and covetousness, and ungodly conversation which they live in. And now people, have not your eyes seen this, That as long as we followed them, to hear them tell their imaginations & their dreams, and put into their mouths, they spake peace unto us, as they do unto you in this day? But do not you hear, that when we cannot put into their mouths, and uphold them and their Wives in pride and covetousness, then they prepare war against us, and causes some to be put into prison, and others to stocks, & others they cause their means to be taken from them violently, to up∣hold them and their Wives in pride, and that which is taken vio∣lently, is the Wages of unrighteousness? Oh people! this is an abo∣minable thing, and deserves to be declared against; for the peo∣ple of God in all ages delared against the Wages of unrighteous∣ness, which is to take mens means, and they having nothing for it, as these do who are called Ministers of England; and yet further they go in their wickedness, besides taking their means, they oft cast them into prison, & takes their means from them who learns not of them, neither do they buy any thing of them; and herein it is plainly manifest, that the Ministers of England exceed all o∣ther Trades for falshood and dissimulation, for they force men to buy of them, or else they cause their means to be taken from them by force, of those people who deny either to learn of them, or to buy any of their stuff. And furthermore, they cause mens means to be taken from them to uphold their Idols Temple, (which they call their Church) of those men who denies their Worship, & when that man comes & declares against their Wor∣ship, they will draw him out, and put him into prison; and this is abominable, to cause a man to pay towards the repairing of a House, and when he comes there, they will pull him out, and put him into prison; but the day of the Lord is springing, that people will not buy their stuff so willingly as they have done in times past; and now they are inventing and devising a way, which is a Law to enforce people to buy of their stuff, & to compel them to
their Worship, the same it is now as it was with Nebuchadnezar, who caused the people to worship the Image. So all people consi∣der whom you worship, & what you have bought of the Ministers of England, and what it is they have sold unto you; for if it be truth, then they do act contrary to the Scriptures, which saith,Prov. 23. Buy the Truth, & sell it not; [mark] sell it not; for whoever sells the truth, (God's Word) is one with Judas, for he sold the Truth, and the life, and the Word of God; and if any should say he sells notRom. 23. the Truth, then doth he sell lyes, (for what is of faith, is of God, and what is not of faith, is sin) and a divination of their own brains, and the imaginations of their own hearts; and these men speaks peace where the Lord speaks not peace unto them, and will say, Is not the Lord amongst us? And all this is but to have the people to uphold them and their Wives in covertousness and pride; and these are them that deceives the people, who joins house to house, and layes field to field, as the deceivers in all a∣ges did, Isa. 5. 8. Now if it were so, that the Lord were well-pleased with their doings, and were amongst them, and they received him to whom all power is given, Why then have they not power over sin? for that which destroys sin is much wanting amongst the Priests and people of England, for they can cry out against sin in words, as the false prophets did, but in life, practice, and conver∣sation, they live in sin and unrighteousness; now we can truly say that these Priests & people have not the truth, though they have the true Words; for the Scripture saith, As many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe in his Name, John 1. 12. If they had but come so far as to believe in his Name, he would have given them power over sin & uncleanness, but they wanting power, they want the truth, and remains in their sins, and so are found false Witnesses, 1 Cor. 15. 15. and ever lives in ungodliness, and the pleasure of the World, and wantonly upon earth, and so man cometh to commit sin and iniquity, and so becomes ignorant of God; for whosoever sinneth, hath not seen him, neither known him, John 3. 6. Now all people to the truth, the light of the Lord Jesus Christ which shews sin and iniquity, all take heed, & hearken to it, and it will shew you whether you have profited more unto salvation then the deceivers, and the deceived people did, for they could say Lord, Lord, but did not the will of God, but did their own
wils, and took pleasure therein, which Works are these, Pride, Co∣vetousness, High-mindedness, Envy, Drunkenness, and Whore∣dom, Lying, Stealing, and Swearing; and them that follow or live in those practices, are deceived; and when we come and declare against these evil practices, then those that live in these evil pra∣ctices do rage, and cannot abide sound Doctrine, and so they wil go about to plead for sin & wickedness with all their strength & might, and strive to uphold it; these are not in the truth, but out of it; Whosoever abideth in him who is the Truth, sinneth not, John. 3. 6. And because we say, that all people upon earth should come to that which is pure, perfect, and holy, and this is the gift of God, Christ Jesus, who saith, Come learn of me, I am meek and lowly in heart, and thou shalt find rest unto thy soul; and all that comes to learn of Christ Jesus, wil deny such as goes for gifts and rewards, or set-maintenance, and this causes the false Prophet and Priest to rage that they can no longer be upholden after men come to learn of Christ; for he teaches purity and holiness, and so brings man to God, and so man comes to see the end of all perfection: But thy Commandments are exceeding broad, O Lord, thy Testimonies are wonderful, therefore doth my soul keep them, Psal. 119. 96. And further, this was I moved to make known unto the World, That in that time the Lord God Almighty did visit me with weakness, insomuch that I did lye for dead, the Lord God Almighty made known unto me that the day of destruction draweth nigh, and will shortly come to pass, that all the Wicked (both Priests and People) God will utterly destroy, and burn them up both root and branch; for the day cometh that shall burn as an Oven, and the proud, and all that doth wickedly shall be as stubble; and then what will the wicked and ungodly Priests and people do in the day of Visitation, and in the day of Deso∣lation, which will shortly come? Then to whom will ye flye for help? and where will you leave your glory? So this have I made known to the World, that some of them may fear and dread the Name of the Lord God Almighty, against whom they have sin∣ned, and vvhose Name they have greatly dishonored, and turn unto him vvith speed, and forsake their sins, and the evil of their Wayes, that they may find mercy to help in the time of need, and be saved. John Moon. FINIS.
