P2321A 12996580 96409
A True and Impartial Account OF A Great and Bloody Fight Between part of the ENGLISH FLEET, Commanded by Sir Clovesly Shovel, AND THE FRENCH at SEA. With an Account of the Men Killed and Wounded. Together with the great Bravery and Courage of Captain Hoskins. From on Board their Majesties Ship the Crown, this Ninth of December, 1690. Riding Plimouth-Sound. Licensed according to Order. My Loving Friend, AS I promised at parting to acquaint you of any thing of moment betwixt the French and Vs that might be: Take this from me as a Real Account being an Eye witness. Last Sunday Morning being the Seventh, by Break of Day, being Crusing with Sir Clovesly Shovell in his Squadron, about Twenty Leagues South-West of the Lizard: In all of us Five Sail of Men of War and one Fireship, whose Names are the Monk, Rear-Admiral, the York, Crown, Debtford, Dover, who all Espying a French Man of War in a League off us, we all Boe after her, which the French seeing, made the best of his Heels; but the Crown Sailing best, we got on Her, and about Twelve got up with Her, and had a Bloody Fight for the time of half an hour, till at last we Clapt her on Board, carried her Main-Mast, and so made our selves Masters of her: The Number of what Men the French
had Killed is uncertain, some say 40, some 50; we lost but one Man▪ be∣sides several wounded: We brought Her in last Night. The French are yet on Board us; a great many of them wounded: She is a Rich Prize, and hath in some Measure requited the Couragious Seamen for their Valour: Her Name is the Slut, 28 Guns 10 Patereroes; we asking the Prisoners what made them Fight at so great disadvantage, they say, the French K will Hang up every Captain that doth not Fight, though with a The French Captain is Killed, the Lieutenant dangerously wounded in the Thigh, and almost all the Officers. And now I cannot but acquaint you of the Gallant Behaviour of Cap∣tain Hoskins Incouraging his Men, every Officer particular to their Charge, he exposing himself to the greatest Dangers: A great Sh coming close to Him, almost Mortally Wounded another. But to short, both Officers and Seamen Behaved themselves truly Couragio to the Honour of our Nation: I have not time to write any more par∣ticulars; but do desire you to take a Copy of this as soon as you Read it. You may Assure your self, this is the first come to you, and Truth. My Service to your good Lady. I Rest yours to Serve. Tho. Pitts. Advertisement I. THE Anti-weesels; a Poem sold by Randall Taylor near Stationers Hall. Price 6 d. II. The Wonders of Free Grace; or a compleat History of all the Remarkable Penitents that have been Executed at Tyburn, and elsewhere, for these last Thirty years. Price Bound 1 s. III. The third Volume of the Pocket Library (compleating the two former) containing a further account of the Ju∣venile Rambles of Don Kainophilus, with his first project of girdling the World. The whole work intermixt with Essays Hi∣storical, Moral, and Divine, and all o∣ther kinds of Learning. Price 1 s. 6 d. IV. A Treatise of Fornication; occa∣sion'd by the late Birth of several Ille∣tigimates in the Parish of—To which is added, A Penitentiary Sermon preached before the guilty Persons in the publick Congregation upon John 8. 11. Go and sin no more. V. Practical Discourses on Sickness and Recovery, in several Sermons, as they were lately preached in a Congre∣gation in London, by Timothy Rogers, M. A. after his Recovery from a Sick∣ness of near two years continuance. VI. The Vanity and Impiety of Judi∣cial Astrology, whereby men undertake to foretel future Contingencies, especi∣ally the particular Fates of Mankind, by the Knowledge of the Stars, by Francis Crow, M. A. VII. The Abdicated Prince; or the Adventures of Four years. The second Edition. Price 1. s. The Bloody Duke; or the Adventures for a Crown. Price 1. s. The late Revolution; or the Happy Change. Written by a Person of Qua∣lity. Price 1. s. The Royal Voyage; or the Irish Expedition. Price 1 s. These Four last Books contain a full Account of the Private Intreagues of the two last Reigns, and of all the most Remarkable Transactions that have happened since. VIII. The Present State of Europe; or the Historical and Political Mercury, giving an account of all the Occurrences that are most considerable in every Court for the Month of November. All sold at the Raven in the Poultrey, where are to be had all the Months be∣ginning from July. 1690. Printed for Richard Newcome. 1690.
