S2713 31355712 110621
THE PROLOGUE TO PASTOR FIDO. Spoken by Mr. Edward Lambert. PReface and Prologue, are such modish Toys, Books ar'nt without this, nor without that Plays. Welcome, Gallants! and Ladies of the May, You shall be courted modishly to day, Because without you, there had been no Play. As to our Play's Original; we'l first Do right to fam'd Guarini's sacred Dust, It's learn'd Author. Nor let it be decry'd, 'Cause All's Italian, Nothing's Frenchifi'd. For, Plays (you know) like Cloaths submit to Mode, And thats but dull, that keeps the common Road. We care nt for that—for here, Sirs! nought you'l have, But what is Noble, Sage, Wise, Solid, Grave. Stern CATO a Spectator might be here, And modest Vrgins may Vnmaskt appear. You've Come in it's most ancient dress, As when of old▪ Carted through Villages. Here's then no place, for th' Sparks and th' Blades o'th' Times, (Vallueing themselves upon their Garb, their Crimes) Who scoff at us poor Bumkins: whose defence Is our Simplicity, our Innocence. To please such Fopps (for mortally we hate 'um) Wee'l ne're attempt.— In short, you've here, the Passions rudely drest To act their parts, if Far balks not the rest. Here's coy Love, flattring Hope, cold Desperation, Enliv'ning Joys, fawning Dissimulation, Pleasing Revenge, easy Credulity, Fondness, Moroseness, Rage, and Cruelty Charm'd into Pity.—Here re Love's Fatigues It's Toyls: and Lover's Wi Councels, Intrigues. And if All this won't take, stop here—for not (As I'me a Sinner) one word of the Plot. For, since 'tis at your choice, to clap or hiss, Expect the rest: if well, we do in This Your patience crave; pardon in what's amiss. The End.
THE EPILOGUE TO PASTOR FIDO. Spoken by Sir Wlter Ernle Barronet. GAllants! the Stage is clr'd, and I am come, To hear the Actor's nd or fatal doom. Poor Wretches! The amus'd with anxious fears And fled; jealous they've fofeited their Ears▪ Tho' to be try'd by YOU more than their Peers. Yet why shou'd They a paial Tryal fear, Where YOU, fair Ladis! influence the Bar? Where full of Pity, as of ate, YOU sit, There needs no IGNOAMVS to acquit. Do like your selves! Stem the moroser guise! Cramp snarling Criticks! and controul the wise! These All strike Sail to YOU—and are All blest Who in such Harbour, can securely rest. You'l say the Play's umodish because old, Alas! you'l all be so—good Tales are oft ill told. This seems to be our ase. Put (Ladies!) then Most of you know, sch Striplings are not Men And tho' your kindness call't or Farce or Play. In Truth 'tis neither but a rude Essay. Faith! then be kind!—I do protest you'd need Accept this first time, the good will for th' deed. This Boon I only beg; grant This and then We hope to temp you hither once ag'en Mean time, win parting thanks Clown-like we treat ye And in our Hone-bred Phrase can only say t'ye After an ill Mea (Friends!) much good may't do t'ye. The End.
