S5057 12166871 55340
Moore, Mayor. Martis xxxio. die Ianuarii, 1681. Anno{que} Regni Regis CAROLI Secundi, Angliae, &c. xxxiv. THis Court doth desire Dr. Sprat to Print his Sermon Preached on Sunday Morning last in the Guild-Hall-Chappel before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of this City. Wagstaffe.
A SERMON Preach'd before the Lord Mayor, AND THE Court of ALDERMEN, AT GUILD-HALL Chappel, ON The 29th. of Ianuary, 1681/2; By THOMAS SPRAT, D.D. One of his Majesties Chaplains in Ordinary. LONDON: Printed by M. C. for Ioanna Brome, at the Gun in St. Paul's Church-yard, 1682.
To the Right Honorable Sir IOHN MOORE, Kt. Lord Mayor of the City of London; And to the Right Worshipful the ALDERMEN His Brethren. My Lord, THough the favour of your Commands is an abundant Excuse for my Printing this very plain Sermon: yet, I doubt, I need some Apo∣logy for Preaching it in such an Auditory, as I had the honor that day to serve. I fear, it might seem a pre∣sumption for me to discourse on this Subject, in the pre∣sence of the Reverend Iudges of the Land, the Learned Serjeants of the Law, and the wise Governors of your Great and Honorable City: An Assembly of men, from whose Wisdom and Experience such as I might better learn the Doctrine, and Practice of Righteousness, and Mercy. I can only say, that as it was my Duty, so it was my Endeavour to treat of this Argument meerly as a
Divine. I design'd not to persuade you to these Virtues by the Principles of Humane Prudence; which such a Congregation could not be suppos'd to want; but rather to confirm you in them by the Obligations and Promises of our Holy Religion: which is the proper business of my Profession. It was therefore enough for me, in that place, on that Text, to perform the part not so much of a Teacher, as of a Remembrancer. And I have at∣tain'd my end, if I have laid before you some of the chief Praises, and Rewards, that the Scriptures be∣stow on these two excellent Graces: whereof you, that heard me, are so much more able to give Rule, and, what is much better, Example to the World. My Lord,  I am Your Lordships most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, Tho. Sprat.
A SERMON Preach'd before the Lord Mayor, &c. PROVERBS xxi. 21. He that followeth after righteousness, and mercy, findeth life, righteousness, and honor. IN these words there are two most eminent Vertues recommended to us: one the most useful, the other the most amiable, of all that we can acquire towards our being, or well being, in this life or the next: Righteous∣ness, the best of all Natural Virtues; nay, it is a Christian Grace: Mercy, the most excellent of all Christian Graces. These two are here represented to our earnest pursuit, not in the severe stile of a strict command,
nor in the rigid terms of a legal precept. Though if God had only thus required them of us, they had deserved our most dutiful Obedi∣ence, considering the high prerogative the Al∣mighty Law-giver has over us. But here they are set off to us in the stile of the Gospel, in the gentle, alluring, and delightful form of a Pro∣mise. That, which is our necessary duty, is atten∣ded with a free, ample, immense reward. The Duty is double, The following after Righte∣ousness: The following after Mercy. The Reward is treble, Life, Righteousness, and Honor: according to the usual method of Gods gracious dealings with men. His Promises always go beyond our performances: his Rewards both in weight, and number, by far exceed our duties. Of these studies of Righteousness and Mercy we should all be followers, as we are men; we all profess our selves to be followers, as we are Christians. What then can be a more proper work for us all, in this our solemn meeting, ei∣ther as men, or as Christians, than to reason with our selves, concerning this whole matter, to convince our judgments of the necessity of these duties, to excite our affections towards them, by the greatness of their reward? To this purpose, be pleased that I examine,
First, What are the two things, which are here proposed to our zelous prosecution? Secondly, What is the way, the best way of following after them? Thirdly, Let us encourage one another in their attainment, by the largeness of the recom∣pence, which is here assured to us from the mouth of Divine Wisdom it self. My Text, you see, consisting of a two-fold Duty, and a three-fold Reward, the Duty comes first to be considered in both its parts; Righte∣ousness and Mercy. Both which Solomon the wise King has here most wisely put together, and in their right order. For wherever they both are, Righteousness is the foundation of Mercy; Mercy is the ornament of Righteousness. And neither of them can be complete without the other. What∣ever is not just can never be merciful: Whatever is meerly, strictly just, without any compassion, it is to a Proverb highly injurious: it is that which the Scripture calls a being righteous over∣much. Eccles. vii. 16. The word Righteousness has several diffe∣rent significations in the Old, and the New Te∣stament. In the Old it sometimes passes for all manner of Goodness, frequently for the particu∣lar virtue of Justice. In the New it commonly
signifies the same; and besides, it is often raised to a higher meaning, to express the glorious mystery of our Justification by Christ, and the spiritual Grace which attends it. I believe, my Text is most to be understood of that kind of Righteousness, by which is meant, integrity of Actions, and honesty of Conversa∣tion, in all our public, and private relations in this world. And so I shall chiefly handle it. Though indeed the other more Divine Interpretation of the Word ought not wholly to be excluded, in our present meditations. For to all I shall say on this argument, it must be premised, that without the Righteousness of Christ, to conse∣crate all our own righteousness, and mercy, and to make them acceptable to God, it were a vain presumption for any man to think he can deserve by them, upon their own account, either honor, or righteousness, or life it self. But first, I begin with Righteousness, as it is taken in the usual sense of the Old Testament: for common Justice, and moral Honesty, and obedience to good Laws. In explaining the nature of this Virtue, it would be no very modest undertaking, for me to make a large discourse, before this venerable Assembly; where I speak to those, whose busi∣ness
it is, not only to instruct, but to regulate, and steer the whole Nation in the practice of it. Only for our clearer proceeding, something must be said concerning it. I humbly conceive, a thing, or person may be call'd right, or righteous, or just, either by reason it is so, originally, and independently in its own being; or because it is conformable to some certain Rule of a Superior Being; by com∣parison to whose perfection, the moral strait∣ness, or crookedness of all inferior things ought to be judg'd. Now nothing can be absolutely righteous, and primitively just, but only God himself; who is the sole Author of all Truth, and Justice, the only Donor of it to us. His infinite understand∣ing is the only cause, and measure of all Truth. His unerring will is the only Fountain, and unalterable Standard of all Righteousness. As therefore this will of God is display'd in several manifestations to mankind, so, accord∣ing to the resemblance of our wills, and actions to his will thus manifested, there may, and ought to be various kinds of righteousness amongst men. As the will of God expresses it self, to our own hearts, in the dictates of rectify'd nature,
and right reason: so an observance of that will is natural, and moral Righteousness. As the will of God is declared in his written Word, so a submission to that Will is Religious Righteous∣ness. As the will of God appears in the images, and representatives of Gods power on earth, so an obedience to their Laws is Political, nay, it is Religious Righteousness too: as far as those Laws do not transgress the higher principles of Gods Natural, Moral, or Divine Laws. This seems to be the nature of Righteousness in general. And this three-fold declaration of Gods will, either written in our own Hearts, or spoken in his Word, or pronounced in the Voice of lawful Anthority, is the most certain, if not the only, Foundation of that distinction between right, and wrong, equity, and injury, by which all mankind is to be directed in all conditions, either as Superiors, Equals, or Inferiors. And now that this most commendable vertue may not pass among any of us, as it has with too many in our days, only for an Old Testa∣ment Duty, rather belonging to a moral man, than to a Christian: give me leave to put you in mind, how essential it is to Christianity it self; what commendations and privileges the Holy Scripture ascribes to it; what high rank and
dignity it holds in Gods Statute-Book, as well as in mens; and that not only in the Law, but in the Gospel; and not only spiritual Righteous∣ness, but natural, and political Righteousness too. If we shall reflect on the whole progress, and all the revolutions of Gods dispensations to man∣kind, we may easily observe, he has always proceeded with us, not only according to the un∣accountable purposes of his own secret will, whose Judgments are unsearchable, and its ways past finding out: But he has dealt with us, as af∣ter the manner of a God, by his infinite mercy, so, as I may say, after the manner of men too, by a standing, plain, declared, written Rule of Justice and Righteousness; by truth of Contract, by Covenant, a double Covenant, in which we might know what is his, what ours by his gift: a Covenant, in which we might understand our work, and, if we perform it well, may claim our recompence. Thus the great Creator of Heaven and Earth, who has an unlimited Dominion and Sovereign∣ty over the works of his hands, is yet so much delighted to have mankind govern'd by known Laws, that he himself was pleas'd, if I may so speak with reverence, to bound, and circumscribe
that part of his own Omnipotence, by the like method. And in the first, most public appearance of Gods presence to the world, as soon as he had chosen to himself a peculiar people, when he began to establish a setled Religion, did not then his care of common Justice, and civil Rights keep an equal pace with his provision for his own Worship? were his first Laws to the Jews, Ceremonial, and Ritual only, relating to his own Service alone? were they not Judici∣al, and Moral also, respecting as well the peace and prosperity of Humane Society? of all which Laws, did not God himself seem to give the advantage to this latter kind? he did, in this at least, that his own Ceremonial Law, which he then prescrib'd, was sometime to be abolish'd, but his Moral Law never. For upon his second, more perfect, and last Revelation of Religion in the Gospel, the way of his own Divine Service was indeed much al∣ter'd, but not any one common Rule of Human Justice: no abrogation of any one precept of Righteousness or Honesty followed upon the great reformation from Judaism to Christianity, but rather a new addition of more strength, and authority to them all.
Whoever shall recollect the whole matter, and design of our Blessed Saviours Preaching, can he possibly think otherwise? Does not the whole sum of his Divine Doctrine seem well nigh calculated, and fitted as much to establish, and direct the Courts of Legislators, and the Seats of Justice; as for the Temple, and the Pulpit? Were not all his Sermons, especially his great Sermon on the Mount, a perfect Comment on the ancient precepts of Righteousness, and Mercy? Does he not there free them all, one by one, from gross corruptions? Does he not vindicate them all by most genuine interpretati∣ons? Does he not establish them all by severer punishments, and more glorious rewards? Es∣pecially did he not exemplifie them all, by his own most innocent, just, unblamable, and mer∣ciful life? Thus confirm'd, thus advanc'd, did our Bles∣sed Saviour deliver down the common Rules of Right and Justice; and thus the same Rules have continued unchangeable in all successions of the Christian Church; never hindring the great design of Christianity, but exceedingly promoting it, and being themselves incorpo∣rated into it: So that all along the same do, as you would be done to, the same definitions of
Reason, and Righteousness; the same general pre∣cepts of Honesty in Commerce, and Judicial Pro∣ceedings; the same Laws of Ruling, and Obey∣ing, have been common to Christians with the wisest Heathen Nations: or wherever there was any difference, the Christian Laws of this kind were the stricter, and the practice of them too amongst Christians for many ages was, as their Principles require it ever to be, far more exact. Whatever our new Saints, that are only so of their own making, have devised, was it ever so much as question'd amongst the Apostles, and Primitive Saints, whether the new Law of the Gospel, tho that be stiled in Scripture, the Royal Law of Liberty; whether that did infranchise and set any man loose from the precepts of in∣ternal Virtue and Goodness, or of external Sub∣mission to Civil Government, and internal too? A question indeed there was concerning the Ce∣remonial Law, Whether that were to be extin∣guish'd? and that carried in the Affirmative: a question there was also concerning the Moral Law, and legal Righteousness, Whether that alone could justifie a Christian? and that deter∣min'd in the Negative. But never did any so∣ber Christian doubt, whether the Moral Law did oblige under the Gospel or no.
Certainly, till after a thousand years, the Romish Tyranny prevailed over weak Princes, and blind People, never did any Church of Christ, or pretended Head of any, take to it self a prerogative to exempt the Christian Church from due Obedience to the Temporal Power; much less to set up a Spiritual Power above the Temporal, nay, with a pretended right to Advance or Depose the Temporal. Cer∣tainly never, till the Anabaptistical madness, and Enthusiastical phrensies of these last Ages, did any Members of the Church of Christ, pre∣sume upon an extraordinary Purity, and Holi∣ness of their own, to declare themselves Absol∣ved, by a Spiritual Light within them, from the eternal Bonds of Reason, Right, and Ju∣stice, to which we are all indispensably obliged, not only as we are men, but much more as we are Christians. And to manifest the just Judgment of God against them all for these Usurpations, is it not very observable, that the very same men, who most of all men, that call themselves Christi∣ans, have invaded the rights of publick Govern∣ment, and private Virtue, the Romanist on the one side, the Enthusiasts on the other, the very same men have made the greatest Invasions
on Religion it self? the one on its Purity, the other on its Unity? Those of the Church of Rome, Pope Hilde∣brand, and His Followers, who assum'd a Do∣minion, and Supremacy over all Temporal Laws, did not they first exalt themselves in the Temple of God, above all that is called God, above the Scripture it self, the express Law of God? The Anabaptists in Germany, and their Successors, of whatever Name or Sect, who first falsly boasted, that their inward Sanctity, and Inspirations did set them above the low rudiments, and beggerly elements of this world, as they mis∣call'd the Obligations of Virtue, and Obedience: did the same men rest satisfied there? Did they not at the same time, profess, that all sober Pie∣ty, and decent Worship, and intelligible Reli∣gion, was as gross, and carnal, and Antichri∣stian, and as grievous to their spirits, as they had pronounced all the Ordinances of Civil Go∣vernment, and moral Virtue to be? But, God be praised! neither of these abomi∣nable examples, is of sufficient Authority, or An∣tiquity, to make a President, against the con∣stant, universal practice of the whole uncor∣rupt Christian, as well as Jewish Institution. Still therefore the same observation holds good,
that Justice and Piety, Righteousness and Reli∣gion came into the world together. In their be∣ginning they were brought forth as Twins, the most beloved Children of the most high, the most likely Off-spring of Heaven. And as they were Contemporaries at first, so they have been all along educated together; both cherish'd alike by God himself, both observed alike by all wise, holy, and good men. Nor indeed could it well be otherwise. For the mutual agreement between Justice, and Pie∣ty is inseparable: The perpetual union of Righ∣teousness and Religion is most necessary. The Principles on which they both subsist, the ends, which they would both produce, are the same, or subordinate one to the other. Are not true Reason, and the Word of God some of the chief Principles of true Righteousness? so they are of true Religion. Are not the Glory of God, and the happiness of mankind the ends of Religion? so they are of Righteousness. Religion indeed does carry the blessed work much farther; under∣takes to finish it in another life. But Righteous∣ness begins it in this life, and performs its part so well, that without it, Religion it self could have little, or no real influence on the Consciences of its Disciples.
Was not mankind a Society, as soon as it was a Church? and Righteousness contributed to make it a Society, as Religion did to make it a Church. Was it not Righteousness that first made men begin to confide in one another? to com∣mit their private Safety, and Profit to each others Fidelity? That therefore was the common pa∣rent of all other Virtues: That first peopled the world: That first drew, and enticed men into Houses, and Cities, and then secured them there: and so divided mankind from beasts in conditions, as well as habitations. Certainly it was Righteousness, as a part of natural Religi∣on, that first made men to be men: and so pre∣pared, and then deliver'd them over to reveal'd Religion, and at last to be made Christians, and Saints. If Righteousness had not temper'd, and sof∣ten'd, and reconciled humane nature within it self: no creature had been more fierce, and sal∣vage, than the Sons of Adam: none would have had more vehement passions to desire mischief; none more cunning to contrive it; none a grea∣ter power to effect it. If we take Righteousness out of the heart of a man, we leave nothing there of the image of God, after which he was created. Take Righte∣ousness
out of a private Family; and it soon turns into a den of Thieves. Take Righteous∣ness out of a State; and that only, becomes a more regular, more politic, more combin'd, and therefore a more pernicious society of migh∣ty Robbers. Take Righteousness out of the World; and the world would not deserve to be call'd, as it was at first, the complete work of God's hands; but a Chaos still, or a rude Forest or Wilderness; or something worse: For to be inhabited only by rapine, and violence, is worse, than to be only an innocent, unfrequented De∣sart. Thus whatever increase of Civil Arts, what∣ever flourishing of populous Nations, whatever intercourse between people and people has been practis'd to supply the necessities, conveniences, and Ornaments of humane life: they were all at first founded on Righteousness. From that are derived to us all our temporal Blessings: without that, we could never have enjoyed the means of our eternal Blessings. For where there is no true Righteousness, there can be no true humanity, no civility, no kindness of men to one another: and by consequence, no true Reli∣gion. For all true Religion is always accompa∣nied with some true humanity: wherever the
power of Christianity comes, it either finds some civility, or makes it. What is that which imme∣diately follows Glory to God on high? peace on earth, good will towards men. And where there is no Righteousness, there can be no good will; where there is no good will of men to one another, there can be no place, or no well-grounded hope of Gods good will to men. This is the first thing in my Text, Righteous∣ness; a virtue so beneficial, so necessary to man∣kind; so highly valued of God himself. This deals with men, as men, upon the square, upon even terms; justly expecting a like return of good offices. The next is Mercy. But that has more of superiority, and majesty in it. That takes men on the greatest disadvantage, with the greatest generosity: when they are either miserable by distresses, or obnoxious by inju∣ries, relieves the one, pardons the other. What∣ever therefore I have said, or can be said in praise of Righteousness; still the chief place in our praises, and practice, ought to be reserved for Mercy. Great indeed is the extent of both these together. All below Righteousness, is sin: nothing is above Mercy. So that both to∣gether comprehend the whole compass of mens duty to one another, from the lowest to the
highest part of it; which may be all contained in two words, Honesty, and Charity; that is, the Righteousness, and Mercy in my Text. Thus they are best together. But if consider'd asunder, or compared, then Mercy must tri∣umph over, S. James ii. 13. and rejoyce against judgment. Righ∣teousness is a virtue unblamable: Mercy is a grace most lovely, and honorable. Righteous∣ness obliges us to yield to other men their own: Mercy inclines us to give them our own too: and what can be more? Righteousness makes you not to be enemies to others unjustly: Mer∣cy makes you not to be enemies to your ene∣mies: nay, to be their Friends, their Benefa∣ctors, even their Gods. Most certainly, S. James ii. 13. as he shall have judgment without mercy, that hath shewed no mercy: so God will re∣quire Mercy with the greatest Mercy; for he will requite even Righteousness with Mercy. Of all the Divine Attributes, God is delighted to exer∣cise his mercy to men, more than any, nay than all the rest: and therefore he cannot but esteem mercy in men above all other humane endow∣ments. So essential, so dear is Mercy to God himself, that in his own inexpressibly-Divine Nature, he seems to give it some special pre∣eminence over all his other perfections: though
no doubt, they are in themselves all equally Di∣vine and Infinite. For the sake of his Mercy, God seems willing to change his own eternal mind, which is un∣doubtedly immutable. Psal. cvi. 45. It is said, He repented ac∣cording to the multitude of his mercies. When he in∣joyns it us, he prefers it before his own Worship: He says, S. Mat. ix. 13. I will have mercy, and not sacrifice. His Mercy may be said to sweeten his Holiness, to moderate his Power, to delay, to stop his Re∣venge, to enlarge, beyond all proportion, his di∣stributive, and, after all provocations, to restrain his vindicative Justice. His Mercy God often employs, without any the least mixture of his severe Attributes; But he seldom, or never ex∣ercises any of them in this world, so as utterly, irreparably to exclude his Mercy: In the midst of judgments, he remembers mercy. The two great Attributes, by which God con∣descends to govern all humane affairs, are his Power, or his Mercy. But an Almighty Power alone had been rather dreadful, than auspicious to mankind. It might have fill'd mens minds with fear, and terror, and have frighted them in∣to a servile compliance. 'Tis only mercy added to power, that brings authority with it; and charms mens hearts into a willing obedience.
Which of these two God himself prefers, can we have a clearer instance, than in the persons and administrations of Moses, and our Blessed Saviour? Moses the Vice-gerent of Gods Power; our Saviour of his Mercy: Moses the Servant of God; our Saviour the Son of God, nay, God himself. During the Ministry of Moses, we read much of Countries laid wast, of Nations plagued, of the First-born cut off, of Kingdoms and Armies over-whelm'd and destroy'd. Then Religion seem'd rather inclined to terrifie the world, than to pardon it; to inforce a Law, than to persuade it; to subdue enemies, than to make friends. But at the appearance of our Blessed Saviour, Religion seemed on a sudden reconciled to the whole world; and not only to require by its Divinity, but to deserve by its Clemency the love and reverence of all mankind. For in our Saviours works, though there were undeniable Testimonies of his unlimited Power, yet there were more of his boundless Mercy: though both in him were infinite, yet his Mercy was most apparent. Such is Mercy, so wonderful, adorable, and universal, in the first great example, and most perfect Original of it, God himself! 'Tis well
for us that it is so. And such in truth of imitation, should be the imperfect Copies, that we take of it from him. Though we cannot come near that Mercy in any measure of equality: yet we should all strive to resemble it, if we would par∣take of it: S. Luke vi. 36. Ps. cxlv. 9. To be merciful as our heavenly Father is merciful. As he is merciful! Yes. As his mercy is over all his own works, and above all our sins: So should our mercy be, in our weak degree of proportion; above all our own good works to other men, above all other mens ill works, and offences against us. This is the only way, for us frail, and sinful creatures, to be like our heavenly Father, in that very thing, in which he is most our Father, most our heavenly Father. These then are the two great Duties here re∣commended, both the principal things in Hea∣ven and Earth. Nothing brings Heaven down so near to Earth: nothing raises Earth so much toward Heaven. What then can be done bet∣ter on Earth? What more worthy of Heaven, than to follow after them both? and what is it to follow after them, in a right manner, in a true Scripture sense? which is my second Head proposed.
We read it, according to the Hebrew, , &c He that followeth after Righteousness, and Mercy. The Septua∣gint render it, The way of Righteousness and Mercy, shall find, &. Indeed whoever would rightly pur∣sue these, or any other graces, they must do it, in a way; not by secret shifts, and turnings; not in by-paths, or indirectly; not after any private fancy, or spirit; but by a trodden, direct, lawful Rule: Let me say it, in the Kings High-way. Thus every man ought to be righteous to all men, equally, and indifferently, not only to his own Friends, or Sect, or Party. We may, 'tis true be merciful to some men more than to others, according to our opportunities, or obli∣gations, or discretion: But then still we should be exceedingly careful, that we be not unmer∣ciful to any man. Thus to follow after these things is to set about their performance, speedily, zelously, indefati∣gably, with the whole man, in all our thoughts, words, and actions; especially the men of this world, as Christian men of this world, plainly, and sincerely to set your minds, your tongues, your hands, your feet, to the work: with the clearest conviction of your understandings, that they ought to be practis'd, but chiefly with the most ardent, and unwearied affections of your
hearts, in the practice: For it is the heart, it is practice, that God most regards. And to follow after both these graces aright, is to practice them both in their seasons, and pro∣portions: never to divide two such things, which God himself has so nearly joyn'd in his Com∣mands; in his own incomprehensible Godhead has indissolubly united them: so we to conjoyn, and mingle them both together; never to omit either of them, on a pretence, that it is for the sake of the other; but with the most charitable, and harmonious mixture of both in one, to sea∣son, to strengthen, to justify all our mercy with Righteousness; to qualifie, to allay, to sweeten all our righteousness with Mercy. And thus really to follow after both these things, in Scripture-Language, is, really to ob∣tain them. So gracious, and benign are the expressions of the Holy Ghost in these matters, that your unfeigned labor, and well-directed in∣dustry in the ways of grace, and goodness, brings with it an infallible success: Your very endea∣vours after them, if uncounterfeit, and perse∣vering, are often here taken for the effect it self. So gently, so compassionately does our good, and only wise God condescend to meet our infirmi∣ties, that his Grace does often prevent our dili∣gence;
never fails it, never comes short of it. Let us but knock, S. Mat. vii. 7. and the gate of divine Mercy shall be open'd to us; Let us but seek, and we shall find: Let us but ask, and we shall have: Let us but follow after, and we shall overtake. Nay farther yet, God will not only give us the very things, we ask, and seek, and follow after: but he of∣ten super-adds the recompence of them at the same time: oftentimes accompanies, and sets off his graces, not only with their own peculiar gifts, and advantages; but accumulates more, heaps upon them many other remote blessings. Of which most bounteous method of Gods dispensations to mankind, Solomon, the wise Au∣thor of this sentence in my Text, of all men li∣ving in his time, had the greatest experience. For when God entirely left it to his will, which he would choose, either Wisdom, or Wealth, or Power, or Victory; and he had made the best choice in preferring Wisdom: God did not only plentifully bestow that upon him, but over and above cast in all the other good things, which in comparison to Wisdom, he himself had rejected. I Kings iii. God said to him, Because thou hast asked for thy self this thing, and hast not ask'd for thy self long life, neither hast ask'd riches for thy self, nor hast ask'd the life of thine enemies, but hast
ask'd for thy self understanding to discern judgment; behold, I have done according to thy words: Lo! I have given thee a wise, and an understanding heart: so that there was none like thee before thee, neither after thee shall any arise like unto thee. And I have also, says God, given thee that which thou hast not ask'd, both riches and honor. And if thou wilt walk in my ways, to keep my Statutes, and my Commandments, then I will also lengthen thy days. So that Solomon, or all men, was the fittest man to continue his own observation of Gods in∣finite goodness in this kind, upon Sacred Record to all generations. And therefore as God had proved to him, concerning Wisdom, and Under∣standing, so he pronounces here of Righteousness, and Mercy, without which the highest under∣standing is Craft, not Prudence; the greatest seeming Wisdom is Subtilty, and Artifice, not Wisdom. Of Righteousness and Mercy, he affirms in my Text, not only that he, who follows after them shall find Righteousness and Mercy themselves: though that were much; much more than any other study can boast of, that all our search shall never be in vain: But here that is supposed, as out of all question: much more is said: not only that he who follows after Righteousness and
Mercy shall find, but findeth, what? not only Righteousness, and Mercy, but moreover Life, Righteousness and Honor. You shall not only pos∣sess these Virtues, if you sincerely pursue them, but you shall enjoy, so surely, that you may be said already to enjoy, the happy fruits of that pursuit, which are Life, Righteousness, and Honor. That is my third, and last particular, the Rewards, ensuing the right following after these duties, which, you see, are far more than equal to the duties themselves. But what if these Virtues had come single, and alone, without any such blessed train of promises, or bright atten∣dance of rewards? how ought we to have been affected towards them even then? Out of all controversie, we ought still to have followed after them most earnestly, to have em∣braced them most willingly, for their own sakes, for their own true worth, and unvaluable beau∣ty. Nor need we to fetch arguments from the Christian Principles, to persuade us to this. Thus much even the wise, and good men amongst the Gentiles have taught us. They scarce thought any Philosophy worthy of a man, that did not oblige him to love Justice, and Bounty, and all other Virtues, for themselves, for their inward benefit, and invisible excellence.
And if the very Heathens could have such just apprehensions of things, under their obscure, and imperfect light; what shame would it be to us Christians, if we should not far exceed them? what reproach, if we should scarce equal them? what hainous scandal, if we should come short of them, in our opinions, and pra∣ctice of these things? if we should think Virtue of it self to be less praise-worthy than they did, or less its own reward? Yet since our most gracious Master, our most indulgent Father has thought fit to add so much to these self-sufficient Duties; we may thankful∣ly accept of those promises: we may lawfully look to that recompence of reward, that recom∣pence, which we could not deserve. And we ought therefore to double our industry, which is so doubly, so manifoldly requited; most dili∣gently to follow after Righteousness, and Mercy: since they are things in themselves so desirable, so advantageous, so inestimable in their Re∣wards. First, Of Life, and Honor. As I said before of the word Righteousness, so I must now say of the words Life, and Honor: they have different meanings in the Old, and
New Testament. Under the Law, Life, and Honor, and most other legal promises; were, I do not say only, but commonly understood in a literal sense; for temporal Prosperity, and secu∣lar happiness. But the Gospel, as it has rais'd the things themselves much higher, so it has propor∣tionably advanc'd the words. And therefore in the Gospel, though temporal felicity be not at all obstructed, but rather exceedingly promoted by it, yet Life, and Honor, and most other Evange∣lical promises, are most frequently to be taken in a more sublime, and Divine sense; for life immortal, honors unspeakable, joys full of glory. I cannot now in Justice, but apply this pro∣mise to my present subject, in its full extent, in both its senses: For most surely Righteousness and Mercy are able to entitle you all to both these lives, to both these honors, both here, and here∣after. The first kind of Life, and Honor, which is peace of days, increase of dignity, and reputa∣tion in this world, all those blessings these Vir∣tues may claim, as their due, and right; as their own by purchase, and desert, though not from God, yet from all mankind. And in fact they are seldom dispossest of them, but by great inju∣ry,
or extraordinary misfortune, or, to speak in the Christian language, by some hidden purpose of Divine Providence. Nor is this only the prerogative of Righteous∣ness and Mercy. But, though this may at first seem a paradox, yet it is a privilege common to all other Virtues, that as they have great, and just expectations of a future recompence, so they are usually accompanied with some very consi∣derable temporal good, and advantage. And it is the unavoidable, insupportable misery of all vice, that as its prospect into another world is most dismal, so its condition in this is ever some way, or other very uncomfortable. Whatever flattering, and deceitful shapes sin may put on, yet it can never so dissemble all its defects, so hide all its deformities, but still when we come to our selves, when the charm is over, we may see, and must confess, that all wickedness is followed close by some very great, notorious, temporal punishment, and disadvan∣tage. Some bring loss of credit, contempt, infa∣my, hatred: as dishonesty, cruelty, corruption, oppression, inordinate ambition: which very commonly fails of that vain honor, it unduly grasps at, and loses that quiet life, of which be∣fore it was calmly possest. Some bring loss of
health, decay of bodily strength, and pleasure, which they only seem to consult. As Luxury, and Riot bring sickness and diseases: they make men most unfit for death, and yet most hasten it. Some bring loss of earthly riches, as Prodigali∣ty, and Intemperance; which Poverty pursues as an armed man: so that men often lose their hopes of another world, not so much, as for the good things of this world, but even by throwing away their share in this world too. Nay, Covetousness does the same: by a greedi∣ness of getting more, it deprives it self of the true ends of getting: it loses the use, and enjoy∣ment of what it had got. Thus every Vice has its dark shadow, some evil genius haunting it in this world: its satisfa∣ctions are short, and uncertain: its calamities most certain, most durable, Whilst on the other side every Virtue has its good Angle, is sur∣rounded with some, visible luster, some worldly advantage. Some bring health, some wealth, some power, some fame, some contentment; a good at least equal to any of the other. But Righ∣teousness and Mercy united bring them all together. You see they freely offer to your possession, they will plentifully shower into your bosoms all the sweetness, and tranquillity of life, all the splen∣dor,
and abundance of a life, that is honor∣able. All this they are here enabled to do, by the gift of a Divine Promise: This in truth for the most part, they cannot but do, by natural effect, and consequence. For towards a secure, and happy life, Righteousness does very much: Mercy perfects what the other leaves undone. Righteousness makes few, or no foes, none worth making friends: Mercy makes, or deserves to make, all friends; friends even of foes. Righ∣teousness always commends you to good men, often defends you against wicked men; never justly provokes wicked men against you: Mer∣cy moves, Rom. xii. 21 melts, reconciles, conquers even the wicked; by the most powerful kind of victory overcomes evil with good. What then, in all humane probability, may be reasonably expected from such inoffensive ju∣stice, such charming, such diffusive benignity, and compassion? what? but the justice, nay more, the thanks, the good will, and good offices of those, who shall be righted by your justice? what? but the Prayers, the hearts, the lives, if need be, of those who shall be preserv'd by your mercy, or forgiven by your pity? All this from without: Besides the comfortable assurance, and
testimony of a clear, and serene conscience within: which only is able to make life sweet, honor not a burden: nay it is able to make un∣deserv'd disgrace a comfort, and death it self happy. And certainly all this is life, and honor; this is praise and glory; if there be any true life, a∣bove a sensual, carnal life: if there be any sub∣stantial, lasting honor, above the perishing sha∣dows of it: if there be not only any Religion towards God, but if there be any thing true, and just, and honest, and lovely, and of good report; if there be any virtue, any praise amongst men: if that be glory, which the very Heathens have defined to be the concurring esteem, and com∣mendation of the wise, and the good, bestow'd on great men, not only, nor indeed chiefly, for their riches, or power; but rather for their cle∣mency, and beneficence: perfections most pro∣per to the upper part of mankind. And they can never do mischief to the lower part, nay they can never be employ'd, but in doing good to the lower part of the world. God himself has said, that Great men are Gods: yet it is not greatness alone, but mercy joyn'd with greatness, and strengthen'd with Righteousness, that can make them so.
Yet because it may so happen, by the secret disposal of the all-wise Governor of all things, that Righteousness, and Mercy may sometimes fail of a Temporal Reward: because that may come to pass, which yet David professes never to have seen from his youth to his old age, Psalm xxxvii. 25. that the righte∣ous man may be forsaken, and his seed beg their bread, or want an easie subsistence of life: nay, because the merciful man may come short of his just recompence of honor here below: therefore there is still behind a sufficient reserve, an un∣measurable compensation, in the other more heavenly sense of the words life, and honor: which, as sure as God is true, will be, are the un∣doubted portion of the righteous, and merciful man. That life, that honor, which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor hath it enter'd into the tongue of man to express, or heart to conceive, that is the most worthy subject of all our thoughts, that ought to be the chief end of all our designs. Else our designs may be speciously honorable; they may be for life in a low sense, rather indeed for livelihood than life; only to support a life, that is but for a moment supportable: But they can never else promote our true life; they can never else be truly profitable, much less truly honor∣able.
Our gracious God indeed permits, nay, he encourages you all, in the prosecution of the life, and honors of this world. His Laws have very many precepts of true humility, but no level∣ling principles in them, no more than yours have. Distinctions of dignity, different advantages of life, degrees of honor do very well agree with the greatest purity, strictness, and simplicity of the Gospel: no doubt therefore they must be consistent with the freeness, and largeness, and generosity of Christianity. God suffers mankind to be provok'd, and ex∣cited to Virtue, by all manner of arguments, by secular, as well as by spiritual promises; by temporal, as well as by eternal hopes. He al∣lows you all the sober pursuit of the moderate delights, and plenty of this life: They are his gift, if you obtain them. He is, no doubt, well pleas'd with your earnest endeavours after ex∣cellency, in any kind of wise counsel, or useful knowledg, or worthy action. The honors you reap thereby, he confers upon you: of the good you do thereby, you your selves have the prin∣cipal advantage. Give me leave therefore to add; All these our other designs should so be proportion'd, that be∣ing good in themselves, they be not made ill by
their abuse, or excess: all our thoughts of this worlds life, and honors should be so order'd, as neither to depress our minds too much, by the cares of this life, nor to raise them too high, by the honors of this world: rather they should be employ'd, to assist our souls, and give them wings, in rising higher to supernatural expectati∣ons; to a life, to honor immortal; to carry up our contemplations, to fix our affections on Hea∣ven, on that prospect above, which is the last bound of the very eyes of our Bodies; how much more ought it to be the last object of the eyes of our minds! And if that life, that honor shall be at the bot∣tom of all your hearts, shall be the beginning and end of all your pains, and studies, if by Righ∣teousness, and Mercy you shall aspire towards them, you cannot come short of them. This way you shall find as near, and as sure a passage to Heaven, from the midst of your earthly busi∣ness, and worldly Employments, conscientiously, and piously, righteously, and mercifully managed as any other man has reason to expect from the greatest retirement of a solitary Devotion. I speak this on good authority. For thus the holy Scripture it self dispenses the joys of Hea∣ven. In the whole course of the Gospel, eternal
glory is as much, at least as much, ensured to the just, and charitable virtues, and graces of an a∣ctive life, and of a publick station in this world, as to any other part of all contemplative, or pra∣ctical Religion. Whatever imaginations some men may have concerning the true way, and gate, that leads to celestial happiness: which men have been al∣ways too ready to open to themselves, and to those of their own parties, and opinions; too quick in shutting it upon all others: too many usurping an authority of brandishing the terrors of Gods Justice, and of scattering the assurances of his Mercy, when, and where they please; which were neither of them ever committed to their distribution: yet whatever claim such men may make to the joys of Heaven: some pre∣tending to them only by the free Grace, without regarding the precepts of the Gospel: some on∣ly by relying on single Faith, and vilifying of Charity: some by great scruples in little things, and far less care of great things: some by censuring of other mens lives, and putting as many as they can, under a state of Damnation; by being more against other mens Religions, than for their own: yet undoubtedly none of these is the way. These are all mistaken, unrighteous, unmerci∣ful
ways. The only true way to Heaven, which God himself has traced out, which Christ him∣self does often point at, though it be narrow, yet it is a direct; not a cross way: though it be strait, yet it is passable, and has a gate always open. And what is this way? what this gate? It is not a di∣sputing, contentious, comparing, censorious, but a mild, peaceable, righteous, merciful way. And this it is, By the mercy of God the Father, Christ made to us Righteousness: and that Mercy and this Righteousness made effectual to us men by the assistance, and consolations of God the Holy Ghost; and that received, by men with a lively, efficacious Faith; and that evidenc'd to be in men by such effects, as most resemble their Di∣vine Original, such as respect both God, and man: Which are true Righteousness, and Mercy of men to one another, accompanied with unfeigned piety towards God. Is there still behind in my Text any more re∣ward promised to the man, who follows after Righteousness, and Mercy? Indeed can there be any more, than mortal life, and honor? life, and honor immortal? yes there is still more. And it is that, you see, which is the cause of all the other Rewards. It is Righteousness it self. He that followeth after Righteousness, and Mercy,
findeth life, righteousness, and honor: which now, if you please, may be thus briefly paraphrased. He that lives righteously, and mercifully towards men, if he shall practise these virtues humbly, and constantly; if he shall perform them so, as not at all to rely on their merit for salvation; if still he shall find the want, and believe the effi∣cacy; and lay hold on the benefit of our dear Redeemers more precious Righteousness: he shall then partake of the fruits, and enjoy the happiness, that is promised indeed to our righte∣ousness, and mercy, but was purchas'd only by our Saviours Righteousness, and bestow'd only by Gods mercy. I am now arrived at the other more Evange∣lical signification of the word Righteousness. But I come to it so late, that I cannot treat of it at large. And it is better to say nothing of it than too little. Only from this, and the rest of my dis∣course, I beg leave to present you farther with one short observation; which perhaps will not be unseasonable, by me to be mention'd with all Submission, by you to be received with favorable Interpretation. You may perceive, that the true Doctrine, and Practice of Righteousness, and Mercy, of mens righteousness, and mercy to one another; of Gods
righteousness, and mercy to men, had the same Di∣vine Author, and example at first, the same course, and progress afterwards: and they are all along in Scripture represented under the same, or very like expressions. Righteousness, and Mercy are the sum of the Law in one sense; they are the substance of the Gospel in another. The only possible means and instrument, to secure, and preserve the one of these, is Civil Govern∣ment: The only way to teach, and maintain the other is Religion. What now may be fairly concluded from all this? Certainly, that as these two most admi∣rable things have themselves so long, so well agreed in matter, and words, in growth, and in∣crease; as they are both the best things in this world; so the means, and instruments of pre∣serving them both, are both most nearly united in interest, and ought to be so in mutual affecti∣ons, and assistance. Certainly when God himself chose his first Law-giver, and his first High-Priest, out of the same Family; when he appointed Moses and Aaron two Brethren of the same house, to be his principal Ministers of Justice, and Piety: it was not by chance, it was not for want of choice. But there was even then some mystical intenti∣on,
and that was even then a happy presage, that between the true Righteousness, and the true Religion, there should, in all succeeding Ages be nourish'd a perpetual League, and Al∣liance, offensive and defensive: that, as God himself expresses it, Aaron might be to Moses in∣stead of a mouth; Moses to Aaron instead of God. And is there not still the same reason, for the same entire union between both these things among us, as there was then among Gods own people? have they not both the same strengths, and dangers, the same hopes, and fears, the same friends, and enemies, the same friends in Hea∣ven, and Earth, the same enemies in Earth, and Hell? The common adversaries of both may begin against Religion, as, God knows, in most of our memories, they did. But did not then, and will not always, the ruine of Righteousness suddenly follow the overthrow of Religion? In all, or most of the seditious practices, tu∣mults, and confusions among us, the false cause of God has been first pretended, the true cause of God first struck at: and next to that imme∣diately a false Justice has been made a colour to supplant the true Justice: The Church has been always attempted first to be removed,
that they might come at the State the more ea∣sily. Can there be then a more powerful argu∣ment to unite us all in preventing the like mis∣chiefs, than our common danger? Can there be a better guide to admonish us all how to pre∣vent them, than our common experience? I profess I speak this, not only as a necessary caution for the time to come, but as well in just acknowledgment of what is past. For as we have reason to thank the enemies of our Religi∣on, on all sides, when they upbraid us, as they often do, that ours is a meer State-Religion, be∣cause the interest of our Church has been al∣ways, ever since its Reformation, inseparable from that of the Civil Government: Which we freely grant, and must always assert, as that by which we shall stand, or fall; nay by which, through the blessing of God, we shall always stand: so we must declare to all the world, that next to the Scripture it self, and the genuine Interpretation of it by the ancient Christian Writers, and the uninterrupted use of the best, and purest Ages of Christianity; next these, the great Establishment, and Strength of the Church of England, is the protection of the Crown, and the stability of our Civil Government, and
Laws. And thus far we confess, ours is a State-Religion: Our Church was Reform'd by Au∣thority of the State: and above all its enemies, it best provides for the security of the State. Wherefore, in the name of God, as the best way to frustrate all our enemies hopes against our Church and State; which will be the most solid answer to all their little objections, let us all unanimously persevere, in our several sta∣tions, to pray for, and obey, to strengthen and defend one of the most moderate, the wisest, the most pious frames of Religion, that ever Christians enjoy'd since the Primitive Age; one of the best, the freest, the most happy constitu∣tions of Civil Government, that ever mankind enjoy'd since the Creation. May we all agree in this undeniable truth, that whoever would subvert the State, they are mortal enemies to Religion: whoever would destroy Religion, they are equally enemies to the State. To both let us be subject, Rom. xiii. not only for wrath, but for con∣science sake: And the more for Conscience sake, because so very little, or no wrath, so much of Justice, and Mercy is to be found in them both. May therefore Iustice, and Piety, Mercy, and Truth meet together, that Glory may dwell in our
Land: may Righteousness, and Peace, always kis each other among us. May the Counsels, an persons, that advance, and protect both in th Nation, be inviolably united in Righteousnes and Mercy: may they for ever prosper with Lif and Honor. AMEN. FINIS.
