T2187A 12363356 60327
THE TRYAL OF Elizabeth Cellier, THE Popish Midwife, At the Old Baily, Septemb. 11. 1680. For Printing and Publishing the late Notori∣ous Libel, Intituled, Malice Defeated, &c. Where she was found GƲILTY. Together with her SENTENCE. THis Prodigy of Impudence not content to have Luckily escap'd on her former Tryal for High Treason, but being thereupon grown extravagantly vain and insolent, was by some of the Hellish Crew of Jesuits and Fryars put upon owning and publishing the above mentioned Libel, of their contrivance, pretending to give an ac∣count of her case, but being indeed most scandalous reflections on the Pub∣lick Justice of the Nation, his Majesty, the Lords of his most honourable Privy Council, the Judges of the Land, the Kings Evidence, the Gentlemen of her Jury, and in a word the whole Kingdom, except her own Trayterous Popish Faction; and as the matter of it was most Audacious Falshoods, so did she very suitably Midwife it into the World with Cheats and Lies, sen∣ding
for several Booksellers to buy the worshipful Copy, (the precise price of which was an Hundred Guinnics) and to every one of them protesting on the Faith of a Catholick Wound, and Honour of her calling, that he had the Maiden-head on't, and was the first Man she ever offer'd it to; and af∣terwards buzz'd abroad, that such a Man offered her Forty Guinnies, and such  one Fift whereas in truth they were so fa from offerg her a Penn that she culd not for an Hundred Pounds hav Brib'd them to med∣dle wh one sh of such Villan; and therefore at ast herself ut it to Pring, engng with many Asseverations to be him harss that did it, and pay all his Charges if any trouble happened; yet when he was questioned, very civilly denied that promise, and would not pay a Farthing of his Fees; and to give him his due he was right enough served. These petty Circumstances we mention, to give the World a taste of the Honesty and Veracity of this Catholick Saint, whose Pamphlet being seiz'd at the Press, she ws carrie before the Council, and bound over o answer it the firs a f the nxt Trm, and to be of good Behaviour; but with an Impudence peculiar to herself and the Cause, she notwithstanding such restraint proceeded to compleat the Libel and published it. This so justly ex∣asperated Authority, to see it self thus Braved and Affronted by the Bag∣gage, that an immediate Prosecution was ordered, and an Indictment of Misdemeanour being exhibited against her to the Grand Jury for Midlesex at Hicks Hall, and by them found, on Friday the Tenh instant, she was forthwith appreded, and brought to the Sessions at the Old Baily, where she behaved her self very Malapertly, and would fain have put off the Tryal till another Sessions; but being therein over-ruled by the Court, and ready to be taken into the Bail-dock by the Keepers, she Sreamed as loud as her lying impudence would make the World believe Mr. Prance did on the imaginary Rack, and seemed to have a great Antipathy against the smell of Newgate and therefore offered two shabby fellows for a▪ one of whom was said to be the Brother of Nevil, alias Pain, that Hackney Drudge, whom they keep (as Birds are Caged to make them Sing) in Jail, on purpose that he may be at leasure to oribble Lies for the party. But this Broomstaff Security being refused by the Court, she prayed leave to go forth with a Keeper to got better; vapouring in open Court, that within an hour she would return with Bail worth Thousands. But it seems the Vermin were for quitting the House that they saw ready to tumble, for those that before encouraged her, were now loth to appear, and so the distressed Damosel was forced to take up her Lodging for that Night in the Inchanted Castle of New∣gate. It is observable that she then praying longer time▪ and insisting on the absence of her witnesses, the Court told her they could not apprehend what Witnesses she could have occasion for, unless she would prove who Wrote the Book▪ and set heron work to own it; whereupon she loudly answered,—My Lord▪ I wrote it every Line my self. So Ambitious she was of being Gossip to the Spurious Libel, though 'tis well known to be The whole Troops Child; for though the Dominican Rascal, for whom the Gallows has groan'd ever since January last might be chief Agent, yet C. and G. and several others, 'tis probable Clubb'd ther Politick Noddles towards it. On Saturday Septemb, 11, in the afternoon she was brought to tryal, where the learned and unbiassed Baron weston (being the onely Judge pre∣sent) heard the Cause, discharging his duty to the great satisfaction of all the numerous Auditory. The Indictment was for causing to be printed
and published a false, scandalous, and seditious Libel▪ and several of the grossest passages, as that or Racking Mr. Prance, &c. were recited. The Kings Council opened the matter excellently, shewed the desperate de∣sign of the Libel, to turn off the Popish Plot upon the Protestants, to vi∣lifie the Kings Evidence, to stifle the th of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey's Murder, and make the Nation and the Protestant Religion odious in Forein Parts, by these lying stories of Racks and Tortures used upon poor Catho∣licks. The Prisoner, though she publickly boasted her self to be the Au∣thorers but yesterday, had the grace now as stoutly to deny it; and be∣ing urg'd with her so late Acknowledgment to the Court, replied, She hop'd it did not become that Honourable Bench to give Evidence. Nor needed it, the thing being otherwise sufficiently proved. For, 1. A man testified that he bought one of the Books of her, and paid her for it; to whom she declar'd that they were her Books, and that she could have put much more into them, and did give him another small Libel into the bargain. 2. Mr. Downing, that printed some Sheets of it, proved that she bar∣gained with him to do it, promised to bear him harmless, ordered her Name to be printed in the Title-page, and that she sent for Sheets to have them corrected. 3. Mr. Stevins the Messenger, whose Industry first discover'd and sei∣zed it, prov'd that she own'd it to him, pretending at first that the Copy was her own hand-writing, but afterwards he saw her write, and found hers a scrambling ugly hand, far different from the Manuscript; and then she told him, she kept two men in her house to write it as she dictated to them▪ of whom the notorious Sing, formerly a Coffeeman and Intelligen∣cer, was one. 4. Mr. Prance declar'd upon his Oath the utter falshood of that Ma∣licious story of his being Rack'd or in any kind Tortured but that on the contrary he was very civilly Treated at all times by Capt. Richardson, and also by his Lady in the time of his sickness, and that he made his discovery freely and voluntarily, and was only led thereunto by the Power of Truth, and to disburthen his Conscience of so horrid a Crime. And Mr. Boyce and several others were present to have testified and confirmed the same, but it was not thought necessary, that Lie of hers Stabbing it self by its own improbabillity, and being so notoriously Contrary to the Laws and Practice of this Nation. 'Tis Popery that needs an Inquisition to support it, and delights in Cruelties and Tortures, and Extorts Confessions by Racks and Strapado's; the Protestant Religion, and the generous English temper, disdain such Barbarities. 5. Mr. Fowler the Vintner upon his Oath inform'd the Court, with the grounds of his suspecting Corral the Coach-man mentioned in the Libel pag. 3. viz. From his own words, but denied utterly that he ever bid him lay it upon any, or told him of any Money that was to be got by it, or any thing of that kind, giving so punctual an account of the whole matter, that the Court was satisfied. Mr. Fowler did nothing but what became and was the duty of every honest Man in that affair. As to the Prisoners defence, it was very inconsiderable, her Romantick Spirit was much abated, and she talk'd abundantly more like a Midwife, than such a Politician and Stateswoman as she would be accounted; only she called two Women and a Man as Witnesses, but two of them could say
nothing material, the third was the before mentioned Coach-man's Wife, who said her Husband was at the time mentioned in Newgate, and had Irons on, but acknowledged she had access to him and never was beaten, or any thing of that kind, as in the Libel is pretended. 'Tis also observable, that the said Coach-man had upon Oath disown'd all that Tragical story that Cellier reports of him, but did not appear now in Court. Then the BARON in a grave and solid discourse summ'd up the Evidence, and the Court being so full that the Jury could not conveniently come together to Consult, did for that reason withdraw, but presently return'd, and brought her in Guilty. At which the People gave a general shout, yet she had the Confidence, even after Conviction, to mov'd to be Bailed; but that not being Grantable by Law, she was ordered back to Newgate, where she now remains, with much better accomodations from the Captains Civility, than she deserves or could expect from a Person she had so basely and causlesly abused, were not his Generosity as imcomparable as her Malice. On Monday the 13 of Sept. she received the judgment of the Court, which was to stand Three times in the Pillory, First at the May-pole in the Strand, Secondly in Covent Garden, and Thirdly at Charing-cross, and some of her Books to be Burnt at each place before her face by the Common Hangman, and also was fined 1000 l. and one Years imprisonment, and after that time expired, and the Fine paid, to give security for the good behaviour during Life. There were at this Sessions Eleven Persons Condemned to die, Six Wo∣men and Five Men, one burnt in the hand, and Three to be Whipped. FINIS. Printed by A. Godbid, for L. C. 1680.
