T2572 12075968 53607
A true and plain DECLARATION OF THE Horrible Treasons PRACTISED By WILLIAM PARRY, Dr. of the Civil Law, BEING A PAPIST, AGAINST Queen Elizabeth (of blessed memory,) Because She was a PROTESTANT; And of his Tryal, Conviction, and Execution for the same, Being a full Account of his Design to have Murthered the said Queen; with the Copy of a Letter written to him by Cardinal Como, by the Popes order, to incourage him to kill the Queen: And of his Confession of his Treason, both to the Lords of the Council, and at his Tryal upon his Indictment in Westminster-hall. Together with his Denyal thereof at the place of Execu∣tion, and his manner of Behaviour there. Written in the Year, 1584. Audax omnia perpeti Gens Romana ruit per vetitum nefas. Published to shew how little credit is to be given to the last and dying words of the Romanists. LONDON: Printed for William Crook and Charles Harper, at the Green Dragon without Temple-Bar, and at the Flower-de-luce over against St. Dun¦stan's Church in Fleetstreet, 1679.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER. READER, THE Papists, those restless Enemies of the Protestant Religion, are not more infamous for the unsoundness of their Doctrines, than for the greatness of their Treasons: where they cannot convince, they labour to destroy; and rather than not subdue what they call (but cannot prove) a pestilent Heresie, they will massacre the whole Protestant Party; and will pull down a flourishing State, to build a corrupt Church. Their Subjection to the Pope is in consistent with their Allegiance to the Prince; and if they are true Roman Catholicks, they cannot be good English Subjects: For when they are designed by the Church to be made Saints, they never afterwards by the Law can be made Rebels. And therefore when God is pleased, by discovering their Designs, to expose them to Justice, there is not a man of them that is guilty, but as innocent as the Child unborn: For unless their attempts succeed, and declare to all the World their actual Treason, in despight of all other proofs, they will brag of their constant Loyalty. Willing enough they are to reap the fruits of Rebellion, but take care (if the case be hazardous) to avoid the Scandal: And therefore sometimes they stand behind the Curtain, while they spur on others (more adventrous, though no more wicked) to exe∣cute their Counsels; and by exposing them, secure themselves from the Censure and the Punishment. To be sure, when they have Power they never want Cruelty: The Turks and the Pagans have been out-done by their greater Persecutions: The Stakes, and the Pa∣gots, and the Fire bear witness against them. And when they have no strength, we know they want not malice, but labour by Treachery to undermine, when by Power they cannot subdue; His Majesty and our Religion have been brought into great danger by their secret Plots and Conspiracies; The unhappy Quarrels and Dissentions amongst our selves are Tares of their sowing. But if they want might or subtilty of their own, before they will desist, they will crave assistance from abroad; Foreign Powers shall be ingag'd to weaken us; and ra∣ther than Popery should be kept out, they will truck for an Invasion. Indeed there is no Age, no place, but gives us too sad Examples of their Villanies, either Acted or Contrived. Nor is it strange, when men call Evil Good, that they run into all excess of wickedness: With them 'tis lawful to tread upon the Royal Diadem to advance the Tri∣ple Crown; and meritorious to kill the Lords Anointed, who is really Gods Vicegerent, for the Interest of the Man of Sin, who falsly calls himself Christs Vicar. Hence it is that these fiery Zealots so often ingage to Assassinate Soveraign Princes, and imbroyl Peaceable Kingdoms.
The proofs hereof are too plain, and one would think needless, but that the impu∣dence of our Adversaries, that teaches them to deny the plainest Evidence, will not suffer them to confess the most apparent Crimes. Wonder not (Good Reader) at this their boldness! For 'tis the old Roman-Catho∣lick usage, under a deep guilt, to protest an unspotted Innocence; and then chiefly to declare that it is not lawful to depose, or murther the King, when they are not able, or want an opportunity. The truth is, 'tis no new thing for them, when they have done or intended evil, to wipe their mouths, and say they have done or intended nothing: Tresham (one of the Gunpowder Traytors) in King James his time, when he came to die, denied what Garnet (the Provincial) proved against him, and what he himself had formerly con∣fessed: And Garnet denied, upon his Salvation, with horrid imprecations, what Fa∣ther Oldcorn, alias Hall, proved against him; and at his Execution, he said he was sorry for dissembling with the Lords of the Council, but excus'd it, by affirming, he did not think they had such proofs against him: These things are evident, and appear by the Printed Tryals of those Traytors. Here I present thee with a true and faithful account of William Parry's Treason, against Queen Elizabeth, and of his behaviour after his Apprehension, upon his Ar∣raignment, and at his Execution, written in the Year of our Lord 1584. Sir Richard Baker in his History of England, p. 366. gives us a short Essay of all the remarkable passages thereof, which in this Treatise are more particularly▪ and at large, set forth, being done by an exact hand immediately after Parry's Execution. Peruse it, and thou wilt find, that the Pope and the Cardinal, like Simeon and Levi, have joyned hand in hand in wickedness, endeavouring, by hook or by crook, to bring Popery into England. And that confederation with Foreign Powers hath heretofore been entred into to root out Protestant Religion; Popish Forces uniting to cut off us poor Hereticks. And that 'tis commendable to destroy the Prince, and overthrow the Government, to make way for the Popes Supremacy, and the Churches Vsurpation. Nay, that 'tis part of the Religion of Rome to commit Treason; the greatest Mon∣sters of Mankind being the chiefest Darlings of that Church. And that the Laity, aswell as the Clergy, may be influenc'd so far by the power of wicked Principles, as to Espouse the interest of the Church, to the loss of their Allegiance. Read on, and thou wilt likewise find, that the Papists formerly have had brows of Brass, as well as wanted bowels of Compassion, and have been as unwilling to confess Treason, as forward to commit it. And that the Papist, after he hath acknowledg'd his guilt, can deny his Confession, and impudently contradict, what himself hath freely owned: For should he suffex as an evil doer, he might forfeit the title of his Martyrdom. And that 'tis no new thing for a Papist to tell a lye with his dying breath; Rather than a true Roman Confessor will be foiled, his last words shall be the falsest: For they that are nurst at Rome, are educated at Crete, and are as infamus for their Lies as their Blood-shed. Let the Church of Rome keep such a Religion to her self, and God preserve these Nations from it, that we and our Posterity may enjoy our true Religion, our Laws, our Estates, our Liberties and our Lives: And let all good Protestants say Amen.
A true and plain DECLARATION OF THE Horrible Treasons Practised by WILLIAM PARRY Against the Queens Majesty; AND OF His Conviction and Execution for the same, The 2d. of March 1584. according to the account of England. THis William Parry being a man of very mean and base Parentage, but of a most proud and insolent Spirit, bearing himself always far above the measure of his Fortune, after he had long led a wasteful and disso∣lute life, and had committed a great Outrage against one Hugh Hare, a Gentleman of the Inner-Temple, with an intent to have murthered him in his own Chamber, for the which he was most justly convicted; seeing himself generally condemned with all good men for the same, and other his Misdemeanours, he left his natural Country, and gave himself to travel into forreign parts beyond the Seas. In the course of this his Travel, he forsook his Allegiance and dutiful Obedience to her Majesty, and was recon∣ciled, and subjected himself to the Pope. After which, upon con∣ference with certain Jesuites, and others of like quality, he first conceived his most detestable Treason to kill the Queen (whose life God long preserve;) which he bound himself by Promise, Letters, and Vows, to perform and execute: and so with this in∣tent he returned into England in January 1583; and since that did practise at sundry times to have executed his most devilish purpose and determination: yet covering the same, so much as in him lay, with a vail and pretence of great Loyalty to her Majesty. Inmediately upon his return into England, he sought to have secret Access to her Majesty, pretending to have some matter of great importance to reveal unto her: which obtained, and the
same so privately in her Highness's Palace at Whitehal, as her Ma∣jesty had but one onely Counsellor with her at the time of his Access, in a remote place, who was so far distant, as he could not hear his Speech. And there then he discovered unto her Ma∣jesty (but shadowed with all crafty and traiterous skill he had) some part of the Conference and Proceeding, as well with the said Jesuites, and other Ministers of the Popes, as especially with one Thomas Morgan, a Fugitive, residing at Paris, who above all others did perswade him to proceed in that most devilish Attempt, (as is set down in his voluntary Confession following,) bearing her Majesty notwithstanding in hand, That his onely intent of pro∣ceeding so far with the said Jesuites, and the Popes Ministers, ten∣ded to no other end, but to discover the dangerous Practices de∣vised and attempted against her Majesty by her disloyal Subjects, and other malicious persons in forraign parts. Albeit it hath since appeared most manifestly, as well by his said Confession, as by his dealing with one Edmond Nevil Esq That his onely intent of dis∣covering the same in sort as he craftily and traiterously did, ten∣ded to no other end, but to make the way the easier to accom∣plish his most devilish and wicked purpose. And although any other Prince but her Majesty (who is loath to put on a hard Censure of those that protest to be loyal, as Parry did,) would rather have proceeded to the punishment of a Subject that had waded so far, as by Oath and Vow to promise the taking away of her life (as he to her Majesties self did con∣fess;) yet such was her goodness, as instead of punishing, she did deal so graciously with him, as she suffered him not onely to have Access unto her presence, but also many times to have private Con∣fernce with her; and did offer unto him, upon opinion once con∣ceived of his fidelity towards her (as though his wicked pretence had been, as he protested, for her service) a most liberal Pension. Besides, to the end that he might not grow hateful to the good and well-affected Subjects of the Realm, (from whom he could in no sort have escaped with safety of his life, if his devilish purpose had been revealed) her Majesty did conceal the same, without communicating it to any creature, untill such time as he himself had opened the same unto certain of her Council; and that it was also discovered, that he sought to draw the said Nevil to have been a party in his devilish and most wicked purpose. A very rare Example! and such as doth more set forth the sin∣gular goodness and bounty of her Majesties Princely nature, than
commend (if it be lawful for a Subject to censure his Soveraign) her providence such as ought to be in a Prince and person of her Majesties wisdom and quality. And as the goodness of her Ma∣jesties nature did hereby most manifestly shew it self to be rare in so extraordinary a case, and in a matter of so great peril unto her own Royal Person; so did the malice of Parry most evidently appear to be in the highest and extreamest degree: who notwithstanding the said extraordinary grace and favour extended towards him, did not onely perswade the said Nevil to be an Associate in the said wicked Enterprize, but did also very vehemently (as Nevil confesseth) importune him therein, as an Action lawful, honoura∣ble, and meritorious, omitting nothing that might provoke him to assent thereunto. But such was the singular goodness of Almighty God, (who even from her Majesties Cradle, by many evident Arguments, hath shewed himself her onely and especial Protector) that he so wrought in Nevil's heart, as he was moved to reveal the same un∣to her Majesty; and for that purpoce made choise of a faithful Gentleman, and of good quality in the Court, unto whom upon Munday the 8th of February last, he discovered at large all that had passed between Parry and him; who immediately made it known to her Majesty: whereupon her Highnesses pleasure was, That Nevil should be examined by the Earl of Leicester, and Sir Chri∣stopher Hatton; who in the evening of the same day did examine him; and he affirmed constantly all which he had before declared to the said Gentleman. In the mean time, her Majesty continued her singular and most Princely magnanimity, neither dismaid with the rareness of the Accident, nor appaled with the horrour of so villanous an Enter∣prize, tending even to the taking away of her most gracious life; (a matter especially observed by the Counsellor that was present at such time as Parry, after his return, did first discover unto her Majesty his wicked purpose; who found no other alteration in her countenance, than if he had imparted unto her some matter of con∣tentment;) which sheweth manifestly how she reposeth her con∣fidence wholly in the defence of the Almighty. And so her Ma∣jesty, following the wonted course of her singular Clemency, gave order that Parry the same Munday in the evening (though not so known to him) should be sent to Mr. Secretaries house in London, he being then there; who according unto such direction as he re∣ceived from her Majesty, did let him understand, That her High∣ness
(in respect of the good will she knew he bare unto the said Parry, and of the Trust that Parry did outwardly profess to repose in Mr. Secretary) had made especial choice of him to deal with him in a matter that concerned her highly; and that she doubted not but that he would discharge his duty towards her, according unto that extraordinary devotion that he professed to bear unto her. And thereupon told him that her Majesty had been advertised that there was somewhat intended presently against her own Per∣son, wherewith she thought he could not but be made acquainted, considering the great Trust that some of her worst-affected Sub∣jects reposed in him; and that her pleasure therefore was, That he should declare unto him his knowledge therein: and whether the said Parry himself had let fall any speech unto any person (though with an intent onely to have discovered his disposition) that might draw him in suspition, as though he himself had any such wicked intent. But Parry with great and vehement prote∣stations denied it utterly; whereupon Mr. Secretary, the rather to induce him to deal more plainly in a matter so important, declared unto him, That there was a Gentleman of Quality, every way as good or better than himself, and rather his Friend than Enemy, that would avouch it to his face: Yet Parry persisted stubbornly in his former denial, and justification of his own innocency; and would not in any respect yield that he was party or privy to any such Motion, Enterprize, or intent. And being lodged that night at Mr. Secretaries house, the next morning he desired earnestly to have some further speech with Mr. Secretary; which granted, Parry declared to him, that he had called to remembrance that he had once some speech with one Nevil a Kinsman of his (so he called him) touching a point of Doctrine contained in the Answer made to the Book, entituled, The Execution of Justice in England; by which book it was resolved, That it was lawful to take away the Life of a Prince, in furtherance of the Catholick Religion: But he protested that they never had any speech at all of any Attempt intended against her Majesties Person. Which Denial of his (at two sundry times, after so much light given him) doth set forth most apparently both the Justice and Providence of God: His Justice, for that (though he was one of a sharp conceit) he had no power to take hold of this Overture, thereby to have avoided the danger that Nevil's Accusation might bring him into by con∣fessing the same, as a thing propounded onely to feel Nevil's mind,
whom before he had reported unto Master Secretary he found a person discontented, and therefore his Confession might to very great purpose have served to have cleared himself touching the intent: His Providence, for that of his great Mercy he would not suffer so dangerous and wicked a member to escape, and to live to Her Majesties peril. The same day at Night Parry was brought to the Earl of Leicester's house, and there eftsoons examined before the said Earl of Leicester, Master Vice-Chamberlain, and Master Secretary: He persisted still in his denial of all that he was charged with. Whereupon Nevil, being brought before him face to face, justi∣fied his Accusation against him. He notwithstanding would not yet yield to confess it, but very proudly and insolently opposed his Credit against the Credit of Nevil, affirming that his No was as good as Nevil's Yea; and as by way of recrimination, objected the Crime to Nevil himself. On the other side, Nevil did with great Constancy affirm all that he had before said, and did set down many probable Circumstances of the Times, Places, and Manners of their sundry Conferences, and of such other Acci∣dents as had happened between them in the course of that Action. Whereupon Parry was then committed to the Tower, and Nevil commanded by their Honours to set down in writing under his Hand, all that which before he had delivered by words: which he did with his own hand, as followeth. Edmund Nevil his Declaration the 10th of Febru∣ary, 1584. subscribed with his own Hand. WIlliam Parry the last Summer, soon after his repulse in his Suit for the Mastership of St. Katherines, repaired to my Lodging in the White Friars, where he shewed himself a person greatly discontented, and vehemently inveighed against Her Majesty, and willed me to assure my self, that during this time and state, I should never receive Contentment. But sith, said he, I know you to be Honourably descended, and a Man of Resolution, if you will give me assurance, either to joyn with me, or not to discover me, I will deliver unto you the only means to do your self good. Which when I had promised him, he appointed me to come the next day to his House in
Fetterlane: and repairing thither accordingly, I found him in his Bed; whereupon he commanded his men forth, and began with me in this order. My Lord, said he, (for so he called me) I pro∣test before God, that three Reasons principally do induce me to enter into this Action, which I intend to discover unto you; the replanting of Religion, the preferring of the Scotish Title, and the advance∣ment of Justice, wonderfully corrupted in this Commowealth: And thereupon entred into some Discourses what places were fit to be taken, to give entrance to such Forreign Forces as should be best liked of, for the furtherance of such Enterprizes as were to be undertaken. And with these Discourses he passed the time, un∣til he went to Dinner: after which, the Company being retired, he entred into his former discourses. And if I be not deceived, (said he) by taking of Quinborough-Castle, we shall hinder the passage of the Queens Ships forth of the River. Whereunto when he saw me use no contradiction, he shook me by the hand; Tush, said he, this is nothing: If men were resolute, there is an Enterprize of much more moment, and much easier to perform; an Act honour∣able and meritorious to God and the world. Which seeing me de∣sirous to know, he was not ashamed to utter in plain terms, to consist in killing of her Majesty: Wherein, saith he, if you will go with me, I will loose my Life, or deliver my Countrey from her bad and Tyrannous Government. At which Speeches finding me discontented, he asked me, if I had read Doctor Allen's Book, out of which he alledged an Authority for it. I answered, No, and that I did not believe that Authority. Well, said he, what will you say, if I shew further Authority than this, even from Rome itself a plain Dispensation for the killing of her, wherein you shall finde it (as I said before) meritorious? Good Cousin, said I, when you shall shew it me, I shall think it very strange, when I shall see one to hold that for meritorious, which another holdeth for damnable. Well, said Parry, do me but the favour to think upon it till to morrow: And if one man be in the Town, I will not fail to shew you the thing it self: and if he be not, he will be within these five or six days; at which time if it please you to meet me at Chanon-row, we may there receive the Sacrament to be true each to other, and then I will discover unto you both the party, and the thing itself. Whereupon I prayed Parry to think better upon it, as a matter of great charge both of Soul and Body. I would to God, said Parry, you were as per∣fectly perswaded in it as I am, for then undoubtedly you should do God great service.
Not long after, eight or ten days, (as I remember) Parry com∣ing to visit me at my lodging in Herns rents in Holborn, as he often used, we walked forth into the fields, where he renewed again his determination to kill her Majesty, whom he said he thought most unworthy to live, and that he wondred I was so scrupulous therein. She hath sought, said he, your ruine and over∣throw, why should you not then seek to revenge it? I confess, quoth I, that my case is hard, but yet am I not so desperate as to revenge it upon my self, which must needs be the event of so un∣honest and unpossible an enterprise. Unpossible, said Parry, I wonder at you; for in truth there is not any thing more easie: you are no Courtier, and therefore know not her customs of walking with small train, and often in the Garden very privately, at which time my self may easily have access unto her, and you also when you are known in Court. Upon the fact we must have a Barge ready to carry us with speed down the River, where we will have a ship ready to transport us if it be needfull: but upon my head, we shall never be followed so far. I asked him, How will you escape forth of the Garden? for you shall not be per∣mitted to carry any men with you, and the Gates will then be locked, neither can you carry a Dagge without suspition. As for a Dagge, said Parry, I care not: my Dagger is enough. And as for my escaping, those that shall be with her, will be so busie about her, as I shall finde opportunity enough to escape, if you be there ready with the Barge to receive me. But if this seem dangerous in respect of your reason before shewed, let it then rest till her coming to St. James, and let us furnish our selves in the mean time with men and horse fit for the purpose: we may each of us keep eight or ten men without suspition. And for my part, said he, I shall finde good fellows that will fol∣low me without suspecting mine intent. It is much, said he, that so many resolute men may do upon the suddain, being well ap∣pointed with each his Case of Dagges: if they were an hundred waiting upon her, they were not able to save her; you coming of the one side and I on the other, and discharging our Dagges upon her, it were unhappy if we should both miss her. But if our Dagges fail, I shall bestir me well with a sword ere she escape me. Whereunto I said, Good Doctor give over this odious enterprise, and trouble me no more with the hearing of that, which in heart I loath so much. I would to God the enterprise were honest, that I might make known unto thee whether I want
solution. And not long after, her Majesty came to St. James's; after which, one morning (the day certain I remember not,) Parry revived again his former discourse of killing her Majesty, with great earnestness and importunity perswading me to joyn therein: saying, he thought me the onely man of England like to perform it, in respect of my valure, as he termed it. Whereupon, I made semblance as if I had been more willing to hear him than before, hoping by that means to cause him to deliver his minde to some other that might be witness thereof with me; wherein nevertheless I failed. After all this, on Saturday last, being the sixth of February, between the hours of five and six in the afternoon, Parry came to my Chamber, and desired to talk with me apart: whereupon we drew our selves to a win∣dow. And where I had told Parry before, that a learned man whom I met by chance in the fields, unto whom I proponed the question touching her Majesty, had answered me that it was an enterprise most villanous and damnable, willing me to dis∣charge my self of it: Parry then desired to know that learned mans name, and what was become of him, saying, after a scornful manner, No doubt he was a very wise man, and you wiser in be∣lieving him: and said further, I hope you told him not that I had any thing from Rome. Yes in truth, said I. Whereunto Parry said, I would you had not named me, nor spoken of any thing I had from Rome. And thereupon he earnestly perswaded me est∣soons to depart beyond the Seas, promising to procure me safe passage into Wales, and from thence into Britain; whereat we ended. But I then resolved not to do so, but to discharge my conscience, and lay open this his most traiterous and abominable intention against her Majesty: which I revealed in sort as is be∣fore set down. Edmund Nevil. After this confession of Edmund Nevil, William Parry the 11th. day of February last, being examined in the Tower of Lon∣don, by the Lord Hunsdon, Lord Governour of Barwick, Sir Chri∣stopher Hatton knight, Vicechamberlain to her Majesty, and Sir Francis Walsingham Knight, principal Secretary to her Majesty, did voluntary and without any constraint, by word of mouth make confession of his said Treason; and after, set it down in writing all with his own hand in his Lodging in the Tower, and sent it to the Court the 13th. of the same, by the Lieutenant of the Tower. The
parts whereof concerning his manner of doing the same, and the Treasons wherewith he was justly charged are here set down, word for word, as they are written and signed with his own hand and name, the 11th. of February, 1584. The voluntary Confession of William Parry, in writing all with his own hand. The voluntary Confession of William Parry Doctor of the Laws, (now Prisoner in the Tower) and accused of Treason by Edmund Nevil Esquire, promised by him (with all faith and humility) to the Queens Majesty, in discharge of his Conscience and Duty to∣wards God and her. Before the Lord Hunsdon, Lord Governour of Barwick, Sir Christopher Hatton Knight, Vicechamberlain, Sir Francis Walsingham Knight, principal Secretary, the 13th. of February, 1584. Parry. IN the year 1570. I was sworn her Majesties servant, from which time until the year 1580. I served, honoured, and loved her with as great readiness, devotion, and assurance as any poor subject in England. In the end of that year, and until Mid∣summer 1582. I had some trouble for the hurting of a Gentle∣man of the Temple. In which action I was so disgraced and op∣pressed by two great men (to whom I have of late been behol∣den) that I never had contented thought since. There began my misfortune, and here followeth my woful fall. In July after, I laboured for licence to travail for three years, which (upon some consideration) was easily obtained. And so in August, I went over with doubtful minde of return, for that being suspected in Religion, and not having received the Com∣munion in twenty two years, I began to mistrust my advance∣ment in England. In September I came to Paris, where I was re∣conciled to the Church, and advised to live without scandal, the rather, for that it was mistrusted by the English Catholiques, that I had Intelligence with the greatest Councellour of England. I staied not long there, but removed to Lions (a place of great Traffick) where, because it was the ordinary passage of our Nation to and fro, between Paris and Rome, I was also suspected. To put all men out of doubt of me, and for some other cause,
I went to Millain, from whence, as a place of some danger (though I found favour there) after I had cleared my conscience, and justi∣fied my self in Religion before the Inquisitor, I went to Venice. There I came acquainted with father Benedicto Palmio, a grave and a learned Jesuite. By conference with him of the hard state of the Catholicks in England, and by reading of the Book De per∣secutione Anglicana, and other discourses of like argument, 1 I conceived a possible mean to relieve the afflicted state of our Catho∣licks, if the same might be well warranted in religion and conscience by the Pope, or some learned Divines. I asked his opinion; he made it clear, commended my devotion, comforted me in it, and after a while made me known to the Nuntio Campeggio, there resident for his Holiness. By his means I wrote to the Pope, presented the service, and sued for a Pasport to go to Rome, and to return safely into France. Answer came from Cardinal Como, that I might come, and should be welcome. I misliked the warrant, sued for a bet∣ter, which I was promised: but it came not before my departure to Lions, where I promised to stay some time for it. And being indeed desirous to go to Rome, and loth to go without counte∣nance, I desired Christofero de Salazar, Secretary to the Catholick King in Venice, who had some understanding by conference, of my devotion to the afflicted Catholicks at home and abroad, to commend me to the Duke di Nova Terra, Governour of Millain, and to the County of Olivaris Embi, then Resident for the King his Master in Rome: which he promised to do effectually for the one, and did for the other. And so I took my journey towards Lyons, whi∣ther came for me an ample Passeport (but somewhat too late,) that I might come and go in verbo Pontificis per omnes jurisdictones Ecclesiasticas, absque impedimento. I acquainted some good Fathers there, of my necessity to depart towards Paris by promise, and prayed their advises upon divers points; wherein I was well satisfied. And so assuring them that his Holiness should hear from me shortly, it was undertaken that I should be excused for that time. In October I came to Paris, where (upon better opinion con∣ceived of me amongst my Catholick Country-men) I found my credit well setled, and such as mistrusted me before, ready to trust and imbrace me. And being one day at the Chamber of Thomas Morgan a Catholick Gentleman (greatly beloved and trusted on that side) amongst other Gentlemen, talking (but in very good sort) of England, I was desired by Morgan to go up with him to
another Chamber, where he brake with me, and told me that it was hoped and looked for, that I should do some service for God and his Church. I answered him, I would do it, if it were to kill the greatest subject in England; whom I named, and in truth then hated. No, no, said he, let him live to his greater fall and ruine of his house: 2. It is the Queen I mean. I had him as I wished, and told him it were soon done, if it might be lawfully done, and warranted in the opinion of some learned Divines. And so the doubt once resolved (though as you have heard I was before reasonably well satisfied) I vowed to undertake the enterprise, for the restitution of England to the anci∣ent obedience of the Sea Apostolick. Divers Divines were named. Doctor Allein I desired, Parsons I refused. And by chance came Master Wattes a learned Priest, with whom I conferred, and was over-ruled. 3 For he plainly pronounced (the case onely altered in name) that it was utterly unlawful: with whom many English Priests did agree as I have heard, if it be not altered since the book made in answer of The execution of the English Justice was published, which I must confess hath taken hard hold in me, and (I fear me) will do in others, if it be not prevented by more gracious hand∣ling of the quiet and obedient Catholick subjects, whereof there is good and greater store in England, than this age will extinguish. Well, notwithstanding all these doubts, I was gone so far by letters and conference in Italy, that I could not go back, but promised faithfully to perform the enterprise, if his Holiness upon my offer and letters would allow it, and grant me full remission of my sins. 4 I wrote my letters the first of January 1584. by their computation; took advice upon them in confession of Father Anibal a Codreto a learned Jesuite in Paris, was lovingly embraced, commended, confessed, and communicated at the Jesuites at one altar with the Cardinals of Vandosmi, and Narbone, whereof I prayed certificate, and enclosed the same in my Letter to his Holiness, to lead him the rather to ab∣solve me; which I required by my Letters, in consideration of so great an enterprise undertaken without promise or reward. 5 I went with Morgan to the Nuntio Ragazzoni, to whom I read the Letter and certificate enclosed, sealed it, and left it with him to send to Rome: he promised great care of it, and to procure answer: And so lovingly imbraced me, wished me good speed, and promised that I should be remembred at the altar. 6 After this I desired Morgan, that some special man might be made privy to this matter, lest he dying, and I
miscarrying in the execution, and my intent never truly discovered, it might stick for an everlasting spot in my Race. Divers were na∣med, but none agreed upon for fear of beraying. 7 This being done, Morgan assured me, that shortly after my departure, the L. Fernehurst (then in Paris) should go into Scotland, and be ready up∣on the first news of the Queens fall to enter into England with 20 or 30000 Men to defend the Queen of Scotland, (whom, and the King her Son, I do in my conscience acquit of any privity, liking, or consent to this, or any other bad action, for any thing that ever I did know.) I shortly departed for England, and arrived at Rie in January 1583. from whence I wrote to the Court, advertised some, that I had a special service to discover to the Queens Maje∣sty; 8 which I did more to prepare access and credit, than for any care I had of her Person, though I were fully resolved never to touch her (notwithstanding any Warrant) if by any device, perswasion, or policy she might be wrought to deal more graciously with the Catholicks than she doth, or by our manner of proceeding in Parliament meaneth to do, or any thing yet seen. I came to the Court, (then at Whitehall,) prayed audience, had it at large, and very privately discovered to her Majesty this Conspiracy, much to this effect, though covered with all the skill I had: she took it doubtfully, I departed with fear. And amongst other things, I cannot forget he. Majesties gratious speech then uttered touching the Catholicks, which of late, after a sort I avowed in Parliament: she said to me, that never a Catholick should be troubled for Re∣ligion or Supremacy, so long as they lived like good Subjects. Whereby I mistrusted that her Majesty is born in hand, that none is troubled for the one or the other. It may be truly said, that it is better than it hath been, though it be not yet as it should be. In March last, while I was at Greenwich (as I remember) suing for St. Katherines, came Letters to me from Cardinal Como, dated at Rome, the last of January before, whereby I found the enterprise commended, and allowed, and my self absolved (in his Holiness name) of all my sins, and willed to go forward in the name of God. That Letter I shewed to some in Court, who imparted it to the Queen: what it wrought, or may work in her Majesty, God knoweth: onely this I know, 9 that it confirmed my resolution to kill her, and made it clear in my conscience, that it was lawful and meritorious. And yet was I determined never to do it, if either policy, practice, perswasion, or motion in Parliament could prevail. I feared to be tempted, and therefore always when I came near her, I left my
Dagger at home. 10 When I looked upon her Majesty, and remem∣bred her many excellencies, I was greatly troubled: And yet I saw no remedy, for my Vows were in Heaven, my Letters and Promises in Earth, and the case of the Catholick Recusants, and others, little bettered. Sometimes I said to my self, Why should I care for her? what hath she done for me? have I not spent 10000 Marks since I knew her service, and never had peny by her? It may be said, she gave me my life. But I say (as my case stood) it had been Tyranny to take it: And I fear me it is little less yet. If it please her gratiously to look into my discontentments, I would to Jesus Christ she had it, for I am weary of it. And now to come to an end of this tragical discourse: In July I left the Court, utterly rejected, discontented, and as her Majesty might perceive by my passionate Letters, careless of my self. I came to London: Doctor Alleins Book was sent me out of France: 11 it redoubled my former conceits: Every word in it was a warrant to a prepared mind: It taught that Kings may be excommunicated, deprived, and violently handled: It proveth that all Wars Civil or Forraign undertaken for Religion, is Honorable. Her Majesty may do well to read it, and to be out of doubt (if things be not amended) that it is a warning, and a Doctrine full dangerous. This is the Book I shewed, in some places read, and lent it to my Cousin Nevil (the accuser) who came often to mine house, put his finger in my Dish, his hand in my Purse; and the night wherein he accused me, was wrapped in my Gown, six moneths at least after we had entred into this Conspiracy: In which space her Majesty, and ten Princes in seve∣ral Provinces might have been killed. God bless her Majesty from him: for before Almighty God, I joy and am glad in my soul, that it was his hap to discover me in time, though there were no danger near. And now to the manner of our meetings. He came to me in the beginning of August, and spake to me in this or like sort. Cousin, let us do somewhat, sithens we can have nothing. I offered to joyn with him, and gladly heard him, hoping because I knew him to be a Catholick, that he would hit upon that I had in my head: but it fell not out so. He thought the delivery of the Queen of Scotland easie, presuming upon his Credit and Kindred in the North: I thought it dangerous to her, and impossible to men of our fortunes: He fell from that to the taking of Barwick: I spake of Quinborough and the Navy, rather to entertain him with discourse, than that I cared for those motions, my head being full
of a greater matter: 12 I told him that I had another manner of Enterprise, more honourable and profitable to us, and the Catho∣licks Common-wealth, than all these, if he would joyn in it with me, as he presently vowed to do: He pressed to know it; I wil∣led him to sleep upon the motion: He did so, (and belike over∣taken) came to me the next morning to my Lodging in London, offered to joyn with me, and took his Oath upon a Bible, to conceal and constantly to pursue the enterprise for the advancement of Religion; which I also did, and meant to perform: the killing of the Queen was the matter. The manner and place, to be on Horsback, with eight or ten horses, when she should ride abroad about St. James, or some other like place. It was once thought fit in a Garden, and that the escape would be easiest by water into Shepey, or some other part: but we resolved upon the first. This continued as agreed upon many moneths, until he heard of the death of Westmoreland, whose Land and Dignity (whereof he assured himself) bred belike this Conscience in him to discover a Treason in February, contrived and agreed upon in August. If it cost him not an ambitious Head at last, let him never trust me. He brought a tall Gentleman (whom he commended for an ex∣cellent Pistolier) to me to Chanon-Row, to make one in the match: but I refused to deal with him, being loth to lay my head upon so many hands. Master Nevil hath (I think) forgotten, that he did swear to to me at divers times, that all the advancement she could give, should serve but for her scourge, if ever time and occasion should serve: and that though he would not lay hand upon her in a cor∣ner, his heart served him to strike off her Head in the field. Now leaving him to himself, this much (to make an end) I must confess of my self, I did mean to try what might be done in Parliament, to do my best to hinder all hard courses, to have prayed hearing of the Queens Majesty, to move her (if I could) to take compas∣sion upon her Catholick Subjects; and when all had failed, to do as I intended. If her Majesty by this course would have eased them, though she had never preferred me, I had with all comfort and patience born it: 13 but if she had preferred me without ease or care of them, the Enterprise had held. Parry. God preserve the Queen, and encline her merciful heart to forgive me this desperate purpose; and to take my Head (with all my heart) for her better satisfaction.
After which, for the better manifesting of his Treasons, on the 14th of February last, there was a Letter written by him to her Majesty, very voluntarily, all of his own Hand, with∣out any motion made to him: The tenor whereof, for that which concerneth these his Traiterous dealings, is as followeth. A Letter written by Parry to Her Majesty. YOur Majesty may see by my voluntary Confession, the dangerous fruits of a discontented minde; and how constantly I pur∣sued my first conceived purpose in Venice, for the relief of the afflicted Catholicks; continued it in Lions, and resolved in Paris to put it in adventure, for the Restitution of England to the antient Obedience of the See Apostolick. You may see withal, how it is Commended, Allowed, and Warranted in Conscience, Divinity, and Policy, by the Pope and some great Divines: Though it be true or likely, that most of our English Divines (less practised in matters of this weight) do utterly mislike and condemn it. The Enterprise is prevented, and Conspiracy discovered by an honourable Gentleman, my Kinsman and late familiar Friend, Ma∣ster Edmund Nevil, privy and by solemn Oath (taken upon the Bible) party to the matter, whereof I am hardly glad, but now sorry (in my very Soul) that ever I conceived or intended it, how com∣mendable or meritoritous soever I thought it. God thank him, and forgive me, who would not now (before God) attempt it (if I had liberty and opportunity to do it) to gain your Kingdome. I beseech Christ, that my Death and Example may as well satisfie your Majesty and the world, as it shall glad and content me. The Queen of Scotland is your Prisoner; let her be honourably entreated, but yet surely guarded. The French King is French, you know it well enough, you will finde him occupied when he should do you good; he will not loose a Pilgrimage to save you a Crown. I have no more to say at this time, but that with my Heart and Soul I do now honour and love you; am inwardly sorry for mine Offence, and ready to make you amends by my Death and Patience. Discharge me à culpâ, but not à poenâ, good Lady. And so farewel, most gracious, and the best-natured and qualified Queen that ever lived in England. From the Tower, the 14th of February, 1584. W. Parry.
After which, to wit, the 18th of February last past, Parry, in further acknowledging his wicked and intended Treasons, wrote a Letter all of his own hand, in like voluntary manner, to the Lord Treasurer of England, and the Earl of Leicester, Lord Steward of her Majesties house; the Tenour whereof is as fol∣loweth. William Parry's Letter to the Lord Treasurer, and the Earl of Leicester. MY Lords, now that the Conspiracy is discovered, the Fault confessed, my Conscience cleared, and Minde prepared patiently to suffer the Pains due for so heinous a Crime: I hope it shall not offend you, if crying Miserere with the poor Publican, I leave to despair with cursed Cain. My Case is rare and strange, and, for any thing I can remember, singular: A natural Subject solemnly to vow the Death of his natural Queen (so born, so known, and so taken by all men) for the Relief of the afflicted Catholicks, and Restitution of Religion. The Matter first conceived in Venice, the Service (in general words) presented to the Pope, continued and un∣dertaken in Paris; and lastly, commended and warranted by his Holiness, digested and resolved in England, if it had not been prevented by Accusation, or by her Majesties greater Lenity and more gracious Usage of her Catholick Subjects. This is my first and last Offence conceived against my Prince or Country, and doth (I cannot deny) contein all other faults whatsoever. It is now to be punished by Death, or most graciously (beyond all common expectation) to be par∣doned. Death I do confess to have deserved; Life I do (with all Humility) crave, if it may stand with the Queens Honour, and Policy of the Time. To leave so great a Treason unpunished, were strange: To draw it by my Death in example, were dangerous: A sworn Servant to take upon him such an Enterprize, upon such a ground, and by such a war∣rant, hath not been seen in England: To Indict him, Ar∣raign him, bring him to the Scaffold, and to publish his Offence, can do no good: To hope that he hath more to discover than is Confessed, or that at his Execution he will unsay any thing he hath written, is in vain: To conclude, that it is im∣possible for him in time to make some part of amends, were
very hard, and against former Experiences. The Question then is, whether it be better to kill him, or (lest the matter be mistaken) upon hope of his amendment to pardon him. For mine own opinion (though partial) I will deliver you my Con∣science. The Case is good Queen Elizabeths, the Offence is committed against her Sacred Person, and she may (of her Mercy) pardon it without prejudice to any. Then this I say, in few words, as a man more desirous to discharge his troubled Conscience, than to live. Pardon poor Parry, and relieve him: for life without living is not fit for him. If this may not be, or be thought dangerous, or dishonourable to the Queens Majesty (as by your favours, I think it full of Honour and Mercy) then I beseech your Lordships (and no other) once to hear me be∣fore I be Indicted, and afterwards (if I must dye) humbly to intreat the Queens Majesty to hasten my Trial and Execu∣tion, which I pray God (with all my heart) may prove as honourable to her, as I hope it shall be happy to me; who will, while I live, (as I have done always) pray to Jesus Christ for her Majesties long and prosperous Reign. From the Tower, the 18th of February, 1584. W. Parry. And where in this mean time Sir Francis Walsingham, Secre∣tary to her Majesty, had dealt with one William Creichton, a Scot for his Birth, and a Jesuit by his Profession, now Prisoner also in the Tower, for that he was apprehended with divers Plots for Invasions of this Realm, to understand of him, if the said Parry had ever dealt with him in the parties beyond the Seas touching that Question, Whether it were lawful to kill her Majesty, or not: the which at that time the said Creichton called not to his remembrance; yet after upon better calling it to minde, upon the 20th day of February last past, he wrote to Master Secretary Walsingham thereof voluntary, all of his own hand, to the effect following. William Creichtons Letter. February 20. RIght honourable Sir, when your Honour demanded me if Mr. Parry did ask me, If it was reason to kill the Queen, indeed and verity, then I had no remembrance at all thereof. But since, thinking on the matter, I have called to mind the whole fashion of his dealing with me, and some of his
Arguments: for he dealt very craftily with me, I dare not say maliciously. For I did in no ways think of any such design of his, or of any other, and did answer him simply after my consci∣ence and knowledge to the verity of the question. For after that I had answered him twice before, Quòd omnino non liceret, he returned late at Even, by reason I was to depart early in the next Morning toward Chamberie in Savoy where I did remain, and being return'd out of the Close within one of the Classes of the Colledge, he proponed to me of the new matter, with his Reasons and Arguments. First, he alledged the utility of the deed for delivering of so many Catholicks out of misery, and restitution of the Catholick Religion. I answered, that the Scripture answereth thereto, saying, Non sunt facienda mala, ut veniant bona. So that for no good, how great that ever it be, may be wrought any evil, how little that ever it be. He re∣plyed, that it was not evil to take away so great evil, and induce so great good. I answered, That all good is not to be done, but that onely, Quod bene & legitime fieri potest. And there∣fore, Dixi, Deum magis amare adverbia quàm nomina. Quia in actionibus magis ei placent bene & legitime, quam bonum. Ita ut nullum bonum liceat facere, nisi bene & legitimè fieri possit. Quod in hoc casu fieri non potest. Yet said he, that several learn∣ed men were of the opinion, Quod liceret. I answered, that they men perhaps were of the opinion that for the safety of many in Soul and Body, they would permit a particular to his danger, and to the occult judgment of God: Or perhaps said so, moved rather by some compassion and commiseration of the miserable estate of the Catholicks, not for any such Do∣ctrine that they did finde in their Books. For it is certain, that such a thing is not licite to a particular, without special revela∣tion Divine, which exceedeth our Learning and Doctrine. And so he departed from me. Your Honours poor servitor in Christ Jesu. William Creichton Prisoner. Out of the Prison in the Tower, the 20th of February. And where also the same Parry was on the same 20th day of February examined by Sir Francis Walsingham Knight, what was become of the Letter contained in his Confession to be written
unto him by the Cardinal de Como, he then answered, that it was consumed and burnt: and yet after, the next day following, be∣ing more vehemently urged upon that point in examination (be∣cause it was known that it was not burnt) he confessed where he had left it in the Town: whereupon, by Parrys direction it was sent for, where it had been lapped up together with other frivo∣lous papers, and written upon the one side of it, The last Will of William Parry, the which Letter was in the Italian Tongue, as hereafter followeth, with the same in English accordingly Trans∣lated. A mon Signore, mon Signore Guglielmo Parry. MOn Signore, la Santita di N. S. ha veduto le Lettere di V. S. del primo con la fede inclusa, & non puo se non landare la buona disposittione & risolutione che serive di tenere verso il servitio & beneficio publico, nel che la Santita sua lessorta di perseverare, con farne riuscire li effetti che V. S. promette: Et accioche tanto maggiormente V. S. sia ajutata da quel buon Spirito che l'ha mosso, le concede sua Beneditione, plenaria Indulgenza & remissione di tutti li peccati, secondo che V. S. ha chiesto, assicurandos si che oltre il merito, che n'havera in cielo, vuole anco sua Santita constituirsi de∣bitore a riconoscere li meriti di V. S. in ogni miglior modo che potra, & cio tanto pin, quanto che V. S. usa maggior modestia in non pre∣tender niente. Metta dun{que} ad effetto li suoi santi & honorati pen∣sieri, & attenda astar sano. Che per fine io me le offero di core, & le desidero ogni buono & felice successo. Di Roma a 30 di Gennaro, MDLXXXIV. Al piacer di V. S. N. Cardinale di Como. Al Sig. Guglielmo Parri. Cardinal de Como's Letter to Will. Parry, Janu∣ary 30th 1584. by accompt of Rome. MOnsignor, the Holiness of our Lord hath seen the Letter of your Signory of the first, with the assurance in∣cluded, and cannot but commend the good disposition and resolution, which you write to hold towards the Service and Benefit publick: Wherein his Holiness doth exhort you to persevere, with causing to bring forth the effects which your
Signorie promiseth. And to the end you may be so much the more holpen, by that good Spirit which hath moved you thereunto, his Blessedness doth grant to you plenary Indulgence and Remission of all your Sins, according to your request. Assuring you, that besides the Merit that you shall receive therefore in Heaven, his Holiness will further make himself Debtour, to re-acknowledge the deservings of your Signorie in the best manner that he can. And that so much the more, in that your Signorie useth the greater Modesty, in not pre∣tending any thing. Put therefore to effect your holy and honourable thoughts, and attend your Health. And to con∣clude, I offer my self unto you heartily, and do desire all good and happy success. From Rome the 30th of January, 1584. At the pleasure of your Signorie, N. Card. of Como. UPon all which former Accusation, Declaration, Confessions, and Proofs, upon Munday the 22th day of February last past, at Westminster-Hall, before Sir Christopher Wray Knight, Chief Justice of England, Sir Gilbert Gerrard Knight, Master of the Rolls, Sir Edmund Anderson Knight, Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, Sir Roger Manwood Knight, Chief Baron of the Exchequer, Sir Thomas Gawdy Knight, one of the Justices of the Pleas before her Majesty to be holden, and Will. Perriam, one of the Justices of the Common Pleas, by vertue of her Majesties Commission to them and others in that behalf directed; The same Parry was Indicted of High Treason, for intending and practising the Death and Destruction of her Majesty, whom God long prosper, and preserve from all such wicked attempts. The tenour of which Indictment appeareth more particularly in the course of his Arraignment following. The manner of the Arraignment of Will. Parry the 25th of Fe∣bruary, 1584. at Westminster, in the place where the Court, commonly called the Kings-Bench, is usually kept, by vertue of her Majesties Commission of Oyer and Terminer, before Henry Lord Hunsdon Governour of Barwick, Sir Francis Knolles Knight, Treasurer of the Queens Majesties Houshold, Sir James Croft Knight, Comptroller of the same Houshold, Sir Christopher Hatton Knight, Vice-Chamberlain to her Majesty, Sir Christopher Wray Knight, Chief Justice of England, Sir Gilbert Gerrard Knight, Master of the Rolls, Sir Edmund Anderson Knight, Chief-Justice of the Common-Pleas, Sir Roger Manwood Knight, Chief-Baron of the Exchequer, and Sir Thomas Hennage Knight, Treasurer of the Chamber.
FIrst, three Proclamations for silence were made, according to the usual course in such cases. Then the Lieutenant was commanded to return his Precept; which did so, and brought the Prisoner to the Bar, to whom Miles Sandes Esquire, Clerk of the Crown, said, William Parry, hold up thy hand; and he did so. Then said the Clerk of the Crown, Thou art here Indicted by the Oaths of twelve good and lawful men of the County of Middlesex,The Indictment. before Sir Christopher Wray Knight, and others, which took the Indictment by the name of William Parry, late of London, Gentleman, otherwise called William Parry, late of London, Doctor of the Law; for that thou, as a false Traitor against the most Noble and Christian Prince, Queen Elizabeth, thy most gracious Soveraign and Liege-Lady, not having the fear of God before thine eyes, nor re∣garding thy due Allegiance; but being seduced by the instigation of the Devil, and intending to withdraw and extinguish the hearty Love and due Obedience which true and faithful Sub∣jects should bear unto the same our Soveraign Lady, didst at Westminster in the County of Middlesex, on the first day of Febru∣ary, in the 26th year of her Highness Reign, and at divers other times and places in the same County, maliciously and traiterously conspire and compass, not only to deprive and depose the same our Sovereign Lady of her Royal Estate, Title and Dignity; but also to bring her Highness to Death and final Destruction, and Sedition in the Realm to make, and the Government thereof to subvert, and the sincere Religion of God established in her Highness Dominions to alter and subvert. And that, whereas thou William Parry, by thy Letters sent unto Gregory Bishop of Rome, didst signifie unto the same Bishop thy purposes and in∣tentions aforesaid, and thereby didst pray and require the same Bishop to give thee Absolution; that thou afterwards, that is to say, the last day of March in the 26th year aforesaid, didst trai∣terously receive Letters from one called Cardinal de Como, di∣rected unto thee William Parry, whereby the same Cardinal did signifie unto thee, that the Bishop of Rome had perused thy Let∣ters, and allowed of thine intent; and that to that end he had
absolved thee of all thy Sins, and by the same Letter did animate and stir thee to proceed with thine Enterprize; and that there∣upon, thou, the last day of August, in the 26th year aforesaid, at Saint Giles in the fields, in the same County of Middlesex, didst traiterously confer with one Edmund Nevil Esquire, uttering to him all thy wicked and traiterous devises, and then and there didst move him to assist thee therein, and to joyn with thee in those wicked Treasons aforesaid, against the Peace of our said Soveraign Lady the Queen, her Crown and Dignity. What sayest thou, William Parry, Art thou guilty of these Treasons whereof thou standest here Indicted, or not guilty? Then Parry said,Parry's answer to the In∣dictment. Before I plead not guilty, or confess my self guilty, I pray you give me leave to speak a few words: and with humbling himself, began in this manner. God save Queen Elizabeth, and God send me grace to discharge my duty to her, and to send you home in charity. But touching the matters that I am Indicted of, some were in one place, and some in another, and done so secretly, as none can see into them, except that they had eyes like unto God; wherefore I will not lay my Blood upon the Jury, but do minde to confess the Indictment. It containeth but the parts that have been open∣ly read, I pray you tell me? Whereunto it was answered, that the Indictment contained the parts he had heard read, and no o∣ther: whereupon the Clerk of the Crown said unto Parry, Parry, thou must answer directly to the Indictment, whether thou be guilty or not. Then said Parry,Parry confesseth that he is guilty of all things con∣tained in the Indictment. I do confess that I am guilty of all that is therein contained: And further too, I desire not life, but desire to die. Unto which the Clerk of the Crown said, If you confess it, you must confess it in manner and form as it is comprised in the Indictment. Whereunto he said, I do confess it in manner and form as the same is set down, and all the circumstances therof. Then the Confession being Recorded, the Queens learned Council being ready to pray Judgment upon the same Confession, Master Vice-chamberlain said, These matters contained in this Indictment, and confessed by this man, are of great importance: they touch the Person of the Queens most excellent Majesty in the highest de∣gree, the very state and well-doing of the whole Common-wealth, and the truth of Gods Word established in these her Majesties Dominions, and the open demonstration of that capital envy of
the man of Rome, that hath set himself against God and all godli∣ness, all good Princes and good Government, and against good men. Wherefore, I pray you, for the satisfaction of this great Multitude, let the whole matter appear, that every one may see that the matter of it self is as bad as the Indictment purporteth, and as he hath Confessed. Whereto in respect that the Justice of the Realm hath been of late very impudently slandered, all yielded as a thing necessary to satisfie the world in particular, of that which was but summarily comprised in the Indictment, though in the Law, his Confession served sufficiently to have proceeded thereupon unto Judgment. Whereupon the Lords and others the Commissioners, her Majesties learned Councel, and Parry himself agreed, that Parry's Confession (taken the 11th and 13th of February 1584. before the Lord of Hunsdon, Master Vice-chamberlain, and Master Secretary,) and Cardinal de Como his Letters, and Parry's Letters to the Lord Treasurer and Lord Steward, should be openly read. And Parry, for the better satisfying of the people and standers by, offered to read them himself: but being told that the Order was, the Clerk of the Crown should read them, it was so resolved of all parts. And then Master Vice-chamberlain caused to be shewed to Parry his said Confession, the Cardinals Letter, and his own Letter aforesaid; which after he had particularly viewed every leaf thereof, he confessed, and said openly they were the same. Then said Master Vice-chamberlain, Before we proceed to shew what he hath Confessed, what say you, said he to Parry, is that which you have Confessed here true, and did you Confess it freely and willingly of your self, or was then any extort means used to draw it from you? Surely, said Parry, I made that Confession freely without any constraint, and that is all true, and more too: for there is no Trea∣son that hath been sithens the sirst year of the Queen, any way touching Religion, saving receipt of Agnus Dei, and perswading of others, wherein I have not much dealt, but I have offended in it. And I have also delivered mine opinion in writing, who ought to be Successor to the Crown, which he faid to be Treason also. Then his Confession of the eleventh and thir∣teenth of February,Parry's Confession of his Treasons was read by his own assent. all of his own hand writing, and before particularly set down, was openly,
and distinctly read by the Clerk of the Crown. And that done, the Cardinal di Como his Letter in Italian was delivered unto Par∣ry's hand by the direction of Master Vicechamberlain, which Parry there perused,A Letter of Cardinal di Como to Parry, also read. and openly affirmed to be wholly of the Cardinals own hand writing, and the Seal to be his own also, and to be with a Cardinals Hat on it: And himself did openly read it in Italian, as before is set down. And the words bearing sence as it were written to a Bishop, or to a man of such degree, it was demanded of him by Master Vice-Chamberlain, Whether he had not taken the degree of a Bishop? He said, No: But said at first, those terms were proper to the Degree he had taken. And after said, that the Cardinal did vouchsafe, as of a favour, to write so to him. Then the Copy of that Letter in English, as before is also set down, was in like manner openly read by the Clerk of the Crown; which Parry then acknowledged to be truely translated. And thereupon was shewed unto Parry his Letter of the 18th of February,Parry's Letter of the 18th of February to the Lord Treasurer and the Earl of Leicester, read. written to the Lord Treasurer, and the Lord Steward: which he confessed to be all of his own Hand∣writing, and was as before is set down. These matters being read openly, for manifestation of the matter, Parry prayed leave to speak: Whereto Master Vice∣chamberlain said, If you will say any thing for the better opening to the world of those your foul and horrible Facts, speak on: but if you mean to make any excuse of that which you have confessed, which else would have been and do stand proved against you, for my part, I will not sit to hear you. Then her Majesties Attourney-General stood up and said. It appeareth before you, my Lords, that this man hath been Indicted and Arraigned of several most hainous and horrible Treasons, and hath confessed them, which is before you of Record; wherefore there resteth no more to be done, but for the Court to give Judgment accordingly,The Queens Atturny requires Judgment. which here I require in the behalf of the Queens Majesty. Then said Parry, I pray you hear me for dis∣charging of my Conscience. I will not go about to excuse my self, nor to seek to save my Life, I care not for it; you have my Confession of record, that is enough for my Life. And I mean to utter more, for which I were worthy to die. And said, I pray you hear me, in that I am to speak to discharge my Conscience.
Then said Master Vice-Chamberlain, Parry, then do thy Du∣ty according to Conscience, and utter all that thou canst say concerning those thy most wicked Facts. Then said Parry, My cause is rare, singular and unnatural, conceived at Venice, presented in general words to the Pope, undertaken at Paris, commended and allowed of by his Holiness, and was to have been executed in England, if it had not been prevented. Yea, I have committed many Treasons, for I have committed Treason in being reconciled, and Trea∣son in taking Absolution.Parry had for his credit aforetime said very secret∣ly, that he had been soli∣cited beyond the Seas to commit the fact, but he would not do it; where∣with he craftily abused both the Queens Majesty, and those two Counsellers whereof he now would help himself with these false Speeches, against most manifest proofs. There hath been no Trea∣son sithens the first year of the Queens Reign tou∣ching Religion, but that I am guilty of (except for receiving of Agnus Dei, and perswading as I have said:) And yet never intended to kill Queen Elizabeth. I appeal to her own knowledge, and to my Lord Treasurers, and Master Secretaries. Then said my Ld Hunsdon, Hast thou acknow∣ledged it so often, and so plainly in writing under thy hand, and here of record; and now, when thou shouldest have thy judgment according to that which thou hast Confessed thy self guilty of, doest thou go back again, and deny the ef∣fect of all? How can we believe that thou now sayest? Then said Master Vice-chamberlain,Master Vice-chamberlains Speeches, proving mani∣festly Parry's Traiterous intentions. This is absurd. Thou hast not onely Confessed ge∣nerally, that thou wert guilty according to the Indictment, which summarily, and yet in ex∣press words doth contain that thou hadst Traiterously compassed and intended the death and destruction of her Majesty; but thou also saidst particularly that thou wert guilty of every of the Trea∣sons contained therein, whereof the same was one, in plain and express letter set down, and read unto thee. Yea, thou saidst that thou wert guilty of more Treasons too besides these. And didst thou not upon thy examination voluntarily confess, how thou wast moved first thereunto by mislike of thy state after thy departure out of the Realm, And that thou didst mislike her Ma∣jesty for that she had done nothing for thee; How by wicked Pa∣pists and Popish Books, thou wert perswaded that it was lawful to kill her Majesty; How thou wert by reconciliation become one of that wicked sort, that held her Majesty for neither lawful Queen nor Christian, And that it was meritorious to kill her? And didst thou not signifie that thy purpose to the Pope by Let∣tersand, receivedst Letters from the Cardinal, how he allowed of
thine intent, and excited thee to perform it, and thereupon didst receive Absolution? And didst thou not conceive it, promise it, vow it, swear it, and receive the Sacrament that thou wouldst do it? And didst not thou thereupon affirm, that thy Vows were in Heaven, and thy Letters and Promises on Earth to binde thee to do it? And that whatsoever her Majesty would have done for thee, could not have removed thee from that intention or purpose, unless she would have desisted from dealing as she hath done with the Catholicks, as thou callest them? All this thou hast plainly Confessed: And I protest before this great Assembly, thou hast Confessed it more plainly and in better sort, than my memory will serve me to utter: And saist thou now, that thou never meant'st it? Ah, said Parry, your Honours know, how my Confession upon mine Examination was extorted. Then both the Lord Hunsdon and Master Vice-Chamberlain affirmed, that there was no Torture or threatning words offered him. But Parry then said, that they told him, that if he would not confess willingly, he should have torture: whereunto their Ho∣nours answered, that they used not any speech or word of torture to him. You said, said Parry, that you would proceed with rigour against me, if I would not confess it of my self. But their Honours expresly affirmed, that they used no such words. But I will tell thee, said Master Vice-chamberlain, what we said. I spake these words: If you will willingly utter the truth of your self, it may do you good, and I wish you to do so: If you will not, we must then proceed in ordinary course to take your Examina∣tion. Whereunto you answered, that you would tell the truth of your self.Parry reproved of false Speeches, and so by him∣self also confessed. Was not this true? Which then he yielded unto. And hereunto, her Majesties Attourney-General put Parry in remembrance what Speeches he used to the Lieutenant of the Tower, the Queens Majesties Serjeant at Law, Master Gaudie, and the same Attourney, on Saturday the twentieth of February last, at the Tower, upon that he was by them then examined by Order from the Lords: which was, that he acknow∣ledg'd he was most mildly and favourably dealt with, in all his Ex∣aminations: which he also at the Bar then acknowledg'd to be true. Then Master Vice-chamberlain said, that it was wonder to see the magnanimity of her Majesty, which after that thou hadst
opened those Trayterous Practices in sort as thou hast laid it down in thy Confession, was nevertheless such, and so far from all fear, as that she would not so much as acquaint any one of her Highness Privy-Council with it, to his knowledge, no not until after this thine Enterprise discovered and made manifest. And besides that which thou hast set down under thine own hand, thou didst confess, that thou hadst prepared two Scottish Dag∣gers, fit for such a purpose; and those being disposed away by thee, thou didst say, that another would serve thy turn. And withal, Parry, didst thou not also confess before us, how wonderfully thou wert appaled and perplexed upon a sudden, at the presence of her Majesty at Hampton-Court this last Sum∣mer, saying, that thou didst think, thou then sawest in her, the very likeness and image of King Henry the Seventh? And that therewith, and upon some Speeches used by her Majesty, thou didst turn about and weep bitterly to thy self? And yet didst call to minde that thy Vows were in Heaven, thy Letters and Promises on Earth; and that therefore thou didst say with thy self, that there was no remedy but to do it? Didst thou not confess this? The which he acknowledged. Then said the Lord Hunsdon,The L. of Hunsdon's Speeches, convincing Parry manifestly of his Trea∣son. Sayest thou now, that thou didst never mean to kill the Queen? Didst thou not confess, that when thou didst utter this practice of treachery to her Majesty, that thou didst cover it with all the skill thou hadst, and that it was done by thee, rather to get credit and access thereby, than for any regard thou hadst of her Person? But in truth thou didst it, that thereby thou mightest have better opportunity to perform thy wicked Enterprise. And wouldest thou have run into such fear as thou didst confess that thou wert in, when thou didst utter it, if thou hadst never meant it? What reason canst thou shew for thy self? With that he cryed out in a furious manner, I never meant to kill her: I will lay my Blood upon Queen Elizabeth and you, before God and the World: And thereupon fell into a rage and evil words with the Queens Majesties Attourney-General. Then said the Lord Hunsdon, This is but thy Popish Pride and Ostentation, which thou wouldst have to be told to thy fellows of that Faction, to make them believe that thou diest for Po∣pery, when thou diest for most horrible and dangerous Treasons against her Majesty, and thy whole Country. For thy laying of thy Bloud, it must lye on thine own Head, as a just Reward
of thy wickedness. The Laws of the Realm most justly con∣demn thee to die, out of thine own mouth, for the conspiring the Destruction both of her Majesty, and of us all: Therefore thy Bloud be upon thee; neither her Majesty nor we at any time sought it, thy self hast spilt it. Then he was asked, What he could say, why Judgment of Death ought not to be awarded against him. Whereto he said, he did see that he must die, because he was not settled. What meanest thou by that, said Master Vice-Chamberlain? Said he, Look into your Study, and into your new Books, and you shall finde what I mean. I protest (said his Honour) I know not what thou meanest: thou dost not well to use such dark Speeches, unless thou wouldst plainly utter what thou meanest thereby. But he said, he cared not for Death, and that he would lay his Bloud amongst them. Then spake the Lord Chief-Justice of En∣gland,The Lord Chief-Ju∣stices Speech to Parry. being required to give the Judgment, and said, Parry, you have been much heard, and what you mean by being settled, I know not; but I see you are so settled in Popery, that you cannot settle your self to be a good Subject. But touching that you should say, to stay Judgment from being given against you, your Speeches must be of one of these kinds, either to prove the Indictment (which you have confessed to be true) to be insufficient in Law; or else to plead somewhat touching her Majesties Mercy, why Justice should not be done of you. All other Speeches, wherein you have used great Liberty, is more than by Law you can ask. These be the matters you must look to, what say you to them? Whereto he said nothing. Then said the Lord Chief-Justice, Parry, thou hast been be∣fore this time Indicted of divers most horrible and hateful Trea∣sons, committed against thy most gracious Soveraign and Native Country: the matter most detestable, the manner most subtle and dangerous, and the occasions and means that led thee there∣unto, most ungodly and villanous. That thou didst intend it, it is most evident by thy self. The matter was the destruction of a most Sacred and an Anointed Queen, thy Sovereign and Mistriss, who hath shewed thee such Favour, as some thy betters have not obtained: Yea, the Overthrow of thy Country where∣in thou wert born, and of a most happy Commonwealth where∣of
thou art a Member, and of such a Queen, as hath bestowed on thee the Benefit of all benefits in this world, that is, thy Life, heretofore granted thee by her Mercy, when thou hadst lost it by Justice and Desert. Yet thou her Servant, sworn to defend her, meant'st with thy bloudy hand to have taken away her Life, that mercifully gave thee thine, when it was yielded into her hands: This is the matter wherein thou hast offended. The manner was most subtle and dangerous, beyond all that before thee have committed any Wickedness against her Majesty. For thou, making shew as if thou wouldest simply have uttered for her safety the Evil that others had contrived, didst but seek thereby credit and access, that thou mightest take the apter opportunity for her Destruction. And for the occasions and means that drew thee on, they were most ungodly and villanous, as the perswasions of the Pope, of Papists, and Popish Books. The Pope pretendeth that he is a Pastor, when as in truth, he is far from feeding of the Flock of Christ; but rather as a Wolf, secketh but to feed on and to suck out the blood of true Christians, and as it were thir∣steth after the bloud of our most Gracious and Christian Queen. And these Papists and Popish Books, while they pretend to set forth Divinity, they do indeed most ungodly teach and per∣swade, that which is quite contrary both to God and his Word. For the Word teaches Obedience of Subjects towards Princes, and forbideth any private man to kill: But they teach Subjects to disobey Princes, and that a private wicked person may kill; yea, and whom? A most godly Queen, and their own natural and most gracious Soveraign. Let all men therefore take heed how they receive any thing from him, hear or read any of their Books, and how they confer with any Papists. God grant her Majesty, that she may know by thee, how ever she trust such like to come so near her Person. But see the end, and why thou didst it; and it will appear to be a most miserable, fearful, and foolish thing: For thou didst imagine, that it was to relieve those, that thou callest Catholicks, who were most likely amongst all others to have felt the worst of it, if thy devilish practice had taken effect. But sith thou hast been Indicted of the Treasons com∣prised in the Indictment, and thereupon Arraigned,The Form of the Judgment against the Traitor. and hast confessed thy self Guilty of them, the Court doth award, that thou shalt be had from hence to the place whence thou didst come, and so drawn through the open City of London upon an Hurdle to the place of Exe∣cution,
and there to be hanged and let down alive, and thy privy parts cut off, and thy entrals taken out and burnt in thy sight, then thy Head to be cut off, and thy Body to be divided in four parts, and to be disposed at her Majesties pleasure: And God have mercy on thy Soul. Parry nevertheless persisted still in his rage and fond Speech, and ragingly there said, he there summoned Queen Elizabeth to answer for his Blood before God: wherewith, the Lieutenant of the Tower was commanded to take him from the Bar, and so he did. And upon his departure, the people stricken as it were at heart with the horror of his intended Enterprise, ceased not, but pursued him with out-cryes, as, Away with the Traitor, away with him, and such like: whereupon he was conveyed to the Barge, to pass to the Tower again by water, and the Court was adjorned. After which,2. Martii. William Par∣ry the Traytor Executed. upon the second day of this instant March, William Parry was by vertue of process in that behalf, awarded from the same Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer, delivered by the Lieutenant of the Tower ear∣ly in the morning, unto the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, who received him at the Tower-hill, and thereupon, according to the judgment, caused him there to be forthwith set on the Hurdel. From whence he was drawn thereupon threw the midst of the City of London, unto the place for his Execution in the Pallace at Westmin∣ster: where, having long time of stay admitted unto him before his Execution, he most maliciously and impudently, after some other vain discourses eftsoons and often delivered in Speech, that he was never guilty of any intention to kill Queen Elizabeth, and so (without any request made by him to the people to pray to God for him, or prayer publickly used by himself for ought that appear∣ed; but such as he used, if he used any, was private to himself) he was executed according to the judgment. And now for his intent, howsoever he pretended the contrary in words, yet by these his own Writings, Confessions, Letters, and many other proofs afore here expressed, it is most manifest to all persons, how horrible his intentions and Treasons were, and how justly he suffered for the same; and thereby greatly to be doubted, that as he had lived a long time vainly and ungodly, and like an Atheist and godless man, so he continued the same course till his death to the outward sight of men. Here endeth the true and plain course and process of the Trea∣sons, Arrest, Arraignment, and Execution of William Par∣ry the Traitor.
An addition not unnecessary for this purpose. FOr as much as Parry in the abundance of his proud and arro∣gant humour, hath often both in his Confession, and Letters, pretended some great and grievous causes of discontentment against her Majesty, and the present State: It shall not be impertinent, for better satisfaction of all persons, to set forth simply and tru∣ly, the condition and quality of the man, what he was by Birth and Education, and in what course of life he had lived. This vile and Traiterous Wretch was one of the younger Sons of a poor man, called Harry ap David: he dwelled in North-Wales in a little Village called Northoppe, in the County of Flint: there he kept a common Ale-house, which was the best and great∣est stay of his living. In that house was this Traitor Born, his Mother was the reputed Daughter of one Conway a Priest, Parson of a poor Parish called Halkin, in the same County of Flint: his his eldest Brother dwelleth at this present in the same House, and there keepeth an Ale-house as his Father did before him. This Traitor in his Childhood, so soon as he had learned a lttleto Write & Read, was put to serve a poor man dwelling in Chester, named John Fisher, who professed to have some small skill and under∣standing in the Law. With him he continued divers years, and served as a Clerk, to write such things, as in that Trade which his master used, he was appointed. During this time, he learned the English Tongue, and at such times of leasure, as the poor man his Master had no occasion otherwise to use him, he was suf∣fered to go to the Grammer-School, where he got some little un∣derstanding in the Latin Tongue. In this his Childhood he was noted by such as best knew him, to be of a most villanous and dangerous nature and disposition. He did often run away from his Master, and was often taken and brought to him again. His Master, to correct his perverse and froward conditions, did many times shut him as Prisoner in some close place of his house, and many times caused him to be chained, locked, and clogged, to stay his running away. Yet all was in vain: For about the third year of her Majesties Reign, for his last farewel to his poor Master, he ran away from him, and came to London to seek his Adven∣tures. He was then constrained to seek what Trade he could to live by, and to get meat and drink for his belly, and cloaths for his back. His good hap in the end was to be entertained in
place of Service above his Desert; where he staid not long, but shifted himself divers times from Service to Service, and from one Master to another. Now he began to forget his old Home, his Birth, his Education, his Parents, his Friends, his own Name, and what he was. He aspired to greater matters, he challenged the Name and Title of a great Gentleman, he vaunted himself to be of Kin and allied to Noble and Worshipful; he left his old Name, which he did bear and was commonly called by in his Childhood, and during all the time of his abode in the Country, which was William ap Harry (as the manner in Wales is.) And because he would seem to be indeed the man which he pre∣tended, he took upon him the Name of Parry, being the Sir∣name of divers Gentlemen of great Worship and Honour. And because his Mothers Name by her Father (a Priest) was Conway, he pretended Kindred to the Family of Sir John Conway, and so thereby made himself of kin to Edmund Nevil. Being thus set forth with his new Name and new Title of Gentleman, and commended by some of his good Favourers, he matched him∣self in Marriage with a Widow in South-Wales, who brought him some reasonable Portion of Wealth. She lived with him but a short time, and the wealth he had with her lasted not long: it was soon consumed with his dissolute and wastful manner of life. He was then driven to his wonted shifts, his Creditors were ma∣ny, the Debt which he owed great, he had nothing wherewith to make Payment, he was continually pursued by Serjeants and Officers to Arrest him, he did often by slights and shifts escape from them. In this his needy and poor estate, he sought to repair himself again by a new match in Marriage with another Widow, which before was the Wife of one Richard Heywood; this matter was so earnestly followed by himself, and so effectually com∣mended by his Friends and Favourers, that the Woman yielded to take him to Husband: a Match in every respect very unequal and unfit; her Wealth and yearly Livelihood was very great, his poor and base Estate worse than nothing; he very young, she of such age, as for years she might have been his Mother. When he had thus possessed himself of his new Wives wealth, he omitted nothing that might serve for a prodigal, dissolute, and most ungodly course of Life. His Riot and Excess was un∣measurable; he did most wickedly deflower his Wives own Daughter, and sundry ways pitifully abuse the old Mother: He carried himself for his outward port and countenance (so long as
his Old wives Bags lasted) in such sort, as might well have suffi∣ced for a man of very good haviour and degree. But this lasted not long; his proud heart and wastful hand had soon poured out old Heywood's Wealth. He then fell again to his wonted shifts, borrowed where he could finde any to lend, and engaged his Credit so far as any would trust him. Amongst others, he became greatly indebted to Hugh Hare, the Gentle∣man before-named; who after long forbearing of his Money, sought to recover it by ordinary means of Law. For this cause Parry conceived great displeasure against him, which he pursued with all Malice, even to the seeking of his Life. In this mur∣therous intent, he came in the night-time to Mr. Hares Chamber in the Temple, broke open the door, assaulted him, and wounded him grievously, and so left him in great danger of Life. For this Offence he was Apprehended, Committed to Newgate, In∣dicted of Burglary, Arraigned, and found Guilty by a very substantial Jury,Parry Condemned for Burglary, Par∣doned of the Queen. and Condemned to be Hanged, as the Law in that Case requireth. He standing thus Convicted, her Majesty, of her most gracious Clemency, and pitiful Disposition, took com∣passion upon him, pardoned his Offence, and gave him his Life, which by the Law and due course of Justice he ought then to have lost. After this he carried not long, but pretending some causes of discontentment, departed the Realm, and travelled be∣yond the Seas. How he demeaned himself there from time to time, and with whom he conversed, is partly in his own Con∣fession touched before. This is the man, this is his Race, which he feared should be spotted, if he miscarried in the execution of his Traiterous Enterprise; this hath been the course of his Life, these are the great canses of his Discontentment. And whereas at his Arraignment and Execution, he pretended great care of the disobedient Popish Subjects of this Realm, whom he called Catholicks, and in very insolent sort seemed to glory greatly in the Profession of his pretensed Catholick Reli∣gion: The whole course and action of his Life sheweth plainly, how profanely and irreligiously he did always bear himself. He vaunted, that for these two and twenty years past he had been a Catholick, and during all that time never received the Com∣munion: Yet before he travelled beyond the Seas, at three se∣veral times within the compass of those two and twenty years, he did voluntarily take the Oath of Obedience to the Queens Majesty, set down in the Statute made in the first year of her Highness
Reign; by which, amongst other things, he did testifie and declare in his Conscience, that no Forreign Prince, Person, Pre∣late, State, or Potentate, hath or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power, Preeminence, or Authority, Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, with∣in this Realm; and therefore did utterly renounce and forsake all Forreign Jurisdictions, Powers, and Authorities; and did promise to bear Faith and true Allegeance to the Queens High∣ness, her Heirs and lawful Successors. With what Conscience or Religion he took that Oath so often, if he were then a Papist indeed, as sithence the discovery of his Treasons he pretended, let his best friends the Papists themselves judge. But perhaps it may be said, that he repented those his Offences past; that since those three Oaths so taken by him, he was twice reconciled to the Pope, and so his Conscience cleared, and he become a new man; and (which is more) that in the time of his last Travel, he cast away all his former lewd manners: that he changed his degree and habit, and bought or begged the grave Title of a Doctor of Law, for which he was well qualified with a little Grammar-School Latine; that he had Plenary In∣dulgence, and Remission of all his Sins, in consideration of his undertaking of so holy an Enterprise as to kill Queen Elizabeth, a sacred anointed Queen, his Natural and Soveraign Lady: That he promised to the Pope, and vowed to God to perform it: that he confirmed the same by receiving the Sacrament at the Jesuits, at one Altar with his two Beaupeers, the Cardinals of Vendosme and Narbonne: And that since his last return into England, he did take his Oath upon the Bible to execute it. These Reasons may seem to bear some weight indeed amongst his Friends the Je∣suits, and other Papists of State, who have special Skill in mat∣ters of such importance. But now lately in the beginning of this Parliament in November last, he did eftsoons solemnly in publick place take the Oath be∣fore mentioned, of obedience to her Majesty. How that may stand with his reconciliations to the Pope, and with his Promises, Vows, and Oath to kill the Queen, it is a thing can hardly be warranted, unless it be by some special priviledge of the Popes omnipotency. But let him have the glory he desired, to live and die a Papist. He deserved it, it is fit for him, his death was correspondent to the course of his life, which was disloyal, perjured, and Traiterous towards her Majesty, and false and perfidious towards the Pope himself, and his Catholicks, if they will believe his solemn protesta∣tions
which he made at his Arraignment and Execution, that he never meant nor intended any hurt to her Highness Person. For if that be true, where are then his Vows which he said were in Heaven, his Letters and Promise upon Earth? Why hath he stol∣len out of the Popes shop so large an Indulgence and plenary Re∣mission of all his Sins, and meant to perform nothing that he pro∣mised? Why was his Devotion and Zeal so highly commended? Why was he so specially prayed for and remembred at the Altar? All these great favours were then bestowed upon him without cause or desert: for he deceived the Pope, he deceived the Car∣dinals, and Jesuites, with a false semblance, and pretence to do that thing which he never meant. But the matter is clear, the Conspiracy, and his traiterous intent is too plain and evident: it is the Lord that revealed it in time, and prevented their malice: there lacked no will, or readiness in him to execute that horrible fact. It is the Lord that hath pre∣served her Majesty from all the wicked Practices and Conspiracies of that Hellish Rabble: it is he that hath most gratiously deliver'd her from the hands of this Traiterous miscreant. The Lord is her onely defence, in whom she hath always trusted. A Prayer for all Kings, Princes, Countries and People which do profess the Gospel▪ and especially for our Soveraign Lady Queen Elizabeth: used in Her Majesties Chappel, and meet to be used of all persons within Her Majesties Dominions. O Lord God of hosts, most loving and merciful Father, whose power no creature is able to resist, who of thy great goodness hast promi∣sed to grant the petitions of such as ask in thy Sons Name: We most humbly beséech thee to save and defend all Princes, Magistrates, Kingdoms, Countries and People which have received and no profess thy holy Word and Gospel; and namely this Realm of England, and thy servant Elizabeth our Queen, whom thou hast hitherto wonderfully preserved from manifold Perils and sundry Dangers, and of late revealed and ftustra∣ted the Trafterous Practices and Conspiracies of divers against her: for the which, and all other thy great goodness towards us, we give thee most humble and hearty thanks, beseeching thee in the Name of thy dear Son Iesus Christ, and for his sake, still to preserve and continue her unto us, and to give her long life and many years to rule over this Land. O Hea∣venly Father, the practices of our Enemies, and the Enemies of thy word and truth, against her and us, are manifest and known unto thee. Turn them, O Lord, if it be thy blessed Will, or overthrow and confound them, for thy Names sake: Suffer them not to prevail: Take them, O Lord, in their crafty Wittness that they have invented,and let them fall into the Pit which they have digged for others. Permit them not ungodly to triumph over us: Discomfort them, discomfort them, O Lord, which trust in their own multitude, and please themselves in their subtile devices, and wicked Conspiracies. O loving Father, we have not deserved the least of these the Mercies which we crave: For we have sinned, and grievously offended thee▪ we are not worthy to be called thy Sons: We have not been so thankful unto thee as we
should, for thy unspeakable benefits powred upon us: We have abused this long time of Peace and Prosperity: We have not obeyed thy Word: We have had it in Mouth, but not in heart, in outward ap∣pearance, but not in deed: We have lived carelesly: We have not known the time of our visitation: we have deserved utter destruction. But thou, O Lord, art merciful, and ready to forgive; therefore we come to thy Throne of Grace, confessing and acknowledging thee to be our only refuge in all times of peril and danger: And by the means of thy Son, we most heartily pray thee to forgive us our Vnthank∣fulness, Disobedience, Hypocrisie, and all other our Sins; to turn from us thy heavy wrath and displeasure, which we have justly de∣served, and to turn our hearts truly unto thee, that daily we may increase in all goodness, and continually more and more fear thy holy Name: So shall we glorifie thy Name, and sing unto thee in Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs: And thy enemies and ours shall know themselves to be but men, and not able by any means to with∣stand thee, nor to hurt those whom thou hast received into thy pro∣tection and defence. Grant these things, O Lord of Power, and Fa∣ther of Mercy, for thy Christ's sake, to whom with thee and thy Holy Spirit, be all Honour and Glory for ever and ever. Amen. A Prayer and Thanksgiving for the Queen, used of all Knights and Bur∣gesses in the High Court of Parliament, and very requisite to be used and continued of all her Majesties loving Subjects. O Almighty and most merciful God, which dost, pitch thy tents round about the peo∣ple, to deliver them from the hands of their enemies; we thy humble Servants, which have ever of old seen thy Salvation, do fall down and prostrate▪ ourselves with Praise and Thanksgiving to thy glorious Name, who hast in thy tender Mercies from time to time saved and defended the Servant ELIZABETH, our most gracious Quéen, not only from the hands of strange Children, but also of late revealed and made frustrate his bloody and most barbarous Treason, who being her natural Subject, most unnaturally violating thy Divine Ordinance, hath secretly sought to shed her blood, to the great disquiet of thy Church, and utter discomfort of our Souls: his snare is heaven in pieces, but upon thy Servant doth the Crown flourish. The wicked and bloodthirsty men think to devour Iacob, and to lay waste his dwelling-place: But thou (O God) which rulest in Iacob, and unto the ends of the world, dost daily teach us still to trust in thée for all thy great Mercies, and not to forget thy merciful Kindness shewed to her, that feareth thy Name. O Lord, we confess to thy Glory and Praise, that thou only hast saved us from destruction, because thou hast not given her over for a prey to the wicked: Her Soul is delivered, and we are escaped. Hear us now we pray thee, (O most merciful Father) and continue forth thy loving Kindness towards thy Servant, and evermore to the Glory and our Comfort, kéep her in health, with long Life, and Prosperity; whose rest and only refuge is in thée, O God of her Salvation. Preserve her, as thou art wont, preserve her from the snare of the Enemy, from the gathering together of the froward, from the insurrection of wicked Doers, and from all the traiterous Conspiracies of those which privily lay wait for her life. Grant this, O Heavenly Father, for Iesus Christs sake, our only Mediator and Advocate, Amen. Io. Th. A Prayer used in the Parliament onely. O Merciful God and Father, forasmuch as no counsel can stand, nor any can prosper, but only such as are humbly gathered in thy Name, to feel the swéet taste of thy Holy Spirit; we gladly acknowledge, that by thy favour standeth the peaceable pro∣tection of our Quén and Realm, and likewise this favourable liberty granted unto us at this time to make our méeting together; which thy bountiful Goodness we most thankfully acknowledging, do withal earnestly pray thy Divine Majesty so to encline our hearts, as our counsels may be subject in true obedience to thy Holy Word and Will. And sithe it hath pleased thée to govern this Realm by ordinary assembling the thrée Estates of the same: Our humble Prayer is, that thou wilt graff in us good mindes to conceive, frée liberty to speak, and on all sides a ready and quiet consent to such wholesome Laws and Statutes, as may declare us to be thy people, and this Realm to be prosperously ruled by thy good guiding and defence: So that we and our Posterity may with chearful hearts wait for thy appearance in Iudgment, that art only able to present us faultless before God our Heavenly Father: To whom with thée our Saviour Christ, and the Holy Spirit, be all Glory both now and ever. Amen. FINIS.
